<<<PAGE 1>>>

<<<PAGE 2>>>
A Short Textbook of

PSYCHIATRY


<<<PAGE 3>>>
Every effort has been made to ensure that drug dosage schedules in this book are accurate and
conform to the standards accepted at the time of publication. However, as recommendations for
treatment vary in the light of continuing research and clinical experience, the reader is advised to
verify drug dosage schedules contained in the product information sheets included in the package
of each drug as well as Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC), before any drug is administered.
It is the responsibility of the treating physician, relying on experience and knowledge about the
patient, to determine the dose(s) and the best treatment for the patient. Neither the publisher nor
the author assumes responsibility for any possible untoward consequences.


<<<PAGE 4>>>
A Short Textbook of

PSYCHIATRY
Seventh Edition

Niraj Ahuja MBBS MD MRCPsych
Consultant Psychiatrist
Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK
Formerly
Associate Professor (Psychiatry)
GB Pant Hospital and
Associated Maulana Azad Medical College (MAMC) and
Lok Nayak Hospital, New Delhi, India
Formerly also at
Department of Psychiatry
Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research (JIPMER), Pondicherry
Lady Hardinge Medical College (LHMC) and Smt. SK Hospital, New Delhi
All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, India
Contributing Editor
Savita Ahuja MBBS DGO DFSRH DRCOG

®

JAYPEE BROTHERS MEDICAL PUBLISHERS (P) LTD
New Delhi • St Louis (USA) • Panama City (Panama) • London (UK) • Ahmedabad • Bengaluru
Chennai • Hyderabad • Kochi • Kolkata • Lucknow • Mumbai • Nagpur


<<<PAGE 5>>>
Published by
Jitendar P Vij
Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd
Corporate Office
4838/24 Ansari Road, Daryaganj, New Delhi - 110002, India,
Phone: +91-11-43574357, Fax: +91-11-43574314
Registered Office
B-3 EMCA House, 23/23B Ansari Road, Daryaganj, New Delhi - 110 002, India
Phones: +91-11-23272143, +91-11-23272703, +91-11-23282021
+91-11-23245672, Rel: +91-11-32558559, Fax: +91-11-23276490, +91-11-23245683
e-mail: jaypee@jaypeebrothers.com, Website: www.jaypeebrothers.com
Offices in India
• Ahmedabad, Phone: Rel: +91-79-32988717, e-mail: ahmedabad@jaypeebrothers.com
• Bengaluru, Phone: Rel: +91-80-32714073, e-mail: bangalore@jaypeebrothers.com
• Chennai, Phone: Rel: +91-44-32972089, e-mail: chennai@jaypeebrothers.com
• Hyderabad, Phone: Rel:+91-40-32940929, e-mail: hyderabad@jaypeebrothers.com
• Kochi, Phone: +91-484-2395740, e-mail: kochi@jaypeebrothers.com
• Kolkata, Phone: +91-33-22276415, e-mail: kolkata@jaypeebrothers.com
• Lucknow, Phone: +91-522-3040554, e-mail: lucknow@jaypeebrothers.com
• Mumbai, Phone: Rel: +91-22-32926896, e-mail: mumbai@jaypeebrothers.com
• Nagpur, Phone: Rel: +91-712-3245220, e-mail: nagpur@jaypeebrothers.com
Overseas Offices
• North America Office, USA, Ph: 001-636-6279734, e-mail: jaypee@jaypeebrothers.com,
anjulav@jaypeebrothers.com
• Central America Office, Panama City, Panama, Ph: 001-507-317-0160, e-mail: cservice@jphmedical.com,
Website: www.jphmedical.com
• Europe Office, UK, Ph: +44 (0) 2031708910, e-mail: info@jpmedpub.com
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry
© 2011, Niraj Ahuja
All rights reserved. No part of this publication should be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means: electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission
of the author and the publisher.
This book has been published in good faith that the material provided by author is original. Every effort is made to ensure
accuracy of material, but the publisher, printer and author will not be held responsible for any inadvertent error (s). In
case of any dispute, all legal matters are to be settled under Delhi jurisdiction only.
First Edition:
1990
Second Edition: 1992
Third Edition:
1995
Fourth Edition: 1999
Fifth Edition:
2002
Sixth Edition:
2006
Reprint:
2009
Seventh Edition: 2011
ISBN: 978-93-80704-66-1
Typeset at JPBMP typesetting unit
Printed at


<<<PAGE 6>>>
For
Manisha
and
Neha


<<<PAGE 7>>>

<<<PAGE 8>>>
Preface to the Seventh Edition

It is rather humbling to consider that it has been two decades that the Short Textbook of Psychiatry has enjoyed
a wide distribution among the undergraduate medical students, interns, junior residents, postgraduate psychiatry
students, nursing students, psychology and psychiatric social work students, occupational therapy and physiotherapy students, general medical practitioners, other physicians and health professionals in India and some
other countries. I am really indebted to the many astute readers who have provided a very constructive and
useful feedback, along with encouraging comments regarding the existing format and the contents of the book.
The seventh edition of the Short Textbook of Psychiatry has been once again extensively revised and
updated. Significant changes have been made in almost all the chapters, especially in chapters on diagnosis
and classification, psychoactive substance use disorders, psychopharmacology, schizophrenia, mood disorders
and other biological methods of treatment. Coloured-shaded boxes have been added at various places in the
text to highlight the important points in tables and figures. The chapter on psychiatric history and examination
contains a summary of laboratory tests in psychiatry, in additions to other significant changes. The appendices
have been revised and contain a glossary of common psychiatric terms.
The Short Textbook of Psychiatry sincerely hopes to retain its original aim of providing a brief yet comprehensive account of the psychiatric disorders and their allied aspects in a ‘user-friendly’ and ‘easy-to-follow’
manner.
I am grateful to Shri Jitendar P Vij, Chairman and Managing Director, Jaypee Brothers Medical
Publishers (P) Ltd for his exquisite control over the production and distribution of the Short Textbook of
Psychiatry over the last 20 years.
I hope you enjoy reading the book and I warmly welcome critical comments and constructive suggestions.
Please send your comments by email to STBPsy@gmail.com.
July 2010

Niraj Ahuja


<<<PAGE 9>>>

<<<PAGE 10>>>
Preface to the First Edition
Psychiatry, as a branch of Medicine, has been cold-shouldered by physicians for a long time. There are various reasons for such an attitude. But, the most important exposition is an unfamiliarity with the psychiatric
disorders and their treatment. This is easy to understand in the light of the fact that an easily comprehensible,
non-intimidating and concise text on psychiatry was not earlier available.
Recently too, the various postgraduate entrance examinations have laid an increasing emphasis on
psychiatry and its related branches. Keeping this in mind, the Medical Examination Review—Psychiatry
(Multiple Choice Questions with Explanatory Answers) was written, the new edition of which appears this
year. Its tremendous success during the last four years and encouraging suggestions from the readers have
been a source of stimulation for drafting this text.
The Short Textbook of Psychiatry aims to provide a brief yet comprehensive account of psychiatric disorders and their allied aspects. While striving to make the book simple and easy-to-follow, an attempt has been
made to keep the book aligned to the most recent developments in classification, terminology and treatment
methods.
The Short Textbook of Psychiatry is addressed to medical students, interested physicians and other health
professionals. A postgraduate student in psychiatry will find the text elementary and basic, although a first
year postgraduate will find it useful for a broad introduction to the subject.
I will like to put on record my deep appreciation for Shri Jitendar P Vij, Managing Director; Mr. Pawaninder
Vij, Production Manager and their efficient staff at the Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd, New Delhi
for bringing out this volume in a short time.
I welcome critical comments and constructive suggestions from the readers.
January 1990

Niraj Ahuja


<<<PAGE 11>>>

<<<PAGE 12>>>
Contents

1. Diagnosis and Classification in Psychiatry ......................................................................................1
2. Psychiatric History and Examination ...............................................................................................5
3. Organic (Including Symptomatic) Mental Disorders ................................................................... 19
4. Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders ........................................................................................ 33
5. Schizophrenia ................................................................................................................................. 54
6. Mood Disorders .............................................................................................................................. 69
7. Other Psychotic Disorders ............................................................................................................. 83
8. Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform Disorders ................................................................... 89
9. Disorders of Adult Personality and Behaviour ........................................................................... 113
10. Sexual Disorders ........................................................................................................................... 121
11. Sleep Disorders ............................................................................................................................. 133
12. Behavioural Syndromes Associated with Psychological Disturbances
and Physiological Factors ............................................................................................................ 142
13. Mental Retardation ...................................................................................................................... 153
14. Child Psychiatry ............................................................................................................................ 162
15. Psychopharmacology ................................................................................................................... 172
16. Other Biological Methods of Treatment ..................................................................................... 199
17. Psychoanalysis .............................................................................................................................. 205
18. Psychological Treatments ............................................................................................................ 213
19. Emergency Psychiatry .................................................................................................................. 221
20. Legal and Ethical Issues in Psychiatry ......................................................................................... 229
21. Community Psychiatry ................................................................................................................. 235
Appendices .......................................................................................................................................... 241
Appendix I: Nobel Prizes in Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines .............................................................................. 241
Appendix II: Some Important Contributors in Psychiatry..................................................................................... 242
Appendix III: Glossary of Some Important Terms in Psychiatry........................................................................... 246
Suggested Further Reading ................................................................................................................ 249
Index .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 253


<<<PAGE 13>>>
1

Diagnosis and Classification
in Psychiatry

Classification is a process by which phenomena are
organized into categories so as to bring together those
phenomena that most resemble each other and to separate those that differ. Any classification of psychiatric
disorders, like that of medical illnesses, should ideally
be based on aetiology. For a large majority of psychiatric disorders, no distinct aetiology is known at present,
although there are many attractive probabilities for
several of them. Therefore, one of the most rational
ways to classify psychiatric disorders at present is
probably syndromal. A syndrome is defined as a group
of symptoms and signs that often occur together, and
delineate a recognisable clinical condition.
The syndromal approach of classifying psychiatric disorders, on the basis of their clinical signs and
symptoms, is very similar to the historical approach
of classification of medical illnesses, when aetiology
of a majority of medical illnesses was still obscure.
There are three major purposes of classification
of psychiatric disorders:
1. To enable communication regarding the diagnosis
of disorders,
2. To facilitate comprehension of the underlying
causes of these disorders, and
3. To aid prediction of the prognosis of psychiatric
disorders.
This syndromal approach of classification, in the
absence of clearly known aetiologies, fulfils these
purposes reasonably well.
Before proceeding to look at current classifications
of psychiatric disorders, it is important to define what
is meant by the term, psychiatric disorder.

DEFINITION OF A PSYCHIATRIC
DISORDER
The simplest way to conceptualize a psychiatric
disorder is a disturbance of Cognition (i.e. Thought),
Conation (i.e. Action), or Affect (i.e. Feeling), or any
disequilibrium between the three domains. However,
this simple definition is not very useful in routine
clinical practice.
Another way to define a psychiatric disorder or
mental disorder is as a clinically significant psychological or behavioural syndrome that causes significant
(subjective) distress, (objective) disability, or loss of
freedom; and which is not merely a socially deviant
behaviour or an expected response to a stressful life
event (e.g. loss of a loved one). Conflicts between
the society and the individual are not considered
psychiatric disorders. A psychiatric disorder should
be a manifestation of behavioural, psychological, and/
or biological dysfunction in that person (Definition
modified after DSM-IV-TR, APA).
Although slightly lengthy, this definition defines
a psychiatric disorder more accurately.

NORMAL MENTAL HEALTH
According to the World Health Organization (WHO),
Health is a state of complete physical, mental and
social well-being, and not merely absence of disease
or infirmity.
Normal mental health, much like normal health, is
a rather difficult concept to define. There are several


<<<PAGE 14>>>
2

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

models available for understanding what may constitute ‘normality’ (see Table 1.1).
Although, normality is not an easy concept to
define, some of the following traits are more commonly found in ‘normal’ individuals.
1. Reality orientation.
2. Self-awareness and self-knowledge.
3. Self-esteem and self-acceptance.
4. Ability to exercise voluntary control over their
behaviour.
5. Ability to form affectionate relationships.
6. Pursuance of productive and goal-directive activities.

CLASSIFICATION IN PSYCHIATRY
Like any growing branch of Medicine, Psychiatry has
seen rapid changes in classification to keep up with a
conglomeration of growing research data dealing with
epidemiology, symptomatology, prognostic factors,
treatment methods and new theories for the causation
of psychiatric disorders.
Although first attempts to classify psychiatric
disorders can be traced back to Ayurveda, Plato (4th
century BC) and Asclepiades (1st century BC), classification in Psychiatry has certainly evolved ever
since.
At present, there are two major classifications in
Psychiatry, namely ICD-10 (1992) and DSM-IV-TR
(2000).
ICD-10 (International Classification of Diseases,
10th Revision, 1992) is World Health Organisation’s
classification for all diseases and related health problems (and not only psychiatric disorders).
Chapter ‘F’ classifies psychiatric disorders as Mental and Behavioural Disorders (MBDs) and codes them
on an alphanumeric system from F00 to F99. ICD-10
is now available in several versions, the most important of which are listed in Table 1.2. There are several
versions of ICD-10; some are listed in Table 1.3.
DSM-IV-TR (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders, IV Edition, Text Revision, 2000)
is the American Psychiatric Association (APA)’s

Table 1.1: Some Models of Normality in Mental Health
1. Medical Model (Normality as Health): Normal mental health is conceptualized as the absence of any
psychiatric disorder (‘disease’) or psychopathology.
2. Statistical Model (Normality as an Average): Statistically normal mental health falls within two standard
deviations (SDs) of the normal distribution curve for
the population.
3. Utopian Model (Normality as Utopia): In this model,
the focus in defining normality is on ‘optimal functioning’.
4. Subjective Model: According to this model, normality
is viewed as an absence of distress, disability, or any
help-seeking behaviour resulting thereof. This definition is similar in many ways to the medical model.
5. Social Model: A normal person, according to
this definition, is expected to behave in a socially
‘acceptable’ behaviour.
6. Process Model (Normality as a Process): This model
views normality as a dynamic and changing process,
rather than as a static concept. This model can be
combined with any other model mentioned here.
7. Continuum Model (Normality as a Conti nuum):
Normality and mental disorder are considered by
this model as falling at the two ends of a continuum,
rather than being disparate entities. According to
this model, it is the severity (scores above the ‘cutoff’) that determines whether a particular person’s
experience constitutes a symptom of a disorder or
falls on the healthy side of the continuum.

classification of mental disorders. DSM-IV-TR is a
text revision of the DSM-IV which was originally
published in 1994.
The next editions of ICD (ICD-11) and DSM
(DSM-V) are likely to be available in the years
2012-14.
For the purpose of this book, it is intended to
follow the ICD-10 classification. ICD-10 is easy to
follow, has been tested extensively all over the world
(51 countries; 195 clinical centres), and has been found
to be generally applicable across the globe. At some
places in the book, DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria are
also discussed, wherever appropriate.


<<<PAGE 15>>>
Diagnosis and Classification in Psychiatry

3

Table 1.2: Mental and Behavioural Disorders in ICD-10
1. F00-F09 Organic, Including Symptomatic, Mental
Disorders, such as delirium, dementia, organic amnestic syndrome, and other organic mental disorders.
2. F10-F19 Mental and Behavioural Disorders due to
Psychoactive Substance Use, such as acute intoxication, harmful use, dependence syndrome, withdrawal
state, amnestic syndrome, and psychotic disorders
due to psychoactive substance use.
3. F20-F29 Schizophrenia, Schizotypal and Delusional
Disorders, such as schizophrenia, schizotypal disorder, persistent delusional disorders, acute and
transient psychotic disorders, induced delusional
disorder, and schizo-affective disorders.
4. F31-F39 Mood (Affective) Disorders, such as manic
episode, depressive episode, bipolar affective disorder, recurrent depressive disorder, and persistent
mood disorder.
5. F40-F48 Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform
Disorders (There is no category with code number
F49), such as anxiety disorders, phobic anxiety
disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, dissociative (conversion) disorders, somatoform disorders,
reaction to stress, and adjustment disorders, and
other neurotic disorders.
6. F50-F59 Behavioural Syndromes Associated with
Physiological Disturbances and Physical Factors,
Table 1.3: Some Versions of ICD-10
A. Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines
(CDDG)
B. Diagnostic Criteria for Research (DCR)
C. Multi-axial Classification Version
D. Primary Care Version

Earlier classifications in psychiatry were based on
hierarchies of diagnoses with presence of a diagnosis
higher in the hierarchy usually ruling out a diagnosis
lower in the hierarchy. This was felt to be in keeping
with the teaching of Medicine at large at the time,
where there was emphasis on making a single diagnosis of one disease rather than explaining different
symptoms by different disease entities.

such as eating disorders, non-organic sleep disorders, sexual dysfunctions (not caused by organic
disorder or disease), mental and behavioural disorders associated with puerperium, and abuse of
non-dependence-producing substances.
7. F60-F69 Disorders of Adult Personality and Behaviour, such as specific personality disorders, enduring
personality changes, habit and impulse disorders,
gender-identity disorders, disorders of sexual preference, and psychological and behavioural disorders
associated with sexual development and orientation.
8. F70-F79 Mental Retardation, including mild, moderate, severe, and profound mental retardation.
9. F80-F89 Disorders of Psychological Development,
such as specific developmental disorders of speech
and language, specific developmental disorders of
scholastic skills, specific developmental disorders
of motor function, mixed specific developmental
disorders, and pervasive developmental disorders.
10. F90-F98 Behavioural and Emotional Disorders with
Onset Usually Occurring in Childhood and Adolescence, such as hyperkinetic disorders, conduct
disorders, mixed disorders of conduct and emotions,
tic disorders, and other disorders.
11. F99 Unspecified Mental Disorder

The presence of a diagnostic hierarchy implied
that the conditions higher up in the hierarchy needed
to be considered first, before making a diagnosis of
those lower down in the hierarchy. For example, it was
felt that a current diagnosis of organic mental disorder
such as delirium would exclude a diagnosis of anxiety disorder in presence of agitation; and alcohol and
drug induced disorders would take precedence over a
diagnosis of primary mood disorder.
The current classifications however encourage
recording of multiple diagnoses in a given patient (as
co-morbidity) regardless of any hierarchy. Although
a diagnostic hierarchy makes much clinical sense,
consideration and recording of co-morbidity can be
helpful in identifying more of patient’s needs; for
example, a diagnosis of co-morbid anxiety disorder


<<<PAGE 16>>>
4

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

in a patient with bipolar disorder helps identify and
treat the anxiety component adequately.

MULTI-AXIAL CLASSIFICATION
The process of making a correct diagnosis is a very
useful clinical exercise as evidence-based management can be dependent on making a correct diagnosis.
However, sometimes making a clinical diagnosis can
lead to labelling of patient and can be stigmatizing.
This can also degrade the patient to “just another case”
and does not direct attention to the whole individual.
In the last few decades, there has been an upsurge
of interest in multi-axial systems for achieving a
more comprehensive description of an individual’s
clinical problems and needs. The pattern adopted by
DSM-IV-TR is a very good example of this attempt.

Table 1.4: The Five Axes of DSM-IV-TR
AXIS I:
AXIS II:
AXIS III:
AXIS IV:
AXIS V:

Clinical Psychiatric Diagnosis
Personality Disorders and Mental Retardation
General Medical Conditions
Psychosocial and Environmental Problems
Global Assessment of Functioning: Current
and in past one year
(Rated on a scale)

In this system, an individual patient is diagnosed on
five separate axes, ensuring a more through evaluation
of needs (see Table 1.4).
This method helps in making a more holistic,
biopsychosocial assessment of an individual patient.
Recently, ICD-10 has also brought out its own multiaxial classification version (see Table 1.3).


<<<PAGE 17>>>
2

Psychiatric History
and Examination

Familiarity with the technique of psychiatric assessment is important not only for a psychiatrist but
also for a medical practitioner or any mental health
professional, since more than one-third of medical
patients can present with psychiatric symptoms.

INTERVIEW TECHNIQUE
In no other branch of Medicine is the history taking
interview as important as in Psychiatry. All physicians
need to communicate with their patients and a skilful
interview can clearly help in obtaining better information, making a more accurate diagnosis, establishing
a better rapport with patients, and working towards
better adherence with management plan.
A psychiatric interview is usually different from
the routine medical interview in several ways (Table
2.1). A few important points regarding the interview
technique are mentioned below. These serve as
pointers towards a technique which clearly has to
be mastered over a period of time with repeated
examinations.
A consistent scheme should be used each time for
recording the interview, although the interview need
not (and should not) follow a fixed and rigid method.
The interview technique should have flexibility,
varying according to appropriate clinical circumstances.
Whenever possible, the patient should be seen first.
When the account of historical information given by
the patient and the informant(s) is different, it is useful
to record them separately.

Table 2.1: Psychiatric vs Medical Interview
A psychiatric interview can be different from a medical
interview in several ways, some of which can include:
1. Presence of disturbances in thinking, behaviour and
emotions can interfere with meaningful communication
2. Collateral information from significant others can be
really important
3. Important to obtain detailed information of personal
history and pre-morbid personality
4. Need for more astute observation of patient’s behaviour
5. Difficulty in establishing rapport may be encountered
more often
6. Patients may lack insight into their illness and may
have poor judgement
7. Usually more important to elicit information regarding stressors and social situation

During the interview session(s), the patient should
be put at ease and an empathic relationship should be
established.
In psychiatric assessment, history taking interview
and mental status examination need not always be
conducted separately (though they must be recorded
individually). During assessment, the interviewer
should observe any abnormalities in verbal and nonverbal communication and make note of them.
It is helpful to record patient’s responses verbatim rather than only naming the signs (for example,
rather than just writing delusion of persecution, it is
better to record in addition: “my neighbour is trying to


<<<PAGE 18>>>
6

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

poison me”). It is best done in the patient’s own spoken
language, whenever possible.
It is useful to ask open-ended and non-directive
questions (for example, “how are you feeling today”?)
rather than asking direct, leading questions (for example, “are you feeling sad at present”?).
Arguably the most important interviewing skills
are listening, and demonstrating that you are interested
in listening and attending to the patient. It is important
to remember that listening is an active, and not a
passive, process.
Confidentiality must always be observed. However, in cases of suicidal/homicidal risk and child
abuse, an exception may have to be made (see Chapter
20 for details). Patients suffering from psychiatric
disorders are usually no more violent than the general
population. However, it is important to ensure safety
if any risks are apparent.
A comprehensive psychiatric interview often
requires more than one session. The psychiatric assessment can be discussed under the following headings.

IDENTIFICATION DATA
It is best to start the interview by obtaining some
identification data which may include Name (including aliases and pet names), Age, Sex, Marital status,
Education, Occupation, Income, Residential and
Office Address(es), Religion, and Socioeconomic
background, as appropriate according to the setting. It
is useful to record the source of referral of the patient.
In medicolegal cases, in addition, two identification
marks should also be recorded.

INFORMANTS
Since sometimes the history provided by the patient
may be incomplete, due to factors such as absent insight or uncooperativeness, it is important to take the
history from patient’s relatives or friends who act as
informants and sources of collateral information. It is
important to take the patient’s consent before taking
this collateral history unless the patient does not have
capacity to consent.

The informants’ identification data should be
recorded along with their relationship to the patient,
whether they stay with the patient or not, and the
duration of stay together.
Finally, a comment should be made regarding the
reliability of the information provided. The reliability
of the information provided by the informants should
be assessed on the following parameters:
1. Relationship with patient,
2. Intellectual and observational ability,
3. Familiarity with the patient and length of stay with
the patient, and
4. Degree of concern regarding the patient.
The source of referral (such as a letter from
patient’s general practitioner or a letter of referral from
the referring physician/surgeon in case of a liaison
psychiatry referral) often provides valuable information regarding the patient’s condition.

PRESENTING (CHIEF) COMPLAINTS
The presenting complaints and/or reasons for consultation should be recorded. Both the patient’s and the
informant’s version should be recorded, if relevant. If
the patient has no complaints (due to absent insight)
this fact should also be noted.
It is important to use patient’s own words and to
note the duration of each presenting complaint. Some
of the additional points which should be noted include:
1. Onset of present illness/symptom.
2. Duration of present illness/symptom.
3. Course of symptoms/illness.
4. Predisposing factors.
5. Precipitating factors (include life stressors).
6. Perpetuating and/or relieving factors.

HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS
When the patient was last well or asymptomatic should
be clearly noted. This provides useful information
about the onset as well as duration of illness. Establishing the time of onset is really important as it provides
clarity about the duration of illness and symptoms.
The symptoms of the illness, from the earliest time


<<<PAGE 19>>>
Psychiatric History and Examination

at which a change was noticed (the onset) until the
present time, should be narrated chronologically, in
a coherent manner.
The presenting (chief) complaints should be
expanded. In particular, any disturbances in physiological functions such as sleep, appetite and sexual
functioning should be enquired. One should always
enquire about the presence of suicidal ideation, ideas
of self-harm and ideas of harm to others (see Chapter
19 for details), with details about any possible intent
and/or plans.
It is also essential to consider and record any important negative history (such as history of alcohol/
drug use in new onset psychosis).
A life chart (Fig. 2.1) provides a valuable display
of the course of illness, episodic sequence, polarity
(if any), severity, frequency, relationship to stressors,
and response to treatment, if any.

PAST PSYCHIATRIC AND MEDICAL
HISTORY
Any history of any past psychiatric illness should be
obtained. Any past history of having received any
psychotropic medication, alcohol and drug abuse or
dependence, and psychiatric hospitalisation should
be enquired.
A past history of any serious medical or neurological illness, surgical procedure, accident or hospitalisation should be obtained. The nature of treatment
received, and allergies, if any, should be ascertained.
A past history of relevant aetiological causes such
as head injury, convulsions, unconsciousness, diabetes

Fig. 2.1: An Example of Life Chart

7

mellitus, hypertension, coronary artery disease, acute
intermittent porphyria, syphilis and HIV positivity (or
AIDS) should be explored.

TREATMENT HISTORY
Any treatment received in present and/or previous
episode(s) should be asked along with history of
treatment adherence, response to treatment received,
any adverse effects experienced or any drug allergies
which should be prominently noted in medical records.

FAMILY HISTORY
The family history usually includes the ‘family of
origin’ (i.e. the patient’s parents, siblings, grandparents, uncles, etc.). The ‘family of procreation’ (i.e.
the patient’s spouse, children and grandchildren) is
conventionally recorded under the heading of personal
history.
Family history is usually recorded under the following headings:
1. Family structure: Drawing of a ‘family tree’ (pedigree chart) can help in recording all the relevant
information in very little space which is easily
readable. An example of a typical family tree is
given in Figure 2.2. It should be noted whether
the family is a nuclear, extended nuclear or joint
family. Any consanguineous relationships should
be noted. The age and cause of death (if any) of
family members should be asked.
2. Family history of similar or other psychiatric illnesses, major medical illnesses, alcohol or drug
dependence and suicide (and suicidal attempts)
should be recorded.
3. Current social situation: Home circumstances,
per capita income, socioeconomic status, leader
of the family (nominal as well as functional) and
current attitudes of family members towards the
patient’s illness should be noted.
The communication patterns in the family, range
of affectivity, cultural and religious values, and social
support system, should be enquired about, where
relevant.


<<<PAGE 20>>>
8

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Fig. 2.2: A Typical Family Tree and Common Pedigree Symbols


<<<PAGE 21>>>
Psychiatric History and Examination

PERSONAL AND SOCIAL HISTORY
In a younger patient, it is often possible to give
more attention to details regarding earlier personal
history. In older patients, it is sometimes harder to get a
detailed account of the early childhood history. Parents
and older siblings, if alive, can often provide much
additional information regarding the past personal
history. Not all questions need to be asked from all
patients and personal history (much like rest of the history taking) should be individualised for each patient.
Personal history can be recorded under the following headings:

Perinatal History
Difficulties in pregnancy (particularly in the first
three months of gestation) such as any febrile illness,
medications, drugs and/or alcohol use; abdominal
trauma, any physical or psychiatric illness should be
asked. Other relevant questions may include whether
the patient was a wanted or unwanted child, date of
birth, whether delivery was normal, any instrumentation needed, where born (hospital or home), any perinatal complications (cyanosis, convulsions, jaundice),
APGAR score (if available), birth cry (immediate or
delayed), any birth defects, and any prematurity.

Childhood History
Whether the patient was brought up by mother or
someone else, breastfeeding, weaning and any history
suggestive of maternal deprivation should be asked.
The age of passing each important developmental
milestone should be noted. The age and ease of toilet
training should be asked.
The occurrence of neurotic traits should be noted.
These include stuttering, stammering, tics, enuresis,
encopresis, night terrors, thumb sucking, nail biting,
head banging, body rocking, morbid fears or phobias,
somnambulism, temper tantrums, and food fads.

Educational History
The age of beginning and finishing formal education,
academic achievements and relationships with peers
and teachers, should be asked.

9

Any school phobia, non-attendance, truancy, any
learning difficulties and reasons for termination of
studies (if occurs prematurely) should be noted.

Play History
The questions to be asked include, what games were
played at what stage, with whom and where. Relationships with peers, particularly the opposite sex,
should be recorded. The evaluation of play history
is obviously more important in the younger patients.

Puberty
The age at menarche, and reaction to menarche (in
females), the age at appearance of secondary sexual
characteristics (in both females and males), nocturnal
emissions (in males), masturbation and any anxiety
related to changes in puberty should be asked.

Menstrual and Obstetric History
The regularity and duration of menses, the length
of each cycle, any abnormalities, the last menstrual
period, the number of children born, and termination
of pregnancy (if any) should be asked for.

Occupational History
The age at starting work; jobs held in chronological
order; reasons for changes; job satisfactions; ambitions;
relationships with authorities, peers and subordinates;
present income; and whether the job is appropriate
to the educational and family background, should
be asked.

Sexual and Marital History
Sexual information, how acquired and of what kind;
masturbation (fantasy and activity); sex play, if any;
adolescent sexual activity; premarital and extramarital
sexual relationships, if any; sexual practices (normal
and abnormal); and any gender identity disorder, are
the areas to be enquired about.
The duration of marriage(s) and/or relationship(s);
time known the partner before marriage; marriage
arranged by parents with or without consent, or
by self-choice with or without parental consent;
number of marriages, divorces or separations; role in


<<<PAGE 22>>>
10

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

marriage; interpersonal and sexual relations; contraceptive measures used; sexual satisfaction; mode and
frequency of sexual intercourse; and psychosexual
dysfunction (if any) should be asked.
Conventionally, the details of the ‘family of procreation’ are recorded here.

Premorbid Personality (PMP)
It is important to elicit details regarding the personality
of the individual (temperament, if the age is less than
16 years). Instead of using labels such as schizoid or
histrionic, it is more useful to describe the personality
in some detail.
The following subheadings are often used for the
description of premorbid personality.
1. Interpersonal relationship: Interpersonal relationships with family members, friends, and
work colleagues; introverted/extroverted; ease
of making and maintaining social relationships.
2. Use of leisure time: Hobbies; interests; intellectual activities; critical faculty; energetic/
sedentary.
3. Predominant mood: Optimistic/pessimistic;
stable/prone to anxiety; cheerful/despondent;
reaction to stressful life events.
4. Attitude to self and others: Self-confidence
level; self-criticism; self-consciousness; selfcentred/thoughtful of others; self-appraisal of
abilities, achievements and failures.
5. Attitude to work and responsibility: Decision
making; acceptance of responsibility; flexibility;
perseverance; foresight.
6. Religious beliefs and moral attitudes: Religious
beliefs; tolerance of others’ standards and
beliefs; conscience; altruism.
7. Fantasy life: Sexual and nonsexual fantasies;
daydreaming-frequency and content; recurrent
or favourite daydreams; dreams.
8. Habits: Food fads; alcohol; tobacco; drugs;
sleep.

One of the most reliable methods of assessment
of premorbid personality is interviewing an informant
familiar with the patient prior to the onset of illness.

ALCOHOL AND SUBSTANCE HISTORY
Although alcohol and drug history is often elicited as a
part of personal history, it is often customary to record
it separately. Alcohol and drugs can often contribute
to causation of several psychiatric symptoms and are
often present co-morbidly alongside many psychiatric
diagnoses.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A detailed general physical examination (GPE) and
systemic examination is a must in every patient.
Physical disease, which is aetiologically important (for
causing psychiatric symptomatology), or accidentally
co-existent, or secondarily caused by the psychiatric
condition or treatment, is often present and can be
detected by a good physical examination.

MENTAL STATUS EXAMINATION (MSE)*
Mental status examination is a standardised format in
which the clinician records the psychiatric signs and
symptoms present at the time of the interview.
MSE should describe all areas of mental functioning (Table 2.2). Some areas, however, may deserve
more emphasis according to the clinical impressions
that may arise from the history; for example, mood
and affect in depression, and cognitive functions in
delirium and dementia.

General Appearance and Behaviour
A rich deal of information can be elicited from examination of the general appearance and behaviour.
While examining, it is important to remember patient’s
sociocultural background and personality.

* The definitions of some MSE terms are described in Appendix III.


<<<PAGE 23>>>
Psychiatric History and Examination
Table 2.2: Mental Status Examination
1. General Appearance and Behaviour
i. General Appearance
ii. Attitude towards Examiner
iii. Comprehension
iv. Gait and Posture
v. Motor Activity
vi. Social Manner
vii. Rapport
2. Speech
i. Rate and Quantity
ii. Volume and Tone
iii. Flow and Rhythm
3. Mood and Affect
4. Thought
i. Stream and Form
ii. Content
5. Perception
6. Cognition (Higher Mental Functions)
i. Consciousness
ii. Orientation
iii. Attention
iv. Concentration
v. Memory
vi. Intelligence
vii. Abstract thinking
7. Insight
8. Judgement

Understandably, general appearance and behaviour needs to be given more emphasis in the examination of an uncooperative patient.

General appearance
The important points to be noted are:
Physique and body habitus (build) and physical appearance (approximate height, weight, and appearance),
Looks comfortable/uncomfortable,
Physical health,
Grooming, Hygiene, Self-care,
Dressing (adequate, appropriate, any peculiarities),
Facies (non-verbal expression of mood),
Effeminate/masculine

11

Attitude towards examiner
Cooperation/guardedness/evasiveness/hostility/combativeness/haughtiness,
Attentiveness,
Appears interested/disinterested/apathetic,
Any ingratiating behaviour,
Perplexity

Comprehension
Intact/impaired (partially/fully)

Gait and posture
Normal or abnormal (way of sitting, standing, walking, lying)

Motor activity
Increased/decreased,
Excitement/stupor,
Abnormal involuntary movements (AIMs) such as
tics, tremors, akathisia,
Restlessness/ill at ease,
Catatonic signs (mannerisms, stereotypies, posturing,
waxy flexibility, negativism, ambitendency, automatic
obedience, stupor, echopraxia, psychological pillow,
forced grasping) (see Chapter 5 for details),
Conversion and dissociative signs (pseudoseizures,
possession states),
Social withdrawal, Autism,
Compulsive acts, rituals or habits (for example, nail
biting),
Reaction time

Social manner and non-verbal
behaviour
Increased, decreased, or inappropriate behaviour
Eye contact (gaze aversion, staring vacantly, staring
at the examiner, hesitant eye contact, or normal eye
contact).

Rapport
Whether a working and empathic relationship
can be established with the patient, should be mentioned.


<<<PAGE 24>>>
12

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Hallucinatory Behaviour
Smiling or crying without reason, Muttering or talking
to self (non-social speech).
Odd gesturing in response to auditory or visual
hallucinations.

Speech
Speech can be examined under the following headings:

Rate and quantity of speech
Whether speech is present or absent (mutism),
If present, whether it is spontaneous, whether productivity is increased or decreased,
Rate is rapid or slow (its appropriateness), Pressure
of speech or poverty of speech.

over time), depth or intensity of affect (normal, increased or blunted) and appropriateness of affect (in
relation to thought and surrounding environment).
Mood is described as general warmth, euphoria,
elation, exaltation and/or ecstasy (seen in severe
mania) in mania; anxious and restless in anxiety
and depression; sad, irritable, angry and/or despaired in depression; and shallow, blunted, indifferent,
restricted, inappropriate and/or labile in schizophrenia.
Anhedonia may occur in both schizophrenia and
depression.

Thought

Smooth/hesitant, Blocking (sudden),
Dysprosody, Stuttering/Stammering/Cluttering, Any
accent,
Circumstantiality, Tangentiality,
Verbigeration, Stereotypies (verbal),
Flight of ideas, Clang associations.

Normal thinking is a goal directed flow of ideas,
symbols and associations initiated by a problem or a
task, characterised by rational connections between
successive ideas or thoughts, and leading towards
a reality oriented conclusion. Therefore, thought
process that is not goal-directed, or not logical, or does
not lead to a realistic solution to the problem at hand,
is not considered normal.
Traditionally, in the clinical examination, thought
is assessed (by the content of speech) under the four
headings of stream, form, content and possession of
thought. However, since there is widespread disagreement regarding this subdivision, ‘thought’ is discussed
here under the following two headings of ‘stream and
form’, and ‘content’.

Mood and Affect

Stream and form of thought

Mood is the pervasive feeling tone which is sustained
(lasts for some length of time) and colours the total
experience of the person. Affect, on the other hand, is
the outward objective expression of the immediate,
cross-sectional experience of emotion at a given time.
The assessment of mood includes testing the quality of mood, which is assessed subjectively (‘how
do you feel’) and objectively (by examination). The
other components are stability of mood (over a period
of time), reactivity of mood (variation in mood with
stimuli), and persistence of mood (length of time the
mood lasts).
The affect is similarly described under quality of
affect, range of affect (of emotional changes displayed

For obvious reasons, the ‘stream of thought’ overlaps
with examination of ‘speech’. Spontaneity, productivity, flight of ideas, prolixity, poverty of content of
speech, and thought block should be mentioned here.
The ‘continuity’ of thought is assessed; Whether
the thought processes are relevant to the questions
asked; Any loosening of associations, tangentiality,
circumstantiality, illogical thinking, perseveration, or
verbigeration is noted.

Volume and tone of speech
Increased/decreased (its appropriateness),
Low/high/normal pitch

Flow and rhythm of speech

Content of thought
Any preoccupations;
Obsessions (recurrent, irrational, intrusive, egodystonic, ego-alien ideas);


<<<PAGE 25>>>
Psychiatric History and Examination

Contents of phobias (irrational fears);
Delusions (false, unshakable beliefs) or Over-valued
ideas;
Explore for delusions/ideas of persecution, reference,
grandeur, love, jealousy (infidelity), guilt, nihilism,
poverty, somatic (hypochondriacal) symptoms, hopelessness, helplessness, worthlessness, and suicidal
ideation.
Delusions of control, thought insertion, thought withdrawal, and thought broadcasting are Schneiderian
first rank symptoms (SFRS). The presence of neologisms should be recorded here.

Perception
Perception is the process of being aware of a sensory
experience and being able to recognize it by comparing it with previous experiences.
Perception is assessed under the following headings:

Hallucinations
The presence of hallucinations should be noted.
A hallucination is a perception experienced in the
absence of an external stimulus. The hallucinations
can be in the auditory, visual, olfactory, gustatory or
tactile domains.
Auditory hallucinations are commonest types of
hallucinations in non-organic psychiatric disorders.
It is really important to clarify whether they are
elementary (only sounds are heard) or complex (voices
heard).
The hallucination is experienced much like a true
perception and it seems to come from an external
objective space (for example, from outside the ears in
the case of an auditory hallucination). If the hallucination does not either appear to be a true perception or
comes from a subjective internal space (for example,
inside the person’s own head in the case of auditory
hallucination), then it is called as a pseudohallucination.
It should be further enquired what was heard, how
many voices were heard, in which part of the day,
male or female voices, how interpreted and whether
these are second person or third person hallucinations

13

(i.e. whether the voices were addressing the patient
or were discussing him in third person); also enquire
about command (imperative) hallucinations (which
give commands to the person).
Enquire whether the hallucinations occurred during wakefulness, or were they hypnagogic (occurring
while going to sleep) and/or hypnopompic (occurring
while getting up from sleep) hallucinations.

Illusions and misinterpretations
Whether visual, auditory, or in other sensory fields;
whether occur in clear consciousness or not; whether
any steps taken to check the reality of distorted perceptions.

Depersonalisation/derealisation
Depersonalisation and derealisation are abnormalities
in the perception of a person’s reality and are often
described as ‘as-if’ phenomena.

Somatic passivity phenomenon
Somatic passivity is the presence of strange sensations described by the patient as being imposed on
the body by ‘some external agency’, with the patient
being a passive recipient. It is one of the Schneider’s
first rank symptoms.

Others
Autoscopy, abnormal vestibular sensations, sense of
presence should be noted here.

Cognition (Neuropsychiatric) Assessment
Assessment of the cognitive or higher mental functions is an important part of the MSE. A significant
disturbance of cognitive functions commonly points
to the presence of an organic psychiatric disorder. It
is usual to use Folstein’s mini mental state examination (MMSE) for a systematic clinical examination of
higher mental functions.

Consciousness
The intensity of stimulation needed to arouse the
patient should be indicated to demonstrate the level of


<<<PAGE 26>>>
14

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

alertness, for example, by calling patient’s name in a
normal voice, calling in a loud voice, light touch on the
arm, vigorous shaking of the arm, or painful stimulus.
Grade the level of consciousness: conscious/ confusion/somnolence/clouding/delirium/stupor/coma.
Any disturbance in the level of consciousness should
ideally be rated on Glasgow Coma Scale, where a
numeric value is given to the best response in each
of the three categories (eye opening, verbal, motor).

Orientation
Whether the patient is well oriented to time (test by
asking the time, date, day, month, year, season, and
the time spent in hospital), place (test by asking the
present location, building, city, and country) and
person (test by asking his own name, and whether
he can identify people around him and their role in
that setting). Disorientation in time usually precedes
disorientation in place and person.

Attention
Is the attention easily aroused and sustained; Ask the
patient to repeat digits forwards and backwards (digit
span test; digit forward and backward test), one at a
time (for example, patient may be able to repeat 5
digits forward and 3 digits backwards). Start with two
digit numbers increasing gradually up to eight digit
numbers or till failure occurs on three consecutive
occasions.

Concentration
Can the patient concentrate; Is he easily distractible;
Ask to subtract serial sevens from hundred (100-7
test), or serial threes from fifty (50-3 test), or to count
backwards from 20, or enumerate the names of the
months (or days of the week) in the reverse order.
Note down the answers and the time taken to
perform the tests.

Memory
a. Immediate Retention and Recall (IR and R)
Use the digit span test to assess the immediate
memory; digit forwards and digit backwards subtests

(also used for testing attention; are described under
attention).
b. Recent Memory
Ask how did the patient come to the room/hospital;
what he ate for dinner the day before or for breakfast
the same morning. Give an address to be memorised
and ask it to be recalled 15 minutes later or at the end
of the interview.
c. Remote Memory
Ask for the date and place of marriage, name and birthdays of children, any other relevant questions from
the person’s past. Note any amnesia (anterograde/
retrograde), or confabulation, if present.

Intelligence
Intelligence is the ability to think logically, act rationally, and deal effectively with environment.
Ask questions about general information, keeping
in mind the patient’s educational and social background, his experiences and interests, for example,
ask about the current and the past prime ministers and
presidents of India, the capital of India, and the name
of the various states.
Test for reading and writing; Use simple tests of
calculation.

Abstract thinking
Abstract thinking is characterised by the ability to:
a. assume a mental set voluntarily,
b. shift voluntarily from one aspect of a situation to
another,
c. keep in mind simultaneously the various aspects
of a situation,
d. grasp the essentials of a ‘whole’ (for example,
situation or concept), and
e. to break a ‘whole’ into its parts.
Abstract thinking testing assesses patient’s concept
formation. The methods used are:
a. Proverb Testing: The meaning of simple proverbs
(usually three) should be asked.
b. Similarities (and also the differences) between
familiar objects should be asked, such as: table/
chair; banana/orange; dog/lion; eye/ear.


<<<PAGE 27>>>
Psychiatric History and Examination

The answers may be overly concrete or abstract.
The appropriateness of answers is judged. Concretisation of responses or inappropriate answers may occur
in schizophrenia.

Insight
Insight is the degree of awareness and understanding
that the patient has regarding his illness.
Ask the patient’s attitude towards his present state;
whether there is an illness or not; if yes, which kind of
illness (physical, psychiatric or both); is any treatment
needed; is there hope for recovery; what is the cause of
illness. Depending on the patient’s responses, insight
can be graded on a six-point scale (Table 2.3).

Judgement
Judgement is the ability to assess a situation correctly
and act appropriately within that situation. Both social
and test judgement are assessed.
i. Social judgement is observed during the hospital
stay and during the interview session. It includes
an evaluation of ‘personal judgement’.
ii. Test judgement is assessed by asking the patient
what he would do in certain test situations, such
as ‘a house on fire’, or ‘a man lying on the road’,
or ‘a sealed, stamped, addressed envelope lying
on a street’.
Judgement is rated as Good/Intact/Normal or Poor/
Impaired/Abnormal.

INVESTIGATIONS
After a detailed history and examination, investigations (laboratory tests, diagnostic standardised
interviews, family interviews, and/or psychological
tests) are carried out based on the diagnostic and
aetiological possibilities. Some of these investigations
are described briefly in Table 2.4.

FORMULATION
After a comprehensive psychiatric assessment, a
diagnostic formulation summarises the detailed posi-

15

Table 2.3: Clinical Rating of Insight
Insight is rated on a 6-point scale from one to six.
1. Complete denial of illness.
2. Slight awareness of being sick and needing help, but
denying it at the same time.
3. Awareness of being sick, but it is attributed to external or physical factors.
4. Awareness of being sick, due to something unknown
in self.
5. Intellectual Insight: Awareness of being ill and that
the symptoms/failures in social adjustment are due
to own particular irrational feelings/thoughts; yet
does not apply this knowledge to the current/future
experiences.
6. True Emotional Insight: It is different from intellectual insight in that the awareness leads to significant
basic changes in the future behaviour.

Table 2.4: Some Investigations in Psychiatry
I. Biological Investigations
Medical Screen
Some of the following tests may be useful in screening for the medical disorders causing the psychiatric
symptoms. Some examples of indications are stated in
front of the tests (these examples are not intended to be
comprehensive).
Haemoglobin: Routine screen.
Total and differential leucocyte counts: Routine screen,
Treatment with antipsychotics (e.g. clozapine), lithium,
carbamazepine.
Mean Corpuscular Volume (MCV): Alcohol dependence
(increased).
Urinalysis: Routine screen; Drug screening.
Peripheral smear: Anaemia.
Renal function tests: Treatment with lithium.
Liver function tests: Treatment with carbamazepine,
valproate, benzodiazepines. Alcohol dependence.
Serum electrolytes: Dehydration, SIADH, Treatment with
carbamazepine, antipsychotics, lithium.
Blood glucose: Routine screen (age>35 years), treatment
with antipsychotics
Contd...


<<<PAGE 28>>>
16

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Contd...
Thyroid function tests: Refractory depression, rapid
cycling mood disorder. Treatment with lithium, carbamazepine.
Electrocardiogram (ECG): Age>35 years, Treatment with
lithium, antidepressants, ECT, antipsychotics.
HIV testing: Intravenous drug users, suggestive sexual
history, AIDS dementia.
VDRL: Suggestive sexual history.
Chest X-ray: Age>35 years, Treatment with ECT.
Skull X-ray: History of head Injury.
Serum CK: Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (markedly
increased levels).
Toxicology Screen
Useful when substance use is suspected; for example,
alcohol, cocaine, opiates, cannabis, phencyclidine,
benzodiazepines, barbiturates; remember that certain
medications can cause false positive results (for example,
quetiapine for methadone).
Drug Levels
Drug levels are indicated to test for therapeutic blood
levels, for toxic blood levels, and for testing drug
compliance. Examples are lithium (0.6-1.0 meq/L),
carbamazepine (4-12 mg/ml), valproate (50-100 mg/
ml), haloperidol (8-18 ng/ml), tricyclic antidepressants
(nortriptyline 50-150 ng/ml; imipramine 200-250 ng/
ml), benzodiazepines, barbiturates and clozapine (350500 μg/L).
Electrophysiological Tests
EEG (Electroencephalogram): Seizures, dementia, pseudoseizures vs. seizures, episodic abnormal behaviour.
BEAM (Brain electrical activity mapping): Provides
topographic imaging of EEG data.
Video-Telemetry EEG: Pseudoseizures vs. seizures.
Evoked potentials (e.g. p300): Research tool.
Polysomnography/Sleep studies: Sleep disorders, seizures (occurring in sleep). The various components in
sleep studies include EEG, ECG, EOG, EMG, airflow
measurement, penile tumescence, oxygen saturation,
body temperature, GSR (Galvanic skin response), and
body movement.
Holter ECG: Panic disorder.

Brain Imaging Tests (Cranial)
Computed Tomography (CT) Scan: Dementia, delirium,
seizures, first episode psychosis.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scan: Dementia.
Higher resolution than CT scan.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Scan: Research tool
for study of brain function and physiology.
Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)
Scan: Research tool.
Magnetic Resonance (MR) Angiography: Research tool
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS): Research tool
Neuroendocrine Tests
Dexamethasone Suppression Test (DST): Research tool
in depression (response to antidepressants or ECT). If
plasma cortisol is >5 mg/100 ml following administration of dexamethasone (1 mg, given at 11 PM the night
before and plasma cortisol taken at 4 PM and 11 PM
the next day), it indicates non-suppression.
TRH Stimulation Test: Lithium-induced hypothyroidism,
refractory depression. If the serum TSH is >35 mIU/ml
(following 500 mg of TRH given IV), the test is positive.
Serum Prolactin Levels: Seizures vs. pseudoseizures,
galactorrhoea with antipsychotics.
Serum 17-hydroxycorticosteroid: Organic mood (depression) disorder.
Serum Melatonin Levels: Seasonal mood disorders.
Biochemical Tests
5-HIAA: Research tool (depression, suicidal and/or
aggressive behaviour).
MHPG: Research tool (depression).
Platelet MAO: Research tool (depression).
Catecholamine levels: Organic anxiety disorder (e.g.
pheochromocytoma).
Genetic Tests
Cytogenetic work-up is useful in some cases of mental
retardation.
Sexual Disorder Investigations
Papaverine test: Male erectile disorder (intracavernosal
injection of papaverine is sometimes used to differentiate
organic from non-organic male erectile disorder).
Nocturnal penile tumescence: Male erectile disorder.
Contd...


<<<PAGE 29>>>
Psychiatric History and Examination

17

Contd...
Serum testosterone: Sexual desire disorders, Male erectile
disorder.
Penile Doppler: Male erectile disorder.

used projective tests of personality are Rorschach inkblot
test, TAT (Thematic apperception test), DAPT (Draw-aperson test), and sentence completion test (SCT).

Miscellaneous Tests
Lactate provocation test: Panic disorders (In about 70%
of patients with panic disorders, sodium lactate infusion
can provoke a panic attack).
Drug assisted interview (Amytal interview): Useful in
catatonia, unexplained mutism, and dissociative stupor.
Discussed in Chapter 18.
CSF examination: Meningitis.

Neuropsychological Tests
Some of the commonly used neuropsychological tests are
Wisconsin card sorting test, Wechsler memory scale, PGI
memory scale, BG test (Bender Gestalt test), BVRT (Benton
visual retention test), Luria-Nabraska neuropsychological
test battery, Halstead-Reitan neuropsychological test battery, and PGI battery of brain dysfunction.

II. Psychological Investigations
Objective Tests
These are pen-and-paper objective tests, which are
employed to test the various aspects of personality and
intelligence in a person.
Objective personality tests: Some examples of objective
personality tests are MMPI (Minnesota multiple personality inventory) and 16-PF (16 personality factors).
Intelligence tests: Some commonly used tests of intelligence are WAIS (Wechsler adult intelligence scale),
Stanford-Binet test and Bhatia’s battery of intelligence
tests.
Projective Tests
In projective tests, ambiguous stimuli are used which are
not clear to the person immediately. Some commonly

tive (and important negative) information regarding
the patient under the focus of care, before listing
differential diagnosis, prognostic factors, and a management plan.
The diagnostic formulation focuses on aetiological
factors based on the biopsychosocial model (Table 2.5;
Fig. 2.3). Similarly, it is useful to devise the management plan based on the biopsychosocial model (Table
2.6). It is possible to use specific formulations based on
treatment options; for example, a cognitive formulation for CBT and a psychodynamic formulation for
psychodynamic psychotherapy.
Thus, psychiatric assessment is an initial step
towards diagnosis and management of psychiatric
disorders.

Rating Scales
Several rating scales are used in psychiatry to quantify the
psychopathology observed. Some of the commonly used
scales are BPRS (Brief psychiatric rating scale), SANS
(Scale for assessment of negative symptoms), SAPS (Scale
for assessment of positive symptoms), HARS (Hamilton’s
anxiety rating scale), HDRS (Hamilton’s depression rating
scale), and Y-BOCS (Yale-Brown obsessive-compulsive
scale).
Diagnostic Standardized Interviews
The use of these instruments makes the diagnostic
assessment more standardized. These include PSE
(Present state examination), SCAN (Schedules for clinical
assessment in neuropsychiatry), SCID (Structured clinical
interview for DSM-IV), and IPDE (International personality disorder examination).
Table 2.5: Diagnostic Formulation
Biological

Psychological

Social

Predisposing
Precipitating
Perpetuating
Protective
Table 2.6: Management Plan
Biological
Short-term
Medium-term
Long-term

Psychological

Social


<<<PAGE 30>>>
18

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

SPECIAL INTERVIEWS

Fig. 2.3: Aetiological Factors Drawn on a Timeline

There are different formats available for detailed evaluation of special populations such as uncooperative
patients, hostile and aggressive patients (Chapter 19),
suicidal patients (Chapter 19), and children. These
formats should be used whenever appropriate.


<<<PAGE 31>>>
3

Organic (Including
Symptomatic)
Mental Disorders

It is assumed that all psychological and behavioural
processes, whether normal or abnormal, are a result of
normal or deranged brain function. A rational corollary would be that all psychiatric disorders are due to
abnormal brain functioning and are therefore organic.
However, this would be a gross oversimplification.
According to our present knowledge, there are
broadly three types of psychiatric disorders:
1. Those due to a known organic cause.
2. Those in whose causation an organic factor has
not yet been found or proven.
3. Those primarily due to psychosocial factors.
Only disorders with a known organic cause are
called organic mental disorders. Thus, organic mental
disorders are behavioural or psychological disorders
associated with transient or permanent brain dysfunction and include only those mental and behavioural
disorders that are due to demonstrable cerebral disease
or disorder, either primary (primary brain pathology)
or secondary (brain dysfunction due to systemic diseases). The use of term organic here does not imply
that other psychiatric disorders are ‘non-organic’ in the
sense of having no biological basis. It simply means
that the organic mental disorders have a demonstrable
and independently diagnosable cerebral disease or
disorder, unlike other psychiatric disorders that do
not at present.
Since organic brain illness can mimic any psychiatric disorder, especially in the initial stages, organic
mental disorder should be the first consideration in

evaluating a patient with any psychological or behavioural clinical syndrome. The presence of following
features requires a high index of suspicion for an
organic mental disorder (or what is loosely called as
organicity):
1. First episode.
2. Sudden onset.
3. Older age of onset.
4. History of drug and/or alcohol use disorder.
5. Concurrent medical or neurological illness.
6. Neurological symptoms or signs, such as seizures,
impairment of consciousness, head injury, sensory
or motor disturbance.
7. Presence of confusion, disorientation, memory
impairment or soft neurological signs.
8. Prominent visual or other non-auditory (e.g. olfactory, gustatory or tactile) hallucinations.
These disorders can be broadly subcategorised
into the following categories:
1. Delirium,
2. Dementia,
3. Organic amnestic syndrome, and
4. Other organic mental disorders.

DELIRIUM
Delirium is the commonest organic mental disorder
seen in clinical practice. Five to fifteen percent of
all patients in medical and surgical inpatient units
are estimated to develop delirium at some time in


<<<PAGE 32>>>
20

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

their lives. This percentage is higher in postoperative
patients.
Delirium is the most appropriate substitute for a
variety of names used in the past such as acute confusional states, acute brain syndrome, acute organic
reaction, toxic psychosis, and metabolic (and other
acute) encephalopathies.

Clinical Features
Delirium is characterised by the following features:
1. A relatively acute onset,
2. Clouding of consciousness, characterised by
a decreased awareness of surroundings and a
decreased ability to respond to environmental
stimuli, and
3. Disorientation (most commonly in time, then in
place and usually later in person), associated with
a decreased attention span and distractibility.
Marked perceptual disturbances such as illusions, misinterpretations, and hallucinations also
occur. These are most commonly visual though
other perceptual domains can also be involved.
There is often a disturbance of sleep-wake cycle;
most commonly, insomnia at night with daytime
drowsiness. Diurnal variation is marked, usually with
worsening of symptoms in the evening and night
(called sun downing). There is also an impairment
of registration and retention of new memories.
Psychomotor disturbance, usually in form of
agitation and occasionally retardation, is present.
Generalised autonomic dysfunc tion, speech and
thought disturbances (such as slurring of speech,
incoherence, dysarthria, and fleeting delusions) are
often present.
The motor symptoms in delirium can include:
1. Asterixis (flapping tremor),
2. Multifocal myoclonus,
3. Carphologia or floccillation (picking movements
at cover-sheets and clothes),
4. Occupational delirium (elaborate pantomimes as
if continuing their usual occupation in the hospital
bed), and
5. Tone and reflex abnormalities.

Lability of affect is usually present. Motor and
verbal perse veration, dysno mia, agraphia and
impaired comprehension can also be seen.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis of delirium is frequently missed, as
the possibility can be overlooked in medical/surgical
settings. It is important to recognize delirium at the
earliest possible as delirium often has an underlying
aetiology which may be correctable. Any delay in
diagnosis, and thus starting treatment, may lead to
permanent deficits which can be irreversible.
The diagnosis of delirium is mainly clinical. No
ancillary laboratory test is diagnostic, although tests
may help in finding the aetiology.
According to ICD-10, for a definite diagnosis
of delirium, symptoms (mild or severe) should be
present in each one of the five areas described. These
include impairment of consciousness and attention (on
a continuum from clouding to coma; reduced ability
to direct, focus, sustain, and shift attention), global
disturbance of cognition, psychomotor disturbances,
disturbance of sleep-wake cycle, and emotional disturbances.
The onset is usually rapid, the course diurnally
fluctuating, and the total duration of the condition
much less than 6 months. The above clinical picture
is so characteristic that a fairly confident diagnosis of
delirium can be made even if the underlying cause is
not clearly established.
A history of underlying physical or brain disease,
and/or evidence of cerebral dysfunction (e.g. an abnormal EEG, usually but not always, showing slowing
of the background activity) may help in reaching the
diagnosis.

Predisposing Factors
Presence of certain predisposing factors lowers the
threshold for the development of delirium (Table 3.1).

Aetiology
The list of possible causes of delirium is virtually
endless. Any factor which disturbs the metabolism of


<<<PAGE 33>>>
Organic (Including Symptomatic) Mental Disorders

brain sufficiently can cause delirium. The aetiology of
delirium demonstrates a threshold phenomenon, with
a combination of factors adding up to cross a threshold
for causing delirium, which appears to be different
for each individual.
Table 3.1: Predisposing Factors in Delirium
1. Pre-existing brain damage or dementia
2. Extremes of age (very old or very young)
3. Previous history of delirium
4. Alcohol or drug dependence
5. Generalised or focal cerebral lesion
6. Chronic medical illness
7. Surgical procedure and postoperative period
8. Severe psychological symptoms (such as fear)
9. Treatment with psychotropic medicines
10. Present or past history of head injury
11. Individual susceptibility to delirium

21

One of the important causes of delirium, namely
post-cardiac surgery delirium, is discussed in Chapter
12. The most common causes are listed in Table 3.2.

Management
1. In cases where a cause is not obvious (or other
contributory causes are suspected), a battery of
investigations should be done which can include
complete blood count, urinalysis, blood glucose,
blood urea, serum electrolytes, liver and renal
function tests, thyroid function tests, serum B12 and
folate levels, X-ray chest, ECG, CSF examination,
urine for porphyrins, drug screens, VDRL, HIV
testing, arterial pO2 and pCO2, EEG, and brain
imaging (such as cranial CT scan or MRI scan).
2. Identification of the cause and its immediate
correction, e.g. 50 mg of 50% dextrose IV for
hypoglycaemia, O2 for hypoxia, 100 mg of B1 IV

Table 3.2: Delirium: Some Important Causes
Metabolic Causes
i. Hypoxia, Carbon dioxide narcosis
ii. Hypoglycaemia
iii. Hepatic encephalopathy, Uremic encephalopathy
iv. Cardiac failure, Cardiac arrhythmias, Cardiac
arrest
v. Water and electrolyte imbalance (Water, Na+,
K+, Mg++, Ca++)
vi. Metabolic acidosis or alkalosis
vii. Fever, Anaemia, Hypovolemic shock
viii. Carcinoid syndrome, Porphyria
Endocrine Causes
i. Hypo- and Hyperpituitarism
ii. Hypo- and Hyperthyroidism
iii. Hypo- and Hyperparathyroidism
iv. Hypo- and Hyperadrenalism
Drugs (Both ingestion and withdrawal can cause
delirium) and Poisons
i. Digitalis, Quinidine, Antihypertensives
ii. Alcohol, Sedatives, Hypnotics (especially barbiturates)
iii. Tricyclic antidepressants, Antipsychotics, Anticholinergics, Disulfiram

iv. Anticonvulsants, L-dopa, Opiates
v. Salicylates, Steroids, Penicillin, Insulin
vi. Methyl alcohol, heavy metals, biocides.
Nutritional Deficiencies
i. Thiamine, Niacin, Pyridoxine, Folic acid, B12
ii. Proteins
Systemic Infections
i. Acute and Chronic, e.g. Septicaemia, Pneumonia, Endocarditis
Intracranial Causes
i. Epilepsy (including post-ictal states)
ii. Head injury, Subarachnoid haemorrhage, Subdural haematoma
iii. Intracranial infections, e.g. Meningitis, Encephalitis, Cerebral malaria
iv. Migraine
v. Stroke (acute phase), Hypertensive encephalopathy
vi. Focal lesions, e.g. right parietal lesions (such
as abscess, neoplasm)
Miscellaneous
i. Postoperative states (including ICU delirium)
ii. Sleep deprivation
iii. Heat, Electricity, Radiation


<<<PAGE 34>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

22

for thiamine deficiency, and IV fluids for fluid and
electrolyte imbalance.
3. Symptomatic measures: As many patients are
agitated, emergency psychiatric treatment may
be needed. Small doses of benzodiazepines(lorazepam or diazepam) or antipsychotics (haloperidol or risperidone) may be given either orally or
parenterally. Maintenance treatment can continue
till recovery occurs, usually within a week’s time.
There is an increased risk of stroke in elderly
patients with dementia with prescription of
atypical antipsychotics such as olanzapine and
risperidone.
4. Supportive medical and nursing care.

DEMENTIA
Dementia is a chronic organic mental disorder, characterised by the following main clinical features:
1. Impairment of intellectual functions,
2. Impairment of memory (predominantly of recent
memory, especially in early stages),
3. Deterioration of personality with lack of personal
care.

Impairment of all these functions occurs globally,
causing interference with day-to-day activities and
interpersonal relationships. There is impairment of
judgement and impulse control, and also impairment
of abstract thinking. There is however usually no impairment of consciousness (unlike in delirium; Table
3.3). The course of dementia is usually progressive
though some forms of dementia can be reversible.
Additional features may also be present. These
include:
1. Emotional lability (marked variation in emotional
expression).
2. Catastrophic reaction (when confronted with an
assignment which is beyond the residual intellectual capacity, patient may go into a sudden rage).
3. Thought abnormalities, e.g. perseveration, delusions.
4. Urinary and faecal incontinence may develop in
later stages.
5. Disorientation in time; disorientation in place and
person may also develop in later stages.
6. Neurological signs may or may not be present,
depending on the underlying cause.

Table 3.3: A Comparison of Delirium and Dementia
Features
1. Onset
2. Course
3. Clinical features
a. Consciousness
b. Orientation
c. Memory

d. Comprehension
e. Sleep-wake cycle
f. Attention and concentration
g. Diurnal variation
h. Perception
i. Other features

Delirium

Dementia

Usually acute
Usually recover in 1 week;
may take up to 1 month

Usually insidious
Usually protracted, although may be reversible
in some cases

Clouded
Grossly disturbed
Immediate retention and
recall disturbed
Recent memory disturbed

Usually normal
Usually normal; disturbed only in late stages
Immediate retention and recall normal
Recent memory disturbed
Remote memory disturbed only in late stages
Impaired only in late stages
Usually normal
Usually normal
Usually absent

Impaired
Grossly disturbed
Grossly disturbed
Marked; sundowning may
be present
Visual illusions and
Hallucinations may occur
hallucinations very common
Asterixis; multifocal myoclonus Catastrophic reaction; perseveration


<<<PAGE 35>>>
Organic (Including Symptomatic) Mental Disorders

Diagnosis
Like delirium, the diagnosis of dementia is clinical
though ancillary laboratory investigations may help
in elucidating the underlying aetiology.
According to ICD-10, the following features are
required for diagnosis: evidence of decline in both
memory and thinking, sufficient enough to impair
personal activities of daily living, memory impairment
(typically affecting registration, storage, and retrieval
of new information though previously learned material
may also be lost particularly in later stages, impaired
thinking, presence of clear consciousness (consciousness can be impaired if delirium is also present), and
a duration of at least 6 months.
The following conditions must be kept in mind in
the differential diagnosis of dementia.
1. Normal aging process: Although impairment of
memory and intellect are commoner in elderly,
their mere presence does not justify a diagnosis
of dementia. Dementia is diagnosed only when
there is demonstrable evidence of memory and
other intellectual impairment which is of sufficient
severity to interfere with social and/or occupational
functioning. The normal memory impairment in
old age is called as benign senescent forgetfulness.
2. Delirium: The syndromes of delirium and dementia may overlap. See Table 3.3 for a comparison
of clinical features.

23

3. Depressive pseudodementia: Depression in the
elderly patients may mimic dementia clinically. It
is called as depressive pseudodementia (Table 3.4).
Identification of depression is very important as it
is far more easily treatable than dementia.
The depressed patients often complain of memory
impairment, difficulty in sustaining attention and
concentration, and reduced intellectual capacity. In
contrast, patients with dementia do not often complain
of these disturbances. In fact, when confronted with
evidence of memory impairment, they often confabulate. As depression may often be superimposed
on dementia, it is at times necessary to undertake a
therapeutic trial with antidepressants, if the clinical
picture is unclear.
It is useful to differentiate dementia into cortical
and subcortical subtypes (Table 3.5).

Aetiology
A large number of conditions can cause dementia
(Table 3.6). However, a majority of cases are due to
a few common causes such as Alzheimer’s disease
and multi-infarct dementia. Some clinically important
types of dementia are briefly discussed here.

Alzheimer’s Dementia
This is the commonest cause of dementia, seen in
about 70% of all cases of dementia in USA. It is more
commonly seen in women. Earlier, it was differentiated

Table 3.4: Dementia vs Pseudodementia
Dementia
1. Patient rarely complains of cognitive impairment
2. Patient often emphasises achievements
3. Patient often appears unconcerned
4. Usually labile affect
5. Patient makes errors on cognitive examination
6. Recent memory impairment found on examination
7. Confabulation may be present
8. Consistently poor performance on similar tests
9. History of depression less common

Pseudodementia (Depressive)
Patient usually always complains about memory impairment
Patient often emphasises disability
Patient very often communicates distress
Severe depression on examination
‘Do not know’ answers are more frequent
Recent memory impairment rarely found on examination
Confabulation very rare
Marked variability in performance on similar tests
Past history of manic and/or depressive episodes may be
present


<<<PAGE 36>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

24

Table 3.5: Cortical and Subcortical Dementia
Features

Cortical Dementia

Subcortical Dementia

2. Examples

Cortex (frontal and temporoparieto-occipital
association areas, and hippocampus)
Alzheimer’s disease, Pick’s disease

3. Severity
4. Motor system

Severe
Usually normal

5. Other features

Subcortical grey matter (thalamus, basal
ganglia, and rostral brain stem)
Huntington’ chorea, Parkinson’s disease,
Progressive supranuclear palsy,
Wilson’s disease
Mild to moderate
Dysarthria, flexed/extended posture,
tremors, dystonia, chorea, ataxia, rigidity
Complex delusions; depression common;
rarely mania

Simple delusions; depression uncommon;
severe aphasia, amnesia, agnosia, apraxia,
acalculia, slowed cognitive speed (bradyphrenia)
Recall helped very little by cues
Recall partially helped by cues and
recognition tasks

1. Site of lesion

6. Memory deficit
(Short-term)

Table 3.6: Some Common Causes of Dementia
A. Parenchymatous brain disease
Alzheimer’s disease, Pick’s disease, Parkinson’s
disease, Huntington’s chorea, Lewy body dementia,
Steel Richardson syndrome (Progressive Supranuclear Palsy)
B. Vascular dementia
Multi-infarct dementia, subcortical vascular dementia
(Binswanger’s disease)
C. Toxic dementias
Bromide intoxication, drugs, heavy metals, alcohol,
carbon monoxide, analgesics, anticonvulsants, benzodiazepines, psychotropic drugs
D. Metabolic dementias
Chronic hepatic or uraemic encephalopathy, dialysis
dementia, Wilson’s disease
E. Endocrine causes
Thyroid, parathyroid, pituitary, adrenal dysfunction

F. Deficiency dementias
Pernicious anaemia, pellagra, folic acid deficiency,
thiamine deficiency
G. Dementias due to infections
Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, neurosyphilis, chronic
meningitis, viral encephalitis, AIDS dementia, other
HIV-related disorders, subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE)
H. Neoplastic dementias
Neoplasms and other intracranial space-occupying
lesions
I. Traumatic dementias
Chronic subdural haematoma, head injury
J. Hydrocephalic dementia
Normal pressure hydrocephalus

into two forms: a presenile form and a senile form.
Now it is known that these two forms represent the
same disease clinically and pathologically. There is
some evidence to suggest that Alzheimer’s disease
may have a genetic basis.
The diagnosis of Alzheimer’s dementia is by
exclusion of all other causes of dementia, as there are
no distinct diagnostic clinical features or laboratory

investigations. Autopsy shows macroscopic changes
such as enlarged cerebral ventricles, widened cerebral
sulci and shrinkage of cerebral cortex, as well as
microscopic changes such as senile plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, cortical nerve cell loss, and granulovacuolar degeneration. However, these changes are
only quantitatively, and not qualitatively, different
from a normal aged brain. Neurochemically, there is


<<<PAGE 37>>>
Organic (Including Symptomatic) Mental Disorders

a marked decrease in brain choline acetyltransferase
(CAT) with a similar decrease in brain acetylcholinesterase (AchE).
At present, Alzheimer’s dementia is not considered a treatable disorder. However, Cholinesterase
Inhibitors such as Rivastigmine (1.5 mg twice a day
to 6 mg twice a day), Donepezil (5-10 mg/day), and
Galantamine (4 mg twice a day to 12 mg twice a day)
have been used in the recent past for treatment of
moderate dementia with Alzheimer’s disease. These
elevate acetylcholine (Ach) concentrations in cerebral
cortex by slowing the degradation of acetylcholine
released by still intact cholinergic neurons in Alzheimer’s disease.
Memantine (5-20 mg/day), an N-methyl-Daspartate (NMDA) antagonist, is also available for the
treatment of moderately severe to severe Alzheimer’s
disease. There are several other drugs (such as ginkgo
biloba, piracetam, and vitamin C and E) used for treatment, though their value remains uncertain.

Multi-infarct Dementia
Multi-infarct dementia is the second commonest cause
of dementia, seen in 10-15% of all cases, though some
studies indicate that multi-infarct dementia is probably far more common in India. It is also one of the
important treatable causes of dementia.
Occurrence of multiple cerebral infarctions can
lead to a progressive disruption of brain function, leading to dementia. The most typical form of multi-infarct
dementia is characterised by the following features:
1. An abrupt onset,
2. Acute exacerbations (due to repeated infarctions),
3. Stepwise clinical deterioration (step-ladder pattern),
4. Fluctuating course,
5. Presence of hypertension (most commonly) or any
other significant cardiovascular disease, and
6. History of previous stroke or transient ischemic
attacks (TIAs).
Focal neurological signs are frequently present.
Insight into the illness is usually present in the early
part of the course. Emotional lability is common. EEG

25

(showing focal area of slowing) and brain imaging (CT
scan or MRI scan of brain showing multiple infarcts)
help in diagnosis. The treatment of the underlying
cause can prevent further deterioration by preventing
further infarctions.

Hypothyroid Dementia
This has been considered one of the most important
treatable and reversible causes of dementia, second
only to toxic dementias. Although it accounts for
less than 1% of dementias, hypothyroidism should be
suspected in every patient of dementia.
Since clinical diagnosis of hypothyroid dementia
may be difficult, laboratory tests should be used for
correct diagnosis. Prompt treatment can reverse the
dementing process and can lead to complete recovery
if the treatment is started within two years of the onset
of dementia.

AIDS Dementia Complex
About 50-70% of patients suffering from AIDS exhibit
a triad of cognitive, behavioural and motoric deficits
of subcortical dementia type and this is known as the
AIDS-dementia complex (ADC). Dementia can in
fact be an initial presentation in about 25% cases of
AIDS.
As the AIDS virus (a lenti-virus, a type of retrovirus) is highly neurotropic and the virus crosses the
blood-brain barrier early in the course of the disease
cognitive impairment is nearly ubiquitous in AIDS.
The diagnosis is established by ELISA (enzymelinked immuno-sorbent assay) showing anti-HIV antibodies, and the Western Blot test (blotting of antibody
specificities to HIV-specific proteins). A Cranial CT
scan can show cortical atrophy 1-4 months before the
onset of clinical dementia while MRI scan is helpful
in detecting the white matter lesions.

Lewy Body Dementia
Lewy body dementia is now believed to be the second
most common cause of the degenerative dementias,
accounting for about 4% of all dementias. Typically,
the clinical features of Lewy body dementia include:


<<<PAGE 38>>>
26

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

i. Fluctuating cognitive impairment over weeks or
months, with involvement of memory and higher
cortical functions (such as language, visuo-spatial
ability, praxis and reasoning). Lucid intervals can
be present in between fluctuations.
ii. Recurrent and detailed visual hallucinations.
iii. Spontaneous extrapyramidal or parkinsonian
symptoms such as rigidity and tremors.
iv. Neuroleptic sensitivity syndrome, characterised by
a marked sensitivity to the effects of typical doses
of antipsychotic drugs (resulting in severe extrapyramidal side-effects with use of antipsychotics).
Other clinical features may include repeated falls,
autonomic dysfunction (e.g. orthostatic hypotension), urinary incontinence, delusions and depressive
features. Although Lewy bodies (intra-cytoplasmic
inclusion bodies) are also present in Parkinson’s
disease, the occurrence of Lewy bodies in Lewy body
dementia is more widespread. A PET (Positron Emission Tomography) or SPECT (Single Photon Emission
Computerised Tomography) scan of brain may show
low dopamine transporter uptake in basal ganglia.
Antipsychotic medication should be avoided (or
used with extreme caution and in low doses) in patients
with Lewy body dementia.

Management
Basic Investigations
The diagnostic tests are of great importance in finding the cause, or to exclude all other causes before
diagnosing Alzheimer’s dementia.
The list of investigations could include complete
blood count, urinalysis, blood glucose, serum electrolytes, renal function tests, thyroid function tests, serum
B12 and folate levels, serological tests for syphilis,
arterial pO2 and pCO2, X-ray chest, ECG, X-ray skull,
EEG, lumbar puncture, CT scan/MRI scan of brain,
neuropsychological tests, and drug screens.

Treatment of the Underlying Cause,
if Treatable
Some underlying causes of dementia are treatable
(reversible dementias), for example, treatment of

hypertension in multi-infarct dementia, thyroxin
replacement in hypothyroid dementia, shunting in
hydrocephalic dementia, levodopa in parkinsonism,
and removal of the toxic agent in toxic dementias.
Early treatment can prevent further deterioration of
dementia.

Symptomatic Management
1. Environmental manipulation and focus on coping
skills to reduce stress in day-to-day activities.
2. Treatment of medical complications, if any.
3. Care of food and hygiene
4. Supportive care for the patient and family/carers.
5. Anxiety symptoms can be treated with low dose of
a short-acting benzodiazepine (such as Lorazepam
and Oxazepam), though care should be taken to
prevent benzodiazepine dependence/misuse.
6. Depression can be treated with low doses of
SSRIs such as Citalopram or Sertraline as these
antidepressants have low anticholinergic activity
and have a safer cardiac profile. Agents with high
anticholinergic activity can cause confusion or
even frank delirium.
7. Psychotic symptoms and disruptive behaviours
can be treated with low doses of antipsychotics.
Haloperidol and Risperidone have usually been
preferred as they are less sedating and have low
cardiac toxicity, though Risperidone can cause
postural hypotension. Recently, the use of antipsychotics in treatment of behavioural symptoms
in dementia has decreased markedly due to
possible association of antipsychotic use with
increased mortality. Antipsychotics should
also be avoided if Lewy body dementia is
suspected.
8. Short-term hospitalisation may be needed for
emergent symptoms whilst a longer term hospitalisation or respite placement may be necessary
in later stages.
9. Specific drug treatment such as cholinesterase
inhibitors (e.g. donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine) in moderate Alzheimer’s disease, or
memantine (NMDA antagonist) in moderate to
severe Alzheimer’s disease, can be helpful.


<<<PAGE 39>>>
Organic (Including Symptomatic) Mental Disorders

ORGANIC AMNESTIC SYNDROME
Organic amnestic syndrome is characterised by the
following clinical features:
1. Impairment of memory due to an underlying
organic cause,
2. No severe disturbance of consciousness and attention (unlike delirium), and
3. No global disturbance of intellectual function,
abstract thinking and personality (unlike dementia).
The impairment of memory is characterised by a
severe impairment of recent memory or short-term
memory (inability to learn new material). This is associated with impaired remote memory or long-term
memory (inability to recall previously learned material). There is however no impairment of immediate
memory (i.e. immediate retention and recall).
Although recent memory is severely disturbed, very
remote events are better remembered, especially in the
initial stages. Recent memory impairment also leads to
disorientation in time and place. To fill in the memory
gaps, the patient uses imaginary events in the early
phase of illness (confabulation). With the progression
of the disease, confabulation often disappears.

Diagnosis
According to ICD-10, the following features are required for the diagnosis: recent memory impairment
(anterograde and retrograde amnesia), no impairment of immediate retention and recall, attention,
consciousness, and global intellectual functioning,
and historical or objective evidence of brain disease
or injury (occurs particularly with bilateral involvement of diencephalic and medial temporal structures).

Differential Diagnosis
Amnestic syndrome should be differentiated from
delirium, dementia, non-organic mental disorders and
transient global amnesia. Differentiation from the first
three is relatively easy on the basis of the pattern of
memory loss.

27

Transient Global Amnesia
A rare disorder with an abrupt onset, it resembles
amnestic syndrome closely. Differentiation is made
on the basis of an abrupt onset and patient’s severe
distress (because of memory loss) in transient global
amnesia. This syndrome is probably caused by temporary cerebral ischaemia in the distribution of posterior
cerebral circulation.

Aetiology
1. Thiamine deficiency: The most common cause
of organic amnestic syndrome is chronic alcohol
dependence (alcoholism). It is also called as
the Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. Wernicke’s
encephalopathy is the acute phase of delirium
preceding the organic amnestic syndrome, while
Korsakoff’s syndrome is the chronic phase of
amnestic syndrome.
2. Any other lesion involving bilaterally the inner
core of limbic system (i.e. mammillary bodies,
fornix, hippocampus and para-hippocampal
structures of medial temporal lobe, posterior
hypothalamus and dorsomedial thalamic nuclei),
such as:
i. Head trauma,
ii. Surgical procedure (e.g. bilateral temporal
lobectomy),
iii. Hypoxia,
iv. Posterior cerebral artery stroke (bilateral),
v. Herpes simplex encephalitis, and
vi. Space occupying lesions in the region of III
ventricle (e.g. neoplasms).

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause, e.g. thiamine
(high doses) in Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome.
However usually the treatment is of not much help,
except in prevention of further deterioration and
the prognosis is often poor.
2. Supportive care for general condition and treatment of the associated medical illness.


<<<PAGE 40>>>
28

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

OTHER ORGANIC MENTAL
DISORDERS (DUE TO BRAIN DAMAGE
AND DYSFUNCTION, AND TO
PHYSICAL DISEASES)
This group includes miscellaneous mental disorders
which are causally related to brain dysfunction due to
primary cerebral disease, systemic disease (secondary), or toxic substances.
According to ICD-10, an evidence of cerebral
disease, damage or dysfunction, or of systemic
physical disease, known to be associated with one
of the listed syndromes is required, with a temporal
relationship between development of the underlying
disease and the onset of the mental syndrome, with
recovery from the mental disorder following removal
or improvement of the underlying presumed cause,
and an absence of evidence to suggest an alternative
cause of the mental syndrome (such as a strong family
history or precipitating stress).
If conditions 1 and 2 are present, a provisional
diagnosis can be made; if all four are present, the
certainty of diagnosis is significantly increased.
The following clinical conditions are known to
be associated with an increased risk for these other
organic mental disorders:

Primary Cerebral Diseases
Epilepsy, limbic encephalitis, Huntington’s disease,
head trauma, brain neoplasms, vascular cerebral disease, cerebral malformations.

Systemic Diseases
Extracranial neoplasms (e.g. carcinoma pancreas),
collagen diseases (e.g. SLE), endocrine disease (e.g.
hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, Cushing’s disease),
metabolic disorders (e.g. hypoglycaemia, porphyria,
hypoxia); infectious diseases (e.g. trypanosomiasis).

Drugs
Steroids, propranolol, levodopa, methyldopa, antihypertensives, antimalarials, alcohol and other psychoactive substances.

ORGANIC HALLUCINOSIS
According to ICD-10, presence of persistent or recurrent hallucinations due to an underlying organic cause
is required for the diagnosis of organic hallucinosis,
in addition to the general guidelines for the diagnosis
of other organic mental disorders, described earlier.
It is important to rule out any major disturbance of
consciousness, intelligence, memory, mood or
thought.
These hallucinations can occur in any sensory
modality but are usually visual (most common) or
auditory in nature. In many cases, they depend on
the underlying cause. These hallucinations can range
from very simple and unformed, to very complex and
well-organised. Usually the patients realise that the
hallucinations are not real but sometimes there may
be a delusional elaboration of hallucinations.

Aetiology
1. Drugs: Hallucinogens (LSD, psilocybin, mescaline), cocaine, cannabis, phencyclidine (PCP),
levodopa, bromocriptine, amantadine, ephedrine,
propranolol, pentazocine, methylphenidate, imipramine, anticholinergics, bromide.
2. Alcohol: In alcoholic hallucinosis, auditory hallucinations are usually more common.
3. Sensory deprivation.
4. ‘Release’ hallucinations due to sensory pathway
disease, e.g. bilateral cataracts, otosclerosis, optic
neuritis.
5. Migraine.
6. Epilepsy: Complex partial seizures.
7. Intracranial space occupying lesions.
8. Temporal arteritis.
9. Brain stem lesions (peduncular hallucinosis).

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause, if treatable.
2. Symptomatic treatment with a low dose of an
antipsychotic medication (such as Haloperidol,
Risperidone and Olanzapine) may be needed.


<<<PAGE 41>>>
Organic (Including Symptomatic) Mental Disorders

ORGANIC CATATONIC DISORDER
According to the ICD-10, the following features
are required for the diagnosis of organic catatonic
disorder, in addition to the general guidelines for the
diagnosis of other organic mental disorders, described
earlier:
1. Stupor (diminution or complete absence of spontaneous movement with partial or complete mutism,
negativism, and rigid posturing);
2. Excitement (gross hypermotility with or without
a tendency to assaultiveness);
3. Mixed (shifting rapidly and unpredictably from
hypo- to hyperactivity).
The presence of other catatonic symptoms and
signs increases the confidence in the diagnosis. The
catatonic symptoms and signs are described in detail
in Chapter 5.

29

earlier. It is important to rule out any major disturbance
of consciousness, orientation, memory, or mood.
The delusions are variable and the type depends on
the underlying aetiology. The most common delusions
are persecutory in nature. Hallucinations (visual more
often than auditory) may accompany the delusions.
Schneiderian first rank symptoms (SFRS) are usually
not seen the organic delusional disorder (in contrast
to schizophrenia).

Diagnosis
Organic delusional disorder secondary to amphetamine use may be difficult to differentiate from paranoid schizophrenia. The differentiating points are an
acute onset, history of amphetamine use prior to the
onset, predominant visual hallucinations which may
be fleeting, absence of formal thought disorder and a
more ‘appropriate’ affect.

Aetiology

Aetiology

The aetiology and management of organic catatonic
disorder is described in detail in Chapter 19.

1. Drugs: Amphetamines, hallucinogens, cannabis,
disulfiram
2. Complex partial seizures (e.g. temporal lobe
epilepsy)
3. Huntington’s chorea (initial stages), Parkinson’s
disease, Wilson’s disease, and idiopathic basal
ganglia calcification
4. Right parietal lobe lesions, especially vascular
lesions
5. Lesions involving limbic system (e.g. tumours)
6. Spinocerebellar degeneration
7. Cerebral malaria
8. Herpes simplex encephalitis
9. Nutritional deficiencies (Vitamin B12, iron)
10. Demyelinating disorders (such as multiple sclerosis, metachromatic leukodystrophy)

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause, if amenable to
treatment.
2. Symptomatic treatment with low dose of a shortacting benzodiazepine (e.g. Lorazepam), or electroconvulsive therapy (if needed). Antipsychotics
should usually be avoided as they can make
catatonic features worse; however small doses
of atypical antipsychotics such as Risperidone,
Olanzapine, Aripiprazole or Quetiapine can be
used with care.

ORGANIC DELUSIONAL
(SCHIZOPHRENIA-LIKE) DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of predominant
delusions caused by an underlying organic cause is
required for the diagnosis of organic delusional disorder, in addition to the general guidelines for the
diagnosis of other organic mental disorders, described

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause such as removal
of toxic agent in amphetamine psychosis.
2. Symptomatic management with a low dose of an
antipsychotic medication (such as Risperidone, Haloperidol, Olanzapine, or Quetiapine) may be needed.


<<<PAGE 42>>>
30

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

ORGANIC MOOD (AFFECTIVE)
DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of prominent and
persistent mood disturbance caused by an underlying
organic cause is required for the diagnosis of organic
mood disorder, in addition to the general guidelines
for the diagnosis of other organic mental disorders,
described earlier. It is important to rule out any major
disturbance of consciousness, orientation, or memory.
The mood disturbance can be a major depressive
episode, a manic episode, or a mixed affective episode.
The severity may vary from mild to severe.

Aetiology
Some of the causes of organic mood disorder are
listed below:
1. Drugs:
Mania: INH, Levodopa, Bromide, LSD, Corticosteroids (hypomania), Hallucinogens, Tricyclic
antidepressants, Cocaine, Baclofen, Amphetamines, Bromocriptine, Cimetidine, Procyclidine
Depression: Reserpine, Ethanol, Clonidine,
Methyldopa, Propranolol, Corticosteroids, Antipsychotics (particularly typical antipsychotics),
Cimetidine, Anticancer chemotherapy, Oral contraceptives.
Any drug a depressed person is taking should be
considered a potential factor in the causation of
depressive episode.
2. Endocrine disorders:
Mania: Hyperthyroidism
Depression: Hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome, Addison’s disease, hyper- and hypoparathyroidism.
3. CNS disorders: Parkinsonism, Huntington’s
chorea, PSP (progressive supranuclear palsy;
depression more likely), CVAs (cerebrovascular
accidents; left-sided anterior lesions and rightsided posterior lesions cause depression in stroke),
cerebral tumours, epilepsy (com plex partial
seizures), neurosyphilis (GPI), head injury (mania
more likely), multiple sclerosis.

4. Post-viral illnesses: Influenza, infectious mononucleosis, viral pneumonia, infectious hepatitis.
5. Deficiencies: Pellagra, deficiency of thiamine,
folate, niacin, folate, B12.
6. Others: Carcinoma pancreas (depression), SLE,
pernicious anaemia, temporal arteritis (depression), carcinoid syndrome (mania).

Management
1. Management of the underlying organic cause, if
treatable.
2. Symptomatic management, if the episodes are
severe. For example, for a manic episode, low dose
antipsychotic medication (such as risperidone,
haloperidol, olanzapine) and/or a mood stabiliser
(such as valproate); and for a depressive episode,
low dose antidepressants (such as sertraline or mirtazapine). Antipsychotics are not recommended
in patients who have suffered from stroke and/or
dementia as the risk of mortality is higher.
Pathological laughter and crying (associated
with multiple sclerosis or stroke) can similarly
respond to small dose SSRIs or small dose amitriptyline.

ORGANIC ANXIETY DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of prominent and
persistent generalised anxiety or panic caused by an
underlying cause is required for diagnosis of organic
anxiety disorder, in addition to the general guidelines
for the diagnosis of other organic mental disorders,
described earlier. It is important to rule out any major
disturbance of consciousness, orientation, memory,
personality, thought, perception, or mood.

Aetiology
1. Drugs and toxins: Cocaine, caffeine, amphetamines and other sympathomimetics, alcohol and
drug withdrawal, heavy metals, penicillin.
2. Endocrine disorders: Thyroid, pituitary, parathyroid, or adrenal dysfunction; pheochromocytoma;
fasting hypoglycaemia, carcinoid syndrome.


<<<PAGE 43>>>
Organic (Including Symptomatic) Mental Disorders

3. Systemic diseases: Cardiac arrhythmias, mitral
valve prolapse syndrome, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, coronary artery disease,
pulmonary embolism, anaemia, fever, deficiency
diseases.
4. CNS diseases: Cerebral tumours, epilepsy (especially complex partial seizures of temporal lobe
origin), cerebrovascular disease, postconcussional
syndrome.

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying organic cause, if
treatable.
2. Symptomatic treatment with benzodiazepines,
beta-blockers (such as propranolol), cognitive
behaviour therapy, and relaxation techniques may
be needed.

ORGANIC PERSONALITY DISORDER
(PERSONALITY AND BEHAVIOURAL
DISORDERS DUE TO BRAIN DISEASE,
DAMAGE AND DYSFUNCTION)
The organic personality disorder is characterised by
a significant alteration of the premorbid personality
caused by an underlying organic cause without major
disturbance of consciousness, orientation, memory
or perception. The personality change may be characterised by poor impulse control, emotional lability,

apathy, accentuation of earlier personality traits, or
hostility.
According to ICD-10, the following features are
required for diagnosis of organic personality disorder,
in addition to the general guidelines for the diagnosis
of other organic mental disorders, described earlier.
In addition to an established history or other evidence
of brain disease, damage, or dysfunction, a definitive
diagnosis requires the presence of two or more of six
features described. These include consistently reduced
ability to persevere with goal-directed activities,
altered emotional behaviour (emotional lability,
euphoria, inappro priate jocularity, irritability or
short-lived anger outbursts), expression of needs and
impulses without consideration of the consequences,
cognitive disturbances (such as suspiciousness, paranoid ideation, and/or excessive preoccupation with a
single theme), marked alteration of language production (such as circumstantiality, over-inclusiveness,
viscosity, and hypergraphia), and altered sexual
behaviour.

Aetiology
1. Temporal lobe epilepsy (complex partial seizures)
which can be associated with temporal lobe (personality) syndrome (see Table 3.7).
2. Concussion (postconcussional syndrome).
3. Encephalitis (postencephalitis syndrome).
4. Multiple sclerosis (early).

Table 3.7: Organic Personality Disorders
Organic Personality Disorder
1. Frontal lobe syndrome (Types)
a. Orbito-frontal syndrome
(Pseudo-psychopathic)
b. Frontal convexity type
(Pseudo-depressive)
c. Medial frontal syndrome
(Akinetic)
2. Temporal lobe syndrome
3. Bilateral temporal lobe or
limbic system lesions

31

Clinical Features
Disinhibition, jocularity, impulsivity, impaired insight and judgement
Apathy, lack of initiative, retardation, perseveration
Akinesis, incontinence, poor verbal output
Egocentricity, explosive affect, perseveration, excessive religiosity,
obsessional traits
Emotional placcidity, hyper-orality, altered sexual behaviour,
excessive exploration of environment (hyper-metamorphosis)


<<<PAGE 44>>>
32

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

5. Cerebral neoplasms, especially in frontal lobe (frontal lobe syndromes) and parietal lobe (see Table 3.7).
6. Cerebrovascular disease.
7. Psychoactive drugs (rarely).

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause, if treatable.
2. Symptomatic treatment, with lithium or carbamazepine for aggressive behaviour and impulse

dyscontrol, and/or antipsychotics (occasionally)
for violent behaviour may be needed.

MISCELLANEOUS ORGANIC
MENTAL DISORDERS
Other organic mental disorders described in ICD-10
include organic dissociative disorder, organic emotionally labile (asthenic) disorder, and mild cognitive
disorder.


<<<PAGE 45>>>
4

Psychoactive Substance
Use Disorders

A drug is defined (by WHO) as any substance that,
when taken into the living organism, may modify one
or more of its functions. This definition conceptualises ‘drug’ in a very broad way, including not only
the medications but also the other pharmacologically
active substances.
The words ‘drug addiction’ and ‘drug addict’ were
dropped from scientific use due to their derogatory
connotation. Instead ‘drug abuse’, ‘drug dependence’,
‘harmful use’, ‘misuse’, and ‘psychoactive substance
use disorders’ are the terms used in the current nomenclature. A psychoactive drug is one that is capable of
altering the mental functioning.
There are four important patterns of substance use
disorders, which may overlap with each other.
1. Acute intoxication,
2. Withdrawal state,
3. Dependence syndrome, and
4. Harmful use.

Acute Intoxication
According to the ICD-10, acute intoxication is a
transient condition following the administration of
alcohol or other psychoactive substance, resulting
in disturbances in level of consciousness, cognition,
perception, affect or behaviour, or other psychophysiological functions and responses. This is usually associated with high blood levels of the drug.
However, in certain cases where the threshold is
low (due to a serious medical illness such as chronic

renal failure or idiosyncratic sensitivity) even a low
dose may lead to intoxication. The intensity of intoxication lessens with time, and effects eventually disappear in the absence of further use of the substance. The
recovery is therefore complete, except where tissue
damage or another complication has arisen.
The following codes may be used to indicate
whether the acute intoxication was associated with
any complications:
i. uncomplicated (symptoms of varying severity,
usually dose-dependent, particularly at high
dose levels);
ii. with trauma or other bodily injury;
iii. with other medical complications (such as haematemesis, inhalation of vomitus);
iv. with delirium;
v. with perceptual distortions;
vi. with coma;
vii. with convulsions; and
viii. pathological intoxication (only for alcohol).

Withdrawal State
A withdrawal state is characterised by a cluster of
symptoms, often specific to the drug used, which
develop on total or partial withdrawal of a drug, usually after repeated and/or high-dose use. This, too, is
a short-lasting syndrome with usual duration of few
hours to few days.
Typically, the patient reports that the withdrawal
symptoms are relieved by further substance use.


<<<PAGE 46>>>
34

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The withdrawal state is further classified as:
i. uncomplicated;
ii. with convulsions; and
iii. with delirium.

Dependence Syndrome
According to the ICD-10, the dependence syndrome is
a cluster of physiological, behavioural, and cognitive
phenomena in which the use of a substance or a class
of substances takes on a much higher priority for a
given individual than other behaviours that once had
greater value.
A central descriptive characteristic of the dependence syndrome is the desire (often strong and
sometimes overpowering) to take psycho active
substances (which may or may not have been medically prescribed), alcohol, or tobacco. There may be
evidence that return to substance use after a period
of abstinence leads to a more rapid reappearance of
other features of the syndrome than occurs with nondependent individuals.
A definite diagnosis of dependence should usually
be made only if at least three of the following have
been experienced or exhibited at sometime during the
previous year:
1. A strong desire or sense of compulsion to take the
substance.
2. Difficulties in controlling the substance-taking
behaviour in terms of its onset, termination, or
levels of use.
3. A physiological withdrawal state when the substance use has ceased or reduced, as evidenced
by the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for
the substance; or use of the same (or a closely
related) substance with the intention of relieving
or avoiding withdrawal symptoms.
4. Evidence of tolerance, such that increased doses of
the psychoactive substance are required in order to
achieve effects originally produced by lower doses
(clear examples of this are found in the alcoholand opiate-dependent individuals who may take
daily doses that are sufficient to incapacitate or
kill non-tolerant users).

5. Progressive neglect of alternative pleasures or
interests because of psychoactive substance use,
increased amount of time necessary to obtain or
take the substance or to recover from its effects.
6. Persisting with substance use despite clear evidence of overtly harmful consequences, such as
harm to the liver through excessive drinking,
depressive mood states consequent to periods of
heavy substance use, or drug-related impairment
of cognitive functioning; efforts should be made
to determine that the user was actually, or could
be expected to be, aware of the nature and extent
of the harm.
A narrowing of personal repertoire of patterns of
psychoactive substance use has also been described as
a characteristic feature of the dependence syndrome
(e.g. a tendency to drink in the same way on weekdays
and weekends, regardless of the social constraints that
determine appropriate drinking behaviour).
The dependence syndrome can be further coded
as (ICD-10):
i. currently abstinent;
ii. currently abstinent, but in a protected environment
(e.g. in hospital, in a therapeutic community, in
prison, etc.);
iii. currently on a clinically supervised maintenance
or replacement regime (controlled dependence,
e.g. with methadone; nicotine gum or nicotine
patch);
iv. currently abstinent, but receiving treatment with
aversive or blocking drugs (e.g. naltrexone or
disulfiram);
v. currently using the substance (active dependence);
vi. continuous use; and
vii. episodic use (dipsomania).
The dependence can be either psychic, or physical,
or both.

Harmful Use
Harmful use is characterised by:
1. Continued drug use, despite the awareness of
harmful medical and/or social effect of the drug
being used, and/or


<<<PAGE 47>>>
Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

2. A pattern of physically hazardous use of drug (e.g.
driving during intoxication).
The diagnosis requires that the actual damage
should have been caused to the mental or physical
health of the user. Harmful use is not diagnosed, if a
dependence syndrome is present. DSM-IV-TR uses the
term substance abuse instead, with minor variations
in description.
The other syndromes associated with the psychoactive substance use in ICD-10 include psychotic disorder, amnesic syndrome, and residual and late-onset
(delayed onset) psychotic disorder.

35

6. Hallucinogens, e.g. LSD, phencyclidine (PCP)
7. Sedatives and hypnotics, e.g. barbiturates
8. Inhalants, e.g. volatile solvents
9. Nicotine, and
10. Other stimulants (e.g. caffeine).
The various psychoactive substances are summarised in Table 4.1.

Aetiology
The various aetiological factors in substance use disorders are briefly summarised in Table 4.2.

ALCOHOL USE DISORDERS

Psychoactive Substances
The major dependence producing drugs are:
1. Alcohol
2. Opioids, e.g. opium, heroin
3. Cannabinoids, e.g. cannabis
4. Cocaine
5. Amphetamine and other sympathomimetics

Alcohol dependence was previously called as alcoholism. This term much like ‘addiction’ has been dropped
due to its derogatory meaning.
According to Jellinek, there are five ‘species’ of
alcohol dependence (alcoholism) on the basis of the
patterns of use (and not on the basis of severity).

Table 4.1: Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Drug

Usual Route of
Administration

Physical
Dependence

Psychic
Dependence

Tolerance

Alcohol
Amphetamines
Barbiturates
Benzodiazepines
Caffeine
Cannabis
(Marihuana)
Cocaine

Oral
Oral, Parenteral
Oral, Parenteral
Oral, Parenteral
Oral
Smoking, Oral

++
++
++
+
+
±

++
++
++
+
++
++

+
+++
+++
+
+
+

Inhalation, Oral,
Smoking, Parenteral
Oral

±

++

–

–

+

+

+
+++

++
+++

+
+++

±
±

+
++

+
+

9
10
11

Lysergic acid
diethylamide (LSD)
Nicotine
Opioids
Phencyclidine (PCP)

12

Volatile solvents

Oral, Smoking
Oral, Parenteral, Smoking
Smoking, Inhalation,
Parenteral, Oral
Inhalation

– = None; ± = Probable/Little; + = Some/Mild; ++ = Moderate; +++ = Severe.
The dependence can be either psychic, or physical, or both.


<<<PAGE 48>>>
36

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Table 4.2: Aetiological Factors in Substance Use
Disorders
1. Biological Factors
i. Genetic vulnerability (family history of substance
use disorder; for example in type II alcoholism)
ii. Co-morbid psychiatric disorder or personality
disorder
iii. Co-morbid medical disorders
iv. Reinforcing effects of drugs (explains continuation of drug use)
v. Withdrawal effects and craving (explains continuation of drug use)
vi. Biochemical factors (for example, role of
dopamine and norepinephrine in cocaine,
ethanol and opioid dependence)
2. Psychological Factors
i. Curiosity; need for novelty seeking
ii. General rebelliousness and social non-conformity
iii. Early initiation of alcohol and tobacco
iv. Poor impulse control
v. Sensation-seeking (high)
vi. Low self-esteem (anomie)
vii. Concerns regarding personal autonomy
viii. Poor stress management skills
ix. Childhood trauma or loss
x. Relief from fatigue and/or boredom
xi. Escape from reality
xii. Lack of interest in conventional goals
xiii. Psychological distress
3. Social Factors
i. Peer pressure (often more important than
parental factors)
ii. Modelling (imitating behaviour of important
others)
iii. Ease of availability of alcohol and drugs
iv. Strictness of drug law enforcement
v. Intrafamilial conflicts
vi. Religious reasons
vii. Poor social/familial support
viii. ‘Perceived distance’ within the family
ix. Permissive social attitudes
x. Rapid urbanisation.

A. Alpha (α)
i. Excessive and inappropriate drinking to relieve
physical and/or emotional pain.
ii. No loss of control.
iii. Ability to abstain present.
B. Beta (β)
i. Excessive and inappropriate drinking.
ii. Physical complications (e.g. cirrhosis, gastritis and
neuritis) due to cultural drinking patterns and poor
nutrition.
iii. No dependence.
C. Gamma (γ); also called as malignant alcoholism
i. Progressive course.
ii. Physical dependence with tolerance and withdrawal symptoms.
iii. Psychological dependence, with inability to control drinking.
D. Delta (δ)
i. Inability to abstain.
ii. Tolerance.
iii. Withdrawal symptoms.
iv. The amount of alcohol consumed can be controlled.
v. Social disruption is minimal.
E. Epsilon (ε)
i. Dipsomania (compulsive-drinking).
ii. Spree-drinking.
Earlier, it was believed that γ-alcoholism was more
common in America, while δ-alcoholism was commoner in the wine-drinking countries such as France.
At present the existence of this pattern of distribution
is doubted and its inclusion in this book is mainly for
historical reasons.
Cloninger has classified alcoholism into two types,
on the basis of the relative importance of genetic and
environmental factors (Table 4.3).
Alcohol dependence is more common in males,
and has an onset in late second or early third decade.
The course is usually insidious. There is often an
associated abuse or dependence of other drugs. If the
onset occurs late in life, especially after 40 years of
age, an underlying mood disorder should be looked for.


<<<PAGE 49>>>
Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

37

Table 4.3: Classification of Alcoholism
Factors

Type I

Type II

Synonym
Gender
Age of onset
Aetiological factors

Milieu-limited
Both sexes
> 25 years
Genetic factors important; strong
environmental influences are
contributory
May be positive

Male-limited
Mostly in males
< 25 years
Heritable; environmental
influences are limited

Family history
Loss of control
Other features

Present
Psychological dependence;
and guilt present

Pre-morbid
personality traits

Harm avoidance;
high reward dependence

Certain laboratory markers of alcohol dependence
have been suggested. These include:
i. GGT (γ-glutyl-transferase) is raised to about
40 IU/L in about 80% of the alcohol dependent
individuals. GGT returns to normal rapidly (i.e.
within 48 hours) on abstinence from alcohol. An
increase of GGT of more than 50% in an abstinent
individual signifies a resumption of heavy drinking
or an abnormality of liver function.
ii. MCV (mean corpuscular volume) is more than
92 fl (normal = 80-90 fl) in about 60% of the
alcohol dependent individuals. MCV takes
several weeks to return to normal values after
abstinence.
iii. Other lab markers include alkaline phosphatase,
AST, ALT, uric acid, blood triglycerides and CK.
GGT and MCV together can usually identify three
out of four problem drinkers. In addition, BAC (blood
alcohol concentration) and breath analyser can be used
for the purpose of identification.
For detection of the problem drinkers in the community, several screening instruments are available.
MAST (Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test) is
frequently used for this purpose whilst CAGE questionnaire (Table 4.5) is the easiest to be administered
(it takes only about 1-2 minutes).

Parental alcoholism and antisocial
behaviour usually present
No loss of control
Drinking followed by aggressive
behaviour; spontaneous alcohol
seeking
Novelty-seeking

Acute Intoxication
After a brief period of excitation, there is a generalised
central nervous system depression with alcohol use.
With increasing intoxication, there is increased reaction time, slowed thinking, distractibility and poor
motor control. Later, dysarthria, ataxia and incoordination can occur. There is progressive loss of self-control
with frank disinhibited behaviour.
The duration of intoxication depends on the
amount and the rapidity of ingestion of alcohol. Usually the signs of intoxication are obvious with blood
levels of 150-200 mg%. With blood alcohol levels
of 300-450 mg%, increasing drowsiness followed
by coma and respiratory depression develop. Death
occurs with blood alcohol levels between 400 to 800
mg% (Table 4.6).
Occasionally a small dose of alcohol may produce
acute intoxication in some persons. This is known as
pathological intoxication. Another feature, sometimes
seen in acute intoxication, is the development of
amnesia or blackouts.

Withdrawal Syndrome
The most common withdrawal syndrome is a hangover
on the next morning. Mild tremors, nausea, vomiting,


<<<PAGE 50>>>
38

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

weakness, irritability, insomnia and anxiety are the
other common withdrawal symptoms. Sometimes
the withdrawal syndrome may be more severe, characterised by one of the following three disturbances:
delirium tremens, alcoholic seizures and alcoholic
hallucinosis. It is important to remember that alcohol
withdrawal syndrome can be associated with marked
morbidity as well as significant mortality, and it is
important to treat it correctly.
1. Delirium tremens
Delirium tremens (DT) is the most severe alcohol
withdrawal syndrome. It occurs usually within 2-4
days of complete or significant abstinence from heavy
alcohol drinking in about 5% of patients, as compared
to acute tremulousness which occurs in about 34%
of patients.
The course is short, with recovery occurring within
3-7 days. This is an acute organic brain syndrome
(delirium) with characteristic features of:
i. Clouding of consciousness with disorientation in
time and place.
ii. Poor attention span and distractibility.
iii. Visual (and also auditory) hallucinations and illusions, which are often vivid and very frightening.
Tactile hallucinations of insects crawling over the
body may occur.
iv. Marked autonomic disturbance with tachycardia,
fever, hypertension, sweating and pupillary dilatation.
v. Psychomotor agitation and ataxia.
vi. Insomnia, with a reversal of sleep-wake pattern.
vii. Dehydration with electrolyte imbalance.
Death can occur in 5-10% of patients with delirium
tremens and is often due to cardiovascular collapse,
infection, hyperthermia or self-inflicted injury. At
times, intercurrent medical illnesses such as pneumonia, fractures, liver disease or pulmonary tuberculosis
may complicate the clinical picture.
2. Alcoholic seizures (‘rum fits’)
Generalised tonic clonic seizures occur in about 10%
of alcohol dependence patients, usually 12-48 hours
after a heavy bout of drinking. Often these patients
have been drinking alcohol in large amounts on a
regular basis for many years.

Multiple seizures (2-6 at one time) are more common than single seizures. Sometimes, status epilepticus may be precipitated. In about 30% of the cases,
delirium tremens follows.
3. Alcoholic hallucinosis
Alcoholic hallucinosis is characterised by the presence
of hallucinations (usually auditory) during partial or
complete abstinence, following regular alcohol intake.
It occurs in about 2% of patients.
These hallucinations persist after the withdrawal
syndrome is over, and classically occur in clear consciousness. Usually recovery occurs within one month
and the duration is very rarely more than six months.

Complications of Chronic Alcohol Use
Alcohol dependence is often associated with several
complications; both medical and social (Table 4.4).
Some withdrawal and intoxication related complications have described above whilst the neuropsychiatric
complications are discussed below.
Wernicke’s encephalopathy
This is an acute reaction to a severe deficiency of
thiamine, the commonest cause being chronic alcohol
use. Characteristically, the onset occurs after a period
of persistent vomiting. The important clinical signs
are:
i. Ocular signs: Coarse nystagmus and ophthalmoplegia, with bilateral external rectus paralysis
occurring early. In addition, pupillary irregularities, retinal haemorrhages and papilloedema can
occur, causing an impairment of vision.
ii. Higher mental function disturbance: Disorientation, confusion, recent memory disturbances,
poor attention span and distractibility are quite
common. Other early symptoms are apathy and
ataxia.
Peripheral neuropathy and serious malnutrition
are often co-existent. Neuropathologically, neuronal
degeneration and haemorrhage are seen in thalamus,
hypothalamus, mammillary bodies and midbrain.
Korsakoff ’s psychosis
As Korsakoff’s psychosis often follows Wernicke’s
encephalopathy; these are together referred to as
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome.


<<<PAGE 51>>>
Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

39

Table 4.4: Some Complications of Alcohol Dependence
I. Medical Complications
A. Gastrointestinal System
i. Fatty liver, cirrhosis of liver, hepatitis, liver cell
carcinoma, liver failure
ii. Gastritis, reflux oesophagitis, oesophageal varices,
Mallory-Weiss syndrome, achlorhydria, peptic
ulcer, carcinoma stomach and oesophagus
iii. Malabsorption syndrome, protein-losing enteropathy
iv. Pancreatitis: acute, chronic, and relapsing
B. Central Nervous System
i. Peripheral neuropathy
ii. Delirium tremens
iii. Rum fits (Alcohol withdrawal seizures)
iv. Alcoholic hallucinosis
v. Alcoholic jealousy
vi. Wernicke-Korsakoff psychosis
vii. Marchiafava-Bignami disease
viii. Alcoholic dementia
ix. Suicide
x. Cerebellar degeneration
xi. Central pontine myelinosis
xii. Head injury and fractures.
C. Miscellaneous
i. Acne rosacea, palmar erythema, rhinophyma,
spider naevi, ascitis, parotid enlargement

ii. Foetal alcohol syndrome (craniofacial anomalies,
growth retardation, major organ system malformations)
iii. Alcoholic hypoglycaemia and ketoacidosis
iv. Cardiomyopathy, cardiac beri-beri
v. Alcoholic myopathy
vi. Anaemia, thrombocytopenia, Vitamin K factor
deficiency, haemolytic anaemia
vii. Accidental hypothermia
viii. Pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome, hypogonadism,
gynaecomastia (in men), amenorrhoea, infertility,
decreased testosterone and increased LH levels
ix. Risk for coronary artery disease
x. Malnutrition, pellagra
xi. Decreased immune function and proneness to
infections such as tuberculosis
xii. Sexual dysfunction
II. Social Complications
i. Accidents
ii. Marital disharmony
iii. Divorce
iv. Occupational problems, with loss of productive
man-hours
v. Increased incidence of drug dependence
vi. Criminality
vii. Financial difficulties.

Table 4.5: CAGE Questionnaire

Table 4.6: Body Fluid Alcohol Levels

The CAGE questionnaire basically consists of four
questions:
i. Have you ever had to Cut down on alcohol (amount)?
ii. Have you ever been Annoyed by people’s criticism
of alcoholism?
iii. Have you ever felt Guilty about drinking?
iv. Have you ever needed an Eye opener drink (early
morning drink)?
A score of 2 or more identifies problem drinkers.

Clinically, Korsakoff’s psychosis presents as an
organic amnestic syndrome, characterised by gross
memory disturbances, with confabulation. Insight
is often impaired. The neuropathological lesion is
usually wide-spread, but the most consistent changes
are seen in bilateral dorsomedial nuclei of thalamus

BAC* (mg%)

Behavioural Correlates

25-100
80
100-200

Excitement
Legal limit for driving (in UK)**
Serious intoxication, slurred speech,
incoordination, nystagmus
Dangerous
Hypothermia, dysarthria, cold sweats
Coma, respiratory depression
Death may occur

200-300
300-350
350-400
>400
Urinary
Alcohol (mg%)

Diagnostic
Use

Equivalent BAC
(mg%)

>120
>200

Suggestive
Diagnostic

80
150

*BAC - Blood Alcohol Concentration
**30 mg/100 ml in India (Section 185 of the Motor
Vehicle Act, 1988)


<<<PAGE 52>>>
40

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

and mammillary bodies. The changes are also seen
in periventricular and periaqueductal grey matter,
cerebellum and parts of brain stem.
The underlying cause is believed to be usually
severe untreated thiamine deficiency secondary to
chronic alcohol use.
Marchiafava-Bignami disease
This is a rare disorder characterised by disorientation,
epilepsy, ataxia, dysarthria, hallucinations, spastic
limb paralysis, and deterioration of personality and
intellectual functioning. There is a widespread demyelination of corpus callosum, optic tracts and cerebellar peduncles. The cause is probably an alcohol-related
nutritional deficiency.

Other Complications
These include:
i. Alcoholic dementia.
ii. Cerebellar degeneration.
iii. Peripheral neuropathy.
iv. Central pontine myelinosis.

Treatment
Before starting any treatment, it is important to follow
these steps:
i. Ruling out (or diagnosing) any physical disorder.
ii. Ruling out (or diagnosing) any psychiatric disorder
and/or co-morbid substance use disorder.
iii. Assessment of motivation for treatment.
iv. Assessment of social support system.
v. Assessment of personality characteristics of the
patient.
vi. Assessment of current and past social, interpersonal and occupational functioning.
The treatment can be broadly divided into two
categories which are often interlinked. These are
detoxification and treatment of alcohol dependence.

Detoxification
Detoxification is the treatment of alcohol withdrawal
symptoms, i.e. symptoms produced by the removal of
the ‘toxin’ (alcohol). The best way to stop alcohol (or
any other drug of dependence) is to stop it suddenly

unless the risks of acute discontinuation are felt to be
high by the treating team. This decision is often based
on several factors including chronicity of alcohol
dependence, daily amount consumed, past history of
alcohol withdrawal complications, level of general
health and the patient’s wishes.
The usual duration of uncomplicated withdrawal
syndrome is 7-14 days. The aim of detoxification is
symptomatic management of emergent withdrawal
symptoms.
The drugs of choice for detoxification are usually
benzodiazepines. Chlordiazepoxide (80-200 mg/day in
divided doses) and diazepam (40-80 mg/day in divided
doses) are the most frequently used benzodiazepines.
The higher limit of the normal dose range is used in
delirium tremens.
A typical dose of Chlordiazepoxide in moderate
alcohol dependence is 20 mg QID (four times a day)
on day 1, 15 mg QID on day 2, 10 mg QID on day 3,
5 mg QID on day 4, 5 mg BD on day 5 and none on
day 6. However, in more severe dependence, higher
doses are needed for longer periods (up to 10 days).
These drugs are used in a standardised protocol, with
the dosage steadily decreasing everyday before being
stopped, usually on the tenth day. Clormethiazole (1-2
g/day) and carbamazepine (600-1600 mg/day) are
experimental drugs and should not be used routinely
for detoxification.
In addition, vitamins should also be administered.
In patients suffering from (or likely to suffer from)
delirium tremens, peripheral neuropathy, WernickeKorsakoff syndrome, and/or with other signs of vitamin B deficiency (especially thiamine and nicotinic
acid), a preparation of vitamin B containing 100 mg
of thiamine (vitamin B1) should be administered
parenterally, twice everyday for 3-5 days. This should
be followed by oral administration of vitamin B1 for
at least 6 months.
Care of hydration is another important step; it is
extremely important not to administer 5% dextrose
(or any carbohydrate) in delirium tremens (or even in
uncomplicated alcohol withdrawal syndrome) without
thiamine.


<<<PAGE 53>>>
Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

Although detoxification can be achieved on an
outpatient (OPD) basis, some patients do require
hospitalisation. These patients may present with:
i. Signs of impending delirium tremens (tremor,
autonomic hyperactivity, disorientation, or perceptual abnormalities), or
ii. Psychiatric symptoms (psychotic disorder, mood
disorder, suicidal ideation or attempts, alcoholinduced neuropsychiatric disorders), or
iii. Physical illness (caused by chronic alcohol use or
incidentally present), or
iv. Inability to stop alcohol in the home setting.
Detoxification is the first step in the treatment of
alcohol dependence.

Treatment of Alcohol Dependence
After the step of detoxification is over, there are several methods to choose from, for further management.
Some of these important methods include:
i. Behaviour therapy
The most commonly used behaviour therapy in the
past has been aversion therapy, using either a subthreshold electric shock or an emetic such as apomorphine. Many other methods (covert sensitisation,
relaxation techniques, assertiveness training, selfcontrol skills, and positive reinforcement) have been
used alone or in combination with aversion therapy.
Currently, in most settings, it is considered unethical
to use aversion therapy for the treatment of alcohol
dependence.
ii. Psychotherapy
Both group and individual psychotherapy have been
used. The patient should be educated about the risks
of continuing alcohol use, asked to resume personal
responsibility for change and be given a choice of
options for change. Motivational enhancement therapy
with or without cognitive behaviour therapy and lifestyle modification is often useful, if available.
iii. Group therapy
Of particular importance is the voluntary self-help
group known as AA (Alcoholics Anonymous), with
branches all over the world and a membership in hundreds of thousands. Although the approach is partly

41

religious in nature, many patients derive benefits
from the group meetings which are non-professional
in nature.
iv. Deterrent agents
The deterrent agents are also known as alcohol sensitising drugs.
Disulfiram (tetraethyl thiuram disulfide) was discovered in 1930s, when it was observed that workers
in the rubber industry developed unpleasant reactions
to alcohol intake, due to accidental absorption of
antioxidant disulfiram. The mechanism of action of
disulfiram is summarised in Figure 4.1.
When alcohol is ingested by a person who is on
disulfiram, alcohol-derived acetaldehyde cannot be
oxidised to acetate and this leads to an accumulation
of acetaldehyde in blood. This causes the important
disulfiram-ethanol reaction (DER) characterised
by flushing, tachycardia, hypotension, tachypnoea,
palpitations, headache, sweating, nausea, vomiting,
giddiness and a sense of impending doom associated
with severe anxiety.
The onset of the reaction occurs within 30 minutes,
becomes full blown within 1 hour, and subsides usually within 2 hours of ingestion of alcohol. In sensitive
patients or in those who have ingested a large amount
of alcohol, DER can be very severe and life threatening
due to one or more of the following: shock, myocardial
infarction, convulsions, hypoxia, confusion and coma.
Therefore, treatment with disulfiram is usually
begun in an inpatient hospital setting, usually after
a challenge test with alcohol to demonstrate that
unpleasant and dangerous side-effects occur, if either
alcohol or alcohol-containing eatable/drink is consumed whilst treatment is continued with disulfiram.
The usual dose of disulfiram is 250-500 mg/day
(taken before bedtime to avoid drowsiness in daytime)
in the first week and 250 mg/day subsequently for
the maintenance treatment. The effect begins within
12 hours of first dose and remains for 7-10 days after
the last dose. The patient should carry a warning card
detailing the forbidden alcohol-containing articles, the
possible effects and their emergency treatment, along
with patient identification details.


<<<PAGE 54>>>
42

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Fig. 4.1: Disulfiram: Mode of Action

The contraindications of disulfiram use are first
trimester of pregnancy, coronary artery disease, liver
failure, chronic renal failure, peripheral neuropathy,
muscle disease and psychotic symptoms presently or
in the past.
In selected patients (such as an older age group,
good motivation, good social support, absent underlying psychopathology and good treatment concordance), the response can be dramatic. In addition to
oral preparations, subcutaneous disulfiram implants
are also now available. However, they provide unpredictable blood levels of disulfiram.
Other deterrent agents
1. Citrated calcium carbimide (CCC): The mechanism of action is similar to disulfiram but onset of
action occurs within 1 hour and is reversible. The
usual dosage is 100 mg/d in two divided doses.
2. Metronidazole.
3. Animal charcoal, a fungus (Coprinus atramentarius), sulfonylureas and certain cephalosporins
also cause a disulfiram like action.
v. Anti-craving agents
Acamprosate, naltrexone and SSRIs (such as fluoxetine) are among the medications tried as anti-craving
agents in alcohol dependence.

Acamprosate (the Ca++ salt of N-acetyl-homotaurinate)
interacts with NMDA receptor-mediated glutamatergic neurotransmission in the various brain regions
and reduces Ca++ fluxes through voltage-operated
channels.
Naltrexone (oral opioid receptor antagonist) probably interferes with alcohol-induced reinforcement
by blocking opioid receptors. Fluoxetine (and other
SSRIs) have been occasionally used as anti-craving
agents in their usual antidepressant doses.
vi. Other medications
A variety of other medicines such as benzodiazepines, antidepressants, antipsychotics, lithium,
carbamazepine, and even narcotics have been tried.
These should be used only if there is a special indication for their use (for example, antidepressants for
underlying depression).
vii. Psychosocial rehabilitation
Rehabilitation is an integral part of the multi-modal
treatment of alcohol dependence.

OPIOID USE DISORDERS
Dried exudate obtained from unripe seed capsules of
Papaver somniferum has been used and abused for


<<<PAGE 55>>>
Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

centuries. The natural alkaloids of opium and their
synthetic preparations are highly dependence producing. These are listed in Table 4.7.
In the last few decades, use of opioids has increased markedly all over the world. India, surrounded
on both sides by the infamous routes of illicit transport,
namely the Golden Triangle (Burma-Thailand-Laos)
and the Golden Crescent (Iran-Afghanistan-Pakistan)
has been particularly severely affected.
The most important dependence producing derivatives are morphine and heroin. They both like
majority of dependence producing opioids bind to
μ (mu) opioid receptors. The other opioid receptors
are k (kappa, e.g. for pentazocine), δ (delta, e.g. for a
type of enkephalin), σ (sigma, e.g. for phencyclidine),
ε (epsilon) and λ (lambda).
Heroin or di-acetyl-morphine is about two times
more potent than morphine in injectable form. Apart
from the parenteral mode of administration, heroin can
also be smoked or ‘chased’ (chasing the dragon), often
in an impure form (called ‘smack’ or ‘brown sugar’
in India). Heroin is more addicting than morphine
and can cause dependence even after a short period
of exposure. Tolerance to heroin occurs rapidly and
can be increased to up to more than 100 times the first
dose needed to produce an effect.

Acute Intoxication
Intoxication is characterised by apathy, bradycardia,
hypotension, respiratory depression, subnormal core
body temperature, and pin-point pupils. Later, delayed
reflexes, thready pulse and coma may occur in case
of a large overdose. In severe intoxication, mydriasis
may occur due to hypoxia.

Withdrawal Syndrome
The onset of withdrawal symptoms occurs typically
within 12-24 hours, peaks within 24-72 hours, and
symptoms usually subside within 7-10 days of the
last dose of opioid.
The characteristic symptoms include lacrimation,
rhinorrhoea, pupillary dilation, sweating, diarrhoea,

43

Table 4.7: Opioid Derivatives
A. Natural Alkaloids of Opium
1. Morphine
2. Codeine
3. Thebaine
4. Noscapine
5. Papaverine
B. Synthetic Compounds
1. Heroin
2. Nalorphine
3. Hydromorphone
4. Methadone
5. Dextropropoxyphene
6. Meperidine (Pethidine)
7. Cyclazocine
8. Levallorphan
9. Diphenoxylate

yawning, tachycardia, mild hypertension, insomnia,
raised body temperature, muscle cramps, generalised
bodyache, severe anxiety, piloerection, nausea, vomiting and anorexia.
There are marked individual differences in presentation of withdrawal symptoms. Heroin withdrawal
syndrome is far more severe than the withdrawal
syndrome seen with morphine.

Complications
The important complications of chronic opioid use
may include one or more of the following:
1. Complications due to illicit drug (contaminants):
Parkinsonism, degeneration of globus pallidus,
peripheral neuropathy, amblyopia, transverse
myelitis.
2. Complications due to intravenous use: AIDS,
skin infection(s), thrombophlebitis, pulmonary
embolism, septicaemia, viral hepatitis, tetanus,
endocarditis.
3. Drug peddling and involvement in criminal activities (social complication).


<<<PAGE 56>>>
44

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Treatment
Before treatment, a correct diagnosis must be made
on the basis of history, examination (pin-point pupils
during intoxication or withdrawal symptoms) and/or
laboratory tests. These tests are:
1. Naloxone challenge test (to precipitate withdrawal
symptoms).
2. Urinary opioids testing: With radioimmunoassay
(RIA), free radical assay tech nique (FRAT),
thin layer chromatography (TLC), gas-liquid
chromatography (GLC), high pressure liquid
chromatography (HPLC) or enzyme-multiplied
immunoassay technique (EMIT).
The treatment can be divided into three main types:
1. Treatment of overdose.
2. Detoxification.
3. Maintenance therapy.

Treatment of Opioid Overdose
An overdose of opioid can be treated with narcotic
antagonists (such as naloxone, naltrexone). Usually an
intravenous injection of 2 mg naloxone, followed by a
repeat injection in 5-10 minutes, can cause reversal of
overdose. But as naloxone has a short half-life repeated
doses may be needed every 1-2 hours. This should be
combined with general care and supportive treatment.

Detoxification
This is a mode of treatment in which the dependent
person is ‘taken off’ opioids. This is usually done
abruptly, followed by management of emergent
withdrawal symptoms. It is highly recommended that
detoxification is conducted in a safe manner under
expert guidance of a specialist.
The withdrawal symptoms can be managed by one
of the following methods:
1. Use of substitution drugs such as methadone (not
available in India at present) to ameliorate the
withdrawal symptoms.
The aim is to gradually taper off the patient from
methadone (which is less addicting, has a longer
half-life, decreases possible criminal behaviour,
and has a much milder withdrawal syndrome).
However, relapses are common and its opponents

argue that one type of dependence is often replaced
by another (methadone).
2. Clonidine is an α2 agonist that acts by inhibiting
norepinephrine release at presynaptic α2 receptors. The usual dose is 0.3-1.2 mg/day, and drug
is tapered off in 10-14 days. It can be started after
stoppage of either the opioid itself or the substitution drug (methadone). The important side effects
of clonidine are excessive sedation and postural
hypotension. Clonidine treatment is usually started
in an inpatient psychiatric or specialist alcohol and
drug treatment centre setting.
3. Naltrexone with Clonidine: Naltrexone is an orally
available narcotic antagonist which, when given to
an opioid dependent individual, causes withdrawal
symptoms. These symptoms are managed with the
addition of clonidine for 10-14 days after which
clonidine is withdrawn and the patient is continued
on naltrexone alone. Now if the person takes an
opioid, there are no pleasurable experiences, as
the opioid receptors are blocked by naltrexone.
Therefore, this method is a combination of detoxification and maintenance treatment. The usual
dose of naltrexone is 100 mg orally, administered
on alternate days. Once again treatment is usually
started in an inpatient psychiatric or specialist
alcohol and drug treatment centre setting.
4. Other Drugs: The other detoxification agents
include LAAM (levo-alpha-acetyl-methadol),
propoxyphene, diphenoxylate, buprenorphine
(long acting synthetic partial μ-agonist which can
be administered sublingually), and lofexidine (α2
agonist, similar to clonidine).
In particular, Buprenorphine has recently been
used widely for detoxification as well as for maintenance treatment in many parts of the World. Care
must be exercised as there is potential for misuse
with buprenorphine.

Maintenance Therapy
After the detoxification phase is over, the patient is
maintained on one of the following regimens:
1. Methadone maintenance
(Agonist substitution therapy)


<<<PAGE 57>>>
Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

This a very popular method used widely in the
Western World. 20-50 mg/day of methadone is given
to the patients to ‘shift’ them from ‘hard’ drugs, thus
decreasing IV use and criminal behaviour. Its use
in India has not been recommended by an expert
committee for de-addiction services.
Other drugs such as LAAM and buprenorphine
can be used for maintenance treatment.
2. Opioid antagonists
Opioid antagonists have been in use for a long time
but they were either partial antagonists (such as nalorphine) or had to be administered parenterally (such as
naloxone). Now with the availability of orally effective
and very potent antagonists, such as naltrexone, the
use of opioid antagonists in routine practice has been
simplified. The usual maintenance dose is 100 mg on
Mondays and Wednesdays, and 150 mg on Fridays.
Naltrexone combined with clonidine, as described
above, is a very effective method for detoxification
as well as for maintenance treatment.
3. Other methods
These include individual psychotherapy, behaviour
therapy, interpersonal therapy, cognitive behaviour
therapy (CBT), motivational enhancement therapy,
self-control strategies, psychotropic drugs for associated psychopathology, family therapy, and group
therapy (e.g. in therapeutic communities such as Synanon, self-help groups such as Narcotic Anonymous or
NA). These methods have to be tailored for use in an
individual patient.

45

4. Psychosocial rehabilitation
This is a very important step in the post-detoxification
phase, in the absence of which relapse rates can be
very high. Rehabilitation should be at both occupational and social levels.

CANNABIS USE DISORDER
Cannabis is derived from the hemp plant, Cannabis
sativa, which has several varieties named after the
region in which it is found (e.g. sativa indica in India
and Pakistan, and americana in America).
Cannabis (street names: grass, hash or hashish,
marihuana) produces more than 400 identifiable
chemicals of which about 50 are cannabinoids, the
most active being Δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9THC). The pistillate form of the female plant is more
important in cannabis production (Table 4.8).
Recently, a Gi-protein (inhibitory G-protein) linked
cannabinoid receptor has been found (in basal ganglia,
hippocampus and cerebellum) which inhibits the adenylate cyclase activity in a dose-dependent manner.
Cannabis produces a very mild physical dependence, with a relatively mild withdrawal syndrome,
which is characterised by fine tremors, irritability, restlessness, nervousness, insomnia, decreased
appetite and craving. This syndrome begins within
few hours of stopping cannabis use and lasts for 4 to
5 days. However, some health professionals feel that
there is no true physical dependence with cannabis.

Table 4.8: Cannabis Preparations
Cannabis
Preparation

Portion of Plant

1

Hashish/Charas

2

Ganja

3

Bhang

4

Hash oil

Resinous exudate from the flowering
tops of cultivated plantsh
Small leaves and brackets of inflorescence
of highly cultivated plants
Dried leaves, flowering shoots and
cut tops of uncultivated plants
Lipid soluble plant extract

THC Content (%)

Potency
(as compared to ‘Bhang’)

8-14

10

1-2

2

1

1

15-40

25


<<<PAGE 58>>>
46

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

On the other hand, psychological dependence
ranges from mild (occasional ‘trips’) to marked (compulsive use). All the active ingredients are called as
marijuana or marihuana. Cannabis can be detected
in urine for up to 3 weeks after chronic heavy use.

Acute Intoxication
Mild cannabis intoxication is characterised by mild
impairment of consciousness and orientation, lightheadedness, tachycardia, a sense of floating in the
air, a euphoric dream-like state, alternation (either
an increase or decrease) in psychomotor activity and
tremors, in addition to photophobia, lacrimation,
tachycardia, reddening of conjunctiva, dry mouth and
increased appetite. There is often a curious splitting of
consciousness, in which the user seems to observe his
own intoxication as a non-participant observer, along
with a feeling that time is slowed down.
Perceptual disturbances are common and can
include depersonalisation, derealisation, synaesthesias (sensation in one sensory modality caused by a
sensation in another sensory modality, e.g. ‘seeing’
the music) and increased sensitivity to sound. However, hallucinations are seen only in marked to severe
intoxication. These are often visual, ranging from
elementary flashes of lights and geometrical figures
to complex human faces and pictures.
Mild cannabis intoxication releases inhibitions,
which is expressed in words and emotions rather than
in actions. ‘Flashback phenomenon’ has been described, and is characterised by a recurrence of cannabis
use experience in the absence of current cannabis use.

Complications
The complications of cannabis use can include:
1. Transient or short-lasting psychiatric disorders:
Acute anxiety, paranoid psychosis, hysterical
fugue-like states, suicidal ideation, hypomania,
schizophrenia-like state (which is characterised by
persecutory delusions, hallucinations and at times
catatonic symptoms), acute organic psychosis and,
very rarely, depression.

2. Amotivational syndrome: Chronic cannabis use is
postulated to cause lethargy, apathy, loss of interest, anergia, reduced drive and lack of ambition.
The aetiological role of cannabis in this disorder
is however far from proven.
3. ‘Hemp insanity’ or cannabis psychosis: Indian
hemp insanity was first described by Dhunjibhoy
in 1930. Thereafter, several reports appeared
in literature from India, Egypt, Morocco and
Nigeria. It was described as being similar to an
acute schizophreniform disorder with disorientation and confusion, and with a good prognosis.
The validity of this specific disorder is currently
doubted.
4. Other complications: Chronic cannabis use sometimes leads to memory impairment, worsening
or relapse in schizophrenia or mood disorder,
chronic obstructive airway disease, pulmonary
malignancies, alteration in both the humoral and
cell-mediated immunity, decreased testosterone
levels, anovulatory cycles, reversible inhibition
of spermatogenesis, blockade of gonadotropin
releasing hormone, and increased risk for the
developing foetus (if taken during pregnancy).

Treatment
As the withdrawal syndrome is usually very mild, the
management consists of supportive and symptomatic
treatment, if the patient comes to medical attention.
The psychiatric symptoms may require appropriate
psychotropic medication and sometimes hospitalisation. Psychotherapy and psychoeducation are
very impor tant in the management of psychic
dependence.

COCAINE USE DISORDER
Cocaine is an alkaloid derived from the coca bush,
Erythroxylum coca, found in Bolivia and Peru. It was
isolated by Albert Neimann in 1860 and was used by
Karl Koller (a friend of Freud) in 1884 as the first
effective local anesthetic agent.


<<<PAGE 59>>>
Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

Cocaine (common street name: Crack) can be
administered orally, intranasally, by smoking (free
basing) or parenterally, depending on the preparation
available (Fig. 4.2). Cocaine HCl is the commonest
form used, followed by the free base alkaloid. Both
intravenous use and free base inhalation produce a
‘rush’ of pleasurable sensations.
Cocaine is a central stimulant which inhibits the
reuptake of dopamine, along with the reuptake of
norepinephrine and serotonin. In animals, cocaine
is the most powerful reinforcer of the drug-taking
behaviour. A typical pattern of cocaine use is cocaine
‘runs’ (binges), followed by the cocaine ‘crashes’
(interruption of use). Cocaine is sometimes used in
combination with opiates like heroin (‘speed ball’)
or at times amphetamines. Previously uncommon,
cocaine misuse appears to be recently a growing
problem in the metros of India.

Acute Intoxication
Acute cocaine intoxication is characterised by pupillary dilatation, tachycardia, hypertension, sweating,
and nausea or vomiting. A hypomanic picture with
increased psychomotor activity, grandiosity, elation of mood, hypervigilance and increased speech

47

output may be present. Later, judgement is impaired
and there is impairment of social or occupational
functioning.

Withdrawal Syndrome
Cocaine use produces a very mild physical, but a
very strong psychological, dependence. A triphasic
withdrawal syndrome usually follows an abrupt discontinuation of chronic cocaine use (Table 4.9).

Complications
The complications of chronic cocaine use include
acute anxiety reaction, uncontrolled compulsive
behaviour, psychotic episodes (with persecutory delusions, and tactile and other hallucinations), delirium
and delusional disorder. High doses of cocaine can
often lead to seizures, respiratory depression, cardiac
arrhythmias, coronary artery occlusion, myocardial
infarction, lung damage, gastrointestinal necrosis,
foetal anoxia and perforation of nasal septum.

Treatment
Before starting treatment, it is essential to diagnose
(or rule out) co-existent psychiatric and/or physical
disorder, and assess the motivation for treatment.

Fig. 4.2: Cocaine Preparations


<<<PAGE 60>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

48

Table 4.9: Phases in Cocaine Withdrawal Syndrome
Phase
I (Crash phase)

Sub-stage
i
ii
iii

II

i

Duration

Clinical Features

9 hours
to
4 days
after discontinuation

Agitation, depression, anorexia,
craving +++
Fatigue, depression, sleepiness, craving +
Exhaustion, hypersomnia with intermittent
awakening, hyperphagia, craving ±
Normal sleep, improved mood, craving ±

4 to 7 days
after
discontinuation

ii
III (Extinction phase)

After 7-10 days of
discontinuation

Cocaine use disorder is commonly associated with
mood disorder, particularly major depression and
cyclothymia.

Treatment of Cocaine Overdose
The treatment of overdose consists of oxygenation,
muscle relaxants, and IV thiopentone and/or IV
diazepam (for seizures and severe anxiety).
IV propranolol, a specific antagonist of cocaineinduced sympathomimetic effects, can be helpful,
administered by a specialist. Haloperidol (or pimozide) can be used for the treatment of psychosis, as
well as for blocking the cardio-stimulatory effects of
cocaine. These must be administered very carefully
by an expert specialist.

Treatment of Chronic Cocaine Use
The management of underlying (or co-existent) psychopathology is probably the most important step in
the management of chronic cocaine use.
The pharmacological treatment includes the
use of bromocriptine (a dopaminergic agonist) and
amantadine (an antiparkinsonian) in reducing cocaine
craving.
Other useful drugs are desipramine, imipramine
and trazodone (both for reducing craving and for
antidepressant effect). The goal of the treatment is
total abstinence from cocaine use.
The psychosocial management techniques, such as
supportive psychotherapy and contingent behaviour

Anxiety, anergia, anhedonia, craving ++
No withdrawal symptoms, increased
vulnerability to relapse

therapy, are useful in the post-withdrawal treatment
and in the prevention of relapse.

AMPHETAMINE USE DISORDER
Though synthesised by Edleano in 1887, it was introduced in Medicine in 1932 as benzedrine inhaler, for
the treatment of coryza, rhinitis and asthma. Later, it
was recommended for a variety of conditions such as
narcolepsy, postencephalitic parkinsonism, obesity,
depression, and even to heighten energy and capacity to work.
Amphetamine refers to a unique chemical which
is basically phenyl-iso-propylamine or methylphenethylamine. It is a powerful CNS stimulant,
with peripheral sympathomimetic effects too. The
dextro-amphetamine isomer is nearly 3-4 times more
potent than the levo-isomer. It acts primarily on norepinephrine release in brain, along with an action on
the release of dopamine and serotonin.
Although still clinically indicated for narcolepsy
and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (and very
rarely for obesity and mild depression), one of the
commonest patterns of ‘use’ is seen amongst the
students and sports-persons to overcome the need for
sleep and fatigue. Tolerance usually develops to the
central as well as cardiovascular effects of amphetamines.
Recently, there has been a resurgence of amphetamine use in USA and Europe, with the availability of


<<<PAGE 61>>>
Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

‘designer’ amphetamines, such as MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxy-amphetamine; street name: ecstasy or
XTC).

Intoxication and Complications
The signs and symptoms of acute amphetamine
intoxication are primarily cardiovascular (tachycardia, hypertension, haemorrhage, cardiac failure and
cardiovascular shock) and central (seizures, hyperpyrexia, tremors, ataxia, euphoria, pupillary dilatation,
tetany and coma). The neuropsychiatric manifestations
include anxiety, panic, insomnia, restlessness, irritability, hostility and bruxism.
Acute intoxication may present as a paranoid hallucinatory syndrome which closely mimics paranoid
schizophrenia. The distinguishing features include
rapidity of onset, prominence of visual hallucinations,
absence of thought disorder, appropriateness of affect,
fearful emotional reaction, and presence of confusion.
However, a confident diagnosis requires an estimation
of the recent urinary amphetamine levels. Amphetamine-induced psychosis usually resolves within seven
days of urinary clearance of amphetamines.
Chronic amphetamine intoxication leads to severe
and compulsive craving for the drug. A high degree
of tolerance is characteristic, with the dependent
individual needing up to 15-20 times the initial dose,
in order to obtain the pleasurable effects. A common
pattern of chronic use is a cycle of runs (heavy use
for several days) followed by crashes (stopping the
drug use).
Tactile hallucinations, in clear consciousness,
may sometimes occur in chronic amphetamine
intoxication.

49

Treatment
Treatment of Intoxication
Acute intoxication is treated by symptomatic measures, e.g. hyperpyrexia (cold sponging, parenteral
antipyretics), seizures (parenteral diazepam), psychotic symptoms (antipsychotics), and hypertension
(antihypertensives). Acidification of urine (with oral
NH4Cl; 500 mg every 4 hours) facilitates the elimination of amphetamines.

Treatment of Withdrawal Symptoms
The presence of severe suicidal depression may necessitate
hospitalisation. The treatment includes symptomatic
management, use of antidepressants and supportive
psychotherapy. The management of withdrawal syndrome
is usually the first step towards successful management
of amphetamine dependence.

LSD USE DISORDER
Lysergic acid diethylamide, first synthesised by Albert
Hoffman in 1938 and popularly known as ‘acid’, is a
powerful hallucinogen. It is related to the psychedelic
compounds found in the ‘morning glory’ seeds, the
lysergic acid amides. As little as 100 μg of LSD is
sufficient to produce behavioural effects in man. LSD
presumably produces its effects by an action on the
5-HT levels in brain.
Although tolerance as well as psychological
dependence can occur with LSD use, no physical
dependence or withdrawal syndrome is reported. A
common pattern of LSD use is a trip (occasional use
followed by a long period of abstinence).

Withdrawal Syndrome

Intoxication

The withdrawal syndrome is typically seen on an
abrupt discontinuation of amphetamines after a period
of chronic use. The syndrome is characterised by
depression (may present with suicidal ideation),
marked asthenia, apathy, fatigue, hypersomnia alternating with insomnia, agitation and hyperphagia.

The characteristic features of acute LSD intoxication
are perceptual changes occurring in a clear consciousness. These perceptual changes include depersonalisation, derealisation, intensification of perceptions,
synaesthesias (for example, colours are heard, and
sounds are felt), illusions, and hallucinations.


<<<PAGE 62>>>
50

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

In addition, features suggestive of autonomic hyperactivity, such as pupillary dilatation, tachycardia,
sweating, tremors, incoordination, palpitations, raised
temperature, piloerection and giddiness, can also be
present.
These changes are usually associated with marked
anxiety and/or depression, though euphoria is more
common in small doses. Persecutory and referential
ideation may also occur.
Sometimes, acute LSD intoxication presents with
an acute panic reaction, known as a bad trip, in which
the individual experiences a loss of control over his
self. The recovery usually occurs within 8-12 hours of
the last dose. Rarely, the intoxication is severe enough
to produce an acute psychotic episode resembling a
schizophreniform psychosis.

Withdrawal Syndrome
No withdrawal syndrome has been described with
LSD use.
However, sometimes, there is a spontaneous recurrence of the LSD use experience in a drug free state.
Described as a flashback, it usually occurs weeks to
months after the last experience. Such episodes are
often induced by stress, fatigue, alcohol intake, severe
physical illness or marihuana intoxication.

Complications
Long-term LSD use is not a common phenomenon.
The complications of chronic LSD use include psychiatric symptoms (anxiety, depression, psychosis or
visual hallucinosis) and occasionally foetal abnormalities.

Treatment
The treatment of acute LSD intoxication consists
of symptomatic management with antianxiety, antidepressant or antipsychotic medication, along with
supportive psychotherapy.

BARBITURATE USE DISORDER
Barbiturate use disorder is now subsumed under sedative, hypnotic and anxiolytic use disorders. However,

it has been described separately as it has some distinctive features.
Since their introduction in 1903, barbiturates have
been used as sedatives, hypnotics, anticonvulsants,
anaesthetics and tranquilisers. The commonly abused
barbiturates are secobarbital, pentobarbital and amobarbital. Their use has recently decreased markedly
as benzodiazepines have replaced barbiturates in the
majority of their clinical uses.
Barbiturates produce marked physical and psychological dependence. Tolerance (both central and
metabolic) develops rapidly and is usually marked.
There is also a cross tolerance with alcohol.

Intoxication and Complications
Acute intoxication, typically occurring as an episodic phenomenon, is characterised by irritability,
increased productivity of speech, lability of mood,
disinhibited behaviour, slurring of speech, incoordination, attentional and memory impairment, and
ataxia. Mild barbiturate intoxication resembles alcohol
intoxication; severe forms may present with diplopia,
nystagmus, hypotonia, positive Romberg’s sign and
suicidal ideation. Drug automatism may sometimes
lead to lethal accidents.
Intravenous use can lead to skin abscesses, cellulitis, infections, embolism and hypersensitivity
reactions.

Withdrawal Syndrome
The barbiturate withdrawal syndrome can be very
severe. It usually occurs in individuals who are taking
more than 600-800 mg/day of secobarbital equivalent
for more than one month.
It is usually characterised by marked restlessness,
tremors, hypertension, seizures, and in severe cases,
a psychosis resembling delirium tremens. The withdrawal syndrome is at its worst about 72 hours after
the last dose. Coma, followed by death, can occur in
some cases.

Treatment
The barbiturate intoxication should be treated symptomatically. If patient is conscious induction of vomiting


<<<PAGE 63>>>
Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

and use of activated charcoal can reduce drug absorption. If coma ensues, intensive care measures should
be employed on an emergency basis.
The treatment of withdrawal syndrome is usually
conservative. However, pentobarbital substitution
therapy has been suggested for treatment of withdrawal
from short-acting barbiturates. After detoxification
phase is over, follow-up supportive treatment and
treatment of associated psychiatric disorder, usually
depression, are important steps to prevent relapses.

BENZODIAZEPINES AND OTHER
SEDATIVE-HYPNOTIC USE DISORDER
Since the discovery of chlordiazepoxide in 1957
by Sternbach, benzodiazepines have replaced other
sedative-hypnotics in treatment of insomnia and
anxiety. These are currently one of the most often prescribed drugs. Benzodiazepines produce their effects
by acting on the benzodiazepine receptors (GABAbenzodiazepine receptor complex), thereby indirectly
increasing the action of GABA, the chief inhibitory
neurotransmitter in the human brain.
Benzodiazepine (or sedative-hypnotic) use disorder can be either iatrogenic or originating with illicit
drug use. Dependence, both physical and psychological, can occur and tolerance is usually moderate.

Intoxication and Complications
Acute intoxication resembles alcohol intoxication
whilst chronic intoxication causes tolerance, especially to the sedative and anticonvulsant actions of
benzodiazepines. Excessive doses can lead to respiratory depression, coma and death while chronic use has
been reported to cause amnestic syndrome.
Some of the other complications of benzodiazepines, particularly with high dose and chronic
use, include behavioural disinhibition, impulsivity,
blackouts, memory loss, worsening of depression and
interactions with other prescribed medications.

51

to heavy doses (more than 60-80 mg per day of diazepam), is characterised by marked anxiety, irritability,
tremors, insomnia, vomiting, weakness, autonomic
hyperactivity with postural hypotension, and seizures.
Depression, transient psychotic episodes, suicidal
ideation, perceptual disturbances and rarely delirium
have also been reported in withdrawal period.

Treatment
The treatment of benzodiazepine intoxication is
usually symptomatic. However, in cases of coma
caused by benzodiazepine overdose, flumazenil (a
benzodiazepine receptor antagonist) can be used in a
dose of 0.3-1.0 mg IV, administered over 1-2 minutes.
The treatment of low dose dependence syndrome
(~15 mg/day of diazepam) is abrupt withdrawal and
symptomatic management of withdrawal symptoms.
However, moderate to high dose dependence is best
managed by gradual withdrawal in a step-wise manner
(a reduction of ~10% of the dose every day). Sometimes
a slower withdrawal is clinically indicated (see Ashton
Manual in Suggested Further Reading List).
The best treatment is probably prevention by limiting benzodiazepine use to no more than 2-4 weeks of
prescription at most.
After the detoxification phase, an adequate follow-up
and supportive treatment is essential to prevent relapses.

INHALANTS OR VOLATILE SOLVENT
USE DISORDER
The commonly used volatile solvents include gasoline (petrol), glues, aerosols (spray paints), thinners,
varnish remover and industrial solvents. The active
ingredients usually include toluene, benzene, acetone
and halogenated hydrocarbons.
Volatile solvent misuse is more common in early
adolescence as a group activity, particularly in low
socioeconomic status groups (e.g. rag-pickers in
Mumbai and Delhi).

Withdrawal Syndrome

Intoxication and Complications

A typical withdrawal syndrome, after cessation of
prolonged use (more than 4-6 weeks) of moderate

Inhalation of a volatile solvent leads to euphoria, excitement, belligerence, dizziness, slurring of speech,


<<<PAGE 64>>>
52

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

apathy, impaired judgement, and neurological signs
(such as decreased reflexes, ataxia, nystagmus, incoordination and coma). Death can occur due to respiratory
depression, cardiac arrhythmias, or asphyxia.
The complications include irreversible damage to
liver and kidneys, peripheral neuropathy, perceptual
disturbances and brain damage.
There appears to be no specific treatment of the
inhalant use disorder. There is often an associated psychiatric disorder (usually schizophrenia or personality
disorder, particularly in solitary sniffers), or there is
a history of criminal background. The prognosis is
usually guarded.

PHENCYCLIDINE USE DISORDER
Phencyclidine (PCP) was introduced as a dissociative
anaesthetic agent (similar to ketamine) in 1950s.
However, its use was soon restricted to veterinary
anaesthesia as some human subjects developed
delirium while emerging from anaesthesia. Classified
as an atypical hallucinogen (street names: Peace pill;
angel dust), PCP selectively antagonises the neuronal
action of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate).
PCP is usually taken either occasionally or in
binges (called as runs); however, some individuals do
take PCP in a regular manner. It can be administered
orally, intravenously or by snorting.

Intoxication and Complications
Acute PCP intoxication produces euphoria in small
doses; higher doses produce dysphoria. Other features
may include impulsiveness, agitation, impaired social
judgement, assaultativeness, feeling of numbness
and inability to move. PCP intoxication can sometimes present with psychiatric syndromes (catatonic
syndrome, delirium, stupor, paranoid hallucinatory
psychosis, mania or depression) and/or neurological
symptoms (nystagmus, ataxia, dysarthria, rigidity,
seizures or coma).

Withdrawal Syndrome
Although no clear-cut withdrawal syndrome has
been described, craving, social withdrawal, anxiety,

depression and impairment in cognitive functions
have been reported.

Treatment
The treatment of PCP intoxication is symptomatic and
usually involves gastric lavage, isolation, and use of
anticonvulsants (for seizures) and antipsychotics (for
PCP induced psychosis).
There is no specific treatment for phencyclidine
withdrawal syndrome.

OTHER USE DISORDERS
Caffeine and nicotine are among the most widely used
substances, as they are both legally available. Both of
these can cause intoxication, dependence, tolerance,
and withdrawal syndrome.
Nicotine use (often in the form of smoking) is more
common in schizophrenia and depression. Smoking
predisposes to increased risk of cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease and cancer, and can affect
metabolism of several psychotropic drugs. Smoking
also decreases serum levels of clozapine (and other
drugs such as olanzapine, duloxetine, fluphenazine)
by up to 50%. Clozapine levels can therefore rise
significantly after smoking cessation even whilst the
patient is on nicotine replacement therapy. This is due
to induction of liver enzymes CYP1A2 (cytochrome
P450 1A2) by hydrocarbons in tobacco smoke rather
than nicotine.
Nicotine withdrawal can occur 12-14 hours after
last smoke and can present with anxiety, restlessness, poor concentration, decreased sleep, increased
appetite and exacerbation of psychiatric symptoms in
those with pre-existing psychiatric disorder(s).
Nicotine replacement therapy is widely used
despite equivocal evidence, delivered in a variety
of preparations such as a sublingual tablet (2 mg),
lozenge (1, 2 or 4 mg), chewing gum (2 or 4 mg),
nasal spray (0.5 mg), inhalator (10 mg), and patches
(7, 14 or 21 mg).
In addition, bupropion (also called as amfebutamone; a norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake
inhibitor – NDRI antidepressant) and varenicline


<<<PAGE 65>>>
Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

(a partial α4β2 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor partial
agonist) are pharmacological agents recently used in
promoting smoking cessation as adjuncts to behavioural or cognitive behavioural treatment(s). These
should only be initiated after a discussion of possible
adverse effects with the patient.
Similarly, caffeine is widely used in general
population as well as in patients with psychiatric
disorders. DSM-IV-TR defines caffeinism (caffeine
intoxication) as a recent consumption of caffeine,
usually in excess of 250 mg per day, along with five
or more of the following: restlessness, nervousness,
excitement, insomnia, flushed face, diuresis, GI (gastrointestinal) disturbance, muscle twitching, rambling
flow of thought and speech, tachycardia or cardiac

53

arrhythmia, periods of inexhaustibility and psychomotor agitation.
These symptoms should be accompanied by
clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational or other areas of functioning, and the
symptoms should not be better accounted by a general
medical condition or another mental disorder.
The typical content of caffeine in the commonly
used drinks is usually as follows: tea (45 mg/cup),
instant coffee (60 mg/cup), brewed coffee (100 mg/
cup), and cola drinks (25-50 mg/can). Caffeine is also
present in chocolate. Caffeine can affect metabolism
of several psychotropic drugs, most importantly
clozapine. It can elevate the levels of clozapine (and
other drugs) by inhibiting CYP1A2.


<<<PAGE 66>>>
5
Schizophrenia has puzzled physicians, philosophers,
and general public for centuries. The systematic
study of schizophrenia, however, is but a century old.
A clinical syndrome with a profound influence on
public health, schizophrenia has been called “arguably
the worst disease affecting mankind, even AIDS not
excepted” (Nature 1988).
To understand what schizophrenia is, it is important to have a brief look at the history of evolution of
the concept of schizophrenia.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Although earlier descriptions of schizophrenia-like
illness are recorded in literature (such as in Ayurveda;
Morel’s description of demence precoce; Kahlbaum’s
description of catatonia; Hecker’s description of
hebephrenia), the scientific study of the disorder
began with the description of dementia praecox by
Emil Kraepelin.

Emil Kraepelin
In 1896, Emil Kraepelin differentiated the major
psychiatric illnesses into two clinical types: Dementia
praecox, and Manic depressive illness.
Under dementia praecox, he brought together the
various psychiatric illnesses (such as paranoia, catatonia and hebephrenia), which were earlier thought
to be distinct illnesses. The emphasis in diagnosis of
dementia praecox was on an early onset and a poor

Schizophrenia
outcome (dementia: deterioration; praecox: early
onset).
He recognised the characteristic features of dementia praecox, such as delusions, hallucinations,
disturbances of affect and motor disturbances.

Eugen Bleuler
Eugen Bleuler (1911), while renaming dementia
praecox as schizophrenia (meaning mental splitting),
recognised that this disorder did not always have a
poor prognosis as described by Kraepelin. He also
recognised that schizophrenia consisted of a group of
disorders rather than being a distinct entity. Therefore,
he used the term, a group of schizophrenias.
Bleuler described the characteristic symptoms
(fundamental symptoms) which were then thought
to be diagnostic of schizophrenia (Table 5.1). He
also described accessory symptoms of schizophrenia
(thought to be secondary to fundamental symptoms).
These accessory symptoms included delusions, hallucinations and negativism.

Kurt Schneider
Kurt Schneider (1959) described symptoms which,
though not specific of schizophrenia, were of great
help in making a clinical diagnosis of schizophrenia.
These are popularly called as Schneider’s first rank
symptoms of schizophrenia (FRS or SFRS) (Table 5.2).
He also described the second rank symptoms of
schizophrenia (which were considered by him as less


<<<PAGE 67>>>
Schizophrenia

Table 5.1: Eugen Bleuler’s Fundamental Symptoms of
Schizophrenia (Also called as 4 A’s of Bleuler)
1. Ambivalence: Marked inability to decide for or
against
2. Autism: Withdrawal into self
3. Affect disturbances: Disturbances of affect such as
inappropriate affect
4. Association disturbances: Loosening of associations;
thought disorder
Table 5.2: First Rank Symptoms (SFRS) of Schizophrenia
1. Audible thoughts: Voices speaking out thoughts aloud
or ‘thought echo’.
2. Voices heard arguing: Two or more hallucinatory
voices discussing the subject in third person.
3. Voices commenting on one’s action.
4. Thought withdrawal: Thoughts cease and subject
experiences them as removed by an external force.
5. Thought insertion: Experience of thoughts imposed
by some external force on person’s passive mind.
6. Thought diffusion or broadcasting: Experience of
thoughts escaping the confines of self and as being
experienced by others around.
7. ‘Made’ feelings or affect.
8. ‘Made’ impulses.
9. ‘Made’ volition or acts: In ‘made’ affect, impulses
and volitions, the person experiences feelings, impulses or acts which are imposed by some external
force. In ‘made’ volition, for example, one’s own
acts are experienced as being under the control of
some external force.
10. Somatic passivity: Bodily sensations, especially
sensory symptoms, are experienced as imposed on
body by some external force.
11. Delusional perception: Normal perception has a
private and illogical meaning.

important for diagnosis of schizophrenia), such as
other forms of hallucinations, perplexity, and affect
disturbances.
These symptoms (SFRS) have been described in
some detail here as they have very often been used
for diagnosis of schizophrenia and have significantly

55

influenced the diagnostic criteria and classification
of schizophrenia and other related psychotic disorders. As mentioned earlier, SFRS are not specific for
schizophrenia and may be seen in other psychiatric
disorders such as mood disorders and organic psychiatric disorders.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
According to the World (Mental) Health Report
2001, about 24 million people worldwide suffer from
schizophrenia. The point prevalence of schizophrenia
is about 0.5-1%. Schizophrenia is prevalent across
racial, sociocultural and national boundaries, with a
few exceptions in the prevalence rates in some isolated
communities.
The incidence of schizophrenia is believed to be
about 0.5 per 1000. The onset of schizophrenia occurs
usually later in women and often runs a relatively more
benign course, as compared to men.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Schizophrenia is characterised by disturbances in
thought and verbal behaviour, perception, affect,
motor behaviour and relationship to the external
world. The diagnosis is entirely clinical and is based
on the following clinical features, none of which are
pathognomonic if present alone.

Thought and Speech Disorders
Autistic thinking is one of the most classical features
of schizophrenia. Here thinking is governed by private and illogical rules. The patient may consider two
things identical because they have identical predicates
or properties (von Domarus Law); for example, Lord
Hanuman was celibate, I am celibate too; So, I am
Lord Hanuman.
Loosening of associations is a pattern of spontaneous speech in which things said in juxtaposition lack
a meaningful relationship or there is idiosyncratic
shifting from one frame of reference to another. The
speech is often described as being ‘disjointed’. If


<<<PAGE 68>>>
56

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

the loosening becomes very severe, speech becomes
virtually incomprehensible. This is then known as
incoherence.
Thought blocking is a characteristic feature of
schizophrenia, although it can also be seen in complex partial seizures (temporal lobe epilepsy). There
is a sudden interruption of stream of speech before
the thought is completed. After a pause, the subject
cannot recall what he had meant to say. This may at
times be associated with thought withdrawal.
Neologisms are newly formed words or phrases
whose derivation cannot be understood. These are
created to express a concept for which the subject
has no dictionary word. Sometimes, normal words
are used in an unconventional or distorted way but the
derivation can be understood, even if bizarre. These
are called word approximations or paraphasias; for
example, describing stomach as a ‘food vessel’.
A patient with schizophrenia may show complete
mutism (with no speech production), poverty of speech
(decreased speech production), poverty of ideation
(speech amount is adequate but content conveys little
information), echolalia (repetition or echoing by the
patient of the words or phrases of examiner), perseveration (persistent repetition of words beyond their
relevance), or verbigeration (senseless repetition of
same words or phrases over and over again). These
are disorders of verbal behaviour or speech.
Delusions are false unshakable beliefs which are
not in keeping with patient’s socio-cultural and educational background. These are of two types: primary
and secondary.
1. Primary delusions arise de novo and cannot be
explained on the basis of other experiences or
perceptions. Also known as autochthonous delusions, these are though to be characteristic of
schizophrenia and are usually seen in early stages.
2. Secondary delusions are the commonest type of
delusions seen in clinical practice and are not
diagnostic of schizophrenia as these can also be
seen in other psychoses. Secondary delusions
can be explained as arising from other abnormal
experiences.

The commonly seen delusions in schizophrenia
include:
1. Delusions of persecution (being persecuted
against, e.g. ‘people are against me’).
2. Delusions of reference (being referred to by others;
e.g. ‘people are talking about me’).
3. Delusions of grandeur (exaggerated self-importance; e.g. ‘I am God almighty’).
4. Delusions of control (being controlled by an external force, known or unknown; e.g. ‘My neighbour
is controlling me”).
5. Somatic (or hypochondriacal) delusions (e.g.
‘there are insects crawling in my scalp’).
The other clinical features of schizophrenic
thought disorder include: overinclusion (tending to
include irrelevant items in speech), impaired abstraction (loss of ability to generalise), concreteness (due
to impaired abstraction), perplexity and ambivalence.
Schneider’s first rank symptoms (such as thought
insertion, thought withdrawal, thought broadcasting,
‘made’ feeling, ‘made’ impulses and ‘made’ volitions),
which have already been discussed earlier (Table 5.2),
may also be present.

Disorders of Perception
Hallucinations (perceptions without stimuli) are common in schizophrenia. Auditory hallucinations are by
far the most frequent. These can be:
i. Elementary auditory hallucinations (i.e. hearing
simple sounds rather than voices)
ii. ‘Thought echo’ (‘audible thoughts’)
iii. ‘Third person hallucinations’ (‘voices heard arguing’, discussing the patient in third person)
iv. ‘Voices commenting on one’s action’.
Only the ‘third person hallucinations’ are believed
to be characteristic of schizophrenia. Visual hallucinations can also occur, usually along with auditory
hallucinations. The tactile, gustatory and olfactory
types are less common.

Disorders of Affect
The disorders of affect include apathy, emotional
blunting, emotional shallowness, anhedonia (inability


<<<PAGE 69>>>
Schizophrenia

57

to experience pleasure) and inappropriate emotional
response (emotional res ponse inappropriate to
thought).
The difficulty of a patient with schizophrenia in
establishing emotional contact with other individuals
can lead to lack of rapport with the physician.

6. There is usually variability in symptomatology
over time which in some cases can be marked.
7. There is no obvious underlying organic cause that
can explain the causation of the symptoms.
8. There is no prominent mood disorder of depressive
or manic type.

Disorders of Motor Behaviour

Suicide in Schizophrenia

There can be either a decrease (decreased spontaneity,
inertia, stupor) or an increase in psychomotor activity
(excitement, aggressiveness, restlessness, agitation).
Mannerisms, grimacing, stereotypies (repetitive
strange behaviour), decreased self-care, and poor
grooming are common features. Catatonic features are
commonly seen in the catatonic subtype of schizophrenia (and are discussed in detail under that heading).

Suicide can occur in schizophrenia due to several
reasons. Some of the common reasons can include
the presence of co-morbid depressive symptoms,
command hallucinations commanding the patient
to commit suicide, impulsive behaviour, presence
of anhedonia, and/or return of insight in the illness
(with the painful awareness that one has suffered from
schizophrenia or psychosis).
It is important to be aware of possibility of suicide
whilst treating a patient with schizophrenia so that the
various risk factors can be addressed in management.

Negative Symptoms
The prominent negative symptoms of schizophrenia
include affective flattening or blunting, attentional
impairment, avolition-apathy (lack of initiative associated with psychomotor slowing), anhedonia,
asociality (social withdrawal), and alogia (lack of
speech output). There is poor verbal as well as nonverbal communication with poor facial expression,
decreased eye contact, with usually poor self-care and
social interaction.

Other Features
1. Decreased functioning in work, social relations
and self-care, as compared to the earlier levels
achieved by the individual.
2. Loss of ego boundaries (feeling of blurring of
boundaries of self with the environment; uncertainty and perplexity regarding own identity and
meaning of existence).
3. Multiple somatic symptoms, especially in the early
stages of illness.
4. Insight (into the illness) is absent and social judgement is usually poor.
5. There is usually no clinically significant disturbance of consciousness, orientation, attention,
memory and intelligence.

DIAGNOSIS
According to ICD-10, for the diagnosis of schizophrenia, a minimum of 1 very clear symptom (and usually
2 or more if less clear cut) belonging to any one of the
groups referred to as (a) to (d) or symptoms from at
least 2 of the groups referred to as (e) to (h), should
have been clearly present for most of the time during
a period of 1 month or more (DSM-IV-TR on the
other hand requires a minimum period of 6 months).
If the duration of illness is less than 1 month, then
a diagnosis of acute schizophrenia-like psychotic
disorder should be made. These symptoms include
(ICD-10):
Thought echo/insertion/withdrawal/broadcasting;
delusions of control/influence/passivity; delusional
perception; hallucinatory voices commenting or
discussing the patient, or other voices coming from
some part of body; and/or persistent culturally inappropriate delusions are included in groups (a) to (d)
mentioned above.
Persistent hallucinations in any modality, or by
persistent overvalued ideas; incoherence or irrelevant


<<<PAGE 70>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

58

speech; neologisms; catatonic behaviour; negative
symptoms not due to depression or antipsychotics are
included in groups (a) to (d) mentioned above.
This is associated with a significant and consistent change in personal behaviour, manifest as loss of
interest, aimlessness, or social withdrawal.
If the patient also meets the criteria for manic episode or depressive episode, the guidelines mentioned
above must have been met before the disturbance of
mood developed. The disorder is not diagnosed in the
presence of overt brain disease, or alcohol- or drugrelated intoxication, dependence, or withdrawal.

CLINICAL TYPES
Schizophrenia can be classified into several subtypes
(Table 5.3). The catatonic and hebephrenic subtypes
of schizophrenia together have been called as nuclear
schizophrenia, as they present with typical symptomatology of schizophrenia and can most frequently result
in personality deterioration over time (especially if
chronic).

Paranoid Schizophrenia
Paranoid schizophrenia is characterised by the following clinical features, in addition to the general
guidelines of schizophrenia described earlier:
1. Delusions of persecution, reference, grandeur (or
‘grandiosity’), control, or infidelity (or ‘jealousy’).
The delusions are usually well-systematised (i.e.
thematically well connected with each other).
2. The hallucinations usually have a persecutory or
grandiose content.
Table 5.3: Clinical Types of Schizophrenia
1. Paranoid schizophrenia
2. Hebephrenic schizophrenia
3. Catatonic schizophrenia
4. Residual schizophrenia
5. Undifferentiated schizophrenia
6. Simple schizophrenia
7. Post-schizophrenic depression
8. Others

3. No prominent disturbances of affect, volition,
speech, and/or motor behaviour.
Personality deterioration in the paranoid subtype is
much less than that seen in other types of schizophrenias. The patient may be quite apprehensive (due to
delusions and hallucinations) and anxious, and appear
evasive and guarded on mental status examination.
The onset of paranoid schizophrenia is usually
insidious, occurs later in life (i.e. late 3rd and early
4th decade) as compared to the other subtypes of
schizophrenia. The course is usually progressive and
complete recovery usually does not occur. There may
be frequent remissions and relapses. At other times, the
functional capability may be only slightly impaired.
The differential diagnosis is usually from delusional
(or paranoid) disorders and paranoid personality disorders.

Disorganised (or Hebephrenic)
Schizophrenia
Disorganised schizophrenia is characterised by the
following features, in addition to the general guidelines of schizophrenia described earlier:
1. Marked thought disorder, incoherence and severe
loosening of associations. Delusions and hallucinations are fragmentary and changeable.
2. Emotional disturbances (inappropriate affect,
blunted affect, or senseless giggling), mannerisms, ‘mirror-gazing’ (for long periods of time),
disinhibited behaviour, poor self-care and hygiene, markedly impaired social and occupational
functioning, extreme social withdrawal and other
oddities of behaviour.
ICD-10 recommends a period of 2 or 3 months
of continuous observation for a confident diagnosis
of disorganised (or hebephrenic) schizophrenia to be
made.
The onset is insidious, usually in the early 2nd
decade. The course is progressive and downhill. The
recovery from the episode is classically poor. Severe
deterioration, without any significant remissions,
usually occurs over time. Hebephrenic schizophrenia
has one of the worst prognoses among the various
subtypes of schizophrenia.


<<<PAGE 71>>>
Schizophrenia

Catatonic Schizophrenia
Catatonic schizophrenia (Cata: disturbed, tonic: tone)
is characterised by a marked disturbance of motor
behaviour, in addition to the general guidelines of
schizophrenia described earlier.
It can present in three clinical forms: excited catatonia, stuporous catatonia, and catatonia alternating
between excitement and stupor.

Excited Catatonia
This is characterised by the following features:
1. Increase in psychomotor activity, ranging from
restlessness, agitation, excitement, aggressiveness
to, at times, violent behaviour (furore).
2. Increase in speech production, with increased
spontaneity, pressure of speech, loosening of associations and frank incoherence.
The excitement has no apparent relationship with
the external environment; instead inner stimuli (e.g.
thought and impulses) influence the excited behaviour.
So, the excitement is not goal-directed.
Sometimes the excitement can become very severe, and is accompanied by rigidity, hyperthermia
and dehydration, finally culminating in death. It is
then known as acute lethal catatonia or pernicious
catatonia. Fortunately, with the availability of new
treatment choices, and early diagnosis and treatment,
lethal catatonia has become increasingly rare in most
parts of the world.

Stuporous (or Retarded) Catatonia
This is characterised by extreme retardation of
psychomotor function. The characteristic catatonic
signs (Table 5.4) are usually observed. Delusions and
hallucinations may be present but are usually not
prominent. Not all the features are present at the
same time.

Catatonia Alternating between
Excitement and Stupor
This clinical picture is very common with features
of both excited catatonia and stuporous catatonia
alternatingly present.

59

Table 5.4: Some Important Clinical Features of
Retarded Catatonia
1. Mutism: Complete absence of speech
2. Rigidity: Maintenance of a rigid posture against efforts to be moved
3. Negativism: An apparently motiveless resistance to
all commands and attempts to be moved, or doing
just the opposite
4. Posturing: Voluntary assumption of an inappropriate
and often bizarre posture for long periods of time
5. Stupor: Akinesis (no movement) with mutism but
with evidence of relative preservation of conscious
awareness
6. Echolalia: Repetition, echo or mimicking of phrases
or words heard
7. Echopraxia: Repetition, echo or mimicking of actions
observed
8. Waxy flexibility: Parts of body can be placed in
positions that will be maintained for long periods of
time, even if very uncomfortable; flexible like wax
9. Ambitendency: Due to ambivalence, conflicting impulses and tentative actions are made, but no goal
directed action occurs, e.g. on asking to take out
tongue, tongue is slightly protruded but taken back
again
10. Other signs such as mannerisms, stereotypies (verbal
and behavioural), automatic obedience (commands
are followed automatically, irrespective of their
nature) and verbigeration (incomprehensible speech).

The onset of catatonic schizophrenia is usually
acute, usually in the late 2nd and early 3rd decade. The
course is often episodic and recovery from the episode
is usually complete. However, residual features are
present after two or more episodes. Differential diagnosis is from other causes of stupor and catatonia.
(This is discussed in further detail in Chapter 19).

Residual and Latent Schizophrenia
Residual schizophrenia is similar to latent schizophrenia and symptoms are similar to prodromal
symptoms of schizophrenia. The only difference is
that residual schizophrenia is diagnosed after at least
one episode has occurred.


<<<PAGE 72>>>
60

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

There are prominent negative symptoms described
above, with absence or marked reduction of florid
psychotic symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations. It is important to rule out antipsychotic-induced
negative symptoms as well as negative symptoms
secondary to associated depression, organic brain
disease or institutionalisation.

Other Subtypes

Undifferentiated Schizophrenia

Pseudoneurotic Schizophrenia

This is a very common type of schizophrenia and is
diagnosed either:
1. When features of no subtype are fully present, or
2. When features of more than one subtype are exhibited, and the general criteria for diagnosis of
schizophrenia are met.

Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia was first described by
Hoch and Polatin. In initial phases, there are predominant neurotic symptoms that last for years and show
a poor response to treatment.
The three classical features described are pananxiety (diffuse, free-floating anxiety which hardly ever
subsides), pan-neurosis (almost all neurotic symptoms
may be present) and pansexuality (constant preoccupation with sexual problems).
Nowadays, this subtype is subsumed under borderline personality disorder.

Simple Schizophrenia
Although called simple, it is one of the subtypes which
is the most difficult to diagnose. It is characterised
by an early onset (early 2nd decade), very insidious
and progressive course, presence of characteristic
‘negative symptoms’ of residual schizophrenia (such
as marked social withdrawal, shallow emotional
response, with loss of initiative and drive), vague
hypochondriacal features, a drift down the social
ladder, and living shabbily and wandering aimlessly.
Delusions and hallucinations are usually absent, and
if present they are short lasting and poorly systematised.
The prognosis is usually very poor.

Post-Schizophrenic Depression
Some schizophrenic patients develop depressive
features within 12 months of an acute episode of
schizophrenia. The depressive features develop in the
presence of residual or active features of schizophrenia
and are associated with an increased risk of suicide.
The depressive features can occur due to side-effect
of antipsychotics, regaining insight after recovery, or
just be an integral part of schizophrenia.
It is important to distinguish the depressive features
from negative symptoms of schizophrenia and extrapyramidal side-effects of antipsychotic medication.

Historically, there have been many other subtypes
of schizophrenia described, but a majority of them
would easily fit in one of the above-mentioned seven
subtypes. A few are briefly mentioned due to their
historical interest and their popular names; though
others are important in their own right.

Schizophreniform Disorder
This is a diagnostic category in DSM-IV-TR with
features of schizophrenia as diagnostic criteria.
The only difference is that the duration is less than
6 months and prognosis is usually better than that of
schizophrenia. This term was originally introduced by
Langfeldt (1961) to designate good prognosis cases,
distinct from “true” schizophrenia. A similar condition
in ICD-10 is called acute schizophrenia-like psychotic
disorder (see Chapter 7 for details).

Oneiroid Schizophrenia
Described first by Mayer-Gross, this is a subtype of
schizophrenia with an acute onset, clouding of consciousness, disorientation, dream-like states (oneiroid
means ‘dream’), and perceptual disturbances with
rapid shifting.
Classically, the episode is usually brief.

Van Gogh Syndrome
Dramatic self-mutilation occurring in schizophrenia
has been also called as Van Gogh syndrome, after the


<<<PAGE 73>>>
Schizophrenia

name of the famous painter Vincent Van Gogh who
had cut his ear during the active phase of illness.

Late Paraphrenia
Described by Sir Martin Roth, this is a disorder which
occurs late in life, usually in the sixth decade. It is
more common in women, especially unmarried or
widowed women. Delusions of persecution are seen,
with bizarre and fantastic content (for example, being
raped or gassed or strangers entering their rooms and
interfering with them).
Hallucinations of all kinds (visual, auditory, tactile,
gustatory and olfactory) can be present. Intelligence
and social judgement outside the arena of persecutory
delusions are usually normal. Approximately 25-40%
of the patients have some defect of sight or hearing.
At present, this syndrome is placed under paranoid
schizophrenia, late onset type.

Pfropf Schizophrenia
This is a syndrome of schizophrenia occurring in the
presence of mental retardation. It differs from schizophrenia in only that there is often a poverty of ideation
and delusions are not usually very well-systematised.
Therefore, behavioural disturbances are much more
prominent than delusions and hallucinations. However, both ICD-10 and DSM-IV-TR do not suggest
a separate category and it is best to diagnose both
schizophrenia and mental retardation, when present
together.

Type I and Type II Schizophrenia
TJ Crow had divided schizophrenia into two subtypes, namely Type I and II schizophrenias. The Type I
syndrome is characterised by positive symptoms while
the Type II syndrome is predominantly characterised
by presence of negative symptoms.
Type I syndrome is supposed to have an acute
presentation, good response to medication and a good
outcome, while Type II is theorised to be chronic in
course, have a poor response to medication and a poor
outcome. Crow also described dilated ventricles on
CT Scan of Brain in Type II syndrome.

61

Although a useful concept theoretically, it has not
been found to be valid in the recent research studies.
Very few patients have a pure Type I or Type II syndrome, and admixtures are far more common.
Table 5.5 summarises symptom clusters in schizophrenia with enumeration of positive, negative and
disorganised symptoms.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The first step in the differential diagnosis is to exclude psychoses with known organic causes, such
as complex partial seizures, drug-induced psychoses
(such as amphetamine-induced psychoses), metabolic
disturbances, or cerebral space occupying lesions.
There would often be clinical features suggestive of
underlying disorders in these conditions.
The second step is to rule out a possibility of mood
disorder (such as mania, depression, or mixed affective
disorder) or schizo-affective disorder.
The third step is to exclude the possibility of other
nonorganic psychoses such as delusional disorders, or
acute and transient psychotic disorders (ATPD).
In addition to the main diagnosis, it is also important to look for co-morbid medical (such as diabetes,
hypertension) and/or psychiatric disorders (such as
depression, anxiety, alcohol or drug misuse, or personality disorder) on a multi-axial diagnostic system
(see Table 1.4).

PROGNOSIS
The important prognostic factors in schizophrenia are
summarised in Table 5.6.

COURSE AND OUTCOME
Since the time of Kraepelin, when the disorder was conceptualised as dementia paecox, schizophrenia has been
associated with a progressive downhill course, with a
large number of patients hospitalised in mental asylums.
However, the longitudinal studies of schizophrenia
suggest that this pattern occurs in only a minority of


<<<PAGE 74>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

62

Table 5.5: Symptom Clusters in Schizophrenia
Positive Symptoms

Negative Symptoms

Disorganised Symptoms

Delusions
Hallucinations

Affective flattening
Alogia (poverty of speech)
Anhedonia—asociality
Avolition—apathy
Attentional impairment

Inappropriate affect
Disorganised behaviour
Thought disorder
Loosening of associations

Table 5.6: Prognostic Factors in Schizophrenia
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

Good Prognostic Factors

Poor Prognostic Factors

Acute or abrupt onset
Onset >35 years of age (late onset)
Presence of precipitating stressor
Good premorbid adjustment
Catatonic subtype (paranoid subtype has an
intermediate prognosis)
Short duration (< 6 months)
Presence of depression
Predominance of positive symptoms
Family history of mood disorder
First episode
Pyknic (fat) physique
Female sex
Good social support
Presence of confusion, perplexity, or disorientation
in the acute phase
Proper treatment, good treatment concordance,
and good response to treatment
Outpatient treatment
Normal cranial CT scan

Insidious onset
Onset <20 years of age (early onset)
Absence of stressor
Poor premorbid adjustment
Disorganised, simple, undifferentiated, or chronic
catatonic subtypes
Chronic course (> 2 years)
Absence of depression
Predominance of negative symptoms
Family history of schizophrenia
Past history of schizophrenia
Asthenic (thin) physique
Male sex
Poor social support or unmarried
Flat or blunted affect

patients. According to a major study (Luc Ciompi
1980), where 5661 cases were followed up for an
average of 36.9 years, the outcome was as follows:
• Complete remission (27%)
• Remission with minor residual deficit (22%)
• Intermediate outcome (24%)
• Severe disability (18%)
• Unstable or uncertain outcome (9%).
So, almost 50% patients reached complete or near
complete recovery, and only 18% were left with severe
disability, with only 9% needing institutionalisation.

Absence of proper treatment or poor response to
treatment
Institutionalisation (long-term hospitalisation)
Evidence of ventricular enlargement on cranial CT
scan

A Study of Factors Associated with Course and
Outcome of Schizophrenia (SOFACOS) was conducted by ICMR (Indian Council of Medical Research)
at three centres (Vellore, Madras and Lucknow) in
India. A total of 386 patients were followed up for a
period of 5 years (1981 to 1986), at the end of which
the outcome was as follows:
• Very favourable outcome (27%)
• Favourable outcome (40%)
• Intermediate outcome (31%)
• Unfavourable outcome (2%).


<<<PAGE 75>>>
Schizophrenia

So, about two-thirds (67%) of the patients had
a favourable outcome as compared to 50% in Luc
Ciompi’s study.
The International Pilot Study on Schizophrenia
(IPSS), conducted on 811 schizophrenic patients
selected in 1968-1969 (patients selected from 9 countries, namely USA, Columbia, UK, Czechoslovakia,
USSR, India, Nigeria, Denmark and China), found
interesting outcome results. It was apparent that the
course and prognosis of schizophrenia was better in
the developing countries such as Nigeria and India,
as compared to the developed countries (Fig. 5.1).
In ICD-10, the course of schizophrenia is specified
under the categories of:
i. Continuous;
ii. Episodic with progressive deficit;
iii. Episodic with stable deficit;
iv. Episodic remittent;
v. Incomplete remission; and
vi. Complete remission.
If the period of observation is less than one year,
the course is not specified.
Some studies have suggested that longer the DUP
(duration of untreated psychosis), worse is the outcome, underlining the importance of early diagnosis
and treatment of schizophrenia. There is an increased
mortality in patients with schizophrenia by almost one
and half times. The most important cause of death
is suicide, the life-time risk of which is about 5-10
times higher in schizophrenia as compared to normal
population.
There is also a higher prevalence of metabolic
syndrome (characterised by abdominal obesity, atherogenic dyslipidaemia, hypertension, raised fasting
blood glucose, and insulin resistance) in schizophrenia
which can be worsened by administration of antipsychotic medication. Patients with schizophrenia can
die 10-15 years prematurely as compared to general
population. There are several factors responsible for
this increased morbidity and mortality, including high
prevalence of smoking, caffeine, alcohol and drug
misuse, obesity, poor treatment concordance, poor

63

help-seeking behaviour, decreased activity levels,
higher incidence of suicide, and metabolic syndrome.

AETIOLOGY
The aetiology of schizophrenia is currently unknown.
However, several theories have been propounded;
these include the following:

Biological Theories
Genetic Hypothesis
About 8-10% of first degree relatives (and 3% of
second degree relatives and 2% of third degree
relatives) of patients with schizophrenia can present
with schizophrenia, as compared with the 0.5-1%
prevalence rate in general population.
The concordance rate for monozygotic twins is
46% and for dizygotic twins is 14%. If one parent has
schizophrenia, the chances of the child developing
schizophrenia are 10-12%. However, if both parents
have schizophrenia, chances of the child developing
schizophrenia increase to about 40%.
Therefore, genetic factors are very important in
making an individual vulnerable to schizophrenia.
However, environmental factors and stress are probably also important in precipitating an episode in
several individuals.

Biochemical Theories
Schizophrenia is presently thought to be probably due
to a functional increase of dopamine at the postsyn-

Fig. 5.1: IPSS Outcome


<<<PAGE 76>>>
64

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

aptic receptor, though other neurotransmitters such
as serotonin (especially 5-HT2 receptors), GABA and
acetylcholine are also presumably involved.

Brain Imaging
Cranial CT Scan, MRI Scan, and postmortem studies
show enlarged ventricles (not amounting to hydrocephalus) and mild cortical atrophy (with an overall
reduction in brain volume and cortical grey matter by
5-10%) in some patients of schizophrenia.
PET (positron emission tomography) scan shows
hypofrontality and decreased glucose utilisation in the
dominant temporal lobe. Attempts are being made to
localise symptoms of schizophrenia (such as auditory
hallucinations, negative symptoms) to the various
brain regions by PET studies.
At present brain imaging does not have a role in
confirming a diagnosis of schizophrenia though it
can be used to rule out an organic basis of psychotic
symptoms where clinically appropriate.

Other Theories
The following findings also point towards a biological
basis of schizophrenia. Antipsychotics, which act by
blocking the dopamine (D2) receptor, cause significant
improvement in schizophrenia and relapse usually
occurs on stopping antipsychotic medication. The
newer, atypical antipsychotics (such as risperidone,
olanzapine, quetiapine) are D2-5-HT2 antagonists.
Drugs such as amphetamines and mescaline can
cause schizophrenia-like symptoms in normal subjects.
Organic mental disorders with schizophrenia-like
symptoms may be seen in Huntington’s chorea (early
stages), homocystinuria, acute intermittent porphyria,
Wilson’s disease and haemachromatosis.
Soft neurological signs (SNS), minor physical anomalies, and impaired eye tracking (smooth
pursuit eye movements) are more often seen in
patients with schizophrenia than in persons without
the disease.
Viral and autoimmune factors have also been
implicated by some, while others (e.g. Weinberger)
have suggested a neurodevelopmental hypothesis for
schizophrenia.

Fig. 5.2: Stress Vulnerability Hypothesis in
Schizophrenia.
Ref: Zubin and Spring (1977)

Psychological Theories
Stress
Increased number of stressful life events before
the onset or relapse probably has a triggering effect on the onset of schizophrenia, in a genetically
vulnerable person (Stress-Vulnerability Hypothesis)
(Fig. 5.2). According to this hypothesis, higher the
genetic vulnerability in a person, lesser the environmental stress needed to precipitate a relapse.
Increased expressed emotions (EE; such as hostility, critical comments, emotional over-involvement)
of ‘significant others’ in the family can lead to an early
relapse. Figure 5.3 depicts the 9-month relapse rates in
patients with schizophrenia in the study conducted by
Vaughn and Leff in 1976. In this study, patients who
were without any antipsychotic medication and were
exposed to more than 35 hours contact per week with
a ‘significant other’ with expressed emotions, were
particularly likely to relapse (92%). The comparable
rate in patients who received antipsychotic medication
and faced less expressed emotions was 12%. In the
research conducted in the last 30 years, these findings
have been replicated all over the globe, though the
period of 35 hours/weeks has not been found to be
significant.

Family Theories
Several theories have been propounded in the past
but are currently of doubtful value. These include


<<<PAGE 77>>>
Schizophrenia

65

loss of ego-boundaries (described by Federn), with a
loss of touch with reality.

Sociocultural Theories
Although the prevalence of schizophrenia is quite
uniform across cultures, it was found to be more common in lower socioeconomic status in some studies.
This has now been explained due to a ‘downward
social drift’, which is a result of having developed
schizophrenia rather than causing it.
Higher rates of schizophrenia have been found
among some migrants, not only among the first
generation migrants but also among the second generation.
9 months relapse rate in 128 patients with schizophrenia
(Vaughn and Leff 1976)

Fig. 5.3: Expressed Emotions (EE) in Schizophrenia

‘schizophrenogenic mothers’, lack of ‘real’ parents,
dependency on mother, anxious mother, parental
marital schism or skew, double-bind theory, communication deviance, and pseudomutuality.
Some of these theories were unfortunately responsible for arousing a sense of unnecessary guilt
in parents for causation of schizophrenia in their
children.

Information Processing Hypothesis
Disturbances in attention, inability to maintain a set,
and inability to assimilate and integrate percepts are
common findings in schizophrenia. Patients with
schizophrenia may at first be overly attentive to
stimuli but later may reduce or exclude attention to
stimuli. There is possibly a breakdown in the internal
representation of mental events.

Psychoanalytical Theories
According to Freud, there is regression to the preoral
(and oral) stage of psychosexual development, with
the use of defense mechanisms of denial, projection,
and reaction formation (see Table 17.1). There is a

MANAGEMENT
The treatment of schizophrenia can be discussed under
the following major headings:
1. Somatic treatment
a. Pharmacological treatment
b. Electro-convulsive therapy (ECT)
c. Miscellaneous treatments.
2. Psychosocial treatment and rehabilitation.

Pharmacological Treatment
The first drug to be used with beneficial effect in
schizophrenia was probably reserpine (Rauwolfia
serpentina extract), in India by Sen and Bose (1931).
Reserpine is no longer used for the treatment of
schizophrenia for a variety of reasons, including its
propensity to cause severe and suicidal depression.
Antipsychotics were formally discovered by Delay
and Deniker in 1952. Since their introduction, they
have changed the outcome of schizophrenia significantly. These are discussed in some detail in Chapter
15. Only some relevant clinical points are briefly
mentioned here. A list of commonly used antipsychotics with their routinely used doses is available
in Table 5.7.
Atypical (or the second generation) antipsychotic
drugs, such as risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine,


<<<PAGE 78>>>
66

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry
Table 5.7: Antipsychotic Dose in Schizophrenia

Drug

Oral Dose Range
(mg/day)

Parenteral Dose
(mg/day)

Equivalent Oral Dose*
(Equal to 100 mg CPZ)

A. Typical/Traditional/First Generation Antipsychotics
1. Chlorpromazine (CPZ)
300-1000
50-100 IM
100
2. Flupentixol
3-18
—
2
3. Haloperidol
5-30
5-10 IM
2-3
4. Loxapine
25-250
—
10
5. Pimozide
4-12
—
2
6. Prochlorperazine
45-150
40-80 IM
15
7. Sulpiride
400-2400
—
200
8. Thioridazine
300-600
—
100
9. Trifluoperazine
15-50
1-5 IM
5
10. Triflupromazine
100-400
30-60 IM
25
11. Zuclopenthixol
25-150
50-100 IM
25
B. Atypical/Second Generation Antipsychotics
12. Amisulpride
400-1200
—
—
13. Aripiprazole
5-30
5.25-15 IM
—
14. Clozapine
50-900
—
50
15. Olanzapine
5-20
2.5-10 IM
2-3
16. Paliperidone
3-12
—
—
17. Quetiapine
150-800
—
50-100
18. Risperidone
2-16
—
0.5-1.0
19. Ziprasidone
40-160
—
20
20. Zotepine
75-300
—
—
*Equivalent doses are at best approximations only. The dose in a particular patient should be chosen on an individualised basis by the treating professional.

aripiprazole, and ziprasidone, are more commonly
used than the older typical (or first generation) antipsychotics such as trifluoperazine and haloperidol, in
acute stages. Atypical antipsychotics are also more
useful when negative symptoms are prominent, e.g.
in chronic schizophrenia.
Clozapine, another atypical antipsychotic, is
available in the Indian market. The clinical trials have
shown that clozapine is effective in about 30% of
patients who had no beneficial response to traditional
(typical and atypical) antipsychotics. It is an effective
drug; however, as it can cause agranulocytosis and
seizures as side-effects, it should be used with caution,
with regular WBC and neutrophil counts as advised
by the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC).

Drug treatment is usually administered in the
outpatient setting as:
1. There are very few number of psychiatric beds in
India,
2. Majorities of families are willing to care for the
patients at home, and
3. Majority of patients do not require hospitalisation.
However, hospitalisation is indicated if there is:
1. Neglect of food and water intake,
2. Danger to self or others,
3. Poor treatment adherence,
4. Significant neglect of self-care, or
5. Lack of social support with evidence of abovementioned risks.


<<<PAGE 79>>>
Schizophrenia

In the presence of acute excitement, haloperidol
5 mg IV or IM, with/without 10 mg diazepam or
50 mg of promethazine can be administered. Given
IM, chlorpromazine can cause painful injection
abscess at the injection site. It should never be given
IV, as severe hypotension can occur. It is really
important to exercise care in administering parenteral
antipsychotics to any patient, but particularly one who
is treatment (antipsychotic) naïve. Oral antipsychotics
are preferable to parenteral antipsychotic in routine
clinical practice.
A majority of patients require maintenance treatment with antipsychotics to prevent relapse. Generally,
the treatment is continued for 6 months to 1 year for
the first episode, for 1-2 years for the subsequent episodes, and for indefinite period for repeated episodes
or persistent symptoms. However, the decision regarding the duration of treatment in a particular case has to
be assessed individually by the treating psychiatrist in
consultation with the patient and family (if appropriate), in view of past history and possible risks.
To ensure drug concordance, depot antipsychotic
preparations with long duration of action can be used.
(See Table 15.5 for some common preparations of
depot antipsychotics).
Many patients require adjuvant antiparkinsonian
medication to prevent extrapyramidal side-effects;
for example, trihexiphenidyl 6 mg/day, orphenadrine
150 mg/day, procyclidine 7.5-15 mg/day. This is
particularly true if the patient is receiving an older,
typical antipsychotic (such as haloperidol). However,
at times atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone
can also cause extrapyramidal symptoms, particularly
in higher doses.
Ideally speaking, during hospitalisation, no patient
should receive anticholinergic antipar kin sonian
medication till extrapyramidal side-effects appear.
Anticholinergics can worsen cognitive function, have
an abuse potential, can cause delirium (especially
in elderly), can worsen or contribute to negative
symptoms in schizophrenia, and may increase the risk
of tardive dyskinesia. But, in routine clinical practice,
often a majority of patients do receive anticholinergics
in addition to traditional antipsychotics.

67

Antipsychotics probably act by blocking the postsynaptic dopamine (D2) receptors in the mesolimbic
system. Other receptors such as 5-HT, muscarinic
receptors and GABA are also probably important.
Atypical antipsychotics are also called as SerotoninDopamine Antagonists (SDAs) due of their action on
both dopamine and 5-HT.

Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)
Schizophrenia is not a primary indication for ECT.
The indications for ECT in schizophrenia include:
1. Catatonic stupor.
2. Uncontrolled catatonic excitement.
3. Acute exacerbation not controlled with drugs.
4. Severe side-effect with drugs, in presence of untreated schizophrenia.
Usually 8-12 ECTs are needed (although up to 18
have been given in poor responders), administered two
or three times a week.

Miscellaneous Treatments
Psychosurgery is not routinely indicated in the treatment of schizophrenia. It is a treatment which is
extremely rarely used in clinical practice. When used,
the treatment of choice is limbic leucotomy (a small
subcaudate lesion with a cingulate lesion) in some
cases with severe and very prominent depression,
anxiety or obsessional symptoms.
Severely deteriorated patients are unlikely to
benefit. The maximum benefit would be in acute
episodes, but antipsychotics are far better obviously
both in efficacy and safety.
Many other methods such as megavitamin therapy,
dialysis, malaria therapy, high dose propranolol and
insulin coma therapy have been used in past but are
no longer used in clinical practice due to either poor
evidence for efficacy and/or risks to the patient.

Psychosocial Treatment
Psychosocial treatment is an extremely important
component of comprehensive management of schizophrenia. It can be divided in following steps:
1. Psychoeducation of the patient and especially the
family/carers (with patient’s consent) regarding


<<<PAGE 80>>>
68

2.

3.

4.

5.

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

the nature of illness, and its course and treatment.
Psychoeducation helps in establishing a good
therapeutic relationship with the patient (and the
family). Psychoeducation also involves explaining
the stress-vulnerability model of schizophrenia to
the patient and carer(s).
Group psychotherapy is particularly aimed
at teaching problem solving and communication skills. This can be conducted in a form
which is known as the ‘social skills training package’.
Family therapy: Apart from psychoeducation,
family members are also provided social skills
training to enhance communication and help
decrease intrafamilial ‘tensions’. Attempts are
also made to decrease the ‘expressed emotions’
(EE) of ‘significant others’ in the family. The
family members’ awareness is raised regarding
decreasing expectations and avoiding critical
remarks, emotional over-involvement, and hostility.
Milieu therapy (or therapeutic community) includes treatment in a living, learning or working
environment ranging from inpatient psychiatric
unit to day-care hospitals and half-way homes.
Individual psychotherapy is usually supportive
in nature. Rarely, psychoanalytically oriented
psychodynamic psychotherapy is used. However,

the current consensus does not recommend the
use of psychoanalytic psychotherapy in routine
treatment of schizophrenia.
Several centres (and guidelines) recommend the
use of cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) in the
treatment of schizophrenia [e.g. NICE (National
Institute of Clinical Excellence, UK) Guidelines
for Schizophrenia 2009]. Delivery of CBT in
schizophrenia needs specialised training and is
often conducted as an adjunct to psychopharmacological therapy.
6. Psychosocial rehabilitation is used, usually along
with milieu therapy. This includes activity therapy,
to develop the work habit, training in a new vocation or retraining in a previous skill, vocational
guidance, independent job placement, sheltered
employment or self-employment, and occupational therapy.
However, antipsychotic drug treatment in the acute
stages, as well as for maintenance treatment, is the
mainstay of management of schizophrenia.
Psychosocial treatment is an important adjunct
to drug treatment which enhances its efficacy and
leads to a more complete recovery and rehabilitation.
However, it is unlikely that psychosocial treatment,
in the absence of drug treatment, will be able to treat
schizophrenia effectively.


<<<PAGE 81>>>
6
Broadly speaking, the emotions can be described as
two main types:
1. Affect, which is a short-lived emotional response
to an idea or an event, and
2. Mood, which is a sustained and pervasive emotional response which colours the whole psychic
life.
So according to these definitions, depression
and mania are mood disorders and not ‘affective
disorders’ as they have been called so frequently in
the past. Throughout this chapter (and this book), the
more correct word mood disorder will be used (as
indeed in DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10).
Mood disorders have been known to man since
antiquity. The Old Testament describes King Saul
as suffering from severe depressive episodes and
responding slightly to David’s soothing music. While
Hippocrates coined the words mania and melancholia,
it was Aretaeus who first described mania and depression occurring in the same individual. Emil Kraepelin,
borrowing from the work of Kahlbaum, Falret and
Baillarger, described the manic-depressive illness as
separate from dementia praecox on the basis of course,
clinical symptoms and outcome.
Recently, the World Health Report 2001 has identified unipolar depression as the 4th cause of DisabilityAdjusted Life Years (DALYs) in all ages, and the
2nd cause in the age group of 15-44 years. Unipolar
depression is also the 1st cause of YLD (Years of Life
Lived with Disability) in all ages. The comparison was

Mood Disorders
with all medical disorders, and not only psychiatric
disorders. The World Health Report 2001 estimates
that there are 121 million people worldwide suffering
from depression.

CLASSIFICATION
The classification of mood disorders is an area which is
fraught with multiple controversies. According to the
ICD-10, the mood disorders are classified as follows:
1. Manic episode
2. Depressive episode
3. Bipolar mood (affective) disorder
4. Recurrent depressive disorder
5. Persistent mood disorder (including cyclothymia
and dysthymia)
6. Other mood disorders (including mixed affective
episode and recurrent brief depressive disorder).

CLINICAL FEATURES AND DIAGNOSIS
Manic Episode
The life-time risk of manic episode is about 0.81%. This disorder tends to occur in episodes lasting
usually 3-4 months, followed by complete clinical
recovery. The future episodes can be manic, depressive or mixed.
A manic episode is typically characterised by the
following features (which should last for at least one


<<<PAGE 82>>>
70

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

week and cause disruption in occupational and social
activities).

Elevated, Expansive or Irritable Mood
The elevated mood can pass through following four
stages, depending on the severity of manic episode:
a. Euphoria (mild elevation of mood): An increased
sense of psychological well-being and happiness,
not in keeping with ongoing events. This is usually
seen in hypomania (Stage I).
b. Elation (moderate elevation of mood): A feeling of
confidence and enjoyment, along with an increased
psychomotor activity. Elation is classically seen
in mania (Stage II).
c. Exaltation (severe elevation of mood): Intense
elation with delusions of grandeur; seen in severe
mania (Stage III).
d. Ecstasy (very severe elevation of mood): Intense
sense of rapture or blissfulness; typically seen in
delirious or stuporous mania (Stage IV).
Along with these variations in elevation of mood,
expansive mood may also be present, which is an
unceasing and unselective enthusiasm for interacting
with people and surrounding environment. At times,
elevated mood may not be apparent and instead an
irritable mood may be predominant, especially when
the person is stopped from doing what he wants. There
may be rapid, short lasting shifts from euphoria to
depression or irritability.

Psychomotor Activity
There is an increased psychomotor activity, ranging
from overactiveness and restlessness, to manic excitement where the person is ‘on-the-toe-on-the-go’, (i.e.
involved in ceaseless activity). The activity is usually
goal-oriented and is based on external environmental
cues. Rarely, a manic patient can go in to a stuporous
state (manic stupor).

Speech and Thought
The person is more talkative than usual; describes
thoughts racing in his mind; develops pressure of
speech; uses playful language with punning, rhyming,
joking and teasing; and speaks loudly.

Later, there is ‘flight of ideas’ (rapidly produced
speech with abrupt shifts from topic to topic, using
external environmental cues. Typically the connections between the shifts are apparent). When the
‘flight’ becomes severe, incoherence may occur. A less
severe and a more ordered ‘flight’, in the absence of
pressure of speech, is called ‘prolixity’.
There can be delusions (or ideas) of grandeur
(grandiosity), with markedly inflated self-esteem.
Delusions of persecution may sometimes develop
secondary to the delusions of grandeur (e.g. I am so
great that people are against me). Hallucinations (both
auditory and visual), often with religious content,
can occur (e.g. God appeared before me and spoke to
me). Since these psychotic symptoms are in keeping
with the elevated mood state, these are called moodcongruent psychotic features.
Distractibility is a common feature and results in
rapid changes in speech and activity, in response to
even irrelevant external stimuli.

Goal-directed Activity
The person is unusually alert, trying to do many things
at one time.
In hypomania, the ability to function becomes
much better and there is a marked increase in productivity and creativity. Many artists and writers
have contributed significantly in such periods. As
past history of hypomania and mild forms of mania
is often difficult to elicit, it is really important to take
additional historical information from reliable informants (e.g. family members).
In mania, there is marked increase in activity
with excessive planning and, at times, execution of
multiple activities. Due to being involved in so many
activities and distractibility, there is often a decrease
in the functioning ability in later stages. There is
marked increase in sociability even with previously
unknown people. Gradually this sociability leads to
an interfering behaviour though the person does not
recognise it as abnormal at that time. The person
becomes impulsive and disinhibited, with sexual
indiscretions, and can later become hypersexual and
promiscuous.


<<<PAGE 83>>>
Mood Disorders

Due to grandiose ideation, increased sociability,
overactivity and poor judgement, the manic person
is often involved in the high-risk activities such as
buying sprees, reckless driving, foolish business
investments, and distributing money and/or personal
articles to unknown persons. He is usually dressed up
in gaudy and flamboyant clothes, although in severe
mania there may be poor self-care.

Other Features
Sleep is usually reduced with a decreased need for
sleep. Appetite may be increased but later there is
usually decreased food intake, due to marked overactivity. Insight into the illness is absent, especially
in severe mania.
Psychotic features such as delusions, hallucinations which are not understandable in the context of
mood disorder (called mood incongruent psychotic
features), e.g. delusions of control, may be present in
some cases.

Absence of Underlying Organic Cause
If manic episode is secondary to an organic cause, a
diagnosis of organic mood disorder should be made.

Depressive Episode
The life-time risk of depression in males is 8-12% and
in females is 20-26%. However, the life-time risk of
major depression (or depressive episode) is about 8%.
The typical depressive episode is characterised by
the following features (which should last for at least
two weeks for a diagnosis to be made):

Depressed Mood
The most important feature is the sadness of mood
or loss of interest and/or pleasure in almost all activities (pervasive sadness), present throughout the
day (persistent sadness). This sadness of mood is
quantitatively as well as qualitatively different from
the sadness encountered in ‘normal’ sadness or grief.
The depressed mood varies little from day to day
and is often not responsive to the environmental
stimuli.

71

The loss of interest in daily activities results in
social withdrawal, decreased ability to function in
occupational and interpersonal areas and decreased
involvement in previously pleasurable activities. In
severe depression, there may be complete anhedonia
(inability to experience pleasure).

Depressive Ideation/Cognition
Sadness of mood is usually associated with pessimism,
which can result in three common types of depressive
ideas. These are:
a. Hopelessness (there is no hope in the future).
b. Helplessness (no help is possible now).
c. Worthlessness (feeling of inadequacy and inferiority).
The ideas of worthlessness can lead to selfreproach and guilt-feelings. The other features are
difficulty in thinking, difficulty in concentration,
indecisiveness, slowed thinking, subjective poor
memory, lack of initiative and energy. Often there are
ruminations (repetitive, intrusive thoughts) with pessimistic ideas. Thoughts of death and preoccupation
with death are not uncommon.
Suicidal ideas may be present. In severe cases,
delusions of nihilism (e.g. ‘world is coming to an
end’, ‘my brain is completely dead’, ‘my intestines
have rotted away’) may occur.

Psychomotor Activity
In younger patients (< 40 year old), retardation is more
common and is characterised by slowed thinking and
activity, decreased energy and monotonous voice.
In a severe form, the patient can become stuporous
(depressive stupor).
In the older patients (e.g. post-menopausal
women), agitation is commoner. It often presents with
marked anxiety, restlessness (inability to sit still, handwriggling, picking at body parts or other objects) and
a subjective feeling of unease.
Anxiety is a frequent accompaniment of depression. Irritability may present as easy annoyance and
frustration in day-to-day activities, e.g. unusual anger
at the noise made by children in the house.


<<<PAGE 84>>>
72

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Physical Symptoms
Multiple physical symptoms (such as heaviness of
head, vague body aches) are particularly common in
the elderly depressives and depressed patients from
the developing countries (such as India).
However, the recent literature has shown that
multiple physical symptoms (called general aches
and pains) are present in most patients even in the
Western world and they can be elicited only if physicians routinely ask the patients for their presence.
Hypochondriacal features may be present in up
to a quarter of depressives presenting for treatment.
These physical symptoms are almost always present
in severe depressive episode.
Another common symptom is the complaints of
reduced energy and easy fatigability. The patients,
therefore, not surprisingly attribute their symptoms
to physical cause(s) and consult a physician instead
of a psychiatrist.

Biological Functions
Disturbance of biological functions is common, with
insomnia (or sometimes increased sleep), loss of
appetite and weight (or sometimes hyperphagia and
weight gain), and loss of sexual drive.
When the disturbance is severe, it is called as
melancholia (somatic syndrome in ICD-10-DCR;
Diagnostic Criteria for Research). The somatic syndrome of depression is described in Table 6.1.
The presence of somatic syndrome in depressive
disorder signifies higher severity and more biological
Table 6.1: Somatic Syndrome in Depression (ICD-10)
The somatic syndrome is characterised by:
a. Significant decrease in appetite or weight
b. Early morning awakening, at least 2 (or more)
hours before the usual time of awakening
c. Diurnal variation, with depression being worst in
the morning
d. Pervasive loss of interest and loss of reactivity to
pleasurable stimuli
e. Psychomotor agitation or retardation.

nature of the disturbance. It often also implies a good
response to somatic methods of treatment (e.g. pharmacotherapy, ECT).

Psychotic Features
About 15-20% of depressed patients have psychotic
symptoms such as delusions, hallucinations, grossly
inappropriate behaviour or stupor. The psychotic
features can be either mood-congruent (e.g. nihilistic
delusions, delusions of guilt, delusions of poverty,
stupor) which are understandable in the light of
depressed mood, or can be mood-incongruent (e.g.
delusions of control) which are not directly related to
depressive mood.

Suicide
Suicidal ideas in depression should always be taken
very seriously. Although there is a risk of suicide in
every depressed patient with suicidal ideation, presence of certain factors increases the risk of suicide
(Table 6.2).

Absence of Underlying Organic Cause
If depressive episode is secondary to an organic cause,
a diagnosis of organic mood disorder should be made.
In ICD-10, the severity of depressive episode is
defined as mild, moderate or severe, depending primarily on the number of the symptoms, but also on the
severity of symptoms and the degree of impairment.
Table 6.2: Suicidal Risk: Some Important Factors
Suicidal risk is much more in the presence of following
factors:
a. Presence of marked hopelessness
b. Males; age>40; unmarried, divorced/widowed
c. Written/verbal communication of suicidal intent
and/or plan
d. Early stages of depression
e. Recovering from depression (At the peak of
depression, the patient is usually either too depressed or too retarded to commit suicide)
f. Period of 3 months from recovery.


<<<PAGE 85>>>
Mood Disorders

73

Bipolar Mood (or Affective) Disorder

Persistent Mood Disorder

This disorder, earlier known as manic depressive psychosis (MDP), is characterised by recurrent episodes
of mania and depression in the same patient at different
times (Fig. 6.1).
These episodes can occur in any sequence. The
patients with recurrent episodes of mania (unipolar
mania) are also classified here as they are rare and
often resemble the bipolar patients in their clinical
features.
The current episode in bipolar mood disorder is
specified as one of the following (ICD-10):
i. hypomanic,
ii. manic without psychotic symptoms,
iii. manic with psychotic symptoms,
iv. mild or moderate depression,
v. severe depression, without psychotic symptoms,
vi. severe depression, with psychotic symptoms,
vii. mixed, or
viii. in remission.
Bipolar mood disorder is further classified in to
bipolar I and bipolar II disorders (Table 6.3).

These disorders are characterised by persistent mood
symptoms which last for more than 2 years (1 year in
children and adolescents) but are not severe enough
to be labelled as even hypomanic or mild depressive
episode.
If the symptoms consist of persistent mild depression, the disorder is called as dysthymia; and if symptoms consist of persistent instability of mood between
mild depression and mild elation, the disorder is called
as cyclothymia.

Recurrent Depressive Disorder

Bipolar mood disorder has an earlier age of onset
(third decade) than recurrent depressive (unipolar)
disorder. Unipolar depression, on the other hand, is
common in two age groups: late third decade and fifth
to sixth decades.
An average manic episode lasts for 3-4 months
while a depressive episode lasts from 4-6 months.
Unipolar depression usually lasts longer than bipolar
depression. With rapid institution of treatment, the
major symptoms of mania are controlled within
2 weeks and of depression within 6-8 weeks.

This disorder is characterised by recurrent (at least
two) depressive episodes (unipolar depression).
The current episode in recurrent depressive disorder is specified as one of the following:
i. mild,
ii. moderate,
iii. severe, without psychotic symptoms,
iv. severe, with psychotic symptoms,
v. in remission.

Other Mood Disorders
This category includes the diagnosis of mixed affective episode. This is a frequently missed diagnosis
clinically. In this type, the full clinical picture of
depression and mania is present either at the same time
intermixed (Fig. 6.1), or alternates rapidly with each
other (rapid cycling), without a normal intervening
period of euthymia.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS

Table 6.3: Subtypes of Bipolar Disorder

Fig. 6.1: Bipolar Disorder: Clinical Picture

1. Bipolar I
Characterised by episodes of severe mania and
severe depression
2. Bipolar II
Characterised by episodes of hypomania (not requiring hospitalisation) and severe depression


<<<PAGE 86>>>
74

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Nearly 40% of depressives with episodic course
improve in 3 months, 60% in 6 months and 80%
improve within a period of one year. 15-20% of
patients develop a chronic course of illness, which
may last for two or more years.
Chronic depression is usually characterised by
less intense depression, hypochondriacal symptoms,
presence of co-morbid disorders (such as dysthymic
disorder, alcohol dependence, personality disorders
and medical disorders), presence of ongoing stressors and unfavourable early environment. As the age
advances, the intervals between two episodes shorten
and, the duration of the episodes and their frequency
tends to increase. Although not all patients have relapses, it has been estimated that up to 75% of patients
have a second episode within 5 years.
Some patients with bipolar mood disorder have
more than 4 episodes per year; they are known as rapid
cyclers (Figure 6.2). About 70-80% of all rapid cyclers
are women. When phases of mania and depression
alternate very rapidly (e.g. in matter of hours or days),
the condition is known as ultra-rapid cycling. Some
of the factors associated with rapid cycling include the
use of antidepressants (especially tricyclic antidepressants), low thyroxin levels, female gender, bipolar II
pattern of illness, and the presence of neurological
disease.

There is an increased mortality in patients with
mood disorders by almost two times the general population. The most important cause of death is suicide,
the life-time risk of which is 10-15 times higher in
depression. Patients with depression also have higher
mortality rates from cardiovascular diseases and comorbid alcohol and drug use disorders. Patients with
depression also exhibit a variety of disturbances in
immune function.

PROGNOSIS
Classically, the prognosis in mood disorders is generally described as better than in schizophrenia. Some
of the good (and poor) prognostic factors in mood
disorders are described in Table 6.4.
Table 6.4: Some Prognostic Factors in Mood Disorders
Good Prognostic Factors
1. Acute or abrupt onset
2. Typical clinical features
3. Severe depression
4. Well-adjusted premorbid personality
5. Good response to treatment.
Poor Prognostic Factors
1. Co-morbid medical disorder, personality disorder or
alcohol dependence
2. Double depression (acute depressive epi sode
superimposed on chronic depression or dysthymia)
3. Catastrophic stress or chronic ongoing stress
4. Unfavourable early environment
5. Marked hypochondriacal features, or mood-incongruent psychotic features
6. Poor drug compliance.

AETIOLOGY

Fig. 6.2: Bipolar Disorder: Rapid Cycling Clinical
Picture

Over the years, a vast amount of literature has emerged
probing the aetiology of mood disorders. However, the
aetiology of mood disorders is not known currently,
despite several theories having been propounded.
Some of these include:


<<<PAGE 87>>>
Mood Disorders

Biological Theories

75

The following findings (and theories) point towards
a biological basis of mood disorders.

decrease in the serotonergic function, evidenced by
decreased urinary and plasma 5-HIAA levels and the
postmortem studies.

Genetic Hypothesis

Neuroendocrine Theories

The life-time risk for the first degree relatives of
bipolar mood disorder patients is 25%, and of recurrent
depressive disorder patients is 20%.
The life-time risk for the children of one parent
with bipolar mood disorder is 27% and of both parents
with bipolar mood disorder is 74%.
The concordance rate in bipolar disorders for
monozygotic twins is 65% and for dizygotic twins is
20%; the concordance rate in unipolar depression for
monozygotic twins is 46% and for dizygotic twins is
20%.
Therefore, genetic factors are very important in
making an individual vulnerable to mood disorders,
particularly so in bipolar mood disorders. However,
environmental factors are also probably important.

Mood symptoms are prominently present in many
endocrine disorders, such as hypothyroi dism,
Cushing’s disease, and Addison’s disease.
Endocrine function is often disturbed in depression, with cortisol hypersecretion, non-suppression
with dexamethasone challenge (Dexamethasone suppression test or DST), blunted TSH response to TRH,
and blunted growth hormone (GH) production during
sleep.
The neuroendocrine and biochemical mechanisms
are closely inter-related.

Biochemical Theories
There are several biochemical hypotheses for the
causation of mood disorders. The mono amine
hypothesis suggests an abnormality in the monoamine
[catecholamine (norepinephrine and dopamine) and
serotonin] system in the central nervous system at
one or more sites. Acetylcholine and GABA are also
presumably involved.
The earlier models of a functional increase (in mania) or decrease (in depression) of amines at the synaptic cleft now appear simplistic, though urinary and
CSF levels of amine metabolites indicate decreased
norepinephrine and/or 5-HT function in depression,
and increased norepinephrine in mania.
The postsynaptic events involving the second
messenger system, and alterations in the receptor
number and function, are also important in addition
to the synaptic and presynaptic events.
The effects of antidepressants and mood stabilisers
in mood disorders also provide additional evidence to
the biochemical hypothesis of mood disorders.
Patients suffering from severe depression with
suicidal intent/attempt appear to have a marked

Sleep Studies
Sleep abnormalities are common in mood disorders
(e.g. decreased need for sleep in mania; insomnia and
frequent awakenings in depression).
In depression, the commonly observed abnormalities include decreased REM latency (i.e. the time
between falling asleep and the first REM period is
decreased), increased duration of the first REM period,
and delayed sleep onset.

Brain Imaging
In mood disorders, brain imaging studies (CT scan/
MRI scan of brain, PET scan, and SPECT) have
yielded inconsistent, yet suggestive findings.
These findings include ventricular dilatation, white
matter hyper-intensities, and changes in the blood flow
and metabolism in several parts of brain (such as prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and caudate).

Psychosocial Theories
Psychoanalytic Theories
In depression, loss of a libidinal object, introjection
of the lost object, fixation in the oral sadistic phase
of development, and intense craving for narcissism
or self-love are some of the postulates of different
psychodynamic theories.


<<<PAGE 88>>>
76

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Mania represents a reaction formation (Table 17.1)
to depression according to the psychodynamic theory.

Table 6.5: Some Commonly used Antidepressants
Generic Name

Stress
Increased number of stressful life events before the
onset or relapse has a formative rather than a precipitating effect in depression though they can serve
a precipitant role in mania. Increased stressors in
the early period of development are probably more
important in depression.

Cognitive and Behavioural Theories
The mechanisms of causation of depression, according
to these theories, include depressive negative
cognition (cognitive theory), learned helplessness
(animal model), and anger directed inwards. These
concepts are useful in the psychological treatment of
mild (to moderate) depression.
Several other theories have also been propounded
but are currently considered to be of doubtful value
as theories of causation of depression.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The first step in the differential diagnosis of any mood
disorder is to exclude a disorder with known organic
cause, e.g. organic (especially drug-induced) mood
disorders and dementia (differential diagnosis from
depressive pseudodementia).
The second step is to rule out a possibility of acute
and transient psychotic disorders, schizo-affective
disorder, and schizophrenia.
The third step is to exclude the possibility of other
non-organic psychoses such as delusional disorders.
The fourth step is to exclude the possibility of
adjustment disorder with depressed mood, generalised
anxiety disorder, normal grief reaction, and obsessive compulsive disorder (with or without secondary
depression).
In addition to the main diagnosis, it is also important to look for co-morbid medical (such as diabetes,
hypertension) and/or psychiatric disorders (such as

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

Agomelatin
Amitriptyline
Amoxapine
Bupropion
Citalopram
Clomipramine
Doxepine
Dosulepin/Dotheipin
Duloxetine
Escitalopram
Fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Imipramine
Lofepramine
Mianserin
Mirtazapine
Moclobemide
Nortriptyline
Paroxetine
Reboxetine
Sertraline
Tianeptin
Trazodone
Venlafaxine

Usual Therapeutic
Range (mg/day)
25-50
75-300
150-300
150-450
10-40
75-250
75-300
75-150
30-120
10-20
20-60
50-200
75-300
140-210
30-120
15-45
300-600
150-300
10-40
10-12
50-200
37.5
300-600
75-375

anxiety, panic, alcohol or drug misuse, or personality disorder) on a multi-axial diagnostic system
(Table 1.4).

MANAGEMENT
Somatic Treatment
Antidepressants
Antidepressants are the treatment of choice for a vast
majority of depressive episodes. Some of the commonly used antidepressants with their usual range of
therapeutic dosage are listed in Table 6.5. (Antidepressants are discussed in more detail in Chapter 15).


<<<PAGE 89>>>
Mood Disorders

The usual starting dose is about 75-150 mg of
imipramine equivalent. The clinical improvement
is assessed after about two weeks. In case of nonimprovement, the dose can usually be increased up
to 300 mg of imipramine equivalent.
It should be remembered that it may take up to
3 weeks before any appreciable response may be
noticed. Before stopping or changing a drug, the
particular drug should be given in a therapeutically
adequate dose for at least 6 weeks.
A variety of antidepressants are now available
in the market. Since almost all antidepressants are
equal in antidepressant efficacy and there is no single
antidepressant effective for all depressed patients, the
choice of antidepressant is often dictated by other factors. These factors include cost and ease of availability
of the drug, the side-effect profile of the drug, past
history of response and (any) co-morbid medical or
psychiatric disorders. An individualised choice has to
be made in each patient, keeping these various factors in mind.
Imipramine, amitriptyline and other related drugs
are called tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). The
newer antidepressants such as selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (e.g. fluoxetine, sertraline,
citalopram), mirtazapine, and serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) (e.g. venlafaxine,
duloxetine) have very little anti cholinergic side
effects and, hence, are generally safer drugs to use in
elderly patients with benign hypertrophy of prostate.
However, both venlafaxine and duloxetine have been
associated with hypertension and should be used with
care in those with a history of cardiac illness.
The antidepressant dosage is monitored on the
basis of clinical improvement. Routine monitoring
of blood levels is not usually indicated.
For the first, uncomplicated, depressive episode,
the patient should receive full therapeutic dose of the
chosen antidepressant for a period of 6-9 months,
after achieving full remission. It is wise to taper the
antidepressant medication, when the treatment is to
be stopped after the continuation phase.

77

There are three main phases of treatment:
i. Acute treatment (till remission occurs),
ii. Continuation treatment (from remission till end
of treatment), and
iii. Maintenance treatment (to prevent further recurrences).
Maintenance treatment may be indicated in the
following patients:
i. Partial response to acute treatment.
ii. Poor symptom control during the continuation
treatment.
iii. More than 3 episodes (90% chances of recurrence).
iv. More than 2 episodes with early age of onset,
or recurrence within 2 years of stopping
antidepressants, or severe and/or life-threatening
depression, or family history of mood disorder.
v. Chronic depression (> 2 years) or double depression.
About 20-35% of depressed patients are refractory
to antidepressant medication. The management of a
treatment refractory depressed patient is best done
by a psychiatrist, often at a tertiary care centre. These
patients may require one of the following alternatives:
i. A change of antidepressant (Switch),
ii. Combination of two types of antidepressants,
iii. Augmentation with lithium,
iv. Augmentation with T3 or T4,
v. Augmentation with antipsychotics,
vi. Electroconvulsive therapy, or
vii. Use of newer and experimental techniques.
One type of depression, namely delusional depression (depression with psychotic features), is usually
refractory to antidepressants alone. The treatments of
choice in this condition include:
i. An antidepressant with ECT, or
ii. An antidepressant with antipsychotics, or
iii. An antidepressant with lithium.

Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)
The indications for ECT in depression include:
i. Severe depression with suicidal risk.


<<<PAGE 90>>>
78

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

ii. Severe depression with stupor, severe psychomotor retardation, or somatic syndrome.
iii. Severe treatment refractory depression.
iv. Delusional depression (psychotic features).
v. Presence of significant antidepressant sideeffects or intolerance to drugs.
Severe depression with suicidal risk is the first and
foremost indication for use of ECT. The prompt use
of ECT can be life-saving in such a situation.
The response is usually rapid, resulting in a marked
improvement. In most clinical situations, usually 6-8
ECTs are needed, given three times a week. When six
ECTs are administered, the usual pattern is three ECTs
in the first week, two in the second week and one in
the third week.
However, improvement is not sustained after
stopping the ECTs. Therefore, antidepressants are
often needed along with ECTs, in order to maintain
the improvement achieved. The safety of the ECT
procedure has now been well-established.
ECT can also be used for acute manic excitement,
if it is not adequately responding to antipsychotics and
mood stabilisers.

Lithium (Li)
Lithium has traditionally been the drug of choice for
the treatment of manic episode (acute phase) as well
as for prevention of further episodes in bipolar mood
disorder. It has also been used in treatment of depression with less success. (Lithium is discussed in detail
in Chapter 15).
There is usually a 1-2 week lag period before any
appreciable response is observed. So, for treatment
of acute manic episode, antipsychotics are usually
administered along with lithium, in order to provide
cover for the first few weeks.
The usual therapeutic dose range is 900-1500 mg
of lithium carbonate per day. Lithium treatment needs
to be closely monitored by repeated blood levels, as
the difference between the therapeutic and lethal blood
levels is not very wide (narrow therapeutic index).
Therapeutic blood lithium = 0.8-1.2 mEq/L
Prophylactic blood lithium = 0.6-1.2 mEq/L

A blood lithium level of >2.0 mEq/L is often
associated with toxicity, while a level of more than
2.5-3.0 mEq/L may be lethal.
Although lithium is indicated for therapeutic use
in all manic episodes, the preventive use is best in
usually those patients with bipolar disorder, in whom
the frequency of episodes is 1-3 per year or 2-5 per
two years.
The common acute toxic symptoms of lithium are
neurological while the common chronic side-effects
are nephrological and endocrinal (usually hypothyroidism).
The important investigations before star ting
lithium therapy include a complete general physical
examination, full blood counts, ECG, urine routine
examination (with/without 24 hour urine volume),
renal function tests and thyroid function tests.

Antipsychotics
Antipsychotics are an important adjunct in the
treatment of mood disorder. The commonly used
drugs include risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine,
haloperidol, and aripiprazole. It is customary to use
the atypical antipsychotics first, before considering
the older typical antipsychotics.
Some of the indications include:
1. Acute manic episode
• Along with mood stabilisers for the first few
weeks, before the effect of mood stabilisers
becomes apparent.
• Where mood stabilisers are not effective, not indicated, or have significant side-effects.
• Given parenterally (IM or IV) for emergency
treatment of mania.
• Recently, there has been some early evidence that
atypical antipsychotics (e.g. olanzapine) might
have some mood stabilising properties.
2. Delusional depression
As stated above, antipsychotics are important adjuncts
in the treatment of delusional depression. Once again,
it is customary to use atypical antipsychotics such as
olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, and ziprasidone
first, although any antipsychotic can be used.


<<<PAGE 91>>>
Mood Disorders

iii. Bipolar depression
There is recent evidence that quetiapine has antidepressant efficacy in bipolar depression.
iv. Maintenance or prophylactic treatment in bipolar
disorder
Recent evidence shows that several atypical antipsychotics such as olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole
can be successfully used in the maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder.

Other Mood Stabilisers
The other mood stabilisers which are used in the treatment of bipolar mood disorders include:
1. Sodium valproate
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium.
• The dose range is usually 1000-3000 mg/day (the
therapeutic blood levels are 50-125 mg/ml).
• It has a faster onset of action than lithium, therefore, it can be used in acute treatment of mania
effectively.
2. Carbamazepine and Oxcarbazepine
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium and valproate.
• Particularly effective when EEG is abnormal
(although this is not necessary for the use of carbamazepine).
• The dose range of carbamazepine is 600-1600 mg/
day (the therapeutic blood levels are 4-12 mg/ml).
• The use of carbamazepine in treatment of bipolar
disorder has recently declined, partly due to its
potential for drug interactions.
• Oxcarbazepine has a narrow evidence base and its
use in bipolar disorder is quite recent.
3. Benzodiazepines
Lorazepam (IV and orally) and clonazepam are used
for the treatment of manic episode alone rarely; however, they have been used more often as adjuvants to
antipsychotics.

79

4. Lamotrigine is particularly effective for bipolar
depression and is recommended by several guidelines.
5. T3 and T4 as adjuncts for the treatment of rapid cycling mood disorder and resistant depression.

Other Treatments
Psychosurgery is an extremely rarely used method
of treatment and is resorted to only in exceptional
circumstances.
In depressive episode, which is either chronic or
persistently recurrent with a limited or absent response
to other modes of treatment, one of the following
procedures may very rarely be performed:
i. Stereotactic subcaudate tractotomy, or
ii. Stereotactic limbic leucotomy.
In carefully selected patients, the results are
reported to be satisfactory. However, in the current
day and age, psychosurgery is hardly ever considered
in routine clinical practice.

Psychosocial Treatment
Although somatic treatment appears to be the primary
mode of management in major mood disorders, psychosocial treatment is often helpful. These indications
include:
i. As an adjunct to somatic treatment.
ii. In mild to moderate cases of depression.
iii. Certain selected cases.
These methods include (see Chapter 18 for details):

Cognitive Behaviour Therapy
Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) aims at correcting depressive negative cognitions (ideations) such
as hopelessness, worthlessness, helplessness and pessimistic ideas, and replacing them by new cognitive
and behavioural responses.
CBT is useful in mild to moderate, non-bipolar
depression and can be used with or without somatic
treatment.

Interpersonal Therapy
Interpersonal therapy (IPT) attempts to recognise
and explore interpersonal stressors, role disputes and


<<<PAGE 92>>>
80

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

transitions, social isolation, or social skills deficits,
which act as precipitants for depression.
It is useful in the treatment of mild to moderate
unipolar depression, with or without antidepressants.

Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy
The short-term psychoanalytic psychotherapies aim
at changing the personality itself rather than just
ameliorating the symptoms.
Their usefulness is uncertain, particularly in florid
depressive or manic episode. These techniques are
however helpful in the treatment of selected patients
(such as dysthymic disorder, depression co-morbid
with personality disorders, or depression with history
of childhood loss/child abuse).

Behaviour Therapy
This includes the various short-term modalities such
as social skills training; problem solving techniques,
assertiveness training, self-control therapy, activity
scheduling and decision-making techniques.
It can be useful in mild cases of depression or as
an adjunct to antidepressants in moderate depression.

Group Therapy
Group psychotherapy can be useful in mild cases of
depression. It is a very useful method of psychoeducation in both recurrent depressive disorder and bipolar
disorder.

Family and Marital Therapy
Apart from educating the family about the nature of
illness and the usefulness of somatic treatment, family
therapy has not been found very useful in treatment
of mood disorders per se.
These therapies can however help decrease the
intrafamilial and interpersonal difficulties, and to reduce or modify stressors, which may help in a faster
and more complete recovery. Their most common use
in clinical practice is to ensure continuity of treatment
(such as lithium prevention in patients with bipolar
disorder) and adequate drug concordance.

OTHER SYNDROMES OF DEPRESSION
AND MANIA
Involutional Melancholia
Described by Kraepelin, this is a form of severe depression which occurs in the involutional period of
life (i.e. 40-65 years of age).
It is typically characterised by marked agitation,
presence of psychotic features (such as delusions of
persecution, tactile and auditory hallucinations) and
multiple somatic symptoms (or hypochondriacal
delusions). Presently, it is no longer thought of as an
independent entity but the term is used to describe the
severity of a depressive episode.

Mixed Anxiety Depressive Disorder
This disorder is characterised by the presence of
depressive and anxiety symptoms which result in
significant distress or disability in the person. The
symptoms should not meet the criteria of either an
anxiety disorder or a mood disorder.
This disorder is apparently seen more frequently
in the medical outpatient departments and primary
care centres. Several cases probably exist untreated
in the general population, but rarely come to medical
attention.
In clinical practice, it is important to consider
a diagnosis of either a mood disorder or an anxiety disorder, before attempting a diagnosis of mixed
anxiety-depressive disorder.

Masked Depression
In masked depression, the depressive mood is not easily apparent and is usually hidden behind the somatic
symptoms. This is especially common in the elderly,
where the somatic symptoms range from chronic pain,
insomnia, atypical facial pain, and paraesthesias. The
depressive symptoms can also be masked by drug and/
or alcohol misuse. However, a more detailed examination will bring out the tell-tale symptomatology of
depression.
The treatment is similar to a depressive episode.


<<<PAGE 93>>>
Mood Disorders

Depressive Equivalents
These are certain conditions which, though not a part
of the depressive syndrome, are still thought be comparable to depression (affective spectrum disorders).
Some of these show clinical response to antidepressant
treatment whilst others appear related to depression
due to multiple complex reasons.
These disorders include agoraphobia, chronic pain,
paraesthesias, panic attacks, alcoholism, drug abuse,
hysteria, obsessive compulsive disorder and eating
disorders (anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa).
This term presently has an uncertain nosological
status.

Atypical Depression(s)
These are depressive syndromes which do not present
with classical or typical features of depression. These
include:
1. Depression with predominant anxiety: The anxiety here is far more subjective, in contrast to the
objective restlessness seen in agitated depression.
The treatment is usually by antidepressants.
2. Phobic-anxiety-depersonalisation syndrome (PAD
syndrome): Described by Roth, this syndrome
is commoner in women aged 20-40 years. It
is characterised by diffuse anxiety and panic
attacks, multiple phobias (such as agoraphobia and
claustrophobia), depersonalisation, derealisation
and depressive features. The treatment is usually
by antidepressants. It is recognised that ECTs may
make the condition worse.
3. Non-endogenous depression: Atypical depression
of the non-endogenous type is characterised by
absence of neurotic traits and significant stressful
life events. This differentiates it from neurotic or
reactive depression.
4. Hysteroid-dysphoric depression: In this type, there
are marked fluctuations of mood, ranging from
near normal to severe depression. Any stress leads
to an abrupt onset of depression, with marked anxiety, pallor and changes in physical appearance.
The person usually has histrionic personality traits
or disorder.

81

Atypical depression usually has an onset in
the teens and runs a chronic course. Hypersomnia,
hyperphagia, reactive nature of symptoms, rejection
sensitivity and lethargy (leaden paralysis) are some
of the characteristic features.
The importance of diagnosing atypical depression
lies in the fact that many of these patients respond
better to MAOIs (monoamine oxidase inhibitors),
although SSRIs (Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors) and TCAs (Tricyclic Antidepressants) should be
tried first.

Double Depression
This is a major depressive episode (usually acute),
superimposed on an underlying dysthymia or neurotic
depression (usually chronic). The response to treatment is usually poor.

Agitated Depression
This is a type of severe depression with marked motor
restlessness or agitation. It is either seen alone or along
with involutional melancholia. It is more common
after the age of 40 years.
The treatment of agitated depression usually
requires addition of antipsychotics or benzodiazepines
to the antidepressant therapy.

Seasonal Mood Disorder
This is either a bipolar mood disorder or recurrent
depressive episode which tends to occur in the same
season on each occasion. It is usually more commonly
seen in women.
For example, in a bipolar seasonal mood disorder,
depression would tend to occur in the same months
every time (usually winter months), while mania
would occur in the months of some other season every
episode (usually summer months).
This is thought to be due to changes in the length
of the day (and light) and its effect on hypothalamus.
The characteristic symptoms of winter depression are
dysphoria, decreased activity and atypical depressive
symptoms (increased fatigue, increased sleep, increased appetite and weight, and carbohydrate craving).


<<<PAGE 94>>>
82

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The prevalence of winter seasonal mood disorder
increases with increasing latitude.
The treatment, in addition to the usual modes
of management, also includes phototherapy, which
consists of increasing the number of hours of day-light
(using artificial, full-spectrum, white light of 2,50010,000 lux intensity, in the early morning, with eyes
open) for the treatment of depression. The recent NICE
guidelines for treatment of depression cast some doubt
on efficacy of light therapy.

Secondary Depression and Secondary
Mania
Both depressive and manic episodes can occur secondary to certain physical diseases and drugs. These
have been discussed under organic mood disorders
(Chapter 3).

Neurotic Depression
Neurotic depression is usually characterised by the
following clinical features:
1. Presence of mild to moderate depression.
2. Depressive symptoms usually occur in response
to a stressful situation but are often quite disproportionate to the severity of stress.
3. Other ‘neurotic’ symptoms such as anxiety, obsessive symptoms, phobic symptoms, and multiple
somatic symptoms, are often present.
4. Preoccupation with the stressful condition is common.
The typical course of neurotic depression is
chronic, with fluctuations. Delusions, hallucinations
and other psychotic features are characteristically
absent. The other common features include:
1. The reactivity of mood is preserved, i.e. the patient
is able to emotionally react to the events occurring
in his surroundings.
2. There may be insomnia or hypersomnia. There is
usually difficulty in initiating sleep and sometimes
difficulty in awakening in the morning.
3. The mood may be worse in the evening, at the end
of the day. The mood may also become better in
social gatherings and whilst engaged in recreational activities.

4. Suicidal threats and gestures are more common
than completed suicide. However, as suicide may
be completed accidentally, all such threats should
be taken seriously.
An episode of major depression may become
superimposed on an underlying neurotic depression.
This is then known as double depression.
Neurotic depression has been renamed as dysthymia or dysthymic disorder in DSM-IV-TR and
ICD-10. This category does not require the presence
of stress as a precipitating factor, and does not put
emphasis on the presence of other neurotic symptoms
or traits. Dysthymia is defined as any mild depression
which is not severe enough to be called a depressive
episode, and lasts for two years or more. This is more
common in females, with an average age of onset in
late third decade.
A large number of psychotherapies have been
advocated for neurotic depression. The choice of
therapy mainly rests on the therapist’s expertise in
a particular mode of therapy. Two important issues
which often need to be addressed in the therapeutic
relationship are:
i. Dependency needs of the patient, and
ii. Manipulative behaviour.
Supportive psychotherapy is an important adjunct
to the treatment.
When depression is significant and/or is not
responding to psychotherapy, antidepressants should
be used. As mixed depression and anxiety are very
common, addition of small doses of benzodiazepines
to antidepressants may be needed for the first one
or two weeks. However, one must be careful as
benzodiazepines tend to get abused if prescribed for
more than four weeks at one time.
For non-responders to TCAs and SSRIs, and/or
when other neurotic symptoms (such as hypochondriacal symptoms or depersonalisation) are prominent,
MAOIs are the drugs of choice. Occasionally, amphetamines (such as methylphenidate) may be useful
in mild depression; however, there is a significant risk
of dependence.


<<<PAGE 95>>>
7

Other Psychotic Disorders

The major nonorganic psychotic disorders are schizophrenia and mood disorders. In addition to these two,
there are other nonorganic psychoses some of which
have been sometimes labelled as the third psychoses
or other psychotic disorders (psychosis is defined
in Table 7.1). These conditions are discussed in this
chapter.

PERSISTENT DELUSIONAL DISORDERS
This category in ICD-10 includes all disorders in
which persistent delusions are the prominent and most
important clinical features.

Delusional Disorder
This disorder, also previously called as paranoid
disorder, is characterised by the following clinical
features in ICD-10. Persistent delusions must be
present for at least 3 months and these can include
delusions of persecution (being persecuted against),
delusions of grandeur (inflated self-esteem and self
image), delusions of jealousy (infidelity), somatic
(hypochondriacal) delusions, erotomanic delusions
(delusions of love), and/or other non-bizarre delusions.
It is important to note absence of prominent hallucinations, organic mental disorders, schizophrenia and
mood disorders.
The common aetiology appears to be an abrupt
change in the environment, for example, in prison
inmates, and in immigrants (to a different culture),

Table 7.1: Definition of Psychosis
The term psychosis is defined as:
1. Gross impairment in reality-testing (‘not in contact’
with reality).
2. Marked disturbance in personality, with impairment
in social, interpersonal and occupational functioning.
3. Marked impairment in judgement and absent understanding of the current symptoms and behaviour
(loss of insight).
4. Presence of the characteristic symptoms, like delusions and hallucinations.

though stressors are not always evident in several other
cases. The aetiology of delusional disorders, similar
to several other psychiatric disorders, appears to be
multifactorial.
It is a disorder with usually a relatively stable and
chronic course. It is characterised by presence of wellsystematised delusions of nonbizarre type (cf. bizarre
delusions can occur in schizophrenia). The emotional
response and behaviour is often understandable in the
light of their delusional beliefs, with behaviour outside
the ‘limits’ of delusions usually almost normal. Very
often, these individuals are able to carry on a near
normal social and occupational life without arousing
suspicion regarding their delusional disorder. It is only
when the area of delusions is probed or confronted that
the dysfunction becomes evident.
When the content of delusions is predominantly
persecutory (as is often the case), it is important to


<<<PAGE 96>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

84

Table 7.2: Differential Diagnosis of Delusional Disorders
Features
1. General behaviour

2. Personality

3. Thought disorder

Paranoid Schizophrenia
Eccentricities, mannerisms,
stereotypies, decreased
self-care, social withdrawal,
guarded and evasive
Disorganised (although
deterioration is much less
than in other types of
schizophrenia
Delusions, Schneiderian FRS,
loosening of associations,
formal thought disorder; delusions may be bizarre

Delusional Disorder
(Paranoid disorder)
Eccentricities, decreased
social interaction

Paranoid Personality
Disorder
Restrained social interaction

Disturbed in delusional
area, near normal in other
areas

No deterioration

No thought disorder

Usually appropriate

6. Insight

Absent

Nonbizarre delusions
which are well-systematised, no other thought
disorder
Uncommon. If present, are
not persistent
Disturbed in area of delusional belief
Absent

7. Affect/mood in
relation to thought

Often inappropriate

Usually appropriate

4. Hallucinations

Auditory hallucinations common
5. Contact with reality Markedly disturbed

differentiate delusional disorder from paranoid schizophrenia and paranoid personality disorder (Table 7.2).
When the content of delusions is predominantly
jealousy (infidelity) involving the spouse, it is called
as Othello syndrome or conjugal paranoia.
A syndrome of late paraphrenia has also been
described in the elderly. Although it was earlier considered a subtype of delusional disorders, it is presently
diagnosed under paranoid schizophrenia.
When the content of delusions is predominantly
characterised by presence of hypochondriacal delusions, it is called as monosymptomatic hypochondriacal psychosis (MHP), delusional parasitosis, or
hypochondriacal paranoia. The common delusions
include infestations by worms or foreign bodies,
emitting a foul odour (delusional halitosis), body
(or its parts) being ugly or misshapen (delusional
dysmorphophobia).
When content of delusions is erotic (erotomanic)
the condition is known as Clerambault’s syndrome or

Absent
Intact
Present

erotomania. Occurring most often in women, there
is an erotic conviction that a person with (usually a)
higher status is in love with the patient.
When the content of delusions is predominantly grandiose, then the patient usually has delusions
with religious or political content and may believe
self to be a leader with ‘higher’ aims of spreading
peace, making war or spreading a message in the
world.

Other Persistent Delusional Disorders
This is a residual category in ICD-10 for other persistent delusional disorders, which do not fulfil the criteria
for delusional disorders. The examples of disorders
included here are:
1. Delusions associated with persistent hallucinatory
voices (but a diagnosis of schizophrenia cannot be
made).
2. Delusional disorders with duration of less than 3
months.


<<<PAGE 97>>>
Other Psychotic Disorders

Differential Diagnosis
The conditions from which delusional disorders
should be differentiated include paranoid schizophrenia, mania, depression, paranoid personality disorder and organic delusional disorder (see Table 7.2).

Treatment
1. Antipsychotics are used to control agitation and
treat the psychotic features. For MHP (monosymptomatic hypochondriacal psychosis) or delusional
disorder with somatic (hypochondriacal) delusions, pimozide has classically been the drug of
choice, though other antipsychotics with or without antidepressants have been used as effectively.
Recently, the use of pimozide has declined sharply
due to concerns regarding its cardiac adverse
effects.
2. Supportive psychotherapy.
3. Antidepressants (such as fluoxetine) and/or ECT
may be needed for secondary depression.

INDUCED DELUSIONAL DISORDER
This is an uncommon delusional disorder characterised by a sharing of delusions between usually two
(folie å deux) or occasionally more persons (folie
å trios, folie å quatre, folie å famille), who usually
have a closely knit emotional bond. Only one person
usually has authentic delusions due to an underlying
psychiatric disorder, most often schizophrenia or
delusional disorder.
On separation of the two, the dependent individual
may give up his/her delusions and the patient with the
primary delusions should then be treated appropriately.

ACUTE AND TRANSIENT PSYCHOTIC
DISORDERS
A large number of psychiatrists, especially from the
developing countries such as India and Africa, reported that many patients developed an acute psychotic
disorder that neither followed the classical course
of schizophrenia nor resembled mood disorders in

85

clinical picture, and usually had a better prognosis
than schizophrenia.
In a study conducted by the Indian Council of
Medical Research (ICMR) on acute psychoses (1989),
the following findings were apparent:
1. 85% of these patients exhibited full recovery.
2. Recovery occurred in several cases even in the
absence of treatment.
3. 50% of patients had a psychological stressor and
20% of patients had a somatic stressor before the
onset of illness.
4. The onset occurred in less than 48 hours in 50%
of cases.
ICD-10 has included a new category of ‘acute and
transient psychotic disorders’ (ATPD) in the section on
‘schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders’.
According to ICD-10, these disorders have an
abrupt (less than 48 hours) or acute (less than 2 weeks)
onset. The onset is often associated with an easily identifiable acute stress (though not necessarily always so)
that would be regarded as stressful to most people in
similar circumstances, within the culture of the person
concerned. The typical events would include bereavement, unexpected loss of partner or job, marriage, or
the psychological trauma of combat, terrorism, and
torture. Longstanding difficulties or problems are not
included here as stressful.
Acute onset is probably associated with a good
outcome, and it seems that more abrupt the onset, the
better is the outcome. A complete recovery usually
occurs within 2-3 months, often even much earlier.
These disorders should not satisfy the criteria for
organic mental disorders, psychoactive substance use
disorders, schizophrenia, or mood disorders.
The subtypes of acute and transient psychotic
disorders include the following:
1. Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder without
symptoms of schizophrenia.
2. Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder with symptoms of schizophrenia.
3. Acute schizophrenia-like psychotic disorder.
4. Other acute predominantly delusional psychotic
disorders.


<<<PAGE 98>>>
86

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The various subtypes of acute and transient psychotic disorders are further classified as:
i. without associated acute stress, and
ii. with associated acute stress.

Acute Polymorphic Psychotic Disorder
without Symptoms of Schizophrenia
According to ICD-10, this disorder is characterised
by an acute onset (from a nonpsychotic state to a
clearly psychotic state within 2 weeks) and polymorphic picture (unstable and markedly variable clinical
picture that changes from day to day or even from
hour to hour).
There are several types of hallucinations and/or
delusions, changing in both type and intensity from
day to day or within the same day. Marked emotional
turmoil, which ranges from intense feelings of happiness and ecstasy to anxiety and irritability, is also
frequently present.
This disorder is particularly likely to have an
abrupt onset (within 48 hours) and a rapid resolution
of symptoms; in a large proportion of cases there
is no obvious precipitating stress. If the symptoms
persist for more than 3 months, the diagnosis should
be changed. In spite of the variety of symptoms, none
should be present with sufficient consistency to fulfil
the criteria for schizophrenia or mood disorder.

Acute Polymorphic Psychotic Disorder
with Symptoms of Schizophrenia
According to ICD-10, this disorder meets the descriptive criteria for acute polymorphic psychotic disorder
but in which typically schizophrenic symptoms are
also consistently present.
If the schizophrenic symptoms persist for more
than 1 month, the diagnosis should be changed to
schizophrenia.

Acute Schizophrenia-like Psychotic
Disorder
According to ICD-10, this disorder is characterised
by an acute onset of a psychotic disorder in which the
psychotic symptoms are comparatively stable (and not

polymorphic) and fulfil the criteria for schizophrenia
but have lasted for less than 1 month.
Some degree of emotional variability or instability
may be present, but not to the extent described in the
acute polymorphic psychotic disorder. The criteria for
acute polymorphic psychotic disorder should not be
fulfilled.
If the schizophrenic symptoms persist for more
than 1 month, the diagnosis should be changed to
schizophrenia.

Other Acute Predominantly Delusional
Psychotic Disorders
According to ICD-10, this disorder is characterised
by an acute onset of a psychotic disorder in which
comparatively stable delusions or hallucinations are
the main clinical features, but do not fulfil the criteria
for schizophrenia.
Delusions of persecution or reference are common, and hallucinations are usually auditory (voices
talking directly to the patient). The criteria for acute
polymorphic psychotic disorder or schizophrenia
should not be fulfilled.
If delusions persist for more than 3 months, the
diagnosis should be changed to persistent delusional
disorder. If only hallucinations persist for more than
3 months, the diagnosis should then be changed to
other nonorganic psychotic disorder.

Differential Diagnosis
The conditions from which acute and transient
psychotic disorders should be differentiated include
organic mental disorders, psychoactive substance
use disorders, schizophrenia, mood disorders, and
delusional disorders.

Prognosis
The good prognostic factors in acute and transient
psychotic disorders are as follows:
1. Well adjusted premorbid personality.
2. Absence of family history of schizophrenia.
3. Presence of severe precipitating stressor before
the onset.


<<<PAGE 99>>>
Other Psychotic Disorders

4. Sudden onset of symptoms.
5. Presence of affective symptoms, confusion, perplexity and/or disorientation in clinical picture.
6. Short duration of symptoms.
7. First episode.

Treatment
1. Antipsychotics are the mainstay of treatment,
and are used to control agitation and psychotic
features. Usually lower doses of antipsychotics
are needed.
However, in the initial stages the patient may not
take oral medication. In such cases, parenteral
administration of antipsychotics (with or without
benzodiazepines such as lorazepam or diazepam)
may be needed.
The first use of parenteral antipsychotics in an
antipsychotic-naive patient should be carefully
considered, as there is a higher risk of neuroleptic
malignant syndrome (NMS) in these patients.
Long-term use of antipsychotics should be preferably avoided in these patients (see Chapter 15 for
further details).
2. ECT may be needed in cases with marked agitation
and emotional turmoil, as well as in cases where
there is a danger to self and/or others.
3. Antidepressants may be rarely needed as adjuvants
in some cases with associated depression.
4. Psychotherapy and other psychological interventions may be needed in cases with associated
stress, as well as for psychoeducation for the
patient and family. Engagement with psychological treatment is usually after the acute episode is
under control and the patient can communicate
his/her fears and anxieties.

SCHIZOAFFECTIVE DISORDER
This is a disorder which lies on the borderland between
schizophrenia and mood disorders. In this disorder,
the symptoms of schizophrenia and mood disorders
are prominently present within the same episode. The
symptoms of both disorders may be present simultaneously or may follow within few days of each other.

87

There are three types described:
1. Schizoaffective disorder, manic (or bipolar) type.
2. Schizoaffective disorder, depressed type.
3. Schizoaffective disorder, mixed type.
The course is usually episodic (particularly in
manic subtype), although a chronic course in some
patients has been described (parti cularly in the
depressed subtype). The prognosis is better than
that in schizophrenia but is worse than that in mood
disorders.
The treatment is with mood stabilisers (such as
lithium or valproate), antipsychotics, antidepressants
and/or ECT, depending on the predominant symptomatology.

CAPGRAS’ SYNDROME
(THE DELUSION OF DOUBLES)
Capgras’ syndrome is a syndrome that is closely
related to delusional disorders and is characterised
by a delusional conviction that other persons in the
environment are not their real selves but are their
own doubles.
It is one of the several delusional misidentification
syndromes, of which there are four types described:
1. Typical Capgras’ syndrome (Illusion des sosies):
Here the patient sees a familiar person as a
complete stranger who is imposing on him as a
familiar person.
2. Illusion de Fregoli: The patient falsely identifies
stranger(s) as familiar person(s).
3. Syndrome of subjective doubles: The patient’s own
self is perceived as being replaced by a double.
4. Intermetamorphosis: Here the patient’s misidentification is complete and the patient misidentifies not only the ‘external appearance’ (as in
the previous three types) but also the complete
personality.
The syndrome is commonly seen in psychotic
conditions with delusional symptomatology, such as
paranoid schizophrenia (most frequently), delusional
disorders and organic delusional disorder.
The treatment consists of adequately treating the
underlying disorder.


<<<PAGE 100>>>
88

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

REACTIVE PSYCHOSIS
Reactive psychosis is characterised by following
features:
1. A sudden onset of symptoms.
2. Presence of a major stress before the onset (the
quantum of stress should be severe enough to be
stressful to a majority of people).

3. A clear temporal relation between stress and the
onset of psychotic symptoms.
4. No organic cause underlying the psychosis.
The usual duration of illness is less than one month
and recovery is usually complete.
Currently a majority of cases of reactive psychosis
would be classified under acute and transient psychotic
disorder with associated stress (in ICD-10) or brief
reactive psychosis (in DSM-IV-TR).


<<<PAGE 101>>>
8

Neurotic, Stress-related and
Somatoform Disorders

The terms neurosis (Table 8.1) and psychosis are currently not widely used. The definitions and descriptions of these terms are far from perfect and there are
clearly exceptions to the rules. These terms also have
psychodynamic connotations. As current classificatory systems are largely theoretical, any aetiological
meaning is not very helpful.
DSM-IV-TR does not use these terms at all and
although ICD-10 still mentions the term neurotic in
the classification, it discourages the use of the terms
neurosis and psychosis.
In ICD-10, ‘neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders have been classified into the following
types:
1. Phobic anxiety disorder,
2. Other anxiety disorders (called simply anxiety
disorder in this book),
3. Obsessive compulsive disorder.

ANXIETY DISORDER
Anxiety is the commonest psychiatric symptom in
clinical practice and anxiety disorders are one of the
commonest psychiatric disorders in general population.
Anxiety is a ‘normal’ phenomenon, which is
characterised by a state of apprehension or unease
arising out of anticipation of danger. Anxiety is often
differentiated from fear, as fear is an apprehension in
response to an external danger while in anxiety the
danger is largely unknown (or internal).

Table 8.1: Definition of Neurosis
The term neurosis has been variously defined as meeting
one or more of the following criteria:
1. The presence of a symptom or group of symptoms
which cause subjective distress to the patient.
2. The symptom is recognised as undesirable (i.e.
insight is present).
3. The personality and behaviour are relatively preserved and not usually grossly disturbed.
4. The contact with reality is preserved.
5. There is an absence of organic causative factors.
6. Reaction to severe stress, and adjustment
disorders,
7. Dissociative (conversion) disorders,
8. Somatoform disorders, and
9. Other neurotic disorders.

Normal anxiety becomes pathological when it
causes significant subjective distress and/or impairment in functioning of an individual.
Some authors separate anxiety into two types:
1. Trait anxiety: This is a habitual tendency to be
anxious in general (a trait) and is exemplified by
‘I often feel anxious’.
2. State anxiety: This is the anxiety felt at the present,
cross-sectional moment (state) and is exemplified
by ‘I feel anxious now’.
Persons with trait anxiety often have episodes of
state anxiety. The symptoms of anxiety can be broadly
classified in two groups: physical and psychological
(psychic) (Table 8.2).


<<<PAGE 102>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

90

Table 8.2: Symptoms of Anxiety
1. Physical Symptoms
A. Motoric Symptoms: Tremors; Restlessness;
Muscle twitches; Fearful facial expression
B. Autonomic and Visceral Symptoms: Palpitations;
Tachycardia; Sweating; Flushes; Dyspnoea;
Hyperventilation; Constriction in the chest; Dry
mouth; Frequency and hesitancy of micturition;
Dizziness; Diarrhoea; Mydriasis
2. Psychological Symptoms
A. Cognitive Symptoms: Poor concentration; Distractibility; Hyperarousal; Vigilance or scanning; Negative automatic thoughts
B. Perceptual Symptoms: Derealisation; Depersonalisation
C. Affective Symptoms: Diffuse, unpleasant, and
vague sense of apprehension; Fearfulness; Inability to relax; Irritability; Feeling of impending
doom (when severe)
D. Other Symptoms: Insomnia (initial); Increased
sensitivity to noise; Exaggerated startle response.

Generalised Anxiety Disorder
This is characterised by an insidious onset in the third
decade and a stable, usually chronic course which may
or may not be punctuated by repeated panic attacks
(episodes of acute anxiety). The symptoms of anxiety should last for at least a period of 6 months for a
diagnosis of generalised anxiety disorder to be made.
The one year prevalence of generalised anxiety
disorder in the general population is about 2.5-8%. It
is the commonest psychiatric disorder in the population. As anxiety is a cardinal feature of almost all
psychiatric disorders, it is very important to exclude
other diagnoses. The most important differential diagnosis is from depressive disorders and organic anxiety
disorder.

Panic Disorder
This is characterised by discrete episodes of acute
anxiety. The onset is usually in early third decade

with often a chronic course. The panic attacks occur
recurrently every few days. There may or may not be
an underlying generalised anxiety disorder.
The episode is usually sudden in onset, lasts for a
few minutes and is characterised by very severe anxiety. Classically the symptoms begin unexpectedly or
‘out-of-the-blue’. Usually there is no apparent precipitating factor, though some patients report exposure to
phobic stimuli as a precipitant.
The differential diagnosis is from organic anxiety
disorder (Chapter 3) (e.g. secondary to hypoglycaemia, hyperthyroidism, phaeochromocytoma) and
cardiac disorders (e.g. MVPS or mitral valve prolapse
syndrome).
The life time prevalence of panic disorder is
1.5-2%, with 3-4% reporting subsyndromal panic
symptoms (i.e. panic symptoms not severe enough to
qualify for panic disorder). Panic disorder is usually
seen about 2-3 times more often in females. Panic
disorder can present either alone or with agoraphobia.

Aetiology
The cause of anxiety disorders is not clearly known.
There are however several theories, of which more
than one may be applicable in a particular patient.
1. Psychodynamic Theory
According to this theory, anxiety is a signal that
something is disturbing the internal psychological
equilibrium. This is called as signal anxiety. This
signal anxiety arouses the ego to take defensive action
which is usually in the form of repression, a primary
defense mechanism. Ordinarily when repression fails,
other secondary defense mechanisms (such as conversion, isolation) are called into action.
In anxiety, repression fails to function adequately but the secondary defense mechanisms are
not activated. Hence, anxiety comes to the fore-front
unopposed. Developmentally, primitive anxiety is
manifested as somatic symptomatology while developmentally advanced anxiety is signal anxiety. Panic
anxiety, according to this theory, is closely related to
the separation anxiety of childhood.


<<<PAGE 103>>>
Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform Disorders

2. Behavioural Theory
According to this theory, anxiety is viewed as an
unconditioned inherent response of the organism to
painful or dangerous stimuli. In anxiety and phobias,
this becomes attached to relatively neutral stimuli by
conditioning.
3. Cognitive Behavioural Theory (CBT)
According to cognitive behaviour theory, in anxiety
disorders there is evidence of selective information
processing (with more attention paid to threat-related
information), cognitive distortions, negative automatic
thoughts and perception of decreased control over both
internal and external stimuli.
4. Biological Theory
i. Genetic evidence: About 15-20% of first degree
relatives of the patients with anxiety disorder exhibit anxiety disorders themselves. The concordance rate in the monozygotic twins of patients with
panic disorders is as high as 80% (4 times more
than in dizygotic twins).
ii. Chemically induced anxiety states: Infusion of
chemicals (such as sodium lactate, isoproterenol
and caffeine), ingestion of yohimbine and inhalation of 5% CO2 can produce panic episodes in
predisposed individuals. Administration (oral) of
MAOIs before the lactate infusion protects the
individual(s) from panic attack, thus providing a
probable clue to the biological model of anxiety.
iii. GABA-benzodiazepine receptors: This is one of
the most recent advances in the search for the aetiology of anxiety disorders. The benzodiazepine
receptors are distributed widely in the central
nervous system. Presently, two types of benzodiazepine receptors have been identified. The type
I (ω1) is GABA and chloride independent, while
type II (ω2) is GABA and chloride dependent.
GABA (Gamma amino butyric acid) is the
most prevalent inhibitory neurotransmitter in the
central nervous system. It has been suggested
that an alteration in GABA levels may lead to
production of clinical anxiety. The fact that the
benzodiazepines (which facilitate GABA transmission, thereby causing a generalised inhibi-

91

tory effect on the CNS) relieve anxiety and that
benzodiazepine-antagonists (e.g. flumazenil) and
inverse agonists (e.g. β-carbolines) cause anxiety,
lends heavy support to this hypothesis.
iv. Other neurotransmitters: Norepinephrine, 5-HT,
dopamine, opioid receptors and neuroendocrine
dysfunction have also been implicated in the
causation of anxiety disorders.
v. Neuroanatomical basis: Locus coeruleus, limbic
system, and prefrontal cortex are some of the areas
implicated in the aetiology of anxiety disorders.
Regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) is increased
in anxiety, though vasoconstriction occurs in severe anxiety.
vi. Organic anxiety disorder: This disorder is characterised by the presence of anxiety which is
secondary to the various medical disorders (e.g.
hyperthyroidism, phaeochromocytoma, coronary
artery disease). If anxiety symptoms can occur
secondary to medical disorders, it seems possible
than that anxiety has a biological basis.

Treatment
The treatment of anxiety disorders is usually multimodal.
1. Psychotherapy
Psychoanalytic psychotherapy is not usually indicated, unless characterological (personality) problems
co-exist. Usually supportive psychotherapy is used
either alone, when anxiety is mild, or in combination with drug therapy. The establishment of a good
therapist-patient relationship is often the first step in
psychotherapy.
Recently, there has been an increasing use of CBT
in the management of anxiety disorders, particularly
panic disorders (with or without agoraphobia). CBT
can be used either alone or in conjunction with SSRIs.
2. Relaxation Techniques
In patients with mild to moderate anxiety, relaxation
techniques are very useful. These techniques are used
by the patient himself as a routine exercise everyday
and also whenever anxiety-provoking situation is at
hand.


<<<PAGE 104>>>
92

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

These techniques include Jacobson’s progressive
relaxation technique, yoga, pranayama, self-hypnosis, and meditation (including TM or transcendental
meditation).
3. Other Behaviour Therapies
The behaviour therapies include biofeedback and
hyperventilation control. These methods are important
adjuncts to treatment.
4. Drug Treatment
The differential response of generalised anxiety and
panic to drug treatment has lead to what is called as
the pharmacological dissection of anxiety disorders
though this differentiation has become much more
diluted recently with antidepressants used in treatment
of both conditions.
The drugs of choice for generalised anxiety disorder have traditionally been benzodiazepines, and for
panic disorder, antidepressants. Both benzodiazepines
and antidepressants are discussed in detail in Chapter
15. It is useful to begin the treatment of panic disorders
with small doses of antidepressants, usually SSRIs
(e.g. fluoxetine).
Benzodiazepines (such as alprazolam and clonazepam) are useful in short-term treatment of both
generalised anxiety and panic disorders. However,
tolerance and dependence potential limit the use of
these drugs. Several antidepressants (such as sertraline) are now licensed for treatment of anxiety and
panic disorders.
β-blockers such as propranolol and atenolol are
particularly useful in the management of anticipatory
anxiety (e.g. anxiety occurring before going on stage
or before examinations). However, due care must be
exercised in the use of propranolol in the patients with
history of asthma, bradycardia or heart block. Atenolol
does not cross the blood brain barrier and takes care
of only the peripheral symptoms of anxiety. It also has
less likelihood of causing bronchial constriction than
propranolol.
Buspirone is an anti-anxiety drug (discussed in
Chapter 15) which does not have any dependence
potential, unlike benzodiazepines. It takes about 2-3
weeks before its action is apparent. It may be prefer-

able to benzodiazepines for the long-term management
of anxiety disorder. It, however, has not much role in
the management of panic disorder.

PHOBIC DISORDER
Phobia is defined as an irrational fear of a specific
object, situation or activity, often leading to persistent
avoidance of the feared object, situation or activity.
The characteristic features of phobia are described
in Table 8.3. The common types of phobias are:
1. Agoraphobia,
2. Social phobia, and
3. Specific (Simple) phobia.

Agoraphobia
Agoraphobia is an example of irrational fear of situations. It is the commonest type of phobia encountered
in clinical practice. Women far out-number men in
suffering from agoraphobia in the Western countries.
It is characterised by an irrational fear of being
in places away from the familiar setting of home.
Although it was earlier thought to be a fear of open
spaces only, now it includes fear of open spaces, public places, crowded places, and any other place from
where there is no easy escape to a safe place.
Table 8.3: Phobia: Some Characteristic Features
1. Presence of the fear of an object, situation or activity.
2. The fear is out of proportion to the dangerousness
perceived.
3. Patient recognises the fear as irrational and unjustified (Insight is present).
4. Patient is unable to control the fear and is very
distressed by it.
5. This leads to persistent avoidance of the particular
object, situation or activity.
6. Gradually, the phobia and the phobic object become
a preoccupation with the patient, resulting in marked
distress and restriction of the freedom of mobility
(afraid to encounter the phobic object; phobic avoidance).


<<<PAGE 105>>>
Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform Disorders

In fact, the patient is afraid of all the places or
situations from where escape may be perceived to be
difficult or help may not be available, if he suddenly
develops embarrassing or incapacitating symptoms.
These embarrassing or incapacitating symptoms are
the classical symptoms of panic.
A full-blown panic attack may occur (agoraphobia
with panic disorder) or only a few symptoms (such
as dizziness or tachycardia) may occur (agoraphobia
without panic disorder).
As the agoraphobia increases in severity, there is
a gradual restriction in the normal day-to-day activities. The activities may become so severely restricted
that the person becomes self-imprisoned at his home.
One or two persons (usually close relations or friends)
may be relied upon, with whom the patient can leave
home. Hence, the patient becomes severely dependent
on these phobic companion(s).

Social Phobia
This is an example of irrational fear of activities or
social interaction, characterised by an irrational fear of
performing activities in the presence of other people
or interacting with others. The patient is afraid of his
own actions being viewed by others critically, resulting in embarrassment or humiliation.
There is marked distress and disturbance in routine daily functioning. Some of the examples include
fear of blushing (erythrophobia), eating in company
of others, public speaking, public performance (e.g.
on stage), participating in groups, writing in public
(e.g. signing a check), speaking to strangers (e.g. for
asking for directions), dating, speaking to authority
figures, and urinating in a public lavatory (shy bladder). Sometimes, alcohol (and sometimes, other drugs)
is used to overcome the anxiety occurring in social
situations.

Specific (Simple) Phobia
In contrast to agoraphobia and social phobia where the
stimuli are generalised, in specific phobia the stimulus
is usually well circumscribed. This is an example of
irrational fear of objects or situations.

93

Specific phobia is characterised by an irrational
fear of a specified object or situation. Anticipatory
anxiety leads to persistent avoidant behaviour, while
confrontation with the avoided object or situation leads
to panic attacks. Gradually, the phobia usually spreads
to other objects and situations.
The disorder is diagnosed only if there is marked
distress and/or disturbance in daily functioning, in
addition to fear and avoidance of the specified object
or situation. Some of the examples of simple phobia
include acrophobia (fear of high places), zoophobia
(fear of animals), xenophobia (fear of strangers),
algophobia (fear of pain), and claustrophobia (fear
of closed places).
The list of specific phobias is virtually endless.

Course
Phobias are generally more common in women with
an onset in late second decade or early third decade.
Typically, the onset is sudden without any apparent
cause. The course is usually chronic with gradually
increasing restriction of daily activities. Sometimes,
phobias are spontaneously remitting.

Aetiology
Psychodynamic Theory
As discussed in the aetiology of anxiety disorders,
anxiety is usually dealt with the defense mechanism
of repression. When repression fails to function
adequately, other secondary defense mechanisms of
ego come into action.
In phobia, this secondary defense mechanism
is displacement. By using displacement, anxiety is
transferred from a really dangerous or frightening
object to a neutral object. These two objects are often
connected by symbolic associations.
The neutral object chosen unconsciously is the
one which can be easily avoided in day-to-day life,
in contrast to the frightening object (frightening to the
patient only, due to oedipal genital drives).
In agoraphobia, loss of parents in childhood and
separation anxiety have been theorised to contribute
to causation.


<<<PAGE 106>>>
94

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

From a psychobiological perspective, the traumatic experiences of childhood may affect the child’s
developing brain in such a manner that the child
becomes susceptible to anxiety and fear in childhood
and later life.

Behavioural Theories
The behavioural theories explain phobia as a conditioned reflex. Initially, the anxiety provoked by
a naturally frightening or dangerous object occurs
in contiguity with a second neutral object. If this
happens often enough, the neutral object becomes a
conditioned stimulus for causing anxiety.
In 1920, John Watson experimentally produced
phobia in an 11 month old boy who came to be know
as ‘Little Albert’. Using classical conditioning, he
paired white objects to a loud noise. ‘Little Albert’
gradually developed a fear of all white objects. Of
course, it would be completely unethical to replicate
this experiment in the present day.
Although the behavioural theory does not explain
all the features of phobic disorders adequately, it is
very helpful in planning systematic treatment.

Biological Theories
All phobias, especially agoraphobia, are closely linked
to panic disorders. It has been suggested that probably
the biological models of panic apply to phobias too.
However, the evidence for this view is not strong
at present, except for the importance of genetic factors
in specific phobias of blood-injury type. There is also
some evidence for the presence of familial factors in
social phobias.

Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnoses include anxiety disorder,
panic disorder, major depression, avoidant personality
disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, delusional
disorder, hypochondriasis, and schizophrenia.

Treatment
Most patients with phobic disorder rely on avoidance
to manage their fears and anxieties. As long as they

find ways to limit their lives within the limitations
imposed by phobias, they experience little, if any,
anxiety. When they are forced to face the phobic situation, anxiety mounts and they then seek treatment.
The patients with more than one phobia and presence
of panic symptoms often seek treatment earlier.
The treatment approach is usually multi-modal.

Psychotherapy
Psychodynamically oriented psychotherapy is not
usually helpful in treatment of phobias. This approach
is however indicated when there are characterological
or personality difficulties as well. Supportive psychotherapy is a helpful adjunct to behaviour therapy and
drug treatment.
As stated earlier, cognitive behaviour therapy
(CBT) can be used to break the anxiety patterns in
phobic disorder. It is usual to combine CBT with
behavioural techniques.

Behaviour Therapy
If properly planned, this mode of treatment is usually
successful. The behavioural therapies are discussed
in Chapter 18 and only the names of important techniques are mentioned here.
1. Flooding.
2. Systematic desensitisation.
3. Exposure and response prevention.
4. Relaxation techniques.

Drug Treatment
The drugs used in the treatment of phobia are:
1. Benzodiazepines (Chapter 15) are useful in reducing the anticipatory anxiety. Alprazolam is stated
to have anti-phobic, anti-panic and anti-anxiety
properties. So, it is the drug of choice, when
benzodiazepines are used. However, long-term,
double-blind randomised controlled trials are
needed. The other drugs used include clonazepam
and diazepam.
However, long-term use of benzodiazepines is
fraught with the dangers of tolerance and dependence.


<<<PAGE 107>>>
Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform Disorders

2. Among the antidepressants (discussed in Chapter
15), SSRIs are currently drugs of choice, with
paroxetine being the most widely used drug. Other
SSRIs, such as fluoxetine and sertraline are also
equally effective. Fluoxetine has the advantage of
a longer half-life. Other antidepressants such as
imipramine (TCA) and phenelzine (MAOI), are
also helpful in treating the panic attacks associated
with phobias, thereby decreasing the distress.
As mentioned earlier, multiple approaches are
usually combined together in treatment of a particular
patient.

OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER
An obsession is defined as:
1. An idea, impulse or image which intrudes into the
conscious awareness repeatedly.
2. It is recognised as one’s own idea, impulse or
image but is perceived as ego-alien (foreign to
one’s personality).
3. It is recognised as irrational and absurd (insight is
present).
4. Patient tries to resist against it but is unable to.
5. Failure to resist, leads to marked distress.
Differentiation has to be made clinically from
delusion and thought insertion. A delusion is recognised as one’s own idea but is not recognised as
ego-alien. In fact, it is strongly believed; hence it
is not thought to be irrational and is never resisted.
Thought insertion is not thought of as one’s own idea,
but instead somebody else’s thought being forcibly
inserted into one’s mind.
An obsession is usually associated with
compulsion(s). A compulsion is defined as:
1. A form of behaviour which usually follows obsessions.
2. It is aimed at either preventing or neutralising the
distress or fear arising out of obsession.
3. The behaviour is not realistic and is either irrational or excessive.
4. Insight is present, so the patient realises the
irrationality of compulsion.

95

5. The behaviour is performed with a sense of subjective compulsion (urge or impulse to act).
Compulsions may diminish the anxiety associated
with obsessions.

Epidemiology, Course and Outcome
In India, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) is
more common in unmarried males, while in other
countries, no gender differences are reported. This disorder is commoner in persons from upper social strata
and with high intelligence. The average age of onset
is late third decade (i.e. late 20s) in India, while in the
Western countries the onset is usually earlier in life.
Recent studies show the life-time prevalence of
OCD to be as high as 2-3%, though the Indian data
shows a lower prevalence rate. Although classically
thought to have a steady chronic course, the longitudinal profile of this disorder can also be episodic.
A summary of long-term follow-up studies shows
that about 25% remained unimproved over time, 50%
had moderate to marked improvement while 25% had
recovered completely.

Clinical Syndromes
ICD-10 classifies OCD into three clinical subtypes:
1. Predominantly obsessive thoughts or ruminations,
2. Predominantly compulsive acts (compulsive rituals), and
3. Mixed obsessional thoughts and acts.
Depression is very commonly associated with
obsessive compulsive disorder. It is estimated that at
least half the patients of OCD have major depressive
episodes while many other have mild depression.
Premorbidly obsessional or anankastic personality
disorder or ‘traits’ may be commoner than in rest of
the population.
Four clinical syndromes have been described in
literature, although admixtures are commoner than
pure syndromes.

Washers
This is the commonest type. Here the obsession is of
contamination with dirt, germs, body excretions and


<<<PAGE 108>>>
96

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

the like. The compulsion is washing of hands or the
whole body, repeatedly many times a day. It usually
spreads on to washing of clothes, washing of bathroom, bedroom, door knobs and personal articles,
gradually.
The person tries to avoid contamination but is
unable to, so washing becomes a ritual.

Checkers
In this type, the person has multiple doubts, e.g. the
door has not been locked, kitchen gas has been left
open, counting of money was not exact, etc. The compulsion, of course, is checking repeatedly to ‘remove’
the doubt.
Any attempt to stop the checking leads to mounting anxiety. Before one doubt has been cleared, other
doubts may creep in.

Pure Obsessions
This syndrome is characterised by repetitive intrusive
thoughts, impulses or images which are not associated
with compulsive acts. The content is usually sexual or
aggressive in nature. The distress associated with these
obsessions is dealt usually by counter-thoughts (such
as counting) and not by behavioural rituals.
A variant is obsessive rumination, which is a preoccupation with thoughts. Here, the person repetitively
ruminates in his mind about the pros and cons of the
thought concerned.

Primary Obsessive Slowness
A relatively rare syndrome, it is characterised by
severe obsessive ideas and/or extensive compulsive
rituals, in the relative absence of manifested anxiety.
This leads to marked slowness in daily activities.
This subtype is quite difficult to diagnose in the
routine clinical practice, unless the possibility of this
subtype is kept in mind.
In clinical practice, one of the most useful scales
is the Y-BOCS (Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive
Scale). It can be used to elicit the symptomatology
and rate the severity of OCD. The Y-BOCS classifies
the symptoms and signs of OCD as follows:

1. Aggressive obsessions
2. Contamination obsessions
3. Sexual obsessions
4. Hoarding/Saving obsessions
5. Religious/Scrupulous obsessions
6. Obsession with need for symmetry or exactness
7. Somatic obsessions
8. Miscellaneous obsessions
9. Cleaning/washing compulsions
10. Checking compulsions
11. Repeating rituals
12. Counting compulsions
13. Ordering/arranging compulsions
14. Hoarding/collecting compulsions
15. Miscellaneous compulsions.

Aetiology
Several causative factors have been explored in the
past but no clear aetiology of obsessive compulsive
disorder is known yet. Some of the important theories
include:

Psychodynamic Theory
Sigmund Freud found obsessions and phobias to be
psychogenetically related. This theory can be explained in a flow diagram (Fig. 8.1).
Isolation of Affect: By this defense mechanism,
ego removes the affect (isolates the affect) from the
anxiety-causing idea. The idea is thus weakened, but
remains still in the consciousness. The affect however becomes free and attaches itself to other neutral
idea(s) by symbolic associations. Thus, these neutral
ideas become anxiety-provoking and turn into obsessions.
This happens only when isolation of affect is
not fully successful (incomplete isolation of affect).
When it is fully successful, both the idea and affect
are repressed and there are no obsessions.
Undoing: This defense mechanism leads to
compulsions, which prevent or undo the feared consequences of obsessions.
Reaction formation results in the formation of
obsessive compulsive personality traits rather than


<<<PAGE 109>>>
Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform Disorders

97

Fig. 8.1: Psychodynamic Theory of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder: A Brief Summary

contributing to obsessive compulsive symptoms,
while displacement leads to formation of phobic
symptoms. These defense mechanisms are discussed
in Table 17.1.
This mechanism has been explained in slight
detail as this theory attempts to describe the probable
causation of OCD in a remarkably systematic manner. However, it must be remembered that this is only
a theory and whether it is true or not, is a matter of
conjecture.
Thus, the psychodynamic theory explains OCD
by a defensive regression to anal-sadistic phase of
development with the use of isolation, undoing and
displacement to produce obsessive-compulsive symptoms.

Behavioural Theory
The behavioural theory explains obsessions as conditioned stimuli to anxiety (similar to phobias). Compulsions have been described as learned behaviour which
decrease the anxiety associated with obsessions.
This decrease in anxiety positively reinforces the
compulsive acts and they become ‘stable’, learned
behaviours.

Behavioural or learning theory is not able to
explain the causation of OCD adequately but is very
useful in its treatment.

Biological Theories
1. Obsessive compulsive symptoms can occur
secondary to many illnesses such as von Economo’s encephalitis, basal ganglia lesions, Gilles
de la Tourette syndrome, and hypothalamic and
third ventricle lesions.
2. Obsessive compulsive disorder is found in 5-7%
of first degree relatives of the patients with
OCD.
3. Psychosurgery has been successfully used for
treatment of OCD.
4. Biochemically, the central 5-HT system seems
to be involved in OCD, as SSRIs are useful in
the treatment of OCD.
Some authors pointed at cingulum (gyrus) as the
probable site of lesion, while others have found EEG
abnormalities most marked over the temporal lobes.
However, at the present moment, there is no conclusive evidence for OCD having a clearly proven
organic aetiology.


<<<PAGE 110>>>
98

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Treatment
Psychotherapy
1. Psychoanalytic psychotherapy is used in certain
selected patients, who are psychologically oriented.
2. Supportive psychotherapy is an important adjunct to other modes of treatment. Supportive
psychotherapy is also needed by the family
members.

Behaviour Therapy and Cognitive
Behaviour Therapy
Behaviour modification is an effective mode of
therapy, with a success rate as high as 80%, especially
for the compulsive acts. It is customary these days to
combine CBT with BT at most centres.
The techniques used are listed below (They are
described in Chapter 18):
i. Thought-stopping (and its modifications).
ii. Response prevention.
iii. Systematic desensitisation.
iv. Modelling.

Drug Treatment
1. Benzodiazepines (e.g. alprazolam, clonazepam)
have a limited role in controlling anxiety as
adjuncts and should be used very sparingly.
2. Antidepressants: Some patients may improve
dramatically with specific serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs).
Clomipramine (75-300 mg/day), a nonspecific
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SRI), was the first
drug used effectively in the treatment of OCD.
The response is better in the presence of depressive symptoms, but many patients with pure
OCD also improve substantially.
Fluoxetine (20-80 mg/day) is a good alternative to clomipramine and often preferred these
days for its better side-effect profile. Fluvoxamine (50-200 mg/day) is marketed as a specific
anti-obsessional SSRI drug, whilst paroxetine

(20-40 mg/day) and sertraline (50-200 mg/day)
are also effective in some patients.
3. Antipsychotics: These are occasionally used in
low doses (e.g. haloperidol, risperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole, pimozide) in the treatment
of severe, disabling anxiety.
4. Buspirone has also been used beneficially as
an adjunct for augmentation of SSRIs, in some
patients.

Electroconvulsive Therapy
In presence of severe depression with OCD, ECT may
be needed. ECT is particularly indicated when there is
a risk of suicide and/or when there is a poor response
to the other modes of treatment. However, ECT is not
the treatment of first choice in OCD.

Psychosurgery
Psychosurgery can be used in treatment of OCD that
has become intractable, and is not responding to other
methods of treatment. It is worth mentioning that
psychosurgery is only available as a treatment choice
at a very few centres throughout the world.
The best responders are usually those who have
significant associated depression, although pure
obsessives also do respond. The main benefit is the
marked reduction in associated distress and severe
anxiety.
The procedures which can be employed are:
i. Stereotactic limbic leucotomy.
ii. Stereotactic subcaudate tractotomy.
Psychosurgery is usually followed by intensive
behaviour therapy aimed at rehabilitation. However,
with the easy availability of SSRIs, and a good response of OCD symptoms to SSRIs and other pharmacological measures, psychosurgery is very rarely
used in the treatment of OCD.
Very often, a comprehensive treatment of OCD
requires that multiple treatment modalities (e.g. drug
treatment and BT/CBT) be combined in a specific
manner, suitable to the particular patient being treated
at the time.


<<<PAGE 111>>>
Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform Disorders

DISSOCIATIVE AND CONVERSION
DISORDERS
The word hysteria has been used in so many contexts
by psychiatrists, physicians and non-professionals
that it no longer has any one meaning. These various
contexts include:
1. Impulsive, uncontrolled behaviour (impulse dyscontrol).
2. Manipulative, exhibitionistic, emotional, dramatic, and/or seductive behaviour (histrionic
personality traits).
3. Absence of objective signs of organic illness.
4. Presence of multiple vague somatic symptoms,
especially in a female patient (masked depression,
somatisation disorder or Briquet’s hysteria).
5. Hypochondriasis.
6. Any mental illness.
7. Presence of certain symptoms which are not explainable in the context of present organic illness
(functional overlay, conversion symptoms).
8. Difficult patient; poor doctor-patient communication.
9. ‘Sick’ role or ‘abnormal illness behaviour’.
10. Psychosomatic disorders.
11. Malingering.
12. Psychosexual dysfunctions.
This list is not exhaustive. Therefore, it is not surprising that the word hysteria has been removed from
DSM-IV-TR as well as the ICD-10. The term hysteria
has now been replaced in the ICD-10 by ‘conversion
and dissociative disorders’ and in DSM-IV-TR, by
conversion and dissociative disorders.

Epidemiology
Hysteria (comprising of conversion, dissociation and
somatisation disorder) constitutes about 6-15% of
all outpatient diagnoses and 14-20% of all neurotic
disorders. Females usually outnumber males, but in
children the percentage tends to be similar in boys
and girls.

99

Conversion Disorder
Conversion disorder is characterised by the following
clinical features:
1. Presence of symptoms or deficits affecting motor
or sensory function, suggesting a medical or
neurological disorder.
2. Sudden onset.
3. Development of symptoms usually in the presence
of a significant psychosocial stressor(s).
4. A clear temporal relationship between stressor and
development or exacerbation of symptoms.
5. Patient does not intentionally produce the symptoms.
6. There is usually a ‘secondary gain’ (though not
required by ICD-10 for diagnosis).
7. Detailed physical examination and investigations
do not reveal any abnormality that can explain the
symptoms adequately.
8. The symptom may have a ‘symbolic’ relationship
with the stressor/conflict.
There can be two different types of disturbances
in conversion disorder; motor and sensory. Autonomic
nervous system is typically not involved, except when
the voluntary musculature is involved, e.g. vomiting,
globus hystericus.
In ICD-10, conversion disorder is subsumed under
‘dissociative disorders of movement and sensation’, a
subtype under ‘dissociative (conversion) disorders’. It
is further classified in to dissociative motor disorders,
dissociative anaesthesia and sensory loss, and dissociative convulsions.

Dissociative Motor Disorders
The motor disturbance usually involves either paralysis or abnormal movements. The ‘paralysis’ may be a
monoplegia, paraplegia or quadriplegia.
Classically, the symptom distribution is according
to the patient’s knowledge of nervous system. The examination shows normal or voluntarily increased tone
and normal reflexes. However, a prolonged ‘paralysis’
may lead to the development of contractures.


<<<PAGE 112>>>
100

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The abnormal movements can range from tremors,
choreiform movements and gait disturbances, to convulsive movements. These movements either occur or
increase when attention is directed towards them, and
may disappear when patient is watched unobserved.
These movements do not fit the ‘typical’ clinical picture of the abnormal involuntary movement
disorders. The gait disturbance (astasia abasia) is
usually characterised by a wide-based, jerky, staggering, dramatic and irregular gait with exaggerated
body movements.

of convulsive movements and partial loss of consciousness. This is a very common disorder in India
and other developing countries, though some patients
may present with only a partial, brief unresponsiveness, in the absence of convulsive movements (called
as brief dissociative stupor or simple dissociative
disorder).
Clearly, differential diagnosis with true seizures
is important. The main differentiating points between
epileptic seizures and dissociative convulsions are
listed in Table 8.4.

Dissociative Anaesthesia and Sensory Loss
(Sensory Disorders)

Dissociative Disorder

The sensory disturbance is exemplified by a ‘glove
and stocking’ anaesthesia (absence of all sensations
with an abrupt boundary, not conforming to the
distribution of dermatomes, and usually limiting at
wrists and ankles), hemi-anaesthesias, blindness or
contracted visual fields (tubular vision), and deafness.
The detailed examination usually shows absence of
objective signs of the particular illness and the disturbance is usually based on patient’s knowledge of
that illness.
Sensory disturbances are inconsistent with the anatomic patterns expected. Often all sensory modalities
(such as touch, pain, temperature and position sense)
are affected at the same level. In conversion disorder,
the loss of vibration sense maintains a strict midline
separation, in spite of the fact that vibrations can be
perceived on the other side of body through bone
conduction. However, this is not a fool-proof test.
A patient with bilateral conversion blindness is
able to go about his way reasonably well and doesn’t
injure himself by walking into obstacles. In unilateral conversion blindness, the pupillary reflex of the
affected eye is normal.
Mixed presentations, with both sensory and motor
symptoms, are quite common.

Dissociative Convulsions (Hysterical Fits)
Earlier known as ‘hysterical fits’ or pseudoseizures,
dissociative convulsions are characterised by presence

These disorders are characterised by the following
clinical features:
1. Disturbance in the normally integrated functions
of consciousness, identity and/or memory.
2. Onset is usually sudden and the disturbance is
usually temporary. Recovery is often abrupt.
3. Often, there is a precipitating stress before the
onset. There is a clear temporal relationship
between the stressor and the onset of the illness.
A frequent stressful situation is an ongoing war.
4. A ‘secondary gain’ resulting from the development
of symptoms may be found.
5. Detailed physical examination and investigations
do not reveal any abnormality that can explain the
symptoms adequately.
The common clinical types are described below:

Dissociative Amnesia
This is the commonest clinical type of dissociative
disorder. Occurring mostly in adolescent and young
adults (females more than males, except in war), it is
characterised by a sudden inability to recall important
personal information (amnesia), particularly concerning stressful or traumatic life events. The amnesia can
not be explained by everyday forgetfulness and there
is no evidence of an underlying medical illness.
Most often, dissociative amnesia follows a traumatic or stressful life situation. Sometimes, imagined
stressors or expression of ‘forbidden’ impulses may
also precipitate the onset of amnesia.


<<<PAGE 113>>>
Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform Disorders

101

Table 8.4: Dissociative Convulsions and Epileptic Seizures
Epileptic Seizures
Dissociative Convulsions (Hysterical
Fits)
Attack pattern
Stereotyped, known clinical patterns
Absence of any established clinical
pattern. Purposive body movements
occur
Place of occurrence
Anywhere
Usually indoors or at safe places
Warning
Both prodrome and aura are stereotyped
Variable
Time of day
Anytime. Can occur during sleep
Never occur during sleep
Tongue bite
Usually present
Usually absent. Cheek and lip bite
may be present
Incontinence of urine Can occur
Very rare
and faeces
Injury
Can occur
Very rare. If occurs, it is minor or
may be accidental
Speech
No verbalisation during the seizure
Verbalisation may occur during
the fit
Duration
Usually about 30-70 sec. (Short)
20-800 sec. (Prolonged)
Head turning
Unilateral
Side to side turning
Eye gaze
Staring, if eyes are open
Avoidant gaze
Amnesia
Complete
Partial
Neurological signs
Present, e.g. up-going plantars
Absent
Post-ictal confusion
Present
Absent
Stress
Present in 25%
Present much more often
EEG - Inter-ictal
Usually abnormal;
Usually normal
- Ictal
Abnormal
Normal
Serum prolactin
Increased in post-ictal period (15-20 minutes Usually normal
after seizure; returns back to normal in 1
hour)
Clinical Features

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

This amnesia is of four types (Table 8.5). During the
amnesic period, there may be slight clouding of consciousness. In the post-amnesic period, the awareness
of disturbance of memory is present.

Dissociative Fugue
Dissociative fugue is characterised by episodes of
wandering away (usually away from home). During
the episode, the person usually adopts a new identity
with complete amnesia for the earlier life. The onset
is usually sudden, often in the presence of severe
stress. The termination too is abrupt and is followed
by amnesia for the episode, but with recovery of
memories of earlier life. The characteristic feature
is the assumption of a purposeful new identity, with
absence of awareness of amnesia.

Table 8.5: Types of Dissociative Amnesia
1. Circumscribed amnesia (commonest type): There is
an inability to recall all the personal events during a
circumscribed period of time, usually corresponding
with the presence of the stressor.
2. Selective amnesia (less common): This is similar to
circumscribed amnesia but there is an inability to
recall only some selective personal events during
that period while some other events during the same
period may be recalled.
3. Continuous amnesia (rare): In this type, there is an
inability to recall all personal events following the
stressful event, till the present time.
4. Generalised amnesia (very rare): In this type, there is
an inability to recall the personal events of the whole
life, in the face of a stressful life event.


<<<PAGE 114>>>
102

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

An important differential diagnosis is from fugue
states seen in complex partial seizures or temporal
lobe epilepsy. In complex partial seizures, there is no
assumption of a new identity, confusion or disorientation is present during the episode and the episodes are
not only linked to any precipitating stress.

Psychodynamic Theory

Multiple Personality
(Dissociative Identity) Disorder

According to this theory, dissociative (and conversion)
symptoms are learned responses in the face of stress.
For the first time, the symptom may be learned from
the surrounding environment (e.g. seeing a paralysed
patient).
The development of the symptom brings about
psychological relief by avoidance of stress and is thus
secondarily reinforced.

In this dissociative disorder, the person is dominated
by two or more personalities, of which only one is
being manifest at a time. These personalities are
usually different, at times even opposing. Each personality has a full range of higher mental functions,
and performs complex behaviour patterns.
Usually one personality is not aware of the existence of the other(s), i.e. there are amnesic barriers
between the personalities. Both the onset and termination of control of the each personality is sudden.
Classical examples in the published literature
include ‘Three faces of Eve’ and ‘Sybil’.

Trance and Possession Disorders
Trance and possession disorders (possession hysteria)
are characterised by the control of person’s personality
by a ‘spirit’, during the episodes. Usually the person is
aware of the existence of the other (i.e. ‘possessor’),
unlike in multiple personality. This disorder is very
commonly seen in India and certain African countries.

Other Dissociative Disorders
Ganser’s syndrome (hysterical pseudodementia) is
commonly found in prison inmates. The characteristic
feature is vorbeireden, which is also called as ‘approximate answers’. The answers are wrong but show that
the person understands the nature of question asked.
For example; when asked the colour of a red pen, the
patient calls it blue.

Aetiology
The aetiological theories of dissociative (and conversion) disorders are predominantly of three types:

The explanation given by this theory can be summarised in a flow diagram (Fig. 8.2). For further details
regarding the defense mechanisms and Freudian
theory, see Tables 17.1 and 17.2.

Behavioural Theory

Biological Theory
The biological basis of dissociative (conversion) disorders is far from proven. Some long-term studies (e.g.
Slater) have found that up to 80% of patients, diagnosed as ‘hysteria’, were later found to have physical
illnesses. However, replications of such studies have
not found such high figures.
Conversion symptoms are frequently seen in the
patients with epilepsy and it may at times be difficult
to differentiate between true seizures and pseudoseizures.
Similarly, ‘conversion-release’ symptoms are seen
in some cerebral cortex lesions. However, these are
only conversion symptoms and are not dissociative
(and conversion) disorders [i.e. other features for
diagnosis of dissociative (conversion) disorders are
not present]. Hence, these are of doubtful help in
elucidating the aetiology of dissociative (and conversion) disorders.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based not merely on the absence of objective signs of physical illness, although it is very important to exclude an underlying or associated physical
illness. The presence of positive points in history and
examination should be present, before a diagnosis of


<<<PAGE 115>>>
Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform Disorders

103

Fig. 8.2: Psychodynamic Theory of Dissociative (Conversion) Disorder

dissociative (and conversion) disorders can be made.
These positive points are the characteristic clinical
features listed previously.
As dissociative (and conversion) disorders and
physical illness can be co-existent, a detailed examination is a must. Dissociative (conversion) symptoms
appearing for the first time in an elderly male,
especially in a male more than 50 years old, a strong
suspicion of underlying physical or major psychiatric
illness should be kept in mind.
Other clinical features of dissociative (conversion)
disorders include la-belle-indifférence, which is a lack
of concern towards the symptoms, despite the apparent
severity of the disability produced. Although earlier
thought to be a hallmark of dissociative (conversion)
disorders, it is now known to be present even in
physical illnesses. In addition, it is not always present
in dissociative (conversion) disorders.
Premorbid histrionic personality traits are often
present, although a personality disorder is less commonly present.

Treatment
Behaviour Therapy
Since the patients with dissociative disorders can be
attention seeking and their symptoms increase with
focus of attention, the symptoms should not be unduly focussed on. These patients should be treated as
normal, and not encouraged to stay in a sick-role. Any
improvement in symptomatology should be actively
encouraged.
Since these patients can also very suggestible, they
respond quickly to the above-stated methods, with a
consistently firm but empathic attitude.
When there is a sudden, acute symptom, its prompt
removal may prevent habituation and future disability. This may be achieved by one of the following
methods:
i. Strong suggestion for a return to normalcy.
ii. Aversion therapy (liquor ammonia; aversive
electric stimulus; pressure just above eyeballs
or tragus of ear; closing the nose and mouth) are
occasionally employed carefully in resistant cases.


<<<PAGE 116>>>
104

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

However, the use of aversion therapy has been
decried as it:
a. tends to get over-used;
b. may harm the patient;
c. violates the basic human rights of the patient;
and
d. can lend a wrong mental picture of the patient
in the physician’s mind, i.e. of a ‘manipulator’
needing punishment!
The current status is that aversion therapy is not
a preferred treatment choice.
iii. Amplification of suggestion with hypnosis, freeassociation, intravenous amytal or thiopentone, or
intravenous diazepam.

Psychotherapy with Abreaction
Abreaction is bringing to the conscious awareness,
thoughts, affects and memories for the first time. This
may be achieved by:
i. Hypnosis.
ii. Free association.
iii. Intravenous thiopentone or diazepam: The aim
of abreaction with IV thiopentone is, both, to
make the conflicts conscious and to make the
patient more suggestible to therapist’s advice.
Once the conflicts have become conscious and
their affects (emotions) have been released,
the conversion or dissociative symptom disappears.

Supportive Psychotherapy
Supportive psychotherapy is needed especially when
the conflicts (and the current problems) have become
conscious and have to be faced in routine life. It is an
important adjunct to treatment.

Psychoanalysis
This mode of treatment is chosen not on the basis of
conversion/dissociative symptoms but on the total
personality structure of the patient. Several patients
respond remarkably well. The total length of therapy
in classical psychoanalysis is usually five years or
more.

Drug Therapy
Drug treatment has a very limited role in dissociative
(and conversion) disorders (apart from the use of IV
thiopentone, amytal or diazepam in abreaction). A few
patients have disabling anxiety (although anxiety as a
rule is rather uncommon in ‘hysteria’) and may need
short-term benzodiazepines.

SOMATOFORM DISORDER
The somatoform disorders are characterised by
repeated presentation with physical symptoms which
do not have any adequate physical basis (and are not
explained by the presence of other psychiatric disorders),
and a persistent request for investigations and treatment
despite repeated assurances by the treating doctors.
In ICD-10, somatoform disorders are divided into
the following categories.

Somatisation Disorder
Somatisation disorder is characterised by the following clinical features:
1. Multiple somatic symptoms in the absence of any
physical disorder.
2. The symptoms are recurrent and chronic (of many
years duration, usually); at least 2 year duration is
needed for diagnosis.
3. The symptoms are vague, presented in a dramatic
manner, and involve multiple organ systems. The
common symptoms include gastrointes tinal
(abdominal pain, beltching, nausea, vomiting,
regurgitation), abnormal skin sensations (numbness, soreness, itching, tingling, burning), and
sexual and menstrual complaints (menorrhagia,
dysmenorrhoea, dyspareunia).
4. There is frequent change of treating physicians.
5. Persistent refusal to accept the advice or reassurance of several doctors that there is no physical
explanation for the symptoms.
6. Some degree of impairment of social and family
functioning attributable to the nature of the symptoms and resulting behaviour.
7. Presence of conversion symptoms is common.


<<<PAGE 117>>>
Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform Disorders

This disorder usually begins in second or third
decade of life and is much more common in females.
In the first degree relatives of patients with somatisation disorder, disorders such as somatisation disorder
(in females), and alcoholism and psychopathy (in
males) are common. Histrionic personality traits or
disorder may also be present.

Differential Diagnosis
It is important to rule out physical disorders before making a diagnosis of somatisation disorder.
Particularly those physical disorders, which often
present with apparently vague and multiple somatic
symptoms, must be kept in mind. This is especially
so if the onset of symptoms is in the later part of
life (> 35 years of age; more so if > 45 years of age)
and in male patients. These physical disorders
include:
1. Multiple sclerosis.
2. Hypothyroidism.
3. Acute intermittent porphyria.
4. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
5. Hyperparathyroidism.
6. Carcinoma pancreas.
Somatisation sometimes presents as an ‘idiom of
distress’ in the absence of a diagnosable psychiatric
disorder. However, certain psychiatric disorders must
be ruled out.
1. Schizophrenia: In the initial (prodromal) stages,
multiple somatic symptoms may be present but
later typical features of schizophrenia are manifested.
2. Major depression: Particularly in developing
countries such as India, multiple somatic symptoms are common in major depre ssion. The
presence of depressed mood, depressive ideation
and disturbances of biological functions in major
depression helps in differentiation. Occasionally,
differential diagnosis with masked depression may
be difficult.
3. Hypochondriasis: In somatisation disorder, there
are multiple, vague somatic symptoms, while in
hypochondriasis, normal body functions or minor

105

somatic symptoms are interpreted as the presence
of a serious body disease.
4. Conversion disorder: Although conversion
symptoms are common in somatisation disorder,
they are classified separately. The number of
symptoms in conversion disorder is far less (one
or two) than in somatisation disorder (usually more
than ten).
5. Delusional disorders: Somatic delusions may
be present in delusional disorders (e.g. monosymptomatic hypochondriacal psychosis). In delusional disorders, there is a delusional conviction
of somatic symptoms, with far fewer symptoms.

Treatment
The treatment is often difficult. It mainly consists of:
1. Supportive psychotherapy: The treatment of
choice is usually supportive psychotherapy. The
first step is to enlist the patient in the therapeutic
alliance by establishing a rapport. It is useful
to demonstrate the link between psychosocial
conflict(s) and somatic symptoms, if it is apparent.
In chronic cases, ‘symptom reduction’ rather than
‘complete cure’ might be a reasonable goal.
2. Behaviour modification: After rapport is established, attempts at modifying behaviour are made,
for example, not focusing on the symptoms per se,
and positively reinforcing normal functioning.
3. Relaxation therapy, with graded physical exercises.
4. Drug therapy: Antidepressants and/or benzodiazepines can be given on a short-term basis
for associated depression and/or anxiety. Benzodiazepines should be used with great caution, as
the risk of dependence and misuse is high in these
patients.

Hypochondriasis
(Hypochondriacal Disorder)
Hypochondriasis is defined as a persistent preoccupation with a fear (or belief) of having one (or more)
serious disease(s), based on person’s own interpretation of normal body function or a minor physical
abnormality.


<<<PAGE 118>>>
106

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The other important features of hypochondriasis
are:
1. Complete physical examination and investigations
do not show presence of any significant abnormality.
2. The fear or belief persists despite assurance to the
contrary by showing normal reports to the patient.
3. The fear or belief is not a delusion but is instead
an example of an overvalued idea. The patient may
agree regarding the possibility of his exaggerating
the graveness of situation, at that time.
4. A preoccupation with medical terms and syndromes is quite common. The patient tends to
change the physician frequently, in order to get
investigated again.
The usual age of onset is in the late third decade.
The course is usually chronic with remissions and
relapses. Obsessive personality traits and narcissistic
personality features are frequently seen, in addition
to associated anxiety and depression.

Aetiology
The cause of hypochondriasis is not known. The important theories are mentioned below:
1. Psychodynamic Theory
Hypochondriasis is believed to be based on a narcissistic personality, caused by a narcissistic libido. Here
other parts of body become erotogenic zones, which
act as substitutes for genitals. Hypochondriacally
focused organs symbolise the genitals. It must be
remembered that this is only a theoretical psychodynamic construct.
2. As a Symptom of Depression
Hypochondriacal symptoms are commonly present
in major depression. In fact, according to some,
hypochondriasis is almost always a part of another
psychiatric syndrome, most commonly a mood disorder. Thus, hypochondriasis has been visualised as
a masked depression or depressive equivalent, though
not everyone agrees with this view.

Treatment
The treatment of hypochondriasis is often difficult. It
basically consists of:

1. Supportive psychotherapy.
2. Treatment of associated or underlying depression
and/or anxiety, if present.

Somatoform Autonomic Dysfunction
According to ICD-10, in this disorder, symptoms
are presented by the patient as if they were due to
a physical disorder of an organ system that is predominantly under autonomic control, e.g. heart and
cardiovascular system (such as palpitations), upper
gastrointestinal tract (such as aerophagy, hiccough),
lower gastrointestinal tract (such as flatulence, irritable
bowel), respiratory system (such as hyperventilation),
genitourinary system (such as dysuria), or other organ
systems.
There is preoccupation with, and distress regarding, the possibility of a serious (but often unspecified)
disorder of the particular organ system. Physical
examination and investigations do not however show
presence of any significant abnormality. The preoccupation persists despite repeated assurances and
explanations.

Treatment
The treatment consists of:
1. Supportive psychotherapy.
2. Drug treatment: The symptoms of anxiety and/or
depression usually respond to short-term use of
benzodiazepines and antidepressants.
Some other common disorders are described in
some detail below:

Hyperventilation Syndrome (HVS)
This is a very common clinical syndrome which is
often missed, particularly when it does not present in
its full blown form. The syndrome is characterised by a
‘habit’ of hyperventilation which becomes particularly
marked in the presence of psychosocial stress, or any
emotional upheaval.
In its mild form, it is characterised by excessive
fatigue, chest pain, headache, palpitations, sweating
and a feeling of ‘lightheadedness’. In severe hyperventilation syndrome, carpopaedal spasm (tetany),
paraesthesias and loss of consciousness may occur.


<<<PAGE 119>>>
Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform Disorders

These symptoms are produced by hypocapnia (or
a decrease in arterial pCO2). The sequence of events in
hyperventilation syndrome is explained in Figure 8.3.
The diagnosis is usually easy, if the possibility
of hyperventilation is remembered. Apart from the
clinical history and presence of frequent ‘sighing’
during the interview, a simple test would demonstrate
the symptomatology. The patient is asked to breathe
rapidly and deeply for 2-3 minutes. This produces
the classical physical symptoms. If carried on longer,
tetany and unconsciousness would result; therefore,
due care should be undertaken in performing this test.

Treatment
1. Relaxation techniques: Jacobson’s progressive
muscular relaxation, autohypnosis or hypnosis,
yoga, transcendental meditation (TM), and/or
biofeedback.
2. Teaching relaxed breathing techniques, which
include:
i. Breathing more from the abdomen, thus avoiding the use of accessory muscles of expiration.

107

ii. Slow respiration with passive expiration, without muscular effort.
iii. A short rest cycle to be voluntarily introduced
after each respiratory cycle.
3. Treatment of underlying anxiety or depression,
if present, with antidepressants and/or short-term
benzodiazepines.
4. Breathing-in-bag technique: The aim of this
technique is to have the patient re-breathe the
expired air. This prevents the decrease in pCO2
which causes physical symptoms, or causes an
increase in pCO2 where physical symptoms have
already developed. Re-breathing in a paper bag,
which is carried by the patient, quickly reverts the
symptoms. It is really important to emphasise a
safe use of the bag, to prevent the possibility of
suffocation. There is some recent evidence doubting the efficacy of this approach.

Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)
This is a common syndrome, often known by a large
variety of names, such as spastic colitis, irritable

Fig. 8.3: Physiology of Hyperventilation Syndrome


<<<PAGE 120>>>
108

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

colon syndrome, nervous diarrhoea, mucus colitis,
and colon neurosis.
The principal abnormality in IBS is a disturbance
of bowel mobility, which is modified by psychosocial
factors. The patients usually present with one or more
of the following symptoms:
1. Abdominal pain, discomfort or cramps.
2. Alteration of bowel habits (diarrhoea or constipation).
3. A sensation of incomplete evacuation.
Quite often, all three features (abdominal pain
and diarrhoea alternating with consti pation) are
present together; also associated is flatulence. The
patients often describe their stools in a dramatic
manner.
It is a fairly common disorder occurring in nearly
40% of all patients attending a gastroenterology (GE)
clinic. Although females more frequently have IBS in
America, in India males are more often affected. It is
more or less a stable disorder with frequent exacerbations.
The typical mode of onset or exacerbation is with
occurrence of a psychosocial stressor or emotional
upheaval. Physiologically, there are two changes possible in the bowel motility.
1. Hypomotility, which is often associated with painless diarrhoea.
2. Hypermotility, which presents clinically as painful
constipation or rarely painful diarrhoea.

Treatment
1. A stable and trustful doctor-patient relationship.
2. Supportive psychotherapy is best carried out in
medical or GE clinic by the treating physician.
These patients often resent psychiatric referrals.
3. Identification of current life stressors, environmental manipulation, and learning of coping skills
aimed at dealing with stressors are very helpful.
4. Anti-anxiety and antidepressant medication may
be helpful at times. At other times, they just act
like placebos.
5. Symptomatic management is often unsuccessful.
However, prokinetic agents (e.g. cisapride) may

sometimes be useful. A trial of fibre (wheat bran,
psyllium, methylcellulose) is reasonable in some
patients with irritable bowel syndrome.

Premenstrual Syndrome
Premenstrual syndrome or premenstrual tension
(PMT—as it has been commonly called) is characterised by a variety of physical, psychological and
behavioural symptoms occurring in the second half of
menstrual cycle. Typically, the symptoms start after
a few days of ovulation, reach a peak about 4-5 days
before menstruation and disappear usually around
menstruation. The period between menstruation and
next ovulation is normal.
The syndrome is characterised by feelings of
irritability, depression, crying spells, restlessness and
anxiety. These are associated with changes in appetite,
signs and symptoms of water retention (such as pedal
oedema, weight gain, swelling of breasts, a sense of
bloating of abdomen), gastroenterological changes,
headache and fatigue.
The aetiology is probably multifactorial. The
biological factors include faulty luteinisation, excess
of oestrogens, and progesterone deficiency. The psychosocial factors encompass education, expectations
and attitudes towards menstruation and femininity
(‘tension’ about menstruation).

Treatment
1. The treatment of water retention can be by diuretics, and restricting the fluid intake. Thiazide
diuretics are often prescribed but spironolactone
(an aldosterone antagonist) is probably superior.
2. Psychotherapy may be helpful in some cases where
conflicts regarding menstruation and/or femininity
are present.
3. Hormonal treatment with oral or parenteral progesterone has been recommended by some, with
good results.
4. In resistant cases, other drugs such as lithium,
bromocriptine, pyridoxine, antidepressants and
anti-anxiety agents have been used with varying
success.


<<<PAGE 121>>>
Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform Disorders

Persistent Somatoform Pain Disorder
It was previously called as psychogenic pain disorder.
In this disorder, persistent, severe and distressing
pain is the main feature which is, either grossly in
excess of what is expected from the physical findings,
or inconsistent with the anatomical distribution of
nervous system. Preoccupation with pain is common.
There is often a precipitating stressful event and
secondary gain may be present. Repeated change of
physicians (doctor-shopping) is common. The affected
person often assumes a ‘sick-role’ or an ‘invalid-role’.
Abuse and dependence of analgesics and minor tranquilisers is common, particularly when the course is
chronic.
This disorder is more common in females, with
an onset in the third or fourth decade of life.

Treatment
1. The patients usually refuse psychiatric intervention; therefore treatment is often managed by the
treating physician.
2. Drug therapy should be avoided if possible as the
risk of iatrogenic drug abuse is quite high.
3. In the absence of other modes of successful
treatment, a supportive relationship with a physician will prevent doctor-shopping and provide
relief.

Other Somatoform Disorders
In ICD-10, this category includes other somatoform
disorders not classified in the previous four categories, e.g. ‘globus hystericus’, psychogenic torticollis,
psychogenic pruritus, psychogenic dysmenorrhoea,
teeth-grinding.

OTHER NEUROTIC DISORDERS
In ICD-10, the other neurotic disorders are divided
into the following categories:

Neurasthenia
According to ICD-10, this disorder is characterised
by:

109

Persisting/distressing complaints of increased
fatigue after mental effort, or of weakness/exhaustion
after minimal effort; with two or more of the following: feelings of muscular aches/pains, dizziness, tension headaches, sleep disturbances, inability to relax,
irritability and dyspepsia. It is important to rule out
other mental disorders which may fully explain the
symptoms.
This is clearly a poorly defined syndrome and its
independence as a diagnosis is doubtful. A differential
diagnosis with CFS (chronic fatigue syndrome), and
other medical and psychiatric disorders presenting
with fatigue, is important before diagnosing neurasthenia.
CFS is characterised by profound fatigue (present
at rest, and made worse by physical and mental effort),
muscle pains, headache, sore throat, functional impairment and nonspecific ‘soft’ physical signs, e.g. mild
fever, mild lymphadenopathy. CFS is diagnosed in the
absence of medical or other psychiatric disorder(s),
though neuropsychiatric symptoms may be present.

Depersonalisation Disorder
(or Depersonalisation-Derealisation
Syndrome)
Depersonalisation is characterised by an alteration in
the perception or experience of self, so that the feeling
of one’s own reality is temporarily changed or lost.
It is an ‘as if’ phenomenon. The person affected
is not delusionally convinced about the change, and
instead describes it to have occurred, as-if. This is
often accompanied by derealisation, which is an
alteration in the perception or experience of the
external world, so that the feeling of reality of external
world is temporarily changed or lost. This too is an
‘as if’ phenomenon. Derealisation is a larger concept
which also encompasses depersonalisation. As they
both often occur together the syndrome is also called
as depersonalisation-derealisation syndrome.
As both depersonalisation and derealisation occur
in many other disorders (Table 8.6), the term depersonalisation disorder should be used only when other
disorders have been ruled out.


<<<PAGE 122>>>
110

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The other associated clinical features may include:
1. The episodes of depersonalisation and/or derealisation causing significant social, interpersonal
or occupational impairment. The episodes recur
frequently.
2. The onset and termination of episodes is usually
sudden.
3. Marked distress and anxiety results, as the experience is highly unpleasant.
4. Insight into the illness is usually present.
5. A feeling of loss of control on one’s action and
speech may occur.
6. The episodes occur in the presence of a clear
sensorium.
The age of onset is usually late second or early
third decade. The course is usually chronic.

Treatment
The treatment is usually not very successful though
co-morbid symptoms of anxiety and depression can
often be treated. The various methods which can be
tried include:
1. Supportive psychotherapy.
2. Drug therapy with antidepressants; rarely antipsychotics may also be tried.

Other Specified Neurotic Disorders
(Culture Bound Syndromes)
In ICD-10, this category includes miscellaneous disorders which are of uncertain aetiology and nosological
status, and which occur in certain cultures, e.g. dhat
syndrome, koro, latah, wihtigo, piblokto and amok.
These are called as culture-bound syndromes, as they
are localised to certain geographical areas only, and are
not usually seen in the Western, developed countries.

Dhat Syndrome
Dhat syndrome is a culture-bound syndrome, which
is prevalent in the Indian subcontinent. This is characterised by:
1. Complaint of passage of dhat in urine.
2. Multiple somatic symptoms.
3. Asthenia (physical or mental exhaustion).

Table 8.6: Depersonalisation: Causes
1. Psychiatric Disorders
i. Depersonalisation disorder
ii. Phobic-anxiety-depersonalisation (PAD)
syndrome
iii. Anxiety disorder
iv. Panic disorder
v. Agoraphobia
vi. Schizophrenia
vii. Depression
2. Neurological Disorders
i. Complex partial seizures
ii. Migraine
iii. Cerebral tumours (especially affecting nondominant parietal lobe)
iv. Encephalitis
3. Other Causes
i. Hyperventilation
ii. Alcohol and drug dependence
iii. Hypoglycaemia
iv. Fatigue
v. Grief
vi. Sensory deprivation

4. Anxiety or depression may be present.
5. Sexual dysfunction may occur.
Dhat is a whitish discharge passed in urine and
believed to be semen by the patient. According to an
ancient sociocultural belief prevalent in the Indian
society, semen is an ‘extremely precious’ body element
which is produced from several drops of blood. Hence,
it follows from this view that loss of semen will be
perceived to lead to weakness and sexual dysfunction.
Often, masturbatory anxiety and overconcern with
nocturnal emissions are also associated with other
clinical symptoms.
Treatment
1. Counselling and Psychotherapy: This is the most
important method of treatment directed towards
removing misconceptions regarding apprehension
of semen loss. This counselling is combined with
general sex education. Specifically, fears regarding
masturbation and nocturnal emissions are allayed.


<<<PAGE 123>>>
Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform Disorders

Cognitive behavioural techniques can easily be
incorporated in the psychotherapy model applied.
2. Symptomatic treatment: The treatment of underlying anxiety, depression, hypochondriasis and/or
sexual dysfunction by the usual means may also be
necessary. Several patients present with underlying (or co-morbid) depression and anxiety, and
may need psychopharmacological management
of these symptoms.

Amok
Amok is characterised by a sudden, unprovoked
episode of rage, in which the affected person runs
about (runs ‘amok’) and indiscriminately injures
or kills any person who is encountered on the way.
This condition is usually seen in south-east Asia (e.g.
Malaysia).

Koro
Koro is a culture-bound syndrome seen in Asia (including India). The affected male person has the belief
that his penis is shrinking and may disappear in to his
abdominal wall and he may then die.
Females are also affected infrequently, with a corresponding belief that their breasts (and/or vulva) are
shrinking.
Koro often spreads rapidly to the other members
of community in an epidemic form. It is usually based
on the culturally elaborated fears regarding nocturnal
emission and masturbation (particularly in men).

Wihtigo (Windigo)
This syndrome is seen in native American-Indians.
The affected person has the belief that he has been
transformed in to a wihtigo, a cannibal monster. The
episodes are known to have occurred especially during
times of starvation.

Piblokto (Arctic Hysteria)
This culture-bound syndrome occurs in Eskimos.
The affected person is often a female, who screams
and tears-off her clothes, and throws herself on ice in

111

extremely cold conditions. She may imitate the cry of
a bird or an animal.
The episode usually lasts for 1-2 hours, followed
by amnesia for the events. It is most probably a type
of dissociative disorder.

Latah (Startle Reaction)
This syndrome is reported from south-east Asia
and Japan. Occurring more often in women, latah
is typically characterised by the presence of automatic obedience, echolalia, and echopraxia. It is often
precipitated by a sudden stimulus, such as loud sound.

Some Indian Culture-bound Syndromes
In addition to dhat syndrome, amok and koro
(described above), the other culture-bound syndromes
seen in India include Suchi-bai (purity mania), ascetic
syndrome, nupital psychosis, and Jhinjhinia.

REACTION TO STRESS AND
ADJUSTMENT DISORDERS
This category in ICD-10 consists of disorders which
are temporally related to an exceptionally stressful
life event (acute stress reaction and post-traumatic
stress disorder) or a significant life change (adjustment
disorders) immediately before the onset of illness.

Acute Stress Reaction
According to ICD-10, in this disorder there is an immediate and clear temporal relationship between an
exceptional stressor (such as death of a loved one,
natural catastrophe, accident, rape) and the onset of
symptoms. The symptoms show a mixed and changing picture. This disorder is more likely to develop in
presence of physical exhaustion and in extremes of
age. It is also more commonly seen in female gender
and people with poor coping skills.
The symptoms range from a ‘dazed’ condition,
anxiety, depression, anger, despair, overactivity or
withdrawal, and constriction of the field of consciousness. The symptoms resolve rapidly (within few hours


<<<PAGE 124>>>
112

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

usually), if removal from the stressful environment is
possible. If the stress continues or cannot be reversed,
the resolution of symptoms begins after 1-2 days and
is usually minimal after about three days.

Treatment
The treatment consists of removal of the patient from
the stressful environment and helping the patient to
‘pass through’ the stressful experience. IV or oral
benzodiazepines (such as diazepam) may be needed
in cases with marked agitation.

Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
According to ICD-10, this disorder arises as a delayed
and/protracted response to an exceptionally stressful
or catastrophic life event or situation, which is likely
to cause pervasive distress in ‘almost any person’ (e.g.
disasters, war, rape or torture, serious accident). The
symptoms of PTSD may develop, after a period of
latency, within six months after the stress or may be
delayed beyond this period.
PTSD is characterised by recurrent and intrusive
recollections of the stressful event, either in flashbacks (images, thoughts, or perceptions) and/or in
dreams. There is an associated sense of re-experiencing of the stressful event. There is marked avoidance
of the events or situations that arouse recollections of
the stressful event, along with marked symptoms of
anxiety and increased arousal.
The other important clinical features of PTSD
include partial amnesia for some aspects of the
stressful event, feeling of numbness, and anhedonia
(inability to experience pleasure).

Treatment
The treatment consists of the following measures:
1. Prevention: Anticipation of disasters in the high
risk areas, with the training of personnel in disaster
management.
2. Disaster management: Here the speed of providing
practical help is of paramount importance. This is
also a preventive measure.
3. Supportive psychotherapy.

4. Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT).
5. Drug treatment: Antidepressants and benzodiazepines (in low doses for short periods)
are useful in treatment, if anxiety and/or depression are important components of the clinical
picture.

Adjustment Disorders
Adjustment disorders are one of the commoner
psychiatric disorders seen in the clinical practice. They
are most frequently seen in adolescents and women.
Although adjustment disorder is often precipitated by
one or more stressors, it usually represents a maladaptive response to the stressful life event(s).
In ICD-10, this disorder is characterised by those
disorders which occur within 1 month of a significant
life change (stressor). This disorder usually occurs
in those individuals who are vulnerable due to poor
coping skills or personality factors. It is assumed that
the disorder would not have arisen in the absence of
the stressor(s). The duration of the disorder is usually
less than 6 months, except in the case of prolonged
depressive reaction.
The various subtypes include brief or prolonged
depressive reaction, mixed anxiety and depressive
reaction, and adjustment disorder with predominant
disturbance of other emotions and/or predominant
disturbance of conduct.
Most patients recover within a period of three
months.

Treatment
1. Supportive psychotherapy remains the treatment
of choice.
2. Crisis intervention is useful in some patients,
by helping to quickly resolve the stressful life
situation which has led to the onset of adjustment
disorder.
3. Stress management training and Coping skills
training.
4. Drug treatment may be needed in some patients
for the management of anxiety (benzodiazepines)
and/or depressive symptoms (antidepressants).


<<<PAGE 125>>>
9

Disorders of Adult
Personality and Behaviour

SPECIFIC PERSONALITY DISORDERS
Personality is defined as a deeply ingrained pattern of
behaviour that includes modes of perception, relating
to and thinking about oneself and the surrounding
environment. Personality traits are normal, prominent
aspects of personality. Personality disorders result
when these personality traits become abnormal, i.e.
become inflexible and maladaptive, and cause significant social or occupational impairment, or significant
subjective distress.
Although personal distress may occur in some
personality disorders, classically the abnormal personality traits are ‘ego-syntonic’. This is in sharp
contrast to the symptoms in neurotic disorders, which
are ego-dystonic and hence cause significant distress
to the patient. So, unlike the patients with neurotic
disorders, several personality disorder patients do not
usually seek psychiatric help unless other psychiatric
symptoms co-exist.
Although personality disorders are usually recognisable by early adolescence, they are not typically diagnosed before early adult life. The symptoms
continue unchanged through the adult life and usually
become less obvious in the later years of life (after 40
years of age).
The life-time prevalence of personality disorders
in the general population is about 5-10%. Often
symptoms of more than one personality disorder are
present in one person. In fact, it is now believed that
the occurrence of mixed personality disorders (i.e.

co-morbidity) is commoner than single (pure) personality disorders.
In DSM-IV-TR, the personality disorders (and
traits) are coded on Axis II (on the multi-axial system)
(see Chapter 1) and have been divided into three
clusters.
Cluster A contains disorders which are thought
to be “odd and eccentric” and on a “schizophreniccontinuum”. These include Paranoid, Schizoid and
Schizotypal personality disorders.
Cluster B consists of disorders considered “dramatic, emotional and erratic” and on a “psychopathic
continuum”. These include Antisocial (or Dissocial),
Histrionic, Narcissistic and Borderline (or Emotionally Unstable) personality disorders.
Cluster C has disorders considered “anxious and
fearful” and characterised by “introversion”. These
include Anxious (Avoidant), Dependent and Obsessive
Compulsive (or Anankastic) personality disorders.
In addition to these three clusters, some other
personality disorders such as passive-aggressive
personality disorder and depressive personality disorder have been included in the section on ‘Criteria
provided for further study’ in DSM-IV-TR. In ICD-10,
the personality disorders are listed under the section
on ‘Disorders of adult personality and behaviour’.

Diagnosis
According to ICD-10, the diagnostic guidelines for
specific personality disorder include conditions not
directly attributable to gross brain damage or disease,


<<<PAGE 126>>>
114

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

or to another psychiatric disorder, meeting the following criteria.
1. Markedly disharmonious attitudes and behaviour,
involving usually several areas of functioning,
e.g. affectivity, arousal, impulse control, ways of
perceiving and thinking, and style of relating to
others;
2. The abnormal behaviour pattern is enduring, of
long standing, and not limited to episodes of
mental illness;
3. The abnormal behaviour pattern is pervasive and
clearly maladaptive to a broad range of personal
and social situations;
4. The above manifestations always appear during
childhood or adolescence and continue into adulthood;
5. The disorder leads to considerable personal distress but this may only become apparent late in its
course;
6. The disorder is usually, but not invariably, associated with significant problems in occupational and
social performance.

Clinical Subtypes
Paranoid Personality Disorder
According to ICD-10, the diagnostic guidelines for
paranoid personality disorder include the following
features (in addition to features of personality disorders in general, described above).
Clear evidence is usually required of the presence of at least three out of seven traits or behaviours
given in the clinical description in ICD-10. These
traits include excessive sensitiveness, tendency to
persistently bear grudges, significant suspiciousness,
a combative and tenacious sense of personal ‘right’,
recurrent suspicions about fidelity of partner without
justification, tendency to experience excessive selfimportance, and preoccupation with unsubstantiated
‘conspiratorial’ explanations of events.
The patients may become involved in litigation on
small issues. The disorder is commoner in men, and it
is more common in minority groups and immigrants.

Psychodynamically, the underlying defense mechanism is projection.
Paranoid personality disorder is common in the
premorbid personality of some patients of paranoid
schizophrenia. However whether its presence predisposes to the development of paranoid schizophrenia
is not known. The differential diagnosis is from
delusional (paranoid) disorders and paranoid schizophrenia.
Treatment
1. Individual psychotherapy.
2. Supportive psychotherapy.
The response to treatment is usually poor. The
patients often do not seek treatment on their own
and may resent treatment. Drug treatment has a very
limited role.

Schizoid Personality Disorder
According to ICD-10, the diagnostic guidelines for
schizoid personality disorder include the following
features (in addition to the general features of personality disorders). Clear evidence is usually required
of the presence of at least three out of nine traits or
behaviours given in the clinical description. These
traits include emotional coldness, lack of pleasure
from activities, limited capacity to express feelings
towards others, apparent indifference to praise or
criticism, little interest in sexual experiences, preference for solitary activities, excessive preoccupation
with fantasy and introspection, lack of close friends,
and marked insensitivity to prevailing social norms
and conventions.
The features of this disorder may overlap with
paranoid and schizotypal personality disorders, which
too belong to the Cluster-A. Psychotic features are
typically absent. The disorder is usually more common
in men.
Psychodynamically, the disorder is supposed to
result from ‘cold and aloof’ parenting in a child with
introverted temperament. However, this hypothesis is
far from proven in the research conducted so far.
Like all personality disorders, schizoid personality
disorder has an onset in early childhood with stable


<<<PAGE 127>>>
Disorders of Adult Personality and Behaviour

course over the years. Earlier, it was believed to predispose to the development of schizophrenia, but later
studies have failed to replicate the findings.
Treatment
1. Individual psychotherapy.
2. Psychoanalysis or psychoanalytical psychotherapy.
3. Gradual involvement in group psychotherapy.
The patients often do not seek treatment on their
own. The response to treatment is usually not good.
Drug treatment clearly has a very limited role.

Schizotypal (Personality) Disorder
According to ICD-10, this disorder is not classified
under specific personality disorders but instead along
with schizophrenia. However, in DSM-IV-TR, it is
considered to be a personality disorder.
The diagnostic guidelines for schizotypal (personality) disorder include the following features. A
disorder characterised by eccentric behaviour, and
anomalies of thinking and affect, which resemble
those seen in schizophrenia, though no definite and
characteristic schizophrenic anomalies have occurred
at any stage. At least three or four out of nine should
be present continuously or episodically for a period of
at least 2 years. These include inappropriate or constricted affect, odd, eccentric, or peculiar behaviour,
poor rapport with others and social withdrawal, odd
beliefs or magical thinking, suspiciousness or paranoid
ideas, obsessive ruminations without inner resistance,
unusual perceptual experiences, vague, circumstantial,
metaphorical, or stereotyped thinking, and occasional
transient quasi-psychotic episodes (with intense illusions, hallucinations, and delusion-like ideas).
This disorder lies between schizoid personality
disorder and schizophrenia on a schizophrenic continuum. Differentiation from simple schizophrenia,
schizoid personality disorder, and paranoid personality disorder is not clearly demarcated. It is more
commonly seen in individuals related to patients
with schizophrenia and is believed to be a part of
the genetic ‘spectrum’ of schizophrenia. However,
its onset, evolution and course are usually those of a
personality disorder. It usually runs a chronic course.

115

Treatment
The response to treatment is usually poor, except for
brief psychotic episodes.
1. Psychoanalysis or psychoanalytical psychotherapy.
2. Individual psychotherapy.
3. Drug therapy: Antipsychotics have been used without much benefit. The role of antipsychotics in the
treatment is limited to brief psychotic episodes.

Antisocial or Dissocial Personality Disorder
According to ICD-10, the diagnostic guidelines for
dissocial (antisocial) personality disorder include the
following clinical features. Clear evidence is usually
required of the presence of at least three of six traits
or behaviours given in the clinical description. This
disorder is synonymous with previously used terms
such as psychopathy and sociopathy, but does not
always mean criminal behaviour. These traits include
callous unconcern for the feelings of others, gross and
persistent attitude of irresponsibility and disregard
for social norms, rules and obligations, incapacity to
maintain enduring relationships, very low tolerance
to frustration and a low threshold for discharge of
aggression, incapacity to experience guilt and to profit
from experience, particularly punishment, and marked
proneness to blame others.
There may also be persistent irritability as an
associated feature. History of conduct disorder in
childhood and adolescence, though not invariably
present, may further support the diagnosis. There are
no psychotic features in this disorder.
Earlier antisocial personality disorder or psychopathy was divided into four clinical types, namely:
1. Aggressive psychopath,
2. Inadequate psychopath,
3. Creative psychopath, and
4. Sexual psychopath.
As these are not discrete groups and their characteristic symptoms merge with one another, they are
no longer classified in this manner. Although no clear
aetiology is known, several genetic, environmental
and biological factors are associated with this disorder.
These factors include more than a ‘normal’ prevalence


<<<PAGE 128>>>
116

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

of antisocial personality disorder in father; presence
of impulsive and inconsistent parents; presence of soft
neurological signs, nonspecific EEG abnormalities;
and presence of conduct and/or attention deficit disorder in childhood.
This disorder is diagnosed more commonly in
males. The course is usually chronic; however, there
is some decrease in the symptoms after the fifth decade
of life in some patients.
Treatment
Patients often do not seek psychiatric help and if they
do, it is usually under pressure from the legal authorities. The therapeutic alliance is often not sustained.
The treatment methods include:
1. Individual psychotherapy.
2. Psychoanalysis or psychoanalytical psychotherapy.
3. Group psychotherapy and self-help groups.
4. Drug therapy: Pharmacotherapy is of little help.
Earlier claims of beneficial effect of pericyazine
(an antipsychotic drug) in certain behaviour
patterns of antisocial personality disorder have
not been substantiated.

Histrionic Personality Disorder
According to ICD-10, the diagnostic guidelines for
histrionic personality disorder include the following
clinical features. Clear evidence is usually required
of the presence of at least three of six traits or behaviours given in the clinical description. These include
self-dramatisation and exaggerated expression of
emotions, suggestibility (easily influenced by others),
shallow and labile affectivity, continual attentionseeking attitude, inappropriate seductiveness, and
over-concern with physical attractiveness. Associated
features may include egocentricity, self-indulgence,
continuous longing for appreciation, feelings that are
easily hurt, and persistent manipulative behaviour to
achieve own needs.
Tantrums or anger outbursts are common. The actions are not planned for any long-term goals; instead
they seek instant satisfaction and approval. Exhibitionistic traits such as dressing flamboyantly, mannerisms

of speech and motor behaviour are present. There is
an attempt to look charming, beautiful and seductive.
Suicidal gestures may be made at times. Interpersonal
relationships are often stormy and ungratifying.
This disorder is more common in female gender.
Hysteria (conversion and dissociation disorder) was
previously thought to be more common in the presence
of histrionic personality disorder, but recent studies
have failed to prove this relationship. Psychodynamically, there are usually intense dependency needs. The
defense mechanisms used most often are acting out
and dissociation.
Treatment
Psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic psychotherapy are
the modes of treatment which are most successful.

Narcissistic Personality Disorder
A relatively new concept in classification, this disorder
is characterised by:
1. Ideas of grandiosity and inflated sense of selfimportance.
2. Preoccupation with fantasies of unlimited
success.
3. Attention seeking, dramatic behaviour, needs
constant praise, and unable to face criticism.
4. Lack of empathy with others, with exploitative
behaviour.
5. Shaky self-esteem, underlying sense of inferiority,
easily depressed by minor events.
Treatment
Psychodynamic/psychoanalytical psychotherapy is
the treatment of choice in a psychologically-minded
patient.

Emotionally Unstable Personality Disorder
According to ICD-10, emotionally unstable personality disorder is described as a disorder in which there
is a marked tendency to act impulsively without consideration of the consequences, together with affective
instability. This disorder is further classified into two
types: Impulsive type and borderline type.
The impulsive type is characterised by emotional
instability and lack of impulse control. Outbursts of


<<<PAGE 129>>>
Disorders of Adult Personality and Behaviour

violence or threatening behaviour are common, particularly in response to criticism by others.
The borderline type is characterised by emotional
instability. In addition, patient’s own self-image, aims,
and internal preferences (including sexual) are often
unclear or disturbed. There are usually chronic feelings of emptiness. A liability to become involved in
intense and unstable relationships may cause repeated
emotional crises and may be associated with excessive
efforts to avoid abandonment and a series of suicidal
threats or acts of self-harm, (although these may occur
without obvious precipitants).
The borderline type is also known as borderline
personality disorder (DSM-IV-TR), the characteristic
features of which include the following:
1. Significant and persistent disturbance of identity of
self, e.g. ‘who am I’. There is marked uncertainty
about major issues in life.
2. Unstable and intense interpersonal relationship
patterns.
3. Impulsivity.
4. Unstable emotional responses, with rapid shifts.
Anger outbursts may occur.
5. Chronic feelings of boredom or emptiness with
inability to stay alone.
6. Deliberate self-harm is common in the form of
self-mutilation, suicidal gestures, or accidentproneness.
The term borderline personality disorder currently
includes ambulatory schizophrenia and pseudoneurotic schizophrenia, which were earlier thought to
be subtypes of schizophrenia. Psychodynamically,
splitting is the primary defense mechanism employed
in borderline personality disorder.
There is a considerable overlap between borderline, narcissistic and antisocial (dissocial) personality
disorders (they belong to the same Cluster of personality disorders, i.e. Cluster B). Major depressive
episodes occur commonly in this disorder.
Treatment
1. Psychoanalysis or psychoanalytical psychotherapy.
2. Supportive psychotherapy.

117

3. Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) or dialectical
behaviour therapy (DBT) approaches or principles
have been used with some success in treatment.
4. Drug therapy: Antidepressants have been used
with success in certain patients with depression.
Major depressive episode, if occurs, necessitates
antidepressant therapy. Occasionally antipsychotics, lithium, valproate or carbamazepine have
been used when aggression or impulsivity are
prominent.
Drug therapy is not the treatment of first choice
in borderline personality disorder.

Anxious (Avoidant) Personality Disorder
According to ICD-10, the diag nostic guidelines
for anxious (avoidant) personality disorder include
the following features. Clear evidence is usually
required of the presence of at least three of six traits
or behaviours given in the clinical description.
These include persistent and pervasive feelings of
tension and apprehension, belief that one is socially
inept, personally unappealing, or inferior to others,
excessive preoccupation with being criticised or rejected in social situations, unwillingness to become
involved with people unless certain of being liked,
restrictions in lifestyle because of need to have
physical security, and avoidance of social or occupational activities that involve significant inter-personal
contact because of fear of criticism, disapproval, or
rejection.
Associated features may include hypersensitivity
to rejection and criticism. These patients do not enter
into interpersonal relationships unless they are very
sure of uncritical approval. This disorder is an epitome
of what is often called as inferiority complex. Understandably, secondary depression is very common.
Treatment
1. Individual psychotherapy.
2. Group psychotherapy.
3. Behaviour therapy: In particular, social skills
training and assertiveness training are useful.
4. CBT: The focus is on negative thoughts and negative self-appraisal.


<<<PAGE 130>>>
118

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Dependent Personality Disorder
According to ICD-10, the diagnostic guidelines for
dependent personality disorder include the following
features. Clear evidence is usually required of the presence of at least three of six traits or behaviours given in
the clinical description. These include allowing others
to make decisions for them, subordination of one’s
own needs to those of others and undue compliance
with their wishes, unwillingness to make even reasonable demands on the people one depends on, feeling
uncomfortable or helpless when alone, preoccupation
with fears of being abandoned by a person with whom
one has a close relationship, and limited capacity to
make everyday decisions without an excessive amount
of advice and reassurance from others.
Associated features may include perceiving oneself as helpless, incompetent, and lacking stamina.
There may be an overlap with avoidant and passiveaggressive personality disorders. Some patients
exhibit masochistic character. They repetitively
establish close interpersonal relationships which result
in punishment.
Treatment
1. Individual psychotherapy.
2. Group psychotherapy.
3. Behaviour therapy (such as assertiveness training
and social skills training) is often useful.
4. CBT: The focus is on negative thoughts and negative self-appraisal.

Obsessive-Compulsive (Anankastic)
Personality Disorder
According to ICD-10, the diagnostic guidelines for
anankastic personality disorder include the following
clinical features. Clear evidence is usually required
of the presence of at least three of eight traits or
behaviours given in the clinical description. These
include feelings of excessive doubt, preoccupation
with details, perfectionism that interferes with task
completion, excessive conscientiousness, excessive
pedantry and adherence to social conventions, rigidity and stubbornness, unreasonable insistence that

others submit to exactly their way of doing things,
and intrusion of insistent and unwelcome thoughts
or impulses.
This disorder is more often diagnosed in males,
and is common in premorbid personality of patients
with obsessive compulsive disorder. Major depressive episodes are frequent. Psychodynamically, this
disorder is believed to result from fixation at the anal
sadistic phase, with the employment of reaction formation as a defense mechanism.
Treatment
These patients usually retain insight, and hence seek
psychiatric help on their own.
1. Psychoanalysis or psychoanalytical psychotherapy.
2. Group psychotherapy.

Passive-Aggressive Personality Disorder
This disorder is not listed as a personality disorder in
both ICD-10 and DSM-IV-TR, though it is listed in
DSM-IV-TR under the section on ‘Criteria provided
for further study’. It is characterised by the following
clinical features:
1. Significant and persistent passive resistance to
demands for adequate social and occupational
performance.
2. Stubbornness, intentional inefficiency, procrastination, unjustified protests, ‘forgetfulness’ and/or
dawdling are used to achieve the purpose.
Passive resistance is viewed as an expression of
‘covert anger’ or ‘retroflexed anger’. This behaviour
is often ‘chosen’ in spite of the fact that a more direct
and active way of showing an opinion and/or resisting
was possible. An overlap with dependent personality
disorder is common. Secondary depression may
develop.
Treatment
1. Supportive psychotherapy.
2. Behaviour therapy: Social skills training and
assertiveness training are helpful.
3. Group therapy.
4. Drug therapy: Antidepressants may be needed for
secondary depression.


<<<PAGE 131>>>
Disorders of Adult Personality and Behaviour

ENDURING PERSONALITY CHANGES,
NOT ATTRIBUTABLE TO BRAIN
DAMAGE AND DISEASE
This new category in ICD-10 includes disorders of
adult personality and behaviour which develop following catastrophic or excessive prolonged stress, or
following a severe psychiatric illness, in people with
no personality disorder. The presence of brain damage
or disease which may cause similar clinical features
should be ruled out.

HABIT AND IMPULSE DISORDERS
This category includes disorders such as pathological
gambling, pyromania, kleptomania, trichotillomania,
and intermittent explosive disorder. The disorders
in this heterogeneous group are characterised by
impulsive behaviour which the patient cannot resist or
control. There may be a feeling of release of tension by
doing the act and a feeling of guilt after the act is over.
Pathological gambling is characterised by two or
more episodes of gambling per year which have no
profitable outcome, but are continued despite personal
distress and interference with personal functioning in
daily living. The person has an intense urge to gamble
which is difficult to control and cannot stop gambling
by effort of will. Preoccupation with thoughts or
mental images of gambling and situations surrounding
gambling is often present.
Pyromania (pathological fire-setting) is characterised by two or more acts of fire-setting without an
apparent motive. There is an intense urge to set fire to
objects, with a feeling of tension before the act and a
sense of relief afterwards. There is often a preoccupation with thoughts or mental images of fire-setting and
situations surrounding fire-setting.
Kleptomania (pathological stealing) is characterised by two or more thefts, in which there is stealing
without apparent motive of personal gain or gain for
another person. There is an intense urge to steal, with
a feeling of tension before the act and a sense of relief
afterwards.

119

Trichotillomania (compulsive hair-pulling) is
characterised by noticeable hair loss caused by person’s persistent and recurrent failure to resist impulses
to pullout hair. There is an intense urge to pull out hair
with mounting tension before the act and a sense of
relief afterwards. There is no pre-existent skin lesion
or inflammation, and hair pulling is not secondary to
any delusion or hallucination.
The management of impulse control disorders
consists of behaviour therapy (e.g. aversion therapy),
cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT), individual psychotherapy, and occasionally pharmacotherapy (e.g.
carbamazepine for intermittent explosive disorder;
fluoxetine for trichotillomania).

GENDER IDENTITY DISORDERS
These disorders of adult personality and behaviour
are discussed in detail in Chapter 10.

DISORDERS OF SEXUAL PREFERENCE
These disorders of adult personality and behaviour
are discussed in detail in Chapter 10.

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND BEHAVIOURAL
DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH SEXUAL
DEVELOPMENT AND ORIENTATION
These disorders of adult personality and behaviour
are discussed in detail in Chapter 10.

FACTITIOUS DISORDER
(MUNCHAUSEN SYNDROME)
Munchausen syndrome (also known variously
as hospital addiction, hospital hoboes, or professional patients) is used for those patients who
repeatedly simulate or fake diseases for the sole
purpose of obtaining medical attention. There is no
other recognisable motive (hence, it is different from
malingering).


<<<PAGE 132>>>
120

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Factitious disorders can present with predominantly physical signs and symptoms, or psychological
signs and symptoms, or combined signs and symptoms.
The patients distort their clinical histories, laboratory
tests’ reports, and even facts about other aspects of
their lives (pseudologia fantastica). Sometimes, they
distort physical signs by self-inflicted injuries and
secondary infections. Drug abuse, especially abuse
of prescription drugs, is common.
These patients often have a detailed though
superficial knowledge of many medical terms and
procedures. Evidence of earlier treatment, usually
surgical procedures, is often available in the form
of multiple scars (e.g. ‘grid-iron abdomen’). These
patients are often manipulative and convincingly tell
lies, create problems in the inpatient setting and often
leave against medical advice, usually after the surgical
procedure has been performed.

The cause is not clear. Probably these patients are
masochistic, seek dependency from a father-figure
(e.g. the physician), attempt to manoeuvre control
over the father-figure and see the surgical procedure
as partial suicide. The early childhood of these patients is characterised by deprivation and neglect.
The prognosis is usually poor and treatment often
unsuccessful.
Certain points must be kept in mind by the physician (or surgeon), after the diagnosis has been made.
These include:
1. Avoid the feelings of anger, hostility and ridicule
which are aroused by the discovery of factitious
illness.
2. Patients should not be confronted or labelled as
liars. Instead, a psychiatric or psychological consultation should be sought, as these patients may
need help.
3. Of course, the unnecessary surgical procedure(s)
should not be carried out.


<<<PAGE 133>>>
10
The sexual disorders can be classified into four main
types:
1. Gender identity disorders.
2. Psychological and behavioural disorders associated with sexual development and maturation.
3. Paraphilias (disorders of sexual preference).
4. Sexual dysfunctions.
In ICD-10, gender identity disorders, disorders of
sexual preference, and sexual development and orientation disorders are listed under the disorders of adult
personality and behaviour, while sexual dysfunctions
(not caused by organic disorder or disease) are listed
under the behavioural syndromes associated with
physiological disturbances and physical factors.

GENDER IDENTITY DISORDERS
These disorders are characterised by disturbance in
gender identity, i.e. the sense of one’s masculinity or
femininity is disturbed. This group includes:
1. Transexualism: Male and female; primary and
secondary.
2. Gender identity disorder of childhood.
3. Dual-role transvestism.
4. Intersexuality.

Transexualism
Transexualism, the severest form of gender identity
disorders, is characterised by the following clinical
features:

Sexual Disorders
1. Normal anatomic sex.
2. Persistent and significant sense of discomfort
regarding one’s anatomic sex and a feeling that it
is inappropriate to one’s perceived-gender.
3. Marked preoccupation with the wish to get rid of
one’s genitals and secondary sex characteristics,
and to adopt sex characteristics of the other sex
(perceived-gender).
4. Diagnosis is made after puberty.
Transexualism is of two main types: Primary and
secondary.

Primary Transexualism
This condition has an onset in early childhood and
has a stable course over time. This is a relatively
homogeneous category. Primary transexuals, more
than secondary transexuals, are preoccupied with
sex-change or sex-reassignment surgery. There are
two main types:
i. Male (or, male-to-female) primary transexualism.
ii. Female (or, female-to-male) primary transexualism.

Secondary Transexualism
In contrast to the primary type, secondary transexualism usually has an onset later in life. This is a
less severe and more heterogeneous category. The
only common feature is a wish to change the anatomic sex.


<<<PAGE 134>>>
122

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

This category includes effeminate homosexuals,
transvestites who secondarily become transexuals
and others. A majority of these patients are male
(or, male-to-female) transexuals. The prevalence of
transexualism is 1:100,000 in males and 1:400,000
in females.

Differential Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis is from the following conditions:
Transvestism (Fetishistic Transvestism)
Transvestism (or fetishistic cross-dressing) is the
wearing or using of clothes traditionally of the other
gender (cross-dressing), for the purpose of sexual
excitement. This is almost exclusively seen in males.
In contrast, transexuals wear clothes of other sex,
because they feel a part of the other sex and, not for
sexual excitement.
Cross-gender Homosexuality
Effeminate male homosexuals and masculine female
homosexuals sometimes cross-dress and occasionally
want a sex-change (called pseudo-transexualism). But
unlike true primary transexualism, these patients do
not feel a part of the other sex and always acknowledge themselves as homosexuals (This is in contrast
to transexualism. For example, a male transexual
who feels like a female, even if he has a homosexual
relationship with another male, justifies it as heterosexual because ‘he himself feels like a female’), and
seek sex-change only rarely, to rationalise or justify
their primary homosexual behaviour.

Treatment
The treatment can aim at two opposite ends by either
making the person reconcile with the anatomic sex,
or arrange sex-change to the desired gender.
Reconciliation with the Anatomic Sex
There are only occasional reports of achieving this
purpose in primary transexuals. However, in secondary transexuals, this method may be more effective
and should be employed first if possible though this
decision is best made by the patient.

The methods include:
i. Psychotherapy.
ii. Behaviour therapy.
Sex-change to the Desired Gender
This procedure is known as sex reassignment
surgery (SRS). The first procedure was done in
1951 (Denmark) on an American soldier, George
Jorgensen who become Christine Jorgensen after
SRS. The first female-to-male SRS was performed
in 1956.
The procedures include hormonal treatment, phalloplasty, castration, mastectomy, and hysterectomy
with salpingo-ophorectomy, which have been used in
different combinations. The procedure is performed
more often in primary transexuals.
As SRS is an almost irreversible process, the following steps are taken before assigning a patient to
surgery:
1. The diagnosis of primary, stable, long-standing
transexualism is confirmed.
2. A possibility of stress-induced transexualism is
considered and eliminated.
3. The patient has to undergo psychotherapy for at
least 3-6 months preoperatively.
4. Experimental trial in the new gender role preoperatively, to assess patient’s ability to adjust in
the ‘new’ role.
5. The limitations of SRS should be explained, e.g.
infertility, nonfunctional testes, etc.
The success rate in carefully planned SRS can
be up to 80-90%. Postoperative psychotherapy is of
utmost importance in prevention of psychiatric morbidity.

Dual-role Transvestism
Dual-role transvestism is characterised by wearing
of clothes of the opposite sex in order to enjoy the
temporary experience of membership of the opposite
sex, but without any desire for a more permanent sex
change (unlike transexualism). No sexual excitement
accompanies the cross-dressing (unlike in fetishistic
transvestism).


<<<PAGE 135>>>
Sexual Disorders

Gender-identity Disorder of Childhood
This is a disorder similar to transexualism, with a very
early age of onset (2-4 years of age). This is characterised by the following clinical features:
1. Persistent and significant desire to be of the other
gender, or insistence on being of the other gender.
2. Marked distress regarding the anatomic sex, with
strong denial of anatomic sex (in contrast, there
is no denial of anatomic sex in transexualism).
3. Involvement in traditional activities, games and
clothing pattern of the perceived gender.
4. Onset before puberty.
Although a majority of primary transexuals have
gender-identity disorder of childhood in their past
history, only a very few of the children with genderidentity disorder, in prospective studies, actually
develop transexualism.
Treatment
Treatment of gender identity disorders is similar to
transexualism. When the anatomic sex and the genderidentity are opposing, decision on treatment should be
based on the gender-identity of the patient.

Inter-sexuality
The patients with this disorder have gross anatomical
and/or physiological aspects of the other sex. These
aspects can be in:
1. External genitals, e.g. pseudo-hermaphroditism.
2. Gonads, e.g. ovotestes.
3. Internal sex organs, e.g. true hermaphrodite.
4. Hormonal disturbances, e.g. testicular feminisation syndrome, congenital adrenal hypoplasia.
5. Chromosomes, e.g. Turner ’s syndrome,
Klinefelter’s syndrome.

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND BEHAVIOURAL
DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH SEXUAL
DEVELOPMENT AND MATURATION
Disorders of sexual development and maturation include disorders where sexual orientation (heterosexual,

123

homosexual, or bisexual) causes significant distress
to the individual or disturbances in the relationships.
It is important to remember that any type of sexual
orientation by itself is not a disorder unless it causes
distress or disability.

Sexual Maturation Disorder
This disorder usually begins in adolescence and is
characterised by uncertainty regarding the gender
identity or sexual orientation (heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual). This uncertainty often leads to
anxiety and depression. Sometimes, this disorder
arises for the time in an individual after a period of
apparently stable sexual orientation.

Egodystonic Sexual Orientation
In this disorder, the sexual orientation is clear. However, the individual wishes to change the orientation
because of the associated distress and/or psychological
symptoms. This disorder is seen most commonly in
homosexuality.

Homosexuality
Homosexuality, in contrast to heterosexuality, is the
sexual relationship between persons of the same sex.
This is a disorder only when it is the predominant,
significant and persistent mode of sexual relationship
for that person and it is ego-dystonic (causes significant distress to the individual).
It is obviously of two types: Male homosexuality,
and female homosexuality. Female homosexuals are
also called as lesbians or sapphic after Sappho, a
female homosexual who lived on the Isle of Lesbos
in ancient Greece, while male homosexuals are called
gay.
The prevalence of homosexuality (in USA) is
4-6% of males and 1-2% of females. Another 5-10%
may show bisexual orientation. Homosexual behaviour can be divided into the following types:
1. Obligatory homosexuality
• Only homosexuality
• No heterosexuality.


<<<PAGE 136>>>
124

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

2. Preferred homosexuality
• Predominant homosexuality
• Occasional heterosexuality.
3. Bisexuality
• Almost equal homosexuality and heterosexuality.
4. Situational homosexuality
• Predominant heterosexuality
• Occasional homosexuality.
5. Latent homosexuality
• Only heterosexuality
• Fantasies of homosexuality.
Last few decades have seen a raging controversy
on whether homosexuality is a normal phenomenon
or a psychiatric disorder. At first, homosexuality was
divided into two types (DSM-III, 1980):
1. Ego-syntonic homosexuality (no distress about
homosexual behaviour).
2. Ego-dystonic homosexuality (associated with
marked distress), and only ego-dystonic type was
called abnormal.
Later (DSM-III-R, 1987), homosexuality was
completely dropped from the psychiatric nomenclature, under social and political pressure. DSM-IVTR does not list homosexuality as a disorder, while
ICD-10 only mentions homosexuality under egodystonic sexual orientation.
Treatment
Some people with homosexual orientation, who have
significant distress about their homosexual orientation
and themselves seek psychiatric help, should be
offered treatment.
At present, the treatment is generally offered under
the following conditions only.
1. Self-referral by a person with homosexual orientation, for seeking a change in the sexual orientation
towards heterosexuality.
2. Self-referral by a person with homosexual orientation, for removal of distress associated with
homosexuality but not for a change in sexual
orientation.
3. Referred by parents, relatives or significant others.
However, treatment can generally be offered only
if the individual seeks help.

1. For seeking a Change in Sexual Orientation
The methods employed include:
i. Psychoanalytic psychotherapy (especially when
associated with personality issues).
ii. Behaviour therapy: Aversion therapy (rarely
used), covert sensitisation, systematic desensitisation (especially if there is a phobia of
heterosexual relationship).
iii. Supportive psychotherapy.
iv. Androgen therapy (occasionally).
2. For Seeking Removal of Distress Only
The following methods may be useful:
i. Psychotherapy: Psychoanalytic and supportive,
depending on the personality character.
ii. Drug therapy: Antidepressants and/or benzodiazepines can be used for treatment of associated
depression and anxiety.
3. Referred by Others
The decision regarding treatment for this group is
highly debatable. The opinions range from ‘no treatment at all’ to ‘treatment as early as possible’. The final
approach depends on the sociocultural background of
the patient and the viewpoint of the therapist.
The current viewpoint is that the individuals
should be informed regarding sexuality and sexual
orientation in as much detail as they wish and the final
decision of choosing the sexual orientation should be
left to the individual. Obviously, further treatment
would depend on that final choice. The individual’s
motivation and presence of significant distress are
important factors in therapy.

Sexual Relationship Disorder
The gender identity disorder or disorder of sexual
preference leads to difficulties in establishing and/or
maintaining sexual relationships. In such a case, both
diagnoses should be made.

PARAPHILIAS (DISORDERS OF SEXUAL
PREFERENCE)
Paraphilias ( sexual deviations; perversions) are
disorders of sexual preference in which sexual arousal
occurs persistently and significantly in response to


<<<PAGE 137>>>
Sexual Disorders

objects which are not a part of normal sexual arousal
(e.g. nonhuman objects; suffering or humiliation of
self and/or sexual partner; children or nonconsenting
person).
These disorders include: Fetishism; fetishistic
transvestism; sexual sadism; sexual masochism;
exhibitionism; voyeurism; frotteurism; pedophilia;
zoophilia (bestiality); and others.

Fetishism
In fetishism, the sexual arousal occurs either solely
or predominantly with a nonliving object, which is
usually intimately associated with the human body.
The word fetish means magical, i.e. the nonliving
object ‘magically’ becomes phallic for that person.
This disorder is almost exclusively seen in males.
The fetish object may include shoes, gloves, bras,
underpants, stockings, etc.
Fetishism is not diagnosed if the sexual object
is the wearing of clothes of opposite sex (fetishistic
transvestism), the use of a human body part (masturbation), or the use of a genital-stimulating object (e.g.
vibrator). Fetishism is very often associated with
masturbation.

Fetishistic Transvestism
This disorder occurs exclusively in heterosexual
males. The person actually or in fantasy wears clothes
of the opposite sex (cross-dressing) for sexual arousal.
This disorder should be differentiated from dual-role
transvestism and transexualism.
This disorder may be associated with fantasies of
other males approaching the person who is in a female
dress. Masturbation or rarely coitus is associated
with cross-dressing to achieve orgasm. To be called
a disorder, this should be a persistent and significant
mode of sexual arousal in the person.

Sexual Sadism
In this disorder, the person (the ‘sadist’) is sexually
aroused by physical and/or psychological humiliation,
suffering or injury of the sexual partner (the ‘victim’).
Most often the person inflicting the suffering is male,

125

although this is not essential. The methods used range
from restraining by tying, beating, burning, cutting,
stabbing, to rape and even killing.

Sexual Masochism
This is just the reverse of sexual sadism. Here the person (the ‘masochist’) is sexually aroused by physical
and/or psychological humiliation, suffering or injury
inflicted on self by others (usually ‘sadists’). Most
often the masochist is a female though any pattern is
possible. The methods used are the same as the ones
used in sexual sadism. Only there is a role reversal.
To be called a disorder, this should be a persistent
and significant mode of sexual arousal in the person.
Sexual sadism and sexual masochism are often seen
in the same individual and are on a continuum; therefore they are classified together as sadomasochism in
ICD-10.

Exhibitionism
Exhibitionism is a persistent (or recurrent) and
significant method of sexual arousal by the exposure
of one’s genitalia to an unsuspecting stranger.
This is often followed by masturbation to achieve
orgasm. The disorder is almost exclusively seen in
males, and the ‘unsuspecting stranger’ is usually a
female (child or adult).

Voyeurism
This is a persistent or recurrent tendency to observe
unsuspecting persons (usually of the other sex) naked,
disrobing or engaged in sexual activity.
This is often followed by masturbation to achieve
orgasm without the observed person(s) being aware.
This is almost always seen in males. Watching pornography is not included here.

Frotteurism
This is a persistent or recurrent involvement in the
act of touching and rubbing against an unsuspecting,
nonconsenting person (usually of the other sex).
Frottage is often employed in crowded places, e.g.
buses, where the victim does not protest because she


<<<PAGE 138>>>
126

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

cannot suspect that frottage can be committed there.
This is often seen in adolescent males.

4. Other treatments: Castration and psychosurgery
are extremely rare choices these days.

Paedophilia

SEXUAL DYSFUNCTIONS

Paedophilia is a persistent or recurrent involvement of
an adult (age >16 years and at least 5 years older than
the child) in sexual activity with prepubertal children,
either heterosexual or homosexual.
This may be associated with sexual sadism.
The paedophilic behaviour may be either limited to
incest or may spread to children outside the family.
In most civilised societies, paedophilia is a serious
offense and the convicted paedophile’s name remains
on a sex offenders’ register in order to protect the
society.

Sexual dysfunction is a significant disturbance in the
sexual response cycle, which is not due to an underlying organic cause.
To understand sexual dysfunction, a brief outline
of normal human sexual response cycle is in order
(Table 10.1). In the light of normal human sexual
response cycle, it is easier to understand sexual dysfunctions.
The common dysfunctions include the following:

Zoophilia (Bestiality)
Zoophilia as a persistent and significant involvement
in sexual activity with animals is rare. Occasional or
situational zoophilia is much more common.

Other Paraphilias
These include sexual arousal with urine (urophilia);
faeces (coprophilia); enemas (klismaphilia); corpses
(necrophilia), among many others.

Treatment
1. Psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic psychotherapy: This is of particular help if the patient is
psychologically minded and has good ego strength
for therapy.
2. Behaviour therapy: Aversion therapy is the treatment of choice in severe, distressing paraphilia,
with the patient’s consent.
3. Drug therapy: Antipsychotics have sometimes
been used for severe or dangerous aggression
associated with paraphilias. Benperidol was earlier
believed to be particularly useful but the claim
has not been substantiated, and the drug is not
available in the market. Antiandrogens (cyproterone acetate or medroxy-progesterone acetate)
can be used in paraphilias with excessive sexual
activity.

Disorders of Appetitive Phase
(Sexual Desire Disorders)
Hypoactive sexual desire disorder
This disorder is characterised by an absence of fantasies and desire for sexual activity which is not secondary to other sexual dysfunctions, such as premature
ejaculation or dyspareunia. Lack or diminution of
sexual desire does not imply an inability to experience
sexual pleasure; it makes the initiation of sexual act
less likely.
This disorder is many times more common in
females (previously called as frigidity) and its prevalence increases with age. The contributing factors may
include fear of pregnancy, unsatisfactory past sexual
experiences, marital disharmony, or fatigue. If the disorder is secondary to biological factors (such as drugs,
chronic medical illnesses), it should be listed under
‘sexual disorders due to a general medical condition’.
Sexual aversion disorder and lack of sexual
enjoyment disorder
In the sexual aversion disorder, there is an aversion
to and avoidance of all sexual activity with a sexual
partner. The thought of sexual interaction is associated with negative feelings and causes anxiety. The
contributing factors may include history of sexual
abuse/molestation (especially in childhood), unsatisfactory past sexual experiences, or culturally induced
negative feelings towards sexual matters.


<<<PAGE 139>>>
Sexual Disorders

127

Table 10.1: Normal Human Sexual Response Cycle
A normal human sexual response cycle can be divided
into five phases:
1. Appetitive Phase: The phase before the actual sexual
response cycle. This consists of sexual fantasies and
a desire to have sexual activity.
2. Excitement Phase: The first true phase of the cycle,
which starts with physical stimulation and/or by
appetitive phase. The major changes during this
phase are:
Males: Penile erection, due to vasocongestion of
corpus cavernosa; elevation of testes with scrotal sac.
Females: Lubrication of vagina by a transudate; erection of nipples (in most women); erection of clitoris;
thickening of labia minora.
The duration of this phase is highly variable and may
last for several minutes (or longer).
3. Plateau Phase: The intermediate phase just before
actual orgasm, at the height of excitement. It is often
difficult to differentiate the plateau phase from the
excitement phase. The following important changes
occur during this phase:
Males: Sexual flush (inconsistent); autonomic hyperactivity; erection and engorgement of penis to
full size; elevation and enlargement of testes; dew
drops on glans penis (2-3 drops of mucoid fluid with
spermatozoa).
Females: Sexual flush (inconsistent); Autonomic hyperactivity; retraction of clitoris behind the prepuce;
development of orgasmic platform in the lower 1/3rd
of vagina, with lengthening and ballooning of vagina;
enlargement of breasts and labia minora; increased
vaginal transudate.

The duration of this phase may last from half to
several minutes.
4. Orgasmic Phase: The phase with peak of sexual excitement followed by release of sexual tension, and
rhythmic contractions of pelvic reproductive organs.
The important changes are as follows:
Males: 4-10 contractions of penile urethra, prostate,
vas, and seminal vesicles; at about 0.8 sec intervals;
autonomic excitement becomes marked in this
phase. Doubling of pulse rate and respiratory rate,
and 10-40 mm increase in systolic and diastolic BP
occur; ejaculatory inevitability precedes orgasm;
Ejaculatory spurt (30-60 cm; decreases with age);
contractions of external and internal sphincters.
Females: 3-15 contractions of lower 1/3rd of vagina,
cervix and uterus; at about 0.8 sec intervals. No
contractions occur in clitoris; autonomic excitement
becomes marked in this phase. Doubling of pulse
rate and respiratory rate, and 10-40 mm increase
in systolic and diastolic BP occur; contractions of
external and internal sphincters.
The duration of this phase may last from 3-15 seconds.
5. Resolution Phase: This phase is characterised by the
following common features in both sexes: A general
sense of relaxation and well-being, after the slight
clouding of consciousness during the orgasmic phase;
disappearance of sexual flush followed by fine perspiration; gradual decrease in vasocongestion from
sexual organs and rest of the body; refractory period
for further orgasm in males varies from few minutes
to many hours; there is usually no refractory period
in females.

In the lack of sexual enjoyment disorder (sexual
anhedonia), the sexual response is usually normal
(which may include a normal orgasm). However, there
is a feeling of lack of subjective sexual pleasure. This
disorder is more common in females.
Excessive sexual drive
Rarely, both men (satyriasis) and women (nymphomania) may complain of excessive sexual drive as a
problem.

Disorders of Excitement and Plateau
Phase (Sexual Arousal Disorders or
Failure of Genital Response)
Male erectile disorder (Impotence; Erectile
dysfunction)
This disorder is characterised by an inability to have
or sustain penile erection till the completion of satisfactory sexual activity. It is a relatively common
disorder.


<<<PAGE 140>>>
128

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Although a large number of physical disorders
have been aetiologically incriminated in the causation of male erectile disorder, some important ones
are mentioned below. If the disorder is secondary to
biological factors (such as drugs, chronic medical
illnesses), it should be listed under ‘sexual disorders
due to a general medical condition’ (Table 10.2).
Since many drugs impair the normal sexual
functioning and often cause more than one sexual
dysfunction, these are listed separately in Table
10.3. The secondary sexual dysfunction is usually
more profound in males. In cases of male erectile
dysfunction where biological causes have been ruled
out, psychological factors should be considered in
causation.
Psychological impotence usually occurs acutely.
The early morning erections and erections during
REM sleep (nocturnal penile tumescence; NPT) are
usually preserved. These psychological factors may
include one of the following conditions.
1. Ignorance regarding the sexual act.
2. Fear of failure and performance anxiety (e.g. during ‘honeymoon’).
3. Interpersonal difficulties between the sexual partners (e.g. marital conflict).
4. Anxiety disorder.
5. Mood disorder.
6. Masturbatory anxiety (and ‘dhat syndrome’ in
India).
7. Fatigue (e.g. after the day’s hard work).
8. Fear of pregnancy, or sexually transmitted disease.
9. Fear of ‘damaging’ the sexual partner or one-self.
10. Certain environmental factors (e.g. lack of privacy).
11. Lack of a consistent sexual partner.
12. Fear of commitment (in premarital and extramarital sexual relationships).
13. Poor self-image or ‘inferiority complex’.
14. Sexual abuse in childhood.
In many cases of erectile dysfunction, aetiology
can be mixed (i.e. both organic as well as psychogenic
factors can be present).

Table 10.2: Physical Causes of Male Erectile
Disorder/Impotence
I. Local Genital Pathology
1. Priapism
2. Congenital malformations
3. Surgical procedures on pelvic region, e.g. perineal prostatectomy
4. Mumps
5. Elephantiasis
6. Hydrocele or varicocele.
II. Endocrine Disorders
1. Diabetes mellitus
2. Dysfunction of pituitary-adrenal-testis axis
3. Testicular atrophy, e.g. secondary to cirrhosis,
dystrophia myotonica, haemochromatosis
4. Thyroid dysfunction.
III. Neurological Disorders
1. Autonomic neuropathy, e.g. in diabetes mellitus
2. Spinal cord lesions, e.g. transverse myelitis
3. 3rd ventricle tumours
4. Brain damage, especially in temporal lobe
5. Multiple sclerosis.
IV. Cardiovascular Disorders
1. Leriche syndrome.
V. Any Severe or Debilitating Systemic Illness
VI. Alcohol and Drugs.

Female sexual arousal disorder
This disorder is characterised by subjective as well as
objective lack of sexual arousal in the form of lack of
lubrication or vaginal dryness.
The causes can be biological (e.g. postmenopausal) or psychological (uncommon).

Disorders of Orgasmic Phase
(Orgasmic Disorders/Dysfunctions)
Male orgasmic disorder (Male anorgasmia)
Failure or marked difficulty to have orgasm, despite
normal sexual excitement, during coitus. An uncommon disorder, it often presents as retarded ejaculation. The causes can be biological (e.g. post-prostate
surgery, drug-induced) or psychological (e.g. marital
conflicts).


<<<PAGE 141>>>
Sexual Disorders

129

Table 10.3: Sexual Dysfunctions Caused by Drugs
Drugs
I.

Effect on
Sexual Desire

Effect on
Effect on
Erectile Function Ejaculation

Antihypertensives
1. Methyldopa
2. Clonidine
3. Propranolol
4. Thiazide diuretics
5. Spironolactone
6. Guanethidine

Inhibited
—
Inhibited
—
Inhibited
—

Impaired
Impaired
Impaired
Impaired
Impaired
Impaired

7. Hexamethonium

—

Impaired

Inhibited
Inhibited (in males)
Increased (in both sexes)

Impaired
Impaired

Impaired
Impaired

+/–

Impaired

Impaired

+/–

Impaired

Delayed ejaculation

Inhibited

Impaired

Inhibited
—
—
Increased (with low dose,
due to decrease in anxiety)
Decreased (with high dose)
—
—

Impaired
Impaired
Priapism
Impaired (with
high dose)

Retrograde and
Delayed ejaculation
—
—
—
Impaired (with high
dose)

Impaired
—

—
Delayed ejaculation

Increased (with low dose)
Inhibited

Impaired
Impaired (with
high dose)

Impaired
Impaired

Inhibited

Impaired

—

Inhibited
—

—
Impaired

—
Impaired

II. Hormonal Preparations
1. Corticosteroids
2. Oestrogens
3. Androgens
III. Psychotropic Medications
1. Tricyclic antidepressants
and MAO inhibitors
2. SSRI antidepressants
(e.g. paroxetine, fluoxetine)
3. Thioridazine
4.
5.
6.
7.

Chlorpromazine
Haloperidol
Trazodone
Barbiturates and
benzodiazepines

8. Lithium
9. Disulfiram
IV. Psychoactive Substance Use
1. Alcohol
2. Opiates and cocaine
V. Others
1. Anti-inflammatory drugs
(e.g. indomethacin)
2. L-dopa
3. Anticholinergic drugs
(e.g. trihexiphenidyl)

Impaired
Impaired
—
—
Impaired
Impaired; Retrograde
ejaculation
Impaired; Retrograde
ejaculation


<<<PAGE 142>>>
130

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Female orgasmic disorder (Female anorgasmia)
Failure or marked difficulty to have orgasm, despite
normal sexual excitement, during coitus. This is a very
common disorder.
Anorgasmia can be either primary or secondary.
Although the disorder causes marked distress, it is
rarely complained of in the clinical setting, particularly
in India. This is probably due to cultural factors.
The causes can be biological (e.g. endocrinal
disorders such as hypothyroidism, drug-induced) or
psychological (e.g. marital conflicts).
Premature ejaculation
This disorder is defined as ejaculation before the
completion of satisfactory sexual activity for both
partners. In severe cases, it is characterised by ejaculation either before penile entry into vagina or soon
after penetration. It is a very common disorder in the
clinical setting.
The causes can be biological (relatively uncommon) or psychological (e.g. performance anxiety).

Sexual Pain Disorders
Nonorganic vaginismus
This disorder is characterised by an involuntary spasm
of the lower 1/3rd of vagina, interfering with coitus.
Penile entry is either painful or impossible.
Before a presumption of nonorganic vaginismus,
it is important to rule out organic factors (e.g. local
pathology causing pain).
Nonorganic dyspareunia
This disorder is characterised by pain in the genital
area of either male or female, during coitus. Before a
presumption of nonorganic dyspareunia, it is particularly important to rule out organic factors (e.g. local
pathology causing pain) in both males and females.

Sexual Disorders Due to a General
Medical Condition
The disorders listed above may occur secondary to a
general medical condition; they should then be coded
here. These dysfunctions are called disorders only
when they occur recurrently and persistently. Also if
the sexual dysfunction is due to sexual stimulation

being inadequate either in focus, intensity or duration, a diagnosis of excitement and orgasmic phase
disorders is not made.

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis
Before making a diagnosis of sexual dysfunction, it
is of paramount importance to rule out an underlying
physical cause, which would need treatment.
Although the diagnosis is clinical, a detailed physical examination and laboratory investigations (e.g.
blood counts, blood sugar, liver function tests, thyroid
function tests, hormonal profile, and rarely, routine
examination and culture of prostatic fluid) coupled
with a good history is a must in every patient to rule
out an underlying physical cause.
Certain laboratory techniques (e.g. penile plethysmograph, penile tumescence monitoring during sleep)
may help in differentiating organic and nonorganic
sexual dysfunc tions. If NPT ( nocturnal penile
tumescence) is abnormal, then ancillary investigations
such as penile vascular investigations (e.g. penile pulse
pressure, penile Doppler, duplex ultrasonography,
diagnostic intracavernosal vasoactive substance-papaverine injection test, arteriography, DICC-dynamic
infusion cavernosomatogram and cavernosogram,
and cavernosography) and penile neurological investigations (e.g. penile sensory threshold test or penile
biothesiometry) may be employed.
Though searching for an organic factor responsible
for the sexual dysfunction is very important, a large
majority of dysfunctions are psychosexual in nature.
A detailed sexual and personal history is important
in finding out the underlying causes. The common
psychological causes of sexual dysfunction have been
discussed earlier.
It should be specified whether the sexual dysfunction is psychogenic alone or biogenic factors co-exist;
whether the dysfunction is life-long or acquired; and
whether the dysfunction is situational or generalised.

Treatment
The treatment usually consists of one or more of the
following methods:


<<<PAGE 143>>>
Sexual Disorders

1. Treatment of the underlying physical or psychiatric
disorder, if present.
2. Psychoanalysis: This is particularly indicated when
the dysfunction is more pervasive and involves personality difficulties. The goal is not symptom removal but
is resolution of the underlying unconscious conflicts.
3. Hypnosis: Hypnosis can be used either alone or in
conjunction with other therapies aiming at symptom
removal. However, only suggestible patients can be
hypnotised.
4. Group psychotherapy: Patients of same sex with
different sexual problems or of both sexes with similar
sexual problems can be treated in group therapy
sessions. The focus is usually on providing education
regarding normal sexuality and to remove anxiety
or guilt by sharing viewpoints in a group setting.
Although occasionally used alone, it is more helpful
as an adjunct to other methods of treatment.
5. Behaviour therapy: The methods commonly employed include the following:
i. Relaxation training, e.g. Jacobson’s progressive
relaxation technique.
ii. Assertiveness training.
iii. Systematic desensitisation, aimed at reducing
the phobic anxiety related to the sexual act, e.g.
in sexual aversion disorder.
iv. Biofeedback, using a penile plethysmograph.
6. Masters’ and Johnson’s technique: This is one of the
most popular and successful methods of treatment for
psychosexual dysfunctions. The patient is not treated
alone, but both the partners are treated together. This
is called as dual-sex therapy, where both the sexual
partners are treated by a team of therapists (one male
and one female), although later modifications of this
technique use only one therapist.
The goal of the treatment is symptom removal,
using simple behavioural techniques. The couple is
usually seen on a weekly basis; however, the sessions
can be more frequent if the couple is encountering
particular difficulties during treatment. Some common
steps before starting therapy include:
i. Detailed history taking (sexual history) from each
partner separately.

131

ii. Round-table discussions aiming at:
a. Education about normal sexuality.
b. Understanding of the couple’s current sexual
problem(s).
c. Enhancing communication between the partners regarding sexual matters.
iii. Behaviour modification steps, depending on the
type of psychosexual dysfunction.
Brief examples of the techniques used are:
a. Sensate focus technique: This is used particularly
for treatment of impotence, although it is also
useful in management of other dysfunctions as
well. The aim is to ‘discover’ on body (excluding genital area) ‘sensate focuses’ (body areas
where manipulation leads to sexual arousal).
This is usually a general exercise before any
sex therapy.
b. Squeeze technique (Seman’s technique): This
has been used in treatment of premature ejaculation. The female partner is asked to manually
stimulate the penis causing erection. When the
male partner experiences ‘ejaculatory inevitability’, the female partner ‘squeezes’ the penis
on the coronal ridge thus delaying ejaculation.
There are similar simple techniques (such as
orgasmic conditioning, desensitisation) for treatment
of other psychosexual dysfunctions. The response
rate is close to 80%, with maximum success in the
treatment of premature ejaculation.
7. Oral drug therapy: Till very recently, this was rarely
a treatment of first choice in sexual dysfunctions.
Current indications of drug treatment include:
i. Treatment of underlying psychiatric disorder.
ii. Intense anxiety related to sexual activity may
require use of low dose benzodiazepines (such
as alprazolam) for a very limited period (to
prevent benzodiazepine misuse or dependence).
iii. Premature ejaculation may sometimes require
treatment with fluoxetine, trazodone, or tricyclic
antidepressants such as clomipramine (to retard
ejaculation).
iv. Several drugs have been used in the treatment
of impotence with varying degrees of efficacy,


<<<PAGE 144>>>
132

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

e.g. alpha-blockers (such as yohim bine,
idazoxan), opiate antagonists (such as naltrexone), dopamine agonists (such as bromocriptine, apomorphine), pentoxifylline, and topical
drugs (glyceryl trinitrate, minoxidyl, papaverine
and PgE1 and E2).
v. Sildenafil citrate has been used for treatment
of erectile dysfunction. Rapidly absorbed after oral administration, the maximum plasma
concentration is reached in 30-120 minutes. It
is metabolised in liver (mainly by cytochrome
P450 3A4) and is converted to an active metabolite. Sildenafil has a terminal half life of about
4 hours. It is highly bound to plasma proteins
and is not dialysable. It is a competitive and
selective inhibitor of cGMP (cyclic guanosine monophosphate)-specific PDE-5 (phosphodiesterase type 5). It prevents the rate of
breakdown of cGMP causing enhanced relaxation of cavernosal smooth muscle, increase in arterial flow in to corpus cavernosa, compression
of subtunical veins, and hence penile erection.
The typical dose is 50 mg (25-100 mg), 1 hour
before sexual activity. The maximum recommended dosing frequency is once a day. The
drug acts only in the presence of sexual stimulation. The adverse effects include transient and
mild headache, flushing, dyspepsia, and nasal
congestion. Caution needs to be exercised in
patients with known history of hypersensitivity,

with poor cardiovascular status, with anatomical deformation of penis, with conditions that
predispose to priapism, and especially those on
nitrates.
Other similar drugs include tadalafil and verdenafil.
vi. Hormonal treatment (e.g. androgens) should
not be employed unless there is an evidence of
hormonal dysfunction.
It should always be remembered that prescription
of the non-essential drugs may worsen sexual dysfunction.
8. Intracavernosal Injection of Vasoactive Drugs
(IIVD): Papaverine, an alkaloid and a vasoactive
substance, has been used as an intracavernosal injection in the differential diagnosis of organic and
non-organic impotence and also for treatment of
impotence (either alone; or along with phentolamine,
phenoxy-benzamine, alprostadil or prostaglandin E1,
and/or atropine).
9. Physical devices: Various suction devices (for
producing artificial penile tumescence) and penile
prosthetic implants are available. Their use, however,
should be limited to only those patients who suffer
from organic sexual disorder or in whom a sufficient
and regular trial of psychological management has
been completing, with distress persisting.
10. Vascular surgery: Rarely, vascular surgery may
be needed for some patients with underlying vascular
insufficiency (organic sexual disorder).


<<<PAGE 145>>>
11
SLEEP
Nearly one third of human life is spent in sleep, an
easily reversible state of relative unresponsiveness
and serenity which occurs more or less regularly and
repetitively each day. The EEG recordings show typical features of sleep which is broadly divided into two
broadly different phases:
1. D-sleep (desynchronised or dreaming sleep), also
called as REM-sleep (rapid eye movement sleep),
active sleep, or paradoxical sleep.
2. S-sleep (synchronised sleep), also called as
NREM-sleep (non-REM sleep), quiet sleep, or
orthodox sleep. S-sleep or NREM-sleep is further
divided into four stages, ranging from stages 1 to
4. As the person falls asleep, the person first passes
through these stages of NREM-sleep.
The EEG recording during the waking state shows
alpha waves of 8-12 cycles/sec. frequency. The onset
of sleep is characterised by a disappearance of the
alpha-activity.
Stage 1, NREM-sleep is the first and the lightest
stage of sleep characterised by an absence of alphawaves, and low voltage, predominantly theta activity.
Stage 2, NREM-sleep follows the stage 1 within a
few minutes and is characterised by two typical EEG
changes:
i. Sleep spindles: Regular spindle shaped waves
of 13-15 cycles/sec. frequency, lasting 0.5-2.0
seconds, with a characteristic waxing and waning amplitude.

Sleep Disorders
ii. K-complexes: High voltage spikes present intermittently.
Stage 3, NREM-sleep shows appearance of high
voltage, 75 μV, δ-waves of 0.5-3.0 cycles/sec.
Stage 4, NREM-sleep shows predominant
δ-activity in EEG.
NREM-sleep is followed by REM-sleep, which
is a light phase of sleep. The EEG is characterised
by a return of α-waves (α-wave sleep); other changes
are similar to stage 1 NREM-sleep. One of the most
characteristic features of the REM-sleep is presence
of REM or rapid (conjugate) eye movements. The
other features include generalised muscular atony,
penile erection, autonomic hyperactivity (increase in
pulse rate, respiratory rate and blood pressure), and
movements of small muscle groups, occurring intermittently. Although it is a light stage of sleep, arousal is
difficult.
These stages occur regularly throughout the whole
duration of sleep. The first REM period occurs typically after 90 minutes of the onset of sleep, although it
can start as early as 7 minutes after going-off to sleep,
e.g. in narcolepsy, in major depression, and after sleep
deprivation.
The important time periods of the various sleep
stages are summarised below:
1. In an 8 hour sleep, usually 6-6½ hours are spent
in the NREM-sleep while 1½-2 hours are in the
REM-sleep.
2. Out of 6-6½ hours NREM-sleep period, only about
70-80 minutes are spent in Stage 4 sleep.


<<<PAGE 146>>>
134

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Fig. 11.1: Stages of Sleep

3. The maximum Stage 4 sleep occurs in the first
one-third of the night. In the later part, the REMsleep follows the Stage 3 NREM-sleep directly.
4. The REM-sleep occurs maximally in the last
one-third of the night. The REM-sleep occurs
regularly after every 90-100 minutes, with progressive lengthening of each REM period. The
first REM period typically lasts for less than 10
minutes. Usually, there are 4-5 REM periods in
the whole night of sleep.
5. A younger person may typically need more sleep.
The usual sleep duration in newborn children is
16-18 hours/day, with nearly 8-10 hours spent in
the REM-sleep. As the age advances, the sleep
duration tends to reduce.
Certain phenomena are common just before
going-off to sleep (hypnagogic phenomena) and just
after waking-up (hypnopompic phenomena). These
phenomena include a variety of illusions and simple

hallucinations (both visual and auditory), jerky muscle
movements involving small muscle groups, and depersonalisation and derealisation. Some of the methods
of sleep study are listed in Table 11.1.
Depending on the duration of total sleep, two
extremes of ‘normal’ sleeping patterns have been
described.
1. Long-sleepers: These persons regularly and
habitually sleep for more than 9 hours/night, and
this pattern of sleep does not cause any symptoms
or dysfunction.
2. Short-sleepers: These persons regularly and
habitually sleep for less than 6 hours/night, and
this pattern of sleep does not cause any symptoms
or dysfunction.
On comparing long-sleepers and short-sleepers,
it has been found that the time spent in stage 3 and 4
of NREM-sleep is the same in both. The maximum
difference is in the duration of the REM-sleep. The


<<<PAGE 147>>>
Sleep Disorders
Table 11.1: Methods of Sleep Study
To study sleep and its associated phenomena, the following techniques can be used.
1. Observation of a sleeping person for externally visible
changes.
2. EEG.
3. Polysomnography (This is usually the preferred
method in the sleep research centers). It consists of:
i. Continuous EEG recording, particularly from
occipital and parietal leads.
ii. EOG (electro-oculography) to record the eye
movements.
iii. EMG (electromyography) for muscle potential
and activities.
iv. ECG for changes in cardiac status.
v. In certain cases, respiratory tracings of various
kinds are used, such as oxymetry, expired CO2,
O2 saturation.
vi. MSLT (Multiple sleep latency test): It involves
repeated measures of the sleep latency (i.e. time
to onset of sleep).
vii. Penile tumescence, body temperature, GSR
(galvanic skin response), and body movements
are also sometimes studied.
The recordings are made throughout the night sleep.

long-sleeper, on an average, has almost double the
duration of REM-sleep as compared to a short-sleeper.

SLEEP DEPRIVATION
Experimental deprivation of sleep is an important
method of studying the functions of sleep. After a
few days of sleep deprivation, EEG recordings show
a gradual diminishing of α activity, with an increase
in the lower frequency activity.
After 4-5 days of sleep deprivation, psychological symptoms become prominent. Initially, there
is a decrease in attention span, with easy distractibility, drowsiness, decreased initiative to perform and
‘micro-sleeps’ lasting but a few seconds. In predisposed individuals, psychotic symptoms may appear
on the fifth night, characterised by break with reality,
illusions and hallucinations, grossly disorganised

135

behaviour, persecutory ideation or delusions, and mild
disorientation and confusion.
As time progresses, frank delirium may occur.
Whether this type of psychosis can occur in previously
normal individuals is doubtful, mainly due to lack of
sufficient research data. Clearly, ethical considerations
prevent this kind of research.
Recovery after sleep deprivation is characterised
by an increase in total sleep duration, usually lasting
for 15-16 hours. There is also a rebound increase in
the stages 3 and 4 of the NREM-sleep in the first few
hours and an increase in the REM-sleep later.

FUNCTIONS OF SLEEP
Despite accumulation of vast amount of research data
regarding physiology and biochemistry of sleep, functions of sleep are still far from clear.
It has been observed that persons sleeping for 7-9
hours per day have significantly lower rates of illness.
On the other hand, certain disorders carry a higher
mortality when present during sleep (especially during
early hours of morning), for example, coronary artery
disease, nocturnal asthma, sudden nocturnal death (in
south-east Asian men), and sleep apnoea.
It has been observed that there is a 5-25% decrease
in metabolic rate during night sleep. Conservation of
energy therefore appears to be one of the important
functions of sleep. It also serves a restorative function
for the whole body (particularly during NREM-sleep)
and for the brain (cognitive functions; especially during REM-sleep). Further research is likely to clarify
exact functions of various components of the sleep
cycle.

SLEEP DISORDERS
There are several types of sleep disorders known. The
ASDC (Association for Sleep Disorders Centre) has
done a lot of work in classifying the various sleep disorders and their classification has been adapted for use
both by DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10. The sleep disorders
are known as non-organic sleep disorders in ICD-10.


<<<PAGE 148>>>
136

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The various sleep disorders are divided in 2 subtypes:
I. Dyssomnias
1. Insomnia
2. Hypersomnia
3. Disorders of sleep-wake schedule.
II. Parasomnias
1. Stage 4 sleep disorders
2. Other sleep disorders.

Dyssomnias
Dyssomnias are sleep disorders that are characterised
by disturbances in the amount, quality or timing of
sleep. These are the commonest disorders of sleep.

Insomnia
Insomnia is also known as the Disorder of Initiation
and/or Maintenance of Sleep (DIMS). Insomnia means
one or more of the following:
1. Difficulty in initiating sleep (going-off to sleep).
2. Difficulty in maintaining sleep (remaining asleep).
This can include both:
a. Frequent awakenings during the night, and
b. Early morning awakening.
3. Non-restorative sleep where despite an adequate
duration of sleep, there is a feeling of not having
rested fully (poor quality sleep).
Insomnia is very common, with nearly 15-30%
of general population complaining of a period of
insomnia per year requiring treatment. It is required for
diagnosis that sleep disturbance occurs at least three
times a week for at least 1 month, and that it causes
either marked distress or interferes with social and
occupational functioning.
Aetiology
The common causes of insomnia are listed in
Table 11.2.
A person suffering from insomnia should be differentiated from a short-sleeper, who needs less than
6 hours of sleep per night and has no symptoms or
dysfunction. A short-sleeper does not need any treatment.

Table 11.2: Common Causes of Insomnia
1. Medical illnesses
i. Any painful or uncomfortable condition
ii. Heart diseases
iii. Respiratory diseases
iv. Rheumatic and musculo-skeletal disease
v. Old age
vi. Brain stem or hypothalamic lesions
vii. Delirium
viii. PMS (Periodic movements in sleep)
2. Alcohol and drug use
i. Drug or alcohol withdrawal syndrome
ii. Delirium tremens
iii. Amphetamine or other stimulants, e.g. caffeine
iv. Chronic alcoholism
3. Current medication, e.g. fluoxetine, steroids, theophylline, propranolol
4. Psychiatric disorders
i. Mania (may not complain of decrease in sleep,
as there is often a decreased need for sleep)
ii. Major depression (difficulty in maintenance of
sleep is more prominent, although difficulty in
initiating sleep is also present)
iii. Dysthymia (difficulty in initiating sleep is characteristic)
iv. Anxiety disorder (difficulty in initiating sleep is
common)
v. Stressful life situation (may cause temporary
insomnia).
5. Idiopathic insomnia

One cause of insomnia, PMS (periodic movements in sleep) needs further mention. PMS actually
consists of two different syndromes, which often occur
together:
1. Periodic Limb Movement Disorder (PLMD), and
2. ‘Restless Legs’ Syndrome (RLS or Ekbom syndrome).
Periodic Limb Movement Disorder (PLMD)
It is characterised by sudden, repeated contraction of
one or more of muscle groups (usually of the legs)
during sleep. Often occurring bilaterally, it is followed
by partial (most commonly) or complete arousal. Since


<<<PAGE 149>>>
Sleep Disorders

each individual contraction lasts for a few seconds and
is repeated at an interval of 20-60sec. during a long
sleep-period, partial or complete awakenings occur
many times in one night sleep.
The patient is usually not aware of the myoclonus
and usually complains of non-restorative sleep or of
frequent awakenings. The myoclonus is observed, if
at all, by the bed partner. This is commonly seen in
middle-aged and elderly people. Due to night-time
insomnia, daytime hypersomnia can occur and, at
times, may be the only presenting symptom.
‘Restless Legs’ Syndrome (Ekbom syndrome)
RLS is a condition in which the person experiences,
during waking, an extremely uncomfortable feeling
in the leg muscles. Sometimes, it may resemble painful creeping sensations deep inside the calf muscles.
Classically, these abnormal sensations occur while
sitting or lying down and cause an irresistible urge to
move the legs. Moving about or standing provides
immediate, temporary relief. This is often associated
with periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD) during night sleep. Daily, regular exercises can lead to
marked improvement in certain cases.
Treatment
1. A thorough medical and psychiatric assessment.
2. Polysomnography (see Table 11.1) may be needed
in some patients to reach a diagnosis.
3. Treatment of the underlying physical and/or psychiatric disorder, if present.
4. Withdrawal of current medications, if any.
5. Relaxation techniques before sleep time and education regarding sleep hygiene (see Table 11.3).
Sleep hygiene consists of general guidelines for
promoting good sleep. In itself, it is not a treatment
for insomnia.
6. Psychotherapy, if indicated.
7. Benzodiazepines may be used, either alone, e.g.
in primary insomnia, or may be used with the
treatment of underlying physical or psychiatric
disorder(s). The use of benzodiazepines should
only be for short-term periods, not more than for
4-6 weeks at one time.

137
Table 11.3: Sleep Hygiene

Some basic components of sleep hygiene are:
1. Regular, daily physical exercises (preferably not in
the evening).
2. Minimise daytime napping.
3. Avoid fluid intake and heavy meals just before bedtime.
4. Avoid caffeine intake (e.g. tea, coffee, cola drinks)
before sleeping hours.
5. Avoid regular use of alcohol (especially avoid use of
alcohol as a hypnotic for promoting sleep).
6. Avoid reading or watching television while in bed.
7. Sleep in a dark, quiet, and comfortable environment.
8. Regular times for going to sleep and waking-up
9. Try relaxation techniques

If the difficulty in initiating sleep is the main
symptom, then a benzodiazepine with shorter halflife should be used, such as temazepam, oxazepam
or lorazepam.
If the difficulty in maintaining sleep is the
predominant symptom, then a longer acting benzodiazepine, such as nitrazepam, flurazepam or
even diazepam, should be used (see Chapter 15
for details).
Physicians should be careful to avoid benzodiazepine abuse or dependence in patients presenting with insomnia. Non-benzodiazepine hypnotics
(e.g. zopiclone, zolpidem, zalpelon and trazodone)
are useful alternatives (see Chapter 15).
8. L-tryptophan, an amino-acid present in many
vegetables, is an apparently non-dependence producing hypnotic. The usual dose is 0.5g at night
time.

Hypersomnia
Hypersomnia is also known as Disorder of excessive
somnolence (DOES). Hypersomnia means one or
more of the following:
1. Excessive day time sleepiness.
2. ‘Sleep attacks’ during day time (falling asleep
unintentionally).


<<<PAGE 150>>>
138

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

3. ‘Sleep drunkenness’ (person needs much more
time to awaken; and during this period is confused
or disoriented).
Hypersomnia is seen in about 1-2% of general
population at any given time. As insomnia and hypersomnia may be present at the same time, the underlying causes may be common to both. It is required for
the diagnosis that the sleep disturbance occurs daily
for at least 1 month or for recurrent periods of shorter
duration, and that it causes either marked distress or
interferes with social and occupational functioning.
Aetiology
The common causes of hypersomnia are listed in
Table 11.4.
A person suffering from hypersomnia should be
differentiated from a long-sleeper, who needs more
than 9 hours of sleep per night and has no symptoms
or dysfunction. A long-sleeper does not need any
treatment.
A few important causes of hypersomnia are discussed below:
1. Narcolepsy
This is a disorder characterised by excessive daytime sleepiness, often disturbed night-time sleep and
disturbances in the REM-sleep. The hallmark of this
disorder is decreased REM latency, i.e. decreased
latent period before the first REM period occurs. Normal REM latency is 90-100 minutes. In narcolepsy,
REM-sleep usually occurs within 10 minutes of the
onset of sleep.
The common age of onset is 15-25 years, with
usually a stable course throughout life. The prevalence
rate of narcolepsy is about 4 per 10,000.
The classical tetrad of symptoms is:
i. Sleep attacks (most common): The person is
unable to resist a sleep attack or ‘nap’, from
which he or she awakens refreshed. These ‘attacks’ can occur during any time of the day,
even whilst driving. Usually, there is a gap of
2-3 hours between the two attacks.
ii. Cataplexy: This is characterised by a loss of
muscle tone in the various parts of body, e.g. jaw

Table 11.4: Causes of Hypersomnia
1. Medical illnesses
i. Narcolepsy (in about 25% of all patients with
hypersomnia)
ii. Sleep apnoea (in about 50% of all patients with
hypersomnia)
iii. Kleine-Levin syndrome
iv. Menstrual-associated somnolence
v. Sleep deprivation
vi. Following or with insomnia
vii. Encephalitis
viii. Hypothyroidism
ix. Head Injury
x. Cerebral tumours in the region of mid-brain
xi. Hypothalamic lesions
xii. Trypanosomiasis
xiii. PMS (Periodic movements in sleep); in about
10% of all patients with hypersomnia.
2. Alcohol and drug use
i. Stimulant withdrawal
ii. Alcohol intoxication
iii. Use of CNS depressant medications.
3. Psychiatric disorders
i. Dysthymia
ii. Atypical depression
iii. Seasonal mood disorder.
4. Idiopathic hypersomnia.

drop, or paresis of all skeletal muscles of body
resulting in a fall. This may be precipitated by
sudden emotion. The consciousness is usually
clear and memory is normal, unless sleep attacks
supervene.
iii. Hypnagogic hallucinations: These are vivid perceptions, usually dream-like, which occur at the
onset of sleep and are associated with fearfulness.
When these occur at awakening, they are called
hypnopompic hallucinations.
iv. Sleep paralysis (least common): This occurs
either at awakening in the morning (usually)
or at sleep onset. The person is conscious but
unable to move his body. The episode may last


<<<PAGE 151>>>
Sleep Disorders

from 30 seconds to a few minutes and may cause
significant distress.
Not all symptoms of the tetrad are present in one
person. The other associated symptoms are fugue
states, blackouts and blurring of vision. Polysomnography helps in making a diagnosis in doubtful cases,
showing a decreased REM latency.
The treatment consists of forced naps at regular times in the day, stimulant medication (such as
amphetamines) or modafinil in some patients, and/
or antidepressants (particularly when cataplexy is a
prominent symptom).
2. Sleep Apnoea
This condition is characterised by presence of repeated
episodes of apnoea during sleep. In this context,
apnoea is defined as the cessation of airflow at the nostrils (and mouth) for 10 seconds or longer. The apnoea
can be of central type, obstructive type or mixed type.
It is commoner in elderly and obese (Pickwickian
syndrome). Typically, there are 5 or more apnoeic
episodes per hour of sleep and the total number of
apnoeic episodes exceeds 30 during one night’s
sleep. In severe cases, the number of episodes may
be in hundreds. The patients are usually not aware of
the occurrence of apnoea. Instead, they complain of
an inability to stay awake in the day time and nonrestorative sleep at night. The bed partner may report
of loud snoring, restless sleep or of periodic absences
of breathing.
The diagnosis can be established in doubtful cases
using polysomnography, with the respiratory tracings
included. Sleep apnoea can be a dangerous condition.
It can cause cardiac arrhythmias, pulmonary and systemic hypertension, and death.
The treatment consists of avoidance of alcohol
and depressant medications, use of stimulants such
as caffeine, regular exercises, losing excess weight,
teaching correct sleeping posture, and corrective procedures for obstructive sleep apnoea (e.g. mechanical
tongue retaining device). Very severe obstructive sleep
apnoea may necessitate tracheostomy (functional only
at night), CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure)
through nasal mesh, or even pharyngoplasty.

139

3. Kleine-Levin Syndrome
This is a rare syndrome characterised by:
1. Hypersomnia (always present), occurring recurrently for long periods of time.
2. Hyperphagia (usually present), with a voracious
appetite.
3. Hypersexuality (associated at times), consisting of
sexual disinhibition, masturbatory activity, exhibitionism, and/or inappropriate sexual advances.
The associated features include apathy, irritable
behaviour, confusion, social withdrawal, bizarre
behaviour, psychotic symptoms (such as delusions
and hallucinations), and disorientation. One or more
of these symptoms may occur during the episode.
EEG abnormalities, usually showing intermittent nonspecific slowing, are common but are not diagnostic.
A typical episode lasts for one to several weeks,
followed usually by a complete remission. The
common age of onset is the second decade of life.
Apparently this disorder has a finite course with a large
majority of patients recovering completely before the
fifth decade of life. The disorder is almost always seen
in males.
No specific treatment is available but Lithium and
occasionally Carbamazepine have been reported to be
successful.
Treatment
1. A thorough physical and psychiatric assessment.
2. Treatment of the underlying cause is the most
important method.
3. Associated or underlying insomnia should be
looked for and treated.
4. Withdrawal of current medication causing hypersomnia, especially depressant medication.
5. Benzodiazepines at night may paradoxi cally
decrease hypersomnia by correcting night time
insomnia.

Disorders of Sleep-wake Schedule
These are characterised by a disturbance in the timing
of sleep. The person with this disorder is not able to
sleep when he wishes to, although at other times he
is able to sleep adequately. This is due to a mismatch


<<<PAGE 152>>>
140

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

between person’s circadian rhythm and the normal
sleep-wake schedule demanded by the environment.
Aetiology
The common causes of disorders of sleep-wake schedule are listed below:
1. ‘Jet lag’ or rapid change of time zone: This typically occurs during international flights crossing
many ‘time zones’. At the new place, the person’s
internal time of sleep and the sleep time of surroundings are different, leading to insomnia during
the new sleep time and somnolescence in the new
daytime, thus causing impairment of functioning.
2. ‘Work-shift’ from day to night or vice-versa.
3. Unusual sleep phases: Some persons are unable
to sleep early. They typically sleep late at night
and get up late in the morning. They are called
as ‘owls’. Others are similarly unable to remain
awake at night. They typically sleep early at night
and get up early in the morning. They are called
as ‘larks’. Some others have a longer-than 24 hour
sleep-wake cycle (usually of 25 hours).
Treatment
No specific treatment is usually needed. Benzodiazepines may be needed for short-term correction
of insomnia. Changes in ‘work-shifts’ may be needed
for persons with unusual sleep phases. Exposure to
sunlight during outdoor activity (instead of staying indoors) and adopting the local (new) hours
for sleeping (and working) can help in combating
jet lag.

Parasomnias
Parasomnias are dysfunctions or episodic nocturnal
events occurring with sleep, sleep stages or partial
arousals. Most parasomnias are common in childhood
though they may persist into adulthood.

Stage 4 Sleep Disorders
These disorders occur during deep sleep, i.e. Stages
3 and 4 of NREM-sleep.
The common Stage 4 parasomnias are:
1. Sleep-walking (somnambulism): The patient carries out automatic motor activities that range from

simple to complex. He may leave the bed, walk
about or leave the house. Arousal is difficult and
accidents may occur during sleep-walking.
2. Sleep-terrors or night terrors (pavor nocturnus):
The patient suddenly gets up screaming with
autonomic arousal (tachycardia, sweating and
hyperventilation). He may be difficult to arouse
and rarely recalls the episode on awakening. In
contrast, nightmares (which occur during REMsleep) are clearly remembered in the morning.
3. Sleep-related enuresis (bedwetting): This is discussed in detail in Chapter 14.
4. Bruxism (teeth-grinding): The patient has an
involuntary and forceful grinding of teeth during
sleep. Though the bed partner reports loud sounds
produced by grinding of teeth and destruction of
the tooth enamel is obvious, the patient remains
completely unaware of the episode(s).
5. Sleep-talking (somniloquy): The patient talks
during stages 3 and 4 of sleep but does not
remember anything about it in the morning on
awakening.
These disorders are often co-existent. As they
occur during stage 4 (and 3) of NREM-sleep, they
are more common during the first one-third of the
night (There is more NREM-sleep in the first third of
the night while the last third has more REM-sleep).
Arousal is difficult and on waking-up, there is a complete amnesia for the event(s).
Treatment
Since benzodiazepines suppress stage 4 of NREMsleep, a single dose at bedtime usually provides relief
from stage 4 parasomnias.

Other Sleep Disorders
Nightmares (dream anxiety disorder) occur during the
REM-sleep. They are characterised by fearful dreams
occurring most commonly in the last one-third of
night sleep. The person wakes up very frightened and
remembers the dream vividly.
This is in contrast to night terrors which occur
early in the night, are a stage 4 NREM disorder, and
are characterised by complete amnesia. In both the


<<<PAGE 153>>>
Sleep Disorders

conditions, the observer finds the person frightened
during the episode.
Other sleep disorders include nocturnal angina,
nocturnal asthma, nocturnal seizures, paroxysmal
nocturnal haemoglobinuria, nocturnal head banging,
and familial sleep paralysis.

141

Treatment
There is no specific treatment. Treatment of the
underlying condition is the most important step. The
treatment of nightmares is by suppression of REMsleep, e.g. by bedtime dose of a benzodiazepine.
However, on stopping the drug, a rebound increase
in symptoms may occur.


<<<PAGE 154>>>
12

Behavioural Syndromes
Associated with
Psychological Disturbances
and Physiological Factors

The disorders can broadly be classified into the following categories:
1. Eating Disorders
2. Sleep disorders
3. Sexual disorder and dysfunctions
4. Postpartum psychiatric disorders
5. Psychosomatic disorders
In addition to these, the chapter also describes
briefly consultation liaison psychiatry and psychiatric
aspects of grief and bereavement.

EATING DISORDERS
Eating disorders are characterised by clinical presentation primary focused on eating behaviour. The following disorders are briefly discussed in the chapter:
1. Anorexia nervosa
2. Bulimia nervosa
3. Obesity (associated with other psychological
disturbances)
4. Binge-eating disorder
5. Psychogenic vomiting

Anorexia Nervosa
Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder characterised
by the following prominent clinical features:
1. It occurs much more often in females as compared
to the males. The common age of onset is adolescence (13-19 years of age).

2. There is an intense fear of becoming obese. This
fear does not decrease even if body becomes very
thin and underweight.
3. There is often a body-image disturbance. The person is unable to perceive own body size accurately.
However, body image disturbance may sometimes
not be seen in patients from non-Western cultural
settings and several such cases have been described from India.
4. There is a refusal to maintain the body weight
above a minimum normal weight for that age, sex
and height.
5. Significant weight loss occurs, usually more than
25% of the original weight. The final weight is usually 15% less than the minimum limit of normal
weight (for that age, sex and height) or a Quetelet’s
body-mass index (BMI) of 17.5 or less (Quetelet’s
body-mass index = weight in kg divided by square
of height in meters).
6. No known medical illness, which can account for
the weight loss, is present.
7. Absence of any other primary psychiatric disorder.
8. Amenorrhoea, primary or secondary, is often
present in females.
In addition to these typical clinical features, other
associated features are often present. The patient imposes dietary restrictions on self; can have peculiar
patterns of handling food, such as breaking food into
small bits, hiding food; and can engage in vigorous


<<<PAGE 155>>>
Behavioural Syndromes Associated with Psychological Disturbances and Physiological Factors

exercises. ‘Anorexia’ is actually a misnomer as there
is never really a decrease in appetite, initially; in fact
patient is often preoccupied with food. A lot of time
may be spent in collecting recipes and cooking food
for significant others.
Depressive symptoms are common and so are
obsessive-compulsive personality traits. Psychomotor activity is usually increased. In severe cases, fine
lanugo hair may develop all over the body. Women
with anorexia nervosa can present with poor sexual
adjustment, with conflicts about being a woman and
fear of pregnancy. Many patients are unconsciously
unable to accept a ‘female role’.
A large number (up to 50%) of patients with anorexia nervosa also have bulimic episodes. These are
characterised by rapid consumption of large amounts
of food in a relatively short period of time, occurring
usually when alone. This is known as eating binges
or binge-eating. These binges are followed by intense
guilt and attempts to remove eaten food, for example,
by self-induced vomiting, laxative abuse, and/or diuretic abuse.
If untreated, the weight loss can become
mar ked. Death may occur due to hypokalaemia
(caused by self-induced vomiting), dehydration,
malnutrition or congestive cardiac failure (caused by
anaemia).
Anorexia nervosa should be differentiated from
other conditions capable of causing significant weight
loss. These include medical illnesses (such as hypopituitarism, lateral hypothalamic lesion and debilitating
systemic illnesses, e.g. disseminated tuberculosis) and
psychiatric disorders (such as depressive disorder and
schizophrenia).
Another important differential diagnosis is bulimia
nervosa. Although bulimic episodes are common in
anorexia nervosa (binge eating followed by vomiting), patients of bulimia nervosa usually maintain a
near normal body weight (or are overweight), in sharp
contrast to the patients with anorexia nervosa.

Treatment
The treatment of anorexia nervosa can be considered
in two phases, which often merge into each other.

•

143

Short-term treatment, to encourage weight gain
and correct nutritional deficiencies, if any.
• Long-term treatment, aimed at maintaining the
near normal weight achieved in short-term treatment and preventing relapses.
The various treatment modalities used can include:
1. Behaviour therapy (BT): Behavioural treatments
are based on providing positive reinforcements
(and at times, negative reinforcements) contingent
on weight gain by the patient. See Chapter 18 for
further details for BT.
A too rapid weight gain is not desirable or safe.
The weight gain should not exceed 1.5 to 2 kg in
a fortnight. As patients are usually unable to eat
a large meal, especially in the initial part of treatment, it is advisable to suggest more number of
meals (about six) per day. Occasionally, forceful
Ryle’s tube feeding may be needed initially, in
resistant patients.
2. Individual psychotherapy is often helpful in addition to supportive physical treatment. This could
involve psychotherapy with a focus on cognitive
behaviour therapy, psychodynamic principles or
supportive measures. See Chapter 17 and 18 for
more details.
3. Hospitalisation, with adequate nursing care for
food intake and weight gain, can be helpful in
short-term treatment as well as prevention and/
or treatment of complications. However, hospitalisation does not necessarily ensure long-term
improvement. It is important to keep a close eye
on water and electrolyte balance, need for supplementation with vitamins and minerals, and prevent
osteoporosis.
4. Drugs are an important adjunct to other modes of
therapy. The drugs used can include:
i. Antipsychotics: Chlorpromazine is rarely used
these days. Olanzapine has efficacy in improving weight gain but it is important to be aware of
possibility of prolongation of QTc particularly
in patients with low BMI.
ii. Antidepressants (such as fluoxetine, clomipramine) for treatment of anorexia nervosa and/
or associated depression.


<<<PAGE 156>>>
144

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

iii. Cyproheptadine: This is particularly helpful in
inducing weight gain, decreasing depressive
symptoms and increasing appetite, if anorexia
is actually present. The usual dose is 8-32 mg/
day, in divided doses. However, co-prescription
with SSRIs can interfere with their effectiveness
as Cyproheptadine is a serotonin antagonist.
5. Group therapy and family therapy can be helpful
in psycho-education for the patient and carers/
family about nature of anorexia nervosa and its
treatment. Psycho-education may also include
discussion of current social norms of slimming
and fitness, since there is evidence to suggest that
anorexia nervosa is far more common in countries
with social pressures for slimming, such as USA
and UK. India is indeed quite fast catching up with
similar social pressures.
The prognosis is generally better if diagnosis
is made early, absence of previous hospitalisations
and absence of bulimic episodes. Weight gain and
improvement in mental outlook often precede return
of menstrual function.

Bulimia Nervosa
Bulimia nervosa is an eating disorder characterised
by the following clinical features:
1. Bulimia nervosa usually has an onset in early teens
or adolescence.
2. There is an intense fear of becoming obese. There
may be an earlier history of anorexia nervosa.
3. There is usually body-image disturbance and the
person is unable to perceive own body size accurately.
4. There is a persistent preoccupation with eating,
and an irresistible craving for food. There are
episodes of overeating in which large amounts of
food are consumed within short periods of time
(eating binges).
5. There are attempts to ‘counteract’ the effects of
overeating by one or more of the following: selfinduced vomiting, purgative abuse, periods of
starvation, and/or use of drugs such as appetite
suppressants.

6. No known medical illness is present which can
account for the disorder.
7. Absence of any other primary psychiatric disorder.

Treatment
The various treatment modalities that can be used
include:
1. Behaviour therapy: This is based on providing
positive reinforcements (and at times negative
reinforcements) contingent on the control of binge
eating by the patient. See Chapter 18 for further
details for BT.
2. Individual psychotherapy: See Chapters 17 and
18 for further details.
3. Antidepressant drugs are an important adjunct
to other modes of therapy. A Selective serotonin
uptake inhibitor (SSRI) such as Fluoxetine (in
doses of 20-60 mg) is particularly useful as it can
cause loss of appetite at least in the initial phase
of treatment, along with its antidepressant effect.
The drugs used in the past have included tricyclic
antidepressants such as imipramine, though they
are currently not widely used.
4. Group therapy and family therapy: These methods
are used for psycho-education of patient and
carers/family about nature of bulimia nervosa and
its treatment.

Obesity (Overeating Associated with Other
Psychological Disturbances)
Obesity caused by a reaction to distressing events is
included here. Obesity caused by drugs or endocrinal
factors, or due to constitutional factors is not considered a psychiatric disorder.
Treatment options depend on the underlying cause;
for example, psychotherapy (for present or past psychological distress), antidepressants (for depression),
advice from dietician, drug treatment, or even bariatric
surgery.

Binge Eating Disorders
In binge eating disorder, large amounts of food are
consumed in a relatively short period, followed by


<<<PAGE 157>>>
Behavioural Syndromes Associated with Psychological Disturbances and Physiological Factors

severe discomfort and feelings of self-denigration.
There is a sense of lack of control over eating during
the episode. Additionally, there also may be eating
of large amounts of food throughout the day with no
planned meal times, eating alone because of being
embarrassed, and/or feeling guilty and depressed
after overeating.
The disorder is not listed separately in ICD-10
and symptoms of binge eating are also seen in bulimia
nervosa.
Treatment is similar to bulimia nervosa, though
the role of drug treatment in binge eating disorder is
not so clear.

145

NON-ORGANIC SLEEP DISORDERS
Non-organic sleep disorders are discus sed in
Chapter 11.

SEXUAL DYSFUNCTIONS, NOT CAUSED
BY ORGANIC DISORDERS OR DISEASE
Non-organic sexual dysfunctions are discussed in
Chapter 10.

POSTPARTUM PSYCHIATRIC
DISORDERS (MENTAL AND
BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS
Psychogenic Vomiting
ASSOCIATED WITH PUERPERIUM,
This is a clinical syndrome in which biopsychosocial NOT CLASSIFIED ELSEWHERE)
factors interact to produce symptoms which are often
mistaken for upper gastrointestinal tract disease,
anorexia nervosa, dissociative (conversion) disorder,
somatization disorder, or malingering.
The characteristic clinical features include:
1. Repeated vomiting, which typically occurs soon
after a meal has begun or just after it has been
completed.
2. Vomiting often occurs in complete absence of
nausea or retching (Patients say that food just
seems to come back up).
3. Vomiting is often self-induced and can be suppressed, if necessary.
4. Despite repeated vomiting, weight loss is not usually significant.
5. The course of illness is usually chronic with frequent remissions and relapses.

Treatment
1. The first and most important step is correct diagnosis and exclusion of other physical and/or
psychiatric causes.
2. Identification of psychosocial stressor.
3. Environmental manipulation and encouragement
of coping strategies to deal with stress.
4. Psychotherapy of either cognitive behavioural or
psychodynamic nature (see Chapters 17 and 18
for further details).

Pregnancy and puerperium are highly stressful periods
in a woman’s life. The person is threatened by:
1. Physical, physiological and endocrinal changes
occurring in one’s body,
2. Reorganisation of psyche in accordance with the
new ‘mother-role’ (in the first pregnancy),
3. Body image changes, and
4. Unconscious intrapsychic conflicts relating to
pregnancy, childbirth and motherhood may become activated.
It is no surprise then that 25-50% of all women
can develop psychological symptoms in the puerperal
period. The commonest type of presentation is mild
depression and irritability, often known as post-natal
blues. These ‘blues’ pass-off within a few days and
usually need no active management except monitoring
and support.
However, in 1.5-4.6/1,000 deliveries (average
2/1000 deliveries), the mother can develop severe
psychiatric symptoms including psychotic symptoms.
This is known as postpartum psychosis.
The postpartum psychosis can present with:
1. Depressive episode with psychotic symptoms
(most common), or
2. Schizophrenia-like symptoms, or
3. Manic episode, or
4. Delirium (least common).


<<<PAGE 158>>>
146

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Typically, the onset of symptoms occurs 3-7 days
after delivery. An onset before the 3rd day postpartum
is rare. The symptoms usually peak by the end of 4th
week, and may necessitate admission to a hospital setting. As the puerperium lasts for 6 weeks, the relevant
postpartum period for psychiatric symptomatology to
appear is 6 weeks (according to ICD-10). Hence, any
psychiatric symptoms appearing within 6-week period
after delivery are called as postpartum psychiatric
disorder(s), if they do not fulfil the criteria of the major
psychiatric disorders.
It was earlier believed that schizophreniform
disorder is the commonest postpartum psychiatric
disorder in developing countries (such as India), in
contrast to developed countries where depression is
usually more common. However, recent studies negate
this hypothesis. Even in India, depressive episode is
the most common type of postpartum psychiatric disorder encountered in routine clinical practice though
psychotic symptoms are frequently present.
The factors involved in causation are both biological (changes in endocrine status especially steroid
withdrawal, sleep disturbances, amine disturbances)
and psychosocial (intrapsychic conflicts relating to
motherhood, family and interpersonal conflicts in light
of the new ‘role’).
Presently, it is believed that postpartum psychosis is not a special or separate category, but only a
residual category in ICD-10. Depressive episode or
schizophreniform disorder occurring separately or
as a part of postpartum psychiatric disorder are very
similar, except the presence of confusion as a prominent and common symptom in postpartum psychiatric
disorders. Childbirth merely acts as a stressful event
precipitating the illness.
Postpartum psychoses have a better prognosis
as compared to similar disorders occurring in a nonpostpartum setting; however 15-25% of these patients
have a recurrence, usually of the same type, during
the next puerperium. Patients with a history of postpartum or postnatal depression are also considered
high risk for development of bipolar disorder. During
an episode, presence of folate deficiency can prolong

the duration of psychiatric disorder and may make it
chronic.

Treatment
1. Treatment of the type of postpartum psychiatric
disorder, such as antidepressants and/or ECTs
for the depressive episode; antipsychotics and/or
mood stabilisers for the manic episode; antipsychotics for the psychotic symptomatology.
2. Psychotherapy for psychological issues, especially
after recovery from psychosis has occurred.
3. General supportive care during the puerperium.
4. Lithium, antipsychotics and antidepressants are
excreted in milk and may be dangerous to the
infant. A judicious decision has to be made regarding feeding of the infant, depending on the dose
prescribed, social support available and risks of
keeping the infant and mother separate.
5. As patients can lack insight, have poor judgement,
may be unable to care for themselves and the baby,
and are receiving psychotropic medication, it is
not uncommon that the baby receives ‘top feeds’
(supplementary feeds). In that case, it may be necessary to extract milk from breast daily (or more
often) either manually or with a breast-pump. It is
more practical to give oral Stilboestrol, Pyridoxine
(100 mg/day) or very rarely Bromocriptine to
inhibit lactation. It is important to remember the
risk of psychosis with Bromocriptine.

PSYCHOSOMATIC DISORDERS
(PSYCHOLOGICAL OR BEHAVIOURAL
FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH
DISORDERS OR DISEASES CLASSIFIED
ELSEWHERE)
Psychosomatic disorders (a term coined by Heinroth
in 1918) are those disorders in which psychosocial
factors are very important in causation. Broadly
applied, this term can encompass all physical illnesses. A narrow but more practical definition would
include those physical disorders which are either
initiated or exacerbated by the presence of meaningful


<<<PAGE 159>>>
Behavioural Syndromes Associated with Psychological Disturbances and Physiological Factors

psychosocial environmental stressors. ICD-10 lists
these disorders under the category of Psychological
or behavioural factors associated with disorders or
diseases classified elsewhere.
Franz Alexander, the Father of Psychosomatic
Medicine, initially described the seven classical
psychosomatic illnesses (Table 12.1). His specificity
hypothesis stated that if a specific environmental stressor or emotional conflict occurs, it results in a specific
illness in a genetically predetermined organ.
George Engel in 1977, described a biopsychosocial
model to explain the complex interaction between
biological, psychological and social spheres resulting
Table 12.1: Classical Psychosomatic Disorders
The 7 classical psychosomatic disorders are:
1. Bronchial asthma
2. Ulcerative colitis
3. Peptic ulcer
4. Neurodermatitis
5. Thyrotoxicosis
6. Rheumatoid arthritis
7. Essential hypertension.

147

in a psychosomatic illness. This viewpoint has become
very popular and is now almost integral to psychiatric
teaching and practice throughout the World. It can be
depicted in a diagram (Fig. 12.1).
Beginning from seven classical psychosomatic
illnesses of Alexander, number of these illnesses
continued to increase as their biopsychosocial causation became more evident and clear. At present, the
list of psychosomatic illnesses is virtually endless
as it is not difficult to imagine the effect of psychosocial factors on most illnesses. The important and
common psychosomatic illnesses are mentioned in
Table 12.2.
It is not the purpose of this book to go into the
details of these physical disorders. However, certain
important aspects and conditions are described, which
are often not available in detail in most medical textbooks.

Type A Personality
When personality characteristics of a patient with
coronary artery disease (CAD) are examined, there
may be preponderance of a certain type of personality traits, collectively described as coronary prone

Fig. 12.1: A Biopsychosocial Model for Psychosomatic Illness


<<<PAGE 160>>>
148

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Table 12.2: Common Examples of Psychosomatic
Disorders
I. Cardiovascular disorders
1. Essential hypertension
2. Coronary artery disease
3. CCU delirium or post-cardiac surgery delirium
4. Migraine
5. Cerebrovascular disease
6. Mitral valve prolapse syndrome (MVPS)
II. Endocrine disorders
1. Diabetes mellitus
2. Hyperthyroidism
3. Cushing’s syndrome
4. Peri-menopausal syndrome
5. Amenorrhoea
6. Menorrhagia
III. Gastro-intestinal disorders
1. Oesophageal reflux
2. Peptic ulcer
3. Ulcerative colitis
4. Crohn’s disease
IV. Immune disorders (These overlap with other
disorders mentioned in this table)
1. Auto-immune disorders such as Ulcerative
colitis, Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
2. Allergic disorders such as Bronchial asthma,
Hay fever
3. Viral infections
V. Musculo-skeletal disorders
1. Rheumatoid arthritis
2. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
VI. Respiratory disorders
1. Bronchial asthma
2. Hay fever
3. Vasomotor (allergic) rhinitis
VII. Skin disorders
1. Psoriasis
2. Pruritus
3. Urticaria
4. Alopecia areata
5. Acne vulgaris
6. Psychogenic purpura
7. Trichotillomania
8. Dermatitis artifacta
9. Lichen planus
10. Warts.

Type A behaviour by Friedman and Rosenman. This
Type A behaviour is characterised by following features:

Time Urgency
There is always a hurry to finish the task at hand. This
is extended even to day-to-day routine activities such
as eating, bathing. Speech is usually hurried and the
psychomotor activity is often increased.

Excessive Competitiveness and Hostility
There is a need to always win, with mistrust for other
people’s motives. Rage ensues, if the person is interrupted from achieving an objective.
Overall, there is a chronic struggle to achieve (or
complete) a large number of tasks, working against the
limits of time available and/or other people in the surrounding environment. In contrast, Type B behaviour
is just the opposite, characterised by a relaxed unhurried attitude and less vigorous attempts to achieve a
goal.
Some studies report that persons with Type B
personality are paradoxically more successful than
those with Type A personality. It is important to note
that not all patients with CAD present with Type A
personality traits.

Treatment
As persons with Type A behaviour are usually aware
of presence of these personality traits, they may come
for treatment on their own, or may need treatment
after CAD has occurred. One or more of the following
methods may be used.
1. Relaxation techniques: This is one of the most
important methods aimed at reducing the basal
generalised anxiety or inner sense of restlessness.
The common techniques include:
i. Jacobson’s progressive muscular relaxation
(PMR) technique
ii. Yoga
iii. Autohypnosis
iv. Transcendental meditation
v. Biofeedback.


<<<PAGE 161>>>
Behavioural Syndromes Associated with Psychological Disturbances and Physiological Factors

2. Behaviour modification techniques.
3. Individual psychotherapy, usually cognitive
behaviour therapy.
4. Group therapy.

Post-cardiac Surgery Delirium
This is a condition similar to ICU (Intensive care unit)
syndrome. A fairly common disorder, its onset typically occurs after 24-48 hours of surgery. The patients,
who develop post-surgery delirium, can sometimes
be the ones who are most fearful before the surgery.
Many causes have been attributed for delirium,
which include:
1. Cardiac status.
2. Presence of preoperative, subclinical organic brain
disease.
3. Restrictive environment of the ICU/CCU, with
isolation.
4. Electrolyte imbalance.
5. Preoperative anxiety, fearfulness, depression or
denial.
Probably the condition is aetiologically multifactorial and should be treated as a type of delirium
(see Chapter 4).

Treatment
1. Preoperative measures.
i. Allaying the anxiety and fears of the patient.
ii. Treatment of depression, if present.
iii. Easy access to clocks and windows in ICU/
CCU, to keep the patient oriented in time.
iv. Allowing a family member to stay near the
patient.
2. Treatment of delirium as described in Chapter 4.
Since delirium can be life threatening, as patients
can take out IV lines, catheters or other ‘life-lines’ and
can jump down from balcony or window, urgent treatment is often needed. Small doses of benzodiazepines
(such as Diazepam or Lorazepam) or antipsychotics
(such as Haloperidol or Risperidone) can be used
orally or parenterally. Later the patient can be switched
to low dose oral haloperidol or risperidone till recovery from delirium occurs.

149

Anticholinergic medication should not routinely
be added to antipsychotics, as it may actually worsen
the delirium. However, it may be needed if there
are any significant extrapyramidal adverse effects
present.

PSYCHIATRY IN MEDICINE
About one-third to two-third of medical outpatients
may have primary or associated psychiatric disorders.
If minor psychological and social problems are also
taken into consideration, this number would be even
larger. Since these patients may benefit from a psychiatric referral, psychiatrists are becoming increasingly
involved in treatment of medical and surgical patients.
In fact a whole new branch of consultation-liaison
psychiatry has sprung up in the last few decades.
Consultation-liaison psychiatry is an area of clinical psychiatry which includes diagnostic, therapeutic,
teaching and research activities of psychiatrists in the
non-psychiatric parts of the hospital.
The common reasons for a psychiatric referral
include:
1. Suicidal attempt, ideation or threat.
2. Grossly ‘abnormal’ behaviour disturbing the
inpatient setting.
3. Presence of disorders related to alcohol or substance abuse/dependence such as severe withdrawal symptoms.
4. Organic brain syndromes.
5. Psychosomatic disorders.
6. Psychological reaction to medical illness.
7. Uncertain diagnosis (No medical illness can be
found despite the presence of significant symptoms).
8. Manipulative or difficult or hostile patient.
9. Psychiatric side-effects of drugs.
10. Patient is unable to manage his or her own affairs.
11. Presence of severe primary psychiatric disorder(s).
A large number of medical illnesses can present
with psychiatric symptomatology. It is important to
keep in mind the possibility of a secondary mental
disorder, i.e. a psychiatric disorder which is caused


<<<PAGE 162>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

150

Table 12.3: Physical Illness and Psychopathology
Physical Illness

Psychiatric Symptomatology (Not all symptoms are present in one patient)

1.

Hyperthyroidism (Thyrotoxicosis)

2.

Hypothyroidism (Myxoedema)

3.

7.

Hyperadrenalism (Cushing’s
syndrome)
Adrenal cortical deficiency
(Addison’s disease)
Hyperpituitarism (Acromegaly)
Hypopituitarism (Simmond’s
disease)
Hyperparathyroidism

8.

Hypoparathyroidism

Anxiety, depression (with apathetic hyperthyroidism), impairment of
higher mental functions, paranoid disorder, delirium (with thyroid
storm), mania, schizophreniform disorder, organic mental disorder
Apathy and lethargy, memory impairment, slow thinking, poor attention span, irritable mood, paranoid ideation, severe depressive episode,
dementia, myxoedema madness
Depression, with paranoid ideation, generalised anxiety, psychosis with
somatic delusions
Depression, with paranoid deficiency ideation, delirium (toxic psychosis), stupor
Apathy, depression, anxiety
Depression with memory disturbances, hypersomnia, delirium, stupor
or coma
Depression, delirium (with parathyroid crises), coma (following recurrent
seizures), early dementia
Delirium (particularly in postoperative cases), dementia (in idiopathic
hypoparathyroidism), depression (with partial parathyroid insufficiency),
mental retardation (especially in pseudo-hypoparathyroidism and
pseudo-pseudo-hypoparathyroidism), ‘pseudoneurosis’
Anxiety and panic attacks
Acute anxiety, severe excitement or psychomotor withdrawal, conversion symptoms, schizophreniform disorder (rare), stupor or coma (rare)
Anxiety, depression, delirium, dementia (AIDS-dementia complex),
organic catatonia, adjustment disorder, suicidal behaviour, delusional
disorder
Depression, delirium (toxic psychosis), steroid psychosis (iatrogenic),
schizophreniform disorder (uncommon)
Personality changes (slow and insidious), mental retardation (in early
onset), dementia (in late onset), schizophreniform disorder (can become
chronic), antisocial behaviour, with rapid mood swings, poor impulse
control and aggressive behaviour
Euphoria or depression, histrionic personality traits, conversion and/or
dissociation symptoms, dementia (if of long duration)
Depression, dementia, paranoid features
Severe depression
Depression, dementia

4.
5.
6.

9. Phaeochromocytoma
10. Acute intermittent porphyria
11. AIDS (Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome)
12. Systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE)
13. Hepatolenticular degeneration
(Wilson’s disease)

14. Multiple sclerosis
15. Parkinsonism
16. Pancreatic carcinoma
17. Progressive supra-nuclear palsy
(PSP)

by an underlying physical disease. Some important
physical illnesses with their commonly presenting
psychiatric symptoms are listed in Table 12.3.

In addition, a large number of physical disorders
such as auto-immune disorders; infections; nutritional
deficiencies (particularly pellagra, pernicious anaemia,


<<<PAGE 163>>>
Behavioural Syndromes Associated with Psychological Disturbances and Physiological Factors

beriberi); malignancies; alcohol and drug abuse; sideeffects or toxicity of many medications; metabolic
and water and electrolyte disturbances (and many
others) may present with psychiatric symptomatology
either alone (especially in initial stages) or with other
physical signs and symptoms. Some of these have
been mentioned under the causes of organic mental
disorders.

GRIEF
Grief is the normal response of an individual to the loss
of a loved object. An “object” (psychological speaking) can include a close relative or a friend, material
values or non-material things such as reputation and
self-esteem.
Grief is a universal phenomenon which is usually
transient and self-limiting. Uncomplicated grief is not
a psychiatric disorder and does not usually require
any psychiatric treatment. However, as physicians
(and psychiatrists) are sometimes called to intervene
in severe cases with complications, the condition is
discussed under this chapter.
Bowlby (1961) described three phases of the
behaviour response to loss of a loved object:
i. protest,
ii. despair, and
iii. detachment.
Following the loss, there is often a state of shock.
The grieved person feels a sense of bewilderment or
numbness, or may completely deny the loss. Although
most commonly this state lasts for a few hours, sometimes it may extend up to 2 weeks. This period may
depend on individual characteristics such as meaning of loss, personality factors and suddenness of
loss. When the full extent of loss is realised, various
physical and mental symptoms appear. These include
repeated sighing and crying, difficulty in breathing,
choking sensation, weakness, poor concentration and
poor appetite. These symptoms usually last for 4-6
weeks but may sometimes extend up to 6 months.
Preoccupation with the memory of the deceased is
a characteristic feature. This is associated with vivid
mental images, vivid dreams and idealisation of the

151

deceased (often ignoring negative qualities). These
preoccupations are usually of a comforting nature.
This may be associated with a ‘sense of presence’ of
the deceased in the surroundings and a misinterpretation of voices and faces of others as that of the lost
person. Rarely, fleeting hallucinations may occur.
The grieved person often becomes depressed
(Table 12.4) and may become somewhat withdrawn
socially. Guilt feelings, hostility towards others, panic
attacks, sense of futility, tiredness, neglect of work
and self, insomnia and suicidal ideas may occur. The
person may identify with the deceased, sometimes
even taking on the deceased’s qualities, mannerisms
and characteristics. Finally, a period of reorganisation
sets in and readjustment to the environment occurs.
Grief has been classified by Gurmeet Singh in
to normal grief and morbid grief reaction. Morbid
grief has been further divided in to pathological and
complicated grief reactions.

Pathological Grief Reaction
When there is an exaggeration of one or more
symptoms of normal grief, or the duration becomes
prolonged beyond 6 months without spontaneous
recovery, grief becomes morbid.
Table 12.4: Grief and Depression
Features

Grief

Severe Depression

1. Identification with
Normal Abnormal
the deceased
2. Ambivalence
Less
More
3. Suicidal ideas
Rare
Common
4. Global worthlessness Rare
Common
5. Self-blame for loss
Limited Global
6. Response evoked
Empathy; Annoyance;
from others
Sympathy Irritation
7. Self-limited
Usually May not be
8. Response to
Usually Usually
assurance
good
Not as good
9. Vulnerability to
Increased Increased
physical illness
10. Response to
Antidepressants
Poor
Good


<<<PAGE 164>>>
152

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The various subtypes are:
i. chronic grief (duration more than 6 months);
ii. delayed grief (onset after 2 weeks of loss);
iii. inhibited grief (denial of loss);
iv. excessive anxiety, guilt, anger or religiosity
grief;
v. identification with the deceased;
vi. over-idealisation of the deceased; and
vii. anniversary reactions (grief reaction on death
anniversary).

Complicated Grief Reaction
Here, the grief is complicated by specific neurotic
or psychotic illness, in addition to grief reaction
symptoms. The various subtypes described include
hysterical, phobic, obsessive-compulsive, manic or
acute psychotic episode.

Treatment
1. Normal grief does not require any psychiatric treatment. Occasionally, mild anxiolytic or hypnotic
may be needed for short-term use.

2. In morbid and (especially) complicated grief,
medication may be needed depending on the
presenting clinical features.
3. The emphasis should be on:
i. Helping the person face the loss by counteracting denial.
ii. Ventilation of feelings (catharsis).
iii. Encouraging presence of significant others.
iv. Bringing together similarly grieved persons,
to encourage communication, share experiences of the loss and to offer companionship,
and social and emotional support. In some
countries (such as UK), referral to CRUSE
counselling is often helpful. There are now
some organisations providing help in some
parts of India, for example, Sangath Bereavement Service (in Goa); Courage-India and
Can-Support (for cancer related bereavement
counselling).
v. Encouragement of goal-directed activities, in a
supportive manner.


<<<PAGE 165>>>
13

Mental Retardation

NORMAL CHILD DEVELOPMENT

INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT

For understanding behavioural and psychological
problems of childhood, it is essential to know the
normal patterns of child development. Although no
two children are alike, there are general similarities
in the mental and physical development of all normal
children. A newborn human infant is probably the most
helpless of all mammalian infants, and needs much
more time to become self-dependent.
The normal development of a child can be divided
into four major areas (these are modified after the
Denver Development Screening Test, DDST).
1. Motor behaviour.
2. Adaptive behaviour.
3. Language, and
4. Personal and social behaviour.
As normal children cross these milestones or
developmental levels at nearly expected age limits
(within a few months’ range) it is best to describe
these developmental changes as milestones. In addition to these milestones, there are other developmental
parameters such as height, weight, activity level and
general health which have an important bearing on
the development of a child. These milestones should
not be seen as rigid set of dates and slight delays from
these milestone dates is not abnormal. Statistically
only those values, which are outside two standard
deviations from the population mean are considered
abnormal. However, statistical abnormality is not
always the same as clinical abnormality.

Intellectual development goes hand-in-hand with the
development of physical and behavioural characteristics. According to Jean Piaget, it can be divided into
the following stages.

Sensori-Motor Stage
This stage extends from birth to 2 years of age, and
is characterised by:
i. Actions related to sucking, orality and assimilation of objects.
ii. Ability to think of only one thought at a time.
iii. Inanimate objects are given human qualities.
iv. ‘Out of sight’ means ceasing to exist.

Concrete Thinking Stage
This stage lasts from 2 years to 7 years of life, and is
characterised by:
i. Egocentric thought with a unique logic of its
own, involving a limited point of view and
lacking introspection.
ii. Inability to generalise from specific events and
to specify from general events.

Abstract or Conceptual Thinking Stage
This stage begins at 7 years of age and lasts till 11 years
of age, although it may be said to continue throughout
life. This is characterised by:
i. Ability to focus on several dimensions of a
problem at one time, mentally.


<<<PAGE 166>>>
154

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry
Table 13.1: Normal Developmental Milestones

Age

Developmental Milestones

1. Motor Behaviour
< 4 weeks
Moves head laterally in prone position
4 weeks
Momentarily lifts head when prone
3 months
Head-holding; Lifts head to 90° when
prone
5 months
Sits with support; Rolls over
6 months
Lifts head and upper chest with support
of extended arms
8 months
Sits steadily with straight back; Crawls;
Early stepping movements when feet are
placed on ground, with support
10 months
Pulls from supine to sitting and sitting
to standing; Stands holding furniture;
Cruises around; Stands without support
momentarily; Creeps on ground without
support of abdomen
14-15 months Walks well without support; Walks
backwards and sideways
2 years
Runs well; Climbs stairs alone; Kicks a
large ball; Throws a ball overhead
2½ years
Walks on tip-toes
3 years
Climbs stairs in a coordinated manner,
with alternate feet going up the staircase;
Rides a tricycle; Makes a broad jump;
Jumps in place
4 years
Stands on one foot for 5 seconds
5 years
Heel-to-toe walk; Jumps on one foot
2. Adaptive Behaviour (includes fine motor
movements)
4 weeks
Momentarily regards close moving objects, close to mid-line
3 months
Follows the moving objects, even away
from mid-line; converges and focuses
4-5 months
Grasps objects crudely; Reaches to grasp
6 months
Transfer objects from one hand to other
9-10 months Claps hands and matches two hand-held
objects in mid line; Thumb-finger grasp
1 year
Gives hand-held objects to mother, when
asked; Turns 2-3 pages of a book at one
time

Age

Developmental Milestones

1½ years

Makes a tower of 3-4 cubes; Scribbles
spontaneously, imitating writing; Sometimes may draw a vertical line
Turns one page of a book at one time;
Makes a tower of 6-7 cubes;
Draws (copies) a horizontal line
Makes a tower of 9-10 cubes; Makes a
3-cube bridge; Draws (copies) a circle.
Draws (copies) a cross.
Draws (copies) a square; Draws (copies)
a recognisable man
Draws (copies) a triangle
Draws (copies) a diamond (Fig. 13.1)
Draws (copies) the following figures
(Figs 13.2 and 13.3)
Draws (copies) the following figure
(Fig. 13.4)

2 years

3 years
4 years
5 years
6 years
7 years
8 years
9 years

3. Language
4 weeks
Turns head and responds to sound of a
bell; Vocalises (apart from crying)
3 months
Laughs aloud

Fig. 13.1

Fig. 13.2

Fig. 13.3

Fig. 13.4
Contd...


<<<PAGE 167>>>
Mental Retardation

155

Contd...
Speaks mama, dada, m-m-m, ah (and
other vowel sounds); Responds to name
10 months
Understands spoken speech to some
extent, e.g. where is ‘mama’?
1-1¼ years
Uses 3-5 words meaningfully
18 months
About 10 words spoken including name
2 years
Combines 2 different words; Names
at least one object in picture; Points to
at least one named body part; Simple
sentences made
3 years
Uses plurals; Has a fairly good vocabulary
5 years
Colour naming accurately (primary
colours); Defines words
4. Personal and Social Behaviour
4 weeks
Regards face intently
2-3 months
Social smile

3 months
6 months

ii. The thought process is flexible and reversible.
iii. Ability of abstraction, i.e. ability to generalise
from specific and ability to find similarities and
differences among specific objects.

the word learning disability is used instead to avoid
the pejorative connotations associated with the word
mental retardation. However, in this book, the term
mental retardation is retained as it is the preferred term
in both ICD-10 and DSM-IV-TR.
Mental retardation is defined as significantly
sub-average general intellectual functioning, associated with significant deficit or impairment
in adaptive functioning, which manifests during the developmental period (before 18 years of
age). General intellectual functioning is usually assessed on a standardised intelligence test with significantly sub-average intelligence as two standard
deviations below the mean (usually an IQ of below
70), whilst adaptive behaviour is the person’s ability to
meet responsibilities of social, personal, occupational
and interpersonal areas of life, appropriate to age,
sociocultural and educational background. Adaptive
behaviour is measured by clinical interview and
standardised assessment scales.
Very often, it is assumed that the persons with
mental retardation constitute a homogenous group.
This is however not true. Persons with mental

9 months

Adolescent Thinking or Formal
Operational Stage
This stage begins at 11 years of age and continues
life-long. This is characterised by:
i. Ability to imagine the possibilities inherent in a
situation, thus making the thought comprehensive.
ii. Ability to develop complete abstract hypotheses
and to test them.
By the end of adolescence, the individual’s
intellectual ability is nearly completely developed,
although learning and intellectual growth go-on
throughout the lifespan of individual.

MENTAL RETARDATION
One to three percent of the general population has
mental retardation. In some countries (such as UK),

9 months

1½ years

2 years
3 years
4 years

5 years

Recognises mother
Takes foot to mouth; Smiles back at
mirror-image of self
Responds to social play; Resists pulling
away of toy and tries to reach for it;
Holds milk-bottle and eats a biscuit all
by oneself
Feeds oneself with a spoon, with little
spilling; Mimics actions of others; Pulls
a toy with a string; Toilet training started
Wears simple garments, socks and shoes
Unbuttons buttons; Buckles shoes; Can
dress and undress, with help
Buttons the dress well; Washes own face;
Plays with other children easily; Separates from mother with little difficulty.
Dresses without supervision.


<<<PAGE 168>>>
156

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

retardation vary in their behavioural, psychological,
physical and social characteristics as much as the socalled ‘normal’ general population does.
Another common error is taking the IQ score as
the measure of someone’s intelligence. It should be remembered that a person with mental retardation must
have a deficit in both general intellectual functioning
and adaptive behaviour.
A classification of mental retardation on the basis
of IQ (Intelligence Quotient, which is equal to mental
age, i.e. MA, divided by chronological age, i.e. CA,
multiplied by 100; i.e. IQ = MA/CA × 100), is provided in Table 13.2.

Mild Mental Retardation
This is the commonest type of mental retardation,
accounting for 85-90% of all cases. The diagnosis
is made usually later than in other types of mental
retardation.
In the preschool period (before 5 years of age),
these children often develop like other normal children,
with very little deficit. Later, they often progress up to
the 6th class (grade) in school and can achieve vocational and social self-sufficiency with a little support.
Only under stressful conditions or in the presence of
an associated disease, supervised care may be needed.
This group has been referred to as ‘educable’ in a
previous educational classification of mental retardation.

Moderate Mental Retardation
About 10% of all persons with mental retardation have
an IQ between 35 and 50. In the educational classification, this group was earlier called as ‘trainable’,
although many of these persons can also be educated.
In the early years, despite a poor social awareness,
these children can learn to speak. Often, they drop
out of school after the 2nd class (grade). They can be
trained to support themselves by performing semiskilled or unskilled work under supervision. A mild
stress may destabilise them from their adaptation; thus
they work best in supervised occupational settings.

Table 13.2: Classification of Mental Retardation by IQ
Mental Retardation Level

IQ Range

1. Mild
2. Moderate
3. Severe
4. Profound

50-70*
35-50*
20-35*
<20*

(*As intelligence tests employed to measure IQ generally
have an error of measurement of about 5 points, each
figure means ± 5 points, e.g. IQ of 50 means an IQ of
50 ± 5, depending on the adaptive behaviour).

Severe Mental Retardation
Severe mental retardation is often recognised early
in life with poor motor development (significantly
delayed developmental milestones) and absent or
markedly delayed speech and other communication
skills.
Later in life, elementary training in personal health
care can be given and they can be taught to talk. At
best, they can perform simple tasks under close supervision. In the earlier educational classification, they
were called as ‘dependent’.

Profound Mental Retardation
This group accounts for about 1-2% of all persons with
mental retardation. The associated physical disorders,
which often contribute to mental retardation, are common in this subtype.
The achievement of developmental milestones is
markedly delayed. They often need nursing care or
‘life support’ under a carefully planned and structured
environment (such as group homes or residential
placements).

Aetiology
Mental retardation is a condition which is caused not
only by biological factors but also by psychosocial
factors. In more than one third of cases, no cause can
be found despite an extensive search.
Some of the common causes of mental retardation are listed in Table 13.3. There appears to be a


<<<PAGE 169>>>
Mental Retardation

157

Table 13.3: Some Causes of Mental Retardation
1. Genetic (probably in 5% of cases)
i. Chromosomal abnormalities (such as Down’s
syndrome, Fragile-X syndrome, Turner’s syndrome, Klinefelter’s syndrome)
ii. Inborn errors of metabolism, involving aminoacids (phenylketonuria, homo-cystinuria,
Hartnup’s disease), lipids (Tay-Sachs disease,
Gaucher’s disease, Niemann-Pick disease),
carbohydrates (galactosaemia, glycogen storage
diseases), purines (Lesch-Nyhan syndrome),
and mucopolysaccharides (Hurler’s disease,
Hunter’s disease, Sanfillipo’s disease).
iii. Single-gene disorders (such as tuberous sclerosis, neurofibromatosis, dystrophia myotonica)
iv. Cranial anomalies (such as microcephaly)
2. Perinatal causes (probably in 10% of cases)
i. Infections (such as rubella, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, cytomegalo-inclusion body disease)
ii. Prematurity

iii. Birth trauma
iv. Hypoxia
v. Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR)
vi. Kernicterus
vii. Placental abnormalities
viii. Drugs during first trimester.
3. Acquired physical disorders in childhood (probably in 2-5% of cases)
i. Infections, especially encephalopathies
ii. Cretinism
iii. Trauma
iv. Lead poisoning
v. Cerebral palsy.
4. Sociocultural causes (probably in 15% of cases)
i. Deprivation of sociocultural stimulation.
5. Psychiatric disorders (probably in 1-2% of cases)
i. Pervasive developmental disorders (such as
Infantile autism)
ii. Childhood onset schizophrenia.

preponderance of males among people with mental
retardation. Some important causes of mental retardation are discussed below.

However, the physical appearance may be normal
and diagnosis made only after investigations, which
include:
1. Ferric chloride test: Addition of FeCl3 to urine
gives a green colour in patients with phenylketonuria. This results from the presence of phenylpyruvic acid in urine. This test may be positive in
other aminoacidurias as well.
2. Guthrie’s test: This involves a bacteriological procedure for measurement of phenylalanine levels
in blood.
3. Chromatography: An early diagnosis is clearly of
paramount importance, since mental retardation
of phenylketonuria is preventable, if diagnosis is
made early in life. The treatment consists of a low
phenylalanine diet, best started before the age of
6 months and usually continued up to 5-6 years
of age. The diet should not be completely devoid
of phenylalanine, as it is an essential amino-acid
and its absence may itself be hazardous.
Other disorders which cause mental retardation
and are preventable by dietary treatment, include:

Phenylketonuria
An inborn error of metabolism, it accounts for about
0.5-1% of all cases of mental retardation. It is an
autosomal recessive (AR) disorder, most prevalent
in North Europe. The basic defect is absence or
inactivity of phenylalanine hydroxylase, a hepatic
enzyme, responsible for catalysis of phenylalanine
to paratyrosine conversion (Fig. 13.5). It results in
marked increase in blood phenylalanine levels and its
metabolites. There is also a decrease in 5-HT, epinephrine and norepinephrine levels in brain.
The majority of patients with phenylketonuria
have severe mental retardation. The associated
features may include short stature, fair complexion
with coarse features, widely spaced upper incisors,
eczematous dermatitis, epilepsy, hyperactivity, poor
communication skills and poor motor coordination.
EEG may be abnormal in up to 80% of cases.


<<<PAGE 170>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

158

Fig. 13.5: Metabolic Pathways of Phenylalanine: Normal and Abnormal

1. Homocystinuria: The treatment is with methionine-free diet.
2. Galactosaemia: The treatment is with lactose and
galactose-free diet.
3. Maple syrup urine disease (Menkes’ disease): The
treatment is with a diet low in leucine, iso-leucine
and valine.
4. Hyperprolinaemia: The treatment is with low
proline diet.
5. Leucine-sensitive hypoglycaemia: The treatment
is with low-protein, leucine-deficient diet.
6. Fructose intolerance: Fructose, sucrose and other
sugars should be replaced in diet.

Down’s syndrome
Down’s syndrome or mongolism occurs in 1 out of
every 700 births. It accounts for about 10% of children
with moderate to severe mental retardation.
There are three types of chromosomal aberrations
in Down’s syndrome:
1. Trisomy-21 is the commonest where karyotype of
mother is normal.
2. Mosaicism, with both normal and trisomic cells
present.

3. Translocation between chromosome 21 and 15.
Thus, the total number of chromosomes is 46, in
spite of 3 chromosomes at 21. The translocation is
inherited, with asymptomatic carriers containing
only 45 chromosomes.
The most important risk factor is higher maternal
age (>35 years), with a risk of 1:50 after the age of
45. The clinical features may include generalised
hypotonia, hyperflexibility, round face, oblique
palpebral fissures, a flat nasal bridge, short ears, loose
skin folds at the nape of neck, persistent epicanthic
folds, single palmar crease, high arched palate, thick
tongue, incurved little fingers and Brushfield spots on
irides.
Congenital heart disease (in about 35% of cases),
gastrointestinal anomalies (in about 10%), chronic
serous otitis media (in >50%), hypothyroidism and
Alzheimer’s disease (in 30’s and 40’s), epilepsy (in
about 10%), ocular disorders, reduced fertility and
reduced life span (often due to antecedent complications like infections) are common.
The diagnosis is made by clinical assessment and
chromosomal studies. At present, there is no effective
pharmacological treatment available.


<<<PAGE 171>>>
Mental Retardation

Tuberous Sclerosis
This is an autosomal dominant disorder, also known as
epiloia. It occurs in about 1:15,000 persons in general
population. The characteristic clinical features are
known as Vogt’s triad, which consist of:
i. Mental retardation, ranging from mild to severe.
ii. Convulsions.
iii. Adenoma sebaceum, present on the face (usually
red) and also on the rest of the body (usually
brownish white). The distribution on the face
is usually of butterfly type.
Multiple glial nodules appear throughout the cerebral cortex and cerebellum. Tumours in the various
other parts of the body (e.g. rhabdomyoma of heart,
mixed tumours of kidney, retinal nerve tumours) may
occur. In addition, periosteal thickening, pulmonary
fibrosis, renal failure and cardiac failure can be manifested.
There is no effective treatment at present except
symptomatic management of seizures and other systemic manifestations.

Fragile-X Syndrome
This is second commonest chromosomal aberration
causing mental retardation. Occurring in about 1 out
of 1000 live births, it is diagnosed on chromosomal
studies. The characteristic presence of a fragile site
at the tip of the long arm of X-chromosome appears
as a constriction.
Clinically, the person may have a short stature,
large head, large ‘bat’ ears, long face and big sized
testes (in males after puberty). The associated psychiatric disorders, like attention deficit disorder, may
be present.

Cretinism
Goitrous cretinism is a common cause of mental retardation in India. It is endemic in iodine-deficient areas
such as the goitrous Himalayan belt. Early recognition
and treatment is essential, as it is a preventable cause
of mental retardation.
The clinical features include goitre, dwarfism,
coarse skin, ossification delays, apathy, hoarseness of

159

voice, large tongue, subnormal temperature, pot belly,
anaemia, hypotonia of muscles, hypertelorism and
mental retardation, which may be severe to profound.

Cerebral Palsy
This is a syndrome consisting of a conglomeration of
perinatal disorders of various aetiologies, presenting
with a common feature of paralysis of limbs. The
paralysis may be monoplegia, hemiplegia, paraplegia,
triplegia or quadriplegia. It is usually of upper motor
neuron type, presenting with spasticity.
The extrapyramidal symptoms may be present
and seizures may occur often. Mental retardation is
present in about 70% of all cases, and ranges from
mild to severe.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis is made by the following steps:
1. History.
2. General physical examination.
3. Detailed neurological examination.
4. Mental status examination, for the assessment of
associated psychiatric disorders and the clinical
assessment of the level of intelligence.
5. Investigations.
i. Routine investigations.
ii. Urine test, e.g. for phenylketonuria, maple syrup
urine disease.
iii. EEG, especially in presence of seizures.
iv. Blood levels, for inborn errors of metabolism.
v. Chromosomal studies, e.g. in Down’s syndrome,
prenatal (by amniocentesis or chorionic villus
biopsy) and postnatal.
vi. CT scan or MRI scan of brain, e.g. in tuberous
sclerosis, focal seizures, unexplained neurological syndromes, anomalies of skull configuration,
severe or profound mental retardation without
any apparent cause, toxoplasmosis.
vii. Thyroid function tests, particularly when cretinism is suspected.
viii. Liver function tests, e.g. in mucopolysaccharidosis.
6. Psychological tests


<<<PAGE 172>>>
160

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The commonly used tests for measurement of
intelligence include:
i. Seguin form board test.
ii. Stanford-Binet, Binet-Simon or Binet-Kamath
tests.
iii. Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children
(WISC) for 6½ to 16 years of age.
iv. Wechsler’s Preschool and Primary Scale of
Intelligence (WPPSI) for 4 to 6½ years of
age.
v. Bhatia’s battery of performance tests.
vi. Raven’s progressive matrices (coloured, standard and advanced).
The tests used for the assessment of adaptive
behaviour include:
i. Vineland Social Maturity Scale (VSMS).
ii. Denver Development Screening Test (DDST).
iii. Gessell’s Development Scale.

Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of mental retardation is usually simple.
However, while making this diagnosis, the following
conditions must be kept in mind, as they can be and
are many times mistaken for mental retardation, with
disastrous results.
1. Deaf and dumb (This possibility must always be
ruled out either by clinical examination and/or by
audiometry).
2. Deprived children, with inadequate social stimulation (Although this can also cause mental retardation, many children become ‘normal’ intellectually
on providing adequate stimulation).
3. Isolated speech defects.
4. Psychiatric disorders (such as infantile autism,
childhood onset schizophrenia).
5. Systemic disorders (without mental retardation
but with physical debilitation).
6. Epilepsy.

Management
The management of mental retardation can be discussed under prevention at primary, secondary and
tertiary levels.

Primary Prevention
This consists of:
1. Improvement in socioeconomic condition
of society at large, aiming at elimination of
under-stimulation, malnutrition, prematurity
and perinatal factors.
2. Education of lay public, aiming at removal of the
misconceptions about individuals with mental
retardation.
3. Medical measures for good perinatal medical
care to prevent infections, trauma, excessive
use of medications, malnutrition, obstetric
complications, and diseases of pregnancy.
4. Universal immunisation of children with BCG,
polio, DPT, and MMR.
5. Facilitating research activities to study the
causes of mental retardation and their treatment.
6. Genetic counselling in at-risk parents, e.g. in
phenylketonuria, Down’s syndrome.

Secondary Prevention
1. Early detection and treatment of preventable disorders, e.g. phenylketonuria (low phenylalanine
diet), maple syrup urine disease (low branched
amino-acid diet) and others as discussed earlier;
hypothyroidism (thyroxine).
2. Early detection of handicaps in sensory, motor or
behavioural areas with early remedial measures
and treatment.
3. Early treatment of correctable disorders, e.g.
infections (antibiotics), skull configuration
anomalies (surgical correction).
4. Early recognition of presence of mental retardation. A delay in diagnosis may cause unfortunate
delay in rehabilitation.
5. As far as possible, individuals with mental
retardation should be integrated with normal
individuals in society, and any kind of segregation or discrimination should be actively
avoided. They should be provided with facilities
to enable them to reach their own full potential.
However, there is a role of special schools for
those with more severe mental retardation.


<<<PAGE 173>>>
Mental Retardation

Tertiary Prevention
1. Adequate treatment of psychological and behavioural problems.
2. Behaviour modification, using the principles of
positive and negative reinforcement.
3. Rehabilitation in vocational, physical, and social
areas, commensurate with the level of handicap.
4. Parental counselling is extremely important
to lessen the levels of stress, teaching them to
adapt to the situation, enlisting them (especially
parents) as co-therapists, and encouraging formation of parents’ or carers’ organisation (s) and
self-help groups.
5. Institutionalisation or residential care may be
needed for individuals with profound mental
retardation.

161

6. Legislation: In 1995, the ‘Persons with Disability Act’ came in to being in India. This act
envisages mandatory support for prevention,
early detection, education, employment, and
other facilities for the welfare of persons with
disabilities in general, and mental retardation
in particular. This Act provides for affirmative
action and non-discrimination of persons with
disabilities.
In 1999, the ‘National Trust Act’ came in to
force. This Act proposes to involve the parents
of mentally challenged persons and voluntary
organisations in setting up and running a variety
of services and facilities with governmental
funding.


<<<PAGE 174>>>
14
CLASSIFICATION IN CHILD PSYCHIATRY
The various psychiatric disorders seen in childhood (‘disorders of psychological development’ and
‘behavioural and emotional disorders with onset
usually occurring in childhood and adolescence’) are
discussed under the following headings:
1. Mental retardation
2. Specific developmental disorders
3. Pervasive developmental disorders
4. Hyperkinetic disorders
5. Conduct disorders
6. Tic disorders
7. Enuresis and encopresis
8. Speech disorders
9. Habit disorders
10. Other disorders.

MENTAL RETARDATION
Mental retardation (or learning disability) has been
discussed in Chapter 13.

SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS
Mental retardation is a generalised impairment in
nearly all areas of functioning. In contrast, specific developmental disorders are characterised by an
inadequate development in usually one specific area
of functioning.

Child Psychiatry
The deficit in functioning may be in scholastic
skills, speech and language, and motor skills. These
may include reading (developmental reading disorder), language (developmental language disorder),
arithmetic or mathematics (developmental arithmetic
or mathematics disorder), articulation (developmental
articulation disorder or phonological disorder), or
coordination (developmental coordination disorder).
Sometimes, more than one developmental disorder is
present.
All developmental disorders either cause impairment in academic functioning at school, especially
when language is affected, or impairment in the daily
activities. A large majority of these children have an
underlying cerebral disorder. Boys are usually more
affected than girls.
Before making a diagnosis of specific developmental disorder, it is important to keep in mind the
mental age, IQ, sociocultural background, schooling,
impairment(s) in vision and hearing, or any neurological deficit.

Specific Reading Disorder
It is also called as developmental reading disorder
or dyslexia.
The child presents with a serious delay in learning to read which is evident from the early years.
The problems may include omissions, distortions, or
substitutions of words, long hesitations, reversal of
words, or simply slow reading.


<<<PAGE 175>>>
Child Psychiatry

Writing and spelling are also impaired. It is important to differentiate the disorder from scholastic
backwardness; therefore a proper assessment is mandatory.

Specific Arithmetic Disorder
It is also called as developmental arithmetic disorder or developmental mathematic disorder or
dyscalculia.
The child presents with arithmetic abilities well
below the level expected for the mental age (below
par). The problems may include failure to understand
simple mathematical concepts, failure to recognise
mathematical signs or numerical symbols, difficulty
in carrying out mathematical manipulations, and difficulty in learning mathematical tables.

Specific Developmental Disorder of
Speech and Language
It is also called as developmental language disorder, developmental communication disorder, or
dysphasia.
There are three main types:
i. Phonological disorder: Also called as dyslalia, it
is characterised by below par accuracy in the use
of speech sounds despite normal language skills.
The problems include severe articulation errors
that make it difficult for others to understand the
speech. Speech sounds or phonemes are omitted,
distorted or substituted (e.g. wabbit for rabbit, ca
for car, bu for blue).
ii. Expressive language disorder: It is characterised
by a below par ability of using expressive speech.
The problems include restricted vocabulary, difficulty in selecting appropriate words, and immature
grammatical usage. Cluttering of speech may also
be present.
iii. Receptive language disorder: The disorder often
presents as a receptive-expressive language disorder and both receptive and expressive impairments
are present together. The disorder is characterised
by a below par understanding of language. Problems include failure to respond to simple instruc-

163

tions; it is obviously important to rule out deafness
and pervasive developmental disorder.

Specific Developmental Disorder of
Motor Function
It is also called as motor skills disorder, developmental coordination disorder, clumsy child syndrome or
motor dyspraxia. It is characterised by poor coordination in daily activities of life, e.g. in dressing, walking,
feeding, and playing. There is an inability to perform
fine or gross motor tasks.

Treatment
The treatment of specific developmental disorders is
based on learning theory principles and is behavioural
in approach. It involves use of special remedial teaching, focusing on the underlying deficit (for example,
perceptual motor training in motor skills disorder).
The treatment of common co-morbid emotional
problems is often necessary. Parental education and
counselling are important components of good management.

PERVASIVE DEVELOPMENTAL
DISORDERS
Infantile autism was described for the first time by Leo
Kanner in 1943 as ‘autistic disturbance of affective
contact’. This syndrome has variously been described
as autistic disorder, pervasive developmental disorder,
childhood autism, childhood psychosis and pseudodefective psychosis.
This syndrome is more common (3-4 times) in
males and has a prevalence rate of 0.4-0.5 per 1000
population. Although earlier it was thought to be commoner in upper socioeconomic classes, recent studies
have failed to confirm this finding.
Typically, the onset occurs before the age of 2½
years though in some cases, the onset may occur later
in childhood. Such cases are called as childhood onset
autism or childhood onset pervasive developmental
disorder. Autism occurring before or after 2½ years
of age is not clinically very different.


<<<PAGE 176>>>
164

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Clinical Features
The characteristic features are:
1. Autism (marked impairment in reciprocal social
and interpersonal interaction):
i. Absent social smile.
ii. Lack of eye-to-eye-contact.
iii. Lack of awareness of others’ existence or feelings; treats people as furniture.
iv. Lack of attachment to parents and absence of
separation anxiety.
v. No or abnormal social play; prefers solitary
games.
vi. Marked impairment in making friends.
vii. Lack of imitative behaviour.
viii. Absence of fear in presence of danger.
2. Marked impairment in language and non-verbal
communication
i. Lack of verbal or facial response to sounds or
voices; might be thought as deaf initially.
ii. In infancy, absence of communicative sounds
like babbling.
iii. Absent or delayed speech (about half of autistic
children never develop useful speech).
iv. Abnormal speech patterns and content. Presence
of echolalia, perseveration, poor articulation and
pronominal reversal (I-You) is common.
v. Rote memory is usually good.
vi. Abstract thinking is impaired.
3. Abnormal behavioural characteristics
i. Mannerisms.
ii. Stereotyped behaviours such as head-banging,
body-spinning, hand-flicking, lining-up objects,
rocking, clapping, twirling, etc.
iii. Ritualistic and compulsive behaviour.
iv. Resistance to even the slightest change in the
environment.
v. Attachment may develop to inanimate objects.
vi. Hyperkinesis is commonly associated.
4. Mental retardation
Only about 25% of all children with autism have
an IQ of more than 70. A large majority (more
than 50%) of these children have moderate to

profound mental retardation. There appears to be a
correlation between severity of mental retardation,
absence of speech and epilepsy in autism.
5. Other features
i. Many children with autism particularly enjoy
music.
ii. In spite of the pervasive impairment of functions, certain islets of precocity or splinter
functions may remain (called as Idiot savant
syndrome). Examples of such splinter functions
are prodigious rote memory or calculating ability, and musical abilities.
iii. Epilepsy is common in children with an IQ of
less than 50.
The course of infantile autism is usually chronic
and only 1-2% become near normal in marital, social
and occupational functioning. A large majority (about
70%) lead dependent lives.

Aetiology
Presently, the cause of infantile autism seems to be predominantly biological. Earlier reports of cold, ‘refrigerator’ mothers causing autism in their children have
not been substantiated and have unnecessarily lead
to undue distress to parents of children with autism.
The evidence for biological causation includes a
higher than average history of perinatal CNS insult,
EEG abnormalities, epilepsy, ventricular dilatation
on brain imaging, increased serotonin (5-HT) levels
in brain and/or neurophysiological abnormalities in
some patients.

Treatment
The treatment consists of three modes of intervention
which are often used together.
1. Behaviour Therapy
i. Development of a regular routine with as few
changes as possible.
ii. Structured class room training, aiming at learning new material and maintenance of acquired
learning.
iii. Positive reinforcements to teach self-care skills.


<<<PAGE 177>>>
Child Psychiatry

iv. Speech therapy and/or sign language teaching.
v. Behavioural techniques to encourage interpersonal interactions.
2. Psychotherapy
Parental counselling and supportive psychotherapy
can be very useful in allaying parental anxiety
and guilt, and helping their active involvement in
therapy. However, overstimulation of child should
be avoided during treatment.
3. Pharmacotherapy
Drug treatment can be used for treatment of autism
as well as for treatment of co-morbid epilepsy.
i. Haloperidol decreases dopamine levels in brain.
It is believed to decrease hyperactivity and
behavioural symptoms. Risperidone, an atypical antipsychotic, is helpful in some patients
and is licensed in some countries for treatment
of autism in children aged 5 and above. Both
haloperidol and risperidone can cause extrapyramidal side-effects (EPSE), though usually
more with haloperidol.
The starting dose for Risperidone is usually
0.25-0.5 mg (based on body weight), with a
dose range of 0.02-0.06 mg/kg/day.
ii. Other drugs such as SSRIs, chlorpromazine,
amphetamines, methysergide, imipra mine,
multi-vitamins and triiodothyronine have been
tried with limited success and should be used
only by the experts in the field.
iii. Anticonvulsant medication is used for the treatment of generalised or other seizures, if present.

OTHER PERVASIVE DEVELOPMENTAL
DISORDERS
Childhood psychosis is a vague term which includes
all psychotic illnesses occurring in childhood, such
as infantile and childhood onset autism, childhood
schizophrenia, mood disorders, and organic psychiatric disorders. This term has frequently been misused in
the past, also meaning at times infantile autism alone.
This is a term which is probably best dispensed with.

165

Schizophrenia, mood disorders and organic
psychiatric disorders have a nearly similar picture in
children as in adulthood. Sometimes, childhood onset
schizophrenia may be mistaken for autism. The most
important differentiating features are:
1. Delusions, formal thought disorder and hallucinations may be present in childhood-onset schizophrenia while they are always absent in infantile
autism.
2. Typical age of onset of symptoms is before 2½
years in infantile autism while it is after 5-6 years
in childhood onset schizophrenia.
3. Moderate to severe mental retardation and epilepsy
are common in infantile autism while they are rare
in childhood-onset schizophrenia. Mental retardation, if ever present, is usually of mild type.
Another type of childhood psychosis, called
Heller’s syndrome or disintegrative psychosis, has
often been described in literature. Typically, the age
of onset is between 3 to 5 years and the syndrome is
characterised by a rapid downhill course, leading to
deterioration and development of neurological deficits.
This is really a ‘rag-bag’ category containing diverse
organic brain syndromes of varying aetiologies (For
example, some are caused by lipoid degeneration of
ganglia in central nervous system). Prognosis is usually poor in this condition.
Two other syndromes with autistic features have
been described; namely, Asperger’s syndrome and
Rett’s syndrome.
Asperger’s syndrome is characterised by autism
without any significant delay in language or cognitive
development (including intelligence). This syndrome
occurs predominantly in boys (male : female ratio =
8:1). It probably represents mild cases of autism and
has been also called as high functioning autism.
Rett’s syndrome is a disorder which is only
reported in girls so far. After an apparently normal
early development and normal head circumference at
birth, there is a deceleration of head growth between
the age of 5 months and 30 months. There is also a loss
of purposive hand movements and acquired fine motor


<<<PAGE 178>>>
166

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

manipulative skills between the same ages, with the
subsequent development of stereotyped movements
of hands (e.g. hand-wringing). Later, other movement
disorders also develop and severe mental handicap is
invariable.

ATTENTION DEFICIT DISORDER
(HYPERKINETIC DISORDER)
This is a syndrome first described by Heinrich Hoff
in 1854. Since then, it has been known by a variety
of names such as minimal brain dysfunction (MBD),
hyperkinetic syndrome, Strauss syndrome, organic
drivenness and minimal brain damage.
A relatively common disorder, it occurs in about
3% of school age children. Males are 6-8 times more
often affected. The onset occurs before the age of
7 years and a large majority of patients exhibit symptoms by the 4th year of age.
Attention deficit disorder (ADD) is of four clinical types: with hyperactivity, without hyperactivity,
residual type, and with conduct disorder.
1. Attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity
(Hyperkinetic disorder): This is the commonest
type. The characteristic clinical features are:
Poor attention span with distractibility
i. Fails to finish the things started.
ii. Shifts from one uncompleted activity to
another.
iii. Doesn’t seem to listen.
iv. Easily distracted by external stimuli.
v. Often loses things.
Hyperactivity
i. Fidgety.
ii. Difficulty in sitting still at one place for long.
iii. Moving about here and there.
iv. Talks excessively.
v. Interference in other people’s activities.
Impulsivity
i. Acts before thinking, on the spur of the moment.
ii. Difficulty in waiting for turn at work or
play.

2. Attention deficit disorder without hyperactivity: It is a rare disorder with similar clinical
features, except hyperactivity.
3. Residual type: It is usually diagnosed in a patient
in adulthood, with a past history of ADD and presence of a few residual features in adult life.
4. Hyperkinetic disorder with conduct disorder
(Hyperkinetic conduct disorder).

Diagnosis
The diagnosis can be made on the basis of:
1. Teacher’s school report (often the most reliable).
2. Parent’s report.
3. Clinical examination (many children with hyperactivity may be able to sit still in the new setting
of the hospital and thus the diagnosis may be
missed).
Hyperactivity is also a common clinical symptom
in mental retardation. Thus, mental retardation should
always be excluded, before making a diagnosis of
ADD.

Aetiology
Many factors, such as minimal brain damage, maturational lag, genetics, neurotransmitters (norepinephrine
and dopamine) and early developmental psychodynamic factors have been incriminated. The cause is
not yet known but it is more likely to be a biological
factor than a purely psychosocial one, though a focus
on both factors is important in the management of an
individual patient.

Course
A large majority (about 80%) of patients improve
on their own by the time of puberty, though a few
(15-20%) may have persistent symptoms even in
adulthood. Impulsivity and inattention are usually the
most common residual features after puberty while
hyperactivity often tends to remit.
ADD can also present in adulthood and Adult
ADD is recognised by both ICD-10 and DSM-IV-TR.
These includes graduates of childhood onset ADD
which continue to have symptoms in adulthood and


<<<PAGE 179>>>
Child Psychiatry

those who begin with symptoms for the first time in
adulthood.

Treatment
The management of ADD consists of the following
methods:

Pharmacotherapy
1. Stimulant medication: Dextro-amphetamine or
dexamphetamine (2.5-20 mg/day) and methylphenidate (5-60 mg/day) have been traditionally
used. Currently, Methylphenidate is the drug
of choice in the treatment of ADD, with a high
response rate. Methylphenidate is also available
in sustained release formulations which are preferable due to improved treatment concordance
and convenience of once a day dose.
Both dexamphetamine and methylphenidate
act on the reticular activating system, causing
stimulation of the inhibitory influences on the
cerebral cortex, thus decreasing hyperactivity
and/or distractibility.
2. Others: When stimulant medication is not available or is not effective, other drugs can be used
after careful individual consideration of the risks
and benefits in the individual patient. These
include clonidine, tricyclic antidepressants
(such as imipramine), bupropion, venlafaxine,
chlorproma zine, thiorida zine, and lithium
carbonate.
Atomoxetine, a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor,
may be an alternative for children who do not respond
to stimulants. The usual dose range is 0.5-1.2 mg/kg/
day. Atomoxetine appears to be the drug of choice in
adult ADD.
Barbiturates are contraindicated in ADD as they
increase hyperactivity.

Behaviour Modification
Counselling and Supportive Psychotherapy
Behaviour modification and counselling are very
important in the successful management of ADD and
can be used along with drug therapy.

167

CONDUCT DISORDERS
Conduct disorder is characterised by a persistent and
significant pattern of conduct, in which the basic rights
of others are violated or rules of society are not followed. The diagnosis is only made when the conduct
is far in excess of the routine mischief of children and
adolescents. The onset occurs much before 18 years
of age, usually even before puberty.
The disorder is much more (about 5-10 times)
common in males. In United States of America, about
10% of all male children under the age of 18 have
conduct disorder.
According to ICD-10, there are four subtypes of
conduct disorder:
1. Conduct disorder confined to the family context.
2. Unsocialised conduct disorder.
3. Socialised conduct disorder.
4. Oppositional defiant disorder.
The characteristic clinical features include:
1. Frequent lying.
2. Stealing or robbery.
3. Running away from home and school.
4. Physical violence such as rape, fire-setting, assault
or breaking-in, use of weapons.
5. Cruelty towards other people and animals.
In the more common socialised (group) type of
conduct disorder, the person claims loyalty to his or
her group. The unsocialised (solitary) type is a more
serious disorder with usually a severe underlying
psychopathology. Earlier, the patients with conduct
disorder were called as juvenile delinquents.
Many patients of conduct disorder, especially
socialised (group) type, go on to improve markedly and may lead well adjusted lives. Some others,
especially those with severe symptomatology, have
a more chronic course and may be diagnosed with
antisocial personality disorder (or traits) after 18
years of age.
In addition to the typical symptoms of conduct
disorder, secondary complications often develop
such as substance misuse or dependence, unwanted
pregnancies, criminal record, suicidal and homicidal
behaviour.


<<<PAGE 180>>>
168

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The treatment of conduct disorder is usually difficult. The most frequent mode of management is
placement in a corrective institution, often after the
child has had legal difficulties. Behavioural, educational and psychotherapeutic measures are usually
employed for the behaviour modification.
Drug treatment may be needed in presence of
epilepsy (anticonvulsants), hyperactivity (stimulant
medication), impulse control disorder and episodic
aggressive behaviour (lithium, carbamazepine), and
psychotic symptoms (antipsychotics).

i. Simple motor tics: These may include eyeblinking, grimacing, shrugging of shoulders,
tongue protrusion.
ii. Complex motor tics: These are facial gestures,
stamping, jumping, hitting self, squatting, twirling, echokinesis (repetition of observed acts),
copropraxia (obscene acts).
Motor tics are often the earliest to appear, beginning in the head region and then progressing downwards. These are later followed by the vocal tics.

TIC DISORDERS

The vocal tics in Tourette’s disorder can also be simple
or complex.
i. Simple vocal tics: Simple vocal tics include
coughing, barking, throat-clearing, sniffing, and
clicking.
ii. Complex vocal tics: These include some very
characteristic, though not always present,
symptoms of Tourette syndrome; for example,
echolalia (repetition of heard phrases), palilalia
(repetition of heard words), coprolalia (use of
obscene words), and mental coprolalia (thinking
of obscene words).
Obsessions and Compulsions are often the associated symptoms. These are usually the last symptoms
to appear.

Tic disorders are characterised by the presence of
tics. Tic is an abnormal involuntary movement (AIM)
which occurs suddenly, repetitively, rapidly and is
purposeless in nature. It is of two types:
1. Motor tic, characterised by repetitive motor movements.
2. Vocal tic, characterised by repetitive vocalisations.
Tic disorders can be either transient or chronic.
Transient tic disorders are more common in boys
and can occur in 5-20% of children. Tics are easily
worsened by stressful life situations, fatigue and/or
use stimulants such as caffeine and nicotine. A vast
majority of these disappear by adulthood.
A special type of chronic tic disorder is Gilles de
la Tourette’s syndrome or Tourette’s disorder.

Tourette’s Disorder
Tourette’s disorder is typically characterised by:
1. Multiple motor tics.
2. Multiple vocal tics.
3. Duration of more than 1 year.
4. Onset usually before 11 years of age and almost
always before 21 years of age.
The disorder is usually more common (about three
times) in males and has a prevalence rate of about 0.5
per 1000 people.

Motor Tics
The motor tics in Tourette’s disorder can be simple
or complex.

Vocal Tics

Aetiology
The aetiology of Tourette syndrome is not known but
the presence of learning difficulties, neurological soft
signs, hyperactivity, abnormal EEG record, abnormal
evoked potentials, and abnormal CT Brain findings in
some patients, point towards a biological basis.
There is some evidence to suggest that Tourette
syndrome may be inherited as autosomal dominant
disorder with variable penetrance.

Treatment
Pharmacotherapy is usually the preferred mode of
treatment though there is lack of clear evidence of
efficacy. Antipsychotics are often helpful in small
doses and several drugs have been tried including
haloperidol, risperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole,


<<<PAGE 181>>>
Child Psychiatry

ziprasidone, quetiapine, and sulpiride. Treatment
options are often chosen based on adverse effect
profile of each drug (which adverse effects to avoid).
SSRIs (such as fluoxetine) have been used for the
treatment of co-morbid obsessive compulsive symptoms.
In the resistant cases or in case of severe sideeffects, pimozide or clonidine can be used under
expert supervision. Behaviour therapy can sometimes
be used, as an adjunct.

NON-ORGANIC ENURESIS
Enuresis is repetitive voiding of urine, either during
the day or night, at inappropriate places. This state of
affairs is normal in infancy.
Most children achieve bladder control by the age
of three years. By the age of 5 years, there are still
about 7% of children who wet their bed. Technically,
enuresis is diagnosed only after 5 years of age (and
at least 4 years of mental age).
Enuresis can be either of:
1. Primary type, where bladder control has never
been achieved, or
2. Secondary type, where enuresis emerges after a
period of bladder control (at least one year).
The majority (about 80%) of children with enuresis
have nocturnal bed wetting only. Non-organic enuresis
is more common (about two times) in males.

Aetiology
The exact cause of enuresis is not known. A variety
of factors, which are implicated in its causation, are
largely biopsychosocial. About 75% of children with
enuresis have a first degree relative with history of
enuresis.
The most commonly occurring factors, however,
are psychosocial, such as emotional disturbances, insecurity, sibling rivalry, death of a parent. An organic
cause must be looked for in children with diurnal
enuresis (15% of all cases of diurnal enuresis) and
adolescents with enuresis. The organic causes are
present in about 5% of cases and include worm infes-

169

tation, spina bifida, neurogenic bladder, urinary tract
infection, diabetes mellitus, and seizure disorder.
In secondary enuresis, the age of onset is usually
5-8 years. Enuresis tends to remit spontaneously and
only 1% of children with enuresis continue to have
the disorder in adulthood.

Treatment
The management consists of one or more of the following measures:
1. Restriction of fluid intake after 8 PM, in nocturnal
enuresis.
2. Bladder training during daytime, aimed at increasing the holding-time of bladder. This is carried out
in a step-by-step manner using positive reinforcements.
3. Interruption of sleep before the expected time of
bed wetting. The child should be fully woken up
and made aware of passing of urine.
4. Conditioning devices, which cause an alarm to
sound as soon as the voided urine touches the bedsheet. It is important to check the child’s hearing
before starting treatment. The alarm causes inhibition of further micturition and the child awakens. If
properly used, it is an effective method of therapy.
5. Supportive psychotherapy for the child, parents
and the whole family is often needed.
6. Pharmacotherapy: Drug treatment is usually not
a preferred option for the treatment of enuresis.
The drug of choice in those who need pharmacotherapy has traditionally been a tricyclic antidepressant, usually imipramine (25-75 mg/day). It
probably acts by its anticholinergic effect as well as
by decreasing the deep sleep (stage 4 NREM-sleep)
period. However, there is a risk of sudden death in
some children with the use of tricyclic antidepressants.
It should never be used for children under the age of
6 years.
Intranasal desmopressin has been found useful
in some patients and is a good alternative. The other
drugs that have been used for this purpose include
diazepam, anticholinergics, amphetamines, placebos,
but none have shown a good therapeutic response.


<<<PAGE 182>>>
170

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

NON-ORGANIC ENCOPRESIS
Encopresis is repetitive passage of faeces at inappropriate time and/or place, after bowel control is
physiologically possible. This is not due to the presence of any organic cause, which is called as faecal
incontinence. Normally, toilet training is achieved
between the ages of 2 and 3. Encopresis is defined as
occurring after the age of 4 years.
Encopresis can be either of:
1. Primary type, where toilet training has never been
achieved, or
2. Secondary type, where encopresis emerges after
a period of faecal continence. This type typically
occurs between the ages of 4 and 8.
Encopresis is more common (about 3-4 times) in
males. By the age of 5 years, 1-1.5% of children suffer
from encopresis. It tends to remit spontaneously with
increasing age and by the age of 16 there are virtually
no adolescents with encopresis. About 25% of these
patients have associated enuresis.

Aetiology
The factors implicated in causation of encopresis
include:
1. Inadequate, inconsistent toilet training.
2. Sibling rivalry.
3. Maturational lag.
4. Underlying hyperkinetic disorder.
5. Emotional disturbances.
6. Mental retardation.
7. Childhood schizophrenia.
8. Autistic disorder.
Whenever presented with a patient of encopresis,
organic causes (faecal incontinence) must be ruled out
(such as Hirschsprung’s disease, overflow diarrhoea
with constipation, hypothyroidism, inflammatory
bowel disease and neurological lesions).

Treatment
The best treatment of encopresis is preventive. The
toilet training period should be made as consistent and
smooth as possible. The family environment should be

warm and understanding. The emotional disturbances
of the child should not be ignored and should be dealt
with at the earliest. The communication between the
family members should be direct.
After encopresis has developed, the treatment of
choice is behaviour therapy, using reinforcements
(both positive and negative). The other treatments
include psychotherapy, biofeedback and imipramine
(in non-retentive encopresis).

SPEECH DISORDERS
Stuttering is a disorder of speech, characterised by the
following features:
1. Disturbed fluency and rhythm of speech.
2. Intermittent blocking.
3. Repetition of words rapidly.
4. Prolongation of sounds.
5. Associated anxiety or distress.
Earlier stammering and stuttering were differentiated on the basis of minor differences. At present,
they are thought to be synonymous. The disorder is
a fairly common one, affecting 2-5% of all children
and 0.5-1% of all adults. Males are more commonly
(about three times) affected.
Differential diagnosis is from cluttering, which is
characterised by an erratic and dysarrhythmic pattern
of speech, with jerky and rapid spurting of words.
Unlike in stuttering where the person is aware of the
difficulty in speech, the affected person in cluttering
is usually unaware of the abnormal speech pattern.

Treatment
The treatment is by behaviour modification techniques
such as desensitisation, biofeedback and stammer
suppresser; and by techniques to diminish anxiety
like relaxation therapy, drug therapy, or individual or
group psychotherapy.

HABIT DISORDERS
These are stereotyped disorders which are intentionally and repetitively produced but serve no constructive or socially acceptable function.


<<<PAGE 183>>>
Child Psychiatry

The common habit disorders include thumb sucking, nail biting, pulling out of hair (trichotillomania),
head banging, masturbation, teeth grinding, picking
of nose, biting parts of the body, skin-scratching,
body rocking, breath-holding, and swallowing of air
(aerophagia).
These habits range from normal to abnormal,
depending on the severity of occurrence and the time
of presentation during the developmental period
(what is normal in infancy, may be abnormal in later
childhood). Many of habit disorders, particularly
those which are self-stimulating in nature, are called
as gratification habits. These have been considered
by some as masturbatory equivalents. These habit
disorders tend to be commoner in individuals with
mental retardation or learning disability.

Treatment
The treatment is by behaviour modification techniques
and treatment of underlying psychopathology, if
present.

ELECTIVE (SELECTIVE) MUTISM
Elective mutism is characterised by the presence of
marked, emotionally determined, selectivity in speak-

171

ing, despite the presence of language competence in
at least some situations.
Typically, it is first manifested in early childhood and is seen more often in girls. It is estimated
to be present in 3-8/10,000 children. It may be associated with temperamental traits involving social
anxiety, withdrawal, sensitivity or resistance. The
child is often mute in front of strangers or at school.
Other socio-emotional disturbances may also be
present.
Elective mutism should be differentiated from shyness in normal children, mental retardation, pervasive
developmental disorder, expressive language disorder,
and conversion disorder. Most cases improve with the
passage of time, though some children may require
pharmacotherapy (such as with fluoxetine) and/or
psychosocial management.

OTHER DISORDERS
The other childhood psychiatric disorders include
separation anxiety disorder, phobic anxiety disorder
of childhood, social anxiety disorder of childhood,
sibling rivalry disorder, mixed disorders of conduct
and emotions, and reactive attachment disorder of
childhood.


<<<PAGE 184>>>
15

Psychopharmacology

HISTORY OF TREATMENT IN
PSYCHIATRY
The treatment of psychiatric disorders in past had often
constituted of merely institutionalisation (i.e. admission in an asylum or mental hospital), sometimes along
with the use of treatment which now seems either
ridiculous or fantastic or mostly both. The advent
of psychopharmacology in the last six decades has
brought treatment of psychiatric disorders within the
realm of scientific medicine.
Some important milestones in the treatment of
psychiatric disorders are summarised in Table 15.1.

CLASSIFICATION OF PSYCHOTROPIC
DRUGS
The drugs which have a significant effect on higher
mental functions are called as psychoactive or psychotropic drugs. These psychotropic drugs can be broadly
classified as follows:
1. Antipsychotics
2. Antidepressants
3. Mood stabilising drugs (or drugs for maintenance
treatment of bipolar disorder)
4. Anti-anxiety and hypnosedatives
5. Anticonvulsants (or anti-epileptics)
6. Alcohol and drugs of dependence (discussed in
Chapter 4)
7. Antiparkinsonian drugs

8. Miscellaneous drugs, such as stimulants, drugs
used in treatment of eating disorders, drugs used
in treatment of alcohol and drug dependence,
anaesthetics, drugs used in treatment of dementia,
drugs used in child psychiatry, vitamins, calcium
channel blockers, and other drugs.

An Ideal Psychotropic Drug
An ideal psychotropic drug should have the following
characteristics (modified after Hollister, 1983):
1. It should cure the underlying pathology causing
the disorder or symptom(s) under focus, so that
the drug can be stopped after sometime.
2. It should benefit all the patients suffering from that
disorder.
3. It should have no side-effects or toxicity in the
therapeutic range.
4. It should have rapid onset of action.
5. There should be no dependence on the drug and
no withdrawal symptoms on stopping the drug.
6. There should be no tolerance to the drug so that
same dose is effective for long duration of time.
7. It should not be lethal in overdoses.
8. It can be given in both inpatient and outpatient
settings.
Although psychotropic drugs available at present
are far from ideal, they are still helpful in alleviation
of symptoms and suffering of patients. With increasing
research, new emerging products appear to be better in
efficacy and have fewer, though newer, side-effects.


<<<PAGE 185>>>
Psychopharmacology

173

Table 15.1: A Brief History of Psychopharmacology
<4000 BC Ayurveda describes treatment of psychiatric patients with sympathy and kindness. The methods of
treatment included dhatura and roots of serpentina plant mixed with oil (ghee).
1853
Bromide used as a sedative-hypnotic.
1869
Chloral hydrate used in the treatment of melancholia and mania.
1882
Paraldehyde used as a hypnotic.
1883
Phenothiazines synthesised during synthesis of methylene blue (Bernthsen).
1903
Barbiturates (barbital) used for sedation in 1903; phenobarbital introduced in 1912.
1917
Malarial treatment for General Paralysis of Insane (GPI) received a Nobel prize (Julius von Wagner
Jauregg).
1922
Barbiturate-induced coma introduced for the treatment of psychoses (Jacob Klaesi).
1927
Insulin-shock treatment introduced for schizophrenia (Manfred Sakel).
1931
First report of successful treatment of psychoses (Ganesh Sen and Kartik Bose from India); using
Rauwolfia serpentina extract (reserpine). Report ignored till Nathan Kline (1958) confirmed the finding.
1934
Metrazol-induced convulsions used for the treatment of psychoses (Laszlo von Meduna).
1936
Frontal lobotomy advocated for treatment of psychiatric disorders (Egas Moniz and Almenda Lima).
1937
Amphetamines used in the treatment of behaviour disorders of children (C Bradley).
1938
Electroconvulsive therapy used for the treatment of psychoses (Ugo Cerletti and Lucio Bini).
1940
Phenytoin used as an anticonvulsant (Tracy Putnam).
1943
LSD synthesised (Albert Hofmann).
1949
Lithium used in mania (John F Cade); did not receive much attention even in Australia.
1950
Chlorpromazine synthesised while making a better antihistaminic than promethazine (Charpentier).
1950
Methylphenidate used in treatment of ADHD, then known as Minimal Brain Dysfunction (MBD).
1951
Lytic cocktail used (Laborit); Chlorpromazine earlier used (as ‘456 ORP’) in artificial hibernation.
1951
Isoniazid (INH) found to have mood elevating properties in patients with tuberculosis. Iproniazid, a
MAOI and a derivative of INH, was later (1958) introduced for treatment of depression.
1952
The revolution in psychopharmacology came with introduction of chlorpromazine (Jean Delay and
Pierre Deniker). The number of admissions in mental hospitals show a sudden decrease after introduction of chlorpromazine.
1955
Meprobamate was introduced as an anti-anxiety agent.
1958
Imipramine, a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) synthesised by Haflinger and Schindler in the late 1940’s,
was introduced for treatment of depression in 1958 (Thomas Kuhn).
1958
MAOIs (e.g. iproniazid) introduced for treatment of depression (Nathan Kline).
1958
Haloperidol synthesised in Belgium (Janssen).
1960
Chlordiazepoxide used as an anti-anxiety agent in 1960-1961 (Sternbach; Synthesised in 1957).
1966
Valpromide (Valproate) used in bipolar disorder (Lambert).
1968
Pimozide used for treatment of schizophrenia (Janssen).
1967
Clomipramine used in OCD (Fernandez and Lopez-Ibor).
1971
Carbamazepine used in bipolar disorder (Takezaki and Hanoaka) (Synthesized in 1953 by Schindler).
1986
Buspirone introduced in US market as a non-benzodiazepine anti-anxiety agent.
1988
Clozapine re-discovered in US as an effective treatment for refractory schizophrenia (Kane et al)
(Synthesised in 1959). Approved by US FDA in 1990 and introduced in Indian market in 1995.
1990s
Second Generation Antipsychotics introduced in market starting with Risperidone.


<<<PAGE 186>>>
174

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The information in this chapter is necessarily very
brief and introductory in nature. A much more detailed
reading is definitely recommended before prescribing any psychotropic medication to a patient with
consultation of local formularies and guidelines. This
information should not be used to make any treatment
decisions without further reading.

ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS
Antipsychotics are psychotropic drugs which are
used in the treatment of psychotic disorders and
psychotic symptoms. These are also known as major
tranquilisers, neuroleptics, ataractics, anti-schizophrenic drugs and D2-receptor (dopamine receptor)
blockers; however, the term antipsychotic appears
to be the most appropriate and the most widely used
term.

Indications
Antipsychotics have previously been used as urinary
antiseptics and anti-helminthic; however, their use
stopped was due to toxicity and lack of efficacy.
Although they have been used in a wide variety of
conditions in the past their current use includes the
following conditions.
Organic Psychiatric Disorders
1. Delirium (in small doses; e.g. haloperidol,
risperidone)
2. Dementia (careful and considered use for psychotic features, and severe agitation)
3. Delirium tremens (and psychoses occurring
in drug and alcohol withdrawal states; e.g.
haloperidol, risperidone)
4. Drug induced psychosis (e.g. haloperidol in
amphetamine-induced psychosis)
5. Other organic mental disorders (e.g. organic
hallucinosis; organic delusional disorder; secondary mania)
Non-organic Psychotic Disorders
1. Schizophrenia
2. Schizo-affective disorder
3. Acute psychoses

4. Mania (with or without mood stabilisers)
5. Maintenance treatment of bipolar disorders
(e.g. olanzapine, quetiapine)
6. Major depression (for psychotic features,
agitation, and melancholic features; along with
antidepressants)
7. Delusional disorders
Neurotic and Other Psychiatric Disorders
1. Severe, intractable, and disabling anxiety
(rarely used and not recommended)
2. Treatment refractory obsessive compulsive
disorder (as an adjunct)
3. Anorexia nervosa (rarely used and not widely
recommended)
Medical Disorders
1. Huntington’s chorea (e.g. haloperidol)
2. Intractable hiccups (e.g. chlorpromazine in low
doses) (rarely used)
3. Nausea and vomiting (rarely, in low doses);
ondansetron, an anti-emetic drug, is a weak
antipsychotic
4. Tic disorders, e.g. Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (e.g. haloperidol, risperidone)

Pharmacokinetics
The orally administered antipsychotics are absorbed
erratically and variably from gastrointestinal tract,
with uneven blood levels. Intramuscular and intravenous administration provides much more reliable
blood levels. On an average, the oral liquid dose produces a peak level at 1½ hours and the intramuscular
dose peaks at 30 minutes.
The antipsychotics are highly lipophilic and
highly protein-bound. They easily enter areas with
good blood supply such as brain, lung, kidneys and
foetus, and accumulate there. They are not dialysable. The half-lives of most antipsychotics are long
and theoretically a single daily dose is sufficient to
produce sustained therapeutic blood levels. However
in practice, divided doses are administered, at least
initially, to decrease adverse effects. Later an attempt
can be made to give the whole dose or a major part of
total daily dose at night.


<<<PAGE 187>>>
Psychopharmacology

Steady state plasma levels are usually reached in
5-10 days. Once the drug is withdrawn, it may remain
in body for many days to many months. The main metabolic pathway is through liver (hepatic microsomal
enzymes). Oxidation and conjugation are the most
important methods of metabolism for phenothiazines.
Many of the metabolites, such as mesoridazine (for
thioridazine), reduced haloperidol (for haloperidol)
and 9-hydroxy-risperidone (for risperidone), are also
active compounds. Chlorpromazine has more than 150
metabolites, some of which are active. The excretion
of the metabolites is through kidneys and liver (enterohepatic circulation).
Most of the antipsychotics tend to have a therapeutic window. If the blood level is below this ‘window’,
the drug is ineffective. If the blood level is higher than
the upper limit of the ‘window’, there is toxicity or
the drug is again ineffective.

Classification
A classification of currently available antipsychotic
drugs is presented in Table 15.2.

Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of action of antipsychotics is
unknown. However, one of the major mechanisms
appears to be antidopaminergic activity of these drugs.
Antipsychotic drugs block D2-receptors, which are
mainly present in mesolimbic-mesocortical system
(mesolimbic system is concerned with emotional reactions), nigro-striatal system and tubero-infundibular
system. The relative potencies of these drugs in competing for D2-receptors parallel quite closely their
clinical potencies.
It is currently believed that antipsychotic drugs
are effective in treating psychosis due to their action on the D2-receptors located in the mesolimbic
system whilst extrapyramidal side-effects (EPSE)
are caused by blockade of D2-receptors situated in
nigro-striatal system and hyperprolactinaemia is
caused by D2-blockade in tubero-infundibular system.
However, other neurotransmitters (such as 5-HT, acetylcholine) are clearly implicated (see below; atypical
antipsychotics). Sedation is caused by histaminergic

175

blockade which is usually highest for drugs such as
chlorpromazine and thioridazine.

Second Generation Antipsychotics
A search for an antipsychotic drug which acts only
on the mesolimbic system but has no effect on nigrostriatal or tubero-infundibular systems, has led to the
development of a heterogeneous group of drugs collectively known as atypical or newer antipsychotics.
These are also known as second generation antipsychotics (SGAs) or serotonin-dopamine antagonists
or (SDAs). These include risperidone, quetiapine,
olanzapine, amisulpride, paliperidone, zotepine,
ziprasidone and aripiprazole.
By definition these drugs are effective antipsychotics without theoretically producing undesirable
extrapyramidal side-effects (i.e. antipsychotics without neuroleptic effect), or causing elevation of serum
prolactin levels. These are characterised by a selective
limbic dopamine blockade, D4-receptor blockade, or
a combination of potent 5-HT2 and weak D2 antagonism. These drugs should theoretically be safer with
lesser incidence of serious side-effects such as tardive
dyskinesia and neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Clozapine is one such drug but it can cause
agranulocytosis and seizures. Risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, aripiprazole, amisulpride and ziprasidone
are currently being used widely as atypical antipsychotics, while paliperidone and zotepine are also
available in the international market.
Atypical antipsychotics, in addition to their effect
on positive symptoms, are believed to be effective
in treatment of negative symptoms (such as apathy,
decreased sociality, anhedonia) of chronic schizophrenia. Clozapine in particular is effective in management
of treatment-resistant schizophrenia. However, there
is need for close haematological monitoring for
neutropenia or agranulocytosis as suggested in SPC
of the drug.

Side Effects
The antipsychotics are safe drugs with a high therapeutic index and wide margin of safety in routine
clinical dosages. In spite of this safety, a wide range


<<<PAGE 188>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

176

Table 15.2: Classification and Properties of Antipsychotics
Drugs

Oral Dose
(mg/d)

Parenteral
Dose (mg)

I. Phenothiazines
A. Aliphatics
1. Chlorpromazine
300-1000 50-100 IM
(CPZ)
2. Triflupromazine
100-400
30-60 IM
B. Piperidines
____
1. Mesoridazine
100-400
____
2. Thioridazine
300-600
C. Piperazines
____
1. Fluphenazine
2-20
2. Prochlorperazine
45-150
40-80 IM
3. Trifluoperazine
15-50
1-5 IM
II. Thioxanthenes
A. Aliphatics
1. Chlorprothixene
75-600
25-75 IM
B. Piperazines
____
1. Flupentixol
3-18
2. Thiothixene
6-60
2-6 IM
3. Zuclopenthixol
25-150
50-100 IM
III. Butyrophenones
1. Haloperidol
5-30
5-10 IM
2. Trifluperidol
0.5-8.0
2.5-5.0 IM
IV. Diphenylbutylpiperidines
____
1. Penfluridol
20-60 mg
weekly
____
2. Pimozide
4-20
V. Indolic Derivatives (Dihydroindolones)
____
1. Molindone
50-225

#

Sedation

Some Common Adverse Effects**
Hypotension
EPSE* Weight
Gain

Increased
Prolactin

+++

+++

+

++

++

++

++

++

++

++

++
+++

+
++

+
+

++
++

+
+

+
+
+

+
+
+

+++
+++
+++

+
+
+

+++
+++
+++

+++

++

++

++

++

+
+
++

+
++
++

++
++
++

++
++
++

++
++
+++

+
±

+
±

+++
+++

+
+

+++
++

+

+

++

+

++

+

+

++

+

+++

++

0

+

±

±

++

++

+

+++

+++

0

+++

0

+
+

+
+

+
+

+++
+++

VI. Dibenzoxapines
____
1. Loxapine
25-250
++
VII. Atypical or Second Generation Antipsychotics
A. Dibenzodiazepines
____
1. Clozapine
50-900
+++
B. Substituted Benzamides
1. Amisulpride
400-1200 ____
±
2. Sulpiride (not
400-2400 ____
±
called atypical
usually)

Contd...


<<<PAGE 189>>>
Psychopharmacology
Contd...
Drugs

Oral Dose
(mg/d)

C. Benzisoxales
1. Iloperidone
4-24
2. Paliperidone
3-12
3. Risperidone
2-8
D. Benzisothiazolyl
1. Ziprasidone
40-160
E. Thienobenzodiazepine
1. Olanzapine
5-20
F. Dibenzothiazepine
1. Quetiapine
150-750
G. Partial Agonists
1. Aripiprazole
5-30
2. Bifeprunox
20
H. Dibenzothiepin
1. Zotepine
75-300
I. Dibenzooxepinopyrrole
1. Asenapine
5-10

177

#

Parenteral
Dose (mg)

Sedation

Some Common Adverse Effects**
Hypotension
EPSE* Weight
Gain

Increased
Prolactin

____
____
____

0
+
+

+
++
++

+
+
+

++
++
++

0
+++
+++

____

±

+

0

±

±

2.5-10 IM

++

+

±

+++

+

____

++

±

0

++

0

____
____

0
0

0
0

0
0

±
±

0
0

____

++

±

+

++

++

____

0

±

0

±

0

#

The estimate of common adverse effects in this table is a very rough and empirical guideline to the clinical use of
antipsychotics. The drug dosage in each patient needs to be individualised based on the clinical symptoms, their
severity, response to treatment and several other clinical factors.
* EPSE means Extrapyramidal side effects.
** 0 = Absent; ± = Probable/Very little; + = Mild; ++ = Moderate; +++ = Severe

of side-effects do occur with the use of antipsychotics
even in the therapeutic doses.
The common side-effects are listed in Table 15.3
with their mechanisms of causation and management.
Some of newer antipsychotics appear to have a higher
association with metabolic syndrome (see Chapter 5
and Table 15.3).
It is important to monitor physical health whilst
prescribing antipsychotics and the following are the
most commonly recommended minimum suggestions.
Other investigations may also be indicated (such as
ECG, HbA1c) based on clinical opinion.
Baseline (before prescribing): Obtaining detailed
personal and family history, Weight, BMI, Waist
circumference, Blood pressure, WBC and Neutrophil
count, Fasting blood sugar, Serum lipids, and LFTs.

After 1 month: Weight, BMI, Blood pressure, Waist
circumference, and Fasting blood sugar.
After 3 months: Weight, BMI, Blood pressure, Waist
circumference, and Fasting blood sugar.
After 6 months: Weight, BMI, Blood pressure, Waist
circumference, Fasting blood sugar, Serum lipids,
and LFTs.
After 12 months: Weight, BMI, Blood pressure, Waist
circumference, Fasting blood sugar, and Serum lipids.
Several antipsychotics can increase QTc interval
(QT interval corrected for heart rate). These include
sertindole, haloperidol, pimozide, ziprasidone, zotepine, quetiapine, or any intravenously administered
antipsychotic. A similar effect is seen with administration of TCAs. QTc prolongation can be made worse
with co-prescribed medications (e.g. anti-arrhythmics


<<<PAGE 190>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

178

Table 15.3: Side Effects of Antipsychotics
Category and
Probable Cause
Maximum with
Side Effect
(For example)
A. Autonomic Side Effects
1. Dry mouth
Muscarinic Choliner- Chlorpromazine
gic blockade

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Haloperidol
Risperidone

2. Constipation

–do–

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Risperidone

3. Cycloplegia

–do–

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Risperidone

4. Mydriasis

–do–

Haloperidol
Risperidone

5. Urinary
Retention

–do–

Thioridazine;
miosis with
Chlorpromazine)
Chlorpromazine

Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Occasionally
Pilocarpine 2%
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Bulk (or sometimes other) laxatives
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Occasionally
Pilocarpine 2%
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Occasionally
Pilocarpine 2%
Usually none if only hesitancy occurs. Tolerance
develops; Rule out BHP;
Bethanethol or catheterisation for retention
Physostigmine (neostigmine does not enter
CNS); Diazepam sometimes supportive care
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; change in posture slowly. When severe,
use plasma expanders,
raise leg, supportive
measures.
Decrease dose. If severe,
change medication.
Decrease dose. If severe,
change medication.

6. Delirium (central –do–
anticholinergic
syndrome)

Haloperidol
Risperidone

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Risperidone

7. Orthostatic
hypotension

α1 Adrenergic
blockade

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Aripiprazole

8. Impotence

–do–

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol

9. Impaired
–do–
Thioridazine
ejaculation
B. Extra-pyramidal Side Effects (EPSE)
1. Parkinsonian
Dopaminergic (D2) Haloperidol
syndrome
receptor blockade in
(esp. tremor)
striatal areas
2. Akathisia (motor –do–
–do–
restlessness)

Haloperidol

Clozapine
Quetiapine
Aripiprazole
Clozapine
Quetiapine

Antiparkisonian medication for treatment; also
for prevention if needed.
Change of medication or
reduction; Beta-blockers
such as Propranolol; Benzodiazepines
Contd...


<<<PAGE 191>>>
Psychopharmacology

179

Contd...
Category and
Side Effect
3. Acute Dystonia

Probable Cause
—do—

Maximum with
(For example)
—do—

4. Rabbit Syndrome —do—
—do—
(Peri-oral tremor)
Dopaminergic (D2) Not known
5. Tardive
Dyskinesia (late receptor
onset oro-facial
super-sensitivity
dyskinesia)
Not known
Probably
6. Neuroleptic
haloperidol
Malignant
Syndrome
(Fever, EPS,
High CPK,
catatonic
symptoms and
autonomic
dysfunction)
C. Other Central Nervous System Effects
1. Seizures
Decreased seizure
Clozapine
threshold
Chlorpromazine
(High doses)
2. Sedation
Histaminergic
—do—
blockade

3. Depression or
Decreased catecho- Not known
Pseudolamine levels in
depression
brain
D. Metabolic and Endocrine Side Effects
1. Weight gain
H1 blockade
Almost all
antipsychotics esp.
Clozapine and
Olanzapine
2. Diabetes
Not known
Clozapine
Olanzapine
3. Galactorrhoea
Increased Prolactin Haloperidol
Risperidone
with/without
released due to
amenorrhoea
dopaminergic blockade in hypothalamus

Minimum with
(For example)
—do—

—do—
Clozapine

Not known

Management
Antiparkinsonian
medication; Rule out
hypercalcaemia
Antiparkinsonian
medication
Treatment unsatisfactory,
though several drugs are
available. Prevention
best.
Bromocriptine, Dantrolene, Baclofen, General
supportive care. Add-on
lorazepam, Occasionally
ECT

Trifluoperazine

Decrease dose. Change
to a safer antipsychotic

Haloperidol
Aripiprazole

This side effect may be
beneficial. Otherwise
decrease dose. Change
drug. Give single dose
only at night
Decrease dose. Change
drug. Occasionally antidepressants or ECT.

SDAs
(e.g. Ziprasidone)

Aripiprazole
Haloperidol

Change drug. Dietary
control. Exercises.

Ziprasidone
Aripiprazole
Aripiprazole
Quetiapine

Change drug. Dietary
control.
None. Change drug.

Contd...


<<<PAGE 192>>>
180

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Contd...
Category and
Probable Cause
Side Effect
E. Allergic Side Effects
1. Cholestatic
Hypersensitivity
Jaundice
reaction
2. Agranulocytosis —do—
(very rare)

F. Cardiac Side Effects
1. ECG Changes
Anticholinergic
(e.g. QTc
effect
prolongation)
Calcium channel
blocking effect
2. Sudden Death
Probably ventricular
(very rare)
fibrillation
G. Ocular Side Effects
1. Granular
Not known
deposits in
(Probably
cornea and lens photosensitivity
Not known
2. Pigmentary
retinopathy
resembling
retinitis
pigmentosa
H. Dermatological Side Effects
1. Contact
Allergic
dermatitis
2. Photosensitive
Probably
reaction
photosensitive
3. Blue-gray
—do—
metallic
discolouration

Maximum with
(For example)

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol

Clozapine

—do—

Change drug. Benign
course. Supportive care.
Stop drug immediately.
Treat infection. Isolation.
General supportive care.
Figastrim may be useful

Thioridazine
Pimozide

Aripiprazole

Change drug, if severe.

Not known

Not known

None

Chlorpromazine
(High doses for
long duration)
Thioridazine only
(Dose-related)

Haloperidol

Change drug.

All other antipsychotics

Never give more than
800 mg/day of thioridazine. Prevention only

Chlorpromazine
(By handling)
—do— (High doses)

—do—

Avoid handling.
Symptomatic treatment
Avoid sunlight.
Use sunscreen.
Change drug.

—do— (High doses
for long duration)

such as quinidine, anti-malarials such as quinine,
and antibiotics such as erythromycin) and/or medical
conditions (such as ischaemic heart disease, extremes
of ages).
This list of side-effects is necessarily incomplete
and it is important to read the SPC of any drug before
prescribing it in a patient.

—do—
—do—

Treatment Adherence
Many patients with schizophrenia can be uncooperative, with a poor treatment adherence (see
Table 15.4). Therefore, it may at times be difficult to
ensure adequate administration of antipsychotics on
an outpatient basis.


<<<PAGE 193>>>
Psychopharmacology
Table 15.4: Some Factors in Poor Drug Concordance
1. Drug Related Factors
i. Adverse effects (particularly their early appearance and persistence)
ii. Slow onset of desirable effects
iii. Complexity of regimen (e.g. several doses/day)
iv. Route of administration (IM/IV as opposed to
oral)
2. Patient Related Factors
i. Poor education regarding illness and medication
ii. Denial of illness/absent insight
iii. Perceived stigma of mental disorder, medication, or visible side effects (e.g. dystonia)
iv. Treatment access problems (e.g. poverty, cost
of medications, distance from hospital)
v. Low IQ and/or low educational level
vi. Poor social support
vii. Specific psychopathology, e.g. persecutory ideation, hopelessness
viii. Poor doctor-patient relationship.
Table 15.5: Some Antipsychotic Depot Preparations*
1. Flupentixol decanoate 20-300 mg IM every 2-4
weeks (40 mg IM every 2 weeks roughly equivalent to
25 mg of fluphenazine decanoate IM every 2 weeks)
2. Fluphenazine decanoate 12.5-100 mg IM every 2-4
weeks (25 mg IM every 2 weeks roughly equivalent
to 300 mg of oral Chlorpromazine per day)
3. Haloperidol decanoate 25-250 mg IM every 4 weeks
(100 mg IM every 4 weeks roughly equivalent to 5
mg/day of oral haloperidol)
4. Olanzapine pamoate 150-300 mg IM every 2 weeks
or 300-405 mg IM every 4 weeks (Note risk of postinjection syndrome; Also note dose escalation chart
in SPC)
5. Pipotiazine palmitate 25-100 mg IM every 4 weeks
6. Risperidone Consta 25-50 mg IM every 2 weeks
(Note delay in onset of action by 2-3 weeks and need
for refrigeration)
7. Zuclopenthixol decanoate 200-400 mg IM every 2-4
weeks (200 mg IM every 2 weeks roughly equivalent
to 25 mg/day of oral Zuclopenthixol)
* Check SPC (Summary of Product Characteristics) before
prescribing any medicines

181

Since discontinuation of antipsychotic medication
often leads to relapse, long-acting preparations of
antipsychotics are valuable in the treatment. They
may be given in a depot form, either intramuscularly
or administered orally. There are several different
preparations available in the international market but
the preparations summarised in Table 15.5 are used
most often.

Clinical Use
Some general principles regarding routine clinical use
of antipsychotics include:
1. Although atypical antipsychotics are usually
preferred, the choice of antipsychotic medication
should be individualised in a particular patient.
The recent evidence shows more differences in
adverse effect profiles but not in efficacy between
older and newer antipsychotics.
2. Whenever possible the lowest effective dose
should be used.
3. Routinely only one antipsychotic should be used
at one time. Rational polypharmacy should be
reserved only for judicious treatment after nonresponse to single antipsychotics.
4. High doses of antipsychotics should be avoided.
5. Whenever appropriate, psychosocial management
should be combined with antipsychotic treatment.
6. It is really important to monitor physical health
on a regular basis whilst the patient receives antipsychotic medication (see above).
7. Do not use rapid neuroleptisation (parenteral use
of a loading dose of antipsychotic medication), if
possible.

ANTIDEPRESSANT DRUGS
Antidepressants are those psychotropic drugs which
are used for treatment of depressive disorders. These
have also been called as mood-elevators and thymoleptics.
Isoniazid (INH) was found to have mood elevating
properties in some patients suffering from tuberculosis
in 1951. Iproniazid, a MAO inhibitor and a derivative
of INH, was later (1958) introduced for the treatment


<<<PAGE 194>>>
182

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

of depression. The first tricyclic antidepressant (TCA)
imipramine was used in 1958 by Thomas Kuhn. It was
different from phenothiazines by only a replacement
of sulphur with an ethylene linkage. With this small
structural difference (discovered by chance), imipramine was found not effective as an antipsychotic
but instead quite beneficial in depressed patients.
Since 1958, the number of antidepressants has been
gradually increasing.
Antidepressants have no euphoriant effect when
administered to normal, non-depressed individuals.

Indications
Presently, the indications for the use of antidepressants
include:
Depression
1. Depressive episode (also called major depression,
endogenous depression)
2. Depressive episode with melancholia (with or
without ECTs)
3. Depressive episode with psychotic features (with
antipsychotics or ECTs)
4. Dysthymia (with psychotherapy)
5. Reactive depression (with psychotherapy)
6. Depressive equivalents and masked depression
(sometimes)
7. Atypical depression (e.g. MAO inhibitors)
8. Secondary depression (e.g. in hypothyroidism,
Cushing’s syndrome)
9. Abnormal grief reaction
Child Psychiatric Disorders
1. Enuresis (with or without behaviour therapy)
2. Attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity (in
low doses, after 6 years of age, when stimulant
medication is not available)
3. School phobia (sometimes, in low doses)
4. Separation anxiety disorder (in children)
5. Somnambulism
6. Night terrors
Other Psychiatric Disorders
1. Panic attacks (e.g. SSRIs)
2. Agoraphobia and social phobia
3. Obsessive compulsive disorder with or without
depression (e.g. clomipramine, SSRIs)

4. Cataplexy (associated with narcolepsy)
5. Aggression in elderly (e.g. trazodone)
6. Eating disorders (e.g. fluoxetine in bulimia nervosa)
7. Borderline personality disorder (for treatment of
depressive symptoms)
8. Trichotillomania (e.g. clomipramine; fluoxetine)
9. Depersonalisation syndrome
10. Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
11. Generalised anxiety disorder (e.g. SSRIs)
12. Nicotine dependence (e.g. bupropion is used for
treatment of craving)
13. Alcohol dependence (e.g. fluoxetine sometimes
used for treatment of craving)
Medical Disorders
1. Chronic pain (in low doses, e.g. amitriptyline,
duloxetine)
2. Migraine (as an adjuvant)

Classification
Classification and properties of antidepressants
(Table 15.6).

Pharmacokinetics
The oral dose of TCAs is incompletely though adequately absorbed. As they are highly anticholinergic
in nature, they delay gastric emptying and slow gastrointestinal motility. SSRIs are well absorbed from the
gastrointestinal tract.
These antidepressants, much like antipsychotics, are highly lipophilic and are highly protein
bound. Thus they have a large volume of distribution and tend to accumulate in areas with good blood
supply. Like antipsychotics, they are also not dialysable.
Their other pharmacokinetic properties of TCAs
are similar to those of phenothiazines. The half-life
is long, usually more than 24 hours. Although TCAs
can be administered in a single night-time dose, the
routine clinical practice is to prescribe divided doses,
at least in the initial days of treatment, to prevent
accumulated side-effects. The metabolism of TCAs is
by oxidation (hepatic microsomal enzymes) followed
by conjugation (glucoronic acid). The major metabolites of imipramine and amitriptyline (desipramine and


<<<PAGE 195>>>
Psychopharmacology

183

Table 15.6: Classification and Properties of Antidepressants
Drugs

Oral Dose
(mg/d)

Some Common Adverse Effects#
Sedation* Orthostatic Hypotension* Anticholinergic*

I. Cyclic Antidepressants
A. Tricyclic Tertiary Amines
1. Amitriptyline
75-300
+++
2. Clomipramine
75-250
++
3. Dosulepin (Dotheipin)
75-300
+++
4. Doxepine
75-300
+++
5. Imipramine
75-300
++
6. Lofepramine
70-210
+
7. Tri-imipramine
75-300
+++
B. Tricyclic Secondary Amines
1. Desipramine
75-300
±
2. Nortriptyline
75-200
+
3. Protriptyline
15-60
0
C. Tetracyclic Antidepressants
1. Amoxapine
150-400
+
2. Maprotiline
75-225
++
3. Mianserin
30-120
+++
D. Bicyclic Antidepressants
1. Viloxazine
100-300
±
II. Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs)
1. Citalopram
20-40
±
2. Escitalopram
10-20
±
3. Fluoxetine
20-60
±
4. Fluvoxamine
50-300
±
5. Paroxetine
20-40
+
6. Sertraline
50-200
±
III. Serotonin Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors (SNRIs)
1. Duloxetine
60
±
2. Venlafaxine
75-375
+

+++
++
+++
+++
++
+
++

+++
++
++
+
++
+
++

+
++
++

++
+
++

+
++
±

++
++
±

±

±

±
±
0
±
0
±

0
0
0
±
±
0

±
±

±
±

IV. Norepinephrine Serotonin Reuptake Enhancers (NSREs)
1. Tianeptin
37.5
+
0
V. Noradrenergic and Specific Serotonergic Antagonists (NaSSAs)
1. Mirtazapine
15-45
+++
+
VI. Norepinephrine Dopamine Reuptake Inhibitors (NDRIs)
1. Bupropion
150-450
Activating 0
VII. Serotonin Antagonists and Reuptake Inhibitors (SARIs)
1. Nefazodone
200-600
++
+
(withdrawn from market)
2. Trazodone
150-400
+++
±

±
±
0
±
±
Contd...


<<<PAGE 196>>>
184

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Contd...
Drugs

Oral Dose
Some Common Adverse Effects#
(mg/d)
Sedation* Orthostatic Hypotension* Anticholinergic*
VIII. Noradrenergic Reuptake Inhibitors (NARIs)
1. Reboxetine
8-10
±
±
±
IX. Mono-amine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
A. Irreversible Non-selective and Selective MAOIs
Not available in India
B. Reversible Selective MAO-B Inhibitors
1. Selegiline
5-10
Useful in Parkinsonism
C. Reversible Selective MAO-A Inhibitors (RIMAs)
1. Moclobemide
300-600
Activating 0
0
X. Melatonin receptor agonist and 5-HT2C antagonist
1. Agomelatin
25-50
+
0
0
# The estimate of common adverse effects in this table is a very rough and empirical guideline to the clinical use of
antidepressants. The drug dosage in each patient needs to be individualised based on the clinical symptoms, their
severity, response to treatment and several other clinical factors.
* 0 = Absent; ± = Probable/Very little; + = Mild; ++ = Moderate; +++ = Severe

nortriptyline respectively) are active antidepressants
themselves. Fluoxetine is demethylated in liver to
norfluoxetine.
With the regular administration of TCAs, a constant blood level is achieved usually by the end of
two weeks. Although routine monitoring of blood
levels is not indicated, it may become important in
cases of toxicity. Also, some antidepressants such
as nortriptyline and protriptyline have a therapeutic
window.
Antidepressants (especially SSRIs, e.g. fluoxetine)
also cause inhibition of cytochrome P450 enzymes in
liver (e.g. CYP P450 2D6 and CYP P450 3A4).
The MAO inhibitors are absorbed well by oral
route, and are predominantly metabolised in liver by
acetylation.

Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of action is not clearly known.
It appears from clinical studies that the predominant
action of antidepressants is to increase the catecholamine levels in brain (Amine hypothesis).
Tricyclic antidepressants are also called as Monoamine reuptake inhibitors (MARIs). Their main modes
of action include:

1. Blocking reuptake of norepinephrine (NE), serotonin (5HT) and/or dopamine (DA) at the nerve
terminals, thus increasing NE, 5HT and/or DA
levels at the receptor site.
2. Down-regulation of the β-adrenergic receptors.
The Mono-amine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
instead act on mono-amine oxidase (MAO) which
is responsible for degradation of catecholamines following their reuptake. The final effect is the same, i.e.
a functional increase in the NE and/or 5HT levels at
receptor site.
Another important clinical point is that it takes
5-10 days before a MAOI, and 2-3 weeks before a
non-MAOI antidepressant, has any evident action on
depression (although sleep, anxiety and agitation may
respond earlier). The reason for this is not fully clear
though an increase in brain amine levels is possibly
responsible for antidepressant action. However, postsynaptic events (such as down-regulation of postsynaptic receptors) are probably more important and they
take longer than an increase in amine levels. Therefore,
it is of no benefit to prescribe antidepressants on an
SOS or PRN (as needed) basis. They must be administered regularly in appropriate doses to achieve the
desired effect.


<<<PAGE 197>>>
Psychopharmacology

It is essential to continue the antidepressant for a
period of further 6 months after reaching remission, in
the first episode of depressive disorder (and for longer
duration in subsequent episodes) to prevent recurrence of symptoms. It is important to prescribe the
antidepressant in the same dose as used for treatment
unless there are adverse effects requiring a decrease
in dose.
Only when adequate doses (150-300 mg
imipramine equivalent) have been administered for
an adequate period (at least 6 weeks) without a clinical response then the drug can be called ineffective
for that patient. Another drug, usually from a different
class or group, or ECT may then be used.

Side Effects and Toxicity
The common side effects of antidepressants with their
management are summarised in Table 15.7.
TCAs are dangerous in overdose; amitriptyline
and dosulepin (dotheipin) are particularly cardiotoxic
whilst lofepramine is the safest amongst TCAs. Clinical features of overdose include agitation, delirium,
paralytic ileus, urinary retention, coma, respiratory
depression, seizures, hyperpyrexia, cardiac arrhythmias, conduction defects, mydriasis, and death. The
lethal dose of imipramine is 1-2 g. (40-80 tabs. of
25 mg imipramine equivalence).
The treatment options in overdose include gastric
lavage/induction of vomiting, activated charcoal for
adsorption, cardio-respiratory resuscitation, treatment
of seizures (if they occur), general supportive care
and symptomatic management. Quinidine-like drugs
are contraindicated whilst antiarrhythmics such as
lignocaine can be helpful. Physostigmine 0.5 mg
IV/IM bolus repeated to a total of 3-4 mg/day may
be used under careful supervision. Coma often reverts
in less than 24 hours, although toxicity lasts for
5-6 days.
Co-prescription of serotonergic drugs (such as
SSRIs) with other serotonergic agents and especially
MAOIs can lead to serotonin syndrome. It is characterised by a classic triad of mental status changes,
neuromuscular abnormalities and autonomic hyper-

185

activity. These include anxiety, agitation, confusion,
clonus (e.g. ankle clonus, ocular clonus), hyperreflexia, myoclonus, rigidity, increased heart rate, tremor,
flushing, hyperthermia and excessive sweating. Death
can occur in severe serotonin syndrome.
Treatment includes discontinuation of the offending drug(s), supportive management and (sometimes)
use of serotonin and histamine antagonist cyproheptadine.

Refractory Depression
About 20-35% of patients do not respond to the
antidepressant therapy. The chief reasons for this
non-response include:
1. Poor drug concordance.
2. Inadequate dosage.
3. Insufficient treatment duration.
4. Low plasma antidepressant levels.
5. Incorrect diagnosis.
Even when these important reasons are excluded,
there still remains a group (15-20%) of depressed
patients who are non-responders or poor-responders.
Such patients should receive a trial of another antidepressant preferably from a different group (e.g. SNRI)
for adequate duration. In case the patient still does not
respond, the treatment of choice of refractory depression is electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), though other
treatment choices (such as lithium augmentation) are
also available.

MOOD STABILISING DRUGS
(DRUGS USED IN PROPHYLAXIS
OF BIPOLAR DISORDER)
These drugs are usually effective in treatment of mania and therefore the word antimanic is often used to
describe them. But as they are effective in preventing
mood swings in bipolar disorder, the better term is
mood-stabilising agent or a prophylactic agent. The
most commonly used mood-stabilising agents include
lithium, valproate, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine,
though there are several other experimental mood
stabilisers such as oxcarbazepine.


<<<PAGE 198>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

186

Table 15.7: Side Effects of Antidepressants
Category and
Side Effect

Probable Cause

Maximum with
(For example)

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Amitriptyline

Fluoxetine

See table for side effects of
antipsychotics (Table 15.3)

Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline

Fluoxetine
Fluoxetine
Fluoxetine
Fluoxetine
Fluoxetine
Fluoxetine

Amitriptyline

Fluoxetine

Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline
Paroxetine

Mirtazapine
Bupropion
Mirtazapine
Bupropion

SSRIs
TCAs
Trazodone

Mirtazapine
Bupropion
Not known

α Adrenergic
blockade

Amitriptyline

Protriptyline
Fluoxetine

2. Tremor and
Other EPSE
3. Jitteriness
syndrome

Serotonergic

Amoxapine

Not known

Adrenergic;
Serotonergic

Imipramine
Fluoxetine

MAOI

4. Withdrawal
syndrome (mild)

Dependence

Imipramine
Paroxetine

Protriptyline
Fluoxetine

5. Seizures

Decreased
threshold

Bupropion
Amitriptyline

Nomifensine
Fluoxetine

A. Autonomic Side Effects
1. Dry mouth
Muscarinic
Cholinergic
blockade
2. Constipation
–do–
3. Cycloplegia
–do–
4. Mydriasis
–do–
5. Urinary retention –do–
6. Delirium
–do–
–do–
7. Aggravation of
narrow angle
glaucoma
8. Orthostatic
α1 Adrenergic
hypotension
blockade
B. Sexual Side Effects
1. Impotence
α1 Adrenergic
blockade
2. Impaired/
α1 Adrenergic
retarded
blockade
ejaculation
3. Anorgasmia

5-HT blockade

4. Priapism

Not known

C. CNS Effects
1. Sedation

Do not use in elderly and in
patients with past history.
Change or stop drug.
See table for side effects of
antipsychotics (Table 15.3)

Cyproheptadine given 1 hour
before, can reverse anorgasmia and retarded ejaculation
caused by SSRIs.

Stop drug; muscular relaxation; sometimes surgical
procedure needed
This side effect may be beneficial; Otherwise decrease
dose. Change drug. Give
single dose only at night.
Decrease dose. Change drug.
This is very common in
first week of therapy. Add
diazepam for first 1-2 weeks.
Tolerance occurs.
Slow withdrawal of drug.
Decrease dose. Change drug.
Contd...


<<<PAGE 199>>>
Psychopharmacology
Contd...
Category and
Side Effect

Probable Cause

6. Aggravation of
Sympathomimetic
psychosis
7. Precipitation of
Sympathomimetic
mania
D. Cardiac Side Effects
1. Tachycardia
Anticholinergic
2. Quinidine-like
Cardiotoxic
action (decreased
conduction time)
3. ECG changes
Cardiotoxic
4. Arrhythmias
Cardiotoxic
(in overdoses)
5. Direct myocardial Cardiotoxic
depression
(in overdoses)
6. Hypertension
Noradrenegic

187

Maximum with
(For example)

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Not known

Amoxapine

Stop drug. Re-evaluate.

Tricyclics

Not known

Stop drug. Use mood
stabilisers.

Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline

Trazodone
Fluoxetine

Decrease dosage. Use safer
drugs in elderly and those
with past history or co-existing heart disease

Amitriptyline
Dosulepin
Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline

Fluoxetine
Fluoxetine

Venlafaxine
Duloxetine

SSRIs

Close monitoring; ECG and
BP check before start (especially on higher doses); treat
hypertension

Not known

See table for side effects of
antipsychotics (Table 15.3)

E. Allergic Side Effects
1. Agranulocytosis
Hypersensitivity
Mianserin
(very rare)
Mirtazapine
Hypersensitivity
Not known
2. Cholestatic
jaundice
(very rare)
3. Skin rashes
Hypersensitivity
Not known
4. Systemic vasculitis Not known
Not known
F. Metabolic and Endocrine Side Effects
1. Weight gain
Not known
Mirtazapine
Amitriptyline
G. Miscellaneous Side Effects
Tranylcypromine
1. Hypertensive
Interaction with
crises
tyramine in foods
(cheese, red wine,
chicken liver)
and/or sympathomimetic drugs
(e.g. amphetamine)

Fluoxetine

Not known

Not known
Not known
Bupropion
Fluoxetine can
cause weight loss

Change drug. Exercise. Diet
control.

Non-MAOIs

Prevent use of such agents
with MAOI. Carry ‘warning
cards’. When crisis occurs,
use alpha (α) blockers like
phentolamine.

Contd...


<<<PAGE 200>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

188
Contd...
Category and
Side Effect
2. Severe hepatic
necrosis (rare)
3. Hyperpyrexia

4. Bleeding

5. Hyponatraemia

Probable Cause

Maximum with
(For example)

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Toxic or
Hypersensitive
Interaction with
tricyclics or
meperidine
Decreased
platelet serotonin

Iproniazid

Tranylcypromine

Not known

Not known

SSRIs

Not known

SSRIs
SNRIs

Not known;
Probably MAOIs

Stop/change drug. Supportive
care; Death rate high.
Stop drug. Keep a gap of
1 week between imipramine
and MAOI. Supportive care.
Change drug. Do not coprescribe other drugs that
increase risk of bleeding;
Gastro-protective drugs such
as PPIs can decrease risk
to some extent in high-risk
patients
Risk higher in elderly; Avoid
co-prescribing other drugs
that cause hyponatraemia
(such as diuretics); monitor
closely

Probably SIADH

Recently, several atypical antipsychotics such as
olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole have been
added to list of drugs used in maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder. In addition, other antipsychotics
such as risperidone (and the others mentioned above)
are also used as antimanic agents.
Lamotrigine and Quetiapine (and its metabolite
norquetiapine) appear to have particular efficacy for
treatment of bipolar depression. There is a risk of skin
rash with lamotrigine particularly early in treatment
and the risk appears higher with faster escalation of
dose as well as with co-prescription of valproate. It is
therefore important to increase the dose of lamotrigine
very gradually as suggested in the summary of product
characteristics (SPC) and the dose prescribed depends
on other co-prescribed drugs (such as carbamazepine
and valproate).

LITHIUM
Lithium (Li) is an element (Atomic number 3 and
Atomic weight 7) which is the smallest alkali ion.

The element was discovered in 1817 by Arfuedson.
Since then, it has been used for treatment of gout and
for salt replacement in cardiac disease, but its use was
restricted due to fatal toxicity.
It was rediscovered in 1949 by John Cade, for use
in treatment of mania but its potential went unrecognised as it was discovered in Australia. Mogen Schou
in 1957, had to rediscover it yet again before it became
popular as a treatment of mania.

Indications
Although lithium salts are used in treatment of a
myriad of psychiatric and non-psychiatric disorders,
the established indications are only the following
ones:
1. Treatment of acute mania
2. Prophylaxis of bipolar mood disorder.
In addition, the following may also constitute
possible clinical indications of lithium use:
3. Treatment of schizo-affective disorder
4. Prophylaxis of unipolar mood disorder
5. Treatment of cyclothymia


<<<PAGE 201>>>
Psychopharmacology

6. Treatment of acute depression (as an adjuvant for
refractory depression)
7. Treatment of chronic alcoholism (in presence of
significant depressive symptoms) and psychoactive use disorders (e.g. cocaine dependence)
8. Treatment of impulsive aggression
9. Treatment of Kleine-Levin syndrome.

Pharmacokinetics
Lithium is very rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. The peak serum levels occur between
30 minutes to 3 hours. The absorption is virtually
complete in about 8 hours.
The distribution is in total body water with a slow
entry into the intracellular compartment. Lithium is
not protein bound. The maximum levels occur in
thyroid (3-5 times serum level), saliva (two times),
milk (0.3-1.0 times) and CSF (0.4 times). The steady
state levels are achieved in about 7 days. There is
no metabolism of lithium in body and it is excreted
almost entirely by the kidneys. Proximal reabsorption
is influenced by the sodium balance, and depletion
of sodium results in retention, causing higher blood
levels of lithium.

Mechanism of Action
Lithium’s mechanism of action is not known; however,
the following mechanisms have been hypothesised:
1. It affects the Na+-K+ ATP-ase and accumulates
intracellularly as a substitute of Na+.
2. It inhibits the adenylate cyclase and thus decreases
cAMP (II messenger) intracellularly.
3. It accelerates the presynaptic reuptake and destruction of catecholamines, like norepinephrine.
4. It inhibits the release of catecholamines at the
synapse.
5. It decreases the postsynaptic serotonin 5-HT2
receptor sensitivity.
6. It stabilizes the cell membrane, along with Ca++
and Mg++.
7. It decreases the Ca++ mobilisation from the intracellular pools by ITP (inositol-triphosphate)dependent Ca++ channels (II messenger system).

189

8. It interferes with the phosphatidyl-inositol cycle
by blocking the conversion of IMP (inositol monophosphate) to inositol, by inositol monophosphate
phosphatase. The muscarinic acetylcholine (Ach)
receptor is among one of the neurotransmitter
receptors linked to this system in brain. The
antimanic effects of lithium may be attributed to
this effect on Ach, thus affecting the cholinergicadrenergic balance.
All these actions result in a decreased catecholamine activity, thus ameliorating mania. However,
these mechanisms do not explain the antidepressant
effect and the prophylactic effect in bipolar mood disorder. It is also described to possess NMDA (n-methyl
d-aspartate) mediated neuroprotective properties.
There is a lag period of 7-10 days before the onset
of action occurs, which is probably due to the time
taken to achieve steady state levels.

Clinical Use
Lithium is available in market in the form of the following preparations.
1. Lithium carbonate (300 mg tablets; 400 mg
sustained-release tablets)
2. Lithium citrate (300 mg/5 ml liquid; not available
in India)
Before starting treatment, it is essential to ensure
normal functioning of kidneys (one of the most important), thyroid, heart and central nervous system.
After starting lithium, it is necessary to investigate
these systems at repeated intervals.
The usual profile of investigations is as follows:
1. Routine general and systemic physical examination.
2. Routine blood counts (Hb, TC, DC).
3. Urine: routine and microscopic examination.
4. ECG.
5. Renal function tests (blood urea, serum creatinine,
24 hour urine volume, urine specific gravity).
eGFR with creatinine clearance test, if indicated.
6. Thyroid function tests (TSH, T3, T4).
The initial daily starting dose of lithium for treatment of acute mania is usually 900-2100 mg/day,


<<<PAGE 202>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

190

Table 15.8: Blood Lithium Levels
(in treatment of bipolar disorder)
• Therapeutic levels = 0.6-1.2 mEq/L (For the treatment of acute mania)
• Prophylactic levels = 0.6-1.0 mEq/L (For relapse
prevention in bipolar disorder)
• Toxic lithium levels > 2.0 mEq/L

given in 1-3 doses. Ideally, the treatment is started
after serial lithium estimation, conducted after a loading dose of 600 mg or 900 mg of lithium carbonate,
to determine pharmacokinetics. However, this method
is much less frequently practiced these days.
During treatment it is essential to estimate blood
lithium levels at regular intervals (usually 3 monthly)
(Table 15.8). The blood sample for estimation is
taken 12 hours after the last lithium dose. If any
changes are made in lithium dosage, the next blood
level is estimated after at least 5-7 days of the last
change.
When stopping lithium treatment (except in cases
of lithium toxicity), it is desirable to gradually taper
the dose of lithium over several days or weeks in order
to minimise the risk of early relapse on discontinuation.
There is evidence from several studies that lithium
substantially reduces the risk of suicide in bipolar
disorder; however, it has a narrow margin of safety
and it is important to remember this particularly in
patient with active ideas or plans of suicide.

Side Effects
Adverse effects are common and toxicity can occur
easily, if blood levels reach about 2.0 mEq/L; lifethreatening intoxication occurs, if levels reach about
3.5 mEq/L. In acute administration, toxicity is primarily neurological whilst during maintenance therapy
renal side effects are the commonest.
The common side effects are listed below:
I. Neurological
1. Tremor: This is the commonest side effect,
occurring in up to 50% of patients. Treatment is

by decreasing the dose of lithium or by adding
propranolol.
2. Muscular weakness.
3. Cogwheel rigidity (mild).
4. Seizures (decreased threshold).
5. Neurotoxicity: The important features include
delirium, cerebellar signs, abnormal involuntary
movements, seizures, and later coma. In some
individuals, toxicity may occur even within the
therapeutic range. The treatment of choice for
acute toxicity is haemodialysis.
II. Renal
The renal side effects occur in about 10-50% of all
patients on maintenance lithium therapy. Some of the
features include:
1. Polyuria, polydipsia.
2. Tubular changes.
3. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
4. Nephrotic syndrome.
III. Cardiovascular
The effects on heart are similar to those of hypokalaemia.
The commonest ECG change is T-wave depression.
IV. Endocrine
1. Goitre.
2. Hypothyroidism.
3. Abnormal thyroid function (30-40%).
4. Weight gain (pedal oedema is also common).
V. Gastrointestinal
These side effects include nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea,
metallic taste and abdominal pain.
VI. Dermatological
These dermatological side effects include acneiform
eruptions, papular eruptions and exacerbation of
psoriasis.
VII. Side effects during pregnancy and lactation
1. Teratogenic (possibly).
2. Increased incidence of Ebstein’s anomaly (distortion and downward displacement of tricuspid
valve in the right ventricle), when taken in the first
trimester.
3. Secreted in milk with 30-100% of the maternal
blood lithium levels. Lithium can therefore cause
toxicity in the infant.


<<<PAGE 203>>>
Psychopharmacology

Contraindications of Lithium Use
1. Presence of clear evidence of cardiac, renal, thyroid or neurological dysfunction
2. Presence of blood dyscrasia
3. During pregnancy and lactation
4. Concomitant administration of thiazide diuretics,
tetracyclines or anaesthetics
ACE inhibitors (such as captopril), Angiotensin
II receptor antagonists (such as losartan), NSAIDs
(nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) and COX-2
inhibitors (such as celecoxib) can increase the risk of
lithium toxicity in an unpredictable manner, especially
in elderly.

VALPROATE
Valproate and lithium have been widely used as
first line drugs for treatment of mania as well as for
prophylaxis of bipolar mood disorder.
Valproic acid was first synthesised by Burton
and used as an organic solvent. In 1963, Meunier
serendipitously discovered the antiepileptic properties of valproic acid, while Lambert reported in 1966
that valpromide (a valproic acid analogue) might be
effective as an antimanic. It was approved by the US
FDA as an antiepileptic drug for absence seizures in
1978 and for the treatment of acute mania (and for
migraine headache prophylaxis) in 1996.
Although its mechanism of action is not clearly
understood, it increases GABA though other nonGABAergic mechanisms have been proposed.
The term valproate is often used to denote all
commercial preparations, since the common entity
in blood is valproic acid. The following preparations
of valproate are available in India:
i. Valproate sodium
ii. Divalproex (Enteric-coated stable coordination
compound composed of sodium valproate and
valproic acid in a 1:1 molar relationship)
iii. Chrono preparations (Enteric-coated compound
composed of sodium valproate and valproic acid
in a 3:2 ratio).

191

It is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral
administration. The peak plasma levels are reached
at 1-4 hours after a single oral dose. The half-life of
valproate is 8-17 hours.
The usual dose of valproate is 1000-3000 mg/day
orally in divided doses. The therapeutic blood level is
50-125 mg/ml. Oral loading strategies (20-30 mg/kg/
day) are rapidly effective in the management of acute
mania.

Indications
In addition to its primary indication as an anticonvulsant, Valproate has several other indications in
various psychiatric and neuropsychiatric disorders.

Bipolar Disorders
Acute Mania (as a first-line agent for the treatment
of acute mania in oral and IV forms): Several factors
associated with a favourable antimanic response to
valproate (as well as carbamazepine) include:
a. Co-morbid substance abuse or other psychiatric
disorders
b. Later age at onset and/or shorter duration of illness
c. History of poor response to lithium
d. Dysphoric mania, mixed affective episodes, or
rapid cycling
e. Organic/complicated mania associated with seizure disorder, history of head trauma, or EEG
abnormalities
f. D-M-I (Depression-Mania-Well Interval) pattern
of illness, as opposed to the M-D-I pattern
There is some suggestion that patients nonresponsive to valproate may respond well to
carbamazepine.
Prophylaxis: Valproate is probably less effective in
maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder than in
treatment of acute mania. It has been used alone, as
well as along with lithium and other mood stabilisers
in the maintenance treatment.
The addition of valproate to lithium has been
recognised as a useful treatment for mania refractory
to lithium monotherapy.


<<<PAGE 204>>>
192

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Rapid cycling bipolar disorder and mixed (or dysphoric) mania: The patients with rapid cycling, mixed
affective episodes, or dysphoric mania are often
resistant to lithium treatment and respond better to
valproate. Valproate is also effective in management
of ultra-rapid cycling mood disorders.
Bipolar depression: Valproate appears to be generally
more effective in the treatment of acute mania than in
bipolar depression.

The use of valproate in pregnancy and lactation
should be best avoided. The NICE guidelines for treatment of bipolar disorder recommend that valproate is
best avoided in women of childbearing potential (see
Further Reading List).
In overdose, the amount of drug, that is not protein
bound, is high. Therefore, dialysis is useful in the
management of an overdose with valproate.

Neurological Disorders

Certain drug may increase (such as aspirin, cimetidine,
ibuprofen, erythromycin, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine,
phenothiazines) or decrease (such as carbamazepine,
phenytoin, phenobarbital, ethosuximide, rifampicin,
mefloquine) the serum levels of valproate.
In addition, valproate increases serum levels of
other drugs (such as lamotrigine, tricyclic antidepressants, zidovudine, tolbutamide).

Migraine and Pain syndromes: Valproate has been
used for prophylaxis of migraine headaches, as well
as for aborting an acute attack (IV route). Valproate
has also been used in treatment of trigeminal neuralgia
and neuropathic pain.
Seizure disorders: Valproate is primarily indicated for
treatment of absence seizures (both simple and complex), complex partial seizures, myoclonic seizures,
and generalised tonic-clonic seizures, as monotherapy
as well as adjunct therapy.

Other Disorders
Valproate has also been used at times in several other
conditions, including behavioural agitation in dementia, severe behavioural symptoms in mental retardation, ADHD and conduct disorder, schizoaffective
disorder (bipolar type), alcohol withdrawal, tardive
dyskinesia, impulse control disorder, panic disorder
and borderline personality disorder.

Side Effects
Adverse effects are more common with valproate
concentrations above 100 mg/ml.
The common side effects are nausea, sedation, tremor, flushing, weight gain, thrombocytopenia, menstrual disturbances (in women) and hair
loss. There are some reports of polycystic ovaries
and hyperandrogenism in young women with
epilepsy.
The most serious, though relatively uncommon,
side effects include hepatic toxicity (especially in
young children), acute haemorrhagic pancreatitis, and
Steven-Johnson syndrome.

Drug Interactions

CARBAMAZEPINE
Like lithium and valproate, carbamazepine too has
been used as an antimanic and for prophylaxis of bipolar disorder. It is a tricyclic compound synthesised
in 1953 by Schindler. It has a structure similar to
TCAs. The onset of action can be faster as compared
to lithium, but slower compared to valproate.
The usual dose is 600-1600 mg/day orally, in
divided doses. The treatment is best monitored with
repeated blood levels. The therapeutic blood levels
are 4-12 μg/ml and the toxic blood levels are usually
reached at >15 μg/ml.

Indications
The indications for use of carbamazepine include:
1. Seizures
i. Complex partial seizures (CPS)
ii. Generalised tonic clonic seizures
iii. Alcohol withdrawal seizures (rum fits), if persistent (also used sometimes for treatment of
simple alcohol withdrawal syndrome)
2. Psychiatric disorders
i. Bipolar mood disorder (especially for rapid
cyclers; lithium-refractory patients; lithium-


<<<PAGE 205>>>
Psychopharmacology

intolerant patients; for prophylaxis in some
patients; for treatment of acute mania, especially
severe and dysphoric mania)
ii. Impulse control disorder and aggression (in
some cases)
iii. Psychosis (especially mania) with epilepsy
iv. Borderline personality disorder (for treatment
of mood swings)
v. Cocaine withdrawal syndrome
3. Paroxysmal pain syndromes
i. Trigeminal neuralgia
ii. Phantom limb pain
iii. Other paroxysmal pain syndromes (neuralgias).

Side Effects
The major side effects include diplopia, drowsiness, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, ataxia, skin rash,
Steven-Johnson syndrome (erythema multiforme
major), photosensitivity, cholestatic jaundice, acute
oliguria with hypertension, leucopenia and thrombocytopenic purpura. The most dangerous side effects
include bone marrow depression (causing aplastic anaemia), agranulocytosis and cardiovascular
collapse.
Therefore, it is essential to monitor cardiac, renal,
hepatic and bone-marrow functions during carbamazepine treatment. The use of carbamazepine in
pregnancy and lactation should be best avoided.
The use of carbamazepine in management of
bipolar disorder appears to be recently declining.

ANTI-ANXIETY DRUGS
Anti-anxiety drugs, also known as minor tranquilisers
and anxiolytics, can be classified as follows:

Classification
Barbiturates
Barbiturates can be divided into four main types:
Long Acting
The duration of action is more than 8 hours. Examples
include phenobarbital.

193

Intermediate Acting
The duration of action is 5-8 hours. Examples include
amobarbital and pentobarbital.
Short Acting
The duration of action is 1-5 hours. Examples include
secobarbital.
Ultra-Short Acting
The duration of action is less than 1 hour. Examples
include thiopentone and methohexital.
Barbiturates are no longer used or recommended as
anti-anxiety agents. They produce multiple side effects
such as excessive sedation, respiratory and circulatory
depression, hepatic enzyme induction, dependence,
withdrawal symptoms, rebound increase in REM-sleep
on withdrawal, and potential for use in suicide.

Non-barbiturate, Non-benzodiazepine
Anti-anxiety Agents
These can be further divided into the following categories:
Carbamates
The common examples are meprobamate, tybamate
and carisoprodol. These are not used commonly due
to the potential for abuse and dependence.
Piperidinediones
An example is glutethimide. This drug too is not used
now-a-days due to its dependence potential.
Alcohols
The examples include ethanol, chloral hydrate and
ethchlorvynol. These drugs are highly dependence
producing and clearly not recommended.
Quinazoline Derivatives
An example is methaqualone. Methaqualone had
become a street drug (i.e. a drug of abuse) and its
use was discontinued as an anti-anxiety agent and a
hypnotic.
Anti-histaminics
The common examples include diphenhydramine,
hydroxyzine and promethazine. In past, diphenhydramine was usually combined with methaqualone or
diazepam. They may be used as hypnotic-sedatives,
but their use as anti-anxiety agents is minimal and
probably not safe.


<<<PAGE 206>>>
194

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Cyclic Ethers
An example is paraldehyde. It is not used commonly
as it is not very effective and is also dependence
producing.
Others
Antipsychotics (such as thioridazine, flupentixol,
olanzapine, quetiapine) and antidepressants (such as
doxepine) have sometimes been used for the treatment
of severe, intractable anxiety. However, antipsychotics
are not the drugs of first choice and should be used
with extreme discretion (with balancing of risks and
benefits) when all other drugs have failed to benefit.
Antidepressants (such as SSRIs, SNRIs and Mirtazapine) have recently emerged as treatments of choice
in several anxiety disorders including generalised
anxiety disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, panic
disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder. There is
some data to support that smaller starting doses are
better as anxiety symptoms may worsen initially in
treatment.
Beta (β) Blockers
An example is propranolol which is particularly effective in treatment of peripheral somatic manifestations
of anxiety. It is also helpful in treatment of anticipatory anxiety and situational anxiety. Propranolol can
be used either alone or along with benzodiazepines.
β-blockers are not treatments of first choice in the
treatment of psychic or psychological manifestations
of anxiety.
Propranolol is contraindicated in patients with
bronchial asthma and cardiac conditions. It should be
used with caution in patients of age 40 and above. The
usual dose is 40-240 mg/day, administered in divided
doses.

Benzodiazepines
Since the discovery of chlordiazepoxide in 1957 by
Sternbach, benzodiazepines have replaced other antianxiety drugs and hypnotics though SSRIs are now
gradually becoming drugs of first choice in management of anxiety disorders.
The benzodiazepines can be classified according
to their elimination half-lives (Table 15.9).

Indications
The indications for use of benzodiazepines include
the following:
1. Generalised anxiety disorder; adjustment disorder
with anxious mood (Short-term use)
2. Panic disorder, agoraphobia, and school phobia (particularly alprazolam and clonazepam;
short-term use, along with antidepressants)
3. Agitated depression (short-term use, along with
antidepressants, for first 1-2 weeks)
4. Short-term treatment of insomnia
5. Stage 4 NREM-sleep disorders such as enuresis,
somnambulism (diazepam reduces duration of
Stage 4 NREM-sleep)
6. Nightmares (diazepam also reduces the REMsleep duration).
7. Pre-medication in anaesthesia (intravenous
lorazepam, midazolam, or diazepam)
8. Anticonvulsant use (drugs of choice for status epilepticus, myoclonic seizures and certain infantile
spasms)
9. To produce skeletal muscle relaxation (e.g. in
tetanus, cerebral palsy)
10. Treatment of alcohol and other drug withdrawal
syndromes
11. For minor surgical, endoscopic or obstetric procedures
12. Acute mania (lorazepam, usually with lithium or
atypical antipsychotics).
13. Antipsychotic-induced akathisia
14. Emergency management of acute psycho ses
(IV lorazepam, along with parenteral antipsychotics).
15. Narcoanalysis or abreaction (IV diazepam)
Whenever administered, benzodiazepines should
not be ordinarily used for more than 2-4 weeks at a
time; otherwise risk of dependence is quite high and
tolerance occurs.
Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of action of benzodiazepines is
not clear. The discovery of the benzodiazepine receptors in 1977 shed some light on the mode of action
(Fig. 15.1).


<<<PAGE 207>>>
Psychopharmacology

195

Table 15.9: Classification and Properties of Benzodiazepines
Class and Drug

Elimination
Half-life
(Hours)

I. Very Short Acting Drugs
1. Midazolam
2-5 hours
2. Triazolam

2-5 hours

Usual
Hypnotic
Dose (mg
HS/Nocte)

Oral Dose
(mg/day)

Parenteral
Dose (mg)

Active
Metabolites

Other Comments

___

___

___

___

0.125-0.25 ___
mg

___

α-hydroxytriazolam

Used for
anaesthesia
Rapid oral absorption; Marketed as
hypnotic

α-hydroxyalprazolam
___

II. Short Acting Drugs
1. Alprazolam
6-20 hours

___

0.5-6.0 mg ___

2. Estazolam
3. Loprazolam

8-24 hours
6-12 hours

1-2 mg
1-2 mg

1-2 mg
___

___
___

4. Lormetazepam
5. Lorazepam

10-12 hours 0.5-1.5 mg
10-20 hours 0.5-2.0 mg

___

___

2-6 mg

2-4 mg

6. Oxazepam

5-15 hours

15-120 mg ___

7. Temazepam

10-20 hours 10-20 mg

III. Long Acting Drugs
1. Chlorazepate
30-100
hours

15-30 mg

7.5-30 mg

Piperazine
N-oxide
Lorazepam
None
None

10-20 mg

___

Oxazepam

7.5-60 mg

___

Nordiazepam

2. Chlordiazepoxide

25-48 hours 10-25 mg

3. Clonazepam

20-40 hours ___

15-100 mg 50-100 mg Desmethyldemoxepam
___
0.5-20 mg 2-5 mg

4. Diazepam

14-90 hours 2-10 mg

2-30 mg

2-20 mg

Nordiazepam

5. Flurazepam

30-100
hours

15-60 mg

___

6. Halazepam
7. Nitrazepam

30-60 hours 20-40 mg
20-60 hours 5-10 mg

Desmethylhydroxy-ethylflurazepam
Nordiazepam
Nordiazepam

15-30 mg

40-160 mg ___
___
5-20 mg

___
___
___
___
High dependence
potential
Slow oral
absorption
Slow oral
absorption
Hydrolysed to
active form in
stomach
Erratic absorption
after IM injection
Also used in treatment of epilepsy
Erratic absorption
after IM injection
Marketed as a
hypnotic
___
Marketed as a
hypnotic
Contd...


<<<PAGE 208>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

196
Contd...
Class and Drug

8. Prazepam
9. Quazepam

Usual
Hypnotic
Dose (mg
HS/Nocte)
30-60 hours 10-20 mg

Oral Dose
(mg/day)

Parenteral
Dose (mg)

Active
Metabolites

Other Comments

20-60 mg

___

40-160
hours

7.5-30 mg

Nordiazepam
and Diazepam
___

Slow oral
absorption
Probably selective
for benzodiazepine
receptor I; may
cause less
cognitive/motor
disturbances.

Elimination
Half-life
(Hours)

7.5-15 mg

Each drug is described under the headings of elimination half-life (hours); usual hypnotic dose (mg nocte/HS); usual
oral dose (mg/day; if applicable); usual parenteral dose (mg; if applicable); active metabolites and other comments.

Fig. 15.1: Probable Mechanism of Action of Benzodiazepines (BDZ)

There are, presently, two known benzodiazepine
(BDZ) receptors.
1. BDZ Receptor I, which is linked with the GABA
(Gamma-Aminobutyric acid) receptor and is involved in mediation of sleep.
2. BDZ Receptor II, which is alone and is involved
in cognition and motor control.
Thus, benzodiazepines act by enhancing GABA
transmission in the brain.

Benzodiazepine receptor antagonists (such as
flumazenil) are anxiety-provoking agents. Flumazenil has a half-life of 60 minutes and administered
in a parenteral dose of 0.2-1.0 mg IV given over 1-2
minutes in treatment of benzodiazepine toxicity.

Classification of Benzodiazepines
Each drug is described in Table 15.9 under the headings of elimination half-life (hours); usual hypnotic


<<<PAGE 209>>>
Psychopharmacology

dose (mg nocte/HS); usual oral dose (mg/day; if applicable); usual parenteral dose (mg; if applicable);
active metabolites and other comments.
Side Effects
The side effects of benzodiazepines include nausea,
vomiting, weakness, epigastric pain, diarrhoea, vertigo, blurring of vision, body aches, urinary incontinence (rare), impotence, sedation, lassitude, increased
reaction time, ataxia (in high doses), dry mouth,
retrograde amnesia (rare), impairment of driving
skills, severe effects when administered with alcohol,
irritability, disinhibited behaviour, dependence and
withdrawal symptoms (on stopping the drug).
Cross-tolerance occurs with barbiturates, methaqualone and ethyl alcohol. A worsening of depression and pre-existing psychosis with use of benzodiazepines has been reported.
Since withdrawal symptoms usually occur after
long-term use, benzodiazepines should be withdrawn
slowly.

Newer Drugs
1. Buspirone
Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine, anti-anxiety drug.
It is an azaspiro decanedione (azapirone) derivative.
Buspirone is a 5-HT1A partial agonist and a selective
DA autoreceptor antagonist. It also inhibits the spontaneous firing of 5-HT neurons.
It does not seem to act on the benzodiazepine receptors. It is anxioselective, with no sedative action,
and no anticonvulsant or muscle-relaxant properties.
It is administered in a dose of 15-30 mg/day, in a
thrice daily schedule due to a short half-life. As it has
a slower and more gradual onset of action, it usually
takes about two weeks before its anti-anxiety effects
are evident. Buspirone is not useful in treatment of
panic disorder. The common side effects include dizziness, headache, lightheadedness and diarrhoea.
As it is an anxio-selective and lacks any risk of
dependence, it was hoped that it might replace the
benzodiazepines as the drug of choice in treatment
of generalised anxiety disorders. However, it is not
as widely used as it was once expected.

197

2. Zopiclone
Zopiclone belongs to a new class of non-benzodiazepine drugs, the cyclopyrrolones. Cyclopyrrolone
derivatives also act on the GABA receptors, but at a
site distinct from that of benzodiazepines. Zopiclone
has a short duration of action as well as shorter onset.
After oral administration, it is absorbed rapidly, with
peak plasma concentration occurring in about 60
minute. The elimination half-life is 4-6 hours.
The usual dose of zopiclone is 3.75-7.5 mg
at bedtime (lower dose in elderly patients and in
patients with severe hepatic failure). The side effects
include bitter taste, dry mouth, drowsiness, nausea
and headache. Its safety in children, in pregnancy
and lactation is not proven. It is clinically superior
to benzodiazepines in subjective awakening quality,
well-being, and attention span in the morning.
3. Zolpidem
Zolpidem is an imidazopyridine derivative which
is marketed as a hypnotic. It is administered in a
dose of 5-10 mg for hypnotic use. It has a half-life
of 2-3 hours; therefore it is useful in the treatment
of difficulty in initiation of sleep (initial insomnia).
The side effects include drowsiness, dizziness,
headache, depression, nausea, dry mouth, and myalgia.
It should not be used for more than two weeks at one
time. Its safety in children, in pregnancy and lactation
is not proven.
4. Zalpelon
Zalpelon is a pyrazolo-pyrimidine derivative which
is marketed as a hypnotic. Although a non-benzodiazepine drug, it acts on the omega-1 benzodiazepine
receptor located on the alpha sub-unit of the GABA-A
receptor complex (causing sedation), with very little
effect on omega-2 and omega-3 receptors.
It is administered in a dose of 5-10 mg for
hypnotic use. It has a half-life of one hour with a rapid
onset of effect. Therefore, it is useful in treatment
of difficulty in initiation of sleep (initial insomnia).
It can be taken again at night if there is more than
4 hours of sleep time remaining. Because of the very
short half-life, there is virtually no hangover in the
morning.


<<<PAGE 210>>>
198

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The side effects include headache, drowsiness, dizziness, nausea, and myalgia. It should not be used for
more than 2 weeks at one time. Its safety in children,
in pregnancy and lactation is not proven.
5. Other Drugs
The other newer hypnosedative and anti-anxiety
drugs include suriclone (a cyclopyrrolone derivative; a hypnotic), bretazenil and imidazenil (partial

benzodiazepine agonists; anxiolytic without sedation; rapid onset of action), abecarnil (β-carboline
partial agonist at benzodiazepine receptor; anxiolytic
and anticonvulsant), tiagabine, riluzole, and alpidem
(anxiolytic).
Pregabalin is licensed for treatment of anxiety in
some countries. Cognitive behaviour therapy with or
without medication is helpful in treatment of several
anxiety disorders.


<<<PAGE 211>>>
16

Other Biological
Methods of Treatment

The last 75 years have seen the development of several biological methods of treatment for treatment of
psychiatric disorders. The earlier modes of treatment,
such as malarial treatment for general paralysis of
insane (GPI), insulin coma therapy, atropine coma
therapy, continuous sleep treatment, sub-convulsive
ECT, chemical convulsive therapy, sleep deprivation,
mega-vitamin therapy and hallucinogens (to name a
few important methods) are no longer used in routine
clinical practice.
Although there are other new biological methods
recently introduced for the treatment of psychiatric
disorders, such as vagal nerve stimulation (VNS),
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and deep
brain stimulation (DBS), these are not discussed in
this book.
There are two methods which though introduced
at the same time have been revised extensively and
are still in use presently. These methods are electroconvulsive therapy and psychosurgery.

A much safer form of convulsive therapy was used by
Cerletti and Bini in 1938 (Table 16.1). They called it
EST or electroshock therapy. Later, this method of
treatment came to be known as ECT or electroconvulsive therapy. The 1970s saw widespread criticism of
ECT, with many legislations passed in the US states
(e.g. in California, 1975), restricting the use of ECT.
Following this, widespread modifications in the ECT
technique made it even safer mode of treatment.
In 1974, the American Psychiatric Association’s
(APA’s) Council on Research and Develop ment
appointed a Task Force on ECT. The APA Task Force
on ECT, in 1976, gave its report which provided clear
guidelines for use of ECT and declared it to be a safe
and effective method of treatment when used by
professionals trained in the technique. The 1990 APA
Task Force Report on ECT redefined the indications,
gave guidelines for obtaining consent and set standards
for training, treatment and privileging of ECT. The
most recent version of this task force report became
available in 2001.

ELECTROCONVULSIVE THERAPY

Indications

Brief History

The indications for electroconvulsive therapy are:
1. Major severe depression
i. With suicidal risk (This is the first and most
important indication for ECT)
ii. With stupor
iii. With poor intake of food and fluids

Von Meduna, in 1934, used 25% camphor in oil intramuscularly to produce convulsions for the first time for
therapeutic purposes. Later, he used pentylenetetrazol
(metrazol) for the same purpose.


<<<PAGE 212>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

200

Table 16.1: A Brief Early History of Biological Treatments in Psychiatry
Year

Treatment

Started by

1785
1917
1922
1931
1933
1934
1936
1938
1949
1952
1954
1958
1958
1958
1960

Camphor-induced seizures
Malarial treatment of GPI
Barbiturate coma therapy
Reserpine (1st drug treatment in psychosis)
Insulin coma therapy
Cardiazol (metrazol) induced seizures
Psychosurgery (prefrontal leucotomy)
Electroshock (electroconvulsive therapy)
Lithium (for mania)
Chlorpromazine (1st antipsychotic)
Meprobamate
Iproniazid (1st MAO inhibitor)
Imipramine (1st tricyclic antidepressant)
Haloperidol (1st non-phenothiazine antipsychotic)
Chlordiazepoxide (1st benzodiazepine)

W Oliver
Julius Wagner von Jauregg
Jacob Klaesi
Ganesh Sen, Kartik Bose
Manfred Sakel
LLJ von Meduna
Egas Moniz, Almenda Lima
Ugo Cerletti, Lucio Bini
John F Cade
Jean PL Delay, Pierre Deniker
FM Berger
Nathan Kline
Thomas Kuhn
Janssen
Hugo Sternbach

iv. With melancholia
v. With psychotic features
vi. With unsatisfactory response to drug therapy
vii. Where drugs are contraindicated, or have
serious side effects
viii. Where speedier recovery is needed.
2. Severe catatonia (non-organic)
i. With stupor
ii. With poor intake of food and fluids
iii. With unsatisfactory response to drug therapy
iv. Where drugs are contraindicated, or have
serious side-effects.
v. Where speedier recovery is needed.
3. Severe psychoses (schizophrenia or mania)
i. With risk of suicide, homicide or danger of
physical assault
ii. With unsatisfactory response to drug therapy
iii. Where drugs are contraindicated, or have
serious side effects
iv. With very prominent depressive features (e.g.
schizo-affective disorder).
The use of ECT in mania and schizophrenia is
not a treatment of first choice and is employed only
in the above-mentioned conditions. A history of good

response with ECT and patient preference for ECT
also determine the use of ECT.
The 1990 APA Task Force on ECT also defined
as suggestive indications (for occasional use) the following disorders:
1. Organic mental disorders (e.g. organic mood syndrome, organic hallucinosis, organic delusional
disorder, and delirium).
2. Medical disorders (e.g. organic catatonia, neuroleptic malignant syndrome and parkinsonism).

Pre-treatment Evaluation
The pre-treatment evaluation consists of the following steps:
1. An informed consent, taken from the patient. If the
patient does not have capacity or competence to
give consent, consideration must be given to the
most recent legal guidelines and local procedures
which can include the best interest decision with
consent of guardian/family and additional opinion
from another professional.
2. Detailed medical and psychiatric history taking,
which includes the current and past treatment history.


<<<PAGE 213>>>
Other Biological Methods of Treatment

3. General and systemic physical examination.
4. Routine laboratory investigations, such as Hb, TC,
DC, ESR, urinary examination, ECG, X-ray chest,
and any other investigations in the light of history
and examination. Other optional investigations,
which are not done routinely, include EEG and
estimation of plasma pseudocholinesterase activity
(for patients who would receive succinylcholine
for general anaesthesia).
5. Examination of fundus oculi to rule out papilloedema.

Contraindications
Absolute
The only absolute contraindication is the presence of
raised intracranial tension (so an examination of the
fundus oculi is an essential step). However, the APA
Task Force Report on ECT recognises this too as a
relative contraindication.

Relative
These include:
1. Recent myocardial infarction (MI)
2. Severe hypertension
3. Cerebrovascular accident (CVA)
4. Severe pulmonary disease
5. Retinal detachment, and
6. Pheochromocytoma.

Technique
The techniques used for ECT administration are of
two types:
i. Direct ECT is administered in the absence of
muscular relaxation and general anaesthesia.
All the other steps are the same as in modified
ECT. This method of treatment is nowadays
very infrequently used and not understandably
encouraged by most guidelines.
ii. Modified ECT is modified by drug-induced
muscular relaxation and general anaesthesia
administered by an anaesthetist.
ECT is usually administered in the morning after
an overnight fast. If given at any other time during

201

the day, the patient should be empty stomach for at
least 4 hours. No oral medication should be given
in the morning. The bladder (and bowel) should be
emptied just before the treatment, as incontinence can
occur during the induced seizure. Dentures, if present,
should be removed, and the presence of loose teeth
should be ruled out. Tight clothing, and metallic and
sharp objects (if any) should be removed from the
person’s body.
The usual anaesthetic precautions are taken. The
patient is placed on a hard bed which is well insulated.
A slow intravenous drip may be started (though not
needed in all patients). Atropine (0.6 mg) is given
IV just before the treatment or else is given IM or
SC 30 minutes before treatment. Atropine is given
to decrease the oral secretions and to prevent vagal
stimulation during ECT which can cause cardiac
arrest. However, this method is not followed at many
centres these days.
This step is followed by administration of an
anaesthetic agent such as propofol (0.75–2.5 mg/kg)
or thiopentone (2-5 mg/kg, usually individualised
dose for each patient) and a muscle relaxant like
succinylcholine (0.5-1.5 mg/kg). An anaesthetic mask
is placed on the face and ventilation with 100% oxygen
is given. As succinylcholine is a depolarising blocking agent, its administration is followed by muscular
fasciculations which move from above downwards.
When the fine twitching movements disappear from
the lower extremities, it is the time of complete muscular relaxation.
Now a mouth gag is inserted between teeth, to
prevent tongue bite during convulsion and pressure is
applied on mandible to approximate upper and lower
teeth till convulsions stop. The electrodes (usually
U-shaped) are moistened with saline or 25% bicarbonate solution and are applied on head. According
to the position of application of electrodes, ECT is of
two types:
i. Bilateral ECT: This is the standard form of ECT
used most commonly. Each electrode is placed
2.5-4.0 cm (1-1½") above the midpoint, on a
line joining the tragus of the ear and the lateral
canthus of the eye.


<<<PAGE 214>>>
202

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

ii. Unilateral ECT: In this type, electrodes are
placed only on one side of head, usually the
non-dominant side (right side of head in righthanded individual). There are various positions
described for the electrode placement.
The unilateral ECT is safer, with much fewer side
effects, particularly those of memory impairment.
However, according to the APA ECT Task Force
Report, bilateral ECT is superior to unilateral ECT in
effectiveness.
The electrode placement sites are cleaned with
normal saline or 25% bicarbonate solution, or a conducting gel is applied. One attendant places one hand
each on both thighs near the knee joint, while another
attendant holds the shoulders. This is usually a must
in direct ECT, but may also be done in modified ECT.
This is to prevent falls from the bed and causation of
fracture or dislocation due to muscular contractions
(which may occasionally occur even in modified ECT).
The therapeutic adequacy of the treatment is
usually gauzed by the occurrence of a generalized
tonic-clonic seizure lasting for not less than 25-30
seconds. This is ensured by:
1. Observing the seizure (in direct ECT).
2. EEG recording during ECT (in modified ECT).
3. Occluding the circulation of one extremity with
a BP apparatus cuff, before giving succinylcholine. Thus, the whole body is paralyzed but
one extremity convulses and can be directly
observed.
4. Observing plantar extension and eyelid contractions which may be seen despite the muscular
relaxation (not a very reliable method).
Most guidelines recommended that seizure activity
by EEG of at least 25 seconds and observed convulsion of at least 15 seconds was needed for the seizure
to be classified as adequate. However, the recent
(Third) Report of the Royal College of Psychiatrists’
Special Committee on ECT (2004) recommended
that there is not enough evidence to suggest that the
observed seizure duration is important. According
to this report, a bilateral generalized seizure is more
important.

The usual dose for obtaining an adequate seizure
response is 90-150 volts (average 110 volts) for 0.1-1.0
seconds (average 0.6 seconds). The usual amount of
current passed in an ECT session is 200-1600 mA.
Earlier, the ECT machines used a sine wave to
deliver the current (with a positive and a negative wave
constituting a cycle). However, with sine wave, unnecessarily excessive and inefficient electrical stimulus
is delivered. The newer ECT machines instead use
a brief pulse wave form that delivers the electrical
stimulus, usually in a 1-2 msec time period at a rate
of 30-100 pulses/second. Therefore, the brief pulse
current is more efficacious and safer than the sine wave
current. There are clear guidelines available regarding
the procedure with the new machines.
The stimulus dosing protocols have two principles,
namely calculation of the seizure threshold (the minimum stimulus that induces an adequate seizure) and
calculation of the treatment stimulus (usually 1.5 times
supra-threshold for the bilateral and 2.5 times for the
unilateral ECT). So, the patient is stimulated at higher
stimulus levels during the treatment than the seizure
threshold (therefore, suprathreshold).
After seizure has occurred, the mouth gag is
removed, secretions are removed by a suction machine
from the oral cavity, and oxygen mask is applied. Till
consciousness is regained, the patient is turned to one
side to prevent aspiration. The vital parameters are
constantly monitored till recovery occurs. The patient
is made to rest, for about 30 minutes to 1 hour, on bed
after the treatment is over.

Duration of Therapy
The total duration and number of treatments given
depends on the diagnosis, presence of side effects, and
the response to treatment. Usually 6-10 treatments are
sufficient, although up to 15 treatments can be given
if needed. The treatments should be spaced, so that
no more than 3 ECTs are given per week.
Although ECT is very effective in severe depressive disorder (for example), the benefit lasts only
till the ECTs are given. There is no residual benefit
after the treatment is over. Hence, the patient needs


<<<PAGE 215>>>
Other Biological Methods of Treatment

203

antidepressants (for example) during and after the
ECTs are over.

PSYCHOSURGERY

Mechanism of Action

Psychosurgery is defined (by APA’s Task Force) as, a
surgical intervention, to sever fibres connecting one
part of brain with another, or to remove, destroy or
stimulate brain tissue, with the intent of modifying
behaviour, thought or mood disturbances, for which
there is no underlying organic pathology (i.e. the
disturbance is ‘functional’).

The efficacy of ECT is linked with production of
generalised tonic-clonic seizures though, as stated
above, there is some recent doubt about the need for
a seizure duration of 25-30 sec. Although the exact
mechanism is unclear, one hypothesis states that ECT
possibly affects the catecholamine pathways between
diencephalon (from where seizure generalisation
occurs) and limbic system (which may be responsible
for mood disorders), also involving hypothalamus.
As ECT increases the threshold for further seizures, it may paradoxically act as an anticonvulsant. ECT
also causes down-regulation of β1 receptors in cortex
and hippocampus.

Side Effects
1. Side effects associated with general anaesthesia:
Deaths during ECT are usually due to the general anaesthesia, succinylcholine (in patients with
deficiency of pseudo-cholinesterase) or druginteractions. According to the APA Task Force
Report (2001), the approximate mortality rate is
1:10,000 patients (or 1:80,000 treatments), which
is similar to any operative procedure under anaesthesia.
2. Memory disturbances (both anterograde and retrograde) are very common. These are usually mild
and recovery occurs within 1-6 months after treatment. Unilateral ECTs cause much less memory
disturbance than bilateral ECTs.
3. Confusion may occur in the postictal period. Like
memory disturbances, confusion is much commoner with bilateral ECTs. Usually, no treatment
is needed. Parenteral diazepam may be given for
excitement during this period.
4. Other side effects include headache, prolonged
apnoea, prolonged seizure, cardiovascular dysfunction, emergent mania, muscle aches and
apprehension.
ECT does not cause any brain damage.

Definition

Brief History
Although surgery on skull (such as trephining) was
done for mental illnesses even in ‘primitive’ times,
psychosurgery was introduced as leucotomy by Egas
Moniz and Almenda Lima in 1936. Egaz Moniz later
even received a Noble prize. Freeman and Watts
later introduced prefrontal lobotomy in 1937, while
in India, Govindaswami and Rao performed the first
leucotomies in 1944.
Psychosurgery came in for a severe public criticism in the 1950s when its use decreased substantially.
In the last few decades, several better methods of
treatment have been developed which are safer and
more specific. In addition, careful guidelines for the
use of psychosurgery have also been laid down.

Anatomical Basis
It is believed that limbic system is closely linked
with normal and abnormal emotional reactions. The
limbic system (Fig. 16.1) consists mainly of cingulum
(cingulate gyrus and cingulate bundle), hippocampus,
parahippocampal gyri, fornix, amygdala, parts of
thalamus, parts of hypothalamus and posterior part
of orbital frontal cortex.
The limbic system is closely connected with the
frontal and temporal lobes, midbrain and other parts
of brain, by many connecting fibres. The aim of psychosurgery is to produce surgical lesions in carefully
selected parts of limbic system and/or its connecting
fibres. One major part of limbic system, believed to be
important in emotional experiences, is Papez circuit.
This important circuit, which lies within the limbic


<<<PAGE 216>>>
204

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Techniques

Fig. 16.1: Papez Circuit

system, connects cingulate bundle, hippocampus,
anterior thalamus, mammillary bodies, fornix and
septum (Fig. 16.1).

Indications
The current indications for psychosurgery include
the following:
1. Chronic, severe, incapacitating depression, which
has not responded to all available treatments.
2. Chronic, severe, incapacitating obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), which has not responded to
all available treatments.
3. Chronic, severe, incapacitating anxiety disorder,
which has not responded to all available treatments.
4. Schizophrenia with severe depressive component,
which has not responded to all available treatments.
5. Severe, pathological and uncontrolled aggressive
behaviour associated with a psychiatric or neurological illness (e.g. temporal lobe epilepsy).
It is believed that the maximum improvement
occurs in distress, tension, anxiety and agitation
rather than in other symptoms. An intact, wellmaintained premorbid personality is a good prognostic
sign.

Before any procedure, an informed consent must be
obtained by the neurosurgeon and the treating team.
Currently, all techniques use stereotactic methods
so that the lesion made is precise and side effects
produced are few. The available procedures include
bimedial leucotomy, orbital undercutting, rostral leucotomy, prefrontal leucotomy, anterior or posterior
cingulumectomy and stereotactic tractotomy (in addition to those mentioned below).
The lesion is produced by electrocoagulation,
freezing, thermocoagulation, ultrasonic method,
Yttrium-90 seeds, or laser.
The currently employed procedures include:
1. Stereotactic Subcaudate Tractotomy: A large
subcaudate lesion is produced. It is recommended
for severe depression, severe anxiety, severe obsessive-compulsive disorder and schizo-affective
disorder.
2. Stereotactic Limbic Leucotomy: A small subcaudate lesion is made, in addition to a lesion
in cingulate bundle. It is used for treatment of
intractable obsessive-compulsive disorder and
schizophrenia.
3. Amygdalotomy: This is used for severe, pathological, uncontrolled and intractable aggression
associated with neuropsychiatric disorders.

Side Effects
With the use of stereotactic procedures, side effects
are very rare. These include a less than 1% risk of
seizures, a very uncommon risk of personality change
(which used to be frequent with earlier procedures)
and a 1:1,000 to 1:10,000 mortality risk.

Comments
It must be remembered that at present, psychosurgery
is an extremely uncommon procedure in the routine
psychiatric practice in India and most of the world.
Most psychiatrists would have never referred any
patient for the procedure.


<<<PAGE 217>>>
17
The term psychoanalysis can denote one or more of
the following:
1. A psychological theory of mind and personality
development based primarily on the concept of
intrapsychic ‘conflict’.
2. A procedure for investigation of unconscious
psychical processes, otherwise inaccessible.
3. A therapeutic technique of treating psychiatric
disorders by psychological means.

Psychoanalysis
Although it was later almost replaced by the structural
theory, it is still useful in understanding the mental
mechanisms.
The tripartite division of mind included the unconscious, the preconscious and the conscious.

The Unconscious

BASIC CONCEPTS

Much of the mental activity lies outside the sphere
of consciousness. However, this unconscious mental
activity influences the conscious thought and behaviour even if it is not available to voluntary recall.
The unconscious contains those ideas and affects
which have been repressed (by the censor, as repression is known). This repressed material can only reach
consciousness through preconscious when the censor
is relaxed (for example, in dreams or abreaction) or
overpowered (for example, in slips of tongue or free
association).
The unconscious mental activity is characterised
by primary process thinking which is typically found
in young children, severe psychosis, mental retardation and dreams. It is different from normal thinking
(secondary process thinking) in that it strives for
immediate discharge of drive energy, lacks contact
with reality, is full of contradictions, lacks organisation
and logical connections, and is based on the pleasure
principle.

Topographic Theory of Mind

The Preconscious

This theory was advanced by Freud in the year 1900,
in the book called The Interpretation of Dreams.

This region of mind lies between the unconscious and
the conscious, with access to both. The unconscious

HISTORICAL OVERVIEW
Although the credit for ‘invention’ of psychoanalysis
belongs to Sigmund Freud (1856-1939), he drew heavily from the work of several prominent researchers
including Jean-Martin Charcot (hypnosis), Theodor
Meynert (neuroanatomy and psychiatry), Ernst Brucke
(physiology and physiochemistry), Hippolyte Bernheim (hypnosis) and Josef Breuer (hysteria), among
others.
Although there were several changes in psychoanalysis, some of them even fundamental, as Freud’s
thinking evolved over the years, an attempt is made
here to illustrate the basic concepts of psychoanalysis
as it existed near the end of Freud’s career.


<<<PAGE 218>>>
206

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

mental contents can reach the conscious only through
the preconscious. It is not present at birth but develops
in childhood, paralleling the ego development. The
censor lies here, maintaining the repressive barrier.
The preconscious mental contents can easily become conscious with focusing of attention.

The Conscious
If mind can be divided in portions, the conscious
constitutes only a tiny part of it. Freud conceptualised
conscious as a type of special sense organ of attention concerned with registration of stimuli from both
within and without. The conscious mental contents are
characterised by secondary process thinking based on
the reality principle.
In addition to the topographic model of mind,
Freud also theorised the concept of psychic determinism which means that all mental activity is meaningful
and purposeful, though unconscious, and is linked
with the previous life experiences. Hence, according
to this principle, no mental activity can be accidental
or purposeless.

Structural Theory of Mind
In 1923, in ‘The Ego and The Id’, Freud divided the
mental apparatus into three dynamic structures: the
id, the ego and the super-ego (Fig. 17.1).

The Id
The id is theorised to be the original state of human
mental apparatus with which a newborn baby is born.
It is totally unconscious, containing the basic drives
and instincts concerned with survival, sexual drive
and aggression. It is characterised by primary process
thinking and is based on pleasure principle, lacking
any direct link with reality. The only urge of these
drives is immediate gratification.

maintains a balance between the id and the super-ego
on one hand and the reality on the other.
For example, the individual observes a pleasurable
object surrounded by a barrier. The id wants immediate
gratification by obtaining the object, without seeing
the reality of a barrier around it. The super-ego, on
the other hand, proclaims that it is sinful to derive
pleasure from an object surrounded by barrier. The ego
strikes a balance between the two, as well as the real
world, and decides to wait and find a way to ‘climb’
the barrier and derive pleasure. Although simplistic,
the example illustrates the ego’s function of delaying
gratification in view of the reality.
The ego is the seat of conscious, intellectual,
self-preservative and defensive functions of mental
apparatus.

The Super-ego
The super-ego is predominantly an unconscious subdivision of mental apparatus that develops from the
ego. It is especially concerned with moral standards
and has two parts: a punitive conscience and a nonpunitive ego ideal.
Both derive from the effect of parental influence
on the ego. This parental influence not only includes
the effect of actual parents but also of the important
family members, religion and important people in the
surrounding environment (such as celebrities). The
criticisms, prohibitions, guilt-arousing statements and
punishments are introjected as conscience.
On the other hand, the approvals and rewards
become introjected as the ego ideal. The ego ideal
is later involved in the setting of personal goals and
aspirations.

The Ego
The ego is primarily determined by the experience of
reality and is, therefore, guided by the reality principle.
It is predominantly conscious though some parts (such
as ego defense mechanisms) are unconscious. Ego

Fig. 17.1: Structural Theory of Mind


<<<PAGE 219>>>
Psychoanalysis

Ego Defense Mechanisms

207

nisms are listed in Table 17.1, along with definitions,
clinical illustrations and examples in normal situations.
No ego defense mechanism is by itself psychotic,
neurotic, immature, mature or normal. Almost all
mechanisms of defense can be used in normal individuals. It is an exclusive or abnormally excessive
use that makes a defense mechanism neurotic or
psychotic.

The term ego defense mechanism refers to the automatic, involuntary, and unconsciously instituted psychological activity by which the unacceptable urges or
impulses are excluded from the conscious awareness.
These defense mechanisms are a function of ego.
The defense mechanisms usually operate on an
unconscious level (except, for example, suppression
which is a voluntary defense mechanism). In contrast,
coping mechanisms are voluntary and conscious
mechanisms of defense which an individual employs
to deal with day-to-day external and conscious fears
and conflicts.
There is no ‘standard’ list of defense mechanisms;
however, a few commonly used ego defense mecha-

The Theory of Psychosexual Development
In 1905, in ‘Three essays on the theory of sexuality’,
Freud enunciated his theory of infantile sexuality and
described the psychosexual stages of development
(Table 17.2 for a very brief summary).

Table 17.1: Commonly used Ego Defense Mechanisms
Defense Mechanism

Definition

A. Primary
1. Repression

Unconsciously excluding
from conscious awareness
of anxiety provoking ideas
and/or feelings
B. Psychotic/Narcissistic
1. Regression
Reversion to modes of
psychological functioning
that are characteristic of
earlier life stages, especially
childhood years

2. Denial

3. Projection

4. Distortion

Involuntary exclusion of
unpleasant or painful reality
from conscious awareness
Unconscious attribution
of one’s own attitudes and
urges to other person(s),
because of intolerance or
painful affect aroused by
those attitudes and urges
Unconscious gross ‘reshaping’ of external reality to
satisfy inner needs

Example(s) in Normal life

Illustration(s) from
Clinical Situations

1. ‘Forgetting’
2. Slips of the tongue

Psychogenic amnesia

1. Dreams
2. Regression in the service
of ego (ability of a mature
adult to appropriately indulge periodically in playful
childlike activities)

1. Neuroses (mild regression)
2. Psychoses (more pervasive regression)
3. Severe, prolonged physical illness
1. Psychoses
2. Alcohol dependence

1. Grief
2. Children (3-6 year olds)
A universal phenomenon
though occurs more commonly in children

Persecutory delusions and
hallucinations

—

1. Hallucinations
2. Delusions, especially of
grandiosity
Contd...


<<<PAGE 220>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

208
Contd...
Defense Mechanism

Definition

C. Neurotic/Immature
1. Conversion
A repressed, forbidden
urge is simultaneously kept
out of awareness and also
expressed in symbolic/
disguised form of some
somatic conversion ‘reaction’ (usually either motor
or sensory)
2. Dissociation
Involuntary splitting or suppression of a mental function or a group of mental
functions from rest of the
personality in a manner that
allows expression of forbidden unconscious impulses
without having any sense of
responsibility for actions
3. Displacement
Unconscious shifting of
emotions, usually aroused
by perceived threat, from
an unconscious impulse to
a less threatening external
object which is then felt to
be the source of threat
4. Isolation (Isolation of Separation of the idea of an
affect)
unconscious impulse from
its appropriate affect, thus
allowing only the idea and
not the associated affect to
enter awareness
5. Reaction formation
Unconscious transformation
of unacceptable impulses
into exactly opposite
attitudes, impulses, feelings
or behaviours
6. Undoing
Unconsciously motivated
acts which magically/symbolically counteract unacceptable thoughts, impulses
or acts

Example(s) in Normal life

Illustration(s) from
Clinical Situations

Sometimes seen in normal
individuals when exposed
to catastrophic stress;
otherwise presence always
implies psychopathology

Conversion disorder
(Hysteria)

Near death experience

Dissociative disorders,
e.g. psychogenic amnesia,
psychogenic fugue, multiple
personality, somnambulism,
possession syndrome

Normal, day-to-day deflection of ‘anger’ on a substitute target

1. Phobia (especially in
children)
2. OCD

1. Grief
2. Ability to discuss traumatic events without the
associated disturbing emotions, with passage of time

Obsessional thoughts

Normal character formation Obsessive compulsive perin childhood (from 3 years sonality traits and
onwards)
disorder

1. Checking of gas knobs or 1. Compulsive acts in OCD
locks to ensure safety
2. Compulsive rituals
2. Automatically saying ‘I
am sorry’ on bumping into
somebody
Contd...


<<<PAGE 221>>>
Psychoanalysis

209

Contd...
Defense Mechanism

Definition

Example(s) in Normal life

Illustration(s) from
Clinical Situations

7. Rationalisation

Providing ‘logical’ explana- A universal phenomenon
tions for irrational behaviour motivated by unacceptable unconscious wishes

8. Intellectualisation

—
Excessive use of intellectual When faced with stressful
processes (logic) to avoid af- situation, use of logic to
fective expression (emotion) focus closely on external
reality and avoiding expression of inner feelings (e.g.
fear)

9. Acting out

Expression of an unconscious impulse, through
action, thereby gratifying
the impulse

Destruction of any object in Impulse control disorders
a ‘fit of rage’

10. Schizoid fantasy

Withdrawal into self to
gratify frustrated wishes by
fantasy

Seen in adolescence (wish
fulfilling daydreams)

Schizoid and schizotypal
personality disorder

11. Turning against the
self (Retroflexion)

Unconscious deflection of
hostility towards another
person onto oneself resulting in lowered self-esteem,
self-criticism and at times
injury to self

1. Head banging in children
2. Destruction of property
or self in a fit of rage

1. Suicide
2. Severe depression
3. Any form of deliberate
self harm (DSH)

12. Introjection

Unconscious internalisation 1. Identification with the
of the qualities of an object aggressor (e.g. sometimes
or person
seen in victims kidnapped
by terrorists; also known as
Stockholm syndrome)
2. Grief reaction

13. Hypochondriasis

Unconscious transformation Abnormal illness behaviour Hypochondriasis
in physically disordered or
of unacceptable impulses
into inappropriate somatic normal individuals
concern

14. Inhibition

Involuntary decrease or loss 1. Writing ‘blocks’ or work
‘blocks’
of motivation to engage in
some goal-directed activity ’2. Social shyness
to prevent anxiety arising
out of conflicts with unacceptable impulses

Usually used to explain
behaviours resulting from
other defense mechanisms

Depression

1. OCD
2. Phobias

Contd...


<<<PAGE 222>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

210
Contd...
Defense Mechanism

Definition

Example(s) in Normal life

Illustration(s) from
Clinical Situations

15. Compensation
Unconscious tendency to
(Counter-phobic defense) deal with a fear or conflict
by unusual degree of effort
in the opposite direction

1. Involvement in dare-devil 1. Nymphomania (to
activities (e.g. sky diving to counter a sense of sexual
inadequacy)
counter fear of heights)
2. Excessive pre-occupation 2. Keeping excessive details
with body building to coun- in a diary in patients suffering from dementia
ter feelings of inferiority

16. Splitting

Unconscious viewing of self
or others as either good or
bad without considering the
whole range of qualities

Borderline personality
Believing personalities to
be either ‘black’ or ‘white’ disorder
without the shades of ‘grey’
(e.g. in a ‘typical’ Bollywood movie, the Hero often
is all good and the Villain
all bad)

1. Sublimation

Unconscious gradual channelisation of unacceptable
infantile impulses into
personally satisfying and
socially valuable behaviour
patterns

Channelisation of sexual
or aggressive impulses
into creative activities (e.g.
diverting forbidden sexual
impulses into artistic paintings)

—

2. Suppression
(Voluntary)

Voluntary postponement of
focusing of attention on an
impulse which has reached
conscious awareness

Voluntary decision not to
think about an argument
with a close friend while
going for an interview

—

3. Anticipation

Realistic thinking and plan- Anticipation is a universal
ning about future unpleas- phenomenon occurring in
all intelligent individuals
urable events

—

4. Humour

Overt expression of unacceptable impulses using
humour in a manner which
does not produce unpleasantness in self or others

A universal phenomenon

—

D. Mature

No ego defense mechanism is psychotic, neurotic, immature, mature or normal per se. Almost all mechanisms of defense
are sometimes used in normal individuals. It is an exclusive or abnormally excessive use that makes a defense mechanism
neurotic or psychotic.


<<<PAGE 223>>>
Psychoanalysis

211

Table 17.2: Psychosexual Stages of Development (Sigmund Freud)
Phase

Age Range Normal Development

Psychiatric syndromes theorised to result from fixation
(and regression) to this stage
1. Dependent personality
Major site of gratification is the oral region. It
traits and disorder
consists of 2 phases:
2. Schizophrenia (oral and
i. Oral erotic phase (sucking)
pre-oral phase)
ii. Oral sadistic phase (biting)
3. Severe mood disorder
4. Alcohol dependence
syndrome and drug
dependence
Major site of gratification is the anal and perianal 1. Obsessive compulsive
area; major achievement is toilet training (sphinc- personality traits and
disorder
ter control).
2. OCD (Anal sadistic phase)
It consists of 2 phases:
i. Anal erotic phase (excretion)
ii. Anal sadistic phase (‘holding’ and ‘letting go’
at will)
1. Sexual deviations
Major site of gratification is the genital area;
2. Sexual dysfunctions
genital masturbation is common at this stage.
According to Freud, this development is different 3. Neurotic disorders
in both sexes.
Male development
The boy develops castration anxiety (fear of
castration at the hand of his father in retaliation
for the boy’s desire to replace his father in his
mother’s affections). This leads to formation of
the Oedipus complex (aggressive impulses directed towards the father; named after the Greek
tragedy Oedipus rex in which Oedipus unknowingly kills his father and marries his mother, unaware of their true identities). Oedipus complex
is usually resolves by identification with father,
attempting to adopt his characteristics.
Female development
The girl develops penis envy (discontent with female genitalia following a fantasy that they result
from loss of penis). This is theorised by Freud to
lead to a wish to ‘receive’ the penis and to bear
a child. Resolution occurs by identification with
the mother. This phase has been called as Electra
complex.

1

Oral phase

Birth to
1-1½
years

2

Anal phase

1-1½
years to
3 years

3

Phallic (Oedipal) 3 to 5
phase
years

Contd...


<<<PAGE 224>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

212
Contd...
Phase

Age Range Normal Development

4

Latency phase

5-6 years
to 12
years

5

Genital phase

12 years
onwards)

Oedipus (and Electra) complex is usually
resolved at the beginning of this stage. This is a
stage of relative sexual quiescence. Super-ego is
formed at this stage. Sexual drive is channelised
into socially appropriate goals such as development of interpersonal relationships, sports,
school, work, etc.
Adult sexuality develops with capacity for
intimacy (during puberty) and respect for others. Gradual release from parental controls with
more influence of peer group. True self-identity
develops.

Psychiatric syndromes theorised to result from fixation
(and regression) to this stage
Neurotic disorders

Neurotic disorders

The normal development described here is a simplified account of Sigmund Freud’s theory of psychosexual development.
Till date, it remains a theory; there is no empirical evidence for, say, Oedipus complex or contribution of these stages to
development of psychiatric symptoms or syndromes.

Theory of Dreams
Dream interpretation has been a major component of
psychoanalysis. Beginning with his own dream experiences, Freud analysed dreams as “the royal road to
the unconscious”. He believed dreams to be conscious
expression of unconscious fantasies or impulses which
are not accessible to the individual in wakefulness,
thereby providing gratification by wish fulfilment.
Since expression of unconscious forbidden fantasies can evoke considerable anxiety, these fantasies are
considerably modified so as to preserve sleep on the
one hand and provide gratification of the fantasies on
the other. This modification is known as dream work.
Here the unconscious forbidden fantasies or wishes
which threaten to break sleep constitute the latent
dream content, whereas the dream content modified
by dream work constitutes the manifest dream content.
According to Freud, the aim of dream interpretation is
to get to the latent dream content from manifest dream
content, via free association, in order to understand the
‘real meaning’ of the dream experience.

According to this theory, the dream work consists
of the following mechanisms:
1. Symbolism
2. Displacement
3. Condensation
4. Projection
5. Secondary elaboration (since dream content
consists of primary process thinking, secondary
elaboration is used to introduce logical thinking or
secondary process thinking in the dream content).
In addition to the unconscious impulses, wishes
and fantasies, the dream content is also influenced by:
1. Nocturnal sensory stimuli (e.g. thirst, hunger, full
bladder).
2. Day residue (residue of day experiences of previous one or several days).

Psychoanalysis and Psychoanalytical
Psychotherapy
Psychoanalysis and psychoanalytical psychotherapy as treatment methods are briefly discussed
in Chapter 18.


<<<PAGE 225>>>
18

Psychological Treatments
Table 18.1: Psychosocial Therapies

PSYCHOTHERAPY

Therapy/School

Psychotherapy can be defined (modified from Wolberg) as, the treatment by psychological means, of the
problems of an emotional nature, in which a therapist
deliberately establishes a professional relationship
with the patient to,
1. Remove, modify or retard existing symptoms,
2. Mediate disturbed patterns of behaviour, and/or
3. Promote positive personality growth and development.
Psychotherapy can be conducted by either verbal
or non-verbal means. There are several different kinds
of psychotherapies. The important types include the
following (Table 18.1).

Psychoanalysis and Psychoanalytical
Psychotherapy
These psychotherapeutic methods are based primarily
on Sigmund Freud’s work, although many other techniques developed by other important workers (such as
Carl Jung, Alfred Adler, Erich Fromm, Harry Stack
Sullivan, Karen Horney, Melanie Klein, Otto Rank,
Wilhelm Reich and many others) are also in use.
A detailed discussion of Freudian psychoanalysis
is not attempted here (see Chapter 17) and a very brief
outline of therapy is presented.

Classical Psychoanalysis
Freudian psychoanalysis typically needs 2-5 visits/
week by the patient for a period of 3-5 years (even

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Psychoanalysis
Analytical psychology
Behaviourism
Character analysis
Classical conditioning
Client-centred
psychotherapy
7. Cognitive behaviour
therapy
8. Cognitive therapy
9. Dual sex therapy
10. Existential logotherapy
11. Gestalt therapy
12. Group therapy
13. Hypnosis
14. Operant conditioning
15. Primal therapy
16. Progressive muscular
relaxation
17. Psychodrama
18. Rational emotive therapy
19. Reciprocal inhibition
20. Therapeutic community
21. Token economy
22. Transactional analysis
23. Will therapy

Proponent(s)
Sigmund Freud
Carl Gustav Jung
John Broadus Watson
Wilhelm Reich
Ivan Petrovich Pavlov
Carl R Rogers
Donald Meichenbaum
Aaron T Beck
William Masters and
Virginia Johnson
Victor E Frankl
Frederich Perls
Joseph Pratt
James Braid
Burrhus Frederic
Skinner
Arthur Janov
E. Jacobson
Jacob L Moreno
Albert Ellis
Joseph Wolpe
Maxwell Jones
Ayllon and Azrin
Eric Berne
Otto Rank


<<<PAGE 226>>>
214

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

longer). No detailed history taking, mental status
examination, or formalised psychiatric diagnosis is
attempted. The patient is allowed to communicate
unguided, by using ‘free association’.
The therapist remains passive with a non-directive
approach; however, the therapist constantly challenges
the existing defenses and interprets resistance (during the therapy) and transference (patient’s feelings,
behaviours and relationship with the therapist).
No direct advice is ever given to the patient. The
crux of the therapy is on interpretation. During the
therapy, the patient typically lies on the couch, with
the therapist sitting just out of vision. No other therapy
is usually used as adjunct.

Psychoanalytically-oriented
(Psychodynamic) Psychotherapy
Psychoanalytically-oriented, psychodynamic psychotherapy is a much more direct form of psychoanalysis.
The duration of therapy is much briefer and advice is
given to the patient occasionally. The patient and the
therapist may sit face-to-face or else couch is used. The
rest of technique is nearly the same as psychoanalysis.
However, additional modes of treatment, including
drug therapy can be used.
The indications for both psychoanalysis and
psychoanalytically-oriented psychotherapy are not
usually based on any psychiatric diagnoses. The most
important indication is the presence of long-standing
mental conflicts which, although are unconscious,
produce significant symptomatology.
The prerequisites of therapy are that the patient
should be motivated for therapy, should have strong
‘ ego-structure’ (which can bear frustrations of
impulses during the therapy), should be psychologically-minded and should not have recent significant
life stressors.
It is usually used for the treatment of neurotic disorders and personality disorders (or characterological
difficulties).

Behaviour Therapy
Behaviour therapy is a type of psychotherapy (broadly
defined) which is based on theories of learning, and

aims at modifying maladaptive behaviour and substituting it with adaptive behaviour.
Although there are many theories of learning,
majority of behaviour therapy techniques are based
on operant conditioning model (Skinner) and classical conditioning model (Pavlov). Many of the ideas
actually seem like (and are) common sense principles.
The learning theories assume that all behaviour is
learned behaviour. The behaviour that is followed
by a reward is more likely to occur again (operant
model), and that behaviour is learned more easily if
taught in small steps.
Behaviour therapy is typically a short duration
therapy; therapists are easy to train and it is usually
cost-effective. The total duration of therapy is usually
6-8 weeks. Initial sessions are scheduled daily but
the later sessions are more spaced out. A behavioural
analysis is usually carried out before planning behaviour therapy. One of the simplest methods of behaviour
analysis is called as ABC charting, which involves a
close look at the:
i. Antecedent (e.g. circumstances under which
the behaviour began; who, if any, were present;
other details),
ii. Behaviour (description of the behaviour in
detail), and
iii. Consequence (what happened afterwards; what
factors helped to maintain behaviour).
Some of the important behavioural techniques are
described briefly.

Systematic Desensitisation
Systematic desensitisation (SD) is based on the principle of reciprocal inhibition, described by Wolpe.
The principle states that if a response incompatible
with anxiety is made to occur at the same time as an
anxiety-provoking stimulus, anxiety is reduced by
reciprocal inhibition.
This consists of three main steps:
i. Relaxation training (described later).
ii. Hierarchy construction: Here the patient is
asked to list all the conditions which provoke
anxiety. Then, he is asked to list them in a descending order of anxiety provocation. Thus,


<<<PAGE 227>>>
Psychological Treatments

a hierarchy of anxiety-producing stimuli is
prepared.
iii. Systematic desensitisation proper: This can
be done either in imagery (SD-I) or in reality/in vivo (SD-R). At first, the lowest item in
hierarchy is confronted (in reality or in imagery). The patient is advised to signal whenever
anxiety occurs. With each signal, he is asked
to relax (Step-I). After a few trials, patient is
able to control his anxiety. Thus, gradually the
hierarchy is climbed till the maximum anxietyprovoking stimulus can be faced in the absence
of anxiety.
SD is a treatment of choice in phobias and obsessive-compulsive disorders.

Aversion Therapy
Aversion therapy is used for the treatment of conditions which are pleasant but felt undesirable by the
patient, e.g. alcohol dependence, transvestism, ego
dystonic homosexuality, other sexual deviations.
The underlying principle is pairing of the pleasant
stimulus (such as alcohol) with an unpleasant response
(such as brief electrical stimulus), so that even in
absence of unpleasant response (after the therapy is
over), the pleasant stimulus becomes unpleasant by
association. The unpleasant aversion can be produced
by electric stimulus (low voltage), drugs (such as apomorphine and disulfiram) or even by fantasy (when it
is called as covert sensitisation).
Typically, 20-40 sessions are needed, with each
session lasting about 1 hour. After completion of treatment, booster sessions may be given. The current use
of aversion therapy has declined sharply in the Western
world (and also elsewhere) as it is felt by many that it
may violate the human rights of the patient.

Operant Conditioning Procedures for
Increasing Behaviour
The common methods for augmenting an adaptive
behaviour include:
i. Positive reinforcement: Here, the desirable
behaviour is reinforced by a reward, either
material or symbolic.

215

ii. Negative reinforcement: Here, on performance
of the desirable behaviour, punishment can be
avoided.
iii. Modelling: The person is exposed to ‘model’
behaviour and is induced to copy it. This can
also be used to avoid certain behaviours.

Flooding
This is usually the method used in the treatment of
phobias. Here, the person is directly exposed to the
phobic stimulus, but escape is made impossible. By
prolonged contact with the phobic stimulus, therapist’s
guidance and encouragement, and therapist’s modelling behaviour, anxiety decreases and the phobic
behaviour diminishes.

Operant Conditioning Procedures for
Decreasing Behaviour
These methods include:
i. Time-out: Here, the reinforcement is withdrawn
for some time, contingent upon the undesired
response. Time-out is often used in therapy with
children.
ii. Punishment: Aversive stimulus is here
presented, contingent upon undesired response
(i.e. whenever undesired response occurs, punishment is given).
iii. Satiation: The undesired response is positively
reinforced, so that tiring occurs. A similar technique is negative practice procedure.

Other Behavioural Techniques
Many other techniques such as token economy (for
hospitalised patients), social-skills training (for
patients with social difficulties), family therapy,
marital therapy, and cognitive behavioural therapy
are available. The interested reader is referred to the
Reading List.

Cognitive Therapy or Cognitive
Behaviour Therapy
Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) is a type of psychotherapy which aims at correcting the maladaptive
methods of thinking, thus providing relief from con-


<<<PAGE 228>>>
216

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Fig. 18.1: Cognitive Behaviour Therapy Model

sequent symptoms. The therapist plays an active role,
unlike in psychoanalysis.
Developed separately by Beck and Meichenbaum,
it is used for treatment of depression, anxiety disorder,
panic disorder, phobias, eating disorders, anticipatory
anxiety, and also for teaching problem-solving methods. Some centres also use CBT for management of
psychotic symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations.
Figure 18.1 illustrates the hot cross bun model of
cognitive behaviour therapy.
A typical cognitive therapy schedule consists
of about 15 visits over a three-month period. Some
important techniques in CBT are:
i. Cognitive techniques such as recognising and
correcting negative automatic thoughts, teaching reattribution techniques, increasing objec-

tivity in perspectives, identifying and testing
maladaptive assumptions, and decentering,
ii. Behavioural techniques such as activity
scheduling, homework assignments, graded task
assignment, behavioural rehearsal, role playing,
and diversion techniques, and
iii. Teaching problem-solving skills.
iv. Mindfulness, originally a Buddhist technique,
can also be combined with CBT.

Supportive Psychotherapy
This is a very directive method of psychotherapy, with
the focus clearly on existing symptoms and/or current
life situations. The aims of the therapy are:
i. Correction of the situational problem.
ii. Symptom rectification.
iii. Restoring or strengthening defenses.


<<<PAGE 229>>>
Psychological Treatments

217

iv. Prevention of emotional breakdown.
v. Teaching new coping skills.
The aim is achieved by a conglomeration of
techniques which include guidance, sug gestion,
environmental manipulation, reassurance, persuasion,
development of a doctor-patient relationship, diversion, and even hospitalisation and medication. This is
a highly skilled method of psychotherapy which can
provide excellent results when used judiciously.

utilize psychoanalytic, supportive, transactional or
behavioural approaches.
Over the years, many types of group therapies have
emerged such as self-help groups (Alcoholics Anonymous for alcoholics, Weight Watchers for obese,
Phoenix-House for opiate dependent individuals),
Transactional Analysis groups (Eric Berne), Training
groups (Kurt Lewin), Psychodrama (Jacob Moreno)
and the like.

Family and Marital Therapy

Suggestion

In family therapy and marital therapy (also called as
couples therapy), the focus of intervention is not on
the individual but is instead on the family as a unit or
the marital unit.
There are several varieties of family and marital
therapies, such as those based on psychodynamic,
behavioural or systemic principles. Whenever there
are relational problems within a family or marital unit
(either primarily or secondary to a psychiatric disorder), family and/or marital therapy is indicated. For
example, in a behavioural marital therapy, components
of therapy may include problem solving, training in
communication skills, writing a behavioural marital
contract, and home-work assignments.

Although an integral part of supportive psychotherapy, it is often used alone. It is used by nearly all
medical practitioners, without realising or naming
it as such. It is suggestion, which is in part responsible for the placebo response. A placebo prescribed
confidently by an ‘impressive’ physician can lead to
some improvement in about 33% of patients with
most conditions.

Group Therapy
Group therapy (or group psychotherapy) is a
less time-consuming procedure, in which usually
8-10 people can be treated at one time. This was first
used by Joseph Pratt (an internist) in 1905, for patients
suffering from tuberculosis.
Now, it is known that group therapy is not only
time-saving but also especially beneficial for certain
group of patients. Group therapy offers patients (and
their relatives) an opportunity to realise that many
others have and share problems which are very similar
to their own problems, and that they are not alone in
their suffering.
Typically, sessions are held once or twice a
week, with each session lasting 1-2 hours (often 1½
hours). The patients usually sit in a circle, with equal
opportunities for interaction. Group therapy may

Hypnosis
Hypnosis is a state of artificially induced (by self or
others) increased suggestibility. There is a constriction in the peripheral awareness with increased focal
concentration on task at hand.
Trance phenomena were routinely utilized by
Anton Mesmer in 1775 who called ‘this force’ as
animal magnetism. The word hypnotism was first used
by James Braid in the 19th century.
Not everyone can be hypnotised. The capacity
for hypnosis is called hypnotisability, which can be
measured in a person by using tests such as the eye
roll sign or hand levitation test. Basically, these tests
measure suggestibility.
About 60% of the general population can be hypnotised but only 5-10% reach deep hypnotic trance.
A wide variety of techniques are available for the
induction of hypnosis.
Following changes occur commonly during the
hypnotic trance:
i. The person under hypnosis becomes highly
suggestible to commands of hypnotist, without
understanding their nature.


<<<PAGE 230>>>
218

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

ii. Dissociation of a part of body or emotions from
the remainder may occur.
iii. There is a partial or complete amnesia for the
events occurring during the hypnotic trance.
iv. There is an ability to produce or remove symptoms, perceptions and/or movements.
v. Post-hypnotic suggestion can be given just after
the trance and it is followed by the hypnotised
person.
Persons who are hypnotisable are in no way
abnormal as compared to the rest of the population.

Indications in Psychiatry
i. As an adjunct to psychotherapy.
ii. To abreact past experiences.
The conditions in which hypnosis can help in
treatment are many. The most important ones are listed
below.
i. Psychosomatic disorders
ii. Conversion disorder (hysteria)
iii. Dissociative disorder (hysteria)
iv. Eating disorders (anorexia nervosa, bulimia
nervosa and obesity)
v. Habit disorders (smoking)
vi. Pain
vii. Anxiety disorder.

Abreaction
Abreaction is an important procedure which brings to
conscious awareness, for the first time, unconscious
conflicts and associated emotions.
The release of emotions is therapeutic. Although
abreaction is an integral part of psychoanalysis and
hypnosis, it can be used independently also. Abreaction can be done with or without the use of medication.

Abreaction with Medication
Earlier amphetamines, ether, nitrous oxide and
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) have been used for
abreaction. Particularly, intravenous amphetamines
were very successful as they lead to a marked increase
in productivity of speech, thus facilitating release of
unconscious ideas and emotions. These agents are no

longer commonly used in clinical practice, due to risk
of dependence (in case of amphetamines and LSD)
and/or side effects.
Another method is the use of 5% solution of
sodium amobarbital (amytal) or thiopentone sodium
(pentothal), infused at a rate no faster than 1 cc/min to
prevent sleep as well as respiratory depression. This
procedure must always be done very carefully with
support from an anaesthetist who should be physically
present.
The abreactive procedure is begun with neutral
topics at first, gradually approaching area(s) of conflicts. Usually about 150-350 mg (3-7 cc.) of amytal
is sufficient for the purpose. In elderly and patients
with organic brain disorder, even 75 mg of amytal
may produce excessive drowsiness.
The indications of amytal interview include:
i. Abreaction (mainly) e.g. in hysteria.
ii. Interview with a mute patient.
iii. Diagnostic test in catatonic syndrome.
iv. Differentiating test in stupor (for differential
diagnosis of depression, schizophrenia, hysteria
and organic brain disorder).
There are certain contraindications for the use of
amytal interview:
i. Airway disease including upper respiratory tract
infection.
ii. Severe renal or hepatic disease.
iii. History of porphyria.
iv. Hypotension.
v. Dependence on barbiturates.
vi. Psychosis (except for catatonia or stupor).
The other medications which have been used
successfully for abreaction include diazepam and
ketamine. The use of abreaction has declined considerably in the last three decades and the current practice and guidelines do not encourage its
routine use.

Relaxation Therapies
The aim of these therapies is to induce muscular
relaxation. Since anxiety produces muscular tension,
which in turn reinforces (and thus increases) anxiety,


<<<PAGE 231>>>
Psychological Treatments

any relaxation technique would decrease both anxiety
and muscular tension.
Relaxation techniques are an integral part of a
majority of behaviour therapies, such as systematic
desensitisation. There are many methods which can
be used to induce relaxation and these include:
A. Jacobson’s progressive muscular relaxation:
This is the most frequently used technique. The
patient first tenses and then relaxes major muscle
groups of the body in a prefixed and systematic
order, usually beginning at the top of the body and
progressing downwards.
B. Hypnosis
C. Transcendental meditation (TM) or Yoga
D. ‘Shavasna’ (‘The corpse posture’): Similar to progressive relaxation but the sequence of progression
is below upwards.
E. Yog Nindra, Pranayama and Vipasna are other
Indian methods.
F. Biofeedback.

Biofeedback
Biofeedback (introduced for the first time in 1969) is
the use of an instrument (usually electronic), which
provides immediate feedback to the patient regarding
his physiological activities normally not available to
the conscious mind, such as ECG, EEG, pulse rate,
blood pressure, EMG, and galvanic skin response
(GSR).
The feedback helps the patient, apparently to control these responses. Relaxation is easily achieved by
this method. A simpler form (relaxometer) uses only
one parameter, the GSR.
The other uses of biofeedback include treatment
of enuresis, migraine headaches, tension headache,
idiopathic hypertension, incontinence, cardiac arrhythmias, uncontrolled generalised tonic clonic seizures,
and also for neuromuscular rehabilitation.

Rehabilitation
Psychiatric rehabilitation is defined as restoration of
the fullest physical, mental, social, vocational, and
economic usefulness of which the person suffering
from psychiatric disorder is capable.

219

A large number of patients with psychiatric disorders (such as schizophrenia) may have a poor quality
of life, residual symptoms, and long-term disability.
Although early recognition and treatment is the cornerstone of preventing long-term disability, a substantial
number of patients may need rehabilitation.
There are several components and methods available for rehabilitation, depending on the type and/or
stage of disorder and the type of support available
to the patient. Necessarily, a comprehensive assessment is needed before deciding on the individualized
rehabilitation for a particular patient.
Some of the methods used for psychiatric rehabilitation include housing placement (such as half
way homes, supervised housing), vocational training
and rehabilitation (such as activity therapy, sheltered
workshop, transitional or supported employment,
vocational guidance, occupational therapy), and treatment (such as ensuring compliance with medication,
social skills therapy, family therapy, cognitive remediation).
There is an acute shortage of psychiatric rehabilitation facilities in most parts of India. The Persons
with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights, and Full Participation) Act (PDA), 1995 is a
step forward, as it includes psychiatric disorders and
mental retardation.

Indian Perspective
Just about the time Freud was practicing psychoanalysis, Girindra Shekhar Bose was using his own
version of psychoanalysis in Calcutta. However,
currently psychoanalysis is not widely used in India.
It is believed by some that most Indian patients,
as compared to patients in western, developed countries, are not psychologically minded and are unable
to introspect. They lack verbal fluency and have more
physical symptoms.
The Indian patients have difficulty in maintaining one-to-one relationship with the physicianpsychiatrist, as they believe him to be a healer who is
of higher status than them (something like a Guru).
The Guru-Chela relationship in the patient-doctor
interaction was first described by JS Neki.


<<<PAGE 232>>>
220

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Psychoanalysis (which avoids giving direct
advice) is difficult, as patients expect the therapist to
guide them and make decisions for them. The patients
are also often fatalistic (‘this had to happen’; ‘it is
the result of destiny and past karma’) and often have
magical expectations of cure.
Most psychotherapists in India agree that Western models of psychotherapy cannot be directly
transplanted in the Indian setting. Psychotherapy in a

majority of Indian patients should be preferably brief,
direct, crisis-oriented, with the therapist playing an
active role. However, in psychologically minded and
educated Indian patients, western models can be used
with or without modification.
The commonest type of psychotherapy used in
India is probably supportive psychotherapy though
use of CBT has increased substantially over the last
few years.


<<<PAGE 233>>>
19

Emergency Psychiatry

An emergency is defined as an unforeseen combination
of circumstances which calls for an immediate action.
A medical emergency is defined as a medical
condition which endangers life and/or causes great
suffering to the individual. A psychiatric emergency
is a disturbance in thought, mood and/or action which
causes sudden distress to the individual (or to significant others) and/or sudden disability, thus requiring
immediate management. A similar term crisis means
a situation that presents a challenge to the patient, the
family and/or the community.

TYPES OF PSYCHIATRIC EMERGENCIES
A psychiatric emergency can be one or more of the
following:
1. A new psychiatric disorder with an acute onset.
2. A chronic psychiatric disorder with a relapse.
3. An organic psychiatric disorder.
4. An abnormal response to a stressful situation.
5. Iatrogenic emergencies.
i. Side effects or toxicity of psychotropic medication(s).
ii. Psychiatric symptomatology as a side effect or
toxicity of other medication(s).
6. Alcohol or drug dependence.
i. Withdrawal syndrome.
ii. Intoxication or overdose.
iii. Complications.
7. Deliberate harm to self or others.

EXAMINATION
When faced with a psychiatric emergency, it is often
important to combine speed with obtaining of ‘comprehensive’ or ‘adequate’ information. A scheme for the typical emergency psychiatric evaluation is presented here:

Psychiatric History
It is important to ‘always’ obtain history from both
the patient and the informant(s). Informant(s) may be
more coherent and may provide more relevant information in emergency situation(s).
i. Chief complaint: elaborate, with emphasis on
dating of onset and progression.
ii. Recent life-changes, such as any losses (real or
imagined); any physical illnesses.
iii. Level of adjustment, prior to the psychiatric
emergency.
iv. Past history (briefly) of any physical or psychiatric disorder(s).
v. Family history (briefly) of any physical or psychiatric disorder(s).
vi. Drug and alcohol history, prescription drugs,
street drug(s) or alcohol dependence/abuse.

Detailed General Physical and
Neurological Examination
It is essential to rule out (or diagnose) secondary
psychiatric disorders, with particular emphasis on the
presence of any head injury.


<<<PAGE 234>>>
222

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Mental Status Examination
i. Screen for organicity (most important). Test for
higher mental (or cognitive) functions, such as
consciousness, orientation, attention, concentration, memory, intelligence, abstract thinking,
insight and judgement.
ii. Brief mental status examination, to diagnose or
rule out any psychiatric disorder(s).
iii. Particular emphasis should be placed on the
presence of ideas of self-harm or suicide, or of
harming others.

COMMON PSYCHIATRIC EMERGENCIES
Suicide
Suicide is the model of psychiatric emergencies and
is also the commonest cause of death among the psychiatric patients. Some common themes in suicide are
listed in Table 19.1.
Suicide is a type of deliberate self-harm (DSH)
and is defined as a human act of self-intentioned and
self-inflicted cessation (death). It ends with a fatal outcome. DSH is an act of intentionally injuring oneself,
irrespective of the actual outcome.
An attempted suicide is an unsuccessful suicidal
act with a nonfatal outcome. It is believed that 2-10%
of all persons who attempt suicide, eventually complete suicide in the next 10 years.
A suicidal gesture, on the other hand, is an
attempted suicide where the person performing the
action never intends to die by the act. However, some
of these persons may accidentally die during the act.
Attempted suicide is more common in women while
completed suicide is 2-4 times commoner in men.

Epidemiology
Suicide is among the top 10 causes of death in India
and most other countries. The official suicide rate in
India in 2008 was 10.8/100,000 population/year (9.7
in 1995; 6.3 in 1980). In 2000, the rate in men was
12.2/100,000 and in women 9.1/100,000) with an
overall male to female ratio of 64:36 in 2008 (NCRB).
However, as there is considerable under-reporting of

Table 19.1: Some Common Themes in Suicide
1. A crisis that causes intense suffering with feelings of
hopelessness and helplessness
2. Conflict between unbearable stress and survival
3. Narrowing of the person’s perceived options
4. Wish to escape (it can often be an escape, rather
than a going-towards)
5. Often a wish to punish self and/or punish significant
others with guilt

suicidal behaviour, the probable suicide rate per year
in India would be around 15/100,000 population.
According to the National Crime Records Bureau
(NCRB), there were 125,017 suicides in India in 2008,
which is an increase of 1.95 over the previous year.
In 2003, there were about 300 suicides per day or
one suicide every 5 minutes. The comparable period
prevalence rate for suicide throughout world ranges
from 5/100,000 population/year to 30/100,000 population/year. The World Health Report, 2001, estimates
that every year one million people worldwide commit suicide (100,000 suicides per year in India out of
1 million suicides in the world every year), while
10-20 million people attempt suicide. Thus, the ratio
of attempted suicide to completed suicide is 10-20:1.
In India, the highest suicide rate is in the age group
of 15-29 years. Some of the highest numbers of suicide
in India are reported from West Bengal (11.9% of all
cases), Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and
Karnataka. These five states account for 56.2% of all
suicides in the country (NCRB 2008). There are some
recent reports of high rates of suicide in teenage girls
(15-19 years old) in some parts of Tamil Nadu and
farmers in some areas of Andhra Pradesh.
However, suicide rate per 100,000 population (as
opposed to number of suicides) was highest in Sikkim
(48.2 as compared to national average of 10.7/100,000
population/year) and followed by Pondicherry (46.9)
(NCRB 2008).
Some important risk factors are summarised in
Table 19.2. Table 19.3 lists an example of biopsychosocial summary of risk and protective factors for
suicide in a given case.


<<<PAGE 235>>>
Emergency Psychiatry

Aetiology
Some of the common causes of suicide include:
Psychiatric Disorders
Psychiatric disorders are a major cause of suicide;
for example:
Table 19.2: Risk Factors for Suicide
The presence of following factors increases the risk of
completed suicide:
1. Age>40 years
2. Male gender
3. Staying single
4. Previous suicidal attempt(s)
5. Depression (risk about 25 times more than usual)
i. Presence of guilt, self-accusation, agitation, nihilistic ideation, worthlessness, hypochondriacal
delusions and/or severe insomnia
ii. Risk is usually higher at the beginning or
towards the end of a depressive episode
iii. Risk can often be higher soon after response to
treatment rather at the peak of depression; this
applies to all forms of treatment but particularly
so with antidepressant treatment
iv. There is a higher risk of suicide in the week
after discharge from a psychiatric inpatient unit
6. Suicidal preoccupation (for example, a written
‘suicide note’ and/or detailed plans are made for
committing suicide)
7. Alcohol or drug dependence
8. Severe, disabling, painful or untreatable physical
illness
9. Recent serious loss or major stressful life event
10. Social isolation
11. Higher degree of impulsivity

223

1. Depression
i. Major depression.
ii. Depression secondary to a serious physical illness.
iii. Reactive depression, secondary to life stressors,
e.g. family and/or marital disputes, failure in
goal achievement, occupational and financial
difficulties, and death of significant others.
2. Alcoholism and drug dependence.
3. Schizophrenia.
Genetic factors (a concordance rate of 18% in
monozygotic twins) and biochemical factors (low
levels of 5-HIAA) are important in some cases of
suicide.
Physical Disorders
Patients with incurable or painful physical disorders,
such as cancer and AIDS, often commit suicide (21.9%
of all suicides in India; NCRB 2008).
Psychosocial Factors
Psychosocial factors are a very important cause of
suicide. Some of the examples are failure in an examination, love affairs (3%), dowry difficulties (2.4%),
marital difficulties, ‘illegitimate’ pregnancy, family
problems (23.8% of all suicides in India) or family
psychopathology, loss of a loved object by death
or otherwise, occupational and financial difficulties
(bankruptcy 2.4%; poverty 2.4%), and social isolation (data from NCRB 2008). In about 16% cases, no
obvious causes were found (NCRB 2008).

Methods Used
In India (NCRB 2008), the commonest modes of
committing suicide are ingestion of poison (34.8%)

Table 19.3: An Example of Summary of Risks and Protective Factors for Suicide
Factors
Biological
Psychological
Social
Early childhood trauma
Poor social support
Predisposing Genetic factors
Unemployment
Male gender
Personality traits
Older age
Financial difficulties
Precipitating Discontinuation of antidepressant Separation from spouse
Easy availability of lethal means
Psychiatric diagnosis
Hopelessness
Worthlessness
Poor self-esteem
Poor social support
Perpetuating Alcohol and drug misuse
Protective
Children; elderly parents; religious and moral values; good engagement with treatment


<<<PAGE 236>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

224

followed by hanging (32.2%), burning (about 8.8%),
drowning (about 6.7%), jumping in front of a train or
another vehicle (3%) and ‘alcoholism’ (1.2%). There
were also about 3038 ‘dowry deaths’ in a year in 2008.
Men often tend to use more violent methods for suicide
as compared with women.

Medicolegal Aspects
Under the Indian law, suicide and attempted suicide
are punishable offenses. Section 309 of IPC (Indian
Penal Court) states that “whoever attempts to commit
suicide and does any act towards the commission
of such offense, shall be punishable with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year and shall also be liable to fine”.
It was argued that the law esteems the lives of
men as not only valuable to their own possessors
but also valuable to the State which protects them
and for the protection of which the State exists. The
State, therefore, had the right to prevent persons from
taking their own lives. However, it compounded the
sufferings of a person who survived after a suicide
attempt by making him/her a punishable offender.
The Section 309 of IPC was repealed by the
Supreme Court of India in 1994. However, in March
1996, a five judge Constitution Bench of the Supreme
Court again made the ‘attempt to suicide’ a punishable
offense. So, the Section 309 IPC continues to be valid
at present.

Management
Once suicide is committed, it is obviously no longer
treatable. The management of suicide, therefore, lies

in preventing the act. This can be done at suicide
prevention centres, crisis intervention centres (both of
these are not available as yet on a large scale in India),
psychiatric emergency services, medical emergency
services, social welfare centres (such as Samaritans,
Sanjivini, Maitri, Sumaitri, Befrienders International)
or even at home of the patient.
There are several misconceptions about suicide
and these are briefly enumerated in Table 19.4.
Some important steps for preventing suicide
include:
1. Take all the suicidal threats, gestures and/or
attempts seriously and notify a psychiatrist or a
mental health professional.
2. Psychiatrist (or a mental health professional)
should quantify the seriousness of the situation
(a proper risk assessment) and take remedial
precautionary measures.
i. Inspect physical surroundings and remove all
means of committing suicide, such as sharp
objects, ropes, drugs, firearms, etc. Also, search
the patient thoroughly.
ii. Surveillance, depending on the severity of risk.
3. Acute psychiatric emergency interview.
4. Counselling and guidance
i. to deal with the desire to attempt suicide.
ii. to deal with on-going life stressors, and teaching
coping skills and interpersonal skills.
5. Treatment of the psychiatric disorder(s) with
medication, psychotherapy and/or ECT.
ECT is the treatment of choice for patients with
major depression with suicidal risk. It should also
be used for the treatment of suicidal risk associated

Table 19.4: Common Misconceptions about Suicide (Modified after Shneidman and Farberow, 1961)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Misconceptions

Facts

People who talk about suicide, do not commit
suicide
Suicide happens without warning
Suicidal persons are fully intent on dying
Once a person is suicidal, he/she is suicidal
forever
All suicidal persons are mentally ill or psychotic

Nearly 80% of persons who commit suicide, give definite
warnings and/or clues about their suicidal intentions
Most suicidal persons are undecided about dying or living
Suicidal person is usually suicidal only for a limited
period of time
Although a suicidal person is often extremely unhappy,
he/she is not necessarily mentally ill


<<<PAGE 237>>>
Emergency Psychiatry

with psychotic disorders. Follow-up care is very
important to prevent future suicidal attempts or
suicide.

Stupor and Catatonic Syndrome
Stupor is a common condition which presents at
the emergency services. It is defined as a clinical
syndrome of akinesis and mutism but with relative
preservation of conscious awareness.
The term stupor, traditionally, has a psychiatric
connotation, but a careful analysis of the stuporous
patients shows that a large majority of them have
an underlying organic cerebral cause. Stupor is
often associated with catatonic signs and symptoms
(catatonic withdrawal or catatonic stupor). Catatonic
syndrome is any disorder which presents with at least
two catatonic signs. Catatonia can be either excited
or withdrawn (or mixed). Only catatonic withdrawal
is associated with stupor.
The various catatonic signs include mutism, negativism, stupor, ambitendency, echolalia, echopraxia,
automatic obedience, posturing, mannerisms, stereotypies, excitement (not goal-directed), impulsiveness,
combativeness or nudism.

Aetiology
A wide variety of disorders can cause catatonic stupor.
Some of the important causes are listed in Table 19.5.

Differential Diagnosis
It is of foremost importance to differentiate between
organic stupor and psychogenic (or so called ‘functional’) stupor. This can be done on the basis of antecedent medical and psychiatric history, mode of onset,
and detailed physical and neurological examination.
The important differentiating points between an
organic and a psychogenic stupor are tabulated in
Table 19.6. If a diagnosis of organic catatonic stupor
is made, a search for underlying cause should be made.
On the other hand, if the pentothal/amytal/diazepam
interview reveals psycho pathology, appropriate
treatment can be instituted.

225

Table 19.5: Some Causes of Catatonic Stupor
1. Neurological Disorders
i. Post-encephalitic parkinsonism
ii. Limbic encephalitis
iii. Surgical procedures on basal ganglia
iv. Neoplasms in diencephalon, frontal lobe and
limbic system
v. Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE)
vi. General paresis of insane (GPI)
vii. Petit mal status
viii. Post-ictal phase of epilepsy
ix. Subdural haematoma
x. Cerebral malaria
xi. Cortical venous thrombosis
2. Systemic and Metabolic Disorders
i. Diabetic ketoacidosis
ii. Acute intermittent porphyria
iii. Hyperparathyroidism causing hypercalcaemia
iv. Pellagra
v. Hepatic encephalopathy
vi. Systemic lupus erythematosis
vii. Homocystinuria
viii. Membranous glomerulonephritis
3. Drugs and Poisoning
i. Organic alkaloids
ii. Antipsychotics
iii. ACTH (therapeutic doses)
iv. Aspirin
v. Illuminating gas
vi. Ethyl alcohol (large doses)
vii. Levodopa
viii. Disulfiram
ix. CO poisoning
x. Lithium toxicity
xi. Methylphenidate
xii. Phencyclidine (large doses)
xiii. Mescaline
4. Psychiatric Disorders
i. Catatonic schizophrenia
ii. Depressive stupor
iii. Manic stupor
iv. Periodic catatonia
v. Conversion and dissociative disorder
vi. Reactive psychosis
vii. During hypnosis.


<<<PAGE 238>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

226

Table 19.6: Organic and Psychogenic Stupor
Features

Organic Stupor

Psychogenic Stupor

1. Previous psychiatric illness
2. Previous medical illness
3. Previous history of stupor
4. Precipitating stressor
5. Frequency

Usually absent
Usually present
About 10% of cases
Usually absent
Much more common

6. Onset
7. Course

Sudden or insidious
Longer

8. Protective reflexes
(Blepharospasm, menace reflex,
protective response)
9. Resistance to eye opening
10. Doll’s head eye phenomenon
(Oculocephalic reflex)
11. Meaningful posture and/or facial
expressions
12. Urinary/faecal incontinence
13. Neurological signs and deficits
14. Abnormal EEG
15. Oculovestibular reflex
16. Pentothal/amytal interview*

Absent

Usually present
Usually absent
24-33% of cases
Usually present
Not so common (3-5% of all stupor
cases)
Often sudden
Shorter. Recovery usually within
7 days
Present

17. Mortality

Absent
Usually present
Absent

Usually present
Absent (may avoid the gaze of
examiner)
May be present

Usually present
May be present
More often
Absent
Low dose (100-150 mg) increases
stupor and neurological signs
develop or increase
About 35%

Unlikely
Absent
Less often
Present
High dose (300-400 mg) increases
alertness and a mental status examination can often be conducted
0-3%

*Pentothal/amytal interview is no longer carried out routinely in clinical practice

Examination
The examination consists of the following steps:
1. History and physical examination, with special
emphasis on neurological examination.
2. Level of consciousness should ideally be
rated on the Glasgow Coma Scale. This scale
consists of three main categories of activity,
namely eye opening (1-4), motor response
(1-5) and verbal response (1-5). The rating is done
on a scale from 3 to 14.
3. Pentothal/amytal/diazepam interview is sometimes very helpful in differentiating organic and
psychogenic catatonic stupor. It should however
be noted that pentothal/amytal/diazepam interview

is not routinely administered in clinical practice,
and the emphasis has recently shifted to making
this distinction on a clinical basis.
4. Investigations: Blood glucose, blood urea, serum
creatinine, serum electrolytes, blood (arterial) gas
analysis, ECG, blood and urine examination for
drugs and poisons, blood and urine culture, and
peripheral smear for malarial parasite.
Also routine bloods including haemoglobin,
total leucocyte count (TC), differential leucocyte
count (DC), ESR, urine (routine and microscopic)
examination, thyroid and adrenal functions, liver
function tests, CSF examination, gastric lavage with
examination of aspirate, EEG and CT scan/MRI scan
brain (if indicated).


<<<PAGE 239>>>
Emergency Psychiatry

Management
Since psychogenic stupor may easily be mistaken for
organic stupor and coma, certain steps must be taken
even before a detailed examination is undertaken, to
prevent irreversible brain damage and death which
may otherwise occur. These steps should be taken in
the management of any unconscious patient.
1. Ensure the patency of airway; and provide
ventilatory support with oxygen (for possible
hypoxia).
2. Check cardiac rhythm and stabilise it (if needed).
3. Maintain circulation; insert IV (intravenous) line
and give fluids (for possible fluid and electrolyte
imbalance).
4. Investigations; withdraw blood, CSF and urine
samples, before instituting any treatment.
5. 50 ml of 50% dextrose (2 ml/kg body weight for
a child) should be given IV (for possible hypoglycaemia).
6. Administer:
Naloxone 0.4 mg IV (if morphine poisoning is
suspected);
Physostigmine 1-2 mg IV (if anticholinergic poisoning is suspected);
Thiamine 100 mg IV (if Wernicke’s encephalopathy or delirium tremens is suspected);
Hydrocortisone 100 mg IV (if adrenal crisis is
suspected);
L-Thyroxin 200-500 μg IV (if myxoedema coma
is suspected);
Flumazenil 0.2 mg IV (if benzodiazepine overdose is suspected).
This should be followed by a detailed work-up.
The underlying medical or psychiatric cause of stupor
should be searched for and treated. The importance
of supportive care during the period of stupor cannot
be overemphasised.

Excited Behaviour and Violence
Excitement is a common reason for a referral to an
emergency psychiatry setting. Although a large majority of psychiatric patients are not dangerously violent,

227

some patients can indeed be aggressive especially
during the acute phase of the illness.

Aetiology
Some common causes of excited behaviour are listed
below.
I. Organic psychiatric disorders
1. Delirium (acute organic brain syndrome), e.g.
delirium tremens.
2. Dementia, e.g. catastrophic reaction, loss of
control.
3. Wernicke-Korsakoff’s psychosis.
II. Nonorganic psychiatric disorders
1. Schizophrenia and other psychoses.
i. Schizophreniform psychosis.
ii. Catatonic (excited) schizophrenia.
iii. Paranoid schizophrenia.
iv. Acute psychotic disorder.
2. Mania.
Although excitement is common, violence
occurs usually only when the patient is
prevented from engaging in his activities, or
when he is irritable. Similarly, patients with
dysphoric mania or mixed affective states may
occasionally present similarly.
3. Depression: Agitated depression may present
with excitement. Occasionally aggressive,
violent behaviour may occur if the patient is
irritable and agitated.
4. Drug and alcohol dependence: Excitement and
violence may occur in:
i. Intoxication.
ii. Withdrawal syndrome.
iii. Comorbid psychiatric disorder(s).
5. Epilepsy.
i. Complex partial seizures.
ii. Postictal confusion.
iii. Epileptic furore.
6. Acute stress reaction.
7. Neurotic disorders.
i. Panic disorder.
ii. Agoraphobia with panic attacks.


<<<PAGE 240>>>
228

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Marked excitement can occur during a
panic attack but violent behaviour does not
usually occur.
8. Impulsive violent behaviour.
i. Borderline personality disorder.
ii. Intermittent explosive disorder.
9. Reactive psychosis.

Management
The patient is examined according to the guidelines
suggested earlier in this chapter. The physician,
psychiatrist or another mental health professional,
examining an excited patient, must demonstrate an
attitude of empathy but at the same time must be firm
and should exude confidence.
The measures which can be adopted to handle
excited or violent behaviour include:
1. Reassurance: In case of emergency, it rarely works
alone but must be tried first.
2. Sedation: Diazepam 5-10 mg parenterally slowly
(or lorazepam 1-2 mg parenterally slowly) can be
given. In the presence of psychosis, haloperidol
2-10 mg parenterally (with or without 5-10 mg
diazepam or 50 mg of promethazine) can be given.
It is really important to exercise care in administering parenteral antipsychotics to any patient,
but particularly one who is treatment (antipsychotic) naïve. Oral antipsychotics are preferable to
parenteral antipsychotic in routine clinical practice.
3. Restraint: Restraint should always be used as a last
resort, but when needed, it should not be delayed.
Restraint should always be done in a humane way,
after taking (preferably) written consent from the
attendant relatives/carers. A second opinion from
another mental health professional is helpful.
Restraint is usually followed by compulsory
hospitalisation and parenteral medication. It is
rarely ever necessary to continue restraint for more
than a few hours and restraint should be removed
at the earliest possible time.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is not a treatment
for excitement or violence per se. When used, there
should be a clear indication for the use of ECT, which
should be clearly recorded in the case notes.

Other Psychiatric Emergencies
The list of possible psychiatric emergencies is
long. A few psychiatric emergencies are listed below,
some of which have already been discussed in the
book.
1. Severe depression (Chapter 6): Apart from
presenting as a suicide/suicidal attempt and/or
agitation, the depressed patient may come to
casualty because of a refusal to eat and drink,
leading to dehydration or because of refusal to take
medication (for example, secondary to hopelessness).
2. Hyperventilation syndrome (Chapter 8).
3. Side effects of psychotropic medication, e.g. acute
dystonia (promptly relieved by promethazine
25-50 mg parenterally), akathisia, neuroleptic
malignant syndrome (Chapter 15).
4. Psychiatric complications of medical and surgical
diseases, procedures and medication (e.g. ICU
syndrome, hypomania caused by steroids).
5. Severe insomnia (Chapter 11).
6. Pseudo seizures (conversion and/or dissociation
hysteria) (Chapter 8).
7. Anorexia nervosa (usually presenting with dehydration and/or cachexia) (Chapter 12).
8. Battered child syndrome or child abuse.
9. Grief and bereavement (Chapter 12).
10. Psychosocial crises (e.g. marital conflict, occupational and financial difficulties).
11. Drug or alcohol use disorders (Chapter 4).
12. Panic disorder (Chapter 8).
13. Acute psychosis (Chapter 7).
Psychiatric patients, especially when excited or
emotionally disturbed, often arouse anxiety in the
treating physicians as well as other patients in the
casualty. So, it is necessary to have an ‘emergency
psychiatry room’ or ‘psychiatric holding area’ near
the casualty, where the patients can be interviewed
and treated.
An ideal place for treating psychiatric emergencies
is a separate ‘psychiatric intensive care unit’ (PICU)
or ‘crisis intervention centre’ (CIC) attached to a
psychiatric unit in a general hospital or to a psychiatric
hospital or nursing home.


<<<PAGE 241>>>
20

Legal and Ethical
Issues in Psychiatry

Forensic psychiatry deals with the legal aspects of
psychiatry. Law comes in contact with psychiatry at
many points; for example, admission of a mentally
ill person in a mental hospital, crime committed by a
mentally ill person, validity of marriage, witness, will,
consent, right to vote, and drug dependence.
The various legal aspects of psychiatry are briefly
discussed below.

CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY
In January 1843, a young Scotsman, Daniel
McNaughten shot dead Edward Drummond, the
secretary to the British Prime Minister Sir Robert
Peel. He had intended to kill the Prime Minister but
Drummond was assassinated by mistake.
The Jury, after testification by nine physicians,
found McNaughten not guilty by reasons of insanity.
Queen Victoria, Sir Robert Peel and other prominent
persons were outraged. Following this, 15 prominent
judges were invited by the House of Lords. They were
asked to respond to a series of questions on criminal
responsibility. The answers, which are immortalised
in the history of forensic psychiatry, have now come
to be known as McNaughten Rule(s).
The McNaughten Rule is used in a slightly modified form in many countries even now. In India, Section 84 of the Indian Penal Code (Act 45 of 1860)
states that ‘nothing is an offense, which is done by a
person, who at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature

of the act or that he is doing what is either wrong or
contrary to law’.
So a mentally ill person is not protected ipso facto.
He must satisfy the above mentioned rule. A mentally
retarded person (called ‘idiot’ in law) is not considered
liable under Indian criminal law.
The Law generally classifies criminal lunatics
into three classes: an under-trial who cannot stand
trial because of mental illness; guilty but insane; and
criminals who later become mentally ill. A Class II
‘criminal lunatic’ is acquitted under the law but is
detained in a mental hospital (asylum) for further
treatment.

CIVIL RESPONSIBILITY
There is usually a presumption in the favour of sanity
and the contrary must be proved. This applies both
to the civil and criminal proceedings in the court of
law.

Marriage
The Hindu Marriage Act (Act 25 of 1955) provides
for conditions for a Hindu marriage under Section 5.
One of the conditions, i.e. Section 5 (ii) introduced
by Act 68 of 1976, states that ‘at the time of the marriage, neither party,
a. is incapable of giving a valid consent... (due to)...
unsoundness of mind; or
b. though capable of giving consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such a kind or to


<<<PAGE 242>>>
230

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the
procreation of children; or
c. has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity
or epilepsy.’
Any marriage solemnised in the contravention to
this condition shall be voidable and may be annulled
by a decree of nullity under Section 12 of the Act.
Another ground of nullity under the same section is
the fact that the consent for marriage was obtained
by ‘fraud’...‘as to any material fact or circumstance
concerning the respondent’, for example, the fact of
mental illness or treatment for the same.
Divorce can be granted under Section 13 of the
Act on a petition presented by either spouse on the
ground that the other party ‘has been incurably of
unsound mind, or has been suffering continuously or
intermittently from mental disorder of such kind and
to such an extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably
be expected to live with the respondent’ (Section 13
(iii) inserted by Act 68 of 1976).
Here, the term mental disorder means ‘mental
illness, arrested or incomplete development of mind,
psychopathic disorder or any other disorder or disability of mind and includes schizophrenia’. The term
psychopathic disorder means ‘a persistent disorder or
disability of mind (whether or not including subnormality of intelligence) which results in abnormally
aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct on the
part of the other party, and whether or not it requires
or is susceptible to medical treatment’.
Under the dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act
1939, a woman married under Muslim law is entitled
to obtain a decree for the dissolution of marriage on
the ground of her husband being insane for a period
of 2 years. The husband under the Muslim law has
the power to pronounce divorce (talak) at anytime,
anywhere, and without assigning any reason.
Any married person may be granted divorce,
under the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936, on
the ground that the other party had been of unsound
mind at the time of marriage (and the petitioner was
ignorant of the fact) and has been habitually so till the
date of petition, which should be within 3 years of the
date of marriage.

Adoption
Under the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act
(Act 78 of 1956), any Hindu male ‘who is of sound
mind and is not a minor’ can adopt a child, with the
consent of his wife unless ‘...(she) has been declared
by a court...to be of unsound mind’ (Section 7).
Similarly, any Hindu female ‘who is of sound
mind’, is not a minor, and is not married, can adopt a
child. If she is married, ‘then her husband is dead, or
has ...renounced the world, or ...ceased to be a Hindu,
or ...has been declared by a court ...to be of unsound
mind’ (Section 8).
In addition, the person capable of giving in adoption of a child should be of sound mind.

Witness
Under the Indian Evidence Act 1872, a ‘lunatic’ is not
competent to give evidence if he is prevented by virtue
of his ‘lunacy’ from understanding the questions put to
him and giving rational answers to them (Section 118).
However, such a person can give evidence during a
lucid interval on discretion of the judge (and the jury).

Testamentary Capacity
Testamentary disposition is regulated by the Indian
Succession Act (Act 39 of 1925). Some of the salient points regarding testamentary disposition are as
follows:
1. A will must be in writing, though it need not be
registered.
2. It must be signed by testator in the presence of at
least two witnesses.
3. A legatee cannot attest a will.
4. An executor(s) is appointed under the will by the
testator to carry out its terms after his death.
5. A will can be revoked or modified any time before
the death of the testator.
6. A will comes into effect after the death of the
testator. It is said to speak from grave and to be
‘ambulatory’.
7. The testator must be of a ‘sound and disposing
mind’. Section 59 of the Act states that ‘every
person of sound mind, not being a minor, may
dispose of his property by will’.


<<<PAGE 243>>>
Legal and Ethical Issues in Psychiatry

Explanation 4 of this section states that ‘no person
can make a will while he is in such a state of mind,
whether arising from intoxication or from illnesses
or from any other cause, that he does not know
what he is doing’.
If a medical practitioner is called to examine a
testator as to his fitness to make a valid will, the following points must be kept in mind:
1. Testamentary capacity consists of:
i. an understanding of the nature of the will,
ii. a knowledge of the property to be disposed of,
and
iii. an ability to recognize those who may have
justifiable claims on his property.
2. The testator should be tested on the above mentioned points by thorough questioning.
3. If the testator is seriously ill, he must be made
to read out aloud the will in the presence of the
doctor.
4. A will is invalid if it is executed under undue influence of any other person. If there is reason to
suspect that such is the case, the testator should
be questioned when he is alone.
5. A will is invalid under the following conditions
(for example):
i. imbecility arising from advanced age or by
excessive drinking.
ii. insane delusions making the testator incapable
of rational views and judgement.
6. A will is valid under the following conditions (for
example):
i. deaf, dumb or blind persons who are not thereby
incapacitated for making a will and are able to
know what they do by it.
ii. lucid intervals.
iii. if testator commits suicide immediately after
making the will, in the absence of evidence of
mental disorder.
iv. presence of delusions not affecting in any way
the disposal of the property or the persons
affected by the will.
7. A will may be declared invalid if the testator disposes his property in a way which he would not
have done under normal conditions.

231

Transfer of Property
Under the Transfer of Property Act 1882 (Section 7),
only persons competent to contract, are authorised to
transfer property.

Contract
Under the Indian Contract Act 1872 (Section 11),
every person to be competent to contract must be a
major and of sound mind.
A person is said to be of sound mind for the purposes of a contract, if at the time of making a contract
he is capable of understanding it and of forming a
rational judgement as to its effect upon his interests.

Driving
It is important that advice be given regarding driving
if there is likelihood that driving can be impaired by
the nature of illness, prescribed medication and/or
misuse of alcohol or drugs.

INDIAN LUNACY ACT, 1912
The Indian laws related to mental disorders were based
on British Acts. For example, the Indian Lunacy Act
(ILA), Act 4 of 1912, was based largely on the earlier
English Lunacy Act of 1890 and replaced the existing
Indian Lunatic Asylums Act, Act 36 of 1858.
The ILA had 8 Chapters. Chapter 1 defined a
lunatic as ‘an idiot or person of unsound mind’.
Defectiveness of reasoning, whether partial or complete, was considered as unsoundness of mind. In
Chapter 3, five categories of admission methods were
mentioned, namely voluntary, reception order on
petition, reception order without petition, inquisition
(judicial), and as a criminal lunatic.
There was a ‘board of visitors’ appointed by
the Government which had a role in admission of
voluntary patients, interfering with ongoing care and
treatment and discharge (except in criminal cases). IG
(prisons) was an ex-officio member of this board.
In 1950, three eminent psychiatrists appointed by
the Indian Psychiatric Society prepared a draft ‘Indian
Mental Health Act’ and forwarded it to Government
of India. There was no action taken on the draft for


<<<PAGE 244>>>
232

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

next ten years and it was only in 1978 that the Mental
Health Bill was introduced in Parliament. The bill
had to be reintroduced in Lok Sabha in 1981 and was
passed by Rajya Sabha in November 1986.

THE MENTAL HEALTH ACT, 1987
The Mental Health Bill became the Act 14 of 1987 on
22nd May 1987. Later, the Government of India issued
orders that the Act came in force with effect from April
1, 1993 in all the states and Union territories of India.
The Act is divided into 10 chapters consisting of
98 sections. Chapter I (Preliminary) deals with the
various definitions. The Act uses the term ‘mentally ill
person’ instead of ‘lunatic’ and defines it as ‘a person
who is in need of treatment by reason of any mental
disorder other than mental retardation’.
The term ‘mentally ill prisoner’ is used instead of
‘criminal lunatic’. Other new terms, which are defined
in the Chapter 1, are psychiatric hospital (instead
of mental hospital), psychiatric nursing home and
psychiatrist.
Chapter II provides for establishment of Mental
Health Authorities at Centre and State levels. These
authorities will regulate and coordinate mental health
services under Central and State Government, respectively.
Chapter III lays down the guidelines for establishment and maintenance of psychiatric hospitals and
nursing homes. In addition, there is a provision for
a Licensing Authority who will process applications
for licenses. No private psychiatric hospital or nursing home will be allowed to function without a valid
license, which has to be renewed every 5 years.
There is also a provision for an Inspecting Officer
who will inspect the psychiatric hospitals and nursing
homes to prevent any irregularities.
There is a provision for separate hospitals for:
1. Those under the age of 16 years,
2. Those addicted to alcohol or other drugs which
lead to behavioural changes,
3. Mentally ill prisoners, and
4. Any other prescribed class or category.

Chapter IV deals with the procedures of admission and detention in psychiatric hospitals or nursing
homes. In addition to the 5 methods allowed by the
Indian Lunacy Act of 1912, one more method has been
incorporated.
Hence, the admission in a psychiatric hospital or
nursing home can be made in one of the following
manners:
1. Voluntary Admission.
i. By the patient’s request, if he is a major.
ii. By the guardian, if a minor (a new provision).
2. Admission under Special Circumstances.
This is an involuntary hospitalisation when the
mentally ill person does not or cannot express his
willingness for admission. Admission is made,
if a relative or a friend of the mentally ill person
applies in writing for admission and the medical
officer in-charge of the hospital is satisfied that the
admission will be in the interest of the mentally ill
person. The duration of admission cannot exceed
90 days.
3. Reception order on application.
4. Reception order without application, on production of mentally ill person (e.g. wandering, dangerous, ill-treated or neglected mentally ill person)
before the Magistrate.
5. Admission as inpatient, after judicial inquisition.
6. Admission as a mentally ill prisoner.
In addition, the Magistrate can order detention of
an alleged mentally ill person for short periods pending report by medical officer (for a period not exceeding 10 days in aggregate) or pending his removal to
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home (for
a period not exceeding 30 days).
Chapter V deals with the inspection, discharge,
leave of absence and removal of mentally ill persons.
Chapter VI deals with the judicial inquisition regarding the alleged mentally ill person possessing property,
custody of his person and management of his property.
If the court feels that the alleged mentally ill person
is incapable of looking after both himself and his
property, an order can be issued for the appointment
of a Guardian. If, however, it is felt that the person is


<<<PAGE 245>>>
Legal and Ethical Issues in Psychiatry

only incapable of looking after his property but can
look after himself, a Manager can be appointed.
Chapter VII deals with the liability to meet the cost of
maintenance of mentally ill persons detained in psychiatric hospitals or nursing homes. Chapter VIII is aimed
at the protection of human rights of mentally ill persons.
This is a new chapter in the Act. It provides that:
1. No mentally ill person shall be subjected, during
treatment, to any indignity (whether physical or
mental) or cruelty.
2. No mentally ill person, under treatment, shall be
used for the purposes of research, unless
i. Such research is of direct benefit to him.
ii. A consent has been obtained in writing from
the person (if a voluntary patient) or from the
guardian/relative (if admitted involuntarily).
3. No letters or communications sent by or to a
mentally ill person shall be intercepted, detained
or destroyed.
Chapter IX deals with the penalties and the procedure, while Chapter X provides for miscellaneous
sections.
In addition, the State Mental Health Rules, 1990
(which also contains the nine important forms required
by the Mental Health Act, 1987) and the Central Mental
Health Authority Rules, 1990, have also been passed
by the Government of India on December 29, 1990.
Currently consultations are in progress to consider
either modifying or updating the current Act.

THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND
PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES ACT
(NDPSA), 1985
The first Act for drug abuse and dependence in India
was The Opium Act of 1857. This was revised first
in 1878 (The Opium Act, 1878) and then in 1950
(The Opium and Revenue Laws Act, 1950). Another
relevant Act was the Dangerous Drug Act of 1930,
which included among other drugs, Opium and its
alkaloids and Cocaine. This Act provided for a maximum punishment of 3 years.

233

With the coming in force of the NDPSA, Act 61 of
1985, on 16th September 1985, the above mentioned
acts have been repealed. The Act includes narcotic
drugs (cannabis, cocaine, coca leaf, opium, poppy
straw and all manufactured ‘drugs’) and psychotropic
substances (76 drugs and their derivatives are listed
in the schedule, e.g. diazepam, pentazocine, phenobarbital).
The authorities and officers have been suggested
in Chapter 2. If any person produces, possesses,
transports, imports, exports, sells, purchases, or uses
any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance (except
‘ganja’), he shall be punishable with,
1. Rigorous imprisonment (RI) for not less than 10
years (which may extend to 20 years), and
2. A fine of not less than 1 Lakh rupees (which may
extend to 2 Lakh rupees).
Punishment for a repeat offense is a RI for not
less than 15 years (which may extend to 30 years)
and a fine of not less than 1.5 Lakh rupees (which
may extend to 3 Lakh rupees). Punishment for
ganja handling is a RI for 5 years and/or a fine of
0.5 Lakh rupees. For a repeat offense, the imprisonment may extend to 10 years and the fine to 1 Lakh
rupees.
However, if a person is carrying ‘small quantities’
(e.g. 250 mg of heroin, 5 g of Charas, 5 g of opium,
125 mg of cocaine) which were later specified, then
the punishment is a simple imprisonment which may
extend to 1 year or a fine (unspecified) or both. For
ganja (<500 g), imprisonment is up to 6 months.
There is also a provision for detoxification under
court order. A later enactment, the Prevention of Illicit
Traffic in NDPS Act, 1988 has also been passed (Act
46 of 1988). There is now a provision for preventive
detention and seizure of property. The maximum
punishment is death penalty, if a person is found to be
trafficking more than or equal to 1 kg of pure heroin
(for example), twice (despite conviction and warning
on the first attempt). The Act was further amended
by the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
(Amendment) Act, 2001.


<<<PAGE 246>>>
234

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

A CODE OF ETHICS FOR PSYCHIATRISTS
The Indian Psychiatric Society (IPS) has recommended a code of ethics for psychiatrists (1989) which
is summarised here:

Principles
1. A psychiatrist has a clear social responsibility.
2. A psychiatrist must maintain high standards of
professional competence and ensure continuing
self-education.
3. Benevolence and patient interest precede self
interest.
4. A psychiatrist must maintain high moral standards.
5. Patient welfare is of paramount concern to a psychiatrist. It includes not treating cases which are
not in his domain, terminating treatment when
cannot help the patient, and treating with the best
of the ability.
6. Confidentiality of the patient records must be
meticulously maintained.

Recommendations
1. Treatment should be given with patient’s consent.
Every person who is a major and does not appear
to have lost ability of reason is capable of consent.
If the patient cannot give consent due to mental illness, consent should be taken from a person close
to the patient who appears to be clearly interested
in patient’s welfare. However, treatment can be
given without consent in an emergency situation
involving immediate threat to the life or health of
patient or others.
For research purposes, consent should be entirely
voluntary. The patient can withdraw consent at any
stage, without this affecting patient’s interest.
2. Hospitalisation should be for patient’s welfare,
keeping in view the legal and administrative constraints, and social appropriateness.
3. Psychiatric treatment should be started only on
clinical consideration for patient welfare and
should be humane and never punitive.

No psychiatrist should refuse to treat in an
emergency.
4. No gifts and gratifications should be accepted from
patients under treatment.
5. Any sexual advance towards any patient is unethical.
6. In case of doubt and/or unconventional treatment
procedures a second opinion must be obtained.
7. It is unethical to force a contract on a patient during
treatment.
8. Even if the patient is referred by legal or administrative authority, patient’s welfare is paramount
and patient should be informed of the purpose for
which he is to be examined.
9. The basic human rights of mentally retarded
should not be unethically abridged.
10. In the interest of the patient and the society, drug
abusers who refuse to give consent may be treated
with the consent of their relatives. Effort has to be
made to motivate them for accepting treatment
voluntarily.

ICMR GUIDELINES FOR RESEARCH,
2000
In 2000, the Indian Council of Medical Research
(ICMR) has released ‘Ethical guidelines for biomedical research in human subjects’. These guidelines
are very similar to the GCP (Good Clinical Practice)
guidelines and the prevalent international guidelines.
These guidelines regulate all biomedical research in
human subjects in India.

MCI CODE OF MEDICAL ETHICS, 2002
All psychiatrists as doctors are also bound by the code
of medical ethics of Medical Council of India (MCI).
Called as the Indian Medical Council (Professional
conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002,
the code came in to effect from 6th April, 2002. The
full code is available at the website of MCI, at http://
mohfw.nic.in/code.htm.


<<<PAGE 247>>>
21

Community Psychiatry

Born in 1963, the community psychiatry movement
has been hailed as the third psychiatric revolution. The
first revolution was the age of enlightenment following the middle ages, when mental illness was viewed
as a consequence of sin and witchcraft. The second
revolution was the development of psychoanalysis
which offered hope for a causative explanation of
psychiatric disorders.
However, the community psychiatry movement
was made possible by another revolution, the one
ushered by the advent of psychopharmacology. Therefore, it may be more appropriate to refer to community
psychiatry as the fourth psychiatric revolution.
The community psychiatry concept has its antecedents in Clifford Beers’ (1908) mental hygiene
movement and Adolf Meyer’s recommendation (1913)
of establishment of treatment centres in the community. The period between 1955 and 1980 was an era
of deinstitutionalisation in USA and other Western
countries, consisting of discharging mentally ill
patients from mental hospitals, to be cared for in the
community supported by community mental health
centres. This provided an impetus to the development
of community psychiatry.
In 1975, the World Health Organization strongly
recommended the delivery of mental health services
through primary health care system as a policy for the
developing countries. In India, attempts to develop
models of psychiatric services in the PHC (primary
health centre) setting were made nearly simultane-

ously at PGI, Chandigarh in 1975 (Raipur Rani
block of Ambala district, Haryana) and NIMHANS,
Bangalore in 1976 (Sakalwara in Karnataka).
The basic model of community mental health was
defined by Gerald Caplan in 1967. The predominant
characteristics of community psychiatry are:
1. Responsibility to a population for mental health
care delivery.
2. Treatment close to the patient in community based
centres.
3. Provision of comprehensive services.
4. Multi-disciplinary team approach.
5. Providing continuity of care.
6. Emphasis on prevention as well as treatment.
7. Avoidance of unnecessary hospitalisation.

NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH
PROGRAMME (INDIA)
Mental health is an integral component of health,
which is defined as a positive state of well-being
(physical, mental and social) and not merely an absence of illness. With this aim in mind, an expert group
was formed in 1980. The final draft was submitted to
the Central Council of Health and Family Welfare (the
highest policy making body for health in the country)
on 18-20 August 1982, which recommended its implementation. The National Mental Health Programme
(NMHP) appeared almost simultaneously with the
National Health Policy (1993).


<<<PAGE 248>>>
236

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The objectives of NMHP are:
1. To ensure availability and accessibility of
minimum mental health care for all in the
foreseeable future, particularly to the most
vulnerable and underprivileged sections of population.
2. To encourage application of mental health knowledge in general health care and in social development.
3. To promote community participation in the mental
health service development and to stimulate efforts
towards self-help in the community.
Three aims are specified in the NMHP in planning
mental health services for the country:
1. Prevention and treatment of mental and neurological disorders and their associated disabilities.
2. Use of mental health technology to improve
general health services.
3. Application of mental health principles in total
national development to improve quality of life.
Two strategies, complementary to each other, were
planned for immediate action:
1. Centre to periphery strategy: Establishment and
strengthening of psychiatric units in all district
hospitals, with outpatient clinics and mobile teams
reaching the population for mental health services.
2. Periphery to centre strategy: Training of an
increasing number of different categories of
health personnel in basic mental health skills, with
primary emphasis towards the poor and the underprivileged, directly benefiting about 200 million
people.
The mental health care service was envisaged to
include three components or subprogrammes, namely
treatment, rehabilitation and prevention.
1. Treatment Subprogramme: Multiple levels were
planned.
A. Village and subcentre level: Multi-purpose
workers (MPW) and health supervisors (HS),
under the supervision of medical officer (MO),
to be trained for:
i. Management of psychiatric emergencies.

ii. Administration and supervision of maintenance
treatment for chronic psychiatric disorders.
iii. Diagnosis and management of grand mal epilepsy, especially in children.
iv. Liaison with local school teacher and parents
regarding mental retardation and behaviour
problems in children.
v. Counselling in problems related to alcohol and
drug abuse.
B. Primary health centre (PHC): MO, aided by HS,
to be trained for:
i. Supervision of MPW’s performance
ii. Elementary diagnosis
iii. Treatment of functional psychosis
iv. Treatment of uncomplicated cases of psychiatric
disorders associated with physical diseases
v. Management of uncomplicated psychosocial
problems
vi. Epidemiological surveillance of mental morbidity.
C. District hospital: It was recognized that there
should be at least 1 psychiatrist attached to every
district hospital as an integral part of the district
health services. The district hospital should have
30-50 psychiatric beds. The psychiatrist in a
district hospital was envisaged to devote only a
part of his time in clinical care and greater part in
training and supervision of non-specialist health
workers.
D. Mental hospitals and teaching psychiatric units:
The major activities of these higher centres of
psychiatric care include:
i. Help in care of ‘difficult’ cases.
ii. Teaching.
iii. Specialised facilities such as occupational
therapy units, psychotherapy, counselling and
behaviour therapy.
2. Rehabilitation Subprogramme: The components
of this subprogramme include maintenance treatment
of epileptics and psychotics at the community levels
and development of rehabilitation centres at both the
district level and the higher referral centres.


<<<PAGE 249>>>
Community Psychiatry

3. Prevention Subprogramme: The prevention
component is to be community-based, with the initial
focus on prevention and control of alcohol-related
problems. Later, problems such as addictions, juvenile
delinquency and acute adjustment problems such as
suicidal attempts are to be addressed.
The other approaches designed to achieve the
objectives of the NMHP include:
• Integration of basic mental health care into general
health services.
• Mental health training of general medical doctors
and paramedical health workers.
A plan of action was outlined in 1982, with the
first opportunity to develop it in the 7th-five-year plan
starting from 1985, with a plan allocation of Rs. 100
lakhs (10 million). A National Mental Health Advisory
Group (NMHAG) was formed in August 1988 and
a Mental Health Cell was opened in the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare under a Central Mental
Health Authority (MHA).
Various activities were planned under the action
plan for implementation of national mental health
programme in the 7th-five-year plan, such as community mental health programmes at primary health
care level in states and union territories; training of
existing PHC personnel for mental health care delivery; development of a state level Mental Health
Advisory Committee and state level programme
officer; establishment of Regional Centers of community mental health; formation of National Advisory
Group on Mental Health; development of task forces
for mental hospitals and mental health education
for undergraduate medical students; involvement of
voluntary agencies in mental health care; identification
of priority areas (child mental health, public mental
health education and drug dependence); mental health
training of at least 1 doctor at every district hospital
during the next 5 years; establishment of a department
of psychiatry in all medical colleges and strengthening
the existing ones; and provision of at least 3-4 essential
psychotropic drugs in adequate quantity, at the PHC
level.

237

The District Mental Health Programme (DMHP)
was started in 1995 as a component of NMHP. The
prototype of the District Mental Health Programme
was the Bellary District Programme (in Karnataka,
~320 km from Bangalore). Started in 1985, it caters to
a population of 1.5 million. District hospital psychiatry
units have been opened in every district of Kerala and
Tamil Nadu.
Following the implementation of National Mental
Health Programme in India 1982, other neighbouring countries soon followed the example by drawing
national programmes for mental health (Sri Lanka
1982; Bangladesh 1982; Pakistan 1986; Nepal
1987).
The revised National Health Policy (NHP-2002)
has been released in 2002. Its focus on mental health
“envisages a network of decentralised mental health
services for ameliorating the more common categories
of disorders”. At the same time the NMHP 10thfive-year plan was launched, with a plan to extend
the DMHP to 100 districts. It also emphasizes the
need to broaden the scope of existing curriculum for
undergraduate training in psychiatry and to give more
exposure to psychiatry in undergraduate years and
internship. An essential list of psychotropic drugs was
also being prepared.
The emphasis of NMHP-1982 was primarily on the
rural sector. It is being realized that the urban mental
health needs also need to be addressed under the ambit
of NMHP.
During the 11th-five-year plan, an allocation of
Rs 1000 crore (Rs 10 billion) has been made for the
NMHP. The current focus (2009) is on establishing
centres of excellence in mental health, increasing
intake capacity and starting postgraduate courses in
psychiatry, modernisation of mental hospitals and upgradation of medical college psychiatry departments,
focus on non-government organisations (NGOs)
and public sector partnerships, media campaign to
address stigma, a focus on research, and several other
measures (See http://india.gov.in/sectors/health_family/mental_health.php).


<<<PAGE 250>>>
238

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry
Table 21.1: Extent of the Problem and Facilities Available in India

The Problem
Population = 1027 million (2001)
Prevalence of psychiatric disorders = 58/1000
Severe mental illness
Point prevalence = 10-20/1000 population
Incidence = 35/100,000 population
Neuroses and psychosomatic disorders
Point prevalence = 2-3%
Mental retardation
Point prevalence = 0.5-1.0% of all children
Psychiatric disorders in children
Point prevalence = 1-2% of all children
Psychiatric OPD attendance in (1990 data)
Govt. hospitals = 3.63 million/year
Private practice = 2.63 million/year
Total OPD attendance = 6.29 million/year
(~1% of population)
Additionally, 15-20% of all help-seekers in the general
health services do so for emotional and psychosocial
problems.
Existing Mental Health Services
No. of government mental hospitals = 37
No. of mental hospital beds = ~19000
Private psychiatric hospital beds = 2000-3000
General hospital psychiatry unit beds (GHPU beds) =
4000-5000
Total health beds in India = 870161 (1994-95)

Psychiatric beds in India
Per 10,000 population = 0.25 (World = 1.69;
Median)*
Manpower Available in India
Psychiatrists (qualified) in India
Numbers = ~3500
Per 100,000 population = 0.2 (World = 4.15 Mean;
1.2 Median)
Total qualified doctors in India = 503900 (1999)
Clinical psychologists in India
Numbers = ~1000
Per 100,000 population = 0.03 (World = 0.6
Median)*
Psychiatric social workers
Numbers = ~1000
Per 100,000 population = 0.03 (World = 0.4
Median)*
Psychiatric nurses in India
Numbers = 800-900
Per 100,000 population = 0.05 (World = 2.0
Median)*
Total nurses in India = 737000 (1999)
Postgraduate centers = ~40 (very few of 140 medical
colleges have a psychiatry department)
MD/DPM seats (Psychiatrists/year) = ~200 (For comparison: Doctors/year = 13,000) (1990)

* Source: Atlas: Mental Health Resources in the World, 2005, WHO

The extent of mental health problems and facilities
available in India are briefly summarised in Table 21.1.

WORLD (MENTAL) HEALTH REPORT
2001
This landmark publication of the WHO was published
in 2001 (Editor-in-Chief: RS Murthy). The 2001
World Health Report focused on mental health (Mental Health: New Understanding, New Hope), with a
slogan, Stop Exclusion: Dare to Care.
The report identified that ‘one person in every four
will be affected by a mental disorder at some stage

of life’. It points out that the psychiatric disorders are
estimated to account for 12% of the global burden of
disease, yet the mental health budgets of the majority of countries constitute <1% of their total health
expenditures.
The WHR-2001 appears along with the Atlas, a
unique publication of WHO giving a comparative
account of the mental health resources in the world.
The report identifies that ‘mental disorders affect all
people in all countries’, but the ‘people do not get
the care they need...because of lack of resources,...
because of fear of seeking help, ...and because of lack
of (mental health) policies’.


<<<PAGE 251>>>
Community Psychiatry

The WHR-2001makes ten recommendations for
action:
1. Provide treatment in primary care.
2. Make psychotropic drugs available.
3. Give care in the community.
4. Educate the public.
5. Involve communities, families and consumers.

239

6. Establish national policies, programmes and
legislation.
7. Develop human resources.
8. Link with other sectors.
9. Monitor community mental health.
10. Support more research.


<<<PAGE 252>>>

<<<PAGE 253>>>
Appendices

Appendix I: Nobel Prizes in Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines
Nobel Laureates

Major Contributions

Year of Award

1.

Ivan Petrovich Pavlov (1849-1936; Russia)

Classical conditioning
Physiology of digestion

1904

2.

Camillo Golgi (1843-1926; Italy)
Santiago Ramon y Cajal (1852-1934; Spain)

Structure of CNS

1906

3.

Julius Wagner von Jauregg (1857-1940; Austria)
(First psychiatrist to receive a Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine)

Malarial treatment for GPI (First
successful treatment of a major
psychosis)

1927

4.

Antonio Caetano de Abreu Freire Egas Moniz
(Egas Moniz) (1874-1955; Portugal)
Walter Rudolf Hess (1881-1973; Switzerland)

Psychosurgery (prefrontal leucotomy)
Cerebral angiography

1949

5.

Konrad Lorenz (1903-1989; Austria)
Karl Von Frisch (1886-1982; Germany)
Nikolaas Tinbergen (1907-1988; UK)

Ethology

1973

6.

Sir Godfrey Newbold Hounsfield (1919-2004; UK) Computerised Tomography Scan
Allan Macleod Cormack (1924-1998; US)

1979

7.

Stanley B. Prusiner (1942b; US)

Discovery of Prions

1997

8.

Eric R. Kandel (1929b; US)
Arvid Carlsson (1923b; Sweden)
Paul Greengard (1925b; US)

Signal Transduction in CNS

2000

9.

Paul C. Lauterbaur (1929-2007; US)
Sir Peter Mansfield (1933b; UK)

Magnetic Resonance Imaging

2003


<<<PAGE 254>>>
A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

242

Appendix II: Some Important Contributors in Psychiatry
Contributor

Coined the Term

Special Mention

Adler, Alfred (1870-1937)

Life style
Inferiority complex
Will to power
Creative self

Founder of the school of individual
psychology

Alexander, Franz (1891-1964)

__

Sometimes known as the father of
psychosomatic medicine

Ayurveda (<4000 BC)

__

Five types of constitution and 3
main types of personality were
described. Modernistic descriptions
of mental disorders were stated

Beard, George Miller (1839-1883)

Neurasthenia

__

Berne, Eric (1910-1970)

Games
Transaction

Founder of transactional analysis
(TA). Wrote the book ‘Games
People Play’

Binet, Alfred (1857-1911)

__

Designed the 1st formal scale of
intelligence

Bleuler, Eugen (1857-1939)

Schizophrenia

Described ‘cardinal’ symptoms of
schizophrenia

Braid, James (1795-1860)

Hypnosis

__

Cicero (106-43 BC)

Libido

__

Cullen, William (1710-1790)

Neurosis

__

Delay, Jean PL (b 1907)

Neuroleptic
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
(NMS)

1st antipsychotic treatment
(chlorpromazine) of psychoses

Dendy, Walter Cooper (1794-1871)

Psychotherapy (‘Psychotherapeia’)

__

Deniker, Pierre (b 1917)

‘Hibernotherapie’

__

Erikson, Erik H (1902-1994)

Psychohistory
Identity crisis

Described the stages of life

Esquirol, Jean ED (1772-1840)

Hallucination
Monomania

__

Falret, Jean-Pierre (1794-1870)

Mental alienation

Thus, psychiatrists came to be
known as alienists

Fechner, Gustav Theodore
(1801-1887)

Psychophysics

Founder of experimental and physiological psychology

Feuchtersleben, Ernst von
(1806-1849)

Psychosis

__
Contd...


<<<PAGE 255>>>
Appendices

243

Contd...
Contributor

Coined the Term

Special Mention

Freud, Sigmund (1856-1939)

Free association

Founder of psychoanalysis; some
of the significant contributions
include: interpretation of dreams,
theory of infantile sexuality, structural and topographical model of
mind, theory of instincts, psychopathology of everyday life and stages
of psychosexual development

Psychoanalysis
Psychodynamics
Oedipus complex
Electra complex
Penis envy
Primal scene
Ego defense mechanisms
Repression
Psychological determinism
Pleasure principle
Reality principle
Gall, Franz Joseph (1758-1828)

__

Founder of phrenology

Gita Bhagavad (~4th Century BC)

__

Probably the 1st recorded evidence
of crisis-intervention psychotherapy

Gockel (1547-1628)

Psychology

__

Griesinger, Wilhelm (1817-1868)

Unitary psychosis

Founder of the speciality of neuropsychiatry; 1st full time academic
psychiatrist with a medical orientation

Hecker, Ewald (1843-1909)

Hebephrenia

__

Heinroth, Johann C (1773-1843)

Psychosomatic

__

Horney, Karen (1885-1952)

__

American psychoanalyst; NeoFreudian; Described a theory of
neurosis

Janet, Pierre (1859-1947)

Psychasthenia

__

Jones, Maxwell (b 1907)

Therapeutic community

__

Jung, Carl Gustav (1875-1961)

Collective and personal unconscious
Complex

Founder of the school of analytical
psychology

Introvert and extrovert
Archetypes
Persona
Anima and animus
Contd...


<<<PAGE 256>>>
244

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Contd...
Contributor

Coined the Term

Special Mention

Kahlbaum, Karl (1828-1899)

Catatonia
Symptom complex
Cyclothymia

__

Kanner, Leo (1894-1981)

__

Described infantile autism

Klein, Melanie (1882-1960)

Basic trust

Child psychoanalyst

Kraepelin, Emil (1856-1926)

Dementia praecox

Important work on psychiatric
nosology and classification

Krafft-Ebing, B Richard von
(1840-1902)

Sadism
Masochism

Classic description of sexual
perversions

Maslow, Abraham (1908-1970)

Self-actualization
Self-realization

Humanistic psychology; Described
hierarchy of needs

Mesmer, Franz Anton (1734-1815)

Animal magnetism

__

Meyer, Adolf (1866-1950)

__

Founder of psychobiology; Famous
for ‘common sense psychiatry’

Morel, Benedict-Augustin
(1809-1873)

Demence’ precoce’

__

Pavlov, Ivan Petrovich (1849-1936) Classical conditioning

Animal studies on conditioned
reflexes

Piaget, Jean (1897-1980)

__

Extensive studies on the nature of
children’s intellectual development

Pinel, Philippe (1745-1826)

__

Famous for humane and ‘moral’
treatment of mentally ill

Prichard, James (1786-1848)

Moral insanity

__

Rado, Sandor (1890-1972)

Adaptational psychodynamics

Hungarian psychoanalyst

Rank, Otto (1884-1939)

Birth trauma
Will therapy

__

Ray, Issac (1807-1881)

__

Father of American forensic
psychiatry

Reil, Johann Christian (1759-1820)

Psychiatry

Founded the 1st psychiatric journal

Rogers, Carl (1902-1987)

Client-centred psychotherapy

American psychologist; Non-directive psychotherapist

Rush, Benjamin (1745-1828)

__

Father of American psychiatry

Skinner, Burrhus Frederic
(1904-1990)

__

Founder of operant conditioning
model of learning

Sullivan, Harry Stack (1892-1949)

__

Founder of interpersonal school of
psychiatry

Tissot, Simon Andre (1728-1797)

Onanism

1st medical description of
masturbation


<<<PAGE 257>>>
Appendices

245

Contd...
Contributor

Coined the Term

Special Mention

Vives, Juan Louis (1492-1540)

__

Wrote the 1st modern textbook of
psychology

Watson, John Broadus (1878-1958) __

Founder of behaviourism

Weyer, Johann (1515-1588)

__

Sometimes known as the father of
modern psychiatry

Zacchia, Paolo (1584-1659)

__

Probably the 1st forensic
psychiatrist


<<<PAGE 258>>>
246

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Appendix III: Glossary of Some Important Terms in Psychiatry
Abstract thinking: Abstract thinking is the ability
to assume a mental set voluntarily, shift voluntarily
from one aspect of a situation to another, keep in mind
simultaneously the various aspects of a situation, grasp
the essentials of a ‘whole’ (e.g. situation or concept),
and to break a ‘whole’ into its parts.
Affect: The outward expression of the immediate
(cross-sectional) experience of emotion at a given
time.
Agitation: Presence of anxiety with severe motor
restlessness.
Akinesia: Absence of motor activity.
Alexithymia: Inability to verbally describe one’s
emotionally feelings.
Ambitendency: Due to ambivalence, tentative actions
are made, but no goal directed action occurs.
Ambivalence: Inability to decide for or against, due
to co-existence of two opposing impulses for the same
thing at the same time in the same person.
Anergia: Lack of energy for day-to-day activities.
Anhedonia: Inability to experience pleasure in previously pleasurable activities.
Anxiety: An unpleasurable emotional state, associated
with psycho-physiological changes in response to an
intrapsychic conflict.
Blunted affect: Severe reduction in the intensity of
affect.
Catalepsy: The person maintains body posture in to
which it is placed. Also see waxy flexibility.
Cataplexy: Abrupt loss of muscle tone without impairment of consciousness. Often seen in Narcolepsy.
Circumstantiality: Digression in to unnecessary
details that distract from the central theme; however,
the patient returns back to the original theme after
digression (unlike in tangentiality).
Confabulation: A false memory that the patient
believes to be true.
Coprolalia: Vocal tics characterised by shouting of
obscene words.
Deja entendu: A false sense of familiarity when hearing something new.

Deja vu: A false sense of familiarity with unfamiliar
circumstances or scenes.
Delusion: A false, unshakable belief which is not
amenable to reasoning, and is not in keeping with
the patient’s socio-cultural and educational background.
Delusional perception: Normal perception has a
private and illogical meaning.
Depersonalization: An alteration in the perception
of self, so that the feeling of one’s reality is (as if)
temporarily changed or lost.
Derealization: An alteration in the perception of
external world, so that the feeling of the reality of
external world is (as if) temporarily changed or lost.
Disorientation: A disturbance in orientation in time,
place and/or person.
Distractibility: Inability to concentrate or focus
attention.
Echolalia: Repetition, echo or mimicking of phrases
or words heard.
Echopraxia: Repetition, echo or mimicking of actions
observed.
Ecstasy: Very severe elevation of mood (seen in
delirious or stuporous mania); Intense sense of rapture
or blissfulness.
Elation: Moderate elevation of mood (seen in mania;
Stage II); Feeling of confidence and enjoyment along
with increased psychomotor activity.
Emotional incontinence: Complete loss of control
over affect (represents an extreme form of emotional
lability).
Euphoria: Mild elevation of mood (seen in hypomania); Increased sense of psychological well-being
and happiness, not in keeping with on-going events.
Euthymia: Normal range of mood, with absence of
depressed or elevated mood.
Exaltation: Severe elevation of mood (seen in severe
mania; Stage III); Intense elation with delusions of
grandeur.
Flight of ideas: Rapid speech with sudden shifts in
ideas, without loosing logical connection.


<<<PAGE 259>>>
Appendices

Folie å deux: Delusions shared between two closely
connected persons. Also known are folie å trios, folie
å quatre, and folie å famille.
Formication: A false sense of insects crawling on
one’s skin.
Fugue: Physical and psychological flight (wandering)
from one’s usual place.
Grandiosity: Excessive and exaggerated feeling of
one’s importance.
Hallucination: A perception that occurs in the absence
of a stimulus.
Illusion: A misinterpretation of stimuli arising from
external object(s).
Incoherence: Thought process that is disconnected,
disorganised, or incomprehensible.
Insight: The ability to understand one’s own behaviour
and emotions. In the context of psychiatric disorders,
it implies the degree of awareness and understanding
that the patient has regarding his/her illness.
Intelligence: The ability to think logically, act rationally, and deal effectively with the environment.
Jamais entendu: A sense of unfamiliarity when hearing something familiar.
Jamais vu: A sense of unfamiliarity with familiar
circumstances or scenes.
Judgement: An ability to assess a situation correctly
and act appropriately within that situation.
Labile affect: Rapid and abrupt changes in affect,
unrelated to external stimuli.
Loosening of associations: Thought process characterised by a series of ideas without apparent logical
connections.
Mannerisms: Odd, repetitive and goal-directed
movements.
Mood: The pervasive feeling tone which is sustained
(lasts for some length of time) and colours the total
experience of the person.
Mutism: Complete absence of speech.
Negativism: An apparently motiveless resistance to
all commands and attempts to be moved, or doing
just the opposite.
Neologisms: These are idiosyncratically formed new
words whose derivation cannot be understood easily.

247

Panic: An acute, intense, overwhelming episode of
anxiety, often associated with feelings of impending
doom.
Perplexity: Puzzled bewilderment.
Perseveration: Persistent repetition of words or
themes beyond the point of relevance.
Phobia: An irrational fear of an object, situation or
activity.
Posturing: Voluntary assumption of an inappropriate
and often bizarre posture for long periods of time.
Poverty of speech: Decreased speech production.
Poverty of content of speech: The speech production
is adequate, but the content conveys little information.
Pressure of speech: Rapid production of speech
output, with a subjective feeling of racing thoughts.
Rigidity (Catatonic): Maintenance of a rigid posture
against efforts to be moved.
Somatic passivity: Bodily sensations, especially
sensory symptoms, are experienced as imposed on
body by some external force.
Somnolence: Inability to maintain a state of alertness
without constant stimulation.
Stereotypy: Odd, repetitive and non-goal directed
movement (can also be verbal).
Stupor: A clinical syndrome of akinesis and mutism,
with relative preservation of conscious awareness.
Suicide: A human act of self-intentioned and selfinflicted cessation (death).
Tangentiality: Sudden and oblique digression in to
unnecessary details that completely distract from the
central theme; however, the patient never returns
back to the original theme after digression (unlike in
circumstantiality).
Thinking: Normal thinking is a goal directed flow of
ideas, symbols and associations initiated by a problem or a task, characterised by rational connections
between successive ideas or thoughts, and leading
towards a reality oriented conclusion.
Thought diffusion or Broadcasting: Subject experiences that his thoughts are escaping the confines of
his self and are being experienced by others around.
Thought echo: Voices speaking out thoughts aloud;
also called as echo de la pense.


<<<PAGE 260>>>
248

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Thought insertion: Subject experiences thoughts
imposed by some external force on his passive
mind.
Thought withdrawal: Thoughts cease and subject
experiences them as removed by external force.
Tic: Involuntary, sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic and stereotyped movement (can also be
verbal).

Trance: A sleep like state of reduced consciousness
and suggestibility.
Verbigeration: Senseless repetition of same words
or phrases over and over again.
Waxy flexibility: Parts of body can be placed in
positions that will be maintained for long periods of
time, even if very uncomfortable; flexible like wax.
The process is called as waxy flexibility, while the end
result is called as catalepsy.


<<<PAGE 261>>>
Suggested Further Reading
1. Abse DW. Hysteria and Related Mental Disorders: An Approach to Psychological Medicine.
2nd edn, John Wright, Bristol, 1987.
2. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders. 4th edn, Text Revision. American
Psychiatric Association, Washington DC, 2000.
3. Task Force Report on Electroconvulsive
Therapy. American Psychiatric Association,
Washington DC, 1990.
4. The Practice of Electroconvulsive Therapy:
Recommendations for Treatment, Training
and Privileging. Task Force Report on ECT,
American Psychiatric Association, Washington
DC, 2001.
5. Arieti S. Interpretation of Schizophrenia. 2nd
edn, Basic Books, New York, 1974.
6. Ashton H. Benzodiazepines: How they work and
how to withdraw? The Ashton Manual. http://
benzo.org.uk/manual/index.htm
7. Bancroft J. Human Sexuality and its Problems.
3rd edn, Churchill Livingstone Elsevier, Edinburgh, 2009.
8. Barlett J, Bridges P, Kelly D. Contemporary
indications for psychosurgery. British Journal
of Psychiatry 1981;138:507.
9. Beck AT, Rush AJ, Shaw BI, et al. Cognitive
Therapy of Depression. Guilford, New York,
1979.
10. Beck AT. Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional
Disorders. International Universities Press, New
York, 1976.
11. Bellack AS, Hersen M, Kazdin AE. International Handbook of Behavior Modification and
Therapy. Plenum Press, New York, 1982.
12. Benson DF, Blumer D. (Eds). Psychiatric Aspects of Neurologic Disease. Grune and Stratton, New York Vol I, 1975 and Vol II, 1982.

13. Benson FD. Aphasia, Alexia and Agraphia.
Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1979.
14. Bleuler E. Dementia Precox: The Group of
Schizo phrenias. International Universities
Press, New York, 1950.
15. Bowlby J. Processes of mourning. International
Journal of Psycho-Analysis 1961; 42: 317-40.
16. Brown GW, Birley JLT, Wing JK. Influence of
family life on the course of schizophrenic disorders: A replication. British Journal of Psychiatry
1972;121:241.
17. Brown JAC. Freud and the Post-Freudians.
Penguin, New York, 1978.
18. Cavenar JO, Brodie HKH. (Eds). Signs and
Symptoms in Psychiatry. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia, 1983.
19. Chapman JP. The early symptoms of schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry 1966;
112: 225.
20. Ciompi L. Catamnestic long-term studies on the
course of life of schizophrenics. Schizophrenia
Bulletin 1980;6:606-18.
21. Cleckley H. The Mask of Sanity. 4th edn,
Mosby, St. Louis, 1964.
22. Crow TJ. Molecular pathology of schizophrenia:
More than one disease process. British Medical
Journal 1980; 280: 66-68.
23. David A, Fleminger S, Kopelman M, Lovestone
S, Mellors J. Lishman’s Organic Psychiatry: A
Textbook of Neuropsychiatry. 4th edn, WileyBlackwell, Oxford, 2009.
24. Dement WC. Some Must Watch While Some
Must Sleep. WH Freeman Co, San Francisco,
1974.
25. Directorate General of Health Services. National
Mental Health Programme for India. Directorate
General of Health Services, New Delhi, 1982.


<<<PAGE 262>>>
250

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

26. Editorial. What next with Psychiatric illness?
Nature 1988;336:95-96.
27. Fenichel O. The Psychoanalytic Theory of
Neurosis. Norton, New York, 1945.
28. Fink M. Convulsive Therapy: Theory and Practice. Raven Press, New York, 1979.
29. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. MiniMental State: A practical method for grading
the cognitive state of patients for the clinician.
Journal of Psychiatric Research 1975;12:189.
30. Freud A. The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defense. Hogarth Press, London, 1937.
31. Freud S. The Psychopathology of Everyday
Life. In: Strachey J (Ed). The Standard Edition
of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. Hogarth Press, London, 1960; 6.
32. Gelder M, Mayou R, Cowen P. Shorter Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry. 4th edn, Oxford University Press, New York, 2001.
33. Gelenberg AJ. The catatonic syndrome. Lancet
1976;1:1339.
34. Gottesman II, Shields J. Schizophrenia: The
Epigenetic Puzzle. Cambridge University Press,
New York, 1982.
35. Government of India. The Mental Health Act
14, 1987.
36. Government of India. The Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act 61, 1985.
(Amended in 1989, Act 2 of 1989).
37. Hall CS. A Primer of Freudian Psychology.
World Publishing, Cleveland, 1954.
38. Hamilton M. Fish’s Clinical Psychopathology.
3rd edn, John Wright, Bristol, 1983.
39. Hamilton M. Fish’s Schizophrenia. 3rd edn,
John Wright, Bristol, 1986.
40. Heilman KM, Valenstein E (Eds). Clinical
Neuropsychology. 2nd edn, Oxford University
Press, New York, 1985.
41. Hinsie LE, Campbell RJ. Psychiatric Dictionary.
5th edn, Oxford University Press, New York,
1981.
42. Indian Council of Medical Research. Manual of Mental Health for Medical Officers.
NIMHANS, Bengaluru, 1983.

43. Indian Council of Medical Research. Collaborative Study on Phenomenology and Natural
History of Acute Psychosis. Report of an ICMR
Task Force Study. Indian Council of Medical
Research, New Delhi, 1989.
44. Indian Council of Medical Research. Factors Associated with Course and Outcome of
Schizophrenia. Report of an ICMR Task Force
Study. Indian Council of Medical Research,
New Delhi, 1989.
45. Jefferson JW, Griest JH, Ackerman DL. Lithium
Encyclopedia for Clinical Practice. American
Psychiatric Press, Washington DC, 1983.
46. Jellinek EM. The Disease Concept of Alcoholism. College and University Press, New Haven,
1960.
47. Jones E. The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud.
Basic Books, New York, 1957.
48. Kraepelin E. Dementia Praecox and Paraphrenia. GM Robertson (Ed). Huntington. NY:
Krieger, 1971.
49. Kraepelin E. Manic-Depressive Insanity and
Paranoia. Livingstone, Edinburgh, 1921.
50. Leff JP, Issacs AD. Psychiatric Examination in
Clinical Practice. 2nd edn, Blackwell, Oxford,
1981.
51. Lerer B, Weiner RD, Belmaker RH. ECT: Basic
Mechanisms. John Libbey, London, 1984.
52. Marks IM. Fears, Phobias and Rituals. Academic Press, New York, 1988.
53. Masters WH, Johnson VE. Human Sexual Inadequacy, Little Brown, Boston, 1966.
54. Masters WH, Johnson VE. Human Sexual Response. Little Brown, Boston, 1966.
55. Mellor CS. First rank symptoms of schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry 1970;117:15.
56. Merksey H. The Analysis of Hysteria. Bailliére
Tindall, London, 1979.
57. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. National
Mental Health Programme Booklet. DGHS,
New Delhi, 1982.
58. Morgan C, Bhugra D (Eds). Principles of
Social Psychiatry. 2nd edn, Chichester: WileyBlackwell, 2010.


<<<PAGE 263>>>
Suggested Further Reading

59. Murthy RS, Wig NN. The WHO Collaborative Study on Strategies for Extending Mental
Health care. American Journal of Psychiatry
1983;140:1486.
60. Murthy RS. National Mental Health Programme
in India (1982-1989): Mid-point appraisal. Indian Journal of Psychiatry 1989;31:267.
61. National Collaborating Centre for Mental
Health. Borderline Personality Disorder: The
NICE Guideline on Treatment and Management. National Clinical Practice Guideline No.
78. British Psychological Society and Royal
College of Psychiatrists, 2009.
62. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Core Interventions in the Treatment
and Management of Schizophrenia in Adults
in Primary and Secondary care. NICE Clinical
Guideline 82. National Collaborating Centre for
Mental Health, 2009.
63. National Crime Records Bureau. 2008. Suicides in 2008. http://ncrb.nic.in/ADSI2008/
suicides-08.pdf
64. Neki JS. Guru-Chela relationship: The possibility of a therapeutic paradigm. American Journal
of Orthopsychiatry 1973;3:755-66.
65. Noshpitz JD (Ed). Basic Handbook of Child
Psychiatry. Vol I-IV. Basic Books, New York,
1979.
66. Oyebode F. Sims’s Symptoms in the Mind: An
Introduction to Descriptive Psychopathology.
4th edn, Elsevier Saunders, 2008.
67. Padesky CA, Greenberger D. Mind over Mood:
Change How You Feel by Changing the Way
You Think. Guilford Press, 1995.
68. Perry JC, Jacobs D. Overview: Clinical applications of the amytal interview in psychiatric
emergency settings. American Journal of Psychiatry 1982;139:552.
69. Pincus J, Tucker GJ. Behavioral Neurology. 3rd
edn, Oxford University Press, New York, 1985.
70. Plum F, Posner C. The Diagnosis of Stupor and
Coma. 3rd edn, FA Davis, Philadelphia, 1980.
71. Sachdev PS, Keshavan MS (Eds). Secondary
Schizophrenia. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge: 2010.

251

72. Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P (Eds). Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th edn,
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2009.
73. Sadock BJ, Sadock VA. Kaplan and Sadock’s
Synopsis of Psychiatry. 10th edn, Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins, 2007.
74. Schreiber FR. Sybil. New York: Warner Books,
1973.
75. Scott AIF (Ed). The ECT Handbook, 2nd edn,
Council Report CR128. Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2004.
76. Sharma SD. Mental Hospitals in India. DGHS,
New Delhi, 1990.
77. Shneidman ES, Farberow NL. Some Facts about
Suicide. PHS Publication No 852, US Government. Printing Officem, Washington DC, 1961.
78. Singh G, Tewari SK. Morbid grief: Its clinical
manifestations and proposed classification.
Indian Journal of Psychiatry 1980; 22: 74-80.
79. Slater E, Roth M. Clinical Psychiatry (MayerGross). 3rd edn, JPB Publishers, New Delhi,
1986.
80. Strub RL, Black FW. The Mental Status Examination in Neurology. 2nd edn, FA Davis,
Philadelphia, 1985, reprinted by JPB Publishers,
New Delhi, 1991.
81. Taylor D, Paton C, Kapur S. The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines. 10th edn, Informa Health
care, London, 2009.
82. Thigpen CH, Cleckley HM. The Three Faces of
Eve. New York: McGraw Hill, 1957.
83. Varma VK. Psychotherapy in a Traditional
Society: Context, Concept and Practice. JPB
Publishers, New Delhi, 2008.
84. Vaughn C, Leff J. The measurement of expressed emotion in the families of psychiatric
patients. British Journal of Social and Clinical
Psychology 1976;15:157-65.
85. Watson JB, Rayner R. Conditioned emotional
responses. Journal of Experimental Psychology
1920;3:1-14.
86. Wolberg LR. The Technique of Psychotherapy.
Vol I and II. Secker and Warburg with Heinemann, London, 1989.


<<<PAGE 264>>>
252

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

87. World Health Organization. The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders:
Clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines.
World Health Organization, Geneva, 1992.
88. World Health Organization. Definition of
Health. Accessed May 2010. See http://www.
who.int/about/definition/en/print.html/
89. World Health Organization. Report of the International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia (IPSS).
Geneva: WHO, 1973.
90. World Health Organization. Schizophrenia:
An International Follow-up Study, Wiley, New
York, 1979.

91. The World Health Report: 2001. Mental Health:
New Understanding, New Hope, World Health
Organization, Geneva, 2001.
92. Atlas: Mental Health Resources in the World.
World Health Organization, Geneva, 2005.
http://www.who.int/mental_health/evidence/
atlas/en/
93. Zilboorg GA, Henry GW. A History of Medical
Psychology. Norton, 1941.
94. Zubin J, Spring B. Vulnerability: A new view of
schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology
1977;86,103-26.


<<<PAGE 265>>>
Index

A
Abnormal illness behaviour 99, 209
Abreaction 104, 218
Abstract thinking 14
Acamprosate 42
Acetylcholine 64, 75
Acrophobia 93
Acute
and transient psychotic disorders 61,
76
intoxication 33, 37, 46
polymorphic psychotic disorder
with symptoms of schizophrenia
86
without symptoms of schizophrenia 86
psychosis 228
schizophrenia-like psychotic disorder
60, 86
stress reaction 111
Adenoma sebaceum 159
Adjustment disorder 112
with depressed mood 76
Admission under special circumstances
232
Adolescent thinking 155
Affective
disorders 69
flattening 57, 62
spectrum disorders 81
Agitated depression 81
Agonist substitution therapy 44
Agoraphobia 92
with panic disorder 93
without panic disorder 93
AIDS dementia complex 25
Akathisia 228
Akinesis 225
Alcohol
and substance history 10
sensitising drugs 41
use disorders 35, 228
anonymous 41
hallucinosis 28, 38
seizures 38

Algophobia 93
Alogia 57, 62
Alprazolam 94, 98, 131
Alzheimer’s
dementia 23
disease 26
Amantadine 48
Ambitendency 59, 225
Ambivalence 55, 56
Ambulatory schizophrenia 117
Amine hypothesis 184
Amisulpride 66
Amitriptyline 30
Amok 110, 111
Amotivational syndrome 46
Amphetamine 29, 48
induced psychoses 61
use disorder 48
Amygdalotomy 204
Amytal interview 218
Androgens 132
Anhedonia 12, 56, 57, 62
Anorexia nervosa 142
Antiandrogens 126
Anti-anxiety drugs 193
Anticipation 210
Anti-craving agents 42
Antidepressant 30, 76, 82, 87, 92, 95,
105, 112, 144, 181
Antimanic 185
Antipsychotic 26, 30, 65, 67, 68, 78, 87,
143, 168
depot preparations 181
dose in schizophrenia 66
drugs 174
Antisocial personality disorder 167
Anxiety 71
disorder 89
Anxious personality disorder 117
Apathy 56
Apomorphine 132
Appetite 71
Arctic hysteria 111
Aripiprazole 29, 66, 168
Ashton manual 51
Asperger’s syndrome 165

Assertiveness training 131
Association disturbances 55
Astasia abasia 100
Asterixis 20
Atenolol 92
Atomoxetine 167
Attempted suicide 222
Attention
deficit disorder 166
seeking 103
Atypical
antipsychotics 29, 65
depression 81
Audible thoughts 55, 56
Auditory hallucinations 13, 56
Autism 55, 163, 164
Autistic
disorder 163
thinking 55
Autochthonous delusions 56
Automatic obedience 59, 225
Aversion therapy 41, 103, 126, 215
Ayurveda 54

B
Bad trip 50
Barbiturate 167, 193
use disorder 50
Battered child syndrome 228
Behaviour
modification 105, 131, 161, 167
therapy 41, 80, 94, 131, 143, 144,
214
Behavioural theory 91, 97
Benperidol 126
Benzodiazepines 40, 87, 92, 98, 105, 112,
137, 140, 194
receptor antagonist 51, 196
Beta blockers 194
Binge eating disorders 144
Biological
functions 72
theories 63, 75, 91, 94
Biopsychosocial model 17, 147
Bipolar disorder 73, 75
subtypes 73


<<<PAGE 266>>>
254

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Blackouts 37
Bladder training 169
Blocking 12
Blood
alcohol concentration 39
lithium levels 190
Blunted affect 58
Borderline personality disorder 60,
117, 228
Brain imaging 64, 75
Brief
dissociative stupor 100
history of psychopharmacology 173
pulse ECT 202
Bromocriptine 48, 132
Bruxism 140
Bulimia nervosa 144
Buprenorphine 44, 45
Bupropion 52
Buspirone 92, 98, 197

Childhood
history 9
psychosis 165
Chlordiazepoxide 40, 51
Chlorpromazine 66
Cholinesterase inhibitors 25, 26
Chromatography 157
Chronic
depression 74, 77
fatigue syndrome 109
Circumscribed amnesia 101
Citalopram 26
Citrated calcium carbimide 42
Civil responsibility 229
Classical
conditioning model 214
psychoanalysis 213
psychosomatic disorders 147
Classification in
child psychiatry 162
psychiatry 2
Classification of
alcoholism 37
benzodiazepines 196
mental retardation 156
psychotropic drugs 172
Claustrophobia 93
Clerambault’s syndrome 84
Clomipramine 98, 131
Clonazepam 94, 98
Clonidine 44, 167, 169
Clozapine 52, 53, 66
Cocaine 47
overdose 48
preparations 47
use disorder 46
withdrawal syndrome 48
Code of ethics for psychiatrists 234
Cognitive
behaviour therapy 68, 79, 94, 98,
112, 215, 216
behavioural theory 91
therapy 215
Combativeness 225
Command hallucinations 57
Common
examples of psychosomatic disorders
148
psychiatric emergencies 222
themes in suicide 222
Community
mental health 235
psychiatry 235

C
Caffeine 52, 53
CAGE questionnaire 37, 39
Cannabis
preparations 45
use disorder 45
Capgras’ syndrome 87
Carbamazepine 79, 192
Carphologia 20
Castration anxiety 211
Cataplexy 138
Catastrophic reaction 22
Catatonia 59
Catatonic
behaviour 58
features 57
schizophrenia 59
signs 11, 225
stupor 67, 225
syndrome 225
withdrawal 225
Causes of
catatonic stupor 225
hypersomnia 138
mental retardation 157
Censor 206
Central mental health authority 233, 237
Cerebral palsy 159
Chasing the dragon 43
Child
abuse 228
psychiatry 162

Comparison of delirium and dementia 22
Complex partial seizures 29, 31, 61, 227
Complicated grief reaction 152
Complications of
alcohol dependence 39
chronic alcohol use 38
Conceptual thinking stage 153
Concrete thinking stage 153
Conditioning devices 169
Conduct disorders 167
Conjugal paranoia 84
Consultation-liaison psychiatry 149
Continuous amnesia 101
Contraindications of disulfiram 42
Conversion
disorder 99
release symptoms 102
Coping
mechanisms 207
skills training 112
Coprolalia 168
Cortical dementia 24
Counselling 110
Counter
phobic defense 210
thoughts 96
Covert sensitisation 41, 215
CPAP 139
Crack 47
Cretinism 159
Criminal lunatic 232
Crisis 221
intervention 112
centre 228
Critical
comments 64
remarks 68
Cross-gender homosexuality 122
Culture bound syndromes 110
Cyclothymia 73
Cyproheptadine 144

D
Dangerous Drug Act of 1930 233
Deep brain stimulation 199
Defense mechanism 90
Definition of psychiatric disorder 1
Deliberate self-harm 222
Delirium 19, 21, 23
tremens 38, 41
Delusion of doubles 87
Delusional
depression 77, 78


<<<PAGE 267>>>
Index
disorder 58, 61, 76, 83, 84
dysmorphophobia 84
halitosis 84
parasitosis 84
Delusions 58, 60, 62, 71
Delusions of
control 56
grandeur 56, 70, 83
jealousy 83
nihilism 71
persecution 56, 61, 70, 83
reference 56
Demence precoce 54
Dementia 22, 23, 76
praecox 54, 61
Denial 65, 207
Dependence syndrome 34
Dependent personality disorder 118
Depersonalisation 13, 46, 109
derealisation syndrome 109
disorder 109
Depot antipsychotic 67
Depressed mood 71
Depression 61, 80, 95, 227
with psychotic features 77
Depressive
episode 30, 71
equivalent 81, 106
ideation/cognition 71
pseudodementia 23
stupor 71
Derealisation 13, 46, 109
Desmopressin 169
Deterrent agents 41
Detoxification 40, 41, 44
Developmental
milestones 154
reading disorder 162
Dexamphetamine 167
Dhat syndrome 110
Diagnostic formulation 17
Diazepam 40, 67, 87, 94, 112, 137, 149,
218, 228
Digit
backwards 14
span test 14
Dipsomania 34, 36
Disaster management 112
Disintegrative psychosis 165
Disorders of
adult personality and behaviour 113
affect 56
excessive somnolence 137

perception 56
sexual preference 124
Disorganised
behaviour 62
schizophrenia 58
symptoms 62
Dissocial personality disorder 115
Dissociative
amnesia 100, 101
anaesthesia and sensory loss 100
and conversion disorders 99
convulsions 100, 101
disorder 100
fugue 101
identity disorder 102
motor disorders 99
Distortion 207
District mental health programme 237
Disulfiram 41, 42
ethanol reaction 41
Divalproex 191
Donepezil 25, 26
Dopamine 75
agonists 132
Double depression 81
Down’s syndrome 158
Dream anxiety disorder 140
Drug 33, 228
and alcohol dependence 227
induced psychoses 61
Dual-role transvestism 122
Duration of
therapy 202
untreated psychosis 63
Dyslalia 163
Dyssomnias 136
Dysthymia 73, 82
Dysthymic disorder 80, 82

E
Eating disorders 142
Echolalia 56, 59, 168, 225
Echopraxia 59, 225
Ecstasy 70
Educational history 9
Ego 206
defense mechanisms 206, 207
ideal 206
Egodystonic sexual orientation 123
Ego-structure 214
Ekbom syndrome 136, 137
Elation 70
Elective mutism 171

255
Electra complex 211
Electroconvulsive therapy 29, 67, 77,
98, 199, 228
Electroshock therapy 199
Elementary auditory hallucinations 56
Elevated mood 70
Emergency psychiatry 221
Emil Kraepelin 54
Emotional
blunting 56
lability 22, 25
over-involvement 64
shallowness 56
Emotionally unstable personality disorder 116
Emotions 69
Encopresis 170
English Lunacy Act of 1890 231
Enuresis 169
Environmental manipulation 26
Epidemiology 55, 222
Epilepsy 28
Epileptic seizures 101
Epiloia 159
Erectile dysfunction 127
Erotomania 84
Erotomanic delusions 83
Erythrophobia 93
Eugen Bleuler 54, 55
Euphoria 70
Exaltation 70
Excessive sexual drive 127
Excited
behaviour 227
catatonia 59
Expressed emotions 64, 65, 68
Expressive language disorder 163

F
Factitious disorder 119
Family
and marital therapy 80
history 7
structure 7
theories 64
therapy 68, 144, 217
tree 7
Fantasy life 10
Fatigability 72
Female
anorgasmia 130
orgasmic disorder 130
sexual arousal disorder 128


<<<PAGE 268>>>
256

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Ferric chloride test 157
Fetishism 125
Fetishistic transvestism 122, 125
First generation antipsychotics 66
Flapping tremor 20
Flashback phenomenon 46
Flight of ideas 12, 70
Floccillation 20
Flooding 94, 215
Flumazenil 51, 91, 196, 227
Fluoxetine 42, 85, 95, 98, 131, 144,
169, 171
Flupentixol 66
Flurazepam 137
Fluvoxamine 98
Forensic psychiatry 229
Formal operational stage 155
Fragile-X syndrome 159
Free association 214
Free basing 47
Frontal lobe syndrome 31
Frottage 125
Frotteurism 125
Functions of sleep 135
Furore 59

H

G
GABA 64, 67, 75, 91
benzodiazepine receptors 91
Galantamine 25, 26
Ganser’s syndrome 102
GCP guidelines 234
Gender identity disorders 121, 123
Generalised
amnesia 101
anxiety disorder 90
Genetic hypothesis 63, 75
Genital phase 212
GGT 37
Gilles de la Tourette’s syndrome 168
Glasgow coma scale 14, 226
Globus hystericus 109
Glyceryl trinitrate 132
Gratification habits 171
Grid-iron abdomen 120
Grimacing 57
Group
psychotherapy 68, 131
therapy 41, 80, 144, 217
Guru-Chela relationship 219
Guthrie’s test 157

Habit
and impulse disorders 119
disorders 170
Hallucinations 13, 28, 56, 58, 60-62, 71
Hallucinatory behaviour 12
Haloperidol 26, 28-30, 66, 149, 165, 228
Hangover 37
Hebephrenia 54
Heller’s syndrome 165
Hermaphrodite 123
Hierarchy construction 214
Higher mental functions 13
Hindu
Adoptions and Maintenance Act 230
Marriage Act 229
History of
biological treatments in psychiatry
200
present illness 6
Histrionic personality
disorder 116
traits 105
Homosexuality 123
Hopelessness 71
Hostility 64, 68, 148
Hyperkinesis 164
Hyperkinetic disorder 166
Hyperphagia 139
Hypersexuality 139
Hypersomnia 137, 139
Hyperventilation syndrome 106, 228
Hypnagogic
hallucinations 138
phenomena 134
Hypnosis 131, 217, 219
Hypnotisability 217
Hypoactive sexual desire disorder 126
Hypochondriacal
disorder 105
features 60, 72
paranoia 84
Hypochondriasis 105, 209
Hypomania 70
Hypothyroid dementia 25
Hysteria 99
Hysterical pseudodementia 102

I
ICD-10 2
Id 206
Idazoxan 132

Identification
data 6
with aggressor 209
Idiot savant syndrome 164
Imipramine 95, 167, 169, 182
Immediate retention and recall 14
Impaired abstraction 56
Impairment of memory 27
Impotence 127, 128
Indian
Contract Act 231
Evidence Act 230
Lunacy Act, 1912 231, 232
Lunatic Asylums Act 231
Succession Act 230
Induced delusional disorder 85
Inferiority complex 117
Informants 6
Information processing hypothesis 65
Insomnia 38, 136
Institutionalisation 161
Insulin coma therapy 67
Intellectual development 153
Intelligence 14
Intermetamorphosis 87
International Pilot Study on Schizophrenia 63
Inter-sexuality 123
Interview technique 5
Intracranial space occupying lesions 28
Introjection 75, 209
Investigations in psychiatry 15
Involutional melancholia 80
Iproniazid 181
Irritable
bowel syndrome 107
mood 70
Isolation of affect 96, 208
Isoniazid 181

J
Jacobson’s progressive 107
muscular relaxation 92, 131, 219
Jean Piaget 153
Jet lag 140
Judicial inquisition 232
Juvenile delinquents 167

K
K-complexes 133
Ketamine 52, 218
Kleine-Levin syndrome 139


<<<PAGE 269>>>
Index
Kleptomania 119
Klismaphilia 126
Koro 110, 111
Korsakoff’s
psychosis 38, 39
syndrome 27
Kurt Schneider 54

L
LAAM 44, 45
La-belle-indifférence 103
Lack of
rapport 57
sexual enjoyment disorder 126
Lamotrigine 79, 188
Larks 140
Latah 110, 111
Late paraphrenia 61
Latency phase 212
Latent schizophrenia 59
Leaden paralysis 81
Learned behaviour 214
Learning disability 155
Legal and ethical issues in psychiatry 229
Lethal catatonia 59
Leucotomy 203
Lewy body dementia 25
Licensing authority 232
Life chart 7
Limbic system 203
Lithium 78, 188
Long-sleepers 134
Loosening of associations 55, 58, 59, 62
Lorazepam 26, 29, 87, 149, 228
Loss of ego boundaries 57, 65
Loxapine 66
LSD use disorder 49
L-thyroxin 227
L-tryptophan 137
Lucid intervals 26
Lunatic 232

M
Made
feeling 55, 56
impulses 55, 56
volition 55, 56
Maintenance therapy 44
Major depression 105
Male
anorgasmia 128
erectile disorder 127
orgasmic disorder 128

Malignant syndrome 228
Malingering 119
Mania 61, 70, 80, 227
Manic
depressive psychosis 73
episode 30, 69
stupor 70
Mannerisms 57-59, 164
MAOIs 81, 82
Marchiafava-Bignami disease 40
Marijuana 46
Marital therapy 217
Masked depression 80, 105, 106
MCI code of medical ethics, 2002 234
McNaughten rule 229
Medical
emergency 221
interview 5
Medicolegal aspects 224
Megavitamin therapy 67
Memantine 25, 26
Memory disturbances 203
Menstrual and obstetric history 9
Mental
and behavioural disorders in ICD-10
3
disorders 19
Health
Act, 1987 232, 233
Authorities 232
retardation 153, 155, 162, 164
status examination 10, 11, 222
Mentally ill
person 232
prisoner 232
Metabolic syndrome 63
Methadone 44
maintenance 44
Methylphenidate 167
Michigan alcoholism screening test 37
Migraine 28
Mild cognitive disorder 32
Milieu therapy 68
Mini mental state examination 13
Minimal brain dysfunction 166
Minoxidyl 132
Mirror-gazing 58
Mirtazapine 30
Misconceptions about suicide 224
Mixed
affective 61, 73
episode 73
anxiety depressive disorder 80

257
Monosymptomatic hypochondriacal
psychosis 84, 85
Mood 12, 69
disorders 69, 76
stabiliser 30
stabilising drugs 185
Morbid grief 151
Motor activity 11
Multi-axial classification 4
Multifocal myoclonus 20
Multi-infarct dementia 25
Multiple personality disorder 102
Munchausen syndrome 119
Muslim Marriages Act 230
Mutism 56, 59, 225, 171

N
Naloxone 44, 227
challenge test 44
Naltrexone 42, 44, 132
Narcolepsy 138
Narcotic
anonymous 45
antagonists 44
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
(Amendment) Act, 2001 233
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act (NDPSA), 1985 233
National
Crime Records Bureau 222
Health Policy 235, 237
Mental Health
Advisory Group 237
Programme 235
Trust Act 161
NDRI 52
Necrophilia 126
Negative
reinforcement 215
symptom 57, 58, 60-61
Neurasthenia 109
Neuroleptic
malignant syndrome 228
sensitivity syndrome 26
Neurosis 89
Neurotic
depression 82
traits 9
Nicotine 52
replacement therapy 52
Night terrors 140
Nightmares 140
Nitrazepam 137


<<<PAGE 270>>>
258

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

NMDA 52
antagonist 26
NMHP 236
NMS 87
Nonorganic
dyspareunia 130
vaginismus 130
Non-REM sleep 133
Norepinephrine 75
Normal
aging process 23
child development 153
mental health 1
Nuclear schizophrenia 58
Nymphomania 127

Orgasmic disorders/dysfunctions 128
Othello syndrome 84
Other
acute predominantly delusional psychotic disorders 86
biological methods of treatment 199
organic mental disorders 28
psychiatric emergencies 228
Oxazepam 26
Oxcarbazepine 79

O
Obesity 144
Obsessions 12, 95-97, 168
Obsessive
compulsive
disorder 76, 95
personality disorder 118
symptoms 169
rumination 96
Occupational history 9
Oculocephalic reflex 226
Oedipus complex 211
Olanzapine 28-30, 66, 168
Oneiroid schizophrenia 60
Operant conditioning 215
model 214
Opiate antagonists 132
Opioid
antagonists 45
derivatives 43
use disorders 42
Opium and Revenue Laws Act, 1950 233
Oppositional defiant disorder 167
Organic
amnestic syndrome 27, 39
anxiety 90
disorder 30, 91
catatonic disorder 29
delusional disorder 29
dissociative disorder 32
emotionally labile disorder 32
hallucinosis 28
mood disorder 30, 72
personality disorder 31
sexual disorder 132
stupor 225, 226

P
PAD syndrome 81
Paedophilia 126
Palilalia 168
Paliperidone 66
Pananxiety 60
Panic disorder 90, 93, 228
Pan-neurosis 60
Pansexuality 60
Papaverine 132
Papez circuit 204
Paranoid
disorder 83, 84
personality disorder 58, 84, 114
schizophrenia 58, 61, 84
Paraphasias 56
Paraphilias 124
Parental counselling 165
Parkinsonian symptoms 26
Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 230
Passive-aggressive personality disorder
118
Pathological
grief reaction 151
intoxication 33, 37
laughter and crying 30
Pavor nocturnus 140
Pedigree chart 7
Peduncular hallucinosis 28
Penis envy 211
Pentothal/amytal/diazepam interview 225
Perinatal history 9
Periodic limb movement disorder 136
Pernicious catatonia 59
Perpetuating and/or relieving factors 6
Perplexity 56
Perseveration 56
Persistent
delusional disorders 83
mood disorder 73
somatoform pain disorder 109

Personality
disorders 113
traits 113
Persons with Disability Act 161
Pfropf schizophrenia 61
Phallic phase 211
Phencyclidine use disorder 52
Phenelzine 95
Phenylalanine 158
Phenylketonuria 157
Phobia 92
Phobic
anxiety-depersonalisation syndrome
81
companion 93
disorder 92
Phonological disorder 163
Phototherapy 82
Physical causes of male erectile disorder/
impotence 128
Physiology of hyperventilation syndrome
107
Physostigmine 227
Piblokto 110, 111
Pickwickian syndrome 139
Pimozide 66, 85, 169
Polysomnography 135, 137
Poor drug concordance 181
Positive
reinforcement 215
symptoms 62
Possession hysteria 102
Post-cardiac surgery delirium 149
Post-natal blues 145
Postpartum
psychiatric disorders 145
psychosis 145
Post-schizophrenic depression 60
Post-traumatic stress disorder 112
Poverty of
ideation 56
speech 56, 62
Pranayama 92, 219
Predisposing factors 6, 20
in delirium 21
Prefrontal lobotomy 203
Pregabalin 198
Premature ejaculation 130, 131
Premenstrual
syndrome 108
tension 108
Premorbid
histrionic personality traits 103
personality 10


<<<PAGE 271>>>
Index
Pressure of speech 59
Pre-treatment evaluation 200
Prevention of Illicit Traffic in NDPS Act,
1988 233
Primary
delusions 56
process thinking 205, 206
transexualism 121
Problem-solving skills 216
Prochlorperazine 66
Prodromal symptoms of schizophrenia 59
Prognostic factors in
mood disorders 74
schizophrenia 62
Promethazine 67, 228
Propranolol 48, 67, 92, 194
Proverb testing 14
Pseudoseizures 228
Pseudodementia 23
Pseudohallucination 13
Pseudo-hermaphroditism 123
Pseudologia fantastica 120
Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia 60, 117
Pseudoseizures 100
Pseudo-transexualism 122
Psychiatric
emergency 221
intensive care unit 228
interview 5
rehabilitation 219
Psychiatry in medicine 149
Psychic determinism 206
Psychoactive substances 35
Psychoanalytic
psychotherapy 80, 98
theories 75
Psychoanalytical psychotherapy 213
Psychoanalytically-oriented psychotherapy 214
Psychodynamic theory 90, 93, 96
Psychodynamic theory of
dissociative disorder 103
obsessive compulsive disorder 97
Psychodynamically oriented psychotherapy 94
Psychoeducation 67, 144
Psychogenic
pain disorder 109
stupor 225, 226
vomiting 145
Psychological
theories 64
treatments 213

Psychomotor activity 70, 71
Psychopath 115
Psychopharmacology 172-198
Psychosexual stages of development 211
Psychosis 83, 89
Psychosocial
crises 228
rehabilitation 42, 45, 68
therapies 75, 213
treatment 65, 67, 79
Psychosomatic disorders 146
Psychosurgery 67, 79, 97, 98, 203
Psychotherapy 41, 87, 91, 98, 104, 110,
143, 144, 165, 213
Psychotic
disorders 83
features 70-72
Psychotropic drug 172
Punishment 215
Pyromania 119

Q
Quetiapine 29, 66, 169, 188

R
Rapid
cyclers 74
cycling 73
Rapport 11
Reaction to stress and adjustment disorders 111
Reactive psychosis 87
Reception order
on application 232
without application 232
Receptive language disorder 163
Recurrent depressive disorder 73
Refractory depression 185
Regression in service of ego 207
Rejection sensitivity 81
Relaxation
techniques 91, 94, 107, 137, 148
therapies 218
training 214
Release hallucinations 28
Remote memory 14
REM-sleep 133
Repression 90, 93, 205, 207
Reserpine 65
Residual schizophrenia 59
Restless legs’ syndrome 136, 137
Rett’s syndrome 165

259
Reversible dementias 26
Risperidone 26, 28-30, 66, 149, 165, 168
Rivastigmine 25, 26

S
Satyriasis 127
Schizoaffective disorder 61, 76, 87
Schizoid
fantasy 209
personality disorder 114
Schizophrenia 54, 76, 105
Schizophrenia—clinical types 58
Schizophreniform disorder 60
Schizotypal disorder 115
Schneider’s first rank symptoms 54, 56
Second generation antipsychotics 66, 175
Secondary
delusions 56
depression 82
gain 99
mania 82
process thinking 205, 206
transexualism 121
Sedative-hypnotic use disorder 51
Selective
amnesia 101
serotonin reuptake inhibitors 77
Seman’s technique 131
Sensate focus technique 131
Sensory
deprivation 28
disorders 100
Serotonin 64
dopamine antagonists 67
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
77
syndrome 185
Sertraline 26, 30, 92, 95
Severe depression 199, 228
Sex reassignment surgery 122
Sexual
and marital history 9
anhedonia 127
aversion disorder 126
desire disorders 126
disorders 121, 130
dysfunctions 126, 129
masochism 125
maturation disorder 123
pain disorders 130
relationship disorder 124
response cycle 127
sadism 125


<<<PAGE 272>>>
260

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Shavasna 219
Short-sleepers 134
Side effects of
antidepressants 186
antipsychotics 178
psychotropic medication 228
Sigmund Freud 205
Signal anxiety 90
Sildenafil 132
Simple
dissociative disorder 100
schizophrenia 60
Sleep 71
apnoea 139
attacks 137, 138
deprivation 135
disorders 133, 135
drunkenness 138
hygiene 137
paralysis 138
related enuresis 140
spindles 133
studies 75
terrors 140
Social
drift 65
history 9
judgement 15
manner 11
phobia 93
skills training 215
package 68
withdrawal 60
Sociocultural theories 65
Soft neurological signs 64
Somatic
delusions 56, 83
passivity 13, 55
Somatisation disorder 104, 105
Somatoform
autonomic dysfunction 106
disorder 104
Somnambulism 140
Somniloquy 140
Specific
arithmetic disorder 163
developmental disorder of
motor function 163
speech and language 163
personality disorders 113
phobia 93
reading disorder 162

Speech 12, 70
disorders 170
Splitting 117, 210
Squeeze technique 131
SSRIs 26, 30, 81, 144, 169
Stages of sleep 134
Stammering 170
Startle reaction 111
State
anxiety 89
Mental Health Rules, 1990 233
Stereotactic
limbic leucotomy 79, 204
subcaudate tractotomy 79, 204
Stockholm syndrome 209
Stress
management 112
vulnerability hypothesis in schizophrenia 64
Structural theory of mind 206
Stupor 29, 59, 199, 225
Stuporous catatonia 59
Subcortical dementia 24, 25
Substance abuse 35
Substitution drugs 44
Suction devices 132
Suicidal
gesture 222
ideas 71
risk 72, 199
Suicide 57, 72, 222
Sulpiride 66, 169
Sun downing 20
Super-ego 206, 212
Supportive psychotherapy 82, 85, 98,
105, 112, 167, 169, 220
Suppression 207, 210
Synaesthesias 46
Synanon 45
Syndrome of subjective doubles 87
Systematic desensitisation 94, 131, 215

T
Tactile hallucinations 38
Tadalafil 132
TCAs 81, 82, 184
Temporal
arteritis 28
lobe epilepsy 31
Test judgement 15
Testamentary capacity 230, 231

Theory of psychosexual development 207
Therapeutic
community 68
window 184
Thiamine 27, 227
deficiency 27
Thioridazine 66
Third
person hallucinations 56
psychoses 83
Thought
and speech disorders 55
blocking 56
broadcasting 56
diffusion 55
disorder 58, 62
echo 56
insertion 55, 95
withdrawal 55, 56
Thymia 82
Thymoleptics 181
Tic disorders 168
Token economy 215
Topographic theory of mind 205
Tourette’s
disorder 168
syndrome 168
Trait anxiety 89
Trance and possession disorders 102
Transcendental meditation 92, 219
Transcranial magnetic stimulation 199
Transexualism 121
Transfer of property 231
Transient global amnesia 27
Trazodone 131, 137
Trichotillomania 119, 171
Tricyclic antidepressants 77, 131
Trifluoperazine 66
Triflupromazine 66
Tuberous sclerosis 159
Type
A
behaviour 148
personality 147
I and Type II schizophrenia 61
Types of psychiatric emergencies 221

U
Ultra-rapid cycling 74
Unconscious 205
Undifferentiated schizophrenia 60


<<<PAGE 273>>>
Index
Unilateral ECT 202
Unipolar depression 69, 75
Urophilia 126

V
Vagal nerve stimulation 199
Valproate 30, 79, 191
Valproic acid 191
Valpromide 191
Van Gogh syndrome 60
Varenicline 52
Vascular surgery 132
Verbigeration 56, 59
Verdenafil 132
Violence 227
Vipasna 219
Visual hallucinations 29, 38, 56
Vocal tics 168
Voices
commenting 55, 56
heard arguing 55, 56

Volatile solvent use disorder 51
Voluntary admission 232
Von Domarus law 55
Vorbeireden 102
Voyeurism 125

W
Waxy flexibility 59
Wernicke’s encephalopathy 27, 38
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome 27, 38
Wihtigo 110, 111
Windigo 111
Withdrawal
state 33, 34
symptoms 40
syndrome 37, 46
Word approximations 56
Work-shift 140
World (Mental) Health Report 2001
238, 239

261
Worthlessness 71

X
Xenophobia 93

Y
Y-BOCS 96
Yog nindra 219
Yoga 92, 107
Yohimbine 132

Z
Zalpelon 137, 197
Ziprasidone 66, 169
Zolpidem 137, 197
Zoophilia 126
Zoophobia 93
Zopiclone 137, 197
Zotepine 66
Zuclopenthixol 66

