<<<PAGE 1>>>

<<<PAGE 2>>>

<<<PAGE 3>>>
EDITORIAL ASSISTANT
Arya Shah, M.D.
Resident in Psychiatry Brigham and Women’s Hospital/Harvard
Medical School Program Boston, Massachusetts

CONTRIBUTING EDITORS
Caroly S. Pataki, M.D.
Clinical Professor of Psychiatry and the Biobehavioral Sciences, Keck
School of Medicine at the University of Southern California;Director,
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Residency Training Program,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California
Norman Sussman, M.D.
Professor of Psychiatry, New York University School of
Medicine;Director, Treatment Resistant Depression Program and Codirector, Continuing Education in Psychiatry, Department of
Psychiatry;Attending Psychiatrist, Tisch Hospital, New York, New York


<<<PAGE 4>>>
KAPLAN & SADOCK’S
SYNOPSIS OF
PSYCHIATRY
TWELFTH EDITION
EDITORS

Robert Joseph Boland, M.D.
Vice-Chair for Education
Department of Psychiatry
Brigham and Women’s Hospital
Associate Professor
Harvard Medical School
Boston, Massachusetts

Marcia L. Verduin, M.D.
Associate Dean for Students
Professor of Psychiatry
Department of Medical Education
Department of Clinical Sciences
University of Central Florida College of Medicine
Orlando, Florida
CONSULTING EDITOR

Pedro Ruiz, M.D.
Clinical Professor
Menninger Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences
Baylor College of Medicine


<<<PAGE 5>>>

<<<PAGE 6>>>
Acquisitions Editor: Chris Teja
Development Editor: Ariel S. Winter
Editorial Coordinator: Ashley Pfeiffer
Editorial Assistant: Maribeth Wood
Marketing Manager: Kirsten Watrud
Production Project Manager: Bridgett Dougherty
Design Coordinator: Stephen Druding
Manufacturing Coordinator: Beth Welsh
Prepress Vendor: Aptara, Inc.
12th edition
Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer.
Copyright © 2010 Wolters Kluwer Health / Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Copyright © 2008
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, a Wolters Kluwer business. Copyright © 2007, 2003. Copyright ©
1998, 1994, 1991, 1988 by Williams & Wilkins. Copyright © 1985, 1981, 1976, 1972. All rights
reserved. This book is protected by copyright. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in
any form or by any means, including as photocopies or scanned-in or other electronic copies, or utilized
by any information storage and retrieval system without written permission from the copyright owner,
except for brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. Materials appearing in this book
prepared by individuals as part of their official duties as U.S. government employees are not covered by
the above-mentioned copyright. To request permission, please contact Wolters Kluwer at Two
Commerce Square, 2001 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103, via email at permissions@lww.com,
or via our website at shop.lww.com (products and services).
987654321
Printed in China
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Boland, Robert Joseph, editor. | Verduin, Marcia L., editor. | Ruiz,
Pedro, 1936- editor. | Shah, Arya, editor. | Sadock, Benjamin J., 1933Kaplan & Sadock’s synopsis of psychiatry.
Title: Kaplan & Sadock’s synopsis of psychiatry / editors, Robert Joseph
Boland, Marcia L. Verduin; consulting editor, Pedro Ruiz; editorial
assistant, Arya Shah.
Other titles: Kaplan and Sadock’s synopsis of psychiatry
Description: Twelfth edition. | Philadelphia : Wolters Kluwer, 2022. |
Preceded by Kaplan & Sadock’s synopsis of psychiatry / Benjamin James
Sadock, Virginia Alcott Sadock, Pedro Ruiz. Eleventh edition. 2015. |
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2020056686 | ISBN 9781975145569 (paperback)
Subjects: MESH: Mental Disorders
Classification: LCC RC454 | NLM WM 140 | DDC 616.89–dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020056686
This work is provided “as is,” and the publisher disclaims any and all warranties, express or implied,
including any warranties as to accuracy, comprehensiveness, or currency of the content of this work.


<<<PAGE 7>>>
This work is no substitute for individual patient assessment based upon healthcare professionals’
examination of each patient and consideration of, among other things, age, weight, gender, current or
prior medical conditions, medication history, laboratory data and other factors unique to the patient.
The publisher does not provide medical advice or guidance and this work is merely a reference tool.
Healthcare professionals, and not the publisher, are solely responsible for the use of this work including
all medical judgments and for any resulting diagnosis and treatments.
Given continuous, rapid advances in medical science and health information, independent professional
verification of medical diagnoses, indications, appropriate pharmaceutical selections and dosages, and
treatment options should be made and healthcare professionals should consult a variety of sources.
When prescribing medication, healthcare professionals are advised to consult the product information
sheet (the manufacturer’s package insert) accompanying each drug to verify, among other things,
conditions of use, warnings and side effects and identify any changes in dosage schedule or
contraindications, particularly if the medication to be administered is new, infrequently used or has a
narrow therapeutic range. To the maximum extent permitted under applicable law, no responsibility is
assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or property, as a matter of products
liability, negligence law or otherwise, or from any reference to or use by any person of this work.
shop.lww.com


<<<PAGE 8>>>
To my wife, Susan, who contributed to this work—and everything else
—in more ways than she will ever know. Also to my sons, Rich and
Greg—perhaps I helped encourage you once but now you are both
my inspiration.
—RB
To my husband, Jonathan, and my children, Max and Sarah—for their
encouragement, support, and inspiration in all that I do.
—MV


<<<PAGE 9>>>
Preface
“No one can replace him, Sir; I am only his successor.”
Thomas Jefferson would routinely say this when asked if he was replacing
Benjamin Franklin as Minister to France. Although not quite the same
historical scale, this aptly describes our feelings about taking over as editors
for Kaplan & Sadock’s Synopsis of Psychiatry.
The Synopsis was one of the first psychiatry books we encountered and
was our “Bible” during our respective training years. As we became
educators, it was the book that we recommended to our students and
residents. In our roles as editors of the Psychiatry Resident-In-Training
Examination®, administered by the American College of Psychiatrists to
virtually all trainees in the United States, the Synopsis was the book we
would most often turn to when deciding whether a given question on the test
was within the accepted body of knowledge for all psychiatrists.
As we approach the book again from this new perspective, the time we
have spent editing and revising the book has only given renewed respect for
this fantastic work. The previous authors have done an incredible job of
creating a book that is comprehensive, approachable, and frankly enjoyable
to read.
Much of our approach to this new edition has been careful, and we have
preserved much of the previous editions, often verbatim. Our edits have been
either to incorporate discoveries in our rapidly growing field or to reorganize
the book in a way we think practical for a new generation of psychiatrists.
We have emphasized the clinical material upfront. The underlying science
and theory of the field have been moved later in the book. This
reorganization does not reflect any value or order of importance; it is meant
to be practical: one can imagine a busy trainee grabbing the book during the


<<<PAGE 10>>>
day to answer a crucial question about the diagnosis or management of a
patient, and later that day, with, hopefully, more time for reflection, sitting
down and reading further to understand their patient more deeply.
Whenever we could, we grouped disorders syndromally. Thus, we first
discuss the various depressive disorders’ phenomenology as a group before
discussing diagnosis and, eventually, treatment. This approach was a strategic
choice as much modern research no longer groups patients by clinical
diagnoses, and many incorporate larger groupings: depressed patients or
psychotic patients, for example. That said, in deference to Emerson, we did
not let our desire for organization and consistency become so rigid as to be
foolish, and in cases where the disorders within a chapter are fundamentally
different, we did create separate sections for each.
We realize that some may worry that our “practical” approach might take
away some of the artistry of this book. Indeed, we no longer include many
paintings, creative photos, and other artistic touches that were a defining part
of previous volumes. These are personal choices reflecting on our personal
approaches. We certainly do not wish to wring out all of the personality from
the book, and we hope that our preservation of much of the prose, case
histories, and historical references keep some of what made the previous
volumes special.
The other philosophy we bring to this work is that mental health is part of
physical health, and one cannot discuss psychiatric disease except within the
context of all medicines. Even the term “mind—body” seems obsolete and
implying a divide that does not exist. We were frequently reminded of this as
we edited during the COVID-19 pandemic and witnessed in our patients,
faculty, and trainees how a simple virus can wreak such havoc on the psyche.

HISTORY
This textbook evolved as a condensation of the Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. That book is an extensive, two-volume work with many
contributions by experts in the field. It helps those who require an exhaustive,
detailed, and encyclopedic survey of the entire field. That work aims at all
levels of expertise in the field who desire an up-to-date work that is as
comprehensive as possible. This textbook is aimed more at the trainee, who
needs a brief and more condensed statement of the field of psychiatry.


<<<PAGE 11>>>
Although, in essence, this book derives from the Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry, different purposes for each work result in a divergence. However,
although we have reworked some sections of this book and written new
content, we still owe an outstanding debt of gratitude to the more than 2,000
contributors to the current and previous editions of the Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry, all of whom have allowed us to synopsize their work.
At the same time, we must accept responsibility for the modifications and
changes in the new work.

COMPREHENSIVE TEACHING SYSTEM
This textbook forms one part of a comprehensive system developed to
facilitate the teaching of psychiatry and the behavioral sciences. At the head
of the system is the Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry, which is global
in depth and scope; it is designed for and used by psychiatrists, behavioral
scientists, and all workers in the mental health field. Synopsis of Psychiatry is
a briefer, highly modified, and current version useful for medical students,
psychiatric residents, practicing psychiatrists, and mental health
professionals. Two special editions derived from the Synopsis, Concise
Textbook of Clinical Psychiatry and Concise Textbook of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, contain descriptions of all psychiatric disorders,
including their diagnosis and treatment in adults and children, respectively.
They will be useful for clinical clerks and psychiatric residents who need a
succinct overview of the management of clinical problems. Another part of
the system, Study Guide and Self-Examination Review of Psychiatry, consists
of multiple-choice questions and answers; it is designed for students of
psychiatry and for clinical psychiatrists who require a review of the
behavioral sciences and general psychiatry in preparation for a variety of
examinations. The questions are consistent with the format used by most
standardized examinations. Other parts of the system are the various editions
of the pocket handbooks: Pocket Handbook of Clinical Psychiatry, Pocket
Handbook of Psychiatric Drug Treatment, Pocket Handbook of Emergency
Psychiatric Medicine, and Pocket Handbook of Primary Care Psychiatry.
Those books cover the diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric disorders,
psychopharmacology, psychiatric emergencies, and primary care psychiatry,
respectively, and are designed and written to be carried by clinical clerks and


<<<PAGE 12>>>
practicing physicians, whatever their specialty, for a quick reference. Finally,
Comprehensive Glossary of Psychiatry and Psychology provides written
definitions for psychiatrists and other physicians, psychologists, students,
other mental health professionals, and the public. Together, these books
create multiple approaches to the teaching, study, and learning of psychiatry.

CLASSIFICATION OF DISORDERS
DSM-5
The American Psychiatric Association published the fifth edition of the
American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders in 2013; it is commonly called the DSM-5. It contains the
official nomenclature used by psychiatrists and other mental health
professionals in the United States, and many other countries also use the
manual. The psychiatric disorders discussed in the textbook are consistent
with and follow that nosology. We have chosen not to directly reproduce the
DSM-5 criteria in either prose or table form. We expect that most
psychiatrists and trainees already have access to the DSM-5; if not, we do
highly recommend it. We include some tables outlining the primary
symptoms, time courses, and other criteria associated with the major
diagnoses to aid the reader with diagnostic reasoning.
ICD-10
Readers also should be aware of a parallel classification system developed by
the World Health Organization (WHO) called the International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD-10). There are
textual differences between DSM and ICD, but according to treaties between
the United States and the WHO, the diagnostic code numbers are identical to
ensure uniform national and international psychiatric statistics. ICD
diagnoses and numerical codes are accepted by Medicare, Medicaid, and
private insurance companies for reimbursement purposes. ICD-10 is a
comprehensive list of all medical diagnoses, not just psychiatric. It tends to
be descriptive and allows more judgment than the DSM-5, which contains
fixed numbers of criteria. ICD-10 is also older than DSM-5 and contains
diagnoses no longer included in the newer manual. ICD-11 is currently


<<<PAGE 13>>>
available in draft form and is online at the WHO’s website. The ICD-11 is
more aligned with DSM-5. The WHO plans for this new edition of the ICD to
go into effect in 2022. As much of the world still uses ICD-10 (including the
United States, especially for billing purposes), we include it in our tables
devoted to diagnostic reading. The reader will note the many similarities
between DSM-5 and ICD-10 in those tables, as well as some interesting
differences.

CASE HISTORIES
Case histories are an integral part of Synopsis. They are used extensively
throughout the text to add clarity and bring life to the clinical disorders
described. Cases come from various sources. Many are from the Sadocks’
hospital colleagues or the Sadocks’ own experience at Bellevue Hospital in
New York. We have preserved most of these case studies as we believe that
they expertly illustrate the sometimes abstract concepts described, and we
thank the many contributors of those cases for allowing the Synopsis to use
these cases in past and future editions.

REFERENCES
Each section in Synopsis ends with several citations that include reviews of
the literature and references in addition to relevant chapters in our more
extensive textbook, Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. References are
limited in number; in part, this was to conserve space, but more importantly,
we are mindful that modern-day readers consult Internet databases such as
PubMed and Google Scholar to stay abreast of the most current literature,
and we encourage that trend.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We sincerely appreciate the work of our distinguished Editorial Assistant,
Arya Shah, M.D., who helped us to update much of the work, including
epidemiology and much other research. Dr. Shah also took on the challenge
of reviewing DSM-5 and ICD-10 to create the diagnostic comparative tables,
which are new to this edition.
We also wish to thank our colleagues and friends at our respective


<<<PAGE 14>>>
departments. This impressive group includes the members of the Department
of Psychiatry at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital. A special thanks to
David Silbersweig, M.D., the Chair of Psychiatry at the Brigham and
Women’s, who offered invaluable advice and mentorship throughout the
creation of this work, and to Deborah German, M.D., the Vice President for
Health Affairs and Dean of the College of Medicine at the University of
Central Florida, for her support, encouragement, and mentorship.
We would also thank our many friends in psychiatry and medicine who
live throughout the country. One of them, Josepha Cheong, M.D., at the
University of Florida, has dubbed us an “Invisible College,” and this is an apt
description of the loose network of dear friends, many of them leaders in
their fields, who are available at any time to offer advice, counsel, critique,
and perspective, all delivered with an infectious sense of humor.
We want to take this opportunity to acknowledge those who have
translated this and other Kaplan & Sadock books into foreign languages,
including Chinese, Croatian, French, German, Greek, Indonesian, Italian,
Japanese, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, and Turkish, in
addition to a special Asian and international student edition.
A special thanks to the editorial team at Wolters Kluwer, who were patient
with us as we took on this work. We put their patience to the test during the
pandemic, and the editorial team was both supportive and encouraging as we
helped manage the ramifications of the disease on our respective home fronts
while we worked on this edition. Particular thanks go to Chris Teja, our
Acquisitions Editor; Anne Malcolm, the Associate Director for Content
Development; Ariel Winter, our Development Editor; Ashley Pfeiffer, our
Editorial Coordinator; Karan Rana, our Project Manager and Bridgett
Dougherty, the Vendor Manager.
Our most tremendous thanks go to Benjamin and Virginia Sadock. Sadly,
the pandemic has required that we only know them through their reputations
and electronic communication. We do thank them for trusting us with their
brainchild. We cannot replace them, but we hope we can still do them proud.

INTERVIEW
Our Meeting with the Sadocks


<<<PAGE 15>>>
In planning for this book, we were hoping to visit Benjamin and Virginia
Sadock. However, like so many things, the pandemic made that impossible.
We settled for a Zoom meeting. We wished to hear some of the book’s
history and get some advice from the experts. We also wanted to understand
the goals and values that motivated them to take on this monumental task.
Most of all, we just wanted to meet the people who were responsible for this
fantastic work. So we joined the video call with great anticipation, not
knowing what to expect.
Meeting people you have only known by reputation can play out in various
ways. In this case, the experience was a lovely one. Ben and Virginia turned
out to be a warm and friendly couple who were very gracious. They were a
smart and energetic pair who played well off each other, at times reflective,
other times witty, and always surprisingly humble. They were also happy to
tell us about their life’s work. They explained that the history of the Synopsis
began with the Comprehensive Textbook, first published in 1967. It was
initially about 1,000 pages, with about 200 contributors, edited by Harold
Kaplan and Benjamin. Now, of course, it is closer to 5,000 pages with
thousands of contributors. Still, even then, it was a massive book, so
eventually, they had the idea to try to condense it into something that could
be used by medical students and residents. They explained that they did a
“cut and paste” of the more extensive book for the first edition of the
Synopsis. We asked them to clarify and found that they meant a literal cutting
up of portions of the Comprehensive Textbook with an X-ACTO knife, which
they then pasted together to form the first edition, calling it the Modern
Synopsis of the Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. Several editions later,
they shortened the title. They explained that as they continued to write new
editions of the Synopsis, the authors felt that simply extracting bits from the
Comprehensive Textbook read poorly. They gradually translated the grander
work into their words while keeping some of the original book’s prose until it
became the hybrid between a multiple-contributor and consistently authored
work that exists today.
They recalled that, sadly, Harold Kaplan died in 1998 while working on
the seventh edition of the Synopsis, which is when Virginia became an
official author. Benjamin clarified “official,” as she had long been
unofficially contributing to the book. Virginia noted that, among other things,
she helped to add a female perspective to the book—a critical perspective:


<<<PAGE 16>>>
she was, she noted, only one of eight women in her class at New York
Medical College.
They felt that an important goal for them in writing the Synopsis was to
address their growing concern with the rise of technology and corporate
medicine and their dehumanizing effect on medical education. Medical
students, they felt, were trained to be “robotic physicians.” This dilemma is a
problem all academic physicians still worry about as we heap more
checklists, protocols, and electronic record-keeping on physicians. They
hoped that their book could help to restore some humanism in psychiatric
education.
Thus, although there has always been much science and groundbreaking
research in the book, they have always kept the practicing physician in mind,
which was easy for them as they continued to treat patients as they wrote the
book. Indeed, the book is enormously popular among practicing psychiatrists.
However, they related their surprise when they found that many
nonpsychiatrists were also buying the book, including psychologists, various
therapists, and many other professionals involved in treating patients with
mental illnesses.
The Sadocks noted that there had been specific challenges, such as keeping
up to date with the many revisions of the American Psychiatric Association’s
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). Although
they acknowledge the occasional competition between these two popular
books, they see the DSM and the Synopsis as complementary, with the DSM
defining and their book explaining.
Much of their advice involved the aesthetics of the work. We were
impressed with Virginia and Ben’s careful thought to details such as the
layout, the color scheme, and even the quality of paper used. Their advice
helped us appreciate the importance of the work as a whole, including the
book’s look and feel.
In discussing the book’s more than 50-year history, it was clear that the
Sadocks rightly took a great deal of pride from their masterpiece. They
described being somewhat critical about their first edition, and each time
working to make the book better. They felt that their most recent 11th edition
was as near to perfect as they could make it. Clearly, the book has grown
from the “cut-and-paste” work of the first edition into a thoughtful work with
an engaging style and a humanistic approach that incorporates art, history,


<<<PAGE 17>>>
philosophy, and many case studies. It also grew from a work that, as they
related, was initially difficult to interest a publisher in, to become one of the
most popular books in psychiatry. Most importantly, they rightfully took
great pride in achieving their original goals of creating a work that moves
beyond the checklist and outline style that defines many references, to a work
that reflects both the art and science of medicine, emphasizing the whole
patient.
The meeting ended with their blessing and good wishes. For us, it was a
revelation and a great chance to gain some insight into the passion that goes
into creating great work. We can only hope that we can learn from their
advice and work and try our best to continue the book in the rich tradition
that they have built. We also hope that they remain in the excellent health and
spirits we encountered when we virtually met and that we can meet in person
sometime soon.
Bob Boland and Marcy Verduin. 10/16/2020.


<<<PAGE 18>>>
Contents
A Clinical Psychiatry
1. Examination and Diagnosis of the Psychiatric Patient
1.1 The Adult Patient
1.2 Children and Adolescents
1.3 Geriatric Patients
2. Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Other Childhood Disorders
2.1 Intellectual Disability
2.2 Communication Disorders
2.3 Autism Spectrum Disorder
2.4 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
2.5 Specific Learning Disorder
2.6 Motor Disorders
2.7 Feeding and Eating Disorders of Infancy or Early Childhood
2.8 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders in Children
2.9 Depressive Disorders and Suicide in Children and Adolescents
2.10 Early-Onset Bipolar Disorder
2.11 Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
2.12 Disruptive Behaviors of Childhood
2.13 Anxiety Disorders of Infancy, Childhood, and Adolescence:
Separation Anxiety Disorder, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, and
Social Anxiety Disorder (Social Phobia)
2.14 Selective Mutism
2.15 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder in Childhood and Adolescence
2.16 Early-Onset Schizophrenia


<<<PAGE 19>>>
2.17 Adolescent Substance Use Disorders
3. Neurocognitive Disorders
3.1 Delirium
3.2 Dementia (Major Neurocognitive Disorder)
3.3 Major or Minor Neurocognitive Disorder due to Another Medical
Condition (Amnestic Disorders)
3.4 Neurocognitive and Other Psychiatric Disorders due to a General
Medical Condition
3.5 Mild Cognitive Impairment
4. Substance Use and Addictive Disorders
4.1 General Features of the Substance-Related Disorders
4.2 Alcohol-Related Disorders
4.3 Cannabis-Related Disorders
4.4 Opioid-Related Disorders
4.5 Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related Disorders
4.6 Stimulant-Related Disorders
4.7 Tobacco-Related Disorders
4.8 Caffeine-Related Disorders
4.9 Hallucinogen-Related Disorders
4.10 Inhalant-Related Disorders
4.11 Anabolic-Androgenic Steroid Use
4.12 Gambling Disorder
4.13 Other Disorders Related to the Addictive Disorders
5. Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
6. Bipolar Disorders
7. Depressive Disorders
8. Anxiety Disorders
9. Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
10. Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
11. Dissociative Disorders
12. Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
13. Feeding and Eating Disorders
14. Elimination Disorders


<<<PAGE 20>>>
15. Sleep–Wake Disorders
16. Human Sexuality and Sexual Dysfunctions
17. Gender Dysphoria, Gender Identity, and Related Conditions
18. Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
19. Personality Disorders
20. Other Conditions that May be a Focus of Clinical Attention
B Treatment Across the Lifespan
21. Psychopharmacology
21.1 Antipsychotics
21.2 Antidepressants
21.3 Mood Stabilizers
21.4 Anxiolytics
21.5 Drugs Used to Treat Sleep Disorders
21.6 Stimulants
21.7 Drugs Used to Treat Substance Use Disorders
21.8 Drugs Used for Cognitive Enhancement
21.9 Drugs Used to Treat Sexual Disorders
21.10 Drugs Used to Treat the Side Effects of Psychotropic Drugs
21.11 Nutritional Supplements and Related
22. Other Somatic Therapies
23. Psychotherapy
24. Psychiatric Rehabilitation and Other Interventions
25. Consultation to Other Disciplines
25.1 Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry
25.2 Geriatric Psychiatry
25.3 Psychiatric Emergencies
26. Level of Care
C Other Issues Relevant to Psychiatry
27. Ethics and Professionalism
28. Forensic and Legal Issues


<<<PAGE 21>>>
29. End-of-Life Issues and Palliative Care
29.1 Death, Dying, and Bereavement
29.2 Palliative Care
29.3 Euthanasia and Physician-Assisted Suicide
30. Community Psychiatry
31. Global and Cultural Issues in Psychiatry
D Contributions from the Sciences and Social Sciences to
Psychiatry
32. Normal Development and Aging
32.1 Infant, Child, and Adolescent Development
32.2 Adulthood
32.3 Old Age
33. Contributions from the Neurosciences
34. Contributions from the Behavioral and Social Sciences
34.1 Contributions from the Psychosocial Sciences
34.2 Normality and Mental Health
34.3 Contributions from the Sociocultural Sciences
34.4 Theories of Personality and Psychopathology
35. A Brief History of Psychiatry
Glossary of Terms Relating to Signs and Symptoms
Index


<<<PAGE 22>>>
A Clinical Psychiatry


<<<PAGE 23>>>
1
Examination and Diagnosis of the
Psychiatric Patient
1.1 The Adult Patient
PSYCHIATRIC INTERVIEW, HISTORY, AND MENTAL
STATUS EXAMINATION
The psychiatric interview is the most crucial element in the evaluation and
care of persons with mental illness. A significant purpose of the initial
psychiatric interview is to obtain information that will establish a criteriabased diagnosis. This process, helpful in the prediction of the course of the
illness and the prognosis, leads to treatment decisions. A well-conducted
psychiatric interview provides a multidimensional understanding of the
disorder’s biopsychosocial elements. It provides the information necessary
for the psychiatrist, in collaboration with the patient, to develop a personcentered treatment plan.
Equally important, the interview itself is often an essential part of the
treatment process. From the very first moments of the encounter, the
interview shapes the nature of the patient–physician relationship, which can
have a profound influence on the outcome of treatment. The settings in which
the psychiatric interview takes place include psychiatric inpatient units,
medical nonpsychiatric inpatient units, emergency rooms, outpatient offices,
nursing homes, other residential programs, and correctional facilities. The
length of time for the interview, and its focus, will vary depending on the
setting, the specific purpose of the interview, and other factors (including


<<<PAGE 24>>>
concurrent competing demands for professional services).
Nevertheless, some basic principles and techniques are essential for all
psychiatric interviews, and these will be the focus of this section. There are
particular issues in the evaluation of children that will not be addressed. This
section focuses on the psychiatric interview of adult patients.
General Principles
Agreement as to Process. At the beginning of the interview, the
psychiatrist should introduce themself and, depending on the circumstances,
may need to identify why he or she is speaking with the patient. Unless
implicit (the patient coming to the office), consent to proceed with the
interview should be obtained, and the nature of the interaction and the
approximate (or specific) amount of time for the interview should be stated.
The patient should be encouraged to identify any elements of the process that
he or she wishes to alter or add.
A crucial issue is whether the patient is, directly or indirectly, seeking the
evaluation voluntarily or has been brought involuntarily for the assessment.
This issue should be established before the interview begins, and this
information will guide the interviewer, especially in the early stages of the
process.
Privacy and Confidentiality. Issues concerning confidentiality are crucial
in the evaluation/treatment process and may need to be discussed on multiple
occasions. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
regulations must be carefully followed, and the appropriate paperwork must
be presented to the patient.
Confidentiality is an essential component of the patient–doctor
relationship. The interviewer should make every attempt to ensure that others
cannot overhear the content of the interview. Sometimes, in a hospital unit or
other institutional setting, this may be difficult. If the patient is sharing a
room with others, an attempt should be made to use a different place for the
interview. If this is not feasible, the interviewer may need to avoid specific
topics or indicate that these issues can be discussed later when privacy can be
ensured. Generally, in the beginning, the interviewer should suggest that the
content of the session(s) will remain confidential except for what needs to be


<<<PAGE 25>>>
shared with the referring physician or treatment team. Some evaluations,
including forensic and disability evaluations, are less confidential, and what
is discussed may be shared with others. In those cases, the interviewer should
be explicit in stating that the session is not confidential and identify who will
receive a report of the evaluation. This information should be carefully and
thoroughly documented in the patient’s record.
A special issue concerning confidentiality is when the patient indicates that
he or she intends to harm another person. When the psychiatrist’s evaluation
suggests that this might indeed happen, the psychiatrist may have a legal
obligation to warn the potential victim. (The law concerning notification of a
potential victim varies by state.) Psychiatrists should also consider their
ethical obligations. Part of this obligation may be met by appropriate clinical
measures such as increasing the dose of antipsychotic medication or
hospitalizing the patient.
Often members of the patient’s family, including spouse, adult children, or
parents, come with the patient to the first session or are present in the hospital
or other institutional setting when the psychiatrist first sees the patient. If a
family member wishes to talk to the psychiatrist, it is generally preferable to
meet with the family member(s) and the patient together after the session and
after the patient’s consent has been obtained. The psychiatrist should not
bring up material the patient has shared but listen to the input from family
members and discuss items that the patient introduces during the joint
session. Occasionally, when family members have not asked to be seen, the
psychiatrist may feel that including a family member or caregiver might be
helpful and raise this subject with the patient. This may be the case when the
patient is not able to communicate effectively. As always, the patient must
give consent except if the psychiatrist determines that the patient is a danger
to himself or herself or others. Sometimes family members might telephone
the psychiatrist. Except in an emergency, consent should be obtained from
the patient before the psychiatrist speaks to the relative. As indicated above,
the psychiatrist should not bring up material that the patient has shared but
listen to the input from the family member. The patient should be told when a
family member has contacted the psychiatrist even if the patient has given
consent for this to occur.
In educational and, occasionally, forensic settings, there may be occasions
when the session is recorded. The patient must be fully informed about the


<<<PAGE 26>>>
recording and how the recording will be used. The length of time the
recording will be kept and how access to it will be restricted must be
discussed. Occasionally in educational settings, one-way mirrors may be used
as a tool to allow trainees to benefit from the observation of an interview. The
patient should be informed of the use of the one-way mirror and the category
of the observers and be reassured that the rules of confidentiality also bound
the observers. The patient’s consent for proceeding with the recording or use
of the one-way mirror must be obtained, and it should be made clear that the
patient’s receiving care will not be determined by whether he or she agrees to
its use. These devices will have an impact on the interview that the
psychiatrist should be open to discussing as the session unfolds.
Respect and Consideration. As should happen in all clinical settings, the
patient must be treated with respect, and the interviewer should be
considerate of the circumstances of the patient’s condition. The patient is
often experiencing considerable pain or other distress and frequently is
feeling vulnerable and uncertain of what may happen. Because of the stigma
of mental illness and misconceptions about psychiatry, the patient may be
especially concerned, or even frightened, about seeing a psychiatrist. The
skilled psychiatrist is aware of these potential issues and interacts in a manner
to decrease, or at least not increase the distress. The success of the initial
interview will often depend on the physician’s ability to alleviate excessive
anxiety.
Rapport/Empathy. Respect for and consideration of the patient will
contribute to the development of rapport. In the clinical setting, rapport can
be defined as the harmonious responsiveness of the physician to the patient
and the patient to the physician. It is crucial that patients increasingly feel that
the evaluation is a joint effort and that the psychiatrist is genuinely interested
in their story. Empathic interventions (“That must have been very difficult for
you” or “I’m beginning to understand how awful that felt”) further increase
the rapport. Frequently a nonverbal response (raised eyebrows or leaning
toward the patient) or a very brief response (“Wow”) will be similarly
effective. Empathy is understanding what the patient is thinking and feeling.
It occurs when the psychiatrist can put himself or herself in the patient’s
place while at the same time maintaining objectivity. For the psychiatrist to


<<<PAGE 27>>>
truly understand what the patient is thinking and feeling requires an
appreciation of many issues in the patient’s life. As the interview progresses,
the patient’s story unfolds, and patterns of behaviors become evident, and it
becomes clearer what the patient may have experienced. Early in the
interview, the psychiatrist may not be as fully confident of where the patient
is or was (although the patient’s nonverbal cues can be very beneficial). If the
psychiatrist is uncertain about the patient’s experience, it is often best not to
guess but to encourage the patient to continue. Head nodding, putting down
one’s pen, leaning toward the patient, or a brief comment, “I see,” can
accomplish this objective and simultaneously indicate that this is important
material. The large majority of empathic responses in an interview are
nonverbal.
An essential ingredient in empathy is retaining objectivity. Maintaining
objectivity is crucial in a therapeutic relationship, and it differentiates
empathy from identification. With identification, psychiatrists not only
understand the emotion but also experience it to the extent that they lose the
ability to be objective. This blurring of boundaries between the patient and
psychiatrist can be confusing and distressing to many patients, especially to
those who, as part of their illness, already have significant boundary
problems (e.g., individuals with borderline personality disorder).
Identification can also be draining to the psychiatrist and lead to
disengagement and, ultimately, burnout.
Patient–Physician Relationship. The patient–physician relationship is
the core of the practice of medicine. (For many years, the term used was
“physician–patient” or “doctor–patient,” but the order is sometimes reversed
to reinforce that the treatment should always be patient-centered.) Although
the relationship between any single patient and physician will vary depending
on each of their personalities and past experiences as well as the setting and
purpose of the encounter, there are general principles that, when followed,
help to ensure that the relationship established is helpful.
The patient comes to the interview seeking help. Even in those instances
when the patient arrives on the insistence of others (i.e., spouse, family,
courts), assistance may be sought by the patient in dealing with the person
requesting or requiring the evaluation or treatment. This desire for help
motivates the patient to share with a stranger information and feelings that are


<<<PAGE 28>>>
distressing, personal, and often private. The patient is willing, to various
degrees, to do so because of a belief that the doctor has the expertise, by
training and experience, to be of help. Right from the very first encounter
(sometimes the initial phone call), the patient’s willingness to share is
increased or decreased depending on the verbal and often the nonverbal
interventions of the physician and other staff. As the physician’s behaviors
demonstrate respect and consideration, rapport begins to develop. This
rapport is increased as the patient feels safe and comfortable. If the patient
feels secure that what is said in the interview remains confidential, he or she
will be more open to sharing.
The sharing is reinforced by the nonjudgmental attitude and behavior of
the physician. The patient may have been exposed to considerable negative
responses, actual or feared, to their symptoms or behaviors, including
criticism, disdain, belittlement, anger, or violence. Being able to share
thoughts and feelings with a nonjudgmental listener is generally a positive
experience.
There are two additional essential ingredients in a helpful patient–
physician relationship. One is the demonstration by physicians that they
understand what the patient is stating and emoting. It is not enough that the
physician understands what the patient is relating, thinking, and feeling; this
understanding must be conveyed to the patient if it is to nurture the
therapeutic relationship. The interview is not just an intellectual exercise to
arrive at a supportable diagnosis. The other essential ingredient in a helpful
patient–physician relationship is the recognition by the patient that the
physician cares. As the patient becomes aware that the physician not only
understands but also cares, trust increases, and the therapeutic alliance
becomes stronger.
The genuineness of the physician reinforces the patient–physician
relationship. Being able to laugh in response to a humorous comment, admit
a mistake, or apologize for an error that inconvenienced the patient (e.g.,
being late for or missing an appointment) strengthens the therapeutic alliance.
It is also essential to be flexible in the interview and responsive to patient
initiatives. If the patient brings in an item, for example, a photo that he or she
wants to show the psychiatrist, it is good to look at it, ask questions, and
thank the patient for sharing it. Much can be learned about the family history
and dynamics from such a seemingly sidebar moment. Also, the therapeutic


<<<PAGE 29>>>
alliance is strengthened. The psychiatrist should be mindful of the reality that
there are no irrelevant moments in the interview room.
At times patients will ask questions about the psychiatrist. A good rule of
thumb is that questions about the physician’s qualifications and position
should generally be answered directly (e.g., board certification, hospital
privileges). On occasion, such a question might be a sarcastic comment (“Did
you really go to medical school?”). In this case, it would be better to address
the issue that provoked the comment rather than respond concretely. There is
no easy answer to the question of how the psychiatrist should respond to
personal questions (“Are you married?” “Do you have children?” “Do you
watch football?”). Advice on how to respond will vary depending on several
issues, including the type of psychotherapy being used or considered, the
context in which the question is asked, and the wishes of the psychiatrist.
Often, especially if the patient is being, or might be, seen for insight-oriented
psychotherapy, it is useful to explore why the question is being asked. The
question about children may be precipitated by the patient wondering if the
psychiatrist has had personal experience in raising children, or more
generally does the psychiatrist have the skills and expertise necessary to meet
the patient’s needs. In this instance, part of the psychiatrist’s response may be
that he or she has had considerable experiences in helping people deal with
issues of parenting. For patients being seen for supportive psychotherapy or
medication management, answering the question, especially if it is not very
personal, such as “Do you watch football?” is entirely appropriate. A
significant reason for not directly answering personal questions is that the
interview may become psychiatrist-centered rather than patient-centered.
Occasionally, again depending on the nature of the treatment, it can be
helpful for the psychiatrist to share some personal information even if it is not
asked directly by the patient. The purpose of the self-revelation should
always be to strengthen the therapeutic alliance to be helpful to the patient.
Personal information should not be shared to meet the psychiatrist’s needs.
Conscious/Unconscious. Unconscious processes must be considered to
understand more fully the patient–physician relationship. The reality is that
the majority of mental activity remains outside of conscious awareness. In the
interview, unconscious processes may be suggested by tangential references
to an issue, slips of the tongue or mannerisms of speech, what is not said or


<<<PAGE 30>>>
avoided, and other defense mechanisms. For example, phrases such as “to tell
you the truth” or “to speak frankly” suggest that the speaker does not usually
tell the truth or speak frankly. In the initial interview, it is best to note such
mannerisms or slips but not to explore them. It may or may not be helpful to
pursue them in subsequent sessions. In the interview, transference and
countertransference are very significant expressions of unconscious
processes. Transference is the process of the patient unconsciously and
inappropriately displacing onto individuals in his or her current life those
patterns of behavior and emotional reactions that originated with significant
figures from earlier in life, often childhood. In the clinical situation, the
displacement is onto the psychiatrist, who is usually an authority figure or a
parent surrogate. The psychiatrist must recognize that the transference may
be driving the behaviors of the patient, and the interactions with the
psychiatrist may be based on distortions that have their origins much earlier
in life. The patient may be angry, hostile, demanding, or obsequious not
because of the reality of the relationship with the psychiatrist but because of
former relationships and patterns of behaviors. Failure to recognize this
process can lead to the psychiatrist inappropriately reacting to the patient’s
behavior as if it were a personal attack on the psychiatrist.
Similarly, countertransference is the process where the physician
unconsciously displaces onto the patient patterns of behaviors or emotional
reactions as if he or she were a significant figure from earlier in the
physician’s life. Psychiatrists should be alert to signs of countertransference
issues (missed appointments by the psychiatrist, boredom, or sleepiness in a
session). Supervision or consultations can be helpful as can personal therapy
in helping the psychiatrist recognize and deal with these issues.
Although the patient comes for help, there may be forces that impede the
movement to health. Resistances are the processes, conscious or unconscious,
that interfere with the therapeutic objectives of treatment. The patient is
generally unaware of the impact of these feelings, thinking, or behaviors,
which take many different forms, including exaggerated emotional responses,
intellectualization, generalization, missed appointments or acting out
behaviors. Resistance may be fueled by repression, which is an unconscious
process that keeps issues or feelings out of awareness. Because of repression,
patients may not be aware of the conflicts that may be central to their illness.
In insight-oriented psychotherapy, interpretations are interventions that undo


<<<PAGE 31>>>
the process of repression and allow the unconscious thoughts and feelings to
come to awareness so that they can be handled. As a result of these
interventions, the primary gain of the symptom, the unconscious purpose that
it serves, may become apparent. In the initial session, interpretations are
generally avoided. The psychiatrist should make a note of potential areas for
exploration in subsequent sessions.
Person-Centered and Disorder-Based Interviews. A psychiatric
interview should be person- (patient-) centered. That is, the focus should be
on understanding the patient and enabling the patient to tell his or her story.
The individuality of the patient’s experience is a central theme, and the
patient’s life history is elicited, subject to the constraints of time, the patient’s
willingness to share some of this material, and the skill of the interviewer.
Adolf Meyer’s “life-charts” were graphic representations of the material
collected in this endeavor and were a core component of the
“psychobiological” understanding of the illness. The patient’s early life
experiences, family, education, occupation(s), religious beliefs and practices,
hobbies, talents, relationships, and losses are some of the areas that, in
concert with genetic and biologic variables, contribute to the development of
the personality. An appreciation of these experiences and their impact on the
person is necessary for forming an understanding of the patient. It is not only
the history that should be person-centered. The resulting treatment plan must
be based on the patient’s goals, not the psychiatrist’s. Numerous studies have
demonstrated that often the patient’s goals for treatment (e.g., safe housing)
are not the same as the psychiatrist’s (e.g., decrease in hallucinations). This
dichotomy can often be traced to the interview where the focus was not
sufficiently person-centered but instead was exclusively or mostly symptombased. Even when the interviewer asks explicitly about the patient’s goals
and aspirations, the patient, having been exposed on numerous occasions to
what a professional is interested in hearing about, may attempt to focus on
“acceptable” or “expected” goals rather than his or her own goals. The patient
should be explicitly encouraged to identify his or her goals and aspirations in
his or her own words.
Traditionally, medicine has focused on illness and deficits rather than
strengths and assets. A person-centered approach focuses on strengths and
assets as well as deficits. During the assessment, it is often helpful to ask the


<<<PAGE 32>>>
patient, “Tell me about some of the things you do best,” or, “What do you
consider your greatest asset?” A more open-ended question, such as “Tell me
about yourself,” may elicit information that focuses more on either strengths
or deficits depending on several factors, including the patient’s mood and
self-image.
Safety and Comfort. Both the patient and the interviewer must feel safe.
This includes physical safety. On occasion, especially in hospital or
emergency room settings, this may require that other staff be present or that
the door to the room where the interview is conducted be left ajar. In
emergency room settings, it is generally advisable for the interviewer to have
a clear, unencumbered exit path. Patients, especially if psychotic or confused,
may feel threatened and need to be reassured that they are safe, and the staff
will do everything possible to ensure their safety. Sometimes it is useful to
explicitly state and sometimes demonstrate that there is sufficient staff to
prevent a situation from spiraling out of control. For some, often psychotic
patients who are fearful of losing control, this can be reassuring. The
interview may need to be shortened or quickly terminated if the patient
becomes more agitated and threatening. Once issues of safety have been
assessed (and for many outpatients, this may be accomplished within a few
seconds), the interviewer should inquire about the patient’s comfort and
continue to be alert to the patient’s comfort throughout the interview. A direct
question may be helpful in not only making the patient feel more comfortable
but also in enhancing the patient–doctor relationship. This might include,
“Are you warm enough?” or “Is that chair comfortable for you?” As the
interview progresses, if the patient desires tissues or water, it should be
provided.
Time and Number of Sessions. For an initial interview, 45 to 90
minutes are generally allotted. For inpatients on a medical unit or at times for
confused patients, in considerable distress, or psychotic, the length of time
that can be tolerated in one sitting may be 20 to 30 minutes or less. In those
instances, several brief sessions may be necessary. Even for patients who can
tolerate longer sessions, more than one session may be required to complete
an evaluation. The clinician must accept the reality that the history obtained
is never complete or entirely accurate. An interview is dynamic, and some


<<<PAGE 33>>>
aspects of the assessment are ongoing, such as how a patient responds to
exploration and consideration of new material that emerges. If the patient is
coming for treatment, as the initial interview progresses, the psychiatrist
makes decisions about what can be continued in subsequent sessions.
Process of the Interview
Before the Interview. For outpatients, the first contact with the
psychiatrist’s office is often a telephone call. Whoever is receiving the call
must understand how to respond if the patient is acutely distressed, confused,
or expresses suicidal or homicidal intent. If the receiver of the call is not a
mental health professional, the call should be transferred to the psychiatrist or
other mental health professional, if available. If not available, the caller
should be directed to a psychiatric emergency center or an emergency hotline.
The receiver of the call should obtain the name and phone number of the
caller and offer to initiate the call to the hotline if the caller prefers that.
Most calls are not of such an urgent nature. The receptionist (or whoever
receives the call) should obtain the information that the setting has deemed
relevant for the first contact. Although the requested information varies
considerably, it generally includes the name, age, address, and telephone
number(s) of the patient, who referred the patient, the reason for the referral,
and insurance information. The patient is given relevant information about
the office, including the length of time for the initial session, fees, and whom
to call if there are additional questions. In many practices, the psychiatrist
will contact the patient to discuss the reason for the appointment and to
determine if indeed an appointment appears warranted. The timing of the
appointment should reflect the apparent urgency of the problem. Asking the
patient to bring information about past psychiatric and medical treatments as
well as a list of medications (or preferably the medications themselves) can
be very helpful. Frequently a patient is referred to the psychiatrist or a
psychiatric facility. If possible, reviewing records that precede the patient can
be quite beneficial. Some psychiatrists prefer not to read records before the
initial interview so that prior evaluations will not unduly influence their
initial view of the patient’s problems. Whether or not records are reviewed,
the reason for the referral must be understood as clearly as possible. This is
especially important for forensic evaluations where the reason for the referral


<<<PAGE 34>>>
and the question(s) posed will help to shape the assessment. Often, especially
in the outpatient setting, a patient is referred to the psychiatrist by a primary
care physician or other health care provider. Although not always feasible,
communicating with the referring professional before the evaluation can be
very helpful. It is critical to determine whether the patient is referred for only
an evaluation with the ongoing treatment to be provided by the primary care
physician or mental health provider (e.g., social worker) or if the patient is
being referred for evaluation and treatment by the psychiatrist.
If the court refers the patient or a lawyer or some other non–treatmentoriented agency such as an insurance company, the goals of the interview
may be different from diagnosis and treatment recommendations. These goals
can include determination of disability, questions of competence or capacity,
or determining, if possible, the cause or contributors of the psychiatric illness.
In these particular circumstances, the patient and clinician are not entering a
treatment relationship, and often the usual rules of confidentiality do not
apply. This limited confidentiality must be explicitly established with the
patient and must include a discussion of who will be receiving the
information gathered during the interview.
The Waiting Room. When the patient arrives for the initial appointment,
he or she is often given forms to complete. These generally include
demographic and insurance information. Also, the patient receives
information about the practice (including contact information for evenings
and weekends) and HIPAA-mandated information that must be read and
signed. Many practices also ask for a list of medications, the name and
address of the primary care physician, and the identification of major medical
problems and allergies. Sometimes the patient is asked what his or her
primary reason is for coming to the office. Increasingly, some psychiatrists
ask the patient to fill out a questionnaire or a rating scale that identifies
significant symptoms. Such scales include the Patient Health Questionnaire 9
(PHQ-9) or the Quick Inventory of Depression Symptomatology Self Report
(QIDS-SR), which are scales of depressive symptoms based on the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Diseases (DSM).
The Interview Room. The interview room itself should be relatively
soundproof. The decor should be pleasant and not distracting. If feasible, it is


<<<PAGE 35>>>
a good idea to give the patient the choice of a soft chair or a hard-back chair.
Sometimes the selection of the chair or how the chair is chosen can reveal
characteristics of the patient. Many psychiatrists suggest that the
interviewer’s chair and the patient’s chair be of relatively equal height so that
the interviewer does not tower over the patient (or vice versa). It is generally
agreed that the patient and the psychiatrist should be seated approximately 4
to 6 ft apart. The psychiatrist should not be sitting behind a desk. The
psychiatrist should dress professionally and be well-groomed. Distractions
should be kept to a minimum. Unless there is an urgent matter, there should
be no telephone or beeper interruptions during the interview. The patient
should feel that the time has been set aside just for him or her and that for this
designated time, he or she is the exclusive focus of the psychiatrist’s
attention.
Initiation of the Interview. The patient is greeted in the waiting room by
the psychiatrist who, with a friendly face, introduces themself, extends a
hand, and, if the patient reciprocates, gives a firm handshake. If the patient
does not extend their hand, it is probably best not to comment at that point
but warmly indicate the way to the interview room. The refusal to shake
hands is probably an important issue, and the psychiatrist can keep this in
mind for a potential inquiry if it is not brought up subsequently by the patient.
Upon entering the interview room, if the patient has a coat, the psychiatrist
can offer to take the coat and hang it up. The psychiatrist then indicates
where the patient can sit. A brief pause can be helpful as there may be
something the patient wants to say immediately. If not, the psychiatrist can
inquire if the patient prefers to be called Mr. Smith, Thomas, or Tom. If this
question is not asked, it is best to use the last name as some patients will find
it presumptive to be called by their first name, especially if the interviewer is
many years younger. These first few minutes of the encounter, even before
the formal interview begins, can be crucial to the success of the interview and
the development of a helpful patient–doctor relationship. The patient, who is
often anxious, forms an initial impression of the psychiatrist and begins to
make decisions as to how much can be shared with this doctor. Psychiatrists
can convey interest and support by exhibiting a warm, friendly face and other
nonverbal communications such as leaning forward in their chair. It is
generally useful for the psychiatrist to indicate how much time is available


<<<PAGE 36>>>
for the interview. The patient may have some questions about what will
happen during this time, confidentiality, and other issues, and these questions
should be answered directly by the psychiatrist. The psychiatrist can then
continue with an open-ended inquiry, “Why don’t we start by you telling me
what has led to your being here,” or simply, “What has led to your being
here?” Often the response to this question will establish whether or not the
patient has been referred. When a referral has been made, it is important to
elicit from the patient his or her understanding of why he or she has been
referred. Not uncommonly, the patient may be uncertain as to why he or she
has been referred or may even feel angry at the referrer, often a primary care
physician.
Open-Ended Questions. As the patient responds to these initial questions,
the psychiatrist must interact in a manner that allows the patient to tell his or
her story. This is the primary goal of the data collection part of the interview
to elicit the patient’s story of his or her health and illness. Open-ended
questions are a necessity to accomplish this objective. Open-ended questions
identify an area but provide minimal structure as to how to respond. A typical
open-ended question is, “Tell me about your pain.” This is in contrast to
closed-ended questions that provide much structure and narrow the field from
which a response may be chosen. “Is your pain sharp?” The ultimate closedended question leads to a “yes” or “no” answer. In the initial portion of the
interview, questions should be primarily open-ended. As the patient responds,
the psychiatrist reinforces the patient continuing by nodding or other
supportive interventions. As the patient continues to share his or her story
about an aspect of his or her health or illness, the psychiatrist may ask some
increasingly closed-ended questions to understand some of the specifics of
the history. Then, when that area is understood, the psychiatrist may make a
transition to another area again using open-ended questions and eventually
closed-ended questions until that area is well described. Hence, the interview
should not be a single funnel of open-ended questions in the beginning and
closed-ended questions at the end of the interview but rather a series of
funnels, each of which begins with open-ended questions.
Elements of the Initial Psychiatric Interview


<<<PAGE 37>>>
The interview is now well launched into the present illness. Table 1-1 lists
the sections or parts of the initial psychiatric interview. Although not
necessarily obtained during the interview in precisely this order, these are the
categories that conventionally have been used to organize and record the
elements of the evaluation.
The two overarching elements of the psychiatric interview are patient
history and the mental status examination. The patient history is based on the
subjective report of the patient and, in some cases, the account of collaterals,
including other health care providers, family, and other caregivers. The
mental status examination, on the other hand, is the interviewer’s objective
tool similar to the physical examination in other areas of medicine. The
physical examination, although not part of the interview itself, is included
because of its potential relevance in the psychiatric diagnosis and also
because it usually is included as part of the psychiatric evaluation, especially
in the inpatient setting. (Also, much relevant information can be verbally
obtained by the physician as parts of the physical examination are
performed.) Similarly, the formulation, diagnosis, and treatment plan are
included because they are products of the interview and also influence the
course of the interview dynamically as the interview moves back and forth
pursuing, for example, whether specific diagnostic criteria are met or whether
potential elements of the treatment plan are realistic. Details of the
psychiatric interview are discussed below.
Table 1-1
Parts of the Initial Psychiatric Interview
I. Identifying data
II. Source and reliability
III. Chief complaint
IV. Present illness
V. Past psychiatric history
VI. Substance use/abuse
VII. Past medical history
VIII. Family history
IX. Developmental and social history


<<<PAGE 38>>>
X. Review of systems
XI. Mental status examination
XII. Physical examination
XIII. Formulation
XIV. DSM-5 diagnoses
XV. Treatment plan
I. Identifying Data. This section is brief, one or two sentences, and
typically includes the patient’s name, age, sex, marital status (or significant
other relationship), race or ethnicity, and occupation. Often the referral
source is also included.
II. Source and Reliability. It is important to clarify where the information
has come from, primarily if others have provided information or records
reviewed, and the interviewer’s assessment of how reliable the data are.
III. Chief Complaint. This should be the patient’s presenting complaint,
ideally in his or her own words. Examples include, “I’m depressed” or “I
have a lot of anxiety.”
A 64-year-old man presented in a psychiatric emergency room with a
chief complaint, “I’m melting away like a snowball.” He had become
increasingly depressed over 3 months. Four weeks before the emergency
room visit, he had seen his primary care physician who had increased his
antidepressant medication (imipramine) from 25 to 75 mg and also added
hydrochlorothiazide (50 mg) because of mild hypertension and slight
pedal edema. Over the ensuing 4 weeks, the patient’s condition
deteriorated. In the emergency department, he was noted to have a
depressed mood, hopelessness, weakness, significant weight loss, and
psychomotor retardation and was described as appearing “depleted.” He
also seemed to be dehydrated, and blood work indicated he was
hypokalemic. Examination of his medication revealed that the medication
bottles had been mislabeled; he was taking 25 mg of imipramine
(generally a nontherapeutic dose) and 150 mg of hydrochlorothiazide. He
was indeed, “melting away like a snowball.” Fluid and potassium


<<<PAGE 39>>>
replacement and a therapeutic dose of an antidepressant resulted in
significant improvement.
IV. History of Present Illness. The present illness is a chronologic
description of the evolution of the symptoms of the current episode. Also, the
account should include any other changes that have occurred during this same
period in the patient’s interests, interpersonal relationships, behaviors,
personal habits, and physical health. As noted above, the patient may provide
much of the essential information for this section in response to an openended question such as, “Can you tell me in your own words what brings you
here today?” Other times the clinician may have to lead the patient through
parts of the presenting problem. Details that should be gathered include the
length of time that the current symptoms have been present and whether there
have been fluctuations in the nature or severity of those symptoms over time.
(“I have been depressed for the past 2 weeks” vs. “I’ve had depression all my
life”). The presence or absence of stressors should be established, and these
may include situations at home, work, school, legal issues, medical
comorbidities, and interpersonal difficulties. Also important are factors that
alleviate or exacerbate symptoms such as medications, support, coping skills,
or time of day. The essential questions to be answered in the history of the
present illness include what (symptoms), how much (severity), how long, and
associated factors. It is also essential to identify why the patient is seeking
help now and what are the “triggering” factors (“I’m here now because my
girlfriend told me if I don’t get help with this nervousness she is going to
leave me.”). Identifying the setting in which the illness began can be
revealing and helpful in understanding the etiology of or significant
contributors to the condition. If any treatment has been received for the
current episode, it should be defined in terms of who saw the patient and how
often, what was done (e.g., psychotherapy or medication), and the specifics
of the modality used. Also, is that treatment continuing and, if not, why not?
The psychiatrist should be alert for any hints of abuse by former therapists as
this experience, unless addressed, can be a significant impediment to a
healthy and helpful therapeutic alliance.
Table 1-2


<<<PAGE 40>>>
Psychiatric Review of Systems
1. Mood
A. Depression: Sadness, tearfulness, sleep, appetite, energy,
concentration, sexual function, guilt, psychomotor agitation or
slowing, interest. A common pneumonic used to remember
the symptoms of major depression is SIGECAPS (Sleep,
Interest, Guilt, Energy, Concentration, Appetite, Psychomotor
agitation or slowing, Suicidality).
B. Mania: Impulsivity, grandiosity, recklessness, excessive
energy, decreased need for sleep, increased spending
beyond means, talkativeness, racing thoughts,
hypersexuality.
C. Mixed/Other: Irritability, liability.
2. Anxiety
A. Generalized anxiety symptoms: Where, when, who, how long,
how frequent.
B. Panic disorder symptoms: How long until peak, somatic
symptoms including racing heart, sweating, shortness of
breath, trouble swallowing, sense of doom, fear of
recurrence, agoraphobia.
C. Obsessive-compulsive symptoms: Checking, cleaning,
organizing, rituals, hang-ups, obsessive thinking, counting,
rational vs. irrational beliefs.
D. Posttraumatic stress disorder: Nightmares, flashbacks, startle
response, avoidance.
E. Social anxiety symptoms.
F. Simple phobias, for example, heights, planes, spiders, etc.
3. Psychosis
A. Hallucinations: Auditory, visual, olfactory, tactile.
B. Paranoia.
C. Delusions: TV, radio, thought broadcasting, mind control,
referential thinking.
D. Patient’s perception: Spiritual or cultural context of symptoms,
reality testing.


<<<PAGE 41>>>
4. Other
A. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder symptoms.
B. Eating disorder symptoms: Binging, purging, excessive
exercising.
Often it can be helpful to include a psychiatric review of systems in
conjunction with the history of the present illness to help rule in or out
psychiatric diagnoses with pertinent positives and negatives. This may help to
identify whether some comorbid disorders or disorders are actually more
bothersome to the patient but are not initially identified for a variety of
reasons. This review can be split into four major categories of mood, anxiety,
psychosis, and other (Table 1-2). The clinician will want to ensure that these
areas are covered in the comprehensive psychiatric interview.
V. Past Psychiatric History. In the past psychiatric history, the clinician
should obtain information about all psychiatric illnesses and their course over
the patient’s lifetime, including symptoms and treatment. Because
comorbidity is the rule rather than the exception, also to prior episodes of the
same illness (e.g., past episodes of depression in an individual who has a
major depressive disorder), the psychiatrist should also be alert for the signs
and symptoms of other psychiatric disorders. Description of past symptoms
should include when they occurred, how long they lasted, and the frequency
and severity of episodes.
Past treatment episodes should be reviewed in detail. These include
outpatient treatment such as psychotherapy (individual, group, couple, or
family), day treatment or partial hospitalization, inpatient treatment,
including voluntary or involuntary, and what precipitated the need for the
higher level of care, support groups, or other forms of treatment such as
vocational training. Medications and other modalities such as
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), light therapy, or alternative treatments
should be carefully reviewed. One should explore what was tried (may have
to offer lists of names to patients), how long and at what doses they were
used (to establish the adequacy of the trials), and why they were stopped.
Essential questions include what the response to the medication or modality
and whether there were side effects was. It is also helpful to establish whether
there was reasonable compliance with the recommended treatment. The


<<<PAGE 42>>>
psychiatrist should also inquire whether a diagnosis was made, what it was,
and who made the diagnosis. Although a diagnosis made by another clinician
should not be automatically accepted as valid, it is essential information that
can be used by the psychiatrist in forming his or her opinion.
Special consideration should be given to establishing a lethality history
that is important in the assessment of current risk. Past suicidal ideation,
intent, plan, and attempts should be reviewed, including the nature of
attempts, perceived lethality of the attempts, save potential, suicide notes,
giving away things, or other death preparations. Violence and homicidality
history will include any violent actions or intent. Specific questions about
domestic violence, legal complications, and the outcome of the victim may
help define this history more clearly. History of nonsuicidal self-injurious
behavior should also be covered, including any history of cutting, burning,
banging head, and biting oneself. The feelings, including relief of distress
that accompany or follow the behavior, should also be explored as well as the
degree to which the patient has gone to hide the evidence of these behaviors.
VI. Substance Use, Abuse, and Addictions. A careful review of
substance use, abuse, and addictions are essential to the psychiatric interview.
The clinician should keep in mind that this information may be difficult for
the patient to discuss, and a nonjudgmental style will elicit more accurate
information. If the patient seems reluctant to share such information, specific
questions may be helpful (e.g., “Have you ever used marijuana?” or “Do you
typically drink alcohol every day?”). History of use should include which
substances have been used, including alcohol, drugs, medications (prescribed
or not prescribed to the patient), and routes of use (oral, snorting, or
intravenous). The frequency and amount of use should be determined,
keeping in mind the tendency for patients to minimize or deny use that may
be perceived as socially unacceptable. Also, there are many misconceptions
about alcohol that can lead to erroneous data. The definition of alcohol may
be misunderstood, for example, “No, I don’t use alcohol,” yet later in the
same interview, “I drink a fair amount of beer.” Also, the amount of alcohol
can be confused with the volume of the drink: “I’m not worried about my
alcohol use. I mix my drinks, and I add a lot of water.” in response to a
follow-up question, “How much bourbon? Probably three or four shots?”
Tolerance, the need for increasing amounts of use, and any withdrawal


<<<PAGE 43>>>
symptoms should be established to help determine abuse versus dependence.
The impact of use on social interactions, work, school, legal consequences,
and driving while intoxicated (DWI) should be covered. Some psychiatrists
use a brief standardized questionnaire, the CAGE or RAPS4, to identify
alcohol abuse or dependence.
CAGE includes four questions: Have you ever Cut down on your
drinking? Have people Annoyed you by criticizing your drinking? Have you
ever felt bad or Guilty about your drinking? Have you ever had a drink the
first thing in the morning, as an Eye-opener, to steady your nerves or get rid
of a hangover? The Rapid Alcohol Problem Screen 4 (RAPS4) also consists
of four questions: Have you ever felt guilty after drinking (Remorse), could
not remember things said or did after drinking (Amnesia), failed to do what
was normally expected after drinking (Perform), or had a morning drink
(Starter)?
Any periods of sobriety should be noted, including the length of time and
setting such as in jail, legally mandated, and so forth. A history of treatment
episodes should be explored, including inpatient detoxification or
rehabilitation, outpatient treatment, group therapy, or other settings including
self-help groups, Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or Narcotics Anonymous
(NA), halfway houses, or group homes.
Current substance abuse or dependence can have a significant impact on
psychiatric symptoms and treatment course. The patient’s readiness for
change should be determined, including whether they are in the
precontemplative, contemplative, or action phase. Referral to the appropriate
treatment setting should be considered.
Other vital substances and addictions that should be covered in this section
include tobacco and caffeine use, gambling, eating behaviors, and Internet
use. Exploration of tobacco use is especially crucial because persons abusing
substances are more likely to die as a result of tobacco use than because of
the identified abused substance. Gambling history should include casino
visits, horse racing, lottery, and scratch cards, and sports betting. Addictive
type eating may include binge eating disorder. Overeaters Anonymous (OA)
and Gamblers Anonymous (GA) are 12-step programs, similar to AA, for
patients with addictive eating behaviors and gambling addictions.
VII. Past Medical History. The past medical history includes an account of


<<<PAGE 44>>>
major medical illnesses and conditions as well as treatments, both past, and
present. Any past surgeries should also be reviewed. It is essential to
understand the patient’s reaction to these illnesses and the coping skills
employed. The past medical history is an important consideration when
determining potential causes of mental illness as well as comorbid or
confounding factors and may dictate possible treatment options or
limitations. Medical illnesses can precipitate a psychiatric disorder (e.g.,
anxiety disorder in an individual recently diagnosed with cancer), mimic a
psychiatric disorder (hyperthyroidism resembling an anxiety disorder), be
precipitated by a psychiatric disorder or its treatment (a metabolic syndrome
in a patient on a second-generation antipsychotic medication), or influence
the choice of treatment of a psychiatric disorder (renal disorder and the use of
lithium carbonate). It is vital to pay special attention to neurologic issues,
including seizures, head injury, and pain disorder. Any known history of
prenatal or birthing problems or issues with developmental milestones should
be noted. In women, a reproductive and menstrual history is essential as well
as a careful assessment of the potential for current or future pregnancy.
(“How do you know you are not pregnant?” may be answered with “Because
I have had my tubes tied” or “I just hope I’m not.”)
A careful review of all current medications is critical. This should include
all current psychiatric medications with attention to how long they have been
used, compliance with schedules, the effect of the medications, and any side
effects. It is often helpful to be very specific in determining compliance and
side effects, including asking questions such as, “How many days of the week
are you able to actually take this medication?” or “Have you noticed any
change in your sexual function since starting this medication?” as the patient
may not spontaneously offer this information, which may be embarrassing or
perceived to be treatment interfering.
Nonpsychiatric medications, over-the-counter medications, sleep aids,
herbal, and alternative medications should also be reviewed. These can all
potentially have psychiatric implications, including side effects or produce
symptoms, as well as potential medication interactions dictating treatment
options. Optimally the patient should be asked to bring all medications
currently being taken, prescribed or not, over-the-counter preparations,
vitamins, and herbs to the interview.
Allergies to medications must be covered, including which medication and


<<<PAGE 45>>>
the nature of the extent of, and the treatment of the allergic response.
Psychiatric patients should be encouraged to have adequate and regular
medical care. The sharing of appropriate information among the primary care
physicians, other medical specialists, and the psychiatrist can be beneficial
for optimal patient care. The initial interview is an opportunity to reinforce
that concept with the patient. At times a patient may not want the information
to be shared with his or her primary care physician. This wish should be
respected, although it may be useful to explore if there is some information
that can be shared. Often patients want to restrict certain social or family
information (e.g., an extramarital affair) but are comfortable with other
details (medication prescribed) being shared.
VIII. Family History. Because many psychiatric illnesses are familial and a
significant number of those have a genetic predisposition, if not cause, a
careful review of family history is an essential part of the psychiatric
assessment. Furthermore, an accurate family history helps not only in
defining a patient’s potential risk factors for specific illnesses but also the
formative psychosocial background of the patient. Psychiatric diagnoses,
medications, hospitalizations, substance use disorders, and lethality history
should all be covered. The importance of these issues is highlighted, for
example, by the evidence that, at times, there appears to be a familial
response to medications, and a family history of suicide is a significant risk
factor for suicidal behaviors in the patient. The interviewer must keep in
mind that the diagnosis ascribed to a family member may or may not be
accurate, and some data about the presentation and treatment of that illness
may be helpful. Medical illnesses present in family histories may also be
significant in both the diagnosis and the treatment of the patient.
An example is a family history of diabetes or hyperlipidemia affecting the
choice of antipsychotic medication that may carry a risk for the development
of these illnesses in the patient. Family traditions, beliefs, and expectations
may also play a significant role in the development, expression, or course of
the illness. Also, the family history is essential in identifying potential
support as well as stresses for the patient and, depending on the degree of
disability of the patient, the availability and adequacy of likely caregivers.
IX. Developmental and Social History. The developmental and social


<<<PAGE 46>>>
history reviews the stages of the patient’s life. It is an essential tool in
determining the context of psychiatric symptoms and illnesses and may
identify some of the significant factors in the evolution of the disorder.
Frequently, current psychosocial stressors will be revealed in the course of
obtaining a social history. It can often be helpful to review the social history
chronologically to ensure all information is covered.
Any available information concerning prenatal or birthing history and
developmental milestones should be noted. For the large majority of adult
patients, such information is not readily available, and when it is, it may not
be entirely accurate. Childhood history will include childhood home
environments, including members of the family and social environment,
including the number and quality of friendships. A detailed school history
including how far the patient went in school and how old he or she was at
that level, any special education circumstances or learning disorders,
behavioral problems at school, academic performance, and extracurricular
activities should be obtained. Childhood physical and sexual abuse should be
carefully queried.
Work history will include types of jobs, performance at jobs, reasons for
changing jobs, and current work status. The nature of the patient’s
relationships with supervisors and coworkers should be reviewed. The
patient’s income, financial issues, and insurance coverage, including
pharmacy benefits, are often significant issues.
Military history, where applicable, should be noted, including rank
achieved, combat exposure, disciplinary actions, and discharge status.
Marriage and relationship history, including sexual preferences and current
family structure, should be explored. This should include the patient’s
capacity to develop and maintain stable and mutually satisfying relationships
as well as issues of intimacy and sexual behaviors. Current relationships with
parents, grandparents, children, and grandchildren are an essential part of
social history. Legal history is also relevant, especially any pending charges
or lawsuits. The social history also includes hobbies, interests, pets, and
leisure time activities and how this has fluctuated over time. It is important to
identify cultural and religious influences on the patient’s life and current
religious beliefs and practices. A brief overview of the sexual history is given
in Table 1-3.


<<<PAGE 47>>>
Table 1-3
Sexual History
1. Screening questions
a. Are you sexually active?
b. Have you noticed any changes or problems with sex recently?
2. Developmental
a. Acquisition of sexual knowledge
b. Onset of puberty/menarche
c. Development of sexual identity and orientation
d. First sexual experiences
e. Sex in romantic relationship
f. Changing experiences or preferences over time
g. Sex and advancing age
3. Clarification of sexual problems
a. Desire phase
Presence of sexual thoughts or fantasies:
When do they occur and what is their object?
Who initiates sex and how?
b. Excitement phase
Difficulty in sexual arousal (achieving or maintaining
erections, lubrication), during foreplay and preceding
orgasm
c. Orgasm phase
Does orgasm occur?
Does it occur too soon or too late?
How often and under what circumstances does orgasm
occur?
If orgasm does not occur, is it because of not being excited or
lack of orgasm despite being aroused?
d. Resolution phase
What happens after sex is over (e.g., contentment, frustration,
continued arousal)?
X. Review of Systems. The review of systems attempts to capture any
current physical or psychological signs and symptoms not already identified


<<<PAGE 48>>>
in the present illness. Particular attention is paid to neurologic and systemic
symptoms (e.g., fatigue or weakness). Illnesses that might contribute to the
presenting complaints or influence the choice of therapeutic agents should be
carefully considered (e.g., endocrine, hepatic, or renal disorders). Generally,
the review of systems is organized by the major systems of the body.
XI. Mental Status Examination. The mental status examination (MSE) is
the psychiatric equivalent of the physical examination in the rest of medicine.
The MSE explores all the areas of mental functioning and denotes evidence
of signs and symptoms of mental illnesses. Data are gathered for the mental
status examination throughout the interview from the initial moments of the
interaction, including what the patient is wearing and their general
presentation. Most of the information does not require direct questioning, and
the information gathered from observation may give the clinician a different
dataset than patient responses. Direct questioning augments and rounds out
the MSE. The MSE provides the clinician with a snapshot of the patient’s
mental status at the time of the interview and is useful for subsequent visits to
compare and monitor changes over time. The psychiatric MSE includes
cognitive screening most often in the form of the Mini-Mental Status
Examination (MMSE), but the MMSE is not to be confused with the MSE
overall. The components of the MSE are presented in this section in the order
one might include them in the written note for organizational purposes. Still,
as noted above, the data are gathered throughout the interview.
APPEARANCE AND BEHAVIOR. This section consists of a general description of

how the patient looks and acts during the interview. Does the patient appear
to be his or her stated age, younger or older? Is this related to the patient’s
style of dress, physical features, or style of interaction? Items to be noted
include what the patient is wearing, including body jewelry, and whether it is
appropriate for the context. For example, a patient in a hospital gown would
be appropriate in the emergency room or inpatient unit but not in an
outpatient clinic. Distinguishing features, including disfigurations, scars, and
tattoos, are noted. Grooming and hygiene also are included in the overall
appearance and can be clues to the patient’s level of functioning.
The description of a patient’s behavior includes a general statement about
whether he or she is exhibiting acute distress and then a more specific


<<<PAGE 49>>>
statement about the patient’s approach to the interview. The patient may be
described as cooperative, agitated, disinhibited, disinterested, and so forth.
Once again, appropriateness is an essential factor to consider in the
interpretation of the observation. If a patient is brought involuntarily for
examination, it may be appropriate, certainly understandable, that he or she is
somewhat uncooperative, especially at the beginning of the interview.
Motor activity may be described as normal, slowed
(bradykinesia), or agitated (hyperkinesia). This can give clues to diagnoses
(e.g., depression vs. mania) as well as confounding neurologic or medical
issues. Gait, freedom of movement, any unusual or sustained postures,
pacing, and hand wringing are described. The presence or absence of any tics
should be noted, as should be jitteriness, tremor, apparent restlessness, lipsmacking, and tongue protrusions. These can be clues to adverse reactions or
side effects of medications such as tardive dyskinesia, akathisia, or
parkinsonian features from antipsychotic medications or suggestion of
symptoms of illnesses such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD).
MOTOR ACTIVITY.

SPEECH. Evaluation of speech is an integral part of the MSE. Elements

considered include fluency, amount, rate, tone, and volume. Fluency can refer
to whether the patient has full command of the English language as well as
potentially more subtle fluency issues such as stuttering, word-finding
difficulties, or paraphasic errors. (A Spanish-speaking patient with an
interpreter would be considered not fluent in English, but an attempt should
be made to establish whether he or she is fluent in Spanish.) The evaluation
of the amount of speech refers to whether it is normal, increased, or
decreased. Decreased amounts of speech may suggest several different things
ranging from anxiety or disinterest to thought blocking or psychosis.
Increased amounts of speech often (but not always) are suggestive of mania
or hypomania. A related element is the speed or rate of speech. Is it slowed or
rapid (pressured)? Finally, speech can be evaluated for its tone and volume.
Descriptive terms for these elements include irritable, anxious, dysphoric,
loud, quiet, timid, angry, or childlike.
MOOD. The terms mood and affect vary in their definition, and several authors


<<<PAGE 50>>>
have recommended combining the two elements into a new label, “emotional
expression.” Traditionally, mood is defined as the patient’s internal and
sustained emotional state. Its experience is subjective, and hence it is best to
use the patient’s own words in describing his or her mood. Terms such as
“sad,” “angry,” “guilty,” or “anxious” are common descriptions of mood.
AFFECT. Affect differs from mood in that it is the expression of mood or what

the patient’s mood appears to be to the clinician. Affect is often described
with the following elements: quality, quantity, range, appropriateness, and
congruence. Terms used to describe the quality (or tone) of a patient’s affect
include dysphoric, happy, euthymic, irritable, angry, agitated, tearful,
sobbing, and flat. Speech is often an essential clue to the assessment of affect,
but it is not exclusive. Quantity of affect is a measure of its intensity. Two
patients, both described as having depressed affect can be very different if
one is described as mildly depressed and the other as severely depressed. The
range can be restricted, normal, or labile. Flat is a term that has been used for
a severely restricted range of affect that is described in some patients with
schizophrenia. Appropriateness of affect refers to how the affect correlates to
the setting. A patient who is laughing at a solemn moment of a funeral
service is described as having an inappropriate affect. Affect can also be
congruent or incongruent with the patient’s described mood or thought
content. A patient may report feeling depressed or describe a depressive
theme but do so with laughter, smiling, and no suggestion of sadness.
Essentially, thought content is what thoughts are
occurring to the patient. This is inferred by what the patient spontaneously
expresses, as well as responses to specific questions aimed at eliciting
particular pathology. Some patients may perseverate or ruminate on specific
content or thoughts. They may focus on material that is considered obsessive
or compulsive. Obsessional thoughts are unwelcome and repetitive thoughts
that intrude into the patient’s consciousness. They are generally ego alien and
resisted by the patient. Compulsions are repetitive, ritualized behaviors that
patients feel compelled to perform to avoid an increase in anxiety or some
dreaded outcome. Another broad category of thought content pathology is
delusions. Delusions are false, fixed ideas that are not shared by others and
can be divided into bizarre and nonbizarre (nonbizarre delusions refer to
THOUGHT CONTENT.


<<<PAGE 51>>>
thought content that is not true but is not out of the realm of possibility).
Common delusions include grandiose, erotomanic, jealous, somatic, and
persecutory. It is often helpful to suggest delusional content to patients who
may have learned not to spontaneously discuss them. Questions that can be
helpful include, “Do you ever feel like someone is following you or out to get
you?” and “Do you feel like the TV or radio has a special message for you?”
An affirmative answer to the latter question indicates an “idea of reference.”
Paranoia can be closely related to delusional material and can range from
“soft” paranoia, such as general suspiciousness, to more severe forms that
impact daily functioning. Questions that elicit paranoia can include asking
about the patient worrying about cameras, microphones, or the government.
Suicidality and homicidality fall under the category of thought content, but
here are discussed separately because of their particular importance in being
addressed in every initial psychiatric interview. Simply asking if someone is
suicidal or homicidal is not adequate. One must get a sense of ideation,
intent, plan, and preparation. Although completed suicide is hugely
challenging to predict accurately, there are identified risk factors, and these
can be used in conjunction with an evaluation of the patient’s intent and plan
for acting on thoughts of suicide.
THOUGHT PROCESS. Thought process differs from thought content in that it

does not describe what the person is thinking but rather how the thoughts are
formulated, organized, and expressed. A patient can have normal thought
process with significantly delusional thought content. Conversely, there may
be generally normal thought content but significantly impaired thought
process. Normal thought process is typically described as linear, organized,
and goal-directed. With flight of ideas, the patient rapidly moves from one
thought to another, at a pace that is difficult for the listener to keep up with,
but all of the ideas are logically connected. The circumstantial patient
overincludes details and material that is not directly relevant to the subject or
an answer to the question but does eventually return to address the subject or
answer the question. Typically the examiner can follow a circumstantial train
of thought, seeing connections between the sequential statements. Tangential
thought process may at first appear similar, but the patient never returns to
the original point or question. The tangential thoughts are seen as irrelevant
and related in a minor, insignificant manner. Loose thoughts or associations


<<<PAGE 52>>>
differ from circumstantial and tangential thoughts in that with loose thoughts
it is difficult or impossible to see the connections between the sequential
content. Perseveration is the tendency to focus on a specific idea or content
without the ability to move on to other topics. The perseverative patient will
repeatedly come back to the same topic despite the interviewer’s attempts to
change the subject. Thought blocking refers to a disordered thought process
in which the patient appears to be unable to complete a thought. The patient
may stop midsentence or midthought and leave the interviewer waiting for
the completion. When asked about this, patients will often remark that they
don’t know what happened and may not remember what was being discussed.
Neologisms refer to a new word or condensed combination of several words
that is not a true word and is not readily understandable. However, sometimes
the intended meaning or partial meaning may be apparent. Word salad is
speech characterized by confused, and often repetitious, language with no
apparent meaning or relationship attached to it. A description of formal
thought disorders is given in Table 1-4.
PERCEPTUAL DISTURBANCES. Perceptual disturbances include hallucinations,

illusions, depersonalization, and derealization. Hallucinations are perceptions
in the absence of stimuli to account for them. Auditory hallucinations are the
hallucinations most frequently encountered in the psychiatric setting. Other
hallucinations can include visual, tactile, olfactory, and gustatory (taste). In
the North American culture, nonauditory hallucinations are often clues that
there is a neurologic, medical, or substance withdrawal issue rather than a
primary psychiatric issue. In other cultures, visual hallucinations have been
reported to be the most common form of hallucinations in schizophrenia. The
interviewer should make a distinction between a real hallucination and a
misperception of stimuli (illusion). Hearing the wind rustle through the trees
outside one’s bedroom and thinking a name is being called is an illusion.
Hypnagogic hallucinations (at the interface of wakefulness and sleep) may be
normal phenomena. At times patients without psychosis may hear their name
called or see flashes or shadows out of the corners of their eyes. In describing
hallucinations, the interviewer should include what the patient is
experiencing, when it occurs, how often it occurs, and whether or not it is
uncomfortable (ego-dystonic). In the case of auditory hallucinations, it can be
useful to learn if the patient hears words, commands, or conversations and


<<<PAGE 53>>>
whether the voice is recognizable to the patient.
Depersonalization is a feeling that one is not oneself or that something has
changed. Derealization is a feeling that one’s environment has changed in
some strange way that is difficult to describe.
Table 1-4
Formal Thought Disorders
Circumstantiality. Overinclusion of trivial or irrelevant details that
impede the sense of getting to the point.
Clang associations. Thoughts are associated by the sound of words
rather than by their meaning (e.g., through rhyming or assonance).
Derailment. (Synonymous with loose associations.) A breakdown in
both the logical connection between ideas and the overall sense of
goal directedness. The words make sentences, but the sentences
do not make sense.
Flight of ideas. A succession of multiple associations so that
thoughts seem to move abruptly from idea to idea; often (but not
invariably) expressed through rapid, pressured speech.
Neologism. The invention of new words or phrases or the use of
conventional words in idiosyncratic ways.
Perseveration. Repetition of out of context words, phrases, or ideas.
Tangentiality. In response to a question, the patient gives a reply
that is appropriate to the general topic without actually answering
the question. Example:
Doctor: “Have you had any trouble sleeping lately?”
Patient: “I usually sleep in my bed, but now I’m sleeping on the
sofa.”
Thought blocking. A sudden disruption of thought or a break in the
flow of ideas.
COGNITION. The elements of cognitive functioning that should be assessed are

alertness, orientation, concentration, memory (both short and long term),
calculation, fund of knowledge, abstract reasoning, insight, and judgment.
Note should be made of the patient’s level of alertness. The amount of


<<<PAGE 54>>>
detail in assessing cognitive function will depend on the purpose of the
examination and also what has already been learned in the interview about
the patient’s level of functioning, performance at work, handling daily
chores, balancing one’s checkbook, among others. Also, the psychiatrist will
have already elicited data concerning the patient’s memory for both remote
and recent past. A general sense of intellectual level and how much schooling
the patient has had can help distinguish intelligence and educational issues
versus cognitive impairment that might be seen in delirium or dementia.
Table 1-5 presents an overview of the questions used to test cognitive
function in the mental status examination.
Table 1-5
Questions Used to Test Cognitive Functions in
Sensorium Section of the Mental Status Examination
1. Alertness

(Observation)

2. Orientation

What is your name? Who am I?
What place is this? Where is it located?
What city are we in?

the

3. Concentration Starting at 100, count backward by 7 (or 3).
Say the letters of the alphabet backward starting
with Z.
Name the months of the year backward starting
with December.
4. Memory:
Immediate

Repeat these numbers after me: 1, 4, 9, 2, 5.

Recent

What did you have for breakfast?
What were you doing before we started talking
this morning?
I want you to remember these three things: a
yellow pencil, a cocker spaniel, and Cincinnati.
After a few minutes I’ll ask you to repeat them.

Long term

What was your address when you were in the


<<<PAGE 55>>>
third grade?
Who was your teacher?
What did you do during the summer between high
school and college?
5. Calculations

If you buy something that costs $3.75 and you
pay with a $5 bill, how much change should you
get?
What is the cost of three oranges if a dozen
oranges cost $4.00?

6. Fund of
knowledge

What is the distance between New York and Los
Angeles? What body of water lies between
South America and Africa?

7. Abstract
reasoning

Which one does not belong in this group: a pair of
scissors, a canary, and a spider? Why?
How are an apple and an orange alike?

ABSTRACT REASONING. Abstract reasoning is the ability to shift back and forth

between general concepts and specific examples. Having the patient identify
similarities between like objects or concepts (apple and pear, bus and
airplane, or a poem and a painting) as well as interpreting proverbs can be
useful in assessing one’s ability to abstract. Cultural and educational factors
and limitations should be kept in mind when assessing the ability to abstract.
Occasionally, the inability to abstract or the idiosyncratic manner of grouping
items can be dramatic.
Insight, in the psychiatric evaluation, refers to the patient’s
understanding of how he or she is feeling, presenting, and functioning as well
as the potential causes of his or her psychiatric presentation. The patient may
have no insight, partial insight, or full insight. A component of insight often
is reality testing in the case of a patient with psychosis. An example of intact
reality testing would be, “I know that there are not really little men talking to
me when I am alone, but I feel like I can see them and hear their voices.” As
indicated by this example, the amount of insight is not an indicator of the
severity of the illness. A person with psychosis may have good insight, while
INSIGHT.


<<<PAGE 56>>>
a person with a mild anxiety disorder may have little or no insight.
JUDGMENT. Judgment refers to the person’s capacity to make good decisions

and act on them. The level of judgment may or may not correlate to the level
of insight. A patient may have no insight into his or her illness but have good
judgment. It has been traditional to use hypothetical examples to test
judgment, for example, “What would you do if you found a stamped envelope
on the sidewalk?” It is better to use real situations from the patient’s own
experience to test judgment. The important issues in assessing judgment
include whether a patient is doing things that are dangerous or going to get
him or her into trouble and whether the patient can effectively participate in
his or her own care. Significantly impaired judgment can be cause for
considering a higher level of care or more restrictive setting such as inpatient
hospitalization. Table 1-6 lists some common questions for the psychiatric
history and mental status.
XII. Physical Examination. The inclusion and extent of physical
examination will depend on the nature and setting of the psychiatric
interview. In the outpatient setting, little or no physical examination may be
routinely performed, while in the emergency room or inpatient setting, a
more complete physical examination is warranted. Vital signs, weight, waist
circumference, body mass index, and height may be important measurements
to follow particularly given the potential effects of psychiatric medications or
illnesses on these parameters. The Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale
(AIMS) is an important screening test to be followed when using
antipsychotic medication to monitor for potential side effects such as tardive
dyskinesia. A focused neurologic evaluation is an important part of the
psychiatric assessment.
In those instances where a physical examination is not performed the
psychiatrist should ask the patient when the last physical examination was
performed and by whom. As part of the communication with that physician,
the psychiatrist should inquire about any abnormal findings.
XIII. Formulation. The culmination of the data-gathering aspect of the
psychiatric interview is developing a formulation and diagnosis (diagnoses)
as well as recommendations and treatment planning. In this part of the


<<<PAGE 57>>>
evaluation process, the data gathering is supplanted by data processing where
the various themes contribute to a biopsychosocial understanding of the
patient’s illness. Although the formulation is placed near the end of the
reported or written evaluation, it is developed as part of a dynamic process
throughout the interview as new hypotheses are created and tested by further
data that are elicited. The formulation should include a brief summary of the
patient’s history, presentation, and current status. It should include discussion
of biologic factors (medical, family, and medication history) as well as
psychological factors such as childhood circumstances, upbringing, and past
interpersonal interactions and social factors including stressors, and
contextual circumstances such as finances, school, work, home, and
interpersonal relationships. These elements should lead to a differential
diagnosis of the patient’s illness (if any) as well as a provisional diagnosis.
Finally, the formulation should include a summary of the safety assessment,
which contributes to the determination of the level of care recommended or
required.
XIV. Treatment Planning. The assessment and formulation will appear in
the written note correlating to the psychiatric interview. Still, the discussion
with the patient may only be a summary of this assessment geared toward the
patient’s ability to understand and interpret the information. Treatment
planning and recommendations, in contrast, are integral parts of the
psychiatric interview and should be explicitly discussed with the patient in
detail.
Table 1-6
Common Questions for Psychiatric History and Mental
Status
Topic

Questions

Identifying data Be direct in obtaining
identifying data.
Request specific
answers.

Comments and
Clinical Hints
If patient cannot
cooperate, get
information from
family member or
friend; if referred by a


<<<PAGE 58>>>
physician, obtain
medical record.
Chief complaint Why are you going to see Records answers
(CC)
a psychiatrist? What
verbatim; a bizarre
brought you to the
complaint points to
hospital? What seems
psychotic process.
to be the problem?
History of
present
illness (HPI)

When did you first notice Record in patient’s own
something happening to
words as much as
you? Were you upset
possible. Get history
about anything when
of previous
symptoms began? Did
hospitalizations and
they begin suddenly or
treatment. Sudden
gradually?
onset of symptoms
may indicate druginduced disorder.

Previous
psychiatric
and medical
disorders

Did you ever lose
Ascertain extent of
consciousness? Have a
illness, treatment,
seizure?
medications,
outcomes, hospitals,
doctors. Determine
whether illness
serves some
additional purpose
(secondary gain).

Personal history Do you know anything
about your birth? If so,
from whom? How old
was your mother when
you were born? Your
father?

Older mothers (>35)
have high risk for
Down syndrome
babies; older fathers
(>45) may contribute
damaged sperm,
producing deficits
including
schizophrenia.


<<<PAGE 59>>>
Childhood

Toilet training? BedSeparation anxiety and
wetting? Sex play with
school phobia are
peers? What is your first
associated with adult
childhood memory?
depression; enuresis
is associated with fire
setting. Childhood
memories before the
age of 3 are usually
imagined, not real.

Adolescence

Adolescents may refuse to Poor school
answer questions, but
performance is a
they should be asked.
sensitive indicator of
Adults may distort
emotional disorder.
memories of
Schizophrenia begins
emotionally charged
in late adolescence.
experiences. Sexual
molestation?

Adulthood

Open-ended questions
Depending on the chief
are preferable. Tell me
complaint, some
about your marriage. Be
areas require more
nonjudgmental; What
detailed inquiry.
role does religion play in
Manic patients
your life, if any? What is
frequently go into
your sexual preference
debt or are
in a partner?
promiscuous.
Overvalued religious
ideas are associated
with paranoid
personality disorder.

Sexual history

Are there or have there
been any problems or
concerns about your
sex life? How did you
learn about sex? Has

Be nonjudgmental.
Asking when
masturbation began
is a better approach
than asking do you or


<<<PAGE 60>>>
there been any change
in your sex drive?
Family history

did you ever
masturbate.

Have any members in
your family been
depressed? Alcoholic?
In a mental hospital?
Describe your living
conditions. Did you
have your own room?

Genetic loading in
anxiety, depression,
schizophrenia. Get
medication history of
family (medications
effective in family
members for similar
disorders may be
effective in patient).

General
appearance

Introduce yourself and
direct patient to take a
seat. In the hospital,
bring your chair to
bedside; do not sit on
the bed.

Unkempt and
disheveled in
cognitive disorder,
pinpoint pupils in
narcotic addiction,
withdrawal and
stooped posture in
depression.

Motoric
behavior

Have you been more
Fixed posturing, odd
active than usual? Less
behavior in
active? You may ask
schizophrenia.
about obvious
Hyperactive with
mannerisms, such as, “I
stimulant (cocaine)
notice that your hand
abuse and in mania.
still shakes, can you tell
Psychomotor
me about that?” Stay
retardation in
aware of smells, such
depression; tremors
as
with anxiety or
alcoholism/ketoacidosis.
medication side
effect (lithium). Eye
contact is normally
made during the

Mental Status


<<<PAGE 61>>>
interview. Minimal
eye contact in
schizophrenia.
Scanning of
environment in
paranoid states.
Attitude during
interview

You may comment about
attitude: “You seem
irritated about
something; is that an
accurate observation?”

Suspiciousness in
paranoia; seductive
in hysteria; apathetic
in conversion
disorder (la belle
indifference); punning
(witzelsucht) in
frontal lobe
syndromes.

Mood

How do you feel? How are Suicidal ideas in 25% of
your spirits? Do you
depressives; elation
have thoughts that life is
in mania. Early
not worth living or that
morning awakening
you want to harm
in depression;
yourself? Do you have
decreased need for
plans to take your own
sleep in mania.
life? Do you want to
die? Has there been a
change in your sleep
habits?

Affect

Observe nonverbal signs Changes in affect usual
of emotion, body
with schizophrenia:
movements, facies,
loss of prosody in
rhythm of voice
cognitive disorder,
(prosody). Laughing
catatonia. Do not
when talking about sad
confuse medication
subjects, such as death,
adverse effect with
is inappropriate.
flat affect.


<<<PAGE 62>>>
Speech

Ask patient to say
Manic patients show
“Methodist
pressured speech;
Episcopalian” to test for
paucity of speech in
dysarthria.
depression; uneven
or slurred speech in
cognitive disorders.

Perceptual
disorders

Do you ever see things or Visual hallucinations
hear voices? Do you
suggest
have strange
schizophrenia.
experiences as you fall
Tactile hallucinations
asleep or upon
suggest cocainism,
awakening? Has the
delirium tremens
world changed in any
(DTs). Olfactory
way? Do you have
hallucinations
strange smells?
common in temporal
lobe epilepsy.

Thought content Do you feel people want
Are delusions
to harm you? Do you
congruent with mood
have special powers? Is
(grandiose delusions
anyone trying to
with elated mood) or
influence you? Do you
incongruent? Moodhave strange body
incongruent
sensations? Are there
delusions point to
thoughts that you can’t
schizophrenia.
get out of your mind?
Illusions are common
Do you think about the
in delirium. Thought
end of the world? Can
insertion is
people read your mind?
characteristic of
Do you ever feel the TV
schizophrenia.
is talking to you? Ask
about fantasies and
dreams.
Thought
process

Ask meaning of proverbs Loose associations
to test abstraction, such
point to


<<<PAGE 63>>>
as, “People in glass
houses should not
throw stones.” Concrete
answer is, “Glass
breaks.” Abstract
answers deal with
universal themes or
moral issues. Ask
similarity between bird
and butterfly (both
alive), bread and cake
(both food).

schizophrenia; flight
of ideas to mania;
inability to abstract to
schizophrenia, brain
damage.

Sensorium

What place is this? What Delirium or dementia
is today’s date? Do you
shows clouded or
know who I am?
wandering
sensorium.
Orientation to person
remains intact longer
than orientation to
time or place.

Remote
memory
(long-term
memory)

Where were you born?
Where did you go to
school? Date of
marriage? Birthdays of
children? What were
last week’s newspaper
headlines?

Patients with dementia
of the Alzheimer type
retain remote
memory longer than
recent memory. Gaps
in memory may be
localized or filled in
with confabulatory
details. Hypermnesia
is seen in paranoid
personality.

Immediate
Ask patient to repeat six
memory (very
digits forward, then
short-term
backward (normal

Loss of memory occurs
with cognitive,
dissociative, or


<<<PAGE 64>>>
memory)

Concentration
and
calculation

responses). Ask patient
to try to remember three
nonrelated items; test
patient after 5 min.

conversion disorder.
Anxiety can impair
immediate retention
and recent memory.
Anterograde memory
loss (amnesia)
occurs after taking
certain drugs, such
as benzodiazepines.
Retrograde memory
loss occurs after
head trauma.

Ask patient to count from Rule out medical cause
1 to 20 rapidly; do
for any defects vs.
simple calculations (2 ×
anxiety or depression
4, 4 × 9); do serial 7 test
(pseudodementia).
(i.e., subtract 7 from
Make tests congruent
100 and keep
with educational level
subtracting 7). How
of patient.
many nickels in $1.35?

Information and Distance from New York
Check educational level
intelligence
City to Los Angeles.
to results. Rule out
Name some vegetables.
mental retardation,
What is the largest river
borderline intellectual
in the United States?
functioning.
Judgment

What is the thing to do if
Impaired in brain
you find an envelope in
disease,
the street that is sealed,
schizophrenia,
stamped, and
borderline intellectual
addressed?
functioning,
intoxication.

Insight level

Do you think you have a
problem? Do you need

Impaired in delirium,
dementia, frontal lobe


<<<PAGE 65>>>
treatment? What are
your plans for the
future?

syndrome, psychosis,
borderline intellectual
functioning.

From Sadock BJ, Sadock V. Kaplan and Sadock’s Pocket Handbook of Clinical Psychiatry.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010, with permission.

The first part of treatment planning involves determining whether a
treatment relationship is to be established between the interviewer and
patient. Cases, where this may not be the case, include if the interview was
done in consultation, for a legal matter or as a third-party review, or in the
emergency room or other acute setting. If a treatment relationship is not being
started, then the patient should be informed as to what the recommended
treatment is (if any). In some instances, this may not be voluntary (as in the
case of an involuntary hospitalization). In most cases, there should be a
discussion of the options available so that the patient can participate in the
decisions about the next steps. If a treatment relationship is being initiated,
then the structure of that treatment should be discussed. Will the primary
focus be on medication management, psychotherapy, or both? What will the
frequency of visits be? How will the clinician be paid for service, and what
are the expectations for the patient to be considered engaged in treatment?
Medication recommendations should include a discussion of possible
therapeutic medications, the risks and benefits of no medication treatment,
and alternative treatment options. The prescriber must obtain informed
consent from the patient for any medications (or other treatments) initiated.
Other clinical treatment recommendations may include referral for
psychotherapy, group therapy, chemical dependency evaluation or treatment,
or medical assessment. There also may be recommended psychosocial
interventions, including case management, group home or assisted living,
social clubs, support groups such as a mental health alliance, the National
Alliance for the Mentally Ill, and AA.
Collaboration with primary care doctors, specialists, or other clinicians
should always be a goal, and proper patient consent must be obtained for this.
Similarly, family involvement in a patient’s care can often be a useful and
integral part of treatment and requires proper patient consent.
A thorough discussion of safety planning and contact information should
occur during the psychiatric interview. The clinician’s contact information, as


<<<PAGE 66>>>
well as after-hours coverage scheme, should be reviewed. The patient needs
to be informed of what he or she should do in the case of an emergency,
including using the emergency room or calling 911 or available crisis
hotlines.
Techniques
General principles of the psychiatric interview, such as the patient–doctor
relationship, open-ended interviewing, and confidentiality, are described
above. Also, to the general principles, several specific techniques can be
useful in obtaining information in a manner consistent with the general
principles. These helpful techniques can be described as facilitating
interventions and expanding interventions. Some interventions are generally
counterproductive and interfere with the goals of helping the patient tell his
or her story and reinforcing the therapeutic alliance.
Facilitating Interventions. These are some of the interventions that are
effective in enabling the patient to continue sharing his or her story and also
help promote a positive patient–doctor relationship. At times some of these
techniques may be combined in a single intervention.
REINFORCEMENT. Reinforcement interventions, although seemingly simplistic,

are very important in the patient sharing material about himself or herself and
other influential individuals and events in the patient’s life. Without these
reinforcements, often, the interview will become less productive. A brief
phrase such as “I see,” “Go on,” “Yes,” “Tell me more,” “Hmm,” or “Uhhuh” all convey the interviewer’s interest in the patient continuing. These
phrases must fit naturally into the dialogue.
REFLECTION. By using the patient’s words, the psychiatrist indicates that he or

she has heard what the patient is saying and conveys an interest in hearing
more.
This response is not a question. A question, with a slight inflection at the
end, calls for some clarification. It should also not be said with a tone that is
challenging or disbelieving but rather as a statement of fact. The fact is that
this is the patient’s experience that the psychiatrist hears. Sometimes it is
helpful to paraphrase the patient’s statement, so it doesn’t sound like it is


<<<PAGE 67>>>
coming from anautomation.
SUMMARIZING. Periodically during the interview, it is helpful to summarize

what has been identified about a certain topic. This provides the opportunity
for the patient to clarify or modify the psychiatrist’s understanding and
possibly add new material. When new material is introduced, the psychiatrist
may decide to continue with a further exploration of the previous discussion
and return to the new information at a later point.
EDUCATION. At times in the interview, it is helpful for the psychiatrist to

educate the patient about the interview process.
REASSURANCE. It is often appropriate and helpful to provide reassurance to

the patient. For example, accurate information about the usual course of an
illness can decrease anxiety, encourage the patient to continue to discuss his
or her illness, and strengthen his or her resolve to continue in treatment. It is
generally inappropriate for psychiatrists to reassure patients when the
psychiatrist does not know what the outcome will be. In these cases,
psychiatrists can assure patients they will continue to be available and will
help in whatever way they can.
ENCOURAGEMENT. It is difficult for many patients to come for a psychiatric

evaluation. Often they are uncertain as to what will happen, and receiving
encouragement can facilitate their engagement. Psychiatrists should be
careful not to overstate the patient’s progress in the interview. The
psychiatrist may provide the patient with feedback about his or her efforts,
but the secondary message should be that there is more work to be done.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF EMOTION. The interviewer needs to acknowledge the

expression of emotion by the patient. This frequently leads to the patient
sharing more feelings and being relieved that he or she can do so. Sometimes
a nonverbal action, such as moving a tissue box closer, can suffice or be used
adjunctly. If the display of the emotion is clear (e.g., patient openly crying),
then it is not helpful to comment directly on the expression of the emotion. It
is better to comment on the associated feelings.


<<<PAGE 68>>>
HUMOR. At times the patient may make a humorous comment or tell a brief

joke. It can be beneficial if the psychiatrist smiles, laughs, or even, when
appropriate, add another punch line. This sharing of humor can decrease
tension and anxiety and reinforce the interviewer’s genuineness. It is crucial
to be certain that the patient’s comment was indeed meant to be humorous
and that the psychiatrist clearly conveys that he or she is laughing with the
patient, not at the patient.
SILENCE. Careful use of silence can facilitate the progression of the interview.

The patient may need time to think about what has been said or to experience
a feeling that has arisen in the interview. The psychiatrist, whose own anxiety
results in any silence quickly being terminated, can retard the development of
insight or the expression of feeling by the patient. On the other hand,
extended or repeated silences can deaden an interview and become a struggle
as to who can outwait the other. If the patient is looking at his or her watch or
looking about the room, then it might be helpful to comment, “It looks like
there are other things on your mind.” If the patient has become silent and
looks like he or she is thinking about the subject, then the psychiatrist might
ask, “What thoughts do you have about that?”
NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION. In many good interviews, the most common

facilitating interventions are nonverbal. Nodding of the head, body posture
including leaning toward the patient, body positioning becoming more open,
moving the chair closer to the patient, putting down the pen and folder, and
facial expressions including arching of eyebrows all indicate that the
psychiatrist is concerned, listening attentively, and engaged in the interview.
Although these interventions can be constructive, they can also be overdone,
especially if the same action is repeated too frequently or done exaggeratedly.
The interviewer does not want to reinforce the popular caricature of a
psychiatrist nodding his or her head repeatedly regardless of the content of
what is being said or the emotion being expressed.
EXPANDING INTERVENTIONS. Several interventions can be used to expand the

focus of the interview. These techniques are helpful when the line of
discussion has been sufficiently mined, at least for the time being, and the
interviewer wants to encourage the patient to talk about other issues. These


<<<PAGE 69>>>
interventions are most successful when a degree of trust has been established
in the interview, and the patient feels that the psychiatrist is nonjudgmental
about what is being shared.
CLARIFYING. At times carefully clarifying what the patient has said can lead to

unrecognized issues or psychopathology.
A 62-year-old widow describes how it feels since her husband died 14
months ago. She repeatedly comments that “everything is empty inside.”
The resident interprets this as meaning her world feels empty without her
spouse and makes this interpretation on a few occasions. The patient’s
nonverbal cues suggest that she is not on the same wavelength. The
supervisor asks the patient to clarify what she means by “empty inside.”
After some avoidance, the patient states that she is indeed empty inside;
all her organs are missing—they have “disappeared.”
The resident’s interpretation may have been psychodynamically
accurate, but a somatic delusion was not identified. The correct
identification of what the patient was saying led to an exploration of other
thoughts and other delusions were uncovered. This vignette of “missing”
the delusion is an example of the interviewer “normalizing” what the
patient is saying. The interviewer was using secondary process thinking
in understanding the words of the patient, while the patient was using
primary process thinking.
ASSOCIATIONS. As the patient describes his or her symptoms, other areas are

related to a symptom that should be explored. For example, the symptom of
nausea leads to questions about appetite, bowel habits, weight loss, and
eating habits. Also, experiences that are temporally related may be
investigated. When a patient is talking about his or her sleeping pattern, it can
be a good opportunity to ask about dreams.
LEADING. Often, continuing the story can be facilitated by asking a “what,”

“when,” “where,” or “who” question. Sometimes the psychiatrist may
suggest or ask about something that has not been introduced by the patient
but that the psychiatrist surmises may be relevant.


<<<PAGE 70>>>
PROBING. The interview may point toward an area of conflict, but the patient

may minimize or deny any difficulties. Gently encouraging the patient to talk
more about this issue may be quite productive.
Sometimes transitions occur very smoothly. The patient is
talking about her primary education major in college and the psychiatrist
asks, “Did that lead to your work after college?” On other occasions, the
transition means moving to a different area of the interview, and a bridge
statement is useful.
TRANSITIONS.

REDIRECTING. A difficult technique for unseasoned interviewers is redirecting

the focus of the patient. If the interviewer is concentrating on reinforcing the
patient’s telling of his or her story, it can be especially difficult to move the
interview in a different direction. However, this is often crucial to a
successful interview because of the time constraints and the necessity to
obtain a broad overview of the patient’s life as well as the current problems.
Also, the patient may, for conscious or often unconscious reasons, avoid
certain important areas, and need guidance in approaching these subjects.
Redirection can be used when the patient changes the topic or when the
patient continues to focus on a nonproductive or well-covered area.
Obstructive Interventions. Although supportive and expanding
techniques facilitate the gathering of information and the development of a
positive patient–doctor relationship, several other interventions are not
helpful for either task. Some of these activities are in the same categories as
the more useful interventions but are unclear, unconnected, poorly timed, and
not responsive to the patient’s issues or concerns.
CLOSED-ENDED QUESTIONS. A series of closed-ended questions early in the

interview can retard the natural flow of the patient’s story and reinforces the
patient giving one word or brief answers with little or no elaboration.
A patient can be a partner in the interview unless the psychiatrist blocks
them. Many patients, some of whom have previous experiences in therapy,
come prepared to talk about even painful matters. Over time, psychiatrists,
especially if they have had the benefit of supervision, learn from patients, and
refine their interviewing skills.


<<<PAGE 71>>>
COMPOUND QUESTIONS. Some questions are difficult for patients to respond to

because more than one answer is being sought.
Especially early in the psychiatric interview, “why”
questions are often nonproductive. Very often, the answer to that question is
one of the reasons that the patient has sought help.
WHY QUESTIONS.

Judgmental interventions are
generally nonproductive for the issue at hand and also inhibit the patient from
sharing even more private or sensitive material. Instead of telling a patient
that particular behavior was right or wrong, it would be better for the
psychiatrist to help the patient reflect on how successful that behavior was.
JUDGMENTAL QUESTIONS OR STATEMENTS.

In an attempt to reassure patients,
psychiatrists sometimes make the error of minimizing a concern. This can be
counterproductive in that rather than being reassured, and the patient may feel
that the psychiatrist does not understand what he or she is trying to express. It
is much more productive to explore the concern; there is likely much more
material that has not yet been shared.
MINIMIZING

PATIENT’S

CONCERNS.

PREMATURE ADVICE. Advice given too early is often bad advice because the

interviewer does not yet know all of the variables. Also, it can preempt the
patient from arriving at a plan for himself or herself.
PREMATURE INTERPRETATION. Even if it is accurate, a premature interpretation

can be counterproductive as the patient may respond defensively and feel
misunderstood.
TRANSITIONS. Some transitions are too abrupt and may interrupt essential

issues that the patient is discussing.
The psychiatrist that repeatedly looks at a
watch turns away from the patient, yawns, or refreshes the computer screen
conveys boredom, disinterest, or annoyance. Just as reinforcing nonverbal
communications can be powerful facilitators of a good interview, these
obstructive actions can quickly shatter an interview and undermine the
NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION.


<<<PAGE 72>>>
patient–doctor relationship.
Closing of Interview. The last 5 to 10 minutes of the interview are crucial
and are often not given sufficient attention by inexperienced interviewers. It
is essential to alert the patient to the remaining time: “We have to stop in
about 10 minutes.” Not infrequently, a patient will have kept an important
issue or question until the end of the interview, and having at least a brief
time to identify the issue is helpful. If there is to be another session, then the
psychiatrist can indicate that this issue will be addressed at the beginning of
the next session or ask the patient to bring it up at that time. If the patient
repeatedly brings up important information at the end of sessions, then this
should be explored as to its meaning. If the patient spontaneously brings up
no such item, then it can be useful to ask the patient if any other issues have
not been covered that the patient wanted to share. If such an issue can be
dealt with in short order, then it should be; if not, then it can be put on the
agenda for the next session. It can also be useful to allow the patient to ask a
question: “I’ve asked you a lot of questions today. Are there any other
questions you’d like to ask me at this point?”
If this interview was to be a single evaluative session, then a summary of
the diagnosis and options for treatment should generally be shared with the
patient (exceptions may be a disability or forensic evaluation for which it was
established at the outset that a report would be made to the referring entity).
If a primary care physician referred the patient, then the psychiatrist also
indicates that he or she will communicate with the primary care physician and
share the findings and recommendations. If this was not to be a single session
and the patient will be seen again, then the psychiatrist may indicate that he
or she and the patient can work further on the treatment plan in the next
session. A mutually agreed upon time is arrived at, and the patient is escorted
to the door.
Motivational Interviewing. Motivational interviewing is a technique used
to motivate the patient to change his or her maladaptive behavior. The
therapist relies on empathy to convey understanding, provides support by
noting the patient’s strengths, and explores the ambivalence and conflicting
thoughts or feelings the patient may have about change. Guidance is provided
in the interview by imparting information about issues (e.g., alcoholism,


<<<PAGE 73>>>
diabetes) while at the same time getting the patient to talk about resistances to
altering behavior. It has been used effectively in persons with substance use
disorders to get them to join AA, to help change lifestyles, or to enter
psychotherapy. It has the potential to combine diagnosis and therapy in a
single interview with the patient and can be applied to a wide range of mental
disorders.
Medical Record
Most psychiatrists take notes throughout the interview. Generally, these are
not verbatim recordings, except for the chief complaint or other key
statements. Many psychiatrists use a form that covers the basic elements in
the psychiatric evaluation. Occasionally, patients may have questions or
concerns about note-taking. These concerns, which often have to do with
confidentiality, should be discussed (and during this discussion, notes should
not be taken). After the discussion, it is rare for a patient to insist that notes
not be taken. It is much more common for patients to feel comfortable about
the note-taking, feeling reassured that their experiences and feelings are
important enough to be written. However, too much attention to the record
can be distracting. Eye contact must be maintained as much as possible
during the note-taking. Otherwise, patients will feel that the record is more
important than what they are saying. Also, the interviewer may miss
nonverbal communications that can be more important than the words being
recorded.
Increasingly, the electronic health record (EHR) is now being used
throughout medicine. There are great advantages of computerized records,
including rapid retrieval of information, appropriately sharing data among
various members of the health care team, access to important data in an
emergency, decreasing errors, and as a tool for research and quality
improvement activities. Evidence-based practice guidelines can also be
integrated with EHRs so that information or recommendations can be
provided at the point of service. However, the use of computers can also
present significant challenges to the developing patient–physician
relationship. Frequently, physicians using computers during an interview will
turn away from the patient to enter data. Especially in a psychiatric interview,
this can be very disruptive to a smooth and dynamic interaction. As improved


<<<PAGE 74>>>
technology becomes more widespread (e.g., the use of notepads held in the
lap) and psychiatrists become more accustomed to using the equipment, some
of these disruptions can be minimized.
Cultural Issues
Culture can be defined as a common heritage, a set of beliefs, and values that
set expectations for behaviors, thoughts, and even feelings. Several culturebound syndromes that are unique to a particular population have been
described (see Chapter 34). Culture can influence the presentation of illness,
the decision when and where to seek care, the decision as to what to share
with the physician, and the acceptance of and participation in treatment
planning. Often, individuals from a minority population may be reluctant to
seek help from a physician who is from the majority group, especially for
emotional difficulties. Some minority groups have strong beliefs in faith
healers, and in some areas of the US “root doctors” carry significant
influence. These beliefs may not be apparent in the interview as the patient
may have learned to be quite guarded about such matters. A patient may only
report that he or she is “frightened” and not discuss the reality that this fear
began when he or she realized someone was working “roots” on him or her.
The psychiatrist needs to be alert to the possibility that the patient’s thoughts
about what has happened may be unusual from a traditional Western medical
perspective and at the same time recognize that these culturally shared beliefs
are not indications of psychosis. By being humble, open, and respectful the
psychiatrist increases the possibility of developing a trusting working
relationship with the patient and learning more about the patient’s actual
experiences.
The psychiatrist clearly understanding what the patient is saying, and the
patient clearly understanding what the psychiatrist is saying are crucial for an
effective interview. It is not just both being fluent in the language of the
interview, but the psychiatrist should also be aware of common slang words
and phrases that the patient, depending on their cultural background, may
use. If the psychiatrist does not understand a particular phrase or comment,
then he or she should ask for clarification. If the patient and psychiatrist are
not both fluent in the same language, then an interpreter is necessary.


<<<PAGE 75>>>
Interviewing with an Interpreter. When translation is needed, it should
be provided by a non–family-member professional interpreter. Translation by
family members is to be avoided because (1) a patient, with a family member
as an interpreter, may justifiably be very reluctant to discuss sensitive issues,
including suicidal ideation or drug use, and (2) family members may be
hesitant to portray a patient’s deficits accurately. Both of these issues make
accurate assessment very difficult.
It is helpful to speak with the interpreter before the interview to clarify the
goals of the exam. If the interpreter does not primarily work with psychiatric
patients, then it is important to highlight the need for verbatim translation
even if the responses are disorganized or tangential. If the translator is not
aware of this issue, then the psychiatrist may have difficulty diagnosing
thought disorders or cognitive deficits. Occasionally, the patient will say
several sentences in response to a question, and the interpreter will remark,
“He said it’s okay.” The interpreter should again be reminded that the
psychiatrist wants to hear everything that the patient is saying.
It is helpful to place the chairs in a triangle so that the psychiatrist and
patient can maintain eye contact. The psychiatrist should continue to refer to
the patient directly to maintain the therapeutic connection rather than
speaking to the interpreter. The examiner may need to take a more directive
approach and interrupt the patient’s responses more frequently to allow for
accurate and timely translation.
Once the interview is concluded, it may be helpful to again meet briefly
with the interpreter. If the interpreter is especially knowledgeable about the
patient’s cultural background, they may be able to provide helpful insights
regarding cultural norms.
Interviewing the Difficult Patient
Patients with Psychosis. Patients with psychotic illnesses are often
frightened and guarded. They may have difficulty with reasoning and
thinking clearly. Also, they may be actively hallucinating during the
interview, causing them to be inattentive and distracted. They may have
suspicions regarding the purpose of the interview. All of these possibilities
are reasons that the interviewer may need to alter the usual format and adapt
the interview to match the capacity and tolerance of the patient.


<<<PAGE 76>>>
Auditory hallucinations are the most common hallucinations in psychiatric
illnesses in North America. Many patients will not interpret their experiences
as hallucinations, and it is useful to begin with a more general question: “Do
you ever hear someone talking to you when no one else is there?” The patient
should be asked about the content of the hallucinations, the clarity, and the
situations in which they occur. Often it is helpful to ask the patient about a
specific instance and if he or she can repeat verbatim the content of the
hallucination. It is important to specifically ask if the patient has ever
experienced command hallucinations, hallucinations in which a patient is
ordered to perform a specific act. If so, the nature of the commands should be
clarified, specifically if the commands have ever included orders to harm
himself or herself or others, and if the patient has ever felt compelled to
follow the commands.
The validity of the patient’s perception should not be dismissed, but it is
helpful to test the strength of the belief in the hallucinations: “Does it seem
that the voices are coming from inside your head? Who do you think is
speaking to you?”
Other perceptual disturbances should be explored, including visual,
olfactory, and tactile hallucinations. These disturbances are less common in
psychiatric illness and may suggest a primary medical etiology to the
psychosis.
The psychiatrist should be alert for cues that psychotic processes may be
part of the patient’s experience during the interview. It is usually best to ask
directly about such behaviors or comments.
By definition, patients with delusions have fixed false beliefs. With
delusions, as with hallucinations, it is important to explore the specific
details. Patients are often very reluctant to discuss their beliefs, as many have
had their beliefs dismissed or ridiculed. They may ask the interviewer directly
if the interviewer believes the delusion. Although an interviewer should not
directly endorse the false belief, it is rarely helpful to challenge the delusion,
particularly in the initial examination directly. It can be useful to shift the
attention back to the patient’s rather than the examiner’s beliefs and
acknowledge the need for more information: “I believe that what you are
experiencing is frightening and I would like to know more about your
experiences.”
For patients with paranoid thoughts and behaviors, it is important to


<<<PAGE 77>>>
maintain a respectful distance. Their suspiciousness may be increased by an
overly warm interview. It may be helpful to avoid sustained direct eye
contact, as this may be perceived as threatening. Harry Stack Sullivan
recommended that rather than sitting face to face with the patient who is
paranoid, the psychiatrist might sit more side by side, “looking out” with the
patient. Interviewers should keep in mind that they themselves may become
incorporated into the paranoid delusions, and it is helpful to ask directly
about such fears: “Are you concerned that I am involved?” The psychiatrist
should also ask whether there is a specific target related to paranoid thinking.
When asked regarding thoughts about hurting others, the patient may not
disclose plans for violence. Exploration of the patient’s plan on how to
manage his or her fears may elicit information regarding violence risk: “Do
you feel you need to protect yourself in any way? How do you plan to do so?”
If there is some expression of possible violence toward others, the
psychiatrist then needs to do further risk assessment. This is further discussed
in the section below on hostile, agitated, and violent patients.
Depressed and Potentially Suicidal Patients. The depressed patient
may have particular difficulty during the interview as he or she may have
cognitive deficits as a result of the depressive symptoms. The patients may
have impaired motivation and may not spontaneously report their symptoms.
Feelings of hopelessness may contribute to a lack of engagement. Depending
on the severity of symptoms, patients may need more direct questioning
rather than an open-ended format.
A suicide assessment should be performed for all patients, including prior
history, family history of suicide attempts and completed suicides, and
current ideation, plan, and intent. An open-ended approach is often helpful:
“Have you ever had thoughts that life wasn’t worth living?” It is important to
detail prior attempts. The lethality risk of prior attempts and any potential
triggers for the attempt should be clarified. This can help with assessing the
current risk.
The patient should be asked about any current thoughts of suicide, and if
thoughts are present, what is the patient’s intent. Some patients will describe
having thoughts of suicide but do not intend to act on these thoughts or wish
to be dead. They report that although the thoughts are present, they have no
intent to act on the thoughts. This is typically referred to as passive suicidal


<<<PAGE 78>>>
ideation. Other patients will express their determination to end their life and
are at higher risk. The presence of psychotic symptoms should be assessed.
Some patients may have hallucinations compelling them to hurt themselves
even though they do not have a desire to die.
If the patient reports suicidal ideation, they should be asked if they have a
plan to end his or her life. The specificity of the plan should be determined
and whether the patient has access to the means to complete the plan. The
interviewer should pursue this line of questioning in detail if the patient has
taken any preparatory steps to move forward with the plan. (A patient who
has purchased a gun and has given away important items would be at high
risk.)
If the patient has not acted upon these urges, then it is helpful to ask what
has prevented him or her from acting on these thoughts: “What do you think
has kept you from hurting yourself?” The patient may disclose information
that may decrease their acute risk, such as religious beliefs that prohibit
suicide or awareness of the impact of suicide on family members. This
information is essential to keep in mind during treatment especially if these
preventative factors change. (A patient who states he or she could never
abandon a beloved pet may be at increased risk if the pet dies.)
Although the psychiatric interview intends to build rapport and gather
information for treatment and diagnosis, the patient’s safety must be the
priority. If the patient is viewed to be at imminent risk, then an interview may
need to be terminated, and the interviewer must take action to secure the
safety of the patient.
Hostile, Agitated, and Potentially Violent Patients. Safety for the
patient and the psychiatrist is the priority when interviewing agitated patients.
Hostile patients are often interviewed in emergency settings, but angry and
agitated patients can present in any setting. If interviewing in an unfamiliar
setting, then the psychiatrist should familiarize himself or herself with the
office setup, paying particular attention to the chair placement. The chairs
should ideally be placed in a way in which both the interviewer and patient
could exit if necessary and not be obstructed. The psychiatrist should be
aware of any available safety features (emergency buttons or number for
security) and should be familiar with the facility’s security plan. If the
psychiatrist is aware in advance that the patient is agitated, then he or she can


<<<PAGE 79>>>
take additional preparatory steps such as having security closely available if
necessary.
As increased stimulation can be agitating for a hostile patient, care should
be taken to decrease excess stimulation as much as feasible. The psychiatrist
should be aware of their own body position and avoid postures that could be
seen as threatening, including clenched hands or hands behind the back.
The psychiatrist should approach the interview in a calm, direct manner
and take care not to bargain or promise to elicit cooperation in the interview:
“Once we finish here, you will be able to go home.” These tactics may only
escalate agitation.
As stated above, the priority must be safety. An intimidated psychiatrist
who is fearful regarding his or her physical safety will be unable to perform
an adequate assessment. Similarly, a patient who feels threatened will be
unable to focus on the interview and may begin to escalate thinking that he or
she needs to defend himself or herself. An interview may need to be
terminated early if the patient’s agitation escalates. Generally,
unpremeditated violence is preceded by a period of gradually escalating
psychomotor agitation such as pacing, loud speech, and threatening
comments. At this point, the psychiatrist should consider whether other
measures are necessary, including assistance from security personnel or need
for medication or restraint.
If the patient makes threats or gives some indication that he or she may
become violent outside the interview setting, then further assessment is
necessary. Because a past history of violence is the best predictor of future
violence, past episodes of violence should be explored as to setting, what
precipitated the episode, and what was the outcome or potential outcome (if
the act was interrupted). Also, what has helped in the past in preventing
violent episodes (medication, timeout, physical activity, or talking to a
particular person) should be explored. Is there an identified victim and is
there a plan for the violent behavior? Has the patient taken steps to fulfill the
plan? Depending on the answers to these questions the psychiatrist may
decide to prescribe or increase antipsychotic medication, recommend
hospitalization, and perhaps, depending on the jurisdiction, notify the
threatened victim.
Deceptive Patients. Psychiatrists are trained to diagnose and treat


<<<PAGE 80>>>
psychiatric illness. Although psychiatrists are well trained in eliciting
information and maintaining awareness for deception, these abilities are not
foolproof. Patients lie or deceive their psychiatrists for many different
reasons. Some are motivated by secondary gain (e.g., for financial resources,
absence from work, or for a supply of medication). Some patients may
deceive, not for an external advantage, but for the psychological benefits of
assuming a sick role. As noted above, unconscious processes may result in
events or feelings being outside the patient’s awareness.
There are no current biologic markers to validate a patient’s symptoms
definitively. Psychiatrists are dependent on the patient’s self-report. Given
these limitations, it may be useful, especially when there is a question about
the patient’s reliability (possibly related to inconsistencies in the patient’s
report), to gather collateral information regarding the patient. This allows the
psychiatrist to have a more broad understanding of the patient outside the
interview setting, and discrepancies in symptom severity between self-report
and collateral information may suggest deception. Some psychological tests
can help in further evaluating the reliability of the patient.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE PSYCHIATRIC
PATIENT
Confronted with a patient who has a mental disorder, the psychiatrist must
decide whether a medical, surgical, or neurologic condition may be the cause.
Once satisfied that no disease process can be held accountable, then the
diagnosis of mental disorder not attributable to a medical illness can be made.
Although psychiatrists do not perform routine physical examinations of their
patients, knowledge, and understanding of physical signs and symptoms is
part of their training, which enables them to recognize signs and symptoms
that may indicate possible medical or surgical illness. For example,
palpitations can be associated with mitral valve prolapse, which is diagnosed
by cardiac auscultation. Psychiatrists are also able to recognize and treat the
adverse effects of psychotropic medications, which are used by an increasing
number of patients seen by psychiatrists and nonpsychiatric physicians.
Some psychiatrists insist that every patient has a complete medical
workup; others may not. Whatever their policy, psychiatrists should consider
patients’ medical status at the outset of a psychiatric evaluation. Psychiatrists


<<<PAGE 81>>>
must often decide whether a patient needs a medical examination and, if so,
what it should include—most commonly, a thorough medical history,
including a review of systems, a physical examination, and relevant
diagnostic laboratory studies. A recent study of 1,000 medical patients found
that in 75 percent of cases, no cause of symptoms (i.e., subjective complaints)
could be found, and a psychological basis was assumed in 10 percent of those
cases.
History of Medical Illness
In the course of conducting a psychiatric evaluation, the information should
be gathered about known bodily diseases or dysfunctions, hospitalizations
and operative procedures, medications are taken recently or at present,
personal habits and occupational history, family history of illnesses, and
specific physical complaints. Information about medical illnesses should be
gathered from the patient, the referring physician, and the family, if
necessary.
Information about previous episodes of illness may provide valuable clues
about the nature of the present disorder. For example, a distinctly delusional
disorder in a patient with a history of several similar episodes that responded
promptly to diverse forms of treatment strongly suggests the possibility of
substance-induced psychotic disorder. To pursue this lead, the psychiatrist
should order a drug screen. The history of a surgical procedure may also be
useful; for instance, a thyroidectomy suggests hypothyroidism as the cause of
depression.
Depression is an adverse effect of several medications prescribed for
hypertension. Medication taken in a therapeutic dosage occasionally reaches
high concentrations in the blood. Digitalis intoxication, for example, can
occur under such circumstances and result in impaired mental functioning.
Proprietary drugs can cause or contribute to an anticholinergic delirium. The
psychiatrist, therefore, must inquire about over-the-counter remedies as well
as prescribed medications. A history of herbal intake and alternative therapy
is essential, given their increased use.
An occupational history may also provide essential information. Exposure
to mercury can result in complaints suggesting a psychosis, and exposure to
lead, as in smelting, can produce a cognitive disorder. The latter clinical


<<<PAGE 82>>>
picture can also result from imbibing moonshine whiskey with high lead
content.
In eliciting information about specific symptoms, the psychiatrist brings
medical and psychological knowledge into full play. For example, the
psychiatrist should elicit sufficient information from the patient complaining
of headaches to predict whether the pain results from an intracranial disease
that requires neurologic testing. Also, the psychiatrist should be able to
recognize that the pain in the right shoulder of a hypochondriacal patient with
abdominal discomfort may be the classic referred pain of gallbladder disease.
Review of Systems
An inventory by systems should follow the open-ended inquiry. The review
can be organized according to organ systems (e.g., liver, pancreas), functional
systems (e.g., gastrointestinal), or a combination of the two, as in the outline
presented in the following subsections. In all cases, the review should be
comprehensive and thorough. Even if a psychiatric component is suspected, a
complete workup is still indicated.
Head. Many patients give a history of headache; its duration, frequency,
character, location, and severity should be ascertained. Headaches often result
from substance abuse, including alcohol, nicotine, and caffeine. Vascular
(migraine) headaches are precipitated by stress. Temporal arteritis causes
unilateral throbbing headaches and can lead to blindness. Brain tumors are
associated with headaches as a result of increased intracranial pressure, but
some may be silent, the first signs being a change in personality or cognition.
A 63-year-old woman in treatment for depression began to complain of
difficulties in concentration. The psychiatrist attributed the complaint to
the depressive disorder; however, when the patient began to complain of
balance difficulties, magnetic resonance imaging was obtained, which
revealed the presence of meningioma.
A head injury can result in subdural hematoma and, in boxers, can cause
progressive dementia with extrapyramidal symptoms. The headache of


<<<PAGE 83>>>
subarachnoid hemorrhage is sudden, severe, and associated with changes in
the sensorium. Normal-pressure hydrocephalus can follow a head injury or
encephalitis and be associated with dementia, shuffling gait, and urinary
incontinence. Dizziness occurs in up to 30 percent of persons, and
determining its cause is challenging and often complicated. A change in the
size or shape of the head may be indicative of Paget disease.
Eye, Ear, Nose, and Throat. Visual acuity, diplopia, hearing problems,
tinnitus, glossitis, and bad taste are covered in this area. A patient taking
antipsychotics who gives a history of twitching about the mouth or disturbing
movements of the tongue may be in the early and potentially reversible stage
of tardive dyskinesia. Impaired vision can occur with thioridazine (Mellaril)
in high doses (over 800 mg a day). A history of glaucoma contraindicates
drugs with anticholinergic effects. Complaints of bad odors may be a
symptom of temporal lobe epilepsy rather than schizophrenia. Aphonia may
be hysterical. The late stage of cocaine abuse can result in perforations of the
nasal septum and difficulty breathing. A transitory episode of diplopia may
herald multiple sclerosis. Delusional disorder is more common in hard of
hearing persons than in those with normal hearing. Transient blue-tinged
vision can occur when using sildenafil (Viagra) or similar drugs.
Respiratory System. Cough, asthma, pleurisy, hemoptysis, dyspnea, and
orthopnea are considered in this subsection. Hyperventilation is suggested if
the patient’s symptoms include all or a few of the following: onset at rest,
sighing respirations, apprehension, anxiety, depersonalization, palpitations,
inability to swallow, numbness of the feet and hands, and carpopedal spasm.
Dyspnea and breathlessness can occur in depression. In pulmonary or
obstructive airway disease, the onset of symptoms is usually insidious,
whereas, in depression, it is sudden. In depression, breathlessness is
experienced at rest, shows little change with exertion, and can fluctuate
within a matter of minutes; the onset of breathlessness coincides with the
onset of a mood disorder and is often accompanied by attacks of dizziness,
sweating, palpitations, and paresthesias.
In obstructive airway disease, patients with the most advanced respiratory
incapacity experience breathlessness at rest. Most striking and of greatest
assistance in making a differential diagnosis is an emphasis placed on the


<<<PAGE 84>>>
difficulty in inspiration experienced by patients with depression and on the
difficulty in expiration experienced by patients with pulmonary disease.
Bronchial asthma has sometimes been associated with a childhood history of
extreme dependence on the mother. Patients with bronchospasm should not
receive propranolol (Inderal) because it can block catecholamine-induced
bronchodilation; propranolol is specifically contraindicated for patients with
bronchial asthma because epinephrine given to such patients in an emergency
will not be effective. Patients taking angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors can develop a dry cough as an adverse effect of the drug.
Cardiovascular System. Tachycardia, palpitations, and cardiac
arrhythmia are among the most common signs of anxiety about which the
patient may complain. Pheochromocytoma usually produces symptoms that
mimic anxiety disorders, such as rapid heartbeat, tremors, and pallor.
Increased urinary catecholamines are diagnostic of pheochromocytoma.
Patients taking guanethidine (Ismelin) for hypertension should not receive
tricyclic drugs, which reduce or eliminate the antihypertensive effect of
guanethidine. A history of hypertension can preclude the use of MAOIs
because of the risk of a hypertensive crisis if such patients with hypertension
inadvertently ingest foods high in tyramine. Patients with suspected cardiac
disease should have an electrocardiogram before tricyclics or lithium
(Eskalith) is prescribed. A history of substernal pain should be evaluated, and
the clinician should keep in mind that psychological stress can precipitate
angina-type chest pain in the presence of normal coronary arteries. Patients
taking opioids should never receive MAOIs; the combination can cause
cardiovascular collapse.
Gastrointestinal System. Such topics as appetite, distress before or after
meals, food preferences, diarrhea, vomiting, constipation, laxative use, and
abdominal pain relate to the gastrointestinal system. A history of weight loss
is common in depressive disorders, but depression can accompany the weight
loss caused by ulcerative colitis, regional enteritis, and cancer. Atypical
depression is accompanied by hyperphagia and weight gain. Anorexia
nervosa is accompanied by severe weight loss in the presence of normal
appetite. Avoidance of certain foods may be a phobic phenomenon or part of
an obsessive ritual. Laxative abuse and induced vomiting are common in


<<<PAGE 85>>>
bulimia nervosa. Constipation can be caused by opioid dependence and
psychotropic drugs with anticholinergic side effects. Cocaine or amphetamine
abuse causes a loss of appetite and weight loss. Weight gain can occur under
stress or in association with atypical depression. Polyphagia, polyuria, and
polydipsia are the triad of diabetes mellitus. Polyuria, polydipsia, and
diarrhea are signs of lithium toxicity. Some patients take enemas routinely as
part of paraphilic behavior, and anal fissures or recurrent hemorrhoids may
indicate anal penetration by foreign objects. Some patients may ingest foreign
objects that produce symptoms that can be diagnosed only by x-ray (Fig. 11).


<<<PAGE 86>>>
FIGURE 1-1
A mentally ill patient who is a habitual swallower of foreign objects. Included in his
colonic lumen are 13 thermometers and 8 pennies. The dense, round, almost
punctate densities are globules of liberated liquid mercury. (Courtesy of Stephen
R. Baker, M.D. and Kyunghee C. Cho, M.D.)

Genitourinary System. Urinary frequency, nocturia, pain or burning on
urination, and changes in the size and the force of the stream are some of the
signs and symptoms emanating from the genitourinary system.
Anticholinergic adverse effects associated with antipsychotics and tricyclic


<<<PAGE 87>>>
drugs can cause urinary retention in men with prostate hypertrophy. Erectile
difficulty and retarded ejaculation are also common adverse effects of these
drugs, and retrograde ejaculation occurs with thioridazine. A baseline level of
sexual responsiveness before using pharmacologic agents should be obtained.
A history of STDs—for example, gonorrheal discharge, chancre, herpes, and
pubic lice—may indicate sexual promiscuity or unsafe sexual practices.

FIGURE 1-2
A patient brought to the emergency room with lower abdominal pain. X-ray shows
a nasogastric tube folded into the bladder. The patient would insert the tube into
his urethra as part of a masturbatory ritual (urethral eroticism). (Courtesy of
Stephen R. Baker, M.D. and Kyunghee C. Cho, M.D.)

In some cases, the first symptom of acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(AIDS) is the gradual onset of mental confusion leading to dementia.
Incontinence should be evaluated carefully, and if it persists, further
investigation for more extensive disease should include a workup for HIV
infection. Drugs with anticholinergic adverse effects should be avoided in
men with prostatism. Urethral eroticism, in which catheters or other objects


<<<PAGE 88>>>
are inserted into the urethra, can cause infection or laceration (Fig. 1-2).
Orgasm causes prostatic contractions, which may artificially raise prostatespecific antigen (PSA) and give a false-positive result for prostatic cancer.
Men scheduled to have a PSA test should avoid masturbation or coitus for 7
to 10 days before the test.
Menstrual History. A menstrual history should include the age of the onset
of menarche (and menopause, if applicable); the interval, regularity, duration,
and amount of flow of periods; irregular bleeding; dysmenorrhea; and
abortions. Amenorrhea is characteristic of anorexia nervosa and also occurs
in women who are psychologically stressed. Women who are afraid of
becoming pregnant or who have a wish to be pregnant may have delayed
periods. Pseudocyesis is false pregnancy with complete cessation of the
menses. Perimenstrual mood changes (e.g., irritability, depression, and
dysphoria) should be noted. Painful menstruation can result from uterine
disease (e.g., myomata), from psychological conflicts about the menses, or
from a combination of the two. Some women report a perimenstrual increase
in sexual desire. The emotional reaction associated with abortion should be
explored because it can be mild or severe.
General Observation
An important part of the medical examination is subsumed under the broad
heading of general observation—visual, auditory, and olfactory. Such
nonverbal clues as posture, facial expression, and mannerisms should also be
noted.
Visual Inspection. Scrutiny of the patient begins at the first encounter.
When the patient goes from the waiting room to the interview room, the
psychiatrist should observe the patient’s gait. Is the patient unsteady? Ataxia
suggests diffuse brain disease, alcohol or other substance intoxication,
chorea, spinocerebellar degeneration, weakness based on a debilitating
process, and an underlying disorder, such as myotonic dystrophy. Does the
patient walk without the usual associated arm movements and turn in a rigid
fashion, such as a toy soldier, as is seen in early Parkinson disease? Does the
patient have asymmetry of gait, such as turning one foot outward, dragging a
leg, or not swinging one arm, suggesting a focal brain lesion?


<<<PAGE 89>>>
As soon as the patient is seated, the psychiatrist should direct attention to
grooming. Is the patient’s hair combed, are the nails clean, and are the teeth
brushed? Has clothing been chosen with care and is it appropriate? Although
inattention to dress and hygiene is common in mental disorders—in
particular, depressive disorders—it is also a hallmark of cognitive disorders.
Lapses, such as mismatching socks, stockings, or shoes, may suggest a
cognitive disorder.
The patient’s posture and automatic movements or the lack of them should
be noted. A stooped, flexed posture with a paucity of automatic movements
may be caused by Parkinson disease or diffuse cerebral hemispheric disease
or be an adverse effect of antipsychotics. An unusual tilt of the head may be
adopted to avoid eye contact, but it can also result from diplopia, a visual
field defect, or focal cerebellar dysfunction. Frequent quick, purposeless
movements are characteristic of anxiety disorders, but they are equally
characteristic of chorea and hyperthyroidism. Tremors, although commonly
seen in anxiety disorders, may point to Parkinson disease, essential tremor, or
adverse effects of psychotropic medication. Patients with essential tremor
sometimes seek psychiatric treatment because they believe the tremor must
be caused by unrecognized fear or anxiety, as others often suggest. Unilateral
paucity or excess of movement suggests focal brain disease.
The patient’s appearance is then scrutinized to assess general health. Does
the patient appear to be robust or is there a sense of ill health? Does looseness
of clothing indicate recent weight loss? Is the patient short of breath or
coughing? Does the patient’s general physiognomy suggest a specific
disease? Men with Klinefelter syndrome have a feminine fat distribution and
lack the development of secondary male sex characteristics. Acromegaly is
usually immediately recognizable by the large head and jaw.
What is the patient’s nutritional status? Recent weight loss, although often
seen in depressive disorders and schizophrenia, may be caused by
gastrointestinal disease, diffuse carcinomatosis, Addison disease,
hyperthyroidism, and many other somatic disorders. Obesity can result from
either emotional distress or organic disease. Moon facies, truncal obesity, and
buffalo hump are striking findings in Cushing syndrome. The puffy, bloated
appearance seen in hypothyroidism and the massive obesity and periodic
respiration seen in Pickwickian syndrome are easily recognized in patients
referred for psychiatric help. Hyperthyroidism is indicated by exophthalmos.


<<<PAGE 90>>>
The skin frequently provides valuable information. The yellow
discoloration of hepatic dysfunction and the pallor of anemia are reasonably
distinctive. Intense reddening may be caused by carbon monoxide poisoning
or by photosensitivity resulting from porphyria or phenothiazines. Eruptions
can be manifestations of such disorders as SLE (e.g., the butterfly on the
face), tuberous sclerosis with adenoma sebaceum, and sensitivity to drugs. A
dusky purplish cast to the face, plus telangiectasia, is almost pathognomonic
of alcohol abuse.
Careful observation may reveal clues that lead to the correct diagnosis in
patients who create their skin lesions. For example, the location and shape of
the lesions and the time of their appearance may be characteristic of
dermatitis factitia.
The patient’s face and head should be scanned for evidence of disease.
Premature whitening of the hair occurs in pernicious anemia, and thinning
and coarseness of the hair occur in myxedema. In alopecia areata, patches of
hair are lost, leaving bald spots; hair-pulling disorder (trichotillomania)
presents a similar picture. Pupillary changes are produced by various drugs—
constriction by opioids and dilation by anticholinergic agents and
hallucinogens. The combination of dilated and fixed pupils and dry skin and
mucous membranes should immediately suggest the likelihood of atropine
use or atropine-like toxicity. The diffusion of the conjunctiva suggests
alcohol abuse, cannabis abuse, or obstruction of the superior vena cava.
Flattening of the nasolabial fold on one side or weakness of one side of the
face—as manifested in speaking, smiling, and grimacing—may be the result
of focal dysfunction of the contralateral cerebral hemisphere or Bell palsy. A
drooping eyelid may be an early sign of myasthenia gravis.
The patient’s state of alertness and responsiveness should be evaluated
carefully. A psychological problem may cause drowsiness and
inattentiveness, but they are more likely to result from organic brain
dysfunction, whether secondary to an intrinsic brain disease or an exogenous
factor, such as substance intoxication.
Listening. Listening intently is just as important as looking intently for
evidence of somatic disorders. Slowed speech is characteristic not only of
depression but also of diffuse brain dysfunction and subcortical dysfunction;
unusually rapid speech is characteristic of manic episodes and anxiety


<<<PAGE 91>>>
disorders and also of hyperthyroidism. A weak voice with a monotonous tone
may be a clue to Parkinson disease in patients who complain mainly of
depression. A slow, low-pitched, hoarse voice should suggest the possibility
of hypothyroidism; this voice quality has been described as sounding like a
drowsy, slightly intoxicated person with a bad cold and a plum in the mouth.
A soft or tremulous voice accompanies anxiety.
Difficulty initiating speech may be owing to anxiety or stuttering or may
indicate Parkinson disease or aphasia. Easy fatigability of speech is
sometimes a manifestation of an emotional problem, but it is also
characteristic of myasthenia gravis. Patients with these complaints are likely
to be seen by a psychiatrist before the correct diagnosis is made.
Word production, as well as the quality of speech, is important.
Mispronounced or incorrectly used words suggest a possibility of aphasia
caused by a lesion of the dominant hemisphere. The same possibility exists
when the patient perseverates, has trouble finding a name or a word, or
describes an object or an event in an indirect fashion (paraphasia). When not
consonant with patients’ socioeconomic and educational levels, coarseness,
profanity, or inappropriate disclosures may indicate loss of inhibition caused
by dementia.
Smell. Smell may also provide useful information. The unpleasant odor of a
patient who fails to bathe suggests a cognitive or a depressive disorder. The
odor of alcohol or substances used to hide it is revealing in a patient who
attempts to conceal a drinking problem. Occasionally, a uriniferous odor calls
attention to bladder dysfunction secondary to a nervous system disease.
Characteristic odors are also noted in patients with diabetic acidosis,
flatulence, uremia, and hepatic coma. Precocious puberty can be associated
with the smell of adult sweat produced by mature apocrine glands.
A 23-year-old woman was referred to a psychiatrist for a second opinion.
She had been diagnosed 6 months earlier with schizophrenia after
complaining of smelling foul odors that were considered to be
hallucinatory. She had been placed on antipsychotic medication
(perphenazine) and was compliant despite the side effects of tremor and
lethargy. Although there was some improvement in her symptoms, they


<<<PAGE 92>>>
did not remit entirely. The consulting psychiatrist obtained an
electroencephalogram, which showed abnormal waveforms consistent
with a diagnosis of temporal lobe epilepsy. The antipsychotic medication
was replaced with an anticonvulsant (phenytoin), after which she no
longer experienced an olfactory hallucination, nor did she have to endure
the unpleasant side effects of the previous medication.
Physical Examination
Patient Selection. The nature of the patient’s complaints is critical in
determining whether a complete physical examination is required.
Complaints fall into the three categories of body, mind, and social
interactions. Bodily symptoms (e.g., headaches and palpitations) call for a
thorough medical examination to determine what part if any, somatic
processes play in causing the distress. The same can be said for mental
symptoms such as depression, anxiety, hallucinations, and persecutory
delusions, which can be expressions of somatic processes. If the problem is
limited to the social sphere (e.g., long-standing difficulties in interactions
with teachers, employers, parents, or a spouse), there may be no particular
indication for a physical examination. Personality changes, however, can
result from a medical disorder (e.g., early Alzheimer disease) and cause
interpersonal conflicts.
Psychological Factors. Even a routine physical examination may evoke
adverse reactions; instruments, procedures, and the examining room may be
frightening. A simple running account of what is being done can prevent
much needless anxiety. Moreover, if the patient is consistently forewarned of
what will be done, the dread of being suddenly and painfully surprised
recedes. Comments such as “There’s nothing to this” and “You don’t have to
be afraid because this won’t hurt” leave the patient in the dark and are much
less reassuring than a few words about what actually will be done.
Although the physical examination is likely to engender or intensify a
reaction of anxiety, it can also stir up sexual feelings. Some women with
fears or fantasies of being seduced may misinterpret an ordinary movement in
the physical examination as a sexual advance. Similarly, a delusional man


<<<PAGE 93>>>
with homophobic fears may perceive a rectal examination as a sexual attack.
Lingering over the examination of a particular organ because an unusual but
normal variation has aroused the physician’s scientific curiosity is likely to
raise concern in the patient that a severe pathologic process has been
discovered. Such a reaction may be profound in an anxious or
hypochondriacal patient.
The physical examination occasionally serves a psychotherapeutic
function. Anxious patients may be relieved to learn that, despite troublesome
symptoms, no evidence is found of the serious illness that they fear. The
young person who complains of chest pain and is confident that the pain
heralds a heart attack can usually be reassured by the report of normal
findings after a physical examination and electrocardiogram. The reassurance
relieves only the worry occasioned by the immediate episode, however.
Unless psychiatric treatment succeeds in dealing with the determinants of the
reaction, recurrent episodes are likely.
Sending a patient who has a deeply rooted fear of malignancy for still
another test that is intended to be reassuring is usually unrewarding. Some
patients may have a false fixed belief that a disorder is present.
During the performance of the physical examination, an observant
physician may note indications of emotional distress. For instance, during
genital examinations, a patient’s behavior may reveal information about
sexual attitudes and problems, and these reactions can be used later to open
this area for exploration.
Timing of the Physical Examination. Circumstances occasionally make
it desirable or necessary to defer a complete medical assessment. For
example, a delusional or manic patient may be combative, resistive, or both.
In this instance, a medical history should be elicited from a family member, if
possible, but unless a pressing reason exists to proceed with the examination,
it should be deferred until the patient is tractable.
For psychological reasons, it may be ill-advised to recommend a medical
assessment at the time of an initial office visit. Because of today’s increased
sensitivity and openness about sexual matters and a tendency to turn quickly
to psychiatric help, young men may complain about their failure to
consummate their first coital attempt. After taking a detailed history, the
psychiatrist may conclude that the failure was because of situational anxiety.


<<<PAGE 94>>>
If so, neither a physical examination nor psychotherapy should be
recommended; they would have the undesirable effect of reinforcing the
notion of pathology. Should the problem be recurrent, further evaluation
would be warranted.
Neurologic Examination. If the psychiatrist suspects that the patient has
an underlying somatic disorder, such as diabetes mellitus or Cushing
syndrome, a referral is usually made for diagnosis and treatment. The
situation is different when a cognitive disorder is suspected. The psychiatrist
often chooses to assume responsibility in these cases. At some point,
however, a thorough neurologic evaluation may be indicated.
During the history-taking process in such cases, the patient’s level of
awareness, attentiveness to the details of the examination, understanding,
facial expression, speech, posture, and gait are noted. It is also assumed that a
thorough mental status examination will be performed. The neurologic
examination is carried out with two objectives in mind: to elicit (1) signs
pointing to focal, circumscribed cerebral dysfunction, and (2) signs
suggesting diffuse, bilateral cerebral disease. The first objective is met by the
routine neurologic examination, which is designed primarily to reveal
asymmetries in the motor, perceptual, and reflex functions of the two sides of
the body, caused by focal hemispheric disease. The second objective is met
by seeking to elicit signs that have been attributed to diffuse brain
dysfunction and to frontal lobe disease. These signs include the sucking,
snout, palmomental, and grasp reflexes and the persistence of the glabella tap
response. Regrettably, except for the grasp reflex, such signs do not correlate
strongly with the presence of underlying brain pathology.
Other Findings. Psychiatrists should be able to evaluate the significance of
findings uncovered by consultants. With a patient who complains of a lump
in the throat (globus hystericus) and who is found on examination to have
hypertrophied lymphoid tissue, it is tempting to wonder about a causal
relation. How can a clinician be sure that the finding is not incidental? Has
the patient been known to have hypertrophied lymphoid tissue at a time when
no complaint was made? Do many persons with hypertrophied lymphoid
tissue never experience the sensation of a lump in the throat?
With a patient with multiple sclerosis who complains of an inability to


<<<PAGE 95>>>
walk but, on neurologic examination, has only mild spasticity and a unilateral
Babinski sign, it is tempting to ascribe the symptom to the neurologic
disorder. However, the complaint may be aggravated by emotional distress.
The same holds for a patient with profound dementia in whom a small frontal
meningioma is seen on CT scan. Dementia is not always correlated with the
findings. Significant brain atrophy could cause very mild dementia, and
minimal brain atrophy could cause significant dementia.
A lesion is often found that can account for a symptom, but the psychiatrist
should make every effort to separate an incidental finding from a causative
one and to distinguish a lesion merely found in the area of the symptom from
a lesion producing the symptom.
Patients Undergoing Psychiatric Treatment
While patients are being treated for psychiatric disorders, psychiatrists should
be alert to the possibility of intercurrent illnesses that call for diagnostic
studies. Patients in psychotherapy, particularly those in psychoanalysis, may
be all too willing to ascribe their new symptoms to emotional causes.
Attention should be given to the possible use of denial, especially if the
symptoms seem to be unrelated to the conflicts currently in focus.
Not only may patients in psychotherapy be likely to attribute new
symptoms to emotional causes, but sometimes their therapists do so as well.
The danger of providing psychodynamic explanations for physical symptoms
is ever-present.
Symptoms such as drowsiness and dizziness and signs such as a skin
eruption and a gait disturbance, common adverse effects of psychotropic
medication, call for a medical reevaluation if the patient fails to respond in a
reasonable time to changes in the dose or the kind of medication prescribed.
If patients who are receiving tricyclic or antipsychotic drugs complain of
blurred vision (usually an anticholinergic adverse effect) and the condition
does not recede with a reduction in dose or a change in medication, they
should be evaluated to rule out other causes. In one case, the diagnosis
proved to be toxoplasma chorioretinitis. The absence of other anticholinergic
adverse effects, such as a dry mouth and constipation, is an additional clue
alerting the psychiatrist to the possibility of a concomitant medical illness.
Early in the illness, there may be few, if any, positive physical or


<<<PAGE 96>>>
laboratory results. In such instances, especially if the evidence of psychic
trauma or emotional conflicts is glaring, all symptoms are likely to be
regarded as psychosocial in origin, and new symptoms are also seen in this
light. Indications for repeating portions of the medical workup may be missed
unless the psychiatrist is alert to clues suggesting that some symptoms do not
fit the original diagnosis and, instead, point to a medical illness.
Occasionally, a patient with an acute illness, such as encephalitis, is
hospitalized with the diagnosis of schizophrenia, or a patient with a subacute
illness, such as carcinoma of the pancreas, is treated in a private office or
clinic with the diagnosis of a depressive disorder. Although it may not be
possible to make the correct diagnosis at the time of the initial psychiatric
evaluation, continued surveillance, and attention to clinical details usually
provide clues leading to the recognition of the cause.
The likelihood of intercurrent illness is higher with some psychiatric
disorders than with others. Substance abusers, for example, because of their
life patterns, are susceptible to infection and are likely to suffer from the
adverse effects of trauma, dietary deficiencies, and poor hygiene. Depression
decreases the immune response.
When somatic and psychological dysfunctions are known to coexist, the
psychiatrist should be thoroughly conversant with the patient’s medical
status. In cases of cardiac decompensation, peripheral neuropathy, and other
disabling disorders, the nature and degree of impairment that can be
attributed to the physical disorder should be assessed. It is important to
answer the question: Does the patient exploit a disability, or is it ignored or
denied with resultant overexertion? To answer this question, the psychiatrist
must assess the patient’s capabilities and limitations, rather than make
sweeping judgments based on a diagnostic label.
Special vigilance about medical status is required for some patients in
treatment for somatoform and eating disorders. Such is the case for patients
with ulcerative colitis who are bleeding profusely and for patients with
anorexia nervosa who are losing appreciable weight. These disorders can
become life-threatening.
Importance of Medical Screening. Numerous articles have called
attention to the need for thorough medical screening of patients seen in
psychiatric inpatient services and clinics. (A similar need has been


<<<PAGE 97>>>
demonstrated for the psychiatric evaluation of patients seen in medical
inpatient services and clinics.) The concept of medical clearance remains
ambiguous and has meaning in the context of psychiatric admission or
clearance for transfers from different settings or institutions. It implies that no
medical condition exists to account for the patient’s condition.
Among identified psychiatric patients, from 24 to 60 percent have been
shown to suffer from associated physical disorders. In a survey of 2,090
psychiatric clinic patients, 43 percent were found to have associated physical
disorders; of these, almost half the physical disorders had not been diagnosed
by the referring sources. (In this study, 69 patients were found to have
diabetes mellitus, but only 12 of these cases had been diagnosed before
referral.)
Expecting psychiatrists to be experts in internal medicine is unrealistic, but
they should be able to recognize or have a high suspicion of physical
disorders when they are present. Moreover, they should make appropriate
referrals and collaborate in treating patients who have both physical and
mental disorders.
Psychiatric symptoms are nonspecific; they can herald medical as well as
psychiatric illness. They often precede the appearance of definitive medical
symptoms. Some psychiatric symptoms (e.g., visual hallucinations,
distortions, and illusions) should evoke a high level of suspicion of
medication toxicity.
The medical literature abounds with case reports of patients whose
disorders were initially considered emotional but ultimately proved to be
secondary to medical conditions. The data in most of the reports revealed
features pointing toward organicity. Diagnostic errors arose because such
features were accorded too little weight.

THE PSYCHIATRIC REPORT AND MEDICAL RECORD
Psychiatric Report
This section complements the previous section, “Psychiatric Interview,
History, and Mental Status Examination,” in that it provides a comprehensive
outline on how to write the psychiatric report (see Table 1-7). The need to
follow some sort of outline in gathering data about a person to make a


<<<PAGE 98>>>
psychiatric diagnosis is universally recognized. The one that follows calls for
including a tremendous amount of potential information about the patient, not
all of which need be obtained, depending on the circumstances in the case.
Beginning clinicians are advised to get as much information as possible;
more experienced clinicians can pick and choose among the series of
questions they might ask. In all cases, however, the person is best understood
within the context of his or her life events.
Table 1-7
Psychiatric Report
I. Psychiatric History
A. Identification: Name, age, marital status, sex, occupation,
language if other than English, race, nationality, and religion if
pertinent; previous admissions to a hospital for the same or a
different condition; with whom the patient lives
B. Chief complaint: Exactly why the patient came to the
psychiatrist, preferably in the patient’s own words; if that
information does not come from the patient, note who
supplied it
C. History of present illness: Chronologic background and
development of the symptoms or behavioral changes that
culminated in the patient’s seeking assistance; patient’s life
circumstances at the time of onset; personality when well;
how illness has affected life activities and personal relations
—changes in personality, interests, mood, attitudes toward
others, dress, habits, level of tenseness, irritability, activity,
attention, concentration, memory, speech;
psychophysiological symptoms—nature and details of
dysfunction; pain—location, intensity, fluctuation; level of
anxiety—generalized and nonspecific (free floating) or
specifically related to particular situations, activities, or
objects; how anxieties are handled—avoidance, repetition of
feared situation, use of drugs or other activities for alleviation
D. Past psychiatric and medical history: (1) Emotional or mental
disturbances—extent of incapacity, type of treatment, names


<<<PAGE 99>>>
of hospitals, length of illness, effect of treatment; (2)
psychosomatic disorders: hay fever, arthritis, colitis,
rheumatoid arthritis, recurrent colds, skin conditions; (3)
medical conditions: follow customary review of systems—
sexually transmitted diseases, alcohol or other substance
abuse, at risk for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS); (4) neurologic disorders: headache, craniocerebral
trauma, loss of consciousness, seizures, or tumors
E. Family history: Elicited from patient and from someone else,
because quite different descriptions may be given of the
same persons and events; ethnic, national, and religious
traditions; other persons in the home, descriptions of them—
personality and intelligence—and what has become of them
since patient’s childhood; descriptions of different households
lived in; present relationships between patient and those who
were in family; role of illness in the family; family history of
mental illness; where does patient live—neighborhood and
particular residence of the patient; is home crowded; privacy
of family members from each other and from other families;
sources of family income and difficulties in obtaining it; public
assistance (if any) and attitude about it; will patient lose job or
apartment by remaining in the hospital; who is caring for
children
F. Personal history (anamnesis): History of the patient’s life from
infancy to the present to the extent it can be recalled; gaps in
history as spontaneously related by the patient; emotions
associated with different life periods (painful, stressful,
conflictual) or with phases of life cycle
1. Early childhood (Birth through age 3)
a. Prenatal history and mother’s pregnancy and delivery:
Length of pregnancy, spontaneity and normality of
delivery, birth trauma, whether patient was planned
and wanted, birth defects
b. Feeding habits: Breast-fed or bottle-fed, eating
problems
c. Early development: Maternal deprivation, language


<<<PAGE 100>>>
development, motor development, signs of unmet
needs, sleep pattern, object constancy, stranger
anxiety, separation anxiety
d. Toilet training: Age, attitude of parents, feelings about it
e. Symptoms of behavior problems: Thumb sucking,
temper tantrums, tics, head bumping, rocking, night
terrors, fears, bed-wetting or bed soiling, nail biting,
masturbation
f. Personality and temperament as a child: Shy, restless,
overactive, withdrawn, studious, outgoing, timid,
athletic, friendly patterns of play, reactions to siblings
2. Middle childhood (ages 3–11): Early school history—
feelings about going to school, early adjustment, sex
identification, conscience development, punishment;
social relationships, attitudes toward siblings and
playmates
3. Later childhood (prepuberty through adolescence)
a. Peer relationships: Number and closeness of friends,
leader or follower, social popularity, participation in
group or gang activities, idealized figures; patterns of
aggression, passivity, anxiety, antisocial behavior
b. School history: How far the patient went, adjustment to
school, relationships with teachers—teacher’s pet or
rebellious—favorite studies or interests, particular
abilities or assets, extracurricular activities, sports,
hobbies, relationships of problems or symptoms to any
school period
c. Cognitive and motor development: Learning to read
and other intellectual and motor skills, minimal cerebral
dysfunction, learning disabilities—their management
and effects on the child
d. Particular adolescent emotional or physical problems:
Nightmares, phobias, masturbation, bed-wetting,
running away, delinquency, smoking, drug or alcohol
use, weight problems, feeling of inferiority
e. Psychosexual history


<<<PAGE 101>>>
i. Early curiosity, infantile masturbation, sex play
ii. Acquiring of sexual knowledge, attitude of parents
toward sex, sexual abuse
iii. Onset of puberty, feelings about it, kind of
preparation, feelings about menstruation,
development of secondary sexual characteristics
iv. Adolescent sexual activity: Crushes, parties, dating,
petting, masturbation, wet dreams and attitudes
toward them
v. Attitudes toward same and opposite sex: Timid,
shy, aggressive, need to impress, seductive, sexual
conquests, anxiety
vi. Sexual practices: Sexual problems, homosexual
and heterosexual experiences, paraphilias,
promiscuity
f. Religious background: Strict, liberal, mixed (possible
conflicts), relation of background to current religious
practices
4. Adulthood
a. Occupational history: Choice of occupation, training,
ambitions, conflicts; relations with authority, peers, and
subordinates; number of jobs and duration; changes in
job status; current job and feelings about it
b. Social activity: Whether patient has friends or not; is
patient withdrawn or socializing well; social,
intellectual, and physical interests; relationships with
same sex and opposite sex; depth, duration, and
quality of human relations
c. Adult sexuality
i. Premarital sexual relationships, age of first coitus,
sexual orientation
ii. Marital history: Common-law marriages, legal
marriages, description of courtship and role played
by each partner, age at marriage, family planning
and contraception, names and ages of children,
attitudes toward raising children, problems of any


<<<PAGE 102>>>
family members, housing difficulties if important to
the marriage, sexual adjustment, extramarital
affairs, areas of agreement and disagreement,
management of money, role of in-laws
iii. Sexual symptoms: Anorgasmia, impotence,
premature ejaculation, lack of desire
iv. Attitudes toward pregnancy and having children;
contraceptive practices and feelings about them
v. Sexual practices: Paraphilias such as sadism,
fetishes, voyeurism; attitude toward fellation,
cunnilingus; coital techniques, frequency
d. Military history: General adjustment, combat, injuries,
referral to psychiatrists, type of discharge, veteran
status
e. Value systems: Whether children are seen as a burden
or a joy; whether work is seen as a necessary evil, an
avoidable chore, or an opportunity; current attitude
about religion; belief in heaven and hell
G. Summation of the examiner’s observations and impressions
derived from the initial interview
II. Mental Status
A. Appearance
1. Personal identification: May include a brief nontechnical
description of the patient’s appearance and behavior as a
novelist might write it; attitude toward examiner can be
described here—cooperative, attentive, interested, frank,
seductive, defensive, hostile, playful, ingratiating, evasive,
guarded
2. Behavior and psychomotor activity: Gait, mannerisms, tics,
gestures, twitches, stereotypes, picking, touching
examiner, echopraxia, clumsy, agile, limp, rigid, retarded,
hyperactive, agitated, combative, waxy
3. General description: Posture, bearing, clothes, grooming,
hair, nails; healthy, sickly, angry, frightened, apathetic,
perplexed, contemptuous, ill at ease, poised, old looking,
young looking, effeminate, masculine; signs of anxiety—


<<<PAGE 103>>>
moist hands, perspiring forehead, restlessness, tense
posture, strained voice, wide eyes; shifts in level of
anxiety during interview or with particular topic
B. Speech: Rapid, slow, pressured, hesitant, emotional,
monotonous, loud, whispered, slurred, mumbled, stuttering,
echolalia, intensity, pitch, ease, spontaneity, productivity,
manner, reaction time, vocabulary, prosody
C. Mood and affect
1. Mood (a pervasive and sustained emotion that colors the
person’s perception of the world): How does patient say
he or she feels; depth, intensity, duration, and fluctuations
of mood—depressed, despairing, irritable, anxious,
terrified, angry, expansive, euphoric, empty, guilty, awed,
futile, self-contemptuous, anhedonic, alexithymic
2. Affect (the outward expression of the patient’s inner
experiences): How examiner evaluates patient’s affects—
broad, restricted, blunted or flat, shallow, amount and
range of expression; difficulty in initiating, sustaining, or
terminating an emotional response; is the emotional
expression appropriate to the thought content, culture,
and setting of the examination; give examples if emotional
expression is not appropriate
D. Thinking and perception
1. Form of thinking
a. Productivity: Overabundance of ideas, paucity of ideas,
flight of ideas, rapid thinking, slow thinking, hesitant
thinking; does patient speak spontaneously or only
when questions are asked, stream of thought,
quotations from patient
b. Continuity of thought: Whether patient’s replies really
answer questions and are goal directed, relevant, or
irrelevant; loose associations; lack of causal relations
in patient’s explanations; illogic, tangential,
circumstantial, rambling, evasive, perseverative
statements, blocking or distractibility
c. Language impairments: Impairments that reflect


<<<PAGE 104>>>
disordered mentation, such as incoherent or
incomprehensible speech (word salad), clang
associations, neologisms
2. Content of thinking
a. Preoccupations: About the illness, environmental
problems; obsessions, compulsions, phobias;
obsessions or plans about suicide, homicide;
hypochondriacal symptoms, specific antisocial urges or
impulses
3. Thought disturbances
a. Delusions: Content of any delusional system, its
organization, the patient’s convictions as to its validity,
how it affects his or her life: persecutory delusions—
isolated or associated with pervasive suspiciousness;
mood congruent or mood incongruent
b. Ideas of reference and ideas of influence: How ideas
began, their content, and the meaning the patient
attributes to them
4. Perceptual disturbances
a. Hallucinations and illusions: Whether patient hears
voices or sees visions; content, sensory system
involvement, circumstances of the occurrence;
hypnagogic or hypnopompic hallucinations; thought
broadcasting
b. Depersonalization and derealization: Extreme feelings
of detachment from self or from the environment
5. Dreams and fantasies
a. Dreams: Prominent ones, if patient will tell them;
nightmares
b. Fantasies: Recurrent, favorite, or unshakable
daydreams
E. Sensorium
1. Alertness: Awareness of environment, attention span,
clouding of consciousness, fluctuations in levels of
awareness, somnolence, stupor, lethargy, fugue state,
coma


<<<PAGE 105>>>
2. Orientation
a. Time: Whether patient identifies the day correctly; or
approximate date, time of day; if in a hospital, knows
how long he or she has been there; behaves as though
oriented to the present
b. Place: Whether patient knows where he or she is
c. Person: Whether patient knows who the examiner is
and the roles or names of the persons with whom in
contact
3. Concentration and calculation: Subtracting 7 from 100 and
keep subtracting 7s; if patient cannot subtract 7s, can
easier tasks be accomplished—4 × 9; 5 × 4; how many
nickels are in $1.35; whether anxiety or some disturbance
of mood or concentration seems to be responsible for
difficulty
4. Memory: Impairment, efforts made to cope with
impairment—denial, confabulation, catastrophic reaction,
circumstantiality used to conceal deficit: whether the
process of registration, retention, or recollection of
material is involved
a. Remote memory: Childhood data, important events
known to have occurred when the patient was younger
or free of illness, personal matters, neutral material
b. Recent past memory: Past few months
c. Recent memory: Past few days, what did patient do
yesterday, the day before, have for breakfast, lunch,
dinner
d. Immediate retention and recall: Ability to repeat six
figures after examiner dictates them—first forward,
then backward, then after a few minutes’ interruption;
other test questions; did same questions, if repeated,
call forth different answers at different times
e. Effect of defect on patient: Mechanisms patient has
developed to cope with defect
5. Fund of knowledge: Level of formal education and selfeducation; estimate of the patient’s intellectual capability


<<<PAGE 106>>>
and whether capable of functioning at the level of his or
her basic endowment; counting, calculation, general
knowledge; questions should have relevance to the
patient’s educational and cultural background
6. Abstract thinking: Disturbances in concept formation;
manner in which the patient conceptualizes or handles his
or her ideas; similarities (e.g., between apples and pears),
differences, absurdities; meanings of simple proverbs
(e.g., “A rolling stone gathers no moss”) answers may be
concrete (giving specific examples to illustrate the
meaning) or overly abstract (giving generalized
explanation); appropriateness of answers
F. Insight: Degree of personal awareness and understanding of
illness
1. Complete denial of illness
2. Slight awareness of being sick and needing help but
denying it at the same time
3. Awareness of being sick but blaming it on others, on
external factors, on medical or unknown organic factors
4. Intellectual insight: Admission of illness and recognition
that symptoms or failures in social adjustment are due to
irrational feelings or disturbances, without applying that
knowledge to future experiences
5. True emotional insight: Emotional awareness of the
motives and feelings within, of the underlying meaning of
symptoms; does the awareness lead to changes in
personality and future behavior; openness to new ideas
and concepts about self and the important persons in his
or her life
G. Judgment
1. Social judgment: Subtle manifestations of behavior that
are harmful to the patient and contrary to acceptable
behavior in the culture; does the patient understand the
likely outcome of personal behavior and is patient
influenced by that understanding; examples of impairment
2. Test judgment: Patient’s prediction of what he or she


<<<PAGE 107>>>
would do in imaginary situations (e.g., what patient would
do with a stamped addressed letter found in the street)
III. Further Diagnostic Studies
A. Physical examination
B. Neurologic examination
C. Additional psychiatric diagnostic studies
D. Interviews with family members, friends, or neighbors by a
social worker
E. Psychological, neurologic, or laboratory tests as indicated:
Electroencephalogram, computed tomography scan,
magnetic resonance imaging, tests of other medical
conditions, reading comprehension and writing tests, test for
aphasia, projective or objective psychological tests,
dexamethasone-suppression test, 24-hour urine test for
heavy metal intoxication, urine screen for drugs of abuse
IV. Summary of Findings
Summarize mental symptoms, medical and laboratory findings,
and psychological and neurologic test results, if available;
include medications patient has been taking, dosage,
duration. Clarity of thinking is reflected in clarity of writing.
When summarizing the mental status (e.g., the phrase
“Patient denies hallucinations and delusions” is not as precise
as “Patient denies hearing voices or thinking that he is being
followed.”). The latter indicates the specific question asked
and the specific response given. Similarly, in the conclusion
of the report one would write “Hallucinations and delusions
were not elicited.”
V. Diagnosis
Diagnostic classification is made according to DSM-5. The
diagnostic numerical code should be used from DSM-5 or
ICD-10. It might be prudent to use both codes to cover
current and future regulatory guidelines.
VI. Prognosis
Opinion about the probable future course, extent, and outcome of
the disorder; good and bad prognostic factors; specific goals
of therapy


<<<PAGE 108>>>
VII. Psychodynamic Formulation
Causes of the patient’s psychodynamic breakdown—influences
in the patient’s life that contributed to present disorder;
environmental, genetic, and personality factors relevant to
determining patient’s symptoms; primary and secondary
gains; outline of the major defense mechanism used by the
patient
VIII. Comprehensive Treatment Plan
Modalities of treatment recommended, role of medication,
inpatient or outpatient treatment, frequency of sessions,
probable duration of therapy; type of psychotherapy;
individual, group, or family therapy; symptoms or
problems to be treated. Initially, treatment must be
directed toward any life-threatening situations such as
suicidal risk or risk of danger to others that require
psychiatric hospitalization. Danger to self or others is an
acceptable reason (both legally and medically) for
involuntary hospitalization. In the absence of the need for
confinement, a variety of outpatient treatment alternatives
are available: day hospitals, supervised residences,
outpatient psychotherapy or pharmacotherapy, among
others. In some cases, treatment planning must attend to
vocational and psychosocial skills training and even legal
or forensic issues.
Comprehensive treatment planning requires a therapeutic
team approach using the skills of psychologists, social
workers, nurses, activity and occupational therapists, and
a variety of other mental health professionals, with referral
to self-help groups (e.g., Alcoholics Anonymous [AA]) if
needed. If either the patient or family members are
unwilling to accept the recommendations of treatment and
the clinician thinks that the refusal of the
recommendations may have serious consequences, the
patient, parent, or guardian should sign a statement to the
effect that the recommended treatment was refused.


<<<PAGE 109>>>
The psychiatric report covers both the psychiatric history and the mental
status. The history, or anamnesis (from the Greek meaning “to remember”),
describes life events within the framework of the life cycle, from infancy to
old age, and the clinician should attempt to elicit the emotional reaction to
each event as remembered by the patient. The mental status examination
covers what the patient is thinking and feeling at the moment and how he or
she responds to specific questions from the examiner. Sometimes it may be
necessary to report, in detail, the questions asked and the answers received;
but this should be kept to a minimum, so that the report does not read like a
verbatim transcript. Nevertheless, the clinician should try to use the patient’s
own words as much as possible, especially when describing certain
symptoms such as hallucinations or delusions.
Finally, the psychiatric report includes more than the psychiatric history
and mental status. It also includes a summary of positive and negative
findings and an interpretation of the data. It has more than descriptive value;
it has meaning that helps provide an understanding of the case. The examiner
addresses critical questions in the report: Are future diagnostic studies
needed, and, if so, which ones? Is a consultant needed? Is a comprehensive
neurologic workup, including an electroencephalogram (EEG) or computed
tomography (CT) scan, needed? Are psychological tests indicated? Are
psychodynamic factors relevant? Has the cultural context of the patient’s
illness been considered? The report includes a diagnosis made according to
the 5th edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-5). Prognosis is also discussed in the report, with good and bad
prognostic factors listed. The report concludes with a discussion of a
treatment plan and makes firm recommendations about the management of
the case.
Medical Record
The psychiatric report is a part of the medical record; however, the medical
record is more than the psychiatric report. It is a narrative that documents all
events that occur during treatment, most often referring to the patient’s stay
in the hospital. Progress notes record every interaction between doctor and
patient; reports of all special studies, including laboratory tests; and
prescriptions and orders for all medications. Nurses’ notes help describe the


<<<PAGE 110>>>
patient’s course: Is the patient beginning to respond to treatment? Are there
times during the day or night when symptoms get worse or remit? Are there
adverse effects or complaints by the patient about prescribed medication? Are
there signs of agitation, violence, or mention of suicide? If the patient
requires restraints or seclusion, are the proper supervisory procedures being
followed? The medical record tells what happened to the patient since first
making contact with the health care system. It concludes with a discharge
summary that provides a concise overview of the patient’s course with
recommendations for future treatment, if necessary. Evidence of contact with
a referral agency should be documented in the medical record to establish
continuity of care if further intervention is necessary.
Use of the Record. The medical record is not only used by physicians. It is
also used by regulatory agencies and managed care companies to determine
the length of stay, quality of care, and reimbursement to doctors and
hospitals. In theory, the inpatient medical record is accessible to authorized
persons only and is safeguarded for confidentiality. In practice, however,
absolute confidentiality cannot be guaranteed. Guidelines for what material
needs to be incorporated into the medical record are provided in Table 1-8.
Table 1-8
Medical Record
There shall be an individual record for each person admitted to the
psychiatric inpatient unit. Patient records shall be safeguarded for
confidentiality and should be accessible only to authorized
persons. Each case record shall include:
Legal admission documents
Identifying information on the individual and family
Source of referral, date of commencement of service, and name of
staff member carrying overall responsibility for treatment and
care
Initial, intercurrent, and final diagnoses, including psychiatric or
mental retardation diagnoses in official terminology
Reports of all diagnostic examinations and evaluations, including
findings and conclusions


<<<PAGE 111>>>
Reports of all special studies performed, including x-rays, clinical
laboratory tests, clinical psychological testing,
electroencephalograms, and psychometric tests
The individual written plan of care, treatment, and rehabilitation
Progress notes written and signed by all staff members having
significant participation in the program of treatment and care
Summaries of case conferences and special consultations
Dated and signed prescriptions or orders for all medications, with
notation of termination dates
Closing summary of the course of treatment and care
Documentation of any referrals to another agency
Adapted from the 1995 guidelines of the New York State Office of Mental Health.

The medical record is also crucial in malpractice litigation. Robert I.
Simon summarized the liability issues as follows:
Properly kept medical records can be the psychiatrist’s best ally in
malpractice litigation. If no record is kept, numerous questions will be raised
regarding the psychiatrist’s competence and credibility. This failure to keep
medical records may also violate state statutes or licensing provisions. Failure
to keep medical records may arise out of the psychiatrist’s concern that
patient treatment information be totally protected. Although this is an
admirable ideal, in real life, the psychiatrist may be legally compelled under
certain circumstances to testify directly about confidential treatment matters.
Outpatient records are also subject to scrutiny by third parties under certain
circumstances, and psychiatrists in private practice are under the same
obligation to maintain a record of the patient in treatment as the hospital
psychiatrist. Table 1-9 lists documentation issues of concern to third-party
payers.
Personal Notes and Observations. According to laws relating to access
to medical records, some jurisdictions (such as in the Public Health Law of
New York State) have a provision that applies to a physician’s personal notes
and observations. Personal notes are defined as “a practitioner’s speculations,
impressions (other than tentative or actual diagnosis) and reminders.” The
data are maintained only by the clinician and cannot be disclosed to any other


<<<PAGE 112>>>
person, including the patient. Psychiatrists concerned about material that may
prove damaging or otherwise hurtful to the patient if released to a third party
may consider using this provision to maintain doctor–patient confidentiality.
Psychotherapy Notes. Psychotherapy notes include details of
transference, fantasies, dreams, personal information about persons with
whom the patient interacts, and other intimate details of the patient’s life.
They may also include the psychiatrist’s comments on his or her
countertransference and feelings toward the patient. Psychotherapy notes
should be kept separate from the rest of the medical records.
Table 1-9
Documentation Issues
Are patient’s areas of dysfunction described? From the biologic,
psychological, and social points of view?
Is alcohol or substance abuse addressed?
Do clinical activities happen at the expected time? If too late or
never, why?
Are issues identified in the treatment plan and followed in progress
notes?
When there is a variance in the patient’s outcome, is there a note in
the progress notes to that effect? Is there also a note in the
progress notes reflecting the clinical strategies recommended to
overcome the impediments to the patient’s improvement?
If new clinical strategies are implemented, how is their impact
evaluated? When?
Is there a sense of multidisciplinary input and coordination of
treatment in the progress notes?
Do progress notes indicate the patient’s functioning in the therapeutic
community and its relationship to their discharge criteria?
Can one extrapolate from the patient’s behavior in the therapeutic
community how he or she will function in the community at large?
Are there notes depicting the patient’s understanding of his or her
discharge planning? Family participation in discharge planning


<<<PAGE 113>>>
must be entered in the progress notes with their reaction to the
plan.
Do attending progress notes bridge the differences in thinking of
other disciplines?
Are the patient’s needs addressed in the treatment plan?
Are the patient’s family’s needs evaluated and implemented?
Is patient and family satisfaction evaluated in any way?
Is alcohol and substance abuse addressed as a possible contributor
to readmission?
If the patient was readmitted, are there indications that previous
records were reviewed, and, if the patient is on medication other
than that prescribed on discharge, is there a rationale for this
change?
Do the progress notes identify the type of medication used and the
rationale for increase, decrease, discontinuation, or augmentation
of medication?
Are medication effects documented, including dosages, response,
and adverse or other side effects?
Note: Documentation issues are of concern to third-party payers, such as insurance
companies and health maintenance organizations who examine patients’ charts to see if the
areas listed above are covered. In many cases, however, the review is conducted by persons
with little or no background in psychiatry or psychology who do not recognize the complexities
of psychiatric diagnosis and treatment. Payments to hospitals, doctors, and patients are often
denied because of what such reviewers consider to be the so-called inadequate
documentation.

Patient Access to Records. Patients have a legal right to access their
medical records. This right represents society’s belief that the responsibility
for medical care has become a collaborative process between doctor and
patient. Patients see many different physicians, and they can be more
effective historians and coordinators of their care with such information.
Psychiatrists must be careful in releasing their records to the patient if, in
their judgment, the patient can be harmed emotionally as a result. Under these
circumstances, the psychiatrist may choose to prepare a summary of the
patient’s course of treatment, holding back material that might be hurtful—
especially if it were to get into the hands of third parties. In malpractice cases,


<<<PAGE 114>>>
however, it may not be possible to do so. When litigation occurs, the entire
medical record is subject to discovery. Psychotherapy notes are usually
protected, but not always. If psychotherapy notes are ordered to be produced,
the judge would probably review them privately and select what is relevant to
the case in question.
Blogs. Blogs or weblogs are used by persons who wish to record their dayto-day experiences or to express their thoughts and feelings about events.
Physicians should be especially cautious about such activities because they
are subject to discovery in lawsuits. Pseudonyms and aliases offer no
protection because they can be traced. Writing about patients on blogs is a
breach of confidentiality. In one case, a doctor detailed his thoughts about a
lawsuit that included hostile comments about the plaintiff and his attorney.
His blog was discovered inadvertently and was used against him in court.
Physicians are advised not to use blogs to vent emotions and to write nothing
that they would not write for attribution even if their identity were
discovered.
E-Mail. Physicians are increasingly using e-mail as a quick and efficient way
to communicate not only with patients but also with other doctors about their
patients; however, it is a public document and should be treated as such. The
dictum of not diagnosing or prescribing medication over the telephone to a
patient one has not examined should also apply to e-mail. It is not only
dangerous but also unethical. All e-mail messages should be printed to
include with the paper chart unless electronic archives are regularly backed
up and secure.
Ethical Issues and the Medical Record. Psychiatrists continually make
judgments about what is appropriate material to include in the psychiatric
report, the medical record, the case report, and other written communications
about a patient. Such judgments often involve ethical issues. In a case report,
for example, the patient should not be identifiable, a position made clear in
the American Psychiatric Association’s (APA’s) Principles of Medical Ethics
with Annotations Especially Applicable to Psychiatry, which states that
published case reports must be suitably disguised to safeguard patient
confidentiality without altering material to provide a less-than-complete


<<<PAGE 115>>>
portrayal of the patient’s actual condition. In some instances, obtaining a
written release from the patient that allows the psychiatrist to publish the case
may also be advisable, even if the patient is appropriately disguised.
Psychiatrists sometimes include material in the medical record that is
specifically directed toward warding off future culpability if liability issues
are ever raised. This may include having advised the patient about specific
adverse effects of medication to be prescribed.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). The
HIPAA was passed in 1996 to address the medical delivery system’s
mounting complexity and its rising dependence on electronic communication.
The act orders that the federal Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS) develop rules protecting the transmission and confidentiality of patient
information, and all units under HIPAA must comply with such rules.
Two rules were finalized in February 2003: the Transaction Rule and the
Privacy Rule (see Tables 1-10 and 1-11). The Transaction Rule facilitates
transferring health information effectively and efficiently using regulations
created by the HHS that established a uniform set of formats, code sets, and
data requirements. The Privacy Rule, administered by the Office of Civil
Rights (OCR) at HHS, protects the confidentiality of patient information.
This means that a patient’s medical information belongs to the patient and
that the patient has the right to access it, except for psychotherapy notes,
which are deemed as property of the psychotherapist who wrote them.
Table 1-10
Transaction Rule Code Sets
Health care information: The Transactions Rule defines standards
and establishes code sets and forms to be used for electronic
transaction that involve the following health care information:
Claims or equivalent encounter information
Eligibility inquiries
Referral certification and authorization
Claims status inquiries
Enrollment and disenrollment information
Payment and remittance advice


<<<PAGE 116>>>
Health plan premium payments
Coordination of benefits
Code sets: Under the Transaction Rule, the following code sets are
required for filing claims with Medicare:
Procedure codes
American Medical Association Current Procedural Terminology
codes
Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System codes
Diagnosis codes
International Classification of Disease, 10th edition, clinical
modification, codes
Drugs and biologicals
National Drug Codes
Dental codes
Code on dental procedures
Nomenclature for dental services
Adapted from Jaffe E. HIPAA basics for psychiatrists. Psych Pract Manage Care. 2002;8:15.

In 2003, the Privacy Rule was executed. Under the Privacy Rule, there are
certain guidelines by which every practice must abide:
1. Every practice must establish written privacy procedures. These include
administrative, physical, and technical safeguards that establish who has
access to the patient’s information, how this information is used within
the facility, and when the information will and will not be disclosed to
others.
2. Every practice must take steps to make sure that its business associates
protect the privacy of medical records and other health information.
3. Every practice must train employees to comply with the rule.
4. Every practice must have a designated person to serve as a privacy
officer. If it is an individual practice or private practice, this person can
be the physician.
5. Every practice must establish complaint procedures for patients who
wish to ask or to complain about the privacy of their records.


<<<PAGE 117>>>
The OCR at HHS is responsible for making sure that Privacy Rule is
enforced; however, it is not clear as to how it will be done. One method
expressed by the government is a complaint-driven system in which the OCR
will respond to complaints made by patients concerning confidentiality
violations or denied access to records, all of which are covered under
HIPAA. In such cases, OCR may follow up and audit compliance.
The APA’s Committee on Confidentiality, along with legal experts, has
developed a set of sample forms. They are part of the APA’s HIPAA
educational packet, which can be obtained on the APA website
(www.psych.org/). On the website, there are also recommendations for
enabling physicians to comply with HIPAA.
Table 1-11
Patient’s Rights under the Privacy Rule
Physician must give the patient a written notice of his or her privacy
rights, the privacy policies of the practice, and how patient
information is used, kept, and disclosed. A written
acknowledgment should be taken from the patient verifying that he
or she seen such notice.
Patients should be able to obtain copies of their medical records and
to request revisions to those records within a stated amount of time
(usually 30 days). Patients do not have the right to see
psychotherapy notes.
Physicians must provide the patient with a history of most disclosures
of his or her medical history on request. There are some
exceptions. The APA Committee on Confidentiality has developed
a model document for this requirement.
Physicians must obtain authorization from the patient for disclosure
of information other than for treatment, payment, and health care
operations (these three are considered to be routine uses, for
which consent is not required). The APA Committee on
Confidentiality has developed a model document for this
requirement.
Patients may request another means of communication of their


<<<PAGE 118>>>
protected information (i.e., request that the physician contact them
at a specific phone number or address).
Physicians cannot generally limit treatment to obtaining patient
authorization for disclosure of the patient’s information for
nonroutine uses.
Patients have the right to complain about Privacy Rule violations to
the physician, their health plan, or to the secretary of HHS.
APA, American Psychiatric Association; HHS, Department of Health and Human Services.
Adapted from Jaffe E. HIPAA basics for psychiatrists. Psych Pract Manage Care. 2002;8:15.

PSYCHIATRIC RATING SCALES
The term psychiatric rating scales encompasses a variety of questionnaires,
interviews, checklists, outcome assessments, and other instruments that are
available to inform psychiatric practice, research, and administration.
Psychiatrists must keep up with significant developments in rating scales for
several reasons. Most critically, many such scales are useful in psychiatric
practice for monitoring patients over time or for providing information that is
more comprehensive than what is generally obtained in a routine clinical
interview. Also, health care administrators and payors are increasingly
requiring standardized assessments to justify the need for services or to assess
the quality of care. Lastly, but equally important, rating scales are used in
research that informs the practice of psychiatry, so familiarity with them
provides a deeper understanding of the results of that research and the degree
to which it applies to psychiatric practice.
Potential Benefits and Limitations of Rating Scales in Psychiatry
The key role of rating scales in psychiatry and elsewhere is to standardize the
information collected across time and by various observers. This
standardization ensures a consistent, comprehensive evaluation that may aid
treatment planning by establishing a diagnosis, ensuring a thorough
description of symptoms, identifying comorbid conditions, and characterizing
other factors affecting treatment response. Also, the use of a rating scale can
establish a baseline for follow-up of the progression of an illness over time or
in response to specific interventions. This is particularly useful when more
than one clinician is involved—for instance, in a group practice or in the


<<<PAGE 119>>>
conduct of psychiatric research.
Also to standardization, most rating scales also offer the user the
advantages of a formal evaluation of the measure’s performance
characteristics. This allows the clinician to know to what extent a given scale
produces reproducible results (reliability) and how it compares to more
definitive or established ways of measuring the same thing (validity).
Types of Scales and What They Measure
Scales are used in psychiatric research and practice to achieve a variety of
goals. They also cover a broad range of areas and use a broad range of
procedures and formats.
Measurement Goals. Most psychiatric rating scales in common use fall
into one or more of the following categories: making a diagnosis; measuring
severity and tracking change in specific symptoms, in general functioning, or
overall outcome; and screening for conditions that may or may not be
present.
Constructs Assessed. Psychiatric practitioners and investigators assess a
broad range of areas, referred to as constructs, to underscore the fact that they
are not simple, direct observations of nature. These include diagnoses, signs
and symptoms, severity, functional impairment, quality of life, and many
others. Some of these constructs are relatively complex and are divided into
two or more domains (e.g., positive and negative symptoms in schizophrenia
or mood and neurovegetative symptoms in major depression).
Some constructs are
viewed as categorical or classifying, whereas others are seen as continuous
or measuring. Categorical constructs describe the presence or absence of a
given attribute (e.g., competency to stand trial) or the category best suited to a
given individual among a finite set of options (e.g., assigning a diagnosis).
Continuous measures provide a quantitative assessment along a continuum of
intensity, frequency, or severity. Also, to symptom severity and functional
status, multidimensional personality traits, cognitive status, social support,
and many other attributes are generally measured continuously.
The distinction between categorical and continuous measures is by no
CATEGORICAL VERSUS CONTINUOUS CLASSIFICATION.


<<<PAGE 120>>>
means absolute. Ordinal classification, which uses a finite, ordered set of
categories (e.g., unaffected, mild, moderate, or severe) stands between the
two.
Measurement Procedures. Rating scales differ in measurement methods.
Issues to be considered include format, raters, and sources of information.
FORMAT. Rating scales are available in a variety of formats. Some are simply

checklists or guides to observation that help the clinician achieve a
standardized rating. Others are self-administered questionnaires or tests. Still,
others are formal interviews that may be fully structured (i.e., specifying the
exact wording of questions to be asked) or partly structured (i.e., providing
only some specific wording, along with suggestions for additional questions
or probes).
RATERS. Some instruments are designed to be administered by doctoral-level

clinicians only, whereas others may be administered by psychiatric nurses or
social workers with more limited clinical experience. Other instruments are
designed primarily for use by lay raters with little or no experience with
psychopathology.
SOURCE OF INFORMATION. Instruments also vary in the source of information

used to make the ratings. Information may be obtained solely from the
patient, who generally knows the most about his or her condition. In some
instruments, some or all of the information may be obtained from a
knowledgeable informant. When the construct involves limited insight (e.g.,
cognitive disorders or mania) or significant social undesirability (e.g.,
antisocial personality or substance abuse), other informants may be
preferable. Informants may also be helpful when the subject has limited
ability to recall or report symptoms (e.g., delirium, dementia, or any disorder
in young children). Some rating scales also allow or require information to be
included from medical records or patient observation.
Assessment of Rating Scales
In clinical research, rating scales are mandatory to ensure interpretable and
potentially generalizable results. They are selected based on coverage of the


<<<PAGE 121>>>
relevant constructs, expense (based on the nature of the raters, purchase price
if any, and necessary training), length and administration time,
comprehensibility to the intended audience, and quality of the ratings
provided. In clinical practice, one considers these factors and, also, whether a
scale would provide more or better information than what would be obtained
in ordinary clinical practice or would contribute to the efficiency of obtaining
that information. In either case, the assessment of quality is based on
psychometric, or mind-measuring, properties.
Psychometric Properties. The two principal psychometric properties of a
measure are reliability and validity. Although these words are used almost
interchangeably in everyday speech, they are distinct in the context of
evaluating rating scales. Scales should be reliable, or consistent and
repeatable even if performed by different raters at different times or under
different conditions, and they should be valid or accurate in representing the
actual state of nature.
RELIABILITY. Reliability refers to the consistency or repeatability of ratings

and is mainly empirical. An instrument is more likely to be reliable if the
instructions and questions are clearly and simply worded, and the format is
easy to understand and score. There are three standard ways to assess
reliability: internal consistency, interrater, and test–retest.
INTERNAL CONSISTENCY. Internal consistency assesses agreement among the

individual items in a measure. This provides information about reliability
because each item is viewed as a single measurement of the underlying
construct. Thus, the coherence of the items suggests that each is measuring
the same thing.
INTERRATER AND TEST–RETEST RELIABILITY. Interrater (also called interjudge

or joint) reliability is a measure of agreement between two or more observers
evaluating the same subjects using the same information. Estimates may vary
with assessment conditions—for instance, estimates of interrater reliability
based on videotaped interviews tend to be higher than those based on
interviews conducted by one of the raters. Test–retest evaluations measure
reliability only to the extent that the subject’s true condition remains stable in


<<<PAGE 122>>>
the time interval.
ISSUES IN INTERPRETING RELIABILITY DATA. When interpreting reliability data,

it is important to bear in mind that reliability estimates published in the
literature may not generalize to other settings. Factors to consider are the
nature of the sample, the training and experience of the raters, and the test
conditions. Issues regarding the sample are especially critical. In particular,
reliability tends to be higher in samples with high variability in which it is
easier to discriminate among individuals.
VALIDITY. Validity refers to conformity with truth, or a gold standard that can

stand for truth. In the categorical context, it refers to whether an instrument
can make correct classifications. In the continuous context, it refers to
accuracy, or whether the score assigned can be said to represent the true state
of nature. Although reliability is an empirical question, validity is partly
theoretical—for many constructs measured in psychiatry, there is no absolute
underlying truth. Even so, some measures yield more useful and meaningful
data than others do. Validity assessment is generally divided into face and
content validity, criterion validity, and construct validity.
Face and Content Validity. Face validity refers to whether the items appear to
assess the construct in question. Although a rating scale may purport to
measure a construct of interest, a review of the items may reveal that it
embodies a very different conceptualization of the construct. For instance, an
insight scale may define insight in either psychoanalytic or neurologic terms.
However, items with a transparent relationship to the construct may be a
disadvantage when measuring socially undesirable traits, such as substance
abuse or malingering. Content validity is similar to face validity but describes
whether the measure provides good balanced coverage of the construct and is
less focused on whether the items give the appearance of validity. Content
validity is often assessed with formal procedures such as expert consensus or
factor analysis.
Criterion Validity. Criterion validity (sometimes called predictive or
concurrent validity) refers to whether or not the measure agrees with a gold
standard or criterion of accuracy. Suitable gold standards include the long


<<<PAGE 123>>>
form of an established instrument for a new, shorter version, a clinician-rated
measure for a self-report form, and blood or urine tests for measures of drug
use. For diagnostic interviews, the generally accepted gold standard is the
Longitudinal, Expert, All Data (LEAD) standard, which incorporates expert
clinical evaluation, longitudinal data, medical records, family history, and
any other sources of information.
Construct Validity. When an adequate gold standard is not available—a
frequent state of affairs in psychiatry—or when additional validity data are
desired, construct validity must be assessed. To accomplish this, one can
compare the measure to external validators. These attributes bear a wellcharacterized relationship to the construct under study but are not measured
directly by the instrument. External validators used to validate psychiatric
diagnostic criteria and the diagnostic instruments that aim to operationalize
them include the course of illness, family history, and treatment response.
For example, when compared with schizophrenia measures, mania measures
are expected to identify more individuals with a remitting course, a family
history of major mood disorders, and a good response to lithium.
Selection of Psychiatric Rating Scales
The scales discussed below cover various areas such as diagnosis,
functioning, and symptom severity, among others. Selections were made
based on coverage of major areas and common use in clinical research or
current (or potential) use in clinical practice. Only a few of the many scales
available in each category are discussed here.
Disability Assessment. One of the most widely used scales to measure
disability was developed by the World Health Association (WHO), known as
the WHO Disability Assessment Schedule, now in its second iteration
(WHODAS 2.0). It is self-administered and measures disability along several
parameters such as cognition, interpersonal relations, work and social
impairment, among many others. It can be taken at intervals along the course
of a person’s illness and is reliable in tracking changes that indicate a positive
or negative response to therapeutic interventions or course of illness (Table 112).
Several assessment scales were developed for inclusion in the 5th edition


<<<PAGE 124>>>
of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders of the
American Psychiatric Association, (DSM-5); however, they were developed
by and intended for use by research psychiatrists and are not as well tested as
the WHO scales. It is expected that, in time, they will eventually be better
adapted for clinical use. Some clinicians may wish to use the scales known as
Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure Scales, but at this time, the WHO scale is
recommended for general use.
Psychiatric Diagnosis. Instruments assessing psychiatric diagnoses are
central to psychiatric research and may be useful in clinical practice as well.
However, they tend to be rather long, especially with individuals reporting
many symptoms, potentially requiring many follow-up questions. When such
instruments are evaluated, it is essential to ensure they implement the current
diagnostic criteria and cover the diagnostic areas of interest.
STRUCTURED CLINICAL INTERVIEW FOR DSM (SCID). The SCID begins with a

section on demographic information and clinical background. Then there are
seven diagnostic modules focused on different diagnostic groups: mood,
psychotic, substance abuse, anxiety, somatic, eating, and adjustment
disorders; the modules can be administered separately. Both required and
optional probes are provided and skip outs are suggested where no further
questioning is warranted. All available information, including that from
hospital records, informants, and patient observation, should be used to rate
the SCID. The SCID is designed to be administered by experienced clinicians
and is generally not recommended for use by lay interviewers. Also, formal
training in the SCID is required, and training books and videos are available
to facilitate this. Although the primary focus is research with psychiatric
patients, a nonpatient version (with no reference to a chief complaint) and a
more clinical version (without as much detailed subtyping) are also available.
Reliability data on the SCID suggest that it performs better on more severe
disorders (e.g., bipolar disorder or alcohol dependence) than on milder ones
(e.g., dysthymia). Validity data are limited, as the SCID is more often used as
the gold standard to evaluate other instruments. It is considered the standard
interview to verify the diagnosis in clinical trials and is extensively used in
other forms of psychiatric research. Although its length precludes its use in
routine clinical practice, the SCID can sometimes be useful to ensure a


<<<PAGE 125>>>
systematic evaluation in psychiatric patients—for instance, on admission to
an inpatient unit or at intake into an outpatient clinic. It is also used in
forensic practice to ensure a formal and reproducible examination.
Psychotic Disorders. A variety of instruments are used for patients with
psychotic disorders. Those discussed here are symptom severity measures. A
developing consensus suggests that the distinction between positive and
negative symptoms in schizophrenia is worthwhile, and more recently
developed instruments implement this distinction.
Table 1-12
WHODAS 2.0


<<<PAGE 126>>>

<<<PAGE 127>>>
Table 1-13
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale


<<<PAGE 128>>>

<<<PAGE 129>>>

<<<PAGE 130>>>

<<<PAGE 131>>>

<<<PAGE 132>>>
The BPRS (Table 1-13) was
developed in the late 1960s as a short scale for measuring the severity of
psychiatric symptomatology. It was designed primarily to assess change in
psychotic inpatients and covers a broad range of areas, including thought
disturbance, emotional withdrawal and retardation, anxiety and depression,
and hostility and suspiciousness. The reliability of the BPRS is good to
excellent when raters are experienced, but this is difficult to achieve without
substantial training; a semistructured interview has been developed to
increase reliability. Validity is also good as measured by correlations with
other measures of symptom severity, especially those assessing schizophrenia
symptomatology. The BPRS has been used extensively for decades as an
outcome measure in treatment studies of schizophrenia; it functions well as a
measure of the change in this context and offers the advantage of
BRIEF PSYCHIATRIC RATING SCALE (BPRS).


<<<PAGE 133>>>
comparability with earlier trials. However, it has been largely supplanted in
more recent clinical trials by the newer measures described below. Also,
given its focus on psychosis and associated symptoms, it is only suitable for
patients with fairly significant impairment. Its use in clinical practice is less
well supported, in part because considerable training is required to achieve
the necessary reliability.
The PANSS was
developed in the late 1980s to remedy perceived deficits in the BPRS in the
assessment of positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia and other
psychotic disorders by adding additional items and providing careful anchors
for each. The PANSS requires a clinician rater because it requires
considerable probing and clinical judgment. A semistructured interview guide
is available. Reliability for each scale is reasonably high, with excellent
internal consistency and interrater reliability. Validity also appears good
based on correlation with other symptom severity measures and factor
analytic validation of the subscales. The PANSS has become the standard
tool for assessing clinical outcome in treatment studies of schizophrenia and
other psychotic disorders and is easy to administer reliably and sensitive to
change with treatment. Its high reliability and good coverage of both positive
and negative symptoms make it excellent for this purpose. It may also be
useful for tracking severity in clinical practice, and its clear anchors make it
easy to use in this setting.
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE SYNDROME SCALE (PANSS).

SCALE FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF POSITIVE SYMPTOMS (SAPS) AND SCALE FOR

The SAPS and SANS
(Tables 1-14 and 1-15) were designed to provide a detailed assessment of
positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia and may be used separately
or in tandem. SAPS assesses hallucinations, delusions, bizarre behavior, and
thought disorder, and SANS assesses affective flattening, poverty of speech,
apathy, anhedonia, and inattentiveness. The SAPS and SANS are mainly used
to monitor treatment effects in clinical research.
THE ASSESSMENT OF NEGATIVE SYMPTOMS (SANS).

Mood Disorders. The domain of mood disorders includes both unipolar
and bipolar disorder, and the instruments described here assess depression
and mania. For mania, the issues are similar to those for psychotic disorders


<<<PAGE 134>>>
in that limited insight and agitation may hinder accurate symptom reporting,
so clinician ratings, including observational data, are generally required.
Rating depression, on the other hand, depends, to a substantial extent, on
subjective assessment of mood states, so interviews and self-report
instruments are both common. Because depression is common in the general
population and involves significant morbidity and even mortality, screening
instruments—especially those using a self-report format—are potentially
quite useful in primary care and community settings.
The HAM-D was
developed in the early 1960s to monitor the severity of major depression,
with a focus on somatic symptomatology. The 17-item version is the most
commonly used version, although versions with different numbers of items,
including the 24-item version in Table 1-16, have been used in many studies
as well. The 17-item version does not include some of the symptoms for
depression in DSM-III and its successors, most notably the so-called reverse
neurovegetative signs (increased sleep, increased appetite, and psychomotor
retardation). The HAM-D was designed for clinician raters but has been used
by trained lay administrators as well. Ratings are completed by the examiner
based on the patient interview and observations. A structured interview guide
has been developed to improve reliability. The ratings can be completed in 15
to 20 minutes. Reliability is good to excellent, particularly when the
structured interview version is used. Validity appears good based on
correlation with other depression symptom measures. The HAM-D has been
used extensively to evaluate a change in response to pharmacologic and other
interventions and, thus, offers the advantage of comparability across a broad
range of treatment trials. It is more problematic in the elderly and the
medically ill, in whom the presence of somatic symptoms may not be
indicative of major depression.
HAMILTON RATING SCALE FOR DEPRESSION (HAM-D).

BECK DEPRESSION INVENTORY (BDI). The BDI was developed in the early

1960s to rate depression severity, with a focus on behavioral and cognitive
dimensions of depression. The current version, the Beck-II, has added more
coverage of somatic symptoms and covers the most recent 2 weeks. Earlier
versions are focused on the past week or even shorter intervals, which may be
preferable for monitoring treatment response. The scale can be completed in


<<<PAGE 135>>>
5 to 10 minutes. Internal consistency has been high in numerous studies.
Test–retest reliability is not consistently high, but this may reflect changes in
underlying symptoms. Validity is supported by correlation with other
depression measures. The principal use of the BDI is as an outcome measure
in clinical trials of interventions for major depression, including
psychotherapeutic interventions. Because it is a self-report instrument, it is
sometimes used to screen for major depression.
Anxiety Disorders. The anxiety disorders addressed by the measures
below include panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). When
anxiety measures are examined, it is important to be aware that there have
been significant changes over time in how anxiety disorders are defined. Both
panic and OCD are relatively recently recognized, and the conceptualization
of generalized anxiety disorder has shifted over time. Thus, older measures
have somewhat less relevance for diagnostic purposes, although they may
identify symptoms causing considerable distress. Whether reported during an
interview or on a self-report rating scale, virtually all measures in this
domain, like the measures of depression discussed above, depend on
subjective descriptions of inner states.
HAMILTON ANXIETY RATING SCALE (HAM-A). The HAM-A (Table 1-17) was

developed in the late 1950s to assess anxiety symptoms, both somatic and
cognitive. Because the conceptualization of anxiety has changed
considerably, the HAM-A provides limited coverage of the “worry” required
for a diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder and does not include the
episodic anxiety found in panic disorder. A score of 14 has been suggested as
the threshold for clinically significant anxiety, but scores of 5 or less are
typical in individuals in the community. The scale is designed to be
administered by a clinician, and formal training or the use of a structured
interview guide is required to achieve high reliability. A computeradministered version is also available. Reliability is fairly good based on
internal consistency, interrater, and test–retest studies. However, given the
lack of specific anchors, reliability should not be assumed to be high across
different users in the absence of formal training. Validity appears good based
on correlation with other anxiety scales but is limited by the relative lack of


<<<PAGE 136>>>
coverage of domains critical to the modern understanding of anxiety
disorders. Even so, the HAM-A has been used extensively to monitor
treatment response in clinical trials of generalized anxiety disorder and may
also be useful for this purpose in clinical settings.
PANIC DISORDER SEVERITY SCALE (PDSS). The PDSS was developed in the

1990s as a brief rating scale for the severity of panic disorder. It was based on
the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale and has seven items, each of
which is rated on an item-specific, 5-point Likert scale. The seven items
address frequency of attacks, distress associated with attacks, anticipatory
anxiety, phobic avoidance, and impairment. Reliability is excellent based on
interrater studies, but, in keeping with the small number of items and multiple
dimensions, internal consistency is limited. Validity is supported by
correlations with other anxiety measures, both at the total and item levels;
lack of correlation with the HAM-D; and, more recently, by brain imaging
studies. Growing experience with the PDSS suggests that it is sensitive to
change with treatment and is useful as a change measure in clinical trials or
other outcome studies for panic disorder, as well as for monitoring panic
disorder in clinical practice.
Table 1-14
Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms (SAPS)


<<<PAGE 137>>>
Table 1-15
Scale for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS)


<<<PAGE 138>>>
CLINICIAN-ADMINISTERED PTSD SCALE (CAPS). The CAPS includes 17 items

required to make the diagnosis, covering all four criteria: (1) the event itself,
(2) reexperiencing of the event, (3) avoidance, and (4) increased arousal. The
diagnosis requires evidence of a traumatic event, one symptom of
reexperiencing, three of avoidance, and two of arousal (typically, an item is
counted if the frequency is rated at least 1 and intensity is at least 2). The
items can also be used to generate a total PTSD severity score obtained by
summing the frequency and intensity scales for each item. The CAPS also


<<<PAGE 139>>>
includes several global rating scales for the impact of PTSD symptomatology
on social and occupational functioning, for general severity, for recent
changes, and the validity of the patient’s report. The CAPS must be
administered by a trained clinician and requires 45 to 60 minutes to complete,
with follow-up examinations somewhat briefer. It has demonstrated
reliability and validity in multiple settings and multiple languages, although it
has had more limited testing in the setting of sexual and criminal assault. It
performs well in the research setting for diagnosis and severity assessment
but is generally too long for use in clinical practice.
Table 1-16
Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression


<<<PAGE 140>>>

<<<PAGE 141>>>
Table 1-17
Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale

YALE-BROWN OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE SCALE (YBOCS).

The YBOCS was


<<<PAGE 142>>>
developed in the late 1980s to measure the severity of symptoms in OCD. It
has 10 items rated based on a semistructured interview. The first five items
concern obsessions: the amount of time that they consume, the degree to
which they interfere with normal functioning, the distress that they cause, the
patient’s attempts to resist them, and the patient’s ability to control them. The
remaining five items ask parallel questions about compulsions. The
semistructured interview and ratings can be completed in 15 minutes or less.
A self-administered version has recently been developed and can be
completed in 10 to 15 minutes. Computerized and telephone use have also
been found to provide acceptable ratings. Reliability studies of the YBOCS
show good internal consistency, interrater reliability, and test–retest
reliability over a 1-week interval. Validity appears good, although data are
fairly limited in this developing field. The YBOCS has become the standard
instrument for assessing OCD severity and is used in virtually every drug
trial. It may also be used clinically to monitor treatment response.
Substance Use Disorders. Substance use disorders include abuse and
dependence on both alcohol and drugs. These disorders, particularly those
involving alcohol, are common and debilitating in the general population, so
screening instruments are particularly helpful. Because these behaviors are
socially undesirable, underreporting of symptoms is a significant problem;
thus, the validity of all substance use measures is limited by the honesty of
the patient. Validation against drug tests or other measures is of great value,
particularly when working with patients who have known substance abuse.
CAGE. The CAGE was developed in the mid-1970s to serve as a very brief

screen for significant alcohol problems in a variety of settings, which could
then be followed up by clinical inquiry. CAGE is an acronym for the four
questions that comprise the instrument: (1) Have you ever felt you should
Cut down on your drinking? (2) Have people Annoyed you by criticizing
your drinking? (3) Have you ever felt bad or Guilty about your drinking? (4)
Have you ever had a drink first thing in the morning to steady your nerves or
to get rid of a hangover (Eye-opener)? Each “yes” answer is scored as 1, and
these are summed to generate a total score. Scores of 1 or more warrant
follow-up, and scores of 2 or more strongly suggest significant alcohol
problems. The instrument can be administered in a minute or less, either


<<<PAGE 143>>>
orally or on paper. Reliability has not been formally assessed. Validity has
been assessed against a clinical diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence,
and these four questions perform surprisingly well. Using a threshold score of
1, the CAGE achieves excellent sensitivity and fair to good specificity. A
threshold of 2 provides still greater specificity but at the cost of a drop in
sensitivity. The CAGE performs well as an extremely brief screening
instrument for use in primary care or in psychiatric practice focused on
problems unrelated to alcohol. However, it has limited ability to pick up early
indicators of problem drinking that might be the focus of preventive efforts.
ADDICTION SEVERITY INDEX (ASI). The ASI was developed in the early 1980s to

serve as a quantitative measure of symptoms and functional impairment due
to alcohol or drug disorders. It covers demographics, alcohol use, drug use,
psychiatric status, medical status, employment, legal status, and family and
social issues. Frequency, duration, and severity are assessed. It includes both
subjective and objective items reported by the patient and observations made
by the interviewer.
Eating Disorders. Eating disorders include anorexia nervosa, bulimia, and
binge-eating disorder. A wide variety of instruments, particularly self-report
scales, are available. Because of the secrecy that may surround dieting,
bingeing, purging, and other symptoms, validation against other indicators
(e.g., body weight for anorexia or dental examination for bulimia) may be
very helpful. Such validation is particularly critical for patients with anorexia,
who may lack insight into their difficulties.
EATING DISORDERS EXAMINATION (EDE). The EDE was developed in 1987 as

the first interviewer-based comprehensive assessment of eating disorders,
including diagnosis, severity, and an assessment of subthreshold symptoms.
A self-report version (the EDE-Q), as well as an interview for children, have
since been developed. The EDE focuses on symptoms during the preceding 4
weeks, although longer-term questions are included to assess diagnostic
criteria for eating disorders. Each item on the EDE has a required probe with
suggested follow-up questions to judge severity, frequency, or both, which
are then rated on a 7-point Likert scale. For the self-report version, subjects
are asked to make similar ratings of frequency or severity. The instrument


<<<PAGE 144>>>
provides both global severity ratings and ratings on four subscales: restraint,
eating concern, weight concern, and shape concern. The interview, which
must be administered by a trained clinician, requires 30 to 60 minutes to
complete, whereas the self-report version can be completed more quickly.
Reliability and validity data for both the EDE and EDE-Q are excellent,
although the EDE-Q may have greater sensitivity for binge-eating disorder.
The EDE performs well in both the diagnosis and the detailed assessment of
eating disorders in the research context. It also has the sensitivity to change
as is required for use in clinical trials or monitoring of individual therapy.
Even in the research setting, however, the EDE is relatively lengthy for
repeated use, and the EDE-Q may be preferable for some purposes. Although
the EDE is too lengthy for routine clinical practice, the EDE or EDE-Q might
help provide a comprehensive assessment of a patient with a suspected eating
disorder, particularly during an evaluation visit or on entry into an inpatient
facility.
BULIMIA TEST-REVISED (BULIT-R). The BULIT-R was developed in the mid-

1980s to provide both a categorical and a continuous assessment of bulimia.
Patients with bulimia typically score above 110, whereas patients without
disordered eating typically score below 60. The instrument can be completed
in approximately 10 minutes. The BULIT-R shows high reliability based on
studies of internal consistency and test–retest reliability in multiple studies.
High correlations support validity with other bulimia assessments. The
recommended cutoff of 104 suggested to identify probable cases of bulimia
shows high sensitivity and specificity for a clinical diagnosis of bulimia
nervosa. With cutoffs between 98 and 104, the BULIT-R has been used
successfully to screen for cases of bulimia nervosa. As with any screening
procedure, follow-up by clinical examination is indicated for individuals
scoring positive; clinical follow-up is particularly critical because the
BULIT-R does not distinguish clearly between different types of eating
disorders. The BULIT-R may also be useful in clinical and research practice
to track symptoms over time or in response to treatment. However, more
detailed measures of the frequency and severity of bingeing and purging may
be preferable in research settings.
Cognitive Disorders. A wide variety of measures of dementia are


<<<PAGE 145>>>
available. Most involve cognitive testing and provide objective, quantifiable
data. However, scores vary by educational level in subjects without dementia,
so these instruments tend to be most useful when the patient’s baseline scores
are known. Other measures focus on functional status, which can be assessed
based on a comparison with a description of the subject’s baseline function;
these types of measures generally require a knowledgeable informant and,
thus, may be more cumbersome to administer but tend to be less subject to
educational biases. A third type of measure focuses on the associated
behavioral symptoms that are frequently seen in demented patients.
MINI-MENTAL STATE EXAMINATION (MMSE). The MMSE is a 30-point cognitive

test developed in the mid-1970s to provide a bedside assessment of a broad
array of cognitive functions, including orientation, attention, memory,
construction, and language. It can be administered in less than 10 minutes by
a busy doctor or a technician and scored rapidly by hand. The MMSE has
been extensively studied and shows excellent reliability when raters refer to
consistent scoring rules. Validity appears good based on correlations with a
wide variety of more comprehensive measures of mental functioning and
clinicopathologic correlations.
Since its development in 1975, the MMSE was widely distributed in
textbooks, pocket guides, and on websites and has been used at the bedside.
In 2001 the authors granted a worldwide exclusive license to Psychological
Assessment Resources (PAR) to publish, distribute, and manage all
intellectual property rights to the test. A licensed version of the MMSE,
officially called the MMSE-2, must now be purchased from PAR per test.
The MMSE form is gradually disappearing from textbooks, websites, and
clinical tool kits.
In an article in the New England Journal of Medicine (2011;365:2447–
2449) John C. Newman and Robin Feldman concluded: “The restrictions on
the MMSE’s use present clinicians with difficult choices: increase practice
costs and complexity, risk copyright infringement, or sacrifice 30 years of
practical experience and validation to adopt new cognitive assessment tools.”
NEUROPSYCHIATRIC INVENTORY (NPI). The NPI was developed in the mid-

1990s to assess a wide range of behavioral symptoms that are often seen in
Alzheimer disease and other dementing disorders. The current version rates


<<<PAGE 146>>>
12 areas: delusions, hallucinations, dysphoria, anxiety, agitation/aggression,
euphoria, disinhibition, irritability/lability, apathy, aberrant motor behavior,
nocturnal disturbances, appetite, and eating. The standard NPI is an interview
with a caregiver or other informant that can be performed by a clinician or
trained lay interviewer and requires 15 to 20 minutes to complete. There is
also a nursing home interview version, the NPI-NH, and a self-report
questionnaire, the NPI-Q. For each area, the NPI asks whether a symptom is
present and, if so, assesses the frequency, severity, and associated caregiver
distress. The instrument has demonstrated reliability and validity and is
useful to screen for problem behaviors in both clinical and research settings.
Because of the detailed frequency and severity ratings, it is also helpful to
monitor change with treatment.
SCORED GENERAL INTELLIGENCE TEST (SGIT). This test was developed and

validated by N. D. C. Lewis at the New York State Psychiatric Institute in the
1930s. It is one of the few tests that attempts to measure general intelligence
that can be administered by the clinician during the psychiatric interview. A
decline in general intelligence will be seen in cognitive disorders, and the
SGIT can alert the clinician to begin a workup for disease states that interfere
with cognition. This test deserves more widespread use (Table 1-18).
Personality Disorders and Personality Traits. Personality may be
conceptualized categorically as personality disorders or dimensionally as
personality traits, which may be viewed as normal or pathologic. The focus
here is on personality disorders and the maladaptive traits generally viewed
as their milder forms. Ten personality disorders are divided into three
clusters. Patients tend not to fall neatly into DSM personality categories;
instead, most patients who meet the criteria for one personality disorder also
meet the criteria for at least one other, particularly within the same cluster.
This and other limitations in the validity of the constructs themselves make it
difficult to achieve validity in personality measures. Personality measures
include both interviews and self-report instruments. Self-report measures are
appealing in that they require less time and may appear less threatening to the
patient. However, they tend to overdiagnose personality disorders. Because
many of the symptoms suggesting personality problems are socially
undesirable and because patients’ insight tends to be limited, clinician-


<<<PAGE 147>>>
administered instruments, which allow for probing and patient observation,
may provide more accurate data.
PERSONALITY DISORDER QUESTIONNAIRE (PDQ). The PDQ was developed in

the late 1980s as a simple self-report questionnaire designed to provide a
categorical and dimensional assessment of personality disorders. The PDQ
includes 85 yes–no items intended primarily to assess the diagnostic criteria
for personality disorders. Within the 85 items, two validity scales are
embedded to identify underreporting, lying, and inattention. There is also a
brief clinician-administered Clinical Significance Scale to address the impact
of any personality disorder identified by the self-report PDQ. The PDQ can
provide categorical diagnoses, a scaled score for each, or an overall index of
personality disturbance based on the sum of all of the diagnostic criteria.
Overall scores range from 0 to 79; normal controls tend to score below 20,
personality disordered patients generally score above 30, and psychotherapy
outpatients without such disorders tend to score in the 20 to 30 range.
Childhood Disorders. A wide variety of instruments are available to
assess mental disorders in children. Despite this rich array of instruments,
however, the evaluation of children remains difficult for several reasons.
First, the child psychiatric nosology is at an earlier stage of development, and
construct validity is often problematic. Second, because children change
markedly with age, it is virtually impossible to design a measure that covers
children of all ages. Lastly, because children, particularly young children,
have limited ability to report their symptoms, other informants are necessary.
This often creates problems because there are frequent disagreements among
child, parent, and teacher reports of symptoms, and the optimal way to
combine information is unclear.
The CBCL is a family of self-rated
instruments that survey a broad range of difficulties encountered in children
from preschool through adolescence. One version of the CBCL is designed
for completion by parents of children between 4 and 18 years of age. Another
version is available for parents of children between 2 and 3 years of age.
Children between 11 and 18 years of age complete the Youth Self-Report and
the Teacher Report Form is completed by teachers of school-age children.
CHILD BEHAVIOR CHECKLIST (CBCL).


<<<PAGE 148>>>
The scale includes not only problem behaviors but also academic and social
strengths. Each version includes approximately 100 items scored on a 3-point
Likert scale. Scoring can be done by hand or computer, and normative data
are available for each of the three subscales: problem behaviors, academic
functioning, and adaptive behaviors. A computerized version is also
available. The CBCL does not generate diagnoses but, instead, suggests
cutoff scores for problems in the “clinical range.” Parent, teacher, and child
versions all show high reliability on the problem subscale, but the three
informants frequently do not agree with one another. The CBCL may be
useful in clinical settings as an adjunct to clinical evaluation, as it provides a
good overall view of symptomatology and may also be used to track change
over time. It is used frequently for similar purposes in research involving
children and, thus, can be compared with clinical experience. The instrument
does not, however, provide diagnostic information, and its length limits its
efficiency for tracking purposes.
Table 1-18
Scored General Intelligence Test (SGIT)


<<<PAGE 149>>>
DIAGNOSTIC INTERVIEW SCHEDULE FOR CHILDREN (DISC). The current DISC, the

DISC-IV, covers a broad range of DSM diagnoses, both current and lifetime.
It has nearly 3,000 questions but is structured with a series of stem questions
that serve as gateways to each diagnostic area, with the remainder of each
section skipped if the subject answers no. Subjects who enter each section
have very few skips, so complete diagnostic and symptom scale information
can be obtained. Child, parent, and teacher versions are available. Computer
programs are available to implement diagnostic criteria and generate severity
scales based on each version or to combine parent and child information. A
typical DISC interview may take more than 1 hour for a child, plus an
additional hour for a parent. However, because of the stem question structure,
the actual time varies widely with the number of symptoms endorsed. The
DISC was designed for lay interviewers. It is relatively complicated to
administer, and formal training programs are highly recommended. The


<<<PAGE 150>>>
reliability of the DISC is only fair to good and generally better for the
combined child and parent interview. Validity judged against a clinical
interview by a child psychiatrist is also fair to good—better for some
diagnoses and better for the combined interview. The DISC is well tolerated
by parents and children and can be used to supplement a clinical interview to
ensure comprehensive diagnostic coverage. Because of its inflexibility, some
clinicians find it uncomfortable to use, and its length makes it less than
optimal for use in clinical practice. However, it is frequently used in a variety
of research settings.
The Conners Rating Scales are a family of
instruments designed to measure a range of childhood and adolescent
psychopathology. They are most commonly used in the assessment of
ADHD. The main uses of the Conners Rating Scales are in screening for
ADHD in school or clinic populations and following changes in symptom
severity over time; sensitivity to change in response to specific therapies has
been demonstrated for most versions of the Conners Rating Scales. There are
teacher, parent, and self-report (for adolescents) versions and both short (as
few as 10 items) and long (as many as 80 items, with multiple subscales)
forms. Reliability data are excellent for the Conners Rating Scales. However,
the teacher and parent versions tend to show poor agreement. Validity data
suggest that the Conners Rating Scales are excellent at discriminating
between ADHD patients and normal controls.
CONNERS RATING SCALES.

The Autism Diagnostic
Interview (ADI) was developed in 1989 as a clinical assessment of autism
and related disorders. The ADI-R was developed in 2003 to provide a shorter
instrument with a better ability to discriminate autism from other
developmental disorders. The instrument has 93 items, is designed for
individuals with a mental age greater than 18 months, and covers three broad
areas, consistent with the diagnostic criteria for autism: language and
communication; reciprocal social interactions; and restricted, repetitive, and
stereotyped behaviors and interests. There are three versions: one for lifetime
diagnosis, one for current diagnosis, and one for patients under age 4 focused
on an initial diagnosis. It must be administered by a clinician trained in its use
and takes about 90 minutes to complete. When clinicians are properly trained,
AUTISM DIAGNOSTIC INTERVIEW-REVISED (ADI-R).


<<<PAGE 151>>>
it has good to excellent reliability and validity but performs poorly in the
setting of severe developmental disabilities. It is generally intended for the
research setting when a thorough assessment of autism is required but may
have use in clinical practice as well.


<<<PAGE 152>>>
CLINICAL NEUROPSYCHOLOGY AND INTELLECTUAL
ASSESSMENT OF ADULTS
Clinical neuropsychology is a specialty in psychology that examines the
relationship between behavior and brain functioning in the realms of
cognitive, motor, sensory, and emotional functioning. The clinical
neuropsychologist integrates the medical and psychosocial history with the
reported complaints and the pattern of performance on neuropsychological
procedures to determine whether results are consistent with a particular area
of brain damage or a specific diagnosis.
Neuroanatomical Correlates
The early history of neuropsychology was driven in large part by the goal of
linking behavioral deficits to specific neuroanatomical areas of dysfunction
or damage. Although this historic assessment method helped to validate
neuropsychological tests that are commonly used today, the localizing
function of neuropsychological assessment is now considered less important
in light of recent advances in neuroimaging techniques. Increasing
knowledge in the neurosciences has also led to a more sophisticated view of
brain–behavior relationships, in which complex cognitive, perceptual, and
motor activities are controlled by neural circuits rather than single structures
within the brain. An understanding of these brain–behavior relationships is
particularly helpful when evaluating patients with focal damage. It is crucial
to ensure that the neuropsychological evaluation adequately assesses relevant
behavior that is likely to be associated with that area and its interconnecting
pathways.
Table 1-19
Selected Neuropsychological Deficits Associated with Left
or Right Hemisphere Damage
Left Hemisphere

Right Hemisphere

Aphasia

Visuospatial deficits

Right–left disorientation

Impaired visual perception


<<<PAGE 153>>>
Finger agnosia

Neglect

Dysgraphia (aphasic)

Dysgraphia (spatial, neglect)

Dyscalculia (number alexia)

Dyscalculia (spatial)

Constructional apraxia (details)

Constructional apraxia (Gestalt)

Limb apraxia

Dressing apraxia
Anosognosia

From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009, with permission.

Hemispheric Dominance and Intrahemispheric Localization. Many
functions are mediated by both the right and left hemispheres. However,
critical qualitative differences between the two hemispheres can be
demonstrated in the presence of lateralized brain injury. Various cognitive
skills that have been linked to the left or right hemisphere in right-handed
individuals are listed in Table 1-19. Although language is the most apparent
function that is mostly controlled by the left hemisphere, especially among
right-handed individuals, the left hemisphere is also generally considered to
be dominant for limb praxis (i.e., performing complex movements, such as
brushing teeth, to command, or imitation). It has been associated with the
cluster of deficits identified as Gerstmann syndrome (i.e., finger agnosia,
dyscalculia, dysgraphia, and right–left disorientation). In contrast, the right
hemisphere is thought to play a more critical role in controlling visuospatial
abilities and hemispatial attention, which are associated with the clinical
presentations of constructional apraxia and neglect, respectively.
Although lateralized deficits such as these are typically characterized in
terms of damage to the right or left hemisphere, it is essential to keep in mind
that the patient’s performance can also be described in terms of preserved
brain functions. In other words, it is the remaining intact brain tissue that
drives many behavioral responses following an injury to the brain and not
only the absence of critical brain tissue.
Appreciation for the special role of the left
hemisphere in the control of language functions in most right-handed
LANGUAGE DISORDERS.


<<<PAGE 154>>>
individuals has been validated in many studies. These include the results of
sodium amytal testing in epilepsy surgery patients, as well as the incidence of
aphasia following unilateral stroke to the left versus right hemisphere.
Although it is rare for right-handed individuals to be right hemisphere
dominant for language, it does occur in about 1 percent of the cases.
Hemispheric dominance for language in left-handed individuals varies. About
two-thirds of left-handed individuals are left-hemisphere dominant for
language, while about 20 percent each are right hemisphere dominant or
bilaterally dominant.
Several classification systems have been developed over the years for
describing various patterns of language breakdown. A standard method takes
into account the presence or absence of three key features: (1) fluency, (2)
comprehension, and (3) repetition (i.e., intact ability to repeat verbally
presented words or phrases).
Broca Aphasia. Broca Aphasia (also called nonfluent or expressive aphasia)
has traditionally been characterized by nonfluent speech but intact auditory
comprehension and somewhat impaired repetition. It has long been thought to
be associated with damage to Broca area (i.e., left inferior frontal
convolution) or Brodmann area 44 (Fig. 1-3). However, more recent
neuroimaging data in stroke patients have shown that the full syndrome of
Broca aphasia, including agrammatism (telegraphic speech), is found only in
the presence of more extensive damage, which encompasses the suprasylvian
area from Broca area to the posterior extent of the Sylvian fissure.
Wernicke Aphasia. Wernicke aphasia (also called fluent or receptive aphasia)
is characterized by fluent speech, impaired comprehension, and somewhat
impaired repetition. It has been associated with damage to Wernicke area in
the region of the superior temporal gyrus. The impaired ability to
comprehend language directly affects the individual’s ability to self-monitor
language output and may be related to a breakdown of the syntactic structure
of language. Unlike patients with Broca aphasia, who are usually painfully
aware of their communication difficulty, patients with Wernicke aphasia are
typically not aware of their communication problems because Wernicke area
is critical for comprehending their speech as well as the language of others.
This lack of insight is similar to the condition of anosognosia, in which


<<<PAGE 155>>>
patients fail to appreciate their deficits, and presents an incredibly frustrating
condition for many family members and caregivers.

FIGURE 1-3
Brodmann areas of the human cortex, showing convex surface (top) and medial


<<<PAGE 156>>>
surface (bottom). (From Elliott HC. Textbook of Neuroanatomy. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott; 1969, with permission.)

Conduction Aphasia. Patients with conduction aphasia demonstrate
relatively intact auditory comprehension and spontaneous speech, due to the
preservation of Wernicke and Broca areas. However, the ability to repeat
words and phrases is specifically impaired and has traditionally been
attributed to damage to the arcuate fasciculus, which interconnects Wernicke
and Broca areas. This type of aphasia is much more subtle and tends to have
a less negative impact on daily functioning.
Global Aphasia. Another common classification, global aphasia, is
characterized by impairment in all three dimensions of fluency,
comprehension, and repetition due to damage to the core language areas on
the lateral surface of the left hemisphere. In reality, many aphasic patients
cannot be neatly classified within a specific system because the pattern of
deficits does not precisely fit clear, descriptive categories. Detailed language
assessment of most aphasic patients typically demonstrates deficits in all
three areas, although the degree of deficit among the three areas varies.
LIMB APRAXIA. Limb apraxia and other cognitive-motor skills deficits are

more commonly seen with left than with right hemisphere damage. However,
Kathleen Haaland and Deborah Harrington reviewed data showing that the
difference in the incidence of limb apraxia after left or right hemisphere
damage is not as great as with language, suggesting that left hemisphere
dominance for disorders of complex movement is not as strong as that for
language. Although limb apraxia has not traditionally been considered to be
of substantial functional importance, more recently, new information
suggests it may significantly affect rehabilitation outcome. Conceptual
apraxia might result in using the wrong object to perform a movement, such
as attempting to use a toothbrush to eat. Finally, sequencing errors and
ideational errors can lead to disrupted activities, such as trying to light a
candle before striking the match.
Arithmetic skills can be impaired after either left or right
hemisphere damage. Left hemisphere damage, especially of the parietal lobe,
ARITHMETIC.


<<<PAGE 157>>>
produces difficulty in reading and appreciating the symbolic meaning of
numbers (number dyslexia). Left hemisphere damage also can be associated
with an impaired conceptual understanding of the arithmetic problem
(anarithmetria). In contrast, the deficits in arithmetic computation that can
accompany right hemisphere damage are more likely to be observed in
written problems. These emerge as problems with the spatial aspects of
arithmetic, such as errors resulting from hemispatial visual neglect, poor
alignment of columns, or visual misperceptions and rotations that can confuse
signs for addition and multiplication.
SPATIAL DISORDERS. Right hemisphere damage in right-handed individuals is

frequently associated with deficits in visuospatial skills. Common assessment
techniques include drawings and constructional or spatial assembly tasks.
Visuospatial Impairment. Distinctive qualitative errors in constructing block
designs and in drawing a complex geometric configuration (e.g., Rey–
Osterrieth Complex Figure test) can be seen with either right or left
hemisphere damage. In the presence of lateralized damage to the right
hemisphere, impaired performance often reflects the patient’s inability to
appreciate the “Gestalt” or global features of a design. In the example shown
in Figure 1-4, this is seen in the patient’s failure to maintain the 2 × 2 matrix
of blocks and instead of converting this matrix into a column of four blocks.
In contrast, damage to the left hemisphere commonly results in inaccurate
reproduction of internal details of the design, including improper orientation
of individual blocks. However, the 2 × 2 matrix (i.e., the Gestalt) is more
likely to be preserved. Many neuropsychologists emphasize that a
neuropsychological understanding of the impairment depends not just on a
set of test scores but also on a qualitative description of the type of error. This
often allows the impairment to be linked to a specific neuroanatomical region
as well as enabling a better understanding of the mechanisms of the deficit
for rehabilitation purposes. This qualitative focus on the type of error is
similar to the pathognomonic approach that is often used by behavioral
neurologists.


<<<PAGE 158>>>
FIGURE 1-4
Examples of block design construction seen in a right hemisphere stroke patient
and a left hemisphere stroke patient. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia,
PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009, with permission.)

In another example, damage to the right hemisphere tends to be associated
with a decreased appreciation of global features of visual stimuli. In contrast,
left hemisphere damage tends to be associated with the decreased analysis of
local features and detail. This notion is illustrated in Figure 1-5, where a
patient with left hemisphere damage focuses on the larger Gestalt of the
triangle or letter M with no regard for the internal characters that make up the
designs. In contrast, the “local” approach of a patient with right hemisphere
damage emphasizes the internal details (small rectangles or letter Z) without
an appreciation of the Gestalt that is formed by the internal details. This
example also illustrates the important point that behavioral responses
(including errors) are driven as much by preserved regions of intact brain
functioning as by the loss of other regions of brain functioning.
Neglect. Neglect syndromes are characterized by failure to detect visual or
tactile stimuli or to move the limb in the contralateral hemispace. They are
most commonly associated with right hemisphere damage in the parietal
region, but damage to other areas within the cerebral cortex and subcortical


<<<PAGE 159>>>
areas can also produce this problem. Although neglect syndromes have a
similar incidence and may co-occur with visual field cuts or somatosensory
deficits, the neglect syndrome is distinct and not explained by any motor or
sensory problems that may be present. Visual neglect can be assessed with
line cancellation and line bisection tasks, in which the paper is placed at the
patient’s midline, and the patient is asked to either cross out all of the lines on
the page or to bisect the single line presented. The method of double
simultaneous stimulation or visual extinction is another standard procedure
for demonstrating the deficit. Neglect syndromes can have devastating
functional effects on safety and the ability to live independently and should
be taken into account as a standard consideration in the evaluation process.

FIGURE 1-5
Global local target stimuli with drawings from memory by a patient with right
hemisphere cerebrovascular accident (CVA) and by a patient with left hemisphere
CVA. (From Robertson LC, Lamb MR. Neuropsychological contributions to
theories of part/whole organization. Cogn Psychol. 1991;23:325, with permission
from Elsevier Science.)

Dressing Apraxia. The syndrome of dressing apraxia tends to arise in
association with spatial deficits following right hemisphere damage. The


<<<PAGE 160>>>
resulting difficulty in coordinating the spatial and tactual demands of
dressing can be seen in the patient’s difficulty in identifying the top or bottom
of a garment, as well as right–left confusion in inserting his or her limbs into
the garment. As a result, dressing time can be painfully protracted, and the
patient may present with a greater level of functional dependence than might
otherwise be expected from the assessment of simple motor or spatial skills
alone.
Memory complaints constitute the most common
referral to neuropsychology. A thorough neuropsychological examination of
memory considers the modality (e.g., verbal vs. spatial) in which the material
is presented, as well as presentation formats that systematically assess
different aspects of the information-processing and storage system that forms
the basis for memory. Accumulated research indicates that specialized
processing of verbal and spatial memory material tends to be differentially
mediated by the left and right hemispheres, respectively. Also, to
interhemispheric differences in functional localization, specific memory
problems can be associated with a breakdown at any stage in the informationprocessing model of memory. These stages include (1) registration of the
material through attention, (2) initial processing and encoding of the material
within short-term memory, also known as working memory, (3) consolidation
and storage of material in long-term memory, and (4) retrieval processes, in
which material moves from long-term memory storage back into
consciousness. A great advantage of neuropsychological assessment is that
these various types of memory problems can be readily isolated and
described in the course of the examination procedures. Once identified, the
specific nature of the deficit can then have important implications for
diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis.
MEMORY DISORDERS.

Encoding. The initial encoding of new material can be influenced by a variety
of factors, including deficits in attention, language, and spatial processing
abilities. It is usually measured by the immediate recall of newly learned
information (e.g., narrative stories or designs) or by demonstrating the ability
to learn new material that has been presented across multiple “learning trials”
(e.g., word lists). Attention itself is a relatively fragile cognitive function that
can be affected by many factors, including neurologically based disorders


<<<PAGE 161>>>
(e.g., head injury or acute confusional state) and psychiatric disorders (e.g.,
depression or anxiety), so it is a crucial aspect of a proper assessment of
memory.
Storage and Retrieval. Deficits in recall can be associated with impaired
storage of information, or it can be due to impaired retrieval, in which case
the material is still present but not readily accessible. The best way of
differentiating these problems is to examine recognition memory, in which a
patient is typically asked to choose from a set of multiple-choice alternatives
or to discriminate target words from false-positive foils. If the patient
demonstrates accurate recognition but poor recall, then the problem most
likely lies in poor retrieval. However, if recognition is impaired, then the
problem is more likely to be related to impaired storage of new information.
This distinction is important because different neuroanatomical structures
subserve the functions of retrieval and storage. Impaired storage is more
often associated with dysfunction of the medial temporal lobe (MTL)diencephalic systems, whereas impaired retrieval can be associated with a
variety of structures, including the frontal lobes.
EXECUTIVE FUNCTION. The prefrontal lobes and their interconnections to the

rest of the brain are known to play an important role in executive functions,
which are essential in planning and organizing, self-monitoring, and
controlling complex problem-solving responses. Damage to the frontal lobes
also has been associated with significant personality changes. This was
historically exemplified by the famous 19th-century case of Phineas Gage,
who became irresponsible, socially inappropriate, and unable to carry out
plans after a tamping iron was blown through his frontal lobes. As
conceptualized by Muriel Lezak, the executive functions include volition
(i.e., formulation of a goal, motivation to achieve the goal, and awareness of
one’s own ability to achieve the goal), planning, purposive action (response
selection and initiation, maintenance, switching, and stopping), and
execution, which involves self-monitoring and self-correction as well as
control of the spatiotemporal aspects of the response. Hemispheric
differences in the control of executive functions by the frontal lobes have not
been as well documented as in the parietal and temporal lobes.


<<<PAGE 162>>>
MOTOR SKILLS. The neuropsychological evaluation commonly includes formal

tests of motor skills, such as measures of finger tapping speed, grip strength,
and fine motor dexterity. These tests, which have demonstrated validity and
reliability, are useful for assessing lateralized motor impairment and have
implications for functioning in daily life as well as vocational planning.
General Referral Issues
Referents turn to neuropsychology for many reasons that include differential
diagnosis, baseline measurement, and treatment planning, as well as opinions
regarding causality and decisional capacity. Because many referents have
limited experience and knowledge of the scope of neuropsychology, it is both
reasonable and essential for the neuropsychologist to take an active role in
refining the specific questions that are asked and providing realistic
information about the limitations of the consultation.
Level of Functioning. A common referral issue involves documentation of
the level of functioning for a variety of purposes, including assessment of
change or capacity to make decisions, especially in the presence of diagnoses
such as dementia, stroke, and head injury.
Differential Diagnosis. Like any other diagnostic procedure, the results of
a neuropsychological examination must be interpreted in light of all available
information, including the history and any associated medical factors that are
documented or reported for the individual. Many neurologic and psychiatric
disorders have similar clusters of symptoms in common, with complaints of
concentration or memory problems being among the most frequently reported
problems.
AGE- OR STRESS-RELATED COGNITIVE CHANGE. Many middle-aged and older

adults have concerns about everyday concentration and memory failures.
With heightened public awareness about conditions such as Alzheimer
disease, an increasing number of these individuals seek evaluations for these
concerns. Neuropsychological testing provides a detailed, objective picture of
different aspects of memory and attention, which can be helpful in reassuring
healthy persons about their abilities. It also offers an opportunity for
assessing undetected mood or anxiety disorders that may be reflected in


<<<PAGE 163>>>
cognitive concerns and for offering suggestions about mnemonic strategies
that can sharpen everyday function.
A 77-year-old, left-handed man with a high school education was
referred for neuropsychological assessment by his primary care physician
after the patient mentioned a recent episode of getting turned around
while driving. Results of the neuropsychological assessment indicated
variable performance on tests of attention and concentration. His
performance was excellent on tests of memory, language, and executive
problem-solving abilities, but visual-spatial and constructional abilities
were moderately impaired.
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is usually
classified as mild, moderate, or severe. However, the vast majority of TBI
cases referred for neuropsychological consultation involve mild TBI. A
significant proportion of persons who have suffered a mild TBI complain of
problems with attention and inefficient information processing, memory, and
mood, also to headache or other forms of pain, for many months after the
injury. Neuropsychological testing plays a crucial role in determining the
extent of objective cognitive deficit and examining the possible role of
psychological factors in perpetuating cognitive problems.
The neuropsychologist should bear in mind that many patients with mild
TBI are involved in litigation, which can complicate the neuropsychologist’s
ability to identify the causes for impairment. Although outright malingering
is probably relatively infrequent, subtle presentations of chronic illness
behavior should be a prominent consideration when potential legal
settlements or disability benefits are in question. This is a particularly
important factor in the case of mild head injury, when subjective complaints
may be disproportionate to the objectively reported circumstances of the
injury, especially because most follow-up studies of mild head injury indicate
a return to neuropsychological baseline with no objective evidence of
significant cognitive sequelae after 3 to 12 months following injury.
MILD TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY.

POSTSTROKE SYNDROMES. After the acute phase of recovery from stroke,

patients may be left with residual deficits, which can affect memory,


<<<PAGE 164>>>
language, sensory/motor skills, reasoning, or mood. Neuropsychological
testing can help to identify areas of strength, which can be used in planning
additional rehabilitation and can provide feedback on the functional
implications of residual deficits for work or complex activities of daily living.
Assessment of functional skills can also be helpful to a psychiatrist who is
managing mood and behavioral symptoms or dealing with family caregivers.
Conditions that particularly warrant
neuropsychological assessment for early detection and potential treatment
include HIV-related cognitive deficits and normal pressure hydrocephalus.
When concerns about a person’s memory functioning are expressed by
relatives instead of the patient, there is a higher probability of a neurologic
basis for the functional problems. Neuropsychological testing, combined with
a good clinical history and other medical screening tests, can be highly
effective in distinguishing early dementia from the mild changes in memory
and executive functioning that can be seen with normal aging.
Neuropsychological evaluation is particularly helpful in documenting
cognitive deterioration and differentiating among different forms of
dementia. An additional incentive for early diagnosis of dementia now lies in
the fact that a portion of patients with early dementia may be candidates for
memory-enhancing therapies (e.g., acetylcholinesterase inhibitors), and
testing can provide an objective means of monitoring treatment efficacy.
DETECTING

EARLY

DEMENTIA.

DISTINGUISHING DEMENTIA AND DEPRESSION. A substantial minority of patients

with severe depression exhibit serious generalized impairment of cognitive
functioning. Also, to problems with attention and slowing of thought and
action, there may be significant forgetfulness and problems with reasoning.
By examining the pattern of cognitive impairment, neuropsychological
testing can help to identify a dementia syndrome that is associated with
depression, usually known as depression-related cognitive dysfunction.
Mixed presentations are also common, in which symptoms of depression
coexist with various forms of cognitive decline and exacerbate the effects of
cognitive dysfunction beyond what would be expected from the neurologic
impairment alone. Neuropsychological testing, in this case, can be beneficial
by providing a baseline for measuring the effect of antidepressants or other
therapy in alleviating cognitive and mood symptoms.


<<<PAGE 165>>>
A 75-year-old man with a Ph.D. in the social sciences sought
neuropsychological reexamination for ongoing memory complaints,
stating that “several of my friends have Alzheimer’s.” In an initial
examination 1 year prior, he had performed in the expected range (above
average) for most procedures, despite variable performance on measures
of attention and concentration. Results of the follow-up examination
again clustered in the expected above-average range with uneven
performance on measures of attention. On list learning tests of memory,
his initial learning of a word list was lower than expected. Still, delayed
retention of the material was above average, with excellent discrimination
of target items on a recognition subtest. He also endorsed a large number
of symptoms of depression on a self-report inventory.
Change in Functioning Over Time. Because many neurologic diagnoses
carry clear expectations regarding normal rates of recovery and decline over
time, it is frequently important to reexamine a given patient with follow-up
neuropsychological assessment after 6 months to a year. For example, it
might be essential to monitor declines in independent functioning that could
be associated with progressive dementia or to identify improvement
following a stroke or tumor resection. Follow-up examinations also provide
an opportunity to objectively examine complaints of long-standing or
worsening cognitive sequelae following mild head trauma, even though the
current literature indicates that the most significant proportion of recovery of
function is likely to occur over the initial 6 months to 1-year postinjury.
Although continuing subtle signs of recovery can continue after that period,
failure to improve following the injury—or a worsening of complaints—
would suggest the possibility of contributing psychological factors or the
existence of a preexisting or coexisting condition, such as substance abuse,
dementia, or outright malingering.
Assessment of Decision-Making Capacity. Neuropsychologists are
often asked to assist in determining an individual’s capacity to make
decisions or to manage personal affairs. Neuropsychological testing can be
useful in these cases by documenting areas of significant impairment and by
identifying areas of strength and well-preserved skills. Opinions about


<<<PAGE 166>>>
decision-making capacity are seldom based on test findings alone. Usually,
they rely heavily on information gleaned from the clinical interview,
collateral interviews with family or caregivers, and direct observations (e.g.,
in-home assessment) of everyday function. Appraisal of an individual’s level
of insight and capacity to appreciate his or her limitations is typically the
most critical aspect of the assessment. State statutes generally define
standards for decision-making capacity, and, of course, the ultimate
determination of competence rests in the authority of the presiding judge.
However, the neuropsychologist or other health care professional can play a
significant role in shaping the judge’s ruling by providing a professional
opinion that is supported by compelling behavioral data that have strong face
validity. As a general rule of thumb, consideration of decision-making
capacity is usually best approached in the narrowest possible sense to infringe
as little as possible on the individual’s freedom to represent his or her
interests. Therefore, consultation requests for assessment of decision-making
capacity should identify specific areas of decision making and behavior that
are of concern. Frequent concerns having to do with decision-making
capacity involve the areas of (1) financial and legal matters, (2) health care
and medical treatment, and (3) ability to live independently. Some capacity
issues involve higher standards, such as the ability to drive, the ability to
work, or practice in a given profession (e.g., air traffic controller, surgeon, or
financial advisor). In such cases, the neuropsychologist needs to rely on
normative expectations that are appropriate for the type of activity, as well as
the patient’s demographics.
Forensic Evaluation. Neuropsychological evaluation of individuals in
matters of criminal or civil law usually requires specialized knowledge
beyond expertise in neuropsychology. Neuropsychologists are frequently
called upon as experts in matters involving head injury, especially in the case
of mild head injury associated with a motor vehicle accident. As a distinct
subspecialty, this area of practice requires the integration of knowledge of
statutes, laws, precedents, and legal procedures as well as expertise in
identifying and describing the impact of an injury or event on cognitive,
emotional, and behavioral functioning.
Approaches to Neuropsychological Assessment


<<<PAGE 167>>>
The neuropsychological examination systematically assesses functioning in
the realms of attention and concentration, memory, language, spatial skills,
sensory and motor abilities, as well as executive functioning and emotional
status. Because deficits in cognitive performance can only be interpreted in
comparison to a person’s long-standing or premorbid level of functioning,
overall intellectual abilities are typically examined to measure the current
level of overall functioning and to identify any changes in intellectual
functioning. Psychological contributions to performance are also considered
concerning personality and coping style, emotional lability, presence of
thought disorder, developmental history, and significant past or current
stressors. The expertise of the neuropsychologist lies in integrating findings
that are obtained from many diverse sources, including the history, clinical
presentation, and several dozen discrete performance scores that make up the
neuropsychological data.
Battery Approach. The battery approach, exemplified by the Halstead–
Reitan
Neuropsychological
Test
Battery
(HRNTB)
or
the
Neuropsychological Assessment Battery (NAB), grew directly out of the
psychometric tradition in psychology. This approach typically includes a
large variety of tests that measure most cognitive domains as well as sensory
and motor skills. Traditionally, all parts of the test battery are administered
regardless of the patient’s presenting problem, although the NAB has a
screening examination that covers all appropriate domains. The battery
approach has the advantage of identifying issues that the patient might not
have mentioned and that the medical history may not necessarily predict.
However, it has the disadvantage of being very time-consuming (i.e., 6- to 8hour examination for the HRNTB).
Hypothesis Testing Approach. The qualitative hypothesis testing
approach is historically best exemplified by the work of Alexander Luria and
more recently developed as the Boston Process Approach by Edith Kaplan
and her colleagues. It is characterized by a detailed evaluation of areas of
functioning that are related to the patient’s complaints and predicted areas of
impairment, with relatively less emphasis on aspects of functioning that are
less likely to be impaired. The hypothesis testing approach has been
particularly helpful in illuminating the differential roles of the two


<<<PAGE 168>>>
hemispheres, as discussed above. This approach has the advantage of
efficiently honing in on areas of impairment and producing a detailed
description of the deficits from a cognitive processing standpoint. Still, it has
the shortcoming of potentially overlooking unexpected areas of deficits.
Screening Approaches. Many practitioners have moved away from strict
battery or hypothesis testing approaches since the 1990s and developed more
flexible and efficient screening approaches. In this model, the
neuropsychologist utilizes a core set of screening procedures as a first step in
determining whether a diagnosis can be made with less information or
whether additional testing is necessary to identify more subtle problems.
Therefore, a screening protocol that efficiently assesses the major areas of
neuropsychological functioning may or may not be followed by more
detailed testing in selected areas that might provide a better understanding of
the reasons for the deficits demonstrated on the screening evaluation.
Mental Status Examinations. In some cases, usually involving very
acute or severe cognitive impairment, it is simply not feasible to administer
extensive cognitive examination procedures, so the neuropsychologist might
appropriately rely on bedside mental status examination or very brief
cognitive screening procedures to address the referral issues. However,
research has shown that, even with brief screening procedures, the systematic
use of a structured examination format can significantly increase the accuracy
of detecting cognitive impairment.
One of the most widely used screening instruments for documenting gross
changes in mental status is the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE).
However, it is essential to note that the MMSE does have distinct limitations.
Other than serial seven countings, the MMSE does not assess executive
functions, which are often impaired in dementing patients. Also, the MMSE
is likely to underestimate the prevalence of cognitive deficits in welleducated older persons with early Alzheimer disease or in younger adults
with focal brain injury. Still, it is more likely to overestimate the presence of
cognitive deficits in persons with little education. Therefore, cutoff scores
should be adjusted for age and education before concluding that impairment
is present. Although mental status examinations can be beneficial in
screening for gross signs of cognitive impairment, they do not provide a


<<<PAGE 169>>>
sufficient foundation for diagnosing specific etiologies of cognitive
impairment, and they are not interchangeable with neuropsychological
testing.
Domains of Formal Neuropsychological Assessment
The past decade has seen a virtual explosion in the growth of more
sophisticated and better-standardized tests and procedures for
neuropsychological evaluation. A list of examples of standard
neuropsychological tests and techniques is provided in Table 1-20.
Interview. The clinical interview provides the single best opportunity for
identifying the patient’s concerns and questions, eliciting a direct description
of current complaints from the patient, and understanding the context of the
patient’s history and current circumstances. Although the patient typically
serves as the primary interview source, it is crucial to seek corroborating
information for the patient’s account from interviews with caregivers or
family members as well as a thorough review of relevant records, such as
medical and mental health treatment, educational, and employment
experiences.
Intellectual Functioning. Assessment of intellectual functioning serves as
the cornerstone of the neuropsychological examination. The Wechsler
Intelligence Scales have represented the traditional gold standard in
intellectual assessment for many years, based on carefully developed
normative standards. The scope and variety of subtests on which the
summary IQ values are based also provide useful benchmarks against which
to compare performance on other tests of specific abilities. The latest revision
of this instrument, the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale III (WAIS-III),
offers the additional advantage of greatly extended age norms (ages 16 to 89)
that are directly related to normative performances on the Wechsler Memory
Scale III (WMS-III). The Wechsler Intelligence Scales utilize a broad set of
complex verbal and visuospatial tasks that have traditionally been
summarized as a verbal IQ, a performance IQ, and full-scale IQ. In the
context of a neuropsychological examination, the patient’s performance
across the procedures provides useful information regarding long-standing
abilities as well as current functioning. Most neuropsychologists recognize


<<<PAGE 170>>>
that the summary IQ values provide only a ballpark range for characterizing
an individual’s general level of functioning. Therefore, it is usually more
appropriate and meaningful to characterize an individual’s intellectual
functioning in terms of the range of functioning (e.g., borderline, low
average, average, high average, or superior) that is represented by the IQ
value rather than the specific value itself.
Table 1-20
Selected Tests of Neuropsychological Functioning
Area of
Function

Comment

Intellectual Functioning
Wechsler
Age-stratified normative references; appropriate for
Intelligence
adults up to age 89, adolescents, and young
Scales
children
Shipley Scale Scale Brief (20-min) paper-and-pencil measure of
multiple-choice vocabulary and open-ended verbal
abstraction
Attention and Concentration
Digit Span

Auditory–verbal measure of simple span of attention
(digits forward) and cognitive manipulation of
increasingly longer strings of digits (digits
backward)

Visual
Memory
Span

Visual–spatial measure of ability to reproduce a
spatial sequence in forward and reverse order

Paced
Auditory
Serial
Addition
Test

Requires double tracking to add pairs of digits at
increasing rates; particularly sensitive to subtle
simultaneous processing deficits, especially in
head injury


<<<PAGE 171>>>
(PASAT)
Digit Vigilance Timed measure of speed and accuracy in cancelling
Test
a specific digit on a page of random digits; directly
examines an individual’s tendency to sacrifice
either speed or accuracy in favor of the other
Memory
Wechsler
Memory
Scale III

Comprehensive set of subtests measuring attention
and encoding, retrieval, and recognition of various
types of verbal and visual material with both
immediate recall and delayed retention; excellent
age-stratified normative comparisons for adults up
to age 89 with intellectual data for direct
comparison

California
Verbal
Learning
Test II

Documents encoding, recognition, and both
immediate and 30-min recall; affords examination
of possible learning strategies as well as
susceptibility to semantic interference with
alternate and short forms available

Fuld Object
Memory
Evaluation

Selective reminding format requires patient to identify
objects tactually, then assesses consistency of
retrieval and storage as well as ability to benefit
from cues; normative reference group is designed
for use with older individuals

Benton Visual Assesses memory for 10 geometric designs after 10Retention
s exposures; requires graphomotor response
Test
Brief
Serial learning approach used to assess recall and
Visuospatial
recognition memory for an array of six geometric
Memory
figures; six alternate forms
Test—
Revised
Language


<<<PAGE 172>>>
Boston
Comprehensive assessment of expressive and
Diagnostic
receptive language functions
Aphasia
Examination
Boston
Naming
Test—
Revised

Documents word finding difficulty in a visual
confrontation format

Verbal
Fluency

Measures ability to fluently generate words within
semantic categories (e.g., animals) or phonetic
categories (e.g., words beginning with “S”)

Token Test

Systematically assesses comprehension of complex
commands using standard token stimuli that vary
in size, shape, and color

Visuospatial-Constructional
Judgment of
Line
Orientation

Ability to judge angles of lines on a page presented in
a match-to-sample format

Facial
Assesses matching and discrimination of unfamiliar
Recognition
faces
Clock Drawing Useful screening technique is sensitive to
organization and planning as well as constructional
ability
Rey–
Osterrieth
Complex
Figure test

Ability to draw and later recall a complex geometric
configuration; sensitive visual memory as well as
executive deficits in development of strategies and
planning

Motor
Finger

Standard measure of simple motor speed;


<<<PAGE 173>>>
Tapping

particularly useful for documenting lateralized
motor impairment

Grooved
Pegboard

Ability to rapidly place notched pegs in slotted holes;
measures fine finger dexterity as well as eye–hand
coordination

Grip Strength

Standard measure of lateralizing differences in
strength

Executive Functions
Wisconsin
Measure of problem-solving efficiency is particularly
Card
sensitive to executive deficits of perseveration and
Sorting Test
impaired ability to flexibly generate alternative
strategies in response to feedback
Category Test This measure of problem-solving ability also
examines ability to benefit from feedback while
flexibly generating alternative response strategies;
regarded as one of the most sensitive measures of
general brain dysfunction in the Halstead–Reitan
Battery
Trail-Making
Test

Requires rapid and efficient integration of attention,
visual scanning, and cognitive sequencing

Delis–Kaplan
Executive
Function
System (DKEFS)

Battery of measures that are sensitive to executive
functions

Psychological Factors
Beck
Brief (5–10 min) self-report measure that is sensitive
Depression
to symptoms of depression; best for screening
Inventory
depression in adults up to late middle age, who
can be expected to frankly report symptoms;
available in standard (21 four-choice items) or


<<<PAGE 174>>>
short (13-item) form
Geriatric
30-item self-report screen for symptoms of
Depression
depression; the yes–no format is less cognitively
Scale
demanding than other scales
Minnesota
Multiphasic
Personality
Inventory 2

This psychometrically developed self-report
instrument remains highly useful for documenting
quantitative levels of self-reported symptoms that
can be objectively compared with known
populations; drawbacks include administration time
(567 true–false questions, requires about 1–1.5 hr
or more) for frail individuals, and the emphasis on
pathologic features for persons who are generally
psychologically healthy; advantages include welldeveloped validity scales and availability of many
symptom-specific subscales that have been
identified over the years

From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009, with permission.

Careful examination of the individual’s performance across the various
verbal and performance subtests can provide information regarding the
patient’s pattern of strengths and weaknesses as well as the degree to which
these performance characteristics are consistent with the history and
performance on other aspects of the neuropsychological examination. Tests
of long-standing knowledge, such as for vocabulary or general information,
provide a basis for estimating an individual’s long-standing (or premorbid)
level of intellectual abilities, which in turn can help to gauge the degree to
which an individual may have deteriorated.
The verbal IQ and performance IQ (VIQ and PIQ) have historically been
reported to be associated with left and right hemisphere functioning,
respectively. However, more recent research indicates that, also to language
and spatial skills, the subtests of the Wechsler Intelligence Scales reflect
other contributions such as speed, sustained concentration, and novel
experience. Therefore, experienced neuropsychologists do not merely assume


<<<PAGE 175>>>
that a discrepancy between VIQ and PIQ is due to unilateral hemispheric
damage. Important clues to the nature of the contributing problem can often
be gleaned by considering the pattern of performance across other aspects of
the examination and by carefully analyzing the types of errors that are
observed.
Attention. Attention underlies performance in virtually all other areas of
functioning. It should always be considered a potential contributor to
impairment on any tests that require sustained concentration and vigilance or
rapid integration of new information. Measures of attention and concentration
have traditionally been included in the Wechsler Intelligence and Wechsler
Memory Scales to assess orientation and “freedom from distractibility.”
These procedures also provide a useful basis for “previewing” the
individual’s ability to comprehend, process information, and otherwise
engage in the assessment process. Digit span requires patients to repeat
longer strings of digits increasingly as a way of assessing the ability to
process relatively simple information. In contrast, digit span backward
reflects more complex simultaneous processing and cognitive manipulation
demands or working memory.
Memory. Complaints of memory problems constitute one of the most
common reasons for referral to neuropsychology. As described above, the
neuropsychologist utilizes an information-processing approach to assess
memory problems that might involve difficulty with encoding, retrieval, or
storage of new information. The WMS-III is the latest revision of a widely
used battery of subtests that utilizes several measures of attention, memory,
and new learning ability.
Language. The assessment of language examines both expressive abilities
and comprehension. However, most neuropsychologists screen for language
impairment rather than administer an extensive formal language assessment
battery, such as the Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination. Expressive
language is commonly assessed by measures of verbal fluency, which require
the patient to rapidly generate words within semantic (e.g., names of animals)
and phonetic categories (e.g., words beginning with specified letters of the
alphabet).


<<<PAGE 176>>>
Visuospatial Functions. Complex visuospatial abilities can be assessed
through procedures that were developed in Arthur Benton’s laboratory, such
as facial recognition and judgment of line orientation. Measures of visual
constructional ability examine the person’s ability to draw spatial designs or
assemble two- or three-dimensional figures (see Fig. 1-5). Also, to the
significant visuospatial component, these tasks reflect the contributions of
executive planning and organizational abilities. More impaired individuals
can be asked to copy simple geometric forms, such as a Greek cross or
intersecting pentagons, to examine visuospatial abilities that are less
influenced by planning and organization.
The widely used technique of clock drawing provides a surprisingly
sensitive measure of planning and organization, especially for older
individuals who are at risk for dementia. Although problems involving poor
organization, perseveration, and possible neglect are apparent in the drawing
that is illustrated in Figure 1-6, more subtle difficulties can also be detected,
especially when a patient’s performance is evaluated in light of premorbid
expectations.
Sensory and Motor Functions. Double simultaneous stimulation in the
visual, tactile, and auditory modalities is a standard component of the
HRNTB. It can be useful for assessing the integrity of basic sensory functions
as well as neglect if deficits are present on one side only on the bilateral
simultaneous trials and not when stimulation is unilateral. Grip strength and
rapid finger tapping are commonly used measures of motor strength and
speed that are sensitive to lateralized brain dysfunction.


<<<PAGE 177>>>
FIGURE 1-6
Clock drawing by a patient with vascular dementia, showing poor planning and
organization, perseveration, and possible neglect. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009, with permission.)

Executive Functions. One of the most critical aspects of the
neuropsychological examination lies in the assessment of higher executive
functions, which play an essential role in the planning and initiation of
independent activities, self-monitoring of performance, inhibition of
inappropriate responses, switching between tasks, and planning and control
of complex motor and problem-solving responses. Although the prefrontal
lobes have long been regarded as a vital component in mediating these
functions, more recent developments in the neurosciences have also led to an
increased appreciation for the essential role that is played by extensive
cerebral interconnections between subcortical and cortical regions of the
brain.


<<<PAGE 178>>>
Psychological Factors. A key component of any neuropsychological
examination involves consideration of the degree to which long-standing
personality or other psychological factors (including current stressors) might
contribute to the patient’s presentation. Common techniques for assessing
personality and psychological factors include the Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory 2 (MMPI-2) and paper and pencil techniques, such as
the Beck Depression Inventory II.
Assessment of Effort and Motivation. Because the results of
neuropsychological examinations may eventually be introduced as evidence
in litigation or other forensic proceedings or be used for determining
disability compensation, the neuropsychologist must address any possible
concerns about effort and motivation as a routine matter. Several instruments
have been developed recently that directly assess a patient’s level of effort
and motivation to perform at his or her best. Normative research indicates
that patients with histories of bona fide brain injury or even dementia perform
close to perfect levels on many such instruments, so poor performance
suggests poor effort or tendencies to exaggerate symptoms. Many other
indicators of effort are based on the pattern of an individual’s performance on
standard procedures in a neuropsychological examination.

FIGURE 1-7
Rey’s Memory Test with example of a response that is typical of exaggerated
“memory” problems. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009, with permission.)


<<<PAGE 179>>>
A 32-year-old woman with 13 years’ education was seen for disability
evaluation, claiming current “trouble remembering things.” Her account
of personal history was vague, and she “forgot” information, such as her
birth date and mother’s maiden name. Response latencies were extremely
long, even for highly familiar information (e.g., count from 1 to 20), she
could not repeat more than three digits forward consistently, and on a
word list learning procedure, she was not able to correctly recognize
more items (only five) than she could freely recall (also five). Despite
otherwise fluent language, she was only able to generate five examples of
animals in 1 minute. When asked to recall 15 items on a procedure (Rey’s
Memory Test) that is presented as a challenging task, but in reality is
fairly simple, her performance demonstrated exaggerated errors of
commission (Fig. 1-7). The evaluation concluded that current levels of
cognitive functioning could not be conclusively established due to overt
symptoms exaggeration.
Therapeutic Discussion of Results
A critical component of the neuropsychological examination process is found
in the opportunity to discuss the results of the examination with the patient
and family or other caregivers. This meeting can represent a potential
therapeutic opportunity to educate and clarify individual and relationship
issues, which can impact the identified patient’s functioning. If the patient’s
active cooperation in the initial examination has been appropriately enlisted,
then the patient will be prepared to invest value and confidence in the
findings of the examination. At the time of the discussion of the results, it is
useful to review the goals of the examination with the patient and supportive
family or caregivers and to clarify the expectations of those who are present.
Typically, these sessions will include information about the patient’s
diagnosis, with emphasis on the natural course and prognosis as well as
compensation and coping strategies for the patient and family. Given the
impact of chronic neurologic disease on the family system as well as the
patient, explicit discussion of these issues is critical in maximizing
adjustment to brain injury. It is equally important to relate the impact of the
results on the patient’s current living circumstances, future goals, and course


<<<PAGE 180>>>
of adjustment. It is not unusual for strong emotions and underlying tensions
within family relationships to come to light in the context of honest
discussion, so the results discussion can represent a significant therapeutic
opportunity to model effective communication and problem-solving
techniques.

PERSONALITY ASSESSMENT: ADULTS AND CHILDREN
Personality is defined as an individual’s enduring and pervasive motivations,
emotions, interpersonal styles, attitudes, and traits. Personality assessment is
the systematic measurement of these personality characteristics. Personality
tests measure such difficult-to-define concepts as depression, anger, and
anxiety. Even more challenging personality concepts such as somatization,
ability to delay gratification or suicide potential can be quantified using
personality assessment. Personality assessment can be of utmost importance
in the scientific study of psychology and psychiatry.
Purposes of Psychological Testing
Personality testing can be an expensive undertaking. A considerable amount
of time is required to administer, score, and interpret psychological test
results. Personality testing should not be routinely obtained from all
psychiatric patients. Personality testing can be helpful with selective patients
from both a clinical and a cost–benefit analysis perspective.
Assisting in Differential Diagnosis. Psychiatric diagnosis can be
difficult and, at times, confusing exercise. However, knowing a patient’s
diagnosis is essential to treatment, as a proper diagnosis can assist in
understanding the etiology of the presenting psychiatric problem and the
prognosis of the disorder.
A 49-year-old man had abruptly resigned his position as an accountant
and decided he was going to start an oil exploration business. He had
never worked in the oil business and knew nothing about the profession.
The patient had received a revelation from an unknown entity through an
auditory hallucination. This voice told him he would become quite


<<<PAGE 181>>>
wealthy in the business if he would simply follow the directions given to
him. Around this time, the patient had a marked change in personality.
Although his grooming was formally very neat and appropriate, he
became disheveled. He began sleeping about 3 hours a night. He became
somewhat agitated and talked loudly to those around him.
The differential diagnosis, in this case, includes schizophrenia and
bipolar disorder. Psychological testing might help assist in this
differential diagnosis, as well as in the formulation of a treatment plan.
Aiding in Psychotherapy. Psychological tests can be useful in
psychotherapy. The usefulness of these tests can be even more important for
short-term, problem-centered therapy, where understanding the patient and
his or her problem must be accomplished quickly. Psychological assessment
can be used in pretreatment planning, assessing progress once therapy begins,
and in evaluating the effectiveness of therapy. Patients need to have objective
information about themselves at the time of therapy if they are to go about
changing themselves productively. Personality tests, particularly objective
tests, allow patients to compare themselves to objective norms and evaluate
the extent and magnitude of their problem. Testing also can reveal areas of
the patient’s life that may be problematic but for which the patient may not
have a full appreciation. Information about patients’ willingness to disclose
information about themselves can also be helpful. Psychological tests may
reveal considerable information concerning the patient’s inner life, feelings,
and images, which may make therapy progress faster. Psychological testing
can provide baseline information at the beginning of therapy, and repeat
testing can then be used to assess the change that occurred during therapy.
Providing Narrow-Band Assessment. Narrow-band personality tests
measure a single personality characteristic or a few related characteristics.
Broad-bank personality tests, on the other hand, are designed to measure a
wide spectrum of personality characteristics. A psychiatrist may need
answers to specific questions, such as those that arise when assessing the
degree of clinical depression, measuring the intensity of the state or trait
anxiety, or, possibly, quantifying the amount of a patient’s anger. Such
quantification can help measure severity or in providing a baseline for future


<<<PAGE 182>>>
assessment.
Psychometric Properties of Personality Assessment Instruments
The quality of personality tests varies widely. On the one hand, there are
well-constructed, empirically validated instruments, and, on the other hand,
there are “psychological tests” that one can find in the Sunday supplement of
the newspaper or on the Internet. Evaluating the usefulness of particular
psychological instruments can be challenging, even to the well informed.
Normative Sample. To construct a personality test, a representative sample
of subjects (normative sample) should be administered the test to establish
expected performance. Fundamental issues, such as the size and
representativeness of the sample used to construct the test, must be evaluated.
To illustrate this point, the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 2
(MMPI-2), a well-constructed instrument, initially tested approximately
2,900 subjects. However, about 300 subjects were eliminated because of test
invalidity or incompleteness of needed information.
Test Characteristics. Any psychological test must be completed, in its
entirety, by the intended test taker to be useful. If the questions are offensive
or are difficult to understand, then the individual taking the test may not
complete all items. These omissions can create problems, especially when
normative tables are used to interpret results.
Validity Issues. Perhaps the most crucial characteristic in evaluating the
scientific merit of a given personality test is the validity of the instrument.
Does the test measure what it purports to measure? If a test is designed to
measure depression, does it indeed measure depression? Although validity
may seem like a simple issue to address, it can become complex, especially
when attempting to measure such characteristics as self-esteem, assertiveness,
hostility, or self-control.
FACE VALIDITY. Face validity refers to the content of the test items themselves.

In other words, do the items appear to measure what they purport to measure?
One problem with face validity is that professionals differ in their subjective
appraisal of individual items.


<<<PAGE 183>>>
Although face validity refers to the
degree that test items appear on the surface to measure what the instrument,
as a whole, purports to measure, criterion validity uses data outside the test
itself to measure validity. For example, if a test were designed to measure
hypochondria, one would expect that a patient with high scores would have
more visits to the physician’s office, complain of more physical symptoms,
and use prescribed and over-the-counter medications more extensively.
CRITERIA AND CONSTRUCT VALIDITY.

CONCURRENT AND PREDICTIVE VALIDITY. To determine test concurrent validity,

external measures are obtained at the same time that the test is given to the
sample of subjects. Thus, the concurrent validity of the test reveals that, at a
given point of time, high scorers on a test may be more likely than low
scorers on a test to manifest the behavior reflected in the criteria (e.g., more
physician visits or more medication for a hypochondriac patient).
Occasionally, however, a test developer is interested in predicting future
events. The discriminant validity of a test tells whether the test can
discriminate between known groups of patients at a given time. Is a measure
of depression able to statistically differentiate among mild, moderate, and
severe major depressive disorder?
FACTOR VALIDITY. Factor validity utilizes a multivariate statistical technique

known as factor analysis to determine if certain significant groups of items
on a given test empirically cluster together. For example, on a personality test
measuring depression, do items concerning vegetative symptoms tend to
covary together?
Reliability. Reliability refers to the degree that a test measures what it
purports to measure, consistently. The key word here is consistently. There
are several means of checking reliability, including test–retest reliability,
internal consistency reliability, and parallel form reliability.
Test–retest reliability is obtained by simply
administering the same test on two occasions to a group of subjects and
statistically correlating the results. The correlation coefficient should be at
least 0.80 if the two tests were administered within 2 weeks of each other,
and if the trait in question is stable.
TEST–RETEST RELIABILITY.


<<<PAGE 184>>>
Another approach to determining
internal consistency reliability is to divide a given test into two equal parts
and statistically correlate the two halves for the test with each other. This
technique determines the split-half reliability of a test. The first half of the
test should be highly correlated with the second half of the test if the test is
consistently measuring what it purportedly measures. Alternatively, the oddnumbered items could be correlated with the even-numbered items (odd–even
consistent reliability). A reliability coefficient of 0.80 to 0.85 is needed to
demonstrate usefulness in most circumstances. However, the higher the
reliability as measured by the correlation coefficient, the better the test
instrument.
INTERNAL CONSISTENCY RELIABILITY.

PARALLEL FORM RELIABILITY. Sometimes, two separate forms of the same test

are needed. For example, if the process of taking a test at one point in time
would by itself influence a patient’s score the second time he or she took the
same test, then parallel forms of the tests are needed. Parallel forms of a test
measure the same construct but use different items to do so. To ensure that
the test does measure the same construct, the correlation coefficient between
the two parallel forms of the same test is computed. Such parallel form
reliability should be at least 0.90 or higher.
USE OF STANDARD ERROR OF MEASUREMENT TO ASSESS RELIABILITY. Another

way to assess the usefulness of a given test is to examine the test’s standard
error of measurement (SEM), which should be included in the test’s manual.
The SEM is a single statistic that is used to estimate what the score of a given
patient would be on the test if the patient retook the same test within a short
time.
Adult Psychological Tests
Objective Personality Tests. Objective personality tests are rather
straightforward in approach. Patients are usually asked specific and standard
questions in a structured written or oral format. Each patient is typically
asked the same question. The data obtained from a given patient are
compared to similar data obtained from the normative group. The degree to
which the patient deviates from the norm is noted and is used in the


<<<PAGE 185>>>
interpretive process. The patient’s responses are scored according to certain
agreed-upon criteria. The obtained scores are then compared with normative
tables and often converted to standardized scores or percentiles, or both. The
MMPI-2 is an example of an objective personality test. Table 1-21 lists a
sample of objective personality test along with a brief description and brief
list of strengths and weaknesses.
MINNESOTA MULTIPHASIC PERSONALITY INVENTORY. The MMPI-2 is relatively

easy to administer and score and takes approximately 1.5 hours for most
patients to complete. It consists of 567 true or false questions concerning a
wide variety of issues and requires only eighth-grade reading comprehension.
Scoring of the MMPI-2 involves adding up the number of responses on
numerous scales and comparing the results to certain normative information.
Interpretation of the MMPI-2 is more straightforward than with many other
tests.
When a patient takes the MMPI-2, questions are not grouped in any
particular order to aid in interpretation. Various items in the MMPI-2 can be
selected, sorted, and analyzed according to various criteria.
A new version of the MMPI-2 was developed in 2008, the MMPI-2
Restructured Form (MMPI-2 RF). It contains 338 questions and allows less
time to administer. The MMPI-2 RF is meant to be an alternative to the
MMPI-2, not a replacement.
Another increasingly popular
objective personality test is the Personality Assessment Inventory (PAI). This
test consists of 344 items that are written at a fourth-grade reading level. This
reading level ensures that most patients can complete it without experiencing
any reading problems. The PAI takes about 45 to 50 minutes to complete for
most patients. The PAI was normed on 1,000 community-dwelling
individuals stratified according to sex, race, and age. There are no separate
norms for male and female as there are in the MMPI. Also, data were
gathered on 1,246 clinical subjects and 1,051 college students in the
normative process. The clinical subjects were drawn from a variety of
different clinical settings, including inpatient psychiatric facilities (25
percent), outpatient psychiatric facilities (35 percent), correctional institutions
(12 percent), medical settings (2 percent), and substance abuse treatment
PERSONALITY ASSESSMENT INVENTORY (PAI).


<<<PAGE 186>>>
programs (15 percent).
The PAI has 11 clinical scales. These main clinical scales are similar to the
MMPI-2 clinical scales and measure such personality issues as somatic
concerns, depression, paranoia, borderline features, or alcohol or drug
problems. The PAI also has five treatment-related scales that are designed to
address such issues as treatment rejection, suicide ideation, or aggression.
Projective Personality Test. Projective personality tests, in contrast to
objective personality instruments, are more indirect and unstructured. Unlike
objective tests in which the patient may simply mark true or false to given
questions, the variety of responses to projective personality tests are almost
unlimited. Instructions are usually very general, allowing the patient’s
fantasies to be expressed. The patient generally does not know how his or her
responses will be scored or analyzed. Consequently, trying to fake the test
becomes difficult. Projective tests typically do not measure one particular
personality characteristic, such as “type A personality” (e.g., narrow-band
measurement). Instead, they are designed to assess one’s personality as a
whole (e.g., broad-band measurement).
Table 1-21
Objective Measures of Personality
Name

Description

Strengths

Weaknesses

Minnesota
Multiphasic
Personality
Inventory-2
(MMPI-2)

567 Items;
Current revision of Preliminary data
true–false;
MMPI that has
indicate that the
self-report
updated the
MMPI-2 and
format; 20
response booklet;
the MMPI can
primary
revised scaling
provide
scales
methods and new
discrepant
validity scores;
results;
new normative
normative
data
sample biased
toward upper
socioeconomic
status; no


<<<PAGE 187>>>
normative data
for adolescents
Million Clinical
Multiaxial
Inventory
(MCMI)

175 Items;
Brief administration In need of more
true–false;
time; corresponds
validation
self-report
well with
research; no
format; 20
diagnostic
information on
primary
classifications
disorder
scales
severity; needs
revision for
DSM-5

Million Clinical
Multiaxial
Inventory-II
(MCMI-II)

175 Items;
Brief administration
true–false;
time
self-report
format; 25
primary
scales

16 Personality True–false;
Sophisticated
Factor
self-report
psychometric
Questionnaire
format; 16
instrument with
(16 PF)
personality
considerable
dimensions
research
conducted on
nonclinical
populations
Personality
Assessment
Inventory
(PAI)

High degree of
item overlap in
various scales;
no information
on disorder or
trait severity
Limited
usefulness with
clinical
populations

344 Items;
Includes measures The inventory is
Likert-type
of
new and has
format;
psychopathology,
not yet
self-report;
personality
generated a
22 scales
dimensions,
supportive
validity scales,
research base
and specific
concerns to
psychotherapeutic
treatment


<<<PAGE 188>>>
California
Personality
Inventory
(CPI)

True–false;
self-report
format; 17
scales

Jackson
Personality
Inventory
(JPI)

True–false;
Constructed in
self-report
accord with
format; 15
sophisticated
personality
psychometric
scales
techniques;
controls for
response sets

Unproved
usefulness in
clinical settings

Edwards
Personal
Preference
Schedule
(EPPS)

Forced
choice;
self-report
format

Not widely used
clinically
because of
restricted
nature of
information
obtained

Psychological
Screening
Inventory
(PSI)

103 Items;
Yields four scores, The scales are
true–false;
which can be
short and have
self-report
used as screening
correspondingly
format
measures on the
low reliability
possibility of a
need for
psychological
help

Eysenck
True–false;
Personality
self-report
Questionnaire
format
(EPQ)

Well-accepted
method of
assessing
patients who do
not present with
major
psychopathology

Follows Murray’s
theory of
personology;
accounts for
social desirability

Limited
usefulness with
clinical
populations

Useful as a
Scales are short,
screening device;
and items are
test has a
transparent as
theoretical basis
to purpose; not


<<<PAGE 189>>>
with research
support

Adjective
Checklist
(ACL)

True–false;
self-report
or
informant
report

Comrey
True–false;
Personality
self-report
Scales (CPS)
format;
eight
scales

recommended
for other than a
screening
device

Can be used for
Scores rarely
self-rating or other
correlate highly
rating
with
conventional
personality
inventories
Factor analytic
techniques used
with a high
degree of
sophistication in
test constructed

Not widely used;
factor analytic
interpretation
problems

Tennessee
100 Items;
Brief administration
Self-Concept
true–false;
time yields
Scale (TSCS)
self-report
considerable
format; 14
information
scales

Brevity is also a
disadvantage,
lowering
reliability and
validity; useful
as a screening
device only

Courtesy of Robert W. Butler, Ph.D. and Paul Satz, Ph.D.

Projective tests often focus on “latent” or unconscious aspects of
personality. Psychologists and others differ in the degree to which they rely
on “unconscious” information. In many projective techniques, the patient is
simply shown a picture of something and asked to tell what the picture
reminds him or her of. An underlying assumption of projective techniques
(projective hypothesis) is that, when presented with an ambiguous stimulus,
such as an inkblot, for which there are an almost unlimited number of
responses, the patient’s responses will reflect fundamental aspects of his or
her personality. The ambiguous stimulus is a sort of screen on which the


<<<PAGE 190>>>
individual projects his or her own needs, thoughts, or conflicts. Different
persons have different thoughts, needs, and conflicts and, hence, have widely
different responses. A schizophrenic’s responses often reflect a rather bizarre,
idiosyncratic view of the world.
Table 1-22 lists the common projective tests together with a description
and strengths and weaknesses for each test.
RORSCHACH TEST. Herman Rorschach, a Swiss psychiatrist, developed the

first significant use of projective techniques around 1910. The Rorschach test
is the most frequently used projective personality instrument (Fig. 1-8). The
test consists of 10 ambiguous symmetrical inkblots. The inkblot card appears
as if a blot of ink were poured onto a piece of paper and folded over—hence,
the symmetrical appearance.
Table 1-22
Projective Measures of Personality
Name

Description

Strengths

Weaknesses

Rorschach test 10 Stimulus
cards of
inkblots,
some
colored,
others
achromatic

Most widely
Some Rorschach
used
interpretive
projective
systems have
device and
unimproved
certainly the
validity
best
researched;
considerable
interpretative
data available

Thematic
20 Stimulus
Apperception
cards
Test (TAT)
depicting a
number of
scenes of
varying
ambiguity

A widely used
method that,
in the hands
of a welltrained
person,
provides

No generally
accepted
scoring system
results in poor
consistence in
interpretation;
time-


<<<PAGE 191>>>
valuable
information
Sentence
completion
test

A number of
different
devices
available, all
sharing the
same format
with more
similarities
than
differences

Holtzman
Inkblot
Technique
(HIT)

Two parallel
Only one
forms of
response is
inkblot cards
allowed per
with 45 cards
card, making
per form
research less
troublesome

consuming
administration

Brief
Stimuli are
administration
obvious as to
time; can be a
intent and
useful adjunct
subject to easy
to clinical
falsification
interviews if
supplied
beforehand

Not widely
accepted and
rarely used;
not directly
comparable to
Rorschach
interpretive
strategies

Figure drawing Typically
Quick
Interpretive
human forms
administration
strategies
but can
have typically
involve
been
houses or
unsupported
other forms
by research
Make-a-Picture Similar to TAT; Provides
Story
however,
idiographic
(MAPS)
stimuli can
personality
be
information
manipulated
through
by the patient
thematic
analysis

Minimal research
support; not
widely used


<<<PAGE 192>>>
Courtesy of Robert W. Butler, Ph.D. and Paul Satz, Ph.D.

Minimal interaction between the examiner and the patient occurs while the
Rorschach is administered, which ensures standardization procedures are
upheld. The examiner writes down verbatim what the patient says during the
above-described “free association” or “response proper” phase. If the patient
rotates the card during his or her response, then the examiner makes the
appropriate notation on the test protocol. After the patient has given answers
to all 10 cards, an inquiry phase of administration begins. The examiner asks
the patient to go through the cards again and help the examiner see the
responses he or she gave. The examiner reads the patient’s initial response
and asks the patient to point out what he or she saw and explain what made it
look like that to him or her. An almost unlimited range of responses is
possible with the Rorschach test and most projective tests.

FIGURE 1-8
Card I of the Rorschach test. (From Hermann Rorschach, Rorschach®-Test.
Copyright © Verlag Hans Hubar AG, Bern, Switzerland, 1921, 1948, 1994, with
permission.)

Although the Rorschach test is the most
frequently used projective personality test, the Thematic Apperception Test
(TAT) is probably in second place. Many clinicians will include both the
TAT and the Rorschach test in a battery of tests for personality assessment.
The TAT consists of a series of 10 black-and-white pictures that depict
individuals of both sexes and of different age groups, who are involved in a
THEMATIC APPERCEPTION TEST.


<<<PAGE 193>>>
variety of different activities. An example of a TAT card is presented in
Figure 1-9.

FIGURE 1-9
Card 12F of the Thematic Apperception Test. (Reprinted from Henry A. Murray,
Thematic Apperception Test, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Copyright © 1943 President and Fellows of Harvard College, © 1971 Henry A.
Murray, with permission.)

Henry Murray developed the TAT in 1943 at the Harvard Psychological
Clinic. The stories that the patient makes up concerning the pictures,
according to the projective hypothesis, reflect the patient’s own needs,
thoughts, feelings, stresses, wishes, desires, and views of the future.
According to the theory underlying the test, a patient identifies with a
particular individual in the picture. This individual is called the hero. The
hero is usually close to the age of the patient and frequently of the same sex,
although not necessarily so. Theoretically, the patient would attribute his or


<<<PAGE 194>>>
her own needs, thoughts, and feelings to this hero. The forces present in the
hero’s environment represent the press of the story, and the outcome is the
resolution of the interaction between the hero’s needs and desires and the
press of the environment.
SENTENCE COMPLETION TEST. Although a projective instrument, the sentence

completion test is much more direct in soliciting responses from the patient.
He or she is simply presented with a series of incomplete sentences and is
asked to complete the sentence with the first response that comes to mind.
The following are examples of possible incomplete sentences:
My father seldom…
Most people don’t know that I’m afraid of…
When I was a child, I…
When encountering frustration, I usually…
The purpose of the test is to elicit, in a somewhat indirect manner,
information about the patient that cannot be elicited from other measures.
Because the patient responds in writing, the examiner’s time is limited. The
length of time it takes to complete the sentence completion varies greatly
depending on the number of incomplete sentences. Tests can range from less
than 10 sentences to greater than 75.
Behavioral Assessment. Behavioral assessment involves the direct
measurement of a given behavior. Rather than focus primarily on human
characteristics, such as repression, ego strength, or self-esteem (vague terms
to a behaviorist), strict behavioral measurement concentrates on the direct
measurement that can be observed, such as several temper tantrums per unit
of time, duration, and intensity and number of hyperventilation episodes, or
the number of cigarettes smoked per 24-hour period.
Although early strict behaviorists would count only observable behaviors,
a broader definition of behavior has emerged, under which just about
anything people do—whether it is overt such as crying, swearing, or handwashing or covert such as feeling and thinking—is considered behavior.
DIRECT COUNTING OF BEHAVIOR. Measuring overt behavior is direct and can be


<<<PAGE 195>>>
done by the patient himself or herself, a family member, or an impartial
observer.
Cognitive behavior therapists use these measurements to establish
baselines of a given undesirable behavior (i.e., violent thoughts that the
patient may wish to reduce). Similarly, therapists can measure behavior that
the patient wants to increase (time studying, time out of bed, or distance
walked on a treadmill). Follow-up measures of the same behavior monitor
progress and quantify improvement.

MEDICAL ASSESSMENT AND LABORATORY TESTING
IN PSYCHIATRY
Two recent issues have pushed medical assessment and laboratory testing in
psychiatric patients to the forefront of attention for most clinicians: the
widespread recognition of the pervasive problem of metabolic syndrome in
clinical psychiatry and the shorter life expectancy of psychiatric patients
compared with that of the general population. Factors that may contribute to
medical comorbidity include abuse of tobacco, alcohol, and drugs, poor
dietary habits, and obesity. Further, many psychotropic medications are
associated with health risks that include obesity, metabolic syndrome, and
hyperprolactinemia. Consequently, monitoring the physical health of
psychiatric patients has become a more prominent issue.
A logical and systematic approach to the use of medical assessment and
laboratory testing by the psychiatrist is vital to achieving the goals of arriving
at accurate diagnoses, identifying medical comorbidities, implementing
appropriate treatment, and delivering cost-effective care. Concerning the
diagnosis or management of medical disease, it is crucial to consult with
colleagues in other specialties. Good clinicians recognize the limits of their
expertise and the need for consultation with their nonpsychiatric colleagues.
Physical Health Monitoring
Monitoring the physical health of psychiatric patients has two goals: to
provide appropriate care for existing illnesses and to protect the patient’s
current health from possible future impairment. Disease prevention should
begin with a clear concept of the condition to be avoided. Ideally, in
psychiatry, this would be a focus on commonly found conditions that could


<<<PAGE 196>>>
be a significant source of morbidity or mortality. It is clear that in psychiatry,
a small number of clinical problems underlie a significant number of
impairments and premature deaths.
Role of History and Physical Examination
A thorough history, including a review of systems, is the basis for a
comprehensive patient assessment. The history guides the clinician in the
selection of laboratory studies that are relevant for a specific patient. Many
psychiatric patients, owing to their illnesses, are not capable of providing
sufficiently detailed information. Collateral sources of information, including
family members and prior clinicians and their medical records, may be
particularly helpful in the assessment of such patients.
The patient’s medical history is an important component of the history. It
should include notation of prior injuries and, in particular, head injuries that
resulted in loss of consciousness and other causes of unconsciousness. The
patient’s medical history also should note pain conditions, ongoing medical
problems, prior hospitalizations, prior surgeries, and a list of the patient’s
current medications. Toxic exposures are another important component of the
medical history. Such exposures are often workplace-related.
The social history contains many of the details relevant to the assessment
of character pathology, including risk factors for personality disorders as well
as information relevant to the assessment of major disorders. Commonly, the
social history includes a legal history, information about family and other
significant relationships, and an occupational history.
In evaluating patients who appear demented, the role of the physical
examination is to elucidate possible causative factors such as the cogwheel
rigidity and tremor associated with Parkinson disease or neurologic deficits
suggestive of prior strokes. Standard laboratory studies commonly assessed
in dementia patients include a complete blood count (CBC), serum
electrolytes, liver function tests (LFTs), blood urea nitrogen (BUN),
creatinine (Cr), thyroid function tests, serum B12, and folate levels, Venereal
Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test, and a urinalysis. Currently, there
is no clear clinical indication for testing for the apolipoprotein E epsilon 4
allele. Often, a CT scan is performed if there are focal neurologic findings,
and an electroencephalogram (EEG) may be performed if there is delirium.


<<<PAGE 197>>>
When patients are delirious, the neurologic examination may be complicated
by inattention due to altered levels of consciousness. Delirium workup often
includes the same laboratory workup described above for dementia. Urine or
blood cultures, chest radiograph, neuroimaging studies, or EEG also may be
appropriate.
Imaging of the Central Nervous System
Imaging of the central nervous system (CNS) can be broadly divided into two
domains: structural and functional. Structural imaging provides detailed,
noninvasive visualization of the morphology of the brain. Functional imaging
provides a visualization of the spatial distribution of specific biochemical
processes. Structural imaging includes x-ray, CT, and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI). Functional imaging includes PET, single-photon emission
computed tomography (SPECT), fMRI, and magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS). With the limited exception of PET scanning, functional
imaging techniques are still considered research tools that are not yet ready
for routine clinical use.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging. MRI scans are used to distinguish
structural brain abnormalities that may be associated with a patient’s
behavioral changes. These studies provide the clinician with images of
anatomical structures viewed from cross-sectional, coronal, or oblique
perspectives. MRI scans can detect a large variety of structural abnormalities.
The MRI is particularly useful in examining the temporal lobes, the
cerebellum, and the deep subcortical structures. It is unique in its ability to
identify periventricular white matter hyperintensities. MRI scans are useful in
examining the patient for particular diseases, such as nonmeningeal
neoplasms, vascular malformations, seizure foci, demyelinating disorders,
neurodegenerative disorders, and infarctions. The advantages of MRI include
the absence of ionizing radiation and the absence of iodine-based contrast
agents. MRI scans are contraindicated when the patient has a pacemaker,
aneurysm clips, or ferromagnetic foreign bodies.
Computed Tomography. CT scans are used to identify structural brain
abnormalities that may contribute to a patient’s behavioral abnormalities.
These studies provide the clinician with cross-sectional x-ray images of the


<<<PAGE 198>>>
brain. CT scans can detect a large variety of structural abnormalities in the
cortical and subcortical regions of the brain. CT scans are useful when a
clinician is looking for evidence of a stroke, subdural hematoma, tumor, or
abscess. These studies also permit visualization of skull fractures. CT scans
are the preferred modality when there is suspicion of a meningeal tumor,
calcified lesions, acute subarachnoid or parenchymal hemorrhage, or acute
parenchymal infarction.
CT scans may be performed with or without contrast. The purpose of
contrast is to enhance the visualization of diseases that alter the blood–brain
barrier, such as tumors, strokes, abscesses, and other infections.
Positron Emission Tomography. PET scans are performed
predominately at university medical centers. PET scans require a positron
emission tomograph (the scanner) and a cyclotron to create the relevant
isotopes. This type of scan involves the detection and measurement of
emitted positron radiation after the injection of a compound that has been
tagged with a positron-emitting isotope. Typically, PET scans use
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) to measure regional brain glucose metabolism.
Glucose is the principal energy source for the brain. These scans can provide
information about the relative activation of brain regions because regional
glucose metabolism is directly proportionate to neuronal activity. Brain FDG
scans are useful in the differential diagnosis of dementing disease. The most
consistent finding in the PET literature is the pattern of temporal-parietal
glucose hypometabolism in patients with Alzheimer type dementia.
PET scanning using FDDNP (2-(1-{6-[(2-[fluorine-18]fluoroethyl)
(methyl)amino]-2-naphthyl}-ethylidene) malononitrile) can differentiate
between normal aging, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer disease by
determining regional cerebral patterns of plaques and tangles associated with
Alzheimer disease. FDDNP binds to the amyloid senile plaques and tau
neurofibrillary tangles. FDDNP appears to be superior to FDG PET in
differentiating Alzheimer’s patients from those with mild cognitive
impairment and subjects with normal aging and no cognitive impairment.
Single-Photon Emission Computed Tomography. SPECT is
available in most hospitals but is rarely used to study the brain. SPECT is
more commonly used to study other organs, such as the heart, liver, and


<<<PAGE 199>>>
spleen. Some recent work, however, attempts to correlate SPECT brain
imaging with mental disorders.
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging. fMRI is a research scan
used to measure regional cerebral blood flow. Often, fMRI data are
superimposed on conventional MRI images, resulting in detailed brain maps
of brain structure and function. The measurement of blood flow involves the
use of the heme molecule as an endogenous contrast agent. The rate of flow
of heme molecules can be measured, resulting in an assessment of regional
cerebral metabolism.
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy. MRS is another research method
to measure regional brain metabolism. MRS scans are performed on
conventional MRI devices that have had specific upgrades to their hardware
and software. The upgrades permit the signal from protons to be suppressed
and other compounds to be measured. (Conventional MRI images are, in
reality, a map of the spatial distribution of protons found in water and fat.)
Magnetic Resonance Angiography. Magnetic resonance angiography
(MRA) is a method for creating three-dimensional maps of cerebral blood
flow. Neurologists and neurosurgeons more commonly use this test.
Psychiatrists rarely use it.
Toxicology Studies
Urine drugs of abuse screens are immunoassays that detect barbiturates,
benzodiazepines,
cocaine
metabolites,
opiates,
phencyclidine,
tetrahydrocannabinol, and tricyclic antidepressants. These rapid tests provide
results within an hour. However, they are screening tests; additional testing is
required to confirm the results of this screening.
Testing to determine blood concentrations of certain psychotropic
medications enables the clinician to ascertain whether blood levels of
medications are at therapeutic, subtherapeutic, or toxic levels. Psychiatric
symptoms are not uncommon when prescribed medications are at toxic
levels. In the debilitated and the elderly, pathologic symptoms may occur at
therapeutic concentrations. The normal reference range varies between
laboratories. It is essential to check with the laboratory performing the test to


<<<PAGE 200>>>
obtain the normal reference range for that laboratory.
Testing for drugs of abuse is usually performed on urine specimens. It also
may be performed on specimens of blood, breath (alcohol), hair, saliva, and
sweat. Urine screens provide information about the recent use of frequently
abused drugs such as alcohol, amphetamines, cocaine, marijuana, opioids,
and phencyclidine along with 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA) (ecstasy). Many substances may produce false positives with urine
drug screening tests. When a false positive is suspected, a confirmatory test
may be requested.
Comprehensive qualitative toxicology screening is usually performed by
liquid and gas chromatography. This may require many hours to perform and
is rarely done in routine clinical situations. It is usually performed in patients
with unexplained toxicity and an atypical clinical picture.
Qualitative toxicology assessments may be useful in managing patients
who have overdosed when combined with clinical assessment and knowledge
of when the ingestion occurred.
Drug Abuse. Patients are frequently unreliable when reporting their drug
abuse history. Drug-induced mental disorders often resemble primary
psychiatric disorders. Furthermore, substance abuse can exacerbate
preexisting mental illness. Indications for ordering a drug abuse screen
include unexplained behavioral symptoms, a history of illicit drug use or
dependence in a new patient evaluation, or a high-risk background (e.g.,
criminal record, adolescents, and prostitutes). A drug abuse screen is also
frequently used to monitor patient abstinence during treatment of substance
abuse. Such tests can be ordered on a scheduled or random basis. Many
clinicians believe random testing may be more accurate in the assessment of
abstinence. The tests also may help to motivate the patient.
Other laboratory data may suggest a problem with a substance use
disorder. An increase in the mean corpuscular volume is associated with
alcohol use disorder. Liver enzymes may be increased with alcohol use
disorder or from hepatitis B or C acquired from intravenous (IV) drug abuse.
Serologic testing for hepatitis B or C can confirm that diagnosis. IV drug
abusers are at risk for bacterial endocarditis. If bacterial endocarditis is
suspected, a further medical workup is indicated.


<<<PAGE 201>>>
TESTED SUBSTANCES. Routine tests are available for phencyclidine (PCP),

cocaine, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC; also known as marijuana),
benzodiazepines, methamphetamine, and its metabolite amphetamine,
morphine (Duramorph), codeine, methadone (Dolophine), propoxyphene
(Darvon), barbiturates, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), and MDMA.
Drug screening tests may have high false-positive rates. This is often due
to the interaction of prescribed medication with the test, resulting in falsepositive results and a lack of confirmatory testing. False-negative tests are
common as well. False-negative results may be due to problems with
specimen collection and storage.
Testing is most commonly performed on urine, although serum testing is
also possible for most agents. Hair and saliva testing are also available in
some laboratories. Alcohol can also be detected in the breath (breathalyzer).
Except for alcohol, drug levels are not usually determined. Instead, only the
presence or absence of the drug is determined. There is usually not a
meaningful or useful correlation between the level of the drug and clinical
behavior. The length of time that a substance can be detected in the urine is
listed in Table 1-23.
Table 1-23
Drugs of Abuse that Can Be Detected in Urine
Drug

Length of Time Detected in Urine

Alcohol

7–12 hr

Amphetamine

48–72 hr

Barbiturate

24 hr (short acting); 3 wk (long acting)

Benzodiazepine

3 days

Cocaine

6–8 hr (metabolites 2–4 days)

Codeine

48 hr

Heroin

36–72 hr

Marijuana

2–7 days


<<<PAGE 202>>>
Methadone

3 days

Methaqualone

7 days

Morphine

48–72 hr

Alcohol. There is no single test or finding on physical examination that is
diagnostic for alcohol use disorder. The history of the pattern of alcohol
ingestion is most important in making the diagnosis. Laboratory test results
and findings on physical examination may help to confirm the diagnosis. In
patients with acute alcohol intoxication, a blood alcohol level (BAL) may be
useful. A high BAL in a patient who clinically does not show significant
intoxication is consistent with tolerance. Significant clinical evidence of
intoxication with a low BAL should suggest intoxication with additional
agents. Intoxication is commonly found with levels between 100 and 300
mg/dL. The degree of alcohol intoxication can also be assessed using the
concentration of alcohol in expired respirations (breathalyzer). Chronic
alcohol use is commonly associated with other laboratory abnormalities,
including elevation in liver enzymes, such as aspartate aminotransferase
(AST), which is usually greater than serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT).
Bilirubin also is often elevated. Total protein and albumin may be low, and
prothrombin time (PT) may be increased. A macrocytic anemia may be
present.
Alcohol use disorder may be associated with rhinophyma, telangiectasias,
hepatomegaly, and evidence of trauma on physical examination. In
withdrawal, patients may have hypertension, tremulousness, and tachycardia.
Laboratory studies in patients who abuse alcohol may reveal macrocytosis.
This occurs in most patients who consume four or more drinks per day.
Elevations in AST and ALT characterize alcoholic liver disease, typically in a
ratio of AST to ALT of 2:1 or greater. The γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)
level may be elevated. Carbohydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT) may be
helpful in the identification of chronic heavy alcohol use. It has a sensitivity
of 60 to 70 percent and a specificity of 80 to 90 percent.
BAL is used to legally define intoxication in the determination of whether
an individual is driving under the influence. The legal limit in many states is
80 mg/dL. However, clinical manifestations of intoxication vary with an


<<<PAGE 203>>>
individual’s degree of alcohol tolerance. At the same BAL, an individual who
chronically abuses alcohol may exhibit less impairment than an alcohol-naive
individual. Generally, a BAL in the range of 50 to 100 mg/dL is associated
with impaired judgment and coordination and levels greater than 100 mg/dL
produce ataxia.
Environmental Toxins. Specific toxins are associated with a variety of
behavioral abnormalities. Exposure to toxins commonly occurs through
occupation or hobbies.
Aluminum intoxication can cause a dementia-like condition. Aluminum
can be detected in the urine or blood.
Arsenic intoxication may cause fatigue, loss of consciousness, anemia, and
hair loss. Arsenic can be detected in urine, blood, and hair.
Manganese intoxication may present with delirium, confusion, and a
parkinsonian syndrome. Manganese may be detected in urine, blood, and
hair.
Symptoms of mercury intoxication include apathy, poor memory, lability,
headache, and fatigue. Mercury can be detected in urine, blood, and hair.
Manifestations of lead intoxication include encephalopathy, irritability,
apathy, and anorexia. Lead can be detected in blood or urine. Lead levels
typically are assessed by collecting a 24-hour urine sample. The free
erythrocyte protoporphyrin test is a screening test for chronic lead
intoxication. This test is commonly coupled with a blood lead level. The
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention specify that a lead level greater
than 5 μg/dL requires further evaluation, and above 20 μg/dL requires a
thorough investigation of the home and other possible sources of lead
exposure. The incidence of lead toxicity in children has been falling recently.
Significant exposure to organic compounds, such as insecticides, may
produce behavioral abnormalities. Many insecticides have strong
anticholinergic effects. There are no readily available laboratory tests to
detect these compounds. Poison control centers may assist in the
identification of appropriate testing facilities.
Volatile Solvent Inhalation. Volatile substances produce vapors that are
inhaled for their psychoactive effect. The most commonly abused volatile
solvents include gasoline, glue, paint thinner, and correction fluid (white-


<<<PAGE 204>>>
out). The aerosol propellants from cleaning sprays, deodorant sprays, and
whipped cream containers may be abused. Nitrites, such as amyl nitrite
(“poppers”) and butyl nitrite vials (“rush”), and anesthetic gases, such as
chloroform, ether, and nitrous oxide, are also abused.
Chronic abuse of volatile solvents is associated with damage to the brain,
liver, kidneys, lung, heart, bone marrow, and blood. Abuse may produce
hypoxia or anoxia. Signs of abuse include short-term memory loss, cognitive
impairment, slurred and “scanning” speech, and tremor. Cardiac arrhythmias
may occur. Exposure to toluene, which is present in many cleaning solutions,
paints, and glues, has been associated with loss of clear gray–white matter
differentiation and with brain atrophy on MRI scans. Methemoglobinemia
has occurred with butyl nitrite abuse. Chronic use of volatile solvents is
associated with the production of panic attacks and an organic personality
disorder. Chronic use may also produce impairment in working memory and
executive cognitive function.
Serum Medication Concentrations
Serum concentrations of psychotropic medications are assessed to minimize
the risk of toxicity to patients receiving these medications and to ensure the
administration of amounts sufficient to produce a therapeutic response. This
is particularly true for medications with therapeutic blood levels. Medication
levels are often influenced by hepatic metabolism. This metabolism occurs
via the action of enzymes in the liver.
Acetaminophen. Acetaminophen may produce hepatic necrosis, which in
some cases may be fatal. Acetaminophen is one of the most frequently used
agents in intentional drug overdoses and is a common cause of overdoserelated deaths. Toxicity is associated with levels greater than 140 mcg/mL at
4 hours from ingestion in patients without preexisting liver disease. Chronic
abusers of alcohol are particularly vulnerable to the effects of an overdose.
Acetylcysteine (Mucomyst) treatment must occur promptly after an overdose
to prevent hepatotoxicity.
Salicylate Toxicity. Aspirin is frequently ingested in overdose.
Consequently, serum salicylate levels often are obtained in overdose cases.
Some rheumatic patients may chronically ingest large amounts of salicylate


<<<PAGE 205>>>
for therapeutic reasons. Ingestion of 500 mg/kg of aspirin may be fatal. Most
patients will develop symptoms of toxicity when salicylate levels are greater
than 40 mg/dL. Common symptoms of toxicity include acid–base
abnormalities, tachypnea, tinnitus, nausea, and vomiting. In cases of severe
toxicity, symptoms may include hyperthermia, altered mental status,
pulmonary edema, and death.
Antipsychotic Agents
CLOZAPINE. Clozapine (Clozaril) levels are trough levels determined in the

morning before administration of the morning dose of medication. A
therapeutic range for clozapine has not been established; however, a level of
100 mg/mL is widely considered to be the minimum therapeutic threshold. At
least 350 mg/mL of clozapine is considered to be necessary to achieve
therapeutic response in patients with refractory schizophrenia. The likelihood
of seizures and other side effects increase with clozapine levels greater than
1,200 mg/mL or doses greater than 600 mg per day or both. Clozapine is a
common cause of leukopenia in psychiatry. When moderate to severe
leucopenia develops, clozapine treatment must be interrupted, but patients
may be retreated with clozapine in the future.
Mood Stabilizers
Carbamazepine (Tegretol) may produce changes in the
levels of white blood cells, platelets, and, under rare circumstances, red blood
cells. Anemia, aplastic anemia, leucopenia, and thrombocytopenia may all
occur but are rare. Pretreatment evaluations typically include CBC.
Carbamazepine may produce hyponatremia. This hyponatremia is usually
mild and does not produce clinical symptoms. However, carbamazepine may
cause the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone
(SIADH). Carbamazepine may produce a variety of congenital abnormalities,
including spina bifida and anomalies of the fingers. Manifestations of toxicity
may include nausea, vomiting, urinary retention, ataxia, confusion,
drowsiness, agitation, or nystagmus. At very high levels, symptoms may also
include cardiac dysrhythmias, seizures, and respiratory depression.
CARBAMAZEPINE.


<<<PAGE 206>>>
LITHIUM. Lithium (Eskalith) has a narrow therapeutic index. Consequently,

blood levels of lithium must be monitored to achieve therapeutic dosing and
avoid toxicity. Side effects are dose-dependent. Symptoms of toxicity include
tremors, sedation, and confusion. At higher levels, delirium, seizures, and
coma may occur. Symptoms of toxicity may begin to manifest with serum
levels of greater than 1.2 mEq/L and are common with levels greater than 1.4
mEq/L. Elderly or debilitated patients may show signs of toxicity with levels
of less than 1.2 mEq/L.
Because of the risk of hepatotoxicity, ranging from mild
dysfunction to hepatic necrosis, pretreatment LFTs are usually obtained.
More commonly valproate (valproic acid [Depakene] and divalproex
[Depakote]) may cause a sustained elevation in liver transaminase levels of as
much as three times the upper limit of normal.
Valproate may increase the risk of congenital disabilities. A pretreatment
urine pregnancy test is usually obtained in women of childbearing years.
Women should be cautioned to use adequate contraception.
Hematologic abnormalities are also possible and include leucopenia and
thrombocytopenia. Treatment with valproate may increase serum ammonia
levels. It is prudent to obtain an ammonia level in a patient undergoing
valproate treatment who presents with altered mental status or lethargy.
Acute pancreatitis may also occur.
VALPROATE.

Antidepressants
Treatment with monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAOIs) can cause orthostasis and, rarely, hypertensive crisis.
Baseline blood pressure measurement should be obtained before the initiation
of treatment, and blood pressure should be monitored during treatment.
There are no meaningful blood levels for MAOIs, and direct monitoring of
MAOI blood levels is not clinically indicated. Treatment with MAOIs is
occasionally associated with hepatotoxicity. For this reason, LFTs usually are
obtained at the initiation of treatment and periodically after.
MONOAMINE

OXIDASE

INHIBITORS.

TRICYCLIC AND TETRACYCLIC ANTIDEPRESSANTS. Routine laboratory studies

obtained before initiation of tricyclic or tetracyclic antidepressants (TCAs)


<<<PAGE 207>>>
typically include CBC, serum electrolytes, and LFTs. Because TCAs affect
cardiac conduction, clinicians also may obtain an electrocardiogram (ECG) to
assess for the presence of abnormal cardiac rhythms and prolonged PR, QRS,
and QTc complexes before initiation of these medications.
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is a rare, potentially fatal
consequence of neuroleptic administration. The syndrome consists of
autonomic instability, hyperpyrexia, severe extrapyramidal symptoms (i.e.,
rigidity), and delirium. Sustained muscle contraction results in peripheral heat
generation and muscle breakdown. Muscle breakdown contributes to elevated
levels of creatine kinase (CK). Peripheral heat generation with impaired
central mechanisms of thermoregulation results in hyperpyrexia.
Myoglobinuria and leukocytosis are common. Hepatic and renal failure may
occur. Liver enzymes become elevated with liver failure. Patients may die
from hyperpyrexia, aspiration pneumonia, renal failure, hepatic failure,
respiratory arrest, or cardiovascular collapse. Treatment includes
discontinuation of the neuroleptic, hydration, administration of muscle
relaxants, and general supportive nursing care.
A typical laboratory workup for NMS includes a CBC, serum electrolytes,
BUN, Cr, and CK. A urinalysis, including an assessment of urine myoglobin,
is also usually performed. As part of the differential diagnosis, blood and
urine cultures are performed as part of a fever workup. Pronounced
elevations in the white blood cell (WBC) count may occur in NMS. White
blood cell counts are typically in the range from 10,000 to 40,000 per mm3.
Muscle Injury. Serum CK levels may rise in response to repeated
intramuscular (IM) injections, prolonged or agitated periods in restraint, or
NMS. Dystonic reactions from neuroleptic administration may also result in
elevated levels of CK.
Electroconvulsive Therapy
ECT is usually reserved for patients with the most treatment-resistant
depression. Typical laboratory tests obtained before the administration of
ECT include a CBC, serum electrolytes, urinalysis, and LFTs. However, no


<<<PAGE 208>>>
specific laboratory tests are required in the pre-ECT evaluation. Usually, an
ECG is also obtained. A spinal x-ray series is no longer considered routinely
indicated because of the low risk of spinal injury associated with modern
administration techniques that use paralyzing agents. A comprehensive
medical history and physical examination are useful screening tools to
identify possible conditions that could complicate treatment.
Endocrine Evaluations
Endocrine disease is of great relevance to psychiatry. Management of
psychiatric illness is complicated by comorbid endocrine disease. Endocrine
illness frequently has psychiatric manifestations. For these reasons, screening
for endocrine disease is often of relevance to the psychiatrist.
Adrenal Disease. Adrenal disease may have psychiatric manifestations,
including depression, anxiety, mania, dementia, psychosis, and delirium.
However, patients with adrenal disease rarely come to the attention of
psychiatrists. Assessment and management of these patients are best done in
conjunction with specialists.
Low plasma levels of cortisol are found in Addison disease. These patients
may have symptoms that are also common in psychiatric conditions,
including fatigue, anorexia, weight loss, and malaise. Patients may also have
memory impairment, confusion, or delirium. Depression or psychosis with
hallucinations and delusions may occur.
Elevated levels of cortisol are seen in Cushing syndrome. About half of all
patients with Cushing syndrome develop psychiatric symptoms. These
symptoms may include lability, irritability, anxiety, panic attacks, depressed
mood, euphoria, mania, or paranoia. Cognitive dysfunctions may include
cognitive slowing and poor short-term memory. Symptoms usually improve
when cortisol normalizes. If not, or if symptoms are severe, psychiatric
treatment may be necessary.
Cortisol levels are not useful in the assessment or management of primary
psychiatric disease. In particular, the dexamethasone-suppression test (DST)
remains a research tool in psychiatry that is not used in routine clinical care.
Anabolic Steroid Use. The use of anabolic steroids has been associated
with irritability, aggression, depression, and psychosis. Athletes and


<<<PAGE 209>>>
bodybuilders are common abusers of anabolic steroids. Urine specimens can
be used to screen for these agents. Because so many compounds have been
synthesized, a variety of tests may be required to confirm the diagnosis,
depending on the compound that has been used. Consultation with a
specialist is advised. Generally, androgens other than testosterone can be
detected by gas chromatography and mass spectroscopy.
Antidiuretic Hormone. Arginine vasopressin (AVP), also called
antidiuretic hormone (ADH), is decreased in central diabetes insipidus (DI).
DI may be central (due to the pituitary or hypothalamus) or nephrogenic.
Nephrogenic DI may be acquired or due to an inherited X-linked condition.
Lithium-induced DI is an example of an acquired form of DI. Lithium has
been shown to decrease the sensitivity of renal tubules to AVP. Patients with
central DI respond to the administration of vasopressin with a decrease in
urine output. Secondary central DI may develop in response to head trauma
that produces damage in the pituitary or hypothalamus.
About one-fifth of patients taking lithium develop polyuria, and a more
considerable amount may have some degree of impairment in concentrating
urine. Chronic treatment with lithium is a common cause of nephrogenic DI.
However, there are other causes of polyuria in lithium-treated patients also to
nephrogenic DI. Primary polydipsia is common and is often associated with
the dry mouth associated with many psychiatric medications. Central diabetes
has also been associated with lithium treatment.
Excessive secretion of AVP results in increased retention of fluid in the
body. This condition is called SIADH. Water retention in SIADH causes
hyponatremia. SIADH may develop in response to injury to the brain or from
medication administration (including phenothiazines, butyrophenones,
carbamazepine, and oxcarbazepine). The hyponatremia associated with this
condition may produce delirium.
Human Chorionic Gonadotropin. Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
can be assessed in the urine and blood. The urine test for hCG is the basis for
the commonly used urine pregnancy test. This immunometric test can detect
pregnancy approximately 2 weeks after an expected menstrual period has
passed. Routine tests are most accurate when performed 1 to 2 weeks after a
missed period and are not reliably accurate until the 2-week period has


<<<PAGE 210>>>
passed. However, there are ultrasensitive urine hCG tests that can accurately
detect pregnancy 7 days after fertilization. Pregnancy tests often are obtained
before initiating certain psychotropic medications, such as lithium,
carbamazepine, and valproate, which are associated with congenital
anomalies.
Parathormone. Parathormone (parathyroid hormone) modulates serum
concentrations of calcium and phosphorus. Dysregulation in this hormone
and the resulting production of abnormalities in calcium and phosphorus may
produce depression or delirium.
Prolactin. Prolactin levels may become elevated in response to the
administration of antipsychotic agents. Elevations in serum prolactin result
from the blockade of dopamine receptors in the pituitary. This blockade
produces an increase in prolactin synthesis and release.
Cerebral MRI is not usually performed if the patient is taking an
antipsychotic drug known to cause hyperprolactinemia, and the magnitude of
the prolactin elevation is consistent with drug-induced causes.
Prolactin levels may briefly rise after a seizure. For this reason, prompt
measurement of a prolactin level after possible seizure activity may assist in
differentiating a seizure from a pseudoseizure.
Thyroid Hormone. The disease of the thyroid is associated with many
psychiatric manifestations. Thyroid disease is most commonly associated
with depression and anxiety but may also give rise to symptoms of panic,
dementia, and psychosis. Thyroid disease may mimic depression. It is
challenging to achieve euthymia if a patient is not euthyroid.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
is an autoimmune disorder. Tests for SLE are based on the detection of
antibodies formed as part of the disease. Antinuclear antibodies are found in
virtually all patients with SLE. Antibody levels also are used to monitor the
severity of the illness. A fluorescent test is used to detect antinuclear
antibodies. This test can be positive in a variety of rheumatic diseases.
For this reason, a positive result usually is followed by additional tests,
including a test to detect anti-deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) antibodies. Anti-


<<<PAGE 211>>>
DNA antibodies, when associated with antinuclear antibodies, are strongly
suggestive of a diagnosis of lupus. Anti-DNA antibodies are followed to
monitor the response to treatment.
Psychiatric manifestations of lupus include depression, dementia, delirium,
mania, and psychosis. About 5 percent of patients with lupus present with
symptoms of psychosis, including hallucinations and delusions.
Pancreatic Function. Measurement of serum amylase is used to monitor
pancreatic function. Elevations in amylase levels may occur in alcoholabusing patients who develop pancreatitis. Serum amylase levels also may be
fractionated into salivary and pancreatic components.
Clinical Chemistry
Serum Electrolytes. Serum electrolyte levels may be useful in the initial
evaluation of a psychiatric patient. Levels of serum electrolytes often are
abnormal in patients with delirium. Abnormalities also may occur in response
to the administration of psychotropic medications. Low serum chloride levels
may occur in eating disorder patients who purge by self-induced vomiting.
Serum bicarbonate levels may be elevated in patients who purge or who
abuse laxatives. Bicarbonate levels are commonly low in patients who
hyperventilate in response to anxiety.
Hypokalemia may be present in eating disorder patients who purge or
abuse laxatives and in psychogenic vomiting. Diuretic abuse by eating
disorder patients also may produce hypokalemia. Low levels of potassium are
associated with weakness and fatigue. Characteristic ECG changes occur with
hypokalemia and consist of cardiac arrhythmias, U waves, flattened T waves,
and ST-segment depression.
Eating disorder patients with anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa usually
receive a relatively standard set of laboratory studies, including serum
electrolytes (particularly potassium and phosphorus), blood glucose, thyroid
function tests, liver enzymes, total protein, serum albumin, BUN, Cr, CBC,
and ECG. Serum amylase is often assessed in bulimic patients.
Magnesium levels may be low in alcohol-abusing patients. Low
magnesium levels are associated with agitation, confusion, and delirium. If
untreated, convulsions and coma may follow.


<<<PAGE 212>>>
Low levels of serum phosphorus may be present in eating disorder patients
with purging behavior. Phosphorus levels may also be low in anxiety patients
who hyperventilate. Hyperparathyroidism may produce low serum
phosphorus levels. Elevated serum phosphorus levels are seen in
hypoparathyroidism.
Hyponatremia is seen in psychogenic polydipsia and SIADH and in
response to certain medications, such as carbamazepine. Low sodium levels
are associated with delirium.
Serum calcium abnormalities are associated with a variety of behavioral
abnormalities. Low serum calcium levels are associated with depression,
delirium, and irritability. Elevated levels are associated with depression,
psychosis, and weakness. Laxative abuse, common in eating disorder
patients, can be associated with hypocalcemia. Hypocalcemia secondary to
hypoparathyroidism may occur in patients who have undergone surgery for
thyroid disease.
Serum copper levels are low in Wilson disease, a rare abnormality in
copper metabolism. Copper is deposited in the brain and liver, resulting in
decreased intellectual functioning, personality changes, psychosis, and a
movement disorder. Symptoms are usually present in the second and third
decades of life. Laboratory assessment for Wilson disease includes the
measurement of serum ceruloplasmin, the transport protein for copper, which
is low, and urine copper, measured in a 24-hour specimen, which is elevated.
Renal Function. Tests of renal function include BUN and Cr. Other
relevant laboratory studies include routine urinalysis and Cr clearance. An
elevated BUN often results in lethargy or delirium. BUN is commonly
elevated with dehydration. Elevations in BUN often are associated with
impaired clearance of lithium. A less sensitive index of renal function is Cr.
Elevations in Cr may indicate extensive renal impairment. Elevated levels
occur when approximately 50 percent of the nephrons are damaged.
Cr clearance is often assessed in patients taking lithium. It is a sensitive
measurement of renal function. The test is performed in a well-hydrated
patient by collecting all of the patient’s urine for 24 hours. During the
midpoint of the 24-hour collection period, a serum Cr level also is obtained.
The resulting data are used to calculate the patient’s Cr clearance. Usually,
the laboratory performs the calculation.


<<<PAGE 213>>>
Elevated levels of porphobilinogen are found in the urine of symptomatic
patients with acute intermittent porphyria. Symptoms of this disease include
psychosis, apathy, or depression, along with intermittent abdominal pain,
neuropathy, and autonomic dysfunction. If urine porphobilinogen levels are
elevated when the patient is symptomatic, collection of a 24-hour urine
specimen for quantitative assessment of porphobilinogen and aminolevulinic
acid is indicated.
Liver Function. LFTs commonly include the serum aminotransferases,
alkaline phosphatase, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, and tests of synthetic
function, usually the serum albumin concentration and prothrombin time, and
the serum bilirubin, which reflects hepatic transport capability.
Elevations in AST may occur with diseases of the liver, heart, lungs,
kidneys, and skeletal muscle. In patients with alcohol-induced liver disease,
AST typically is more elevated than ALT. In viral- and drug-induced liver
disease, ALT is often elevated. Serum GGT is elevated in hepatobiliary
disease, including alcohol-induced liver disease and cirrhosis.
Alkaline phosphatase elevations occur in many diseases, including diseases
of the liver, bone, kidney, and thyroid. Levels of alkaline phosphatase may be
elevated in response to some psychiatric medications, most notably the
phenothiazines.
Serum ammonia levels are often elevated in patients with hepatic
encephalopathy. High levels are associated with the delirium of hepatic
encephalopathy. Serum ammonia levels also may be elevated in patients
undergoing treatment with valproate.
Serum bilirubin is an index of hepatic and bile duct function. Prehepatic,
unconjugated, or indirect bilirubin and posthepatic, conjugated, or direct
bilirubin are often assessed to help elucidate the origin of the elevation in
bilirubin.
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) may be elevated in diseases of the liver,
skeletal muscle, heart, and kidney. It is also elevated in pernicious anemia.
Vitamins
FOLATE AND B12. Folate and B12 deficiencies are common in patients who


<<<PAGE 214>>>
abuse alcohol. Folate and B12 deficiencies are associated with dementia;
delirium; psychosis, including paranoia; fatigue; and personality change.
Folate and B12 can be directly measured. Low folate levels may be found in
patients who use contraceptive pills or other forms of estrogen, who drink
alcohol, or who take phenytoin.
Infectious Disease Testing
Testing for sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) has become common, given
the current frequency of these diseases. Some psychiatric illnesses, such as
mania and substance abuse, are associated with a higher risk of contracting
STDs. STDs include herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2, chlamydia, hepatitis
viruses, gonorrhea, syphilis, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Risk
factors for STD include contact with sex workers, drug abuse, prior history of
STDs, meeting partners on the Internet, multiple sex partners, a new sex
partner, and being young or unmarried. Other diseases to think about are
Epstein–Barr virus and gonorrhea.
Intravenous Drug Use. The IV route is used for many substances of
abuse. Most commonly, heroin, amphetamines, and cocaine are used alone or
in combination via the IV route. Because needles often are contaminated, IV
drug users are at risk for bacterial endocarditis, hepatitis B and C, HIV
infection, and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) from HIV
infection. It has been estimated that over 60 percent of new cases of hepatitis
C occur in individuals with a history of injecting illicit drugs.
The use of contaminated needles or
nonsterile injection sites places IV drug users at risk for bacterial infections,
including abscesses, bacteremia, and bacterial endocarditis. Findings on
physical examination suggestive of endocarditis, possible bacteremia, or
abscess necessitate obtaining a CBC to rule out an elevated WBC count.
Blood cultures should be obtained from at least two different sites if the
patient is febrile or if findings are suggestive of bacteremia or endocarditis,
and internal medicine consultation should be obtained.
CBC AND SERUM BLOOD CULTURES.

Syphilis. The fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS) test


<<<PAGE 215>>>
detects antibodies against Treponema pallidum spirochetes and is more
sensitive and specific than nontreponemal tests for syphilis. The test is used
to confirm positive screening tests for syphilis, such as the rapid plasma
reagin (RPR) test and the VDRL test. The FTA-ABS test is also used when
neurosyphilis is suspected. Once positive, a patient usually remains so for
life. False-positive results may occur in patients with SLE.
Viral Hepatitis. Several types of viruses can cause viral hepatitis. Viral
hepatitis produces abnormalities in LFTs, including elevation of liver
enzymes, especially ALT. Symptoms range from mild flu-like manifestations
to rapidly progressive and fatal liver failure. Psychiatric manifestations
include depression, anxiety, weakness, and psychosis. Viral hepatitis can also
impair the metabolism of psychotropic medications that are metabolized by
the liver. Impaired liver metabolism requires an adjustment of the dose of
medications metabolized by the liver or consideration of agents that are less
affected by alterations in liver metabolism. Viruses causing hepatitis include
hepatitis A virus (HAV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV),
and hepatitis D virus (HDV) (delta agent).
The WBC is normal to low in patients with hepatitis, especially in the
preicteric phase. Large atypical lymphocytes occasionally are present. Rarely,
aplastic anemia follows an episode of acute hepatitis not caused by any of the
known hepatitis viruses. Mild proteinuria is common, and bilirubinuria often
precedes the appearance of jaundice. Acholic stools frequently are present
during the icteric phase. Strikingly elevated AST or ALT occurs early,
followed by elevations of bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase. In a minority of
patients, elevations of bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase persist after
aminotransferase levels have normalized. Cholestasis may be substantial in
acute hepatitis A. Marked prolongation of the PT in severe hepatitis
correlates with increased mortality.
Chronic hepatitis, characterized by elevated aminotransferase levels for
more than 6 months, develops in 1 to 2 percent of immunocompetent adults
with acute hepatitis B. More than 80 percent of all persons with acute
hepatitis C develop chronic hepatitis, which, in many cases, progresses
slowly. Ultimately, cirrhosis develops in as many as 30 percent of those with
chronic hepatitis C and 40 percent of those with chronic hepatitis B; the risk
of cirrhosis is even higher in patients coinfected with both viruses or with


<<<PAGE 216>>>
HIV. Patients with cirrhosis are at risk, with a rate of 3 to 5 percent per year,
of hepatocellular carcinoma. Even in the absence of cirrhosis, patients with
chronic hepatitis B—particularly those with active viral replication—are at an
increased risk.
Electroencephalogram
The EEG assesses regional cerebral cortical electrical activity. Clinical
neuroscience has a long history of using EEG. The EEG can be used in
different ways to study specific brain states or activities by modifications to
the technique of data collection or the data themselves. EEG data can be
displayed on paper tracings in the manner of conventional EEG recordings.
Alternatively, the data can be digitized, and the digitized data can be
transformed, often using a Fourier transformation, to yield color-coded
topographic brain maps of regional activity. The collection periods can be
prolonged, and the data can be electronically displayed along with video
monitoring of the patient to provide telemetry assessments of patients with
epilepsy. Telemetry assessments are typically performed to correlate
behavioral abnormalities with brain electrical activity as part of the workup
of seizure disorders. Prolonged periods of EEG recording during sleep, when
coupled with a recording of a limited lead ECG and facial muscle activity,
result in the sleep EEG or polysomnography. Many clinicians also use the
EEG to monitor ECT administration.
Clinicians use the EEG to localize seizure foci and to evaluate delirium.
The EEG and its topographical descendants have not found an exact role in
the diagnostic assessment of psychiatric patients. The EEG is usually used in
psychiatry to rule out nonpsychiatric diseases, such as seizure disorders or
delirium, as a cause of psychiatric symptoms. When the differential diagnosis
includes strokes, tumors, subdural hematomas, or dementia, the yield is
usually higher with imaging tests. Not surprisingly, the yield is the highest in
patients with a history of a seizure disorder or a clinical history that is
strongly suggestive of a recent seizure or other organic illness. Such clinical
features would include a history of altered consciousness, atypical
hallucinations (e.g., olfactory), head injury, and automatism. Also, the EEG is
commonly obtained when there is an abnormal CT or MRI. It is important to
remember that seizures are a clinical diagnosis; a normal EEG does not rule


<<<PAGE 217>>>
out the possibility of a seizure disorder.
Evoked Potential. Evoked potential (EP) testing is the measurement of the
EEG response to specific sensory stimulation. The stimulation may be visual,
auditory, or somatosensory. During visual EPs, the patient is exposed to
flashing lights or a checkerboard pattern. With auditory EP, the patient hears
a specific tone. In somatosensory EP, the patient experiences an electrical
stimulation to an extremity. These stimuli repeatedly occur while the patient
undergoes a routine EEG. Using a computer, the responses to these stimuli
are recorded and averaged. The time frame is measured in milliseconds.
These tests are useful in neurology and neurosurgery. For example, they
assist in the assessment of demyelinating disorders such as multiple sclerosis
(MS). In psychiatry, EP testing may help in the differentiation of organic
from functional impairments. A classical example is the use of EP testing to
evaluate possible hysterical blindness. The usefulness of these tests in
psychiatry is still under investigation.
Polysomnography. Polysomnography is used to assess disorders of sleep
by concurrently assessing the EEG, ECG, blood oxygen saturation,
respiration, body temperature, electromyogram, and electrooculogram.
Polysomnography has demonstrated an increase in the overall amount of
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and a shortened period before the onset of
REM sleep (decreased REM latency) in patients with major depression.
These studies may assist in differentiating depression from other conditions
that mimic depression. For example, patients who appear depressed from
dementia do not have decreased REM latency or an increase in the amount of
REM sleep.
Electrocardiogram
The ECG is a graphical representation of the electrical activity of the heart.
Abnormalities in this activity correlate with cardiac pathology. The ECG is
most commonly used in psychiatry to assess the side effects of psychotropic
medications.
Ziprasidone has been associated with a dose-related prolongation of the
QTc interval. There is a known association of fatal arrhythmias (e.g., torsades
de pointes) with QTc prolongation from some other medications. For this


<<<PAGE 218>>>
reason, clinicians usually obtain an ECG before initiation of treatment with
ziprasidone. Ziprasidone is contraindicated in patients with a known history
of QTc prolongation (including congenital long QT syndrome), with recent
acute myocardial infarction, or with uncompensated heart failure.
Bradycardia, hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia, or the concurrent use of other
drugs that prolong the QTc interval all increase the risk of severe
arrhythmias. Ziprasidone should be discontinued in patients who have
persistent QTc measurements greater than 500 milliseconds.
Like ziprasidone, thioridazine has been associated with prolongation of the
QTc interval in a dose-related manner. Prolongation of the QTc interval has
been associated with torsades de pointes arrhythmias and sudden death. An
ECG should be obtained before initiating treatment with thioridazine to rule
out QTc prolongation. Many other antipsychotics can along prolong the QTc
interval particularly in patients with preexisting arrhythmia.
TCAs are, at times, associated with ECG changes. Anticholinergic effects
may increase heart rate. Prolongation of the PR, QT, and QRS intervals,
along with ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities, may occur. The TCAs can
cause or increase preexisting atrioventricular or bundle branch block. When
the QTc exceeds 0.440 seconds, a patient is at an increased risk for sudden
death due to cardiac arrhythmias. Many clinicians obtain an ECG before
beginning a TCA in a patient older than 40 years of age and any patient with
known cardiovascular disease.
Lithium therapy can cause benign reversible T-wave changes, which can
impair sinoatrial (SA) node function and can cause heart block. ECGs are
often obtained before initiation of treatment with lithium and in cases of
lithium toxicity or overdose.
Psychiatrists, when treating patients with specific psychiatric diagnoses,
also use the ECG. Eating disorder patients commonly have low potassium
levels that may result in abnormal ECG recordings. As the serum potassium
drops below normal, T waves become flat (or inverted), and U waves may
appear.
Holter Monitoring. Holter monitoring is the continuous recording of a
patient’s ECG activity for a sustained period (e.g., 24 hours). Patients are
ambulatory during this time. It is useful for the evaluation of dizziness,
palpitations, and syncope. It is commonly used in the evaluation of patients


<<<PAGE 219>>>
with panic disorder who manifest cardiac symptoms.
Cardiac Ultrasound. Cardiac ultrasound is the visualization of cardiac
anatomy by the use of computer-transformed echoes of ultrasound. It is
commonly used in the evaluation of mitral valve prolapse. There is an unclear
association between mitral valve prolapse and panic attacks and anxiety
disorders.

NEUROIMAGING
The primary observation of structural and functional brain imaging in
neuropsychiatric disorders such as dementia, movement disorders,
demyelinating disorders, and epilepsy has contributed to a greater
understanding of the pathophysiology of neurologic and psychiatric illnesses
and helps practicing clinicians in difficult diagnostic situations.
Neuroimaging methodologies allow measurement of the structure,
function, and chemistry of the living human brain. Over the past decade,
studies using these methods have provided new information about the
pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders that may prove to be useful for
diagnosing illness and for developing new treatments. Computed
tomographic (CT) scanners, the first widely used neuroimaging devices,
allowed assessment of structural brain lesions such as tumors or strokes. MRI
scans, developed next, distinguish gray and white matter better than CT scans
do and allow visualizations of smaller brain lesions as well as white matter
abnormalities. Also, to structural neuroimaging with CT and MRI, a
revolution in functional neuroimaging has enabled clinical scientists to obtain
unprecedented insight into the diseased human brain. The foremost
techniques for functional neuroimaging include PET and SPECT.
Uses of Neuroimaging
Indications for Ordering Neuroimaging in Clinical Practice
NEUROLOGIC DEFICITS. In a neurologic examination, any change that can be

localized to the brain or spinal cord requires neuroimaging. Neurologic
examination includes mental status, cranial nerves, motor system,


<<<PAGE 220>>>
coordination, sensory system, and reflex components. The mental status
examination assesses arousal, attention, and motivation; memory; language;
visuospatial function; complex cognition; and mood and affect. Consultant
psychiatrists should consider a workup, including neuroimaging for patients
with new-onset psychosis and acute changes in mental status. The clinical
examination always assumes priority, and neuroimaging is ordered based on
clinical suspicion of a CNS disorder.
DEMENTIA. Loss

of memory and cognitive abilities affects more than 10
million persons in the United States and will affect an increasing number as
the population ages. Reduced mortality from cancer and heart disease has
increased life expectancy and has allowed persons to survive to the age of
onset of degenerative brain disorders, which have proved more challenging to
treat. Depression, anxiety, and psychosis are common in patients with
dementia. The most common cause of dementia is Alzheimer disease, which
does not have a characteristic appearance on routine neuroimaging but,
instead, is associated with diffuse loss of brain volume.
One treatable cause of dementia that requires neuroimaging for diagnosis
is normal pressure hydrocephalus, a disorder of the drainage of cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF). This condition does not progress to the point of acutely increased
intracranial pressure but stabilizes at a pressure at the upper end of the normal
range. The dilated ventricles, which may be readily visualized with CT or
MRI, exert pressure on the frontal lobes. A gait disorder is almost uniformly
present; dementia, which may be indistinguishable from Alzheimer disease,
appears less consistently. Relief of the increased CSF pressure may
completely restore gait and mental function.
Infarction of the cortical or subcortical areas, or stroke, can produce focal
neurologic deficits, including cognitive and emotional changes. Strokes are
easily seen on MRI scans. Depression is common among stroke patients,
either because of direct damage to the emotional centers of the brain or
because of the patient’s reaction to the disability. Depression, in turn, can
cause pseudodementia. Also, to major strokes, extensive atherosclerosis in
brain capillaries can cause countless tiny infarctions of brain tissue; patients
with this phenomenon may develop dementia as fewer and fewer neural
pathways participate in cognition. This state, called vascular dementia (or
Vascular Neurocognitive Disorder in DSM-5), is characterized on MRI scans


<<<PAGE 221>>>
by patches of increased signal in the white matter.
Certain degenerative disorders of basal ganglia structures, associated with
dementia, may have a characteristic appearance on MRI scans. Huntington
disease typically produces atrophy of the caudate nucleus; thalamic
degeneration can interrupt the neural links to the cortex (Fig. 1-10).
Space-occupying lesions can cause dementia. Chronic subdural hematomas
and cerebral contusions, caused by head trauma, can produce focal
neurologic deficits or may only produce dementia. Brain tumors can affect
cognition in several ways. Skull-based meningiomas can compress the
underlying cortex and impair its processing. Infiltrative glial cell tumors,
such as astrocytoma or glioblastoma multiforme, can cut off communication
between brain centers by interrupting white matter tracts. Tumors located
near the ventricular system can obstruct the flow of CSF and gradually
increase the intracranial pressure.
Chronic infections, including neurosyphilis, cryptococcosis, tuberculosis,
and Lyme disease, can cause symptoms of dementia and may produce a
characteristic enhancement of the meninges, especially at the base of the
brain. Serologic studies are needed to complete the diagnosis. HIV infection
can cause dementia directly, in which case is seen as a diffuse loss of brain
volume, or it can allow a proliferation of Creutzfeldt–Jakob virus to yield
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, which affects white matter
tracts and appears as increased white matter signal on MRI scans.
Chronic demyelinating diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, can affect
cognition because of white matter disruption. Multiple sclerosis plaques are
easily seen on MRI scans as periventricular patches of increased signal
intensity.
Any evaluation of dementia should consider medication effects, metabolic
derangements, infections, and nutritional causes that may not produce
abnormalities on neuroimaging.


<<<PAGE 222>>>
FIGURE 1-10
Brain slices. Top: Huntington disease. Atrophy of caudate nucleus and lentiform
nuclei with dilatation of lateral ventricle. Bottom: Normal brain. (From Fahn S.
Huntington disease. In: Rowland LP, ed. Merritt’s Textbook of Neurology. 10th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2000:659, with permission.)

Indications for Neuroimaging in Clinical Research
ANALYSIS OF CLINICALLY DEFINED GROUPS OF PATIENTS. Psychiatric research
aims to categorize patients with psychiatric disorders to facilitate the


<<<PAGE 223>>>
discovery of neuroanatomical and neurochemical bases of mental illness.
Researchers have used functional neuroimaging to study groups of patients
with such psychiatric conditions as schizophrenia, affective disorders, and
anxiety disorders, among others. In schizophrenia, for example,
neuropathologic volumetric analyses have suggested a loss of brain weight,
specifically of gray matter. A paucity of axons and dendrites appears present
in the cortex, and CT and MRI may show compensatory enlargement of the
lateral and third ventricles. Specifically, the temporal lobes of persons with
schizophrenia appear to lose the most volume relative to healthy persons.
Recent studies have found that the left temporal lobe is generally more
affected than the right. The frontal lobe may also have abnormalities, not in
the volume of the lobe, but in the level of activity detected by functional
neuroimaging. Persons with schizophrenia consistently exhibit decreased
metabolic activity in the frontal lobes, especially during tasks that require the
prefrontal cortex. As a group, patients with schizophrenia are also more likely
to have an increase in ventricular size than are healthy controls.
Disorders of mood and affect can also be associated with loss of brain
volume and decreased metabolic activity in the frontal lobes. Inactivation of
the left prefrontal cortex appears to depress mood; inactivation of the right
prefrontal cortex elevates it. Among anxiety disorders, studies of OCD with
conventional CT and MRI have shown either no specific abnormalities or a
smaller caudate nucleus. Functional PET and SPECT studies suggest
abnormalities in the corticolimbic, basal ganglia, and thalamic structures in
the disorder. When patients are experiencing OCD symptoms, the orbital
prefrontal cortex shows abnormal activity. A partial normalization of caudate
glucose metabolism appears in patients taking medications such as fluoxetine
or clomipramine or undergoing behavior modification.
Functional neuroimaging studies of persons with ADHD either have shown
no abnormalities or have shown a decreased volume of the right prefrontal
cortex and the right globus pallidus. Also, whereas usually the right caudate
nucleus is larger than the left caudate nucleus, persons with ADHD may have
caudate nuclei of equal size. These findings suggest dysfunction of the right
prefrontal-striatal pathway for control of attention.
ANALYSIS OF BRAIN ACTIVITY DURING PERFORMANCE OF SPECIFIC TASKS. Many

original conceptions of different brain region functions emerged from


<<<PAGE 224>>>
observing deficits caused by local injuries, tumors, or strokes. Functional
neuroimaging allows researchers to review and reassess classic teachings in
the intact brain. Most work, to date, has been aimed at language and vision.
Although many technical peculiarities and limitations of SPECT, PET, and
fMRI have been overcome, none of these techniques has demonstrated clear
superiority. Studies require carefully controlled conditions, which subjects
may find arduous. Nonetheless, functional neuroimaging has contributed
major conceptual advances, and the methods are now limited mainly by the
creativity of the investigative protocols.
Studies have been designed to reveal the functional neuroanatomy of all
sensory modalities, gross and fine motor skills, language, memory,
calculations, learning, and disorders of thought, mood, and anxiety.
Unconscious sensations transmitted by the autonomic nervous system have
been localized to specific brain regions. These analyses provide a basis for
comparison with results of studies of clinically defined patient groups and
may lead to improved therapies for mental illnesses.
Specific Techniques
CT Scans. In 1972, CT scanning revolutionized diagnostic neuroradiology
by allowing imaging of the brain tissue in live patients. CT scanners are
currently the most widely available and convenient imaging tools available in
clinical practice; practically, every hospital emergency room has immediate
access to a CT scanner at all times. CT scanners effectively take a series of
head x-ray pictures from all vantage points, 360 degrees around a patient’s
head. The amount of radiation that passes through, or is not absorbed from,
each angle is digitized and entered into a computer. The computer uses
matrix algebra calculations to assign a specific density to each point within
the head and displays these data as a set of two-dimensional images. When
viewed in sequence, the images allow mental reconstruction of the shape of
the brain.
The CT image is determined only by the degree to which tissues absorb xirradiation. The bony structures absorb high amounts of irradiation and tend
to obscure details of neighboring structures, an especially troublesome
problem in the brainstem, which is surrounded by a thick skull base. Within
the brain itself, there is relatively little difference in the attenuation between


<<<PAGE 225>>>
gray matter and white matter in x-ray images. Although the gray–white
border is usually distinguishable, details of the gyral pattern may be difficult
to appreciate in CT scans. Certain tumors may be invisible on CT because
they absorb as much irradiation as the surrounding normal brain.

FIGURE 1-11
Comparison of computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI). A: CT scan in the axial plane at the level of the third ventricle. The
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) within the ventricles appears black, the brain tissue
appears gray, and the skull appears white. There is very poor discrimination
between the gray and white matter of the brain. The arrow indicates a small
calcified lesion in a tumor of the pineal gland. Detection of calcification is one role
in which CT is superior to MRI. B: T2-weighted image of the same patient at
roughly the same level. With T2, the CSF appears white, the gray matter appears
gray, the white matter is clearly distinguished from the gray matter; the skull and
indicated calcification appear black. Much more detail of the brain is visible than
with CT. C: T1-weighted image of the same patient at roughly the same level.
With T1, the CSF appears dark, the brain appears more uniformly gray, and the
skull and indicated calcification appear black. T1 MRI images are the most similar
to CT images. (Reprinted from Grossman CB. Magnetic Resonance Imaging and
Computed Tomography of the Head and Spine. 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams
& Wilkins; 1996:101, with permission.)

Appreciation of tumors and areas of inflammation, which can cause
changes in behavior, can be increased by intravenous infusion of iodinecontaining contrast agents. Iodinated compounds, which absorb much more
irradiation than the brain, appear white. The intact brain is separated from the
bloodstream by the blood–brain barrier, which normally prevents the passage
of the highly charged contrast agents. The blood–brain barrier, however,
breaks down in the presence of inflammation or fails to form within tumors
and thus allows accumulation of contrast agents. These sites appear whiter
than the surrounding brain. Iodinated contrast agents must be used with


<<<PAGE 226>>>
caution in patients who are allergic to these agents or shellfish.
With the introduction of MRI scanning, CT scans have been supplanted as
the nonemergency neuroimaging study of choice (Fig. 1-11). The increased
resolution and delineation of detail afforded by MRI scanning is often
required for diagnosis in psychiatry. Also, performing the most detailed study
available inspires the most confidence in the analysis. The only component of
the brain better seen on CT scanning is calcification, which may be invisible
on MRI.
MRI Scans. MRI scanning entered clinical practice in 1982 and soon
became the test of choice for clinical psychiatrists and neurologists. The
technique does not rely on the absorption of x-rays but is based on nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR). The principle of NMR is that the nuclei of all
atoms are thought to spin about an axis, which is randomly oriented in space.
When atoms are placed in a magnetic field, the axes of all odd-numbered
nuclei align with the magnetic field. The axis of a nucleus deviates away
from the magnetic field when exposed to a pulse of radiofrequency
electromagnetic radiation oriented at 90 or 180 degrees to the magnetic field.
When the pulse terminates, the axis of the spinning nucleus realigns itself
with the magnetic field, and during this realignment, it emits its own
radiofrequency signal. MRI scanners collect the emissions of individuals,
realigning nuclei, and use computer analysis to generate a series of twodimensional images that represent the brain. The images can be in the axial,
coronal, or sagittal planes.
By far, the most abundant odd-numbered nucleus in the brain belongs to
hydrogen. The rate of realignment of the hydrogen axis is determined by its
immediate environment, a combination of both the nature of the molecule of
which it is a part and the degree to which it is surrounded by water. Hydrogen
nuclei within fat realign rapidly, and hydrogen nuclei within water realign
slowly. Hydrogen nuclei in proteins and carbohydrates realign at intermediate
rates.
Routine MRI studies use three different radiofrequency pulse sequences.
The two varied parameters are the duration of the radiofrequency excitation
pulse and the length of the time that data are collected from the realigning
nuclei. Because T1 pulses are brief and data collection is brief, hydrogen
nuclei in hydrophobic environments are emphasized. Thus, fat is bright on


<<<PAGE 227>>>
T1, and CSF is dark. The T1 image most closely resembles that of CT scans
and is most useful for assessing overall brain structure. T1 is also the only
sequence that allows contrast enhancement with the contrast agent
gadolinium-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (gadolinium-DTPA). As with
the iodinated contrast agents used in CT scanning, gadolinium remains
excluded from the brain by the blood–brain barrier, except in areas where this
barrier breaks down, such as inflammation or tumor. On T1 images,
gadolinium-enhanced structures appear white.
T2 pulses last four times as long as T1 pulses, and the collection times are
also extended to emphasize the signal from hydrogen nuclei surrounded by
water. Thus, brain tissue is dark, and CSF is white on T2 images. Areas
within the brain tissue that have abnormally high water content, such as
tumors, inflammation, or strokes, appear brighter on T2 images. T2 images
reveal brain pathology most clearly. The third routine pulse sequence is the
proton density or balanced sequence. In this sequence, a short radio pulse is
followed by a prolonged period of data collection, which equalizes the
density of the CSF and the brain and allows the distinction of tissue changes
immediately adjacent to the ventricles.
An additional technique, sometimes used in clinical practice for specific
indications, is fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR). In this method,
the T1 image is inverted and added to the T2 image to double the contrast
between gray matter and white matter. Inversion recovery imaging is useful
for detecting sclerosis of the hippocampus caused by temporal lobe epilepsy
and for localizing areas of abnormal metabolism in degenerative neurologic
disorders.

FIGURE 1-12
Three axial images from a 46-year-old woman who was hospitalized for the first


<<<PAGE 228>>>
time for depression and suicidality following the end of a long-standing
relationship. A malignant neoplasm extending into the posterior aspect of the left
lateral ventricle is clearly seen in all three images. Images A and B are T1 and T2
weighted, respectively. Image C demonstrates the effects of postcontrast
enhancement. (Courtesy of Craig N. Carson, M.D. and Perry F. Renshaw, M.D.)

MRI magnets are rated in teslas (T), units of magnetic field strength. MRI
scanners in clinical use range from 1.5 to 3.0 T. Higher field–strength
scanners produce images of markedly higher resolution. In research settings
for humans, magnets as powerful as 7.0 T are used (and a few centers have
used magnetic fields greater than 10 T in humans); for animals, magnets
greater than 20 T are used. Unlike the well-known hazards of x-irradiation,
exposure to electromagnetic fields of the strength used in MRI machines has
not been shown to damage biologic tissues.
MRI scans cannot be used for patients with pacemakers or implants of
ferromagnetic metals. MRI involves enclosing a patient in a narrow tube, in
which the patient must remain motionless for up to 20 minutes. The
radiofrequency pulses create a loud banging noise that may be obscured by
music played in headphones. A significant number of patients cannot tolerate
the claustrophobic conditions of routine MRI scanners and may need an open
MRI scanner, which has less power and thus produces images of lower
resolution. The resolution of brain tissue of even the lowest power MRI scan,
however, exceeds that of CT scanning. Figure 1-12 reveals that a brain tumor
is the cause of a patient’s depression.
MRI APPLICATIONS TO DEMENTIA. Several MRI changes, including an increased

number of subcortical hyperintensities, generalized atrophy, and ventricular
enlargement, are associated with normal aging. However, it is well
established that some changes seem more specific to the diagnosis of
Alzheimer disease and may be clinically useful in formulating the diagnosis
and prognosis of the disorder. MRI evidence of MTL atrophy appears to be
most closely associated with the disorder. One approach that may help to
improve the clinical utility of MRI in the diagnosis and prognosis of
Alzheimer disease and other forms of dementia is to follow the rate of change
in brain structure over time. Longitudinal follow-up studies have shown the
rates of volume loss to be significantly greater in subjects with prodromal
Alzheimer disease (up to 5 percent brain volume per year) compared with


<<<PAGE 229>>>
those experiencing normal age-related reductions (0.1 percent brain volume
per year).
MRI APPLICATIONS TO ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE. MRI studies have been the

principal tool to describe in vivo the many sources of neurotoxicity
associated with alcoholism, including (1) the direct neurotoxic and gliotoxic
effect of ethanol, (2) the neurotoxic effects of poor nutrition that often
accompany the abuse of alcohol, (3) the excitotoxicity associated with the
ethanol withdrawal state, and (4) the possible disruption in adultneurogenesis-associated ethanol intoxication and withdrawal. These studies
documented a striking age dependence of the overall neurotoxicity associated
with alcoholism.
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy. Whereas routine MRI detects
hydrogen nuclei to determine brain structure, MRS can detect several oddnumbered nuclei (Table 1-24). The ability of MRS to detect a wide range of
biologically important nuclei allows the use of the technique to study many
metabolic processes. Although the resolution and sensitivity of MRS
machines are poor compared with those of currently available PET and
SPECT devices, the use of stronger magnetic fields will improve this feature
to some extent in the future. MRS can image nuclei with an odd number of
protons and neutrons. The unpaired protons and neutrons (nucleons) appear
naturally and are nonradioactive. As in MRI, the nuclei align themselves in
the strong magnetic field produced by an MRS device. A radiofrequency
pulse causes the nuclei of interest to absorb and then emit energy. The
readout of an MRS device is usually in the form of a spectrum, such as those
for phosphorus-31 and hydrogen-1 nuclei, although the spectrum can also be
converted into a pictorial image of the brain. The multiple peaks for each
nucleus reflect that the same nucleus is exposed to different electron
environments (electron clouds) in different molecules. The hydrogen-1 nuclei
in a molecule of creatine, therefore, have a different chemical shift (position
in the spectrum) than the hydrogen-1 nuclei in a choline molecule, for
example. Thus, the position in the spectrum (the chemical shift) indicates the
identity of the molecule in which the nuclei are present. The height of the
peak for a reference standard of the molecule indicates the amount of the
molecule present.


<<<PAGE 230>>>
The MRS of the hydrogen-1 nuclei is best at measuring N-acetylaspartate
(NAA), creatine, and choline-containing molecules, but MRS can also detect
glutamate, glutamine, lactate, and myoinositol. Although glutamate and γaminobutyric acid (GABA), the major amino acid neurotransmitters, can be
detected by MRS, the biogenic amine neurotransmitters (e.g., dopamine) are
present in concentrations too low to be detected with the technique. MRS of
phosphorus-31 can be used to determine the pH of brain regions and the
concentrations of phosphorus-containing compounds (e.g., adenosine
triphosphate [ATP] and guanosine triphosphate [GTP]), which are important
in the energy metabolism of the brain.
Table 1-24
Nuclei Available
Spectroscopya

for

In

Vivo

Magnetic

Resonance

Nucleus Natural
Sensitivity Relative Potential Clinical
Abundance
Uses
1H

99.99

1.00

Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI)
Analysis of metabolism
Identification of unusual
metabolites
Characterization of hypoxia

19F

100.00

0.83

Measurement of pO2
Analysis of glucose metabolism
Measurement of pH
Noninvasive pharmacokinetics

7Li

92.58

0.27

Pharmacokinetics

23Na

100.00

0.09

MRI

31P

100.00

0.07

Analysis of bioenergetics
Identification of unusual
metabolites
Characterization of hypoxia


<<<PAGE 231>>>
Measurement of pH
14N

93.08

0.001

Measurement of glutamate,
urea, ammonia

39K

93.08

0.0005

Similar to sodium (23Na) but less
specific, hence rarely used

13C

1.11

0.0002

Analysis of metabolite turnover
rate
Pharmacokinetics of labeled
drugs

17O

0.04

0.00001

Measurement of metabolic rate

2H

0.02

0.000002

Measurement of perfusion

aNatural abundance is given as percentage abundance of the isotope of interest. Nuclei are

tabulated in order of decreasing relative sensitivity; relative sensitivity is calculated by
multiplying the relative sensitivity for equal numbers of nuclei (at a given field strength) by the
natural abundance of that nucleus. A considerable gain in relative sensitivity can be obtained
by isotopic enrichment of the nucleus of choice or by the use of novel pulse sequences.
Reprinted from Dager SR, Steen RG with minor adaptations. Applications of magnetic
resonance spectroscopy to the investigation of neuropsychiatric disorders.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 1992;6:249, with permission.

MRS has revealed decreased concentrations of NAA in the temporal lobes
and increased concentrations of inositol in the occipital lobes of persons with
dementia of the Alzheimer type. In a series of subjects with schizophrenia,
decreased NAA concentrations were found in the temporal and frontal lobes.
MRS has been used to trace the levels of ethanol in various brain regions. In
panic disorder, MRS has been used to record the levels of lactate, whose
intravenous infusion can precipitate panic episodes in about three-fourths of
patients with either panic disorder or major depression. Brain lactate
concentrations were found to be elevated during panic attacks, even without
provocative infusion.
Additional indications include the use of MRS to measure concentrations
of psychotherapeutic drugs in the brain. One study used MRS to measure
lithium (Eskalith) concentrations in the brains of patients with bipolar
disorder and found that lithium concentrations in the brain were half those in
the plasma during depressed and euthymic periods but exceeded those in the


<<<PAGE 232>>>
plasma during manic episodes. Some compounds, such as fluoxetine and
trifluoperazine (Stelazine), contain fluorine-19, which can also be detected in
the brain and measured by MRS. For example, MRS has demonstrated that it
takes 6 months of steady use for fluoxetine to reach maximal concentrations
in the brain, which equilibrate at about 20 times the serum concentrations.
MRS IN DEMENTIA. MRS presents the opportunity to noninvasively obtain

measures of several neurochemicals related to neurotransmission, energy
metabolism, and cellular function. Studies using MRS have shown a trend for
a general reduction in NAA measures with increasing age in MTL and frontal
cortical brain regions. The studies in MCI and Alzheimer disease report
patients with these disorders have decreased levels of NAA and increased
levels of myoinositol (a form of inositol normally found in the brain that
contributes to osmotic regulation) compared with those of age-matched
comparison subjects.
MRS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA. MRS has been applied widely in studies of cortical

chemistry in schizophrenia. These studies documented reductions in NAA
levels in many cortical and limbic brain regions in schizophrenic individuals
and smaller reductions in family members of people diagnosed with
schizophrenia. Other metabolites have been measured in MRS studies of
schizophrenic patients. The most interesting finding may be the description of
normal or low levels of glutamate and increased levels of glutamine in
medication-free patients with schizophrenia. One preliminary study
suggested that glutamine elevations were not present in medication-free
patients who were receiving benzodiazepines, drugs that would be predicted
to suppress excitatory neurotransmission.
MRS IN ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE. MRS studies evaluating NAA and choline

have provided neurochemical evidence that complements the MRI findings
related to the emergence and recovery from alcohol-related neurotoxicity.
MRS studies of GABA have provided insights into alterations in cortical
inhibitory neurotransmissions associated with the recovery from alcohol
dependence. During acute withdrawal, cortical GABA levels appear to be
normal. With recovery from alcohol dependence, cortical GABA levels
appear to decline and may be significantly below the level seen in healthy


<<<PAGE 233>>>
subjects with extended sobriety.
Functional MRI. Recent advances in data collection and computer data
processing have reduced the acquisition time for an MRI image to less than 1
second. A new sequence of particular interest to psychiatrists is the T2 or
blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) sequence, which detects levels of
oxygenated hemoglobin in the blood. Neuronal activity within the brain
causes a local increase in blood flow, which in turn increases the local
hemoglobin concentration. Although neuronal metabolism extracts more
oxygen in active areas of the brain, the net effect of neuronal activity is to
increase the local amount of oxygenated hemoglobin. This change can be
detected nearly in real-time with the T2 sequence, which thus detects the
functionally active brain regions. This process is the basis for the technique
of fMRI.
What fMRI detects is not brain activity per se, but blood flow. The volume
of the brain in which blood flow increases exceeds the volume of activated
neurons by about 1 to 2 cm and limits the resolution of the technique.
Sensitivity and resolution can be improved with the use of nontoxic,
ultrasmall iron oxide particles. Thus, two tasks that activate clusters of
neurons 5 mm apart, such as recognizing two different faces, yield
overlapping signals on fMRI and so are usually indistinguishable by this
technique. fMRI is useful to localize neuronal activity to a particular lobe or
subcortical nucleus and has even been able to localize activity to a single
gyrus. The method detects tissue perfusion, not neuronal metabolism. In
contrast, PET scanning may give information specifically about neuronal
metabolism.
No radioactive isotopes are administered in fMRI, a great advantage over
PET and SPECT. A subject can perform a variety of tasks, both experimental
and control, in the same imaging session. First, a routine T1 MRI image is
obtained; then, the T2 images are superimposed to allow more precise
localization. Acquisition of sufficient images for study can require 20
minutes to 3 hours, during which time the subject’s head must remain in
exactly the same position. Several methods, including a frame around the
head and a special mouthpiece, have been used. Although realignments of
images can correct for some head movement, small changes in head position
may lead to erroneous interpretations of brain activation.


<<<PAGE 234>>>
fMRI has recently revealed unexpected details about the organization of
language within the brain. Using a series of language tasks requiring
semantic, phonemic, and rhyming discrimination, one study found that
rhyming (but not other types of language processing) produced a different
pattern of activation in men and women. Rhyming activated the inferior
frontal gyrus bilaterally in women, but only on the left in men. In another
study, fMRI revealed a previously suspected, but unproved, neural circuit for
lexical categories, interpolated between the representations for concepts and
those for phonemes. This novel circuit was located in the left anterior
temporal lobe. Data from patients with dyslexia (reading disorder) doing
simple rhyming tasks demonstrated a failure to activate Wernicke area and
the insula, which were active in normal subjects doing the same task.
Sensory functions have also been mapped in detail with fMRI. The
activation of the visual and auditory cortices has been visualized in real-time.
In a recent intriguing study, the areas that were activated while a subject with
schizophrenia listened to speech were also activated during auditory
hallucinations. These areas included the primary auditory cortex as well as
higher-order auditory processing regions. fMRI is the imaging technique
most widely used to study brain abnormality related to cognitive dysfunction.
FMRI OF DEMENTIA. fMRI methods provide information that can potentially be

used in the study, diagnosis, and prognosis of Alzheimer disease and other
forms of dementia as well as proving insights into normal age-related
changes in cognitive processing. Evidence that aging is associated with
weaker and more diffused activations as well as decreased hemispheric
lateralization, suggests either compensation for lost regional intensity or
dedifferentiation of processing. The weaker activation, especially prefrontal,
suggests potential encoding-stage dysfunctions associated with aging. fMRI
studies have consistently demonstrated that patients with Alzheimer disease
have decreased fMRI activation in the hippocampus and related structures
within the MTL during the encoding of new memories compared with
cognitively intact older subjects. More recently, fMRI studies of subjects at
risk for Alzheimer disease, by their genetics or evidence of minimal cognitive
impairment, have yielded variable results with some studies suggesting there
may be a phase of paradoxically increased activation early in the course of
prodromal Alzheimer disease.


<<<PAGE 235>>>
FMRI OF ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE. fMRI studies have provided insights into the

functional consequences of alcoholism-related neurotoxicity. Studies suggest
that recovering alcohol-dependent patients show abnormal activation patterns
in the frontal cortex, thalamus, striatum, cerebellum, and hippocampus
related to impairments in attention, learning and memory, motor
coordination, and inhibitory control of behavior. Studies have begun to
explore pharmacologic modulation of resting circuit activity to probe
mechanisms underlying circuit dysfunction in alcoholism, illustrated by
blunted responses to benzodiazepines.
SPECT Scanning. Manufactured radioactive compounds are used in
SPECT to study regional differences in cerebral blood flow within the brain.
This high-resolution imaging technique records the pattern of photon
emission from the bloodstream according to the level of perfusion in different
regions of the brain. As with fMRI, it provides information on the cerebral
blood flow, which is highly correlated with the rate of glucose metabolism,
but does not measure neuronal metabolism directly.
SPECT uses compounds labeled with single photon-emitting isotopes:
iodine-123, technetium-99m, and xenon-133. Xenon-133 is a noble gas that is
inhaled directly. The xenon quickly enters the blood and is distributed to
areas of the brain as a function of regional blood flow. Xenon-SPECT is thus
referred to as the regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) technique. For
technical reasons, xenon-SPECT can measure blood flow only on the surface
of the brain, which is an important limitation. Many mental tasks require
communication between the cortex and subcortical structures, and this
activity is poorly measured by xenon-SPECT.
Assessment of blood flow over the whole brain with SPECT requires the
injectable tracers, technetium-99m-D,L-hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime
(HMPAO [Ceretec]) or iodoamphetamine (Spectamine). These isotopes are
attached to molecules that are highly lipophilic and rapidly cross the blood–
brain barrier and enter cells. Once inside the cell, the ligands are
enzymatically converted to charged ions, which remain trapped in the cell.
Thus, over time, the tracers are concentrated in areas of relatively higher
blood flow. Although blood flow is usually assumed to be the major variable
tested in HMPAO SPECT, local variations in the permeability of the blood–
brain barrier and in the enzymatic conversion of the ligands within cells also


<<<PAGE 236>>>
contribute to regional differences in signal levels.
Also, to these compounds used for measuring blood flow, iodine-123–
labeled ligands for the muscarinic, dopaminergic, and serotonergic receptors,
for example, can be used to study these receptors by SPECT technology.
Once photon-emitting compounds reach the brain, detectors surrounding the
patient’s head pick up their light emissions. This information is relayed to a
computer, which constructs a two-dimensional image of the isotope’s
distribution within a slice of the brain. A critical difference between SPECT
and PET is that in SPECT a single particle is emitted, whereas in PET two
particles are emitted; the latter reaction gives a more precise location for the
event and better resolution of the image. Increasingly, for both SPECT and
PET studies, investigators are performing prestudy MRI or CT studies, then
superimposing the SPECT or PET image on the MRI or CT image to obtain a
more accurate anatomical location for the functional information. SPECT is
useful in diagnosing decreased or blocked cerebral blood flow in stroke
victims. Some have described abnormal flow patterns in the early stages of
Alzheimer disease that may aid in early diagnosis.
PET Scanning. The isotopes used in PET decay by emitting positrons,
antimatter particles that bind with and annihilate electrons, thereby giving off
photons that travel in 180-degree opposite directions. Because detectors have
twice as much signal from which to generate an image as SPECT scanners
have, the resolution of the PET image is higher than with SPECT. A wide
range of compounds can be used in PET studies, and the resolution of PET
continues to be refined closer to its theoretical minimum of 3 mm, which is
the distance positrons move before colliding with an electron. Relatively few
PET scanners are available because they require an onsite cyclotron to make
the isotopes.
The most commonly used isotopes in PET are fluorine-18 (18F), nitrogen13, and oxygen-15. These isotopes are usually linked to another molecule,
except in the case of oxygen-15 (15O). The most commonly reported ligand
has been [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), an analog of glucose that the brain
cannot metabolize. Thus, the brain regions with the highest metabolic rate
and the highest blood flow take up the most FDG but cannot metabolize and
excrete the usual metabolic products. The concentration of 18F builds up in
these neurons and is detected by the PET camera. Water-15 (H215O) and


<<<PAGE 237>>>
nitrogen-13 are used to measure blood flow, and 15O can be used to
determine the metabolic rate. Glucose is by far the predominant energy
source available to brain cells, and its use is thus a highly sensitive indicator
of the rate of brain metabolism. 18F-labeled 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine
(DOPA), the fluorinated precursor to dopamine, has been used to localize
dopaminergic neurons.
PET has been used increasingly to study normal brain development and
function as well as to study neuropsychiatric disorders. Concerning brain
development, PET studies have found that glucose use is greatest in the
sensorimotor cortex, thalamus, brainstem, and cerebellar vermis when an
infant is 5 weeks of age or younger. By 3 months of age, most areas of the
cortex show increased use, except for the frontal and association cortices,
which do not begin to exhibit an increase until the infant is 8 months of age.
An adult pattern of glucose metabolism is achieved by the age of 1 year, but
use in the cortex continues to rise above adult levels until the child is about 9
years of age when use in the cortex begins to decrease and reaches its final
adult level in the late teen years.
In another study, subjects listened to a rapidly presented list of
thematically related words. When asked to recall words in the thematic
category that may or may not have been on the list, some subjects falsely
recalled that they had heard words that were not on the list. By PET scanning,
the hippocampus was active during both true and false recollections, whereas
the auditory cortex was only active during recollection of words that were
heard. When pressed to determine whether memories were true or false,
subjects activated the frontal lobes. FDG studies have also investigated
pathology in neurologic disorders and psychiatric disorders. Two other types
of studies used precursor molecules and receptor ligands. The dopamine
precursor dopa has been used to visualize pathology in patients with
Parkinson disease, and radiolabeled ligands for receptors have been useful in
determining the occupancy of receptors by specific psychotherapeutic drugs.
Neurochemical findings from PET radiotracer scan are listed in Table 1-25.
For example, dopamine receptor antagonists such as haloperidol block
almost 100 percent of D2 receptors. The atypical antipsychotic drugs block
serotonin 5-HT2 receptors also to D2 receptors; hence, they are referred to as
serotonin-dopamine receptor antagonists. The case study presented


<<<PAGE 238>>>
illustrates the potential diagnostic value of three-dimensional PET imaging.
Patient A is a 70-year-old man who had gotten more forgetful, to the
point that his family was worried about him. The patient’s family was
interested in getting a diagnostic workup to evaluate the possible causes
of his memory disorder. His PET scan showed that he had functional
parietotemporal decrease, which corroborated other neurologic
evaluations, suggesting that he had Alzheimer disease. The patient was
treated with tacrine (Cognex) and benefited from some stabilization of his
symptoms. (Courtesy of Joseph C. Wu, M.D., Daniel G. Amen, M.D.,
and H. Stefan Bracha, M.D.)
Pharmacologic and Neuropsychological Probes. With both PET and
SPECT and eventually, with MRS, more studies and possibly more
diagnostic procedures will use pharmacologic and neuropsychological
probes. The purpose of such probes is to stimulate particular regions of brain
activity, so that, when compared with a baseline, workers can reach
conclusions about the functional correspondence to particular brain regions.
One example of the approach is the use of PET to detect regions of the brain
involved in the processing of shape, color, and velocity in the visual system.
Another example is the use of cognitive activation tasks (e.g., the Wisconsin
Card Sorting Test) to study frontal blood flow in patients with schizophrenia.
A key consideration in the evaluation of reports that measure blood flow is
the establishment of actual baseline value in the study design. Typically, the
reports use an awake, resting state, but there is variability in whether the
patients have their eyes closed or their ears blocked; both conditions can
affect brain function. There is also variability in such baseline brain function
factors as sex, age, anxiety about the test, nonpsychiatric drug treatment,
vasoactive medications, and time of day.

1.2 Children and Adolescents
A comprehensive evaluation of a child is composed of interviews with the


<<<PAGE 239>>>
parents, the child, and other family members, gathering information
regarding the child’s current school functioning; and often, a standardized
assessment of the child’s intellectual level and academic achievement. In
some cases, standardized measures of developmental level and
neuropsychological assessments are useful. The child rarely initiates
psychiatric evaluations, so we must obtain information from the family and
the school to understand the reasons for the evaluation. In some cases, the
court or a child protective service agency may initiate a psychiatric
evaluation. Children can be excellent informants about symptoms related to
mood and inner experiences, such as psychotic phenomena, sadness, fears,
and anxiety. However, they often have difficulty with the chronology of
symptoms and are sometimes reticent about reporting behaviors that have
gotten them into trouble. Very young children often cannot articulate their
experiences verbally and do better, showing their feelings and preoccupations
in a play situation. Assessment of a child or adolescent includes identifying
the reasons for referral; assessing the nature and extent of the child’s
psychological and behavioral difficulties; and determining family, school,
social, and developmental factors that may be influencing the child’s
emotional well-being.
Table 1-25
Neurochemical
Findings
from
Tomography Radiotracer Scans
Dopamine

Positron

Emission

Decreased uptake of dopamine in striatum in
parkinsonian patients
Dopamine release higher in patients with
schizophrenia than in controls
High dopamine release associated with positive
symptoms in schizophrenia

Receptors
• D1 receptor

Lower D1 receptor binding in prefrontal cortex of
patients with schizophrenia compared with
controls; correlates with negative symptoms


<<<PAGE 240>>>
• D2 receptor

Schizophrenia associated with small elevations
of binding at D2 receptor

• Serotonin
Reduction in receptor binding in patients with
type 1A (5unipolar major depression
HT1A)
Transporters
• Dopamine

Amphetamine and cocaine cause an increase in
dopamine
Tourette disorder shows increase in dopamine
transporter system (may account for success
of dopamine blocking therapies)

• Serotonin

Serotonin binding is low in depression,
alcoholism, cocainism, binge eating, and
impulse control

Metabolism
• Nicotine

Cigarette smoking inhibits monamine oxidase
activity in brain

• Amyloid-β
Deposits

Can be visualized in vivo with positron emission
tomography

Pharmacology

Plasma levels of cocaine peak at 2 min
D2 receptor occupancy lasts for several weeks
after discontinuation of antipsychotic
medication
D2 receptor occupancy is lower for atypical
antipsychotics than typical antipsychotics
(may account for decrease in extrapyramidal
side effects)
Low doses (10–20 mg) of selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors cause occupancy of up to
90% of serotonin receptors


<<<PAGE 241>>>
The first step in the comprehensive evaluation of a child or adolescent is to
obtain a full description of the current concerns and a history of the child’s
previous psychiatric and medical problems. This evaluation is often done
with the parents for school-age children, whereas we may choose to see
adolescents first, to get their perception of the situation. A direct interview
and observation of the child are usually next, followed by psychological
testing when indicated.
Clinical interviews offer the most flexibility in understanding the evolution
of problems and in establishing the role of environmental factors and life
events, but they may not systematically cover all psychiatric diagnostic
categories. To increase the breadth of information generated, we may use
semistructured interviews such as the Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders
and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children (K-SADS); structured interviews
such as the National Institute for Mental Health Diagnostic Interview
Schedule for Children Version IV (NIMH DISC-IV); and rating scales, such
as the Child Behavior Checklist and Connors Parent or Teacher Rating Scale
for ADHD.
It is not uncommon for interviews from different sources, such as parents,
teachers, and school counselors, to reflect different or even contradictory
information about a given child. When faced with conflicting information, we
must determine whether apparent contradictions reflect an accurate picture of
the child in different settings. Once obtaining a complete history from the
parents, we should examine the child and assess the child’s current
functioning at home and school. Once we complete the evaluation and
psychological testing, we can use all the available information to make a
best-estimate diagnosis and can then make recommendations.
Once we obtain clinical information about a given child or adolescent, it is
our task to determine whether that child meets the criteria for one or more
psychiatric disorders according to the Fifth Edition of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5). Whereas clinical situations
requiring intervention do not always fall within the context of a given
psychiatric disorder, the importance of identifying psychiatric disorders when
they arise is to facilitate meaningful investigation of childhood
psychopathology.


<<<PAGE 242>>>
CLINICAL INTERVIEWS
To conduct a useful child interview, we must be familiar with typical
development to place the child’s responses in the proper perspective. For
example, a young child’s discomfort on separation from a parent and a
school-age child’s lack of clarity about the purpose of the interview is
perfectly normal. Furthermore, behavior that is normal in a child at one age,
such as temper tantrums in a 2-year-old, takes on a different meaning, for
example, in a teenager. Chapter 32 presents a detailed discussion of healthy
childhood development.
The interviewer’s first task is to engage the child and develop a rapport so
that the child is comfortable. The interviewer should inquire about the child’s
concept of the purpose of the interview and should ask what the parents have
told the child. If the child appears to be confused about the reason for the
interview, the examiner may opt to summarize the parents’ concerns in a
developmentally appropriate and supportive manner. During the interview
with the child, we seek to learn about the child’s relationships with family
members and peers, academic achievement, and peer relationships in school,
and the child’s pleasurable activities. An estimate of the child’s cognitive
functioning is a part of the mental status examination.
The extent of confidentiality in child assessment correlates with the age of
the child. In most cases, almost all specific information can appropriately be
shared with the parents of a very young child, whereas the privacy and
permission of an older child or adolescent are necessary before we can share
any information with parents. We should inform school-age and older
children that if we become concerned that any child is dangerous to himself
or herself or others, we must share this information with parents and, at
times, additional adults. As part of our assessment, we must determine
whether that child is safe in his or her environment and must develop an
index of suspicion about whether the child is a victim of abuse or neglect.
Whenever there is a suspicion of child maltreatment, we are required to
inform the local child protective service agency.
Toward the end of the interview, the child may be asked in an open-ended
manner whether he or she would like to bring up anything else. We should
complement each child for his or her cooperation and thank them for
participating in the interview, and the interview should end on a positive


<<<PAGE 243>>>
note.
Infants and Young Children
Assessments of infants usually begin with the parents present, because very
young children may be frightened by the interview situation; the interview
with the parents present also allows us to assess the parent–infant interaction.
Infants may be referred for a variety of reasons, including high levels of
irritability, difficulty being consoled, eating disturbances, poor weight gain,
sleep disturbances, withdrawn behavior, lack of engagement in play, and
developmental delay. We should assess areas of functioning that include
motor development, activity level, verbal communication, ability to engage in
play, problem-solving skills, adaptation to daily routines, relationships, and
social responsiveness.
We should use our observations during the interview and well as
standardized developmental measures to determine a child’s developmental
level of functioning. Observations of play reveal a child’s developmental
level and reflect the child’s emotional state and preoccupations. The
examiner can interact with an infant age 18 months or younger in a playful
manner by using such games as peek-a-boo. We may observe children
between the ages of 18 months and 3 years in a playroom. Children ages 2
years or older may exhibit symbolic play with toys, revealing more in this
mode than through conversation. The use of puppets and dolls with children
younger than 6 years of age is often an effective way to elicit information,
particularly if questions are directed to the dolls, rather than to the child.
School-Age Children
Some school-age children are at ease when conversing with an adult; others
may show fear, anxiety, poor verbal skills, or oppositional behavior. Schoolage children can usually tolerate a 45-minute session. The room should be
sufficiently spacious for the child to move around, but not so large as to
reduce intimate contact between the examiner and the child. We may reserve
part of the interview for unstructured play, and various toys can be made
available to capture the child’s interest and to elicit themes and feelings.
Children in lower grades may be more interested in the toys in the room,
whereas by the sixth grade, children may be more comfortable with the


<<<PAGE 244>>>
interview process and less likely to show spontaneous play.
The first part of the interview explores the child’s understanding of the
reasons for the meeting. We should reassure the child that they are not here
because they are “in trouble.” Techniques that can facilitate disclosure of
feelings include asking the child to draw peers, family members, a house, or
anything else that comes to mind. We can then question the child about the
drawings. We may ask children to reveal three wishes, to describe the best
and worst events of their lives, and to name a favorite person to be stranded
with on a desert island. Games such as Donald W. Winnicott’s “squiggle,” in
which the examiner draws a curved line and then the child and the examiner
take turns continuing the drawing, may facilitate conversation.
Questions that are partially open-ended with some multiple choices may
elicit the best answers from school-age children. Simple, closed (yes or no)
questions may not elicit sufficient information, and entirely open-ended
questions can overwhelm a school-age child who cannot construct a
chronologic narrative. These techniques often result in a shoulder shrug from
the child. The use of indirect commentaries—such as, “I once knew a child
who felt very sad when he moved away from all his friends”—is helpful,
although we must be careful not to lead the child into confirming what the
child thinks we want to hear. School-age children respond well to clinicians
who help them compare moods or feelings by asking them to rate feelings on
a scale of 1 to 10.
Adolescents
Adolescents usually have distinct ideas about why the evaluation was
initiated, and can usually give a chronologic account of the recent events
leading to the evaluation, although some may disagree with the need for the
evaluation. We should communicate the value of hearing the story from an
adolescent’s point of view and must be careful to reserve judgment and not
assign blame. Adolescents may be concerned about confidentiality, and
clinicians can assure them that permission will be requested from them before
we share any specific information with parents, except in situations involving
danger to the adolescent or others, in which case we must sacrifice
confidentiality. We can approach adolescents in an open-ended manner;
however, when silences occur during the interview, we should attempt to


<<<PAGE 245>>>
reengage the patient. We can explore what the adolescent believes the
outcome of the evaluation will be (change of school, hospitalization, removal
from the home, removal of privileges).
Some adolescents approach the interview with apprehension or hostility
but open up when it becomes evident that we are neither punitive nor
judgmental. We must be aware of our responses to adolescents’ behavior
(countertransference) and stay focused on the therapeutic process even in the
face of defiant, angry, or difficult teenagers. We should set appropriate limits
and should postpone or discontinue an interview if they feel threatened or if
they become destructive or self-injurious. Every interview should include an
exploration of suicidal thoughts, assaultive behavior, psychotic symptoms,
substance use, and knowledge of safe sexual practices along with a sexual
history. Once we establish rapport, many adolescents appreciate the
opportunity to tell their side of the story and may reveal things that they have
not disclosed to anyone else.
Family Interview
An interview with parents and the patient may take place first or may occur
later in the evaluation. Sometimes, an interview with the entire family,
including siblings, can be enlightening. During it, we can observe the
interactions between the parents and children. Our job is to maintain a
nonthreatening atmosphere in which each member of the family can speak
freely without feeling that we are taking sides with any particular member.
Although child psychiatrists generally function as advocates for the child, we
must validate each family member’s feelings in this setting, because lack of
communication often contributes to the patient’s problems.
Parents
The interview with the patient’s parents or caretakers is necessary to get a
chronologic picture of the child’s growth and development. We should obtain
a thorough developmental history and details of any stressors or significant
events that have influenced the child’s development. We should also elicit the
parents’ view of the family dynamics, their marital history, and their
emotional adjustment. The family’s psychiatric history and the upbringing of
the parents are pertinent. Parents are usually the best informants about the


<<<PAGE 246>>>
child’s early development and previous psychiatric and medical illnesses.
They may be better able to provide an accurate chronology of past
evaluations and treatment. In some cases, especially with older children and
adolescents, the parents may be unaware of significant current symptoms or
social difficulties of the child. Clinicians elicit the parents’ formulation of the
causes and nature of their child’s problems and ask about their expectations
for the current assessment.

DIAGNOSTIC INSTRUMENTS
The two main types of diagnostic instruments used by clinicians are
diagnostic interviews and questionnaires. We administer diagnostic
interviews to either children or their parents, which should elicit sufficient
information on various aspects of functioning in order to determine whether
the child meets DSM-5 criteria.
Semistructured interviews, or “interviewer-based” interviews, such as KSADS and the Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Assessment (CAPA), serve
as guides. They help us clarify answers to questions about symptoms.
Structured interviews, or “respondent-based” interviews, such as NIMH
DISC-IV, the Children’s Interview for Psychiatric Syndromes (ChIPS), and
the Diagnostic Interview for Children and Adolescents (DICA), provide a
script for the interviewer without interpretation of the patient responses
during the interview process. Two other diagnostic instruments, the DominicR and the Pictorial Instrument for Children and Adolescents (PICA-III-R),
use pictures as cues along with an accompanying question to elicit
information about symptoms, which can be especially useful for young
children as well as for adolescents.
Diagnostic instruments systematically aid the collection of information.
Diagnostic instruments, even the most comprehensive, however, cannot
replace clinical interviews because clinical interviews are superior in
understanding the chronology of symptoms, the interplay between
environmental stressors and emotional responses, and developmental issues.
Clinicians often find it helpful to combine data from diagnostic instruments
with clinical material gathered in a comprehensive evaluation.
Questionnaires can cover a broad range of symptom areas, such as the
Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist, or they can focus on a particular type


<<<PAGE 247>>>
of symptomatology, such as the Connors Parent Rating Scale for ADHD.
Semistructured Diagnostic Interviews
Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for
School-Age Children (K-SADS). The K-SADS is intended for children
and adolescents from 6 to 18 years of age. It contains multiple items with
some space for further clarification of symptoms. It elicits information on
current diagnosis and symptoms present in the previous year. Another version
can also ascertain lifetime diagnoses. This instrument has been used
extensively, especially in the evaluation of mood disorders, and includes
measures of impairment caused by symptoms. There is also a form for
parents as well as the child. The schedule takes about 1 to 1.5 hours to
administer. The interviewer should have some training in the field of child
psychiatry, but need not be a psychiatrist.
Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Assessment (CAPA). The CAPA
is an “interviewer-based” instrument that can be used for children from 9 to
17 years of age. It comes in modular form so that we can focus on particular
diagnostic entities without having to give the entire interview. It covers
disruptive behavior disorders, mood disorders, anxiety disorders, eating
disorders, sleep disorders, elimination disorders, substance use disorders, tic
disorders, schizophrenia, PTSD, and somatization symptoms. It focuses on
the 3 months before the interview, called the “primary period.” In general, it
takes about 1 hour to administer. It has a glossary to help clarify symptoms,
and it provides separate ratings for the presence and severity of symptoms.
The CAPA can be used to obtain information that applies to DSM-5
diagnoses. Training is necessary to administer this interview, and the
interviewer must be prepared to use some clinical judgment in interpreting
elicited symptoms.
Structured Diagnostic Interviews
National Institute of Mental Health Interview Schedule for
Children Version IV (NIMH DISC-IV). The NIMH DISC-IV is a highly
structured interview designed to assess more than 30 DSM-IV diagnostic


<<<PAGE 248>>>
entities administered by trained “laypersons.” Although developed for DSMIV, it can still be helpful diagnoses in DSM-5. It is available in parallel child
and parent forms. The parent form can be used for children from 6 to 17
years of age, and the direct child form of the instrument was designed for
children from 9 to 17 years of age. A computer scoring algorithm is available.
This instrument assesses for diagnoses present within the last 4 weeks, and
also within the last year. Because it is a fully structured interview, the
instructions serve as a complete guide for the questions, and the examiner
need not have any knowledge of child psychiatry to administer the interview
correctly.
Children’s Interview for Psychiatric Syndromes (ChIPS). The
ChIPS is a highly structured interview designed for use by trained
interviewers with children from 6 to 18 years of age. It is composed of 15
sections, and it elicits information on psychiatric symptoms as well as
psychosocial stressors targeting 20 psychiatric disorders, according to DSMIV criteria; however, it also applies to diagnoses in DSM-5. There are parent
and child forms. It takes approximately 40 minutes to administer the ChIPS.
Diagnoses covered include depression, mania, ADHD, separation disorder,
OCD, conduct disorder, substance use disorder, anorexia, and bulimia. The
ChIPS is a screening instrument for clinicians and a diagnostic instrument for
clinical and epidemiologic research.
Diagnostic Interview for Children and Adolescents (DICA). The
current version of the DICA was developed in 1997 to assess information
resulting in diagnoses according to either DSM-IV or DSM-III-R. This
instrument is relevant to DSM-5 as well. Although designed as a highly
structured interview, it can be used in a semistructured format. This means
that, although interviewers are allowed to use additional questions and probes
to clarify elicited information, the method of probing is standardized so that
all interviewers will follow a specific pattern. When using the interview with
younger children, more flexibility is built-in, allowing interviewers to deviate
from written questions to ensure that the child understands the question.
Parent and child interviews are expected to be used. The DICA is designed
for use with children 6 to 17 years of age and generally takes 1 to 2 hours to
administer. It covers externalizing behavior disorders, anxiety disorders,


<<<PAGE 249>>>
depressive disorders, and substance abuse disorders, among others.
Pictorial Diagnostic Instruments
Dominic-R. The Dominic-R is a pictorial, fully structured interview
designed to elicit psychiatric symptoms from children 6 to 11 years of age.
The pictures illustrate abstract emotional and behavioral content of diagnostic
entities according to the DSM-III-R; however, information gleaned from this
instrument also applies in conjunction with clinical information to the DSM5. The instrument uses a picture of a child called “Dominic,” who is
experiencing the symptom in question. Some symptoms have more than one
picture, with a brief story. Each picture includes a question about the
situation depicted and whether the child has experienced something similar.
Diagnostic entities covered by the Dominic-R include separation anxiety,
generalized anxiety, depression and dysthymia, ADHD, oppositional defiant
disorder, conduct disorder, and specific phobia. The symptom list is
comprehensive; however, the interview does not explicitly ask about the
frequency, duration, or age of onset of the symptom. The paper version of
this interview takes about 20 minutes, and the computerized version of this
instrument takes about 15 minutes. Trained lay-interviewers can administer
this interview. Computerized versions of this interview are available with
pictures of a child who is white, black, Latino, or Asian.
Pictorial Instrument for Children and Adolescents (PICA-III-R).
PICA-III-R is composed of 137 pictures organized in modules and designed
to cover five diagnostic categories, including disorders of anxiety, mood,
psychosis, disruptive disorders, and substance use disorder. It is designed to
be administered by clinicians and can be used for children and adolescents
ranging from 6 to 16 years of age. The PICA-III_R provides a categorical
(diagnosis present or absent) and a dimensional (range of severity)
assessment. This instrument presents pictures of a child experiencing
emotional, behavioral, and cognitive symptoms. The clinician asks the child,
“How much are you like him/her?” and a five-point rating scale with pictures
of a person with open arms in increasing degrees is shown to the child to help
the child identify the severity of the symptoms. It takes about 40 minutes to 1
hour to administer the interview. This instrument was designed for DSM-III-


<<<PAGE 250>>>
R but is useful for DSM-5 diagnoses. This assessment can be used to aid in
clinical interviews and research diagnostic protocols.

QUESTIONNAIRES AND RATING SCALES
Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist
The parent and teacher versions of the Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist
cover a broad range of symptoms and several positive attributes related to
academic and social competence. The checklist presents items related to
mood, frustration tolerance, hyperactivity, oppositional behavior, anxiety,
and various other behaviors. The parent version consists of 118 items to be
rated 0 (not true), 1 (sometimes true), or 2 (very true). The teacher version is
similar, but without the items that apply only to home life. Profiles were
developed based on normal children of three different age groups (4 to 5, 6 to
11, and 12 to 16).
Such a checklist identifies specific problem areas that we might otherwise
overlook, and it may point out areas in which the child’s behavior deviates
from that of normal children of the same age group. The checklist does not
make diagnoses.
Revised Achenbach Behavior Problem Checklist
Consisting of 150 items that cover a variety of childhood behavioral and
emotional symptoms, the Revised Achenbach Behavior Problem Checklist
discriminates between clinic-referred and nonreferred children. Separate
subscales correlate in the appropriate direction with other measures of
intelligence, academic achievement, clinical observations, and peer
popularity. As with the other broad rating scales, this instrument can help
elicit a comprehensive view of a multitude of behavioral areas, but it does not
make psychiatric diagnoses.
Connors Abbreviated Parent–Teacher Rating Scale for ADHD
In its original form, the Connors Abbreviated Parent–Teacher Rating Scale
for ADHD consisted of 93 items rated on a 0 to 3 scale, subgrouped into 25
clusters, including problems with restlessness, temper, school, stealing,
eating, and sleeping. Over the years, multiple versions of this scale were


<<<PAGE 251>>>
developed and used to aid in the systematic identification of children with
ADHD. A highly abbreviated form of this rating scale, the Connors
Abbreviated Parent–Teacher Questionnaire, was developed in 1973. It
consists of 10 items that assess both hyperactivity and inattention.
Brief Impairment Scale
A newly validated 23-item instrument suitable to obtain information on
children ranging from 4 to 17 years, the Brief Impairment Scale (BIS)
evaluates three domains of functioning: interpersonal relations, school/work
functioning, and care/self-fulfillment. This scale is administered to an adult
informant about his or her child, does not take long to administer, and
provides a global measure of impairment along the above three dimensions.
This scale does not make clinical decisions on individual patients, but it can
provide information on the degree of impairment that a given child is
experiencing in a particular area.

COMPONENTS OF THE CHILD PSYCHIATRIC
EVALUATION
Psychiatric evaluation of a child includes a description of the reason for the
referral, the child’s past and present functioning, and any test results. Table 126 gives an outline of the evaluation.
Identifying Data
Identifying data for a child includes the child’s gender, age, as well as the
family constellation surrounding the child.
Table 1-26
Child Psychiatric Evaluation
Identifying data
Identified patient and family members
Source of referral
Informants
History


<<<PAGE 252>>>
Chief complaint
History of present illness
Developmental history and milestones
Psychiatric history
Medical history, including immunizations
Family social history and parents’ marital status
Educational history and current school functioning
Peer relationship history
Current family functioning
Family psychiatric and medical histories
Current physical examination
Mental status examination
Neuropsychiatric examination (when applicable)
Developmental, psychological, and educational testing
Formulation and summary
DSM-5 diagnosis
Recommendations and treatment plan
History
A comprehensive history contains information about the child’s current and
past functioning from the child’s report, from clinical and structured
interviews with the parents, and information from teachers and previous
treating clinicians. We usually obtain the chief complaint and the history of
the present illness from both the child and the parents. Naturally, the child
will articulate the situation according to his or her developmental level. The
parents are usually the best source for determining the child’s developmental
history. Past clinicians can help augment the psychiatric and medical
histories. The child’s report is critical for understanding the current situation
regarding peer relationships and adjustment to school. Adolescents are the
best informants regarding knowledge of safe sexual practices, drug or alcohol
use, and suicidal ideation. The parents are usually the best source to
understand the family’s psychiatric and social histories and family
functioning.


<<<PAGE 253>>>
Mental Status Examination
We should obtain a detailed description of the child’s current mental
functioning through observation and specific questioning. Table 1-27
presents an outline of the mental status examination, and Table 1-28 lists
components of a comprehensive neuropsychiatry mental status.
Physical Appearance. The examiner should document the child’s size,
grooming, nutritional state, bruising, head circumference, physical signs of
anxiety, facial expressions, and mannerisms.
Parent–Child Interaction. Before the interview, the examiner can observe
the interactions between parents and the child in the waiting area. How the
parents and child interact, both verbally and emotionally, are pertinent.
Table 1-27
Mental Status Examination for Children
1. Physical appearance
2. Parent–child interaction
3. Separation and reunion
4. Orientation to time, place, and person
5. Speech and language
6. Mood
7. Affect
8. Thought process and content
9. Social relatedness
10. Motor behavior
11. Cognition
12. Memory
13. Judgment and insight
Separation and Reunion. The examiner should note how the child
responds to separation from a parent, and how they react to the reunion.
Either lack of affect at separation and reunion or severe distress on separation
or reunion can indicate problems in the parent–child relationship or other
psychiatric disturbances.


<<<PAGE 254>>>
Orientation to Time, Place, and Person. Impairments in orientation can
reflect neurologic damage, low intelligence, or a thought disorder. The age of
the child must be kept in mind, however, because very young children may
not know the date, other chronologic information, or the name of the
interview site.
Speech and Language. The examiner should evaluate the child’s speech
and language acquisition. Is it appropriate for the child’s age? A disparity
between expressive language usage and receptive language is notable. The
examiner should also note the child’s rate of speech, rhythm, latency to
answer, the spontaneity of speech, intonation, articulation of words, and
prosody. Echolalia, repetitive stereotypical phrases and unusual syntax are
significant psychiatric findings. Children who do not use words by age 18
months or who do not use phrases by ages 2.5 to 3 years, but who have a
history of typical babbling and responding appropriately to nonverbal cues,
are probably developing typically. The examiner should consider the
possibility that a hearing loss is contributing to a speech and language deficit.
Mood. A child’s sad expression, lack of appropriate smiling, tearfulness,
anxiety, euphoria, and anger are valid indicators of mood, as are verbal
admissions of feelings. Persistent themes in play and fantasy also reflect the
child’s mood.
Affect. The examiner should note the child’s range of emotional
expressivity, appropriateness of affect to thought content, ability to move
smoothly from one affect to another, and sudden labile emotional shifts.
Thought Process and Content. In evaluating a thought disorder in a
child, we must always consider what is typical for the child’s age and what is
deviant for any age group. The evaluation of thought-form considers
loosening of associations, excessive magical thinking, perseveration,
echolalia, the ability to distinguish fantasy from reality, sentence coherence,
and the ability to reason logically. The evaluation of thought content
considers delusions, obsessions, themes, fears, wishes, preoccupations, and
interests.


<<<PAGE 255>>>
Table 1-28
Neuropsychiatric Mental Status Examinationa
A. General Description
1. General appearance and dress
2. Level of consciousness and arousal
3. Attention to environment
4. Posture (standing and seated)
5. Gait
6. Movements of limbs, trunk, and face (spontaneous, resting,
and after instruction)
7. General demeanor (including evidence of responses to
internal stimuli)
8. Response to examiner (eye contact, cooperation, ability to
focus on interview process)
9. Native or primary language
B. Language and Speech
1. Comprehension (words, sentences, simple and complex
commands, and concepts)
2. Output (spontaneity, rate, fluency, melody or prosody,
volume, coherence, vocabulary, paraphasic errors,
complexity of usage)
3. Repetition
4. Other aspects
a. Object naming
b. Color naming
c. Body part identification
d. Ideomotor praxis to command
C. Thought
1. Form (coherence and connectedness)
2. Content
a. Ideational (preoccupations, overvalued ideas, delusions)
b. Perceptual (hallucinations)
D. Mood and Affect
1. Internal mood state (spontaneous and elicited; sense of


<<<PAGE 256>>>
humor)
2. Future outlook
3. Suicidal ideas and plans
4. Demonstrated emotional status (congruence with mood)
E. Insight and Judgment
1. Insight
a. Self-appraisal and self-esteem
b. Understanding of current circumstances
c. Ability to describe personal psychological and physical
status
2. Judgment
a. Appraisal of major social relationships
b. Understanding of personal roles and responsibilities
F. Cognition
1. Memory
a. Spontaneous (as evidenced during interview)
b. Tested (incidental, immediate repetition, delayed recall,
cued recall, recognition; verbal, nonverbal; explicit,
implicit)
2. Visuospatial skills
3. Constructional ability
4. Mathematics
5. Reading
6. Writing
7. Fine sensory function (stereognosis, graphesthesia, twopoint discrimination)
8. Finger gnosis
9. Right–left orientation
10. “Executive functions”
11. Abstraction
aQuestions should be adapted to the age of the child.

Courtesy of Eric D. Caine, M.D. and Jeffrey M. Lyness, M.D.

Suicidal ideation is always a part of the mental status examination for
children who are sufficiently verbal to understand the questions and old


<<<PAGE 257>>>
enough to understand the concept. Generally, children of average intelligence
who are older than 4 years of age have some understanding of what is real
and what is make-believe and may be asked about suicidal ideation, although
a firm concept of the permanence of death may not be present until several
years later.
We should also assess for aggressive thoughts and homicidal ideation.
Perceptual disturbances, such as hallucinations, are also assessed. Very
young children are expected to have short attention spans and may change the
topic and conversation abruptly without exhibiting a symptomatic flight of
ideas. Transient visual and auditory hallucinations in very young children do
not necessarily represent major psychotic illnesses, but they do deserve
further investigation.
Social Relatedness. We should assess the appropriateness of the child’s
response to the interviewer, general level of social skills, eye contact, and
degree of familiarity or withdrawal in the interview process. Overly friendly
or familiar behavior may be as troublesome as extremely retiring and
withdrawn responses. The examiner assesses the child’s self-esteem, general
and specific areas of confidence, and success with family and peer
relationships.
Motor Behavior. The motor behavior part of the mental status examination
includes observations of the child’s coordination and activity level and ability
to pay attention and carry out developmentally appropriate tasks. It also
involves involuntary movements, tremors, motor hyperactivity, and any
unusual focal asymmetries of muscle movement.
Cognition. We also should assess the child’s intellectual functioning and
problem-solving abilities. We can estimate the relative level of intelligence
from a child’s general information, vocabulary, and comprehension. For a
specific assessment of the child’s cognitive abilities, we can use a
standardized test.
Memory. School-age children should be able to remember three objects after
5 minutes and to repeat five digits forward and three digits backward.
Anxiety can interfere with the child’s performance, but an apparent inability


<<<PAGE 258>>>
to repeat digits or to add simple numbers may reflect brain damage, mental
retardation, or learning disabilities.
Judgment and Insight. The child’s view of the problems, reactions to
them, and suggested solutions may give us a good idea of the child’s
judgment and insight. Also, the child’s understanding of what he or she can
realistically do to help and what we can do adds to the assessment of the
child’s judgment.
Neuropsychiatric Assessment
A neuropsychiatric assessment is appropriate for children suspected of having
a psychiatric disorder that coexists with neuropsychiatric impairment, or
psychiatric symptoms that may be caused by neuropsychiatric dysfunction, or
a neurologic disorder. Although a neuropsychiatric assessment is not
sufficient in most cases to make a psychiatric diagnosis, neuropsychological
profiles have been, in some cases, correlated with particular psychiatric
symptoms and syndromes. For example, neuropsychological differences in
executive function, language, and memory functions, as well as measures of
mood and anxiety, have been found between youth with histories of
childhood maltreatment and those without it. The neuropsychiatric evaluation
combines information from neurologic, neuropsychological testing, and
mental status examinations. The neurologic examination can identify
asymmetrical abnormal signs (hard signs) that may indicate lesions in the
brain. A physical examination can evaluate the presence of physical stigmata
of particular syndromes in which neuropsychiatric symptoms or
developmental aberrations play a role (e.g., fetal alcohol syndrome, Down
syndrome).
A neuropsychiatric examination also includes neurologic soft signs and
minor physical anomalies. Loretta Bender coined the term neurological soft
signs in the 1940s to describe the nondiagnostic abnormalities in the
neurologic examinations of children with schizophrenia. Soft signs do not
indicate focal neurologic disorders, but they are associated with a wide
variety of developmental disabilities and frequently occur in children with
low intelligence, learning disabilities, and behavioral disturbances. Soft signs
may refer to both behavioral symptoms (which are sometimes associated with


<<<PAGE 259>>>
brain damage, such as severe impulsivity and hyperactivity), physical
findings (including contralateral overflow movements), and a variety of
nonfocal signs (e.g., mild choreiform movements, poor balance, mild
incoordination, asymmetry of gait, nystagmus, and the persistence of infantile
reflexes). Soft signs include those that are normal in a young child, but
become abnormal when they persist in an older child and those that are
abnormal at any age. The Physical and Neurological Examination for Soft
Signs (PANESS) is an instrument used with children up to the age of 15
years. It consists of 15 questions about the general physical status and
medical history and 43 physical tasks (e.g., touch your finger to your nose,
hop on one foot to the end of the line, tap quickly with your finger).
Neurologic soft signs are useful to note, but they are not useful in making a
specific psychiatric diagnosis.
Minor physical anomalies or dysmorphic features occur with a higher than
usual frequency in children with developmental disabilities, learning
disabilities, speech and language disorders, and hyperactivity. As with soft
signs, the documentation of minor physical anomalies is part of the
neuropsychiatric assessment, but it is rarely helpful in the diagnostic process
and does not imply a good or bad prognosis. Minor physical anomalies
include a high-arched palate, epicanthal folds, hypertelorism, low-set ears,
transverse palmar creases, multiple hair whorls, a large head, a furrowed
tongue, and partial syndactyl of several toes.
When considering a seizure disorder in the differential diagnosis or a
structural abnormality in the brain, electroencephalography (EEG), CT, or
MRI may be indicated.
Developmental, Psychological, and Educational Testing
Psychological testing, structured developmental assessments, and
achievement testing are valuable in evaluating a child’s developmental level,
intellectual functioning, and academic difficulties. A measure of adaptive
functioning (including the child’s competence in communication, daily living
skills, socialization, and motor skills) is the most definitive way to determine
the level of intellectual disability in a child. Table 1-29 outlines the general
categories of psychological tests.


<<<PAGE 260>>>
Development Tests for Infants and Preschoolers. The Gesell Infant
Scale, the Cattell Infant Intelligence Scale, Bayley Scales of Infant
Development, and the Denver Developmental Screening Test include
developmental assessments of infants as young as 2 months of age. When
used with very young infants, the tests focus on sensorimotor and social
responses to a variety of objects and interactions. When using these
instruments with older infants and preschoolers, the emphasis is on language
acquisition. The Gesell Infant Scale measures development in four areas:
motor, adaptive functioning, language, and social.
An infant’s score on one of these developmental assessments is not a
reliable way to predict a child’s future IQ in most cases. Infant assessments
are valuable, however, in detecting developmental deviation and mental
retardation and in raising suspicions of a developmental disorder. Whereas
infant assessments rely heavily on sensorimotor functions, intelligence testing
in older children and adolescents includes later-developing functions,
including verbal, social, and abstract cognitive abilities.
Intelligence Tests for School-Age Children and Adolescents. The
most widely used test of intelligence for school-age children and adolescents
is the third edition of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-IIIR). It can be given to children from 6 to 17 years of age and yields a verbal
IQ, a performance IQ, and a combined full-scale IQ. The verbal subtests
consist of vocabulary, information, arithmetic, similarities, comprehension,
and digit span (supplemental) categories. The performance subtests include
block design, picture completion, picture arrangement, object assembly,
coding, mazes (supplemental), and symbol search (supplemental). The IQ
computation does not include the scores of the supplemental subtests.
Each subcategory is scored from 1 to 19, with 10 being the average score.
An average full-scale IQ is 100; 70 to 80 represents borderline intellectual
function; 80 to 90 is in the low average range; 90 to 109 is average; 110 to
119 is a high average, and above 120 is in the superior or very superior range.
The multiple breakdowns of the performance and verbal subscales allow
great flexibility in identifying specific areas of deficit and scatter in
intellectual abilities. Because a large part of intelligence testing measures
abilities used in academic settings, the breakdown of the WISC-III-R can also
point out skills in which a child is weak and may benefit from remedial


<<<PAGE 261>>>
education.
The Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale covers an age range from 2 to 24
years. It relies on pictures, drawings, and objects for very young children and
verbal performance for older children and adolescents. This intelligence
scale, the earliest version of an intelligence test of its kind, leads to a mental
age score as well as an IQ.
The McCarthy Scales of Children’s Abilities and the Kaufman Assessment
Battery for Children are two other intelligence tests that are available for
preschool and school-age children. They do not cover adolescents.
LONG-TERM STABILITY OF INTELLIGENCE. Although a child’s intelligence is

relatively stable throughout the school-age years and adolescence, some
factors can influence intelligence and a child’s score on an intelligence test.
The intellectual functions of children with severe mental illnesses and of
those from deprived and neglectful environments may decrease over time,
whereas the IQs of children with intensively enriched environments may
increase over time. Factors that influence a child’s score on a given test of
intellectual functioning and, thus, affect the accuracy of the test are
motivation, emotional state, anxiety, and cultural milieu. The interactions
between cognitive ability and anxiety and depression and psychosis are
complex. One study of 4,405 youth from the Canadian National Longitudinal
Study of Children and Youth (NLSCY), by Weeks and colleagues (2013)
found that more exceptional cognitive ability was associated with less risk for
anxiety and depressive symptoms in youth from 12 to 13 years of age,
however, by ages 14 to 15 years, cognitive ability did not affect the odds of
anxiety or depression.
Table 1-29
Commonly Used Child and Adolescent Psychological
Assessment Instruments
Test

Age/Grades

Data Generated and
Comments

6–16

Standard scores: verbal,

Intellectual Ability
Wechsler Intelligence


<<<PAGE 262>>>
Scale for Children—
Third Edition (WISCIII-R)
Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale—
(WAIS-III)

performance and full-scale
IQ; scaled subtest scores
permitting specific skill
assessment.
16–adult

Same as WISC-III-R.

Wechsler Preschool
3–7
and Primary Scale of
Intelligence—
Revised (WPPSI-R)

Same as WISC-III-R.

Kaufman Assessment
Battery for Children
(K-ABC)

2.6–12.6

Well-grounded in theories of
cognitive psychology and
neuropsychology. Allows
immediate comparison of
intellectual capacity with
acquired knowledge.
Scores: Mental Processing
Composite (IQ equivalent);
sequential and
simultaneous processing
and achievement standard
scores; scaled mental
processing and
achievement subtest
scores; age equivalents;
percentiles.

Kaufman Adolescent
and Adult
Intelligence Test
(KAIT)

11–85+

Composed of separate
Crystallized and Fluid
scales. Scores: Composite
Intelligence Scale;
Crystallized and Fluid IQ;
scaled subtest scores;
percentiles.


<<<PAGE 263>>>
Stanford-Binet, 4th
Edition (SB:FE)

2–23

Peabody Picture
4–adult
Vocabulary Test—III
(PPVT-III)

Scores: IQ; verbal,
abstract/visual, and
quantitative reasoning;
short-term memory;
standard age.
Measures receptive
vocabulary acquisition;
standard scores,
percentiles, age
equivalents.

Achievement
Woodcock–Johnson
Psycho-Educational
Battery—Revised
(W-J)

K–12

Scores: reading and
mathematics (mechanics
and comprehension),
written language, other
academic achievement;
grade and age scores,
standard scores,
percentiles.

Wide Range
Achievement Test—
3, Levels 1 and 2
(WRAT-3)

Level 1: 1–5
Level 2:
12–75

Permits screening for deficits
in reading, spelling, and
arithmetic; grade levels,
percentiles, stanines,
standard scores.

Kaufman Test of
Educational
Achievement, Brief
and Comprehensive
Forms (K-TEA)

1–12

Standard scores: reading,
mathematics, and spelling;
grade and age
equivalents, percentiles,
stanines. Brief Form is
sufficient for most clinical
applications;
Comprehensive Form


<<<PAGE 264>>>
allows error analysis and
more detailed curriculum
planning.
Wechsler Individual
Achievement Test
(WIAT)

K–12

Standard scores: basic
reading, mathematics
reasoning, spelling,
reading comprehension,
numerical operations,
listening comprehension,
oral expression, written
expression. Co-normal
with WISC-III-R.

Adaptive Behavior
Vineland Adaptive
Behavior Scales

Normal: 0–19 Standard scores: adaptive
Retarded:
behavior composite and
All ages
communication, daily living
skills, socialization, and
motor domains;
percentiles, age
equivalents,
developmental age scores.
Separate standardization
groups for normal, visually
handicapped, hearing
impaired, emotionally
disturbed, and retarded.

Scales of Independent
Behavior—Revised

Newborn–
adult

Standard scores: four
adaptive (motor, social
interaction,
communication, personal
living, community living)
and three maladaptive
(internalized, asocial, and
externalized) areas;


<<<PAGE 265>>>
General Maladaptive Index
and Broad Independence
cluster.
Attentional Capacity
Trail Making Test

8–adult

Standard scores, standard
deviations, ranges;
corrections for age and
education.

Wisconsin Card Sorting 6.6–adult
Test

Standard scores, standard
deviations, T-scores,
percentiles, developmental
norms for number of
categories achieved,
perseverative errors, and
failures to maintain set;
computer measures.

Behavior Assessment
System for Children
(BASC)

4–18

Teacher and parent rating
scales and child self-report
of personality permitting
multireporter assessment
across a variety of
domains in home, school,
and community. Provides
validity, clinical, and
adaptive scales. ADHD
component avails.

Home Situations
Questionnaire—
Revised (HSQ-R)

6–12

Permits parents to rate
child’s specific problems
with attention or
concentration. Scores for
number of problem
settings, mean severity,
and factor scores for


<<<PAGE 266>>>
compliance and leisure
situations.
ADHD Rating Scale

6–12

Score for number of
symptoms keyed to DSM
cutoff for diagnosis of
ADHD; standard scores
permit derivation of clinical
significance for total score
and two factors
(Inattentive-Hyperactive
and ImpulsiveHyperactive).

School Situations
6–12
Questionnaire (SSQR)

Permits teachers to rate a
child’s specific problems
with attention or
concentration. Scores for
number of problem
settings and mean
severity.

Child Attention Profile
(CAP)

6–12

Brief measure allowing
teachers’ weekly ratings of
presence and degree of
child’s inattention and
overactivity. Normative
scores for inattention,
overactivity, and total
score.

3–adult

Special scoring systems.
Most recently developed
and increasingly
universally accepted is

Projective Tests
Rorschach Inkblots


<<<PAGE 267>>>
John Exner’s
Comprehensive System
(1974). Assesses
perceptual accuracy,
integration of affective and
intellectual functioning,
reality testing, and other
psychological processes.
Thematic Apperception 6–adult
Test (TAT)

Generates stories that are
analyzed qualitatively.
Assumed to provide
especially rich data
regarding interpersonal
functioning.

Machover Draw-APerson Test (DAP)

3–adult

Qualitative analysis and
hypothesis generation,
especially regarding
subject’s feelings about
self and significant others.

Kinetic Family Drawing 3–adult
(KFD)

Qualitative analysis and
hypothesis generation
regarding an individual’s
perception of family
structure and sentient
environment. Some
objective scoring systems
in existence.

Rotter Incomplete
Sentences Blank

Personality Tests

Child,
Primarily qualitative analysis,
adolescent,
although some objective
and adult
scoring systems have
forms
been developed.


<<<PAGE 268>>>
Minnesota Multiphasic 14–18
Personality
Inventory-Adolescent
(MMPI-A)

1992 version of widely used
personality measure,
developed specifically for
use with adolescents.
Standard scores: 3 validity
scales, 14 clinical scales,
additional content and
supplementary scales.

Millon Adolescent
13–18
Personality Inventory
(MAPI)

Standard scores for 20
scales grouped into three
categories: Personality
styles; expressed
concerns; behavioral
correlates. Normed on
adolescent population.
Focuses on broad
functional spectrum, not
just problem areas.
Measures 14 primary
personality traits, including
emotional stability, selfconcept level, excitability,
and self-assurance.

Children’s Personality
Questionnaire

8–12

Generates combined broad
trait patterns including
extraversion and anxiety.

2–16

Screening instrument for
visual motor deficits.
Standard scores, age
equivalents, percentiles.

Neuropsychological
Screening Tests
and Test Batteries
Developmental Test of
Visual-Motor
Integration (VMI)


<<<PAGE 269>>>
Benton Visual
Retention Test

6–adult

Assesses presence of
deficits in visual-figure
memory. Mean scores by
age.

Benton Visual Motor
Gestalt Test

5–adult

Assesses visual-motor
deficits and visual-figural
retention. Age equivalents.

Reitan-Indiana
Neuropsychological
Test Battery for
Children

5–8

Cognitive and perceptualmotor tests for children
with suspected brain
damage.

Halstead–Reitan
9–14
Neuropsychological
Test Battery for Older
Children

Same as Reitan-Indiana.

Luria-Nebraska
Neuropsychological
Battery: Children’s
Revision LNNB:C

Sensory-motor, perceptual,
cognitive tests measuring
11 clinical and 2 additional
domains of
neuropsychological
functioning.
Provides standard scores.

8–12

Developmental Status
Bayley Scales of Infant 16 days–42
Developmentmo
Second Edition

Mental, motor, and behavior
scales measuring infant,
development. Provides
standard scores.

Mullen Scales of Early
Learning

Language and visual scales
for receptive and
expressive ability. Yields
age scores and T scores.

Newborn–5
yr


<<<PAGE 270>>>
Adapted from Racusin G, Moss N. Psychological assessment of children and adolescents. In:
Lewis M, ed. Child and Adolescent Psychiatry: A Comprehensive Textbook. Philadelphia, PA:
Williams Wilkins; 1991, with permission.

Perceptual and Perceptual Motor Tests. The Bender Visual-Motor
Gestalt Test can be given to children between the ages of 4 and 12 years. The
test consists of a set of spatially related figures that the child copies. The
number of errors determines the score. Although not a diagnostic test, it is
useful in identifying developmentally age-inappropriate perceptual
performances.
Personality Tests. Personality tests are not of much use in making
diagnoses, and they are less satisfactory than intelligence tests concerning
norms, reliability, and validity, but they can help elicit themes and fantasies.
The Rorschach test is a projective technique in which ambiguous stimuli—
a set of bilaterally symmetrical inkblots—are shown to a child, who then
describes what he or she sees in each. The hypothesis is that the child’s
interpretation of the vague stimuli reflects the basic characteristics of their
personality. The examiner notes the themes and patterns.
A more structured projective test is the Children’s Apperception Test
(CAT), which is an adaptation of the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT). The
CAT consists of cards with pictures of animals in scenes that are somewhat
ambiguous but are related to parent–child and sibling issues, caretaking, and
other relationships. The child describes what is happening and tells a story
about the scene. The choice to use animals for the pictures is because some
believe that children might respond more readily to animal images than to
human figures.
Drawings, toys, and play are also applications of projective techniques
used to evaluate children. Dollhouses, dolls, and puppets have been
especially helpful in allowing a child a nonconversational mode in which to
express a variety of attitudes and feelings. Play materials that reflect
household situations are likely to elicit a child’s fears, hopes, and conflicts
about the family.
Projective techniques have not fared well as standardized instruments.
Rather than being considered tests, projective techniques are better used as
additional clinical modalities.


<<<PAGE 271>>>
Educational Tests. Achievement tests measure the attainment of
knowledge and skills in a particular academic curriculum. The Wide-Range
Achievement Test-Revised (WRAT-R) consists of tests of knowledge and
skills and timed performances of reading, spelling, and mathematics. It is
used with children from 5 years of age to adulthood. The test yields a score
that we can compare to the average expected score for the child’s chronologic
age and grade level.
The Peabody Individual Achievement Test (PIAT) includes word
identification, spelling, mathematics, and reading comprehension.
The Kaufman Test of Educational Achievement, the Gray Oral Reading
Test-Revised (GORT-R), and the Sequential Tests of Educational Progress
(STEP) are achievement tests that determine whether a child has achieved the
educational level expected for his or her grade level. Often, children whose
achievement is significantly lower than expected for their grade level in one
or more subjects exhibit a specific learning disorder.
Biopsychosocial Formulation. Our task is to integrate all of the
information obtained into a formulation that takes into account the biologic
predisposition, psychodynamic factors, environmental stressors, and life
events that have led to the child’s current level of functioning. We must
consider psychiatric disorders and any specific physical, neuromotor, or
developmental abnormalities in the formulation of etiologic factors for
current impairment. Our conclusions are an integration of clinical information
along with data from standardized psychological and developmental
assessments. The psychiatric formulation includes an assessment of family
function as well as the appropriateness of the child’s educational setting. We
should then determine the child’s overall safety in his or her current situation,
and report any suspected maltreatment to the local child protective service
agency. We then consider the child’s overall well-being regarding growth,
development, and academic and play activities.
Diagnosis
Structured and semistructured (evidence-based) assessment tools often
enhance a clinician’s ability to make the most accurate diagnoses. These
instruments described earlier include the K-SADS, the CAPA, and the NIMH


<<<PAGE 272>>>
DISC-IV interviews. The advantages of including an evidence-based
instrument in the diagnostic process include decreasing potential clinician
bias to make a diagnosis without all of the necessary symptoms information
and serving as guides for us to consider each symptom that could contribute
to a given diagnosis. These data can enable us to optimize his expertise to
make challenging judgments regarding child and adolescent disorders, which
may possess overlapping symptoms. Our ultimate task includes making all
appropriate diagnoses according to the DSM-5. Some clinical situations do
not fulfill the criteria for DSM-5 diagnoses, but cause impairment and require
psychiatric attention and intervention. Clinicians who evaluate children are
frequently in the position of determining the impact of the behavior of family
members on the child’s well-being. In many cases, a child’s level of
impairment is related to factors extending beyond a psychiatric diagnosis,
such as the child’s adjustment to his or her family life, peer relationships, and
educational placement.

RECOMMENDATIONS AND TREATMENT PLAN
To recommend treatment, we should use our formulation, integrating all of
the data gained during our assessments. Optimal treatment often flows from
this formulation. That is, identification of a biologic predisposition to a
particular psychiatric disorder may be clinically relevant to inform a
psychopharmacologic recommendation. An understanding of the
psychodynamic interactions between family members may lead a clinician to
recommend treatment that includes a family component. Educational and
academic problems addressed in the formulation may lead to a
recommendation to seek a more effective academic placement. We should
also take into account the overall social situation of the child or adolescent
when recommending treatment. Of utmost important—and at the top of our
recommendation list—is the physical and emotional safety of a child or
adolescent.
The child or adolescent’s family, school life, peer interactions, and social
activities often have a direct impact on the child’s success in overcoming his
or her difficulties. The psychological education and cooperation of a child or
adolescent’s family are essential ingredients in the successful application of
treatment recommendations. Patients and families often see communications


<<<PAGE 273>>>
that balance the observed positive qualities of the child and family with the
weak areas as more helpful than a focus only on the problem areas. Finally,
the most successful treatment plans are those developed cooperatively
between us, the child, and the family.


<<<PAGE 274>>>
INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY PSYCHIATRIC INTERVIEW
AND TESTS
Psychiatric Interview
A psychiatric interview of a child or adolescent with intellectual disability
requires a high level of sensitivity in order to elicit information at the
appropriate intellectual level while remaining respectful of the patient’s age
and emotional development. The patient’s verbal abilities, including receptive
and expressive language, can be initially screened by observing the
communication between the caretakers and the patient. If the patient
communicates mostly through gestures or sign language, the parents may
serve as interpreters. Patients with milder forms of intellectual disability are
often well aware of their differences from others and their failures and may
be anxious and ashamed during the interview. Approaching patients with a
clear, supportive, concrete explanation of the diagnostic process, particularly
patients with sufficiently receptive language ability, may allay anxiety and
fears. Providing support and praise in language appropriate to the patient’s
age and understanding is beneficial. Subtle direction, structure, and
reinforcement may be necessary to keep patients focused on the task or topic.
In general, the psychiatric examination of an intellectually disabled child
or adolescent should reveal how the patient has coped with stages of
development. Frustration tolerance, impulse control, and over-aggressive
motor and sexual behavior are essential areas of attention in the interview. It
is equally crucial to elicit the patient’s self-image, areas of self-confidence,
and an assessment of tenacity, persistence, curiosity, and willingness to
explore the environment.
Structured Instruments, Rating Scales, and Psychological
Assessment
In children and adolescents who have acquired language, we usually use one
of several standardized instruments that include numerous domains of
cognitive function. For children ages 6 to 16 years, the Wechsler Intelligence
Test for Children is most common, and for children ages 3 to 6 years, the
most commonly used is the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of


<<<PAGE 275>>>
Intelligence-Revised. The Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale, Fourth Edition,
has the advantage that it can be administered to children even younger,
starting at the age of 2 years. The Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children
is appropriate for children ages 2½ to 12½ years, whereas the Kaufman
Adolescent and Adult Intelligence Test apply to a wide range of ages, from
11 to 85 years. All of these standardized instruments evaluate cognitive
abilities across multiple domains, including verbal, performance, memory,
and problem-solving. Standardized instruments measuring adaptive function
(functions of “everyday” life) assume that adaptive skills increase with age,
and that adaptation may vary across different settings such as school, peer
relationships, and family life. The Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales can be
used in infants through youth 18 years of age and includes four basic domains
including Communication (Receptive, Expressive, and Written); Daily Living
Skills (Personal, Domestic, and Community); Socialization (Interpersonal
Relations, Play and Leisure, and Coping Skills); Motor Skills (Fine and
Gross).
Several behavioral rating scales exist for the population with intellectual
disabilities. General behavioral rating scales include the Aberrant Behavior
Checklist (ABC) and the Developmental Behavior Checklist (DBC). The
Behavior Problem Inventory (BPI) is a useful screening instrument for selfinjurious, aggressive, and stereotyped behaviors. The Psychopathology
Inventory for Mentally Retarded Adults (PIMRA) helps identify the presence
of comorbid psychiatric symptoms and disorders.
Examining clinicians can use several screening instruments for
developmental and intellectual delay or disability in infants and toddlers.
However, the controversy over the predictive value of infant psychological
tests is heated. Some report the correlation of abnormalities during infancy
with later abnormal functioning as very low, and others report it to be very
high. The correlation rises in direct proportion to the age of the child at the
time of the developmental examination. Some exercises such as copying
geometric figures, the Goodenough Draw-a-Person Test, the Kohs Block
Test, and geometric puzzles all are useful quick screening tests of visualmotor coordination. For infants, the Gesell and Bayley scales and the Cattell
Infant Intelligence Scale are useful.
The Peabody Vocabulary Test is the most widely used picture-based
vocabulary test. Other tests often found useful in detecting intellectual


<<<PAGE 276>>>
disability are the Bender Gestalt Test and the Benton Visual Retention Test.
The psychological evaluation should assess perceptual, motor, linguistic, and
cognitive abilities.
Physical Examination
Various parts of the body may demonstrate identifying characteristics of
specific perinatal and prenatal events or conditions associated with
intellectual disabilities. For example, the configuration and the size of the
head may offer clues to a variety of conditions, such as microcephaly,
hydrocephalus, or Down syndrome. A patient’s facial characteristics, for
example, hypertelorism, a flat nasal bridge, prominent eyebrows, epicanthal
folds, may provide clues to a recognizable syndrome such as FAS. Additional
facial characteristics including corneal opacities, retinal changes, low-set, and
small or misshapen ears, a protruding tongue, and disturbance in dentition
may be stigmata of a variety of known syndromes. The facial expression,
color, and texture of the skin and hair, a high-arched palate, the size of the
thyroid gland, and the proportions of a child’s trunk and extremities may
offer clues for particular syndromes. We should measure the circumference
of the head as part of the clinical investigation. Dermatoglyphics (studying
skin markings) may offer another diagnostic tool because unique ridge
patterns and flexion creases on the hand occur in persons who are
intellectually disabled, including chromosomal disorders and rubella. Table
1-30 lists syndromes with intellectual disability and their behavioral
phenotypes.
Neurologic Examination
Sensory impairments frequently occur among persons with intellectual
disabilities. For example, hearing impairment occurs in 10 percent of persons
with intellectual disability, a rate that is four times that of the general
population. Visual disturbances can range from blindness to disturbances of
spatial concepts, design recognition, and concepts of body image. Seizure
disorders occur in about 10 percent of intellectually disabled populations and
one-third of those with severe intellectual disabilities. Neurologic
abnormalities increase in incidence and severity in direct proportion to the
degree of intellectual disability. Disturbances in motor areas cause


<<<PAGE 277>>>
abnormalities of muscle tone (spasticity or hypotonia), reflexes
(hyperreflexia), and involuntary movements (choreoathetosis). Less disability
may also be associated with clumsiness and poor coordination.
Table 1-30
Syndromes with Intellectual Disability and Behavioral
Phenotypes
Disorder

Pathophysiology

Clinical Features and
Behavioral Phenotype

Down syndrome

Trisomy 21, 95%
Hypotonia, upwardnondisjunction,
slanted palpebral
approx. 4%
fissures, midface
translocation;
depression, flat wide
1/1,000 live
nasal bridge, simian
births: 1:2,500 in
crease, short stature,
women less than
increased incidence of
30 yr old, 1:80
thyroid abnormalities
over 40 yr old,
and congenital heart
1:32 at 45 yr old;
disease
possible
Passive, affable,
overproduction of
hyperactivity in
β-amyloid due to
childhood, stubborn;
defect at 21q21.1
verbal > auditory
processing, increased
risk of depression, and
dementia of the
Alzheimer type in
adulthood

Fragile X syndrome Inactivation of FMR- Long face, large ears,
1 gene at X q27.3
midface hypoplasia,
due to CGG base
high arched palate,
repeats,
short stature,
methylation;
macroorchidism, mitral
recessive;
valve prolapse, joint


<<<PAGE 278>>>
1:1,000 male
laxity, strabismus
births, 1:3,000
Hyperactivity, inattention,
female; accounts
anxiety, stereotypies,
for 10–12% of
speech and language
intellectual
delays, IQ decline,
disability in males
gaze aversion, social
avoidance, shyness,
irritability, learning
disorder in some
females; mild
intellectual disability in
affected females,
moderate to severe in
males; verbal IQ >
performance IQ
Prader–Willi
syndrome

Deletion in 15q12
Hypotonia, failure to
(15q11–15q13) of
thrive in infancy,
paternal origin;
obesity, small hands
some cases of
and feet
maternal
microorchidism,
uniparental
cryptorchidism, short
disomy; dominant
stature, almond-shaped
1/10,000 live
eyes, fair hair and light
births; 90%
skin, flat face, scoliosis,
sporadic;
orthopedic problems,
candidate gene:
prominent forehead
small nuclear
and bitemporal
ribonucleoprotein
narrowing
polypeptide
Compulsive behavior,
(SNRPN)
hyperphagia, hoarding,
impulsivity, borderline
to moderate intellectual
disability, emotional
lability, tantrums,
excess daytime


<<<PAGE 279>>>
sleepiness, skin
picking, anxiety,
aggression
Angelman
syndrome

Deletion in 15q12
Fair hair and blue eyes
(15q11–15q13) of
(66%); dysmorphic
maternal origin;
faces including wide
dominant;
smiling mouth, thin
frequent deletion
upper lip, and pointed
of γ-aminobutyric
chin; epilepsy (90%)
acid (GABA) B-3
with characteristic
receptor subunit,
EEG; ataxia; small
prevalence
head circumference,
unknown but rare,
25% microcephalic
estimated
Happy disposition,
1/20,000–
paroxysmal laughter,
1/30,000
hand flapping,
clapping; profound
intellectual disability;
sleep disturbance with
nighttime waking;
possible increased
incidence of autistic
features; anecdotal
love of water and music

Cornelia de Lange
syndrome

Lack of pregnancy- Continuous eyebrows,
associated
thin downturning upper
plasma protein A
lip, microcephaly, short
(PAPPA) linked to
stature, small hands
chromosome
and feet, small
9q33; similar
upturned nose,
phenotype
anteverted nostrils,
associated with
malformed upper limbs,
trisomy 5p, ring
failure to thrive
chromosome 3;
Self-injury, limited speech


<<<PAGE 280>>>
rare (1/40,000–
1/100,000 live
births); possible
association with
3q26.3

in severe cases,
language delays,
avoidance of being
held, stereotypic
movements, twirling,
severe to profound
intellectual disability

Williams syndrome

1/20,000 births;
hemizygous
deletion that
includes elastin
locus
chromosome
7q11–23;
autosomal
dominant

Short stature, unusual
facial features including
broad forehead,
depressed nasal
bridge, stellate pattern
of the iris, widely
spaced teeth, and full
lips; elfinlike facies;
renal and
cardiovascular
abnormalities; thyroid
abnormalities;
hypercalcemia
Anxiety, hyperactivity,
fears, outgoing,
sociable, verbal skills >
visual spatial skills

Cri-du-chat
syndrome

Partial deletion 5p;
1/50,000; region
may be 5p15.2

Round face with
hypertelorism,
epicanthal folds,
slanting palpebral
fissures, broad flat
nose, low-set ears,
micrognathia; prenatal
growth retardation;
respiratory and ear
infections; congenital


<<<PAGE 281>>>
heart disease;
gastrointestinal
abnormalities
Severe intellectual
disability, infantile
catlike cry,
hyperactivity,
stereotypies, self-injury
Smith–Magenis
syndrome

Incidence unknown, Broad face; flat midface;
estimated
short, broad hands;
1/25,000 live
small toes; hoarse,
births; complete
deep voice
or partial deletion Severe intellectual
of 17p11.2
disability; hyperactivity;
severe self-injury
including hand biting,
head banging, and
pulling out finger- and
toenails; stereotyped
self-hugging; attention
seeking; aggression;
sleep disturbance
(decreased REM)

Rubinstein–Taybi
syndrome

1/250,000, approx.
male = female;
sporadic; likely
autosomal
dominant;
documented
microdeletions in
some cases at
16p13.3

Short stature and
microcephaly, broad
thumb and big toes,
prominent nose, broad
nasal bridge,
hypertelorism, ptosis,
frequent fractures,
feeding difficulties in
infancy, congenital
heart disease, EEG
abnormalities, seizures


<<<PAGE 282>>>
Poor concentration,
distractible, expressive
language difficulties,
performance IQ >
verbal IQ; anecdotally
happy, loving, sociable,
responsive to music,
self-stimulating
behavior; older patients
have mood lability and
temper tantrums
Tuberous sclerosis
complex 1 and 2

Benign tumors
(hamartomas)
and
malformations
(hamartias) of
central nervous
system (CNS),
skin, kidney,
heart; dominant;
1/10,000 births;
50% TSC 1,
9q34; 50% TSC
2, 16p13

Epilepsy, autism,
hyperactivity,
impulsivity, aggression;
spectrum of intellectual
disability from none
(30%) to profound; selfinjurious behaviors,
sleep disturbances

Neurofibromatosis
type 1 (NF1)

1/2,500–1/4,000;
male = female;
autosomal
dominant; 50%
new mutations;
more than 90%
paternal NF1
allele mutated;
NFl gene
17q11.2; gene
product is

Variable manifestations;
café-au-lait spots,
cutaneous
neurofibromas, Lisch
nodules; short stature
and macrocephaly in
30–45
Half with speech and
language difficulties;
10% with moderate to


<<<PAGE 283>>>
neurofibromin
thought to be
tumor suppressor
gene

profound intellectual
disability; verbal IQ >
performance IQ;
distractible, impulsive,
hyperactive, anxious;
possibly associated
with increased
incidence of mood and
anxiety disorders

Lesch–Nyhan
syndrome

Defect in
hypoxanthine
guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase with
accumulation of
uric acid; Xq26–
27; recessive;
rare (1/10,000–
1/38,000)

Ataxia, chorea, kidney
failure, gout
Often severe self-biting
behavior; aggression;
anxiety; mild to
moderate intellectual
disability

Galactosemia

Defect in galactose- Vomiting in early infancy,
1-phosphate
jaundice,
uridyltransferase
hepatosplenomegaly;
or galactokinase
later cataracts, weight
or empiramase;
loss, food refusal,
autosomal
increased intracranial
recessive;
pressure and increased
1/62,000 births in
risk for sepsis, ovarian
the United States
failure, failure to thrive,
renal tubular damage
Possible intellectual
disability even with
treatment, visuospatial
deficits, language
disorders, reports of


<<<PAGE 284>>>
increased behavioral
problems, anxiety,
social withdrawal, and
shyness
Phenylketonuria

Defect in
Symptoms absent
phenylalanine
neonatally, later
hydroxylase
development of
(PAH) or cofactor
seizures (25%
(biopterin) with
generalized), fair skin,
accumulation of
blue eyes, blond hair,
phenylalanine;
rash
approximately
Untreated: mild to
1/11,500 births;
profound intellectual
varies with
disability, language
geographical
delay, destructiveness,
location; gene for
self-injury, hyperactivity
PAH, 12q22–
24.1; autosomal
recessive

Hurler syndrome

1/100,000;
Early onset; short stature,
deficiency in α-Lhepatosplenomegaly;
iduronidase
hirsutism, corneal
activity;
clouding, death before
autosomal
age 10 yr, dwarfism,
recessive
coarse facial features,
recurrent respiratory
infections
Moderate to severe
intellectual disability,
anxious, fearful, rarely
aggressive

Hunter syndrome

1/100,000, X-linked Normal infancy; symptom
recessive;
onset at age 2–4 yr;


<<<PAGE 285>>>
iduronate
sulfatase
deficiency; X q28

typical coarse faces
with flat nasal bridge,
flaring nostrils; hearing
loss, ataxia, hernia
common; enlarged liver
and spleen, joint
stiffness, recurrent
infections, growth
retardation,
cardiovascular
abnormality
Hyperactivity, intellectual
disability by 2 yr;
speech delay; loss of
speech at 8–10 yr;
restless, aggressive,
inattentive, sleep
abnormalities;
apathetic, sedentary
with disease
progression

Fetal alcohol
syndrome

Maternal alcohol
Microcephaly, short
consumption
stature, midface
(trimester III > II >
hypoplasia, short
I); 1/3,000 live
palpebral fissure, thin
births in Western
upper lip, retrognathia
countries; 1/300
in infancy, micrognathia
with fetal alcohol
in adolescence,
effects
hypoplastic long or
smooth philtrum
Mild to moderate
intellectual disability,
irritability, inattention,
memory impairment


<<<PAGE 286>>>
Table by B. H. King, M.D., R. M. Hodapp, Ph.D., and E. M. Dykens, Ph.D.

1.3 Geriatric Patients
PSYCHIATRIC EXAMINATION OF THE OLDER PATIENT
Psychiatric history taking and the mental status examination of older adults
follow the same format as for younger adults; however, because of the high
prevalence of cognitive disorders in older persons, psychiatrists must
determine whether a patient understands the nature and purpose of the
examination. When a patient is cognitively impaired, an independent history
should be obtained from a family member or caretaker. The patient still
should be seen alone—even in cases of clear evidence of impairment—to
preserve the privacy of the doctor–patient relationship and to elicit any
suicidal thoughts or paranoid ideation, which may not be voiced in the
presence of a relative or nurse.
When approaching the examination of the older patient, it is essential to
remember that older adults differ markedly from one another. The approach
to examining the older patient must take into account whether the person is a
healthy 75-year-old who recently retired from a second career or a frail 96year-old who just lost the only surviving relative with the death of the 75year-old care-giving daughter.
Psychiatric History
A complete psychiatric history includes preliminary identification (name,
age, sex, marital status), chief complaint, history of the present illness,
history of previous illnesses, personal history, and family history. A review
of medications (including over-the-counter medications), both current and
recent, is also essential.
Patients older than age 65 often have subjective complaints of minor
memory impairments, such as forgetting persons’ names and misplacing
objects. Minor cognitive problems also can occur because of anxiety in the
interview situation. These age-associated memory impairments are of no
significance; the term benign senescent forgetfulness has been used to


<<<PAGE 287>>>
describe them.
A patient’s childhood and adolescent history can provide information
about personality organization and give important clues about coping
strategies and defense mechanisms used under stress. A history of learning
disability or minimal cerebral dysfunction is significant. The psychiatrist
should inquire about friends, sports, hobbies, social activity, and work. The
occupational history should include the patient’s feelings about work,
relationships with peers, problems with authority, and attitudes toward
retirement. The patient also should be questioned about plans for the future.
What are the patient’s hopes and fears?
The family history should include a patient’s description of parents’
attitudes and adaptation to their old age and, if applicable, information about
the causes of their deaths. Alzheimer disease is transmitted as an autosomaldominant trait in 10 to 30 percent of the offspring of parents with Alzheimer
disease; depression and alcohol dependence also run in families. The
patient’s current social situation should be evaluated. Who cares for the
patient? Does the patient have children? What are the characteristics of the
patient’s parent–child relationships? A financial history helps the psychiatrist
evaluate the role of economic hardship in the patient’s illness and to make
realistic treatment recommendations.
The marital history includes a description of the spouse and the
characteristics of the relationship. If the patient is a widow or a widower, the
psychiatrist should explore how grieving was handled. If the loss of the
spouse occurred within the past year, the patient is at high risk for an adverse
physical or psychological event.
The patient’s sexual history includes sexual activity, orientation, libido,
masturbation, extramarital affairs, and sexual symptoms (e.g., impotence and
anorgasmia). Young clinicians may have to overcome their own biases about
taking a sexual history: Sexuality is an area of concern for many geriatric
patients, who welcome the chance to talk about their sexual feelings and
attitudes.
Mental Status Examination
The mental status examination offers a cross-sectional view of how a patient
thinks, feels, and behaves during the examination. With older adults, a


<<<PAGE 288>>>
psychiatrist may not be able to rely on a single examination to answer all of
the diagnostic questions. Repeat mental status examinations may be needed
because of fluctuating changes in the patient’s family.
General Description. A general description of the patient includes
appearance, psychomotor activity, attitude toward the examiner, and speech
activity.
Motor disturbances (e.g., shuffling gait, stooped posture, “pill-rolling”
movements of the fingers, tremors, and body asymmetry) should be noted.
Involuntary movements of the mouth or tongue may be adverse effects of
phenothiazine medication. Many depressed patients seem to be slow in
speech and movement. Mask-like facies occurs in Parkinson disease.
The patient’s speech may be pressured in agitated, manic, and anxious
states. Tearfulness and overt crying occur in depressive and cognitive
disorders, especially if the patient feels frustrated about being unable to
answer one of the examiner’s questions. The presence of a hearing aid or
another indication that the patient has a hearing problem (e.g., requesting
repetition of questions) should be noted.
The patient’s attitude toward the examiner—cooperative, suspicious,
guarded, ingratiating—can give clues about possible transference reactions.
Because of transference, older adults can react to younger physicians as if the
physicians were parent figures, despite the age difference.
Functional Assessment. Patients older than 65 years of age should be
evaluated for their capacity to maintain independence and to perform the
activities of daily life, which include toileting, preparing meals, dressing,
grooming, and eating. The degree of functional competence in their everyday
behaviors is an essential consideration in formulating a treatment plan for
these patients.
Mood, Feelings, and Affect. Suicide is a leading cause of death of older
persons, and an evaluation of a patient’s suicidal ideation is essential.
Loneliness is the most common reason cited by older adults who consider
suicide. Feelings of loneliness, worthlessness, helplessness, and hopelessness
are symptoms of depression, which carries a high risk of suicide. Nearly 75
percent of all suicide victims suffer from depression, alcohol abuse, or both.


<<<PAGE 289>>>
The examiner should specifically ask the patient about any thoughts of
suicide: Does the patient feel life is no longer worth living? Does the patient
think he or she would be better off dead or, when dead, would no longer be a
burden to others? Such thoughts—significantly when associated with alcohol
abuse, living alone, the recent death of a spouse, physical illness, and somatic
pain—indicate a high suicidal risk.
Disturbances in mood states, most notably depression and anxiety, can
interfere with memory functioning. An expansive or euphoric mood may
indicate a manic episode or may signal a dementing disorder. Frontal lobe
dysfunction often produces witzelsucht, which is the tendency to make puns
and jokes and then laugh aloud at them.
The patient’s affect may be flat, blunted, constricted, shallow, or
inappropriate, all of which can indicate a depressive disorder, schizophrenia,
or brain dysfunction. Such affects are significant abnormal findings, although
they are not pathognomonic of a specific disorder. Dominant lobe
dysfunction causes dysprosody, an inability to express emotional feelings
through speech intonation.
Perceptual Disturbances. Hallucinations and illusions by older adults
can be transitory phenomena resulting from decreased sensory acuity. The
examiner should note whether the patient is confused about time or place
during the hallucinatory episode; confusion points to an organic condition. It
is particularly important to ask the patient about distorted body perceptions.
Because brain tumors and other focal pathology can cause hallucinations, a
diagnostic workup may be indicated. Brain diseases cause perceptive
impairments; agnosia, the inability to recognize and interpret the significance
of sensory impressions, is associated with organic brain diseases. The
examiner should note the type of agnosia. Types of agnosia include denial of
illness (anosognosia), denial of a body part (atopognosia), and inability to
recognize objects (visual agnosia) or faces (prosopagnosia).
Language Output. The language output category of the geriatric mental
status examination covers the aphasias, which are disorders of language
output related to organic lesions of the brain. The best described are
nonfluent or Broca aphasia, fluent or Wernicke aphasia, and global aphasia, a
combination of fluent and nonfluent aphasias. In nonfluent or Broca aphasia,


<<<PAGE 290>>>
the patient’s understanding remains intact, but the ability to speak is
impaired. The patient cannot pronounce “Methodist Episcopalian.” Words
are generally mispronounced, and speech may be telegraphic. A simple test
for Wernicke aphasia is to point to some everyday objects—such as a pen or
a pencil, a doorknob, and a light switch—and ask the patient to name them.
The patient also may be unable to demonstrate the use of simple objects, such
as a key and a match (ideomotor apraxia).
Visuospatial Functioning. Some decline in visuospatial capability is
expected with aging. Asking a patient to copy figures or a drawing may help
assess the function. A neuropsychological assessment should be performed
when visuospatial functioning is impaired.
Thought. Disturbances in thinking include neologisms, word salad,
circumstantiality, tangentiality, loosening of associations, flight of ideas,
clang associations, and blocking. The loss of the ability to appreciate nuances
of meaning (abstract thinking) may be an early sign of dementia. Thinking is
then described as concrete or literal.
Thought content should be examined for phobias, obsessions, somatic
preoccupations, and compulsions. Ideas about suicide or homicide should be
discussed. The examiner should determine whether delusions are present and
how such delusions affect the patient’s life. Delusions may be present in
nursing home patients and may have been a reason for admission. Ideas of
reference or influence should be described. Patients who are hard of hearing
can be classified mistakenly as paranoid or suspicious.
Sensorium and Cognition. Sensorium concerns the functioning of the
special senses; cognition concerns information processing and intellect. The
survey of both areas, known as the neuropsychiatric examination, consists of
the clinician’s assessment and a comprehensive battery of psychological
tests.
CONSCIOUSNESS. A sensitive indicator of brain dysfunction is an altered state

of consciousness in which the patient does not seem to be alert, shows
fluctuations in levels of awareness, or seems to be lethargic. In severe cases,
the patient is somnolescent or stuporous.


<<<PAGE 291>>>
Impairment in orientation to time, place, and person is
associated with cognitive disorders. Cognitive impairment often is observed
in mood disorders, anxiety disorders, factitious disorders, conversion
disorder, and personality disorders, especially during periods of severe
physical or environmental stress. The examiner should test for orientation to
place by asking the patient to describe his or her present location. Orientation
to a person may be approached in two ways: Does the patient know their
name, and are nurses and doctors identified as such? Time is tested by asking
the patient the date, the year, the month, and the day of the week. The patient
also should be asked about the length of time spent in a hospital, during what
season of the year, and how the patient knows these facts. Greater
significance is given to difficulties concerning person than to difficulties of
time and place, and more significance is given to orientation to place than to
orientation to time.
ORIENTATION.

MEMORY. Memory usually is evaluated in terms of immediate, recent, and

remote memory. Immediate retention and recall are tested by giving the
patient six digits to repeat forward and backward. The examiner should
record the result of the patient’s capacity to remember. Persons with
unimpaired memory usually can recall six digits forward and five or six digits
backward. The clinician should be aware that the ability to do well on digitspan tests is impaired in very anxious patients. Remote memory can be tested
by asking for the patient’s place and date of birth, the patient’s mother’s
name before she was married, and the names and birthdays of the patient’s
children.
In cognitive disorders, recent memory deteriorates first. Recent memory
assessment can be approached in several ways. Some examiners give the
patient the names of three items early in the interview and ask for recall later.
Others prefer to tell a brief story and ask the patient to repeat it verbatim. We
can test for recent memory by asking for the patient’s place of residence,
including the street number, the method of transportation to the hospital, and
some current events. If the patient has a memory deficit, such as amnesia,
careful testing should be performed to determine whether it is retrograde
amnesia (loss of memory before an event) or anterograde amnesia (loss of
memory after the event). Retention and recall also can be tested by having the
patient retell a simple story. Patients who confabulate make up new material


<<<PAGE 292>>>
in retelling the story.
INTELLECTUAL TASKS, INFORMATION, AND INTELLIGENCE. Various intellectual

tasks can be presented to estimate the patient’s fund of general knowledge
and intellectual functioning. Counting and calculation can be tested by asking
the patient to subtract 7 from 100 and to continue subtracting 7 from the
result until the number 2 is reached. The examiner records the responses as a
baseline for future testing. The examiner can also ask the patient to count
backward from 20 to 1 and can record the time necessary to complete the
exercise.
The patient’s fund of general knowledge is related to intelligence. The
patient can be asked to name the president of the United States, to name the
three largest cities in the United States, to give the population of the United
States, and to give the distance from New York to Paris. The examiner must
take into account the patient’s educational level, socioeconomic status, and
general life experience in assessing the results of some of these tests.
READING AND WRITING. It may be necessary for the clinician to examine the

patient’s reading and writing and to determine whether the patient has a
specific speech deficit. The examiner may have the patient read a simple
story aloud or write a short sentence to test for a reading or writing disorder.
Whether the patient is right-handed or left-handed should be noted.
JUDGMENT. Judgment is the capacity to act appropriately in various situations.

Does the patient show impaired judgment? What would the patient do on
finding a stamped, sealed, addressed envelope in the street? What would the
patient do if he or she smelled smoke in a theater? Can the patient
discriminate? What is the difference between a dwarf and a boy? Why are
couples required to get a marriage license?
Neuropsychological Evaluation
A thorough neuropsychological examination includes a comprehensive
battery of tests that can be replicated by various examiners and can be
repeated over time to assess the course of a specific illness. The most widely
used test of current cognitive functioning is the Mini-Mental State
Examination (MMSE), which assesses orientation, attention, calculation,


<<<PAGE 293>>>
immediate and short-term recall, language, and the ability to follow simple
commands. The MMSE is used to detect impairments, follow the course of
an illness, and monitor the patient’s treatment responses. It is not used to
make a formal diagnosis. The maximal MMSE score is 30. Age and
educational level influence cognitive performance.
The assessment of intellectual abilities is performed with the Wechsler
Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised (WAIS-R), which gives verbal,
performance, and full-scale IQ scores. Some test results, such as those of
vocabulary tests, hold up as aging progresses; results of other tests, such as
tests of similarities and digit-symbol substitution, do not. The performance
part of the WAIS-R is a more sensitive indicator of brain damage than the
verbal part.
Visuospatial functions are sensitive to the normal aging process. The
Bender Gestalt Test is one of a large number of instruments used to test
visuospatial functions; another is the Halstead–Reitan Battery, which is the
most complex battery of tests covering the entire spectrum of information
processing and cognition. Depression, even in the absence of dementia, often
impairs psychomotor performance, especially visuospatial functioning and
timed motor performance. The Geriatric Depression Scale is a useful
screening instrument that excludes somatic complaints from its list of items.
The presence of somatic complaints on a rating scale tends to confound the
diagnosis of a depressive disorder.
Medical History. Elderly patients have more concomitant, chronic, and
multiple medical problems and take more medications than younger adults;
many of these medications can influence their mental status. The medical
history includes all significant illnesses, trauma, hospitalizations, and
treatment interventions. The psychiatrist should also be alert to underlying
medical illness. Psychiatric symptoms may first manifest infections,
metabolic and electrolyte disturbances, and myocardial infarction and stroke.
Depressed mood, delusions, and hallucinations may precede other symptoms
of Parkinson disease by many months. On the other hand, a psychiatric
disorder can also cause such somatic symptoms as weight loss, malnutrition,
and inanition of severe depression.
A careful review of medications (including over-the-counter medications,
laxatives, vitamins, tonics, and lotions) and even substances recently


<<<PAGE 294>>>
discontinued is critical. Drug effects can be long-lasting and may induce
depression (e.g., antihypertensives), cognitive impairment (e.g., sedatives),
delirium (e.g., anticholinergics), and seizures (e.g., neuroleptics). The review
of medications must include sufficient detail to identify misuse (overdose,
underuse) and relate medication use to special diets. A dietary history is also
essential; deficiencies and excesses (e.g., protein, vitamins) can influence
physiologic function and mental status.

EARLY DETECTION AND PREVENTION STRATEGIES
Many age-related illnesses develop insidiously and gradually progress over
the years. The most common cause of late-life cognitive impairment,
Alzheimer disease, is characterized neuropathologically by a gradual
accumulation of neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the brain.
Clinically, a progression of cognitive decline is seen, which begins with mild
memory loss and ends with severe cognitive and behavioral deterioration.
Because it will likely be simpler to prevent neural damage than to repair it
once it occurs, investigators are developing strategies for early detection and
prevention of age-related illnesses, such as Alzheimer disease. Considerable
progress has been made in the detection component of this strategy, using
brain imaging technologies, such as PET and fMRI, in combination with
genetic risk measures. With these approaches, subtle brain changes can now
be detected that progress and can be followed over time. Such surrogate
markers allow clinical scientists to track disease progression and to test novel
treatments designed to decelerate brain aging. Clinical trials of cholinesterase
inhibitor drugs, anticholesterol drugs, anti-inflammatory drugs, and others
(e.g., vitamin E) are in progress to determine if such treatments delay the
onset of Alzheimer disease or the progression of brain metabolic or cognitive
decline.
Novel approaches to measuring the physical evidence of Alzheimer
disease, the plaques, and tangles in the cerebral cortex, have been successful
in initial studies and will likely facilitate the testing of innovative treatments
designed to rid the brain of these pathognomonic lesions. Scientists may not
be able to cure Alzheimer disease in its advanced stages, but they may be
able to delay its onset effectively, thus helping patients live longer without
the debilitating manifestations of the disease, including cognitive decline.


<<<PAGE 295>>>
References
Achenbach TM, Dumenci L, Rescorla LA. Ratings of Relations between
DSM-IV Diagnostic Categories and Items of the CBCL/6–18, TRF, and
YSR. Burlington, VT: University of Vermont, Research Center for
Children, Youth, & Families; 2001.
Adams RL, Culbertson JL. Personality assessment: adults and children. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:951.
Aggarwal NK, Zhang XY, Stefanovics E, Chen da C, Xiu MH, Xu K,
Rosenheck RA. Rater evaluations for psychiatric instruments and cultural
differences: the positive and negative syndrome scale in China and the
United States. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2012;200(9):814–820.
Allott K, Proffitt TM, McGorry PD, Pantelis C, Wood SJ, Cumner M,
Brewer WJ. Clinical neuropsychology within adolescent and young-adult
psychiatry: conceptualizing theory and practice. Appl Neuropsychol Child.
2013;2(1):47–63.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association; 2013.
Arnone D, McKie S, Elliott R, Thomas EJ, Downey D, Juhasz G, Williams
SR, Deakin JF, Anderson IM. Increased amygdala responses to sad but not
fearful faces in major depression: relation to mood state and
pharmacological treatment. Am J Psychiatry. 2012;169(8):841–850.
Aronne LJ, Segal KR. Weight gain in the treatment of mood disorders. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2003;64(Suppl 8):22–29.
Balzer DG, Steffens DC. Essentials of Geriatric Psychiatry. 2nd ed.
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association; 2012.
Baron DA, Baron DA, Baron DH. Laboratory testing for substances of abuse.
In: Frances RJ, Miller SI, Mack AH, eds. Clinical Textbook of Addictive
Disorders. 3rd ed. New York: Guilford; 2011:63.
Beck A, Wüstenberg T, Genauck A, Wrase J, Schlagenhauf F, Smolka MN,
Mann K, Heinz A. Effect of brain structure, brain function, and brain
connectivity on relapse in alcohol-dependent patients. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2012;69(8):842.


<<<PAGE 296>>>
Bird HR, Canino GJ, Davies M, Ramirez R, Chavez L, Duarte C, Shen S.
The Brief Impairment Scale (BIS): a multidimensional scale of functional
impairment for children and adolescents. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2005;44(7):699–707.
Björklund A, Dunnett SB. Dopamine neuron systems in the brain: an update.
Trends Neurosci. 2007;30(5):194–202.
Blacker D. Psychiatric rating scales. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:1032.
Blumenthal JA, Sherwood A, Babyak MA, Watkins LL, Smith PJ, Hoffman
BM, O’Hayer CV, Mabe S, Johnson J, Doraiswamy PM, Jiang W,
Schocken DD, Hinderliter AL. Exercise and pharmacological treatment of
depressive symptoms in patients with coronary heart disease: results from
the UPBEAT (Understanding the Prognostic Benefits of Exercise and
Antidepressant Therapy) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60(12):1053.
Boosman H, Visser-Meily JM, Winken I, van Heugten CM. Clinicians’ views
on learning in brain injury rehabilitation. Brain Inj. 2013;27(6):685–688.
Borairi S, Dougherty DD. The use of neuroimaging to predict treatment
response for neurosurgical interventions for treatment-refractory major
depression and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Harvard Rev Psychiatry.
2011;19(3):155.
Bram AD. The relevance of the Rorschach and patient-examiner relationship
in treatment planning and outcome assessment. J Pers Assess.
2010;92(2):91.
Cahn B, Polich J. Meditation states and traits: EEG, ERP, and neuroimaging
studies. Psychol Consciousness Theory Res Pract. 2013;1(S):48–96.
Calamia M, Markon K, Tranel D. Scoring higher the second time around:
meta-Analyses of practice effects in neuropsychological assessment. Clin
Neuropsychologist. 2012;26(4):543–570.
Cernich AN, Chandler L, Scherdell T, Kurtz S. Assessment of co-occurring
disorders in veterans diagnosed with traumatic brain injury. J Head
Trauma Rehabil. 2012;27(4):253–260.
Chan RCK, Stone WS, Hsi X. Neurological and neuropsychological
endophenotypes in schizophrenia spectrum disorders. In: Ritsner MS, ed.
Handbook of Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders. New York: Springer;
2011:325.


<<<PAGE 297>>>
Chue P, Kovacs CS. Safety and tolerability of atypical antipsychotics in
patients with bipolar disorder: prevalence, monitoring, and management.
Bipolar Disord. 2003;5(Suppl 2):62–79.
Cleary MJ, Scott AJ. Developments in clinical neuropsychology:
implications for school psychological services. J School Health.
2011;81(1):1–7.
Cormac I, Ferriter M, Benning R, Saul C. Physical health and health risk
factors in a population of long-stay psychiatric patients. Psychol Bull.
2005;29:18–20.
Daniel M, Gurczynski J. Mental status examination. In: Segal DL, Hersen M,
eds. Diagnostic Interviewing. 4th ed. New York: Springer; 2010:61.
Dawson P, Guare R. Executive Skills in Children and Adolescents: A
Practical Guide to Assessment and Intervention. 2nd ed. New York:
Gilford; 2010.
De Bellis MD, Wooley DP, Hooper SR. Neuropsychological findings in
pediatric maltreatment: relationship of PTSD, dissociative symptoms and
abuse/neglect indices to neurocognitive outcomes. Child Maltreat.
2013;18(3):171–183.
DeShong HL, Kurtz JE. Four factors of impulsivity differentiate antisocial
and borderline personality disorders. J Pers Disord. 2013;27(2):144–156.
de Waal MWM, van der Weele GM, van der Mast RC, Assendelft WJJ,
Gussekloo J. The influence of the administration method on scores of the
15-item Geriatric Depression Scale in old age. Psychiatry Res.
2012;197(3):280–284.
Doss AJ. Evidence-based diagnosis: incorporating diagnostic instruments
into clinical practice. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2005;44(9):947–952.
Dougall N, Lambert P, Maxwell M, Dawson A, Sinnott R, McCafferty S,
Springbett A. Deaths by suicide and their relationship with general and
psychiatric hospital discharge: 30-year record linkage study. Br J
Psychiatry. 2014;204(4):267–273.
Flanagan DP, Harrison PL, eds. Contemporary Intellectual Assessment. 3rd
ed. Theories, Tests, and Issues. New York: Guilford; 2012.
Fletcher JM, Lyon RG, Fuchs LS, Barnes MA. Learning Disabilities: From
Identification to Intervention. New York: Guilford; 2007.
Fornito A, Bullmore ET. Does fMRI have a role in personalized health care


<<<PAGE 298>>>
for psychiatric patients? In: Gordon E, Koslow SH, eds. Integrative
Neuroscience and Personalized Medicine. New York: Oxford University
Press; 2011:55.
Foster NL. Validating FDG-PET as a biomarker for frontotemporal dementia.
Exp Neurol. 2003;184(Suppl 1):S2–S8.
Frazier JA, Giuliano AJ, Johnson JL, Yakuris L, Youngstrom EA, Breiger D,
Sikich L, Findling RL, McClellan J, Hamer RM, Vitiello B, Lieberman JA,
Hooper SA. Neurocognitive outcomes in the treatment of early-onset
schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders Study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2012;51:496–505.
Garden G. Physical examination in psychiatric practice. Adv Psychiatr Treat.
2005;11:142–149.
Gearing RE, Townsend L, Elkins J, El-Bassel N, Osterberg L. Strategies to
predict, measure, and improve psychosocial treatment adherence. Harv Rev
Psychiatry. 2014;22(1):31–45.
Gibbons RD, Weiss DJ, Pilkonis PA, Frank E, Moore T, Kim JB, Kupfer DJ.
Development of a computerized adaptive test for depression. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2012;69(11):1104–1112.
Guze BH, James M. Medical assessment and laboratory testing in psychiatry.
In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:995.
Guze BH, Love MJ. Medical assessment and laboratory testing in psychiatry.
In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 8th ed. Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2005:916.
Hamilton J. Clinician’s guide to evidence-based practice. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2005;44(5):494–498.
Hamilton J. The answerable question and a hierarchy of evidence. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2005;44(6):596–600.
Hentschel AG, Livesley W. Differentiating normal and disordered personality
using the General Assessment of Personality Disorder (GAPD). Pers
Mental Health. 2013;7(2):133–142.
Hodgson R, Adeyamo O. Physical examination performed by psychiatrists.
Int J Psychiatr Clin Pract. 2004;8(1):57–60.
Hoff HA, Rypdal K, Mykletun A, Cooke DJ. A prototypicality validation of


<<<PAGE 299>>>
the Comprehensive Assessment of Psychopathic Personality model
(CAPP). J Pers Disord. 2012;26(3):414–427.
Holt DJ, Coombs G, Zeidan MA, Goff DC, Milad MR. Failure of neural
responses to safety cues in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2012;69(9):893–903.
Holtz JL. Applied Clinical Neuropsychology: An Introduction. New York:
Springer; 2011.
Hooper SR, Giulano AJ, Youngstrom EA, Breiger D, Sikich L, Frazier JA,
Findling RL McClellan J, Hamer RM, Vitiello B, Lieberman JA.
Neurocognition in early-onset schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorders.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010;49(1):52–60.
Hopwood CJ, Moser JS. Personality assessment inventory internalizing and
externalizing structure in college students: invariance across sex and
ethnicity. Pers Individ Dif. 2011;50:116.
Howieson DB, Lezak MD. The neuropsychological evaluation. In: Yudosfky
SC, Hales RE, eds. Essentials of Neuropsychiatry and Behavioral
Neurosciences. 2nd ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing;
2010:29.
Israel S, Moffitt TE, Belsky DW, Hancox RJ, Poulton R, Roberts B,
Thomson WM, Caspi A. (2014). Translating personality psychology to
help personalize preventive medicine for young adult patients. J Pers Soc
Psychol. 2014;106(3):484–498.
Jeste D. Geriatric psychiatry: introduction. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz
P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3932.
Jura MB, Humphrey LA. Neuropsychological and cognitive assessment of
children. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:973.
Kavanaugh B, Holler KI, Selke G. A neuropsychological profile of childhood
maltreatment within an adolescent inpatient sample. Appl Neuropsychol
Child. 2015;4(1):9–19.
Keedwell PA, Linden DE. Integrative neuroimaging in mood disorders. Curr
Opin Psychiatry. 2013;26(1):27–32.
Kestenbaum CJ. The clinical interview of the child. In: Wiener JM, Dulcan
MK, eds. The American Psychiatric Publishing Textbook of Child and


<<<PAGE 300>>>
Adolescent Psychiatry. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Publishing, Inc.; 2004:103–111.
Kim HF, Schulz PE, Wilde EA, Yudosfky SC. Laboratory testing and
imaging studies in psychiatry. In: Hales RE, Yudosfky SC, Gabbard GO,
eds. Essentials of Psychiatry. 3rd ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Publishing; 2011:15.
King RA, Schwab-Stone ME, Thies AP, Peterson BS, Fisher PW. Psychiatric
examination of the infant, child, and adolescent. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th
ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3366.
Kolanowski AM, Fick DM, Yevchak AM, Hill NL, Mulhall PM, McDowell
JA. Pay attention! The critical importance of assessing attention in older
adults with dementia. J Gerontol Nurs. 2012;38(11):23–27.
Korja M, Ylijoki M, Japinleimu H, Pohjola P, Matomäki J, KusУmierek H,
Mahlman M, Rikalainen H, Parkkola R, Kaukola T, Lehtonen L, Hallman
M, Haataja L. Apolipoprotein E, brain injury and neurodevelopmental
outcome of children. Genes Brain Beh. 2013;28(4):435–445.
Lambert TJ, Velakoulis D, Pantelis C. Medical comorbidity in schizophrenia.
Med J Aust. 2003;178(Suppl):S67–S70.
Leentjens AFG, Dujardin K, Marsh L, Richard IH, Starkstein SE, MartinezMartin P. Anxiety rating scales in Parkinson’s disease: a validation study
of the Hamilton anxiety rating scale, the Beck anxiety inventory, and the
hospital anxiety and depression scale. Mov Disord. 2011;26(3):407–415.
Lewis DA, Gonzalez-Burgos G. Pathophysiologically based treatment
interventions in schizophrenia. Nat Med. 2006;12(9):1016–1022.
Lim HK, Aizenstein HJ. Recent findings and newer paradigms of
neuroimaging research in geriatric psychiatry. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol.
2014;27(1):3–4.
Lyndenmayer JP, Czobor P, Volavka J, Sheitman B, McEvoy JP, Cooper TB,
Chakos M, Lieberman JA. Changes in glucose and cholesterol levels in
patients with schizophrenia treated with typical or atypical antipsychotics.
Am J Psychiatry. 2003;160:290–296.
Lyneham HJ, Rapee RM. Evaluation and treatment of anxiety disorders in the
general pediatric population: a clinician’s guide. Child Adolesc Psychiatr
Clin N Am. 2005;14(4):845–861.
Marder SR, Essock SM, Miller AL, Buchanan RW, Casey DE, Davis JM,


<<<PAGE 301>>>
Kane JM, Lieberman J, Schooler NR, Covell N, Stroup S, Weissman EM,
Wirshing DA, Hall CS, Pogach L, Xavier P, Bigger JT, Friedman A,
Kleinber D, Yevich S, Davis B, Shon S. Health monitoring of patients with
schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 2004;161(9):1334–1349.
Mason GF, Krystal JH, Sanacora G. Nuclear magnetic resonance imaging
and spectroscopy: basic principles and recent findings in neuropsychiatric
disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:248.
Matson JL, Hess JA, Mahan S, Fodstad JC, Neal D. Assessment of the
relationship between diagnoses of ASD and caregiver symptom
endorsement in adults diagnosed with intellectual disability. Res Dev
Disabil. 2013;34(1):168–173.
Mattis S, Papolos D, Luck D, Cockerham M, Thode HC Jr.
Neuropsychological factors differentiating treated children with pediatric
bipolar disorder from those with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J
Clin Experi Neuropsychology. 2011;33(1):74–84.
McDowell I, Newell C. Measuring Health: A Guide to Rating Scales and
Questionnaires. New York: Oxford University Press; 2006.
McIntyre KM, Norton JR, McIntyre JS. Psychiatric interview, history, and
mental status examination. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan
& Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia,
PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:886.
Meszaros ZS, Perl A, Faraone SV. Psychiatric symptoms in systemic lupus
erythematosus: a systematic review. J Clin Psychiatry. 2012;73(7):993–
1001.
Migo EM, Williams SCR, Crum WR, Kempton MJ, Ettinger U. The role of
neuroimaging biomarkers in personalized medicine for neurodegenerative
and psychiatric disorders. In: Gordon E, Koslow SH, eds. Integrative
Neuroscience and Personalized Medicine. New York: Oxford University
Press; 2011:141.
Minden SL, Feinstein A, Kalb RC, Miller D, Mohr DC, Patten SB, Bever C,
Schiffer RB, Gronseth GS, Narayanaswami P. Evidence-based guideline:
assessment and management of psychiatric disorders in individuals with
MS Report of the Guideline Development Subcommittee of the American
Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 2014;82(2):174–181.


<<<PAGE 302>>>
Mordal J, Holm B, M⊘rland J, Bramness JG. Recent substance intake among
patients admitted to acute psychiatric wards: physician’s assessment and
on-site urine testing compared with comprehensive laboratory analyses. J
Clin Psychopharm. 2010;30(4):455–459.
Morgan JE, Ricker JH. Textbook of Clinical Neuropsychology. New York:
Psychology Press; 2008.
Morgenstern J, Naqvi NH, Debellis R, Breiter HC. The contributions of
cognitive neuroscience and neuroimaging to understanding mechanisms of
behavior change in addiction. Psychol Addict Behav. 2013;27(2):336–350.
Ng B, Atkins M. Home assessment in old age psychiatry: a practical guide.
Adv Psychiatry Treat. 2012;18:400.
Oberheim NA, Wang X, Goldman S, Nedergaard M. Astrocytic complexity
distinguishes the human brain. Trends Neurosci. 2006;29(10):547–553.
Pachet A, Astner K, Brown L. Clinical utility of the mini-mental status
examination when assessing decision-making capacity. J Geriatr
Psychiatry Neurol. 2010;23(1):3–8.
Pataki CS. Child psychiatry: introduction and overview. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:3335.
Pavletic AJ, Pao M, Pine DS, Luckenbaugh DA, Rosing DR. Screening
electrocardiograms in psychiatric research: implications for physicians and
healthy volunteers. Int J Clin Pract. 2014;68(1):117–121.
Pennington B. Diagnosing Learning Disorders: A Neuropsychological
Framework. 2nd ed. New York: Guilford; 2008.
Perez VB, Swerdlow NR, Braff DL, Näätänen R, Light GA. Using
biomarkers to inform diagnosis, guide treatments and track response to
interventions in psychotic illnesses. Biomark Med. 2014;8(1):9–14.
Philips ML, Vieta E. Identifying functional neuroimaging biomarkers of
bipolar disorder. In: Tamminga CA, Sirovatka PJ, Regier DA, van Os J,
eds. Deconstructing Psychosis: Refining the Research Agenda for DSM-V.
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association; 2010:131.
Posner K, Brown GK, Stanley B, Brent DA, Yershova KV, Oquendo MA,
Currier GW, Melvin GA, Greenhill L, Shen S, Mann JJ. The Columbia–
Suicide Severity Rating Scale: initial validity and internal consistency
findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. Am J


<<<PAGE 303>>>
Psychiatry. 2011;168(12):1266–1277.
Puig-Antich J, Orraschel H, Tabrizi MA, Chambers W. Schedule for Affective
Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children-Epidemiologic
Version. New York: New York State Psychiatric Institute and Yale School
of Medicine; 1980.
Purgato M, Barbui C. Dichotomizing rating scale scores in psychiatry: a bad
idea? Epidemiol Psychiatric Sci. 2013;22(1):17–19.
Recupero PR. The mental status examination in the age of the internet. J Am
Acad Psychiatry Law. 2010;38(1):15–26.
Robert G, Le Jeune F, Lozachmeur C, Drapier S, Dondaine T, Péron J,
Travers D, Sauleau P, Millet B, Vérin M, Drapier D. Apathy in patients
with Parkinson disease without dementia or depression: a PET study.
Neurology. 2012;79(11):1155.
Roffman JL, Silverman BC, Stern TA. Diagnostic rating scales and
laboratory testing. In: Stern TA, Fricchione GL, Cassem NH, Jellinek M,
Rosenbaum JF, eds. Massachusetts General Hospital Handbook of
General Hospital Psychiatry. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2010:61.
Rosse RB, Deutsch LH, Deutsch SI. Medical assessment and laboratory
testing in psychiatry. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 7th ed. Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2000:732.
Rush J, First MB, Blacker D, eds. Handbook of Psychiatric Measures. 2nd
ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press; 2007.
Ryan JJ, Gontkovsky ST, Kreiner DS, Tree HA. Wechsler adult intelligence
scale–fourth edition performance in relapsing–remitting multiple sclerosis.
J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2012;34(6):571–579.
Saczynski JS, Marcantonio ER, Quach L, Fong TG, Gross A, Inouye SK,
Jones RN. Cognitive trajectories after postoperative delirium. N Engl J
Med. 2012;367(1):30–39.
Samuel DB, Hopwood CJ, Krueger RF, Patrick CJ. Comparing methods for
scoring personality disorder types using maladaptive traits in DSM-5.
Assessment. 2013;20(3):353–361.
Saunders RD, Keshavan MS. Physical and neurologic examinations in
neuropsychiatry. Semin Clin Neuropsychiatry. 2002;7(1):18–29.
Scholle SH, Vuong O, Ding L, Fry S, Gallagher P, Brown JA, Hays RD,
Cleary PD. Development of and field test results for the CAHPS PCMH


<<<PAGE 304>>>
survey. Med Care. 2012;50(Suppl):S2–S10.
Schulte P. What is an adequate trial with clozapine? Therapeutic drug
monitoring and time to response in treatment refractory schizophrenia.
Clin Pharmacokinet. 2003;42(7):607–618.
Schuppert HM, Bloo J, Minderaa RB, Emmelkamp PM, Nauta MH.
Psychometric evaluation of the Borderline Personality Disorder Severity
Index-IV—adolescent version and parent version. J Pers Disord.
2012;26(4):628–640.
Simon RI. Clinical Psychiatry and the Law. American Psychiatric Pub; 2003.
Staley JK, Krystal JH. Radiotracer imaging with positron emission
tomography and single photon emission computed tomography. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:273.
Staller JA. Diagnostic profiles in outpatient child psychiatry. Am J
Orthopsychiatry. 2006;76(1):98–102.
Stark D, Thomas S, Dawson D, Talbot E, Bennett E, Starza-Smith A.
Paediatric neuropsychological assessment: an analysis of parents’
perspectives. Soc Care Neurodisabil. 2014;5:41–50.
Stowell KR, Florence P, Harman HJ, Glick RL. Psychiatric evaluation of the
agitated patient: consensus statement of the American Association for
Emergency Psychiatry project BETA psychiatric evaluation workgroup.
West J Emerg Med. 2012;13:11.
Strickland CM, Drislane LE, Lucy M, Krueger RF, Patrick CJ.
Characterizing psychopathy using DSM-5 personality traits. Assessment.
2013;20(3):327–338.
Suchy Y. Clinical Neuropsychology of Emotions. New York: Guilford; 2011.
Swanda RM, Haaland KY. Clinical neuropsychology and intellectual
assessment of adults. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:935.
Thakur ME, Blazer DG, Steffens DC, eds. Clinical Manual of Geriatric
Psychiatry. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2014.
Thapar A, Hammerton G, Collishaw S, Potter R, Rice F, Harold G, Craddock
N, Thapar A, Smith DJ. Detecting recurrent major depressive disorder
within primary care rapidly and reliably using short questionnaire


<<<PAGE 305>>>
measures. Br J Gen Pract. 2014; 64(618):e31–e37.
Tolin DF, Frost RO, Steketee G. A brief interview for assessing compulsive
hoarding: the hoarding rating scale-interview. Psychiatry Rev.
2010;178(1):147–152.
Vannest J, Szaflarski JP, Eaton KP, Henkel DM, Morita D, Glauser TA,
Byars AW, Patel K, Holland SK. Functional magnetic resonance imaging
reveals changes in language localization in children with benign childhood
epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes. J Child Neurol. 2013;28(4):435–445.
Weeks M, Wild TC, Poubidis GB, Naiker K, Cairney J, North CR, Colman I.
Childhood cognitive ability and its relationship with anxiety and
depression
in
adolescence.
J
Affect
Disord.
2013
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j/jad.2013.08.019.
Williams L, Hermens D, Thein T, Clark C, Cooper N, Clarke S, Lamb C,
Gordon E, Kohn M. Using brain-based cognitive measures to support
clinical decisions in ADHD. Pediatr Neurol. 2010;42(2):118–126.
Wilson KCM, Green B, Mottram P. Overview of rating scales in old age
psychiatry. In: Abou-Saleh MT, Katona C, Kumar A, eds. Principles and
Practice of Geriatric Psychiatry. 3rd ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley; 2011.
Winters NC, Collett BR, Myers KM. Ten-year review of rating scales, VII:
scales assessing functional impairment. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2005;44(4):309–338.
Youngstrom EA, Duax J. Evidence-based assessment of pediatric bipolar
disorder. Part 1: base rate and family history. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2005;44(7):712–717.


<<<PAGE 306>>>
2
Neurodevelopmental Disorders and
Other Childhood Disorders
This section contains disorders typically found in children. Some disorders
are disorders of development and invariably present during childhood or
adolescence. Others are more common disorders, such as depression or
anxiety, that may have unique presentations or treatment issues in children.

2.1 Intellectual Disability
Intellectual disability (ID), formerly known as mental retardation, can be
caused by a range of environmental and genetic factors that lead to a
combination of cognitive and social impairments. The American Association
on Intellectual and Developmental Disability (AAIDD) defines intellectual
disability as a disability characterized by significant limitations in both
intellectual functioning (reasoning, learning, and problem-solving) and in
adaptive behavior (conceptual, social, and practical skills) that emerges
before the age of 18 years.
The widespread acceptance of this definition has led to the international
consensus that an assessment of both social adaptation and intelligence
quotient (IQ) is necessary to determine the level of intellectual disability.
Measures of adaptive function assess competency in social functioning,
understanding of societal norms, and performance of everyday tasks, whereas
measures of intellectual function focus on cognitive abilities. Although
individuals with a given intellectual level do not all have identical levels of
adaptive function, epidemiologic data suggest that a person’s intellectual


<<<PAGE 307>>>
level and level of adaptive function largely determine the prevalence of
intellectual disability and typically correspond closely with cognitive ability.
In the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
Edition (DSM-5), various levels of severity of intellectual disability are
determined based on adaptive functioning, not on IQ scores. DSM-5 has
adopted this change in emphasis from prior diagnostic manuals because
adaptive functioning determines the level of support that is required.
Furthermore, IQ scores are less valid in the lower portions of the IQ range.
Deciding the severity level of intellectual disability, according to DSM-5,
includes an assessment of functioning in a conceptual domain (e.g., academic
skills), a social domain (e.g., relationships), and a practical domain (e.g.,
personal hygiene).
As it is older, the International Classification of Diseases, 10th Edition
(ICD-10) continues to rely on IQ as the main determiner of severity; this is
being revised for the next edition.
Societal approaches to children with intellectual disabilities have shifted
significantly over time. Historically, in the mid-1800s, many children with
intellectual disabilities were placed in residential, educational facilities based
on the belief that with sufficient intensive training, these children would be
able to return to their families and function in society at a higher level.
However, many residential programs increased in size, and eventually, the
focus began to shift from intensive education to custodial care. Residential
settings for children with an intellectual disability received their maximal use
in the mid-1900s until public awareness of the crowded, unsanitary, and, in
some cases, abusive conditions sparked the movement toward
“deinstitutionalization.” A vital force in the deinstitutionalization of children
with intellectual disability was the philosophy of “normalization” in living
situations, and “inclusion” in educational settings. Since the late 1960s,
placing children with intellectual disabilities into institutions is rare, and the
concepts of normalization and inclusion remain prominent among advocacy
groups and parents.
The passage of Public Law 94–142 (the Education for all Handicapped
Children Act) in 1975 mandates that the public school system provides
appropriate educational services to all children with disabilities. The
Individuals with Disabilities Act in 1990 extended and modified the above
legislation. Currently, the provision of public education for all children,


<<<PAGE 308>>>
including those with disabilities, “within the least restrictive environment” is
mandated by law.
In addition to the educational system, advocacy groups, including the
Council for Exceptional Children (CEC) and the Arc of the United States
(The Arc), are well-known parental lobbying organizations for children with
intellectual disability and were instrumental in advocating for Public Law 94–
142. The American Association on Intellectual and Developmental
Disabilities (AAIDD) is the most prominent advocacy organization in this
field. It has been very influential in educating the public about and supporting
research and legislation relating to intellectual disability.
The AAIDD promotes a view of intellectual disability as a functional
interaction between an individual and the environment, rather than a static
designation of a person’s limitations. Within this conceptual framework, a
child or adolescent with an intellectual disability is determined to need
intermittent, limited, extensive, or pervasive “environmental support”
concerning a specific set of adaptive function domains. These include
communication, self-care, home living, social or interpersonal skills, use of
community resources, self-direction, functional academic skills, work,
leisure, health, and safety.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(2006) has created a forum to promote the full social inclusion of people with
intellectual disabilities. Through its recognition and focus on social barriers,
this international forum aims to provide protections for individuals with
intellectual disabilities and to seek more inclusion of those with intellectual
disabilities in social, civic, and educational activities.
Table 2-1
Intellectual Disability
DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic name Intellectual Disability (Intellectual Mental
Developmental Disorder)
Retardation
Duration

The symptoms arise during
development

Occurs during
the
developmental


<<<PAGE 309>>>
period
Symptoms

Deficits in:
• Reasoning
• Abstraction
• Judgment
• Learning
• Adaptive functioning

Incomplete
mental
development
Affects skills
related to
intelligence:
• Cognitive
• Language
• Motor
• Social
abilities

Psychosocial
Symptoms delay developmental
consequences
milestones, achieving
of symptoms
independence and social
functioning
Severity
specifiers

Profound
Severe
Moderate
Mild

Estimated by IQ:
Mild: 50–69
Moderate: 35–
49
Severe: 20–34
Profound: <20

NOMENCLATURE
The accurate definition of intellectual disability has been a challenge for
clinicians over the centuries. All current classification systems underscore
that intellectual disability is more than a cognitive deficit. That is, it also
includes impaired social adaptive function. According to DSM-5, we should
only make a diagnosis of intellectual disability when there are deficits in
intellectual functioning and deficits in adaptive functioning (Table 2-1). Once
intellectual disability is recognized, we determine the level of severity by the
level of adaptive functional impairment.


<<<PAGE 310>>>
Table 2-2
Developmental Characteristics of Intellectual Disability
Level of
Preschool Age
Intellectual (0–5 yr)
Disability Maturation and
Development

School Age (6–
20 yr) Training
and Education

Adult (21 yr and
Above) Social
and Vocational
Adequacy

Profound

Gross disability;
minimal
capacity for
functioning in
sensorimotor
areas; needs
nursing care;
constant aid
and
supervision
required

Some motor
development
present; may
respond to
minimal or
limited training
in self-help

Some motor and
speech
development;
may achieve
very limited
self-care; needs
nursing care

Severe

Poor motor
Can talk or learn May contribute
development;
to
partially to selfspeech
communicate;
maintenance
minimal;
can be trained
under complete
generally
in elemental
supervision;
unable to profit
health habits;
can develop
from training in
profits from
self-protection
self-help; little
systematic
skills to a
or no
habit training;
minimal useful
communication
unable to profit
level in
skills
from vocational
controlled
training
environment

Moderate

Can talk or learn Can profit from
to
training in
communicate;
social and
poor social
occupational
awareness;
skills; unlikely

May achieve selfmaintenance in
unskilled or
semiskilled
work under


<<<PAGE 311>>>
fair motor
development;
profits from
training in selfhelp; can be
managed with
moderate
supervision
Mild

to progress
beyond
second-grade
level in
academic
subjects; may
learn to travel
alone in familiar
places

sheltered
conditions;
needs
supervision and
guidance when
under mild
social or
economic
stress

Can develop
Can learn
Can usually
social and
academic skills
achieve social
communication
up to
and vocational
skills; minimal
approximately
skills adequate
retardation in
sixth-grade
for minimal selfsensorimotor
level by late
support, but
areas; often
teens; can be
may need
not
guided toward
guidance and
distinguished
social
assistance
from normal
conformity
when under
until later age
unusual social
or economic
stress

Adapted from Mental Retarded Activities of the US Department of Health, Education and
Welfare. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office; 1989:2, with permission.

CLASSIFICATION
DSM-5 criteria for intellectual disability include significantly subaverage
general intellectual functioning associated with concurrent impairment in
adaptive behavior manifested before the age of 18. The diagnosis is made
independent of coexisting physical or mental disorders. Table 2-2 presents an
overview of developmental levels in communication, academic functioning,
and vocational skills expected of persons with various degrees of intellectual
disability.
If we choose to use a standardized test of intelligence—which is still a
common practice—the term significantly subaverage is defined as an IQ of


<<<PAGE 312>>>
approximately 70 or below or two standard deviations below the mean for the
particular test. We can measure adaptive functioning by using a standardized
scale, such as the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale. This scale scores
communications, daily living skills, socialization, and motor skills (up to 4
years, 11 months) and generates an adaptive behavior composite that
correlates with the expected skills at a given age.
Approximately 85 percent of individuals who have an intellectual
disability fall within the DSM-5 mild intellectual disability category. This
category requires an IQ between 50 and 70 and an adaptive function severity
in the mild range. Adaptive function includes skills such as communication,
self-care, social skills, work, leisure, and understanding of safety. Genetic,
environmental, and psychosocial factors all influence intellectual disability. A
host of subtle environmental and developmental factors, including subclinical
lead intoxication and prenatal exposure to drugs, alcohol, and other toxins,
can contribute to intellectual disability. Specific genetic syndromes
associated with intellectual disability such as fragile X syndrome, Down
syndrome, and Prader–Willi syndrome have characteristic patterns of social,
linguistic, and cognitive development and typical behavioral manifestations.

DEGREES OF SEVERITY OF INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
DSM-5 classifies the severity levels of intellectual disability as mild,
moderate, severe, and profound. “Borderline intellectual functioning,” a term
previously used to describe individuals with an IQ in the range of 70 to 80, is
no longer described as a diagnosis in DSM-5, and is instead listed as a
condition that may be the focus of clinical attention; although DSM-5 does
not offer any criteria.
Mild intellectual disability represents approximately 85 percent of persons
with intellectual disabilities. Children with mild intellectual disabilities often
are not identified until the first or second grade, when academic demands
increase. By late adolescence, they often acquire academic skills at
approximately a sixth-grade level. Specific causes for intellectual disability
are often unidentified in this group. Many adults with mild intellectual
disabilities can live independently with appropriate support and raise their
own families. IQ for this level of adaptive function may typically range from
50 to 70.


<<<PAGE 313>>>
Moderate intellectual disability represents about 10 percent of persons with
intellectual disabilities. Most children with a moderate intellectual disability
acquire language and can communicate adequately during early childhood.
They are challenged academically and often are not able to achieve above a
second- to third-grade level. During adolescence, socialization difficulties
often set these persons apart, and a great deal of social and vocational support
is beneficial. As adults, individuals with moderate intellectual disability may
be able to perform semiskilled work under appropriate supervision. IQ for
this level of adaptive function may typically range from 35 to 50.
Severe intellectual disability represents about 4 percent of individuals with
intellectual disabilities. They may be able to develop communication skills in
childhood and often can learn to count as well as recognize words that are
critical to functioning. In this group, the cause for the intellectual disability is
more likely to be identified than in milder forms of intellectual disability. In
adulthood, persons with severe intellectual disability may adapt well to
supervised living situations, such as group homes, and may be able to
perform work-related tasks under supervision. IQ in individuals with this
level of adaptive function may typically range from 20 to 35.
Profound intellectual disability constitutes approximately 1 to 2 percent of
individuals with intellectual disabilities. Most individuals with profound
intellectual disabilities have identifiable causes for their condition. Children
with profound intellectual disabilities may be taught some self-care skills and
learn to communicate their needs, given the appropriate training. IQ in
individuals with this level of adaptive function may typically be less than 20.
The DSM-5 also includes a disorder called “Unspecified Intellectual
Disability” (Intellectual Developmental Disorder), reserved for individuals
over the age of 5 years who are difficult to evaluate but likely have an
intellectual disability. Individuals with this diagnosis may have sensory or
physical impairments such as blindness or deafness, or concurrent mental
disorders, making it challenging to administer standard assessment tools.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Mild intellectual disability may not be recognized or diagnosed in a child
until school challenges the child’s social and communication skills. Cognitive
deficits include reduced ability to abstract and egocentric thinking, both of


<<<PAGE 314>>>
which become more readily evident as a child reaches middle childhood.
Children with milder intellectual disabilities may function academically at the
high elementary level and may acquire vocational skills sufficient to support
themselves in some cases; however, social assimilation may be problematic.
Communication deficits, poor self-esteem, and dependence may further
contribute to a relative lack of social spontaneity.
Moderate levels of intellectual disability are significantly more likely to be
observed at a younger age since communication skills develop more slowly,
and social isolation may ensue in the elementary school years. Academic
achievement is usually limited to the middle-elementary level. Children with
moderate intellectual deficits benefit from individual attention focused on the
development of self-help skills. However, these children are aware of their
deficits and often feel alienated from their peers and frustrated by their
limitations. They continue to require a relatively high level of supervision but
can become competent at occupational tasks in supportive settings.
Severe intellectual disability is typically evident in the preschool years;
affected children have minimal speech and impaired motor development.
Some language development may occur in the school-age years. By
adolescence, if the language has not improved significantly, nonverbal forms
of communication may have evolved. Behavioral approaches are useful
means to promote some self-care, although those with severe intellectual
disabilities generally need extensive supervision.
Children with profound intellectual disabilities require constant
supervision and are severely limited in both communication and motor skills.
By adulthood, some speech development may be present, and simple selfhelp skills may be acquired. Clinical features frequently observed in
populations with intellectual disability, either in isolation or as part of a
mental disorder, include hyperactivity, low frustration tolerance, aggression,
affective instability, repetitive and stereotypic motor behaviors, and selfinjurious behaviors. Self-injurious behaviors occur more frequently and with
higher intensity in more severe intellectual disability.
Dylan was a full-term infant, the second child born to his 42-year-old
mother, a medical technician, and a 48-year-old father, a high school
basketball coach. The pregnancy was unremarkable, and Dylan’s sister,


<<<PAGE 315>>>
who was 2 years older, was healthy and developing typically. The family
lived in a rural town in the Midwest.
Dylan was an extremely fussy, active newborn with extended periods
of crying that the pediatrician labeled classic colic. As a newborn, Dylan
seemed to have large ears and strabismus, which the pediatrician said
would probably resolve spontaneously. At 2 months of age, at a regular
pediatric visit, a systolic heart murmur was heard, and
electrocardiography (ECG) revealed a mitral valve prolapse. Because
Dylan was not cyanotic and had no other cardiac symptoms, his
pediatrician monitored him without specific treatment. Although Dylan
became less fussy over time, he remained very active, did not sleep
through the night, and was a picky eater, refusing solid foods.
Milestones were slightly delayed, with Dylan sitting unassisted at 10
months and walking at 18 months. He had delayed language, and,
although his first words appeared at 20 months, Dylan had always made
his wants and needs known. Dylan’s parents were concerned about his
activity level and his developmental delays compared with his sister;
however, the pediatrician reassured them that boys often develop more
slowly than girls in the first 2 years.
When Dylan was 3 years of age, his preschool teacher noted that he
was unable to pay attention, and he was hyperactive compared to his
classmates, prompting his parents to obtain a developmental evaluation.
Results showed modest delays in cognitive, linguistic, and motor
functioning, with a developmental quotient (DQ) of 74. Dylan was
inattentive, shy, and anxious, and he had poor eye contact. Enrolled in a
special kindergarten, Dylan remained in a combination of special
education and mainstreamed classes throughout his academic life.
At 7 years of age, the school psychologist evaluated Dylan, and results
indicated that he met the criteria for a “learning disability” profile. Dylan
had an overall IQ of 66, with close to normal functioning in short-term
memory and pronounced deficits in long-term memory, expressive
language, and visual–spatial functioning. Dylan struggled with writing
tasks and arithmetic but loved science. Due to his significant problems
with inattention and hyperactivity, Dylan was placed on Concerta, which
was beneficial, and titrated up to 54 mg/day. He displayed transient,
intense interests in unusual items, such as vacuum cleaners. When Dylan


<<<PAGE 316>>>
reached the older elementary grades, he began to have more difficulty
socially, and some peers bullied him about being in special education and
teased for his long head and big ears.
As he entered adolescence, Dylan became increasingly anxious, so
much so that he occasionally rubbed his hands or rocked, and he “fretted”
about day-to-day issues and what would happen next. His long-term
sensitivities to loud sounds seemed to wane slightly, but he developed
fears of storm clouds and dogs and refused to ride on elevators. Dylan
became tearful and upset after his older sister left for a party, and worried
that she might have a car accident. Dylan was very shy and would
occasionally pace with worry and complain of stomachaches, but he
attended school and had a small group of acquaintances in the Special
Olympics bowling league. He enjoyed activities that did not involve
much talking or sustained attention.
When Dylan was 17 years of age, his parents happened to watch a
television documentary on genetic causes of intellectual disability. They
were overwhelmed by the similarities between Dylan and some of the
people described in the program. They later described the experience as a
“jolt.” They had always accepted Dylan, quirks and all, and had stopped
pushing their doctors for reasons “why” when Dylan was a preschooler.
Nevertheless, they immediately called the informational number offered
in the show, and within 2 months, genetic tests confirmed a diagnosis of
fragile X syndrome.
Although Dylan’s day-to-day life did not change dramatically after the
diagnosis, his parents reported a big difference in their approach to his
shyness, restricted interests, and inattention. Dylan later received a
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) for anxiety, which
decreased his social anxiety and facilitated activities with a few peers.
Dylan’s parents reported a mixture of feelings at having such a late
diagnosis—disappointment in their doctors, relief in finally knowing, and
twinges of guilt. They were energized by Dylan’s positive responses to
treatments for his attentional and anxiety symptoms and were pleased
with Dylan’s recent increased interest in sharing activities with
classmates and peers.


<<<PAGE 317>>>
A negative self-image and poor self-esteem are standard features of mildly
and moderately intellectually disabled persons who are aware of their social
and academic differences from others. Given their experience of repeated
failure and disappointment in being unable to meet their parents’ and
society’s expectations, they may also fall progressively behind younger
siblings. Communication difficulties further increase their vulnerability to
feelings of ineptness and frustration. Inappropriate behaviors, such as
withdrawal, are common. The perpetual sense of isolation and inadequacy is
related to feelings of anxiety, anger, dysphoria, and depression.

DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of intellectual disability occurs after obtaining the history,
using information from a standardized intellectual assessment, and a
standardized measure of adaptive function indicating that a child is
significantly below the expected level in both areas. The severity of the
intellectual disability is determined based on the level of adaptive function. A
history and psychiatric interview are useful in obtaining a longitudinal picture
of the child’s development and functioning. Examination of physical signs,
neurologic abnormalities, and in some cases, laboratory tests can help
ascertain the cause and prognosis.
History
When we take the history, which may elucidate pathways to intellectual
disability, we should pay particular attention to the mother’s pregnancy,
labor, and delivery; the presence of a family history of intellectual disability;
consanguinity of the parents; and known familial hereditary disorders.
Chapter 1 details some approaches to interviewing and examining children
with intellectual disabilities.
Laboratory Examination
Laboratory tests that may elucidate the causes of intellectual disability
include chromosomal analysis, urine and blood testing for metabolic
disorders, and neuroimaging. Chromosomal abnormalities are the most
common known cause of intellectual disability.


<<<PAGE 318>>>
Chromosome Studies. When multiple physical anomalies, developmental
delays, and intellectual disability present together, we should order
chromosome analysis. Current techniques can identify chromosomal regions
with specific fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) markers, enabling the
identification of microscopic deletions in up to 7 percent of persons with
moderate to severe intellectual disability. A history of growth retardation, the
presence of microcephaly, a family history of intellectual disability, short
stature, hypertelorism, and other facial abnormalities increase the risk of
finding subtelomeric defects.
Amniocentesis, in which clinicians remove a small amount of amniotic
fluid from the amniotic cavity transabdominally at about 15 weeks of
gestation, has been useful for diagnosing prenatal chromosomal
abnormalities. Its use is considered when an increased fetal risk exists, such
as with increased maternal age. Amniotic fluid cells, mostly fetal in origin,
are cultured for cytogenetic and biochemical studies.
Chorionic villi sampling (CVS) is a screening technique to determine fetal
chromosomal abnormalities. It is done at 8 to 10 weeks of gestation, 6 weeks
earlier than amniocentesis. The results are available in a short time (hours or
days) and, if the result is abnormal, it is possible to decide to terminate the
pregnancy within the first trimester. The procedure has a miscarriage risk
between 2 and 5 percent; the risk in amniocentesis is lower (1 in 200). A
noninvasive blood test called MaterniT21 is a proprietary prenatal test that
detects abnormalities of chromosomes 21, 18, 13, X, and Y. It is highly
specific for Down syndrome. There is a slight risk of miscarriage.
Urine and Blood Analysis. Lesch–Nyhan syndrome, galactosemia, PKU,
Hurler syndrome (Fig. 2-1), and Hunter syndrome (Fig. 2-2) are examples of
disorders characterized by an intellectual disability that we can identify
through assays of the appropriate enzyme or organic or amino acids.
Enzymatic abnormalities in chromosomal disorders, such as Down syndrome,
promise to become useful diagnostic tools.
Electroencephalography. Whenever considering a seizure disorder, we
should request electroencephalography (EEG). “Nonspecific” EEG changes,
characterized by slow frequencies with bursts of spikes and sharp or blunt
wave complexes, are found with higher frequency among populations with


<<<PAGE 319>>>
intellectual disability than in the general population; however, these findings
do not elucidate specific diagnoses.

FIGURE 2-1
A 6-year-old girl with Hurler syndrome. Her care has involved a class for seriously
multihandicapped children, attention to cardiac problems, and special counseling
for patients. (Courtesy of L.S. Syzmanski, M.D. and A.C. Crocker, M.D.)


<<<PAGE 320>>>
FIGURE 2-2
Two brothers, age 6 and 8 years, with Hunter syndrome, shown with their
developmentally normal older sister. They have had siganificant developmental
delay, trouble with recurrent respiratory infection, and behavioral abnormalities.
(Courtesy of L.S. Syzmanski, M.D. and A.C. Crocker, M.D.)

Neuroimaging. Neuroimaging studies with populations of intellectually
disabled patients using either computerized tomography (CT) or magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) have found high rates of abnormalities in those
patients with microcephaly, significant delay, cerebral palsy, and profound
disability. Among patients with intellectual disability, seizures, microcephaly
or macrocephaly, loss of previously acquired skills, or neurologic signs such
as dystonia, spasticity, or altered reflexes all are indications for
neuroimaging.
Although clinically not diagnostic, neuroimaging studies are currently also
utilized to gather data that may eventually uncover biologic mechanisms
contributing to intellectual disability. Structural MRI, functional MRI
(fMRI), and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) are useful in current research.
For example, current data suggest that individuals with fragile X syndrome
and concurrent attentional deficits are also more likely to show aberrant


<<<PAGE 321>>>
frontal–striatal pathways on MRI than those patients without attentional
problems. MRI is also useful to elucidate myelination patterns. MRI studies
can also provide a baseline for comparison of a later, potentially degenerative
process in the brain.
Hearing and Speech Evaluations. We should evaluate a patient’s
hearing and speech routinely. Speech development may be the most reliable
criterion in investigating intellectual disability. Various hearing impairments
often occur in persons who are intellectually disabled, but in some instances,
hearing impairments can simulate intellectual disability. The commonly used
methods of hearing and speech evaluation, however, require the patient’s
cooperation and, thus, are often unreliable in severely disabled persons.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
By definition, an intellectual disability must begin before the age of 18. In
some cases, severe child maltreatment in the form of neglect or abuse may
contribute to delays in development, which can appear to be an intellectual
disability. However, these damages are partially reversible when a child
grows up in a corrective, enriched, and stimulating environment. Sensory
disabilities, especially deafness and blindness, can be mistaken for
intellectual disability when a lack of awareness of the sensory deficit leads to
inappropriate testing. Expressive and receptive speech disorders may give the
impression of intellectual disability in a child of average intelligence, and
cerebral palsy may be mistaken for intellectual disability. Chronic,
debilitating medical diseases may depress and delay a child’s functioning and
achievement despite average intelligence. Seizure disorders, especially
uncontrolled, may contribute to persisting intellectual disability. Specific
syndromes leading to isolated handicaps such as failure to read (alexia),
failure to write (agraphia), or failure to communicate (aphasia), may occur in
a child of average and even superior intelligence. Children with learning
disorders (which can coexist with intellectual disability) experience a delay or
failure of development in a specific area, such as reading or mathematics, but
they usually develop in other areas. In contrast, children with intellectual
disabilities show delays in most areas of development.
Intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) often coexist;


<<<PAGE 322>>>
70 to 75 percent of those with ASD have an IQ below 70. Also,
epidemiologic data indicate that ASD occurs in approximately 19.8 percent
of persons with intellectual disabilities. Children with ASD have relatively
more severe impairment in social relatedness and language than other
children with the same level of intellectual disability.
A child younger than the age of 18 years with significant adaptive
functional impairment, with an IQ less than 70, who also meets diagnostic
criteria for dementia, will receive both a diagnosis of dementia and
intellectual disability. However, a child whose IQ drops below 70 after the
age of 18 years with newly acquired cognitive impairment will receive only
the diagnosis of dementia.

COMORBIDITY
Many psychiatric disorders are common with intellectual disabilities,
including depressive disorders, attention-deficit disorders, anxiety and
neurologic disorders.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Estimates of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and ADHD-like
symptoms among children with subaverage intelligence, genetic disorders,
and developmental delay are estimated to be significantly higher than rates in
the community.
Neurologic Disorders
Seizure disorders occur more frequently in individuals with intellectual
disabilities than in the general population, and prevalence rates for seizures
increase proportionally to the severity level of intellectual disability. A
review of psychiatric disorders in children and adolescents with intellectual
disability and epilepsy found that approximately one-third had comorbid
autism spectrum disorder. The combination of intellectual disability,
epilepsy, and autism spectrum disorder may occur in 0.07 percent of the
general population.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS


<<<PAGE 323>>>
Although the underlying intellectual impairment does not improve, in most
cases of intellectual disability, the level of adaptation increases with age and
can be influenced positively by an enriched and supportive environment. In
general, persons with mild and moderate intellectual disabilities have the
most flexibility in adapting to various environmental conditions. Comorbid
psychiatric disorders negatively impact overall prognosis. When psychiatric
disorders co-occur with intellectual disabilities, standard treatments for
comorbid mental disorders are often beneficial; however, less robust
responses and increased vulnerability to side effects of psychopharmacologic
agents are common.

TREATMENT
Interventions for children and adolescents with intellectual disabilities
incorporate an assessment of social, educational, psychiatric, and
environmental needs. Intellectual disability is associated with a variety of
comorbid psychiatric disorders that often require specific treatment, in
addition to psychosocial support. Of course, when preventive measures are
available, the optimal approach includes primary, secondary, and tertiary
interventions.
Prevention
Primary Prevention. Primary prevention comprises actions taken to
eliminate or reduce the conditions that lead to the development of intellectual
disability, as well as associated disorders. For example, screening babies for
PKU, and administrating a low phenylalanine diet when PKU is present,
significantly alters the emergence of intellectual disability in those affected
children. Additional primary prevention steps include education of the
general public about strategies to prevent intellectual disability, such as
abstinence from alcohol during pregnancy, continuing efforts of health
professionals to ensure and upgrade public health policies, and legislation to
provide optimal maternal and child health care. Family and genetic
counseling help reduce the incidence of intellectual disability in a family with
a history of a genetic disorder.


<<<PAGE 324>>>
Secondary and Tertiary Prevention. Prompt attention to medical and
psychiatric complications of intellectual disability can diminish their course
(secondary prevention) and minimize the sequelae or consequent disabilities
(tertiary prevention). Hereditary metabolic and endocrine disorders, such as
PKU and hypothyroidism, can be treated effectively in an early stage by
dietary control or hormone replacement therapy.
Psychosocial Interventions
Educational Interventions. Educational settings for children with
intellectual disability should include a comprehensive program that addresses
academics and training in adaptive skills, social skills, and vocational skills.
Particular attention should focus on communication and efforts to improve
the quality of life.
Behavioral and Cognitive-Behavioral Interventions. The difficulties
in adaptation among the intellectual disability populations are widespread and
so varied that several interventions alone or in combination may be
beneficial. Behavior therapy has been used for many years to shape and
enhance social behaviors and to control and minimize aggressive and
destructive behaviors. Positive reinforcement for desired behaviors and
benign punishment (e.g., loss of privileges) for objectionable behaviors has
been helpful. Cognitive therapy, such as dispelling false beliefs and
relaxation exercises with self-instruction, has also been recommended for
intellectually disabled persons who can follow the instructions.
Psychodynamic therapy has been used with patients and their families to
decrease conflicts about expectations that result in persistent anxiety, rage,
and depression. Psychiatric treatment modalities require modifications that
take into consideration the patient’s level of intelligence.
Family Education. One of the most critical areas that we can address is
educating the family of a child or adolescent with intellectual disability about
ways to enhance competence and self-esteem while maintaining realistic
expectations for the patient. The family often finds it challenging to balance
the fostering of independence and the providing of a nurturing and supportive
environment for an intellectually disabled child, who is likely to experience


<<<PAGE 325>>>
some rejection and failure outside the family context. The parents may
benefit from continuous counseling or family therapy and should be allowed
opportunities to express their feelings of guilt, despair, anguish, recurring
denial, and anger about their child’s disorder and future. We should give the
parents all the necessary and current medical information regarding causes,
treatment, and other pertinent areas (e.g., specialized training and the
correction of sensory defects).
Social Intervention. One of the most prevalent problems among persons
with an intellectual disability is a sense of social isolation and social skills
deficits. Thus, improving the quantity and quality of social competence is a
critical part of their care. Special Olympics International is the most extensive
recreational sports program geared for this population. In addition to
providing a forum to develop physical fitness, Special Olympics also
enhances social interactions, friendships, and (hopefully) general self-esteem.
Psychopharmacologic Interventions
Pharmacologic approaches to the treatment of behavioral and psychological
symptoms in children with an intellectual disability follow the paradigms of
the evidence-based literature on treatment for all children with psychiatric
disorders. However, given the paucity of randomized trials in the childhood
intellectual disability population, an empirical approach must also be taken.
Treating Comorbid Disorders and Symptoms
Antipsychotic
medicine may be useful for reducing challenging behaviors. Among the
antipsychotics, both aripiprazole and risperidone had reasonable effect sizes
in multiple studies. However, we should view these findings cautiously as
many of the studies had significant methodologic limitations. Overall, the
consensus seems to be that antipsychotics are helpful in the short term.
Among them, aripiprazole and risperidone have the majority of studies and
show effect sizes in the moderate to large range. There is little evidence on
the long-term use of these medications. Given the significant side effects
(weight gain, sedation, cardiovascular risks, extrapyramidal side effects, and
increased prolactin levels, which are of particular concern in children), we
AGGRESSION, IRRITABILITY, AND SELF-INJURIOUS BEHAVIOR.


<<<PAGE 326>>>
should be very cautious when choosing to use these medications beyond an
acute crisis.
Other medications, such as anticonvulsants and antioxidants, may be
helpful; however, the data are not conclusive. GABA analogs, such as
piracetam, may have promise, but the supportive data are limited.
ATTENTION-DEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER.

The existing data for the
treatment of ADHD and ADHD-like symptoms in youth with sub-average
intelligence and developmental disorders suggest that agents, particularly
stimulants used to treat ADHD in typically developing children, provide
some degree of benefit to children with intellectual disability and ADHD.
However, these children experience more side effects than ADHD children
without an intellectual disability. Thus, recommendations regarding the
treatment of ADHD in children and adolescents with comorbid intellectual
disability include close monitoring for side effects. Studies of
methylphenidate treatment in those mildly intellectually disabled with ADHD
show significant improvement in the ability to maintain attention and to stay
focused on tasks. Methylphenidate treatment studies have not shown
evidence of long-term improvement in social skills or learning. Risperidone
may be beneficial in reducing symptoms of ADHD in this population;
however, as with all antipsychotics, it has substantial side effects. Thus
stimulant medications are the preferred choice.
In addition to stimulants and antipsychotics, clonidine has been used
clinically in this population, especially to ameliorate hyperactivity and
impulsivity. Although there are scant data, clinical ratings by parents and
clinicians suggest its efficacy. Atomoxetine may also help for this population.
DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS. The identification of depressive disorders among

individuals with intellectual disabilities requires careful evaluation since they
are easy to miss when behavioral problems are prominent. There have been
anecdotal reports of disinhibition in response to SSRIs in intellectually
disabled individuals with ASD. Given the relative safety of SSRI
antidepressants, it is reasonable to try them when a child with an intellectual
disability is depressed.
STEREOTYPICAL MOTOR MOVEMENTS. Antipsychotic medications are used in


<<<PAGE 327>>>
the treatment of repetitive self-stimulatory behaviors in children with
intellectual disability when these behaviors are either harmful to the child or
disruptive. Anecdotal reports indicate that these agents may diminish selfstimulatory behaviors; however, there is no improvement seen in adaptive
behavior. Obsessive-compulsive symptoms often overlap with the repetitive
stereotypical behaviors seen in children and adolescents with intellectual
disability, particularly in those with comorbid ASD. SSRIs such as
fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, and sertraline have efficacy for treating
obsessive-compulsive symptoms in children and adolescents and may have
some efficacy for stereotyped motor movements.
Antipsychotic medications, particularly
risperidone, are typically used for the treatment of explosive rage. As with the
treatment of aggression, there is a need for more data investigating this use.
β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists (β-blockers), such as propranolol, have
been anecdotally reported to result in fewer explosive rages in some children
with intellectual disability and ASD.
EXPLOSIVE

RAGE

BEHAVIOR.

Services and Support for Children with Intellectual Disability
Early Intervention. Early intervention programs serve individuals for the
first 3 years of life. Such services are generally provided by the state and
begin with a specialist visiting the home for several hours per week. Since the
passage of Public Law 99–457, the Education of the Handicapped
Amendments of 1986, the emphasis is on early intervention services for the
entire family. Agencies are required to develop an Individualized Family
Service Plan (IFSP) for each family, which identifies specific interventions to
best help the family and child.
School. From ages 3 to 21 years, school is responsible by law to provide
appropriate educational services to children and adolescents with intellectual
disability in the United States. Two laws codified these mandates, Public Law
94–142, the Education for all Handicapped Children Act of 1975, and the
Individuals with Disabilities Act (IDEA) of 1990. Through these laws, public
schools must develop and provide an individualized educational program for
each student with intellectual disability, determined at a meeting designated


<<<PAGE 328>>>
as the Individualized Education Plan (IEP) with school personnel and the
family. Schools should educate the children in the “least restrictive
environment” that will allow the child to learn.
Supports. A wide variety of organized groups and services are available for
children with intellectual disability and their families. These include shortterm respite care, which allows families a break and is generally set up by
state agencies. Other programs include the Special Olympics, which allows
children with intellectual disabilities to participate in team sports and sports
competitions. Many organizations also exist for families who wish to connect
with others who have children with intellectual disabilities.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
The majority of population-based prevalence estimates for intellectual
disability in developing countries range from 10 to 15 per 1,000 children. The
prevalence of intellectual disability at any one time is estimated to range from
1 to 3 percent of the population in Western societies. The incidence of
intellectual disability is difficult to calculate because mild disabilities may be
unrecognized until middle childhood. In some cases, even when the
intellectual function is limited, adaptive social skills may not be challenged
until late childhood or early adolescence. The highest incidence of
intellectual disability is reported in school-age children, with a peak at ages
10 to 14 years. Intellectual disability is about 1.5 times more common among
males than females.
Prevalence
Epidemiologic surveys indicate that up to two-thirds of children and adults
with intellectual disabilities have comorbid psychiatric disorders, and this rate
is several times higher than that in community samples without intellectual
disability. The prevalence of psychopathology appears to correlate with the
severity of the intellectual disability; the more severe the intellectual
disability, the higher the risk for coexisting psychiatric disorders. An
epidemiologic study found that 40.7 percent of intellectually disabled
children between 4 and 18 years of age met the criteria for at least one
additional psychiatric disorder.


<<<PAGE 329>>>
The severity of intellectual disability influences the risk of particular
comorbid psychiatric disorders. Disruptive and conduct-disorder behaviors
occur more frequently in those diagnosed with mild intellectual disability. In
contrast, those with more severe intellectual disabilities are more likely to
meet criteria for autism spectrum disorder and exhibit symptoms such as selfstimulation and self-mutilation. Comorbidity of psychiatric disorders with
intellectual disability in children do not appear to correlate with age or
gender. Children diagnosed with profound intellectual disabilities are less
likely to exhibit comorbid psychiatric disorders.
Psychiatric disorders among persons with intellectual disabilities vary and
include mood disorders, schizophrenia, ADHD, and conduct disorder.
Children diagnosed with severe intellectual disabilities have an unusually
high rate of comorbid autism spectrum disorder. Approximately 2 to 3
percent of those with an intellectual disability meet diagnostic criteria for
schizophrenia, which is several times higher than the rate for the general
population. Up to 50 percent of children and adults with intellectual
disabilities meet the criteria for a mood disorder as measured on an
appropriate depression scale. However, a limitation of these studies is that
these instruments are not standardized within intellectual disability
populations. Frequent psychiatric symptoms that occur in children with
intellectual disability, outside the context of a full psychiatric disorder,
include hyperactivity and short attention span, self-injurious behaviors (e.g.,
head-banging and self-biting), and repetitive stereotypical behaviors (handflapping and toe-walking). In children and adults with milder forms of
intellectual disability, negative self-image, low self-esteem, poor frustration
tolerance, interpersonal dependence, and a rigid problem-solving style are
frequent.

ETIOLOGY
Etiologic factors in intellectual disability can be genetic, developmental,
environmental, or a combination. Genetic causes include chromosomal and
inherited conditions; developmental and environmental factors include
prenatal exposure to infections and toxins; and environmental or acquired
factors include prenatal trauma (e.g., prematurity) and sociocultural factors.
The severity of intellectual disability may relate to the timing and duration of


<<<PAGE 330>>>
a given trauma as well as to the degree of exposure to the central nervous
system (CNS). In about three-fourths of persons diagnosed with severe
intellectual disability, there is an identifiable cause, whereas the etiology is
apparent in only about half of those diagnosed with mild intellectual
disability. No cause is known for three-fourths of persons with IQ ranging
from 70 to 80 and variable adaptive functioning. Among chromosomal
disorders, Down syndrome and fragile X syndrome are the most common
disorders that usually produce at least moderate intellectual disability. A
prototype of a metabolic disorder associated with an intellectual disability is
phenylketonuria (PKU). Deprivation of nutrition, nurturance, and social
stimulation can potentially contribute to the development of at least mild
forms of intellectual disability. Current knowledge suggests that genetic,
environmental, biologic, and psychosocial factors work additively to the
emergence of intellectual disability.
Genetic Etiologic Factors in Intellectual Disability
Single-Gene Causes. One of the most well-known single-gene causes of
intellectual disability is fragile X syndrome, a mutation of the FMR1 gene. It
is the most common and first X-linked gene to be identified as a direct cause
of intellectual disability. Abnormalities in autosomal chromosomes are
frequently associated with intellectual disability. In contrast, aberrations in
sex chromosomes can result in characteristic physical syndromes that do not
include intellectual disability (e.g., Turner syndrome with XO and Klinefelter
syndrome with XXY, XXXY, and XXYY variations). Some children with
Turner syndrome have average to superior intelligence. An agreement exists
on a few predisposing factors for chromosomal disorders—among them,
advanced maternal age, increased age of the father, and x-ray radiation.
Visible and Submicroscopic Chromosomal Causes of Intellectual
Disability. Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) is a prototype of a cytogenetically
visible abnormality that accounts for about two-thirds of the 15 percent of
intellectual disability attributable to visible abnormal cytogenetics. Other
microscopically visible chromosomal abnormalities associated with
intellectual disability include deletions, translocations, and supernumerary
marker chromosomes. Typically, microscopic chromosome analysis can


<<<PAGE 331>>>
identify abnormalities of 5 to 10 million base pairs or higher.
Submicroscopic identification requires the use of microarrays that can
identify losses of chromosomal segments too small to be picked up by light
microscopy. The altered copy number variants (CNVs) in submicroscopic
segments of the chromosome are associated with up to 13 to 20 percent of
cases of intellectual disability. That is, the genes associated with a particular
developmental abnormality are in the critical regions of the pathogenic
CNVs.
Genetic Intellectual Disability and Behavioral Phenotype
Specific and predictable behaviors are associated with certain genetically
based cases of intellectual disability. These behavioral phenotypes are a
syndrome of observable behaviors that occur with a significantly higher
probability than expected among those individuals with a specific genetic
abnormality.
Examples of behavioral phenotypes occur in genetically determined
syndromes such as fragile X syndrome, Prader–Willi syndrome, and Down
syndrome in which we can expect specific behavioral manifestations. Persons
with fragile X syndrome have incredibly high rates (up to three-fourths of
those studied) of ADHD. High rates of aberrant interpersonal behavior and
language function often meet the criteria for autistic disorder and avoidant
personality disorder. Prader–Willi syndrome is almost always associated with
compulsive eating disturbances, hyperphagia, and obesity. Socialization is an
area of weakness, especially in coping skills. Externalizing behavior
problems—such as temper tantrums, irritability, and arguing—seem to be
heightened in adolescence.
Down Syndrome. The etiology of Down syndrome, known to be caused by
an extra copy of the entire chromosome 21, makes it one of the more
complicated disorders. The original description of Down syndrome, first
made by the English physician Langdon Down in 1866, was based on
physical characteristics associated with subnormal mental functioning. Since
then, Down syndrome has been the most investigated, and most discussed,
syndrome in intellectual disability. Recent data have suggested that Down
syndrome may be more amenable to postnatal interventions to address the


<<<PAGE 332>>>
cognitive deficits that it produces than was previously thought. Although still
in the early stages of animal research, data from experiments with one mouse
model, the Ts65Dn, indicate that pharmacologic interventions may influence
learning and memory deficits known to occur in Down syndrome.

FIGURE 2-3
Down Syndrome and Fragile X Syndrome. A. An young child with Down
syndrome. B. A young adult with fragile X syndrome. (Courtesy of L.S.
Syzmanski, M.D. and A.C. Crocker, M.D.)

Phenotypically, children with Down syndrome have characteristic physical
attributes, including slanted eyes, epicanthal folds, and a flat nose. Figure 2-3
illustrates the typical features.
There are three types of chromosomal aberrations in Down syndrome,
which complicate the diagnosis. They are:
1. Patients with trisomy 21 (three chromosomes 21, instead of the usual
two) represent the overwhelming majority; they have 47 chromosomes,
with an extra chromosome 21. The mothers’ karyotypes are normal. A
nondisjunction during meiosis, occurring for unknown reasons, is held
responsible for the disorder.
2. Nondisjunction occurring after fertilization in any cell division results in
mosaicism, a condition in which there are both normal and trisomic cells
in various tissues.
3. In translocation, a fusion occurs of two chromosomes, usually 21 and


<<<PAGE 333>>>
15, resulting in a total of 46 chromosomes, despite the presence of an
extra chromosome 21. The disorder, unlike trisomy 21, is usually
inherited, and the translocated chromosome may occur in unaffected
parents and siblings. The asymptomatic carriers have only 45
chromosomes.
Approximately 6,000 babies are affected with Down syndrome in the
United States annually, which makes the incidence of Down syndrome 1 in
every 700 births, or 15 per 10,000 live births. For women older than 32 years
of age, the risk of having a child with Down syndrome (trisomy 21) is about
1 in 100 births, but when translocation is present, the risk is about 1 in 3.
Most children with Down syndrome are mildly to moderately intellectually
disabled, with a minority having an IQ above 50. Cognitive development
appears to progress normally from birth to 6 months of age; IQ scores
gradually decrease from near normal at 1 year of age to about 30 to 50 as
development proceeds. The decline in intellectual function may not be readily
apparent. Infant tests may not reveal the full extent of the deficits. According
to anecdotal clinical reports, children with Down syndrome are typically
placid, cheerful, and cooperative and adapt quickly at home. With
adolescence, the picture changes: youth with Down syndrome may
experience more social and emotional difficulties and behavior disorders, and
there is an increased risk for psychotic disorders.
In Down syndrome, language function is a relative weakness, whereas
sociability and social skills, such as interpersonal cooperation and conformity
with social conventions, are relative strengths. Children with Down syndrome
typically manifest deficits in scanning the environment; they are more likely
to focus on a single stimulus, leading to difficulty noticing environmental
changes. A variety of comorbid psychiatric disorders emerge in persons with
Down syndrome; however, the rates appear to be lower than in children with
intellectual disability and an autism spectrum disorder.
The diagnosis of Down syndrome is relatively simple in an older child, but
it is often tricky in newborn infants. The most important signs in a newborn
include general hypotonia; oblique palpebral fissures; abundant neck skin; a
small, flattened skull; high cheekbones; and a protruding tongue. The hands
are broad and thick, with a single palmar transversal crease, and the little
fingers are short and curved inward. Moro reflex is weak or absent. More


<<<PAGE 334>>>
than 100 signs or stigmata may occur in Down syndrome, but rarely all in one
person. Commonly occurring physical problems in Down syndrome include
cardiac defects, thyroid abnormalities, and gastrointestinal problems. Life
expectancy was once drastically limited to about the age of 40. However, it is
now significantly increased, although still shorter than those without
intellectual disability.
Down syndrome includes deterioration in language, memory, self-care
skills, and problem-solving by the third decade of life. Postmortem studies of
individuals with Down syndrome older than age 40 have shown a high
incidence of senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, similar to those seen
in Alzheimer disease. Neurofibrillary tangles are known to occur in a variety
of degenerative diseases, whereas senile plaques seem to be found most often
in Alzheimer disease and Down syndrome.
Fragile X Syndrome. Fragile X syndrome is the second most common
single cause of intellectual disability. The syndrome results from a mutation
on the X chromosome at what is known as the fragile site (Xq27.3). The
fragile site occurs in only some cells, and it may be absent in asymptomatic
males and female carriers. Much variability is present in both genetic and
phenotypic expression. Fragile X syndrome occurs in about 1 of every 1,000
males and 1 of every 2,000 females. The typical phenotype includes a large,
long head and ears, short stature, hyperextensible joints, and postpubertal
macroorchidism (see Figure 2-3). Associated intellectual disability ranges
from mild to severe. The behavioral profile of persons with the syndrome
includes a high rate of ADHD, learning disorders, and autism spectrum
disorder. Deficits in language function include rapid perseverative speech
with abnormalities in combining words into phrases and sentences. Persons
with fragile X syndrome seem to have relatively strong skills in
communication and socialization; their intellectual functions seem to decline
in the pubertal period. Often, female carriers are less impaired than males
with fragile X syndrome, but females can also manifest the typical physical
characteristics and may have a mild intellectual disability.
Prader–Willi Syndrome. Prader–Willi syndrome likely results from a
small deletion involving chromosome 15, occurring sporadically. Its
prevalence is less than 1 in 10,000. Persons with the syndrome exhibit


<<<PAGE 335>>>
compulsive eating behavior and often obesity, intellectual disability,
hypogonadism, small stature, hypotonia, and small hands and feet.
Cat’s Cry (Cri-du-Chat) Syndrome. Children with cat’s cry syndrome
have a deletion in chromosome 5. They are typically severely intellectually
disabled and show many signs often associated with chromosomal
aberrations, such as microcephaly, low-set ears, oblique palpebral fissures,
hypertelorism, and micrognathia. The characteristic cat-like cry that gave the
syndrome its name is caused by laryngeal abnormalities that gradually
change and disappear with increasing age.
Phenylketonuria (PKU). Ivar Asbjörn Fölling first described PKU in 1934
as an inborn error of metabolism. PKU is transmitted as a recessive
autosomal Mendelian trait and occurs in about 1 of every 10,000 to 15,000
live births. For parents who have already had a child with PKU, the chance of
having another child with PKU is 20 to 25 percent of successive pregnancies.
PKU is reported predominantly in persons of North European origin; a few
cases may occur in African Americans, Yemenite Jews, and Asians. The
underlying metabolic defect in PKU is an inability to convert phenylalanine,
an essential amino acid, to paratyrosine because of the absence or inactivity
of the liver enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase, which catalyzes the
conversion. Therefore, PKU is mostly preventable with a screening for it,
which, if positive, should be followed with a low phenylalanine diet. Other
types of hyperphenylalaninemia exist, but are rare and often fatal.
Most patients with PKU are severely intellectually disabled, but some have
borderline or average intelligence. Eczema, vomiting, and convulsions occur
in about one-third of all patients. Although the clinical picture varies,
typically, children with PKU are reported to be hyperactive and irritable.
They frequently exhibit temper tantrums and often display bizarre
movements of their bodies and upper extremities, including twisting hand
mannerisms. Verbal and nonverbal communication is commonly severely
impaired or nonexistent. The child has reduced coordination, and they have
many perceptual difficulties.
Currently, the Guthrie inhibition assay is a widely applied screening test
using a bacteriologic procedure to detect phenylalanine in the blood. In the
United States, screening newborn infants for PKU is routine. Early diagnosis


<<<PAGE 336>>>
is essential, because a low-phenylalanine diet, in use since 1955, significantly
improves both behavior and developmental progress. The best results seem to
be obtained with early diagnosis and the start of dietary treatment before the
child is 6 months of age. Dietary treatment, however, is not without risk.
Phenylalanine is an essential amino acid, and its omission from the diet can
lead to severe complications such as anemia, hypoglycemia, or edema. The
dietary treatment of PKU continues indefinitely. Children who receive a
diagnosis before the age of 3 months and have an optimal dietary regimen
may have average intelligence. A low-phenylalanine diet does not reverse
intellectual disability in untreated older children and adolescents with PKU,
but the diet does decrease irritability and abnormal EEG changes and does
increase social responsiveness and attention span. The parents of children
with PKU and some of the children’s unaffected siblings are heterozygous
carriers.
Rett Syndrome. Rett syndrome, now diagnosed in the DSM-5 as a form of
autism spectrum disorder, is believed to be caused by a dominant X-linked
gene. It is degenerative and affects only females. In 1966, Andreas Rett
reported on 22 girls with a severe progressive neurologic disability.
Deterioration in communications skills, motor behavior, and social
functioning starts at about 1 year of age. Symptoms include ataxia, facial
grimacing, teeth-grinding, and loss of speech. Intermittent hyperventilation
and a disorganized breathing pattern are characteristic while the child is
awake. Stereotypical hand movements, including hand-wringing, are typical.
Progressive gait disturbance, scoliosis, and seizures occur. Severe spasticity
is usually present in middle childhood. Cerebral atrophy occurs with
decreased pigmentation of the substantia nigra, which suggests abnormalities
of the dopaminergic nigrostriatal system.
Associated features include seizures in up to 75 percent of affected
children and disorganized EEG findings with some epileptiform discharges in
almost all young children with Rett syndrome, even in the absence of clinical
seizures. An additional associated feature is irregular respiration, with
episodes of hyperventilation, apnea, and breath-holding. The disorganized
breathing occurs in most patients while they are awake; during sleep, the
breathing usually normalizes. Many patients with Rett syndrome also have
scoliosis. As the disorder progresses, muscle tone seems to change from an


<<<PAGE 337>>>
initial hypotonic condition to spasticity to rigidity.
Although children with Rett syndrome may live for well over a decade
after the onset of the disorder, after 10 years, many patients are wheelchairbound, with muscle wasting, rigidity, and virtually no language ability. Longterm receptive and expressive communication and socialization abilities
remain at a developmental level of less than 1 year.
Dana was born as a full-term and healthy baby after an uncomplicated
pregnancy. An amniocentesis had been obtained because of advanced
maternal age of 40 years, and findings were normal. At birth, Dana
received good Apgar scores and her weight, height, and head
circumference were all near the 50th percentile. Her development during
the first months of life was unremarkable. At approximately 8 months of
age, her development seemed to wane, and her interest in the
environment, including the social environment, declined. Dana’s
developmental milestones failed to progress, and she became markedly
delayed; she was just starting to walk at her second birthday and had no
spoken language. Evaluation at that time revealed that head growth had
decelerated. Self-stimulatory behaviors emerged, and in addition, marked
cognitive and communicative delays were noted on formal testing. Dana
began to lose purposeful hand movements and developed unusual
stereotypical hand-washing behaviors. By age 6, her EEG was abnormal
and abnormal hand movements were prominent. Subsequently, Dana
developed truncal ataxia and breath-holding spells, and motor skills
further deteriorated. (Adapted from Fred Volkmar, M.D.)
Neurofibromatosis. Also called von Recklinghausen’s disease,
neurofibromatosis is the most common of the neurocutaneous syndromes
caused by a single dominant gene, which may be inherited or occur as a new
mutation. The disorder occurs in about 1 of 5,000 births and is characterized
by café-au-lait spots on the skin and by neurofibromas, including optic
gliomas and acoustic neuromas, caused by abnormal cell migration. Mild
intellectual disability occurs in up to one-third of those with the disease.
Tuberous Sclerosis. Tuberous sclerosis is the second most common of the


<<<PAGE 338>>>
neurocutaneous syndromes; a progressive intellectual disability occurs in up
to two-thirds of all affected persons. It occurs in about 1 of 15,000 persons
who inherit it through autosomal dominant transmission. Seizures are present
in all those with intellectual disability, and in two-thirds of those without.
Infantile spasms may occur as early as 6 months of age. The phenotypic
presentation includes adenoma sebaceum and ash-leaf spots, identifiable with
a slit lamp.
Childhood Disintegrative Disorder. The previous diagnosis of
childhood disintegrative disorder, now included in autism spectrum disorder,
is characterized by marked regression in several areas of functioning after at
least 2 years of apparently normal development. Childhood disintegrative
disorder, also called Heller syndrome and disintegrative psychosis, was
described in 1908 as a deterioration over several months of intellectual,
social, and language function occurring in 3- and 4-year-olds with previously
normal function. After the deterioration, the children closely resembled
children with autistic disorder.
Ron’s early history was within normal limits. By age 2, he was speaking
in sentences, and his development appeared to be proceeding
appropriately. At 3½ years of age, he abruptly exhibited a period of
marked behavioral regression shortly after the birth of a sibling. Ron lost
previously acquired skills in communication and was no longer toilet
trained. Ron became more withdrawn and less interested in social
interaction, exhibiting various self-stimulatory behaviors repeatedly.
Comprehensive medical examination failed to reveal any conditions that
might account for this developmental regression. Behaviorally, Ron
exhibited features of autism spectrum disorder. At follow-up at age 12, he
spoke only an occasional single word and had severe mental retardation.
(Adapted from Fred Volkmar, M.D.)
Lesch–Nyhan Syndrome. Lesch–Nyhan syndrome is a rare disorder
caused by a deficiency of an enzyme involved in purine metabolism. The
disorder is X-linked; patients have intellectual disability, microcephaly,
seizures, choreoathetosis, and spasticity. The syndrome is also associated


<<<PAGE 339>>>
with severe compulsive self-mutilation by biting the mouth and fingers.
Lesch–Nyhan syndrome is another example of a genetically determined
syndrome with a specific, predictable behavioral pattern.
Adrenoleukodystrophy. The most common of several disorders of
sudanophilic cerebral sclerosis, adrenoleukodystrophy is characterized by
diffuse demyelination of the cerebral white matter resulting in visual and
intellectual impairment, seizures, spasticity, and progression to death.
Adrenocortical insufficiency accompanies the cerebral degeneration. A sexlinked gene located on the distal end of the long arm of the X chromosome
transmits the disorder. The clinical onset is generally between 5 and 8 years
of age, with early seizures, disturbances in gait, and mild intellectual
impairment. Abnormal pigmentation reflecting adrenal insufficiency
sometimes precedes the neurologic symptoms, and attacks of crying are
frequent. Spastic contractures, ataxia, and swallowing disturbances are also
frequent. Although the course is often rapidly progressive, some patients may
have a relapsing and remitting course.
Maple Syrup Urine Disease. The clinical symptoms of maple syrup urine
disease appear during the first week of life. The infant deteriorates rapidly
and has decerebrate rigidity, seizures, respiratory irregularity, and
hypoglycemia. If untreated, maple syrup urine disease is usually fatal in the
first months of life, and the survivors have a severe intellectual disability.
Some variants have transient ataxia and only mild intellectual disability.
Treatment follows the general principles established for PKU and consists of
a diet deficient in the three involved amino acids—leucine, isoleucine, and
valine.
Other Enzyme Deficiency Disorders. We have identified several
enzyme deficiency disorders associated with intellectual disability, and are
adding more as discoveries are made, including Hartnup disease,
galactosemia, and glycogen-storage disease. Table 2-3 lists 30 significant
disorders with inborn errors of metabolism, hereditary transmission patterns,
defective enzymes, clinical signs, and relation to intellectual disability.
Acquired and Developmental Factors


<<<PAGE 340>>>
Prenatal Period. Essential prerequisites for the overall development of the
fetus include the mother’s physical, psychological, and nutritional health
during pregnancy. Many illnesses and conditions can affect fetal brain
development, including uncontrolled diabetes, anemia, emphysema,
hypertension, and long-term use of alcohol and narcotic substances. Maternal
infections during pregnancy, especially viral infections, have been known to
cause fetal damage and intellectual disability. The extent of fetal damage
depends on several factors. These factors include the type and severity of the
viral infection and the gestational age of the fetus.
Rubella (German Measles). Rubella has replaced syphilis as the primary
cause of congenital malformations and intellectual disability caused by
maternal infection. The children of affected mothers may show several
abnormalities, including congenital heart disease, intellectual disability,
cataracts, deafness, microcephaly, and microphthalmia. Timing is crucial
because the extent and frequency of the complications are inversely related to
the duration of the pregnancy at the time of maternal infection. When
mothers become infected in the first trimester of pregnancy, 10 to 15 percent
of the children are affected. This incidence rises to almost 50 percent when
the infection occurs in the first month of pregnancy. Undetected subclinical
forms of maternal infection can complicate the situation. Immunization can
prevent maternal rubella.
Cytomegalic Inclusion Disease. In many cases, cytomegalic inclusion
disease remains dormant in the mother. Some children are stillborn, and
others have jaundice, microcephaly, hepatosplenomegaly, and radiographic
findings of intracerebral calcification. Children with intellectual disability
from the disease frequently have cerebral calcification, microcephaly, or
hydrocephalus. Positive findings of the virus in throat and urine cultures and
the recovery of inclusion-bearing cells in the urine all can confirm the
diagnosis.
Syphilis. Syphilis in pregnant women was once the leading cause of various
neuropathologic changes in their offspring, including intellectual disability.
Today, the incidence of syphilitic complications of pregnancy fluctuates with
the incidence of syphilis in the general population. Some recent alarming


<<<PAGE 341>>>
statistics from several major cities in the United States indicate that there is
still no room for complacency.
Toxoplasmosis. The mother can transmit toxoplasmosis to the fetus. It
causes mild or severe intellectual disability and, in severe cases,
hydrocephalus, seizures, microcephaly, and chorioretinitis.
Herpes Simplex. The herpes simplex virus can be transmitted
transplacentally, although the most common mode of infection is during
birth. Microcephaly, intellectual disability, intracranial calcification, and
ocular abnormalities may result.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). Cognitive impairments are well
known to be associated with the transmission of HIV from mothers to their
babies. HIV may have both direct and indirect influences on the developing
brain. A subset of infants born infected with HIV may develop progressive
encephalopathy, intellectual disabilities, and seizures within the first year of
life. Fortunately, over the last two decades, there has been a dramatic
decrease in perinatal HIV transmission due to a combination of antiviral
agents provided to mothers during pregnancy and delivery, obstetric
interventions that reduce risk, and administration of zidovudine (ZDV) as
prophylaxis for 6 weeks to newborns exposed to HIV. In the United States,
the annual number of HIV infections through perinatal transmission had
declined about 40 percent over the last 5 years and is dramatically less than
the 1990s when the transmission was at its peak. In 2015 the rates were less
than 1 percent in white and Hispanic/Latino HIV-infected mothers. However,
that rate is about five times greater in African American mothers with HIV.
Vertical transmission of HIV from mother to child around the world,
especially in Africa, is also considerable.
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) results from
prenatal alcohol exposure and can lead to a wide range of problems in the
newborn. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, FAS
in the United States occurs at a rate ranging from 0.2 to 1.5 per 1,000 live
births. FAS is one of the leading preventable causes of intellectual disability
and physical disabilities. Table 2-4 lists the typical characteristics of FAS,


<<<PAGE 342>>>
and Figure 2-4 demonstrates examples of the typical defects.
The entire syndrome occurs in up to 15 percent of babies born to women
who regularly ingest large amounts of alcohol. Babies born to women who
consume alcohol regularly during pregnancy have a high incidence of
ADHD, learning disorders, and intellectual disability without facial
dysmorphism.
Prenatal Drug Exposure. Prenatal exposure to opioids, such as heroin,
often results in infants who are small for their gestational age, with head
circumference below the tenth percentile and withdrawal symptoms that
appear within the first 2 days of life. The withdrawal symptoms of infants
include irritability, hypertonia, tremor, vomiting, a high-pitched cry, and an
abnormal sleep pattern. Seizures are unusual, but the withdrawal syndrome
can be life-threatening to infants if it is untreated. Diazepam, phenobarbital,
chlorpromazine, and paregoric have been used to treat neonatal opioid
withdrawal. The long-term sequelae of prenatal opioid exposure are not fully
known; the children’s developmental milestones and intellectual functions
may be within the normal range, but they have an increased risk for
impulsivity and behavioral problems. Infants prenatally exposed to cocaine
are at high risk for low birth weight and premature delivery. In the early
neonatal period, they may have transient neurologic and behavioral
abnormalities, including abnormal results on EEG studies, tachycardia, poor
feeding patterns, irritability, and excessive drowsiness. The physiologic and
behavioral abnormalities are from cocaine intoxication, not withdrawal, as
cocaine excretion may take up to a week after.
Table 2-3
Impairment in Disorders with Inborn Errors of Metabolism


<<<PAGE 343>>>
Table 2-4
Characteristics of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome


<<<PAGE 344>>>
Growth retardation of prenatal origin (height, weight)
Facial dysmorphism
Microcephaly (head circumference below the third percentile)
Hypertelorism (large distance between eyes)
Microphthalmia (small eyeballs)
Short palpebral fissures
Inner epicanthal folds
Midface hypoplasia (underdevelopment)
Smooth or short philtrum
Thin upper lip
Short, turned up nose
Cardiac Defects
Central nervous system (CNS) manifestations
Delayed development
Hyperactivity
Attention deficits
Learning disabilities
Intellectual deficits
Seizures
Complications of Pregnancy. Toxemia of pregnancy and uncontrolled
maternal diabetes present hazards to the fetus and can potentially result in
intellectual disability. Maternal malnutrition during pregnancy often results in
prematurity and other obstetrical complications. Vaginal hemorrhage,
placenta previa, premature separation of the placenta, and prolapse of the
cord can damage the fetal brain by causing anoxia.
Perinatal Period. Some evidence indicates that premature infants and
infants with low birth weight are at high risk for neurologic and subtle
intellectual impairments that may not be apparent until their school years.
Infants who sustain intracranial hemorrhages or show evidence of cerebral
ischemia are especially vulnerable to cognitive abnormalities. The degree of
neurodevelopmental impairment generally correlates with the severity of the
intracranial hemorrhage. Recent studies have documented that, among


<<<PAGE 345>>>
children with low birth weight (less than 1 kg), 20 percent had significant
disabilities, including cerebral palsy, intellectual disability, autism, and low
intelligence with severe learning problems. Very premature children and
those who had intrauterine growth retardation were at high risk for
developing both social problems and academic difficulties. Socioeconomic
deprivation can also affect the adaptive function of these vulnerable infants.
Early intervention may improve their cognitive, language, and perceptual
abilities.

FIGURE 2-4
Fetal alcohol syndrome. Photographs of children with “fetal-alcohol syndrome.” A.
Severe case. B. Slightly affected child. Note in both children the short palpebral
fissures and hypoplasia of the maxilla. Usually, the defect includes other
craniofacial abnormalities. Cardiovascular defects and limb deformities are also
common symptoms of the fetal alcohol syndrome. (From Langman J. Medical
Embryology. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Williams & Wilkins; 1995:108, with
permission.)

Acquired Childhood Disorders
Infection. The most severe infections affecting cerebral integrity are
encephalitis and meningitis. The universal use of the measles vaccine had
virtually eliminated measles encephalitis. However, a recent refusal by some
individuals and communities to vaccinate their children has increased the risk


<<<PAGE 346>>>
of this as well as subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, a rare and usually fatal
degenerative disease that can occur years after the infection. Antibacterial
agents have reduced the incidence of other bacterial infections, at least in the
developed world. Viruses now cause most episodes of encephalitis.
Sometimes a clinician must retrospectively consider a probable encephalitic
component in a previously unknown illness with a high fever. A delayed
diagnosis of meningitis, even when followed by antibiotic treatment, can
seriously affect a child’s cognitive development. Thrombotic and purulent
intracranial phenomena secondary to septicemia are rarely seen today except
in small infants.
Head Trauma. The best-known causes of head injury in children that
produce developmental handicaps, including seizures, are motor vehicle
accidents (household accidents are the most common cause of head injuries,
such as falls from tables, open windows, and on stairways). Child
maltreatment is a frequent cause of head traumas or intracranial trauma such
as bleeding due to “shaken baby” syndrome.
Asphyxia. Brain damage due to asphyxia associated with near-drowning is
not an uncommon cause of intellectual disability.
Long-Term Exposures. Long-term exposure to lead is a well-established
cause of compromised intelligence and learning skills. Intracranial tumors of
various types and origins, surgery, and chemotherapy can also adversely
affect brain function.
Environmental and Sociocultural Factors
Mild intellectual disability is associated with significant deprivation of
nutrition and nurturance. Children who have endured these conditions are at
risk for a host of psychiatric disorders, including mood disorders,
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and attentional and anxiety disorders.
A prenatal environment compromised by poor medical care and poor
maternal nutrition may be contributing factors in the development of mild
intellectual disability. Teenage pregnancies are at risk for mild intellectual
disability in the baby due to the increased risk of obstetrical complications,
prematurity, and low birth weight. Poor postnatal medical care, malnutrition,


<<<PAGE 347>>>
exposure to toxic substances such as lead, and potential physical trauma are
additional risk factors for mild intellectual disabilities. Child neglect and
inadequate caretaking may deprive an infant of both physical and emotional
nurturances, leading to failure to thrive syndromes.

2.2 Communication Disorders
Communication disorders range from mild delays in acquiring language to
expressive or mixed receptive–expressive disorders, phonologic disorders,
and stuttering, which may remit spontaneously or persist into adolescence or
even adulthood. Language delay is one of the most common very early
childhood developmental delays, affecting up to approximately 7 percent of
5-year-olds. The rates of language disorders are understandably higher in
preschoolers than in school-age children; rates were close to 20 percent of 4year-olds in the Early Language in Victoria Study (ELVS). To communicate
effectively, children must have a mastery of multiple aspects of language—
that is, the ability to understand and express ideas—using words and speech
to express themselves in vernacular language. In DSM-5, Language Disorder
includes both expressive and mixed receptive–expressive problems. DSM-5
speech disorders include Speech Sound Disorder (formerly known as
Phonologic Disorder) and Childhood-Onset Fluency Disorder (Stuttering).
Children with expressive language deficits have difficulties expressing their
thoughts with words and sentences at a level of sophistication expected for
their age and developmental level in other areas. These children may struggle
with a limited vocabulary, speak in sentences that are short or ungrammatical,
and often present descriptions of situations that are disorganized, confusing,
and infantile. They may be slow to develop an understanding and a memory
of words compared with others their age. Children with language disorders
are at higher risk for developing reading difficulties. Current expert
consensus considers reading comprehension impairment a form of language
impairment, distinct from other reading deficits such as dyslexia.
Language and speech are pragmatically intertwined, despite the distinct
categories of language disorders and speech disorders in DSM-5. Language
competence spans four domains: phonology, grammar, semantics, and


<<<PAGE 348>>>
pragmatics. Phonology refers to the ability to produce sounds that constitute
words in a given language and the skills to discriminate the various
phonemes (sounds that are made by a letter or group of letters in a language).
A child must be able to produce the sounds of a word to imitate them.
Grammar designates the organization of words and the rules for placing
words in an order that makes sense in that language. Semantics refers to the
organization of concepts and the acquisition of words themselves. A child
draws from a mental list of words to produce sentences. Children with
language impairments exhibit a wide range of difficulties with semantics that
includes acquiring new words, storage and organization of known words, and
word retrieval. Speech and language evaluations that are sufficiently broad to
test all of the other skill levels will be more accurate in evaluating a child’s
remedial needs. Pragmatics is a branch of linguistics concentrating on the
skill of using language. It involves the ability to understand the context of
one’s speech and how to interact and converse. It requires not only
understanding the literal meaning of a sentence but also the speaker’s
intention. By age 2 years, toddlers without speech or language delay may
know a few words or up to 200 words, and by age 3 years, most children
understand the basic rules of language and can converse effectively. Table 25 provides an overview of typical milestones in language and nonverbal
development.
Over the last decade, there have been an increasing number of investigative
studies of speech and language interventions with positive outcomes
identified in numerous areas of language. These include improvements in
expressive vocabulary, syntax usage, and overall phonologic development.
Most interventions are targeted strategies for the child’s particular deficit and
delivered by speech and language therapists.

LANGUAGE DISORDER
Language disorder consists of difficulties in the acquisition and use of
language across many modalities, including spoken and written, due to
deficits in comprehension or production based on both expressive and
receptive skills. These deficits include reduced vocabulary, limited abilities in
forming sentences using the rules of grammar, and impairments in conversing
based on difficulties using vocabulary to connect sentences in descriptive


<<<PAGE 349>>>
ways. Table 2-6 lists the approaches to diagnosing language disorders.
Expressive Language Deficits
Expressive language deficits are present when a child demonstrates a
selective deficit in expressive language development relative to receptive
language skills and nonverbal intellectual function. Infants and young
children with typically developing expressive language will laugh and coo by
about 6 months of age, babble and verbalize syllables such as mama or dada
by about 9 months, and by 1 year, babies imitate vocalizations and can often
speak at least one word. Expressive speech and language generally continue
to develop in a stepwise fashion, so that at a year and a half, children
typically can say a handful of words, and by 2 years, children generally are
combining words into simple sentences. By the age of 2½ years, children can
name actions in a picture and can make themselves understood through their
verbalizations about half of the time. By 3 years, most children can speak
understandably and can name a color and describe what they see with several
adjectives. At 4 years, children typically can name at least four colors and can
converse understandably. In the early years, before entering preschool, the
development of proficiency in vocabulary and language usage is highly
variable and influenced by the amount and quality of verbal interactions with
family members. After beginning school, the level of verbal engagement in
school can significantly influence a child’s language skills. A child with
expressive language deficits may demonstrate a verbal intellectual level that
appears to be depressed compared with the child’s overall IQ. A child with
expressive language problems is likely to function below the expected levels
of acquired vocabulary, correct tense usage, complex sentence constructions,
and word recall. Children with expressive language deficits often present
verbally as younger than their age. Language disability can be acquired
during childhood (e.g., secondary to a trauma or a neurologic disorder),
although less frequently, or it can be developmental; it is usually congenital,
without an apparent cause. Most childhood language disorders fall into the
developmental category. In either case, deficits in receptive skills (language
comprehension) or expressive skills (ability to use language) can occur.
Expressive language disturbance often appears in the absence of
comprehension difficulties, whereas receptive dysfunction generally


<<<PAGE 350>>>
diminishes proficiency in the expression of language. Children with
expressive language disturbance alone have better prognoses, and less
interference with learning, than children with mixed receptive–expressive
language disturbances.
Table 2-5
Language Development
Age and Stage
Mastery of
of Development Comprehension

Mastery of Expression

0–6 mo

Shows startle
Has vocalizations other
response to loud or
than crying; Has
sudden sounds;
differential cries for
Attempts to
hunger, pain; Makes
localize sounds,
vocalizations to show
turning eyes or
pleasure; Plays at
head; Appears to
making sounds; Babbles
listen to speakers,
(a repeated series of
may respond with
sounds)
smile; Recognizes
warning, angry,
and friendly voices;
Responds to
hearing own name

7–11 mo
Attending-toLanguage

Shows listening
Responds to own name
selectivity
with vocalizations;
(voluntary control
Imitates the melody of
over responses to
utterances; Uses jargon
sounds); Listens to
(own language); Has
music or singing
gestures (shakes head
with interest;
for no); Has exclamation
Recognizes “no,”
(“oh-oh”); Plays
“hot,” own name;
language games (pat-aLooks at pictures
cake, peekaboo)
being named for


<<<PAGE 351>>>
up to 1 min;
Listens to speech
without being
distracted by other
sounds
12–18 mo Single- Shows gross
Uses single words (mean
Word
discriminations
age of first word is 11
between dissimilar
mo; by age 18 mo, child
sounds (bells vs.
is using up to 20 words);
dog vs. horn vs.
“Talks” to toys, self, or
mother’s or father’s
others using long
voice);
patterns of jargon and
Understands basic
occasional words;
body parts, names
Approximately 25% of
of common
utterances are
objects; Acquires
intelligible; All vowels
understanding of
articulated correctly;
some new words
Initial and final
each week; Can
consonants often
identify simple
omitted
objects (baby, ball,
etc.) from a group
of objects or
pictures;
Understands up to
150 words by age
18 mo
12–24 mo TwoWord
Messages

Responds to simple Uses two-word utterances
directions (“Give
(“Mommy sock,” “all
me the ball”)
gone,” “ball here”);
Imitates environmental
Responds to action
sounds in play (“moo,”
commands (“Come
“mmm, mmm,” etc.);
here,” “Sit down”)
Refers to self by name,
Understands
begins to use pronouns;


<<<PAGE 352>>>
pronouns (me,
him, her, you)
Begins to understand
complex sentences
(“When we go to
the store, I’ll buy
you some candy”)

Echoes two or more last
words of sentences;
Begins to use three-word
telegraphic utterances
(“all gone ball,” “me go
now”); Utterances 26–
50% intelligible; Uses
language to ask for
needs

24–36 mo
Grammar
Formation

Understands small
Uses real sentences with
body parts (elbow,
grammatical function
chin, eyebrow);
words (can, will, the, a);
Understands family
Usually announces
name categories
intentions before acting;
(grandma, baby)
“Conversations” with
other children, usually
Understands size
just monologues; Jargon
(little one, big one)
and echolalia gradually
Understands most
drop from speech;
adjectives
Increased vocabulary
Understands
(up to 270 words at 2 yr,
functions (why do
895 words at 3 yr);
we eat, why do we
Speech 50–80%
sleep)
intelligible; P, b, m
articulated correctly;
Speech may show
rhythmic disturbances

36–54 mo
Grammar
Development

Understands
Correct articulation of n, w,
prepositions
ng, h, t, d, k, g; Uses
(under, behind,
language to relate
between)
incidents from the past;
Uses wide range of
Understands many
grammatical forms:
words (up to 3,500
plurals, past tense,


<<<PAGE 353>>>
at 3 yr, 5,500 at 4
yr)
Understands cause
and effect (What
do you do when
you’re hungry?
cold?)
Understands
analogies (Food is
to eat, milk is to
____)

negatives, questions;
Plays with language:
rhymes, exaggerates;
Speech 90% intelligible,
occasional errors in the
ordering of sounds within
words; Able to define
words; Egocentric use of
language rare; Can
repeat a 12-syllable
sentence correctly;
Some grammatical
errors still occur

55 mo on True
Understands
Uses language to tell
Communication
concepts of
stories, share ideas, and
number, speed,
discuss alternatives;
time, space;
Increasing use of varied
Understands left
grammar; Spontaneous
and right;
self-correction of
Understands
grammatical errors;
abstract terms; Is
Stabilizing of articulation
able to categorize
f, v, s, z, l, r, th, and
items into semantic
consonant clusters;
classes
Speech 100% intelligible
Reprinted from Rutter M, Hersov L, eds. Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. London: Blackwell;
1985, with permission.

Table 2-6
Language Disorders

Diagnostic
name

DSM-5

ICD-10

Language Disorder

Specific Developmental
Disorders of Speech and
Language


<<<PAGE 354>>>
Duration

Onset during early
development

Onset during early
development

Symptoms

Difficulties with
acquiring language
skills, symptoms
include
decreased/limited:
• Vocabulary
• Sentence
structure
• Discourse
Symptoms beginning
during school-age
years (but may
become obvious
during later part of
academic career)

Specific speech articulation
disorder: speech sounds
Expressive language
disorder: spoken language
Receptive language
disorder: understanding of
language
Acquired aphasia with
epilepsy (Landau–
Kleffner): sudden loss of
expressive and receptive
skills after onset of
paroxysmal EEG
abnormalities
Other development
disorders of speech and
language: e.g., lisping

Exclusions
Age appropriate
(not result
language
of):
development
Sensory impairment
Motor dysfunction
Intellectual disability
A neurologic disorder
Another medical
disorder

Mechanical speech
abnormality
Sensory impairment
Mental retardation
Neurologic disorder (aphasias,
etc.)
Environmental factors

Although language use depends on both expressive and receptive skills, the
degree of deficits in a given individual may be severe in one area, and hardly
impaired at all in the other. Thus, language disorders can exist in children
with expressive language disturbance in the absence of receptive language
problems, or both receptive and expressive language syndromes can be


<<<PAGE 355>>>
present. In general, when receptive skills are sufficiently impaired to warrant
a diagnosis, expressive skills are also impaired. In DSM-5, a language
disorder is not limited to developmental language disabilities; it also includes
acquired forms of language disturbances. To meet the DSM-5 criteria for
language disorder, patients must have scores on standardized measures of
expressive or receptive language markedly below those of standardized
nonverbal IQ subtests and standardized tests.
Clinical Features. Children with expressive language deficits are vague
when telling a story and use many filler words such as “stuff” and “things”
instead of naming specific objects.
The essential feature of expressive deficits in language disorder is marked
impairment in the development of age-appropriate expressive language,
which results in the use of verbal or sign language markedly below the
expected level given a child’s nonverbal intellectual capacity. Language
understanding (decoding) skills remain relatively intact. When severe, the
disorder becomes recognizable by about the age of 18 months, when a child
fails to utter spontaneously or even echo single words or sounds. Even simple
words, such as “Mama” and “Dada,” are absent from the child’s active
vocabulary, and the child points or uses gestures to indicate desires. The child
seems to want to communicate, maintains eye contact, relates well to the
mother, and enjoys games such as pat-a-cake and peek-a-boo. The child’s
vocabulary is severely limited. At 18 months, the child may only point at
common objects when they are named.
When a child with expressive language deficits begins to speak, language
impairment gradually becomes apparent. Articulation is often immature;
numerous articulation errors occur but are inconsistent, particularly with such
sounds as th, r, s, z, y, and l, which the child either omits or substitutes with
other sounds.
By the age of 4 years, most children with expressive language disturbance
can speak in short phrases but may have difficulty retaining new words. After
beginning to speak, they acquire language more slowly than do most
children. Their use of various grammatical structures is also markedly below
the age-expected level, and they may have delayed milestones. Emotional
problems involving poor self-image, frustration, and depression may develop
in school-age children.


<<<PAGE 356>>>
Diagnosis. We should diagnose a language disorder of the expressive
disturbance type when a child has a selective deficit in language skills and is
functioning well in nonverbal areas. Markedly below-age-level verbal or sign
language, accompanied by a low score on standardized expressive verbal
tests, is diagnostic of expressive deficits in language disorder. Although
expressive language deficits often occur in children with autism spectrum
disorders, these disturbances also frequently occur in the absence of autism
spectrum disorder and are characterized by the following features: limited
vocabulary, simple grammar, and variable articulation. “Inner language” or
the appropriate use of toys and household objects is present. One assessment
tool, the Carter Neurocognitive Assessment, itemizes and quantifies skills in
areas of social awareness, visual attention, auditory comprehension, and
vocal communication even when there are compromised expressive language
and motor skills in very young children—up to 2 years of age. Also, we
should administer standardized expressive language and nonverbal
intelligence tests. Observations of children’s verbal and sign language
patterns in various settings (e.g., schoolyard, classroom, home, and
playroom) and during interactions with other children help ascertain the
severity and specific areas of a child’s impairment and aid in early detection
of behavioral and emotional complications. Family history should include the
presence or absence of expressive language disorder among relatives.
Damien was a friendly, alert, and hyperactive 2-year-old, whose
expressive vocabulary was limited to only two words (mama, daddy). He
used these words one at a time in inappropriate situations. He
supplemented his infrequent verbal communications with pointing and
other simple gestures to request desired objects or actions. He was unable
to communicate for other purposes (e.g., commenting or protesting).
Damien appeared to be developing typically in other areas, especially in
gross motor skills, although his fine motor skills were also poor. Damien
sat, stood, and walked, and played happily with other children, enjoying
activities and toys that were appropriate for 2-year-olds. Although he had
a history of frequent ear infections, a recent hearing test revealed normal
hearing. Despite his expressive limitations, Damien exhibited ageappropriate comprehension for the names of familiar objects and actions


<<<PAGE 357>>>
and simple verbal instructions (e.g., “Put that down.” “Get your shirt.”
“Clap your hands.”). However, due to his hyperactivity and impulsivity,
he often required multiple directions to complete a simple task.
Despite Damien’s slow start in language development, his pediatrician
had reassured his parents that most of the time, toddlers like Damien
spontaneously overcome their initial slow start in language development.
Fortunately, Damien’s language delay spontaneously remitted by the time
he entered preschool at 3½ years of age, although he showed symptoms
of an attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

Jessica was a sociable, active 5-year-old, who presented with a language
disorder. She was well-liked in kindergarten despite her language deficits
and played with many of her classmates. During an activity in which each
student recounted the story of Little Red Riding Hood to her doll,
Jessica’s classmate’s story began: “Little Red Riding Hood was taking a
basket of food to her grandmother who was sick. A bad wolf stopped Red
Riding Hood in the forest. He tried to get the basket away from her, but
she would not give it to him.”
Jessica tried to avoid participating, but when called on, her version
sounded quite different. Jessica struggled and came up with: “Riding
Hood going to grandma house. Her taking food. Bad wolf in a bed.
Riding Hood say, what big ears, and grandma? Hear you, dear. What big
eyes, grandma? See you, dear. What big mouth, grandma? Eat you all
up!”
Jessica’s story was characteristic of expressive language deficits at her
age: including short, incomplete sentences; simple sentence structures;
omission of grammatical function words (e.g., is and the) and inflectional
endings (e.g., possessives and present tense verbs); problems in question
formation; and incorrect use of pronouns (e.g., her for she). Jessica,
however, understood the story as well as her classmates. Jessica also
demonstrated adequate comprehension skills in her kindergarten
classroom, where she readily followed the teacher’s complex, multistep
verbal instructions (e.g., “After you write your name in the top left corner
of your paper, get your crayons and scissors, put your library books under


<<<PAGE 358>>>
your chair, and line up at the back of the room.”).

Ramon was a quiet, sullen 8-year-old boy whose expressive language
problems had improved over time and were no longer evident in play
with peers. His speech now rarely contained the incomplete sentences
and grammatical errors that were so evident when he was younger.
Ramon’s expressive problems, however, were still impairing him in tasks
involving abstract use of language, and he was struggling in his thirdgrade academic work. An example was Ramon’s explanation of a recent
science experiment: “The teacher had stuff in some jars. He poured it,
and it got pink. The other thing made it white.” Although each sentence
was grammatical, his explanation was difficult to follow, because he
vaguely explained critical ideas and details. Ramon also showed
problems in word-finding, and he relied on vague and nonspecific terms,
such as thing, stuff, and got.
In the first and second grades, Ramon had struggled to keep up with
his classmates in reading, writing, and other academic skills. By third
grade, however, the increasing demands for written work were beyond
his abilities. Ramon’s written work was disorganized and lacked
specificity. Also, classmates began to tease him about his difficulties, and
he was ashamed of his disability and reacted quite aggressively, often
leading to physical fighting. Nonetheless, Ramon continued to show
relatively good comprehension of spoken language, including classroom
teaching concerning abstract concepts. He also comprehended sentences
that were grammatically and conceptually complex (e.g., “The car the
truck hit had hubcaps that were stolen. Had it been possible, she would
have notified us by mail or by phone.”)
Children with speech and
language disorders should have an audiogram to rule out hearing loss.
PATHOLOGY AND LABORATORY EXAMINATION.

Course and Prognosis. The prognosis for expressive language
disturbance worsens the longer it persists in a child; prognosis is also
dependent on the severity of the disorder. Studies of infants and toddlers who


<<<PAGE 359>>>
are “late talkers” concur that 50 to 80 percent of these children master
language skills that are within the expected level during the preschool years.
Most children with language delays later catch up in their preschool years.
Other comorbid disorders may influence the outcome of expressive language
deficits. If children do not develop mood disorders or disruptive behavior
problems, the prognosis is better. The rapidity and extent of recovery depend
on the severity of the disorder, the child’s motivation to participate in speech
and language therapy, and the timely initiation of therapeutic interventions.
The presence or absence of hearing loss, or intellectual disability, impedes
remediation and leads to a worse prognosis. Up to 50 percent of children with
mild expressive language disorder recover spontaneously without any sign of
language impairment, but those children with a severe expressive speech
disorder may persist in exhibiting some symptoms into middle childhood or
later.
Current literature shows that children who demonstrate poor
comprehension, poor articulation, or poor academic performance tend to
continue to have problems in these areas at follow-up 7 years later. There is
also an association between particular language impairment profiles and
persistent mood and behavior problems. Children with poor comprehension
associated with expressive difficulties seem to be more socially isolated and
impaired concerning peer relationships.
Differential Diagnosis. Language disorders are associated with various
psychiatric disorders, including other learning disorders and ADHD, and in
some cases, the language disorder is challenging to separate from another
dysfunction. In mixed receptive–expressive language disorder, language
comprehension (decoding) is markedly below the expected age-appropriate
level, whereas in expressive language disorder, language comprehension
remains within normal limits.
In autism spectrum disorders, children often have impaired language,
symbolic and imagery play, appropriate use of gesture, or capacity to form
typical social relationships. In contrast, children with expressive language
disorder become very frustrated with their disorder and are usually highly
motivated to make friends despite their disability.
Children with acquired aphasia or dysphasia have a history of early normal
language development; the disordered language had its onset after head


<<<PAGE 360>>>
trauma or other neurologic disorder (e.g., a seizure disorder). Children with
selective mutism have normal language development. Often these children
will speak only in front of family members (e.g., mother, father, and
siblings). Children affected by selective mutism are socially anxious and
withdrawn outside the family. Table 2-7 lists the differential diagnosis for
language disorders.
Table 2-7
Differential Diagnosis of Language Disorder

Comorbidity. Children with language disorders have above-average rates of
comorbid psychiatric disorders. In one large study of children with speech
and language disorders, the most common comorbid disorders were ADHD
(19 percent), anxiety disorders (10 percent), oppositional defiant disorder,
and conduct disorder (7 percent combined). Children with expressive
language disorder are also at higher risk for a speech disorder, receptive
difficulties, and other learning disorders. Many disorders—such as reading
disorder, developmental coordination disorder, and other communication
disorders—are associated with expressive language disturbance. Children
with expressive language disturbance often have some receptive impairment,
although not always sufficiently significant for the diagnosis of language


<<<PAGE 361>>>
disorder on this basis. Speech sound disorder, formerly known as phonologic
disorder, is commonly found in young children with a language disorder, and
neurologic abnormalities exist in some children, including soft neurologic
signs, depressed vestibular responses, and EEG abnormalities.
Treatment. The primary goals for early childhood speech and language
treatment are to guide children and their parents toward greater production of
meaningful language. There are more data to support improvements through
speech and language interventions for expressive language deficit in young
school-age children with primary deficits than in preschool children. A study
investigating Parent–Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) for school-age
children with expressive language impairment found that PCIT was
particularly efficacious in improving a child’s verbal initiation, mean length
of utterances, and the proportion of child-to-parent utterances. A large-scale
randomized trial of a yearlong intervention targeting preschoolers with
language delay in Australia found that a community-based program did not
affect language acquisition in 2- and 3-year-olds. Given the high rate of
spontaneous remission of language deficits in preschoolers, and less than
robust effects of interventions for children that are young, treatment for
expressive language disorder is generally not initiated unless it persists after
the preschool years. Various techniques may help a child improve their use of
such parts of speech as pronouns, correct tenses, and question forms. Direct
interventions use a speech and language pathologist who works directly with
the child. Mediated interventions, in which a speech and language
professional teaches a child’s teacher or parent how to promote therapeutic
language techniques, have also been efficacious. Language therapy works on
using words to improve communication strategies and social interactions, as
well. Such therapy consists of behaviorally reinforced exercises and training
with phonemes (sound units), vocabulary, and sentence construction. The
goal is to increase the number of phrases by using block-building methods
and conventional speech therapies.
Etiology. The specific causes of the expressive components of language
disorder are likely to be multifactorial. Scant data are available on the
specific brain structure of children with a language disorder. However,
limited MRI studies suggest that language disorders are associated with


<<<PAGE 362>>>
diminished left-right brain asymmetry in the perisylvian and planum
temporale regions. Results of one small MRI study suggested possible
inversion of brain asymmetry (right > left). Left-handedness or ambilaterality
appears to be associated with expressive language problems with more
frequency than righthandedness. Evidence shows that language disorders
occur more frequently within some families, and several studies of twins
show significant concordance for monozygotic twins for language disorders.
Environmental and educational factors also likely contribute to
developmental language disorders.
Mixed Receptive and Expressive Deficits
Children with both receptive and expressive language impairment may have
impaired ability in sound discrimination, deficits in auditory processing, or
poor memory for sound sequences. Children with mixed receptive–expressive
disturbance have impaired skills in the expression and reception
(understanding and comprehension) of spoken language. The expressive
difficulties in these children may be similar to those of children with only
expressive language disturbance, which is characterized by limited
vocabulary, use of simple sentences, and short sentence usage. Children with
receptive language difficulties may be experiencing additional deficits in
basic auditory processing skills, such as discriminating between sounds, rapid
sound changes, the association of sounds and symbols, and the memory of
sound sequences. These deficits may lead to a whole host of communication
barriers for a child, including a lack of understanding of questions or
directives from others, or inability to follow the conversations of peers or
family members. Teachers or parents may initially misattribute
communication difficulties as behavioral problems, delaying the recognition
of the actual diagnosis.
We can measure the essential features of mixed receptive–expressive
language disturbance on standardized tests; both receptive (comprehension)
and expressive language development scores fall substantially below those
obtained from standardized measures of nonverbal intellectual capacity.
Language difficulties must be sufficiently severe to impair academic
achievement or daily social communication.


<<<PAGE 363>>>
Clinical Features. The essential clinical feature of this language
disturbance is a significant impairment in both language comprehension and
language expression. In the mixed type, expressive impairments are similar to
those of expressive language disturbance but can be more severe. The clinical
features of the receptive component of the disorder typically appear before
the age of 4 years. Severe forms are apparent by the age of 2 years; mild
forms may not become evident until age 7 (second grade) or older when
language becomes complex. Children with language disorder characterized
by mixed receptive–expressive disturbance show markedly delayed and
below-normal ability to comprehend (decode) verbal or sign language,
although they have age-appropriate nonverbal intellectual capacity. Patients
with receptive dysfunction also are impaired in verbal or sign expression
(encoding) of language. The clinical features of mixed receptive–expressive
language disturbance in children between the ages of 18 and 24 months result
from a child’s failure to utter a single phoneme spontaneously or to mimic
another person’s words.
Many children with mixed receptive–expressive language deficits have
auditory sensory difficulties and compromised ability to process visual
symbols, such as explaining the meaning of a picture. They have deficits in
integrating both auditory and visual symbols—for example, recognizing the
common attributes of a toy truck and a toy passenger car. Whereas at 18
months, a child with expressive language deficits only comprehends simple
commands and can point to familiar household objects when told to do so, a
child of the same age with mixed receptive–expressive language disturbance
typically cannot either point to everyday objects or obey simple commands.
A child with mixed receptive–expressive language deficits may appear to be
deaf. He or she responds appropriately to sounds from the environment, but
not to spoken language. If the child later starts to speak, the speech contains
numerous articulation errors, such as omissions, distortions, and substitutions
of phonemes. Language acquisition is much slower for children with mixed
receptive–expressive language disturbance than for other children of the same
age.
Children with mixed receptive–expressive language disturbance have
difficulty recalling early visual and auditory memories and recognizing and
reproducing symbols in a proper sequence. Some children with mixed
receptive–expressive language deficits have a partial hearing defect for true


<<<PAGE 364>>>
tones, an increased threshold of auditory arousal, and an inability to localize
sound sources. Seizure disorders and reading disorders are more common
among the relatives of children with mixed receptive–expressive problems
than in the general population.
Diagnosis. Children with mixed receptive–expressive language deficits
develop language more slowly than their peers and have trouble
understanding conversations that peers can follow. In mixed receptive–
expressive language disorder, receptive dysfunction coexists with expressive
dysfunction. Therefore, we should give standardized tests for both receptive
and expressive language abilities to anyone suspected of having a language
disorder with mixed receptive–expressive disturbance.
A markedly below-expected level of comprehension of verbal or sign
language with intact age-appropriate nonverbal intellectual capacity,
confirmation of language difficulties by standardized receptive language
tests, and the absence of autism spectrum disorder, confirm the diagnosis of
mixed receptive–expressive language deficits; however, in DSM-5, these
deficits are included in the diagnosis of language disorder.
PATHOLOGY AND LABORATORY EXAMINATION. All children thought to have

mixed receptive–expressive language disturbance should have an audiogram
to rule out or confirm the presence of deafness or auditory deficits. A history
of the child and family and observation of the child in various settings help to
clarify the diagnosis.
Jenna was a pleasant 2-year-old who did not yet use any spoken words
and did not respond to simple commands without gestures. She made her
needs known with vocalizations and simple gestures (e.g., showing or
pointing) such as those typically used by younger children. She seemed to
understand the names for only a few familiar people and objects (e.g.,
mommy, daddy, cat, bottle, and cookie). Compared with other children
her age, she had a small comprehension vocabulary and showed limited
understanding of simple verbal directions (e.g., “Get your doll.” “Close
your eyes.”). Nonetheless, her hearing was reasonable, and her motor and
play skills were developing as expected for her age. She showed interest


<<<PAGE 365>>>
in her environment and the activities of the other children at her daycare.

Lena was a shy, reserved 5-year-old who grew up in a bilingual home.
Lena’s parents and older siblings spoke English and Cantonese
proficiently. Her grandparents, who lived in the same home, spoke only
Cantonese. Lena began to understand and speak both languages much
later than her older siblings had. Throughout her preschool years, Lena
continued to develop slowly in comprehension and production. At the
start of kindergarten, Lena understood fewer English words for objects,
actions, and relations than her classmates did. Lena was unable to follow
complicated classroom instructions, particularly those that involved
words for concepts of time (e.g., tomorrow, before, or day) and space
(e.g., behind, next to, or under). It was also hard for Lena to match one of
several pictures to a syntactically complex sentence that she had heard
(e.g., “It was not the train she was waiting for.” “Because he had already
completed his work, he was not kept after school.”). Lena played with
other children but only rarely tried to speak with them, which led to her
classmates ostracizing her. Lena’s attempts at conversations usually
broke down because she misinterpreted what others said or could not
express her thoughts clearly.
Consequently, her classmates generally ignored her, preferring instead
to play with more verbally competent peers. Lena’s infrequent
interactions further limited her opportunities to learn and to practice her
already weak language skills. Lena also showed limited receptive and
expressive skills in Cantonese, as revealed by an assessment conducted
with the assistance of a Cantonese interpreter. Nonetheless, her nonverbal
cognitive and motor skills were within the normal range for her age. Lena
was quite proficient in solving spatial and numerical problems, provided
they were presented on paper and were not word problems.

Mark received a diagnosis of Language Disorder, based on mixed
receptive–expressive deficits when he was a preschooler. By 7 years of
age, he had also received the comorbid diagnoses of reading disorder and


<<<PAGE 366>>>
ADHD. This combination of language, reading, and attention problems
made it virtually impossible for Mark to succeed in school, although he
was able to engage his peers during free play. His comprehension and
attention difficulties limited his ability to understand and to learn
valuable information or to follow classroom instructions or discussions.
Mark fell further and further behind his classmates. He was also
disadvantaged because he could read only a few familiar words. This
disadvantage meant that Mark was neither motivated nor able to learn
academic information outside of the classroom by reading. Mark received
tutoring and speech and language interventions, and despite some
improvements, he continued to lag behind his classmates academically.
Despite his academic problems, however, Mark made friends during
sports activities in which he excelled, and continued to show nonverbal
intellectual skills within the average range.
Differential Diagnosis. Children with language disorder characterized by
mixed receptive–expressive deficits have a deficit in language comprehension
as well as in language production. The receptive deficit may be overlooked at
first, because the expressive language deficit may be more prominent. In
expressive language disturbance alone, comprehension of spoken language
(decoding) remains within age norms. Children with speech sound disorder
and child-onset fluency disorder (stuttering) have normal expressive and
receptive language competence, despite the speech impairments.
Most children with mixed receptive–expressive language disturbance have
a history of variable and inconsistent responses to sounds; they respond more
often to environmental sounds than to speech sounds (Table 2-7). We should
also rule out intellectual disability, selective mutism, acquired aphasia, and
autism spectrum disorder.
Comorbidity. Children with mixed receptive–expressive deficits are at high
risk for additional speech and language disorders, learning disorders, and
additional psychiatric disorders. About half of children with these deficits
also have pronunciation difficulties leading to speech sound disorder, and
about half also have a reading disorder. These rates are significantly higher
than the comorbidity found in children with only expressive language


<<<PAGE 367>>>
problems. ADHD is present in at least one-third of children with mixed
receptive–expressive language disturbances.
Course and Prognosis. The overall prognosis for language disorder with
mixed receptive–expressive disturbance is less favorable than that for
expressive language disturbance alone. When the mixed disorder is identified
in a young child, it is usually severe, and the short-term prognosis is poor.
Language develops at a rapid rate in early childhood, and young children
with the disorder may appear to be falling behind. Given the likelihood of
comorbid learning disorders and other mental disorders, there is a guarded
prognosis. Young children with severe mixed receptive–expressive language
deficits are likely to have learning disorders in the future. In children with
mild versions, it may take several years to identify the mixed disorder, and
the disruption in everyday life may be less overwhelming than that in severe
forms of the disorder. Over the long run, some children with mixed
receptive–expressive language disturbance achieve close to normal language
functions. The prognosis for children who have mixed receptive–expressive
language disturbances varies widely and depends on the nature and severity
of the damage.
Treatment. Children with mixed receptive–expressive language disturbance
should have a comprehensive speech and language evaluation, given the
complexities of having both deficits. Some controversy exists as to whether
remediation of receptive deficits before expressive deficits improves the
overall efficacy of treatment. A review of the literature indicates that it is not
more beneficial to address receptive deficits before expressive, and, in some
cases, remediation of expressive language may reduce or eliminate the need
for receptive language remediation. Thus, current recommendations are either
to address both simultaneously, or to provide interventions for the expressive
component first, and then address the receptive language. Preschoolers with
mixed receptive–expressive language problems optimally receive
interventions designed to promote social communication and literacy as well
as oral language. For children at the kindergarten level, the optimal
intervention includes direct teaching of key pre-reading skills as well as
social skills training. An important early goal of interventions for young
children with mixed receptive–expressive language disturbance is the


<<<PAGE 368>>>
achievement of rudimentary reading skills, in that these skills are protective
against the academic and psychosocial ramifications of falling behind early
on in reading. Some language therapists favor a low-stimuli setting, in which
they give children individual linguistic instruction. Others recommend
integrating speech and language instruction into a varied setting with several
children whom they teach several language structures simultaneously. Often,
a child with receptive and expressive language deficits will benefit from a
small, special-educational setting that allows more individualized learning.
Psychotherapy may be helpful for children with mixed language disorder
who have associated emotional and behavioral problems. We should pay
particular attention to evaluating the child’s self-image and social skills.
Family counseling in which parents and children can develop more effective,
less frustrating means of communicating may be beneficial.
Epidemiology. Mixed receptive–expressive language deficits occur less
frequently than expressive deficits; however, epidemiologic data are scant
regarding specific prevalence rates. The language disturbance is believed to
occur in about 5 percent of preschoolers and persists in about 3 percent of
school-age children. It is less common than expressive language disturbance.
Mixed receptive–expressive language disorder is likely twice as prevalent in
boys as in girls.
Etiology. Language disorders most likely have multiple determinants,
including genetic factors, developmental brain abnormalities, environmental
influences, neurodevelopmental immaturity, and auditory processing features
in the brain. As with expressive language disturbance alone, there is evidence
of familial aggregation of mixed receptive–expressive language deficits.
Twin studies implicate a genetic contribution to this disorder, but there is no
proven mode of genetic transmission. Some studies of children with various
speech and language disorders have also shown cognitive deficits, notably
slower processing of tasks involving naming objects, as well as fine motor
tasks. Slower myelinization of neural pathways may account for the slow
processing found in children with developmental language disorders. Several
studies suggest an underlying impairment of auditory discrimination because
most children with the disorder are more responsive to environmental sounds
than to speech sounds.


<<<PAGE 369>>>
SPEECH SOUND DISORDER
Children with speech sound disorder have difficulty pronouncing speech
sounds correctly due to omissions of sounds, distortions of sounds, or
atypical pronunciation. Formerly called phonologic disorder, typical speech
disturbances in speech sound disorder include omitting the last sounds of the
word (e.g., saying mou for mouse or drin for drink), or substituting one sound
for another (saying bwu instead of blue or tup for cup). Distortions in sounds
can occur when children allow too much air to escape from the side of their
mouths while saying sounds like sh or producing sounds like s or z with their
tongue protruded. Speech sound errors can also occur in patterns because a
child has an interrupted airflow instead of a steady airflow preventing their
pronouncing words (e.g., pat for pass or bacuum for vacuum). Children with
a speech sound disorder can be mistaken for younger children because of
their difficulties in producing speech sounds correctly. We make a diagnosis
of a speech sound disorder by comparing the skills of a given child with the
expected skill level of others of the same age. The disorder results in errors in
whole words because of incorrect pronunciation of consonants, substitution
of one sound for another, omission of entire phonemes, and, in some cases,
dysarthria (slurred speech because of incoordination of speech muscles) or
dyspraxia (difficulty planning and executing speech). Speech sound
development likely depends on both linguistic and motor development that
we must integrate to produce sounds.
Speech sound disturbances such as dysarthria and dyspraxia are not
diagnosed as speech sound disorder if they are known to have a neurologic
basis, according to DSM-5. Thus, speech sound abnormalities accounted for
by cerebral palsy, cleft palate, deafness or hearing loss, traumatic brain
injury, or neurologic conditions are not diagnosed as speech sound disorder.
Articulation difficulties not associated with a neurologic condition are the
most common components of speech sound disorder in children. Articulation
deficits include poor articulation, sound substitution, and speech sound
omission, and give the impression of “baby talk.” Typically, these deficits are
not caused by anatomical, structural, physiologic, auditory, or neurologic
abnormalities. They vary from mild to severe and result in speech that ranges
from entirely intelligible to unintelligible.


<<<PAGE 370>>>
Clinical Features
Children with speech sound disorder have a delay in, or are incapable of,
producing accurate speech sounds typical for their age, intelligence, and
dialect. The sounds are often substitutions—for example, the use of t instead
of k—and omissions, such as leaving off the final consonants of words. We
can usually recognize speech sound disorder in early childhood. In severe
cases, we can recognize it between 2 and 3 years of age. In less severe cases,
the disorder may not be apparent until the age of 6 years. A child’s
articulation is disordered when it is significantly behind that of most children
at the same age level, intellectual level, and educational level.
In very mild cases, a single speech sound (i.e., phoneme) may be affected.
When a single phoneme is affected, it is usually one that is acquired late in
normal language acquisition. The speech sounds most frequently
misarticulated are also those acquired late in the developmental sequence,
including r, sh, th, f, z, l, and ch. In severe cases and young children, sounds
such as b, m, t, d, n, and h may be mispronounced. One or many speech
sounds may be affected, but vowel sounds are not among them.
Children with speech sound disorder cannot articulate specific phonemes
correctly and may distort, substitute, or even omit the affected phonemes.
With omissions, the phonemes are absent entirely—for example, bu for blue,
ca for car, or whaa? For what’s that? With substitutions, children may replace
difficult phonemes with incorrect ones—for example, wabbit for rabbit, fum
for thumb, or whath dat? For what’s that? With distortions, the child may
approximate the correct phoneme but articulate it incorrectly. Rarely,
additions (usually of the vowel uh) occur—for example, puhretty for pretty,
what’s uh that uh? For what’s that?
Omissions are the most severe type of misarticulating, with substitutions
the next most serious, and distortions the least severe type. Omissions, which
are most frequent in the speech of young children, usually occur at the ends
of words or in clusters of consonants (ka for car, scisso for scissors).
Distortions, which are found mainly in the speech of older children, result in
a sound that is not part of the speaker’s dialect. Distortions may be the last
type of misarticulating remaining in the speech of children whose articulation
problems have mostly remitted. The most common types of distortions are
the lateral slip—in which a child pronounces s sounds with the airstream


<<<PAGE 371>>>
going across the tongue, producing a whistling effect—and the palatal or lisp
—in which the s sound, formed with the tongue too close to the palate,
produces a ssh sound effect.
The misarticulating of children with speech sound disorder is often
inconsistent and random. A child may pronounce a phoneme correctly one
time and incorrectly another time. Misarticulating is most common at the
ends of words, in long and syntactically complex sentences, and during rapid
speech.
Omissions, distortions, and substitutions also usually occur in the speech
of young children learning to talk. However, whereas young, typically
speaking children soon replace their misarticulating, children with speech
sound disorder do not. Even as children with articulation problems grow and
finally acquire the correct phoneme, they may use it only in newly acquired
words and may not correct the words learned earlier that they have been
mispronouncing for some time.
Most children eventually outgrow speech sound disorder, usually by the
third grade. After the fourth grade, however, spontaneous recovery is
unlikely, and so it is essential to try to remediate the disorder before the
development of complications. Often, beginning kindergarten or school
precipitates the improvement when recovery from speech sound disorder is
spontaneous. Children who have not shown spontaneous improvement by the
third or fourth grade should have speech therapy. Speech therapy should be
initiated at an early age for children whose articulation is significantly
unintelligible and who are troubled by their inability to speak clearly.
Children with speech sound disorder may have various concomitant social,
emotional, and behavioral problems, mainly when comorbid expressive
language problems are present. Children with chronic expressive language
deficits and severe articulation impairment are the ones most likely to suffer
from psychiatric problems.
Martin was a talkative, likable 3-year-old with virtually unintelligible
speech, despite excellent receptive language skills and normal hearing.
Martin’s level of expressive language development was difficult to
quantify due to his very poor pronunciation. The rhythm and melody of
his speech, however, suggested that he was trying to produce multiword


<<<PAGE 372>>>
utterances, as would be expected at his age. Martin produced only a few
vowels (/ee/, /ah/, and /oo/), some early developing consonants (/m/, /n/,
/d/, /t/, /p/, /b/, /h/, and /w/), and limited syllables. This reduced sound
repertoire made many of his spoken words indistinguishable from one
another (e.g., he said bahbah for bottle, baby, and bubble, and he used
nee for knee, need, and Anita [his sister]). Moreover, he consistently
omitted consonant sounds at the end of words and in consonant cluster
sequences (e.g., /tr-/, /st-/, /-nt/, and /-mp/). Understandably, on occasion,
Martin reacted with frustration and tantrums to his difficulties in making
his needs understood.

Brad was a pleasant, cooperative 5-year-old, who was recognized as early
as preschool to have articulation problems, and these persisted into
kindergarten. His language comprehension skills and hearing were within
normal limits. He showed some mild expressive language problems,
however, in the use of certain grammatical features (e.g., pronouns,
auxiliary verbs, and past-tense word endings) and in the formulation of
complex sentences. He correctly produced all vowel sounds and most of
the early developing consonants, but he was inconsistent in his attempts
to produce later-developing consonants (e.g., /r/, /l/, /s/, /z/, /sh/, /th/, and
/ch/). Sometimes, he omitted them; sometimes, he substituted other
sounds for them (e.g., /w/ for /r/ or /f/ for /th/); occasionally, he even
produced them correctly. Brad had particular problems in correctly
producing consonant cluster sequences and multisyllabic words. Cluster
sequences had omitted or incorrect sounds (e.g., blue might be produced
as bue or bwue, and hearts as hots or hars). Multisyllabic words had
syllables omitted (e.g., efant for elephant and getti for spaghetti) and
sounds mispronounced or even transposed (e.g., aminal for animal and
lemon for melon). Strangers were unable to understand approximately 80
percent of Brad’s speech. Brad often spoke more slowly and clearly than
usual, however, when asked to repeat something, as he often was.

Jane was a hyperactive 8-year-old, with a history of significant speech


<<<PAGE 373>>>
delay. During her preschool and early school years, she had overcome
many of her earlier speech errors. A few late-developing sounds (/r/,/l/,
and /th/), however, continued to pose a challenge for her. Jane often
substituted /f/ or /d/ for/th/and produced /w/ for /r/ and /l/. Overall, her
speech was easily understood, despite these minor errors. Nonetheless,
she became somewhat aggressive with her peers because of the teasing
she received from her classmates about her speech.
Diagnosis
The essential feature of speech sound disorder is a child’s delay or failure to
produce developmentally expected speech sounds, especially consonants,
resulting in sound omissions, substitutions, and distortions of phonemes. A
rough guideline for clinical assessment of children’s articulation is that
normal 3-year-olds correctly articulate m, n, ng, b, p, h, t, k, q, and d;
ordinary 4-year-olds correctly articulate f, y, ch, sh, and z; and typical 5-yearolds correctly articulate th, s, and r.
Speech sound disorder cannot be accounted for by structural or neurologic
abnormalities, and typically, normal language development accompanies it.
Table 2-8 lists the diagnostic approaches to speech sound disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of speech sound disorder includes a careful
determination of symptoms, severity, and possible medical conditions that
might be producing the symptoms. First, we must determine that the
misarticulating is sufficiently severe to impair the child, rather than a
normative developmental process of learning to speak. Second, we must
determine that no physical abnormalities account for the articulation errors
and must rule out neurologic disorders that may cause dysarthria, hearing
impairment, mental retardation, and pervasive developmental disorders.
Third, we must obtain an evaluation of receptive and expressive language to
determine that the speech difficulty is not solely attributable to the disorders,
as mentioned earlier.
Table 2-8


<<<PAGE 374>>>
Speech Sound Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic
name

Speech Sound Disorder

Specific Speech
Articulation
Disorder

Duration

Onset during early
development

Onset during early
development

Symptoms

Difficulty producing spoken
Disorder of speech
sounds
sounds. Examples:
Difficult to understand
• Developmental
disorder:
Limits
social/academic/occupational
• phonologic
achievement
disorder
• speech
articulation
disorder
• Dyslalia
• Functional
speech
articulation
disorder
• Lalling

Exclusions
Mechanical disorders of
(not result
speech or hearing (e.g.,
of):
deafness, cleft palate)
A neurologic disorder
Another medical disorder

Aphasia NOS
Apraxia
Hearing loss
Mental retardation
With language
developmental
disorder:
• Expressive
• Receptive


<<<PAGE 375>>>
Comments

ICD groups this with
the language
disorder as per
Table 2-6

Table 2-9
Differential Diagnosis of Speech Sound Disorder

Neurologic, oral structural, and audiometric examinations may be
necessary to rule out physical factors that cause certain types of articulation
abnormalities. Children with dysarthria, a disorder caused by structural or
neurologic abnormalities, differ from children with speech sound disorder in
that dysarthria is less likely to remit spontaneously and may be more difficult
to remediate. Drooling, slow, or uncoordinated motor behavior, abnormal
chewing or swallowing, and awkward or slow protrusion and retraction of the
tongue indicate dysarthria. A slow rate of speech also indicates dysarthria
(Table 2-9).
Comorbidity
More than half of children with speech sound disorder have some difficulty
with language. Disorders most commonly present with speech sound
disorders are language disorder, reading disorder, and developmental


<<<PAGE 376>>>
coordination disorder. Enuresis may also accompany the disorder. A delay in
reaching speech milestones (e.g., first word and first sentence) occurs in
some children with speech sound disorder, but most children with the
disorder begin speaking at the appropriate age. Children with both speech
sound and language disorders are at the highest risk for attentional problems
and specific learning disorders. Children with speech sound disorder in the
absence of language disorder have a lower risk of comorbid psychiatric
disorders and behavioral problems.
Course and Prognosis
Spontaneous remission of symptoms is common in children whose
misarticulating involves only a few phonemes. Children who persist in
exhibiting articulation problems after the age of 5 years may be experiencing
a myriad of other speech and language impairments so that it is appropriate to
perform a comprehensive evaluation at that time. Children older than age 5
with articulation problems are at higher risk for auditory perceptual problems.
Spontaneous recovery is rare after the age of 8 years. Some debate exists
regarding the relationship between articulation problems and reading disorder
or dyslexia. A recent study comparing children with phonologic problems
only, with children who had dyslexia only, and those with both phonologic
difficulties and dyslexia concluded that children with both disorders have
somewhat distinct profiles and are comorbid disorders rather than one mixed
disorder.
Treatment
Two main approaches can successfully improve speech sound difficulties.
The first one, the phonologic approach, is usually chosen for children with
extensive patterns of multiple speech sound errors that may include final
consonant deletion or consonant cluster reduction. Exercises in this approach
to treatment focus on the guided practice of specific sounds, such as final
consonants, and when mastering that skill, extending the practice to use it in
meaningful words and sentences. The other approach, the traditional
approach, is used for children who produce substitution or distortion errors in
just a few sounds. In this approach, the child practices the production of the
problem sound while we provide immediate feedback and cues concerning


<<<PAGE 377>>>
the correct placement of the tongue and mouth for improved articulation.
Children who have errors in articulation because of abnormal swallowing
resulting in tongue thrust and lisps should receive exercises to improve their
swallowing patterns and, in turn, improve their speech. A speech-language
pathologist typically provides speech therapy, yet parents can learn to provide
adjunctive help by practicing techniques used in the treatment. Early
intervention can be helpful, because, for many children with mild articulation
difficulties, even several months of intervention may be helpful in early
elementary school. In general, when a child’s articulation and intelligibility is
noticeably different from peers by 8 years of age, speech deficits often lead to
problems with peers, learning, and self-image, especially when the disorder is
so severe that many consonants are misarticulated, and when errors involve
omissions and substitutions of phonemes, rather than distortions.
Children with persistent articulation problems are likely to be teased or
ostracized by peers and may become isolated and demoralized. Therefore, it
is crucial to give support to children with phonologic disorders and,
whenever possible, to support prosocial activities and social interactions with
peers. Parental counseling and monitoring of child–peer relationships and
school behavior can help minimize social impairment in children with speech
sound and language disorder.
Epidemiology
Epidemiologic studies suggest that the prevalence of speech sound disorder is
at least 3 percent in preschoolers, 2 percent in children 6 to 7 years of age,
and 0.5 percent in 17-year-old adolescents. Approximately 7 to 8 percent of
5-year-old children in one large community sample had speech sound
production problems of developmental, structural, or neurologic origins.
Another study found that up to 7.5 percent of children between the ages of 7
and 11 years had speech sound disorders. Of those, 2.5 percent had speech
delay (deletion and substitution errors past the age of 4 years), and 5 percent
had residual articulation errors beyond the age of 8 years. Speech sound
disorders occur much more frequently than disorders with a known structural
or neurologic origin. Speech sound disorder is approximately two to three
times more common in boys than in girls. It is also more common among
first-degree relatives of patients with the disorder than in the general


<<<PAGE 378>>>
population. Although speech sound mistakes are quite common in children
younger than 3 years of age, these mistakes are usually self-corrected by age
7 years. Misarticulating after the age of 7 years is likely to represent a speech
sound disorder. The prevalence of speech sound disorders reportedly falls to
0.5 percent by mid to late adolescence.
Etiology
Contributing factors leading to speech disturbance may include perinatal
problems, genetic factors, and auditory processing problems. Given the high
rates of spontaneous remission in very young children, there may be a
maturational delay in the developmental brain process underlying speech in
some cases. The likelihood of neuronal cause is supported by the observation
that children with speech sound disorder are also more likely to manifest
“soft neurologic signs” as well as language disorder and a higher-thanexpected rate of reading disorder. Data from twin studies implicate genetic
factors, as they show concordance rates for monozygotic twins that are higher
than chance.
Articulation disorders caused by structural or mechanical problems are
rare. Articulation problems not caused by speech sound disorder could
represent a neurologic impairment, such as dysarthria and apraxia or
dyspraxia. Dysarthria results from an impairment in the neural mechanisms
regulating the muscular control of speech. This impairment can occur in
congenital conditions, such as cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy, or head
injury, or because of infectious processes. Apraxia or dyspraxia is
characterized by difficulty in the execution of speech, even when no apparent
paralysis or weakness of the muscles used in speech exists.
Environmental factors may play a role in speech sound disorder, but
constitutional factors seem to make the most significant contribution. The
high proportion of speech sound disorder in individual families implies a
genetic component in the development of this disorder. Developmental
coordination disorder and coordination in the mouth, such as in chewing and
blowing the nose, may be associated.

CHILD-ONSET FLUENCY DISORDER (STUTTERING)
Child-onset fluency disorder (stuttering) usually begins during the first years


<<<PAGE 379>>>
of life and is characterized by disruptions in the normal flow of speech by
involuntary speech motor events. Stuttering can include a variety of specific
disruptions of fluency, including sound or syllable repetitions, sound
prolongations, dysrhythmic phonations, and complete blocking or unusual
pauses between sounds and syllables of words. In severe cases, the stuttering
may include accessory or secondary attempts to compensate, such as
respiratory, abnormal voice phonations, or tongue clicks. Associated
behaviors, such as eye blinks, facial grimacing, head jerks, and abnormal
body movements, may be observed before or during the disrupted speech.
Early intervention is necessary because children who receive early
intervention can be more than seven times more likely to have full resolution
of their stuttering. In severe and some untreated cases, stuttering can become
an entrenched pattern that is more challenging to remediate later in life and is
associated with significant psychological and social distress. When stuttering
becomes chronic, persisting into adulthood, the rate of concurrent social
anxiety disorder is between 40 and 60 percent.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering) is not difficult
when the clinical features are apparent and well developed, and each of the
following four phases (described in the next section) are readily recognized.
Diagnostic difficulties can arise when evaluating for stuttering in young
children because some preschool children experience transient dysfluency. It
may not be clear whether the nonfluent pattern is part of normal speech and
language development or whether it represents the initial stage in the
development of stuttering. The child should be referred to a speech therapist
if incipient stuttering is suspected. Table 2-10 compares the approaches to
diagnosing stuttering.
Clinical Features
Stuttering usually appears between the ages of 18 months and 9 years, with
two sharp peaks of onset between the ages of 2 to 3.5 years and 5 to 7 years.
Some, but not all, stutterers have other speech and language problems, such
as phonologic disorder and expressive language disorder. Stuttering does not
begin suddenly; it typically develops over weeks or months with a repetition


<<<PAGE 380>>>
of initial consonants, whole words that are usually the first words of a phrase,
or long words. As the disorder progresses, the repetitions become more
frequent, with consistent stuttering on the most important words or phrases.
Even after it develops, stuttering may be absent during oral readings, singing,
and talking to pets or inanimate objects.
Table 2-10
Child Onset Fluency Disorder (Stuttering)
DSM-5
Diagnostic name Childhood-Onset Fluency
Disorder (Stuttering)

ICD-10
Stuttering
(stammering)

Duration

Onset of symptoms during the
developmental period

Symptoms

Fluency/speech abnormalities: Speech
characterized
• Repetition of sounds/
by:
syllables
• Repetition or
• Prolonging sounds or
prolongation
consonants
of sounds or
• Using broken words
words
• Blocking/pausing
• Frequent
• Frequent word substitution
pauses
(circumlocution)
• Excess physical tension
during word production
• Repeating monosyllabic
words

Psychosocial
Causing severe anxiety and/or
consequences
impairment in areas of
of symptoms
functioning

Resulting in
disruption of
normal flow or
rhythm of
speech

Exclusions (not

Tic disorders

Speech-motor or sensory


<<<PAGE 381>>>
result of):

issues
Neurologic injury
Another medical condition
Another mental disorder
Note: later-onset cases after
the developmental period are
coded as “adult-onset fluency
disorder”

There are four gradually evolving phases in the development of stuttering:
Phase 1 occurs during the preschool period. Initially, the difficulty tends
to be episodic and appears for weeks or months between long interludes
of normal speech. A high percentage of recovery from these periods of
stuttering occurs. During this phase, children stutter most often when
excited or upset, when they seem to have a great deal to say, and under
other conditions of communicative pressure.
Phase 2 usually occurs in the elementary school years. The disorder is
chronic, with few, if any, intervals of normal speech. Affected children
become aware of their speech difficulties and regard themselves as
stutterers. In phase 2, the stuttering occurs mainly with the significant
parts of speech—nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs.
Phase 3 usually appears after the age of 8 years and up to adulthood,
most often in late childhood and early adolescence. During phase 3,
stuttering comes and goes mainly in response to specific situations, such
as reciting in class, speaking to strangers, making purchases in stores, and
using the telephone. Some words and sounds are more difficult than
others.
Phase 4 typically appears in late adolescence and adulthood.
Stutterers show vivid, fearful anticipation of stuttering. Words, sounds, and
situations can all be intimidating. Word substitutions and circumlocutions are
common. Stutterers avoid situations requiring speech and show other
evidence of fear and embarrassment.
Stutterers may have associated clinical features: vivid, fearful anticipation
of stuttering, with avoidance of particular words, sounds, or situations in


<<<PAGE 382>>>
which stuttering is anticipated; and eye blinks, tics, and tremors of the lips or
jaw. Frustration, anxiety, and depression are common among those with
chronic stuttering.
Differential Diagnosis
Normal speech dysfluency in preschool years is challenging to differentiate
from incipient stuttering. In stuttering occurs more nonfluencies, part-word
repetitions, sound prolongations, and disruptions in voice airflow through the
vocal tract. Children who stutter appear to be tense and uncomfortable with
their speech pattern, in contrast to young children who are nonfluent in their
speech but seem to be at ease. Spastic dysphonia is a stuttering-like speech
disorder distinguished from stuttering by the presence of an abnormal
breathing pattern.
Cluttering is a speech disorder characterized by erratic and dysrhythmic
speech patterns of rapid and jerky spurts of words and phrases. In cluttering,
those affected are usually unaware of the disturbance, whereas after the initial
phase of the disorder, stutterers are aware of their speech difficulties.
Cluttering is often an associated feature of expressive language disturbance.
Comorbidity
Very young children who stutter typically show some delay in the
development of language and articulation without additional disorders of
speech and language. Preschoolers and school-age children who stutter
exhibit an increased incidence of social anxiety, school refusal, and other
anxiety symptoms. Older children who stutter also do not necessarily have
comorbid speech and language disorders, but often manifest anxiety
symptoms and disorders. When stuttering persists into adolescence, social
isolation occurs at higher rates than in the general adolescent population.
Stuttering is also associated with a variety of abnormal motor movements,
upper body tics, and facial grimaces. Other disorders that coexist with
stuttering include phonologic disorder, expressive language disorder, mixed
receptive–expressive language disorder, and ADHD.
Course and Prognosis
The course of stuttering is often long term, with periods of partial remission


<<<PAGE 383>>>
lasting for weeks or months and exacerbations occurring most frequently
when a child is under pressure to communicate. In children with mild cases,
50 to 80 percent recover spontaneously. School-age children who stutter
chronically may have impaired peer relationships as a result of teasing and
social rejection. These children may face academic difficulties, especially if
they persistently avoid speaking in class. Stuttering is associated with anxiety
disorders in chronic cases, and approximately half of individuals with
persistent stuttering have social anxiety disorder.
Treatment
There are several evidence-based treatments for stuttering. One such
treatment is the Lidcombe Program, which uses an operant conditioning
model in which parents use praise for periods in which the child does not
stutter, and intervene when the child does stutter to request the child to selfcorrect the stuttered word. This treatment program is primarily administered
at home by parents, under the supervision of a speech and language therapist.
A second treatment program in clinical trials is a family-based, PCIT that
identifies stressors possibly associated with increased stuttering and aims to
diminish these stressors. A third treatment under investigation in clinical
trials relies on the knowledge that speaking each syllable in time to a
particular rhythm has led to diminished stuttering in adults. This treatment
program appears to be promising when administered early on, to
preschoolers.
Distinct forms of interventions have historically helped stuttering. The first
approach, direct speech therapy, targets modification of the stuttering
response to fluent-sounding speech by systematic steps and rules of speech
mechanics that the person can practice. The other form of therapy for
stuttering targets diminishing tension and anxiety during speech. These
treatments may utilize breathing exercises and relaxation techniques to help
children slow the rate of speaking and modulate speech volume. Relaxation
techniques use the premise that it is nearly impossible to be relaxed and
stutter in the usual manner at the same time—current interventions for
stuttering use individualized combinations of behavioral distraction,
relaxation techniques, and directed speech modification.
Stutterers who have a poor self-image, comorbid anxiety disorders, or


<<<PAGE 384>>>
depressive disorders are likely to require additional treatments with
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) or pharmacologic agents such as one of
the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants.
An approach to stuttering proposed by the Speech Foundation of America
is labeled self-therapy, based on the premise that stuttering is not a symptom,
but a behavior that can be modified. Stutterers can learn to control their
difficulty partly by modifying their feelings about stuttering and attitudes
toward it and partly by modifying the deviant behaviors associated with their
stuttering blocks. The approach includes desensitizing, reducing the
emotional reaction to and fears of, stuttering, and substituting positive action
to control the moment of stuttering.
Epidemiology
An epidemiologic survey of 3- to 17-year-olds derived from the United States
National Health Interview Surveys reports that the prevalence of stuttering is
approximately 1.6 percent. Stuttering tends to be most common in young
children and has often resolved spontaneously as the child ages. The typical
age of onset is 2 to 7 years of age, with 90 percent of children exhibiting
symptoms by age 7 years. Approximately 65 to 80 percent of young children
who stutter are likely to have a spontaneous remission over time. According
to the DSM-5, the rate dips to 0.8 percent by adolescence. Stuttering affects
about three to four males for every one female. The disorder is significantly
more common among family members of affected children than in the
general population. Reports suggest that for male persons who stutter, 20
percent of their male children and 10 percent of their female children will
also stutter.
Etiology
Converging evidence indicates that the cause of stuttering is multifactorial,
including genetic, neurophysiologic, and psychological factors that
predispose a child to have poor speech fluency. Although research evidence
does not indicate that anxiety or conflicts cause stuttering or that persons who
stutter have more psychiatric disturbances than those with other forms of
speech and language disorders, stressful situations can exacerbate stuttering.
Other theories about the cause of stuttering include organic models and


<<<PAGE 385>>>
learning models. Organic models include those that focus on incomplete
lateralization or abnormal cerebral dominance. Several studies using EEG
found that stuttering males had right hemispheric α-suppression across
stimulus words and tasks; nonstutterers had left hemispheric suppression.
Some studies of stutterers have noted an overrepresentation of lefthandedness
and ambidexterity. Twin studies and striking gender differences in stuttering
indicate that stuttering has some genetic basis.
Learning theories about the cause of stuttering include the semantogenic
theory, in which stuttering is a learned response to normative early childhood
disfluencies. Another learning model focuses on classical conditioning, in
which the stuttering becomes conditioned to environmental factors. In the
cybernetic model, speech is a process that depends on appropriate feedback
for regulation; stuttering is hypothesized to occur because of a breakdown in
the feedback loop. The observations that white noise reduces stuttering and
delayed auditory feedback produces stuttering in regular speakers lend
support to the feedback theory.
The motor functioning of some children who stutter appears to be delayed
or slightly abnormal. The observation of difficulties in speech planning
exhibited by some children who stutter suggests that higher-level cognitive
dysfunction may contribute to stuttering. Although children who stutter do
not routinely exhibit other speech and language disorders, family members of
these children often exhibit an increased incidence of a variety of speech and
language disorders. Stuttering is most likely to be caused by a set of
interacting variables that include both genetic and environmental factors.

SOCIAL (PRAGMATIC) COMMUNICATION DISORDER
Social (pragmatic) communication disorder is a newly added diagnosis to
DSM-5 characterized by persistent deficits in using verbal and nonverbal
communication for social purposes in the absence of restricted and repetitive
interests and behaviors. Examples of observable deficits include difficulty in
understanding and following social rules of language, gesture, and social
context. This deficit may limit a child’s ability to communicate effectively
with peers, in academic settings, and family activities. For successful social
and pragmatic communication, a child or adolescent must integrate gestures,
language, and social context of a given interaction to correctly infer its


<<<PAGE 386>>>
meaning. Thus, the child or adolescent must understand another speaker’s
“intention” of the communication with verbal and nonverbal cues. This
understanding requires that they understand the environmental and social
context of the interaction. One of the reasons DSM-5 introduced the
diagnosis of social (pragmatic) communication disorder was to include those
children with social communication impairment who do not exhibit
restrictive and repetitive interests and behaviors and therefore do not fulfill
the criteria for autism spectrum disorders. Pragmatic communication
encompasses the ability to infer meaning in a given communication by not
only understanding the words used but also integrating the phrases into their
prior understanding of the social environment. Social (pragmatic)
communication disorder is a new disorder; however, the concept of children
with social communication deficits without repetitive and restrictive interests
and behaviors has been identified for many years and is often associated with
delayed language acquisition and language disorder.
Table 2-11
Social (Pragmatic) Communication Disorder
DSM-5
Diagnostic name Social (Pragmatic)
Communication Disorder

ICD-10
Developmental
disorder of
speech and
language,
unspecified

Duration

Begins in the early
developmental period

Symptoms

Difficulties with
(No criteria listed)
verbal/nonverbal
communication in social
situations. Examples include
difficulties with:
• Greetings
• Sharing information


<<<PAGE 387>>>
• Matching conversational
tone
• Matching conversation
context
• Following normal rules for
social conversations
• Understanding implied
meanings
Psychosocial
Causing functional limitation
consequences
of symptoms
Exclusions (not
result of):

• Another medical condition
• Another neurologic condition
• Another mental disorder
• Autism spectrum disorder
• Intellectual disability
• Global developmental delay

Clinical Features
Social (pragmatic) communication disorder is an impaired ability to use
verbal and nonverbal communication for social purposes effectively and
occurs in the absence of restricted and repetitive interests and behaviors.
Although the preceding deficits begin in the early developmental period, we
would rarely make the diagnosis in a child younger than 4 years of age. In
milder cases, the difficulties may not become apparent until adolescence,
with its associated increased demands for language and social understanding.
The deficits in social communication lead to impairment in function in social
situations, in developing relationships, and in family and academic settings.
Diagnosis
According to the DSM-5, all of the following features must be present in
order to meet diagnostic criteria: (1) Deficits in using appropriate
communication such as greeting or sharing information in a social situation


<<<PAGE 388>>>
or context. (2) Impaired ability to modulate the tone, level, or vocabulary
used in social communication to match the listener and the situation, such as
inability to simplify communication when speaking to a young child. (3)
Impaired ability in following the rules for conversations such as taking turns
or rephrasing a statement for clarification and failure to recognize and
respond socially appropriately to verbal and nonverbal feedback. (4)
Difficulty understanding things that are not explicitly stated, impaired ability
to make inferences, understand humor, or interpret socially ambiguous
stimuli.
The diagnosis of social (pragmatic) communication disorder can be
difficult to distinguish from mild variants of autism spectrum disorder in
which repetitive and restricted interests and behaviors are minimal. There are
discrepant data regarding how many children previously diagnosed with
autism would be excluded from the DSM-5 criteria, which now focus on only
two symptom domains: social communication deficits and restricted,
repetitive interests and behaviors. In one study, only 60.6 percent of children
who had previously met the criteria for autistic spectrum disorder in the
previous edition of the DSM met DSM-5 criteria for autistic spectrum
disorder. However, in another study, up to 91 percent of patients with autism
continued to meet the same DSM-5 criteria.
The essential features of social (pragmatic) communication disorder are
persistently impaired social pragmatic communication resulting in limited
effective communication, compromised social relationships, and difficulties
with academic or occupational achievement.
Table 2-11 lists the diagnostic approach to social (pragmatic)
communication disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
The primary diagnostic consideration in social (pragmatic) communication
disorder is autism spectrum disorder. The two disorders are most easily
distinguished when the prominence of restricted and repetitive interests and
behaviors characteristic of autistic spectrum disorder is present. However, in
many cases of autism, restrictive interests and repetitive behaviors manifest
more prominently in the early developmental period and are not apparent in
older childhood. However, even when these features are not observable, if we


<<<PAGE 389>>>
can obtain them in the patient’s history, we would diagnose autism rather
than social (pragmatic) communication disorder. We should consider social
(pragmatic) communication disorder only when the restricted interests and
repetitive behaviors have never been present. ADHD may overlap with a
social (pragmatic) communication disorder in social communication
disturbance; however, the core features of ADHD are not likely to be
confused with autism spectrum disorder.
In some cases, however, the two disorders may coexist. Another childhood
disorder with socially impairing symptoms that may overlap with social
(pragmatic) communication disorder is social anxiety disorder. In social
anxiety disorder, however, social communication skills are present, but not
manifested in feared social situations. In social (pragmatic) communication
disorder, appropriate social communication skills are not present in any
setting. Both social anxiety disorder and social (pragmatic) communication
disorder may occur comorbidly, however, and children with social
(pragmatic) communication disorder may be at higher risk for social anxiety
disorder. Finally, intellectual disability may be confused with social
(pragmatic) communication disorder, in that social communication skills may
be deficits in children with intellectual disability. We should only make a
diagnosis of social (pragmatic) communication disorder when social
communication skills are more severe than intellectual disability.
Comorbidity
Social (pragmatic) communication disorder is commonly associated with
language disorder, consisting of diminished vocabulary for expected age,
deficits in receptive skills, as well as impaired ability to use expressive
language. ADHD is often concurrent with social (pragmatic) communication
disorder. Specific learning disorders with impairments in reading and writing
are also commonly comorbid disorders with social (pragmatic)
communication disorder. Although some symptoms of social anxiety disorder
may overlap with social (pragmatic) communication disorder, the full
disorder of social anxiety disorder may emerge comorbidly with social
(pragmatic) communication disorder.
Course and Prognosis


<<<PAGE 390>>>
The course and outcome of social (pragmatic) communication disorder are
highly variable and dependent on both the severity of the disorder and
potential interventions administered. By age 5 years, most children
demonstrate enough speech and language to be able to discern the presence
of deficits in social communication. However, in the milder forms of the
disorder, social communication deficits may not be identified until
adolescence, when language and social interactions are sufficiently complex
that deficits stand out. Many children have significant improvement over
time; however, even so, some early pragmatic deficits may cause lasting
impairment in social relationships and academic progress. There is a newly
growing body of investigations on therapeutic interventions that may affect
future outcomes of social (pragmatic) communication disorder.
Treatment
There are few data to date to inform an evidence-based treatment for social
(pragmatic) communication disorder or to sufficiently distinguish it from
other disorders with overlapping symptoms such as autism spectrum disorder,
ADHD, and social anxiety disorder. A randomized controlled trial (RCT) of a
social communication intervention explicitly directed at children with social
(pragmatic) communication disorder aimed at three areas of communication:
(1) social understanding and social interaction; (2) verbal and nonverbal
pragmatic skills, including conversation; and (3) language processing,
involving making inferences, and learning new words. Although the primary
outcome measure in this study did not show significant differences for the
intervention group versus the “treatment as usual” group, there were several
ratings by parents and teachers that demonstrate potential improvements in
social communication skills after a 20-session intensive intervention for
social (pragmatic) communication disorder. Continued investigation is
necessary to both validate the preceding results and to promote evidencebased treatments for children with social (pragmatic) communication
disorder.
Epidemiology
It is difficult to estimate the prevalence of social (pragmatic) communication
disorder. Nevertheless, a body of literature has documented a profile of


<<<PAGE 391>>>
children who present with these persistent difficulties in pragmatic language,
who do not meet the criteria for autism spectrum disorder.
Etiology
A family history of communication disorders, autism spectrum disorder, or
specific learning disorder all appear to increase the risk for social (pragmatic)
communication disorder. This increased risk suggests that genetic influences
are contributing factors in the development of this disorder. The etiology of
social (pragmatic) communication disorder, however, is likely to be
multifactorial, and given its frequent comorbidity with both language
disorder and ADHD, developmental and environmental influences are also
likely to play a role.

UNSPECIFIED COMMUNICATION DISORDER
Disorders that do not meet the diagnostic criteria for any specific
communication disorder fall into the category of unspecified communication
disorder. An example is voice disorder, in which the patient has an
abnormality in pitch, loudness, quality, tone, or resonance. To be coded as a
disorder, the voice abnormality must be sufficiently severe to impair
academic achievement or social communication. Operationally, speech
production includes five interacting subsystems, including respiration
(airflow from the lungs), phonation (sound generation in the larynx),
resonance (shaping of the sound quality in the pharynx and nasal cavity),
articulation (modulation of the sound stream into consonant and vowel
sounds with the tongue, jaw, and lips), and suprasegmentalia (speech rhythm,
loudness, and intonation). These systems work together to convey
information, and voice quality conveys information about the speaker’s
emotional, psychological, and physical status. Thus, voice abnormalities can
cover a broad area of communication as well as indicate many different types
of abnormalities.
Cluttering is not a disorder in the DSM-5, but it is an associated speech
abnormality in which a disturbed rate and rhythm of speech impair
intelligibility. ICD-10 does include it as a behavioral disorder usually
occurring in childhood or adolescence. Speech is erratic and dysrhythmic and
consists of rapid, jerky spurts that are inconsistent with standard phrasing


<<<PAGE 392>>>
patterns. The disorder usually occurs in children between 2 and 8 years of
age; in two-thirds of cases, the patient recovers spontaneously by early
adolescence. Cluttering is associated with learning disorders and other
communication disorders.

2.3 Autism Spectrum Disorder
Autism spectrum disorder (previously known as pervasive developmental
disorders), describes a wide range of impairments in social communication
and restricted and repetitive behaviors. It is a phenotypically heterogeneous
group of neurodevelopmental syndromes, with polygenic heritability. Before
DSM-5, five overlapping disorders captured the spectrum: autistic disorder,
Asperger disorder, childhood disintegrative disorder, Rett syndrome, and
pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified. These differed by
the level of severity, specific syndrome, and in some cases underlying
pathology. ICD-10 continues to follow this approach to a degree. However,
the recent clinical consensus has shifted the conceptualization of autism
spectrum disorder toward a continuum model in which heterogeneity of
symptoms is inherent in the disorder. DSM-5 collapses the core diagnostic
impairments into two domains: deficits in social communication, and
restricted and repetitive behaviors. Aberrant language development and usage
are no longer considered a core feature of autism spectrum disorder. This
diagnostic change, is based, in part, on recent studies in siblings with
diagnoses of autistic disorder, suggesting that symptom domains may be
transmitted separately and that aberrant language development and usage is
not a defining feature, but an associated feature in some individuals with
autism spectrum disorder. Autism spectrum disorder is typically evident
during the second year of life, and in severe cases, a lack of developmentally
appropriate interest in social interactions may be noted even in the first year.
Some studies suggest that a decline in social interaction may ensue between
the first and second years of life. However, in milder cases, core impairments
in autism spectrum disorder may not be identified for several more years.
Although language impairment is not a core diagnostic criterion in autism
spectrum disorder, clinicians and parents share concerns about a child who,


<<<PAGE 393>>>
by 12 to 18 months, has not developed any language, and delayed language
accompanied by diminished social behavior are frequently the heralding
symptoms in autism spectrum disorder. In up to 25 percent of cases of autism
spectrum disorder, some language develops and is subsequently lost. Autism
spectrum disorder in children with normal intellectual function and mild
impairment in language function may not be identified until middle
childhood when both academic and social demands increase. Children with
autism spectrum disorder often exhibit intense, idiosyncratic interest in a
narrow range of activities, resist change, and typically do not respond to their
social environment per their peers.
According to the DSM-5, the diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum
disorder include deficits in social communication and restricted interests,
which present in the early developmental period. However, when subtle, the
child’s caregivers may not identify the symptoms until several years later.
Approximately one-third of children who meet the DSM-5 criteria for autism
spectrum disorder show intellectual disability.
Rett syndrome was in DSM-IV and remains in ICD-10. This disorder
appeared to occur exclusively in females and is characterized by normal
development for at least 6 months, followed by stereotyped hand movements,
a loss of purposeful motions, diminishing social engagement, poor
coordination, and decreasing language use. In the formerly labeled childhood
disintegrative disorder, development progresses normally for approximately
2 years, after which the child shows a loss of previously acquired skills in
two or more of the following areas: language use, social responsiveness, play,
motor skills, and bladder or bowel control. The former Asperger disorder is
an impairment in social relatedness and repetitive and stereotyped patterns of
behavior without delay or marked aberrant language development and usage.
In Asperger disorder, cognitive abilities and significant adaptive skills are
age-appropriate, although social communication is impaired. A survey of
children undertaken with the former autism spectrum disorders revealed that
the average age of diagnosis was 3.1 years for children with autistic disorder,
3.9 years for children diagnosed with pervasive developmental disorder not
otherwise specified, and 7.2 years for those youth with Asperger disorder.
Children with autism spectrum disorder who exhibited severe language
deficits received an autism spectrum disorder diagnosis, on average, a year
earlier than children without impairment in language. Children with autism


<<<PAGE 394>>>
spectrum disorder who exhibited repetitive behaviors such as hand-flapping,
toe-walking, and odd play were diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders at
a younger age than those who did not exhibit such behaviors. The current
DSM-5 autism spectrum disorder criteria provide specifiers for the severity of
the main domains of impairment and also specifiers for the presence or
absence of language impairment and intellectual impairment.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Table 2-12 describes the diagnostic approaches to autism spectrum disorder.
Core Symptoms of Autism Spectrum Disorder
Persistent Deficits in Social Communication and Interaction.
Children with autism spectrum disorder characteristically do not conform to
the expected level of reciprocal social skills and spontaneous nonverbal
social interactions. Infants with autism spectrum disorder may not develop a
social smile, and as older babies may lack the anticipatory posture for being
picked up by a caretaker. Less frequent and poor eye contact is common
during childhood and adolescence compared to other children. The social
development of children with autism spectrum disorder is characterized by
atypical, but not absent, attachment behavior. Children with autism spectrum
disorder may not explicitly acknowledge or differentiate the most influential
persons in their lives—parents, siblings, and teachers—and on the other hand,
may not react as strongly to being left with a stranger compared to others
their age. Children with autism spectrum disorder often feel and display
extreme anxiety when someone disrupts their usual routine. By the time
children with this disorder reach school age, their social skills may have
increased, and social withdrawal may be less obvious, particularly in higherfunctioning children. An observable deficit, however, often remains in
spontaneous play with peers and in subtle social abilities that promote
developing friendships. The social behavior of children with autism spectrum
disorder is often awkward and may be inappropriate. In older school-age
children, social impairments may be manifested in a lack of conventional
back and forth conversation, fewer shared interests, and less body and facial
gestures during conversations. Cognitively, children with autism spectrum


<<<PAGE 395>>>
disorder are frequently more skilled in visual–spatial tasks than in tasks
requiring skill in verbal reasoning.
Table 2-12
Autism Spectrum Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic name Autism Spectrum Disorder

Childhood Autism

Duration

Begins in the early developmental
period

Occurs during
development, begins
before age 3

Symptoms

Deficits in social interaction. Example Abnormal:
deficits:
• Social functioning
• Emotional reciprocity/appropriate
• Communication
response to social interactions
• Behavior
• Nonverbal communication/eye
(repetitive/restricte
contact/ body language/gesturing
and/or facial expression
• Forming/developing/maintaining
relationships and friendships
Restricted/repetitive behaviors or
interests. Examples:
• Stereotyped motor movements
• Rigid about daily routines/rituals
• Restricted/fixed interests
• Hyper- or hyporeactivity to
sensations

Required
number of
symptoms

Symptoms from each category above

Psychosocial
Functional impairment
consequences
of symptoms


<<<PAGE 396>>>
Exclusions (not
result of):

Intellectual disability
Global developmental delay

Symptom
Specifiers

With or without accompanying
intellectual impairment
With or without accompanying
language impairment
Associated with another
neurodevelopmental, mental or
behavioral disorder
With catatonia

Severity
specifiers

For social impairment: mild,
moderate, severe
For behavioral patterns: mild,
moderate, severe

Atypical autism—
symptoms do not me
all diagnostic criteria
for childhood autism
Asperger Syndrome—
difficulties in social
interaction similar to
that found in autism,
addition to restricted
interests; however, n
deficits in language o
cognition are seen

One observation of the cognitive style of children with autism spectrum
disorder is an impaired ability to infer the feelings or emotional state of
others around them. That is, individuals with autism spectrum disorder have
difficulty with making attributions about the motivation or intentions of
others (also termed “theory of mind”) and thus have difficulty developing
empathy. The lack of a “theory of mind” produces difficulties interpreting the
social behavior of others and leads to a lack of social reciprocation.
Individuals with autism spectrum disorder generally desire friendships, and
higher functioning children may be aware that their lack of spontaneity and


<<<PAGE 397>>>
poor skills in responding to the emotions and feelings of their peers are
significant obstacles in developing friendships. Children with autism
spectrum disorder are often avoided or shunned by peers who expect them to
conform to their mainstream activities and experience their behavior as
awkward and alienating. Adolescents and adults with autism spectrum
disorder often desire romantic relationships, and for some, their increase in
social competence and skills over time enables them to develop long-term
relationships.
Restricted, Repetitive Patterns of Behavior, Interests, and
Activities. From the first years of life, in a child with autism spectrum
disorder, developmentally expected exploratory play is restricted and muted.
They may not use toys and objects in a typical manner. Instead, they often
manipulate the toys in a ritualistic manner, with fewer symbolic features.
Children with autism spectrum disorder generally do not show the level of
imitative play or abstract pantomime that other children of their age exhibit
spontaneously. The activities and play of children with autism spectrum
disorder may appear more rigid, repetitive, and monotonous than their peers.
Ritualistic and compulsive behaviors are common in early and middle
childhood. Children with autism spectrum disorder often seem to enjoy
spinning, banging, and watching water flow. Frank compulsive behaviors are
not uncommon among children with autism spectrum disorder, such as lining
up objects, and not infrequently a child with autism spectrum disorder may
exhibit a strong attachment to a particular inanimate object. Children with
autism spectrum disorder who are severely intellectually disabled have
increased rates of self-stimulatory and self-injurious behaviors. Stereotypies,
mannerisms, and grimacing emerge most frequently when a child with autism
spectrum disorder is in a less-structured situation. Children with autism
spectrum disorder often find transitions and change intimidating. Moving to a
new house, rearranging furniture in a room, or even a change such as eating a
meal before a bath when the reverse was the routine, may evoke panic, fear,
or temper tantrums in a child with autism spectrum disorder.
Associated Physical Characteristics. At first glance, children with
autism spectrum disorder do not show any physical signs indicating the
disorder. Children with autism spectrum disorder, overall, do exhibit higher


<<<PAGE 398>>>
rates of minor physical anomalies, such as ear malformations, and others that
may reflect abnormalities in fetal development of those organs along with
parts of the brain.
A higher-than-expected number of children with autism spectrum disorder
do not show early handedness and lateralization and remain ambidextrous at
an age when most children establish cerebral dominance. Children with
autism spectrum disorder may have a higher incidence of abnormal
dermatoglyphics (e.g., fingerprints) than those in the general population. This
finding may suggest a disturbance in neuroectodermal development.
Associated Behavioral Symptoms that May Occur in Autism
Spectrum Disorder
Disturbances in Language Development and Usage. Deficits in
language development and difficulty using language to communicate ideas
are not among the core criteria for diagnosing autism spectrum disorder;
however, they occur in a subset of those individuals with autism spectrum
disorder. Some children with autism spectrum disorder are not merely
reluctant to speak, and their speech abnormalities do not result from a lack of
motivation. Language deviance, as much as language delay, is characteristic
of more severe subtypes of autism spectrum disorder. Children with severe
autism spectrum disorder have significant difficulty putting meaningful
sentences together, even when they have extensive vocabularies. When
children with autism spectrum disorder with delayed language learn to
converse fluently, their conversations may impart information without typical
prosody or inflection.
In the first year of life, a typical pattern of babbling may be minimal or
absent. Some children with autism spectrum disorder vocalize noises—clicks,
screeches, or nonsense syllables—in a stereotyped fashion, without a seeming
intent of communication. Unlike most young children who generally have
better receptive language skills than expressive ones, children with autism
spectrum disorder may express more than they understand. Words and even
entire sentences may drop in and out of a child’s vocabulary. It is not atypical
for a child with autism spectrum disorder to use a word once and then not use
it again for a week, a month, or years. Children with autism spectrum
disorder may exhibit speech that contains echolalia, both immediate and


<<<PAGE 399>>>
delayed, or stereotyped phrases that seem out of context. These language
patterns are frequently associated with pronoun reversals. A child with
autistic disorder might say, “You want the toy” when she means that she
wants it. Difficulties in articulation are also common. Many children with
autistic disorder use peculiar voice quality and rhythm. About 50 percent of
autistic children never develop useful speech. Some of the brightest children
show a particular fascination with letters and numbers. Children with autism
spectrum disorder sometimes excel in specific tasks or have special abilities;
for example, a child may learn to read fluently at preschool age (hyperlexia),
often astonishingly well. Very young children with autism spectrum disorder
who can read many words, however, have little comprehension of the words
read.
Intellectual Disability. About 30 percent of children with autism spectrum
disorder are intellectually disabled. Of those, about 30 percent of children
function in the mild to moderate range, and about 45 to 50 percent are severe
to profoundly intellectually disabled. The IQ scores of autism spectrum
disorder children with intellectual impairments tend to reflect the most severe
problems with verbal sequencing and abstraction skills, with relative
strengths in visuospatial or rote memory skills. This finding suggests the
importance of defects in language-related functions.
Irritability. Broadly defined, irritability includes aggression, self-injurious
behaviors, and severe temper tantrums. These phenomena are common in
children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder. Severe temper
tantrums may be difficult to subdue, and self-injurious behaviors are often
problematic to control. Everyday situations can cause these symptoms in
which one would expect a youth to transition from one activity to another, sit
in a classroom setting, or remain still when they desire to run around. In
children with autism spectrum disorder who are lower functioning and have
intellectual deficits, aggression may emerge unexpectedly without an obvious
trigger or purpose, and self-injurious behaviors such as head banging, skin
picking, and biting oneself may also occur.
Instability of Mood and Affect. Some children with autism spectrum
disorder exhibit sudden mood changes, with bursts of laughing or crying


<<<PAGE 400>>>
without an apparent reason. It is difficult to learn more about these episodes
if the child cannot express the thoughts related to the affect.
Response to Sensory Stimuli. Children with autism spectrum disorder
may overrespond to some stimuli and underrespond to other sensory stimuli
(e.g., to sound and pain). It is not uncommon for a child with autism
spectrum disorder to appear deaf, at times showing little response to a normal
speaking voice; on the other hand, the same child may show intent interest in
the sound of a wristwatch. Some children have a heightened pain threshold or
an altered response to pain. Indeed, some children with autism spectrum
disorder do not respond to an injury by crying or seeking comfort. Some
youth with autism spectrum disorder perseverate on a sensory experience; for
example, they frequently hum a tune or sing a song or commercial jingle
before saying words or using speech. Some particularly enjoy vestibular
stimulation—spinning, swinging, and up-and-down movements.
Hyperactivity and Inattention. Hyperactivity and inattention are both
common behaviors in young children with autism spectrum disorder. Lower
than average activity level is less frequent; when present, it often alternates
with hyperactivity. Short attention span, poor ability to focus on a task, may
also interfere with daily functioning.
Precocious Skills. Some individuals with autism spectrum disorder have
precocious or splinter skills of high proficiency, such as prodigious rote
memories or calculating abilities, usually beyond the capabilities of their
conventional peers. Other potential precocious abilities in some children with
autism spectrum disorder include hyperlexia, an early ability to read well
(even though they cannot understand what they read), memorizing and
reciting, and musical abilities (singing or playing tunes or recognizing
musical pieces).
Insomnia. Insomnia is a frequent sleep problem among children and
adolescents with autism spectrum disorder, estimated to occur in 44 to 83
percent of school-age children.
Minor Infections and Gastrointestinal Symptoms. Young children


<<<PAGE 401>>>
with autism spectrum disorder can have a higher-than-expected incidence of
upper respiratory infections and other minor infections. They may also have
febrile seizures. Some do not become febrile when they have a minor
infection, and they may not have the typical malaise. The children can also
have a great many gastrointestinal symptoms. These include such symptoms
as excessive burping, constipation, and loose bowel movements. In other
children, behavior problems and relatedness seem to improve noticeably
during a minor illness, and in some, such changes are a clue to physical
illness.
Assessment Tools
A standardized instrument that can be very helpful in eliciting comprehensive
information regarding autism spectrum disorder is the Autism Diagnostic
Observation Schedule-Generic (ADOS-G).
Brett was the first of two children born to middle-class parents both in
their early 40s after a difficult pregnancy, with induced labor at 36 weeks
due to fetal distress. As an infant, Brett was undemanding and relatively
placid; he did not have colic, and motor development proceeded
appropriately, but he had delayed language development. Brett’s parents
first became concerned about his development when he was 18 months of
age and still not speaking; however, upon questioning, they noted that, in
comparison to other toddlers in his playgroup, Brett had seemed less
interested in social interaction and the social games with toddlers and
adults. Stranger anxiety became marked at 18 months, much later
compared to the other toddlers in his daycare program. Brett would
become extremely upset if his usual daycare worker was not present and
would tantrum until his mother took him home. Brett’s pediatrician
initially reassured his parents that he was a “late talker”; however, when
Brett was 24 months old, he was referred for a developmental evaluation.
At 24 months, motor skills were age-appropriate. His language and social
development, however, were severely delayed, and he was resistant to
changes in routine and unusually sensitive to aspects of the inanimate
environment. Brett’s play skills were quite limited, and he played with
toys in repetitive and idiosyncratic ways. His younger sister, now 12


<<<PAGE 402>>>
months, was beginning to say a few words, and the family history was
negative for language and developmental disorders. A comprehensive
medical evaluation revealed a normal EEG and CT scan; genetic
screening and chromosome analysis were routine as well.
Brett was diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, and he started a
special education program where he gradually began to speak. His speech
was extremely literal and characterized by monotonic voice quality and
an occasional pronoun reversal. Brett often spoke and was able to make
his needs known; however, his language was odd, and the other toddlers
did not play with him. Brett pursued mainly solo activities and remained
quite isolated. By age 5 years, Brett was quite attached to his mother and
often became separation anxious and upset when she went out, exhibiting
severe tantrums. Brett also had developed several self-stimulatory
behaviors, such as waving his fingers in front of his eyes. His extreme
sensitivity to change continued over the next few years. Intelligence
testing revealed a full-scale IQ in the average range with relative
weakness in the verbal subtests compared to the performance subtests. In
the fourth grade, Brett began to have severe behavioral problems at
school and at home. Brett was unable to complete his classwork, would
wander around the classroom, and would begin to tantrum when the
teacher insisted that he sit in his seat. Brett would sometimes begin
screaming so loudly that he had to leave the classroom. He would then
become upset and throw all of his books off his desk in a rage, sometimes
inadvertently hitting other students. It took him up to 2 hours to calm
down. At home, Brett would fly into a tantrum if anyone touched his
things, and he would become stubborn and belligerent when asked to do
anything that he was not expecting. Brett’s tantrum behavior continued
into middle school, and by the eighth grade, when he was 13 years old,
these behaviors became so severe that the school warned his parents that
he was becoming unmanageable.
Brett was evaluated by a child and adolescent psychiatrist who
recommended a social skills group for him and prescribed risperidone.
Brett’s tantrums became less frequent and less severe. Brett seemed
calmer and did not become physically out of control during tantrums.
Brett continued in middle school in a combination of special education
classes and regular classes. Brett’s social skills group was helpful in


<<<PAGE 403>>>
terms of teaching him how to approach peers in ways that would lead to
less rejection. Brett had made some acquaintances, and by the time he
started high school, he had acquired two friends who would come to his
home and play video games with him. Brett knew that he was different
from the other students, but he had trouble articulating what was different
about him. Brett continued in high school with a combination of special
and regular education and had plans to attend a community college and
live at home for the first year. (Adapted from a case by Fred Volkmar,
M.D.)

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Disorders to consider in the differential diagnosis of autism spectrum
disorder include social (pragmatic) communication disorder, the newly
described DSM-5 communication disorder; schizophrenia with childhoodonset; congenital deafness or severe hearing disorder; and psychosocial
deprivation. It is also challenging to make the diagnosis of autism spectrum
disorder because of its potentially overlapping symptoms with childhood
schizophrenia, intellectual disability syndromes with behavioral symptoms,
and language disorders. Given the many concurrent problems often
encountered in autism spectrum disorder, Michael Rutter and Lionel Hersov
suggested a stepwise approach to the differential diagnosis.
Social (Pragmatic) Communication Disorder
Patients with this disorder have difficulty with conforming to typical
storytelling, understanding the rules of social communication through
language, exemplified by a lack of conventional greeting of others, taking
turns in a conversation, and responding to verbal and nonverbal cues of a
listener. Other forms of language impairment may accompany social
communication disorder such as delay in learning language or expressive and
receptive difficulties. Social communication disorder occurs with higher
frequency in relatives of individuals with autism spectrum disorder, which
increases the difficulty in discriminating this disorder from autism spectrum
disorder. Although relationships may be negatively affected by social
communication disorder, this disorder does not include restricted or repetitive


<<<PAGE 404>>>
behaviors and interests, as autism spectrum disorder does.
Childhood-Onset Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is rare in children younger than 12 years and almost
nonexistent before the age of 5 years. Characterized by hallucinations or
delusions, childhood-onset schizophrenia has a lower incidence of seizures
and intellectual disability and poor social skills. Table 2-13 compares autism
spectrum disorder and schizophrenia with childhood-onset.
Intellectual Disability with Behavioral Symptoms
Children with intellectual disability may exhibit behavioral symptoms that
overlap with some autism spectrum disorder features. The main
differentiating features between autism spectrum disorder and intellectual
disability are that children with intellectual disability syndromes generally
display global impairments in both verbal and nonverbal areas. In contrast,
children with autism spectrum disorder are relatively weak in social
interactions compared to other areas of performance. Children with
intellectual disability generally relate verbally and socially to adults and peers
per their mental age, and they exhibit a relatively even profile of limitations.
Table 2-13
Autism Spectrum
Schizophrenia

Disorder

versus

Childhood-Onset

Criteria

Autism Spectrum Disorder

Schizophrenia
(with Onset
before Puberty)

Age of onset

Early developmental period

Rarely under the
age of 5

Incidence

1%

<1 in 10,000

Sex ratio (M:F)

4:1

1.67:1 (slight
preponderance
of males)


<<<PAGE 405>>>
Family history of Not increased
schizophrenia

Likely Increased

Prenatal and
Increased
perinatal
complications

Not increased

Behavioral
Poor social relatedness; may
characteristics
have aberrant language,
speech or echolalia;
stereotyped phrases; may
have stereotypies, repetitive
behaviors

Hallucinations
and delusions;
thought
disorder

Adaptive
functioning

Impaired

Deterioration in
functioning

Level of
intelligence

Wide range, may be
intellectually
disabled (30%)

Usually within
normal range,
may be low
average
normal

Pattern of IQ

Typical higher performance than More even
verbal

Grand mal
seizures

4–32%

Low incidence

Adapted from Magda Campbell, M.D. and Wayne Green, M.D.

Language Disorder
Some children with language disorders also have autism spectrum disorder
features, which may present a diagnostic challenge. Table 2-14 summarizes
the significant differences between autism spectrum disorder and language
disorders.
Table 2-14
Autism Spectrum Disorder versus Language Disorder


<<<PAGE 406>>>
Criteria

Autism Spectrum
Disorder

Language
Disorder

Incidence

1%

5 of 10,000

Sex ratio (M:F)

4:1

Equal or almost
equal sex ratio

Family history of speech
delay or language
problems

<25% cases

<25% cases

Associated deafness

Very infrequent

Not infrequent

Nonverbal communication
(e.g., gestures)

Impaired

Actively utilized

Language abnormalities
(e.g., echolalia,
stereotyped phrases out
of context)

Present in a subset

Uncommon

Articulation problems

Infrequent

Frequent

Intellectual level

Impaired in a subset Uncommon, less
(about 30%)
frequently
severe

Patterns of intelligence
quotient (IQ) tests

Typically lower on
Often verbal
verbal scores than
scores lower
performance
than
scores
performance
scores

Impaired social
communication,
restricted and repetitive
behaviors

Present

Absent or, if
present, mild

Imaginative play

Often impaired

Usually intact

Adapted from Magda Campbell, M.D. and Wayne Green, M.D.


<<<PAGE 407>>>
Congenital Deafness or Hearing Impairment
Because children with autism spectrum disorder may appear mute or lack
language development, we should rule out hearing impairment or congenital
deafness. Differentiating factors include the following: infants with autism
spectrum disorder may babble only infrequently, whereas deaf infants often
have a history of relatively normal babbling that then gradually tapers off and
may stop at 6 months to 1 year of age. Deaf children generally respond only
to loud sounds, whereas children with autism spectrum disorder may ignore
loud or normal sounds and respond to soft or low sounds. Most importantly,
an audiogram or auditory-evoked potentials indicate a significant hearing loss
in deaf children. Deaf children usually seek out nonverbal social
communication with regularity and seek social interactions with peers and
family members more consistently than children with autism spectrum
disorder.
Psychosocial Deprivation
Severe neglect, maltreatment, and lack of parental care can lead children to
appear apathetic, withdrawn, and alienated. They may have delayed language
and motor skills. Children with these signs generally improve when placed in
a favorable and enriched psychosocial environment, but such improvement is
not the case with children with autism spectrum disorder.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Autism spectrum disorder is typically a lifelong, albeit heterogeneous
disorder with highly variable severity and prognosis. Children with autism
spectrum disorder and IQs above 70 with average adaptive skills, who
develop communicative language by ages 5 to 7 years, have the best
prognoses. A longitudinal study comparing symptoms in children with highIQ autism spectrum disorder at the age of 5 years, with their symptoms at age
13 through young adulthood, found that a small proportion no longer met
criteria for autism spectrum disorder. Most of these youth demonstrated
positive changes in communication and social domains over time. Early
intensive behavioral interventions can provide a profound positive impact on
many children with the disorder, and in some cases, lead to recovery and


<<<PAGE 408>>>
function in the average range.
The symptoms that do not seem to improve substantively over time with
early behavioral interventions are related to ritualistic and repetitive
behaviors. However, currently, evidence-based behavioral interventions
specifically targeting repetitive behaviors may ameliorate them. The
prognosis of a given child with autism spectrum disorder is generally
improved if the home environment is supportive.

TREATMENT
The goals of treatment for children with autism spectrum disorder are to
target core behaviors to improve social interactions, communication, broaden
strategies to integrate into schools, develop meaningful peer relationships,
and increase long-term skills in independent living. Psychosocial treatment
interventions aim to help children with autism spectrum disorder to develop
skills in social conventions, increase socially acceptable and prosocial
behavior with peers, and to decrease odd behavioral symptoms. In many
cases, a child may require language and academic remediation. Also,
treatment goals generally include the reduction of irritable and disruptive
behaviors that may emerge in school and at home and may exacerbate during
transitions. Children with intellectual disability require developmentally
appropriate behavioral interventions to reinforce socially acceptable
behaviors and encourage self-care skills. Also, parents of children with
autism spectrum disorder often benefit from psychoeducation, support, and
counseling in order to optimize their relationships and effectiveness with their
children. Comprehensive treatment for autism spectrum disorder, including
intensive behavioral programs, parent training and participation, and
academic/educational interventions, have provided the most promising
results. Components of these comprehensive treatments include expanding
social skills, communication, and language, often through practicing
imitation, joint attention, social reciprocity, and play in a directed but childcentered manner. Five RCTs of early intensive, comprehensive behavioral
interventions targeting core features of autism spectrum disorder in children
ranging in age from 2 to 5 years of age have shown increases in language
acquisition, social interactions, and educational achievement at the end of the
study period compared to control groups. The study periods ranged from 12


<<<PAGE 409>>>
weeks to several years, and the settings were at home, in a clinic, or at school.
The next section describes some comprehensive treatment models or adapted
versions based on these studies.
Psychosocial Interventions
Early Intensive Behavioral and Developmental Interventions
UCLA/LOVAAS-BASED MODEL. This intensive and manualized intervention
primarily utilizes techniques derived from applied behavior analysis, given
on a one-to-one basis for many hours per week. A therapist and a child will
work on practicing specific social skills, language usage, and other target
play skills, with reinforcement and rewards provided for accomplishments
and mastery of skills.
Interventions occur in naturalistic
settings such as in daycare, at home, and during play with other children.
Parents learn to be co-therapists and provide the training at home while
educational settings also provide the interventions. The focus of the
interventions is on developing basic play skills and relationship skills and
integrating applied behavior analysis into the interventions. This approach is
focused on training for very young children and occurs within the context of
the child’s daily routine.
EARLY START DENVER MODEL (ESDM).

PARENT TRAINING APPROACHES. This includes Pivotal Response Training, in

which parents learn to facilitate social and communication development
within the home and during activities by targeting gateway or pivotal social
behaviors for mastery by the child, with the expectation that once they master
these central social skills, a natural generalizing of social behaviors would
follow. The approach integrates extensive parent and family components into
this type of intervention. Once parents learn the interventions, they gradually
increase the frequency until they occur throughout the day with the child.
Another example of a parent training approach is the Hanen More Than
Words Program.
Social Skills Approaches


<<<PAGE 410>>>
Typically provided by therapeutic leaders to
children of various ages in a group setting with peers, children are given
guided practice in initiating social conversation, greetings, initiating games,
and joint attention. The approach includes emotion identification and
regulation in practice with recognizing and learning how to label emotions in
given social situations, learning to attribute appropriate emotional reactions in
others, and social problem-solving techniques. The goals are that with
practice in the group setting, the child will be able to use the techniques in
less-structured settings and internalize strategies to interact positively with
peers.
SOCIAL SKILLS TRAINING.

Behavioral Interventions (BIs) and Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy
(CBT) for Repetitive Behaviors and Associated Symptoms
BEHAVIORAL THERAPY. Applied behavioral analysis is somewhat effective in
reducing some repetitive behaviors in children and adolescents with autism
spectrum disorder. Early intervention helps for repetitive self-injurious
behaviors; behavioral interventions may need to be combined with
pharmacologic treatments to manage the symptoms adequately.
COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL THERAPY. There is a significant evidence base from

RCTs for the efficacy of CBT for symptoms of anxiety, depression, and
obsessive-compulsive disorders (OCDs) in children. There are fewer
controlled trials of this treatment in children with autism spectrum disorder,
although there are at least two published studies in which CBT was used to
treat repetitive behavior in individuals with autism spectrum disorder.
Interventions for Comorbid Symptoms in Autism Spectrum
Disorder
NEUROFEEDBACK. This modality can influence symptoms of ADHD, anxiety,
and increased social interaction by providing computer games or other games
which reinforce the desired behavior. At the same time, the child wears
electrodes that monitor electrical activity in the brain. The aim is to influence
brainwave activity to prolong or produce electrical activity present during the
desired behaviors. This modality is still under investigation in the treatment
of symptoms in autism spectrum disorder.


<<<PAGE 411>>>
INSOMNIA. Insomnia is a prevalent concern among children and adolescents

with autism spectrum disorder, and both behavioral and pharmacologic
interventions may improve this condition. The most common behavioral
intervention for insomnia in autism spectrum disorder is based on changing
the parents’ behavior first toward the child at bedtime and throughout the
night, such that there is a removal of reinforcement and attention for being
awake, leading to gradual extinction of the “staying awake” behavior. Several
studies using massage therapy before bedtime in children with autism
spectrum disorder between the ages of 2 years and 13 years provided an
improvement in falling asleep and a sense of relaxation.
Educational Interventions for Children with Autism Spectrum
Disorder
TREATMENT AND EDUCATION OF AUTISTIC AND COMMUNICATION-RELATED
HANDICAPPED CHILDREN (TEACCH). Originally developed at the University of

North Carolina at Chapel Hill in the 1970s, TEACCH involves structured
teaching based on the notion that children with autism spectrum disorder
have difficulty with perception. This teaching method incorporates many
visual supports and a picture schedule to aid in teaching academic subjects as
well as socially appropriate responses. Caregivers arrange the physical
environment to support visual learning, and the day is structured to promote
autonomy and social relatedness.
BROAD-BASED APPROACHES.

These educational plans include a blend of
teaching strategies that use behavioral analysis and also focus on language
remediation. Behavioral reinforcement is provided for socially acceptable
behaviors while teaching academic subjects. TEACCH can be part of a
broader special educational program for autism spectrum disorder.
COMPUTER-BASED APPROACHES AND VIRTUAL REALITY. Computer-based and

virtual reality approaches use computer programs to teach language
acquisition and reading skills. This approach provides the child with a sense
of mastery. It also delivers a behaviorally based instruction in a modality that
is appealing for the child. The Let’s Face It! program is a computerized game
that helps to teach children with autism spectrum disorder to recognize faces.


<<<PAGE 412>>>
It consists of seven interactive computer games that target changes in facial
expression, attention to the eye region of the face, holistic face recognition,
and identifying emotional expression. An RCT of this program with children
with autism spectrum disorder provided evidence that after 20 hours of face
training with Let’s Face It!, compared to the control group, the trained
children demonstrated improvement in their ability to focus on the eye region
of a face and improved their analytic and holistic face-processing skills.
Several studies using virtual reality environments to teach children with
autism spectrum disorder social skills and interaction have provided evidence
of their value. In one study, a virtual café for children with autism spectrum
disorder allowed the children to practice ordering and paying for drinks and
food by navigation with the use of a computer mouse.
Psychopharmacological Interventions
Psychopharmacological interventions in autism spectrum disorder help
ameliorate behavioral symptoms rather than core features of autism spectrum
disorder. Target symptoms include irritability, broadly including aggression,
temper tantrums, and self-injurious behaviors, hyperactivity, impulsivity, and
inattention.
Irritability. Two second-generation antipsychotics, risperidone, and
aripiprazole, have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) in the United States for treatment of irritability in individuals with
autism spectrum disorder. Risperidone, a high-potency antipsychotic with
combined dopamine (D2) and serotonin (5-HT2) receptor antagonist
properties, has been shown to subdue aggressive or self-injurious behaviors
in children with and without autism spectrum disorder. There have been
seven RCTs, three reanalysis studies, and two add-on studies, which have
converged to confirm risperidone as an efficacious pharmacologic treatment
for irritability in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder.
Typical doses range from 0.5 to 1.5 mg. Some of the preschoolers in this
study were also receiving intensive behavioral treatments. Risperidone is
considered the first-line of medication treatment for children and adolescents
with autism spectrum disorder who exhibit severe irritability. Despite its
efficacy, risperidone’s main side effects of weight gain and increased


<<<PAGE 413>>>
appetite, metabolic side effects such as hyperglycemia, prolactin elevation,
and dyslipidemia, along with other common adverse effects such as fatigue,
drowsiness, dizziness, and drooling, have limited its use in some individuals.
Risperidone should be used with caution in individuals with underlying
cardiac abnormalities or hypotension, since risperidone may contribute to
orthostatic hypotension. In further continuation studies of risperidone in the
treatment of irritability in autism spectrum disorder, persistent efficacy and
tolerability were found over 6 months, with a rapid return of symptoms in
good responders when discontinuing the risperidone. Other drugs studied in
the treatment of irritability in autism spectrum disorder include aripiprazole
and olanzapine.
Two extensive studies utilizing aripiprazole in the treatment of tantrums,
aggression, and self-injury in children and adolescents with autism spectrum
disorder found that aripiprazole was both efficacious and safe. Doses ranged
from 5 to 15 mg/day. The main side effects included sedation, dizziness,
insomnia, akathisia, nausea, and vomiting. Although weight gain was not as
pronounced as with risperidone, it was still considered a moderate adverse
event, with approximately 1.3 to 1.5 kg gained during an 8-week study
period. The weight gain was similar at the lower and higher doses.
Olanzapine, which blocks 5-HT2A and D2 receptors and also blocks
muscarinic receptors, has been studied in children and adolescents with
autism spectrum disorder for the treatment of irritability with a trend toward a
positive response; however, significant weight gain of approximately 3.5 kg
occurred. The main side effect was sedation.
Hyperactivity, Impulsivity, and Inattention. There have been several
randomized placebo-controlled trials of methylphenidate for the treatment of
hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention in children and adolescents with
autism spectrum disorder. The Research Units of Pediatric
Psychopharmacology found methylphenidate to be at least moderately
efficacious at doses of 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg for youth with autism spectrum
disorder and ADHD symptoms. The efficacy of methylphenidate in this
population was less effective than in children with ADHD without autism
spectrum disorder, and children with autism spectrum disorder developed
more frequent side effects, including increased irritability, compared to
ADHD children. A study of methylphenidate in the treatment of hyperactivity


<<<PAGE 414>>>
and inattention in preschoolers with autism spectrum disorder found the
stimulant safe and relatively efficacious; half of the preschoolers developed
side effects including increased stereotypies, gastrointestinal upset, sleep
problems, and emotional lability. Among nonstimulants, one double-blind
placebo-controlled study of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention using
atomoxetine in children with autism spectrum disorder found that it was
significantly more effective than placebo. Side effects included sedation,
irritability, constipation, and nausea. Clonidine, an α-agonist, has also been
studied in children with autism spectrum disorder for the treatment of
hyperactivity with mixed results. Guanfacine may also help in some cases.
Repetitive and Stereotypic Behavior. Antidepressants and mood
stabilizers have been studied for the treatment of these core symptoms of
autism spectrum disorder. One study with fluoxetine found the medication
group only slightly better and not significantly better than the placebo group
regarding the target symptoms, and another trial with escitalopram found no
difference between groups. Risperidone, however, was found to be effective
in targeting irritability, and restrictive and repetitive behaviors were
improved. One study using valproate in a 12-week trial with 55 children with
a mean age of 9½ years with autism spectrum disorder found that those who
were considered responders to irritability also spent less time engaging in
repetitive behaviors.
Agents Administered for Behavioral Impairment in Autism
Spectrum Disorder Based On Open Trials. Quetiapine is an
antipsychotic with more potent 5-HT2A than D2 receptor blocking properties.
Although there are only open-label trials with this agent, some experts use
this when risperidone and olanzapine fail or are intolerable. Doses range from
50 to 200 mg/day. Adverse effects include drowsiness, tachycardia, agitation,
and weight gain.
Clozapine has a heterocyclic chemical structure that is related to certain
first-generation antipsychotics, such as loxapine, although clozapine carries a
lower risk of extrapyramidal symptoms. It is not generally used in the
treatment of aggression and self-injurious behavior unless those behaviors
coexist with psychotic symptoms. The most severe adverse effect is
agranulocytosis, which necessitates monitoring white blood cell count weekly


<<<PAGE 415>>>
during clozapine use. Its use is generally limited to treatment-resistant
psychotic patients.
Ziprasidone has receptor-blocking properties at the 5-HT2A and D2
receptor sites and carries little risk of extrapyramidal and antihistaminic
effects. No guidelines exist for its use in autistic children with aggressive and
self-injurious behaviors; clinicians sometimes use it to treat these behaviors
in treatment-resistant children. In studies of its use in adults with
schizophrenia, dose ranges of 40 to 160 mg were effective. Adverse effects
include sedation, dizziness, and lightheadedness. Before using this
medication, the clinician should check an electrocardiogram.
Lithium is efficacious in children with aggression without autism spectrum
disorder, and it is used clinically in the treatment of aggressive or selfinjurious behaviors when antipsychotic medications are not helpful.
Agents Used for Behavioral Impairment in Autism Spectrum
Disorder without Evidence of Efficacy. A double-blind study
investigated the efficacy of amantadine, which blocks N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptors, in the treatment of behavioral disturbance, such as
irritability, aggression, and hyperactivity, in children with autism. Some
researchers have suggested that abnormalities of the glutamatergic system
may contribute to the emergence of autism spectrum disorders. High
glutamate levels occur in children with the formerly labeled Rett syndrome.
In the amantadine study, 47 percent of children on amantadine were
“improved” per their parents, and 37 percent of children on placebo were
rated “improved” by parents in irritability and hyperactivity, although this
difference was not statistically significant. Investigators rated the children on
amantadine “significantly improved” for hyperactivity. A double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of the efficacy of the anticonvulsant lamotrigine on
hyperactivity in children with autism showed high rates of placebo
improvement in ratings of hyperactivity, which were similar to response on
the medication.
Clomipramine is sometimes used but lacks RCTs to provide evidence of
positive results. Fenfluramine, which reduces blood serotonin levels, has also
been used but appears to be ineffective. Improvement does not seem to be
associated with a reduction in blood serotonin levels. Naltrexone, an opioid


<<<PAGE 416>>>
receptor antagonist, has been investigated without much success, based on
the notion that blocking endogenous opioids would reduce autistic symptoms.
Tetrahydrobiopterin, a coenzyme that enhances the action of enzymes, was
studied. However, the results were not significant. Post hoc analysis of the
three core symptoms of autism—social interaction, communication, and
stereotyped behaviors—revealed a significant improvement in social
interaction score after 6 months of active treatment. There was a positive
correlation between social response and IQ. These results suggest that there is
a possible effect of tetrahydrobiopterin on the social functioning of children
with autism.
A case report suggested that low-dose venlafaxine was efficacious in three
adolescents and young adults with autistic disorder with self-injurious
behavior and hyperactivity. The dose of venlafaxine used was 18.75 mg/day,
and the efficacy continued over 6 months.
Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM) Approaches to
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) is a group of nontraditional
treatments used in conjunction with conventional treatments. Safe
interventions that target both core and associated behavioral features of
autism spectrum disorder with unknown efficacy include the following:
music therapy, to promote communication and expression, and yoga, to
promote attention and decrease activity level. A biologically based practice
that appears to be safe and efficacious is melatonin, which reduces sleeponset latency in children. Other biologic practices that appear to be safe but
with unknown efficacy include vitamin C, multivitamins, essential fatty
acids, and the amino acids carnosine and carnitine. Secretin is ineffective in
RCTs in the treatment of autism spectrum disorder.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Prevalence
The diagnostic rate for autism spectrum disorders has increased over the last
two decades, and currently 1 in 54 children is diagnosed with autism
spectrum disorder in the United States. Autistic disorder, based on DSM-IV-


<<<PAGE 417>>>
TR criteria, is believed to occur at a rate of about 8 cases per 10,000 children
(0.08 percent). By definition, the onset of autism spectrum disorder is in the
early developmental period; however, some children go undetected until they
are much older. Because of this delay between onset and diagnosis, the
prevalence rates increase with age in young children.
Sex Distribution
Autism spectrum disorder is diagnosed four times more often in boys than in
girls. In clinical samples, girls with autism spectrum disorder more often
exhibit intellectual disability than boys. One potential explanation for this is
that girls with autism spectrum disorder without an intellectual disability may
be less likely to be identified, referred clinically, and diagnosed.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
Genetic Factors
Family and twin studies suggest that autism spectrum disorder has a
significant heritable contribution; however, it does not appear to be fully
penetrant. Although up to 15 percent of cases of autism spectrum disorder
appear to be associated with a known genetic mutation, in most cases, its
expression is dependent on multiple genes. Family studies have demonstrated
increased rates of autism spectrum disorder in siblings of an index child, as
high as 50 percent in some families with two or more children with autism
spectrum disorder. Siblings of a child with autism spectrum disorder are also
at increased risk for a variety of developmental impairments in
communication and social skills, even when they do not meet the criteria for
autism spectrum disorder.
The concordance rate of autistic disorder in two extensive twin studies was
36 percent in monozygotic pairs versus 0 percent in dizygotic pairs in one
study and about 96 percent in monozygotic pairs versus about 27 percent in
dizygotic pairs in the second study. High rates of cognitive impairments, in
the nonautistic twin in monozygotic twins with perinatal complications,
suggest that contributions of perinatal environmental factors interact with
genetic vulnerability differentially in autism spectrum disorder.
The heterogeneity in the expression of symptoms in families with autism


<<<PAGE 418>>>
spectrum disorder suggests that there are multiple patterns of genetic
transmission. Studies indicate that both an increase and decrease in specific
genetic patterns may be risk factors for autism spectrum disorder. In addition
to specific genetic factors, gender plays a substantial role in the expression of
autism spectrum disorder. Genetic studies have identified two biologic
systems involved in autism spectrum disorder: the consistent finding of
elevated platelet serotonin (5-HT) and the mTOR, that is, mammalian target
of rapamycin–linked synaptic plasticity mechanisms, which is disrupted in
autism spectrum disorder. These will be discussed further in the next section.
Several genetic disorders cause autism spectrum disorder symptoms as part
of a broader phenotype. The most common of these inherited disorders is
fragile X syndrome, an X-linked recessive disorder that is present in 2 to 3
percent of individuals with autism spectrum disorder. Fragile X syndrome
exhibits a nucleotide repeat in the 5’ untranslated region of the FMNR1 gene,
resulting in symptoms of autism spectrum disorder. Children with fragile X
syndrome characteristically exhibit intellectual disability, gross and fine
motor impairments, an unusual facies, macroorchidism, and significantly
diminished expressive language ability. Tuberous sclerosis, another genetic
disorder characterized by multiple benign tumors, inherited by autosomal
dominant transmission, is found with higher frequency among children with
autism spectrum disorder. Up to 2 percent of children with autism spectrum
disorder also have tuberous sclerosis.
Researchers who screened the DNA of more than 150 pairs of siblings
with autism spectrum disorder found evidence of two regions on
chromosomes 2 and 7 containing genes that may contribute to autism
spectrum disorder. Additional genes hypothesized to be involved in autism
spectrum disorder are on chromosomes 16 and 17.
Biomarkers in Autism Spectrum Disorder
Autism spectrum disorder is associated with several biomarkers, potentially
resulting from interactions of genes and environmental factors, which then
influence neuronal function, dendrite development, and contribute to altered
neuronal information processing. Researchers have identified several
biomarkers of abnormal signaling in the 5-HT system, the mTOR-linked
synaptic plasticity mechanisms, and alterations of the γ-aminobutyric acid


<<<PAGE 419>>>
(GABA) inhibitory system.
The first biomarker identified in autism spectrum disorder was elevated
serotonin in whole blood, almost exclusively in the platelets. Platelets acquire
5-HT through the process of SERT (serotonin transporter), known to be
hereditary, as they pass through the intestinal circulation. The genes that
mediate SERT (SLC64A), and the 5-HT receptor 5-HT2A gene (HTR2A) are
known to be more heritable than autism spectrum disorder, and encode the
same protein in the platelets and the brain. Because 5-HT is known to be
involved in brain development, the changes in 5-HT regulation may lead to
alterations in neuronal migration and growth in the brain.
Both structural and functional neuroimaging studies have suggested
specific biomarkers associated with autism spectrum disorder. Several studies
found increased total brain volume in children younger than 4 years of age
with autism spectrum disorder, whose neonatal head circumferences were
within normal limits or slightly below. By about age 5 years, however, 15 to
20 percent of children with autism spectrum disorder developed
macrocephaly. Additional studies found confirmatory data in samples of
infants who later had autism spectrum disorder, who exhibited normal head
circumferences at birth; by 4 years, 90 percent had larger brain volumes than
controls, with 37 percent of the disordered group meeting criteria for
macrocephaly. In contrast, structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI)
studies of children with autism spectrum disorder ranging from 5 to 16 years
did not find mean values of total brain volume increased. One study followed
the size of the amygdala in youth with autism spectrum disorder in the first
few years of life, and similarly, found an increased size in the first few years
of life, followed by a decrease in size over time. Several studies have found
enlarged striatum in young children with autism spectrum disorder, with a
positive correlation of striatal size with the frequency of repetitive behaviors.
The dynamic process of the atypical and changing total brain volume
observed in children with autism spectrum disorder lends support for the
overarching hypothesis that there are sensitive periods or “critical periods”
within the brain’s plasticity, which when disrupted, may contribute to the
emergence of autism spectrum disorder.
Functional MRI (fMRI) studies have focused on identifying biomarkers;
that is, the functional brain correlates of various observed core symptoms in


<<<PAGE 420>>>
autism spectrum disorder. fMRI studies of children, adolescents, and adults
with autism spectrum disorder have employed tasks including face
perception, neutral face tasks, “theory of mind” deficits, language and
communication impairments, working memory, and repetitive behaviors.
fMRI studies have provided evidence that individuals with autism spectrum
disorder tend to scan faces differently than controls, in that they focus more
on the mouth region of the face rather than on the eye region and rather than
scanning the entire face multiple times, individuals with autism spectrum
disorder focus more on individual features of the face. In response to socially
relevant stimuli, researchers have concluded that individuals with autism
spectrum disorder have greater amygdala hyperarousal. In terms of “theory of
mind,” that is, the ability to attribute emotional states to others, and to
oneself, fMRI studies find differences in activation in brain regions such as
the right temporal lobe and other areas of the brain known to become
activated in controls during tasks involving the theory of mind. This
difference has been hypothesized by some researchers to represent
dysfunction of the mirror neuron system (MNS). Atypical patterns of frontal
lobe activation have been found in multiple studies of autism spectrum
disorder during face processing tasks, suggesting that this area of the brain
may be critical in social perception and emotional reasoning. Decreased
activation in individuals with autism spectrum disorder in the left frontal
regions of the brain during memory and language-based tasks led researchers
to hypothesize that individuals with autism spectrum disorder utilized more
visual strategies during language processing than controls did.
Both sMRI and fMRI research have contributed to demonstrating brain
correlates of core impairments observed in individuals with autism spectrum
disorder.
Immunologic Factors
Several reports have suggested that immunologic incompatibility (i.e.,
maternal antibodies directed at the fetus) may contribute to autistic disorder.
The lymphocytes of some autistic children react with maternal antibodies,
which raise the possibility that embryonic neural tissues damage during
gestation. These reports usually reflect single cases rather than controlled
studies, and this hypothesis is still under investigation.


<<<PAGE 421>>>
Prenatal and Perinatal Factors
A higher-than-expected incidence of prenatal and perinatal complications
seems to occur in infants who later have autism spectrum disorder. The most
significant prenatal factors associated with autism spectrum disorder in the
offspring are advanced maternal and paternal age at birth, maternal
gestational bleeding, gestational diabetes, and first-born baby. Perinatal risk
factors for autism spectrum disorder include umbilical cord complications,
birth trauma, fetal distress, small for gestational age, low birth weight, low 5minute Apgar score, congenital malformation, ABO blood group system or
Rh factor incompatibility and hyperbilirubinemia. Many of the obstetrical
complications that are associated with risk for autism spectrum disorder are
also risk factors for hypoxia, which may be an underlying risk factor itself.
There is no sufficient evidence to implicate any one single perinatal or
prenatal factor in autism spectrum disorder etiology, and a genetic
predisposition to autism spectrum disorder may be interacting with perinatal
factors.
Comorbid Neurologic Disorders
EEG abnormalities and seizure disorders occur with higher-than-expected
frequency in individuals with autism spectrum disorder. Four percent to 32
percent of individuals with autism spectrum disorder have grand mal seizures
at some time, and about 20 to 25 percent show ventricular enlargement on
computed tomography (CT) scans. Various EEG abnormalities occur in 10 to
83 percent of children with the previously defined autistic disorder, and
although no EEG finding is specific to autistic disorder, there is some
indication of failed cerebral lateralization. The current consensus is that
autism spectrum disorder is a set of behavioral syndromes caused by a
multitude of factors acting on the CNS.
Psychosocial Theories
Studies comparing parents of children with autism spectrum disorder with
parents of typical children have shown no significant differences in childrearing skills. Researchers have disproved earlier speculations that parental
emotional factors contribute to the development of autism spectrum disorder.


<<<PAGE 422>>>
2.4 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder
ADHD is a neuropsychiatric condition affecting preschoolers, children,
adolescents, and adults around the world, characterized by a pattern of
diminished sustained attention, and increased impulsivity or hyperactivity.
Based on family history, genotyping, and neuroimaging studies, there is clear
evidence to support a biologic basis for ADHD. Although multiple regions of
the brain and several neurotransmitters contribute to the emergence of
symptoms, dopamine continues to be a focus of investigation regarding
ADHD symptoms. The prefrontal cortex of the brain is a focus of interest
because of its high utilization of dopamine and its reciprocal connections
with other brain regions involved in attention, inhibition, decision-making,
response inhibition, working memory, and vigilance. ADHD affects up to 5
to 8 percent of school-age children, with 60 to 85 percent of those diagnosed
as children continuing to meet criteria for the disorder in adolescence, and up
to 60 percent continuing to be symptomatic into adulthood. Children,
adolescents, and adults with ADHD often have significant impairment in
academic functioning as well as in social and interpersonal situations. ADHD
is frequently associated with comorbid disorders, including learning
disorders, anxiety disorders, mood disorders, and disruptive behavior
disorders.
The DSM-5 has made several changes to the diagnostic criteria of ADHD
in youth and adults. Whereas in the past, ADHD symptoms had to be present
by age 7 years, in DSM-5, “several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive
symptoms” must be present by age 12 years. Previously, there were two
subtypes: Inattentive and Hyperactive/Impulsive type. In DSM-5, however,
subtypes have been replaced by the following three specifiers, which largely
denote the same groups: (1) combined presentation, (2) predominantly
inattentive presentation, and (3) predominantly hyperactive/impulsive
presentation. Additional changes in DSM-5 include permitting a comorbid
ADHD and autism spectrum diagnosis. Finally, in DSM-5, for adolescents 17
years and older and adults, only five symptoms, rather than six symptoms of


<<<PAGE 423>>>
either inattention or hyperactivity and impulsivity, are required. Also, DSM-5
added symptoms to its list to reflect different presentations across the life
span. To confirm a diagnosis of ADHD, impairment from inattention or
hyperactivity and impulsivity must be present in at least two settings and
interfere with developmentally appropriate social or academic functioning.
ADHD has historically been described in the literature using different
terminology. In the early 1900s, impulsive, disinhibited, and hyperactive
children—many of whom also had neurologic damage due to encephalitis—
were grouped under the label hyperactive syndrome. In the 1960s, a
heterogeneous group of children with poor coordination, learning disabilities,
and emotional lability, but without specific neurologic disorders, were
described as having “minimal brain damage”; however, over time, it became
clear that this was an inappropriate term. There are many explanations for
ADHD symptoms, including theories of abnormal arousal and reduced ability
to modulate emotions. This theory was initially supported by the observation
that stimulant medications increased sustained attention and improved focus.
ADHD is one of the most well-researched childhood psychiatric disorders
with several evidence-based treatments.

CLINICAL FEATURES
ADHD can have its onset in infancy, although it is rarely recognized until a
child is at least toddler age. More commonly, infants with ADHD are active
in the crib, sleep little, and cry a great deal.
In school, children with ADHD may attack a test rapidly but may answer
only the first two questions. They may be unable to wait to be called on in
school and may respond before everyone else. At home, caregivers cannot
put them off for even a minute. Impulsiveness and an inability to delay
gratification are characteristic. Children with ADHD are often susceptible to
accidents.
The most cited characteristics of children with ADHD, in order of
frequency, are hyperactivity, attention deficit (short attention span,
distractibility, perseveration, failure to finish tasks, inattention, poor
concentration), impulsivity (action before thought, abrupt shifts in activity,
lack of organization, jumping up in class), memory and thinking deficits,
specific learning disabilities, and speech and hearing deficits. Associated


<<<PAGE 424>>>
features often include perceptual-motor impairment, emotional lability, and
developmental coordination disorder. A significant percentage of children
with ADHD show behavioral symptoms of aggression and defiance. School
difficulties, both learning and behavioral, commonly exist with ADHD.
Comorbid communication disorders or learning disorders that hamper the
acquisition, retention, and display of knowledge complicate the course of
ADHD.
A psychiatrist evaluated Justin, a 9-year-old boy, after his teacher
informed his adoptive parents that she was unable to manage Justin’s
impulsive and aggressive behaviors in the classroom. Justin was
attending public school and was in a regular classroom with two resource
room periods per day to help him with reading and math. Justin also
received speech therapy once a week. Justin’s adoptive parents knew
very little about his biologic family other than that his biologic mother
was known to be a polydrug abuser. Currently, she was incarcerated. His
parents adopted Justin as an infant, and the pediatrician had told his
adoptive parents that Justin was entirely healthy at birth. However, ever
since kindergarten, Justin’s teachers had complained that Justin did “not
seem to listen,” had “poor concentration,” and was unable to stay in his
seat. Because Justin was an engaging and cute child, his teachers in
kindergarten and first grade made accommodations for him in their
classrooms despite their complaints. When Justin entered the second
grade, however, it became clear that he was struggling with reading and
writing, and the school initiated an individualized educational program
(IEP). Justin was provided with resource room periods for remediation
during the school day but continued to have additional problems getting
along with his peers during lunch, and even at recess. Justin was often
arguing or fighting with other children, who said that he did not know the
rules of their games. Justin became angry when his peers criticized him,
and he would often push his classmates. At home, Justin’s adoptive
parents were becoming more and more frustrated with Justin because he
seemed to take hours to do a few math problems and was unable to write
a paragraph without much help. Justin would become easily annoyed
when frustrated with himself and then run around the house in a silly and


<<<PAGE 425>>>
disruptive manner. Justin was a good-hearted child who seemed to get
along best with children who were younger than he was. Justin did not
seem to make any close friends among his classmates, and the teachers
indicated that Justin’s peers sometimes avoided him because he was too
rough during play, and he did not follow the rules of their games. Justin
had a difficult time waiting for his turn, and when reprimanded, he
became easily provoked. Consequently, Justin became alienated and
often bullied by his classmates. Justin was aware that he was not able to
keep up with the classwork, and he told his adoptive parents that he was
just “stupid.” Although Justin acted in a rambunctious and impulsive
manner, he also appeared sad, and one day after a fight with several
peers, he told his adoptive parents that he was going to “kill” himself. At
this point, Justin’s parents became worried and decided that Justin’s
teacher was right, and they would seek a psychiatric evaluation for Justin.
During the initial evaluation with a child and adolescent psychiatrist,
Justin was a well-developed, cute, and active child, who appeared
distracted and fidgety and somewhat sad. When asked about it, Justin
said that he wanted to do “better” in school but that nobody liked him, he
was failing his classes, and that he did not like doing homework. He
denied suicidal thoughts and reported that he had only said that to his
parents because he was angry at his peers. Justin admitted that it was
tough for him to understand his school work and impossible to complete
his assignments. The evaluation included several parent and teacher
rating scales. These included The Child Behavior Checklist and the
SNAP Rating Scale. Justin’s teacher and parents endorsed similar
symptoms, including poor organization, inability to follow directions,
being forgetful in daily activities, impulsivity, with several episodes of
running into the street without looking, blurting things out in the
classroom without raising his hand, and recurrent fights with peers. Justin
looked dejected in school when he was excluded from play activities by
peers, and sullen or angry at home when his parents asked him to read or
do homework. Based on the clinical history, the rating scales, and the
teacher’s report, a diagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder,
with the DSM-5 specifier of combined presentation, was made. Also,
Justin had a mood disorder with depressed mood, which did not qualify
for major depression. The suggested treatment plan included a behavioral


<<<PAGE 426>>>
plan allowing Justin to receive rewards for effort on his homework along
with a trial of stimulant medication. An extensive medical history and
recent physical examination did not reveal any systemic illnesses. After
obtaining a normal ECG, the psychiatrist started Justin on a trial dose of a
short-acting stimulant, methylphenidate at 10 mg, to determine if he
could tolerate a stimulant without any unexpected sensitivities. Justin had
no adverse effects, and soon the doctor switched him to a long-acting
formulation (Concerta), 36 mg, which would last between 10 and 12
hours. Justin became more vigilant in class and seemed to be less restless
and more focused, and his teacher reported that he was not getting out of
his seat as often, although he continued to blurt out in class
inappropriately, and he continued to have difficulty following directions
and forgetting things. Because Justin was not experiencing any adverse
effects and was still displaying some ADHD symptoms, his psychiatrist
increased his Concerta to 54 mg/day. At this dose, Justin was better at
sitting and finishing his classwork and homework. However, he began to
have significant problems with insomnia and was becoming fatigued
from not being able to fall asleep until about 2 AM on a nightly basis. The
child and adolescent psychiatrist and Justin’s parents discussed two
options to address insomnia. One was to add a dose of short-acting
clonidine in the evenings to cause a calming effect along with some
sedative properties. The other was to initiate a methylphenidate
transdermal patch, which could be applied to deliver a similar dose of
methylphenidate throughout the day, and the patch could be removed at
approximately 4 PM or 5 PM to determine which produced the desired
effect for the target symptoms for the most optimal amount of time.
Because the patch may deliver medication for an hour or so after its
removal, Justin would need to try several different removal times to find
the optimal treatment time. Justin’s family and his child psychiatrist
determined that it would be the best next step for Justin to try the
transdermal patch rather than add medication to treat his insomnia. Justin
was tried on the transdermal 20-mg patch and found that if it was
removed by 5 PM, he was able to fall asleep within 30 to 45 minutes after
getting into bed. Despite some mild erythema around the site of the patch,
Justin experienced no other side effects and was glad that he did not have


<<<PAGE 427>>>
to take pills each morning. It was determined by Justin’s parents,
teachers, and child and adolescent psychiatrist that Justin’s ADHD
symptoms were now under much-improved control. Justin began to
receive better grades, and his self-esteem improved. However, Justin still
had difficulties with peers and felt that he was not making as many
friends as he wanted. Justin’s child psychiatrist suggested that Justin
receive weekly social skills group therapy that was led by a psychologist
who had experience with group interventions for children with ADHD.
At first, Justin did not want to attend these sessions, but after a few
sessions, during which the group praised Justin for his appropriate
interactions, he decided he liked the group. Over time, he even invited a
few of his peers from the group to his home to play. The combination of
the medication and the social skills group resulted in a significant
improvement in Justin’s ADHD symptoms. It also improved the quality
of his relationships with peers and even his family. (Adapted from
Greenhill LL, Hechtman LI. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3571.)

DIAGNOSIS
We can elicit the principal signs of inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity
from a detailed history of a child’s early developmental patterns along with
direct observation of the child, especially in situations that require sustained
attention. Hyperactivity may be more severe in some situations (e.g., school)
and less marked in others (e.g., one-on-one interviews), and may be less
evident in pleasant structured activities (sports). The diagnosis of ADHD
requires persistent, impairing symptoms of either hyperactivity/impulsivity or
inattention in at least two different settings. For example, most children with
ADHD have symptoms in school and at home. Table 2-15 outlines the
diagnostic criteria for ADHD.
Distinguishing features of ADHD are short attention span and high levels
of distractibility for chronologic age and developmental level. In school,
children with ADHD often exhibit difficulties following instructions and


<<<PAGE 428>>>
require increased individualized attention from teachers. At home, children
with ADHD frequently have difficulty complying with their parents’
directions and may need to be asked multiple times to complete relatively
simple tasks. Children with ADHD typically act impulsively, are emotionally
labile, explosive, lack focus, and are irritable.
Children for whom hyperactivity is a predominant feature are more likely
to be referred for treatment earlier than are children whose primary symptoms
are attention deficit. Children with the combined inattentive and hyperactiveimpulsive symptoms of ADHD, or predominantly hyperactive-impulsive
symptoms of ADHD, are more apt to have a stable diagnosis over time and to
exhibit comorbid conduct disorder than those children with inattentive
ADHD. Specific learning disorders in the areas of reading, arithmetic,
language, and writing frequently occur in association with ADHD. We
should assess global development to rule out other sources of inattention.
School history and teachers’ reports are critical in evaluating whether a
child’s difficulties in learning and school behavior are caused primarily by
inattention or compromised understanding of the academic material. In
addition to intellectual limitations, poor performance in school may result
from maturational problems, social rejection, mood disorders, anxiety, or
poor self-esteem due to learning disorders. Assessment of social relationships
with siblings, peers, and adults, and engagement in free and structured
activities may yield valuable diagnostic clues to the presence of ADHD.
The mental status examination in a given child with ADHD who is aware
of his or her impairment may reflect a demoralized or depressed mood;
however, we would not expect to see a thought disorder or impaired reality
testing. A child with ADHD may exhibit distractibility and perseveration and
signs of visual-perceptual, auditory-perceptual, or language-based learning
disorders. A neurologic examination may reveal visual, motor, perceptual, or
auditory discriminatory immaturity or impairments without overt signs of
visual or auditory disorders. Children with ADHD often have problems with
motor coordination and difficulty copying age-appropriate figures, rapid
alternating movements, right-left discrimination, ambidexterity, reflex
asymmetries, and a variety of subtle nonfocal neurologic signs (soft signs).
If there are indications of possible absence spells, clinicians should obtain
a neurologic consultation and an EEG to rule out seizure disorders. A child
with an unrecognized temporal lobe seizure focus may have behavior


<<<PAGE 429>>>
disturbances which can resemble those of ADHD.
Pathology and Laboratory Examination
Evaluation for ADHD includes a comprehensive psychiatric and medical
history. This history includes prenatal, perinatal, and toddler information.
Complications during the mother’s pregnancy are also informative. Medical
problems that may produce symptoms overlapping with ADHD include petit
mal epilepsy, hearing and visual impairments, thyroid abnormalities, and
hypoglycemia. A thorough cardiac history should be taken, including an
investigation of the life history of syncope, family history of sudden death,
and a cardiac examination of the child. Although it is reasonable to obtain
electrocardiography (ECG) study before treatment, if any cardiac risk factors
are present, a cardiology consultation and examination are warranted. No
specific laboratory measures are pathognomonic of ADHD.
A continuous performance task, a computerized task in which a child
presses a button each time a particular sequence of letters or numbers flashes
on a screen, is not specifically a useful diagnostic tool for ADHD; however, it
may be useful in comparing a child’s performance before and after
medication treatment, particularly at different doses. Children with poor
attention tend to make errors of omission—that is, they fail to press the
button when the sequence has flashed. Impulsivity causes errors of
commission, in which an impulsive child cannot resist pushing the button,
even when the desired sequence has not yet appeared on the screen.
Table 2-15
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
DSM-5
Diagnostic name AttentionDeficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder
Duration

ICD-10
Hyperkinetic Disorders
Disturbance of activity
and attention

≥6 mo
Usually occurs before
the age of 5
Symptoms present before
the age of 12


<<<PAGE 430>>>
Symptoms

Inattention:
• Poor attention to
detail/frequent
mistakes
• Hard to maintain
attention/focus
• When spoken to,
appears not to listen
• Poor follow through
on tasks
• Poor organizational
skills
• Procrastinates from
tasks requiring
attention
• Loses things
• Distractible
• Forgetfulness
Hyperactivity/impulsivity:
• Fidgety/restless
• Cannot stay seated
• Runs/climbs
inappropriately
• Cannot do things
quietly (e.g., play)
• Cannot keep still
• Inappropriately
talkative
• Inappropriately blurts
out answers
• Cannot wait his turn
• Interrupts others

Required

≥6 of each category (≥5

Cannot engage in
activities requiring
prolonged attention
Disorganized about
completing tasks
Excess activity
May have:
• Impulsivity
• Recklessness
• Social disinhibition


<<<PAGE 431>>>
number of
symptoms

for age ≥17)
Symptoms occur in >1
setting

Psychosocial
Functional impairment
consequences
of symptoms
Exclusions (not
result of):

Another mental illness

Symptom
Specifiers

Combined presentation
Predominantly
inattentive
presentation
Predominantly
hyperactive/impulsive
presentation

Course
specifiers

In partial remission: last
6 mo, symptoms
continue but less than
required for diagnosis

Severity
specifiers

Mild: minimal symptoms
required for diagnosis;
Minor functional
impairment
Moderate: Intermediate
symptoms and
impairment
Severe: Severe
symptoms, marked
impairment

Hyperkinetic conduct
disorder—referring to
symptoms present in
the context of conduct
disorder


<<<PAGE 432>>>
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A temperamental constellation of high activity level and short attention span,
in the normal range for the child’s age, and without impairment, should be
ruled out. Differentiating these temperamental characteristics from the
cardinal symptoms of ADHD before the age of 3 years is difficult, mainly
because of the overlapping features of an ordinarily immature nervous system
and the emerging signs of visual-motor-perceptual impairments frequently
seen in ADHD. It is critical to evaluate for anxiety. Anxiety can accompany
ADHD as a symptom or comorbid disorder, and anxiety can manifest with
overactivity and easy distractibility.
It is not uncommon for a child with ADHD to become demoralized or, in
some cases, to develop depressive symptoms in reaction to persistent
frustration with academic difficulties and resulting in low self-esteem. Mania
and ADHD share many core features, such as excessive verbalization,
motoric hyperactivity, and high levels of distractibility. Also, in children with
mania, irritability seems to be more common than euphoria. Although mania
and ADHD can coexist, children with bipolar I disorder exhibit more waxing
and waning of symptoms than those with ADHD. Recent follow-up data for
children who met the criteria for ADHD and subsequently developed bipolar
disorder suggest that certain clinical features occurring during ADHD predict
future mania. Children with ADHD who had developed bipolar I disorder at
4-year follow-up had a higher co-occurrence of additional disorders and a
higher family history of bipolar disorders and other mood disorders than
children without bipolar disorder.
Frequently, oppositional defiant disorder, or conduct disorder and ADHD,
may coexist, and when that occurs, we should diagnose both disorders. We
must also distinguish specific learning disorders from ADHD; a child may be
unable to read or do mathematics because of a learning disorder, rather than
because of inattention. ADHD often coexists with one or more learning
problems, including deficits in reading, mathematics, or written expression.
The DSM-5 includes Unspecified ADHD as a category for disturbances of
inattention or hyperactivity that cause impairment, but do not meet the full
criteria for ADHD.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS


<<<PAGE 433>>>
The course of ADHD is variable. Symptoms persist into adolescence in 60 to
85 percent of cases, and into adult life in approximately 60 percent of cases.
The remaining 40 percent of cases may remit at puberty or in early
adulthood. In some cases, the hyperactivity may disappear, but the decreased
attention span and impulse-control problems persist. Overactivity is usually
the first symptom to remit, and distractibility is the last. ADHD does not
usually remit during middle childhood. A family history of the disorder
predicts persistence, as do adverse life events, and comorbidity with conduct
symptoms, depression, and anxiety disorders. When remission occurs, it is
usually between the ages of 12 and 20. After remission, the child can go on to
have a productive adolescence and adult life, satisfying interpersonal
relationships, and few significant sequelae. Most patients with the disorder,
however, undergo partial remission and are vulnerable to antisocial behavior,
substance use disorders, and mood disorders. Learning problems often
continue throughout life.
In about 60 percent of cases, some symptoms persist into adulthood. Those
who persist with the disorder may show diminished hyperactivity but remain
impulsive and accident-prone. Although the educational attainments of
people with ADHD as a group are lower than those of people without
ADHD, early employment histories do not differ from those of people with
similar educations.
Children with ADHD whose symptoms persist into adolescence are at
higher risk for developing conduct disorder. Children with both ADHD and
conduct disorder are also at risk for developing substance use disorders. The
development of substance use disorders among ADHD youth in adolescence
appears to be more related to the presence of conduct disorder rather than to
ADHD.
Most children with ADHD have some social difficulties. Socially
dysfunctional children with ADHD have significantly higher rates of
comorbid psychiatric disorders and experience more problems with behavior
in school as well as with peers and family members. Overall, the outcome of
ADHD in childhood seems to be related to the degree of persistent comorbid
psychopathology, primarily conduct disorder, social disability, and chaotic
family factors. For optimal outcomes, it is essential to ameliorate children’s
social functioning, diminish aggression, and improve family situations as
early as possible.


<<<PAGE 434>>>
TREATMENT
Pharmacotherapy
Pharmacologic treatment is considered the first line of treatment for ADHD.
CNS stimulants are the first choice of agents in that they have the highest
efficacy with generally mild tolerable side effects. Children, adolescents, and
adults with known cardiac risks and abnormalities should not use stimulants.
In healthy youths, both short- and sustained-release preparations have
excellent safety records. The newer preparations aim to maximize the target
effects and minimize the adverse effects in individuals with ADHD who
obtain a partial response from methylphenidate or whose dose was limited by
side effects.
Current strategies favor once a day sustained-release stimulant preparations
for their convenience and diminished rebound side effects. Advantages of the
sustained-release preparations are that a single dose will sustain the effects all
day, and the medication is sustained at an approximately even level in the
body throughout the day. In general the immediate-release preparations are
expected to last 1 to 4 hours and extended-release preparations are expected
to last up to 8 hours, with exceptions for the transdermal patch, which lasts an
hour after it is removed.
Nonstimulant medications approved by the FDA in the treatment of
ADHD include atomoxetine, a norepinephrine uptake inhibitor. Unlike the
stimulants, atomoxetine carries with it a black-box warning for potential
increases in suicidal thoughts or behaviors and requires children with ADHD
to be monitored for these symptoms, similarly to children taking
antidepressants. α-agonists, including clonidine and guanfacine, are also
useful in treating ADHD. The FDA has approved the extended-release form
of clonidine and the extended-release form of guanfacine for the treatment of
ADHD in children 6 years and older. Antidepressants, such as bupropion,
have been used with variable success in the treatment of ADHD. Table 2-16
indicates FDA-approved ages for ADHD medications.)
Stimulant Medications. Methylphenidate and amphetamine preparations
are dopamine agonists; however, the precise mechanism of the stimulant’s


<<<PAGE 435>>>
central action remains unknown. Methylphenidate preparations are highly
effective in up to three-fourths of children with ADHD, with relatively few
adverse effects. Concerta, the 10- to 12-hour extended-release OROS
(osmotic controlled-release extended delivery system) form of
methylphenidate, is administered once daily in the morning and is useful
during school hours as well as after school during the afternoon and early
evening. Both shorter forms of methylphenidate and Concerta have similar
common adverse effects, including headaches, stomachaches, nausea, and
insomnia. Some children experience a rebound effect, in which they become
mildly irritable and appear to be slightly hyperactive for a brief period when
the medication wears off. In children with a history of motor tics, we should
observe them as, in some cases, methylphenidate can exacerbate the tics,
whereas, in other children, the tics are unaffected or even improved. Because
tics wax and wane, it is essential to observe their patterns over some time.
Another common concern about the use of methylphenidate preparations over
long periods is potential growth suppression. During periods of use,
methylphenidate may cause slightly decreased rates of growth, and if used
over many years continuously without any drug holidays, experts have noted
a growth suppression of about several centimeters. When given “drug
holidays” on weekends or summers, children tend to eat more and also make
up the growth. The methylphenidate products can improve ADHD children’s
scores on tasks of vigilance, such as on math calculation tests, the continuous
performance task, and paired associations. Transdermal methylphenidate is
available for children and adolescents. Advantages of this preparation include
an alternative for children who have difficulties swallowing pills, and that the
patch can individualize how many hours per day a given child with ADHD
receives the medication. This option is useful because a child with ADHD
who needs the medication in the late afternoons to do homework but
develops insomnia if the medication is still present after dinner can remove
the patch at the desired time. Thus, individualized delivery time may be
provided for each child by how many hours they wear the patch.
In contrast, oral sustained-release forms of methylphenidate are those in
which the release time continues for 12 hours after swallowing the pill. A
double-blind, randomized study in children with ADHD who wore the
methylphenidate patch for 12 hours at a time, showed the efficacy of the
patch preparation doses ranging from patches delivering 0.45 to 1.8 mg/hr of


<<<PAGE 436>>>
methylphenidate. A delay in the onset of the transdermal medication effect
was approximately an hour. Side effects were similar to oral preparations of
methylphenidate. Approximately half of the children exhibited at least minor
erythematous reactions to the patch; however, these side effects are usually
well tolerated by children on the patch. Dextroamphetamine and
dextroamphetamine/amphetamine salt combinations are usually the second
drugs of choice when methylphenidate fails.
Table 2-16
FDA Approval for ADHD Medications
Medication

Generic Name

FDA
Approval
Age (yr)

Methylphenidate
Concerta

Methylphenidate (OROS long acting) 6 and
older

Ritalin

Methylphenidate

6 and
older

Ritalin LA

Methylphenidate (long acting)

6 and
older

Metadate ER

Methylphenidate (extended release) 6 and
older

Metadate CD

Methylphenidate (extended release) 6 and
older

Methylin

Methylphenidate (oral solution and
chewable tablet)

6 and
older

Daytrana

Methylphenidate (patch)

6 and
older

Adhansia XR

Methylphenidate (extended release) 6 and
older


<<<PAGE 437>>>
Aptensio XR

Methylphenidate (extended release) 6 and
older

Cotempla XR-ODT Methylphenidate (extended-release
orally disintegrating tablet)

6–17

Jornay PM

Methylphenidate (extended release) 6 and
older

Quillichew

Methylphenidate (extended-release
chewable)

6 and
older

Quillivant ER

Methylphenidate (extended-release
suspension)

6 and
older

Focalin

Dexmethylphenidate

6 and
older

Focalin XR

Dexmethylphenidate (extended
release)

6 and
older

Dextroamphetamine

3 and
older

Adzenys ER

Amphetamine (extended-release
suspension)

6–12

Adzenys XR-ODT

Amphetamine (extended-release
orally disintegrating tablet)

6–17

Dynavel XR

Amphetamine (extended-release
suspension)

6 and
older

Evekeo

Amphetamine

3 and
older

Evekeo ODT

Amphetamine (orally disintegrating

6–17

Dexmethylphenidate

Dextroamphetamine
Dexedrine
Amphetamine


<<<PAGE 438>>>
tablet)
Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine
Adderall

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine

3 and
older

Adderall XR

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine
(extended release)

6 and
older

Mydayis

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine
(extended release)

13 and
older

Lisdexamfetamine

6 and
older

Atomoxetine

6 and
older

Kapvay

Clonidine (extended release)

6–17

Intuniv

Guanfacine (extended release)

6–17

Lisdexamfetamine
Vyvanse
Nonstimulants
Strattera
Alpha Agonists

CNS STIMULANT SIDE EFFECTS. CNS stimulants are generally well tolerated,

and the current consensus is that once a day dosing is preferable for
convenience and to minimize rebound side effects. Long-term tolerability of
once-daily mixed amphetamine salts has shown mild side effects, most
commonly decreased appetite, insomnia, and headache. There are a variety of
strategies for children or adolescents with ADHD who respond favorably to
methylphenidate, but for whom insomnia has become a significant problem.
Clinical strategies to manage insomnia include the use of diphenhydramine
(25 to 75 mg), a low dose of trazodone (25 to 50 mg), or the addition of an αadrenergic agent, such as guanfacine. In some cases, insomnia may attenuate
on its own after several months of treatment.


<<<PAGE 439>>>
Nonstimulant Medications. Atomoxetine HCl is a norepinephrine uptake
inhibitor approved by the FDA for the treatment of ADHD in children age 6
years and older. The mechanism of action is not well understood, but likely
involves selective inhibition of the presynaptic norepinephrine transporter.
Atomoxetine absorbs well in the gastrointestinal tract, and it reaches maximal
plasma levels in 1 to 2 hours after ingestion. It is useful for inattention as well
as impulsivity in children and adults with ADHD. Its half-life is
approximately 5 hours and is given twice daily in most cases. The most
common side effects include diminished appetite, abdominal discomfort,
dizziness, and irritability. In some cases, there were increases in blood
pressure and heart rate. Atomoxetine is metabolized by the cytochrome P450
(CYP) 2D6 hepatic enzyme system. A small fraction of the population are
poor metabolizers of CYP 2D6–metabolized drugs, and, for those
individuals, plasma concentrations of the drug may increase as much as
fivefold for a given dose of medication. Drugs that inhibit CYP 2D6,
including fluoxetine, paroxetine, and quinidine, may lead to increased plasma
levels of this medication. Despite its short half-life, research suggests that
atomoxetine can reduce symptoms of ADHD in children during the school
day when administered once daily. Another recent study of a combination of
atomoxetine alone and combined with fluoxetine in the treatment of 127
children with ADHD and symptoms of anxiety or depression suggested that
atomoxetine alone can lead to improvements in mood and anxiety. Children
who received combined atomoxetine and fluoxetine experienced more
significant increases in blood pressure and pulse than those taking
atomoxetine only.
α-Agonists, both short-acting and the extended-release forms of clonidine
hydrochloride and guanfacine, are FDA approved for the treatment of ADHD
in children and adolescents from 6 to 7 years of age. Clonidine, a centrally
acting α2-adrenergic receptor agonist, likely exerts its effect on the prefrontal
cortex, although the mechanism of action is unknown. It is available in 0.1mg and 0.2-mg tablets, and is generally used twice daily, once in the morning
and once at night, to provide an around-the-clock effect. Clonidine is initiated
at 0.1 mg at bedtime, with incremental weekly increases of 0.1 mg. The
maximum dose recommended is 0.2 mg twice daily. The extended-release
formulation is not interchangeable with the short-acting clonidine. Because it


<<<PAGE 440>>>
is also an antihypertensive agent, it causes a decrease in blood pressure and
heart rate. We should monitor vital signs in patients, especially during
initiation and titration of the dose. Common side effects include somnolence,
headache, upper abdominal pain, and fatigue. When tapering the drug, the
rate should be no more than 0.1 mg every 3 to 7 days.
Extended-release guanfacine is a once-a-day medication for children
between 6 and 17 years of age, available in 1-mg, 2-mg, 3-mg, and 4-mg
tabs. It is swallowed whole with liquids, and the patient should not take it
with a high-fat meal. It is initiated as a 1-mg tab daily and titrated by 1
mg/day at 1-week intervals. The maximum dose approved is 4 mg/day. As a
monotherapy, improvement in ADHD symptoms occurs at 0.05 to 0.08
mg/kg once daily. As an adjunctive treatment, optimal doses are reported to
range from 0.05 to 0.12 mg/kg/day. Common side effects include
somnolence, sedation, fatigue, nausea, hypotension, insomnia, and dizziness.
We should monitor the heart rate and blood pressure. When discontinuing the
drug, one should use a gradual taper, decreasing by 1 mg every 3 to 7 days.
α-Adrenergic agents, including the short- and extended-release
preparations of guanfacine and clonidine, are sometimes preferred treatments
in children with ADHD and comorbid tic disorders when stimulants
exacerbated the tics. Bupropion is somewhat useful for some children and
adolescents in the treatment of ADHD. One multisite, double-blind, placebocontrolled study found a positive result regarding the efficacy of bupropion.
No further studies have compared bupropion with other stimulants. There is a
higher risk of seizures at doses of 400 mg/day or more.
Few data confirm the efficacy of SSRIs in the treatment of ADHD, but due
to the frequency of comorbid depression and anxiety with ADHD, in cases of
comorbidity, the SSRIs are likely to be considered at least in conjunction
with a stimulant.
We should not use tricyclic drugs for ADHD due to potential cardiac
arrhythmia effects. The reports of sudden death in at least four children with
ADHD using desipramine have made the tricyclic antidepressants an unlikely
choice. Antipsychotics may treat refractory severely hyperactive children and
adolescents who are significantly dysfunctional. Antipsychotics are generally
not chosen in the treatment of ADHD due to the risks of tardive dyskinesia,
withdrawal dyskinesia, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and weight gain.
Modafinil, another type of CNS stimulant, a narcolepsy treatment, may


<<<PAGE 441>>>
help treat adults with ADHD. Only one randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled study of the efficacy and safety of modafinil film-coated tablets in
approximately 250 adolescents with ADHD showed that 48 percent of those
on active treatment were rated as “much” or “very much” improved
compared with 17 percent of patients receiving placebo. The dosage range
was from 170 to 425 mg administered once daily, titrated to optimal doses
based on efficacy and tolerability. Modafinil failed to receive FDA approval
based on a Stevens–Johnson skin rash that occurred in a patient during the
trial. The most common side effects included insomnia, headache, and
decreased appetite.
Some clinicians use venlafaxine, especially for children and adolescents,
with combinations of ADHD and depression or anxiety features. No clear
empirical evidence supports the use of venlafaxine in the treatment of
ADHD.
One open-label report of reboxetine, a selective norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor that is not available in the US, in 31 children and adolescents with
ADHD who were resistant to methylphenidate treatment, suggested that this
agent may have efficacy. In this open trial, reboxetine was initiated and
maintained at 4 mg/day. The most common side effects included drowsiness,
sedation, and gastrointestinal symptoms. Reboxetine and other new agents in
this class await controlled studies.
Monitoring Pharmacologic Treatment
STIMULANTS. Stimulant medications have adrenergic effects and cause
moderate increases in blood pressure and pulse rate. At baseline, the most
recent American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP)
practice parameters recommend the following workup before starting the use
of stimulant medications: physical examination, blood pressure, pulse,
weight, and height. Screening electrocardiograms are recommended prior to
initiating stimulant medications, particularly if there is a family history or risk
factors for cardiac disease.
Children and adolescents using stimulants should have their height, weight,
blood pressure, and pulse checked quarterly and have a physical examination
annually. Monitoring starts with the initiation of medication. Because school
performance is most markedly affected, we should give individual attention


<<<PAGE 442>>>
and effort to establishing and maintaining a close collaborative working
relationship with a child’s school personnel. In most patients, stimulants
reduce overactivity, distractibility, impulsiveness, explosiveness, and
irritability. No evidence indicates that medications directly improve any
existing impairments in learning, although when the attention deficits
diminish, children can learn more effectively. Also, medication can improve
self-esteem when children are no longer constantly reprimanded for their
behavior. Children treated with medications should be taught the purpose of
the medication and encouraged to describe any side effects that they may be
experiencing.
Psychosocial Interventions
Psychosocial interventions for children with ADHD include
psychoeducation, academic organization skills remediation, parent training,
behavior modification in the classroom and at home, CBT, and social skills
training. There are various studies of social skills groups, behavioral training
for parents of children with ADHD, and behavioral interventions at school
and home, alone and in combination with medication management for
ADHD. Evaluation and treatment of coexisting learning disorders or
additional psychiatric disorders are essential.
When we help children structure their environment, their anxiety
diminishes. Parents and teachers should work together to develop concrete
expectations for the child, and a system of rewards when the child meets
these expectations.
A common goal of therapy is to help parents of children with ADHD
recognize and promote the notion that, although the child may not
“voluntarily” exhibit symptoms of ADHD, he or she is still capable of being
responsible for meeting reasonable expectations. We should also help parents
recognize that, despite their child’s difficulties, every child faces the usual
tasks of maturation, including the significant building of self-esteem when
they develop a sense of mastery. Therefore, children with ADHD do not
benefit from being exempted from the requirements, expectations, and
planning applicable to other children. Parental training is an integral part of
the psychotherapeutic interventions for ADHD. Most parental training helps
parents develop usable behavioral interventions with positive reinforcement


<<<PAGE 443>>>
that target both social and academic behaviors.
Group therapy aimed at both refining social skills and increasing selfesteem and a sense of success may be beneficial for children with ADHD
who have great difficulty functioning in group settings, especially in school.
A recent year-long group therapy intervention in a clinical setting for boys
with the disorder described the goals as helping the boys improve skills in
game-playing and feeling a sense of mastery with peers. The researchers
asked the boys to do a fun task, in pairs, and then they were gradually asked
to do projects in a group. The researchers directed them on how to follow
instructions, wait, and pay attention, and praised them for successful
cooperation.
Multimodal Treatment Study of Children with ADHD (MTA Study)
The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)–supported Multimodal
Treatment Study of Children with ADHD (The MTA Cooperative Group,
1999) was a 14-month–long randomized clinical trial involving six clinical
sites comparing four treatment strategies. More than 500 children diagnosed
with DSM-IV ADHD, combined type, were randomly assigned to (1)
systematic medication management utilizing an initial placebo-controlled
titration and t.i.d. dosing 7 days per week and monthly 30-minute clinic
visits, (2) behavior therapy consisting of 27 sessions of group parent training,
eight individual parent sessions, an 8-week summer treatment program, 12
weeks of classroom administered behavior therapy with a half-time aide, and
10 teacher consultation sessions, (3) a combination of medication and
behavior therapy, or (4) usual community care. All groups showed
improvement over baseline; however, a combination of medication
management and behavior therapy led to a greater reduction in symptoms in
children with ADHD alone or ADHD and oppositional defiant disorder than
behavior therapy alone or community care. The combination treatment had
significantly better outcomes for those children with ADHD and anxiety or
mood disorders compared to behavioral treatment and community care.
Combined treatment but not medication management was superior for
improvement in oppositional and aggressive symptoms, anxiety and mood
symptoms, teacher-rated social skills, parent–child relationships, and reading
achievement. Furthermore, the mean dose of medication per day was less in


<<<PAGE 444>>>
the combination group than in the medication-only management group.
A follow-up of the MTA sample at 6 and 8 years revealed that the clinical
presentation of the disorder, including the severity of ADHD, comorbid
conduct disturbance, and intellect, were more reliable predictors of later
functioning than the type of treatment received in childhood during the 14month study period. The children maintained the improvements as long as
they continued treatment, but 3 years after treatment, there was no difference
between groups.
Overall, the evidence suggests that medication and psychosocial
interventions for the combined type of ADHD in childhood provide the
broadest benefit in functioning for this population. This recommendation is
especially pertinent given the comorbidity of learning disorders, anxiety,
mood disorders, and other disruptive behavior disorders that occur in children
with ADHD.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Rates of ADHD are 7 to 8 percent in prepubertal elementary school children.
Epidemiologic studies suggest that ADHD occurs in about 5 percent of
youth, including children and adolescents, and about 2.5 percent of adults.
The rate of ADHD in parents and siblings of children with ADHD is two to
eight times greater than in the general population. ADHD is more prevalent
in boys than in girls, with the ratio ranging from 2:1 to as high as 9:1. Firstdegree biologic relatives (e.g., siblings of probands with ADHD) are at high
risk for developing ADHD as well as other psychiatric disorders, including
disruptive behavior disorders, anxiety disorders, and depressive disorders.
Siblings of children with ADHD are also at higher risk than the general
population for learning disorders and academic difficulties. The parents of
children with ADHD show an increased incidence of substance use disorders.
Symptoms of ADHD are often present by age 3 years, but unless they are
very severe, the diagnosis is frequently not made until the child is in
kindergarten or elementary school when teacher information is available
comparing the index child peers of the same age.

ETIOLOGY


<<<PAGE 445>>>
Data suggest that the etiology of ADHD is mainly genetic, with a heritability
of approximately 75 percent. ADHD symptoms are the product of complex
interactions of neuroanatomical and neurochemical systems evidenced by
data from twin and adoption family genetic studies, dopamine transport gene
studies, neuroimaging studies, and neurotransmitter data. Most children with
ADHD have no evidence of gross structural damage in the CNS. In some
cases, contributory factors for ADHD may include prenatal toxic exposures,
prematurity, and prenatal mechanical insult to the fetal nervous system. Some
have suggested that food additives, colorings, preservatives, and sugar are
possible contributing causes of hyperactive behavior; however, studies have
not confirmed these theories. No research has established artificial food
coloring nor sugar as causes of ADHD. There is no clear evidence that
omega-3 fatty acids are beneficial in the treatment of ADHD.
Genetic Factors
Evidence for a significant genetic contribution to ADHD has emerged from
family studies, which reveal an increased concordance in monozygotic
compared to dizygotic twins, as well as a marked increased risk of two to
eight times for siblings as well as parents of an ADHD child, compared to the
general
population.
Clinically,
one
sibling
may
have
impulsivity/hyperactivity symptoms predominantly, and others may have
predominantly inattention symptoms. Up to 70 percent of children with
ADHD meet criteria for a comorbid psychiatric disorder, including learning
disorders, anxiety disorders, mood disorder, conduct disorders, and substance
use disorders. Several hypotheses of the mode of transmission of ADHD
have been proposed, including a sex-linked hypothesis, which would explain
the significantly increased rates of ADHD in males. Other theories have
focused on a model of interaction of multiple genes that produces the various
symptoms of ADHD. Numerous investigations continue to identify specific
genes involved in ADHD. Cook and colleagues have found an association of
the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) with ADHD, although data from other
research groups have not confirmed that result. Family studies and
population-based studies have found an association between the dopamine
four receptor seven-repeat allele (DRD4) gene and ADHD. Most molecular
research on ADHD has focused on genes that influence the metabolism or


<<<PAGE 446>>>
action of dopamine. Continued investigation is necessary to clarify the
complex relationships between multiple interactive genes and the emergence
of ADHD.
Neurochemical Factors
Many neurotransmitters are likely associated with ADHD symptoms;
however, dopamine is a primary focus of clinical investigation, and the
prefrontal cortex has been implicated based on its role in attention and
regulation of impulse control. Animal studies have shown that other brain
regions such as locus ceruleus, which consists predominantly of
noradrenergic neurons, also play a significant role in attention. The
noradrenergic system includes the central system (originating in the locus
ceruleus) and the peripheral sympathetic system. Dysfunction in peripheral
epinephrine, which causes the hormone to accumulate peripherally, may
potentially feedback to the central system and “reset” the locus ceruleus to a
lower level. In part, hypotheses regarding the neurochemistry of ADHD have
arisen from the predictable effect of medications. Stimulants, known to be the
most effective medications in the treatment of ADHD, affect both dopamine
and norepinephrine, leading to neurotransmitter hypotheses that may include
dysfunction in both the adrenergic and dopaminergic systems. Stimulants
increase catecholamine concentrations by promoting their release and
blocking their uptake.
Neurophysiologic Factors
EEG studies in ADHD children and adolescents over the last several decades
have found evidence of increased theta activity, especially in the frontal
regions. Further studies of youth with ADHD have provided data showing
elevated beta activity in their EEG studies. Clarke and colleagues, studying
EEG findings in children and adolescents over the last two decades, found
that those ADHD children with the combined type of ADHD were the ones
who showed significantly elevated beta activity on EEG, and further studies
indicate that these youth also tend to show increased mood lability and
temper tantrums. The current investigation of EEG in youth with ADHD has
identified behavioral symptom clusters among children with similar EEG
profiles.


<<<PAGE 447>>>
Neuroanatomical Aspects
Researchers have hypothesized networks within the brain for promoting
components of attention, including focusing, sustaining attention, and shifting
attention. They describe neuroanatomical correlations for the superior and
temporal cortices with focusing attention; external parietal and corpus striatal
regions with motor executive functions; the hippocampus with encoding of
memory traces; and the prefrontal cortex with shifting from one stimulus to
another. Further hypotheses suggest that the brainstem, which contains the
reticular thalamic nuclei function, is involved in sustained attention. A review
of MRI, positron emission tomography (PET), and single-photon emission
computerized tomography (SPECT) suggests that populations of children
with ADHD show evidence of both decreased volume and decreased activity
in prefrontal regions, anterior cingulate, globus pallidus, caudate, thalamus,
and cerebellum. PET scans have also shown that female adolescents with
ADHD have globally lower glucose metabolism than both control female and
male adolescents without ADHD. One theory postulates that the frontal lobes
in children with ADHD do not adequately inhibit lower brain structures, an
effect leading to disinhibition.
Developmental Factors
Higher rates of ADHD are present in children who were born prematurely
and whose mothers had infections during pregnancy. Perinatal insult to the
brain during early infancy caused by infection, inflammation, and trauma
may, in some cases, be contributing factors in the emergence of ADHD
symptoms. Children with ADHD exhibit nonfocal (soft) neurologic signs at
higher rates than those in the general population. Reports in the literature
indicate that September is a peak month for births of children with ADHD
with and without comorbid learning disorders. The implication is that
prenatal exposure to winter infections during the first trimester may
contribute to the emergence of ADHD symptoms in some susceptible
children.
Psychosocial Factors
Severe chronic abuse, maltreatment, and neglect are associated with specific
behavioral symptoms that overlap with ADHD, including poor attention and


<<<PAGE 448>>>
poor impulse control. Predisposing factors may include the child’s
temperament and genetic–familial factors.

ADULT MANIFESTATIONS OF ADHD
We usually think of ADHD as a childhood condition resulting in delayed
development of impulse control. Historically, many experts thought that, by
adolescence, patients would grow out of the disorder. However, in the last
few decades, many more adults with ADHD have been identified, diagnosed,
and successfully treated. Longitudinal follow-up has shown that up to 60
percent of children with ADHD have persistent impairment from symptoms
into adulthood. Genetic studies, brain imaging, and neurocognitive and
pharmacologic studies in adults with ADHD have replicated findings
demonstrated in children with ADHD. Increased public awareness and
treatment studies within the last decade have led to widespread acceptance of
the need for diagnosis and treatment of adults with ADHD.
Diagnosis and Clinical Features
The clinical phenomenology of ADHD features inattention and
manifestations of impulsivity prevailing as the core of this disorder. A
leading figure in the development of criteria for adult manifestations of
ADHD is Paul Wender, from the University of Utah, who began his work on
adult ADHD in the 1970s. Wender developed criteria for adults (Table 2-17).
They included a retrospective diagnosis of ADHD in childhood and evidence
of current impairment from ADHD symptoms in adulthood. Furthermore,
evidence exists of several additional symptoms that are typical of adult
behavior as opposed to childhood behaviors.
In adults, residual signs of the disorder include impulsivity and attention
deficit (e.g., difficulty in organizing and completing work, inability to
concentrate, increased distractibility, and sudden decision-making without
thought of the consequences). Many people with the disorder have a
secondary depressive disorder associated with low self-esteem related to their
impaired performance and which affects both occupational and social
functioning.


<<<PAGE 449>>>
Brett was a 26-year-old man convinced by his new wife to seek an
evaluation for his distractibility, forgetfulness, and “not listening” after a
minor traffic accident. After consulting his mother, Brett reported that in
grade school, he was often “in trouble” for talking out of turn, and his
mother recalled teachers’ reports that Brett often made careless mistakes
on tests, forgot his assignments, and had great difficulty sitting still.
Although as a young child people considered him to be intellectually
gifted, when Brett got to the third grade, his grades were only average,
and he seemed more interested in getting his work done quickly than
correctly. Brett was talkative and loud and enjoyed sports, although he
was not particularly talented at them. Nevertheless, Brett had
acquaintances and superficial friends because he was likable, funny, and
even entertaining. Brett had no idea what he wanted to do when he grew
up, and during his senior year in high school, he neglected to finish any
of his college applications on time and ended up attending a community
college part-time. During the 2 years after high school, Brett held down a
series of jobs only briefly, including a construction job, a waiter position
in a restaurant, and a Fed-Ex driver, and then decided that he wanted to
become an actor. Brett went on a series of auditions but found that he
would become distracted and did poorly remembering his lines and even
spaced out during readings. Despite that, he acted in one commercial.
Brett reported that he had never had problems with the abuse of drugs
or alcohol, and he occasionally drank beer socially. During his evaluation
with a child and adolescent psychiatrist, Brett disclosed that his most
significant difficulties were with tasks that seemed boring to him. He had
difficulty maintaining his attention, was easily distracted, felt restless
most of the time, and became frustrated when he had to sit still for long
periods. Brett endorsed six inattentive and five hyperactive/impulsive
symptoms on a DSM ADHD Checklist of current symptoms. Brett met
the diagnostic criteria for adult ADHD, combined presentation, with a
probable onset in childhood. Brett’s medical history was negative for all
major illnesses, and neither he nor his parents had a history of cardiac
abnormalities. He took no prescribed medications. After discussing the
situation with his psychiatrist and his wife, Brett decided that he would
like to try a stimulant medication. A trial of a once-a-day extended-


<<<PAGE 450>>>
release formulation of stimulant medication was selected: Adderall XR
10 mg.
At his first follow-up visit, a week later, Brett reported that he felt a
slight effect from this medication, but it was not enough to improve his
functioning, so Brett and his psychiatrist agreed that he would increase
his dose to 20 mg/day. At his next follow-up appointment, Brett reported
that he had noticed a significant improvement in his ability to focus,
concentrate, and remember his lines in auditions. He had just received a
small part in an upcoming movie. Brett and his wife were both thrilled
with the results, and Brett continued to return for monthly follow-up
visits. (Adapted from McGough J. Adult manifestations of attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3577.)
Table 2-17
Utah Criteria for
Disorder (ADHD)

Adult

Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity

I. Retrospective childhood ADHD diagnosis
A. Narrow criterion: met DSM-IV criteria in childhood by parent
interviewa
B. Broad criterion: both (1) and (2) are met as reported by patientb
1. Childhood hyperactivity
2. Childhood attention deficits
II. Adult characteristics: five additional symptoms, including ongoing
difficulties with inattentiveness and hyperactivity and at least three
other symptoms:
A. Inattentiveness
B. Hyperactivity
C. Mood lability
D. Irritability and hot temper
E. Impaired stress tolerance
F. Disorganization


<<<PAGE 451>>>
G. Impulsivity
III. Exclusions: not diagnosed in presence of severe depression,
psychosis, or severe personality disorder
aParent report aided with 10-item Parent Rating Scale of Childhood Behavior.
bPatient self-report of retrospective childhood symptoms aided by Wender Utah Rating Scale.

Differential Diagnosis
A diagnosis of ADHD is likely when adults describe symptoms of inattention
and impulsivity as a life-long problem, not as episodic events. The overlap of
ADHD and hypomania, bipolar II disorder, and cyclothymia is controversial
and challenging to sort out retrospectively. Clear-cut histories of discrete
episodes of hypomania and mania, with or without periods of depression, are
suggestive of a mood disorder rather than a clinical picture of ADHD;
however, ADHD may have predated the emergence of a mood disorder in
some individuals. In such a case, ADHD and bipolar disorder may be
comorbid. Adults with an early history of chronic school difficulties related
to paying attention, activity level, and impulsive behavior are generally
diagnosed with ADHD, even when a mood disorder occurs later in life.
Anxiety disorders can coexist with ADHD and are less complicated than
hypomania to distinguish from it.
Course and Prognosis
The prevalence of ADHD diminishes over time, although at least half of
children and adolescents may have the disorder into adulthood. Many
children, initially diagnosed with ADHD, combined presentation, exhibit
fewer impulsive-hyperactive symptoms as they get older and, by the time
they are adults, will meet criteria for ADHD, predominantly inattentive
presentation. As with children, adults with ADHD demonstrate higher rates
of learning disorders, anxiety disorders, mood disorders, and substance use
disorders compared with the general population.
Treatment
The treatment of ADHD in adults targets pharmacotherapy, mainly longacting stimulants, similar to that used with children and adolescents with
ADHD. In adults, only the long-acting stimulants are FDA approved in the


<<<PAGE 452>>>
treatment of ADHD. Signs of a positive response are an increased attention
span, decreased impulsiveness, and improved mood. Psychopharmacological
therapy may be needed indefinitely. Clinicians should use standard ways to
monitor drug response and patient compliance.
Epidemiology
Among adults, evidence suggests an approximate 4 percent prevalence of
ADHD in the population. ADHD in adulthood is generally diagnosed by selfreport, given the lack of school information and observer information
available; therefore, it is more challenging to make an accurate diagnosis.

2.5 Specific Learning Disorder
Specific learning disorder in youth is a neurodevelopmental disorder
produced by the interactions of heritable and environmental factors that
influence the brain’s ability to perceive or process verbal and nonverbal
information efficiently. Children with the disorder have persistent difficulty
learning academic skills in reading, written expression, or mathematics,
beginning in early childhood, which is inconsistent with the overall
intellectual ability of a child. Children with specific learning disorder often
find it challenging to keep up with their peers in certain academic subjects,
whereas they may excel in others. Several academic skills may be
compromised in specific learning disorder include reading single words and
sentences fluently, written expression and spelling, and calculation and
solving mathematical problems. Specific learning disorder results in
underachievement that is unexpected based on the child’s potential as well as
the opportunity to have learned more. Specific learning disorder in reading,
spelling, and mathematics appears to aggregate in families. There is an
increased risk of four to eight times in first-degree relatives for reading
deficits, and about five to ten times for mathematics deficits, compared to the
general population. Specific learning disorder occurs two to three times more
often in males than in females. Learning problems in a child or adolescent
identified in this manner can establish eligibility for academic services
through the public school system.


<<<PAGE 453>>>
The American Psychiatric Association’s DSM-5, combines the DSM-IV
diagnoses of reading disorder, mathematics disorder, and disorder of written
expression and learning disorder not otherwise specified into a single
diagnosis: Specific learning disorder. Learning deficits in reading, written
expression, and mathematics in the DSM-5 are designated using specifiers.
ICD-10 continues to separate the disorders. DSM-5 notes that the term
dyslexia is an equivalent term describing a pattern of learning difficulties,
including deficits in accurate or fluent word recognition, poor decoding, and
poor spelling skills. Dyscalculia is an alternative term referring to a pattern of
deficits related to learning arithmetic facts, processing numerical information,
and performing accurate calculations. Table 2-18 lists the approaches to
diagnosis of specific learning disorder.
Specific learning disorder of all types affects approximately 10 percent of
youth. This disorder represents approximately half of all public school
children who receive special education services in the United States. In 1975,
Public Law 94–142 (the Education for All Handicapped Children Act, now
known as the Individual with Disabilities Education Act [IDEA]) mandated
all states to provide free and appropriate educational services to all children.
Since that time, the number of children identified with learning disorders has
increased, and a variety of definitions of learning disabilities have arisen. For
this diagnosis, a child’s achievement must be significantly lower than
expected in one or more of the following: reading skills, comprehension,
spelling, written expression, calculation, mathematical reasoning, or the
learning problems interfere with academic achievement or activities of daily
living. It is common for specific learning disorder to include more than one
area of skill deficits.
Children with specific learning disorder in the area of reading can be
identified by poor word recognition, slow reading rate, and impaired
comprehension compared with most children of the same age. Current data
suggest that most children with reading difficulties have deficits in speech
sound processing skills, regardless of their IQ. In DSM-5, there is no longer a
diagnostic criterion for specific learning disorder comparing the specific
deficit to overall IQ. The current consensus is that children with reading
impairment have trouble with word recognition and “sounding out” words
because they cannot efficiently process and use phonemes (the smaller bits of
words that are associated with particular sounds). An epidemiologic study


<<<PAGE 454>>>
found four profiles, including (1) weak reading, (2) weak language, (3) weak
math, or (4) combined weak math and reading, accounting for 70 percent of
children with specific learning impairments. Low scores in short-term
memory for speech sounds characterized the profile with weak language,
whereas, low speech sound awareness was associated with the weak reading
group, but not the weak language group. Finally, in another study, it was
found that the weak math group did not show speech sound deficits.
Severe specific learning disorder may make it agonizing for a child to
succeed in school, often leading to demoralization, low self-esteem, chronic
frustration, and compromised peer relationships. Specific learning disorder is
associated with an increased risk of comorbid disorders, including ADHD,
communication disorders, conduct disorders, and depressive disorders.
Adolescents with specific learning disorder are at least 1.5 times more likely
to drop out of school, approximating rates of 40 percent. Adults with specific
learning disorder are at increased risk for difficulties in employment and
social adjustment. Specific learning disorder often extends to skills deficits in
multiple areas such as reading, writing, and mathematics.
Moderate to high heritability contributes to specific learning disorder, and
it appears that many cognitive traits are polygenic. Also, there is pleiotropy;
that is, the same genes may affect the skills necessary for diverse learning
tasks. Factors such as perinatal injury and specific neurologic conditions may
contribute to the development of specific learning disorder. Conditions such
as lead poisoning, FAS, and in utero drug exposure are also associated with
increased rates of specific learning disorder.
Table 2-18
Specific Learning Disorder

Diagnostic
name

DSM-5

ICD-10

Specific Learning
Disorder

Specific Developmental
Disorders of Scholastic
Skills
• Specific reading
disorder
• Specific spelling


<<<PAGE 455>>>
disorder
• Specific disorder of
arithmetical skills
• Mixed disorder of
scholastic skills
Duration

≥6 mo
Symptoms beginning
during school-age
years, may not be
apparent until later

Symptoms

Difficulties with learning Deficits in the specific
or academics.
domain (reading, spelling,
Example difficulties:
arithmetic) relevant to the
above listed disorder
• Reading
(slow/inaccurate)
• Reading
comprehension
• Spelling
• Written expression
• Numbers/calculation
• Math reasoning

Exclusions
Intellectual disability
(not result Visual or auditory
of):
impairment
Another mental disorder
Another medical
disorder
Psychosocial adversity
Inadequate education
Symptom
specifiers

With impairment in
reading
With impairment in

Intellectual disability
Mental age
Visual impairment
Inadequate education


<<<PAGE 456>>>
written expression
With impairment in
mathematics
Severity
specifiers

Mild: minimal
accommodations or
support needed in
school
Moderate: some
accommodations
needed
Severe: intensive
individualized and
specialized teaching
most of the time in
school

SPECIFIC LEARNING DISORDER WITH IMPAIRMENT IN
READING
Reading impairment is present in up to 75 percent of children and adolescents
with a specific learning disorder. Students who have learning problems in
other academic areas most commonly experience difficulties with reading as
well.
Reading impairment is characterized by difficulty in recognizing words,
slow and inaccurate reading, poor comprehension, and difficulties with
spelling. Reading impairment is often comorbid with other disorders in
children, particularly ADHD. The historical term developmental alexia
defines a developmental deficit in recognizing printed symbols. The term was
simplified to dyslexia in the 1960s. Dyslexia was used extensively for many
years to describe a reading disability syndrome that often included speech
and language deficits and right-left confusion. Reading impairment is
frequently accompanied by disabilities in other academic skills, and the term
dyslexia remains as an alternate term for a pattern of reading and spelling
difficulties.


<<<PAGE 457>>>
Clinical Features
We can usually identify children with reading disabilities by the age of 7
years (second grade). Reading difficulty may be apparent among students in
classrooms that expect reading skills earlier. Children can sometimes
compensate for reading disorders in the early elementary grades by the use of
memory and inference, particularly in children with high intelligence. In such
instances, the disorder may not be apparent until age 9 (fourth grade) or later.
Children with reading impairment make many errors in their oral reading.
The errors include omissions, additions, and distortions of words. Such
children have difficulty in distinguishing between printed letter characters
and sizes, especially those that differ only in spatial orientation and length of
a line. The problems in managing printed or written language can pertain to
individual letters, sentences, and even a page. The child’s reading speed is
slow, often with minimal comprehension. Most children with reading
disability have an age-appropriate ability to copy from a written or printed
text, but nearly all spell poorly.
Associated problems include language difficulties: discrimination, and
difficulty in sequencing words properly. A patient might start with a word
that occurs midway or at the end of a written sentence. Most children with
reading disorder dislike and avoid reading and writing. They become anxious
when confronted with demands that involve printed language. Many children
with specific learning disorders who do not receive remedial education have a
sense of shame and humiliation because of their continuing failure and
subsequent frustration. The intensity of these feelings grows over time. Older
children tend to be angry and depressed and exhibit poor self-esteem.
Jackson, a 10-year-old boy, was referred for evaluation of failing to
complete in-class assignments and homework and failing tests in reading,
spelling, and arithmetic. For the past 2 years (grades 5 and 6), he had
been attending a particular education class every morning in the local
community school, based on an assessment from the second grade. A
subsequent psychoeducational assessment by a clinical psychologist
confirmed reading problems. Jackson was eligible for a full-day special
education class, after which he started attending a program with eight
other students ranging from 6 to 12 years of age.


<<<PAGE 458>>>
Clinical interview with his parents revealed a healthy pregnancy and
neonatal period, and a history of language delay. In preschool and
kindergarten, Jackson had difficulty with rhyming games and showed a
lack of interest in books and preferred to play with construction toys. In
the first grade, Jackson had more difficulty learning to read than other
boys in his class and continued to have problems pronouncing
multisyllabic words (e.g., he said “aminals” for “animals” and
“sblanation” for “explanation”). Family history was positive for reading
deficits and ADHD. Jackson’s father disclosed a history of personal
reading problems, and Jackson’s older brother, 15 years of age, had
ADHD, for which he took stimulant medication. Jackson’s parents were
concerned about his poor focus in school and wondered whether he had
ADHD. In the clinical interview with Jackson, he rarely made eye
contact, mumbled a lot, and struggled to find the right words (e.g.,
manifested many false starts, hesitations, and nonspecific terms, such as
“the thing that you draw … um … pencil—no … um … lines with”). He
admitted to disliking school, adding, “Reading is boring and stupid—I’d
rather be skateboarding.” Jackson complained about how much reading
he was given—even in math—and commented, “Reading takes so much
time. By the time I figure out a word, I can’t remember what I just read,
and so have to read the stuff again.”
Psychoeducational assessment included the Wechsler Intelligence
Scale for Children-IV, Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals-IV
(CELF-IV), the Wechsler Individual Achievement Test-II, and selfratings of anxiety, depression, and self-esteem. Results indicated lowaverage verbal and above-average performance IQ, poor word attack and
word identification skills (below 12th percentile), poor comprehension
(below ninth percentile), poor spelling (below sixth percentile), weak
comprehension of oral language (below 16th percentile), elevated but
subthreshold scores on the Children’s Depression Inventory, and low
self-esteem. Although Jackson manifested symptoms of inattention,
restlessness, and oppositional behavior (mainly at school), he did not
meet the criteria for ADHD. Jackson met DSM-5 criteria for a specific
learning disorder, with deficits in reading and written expression.
Recommendations included continuation in special education plus
attendance at a summer camp specializing in children with reading


<<<PAGE 459>>>
disorder, as well as ongoing monitoring of self-esteem and depressive
traits.
At 1-year follow-up, Jackson and his parents reported striking
improvements in his reading, overall school performance, mood, and selfesteem. Both Jackson and his family felt that the specialized instruction
provided during the summer camp was beneficial. The program had
provided one-on-one focused and explicit instruction for 1 hour a day for
a total of 70 hours. Jackson explained that he had been taught “like a
game plan” to read, and challenged the clinician to give him a “really
tough long word to read.” He demonstrated strategies that he had learned
to read the word “unconditionally” and also explained what it meant. To
boost his fluency in reading and comprehension, he was provided with
assignments to read along with audio-taped versions of books, use of
graphic organizers to facilitate reading comprehension, and continued
participation in the summer camp reading program. (Adapted from
Rosemary Tannock, Ph.D.)
Diagnosis
Reading impairment is diagnosed when a child’s reading achievement is
significantly below that expected of a child of the same age. Characteristic
diagnostic features include difficulty recalling, evoking, and sequencing
printed letters and words, processing sophisticated grammatical
constructions, and making inferences. School failure and ensuing poor selfesteem can exacerbate the problems as a child becomes more consumed with
a sense of failure and spends less time focusing on academic work. Students
with reading impairment are entitled to an educational evaluation through the
school district to determine eligibility for special education services. Special
education classification, however, is not uniform across states or regions, and
students with identical reading difficulties may be eligible for services in one
region, but ineligible in another.
Pathology and Laboratory Examination. No specific physical signs or
laboratory measures are helpful in the diagnosis of reading deficits.
Psychoeducational testing, however, is critical in determining these deficits.
The diagnostic battery generally includes a standardized spelling test, written


<<<PAGE 460>>>
composition, processing, and using oral language, design copying, and
judgment of the adequacy of pencil use. The reading subtests of the
Woodcock-Johnson Psycho-Educational Battery-Revised and the Peabody
Individual Achievement Test-Revised are useful in identifying reading
disability. A screening projective battery may include human-figure
drawings, picture-story tests, and sentence completion. The evaluation should
also include systematic observation of behavioral variables.
Differential Diagnosis
Reading deficits are often accompanied by comorbid disorders, such as
language disorder, disability in written expression, and ADHD. Data indicate
that children with reading disability consistently present difficulties with
linguistic skills, whereas children with ADHD only do not. Children with
reading disability without ADHD, however, may have some overlapping
deficits in cognitive inhibition. For example, they perform impulsively on
continuous performance tasks. Deficits in expressive language and speech
discrimination, along with reading disorder, may lead to a comorbid
diagnosis of language disorder. We should differentiate reading impairment
from intellectual disability syndromes in which reading, along with most
other skills, are below the achievement expected for a child’s chronologic
age. Intellectual testing helps to differentiate global deficits from more
specific reading difficulties.
We can detect poor reading skills resulting from inadequate schooling by
comparing a given child’s achievement with classmates on reading
performance on standardized reading tests. We should rule out hearing and
visual impairments with screening tests.
Comorbidity
Children with reading difficulties are at high risk for additional learning
deficits, including mathematics and written expression. The DSM-5
Language disorder, also known as specific language impairment, has
traditionally been viewed as distinct from dyslexia and dyscalculia. Children
with language disorder have poor word knowledge, limited abilities to form
accurate sentence structure, and impairments in the ability to put words
together to produce clear explanations. Children with language disorder may


<<<PAGE 461>>>
have delayed development of language acquisition, and difficulties with
grammar and syntactical knowledge. Specific learning disorder in the areas of
reading and mathematics frequently occur comorbidly with language
disorder. In one study, 19 percent to 63 percent of reading disorder patients
also had language impairment.
Conversely, reading impairment occurs in 12.5 to 85 percent of individuals
with language disorder. In twin studies, reading impairments are significantly
higher in those children with specific learning impairment and family
members of children with the disorder. There are also high rates of
comorbidity between reading impairment and mathematics impairment; in
some studies, the comorbidity is as high as 60 percent. It appears that
children with both reading and math impairment may perform more poorly in
mathematics; however, the reading skills of the comorbid children were no
different from children who had only reading disorder and not math disorder.
Comorbid psychiatric disorders are also frequent, such as ADHD,
oppositional defiant disorder, conduct disorders, and depressive disorders,
especially in adolescents. Data suggest that up to 25 percent of children with
reading impairment may have comorbid ADHD. Alternately, between 15 and
30 percent of children diagnosed with ADHD have specific learning disorder.
Family studies suggest that ADHD and reading impairment may share some
degree of heritability. That is, some genetic factors contribute to both reading
impairment and attentional syndromes. Youth with reading impairments have
higher than average rates of depression on self-report measures and
experience higher levels of anxiety symptoms than children without specific
learning disorder. Furthermore, children with reading impairment are at
increased risk for poor peer relationships and exhibit less skill in responding
to subtle social cues.
Course and Prognosis
Children with a reading disability may gain knowledge of printed language
during their first 2 years in grade school without remedial assistance. By the
end of the first grade, many children with reading problems have learned how
to read a few words; however, by the third grade, keeping up with classmates
is exceedingly hard without remedial educational intervention. When
remediation is instituted early, in milder cases, it may not be necessary after


<<<PAGE 462>>>
the first or second grade. In severe cases and depending on the pattern of
deficits and strengths, remediation may continue into the middle and high
school years.
Treatment
Remediation strategies for children with reading impairments focus on direct
instruction that leads a child’s attention to the connections between speech
sounds and spelling. Effective remediation programs begin by teaching the
child to make accurate associations between letters and sounds. This
approach relies on the theory that the core deficits in reading impairments are
related to difficulty recognizing and remembering the associations between
letters and sounds. After mastering individual letter-sound associations,
remediation can target more significant components of reading, such as
syllables and words. We can determine the exact focus of any reading
program only after an accurate assessment of a child’s specific deficits and
weaknesses. Positive strategies include small, structured reading groups that
offer individual attention and make it easier for a child to ask for help.
Children and adolescents with reading difficulties are entitled to an
individual education program (IEP) provided by the public school system.
However, for high school students with persistent reading disorders and
ongoing difficulties with decoding and word identification, IEP services may
not be sufficient to remediate their problems. A study of students with
reading disorders in 54 schools indicated that, at the high school level,
specific goals are not adequately met solely through school remediation. High
schoolers with persisting reading difficulties may likely have more benefit
from individualized reading remediation.
Reading instruction programs such as the Orton Gillingham and Direct
Instructional System for Teaching and Remediation (DISTAR) approaches
begin by concentrating on individual letters and sounds, advance to the
mastery of simple phonetic units, and then blend these units into words and
sentences. Thus, if children learn to cope with graphemes, they will learn to
read. Other reading remediation programs, such as the Merrill program, and
the Science Research Associates, Inc. (SRA) Basic Reading Program, begin
by introducing whole words first and then teach children how to break them
down and recognize the sounds of the syllables and the individual letters in


<<<PAGE 463>>>
the word. Another approach teaches children with reading disorders to
recognize whole words through the use of visual aids and bypasses the
sounding-out process. One such program is called the Bridge Reading
Program. The Fernald method uses a multisensory approach that combines
teaching whole words with a tracing technique so that the child has
kinesthetic stimulation while learning to read the words.
Epidemiology
An estimated 4 to 8 percent of youth in the United States have been identified
with dyslexia, encompassing a variety of reading, spelling, and
comprehension deficits. Three to four times as many boys as girls have
reading impairments in clinically referred samples. In epidemiologic samples,
however, rates of reading impairments are much closer among boys and girls.
Boys with reading impairment are referred for psychiatric evaluation more
often than girls due to comorbid ADHD and disruptive behavior problems.
There is no apparent gender differential among adults who report reading
difficulties.
Etiology
Data from cognitive, neuroimaging and genetic studies suggest that reading
impairment is a neurobiologic disorder with a significant genetic
contribution. It reflects a deficiency in processing sounds of speech sounds,
and thus, spoken language. Children who struggle with reading most likely
also have a deficit in speech sound processing skills. Children with this
deficit cannot adequately identify the parts of words that denote specific
sounds, leading to difficulty in recognizing and “sounding out” words.
Youths with reading impairment are slower than peers in naming letters and
numbers. The core deficits for children with reading impairment include poor
processing of speech sounds and deficits in comprehension, spelling, and
sounding out words.
Because reading impairment typically includes a language deficit, we
believe that the left brain is the anatomical site of this dysfunction. Several
studies using MRI have suggested that the planum temporale in the left brain
shows less asymmetry than the same site in the right brain in children with
both language disorders and specific learning disorder. PET studies have led


<<<PAGE 464>>>
some researchers to conclude that left temporal blood flow patterns during
language tasks differ between children with and without learning disorders.
Cell analysis studies suggest that, in reading impaired individuals, the visual
magnocellular system (which typically contains large cells) contains more
disorganized and smaller cell bodies than expected. Studies indicate that 35
to 40 percent of first-degree relatives of children with reading deficits also
have reading disability. Several studies have suggested that chromosome 6
maps to phonologic awareness (i.e., the ability to decode sounds and sound
out words).
Furthermore, the ability to identify single words maps to chromosome 15.
Impairment in reading and spelling likely links to susceptibility loci on
multiple chromosomes. Although a recent research study identified a locus on
chromosome 18 as a strong influence on single-word reading and phoneme
awareness, generalist genes are likely responsible for learning disorders.
Many genes believed to be associated with specific learning disorder may
also influence normal variation in learning abilities. Also, genes that affect
abilities in reading, for example, are also hypothesized to affect written
expression and potentially mathematics skills.
Several historical hypotheses about the origin of reading deficits are now
known to be untrue. The first myth is that visual-motor problems cause
reading impairments, sometimes called scotopic sensitivity syndrome. There
is no evidence that children with reading impairment have visual problems or
difficulties with their visual-motor system. The second false theory is that
allergies can cause, or contribute to, reading disability. Finally,
unsubstantiated theories have implicated the cerebellar–vestibular system as
the source of reading disabilities.
Research in cognitive neuroscience and neuropsychology supports the
hypothesis that encoding processes and working memory, rather than
attention or long-term memory, are areas of weakness for children with
reading impairment. One study found an association between dyslexia and
birth in May, June, and July, suggesting that prenatal exposure to maternal
infectious illness, such as influenza, in the winter months may contribute to
reading disabilities. Complications during pregnancy and prenatal and
perinatal difficulties are common in the histories of children with reading
disabilities. Meager birth weight and severely premature children are at
higher risk for specific learning disorder. Children born very preterm are at


<<<PAGE 465>>>
increased risk for minor motor, behavioral, and specific learning disorder.
An increased incidence of reading impairment occurs in intellectually
average children with cerebral palsy and epilepsy. Children with postnatal
brain lesions in the left occipital lobe, resulting in right visual-field blindness,
experience reading impairments. Similarly, youths with lesions in the
splenium of the corpus callosum that blocks the transmission of visual
information from the intact right hemisphere to the language areas of the left
hemisphere experience reading impairments.
Children malnourished for long periods during early childhood are at
increased risk of compromised performance cognition, including reading.

SPECIFIC LEARNING DISORDER WITH IMPAIRMENT IN
MATHEMATICS
Children with mathematics difficulties have difficulty learning and
remembering numerals, cannot remember basic facts about numbers, and are
slow and inaccurate in computation. There are four groups of skills for which
children with this disorder have poor achievement: linguistic skills (those
related to understanding mathematical terms and converting written problems
into mathematical symbols), perceptual skills (the ability to recognize and
understand symbols and order clusters of numbers), mathematical skills
(basic addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and following the
sequencing of basic operations), and attentional skills (copying figures
correctly and observing operational symbols correctly). There are a variety of
terms used over the years to denote various difficulties with math skills,
including dyscalculia, congenital arithmetic disorder, acalculia, Gerstmann
syndrome, and developmental arithmetic disorder; these terms have been
used to denote the difficulties present in mathematics disorder. Core deficits
in dyscalculia are in processing numbers, and good language abilities are
needed for accurate counting, calculating, and understanding mathematical
principles.
Mathematics deficits can, however, occur in isolation or conjunction with
language and reading impairments. According to the DSM-5, the diagnosis of
specific learning disorder with impairment in mathematics consists of deficits
in arithmetic counting and calculations, difficulty remembering mathematics
facts, and potentially counting on fingers instead. Additional deficits include


<<<PAGE 466>>>
difficulty with mathematical concepts and reasoning, leading to difficulties in
applying procedures to solve quantitative problems. These deficits lead to
skills that are substantially below what is typical for the child’s age and cause
significant interference in academic success, as documented by standardized
academic achievement testing.
Clinical Features
Common features of mathematics deficit include difficulty learning number
names, remembering the signs for addition and subtraction, learning
multiplication tables, translating word problems into computations, and
performing calculations at the expected pace. We can detect most children
with mathematics deficits during the second and third grades in elementary
school. A child with poor mathematics abilities typically has problems with
concepts, such as counting and adding even one-digit numbers, compared
with classmates of the same age. During the first 2 or 3 years of elementary
school, a child with poor mathematics skill may just get by in mathematics by
relying on rote memory. However, soon, as mathematics problems require
discrimination and manipulation of spatial and numerical relations, a child
with mathematics difficulties is overwhelmed.
Some investigators have classified mathematics deficiencies into the
following categories: difficulty learning to count meaningfully, difficulty
mastering cardinal and ordinal systems, difficulty performing arithmetic
operations, and difficulty envisioning clusters of objects as groups. Children
with mathematics difficulty have trouble associating auditory and visual
symbols, understanding the conservation of quantity, remembering sequences
of arithmetic steps, and choosing principles for problem-solving activities.
Children with these problems are presumed to have good auditory and verbal
abilities; however, in many cases, the mathematics deficits may occur in
conjunction with reading, writing, and language problems. In these cases, the
other deficiencies may compound the impairment of poor mathematics skill.
Mathematics difficulty, in fact, often coexists with other disorders
affecting reading, expressive writing, coordination, and language. Spelling
problems, deficits in memory or attention, and emotional or behavioral
problems may be present. Young grade-school children may exhibit specific
learning problems in reading and writing, and we should evaluate these


<<<PAGE 467>>>
children for mathematics deficits. The exact relationship between
mathematics deficits and the deficits in language and dyslexia is not clear.
Although children with language disorder do not necessarily experience
mathematics deficiencies, these conditions often coexist, and both are
associated with impairments in decoding and encoding processes.
Lena, an 8-year-old girl, was referred for evaluation of impairing
problems in attention and academic achievement, which were first noted
in kindergarten but were now causing difficulty at home and school. Lena
attended a regular third-grade class in a local public school, which she
had been attending since midway through kindergarten.
Lena’s history included a mild delay in speech acquisition (e.g., first
words at approximately 18 months of age and short sentences at
approximately 3 years of age). However, otherwise, she had no major
developmental problems until kindergarten, when her teacher had raised
concerns about inattentiveness, difficulty following instructions, and her
difficulty in mastering basic number concepts (e.g., inaccurate counting
of sets of objects). A speech, language, and hearing assessment
completed at the end of kindergarten revealed mild language problems
that did not warrant specific intervention. School reports from grades 1
and 2 noted ongoing concerns about inattention, poor reading skills, and
difficulty mastering simple arithmetic facts, and “making careless
mistakes in copying numbers from the board and in doing addition and
subtraction.” These problems continued through grade 2, despite some inschool accommodations (e.g., moving Lena’s seat closer to the teacher)
and modifications (e.g., providing her with printed sheets of arithmetic
problems, so she did not need to copy them herself). Lena’s parents
reported a 3-year history of losing things, fidgeting at the dinner table,
and difficulty concentrating on games and homework and forgetting to
bring notes to and from school. The psychological assessment included
the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-III, Clinical Evaluation of
Language Fundamentals-IV, Comprehensive Test of Phonological
Processing, and the Woodcock-Johnson Psycho-Educational Battery–III.
Results indicated average intelligence, with relatively weaker
performance on tests of perceptual organization, weak phonologic


<<<PAGE 468>>>
(speech sound) awareness, mild deficits in receptive and expressive
language, and reading and arithmetic abilities that were well below grade
level. Parent and teacher ratings on a standardized behavior questionnaire
(Conners’ Rating Scales-Long Form) were above the clinical threshold
for ADHD.
Lena was given a diagnosis of ADHD, predominantly inattentive type,
and specific learning disorder with impairment in reading, based on the
history, school achievement, and standardized assessment. She did not
meet the criteria for communication disorder, and her doctors thought
that her mathematics problems did not cause impairment like her reading
disorder and ADHD did. Recommendations included the following:
family psychoeducation clarifying the ADHD and specific learning
disorder, remedial interventions for reading, and treatment of her ADHD
with a long-acting stimulant agent.
At 1-year follow-up, Lena and her parents reported noticeable
improvement with inattention, but ongoing problems with reading and
more significant deficits in mathematics. Her clinicians added
mathematics remediation to her weekly schedule. Two years later, when
Lena was 11 years of age, her parents called for an “urgent reevaluation”
due to a sudden worsening of her difficulties at home and school. Clinical
evaluation revealed adequate stimulant treatment response of her ADHD,
more marked deficits in reading speed accuracy compared to others her
age, and significant deficits in mathematics. Lena’s parents reported that
she had started lying about having mathematics homework or refused to
do it, was suspended from mathematics class twice in the past 3 months
because of oppositional behavior, and had failed sixth-grade
mathematics. Lena acknowledged disliking and worrying about math:
“whenever the teacher starts asking questions and looks in my direction,
my mind just goes blank, and I feel sort of shaky—it’s so bad in tests that
I have to leave class to get myself together.” At this point, her team noted
an additional component of anxiety to be contributing to her school
impairments. Added recommendations included increased specific
educational remediation for mathematics. At follow-up, Lena reported
that the resource teacher had taught her some helpful strategies to address
her mathematics anxiety, as well as ways of classifying word problems
and differentiating critical information from irrelevant information. She


<<<PAGE 469>>>
continued to be a robust responder to long-acting stimulants for her
ADHD and had only minimal difficulties concentrating on homework
after school. (Adapted from case material by Rosemary Tannock, Ph.D.)
Diagnosis
We make a diagnosis of specific learning disorder in mathematics when a
child’s skill in mathematical reasoning, or calculation, remains significantly
below that expected for that child’s age, for at least 6 months, even when
administering remedial interventions. Many different skills contribute to
mathematics proficiency. These include linguistic skills, conceptual skills,
and computational skills. Linguistic skills involve being able to understand
mathematical terms, understand word problems, and translate them into the
proper mathematical process. Conceptual skills involve the recognition of
mathematical symbols and being able to use mathematical signs correctly.
Computational skills include the ability to line up numbers correctly and to
follow the “rules” of the mathematical operation.
Pathology and Laboratory Examination. No physical signs or
symptoms indicate mathematics disorder, but educational testing and
standardized measurement of intellectual function are necessary to make this
diagnosis. The Keymath Diagnostic Arithmetic Test measures several areas of
mathematics, including knowledge of mathematical content, function, and
computation. It assesses ability in mathematics of children in grades 1 to 6.
Course and Prognosis
A child with a specific learning disorder in mathematics is usually
identifiable by the age of 8 years (third grade). In some children, the disorder
is apparent as early as 6 years (first grade); in others, it may not be apparent
until age 10 (fifth grade) or later. Too few data are currently available from
longitudinal studies to predict patterns of developmental and academic
progress of children classified as having mathematics disorder in early school
grades. On the other hand, children with a moderate mathematics disorder
who do not receive intervention may have complications, including
continuing academic difficulties, shame, poor self-concept, frustration, and
depression. These complications can lead to reluctance to attend school and


<<<PAGE 470>>>
demoralization about academic success.
Differential Diagnosis
We should differentiate mathematics deficits from global causes of impaired
functioning such as intellectual disability. Inadequate schooling can affect a
child’s arithmetic performance. Conduct disorder or ADHD can occur
comorbidly with specific learning disorder in mathematics, and, in these
cases, we would make both diagnoses.
Comorbidity
Mathematics deficits are comorbid with deficits in both reading and written
expression. Children with mathematics difficulties may also be at higher risk
for expressive language problems and developmental coordination disorder.
Treatment
It is best to treat mathematics difficulties for children with early interventions
that lead to improved skills in basic computation. The presence of specific
learning disorder in reading, along with mathematics difficulties, can impede
progress; however, children are quite responsive to remediation in early grade
school. Children with indications of mathematics disorder as early as in
kindergarten require help in understanding which digit in a pair is larger,
counting abilities, identification of numbers, and remembering sequences of
numbers. Flashcards, workbooks, and computer games can be a viable part of
this treatment. One study indicated that mathematics instruction is most
helpful when the focus is on problem-solving activities, including word
problems, rather than only computation. Project MATH, a multimedia selfinstructional or group-instructional in-service training program, has been
successful for some children with mathematics disorder. Computer programs
can be helpful and can increase compliance with remediation efforts.
Social skills deficits can contribute to a child’s hesitation in asking for
help, so a child identified with a mathematics disorder may benefit from
gaining positive problem-solving skills in the social arena as well as in
mathematics.
Epidemiology


<<<PAGE 471>>>
Mathematics disability alone is estimated to occur in about 1 percent of
school-age children, that is about one of every five children with specific
learning disorder. Epidemiologic studies have indicated that up to 6 percent
of school-age children have some difficulty with mathematics, with a
prevalence of 3.5 to 6.5 for impairing forms of dyscalculia. Although specific
learning disorder overall occurs two to three times more often in males,
mathematics deficits may be relatively more frequent in girls than reading
deficits. Many studies of learning disorders in children have grouped reading,
writing, and mathematics disability, which makes it more difficult to
ascertain the precise prevalence of mathematics disability.
Etiology
Mathematics deficiency, as with other areas of specific learning disorder, has
a significant genetic contribution. Comorbidity with reading deficits is
common and in the range of 17 percent up to 60 percent. One theory
proposed a neurologic deficit in the right cerebral hemisphere, particularly in
the occipital lobe areas. These regions are responsible for processing visual–
spatial stimuli that, in turn, are responsible for mathematical skills. This
theory, however, has received little support in subsequent neuropsychiatric
studies.
The causes of deficits in mathematics are multifactorial, including genetic,
maturational, cognitive, emotional, educational, and socioeconomic factors.
Prematurity and very low birth weight are also risk factors for specific
learning disorder, including mathematics. Compared with reading abilities,
arithmetic abilities seem to depend more on the amount and quality of
instruction.

SPECIFIC LEARNING DISORDER WITH IMPAIRMENT IN
WRITTEN EXPRESSION
Written expression is the most complex skill acquired to convey an
understanding of language and to express thoughts and ideas. Writing skills
are highly correlated with reading for most children; however, for some
youth, reading comprehension may far surpass their ability to express
complex thoughts. Written expression, in some cases, is a sensitive index of
more subtle deficits in language usage that typically are not detected by


<<<PAGE 472>>>
standardized reading and language tests.
Deficits in written expression include writing skills that are significantly
below the expected level for a child’s age and education. Such deficits impair
the child’s academic performance and writing in everyday life. Components
of writing disorder include poor spelling, errors in grammar and punctuation,
and poor handwriting. Spelling errors are among the most common
difficulties for a child with a writing disorder. Spelling mistakes are most
often phonetic errors; that is, an erroneous spelling that sounds like the
correct spelling. Examples of common spelling errors are: fone for phone or
beleeve for believe.
Historically, experts considered dysgraphia (i.e., poor writing skills) a
reading disorder; however, it is now clear that impairment in written
expression can occur on its own. Terms once used to describe writing
disability include spelling disorder and spelling dyslexia. Writing disabilities
are often associated with other forms of specific learning disorders; however,
impaired writing ability may be identified later than other forms because it is
generally acquired later than verbal language and reading.
In contrast with the DSM-5, which includes specific learning disorder in
written expression, ICD-10 includes a separate specific spelling disorder.
Clinical Features
Youth with impairments in written expression struggle early in grade school
with spelling words and expressing their thoughts according to ageappropriate grammatical norms. Their spoken and written sentences contain
an unusually large number of grammatical errors and poor paragraph
organization. Affected children commonly make simple grammatical errors,
even when writing a short sentence. For example, despite constant reminders,
affected youth frequently fail to capitalize the first letter of the first word in a
sentence, and fail to end the sentence with a period. Typical features of
impaired written expression include spelling errors, grammatical errors,
punctuation errors, poor paragraph organization, and poor handwriting.
In higher grades in school, affected youth’s written sentences become more
conspicuously primitive, odd, and inaccurate compared to what is typical for
students at their grade level. For youth with impaired written expression,
word choices are often erroneous and inappropriate, paragraphs are


<<<PAGE 473>>>
disorganized and not in proper sequence, and spelling accuracy becomes
increasingly difficult as their vocabulary becomes more extensive and more
abstract. Associated features of writing impairments may include reluctance
to go to school, refusal to do assigned written homework, and concurrent
academic difficulties in other areas.
Many children with impaired written expression understandably become
frustrated and angry, and harbor feelings of shame and inadequacy regarding
poor academic achievement. In some cases, depressive disorders can result
from a growing sense of isolation, estrangement, and despair. Young adults
with impaired written expression who do not receive remedial intervention
continue to have writing skills deficits and a persistent sense of incompetence
and inferiority.
Brett, an 11-year-old boy, was referred for evaluation of increasing
problems in school over 2 years, including failure to complete assigned
schoolwork and homework, inattention and oppositional behavior, and
deteriorating grades and test scores. At the time of assessment, he was in
a regular fifth-grade class in a public school, which he had been attending
since grade 1.
Clinical interview with parents revealed that Brett had a twin brother
(monozygotic) with a history of language problems for which he had
received speech-language therapy in the preschool years and remedial
reading in the primary grades. Brett, however, had not exhibited
difficulty in speech or language development, according to parental
reports and scores on standardized tests of oral language administered in
the preschool years. His current and previous school reports indicate that
Brett participated well in class discussions and had no difficulty in
reading or mathematics; however, his written work was far below grade
level. In each of the last 2 years, his teachers had expressed increasing
concerns about Brett’s refusal to complete written work, failure to hand
in homework, daydreaming and fidgeting in class, and withdrawal from
class activities. Brett admitted to an increasing dislike of school and
especially writing assignments. He explained, “It’s writing, writing all
day long—even in math and science. I know how to do the problems and
the experiments, but I hate having to write it all down—my mind just


<<<PAGE 474>>>
goes blank.” Brett complained, “My teacher is always on me, telling me
that I’m lazy and haven’t done enough and that my writing is atrocious.
He tells me I’ve got a bad attitude—so why would I want to go to
school?” Brett and his parents reported that, over the past year, he has
been down, increasingly frustrated with school, and has refused to do
homework. They all agree that Brett has had a few brief episodes of
depressed mood.
Testing by a clinical psychologist revealed average to high-average
scores on the verbal and performance scales of the Wechsler Intelligence
Scale for Children-III and average scores on the reading and arithmetic
subtests of the Wide Range Achievement Test-3 (WRAT-3). However,
scores on the WRAT-3 spelling subtest were below the 9th percentile,
which was significantly below expectations for age and ability.
Examination of his spelling errors revealed that his spelling was typically
phonologically accurate (i.e., could plausibly be pronounced to sound like
the target word). However, he used letter sequences that did not resemble
English, regardless of pronunciation (e.g., “houses” was written as
“howssis,” “phones” was written as “fones,” and “exact” was “egszakt”).
Moreover, his performance was well below age and grade on
standardized tests of written expression (TOWL-3), as well as on a brief
(5-minute) informal assessment of expository text generation on a
favorite topic (e.g., newspaper article on recent sports event). During the
5-minute writing activity, he frequently stared out the window, shifted
positions, and chewed on his pencil. He would often get up to sharpen his
pencil and sigh when he put pencil to paper, writing slowly and
laboriously. At the end of 5 minutes, he had produced three short
sentences without any punctuation or capitalization that were barely
legible, containing several misspellings and grammatical errors, and that
were not linked semantically. By contrast, later in the assessment, he
described the sporting event with detail and enthusiasm. A speechlanguage evaluation revealed average scores on standard tests of oral
language (Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals-IV). However,
he omitted sounds or syllables in a multisyllabic word in a nonword
repetition test, which was sensitive to mild residual language impairments
and written language impairments.
The clinical team formulated a diagnosis of specific learning disorder


<<<PAGE 475>>>
with impairment in written expression, based on Brett’s inability to
compose written text, poor spelling, and grammatical errors, without
problems in reading or mathematics or a history of language
impairments. He did not meet full diagnostic criteria for any other DSM5 disorder, including oppositional defiant disorder, ADHD, or mood
disorder. Recommendations included the following: psychoeducation, the
need for educational accommodations (e.g., provision of additional time
for test-taking and written assignments, specific educational intervention
to facilitate written expression and to teach note-taking, and use of
specific computer software to support written composition and spelling),
and counseling should his depressed mood continue or worsen. (Adapted
from case material from Rosemary Tannock, Ph.D.)
Diagnosis
The DSM-5 diagnosis of specific learning disorder with impairment in
written expression depends on a child’s poor ability to use punctuation and
grammar accurately in sentences, inability to organize paragraphs or to
articulate ideas in writing. Poor performance on composing written text may
also include poor handwriting and impaired ability to spell and to place
words sequentially in coherent sentences, compared to others of the same
age. In addition to spelling mistakes, youth with impaired written expression
make grammatical mistakes, such as using incorrect tenses, forgetting words
in sentences, and placing words in the wrong order. Punctuation may be
incorrect, and the child may have a reduced ability to remember which words
begin with capital letters. Additional symptoms of impaired written
expression include the formation of letters that are not legible, inverted
letters, and mixtures of capital and lowercase letters in a given word. Other
features of writing disorders include poor organization of written stories,
which lack critical elements such as “where,” “when,” and “who” or clear
expression of the plot.
Pathology and Laboratory Examination. Whereas no physical signs of
a writing disorder exist, educational testing helps to make a diagnosis of
writing disorder. Diagnosis depends on a child’s writing performance being
markedly below expected production for his age, as confirmed by an


<<<PAGE 476>>>
individually administered standardized expressive writing test. Currently
available tests of written language include the Test of Written Language
(TOWL), the Diagnostic Evaluation of Writing Skills (DEWS), and the Test
of Early Written Language (TEWL). We should also evaluate for impaired
vision and hearing.
When there are impairments in written expression, we should administer a
standardized intelligence test, such as WISC-R to determine the child’s
overall intellectual capacity.
Course and Prognosis
Specific learning disorder with impairment in writing, reading, and
mathematics often coexist, and additional language disorder may be present
as well. A child with all of the above disabilities will likely be diagnosed with
language disorder first and impaired written expression last. In severe cases,
an impaired written expression is apparent by age 7 (second grade); in less
severe cases, the disorder may not be apparent until age 10 (fifth grade) or
later. Youth with mild and moderate impairment in written expression fare
well if they receive timely remedial education early in grade school. Severely
impaired written expression requires continual, extensive remedial treatment
through the late part of high school and even into college.
The prognosis depends on the severity of the disorder, the age or grade
when starting the remedial intervention, the length and continuity of
treatment, and the presence or absence of associated or secondary emotional
or behavioral problems.
Differential Diagnosis
It is crucial to determine whether disorders such as ADHD or major
depression are interfering with a child’s focus and thereby preventing the
production of adequate writing in the absence of a specific writing
impairment. If true, treatment for the other disorder should improve a child’s
writing performance. Commonly comorbid disorders with writing disability
are language disorder, mathematics disorder, developmental coordination
disorder, disruptive behavior disorders, and ADHD.
Comorbidity


<<<PAGE 477>>>
Children with impaired writing ability are significantly more likely to have
language disorder and impairments in reading and mathematics compared to
the general population of youth. ADHD occurs with higher frequency in
children with writing disability than in the general population. Youth with
specific learning disorder, including writing disability, are at higher risk for
social skills difficulties, and some develop poor self-esteem and depressive
symptoms.
Treatment
Remedial treatment for writing disability includes direct practice in spelling
and sentence writing as well as a review of grammatical rules. Intensive and
continuous administration of individually tailored, one-on-one expressive and
creative writing therapy appears to influence a favorable outcome. Teachers
in some special schools devote as much as 2 hours a day to such writing
instruction. This intervention largely depends on the relationship between the
child and the writing specialist. Success or failure in sustaining the patient’s
motivation affects the treatment’s long-term efficacy. Associated secondary
emotional and behavioral problems should be given prompt attention, with
appropriate psychiatric treatment and parental counseling.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of specific learning disorder with impairment in written
expression occurs in the range of 5 to 15 percent of school-age children. Over
time, specific learning disorder remits in many youths, leading to a persistent
rate of specific learning disorder of 4 percent in adults. The gender ratio in
writing deficits is two to three to one in boys compared with girls. Impaired
written expression often occurs along with deficits in reading, but not always.
Etiology
Causes of writing disability are likely similar to those of reading disorder,
that is, underlying deficits in using the components of language related to
letter sounds. Genetic factors are a significant factor in the development of
writing disability. Writing difficulties often accompany language disorder,
leading an affected child to have trouble with understanding grammatical
rules, finding words, and expressing ideas clearly. According to one


<<<PAGE 478>>>
hypothesis, impairment in written expression may result from combined
effects of language disorder and reading disorder. Most youths with impaired
written expression have first-degree relatives with similar difficulties.
Children with limited attention spans and high levels of distractibility may
find writing an arduous task.

2.6 Motor Disorders
DEVELOPMENTAL COORDINATION DISORDER
Developmental coordination disorder is a neurodevelopmental disorder in
which a child’s fine or gross motor coordination is slower, less accurate, and
more variable than in peers of the same age. Affecting about 5 to 6 percent of
school-age children, 50 percent of children with developmental coordination
disorder also have comorbid ADHD or dyslexia. A meta-analysis of recent
research on developmental coordination disorder concluded that three general
areas of deficits contribute to the disorder: (1) Poor predictive control of
motor movements; (2) deficits in rhythmic coordination and timing; and (3)
deficits in executive functions, including working memory, inhibition, and
attention.
Children with developmental coordination disorder struggle to perform the
motor activities of daily life, such as jumping, hopping, running, or catching
a ball. Children with coordination problems may also agonize over using
utensils, tying their shoelaces, or writing. A child with developmental
coordination disorder may exhibit delays in achieving motor milestones, such
as sitting, crawling, and walking, because of clumsiness, and yet excel at
verbal skills.
Developmental coordination disorder, thus, may be characterized by either
clumsy gross or fine motor skills, resulting in poor performance in sports and
even in academic achievement because of poor writing skills. A child with
developmental coordination disorder may bump into things more often than
siblings or drop things. In the 1930s, the term clumsy child syndrome began
to be used in the literature to denote a condition of awkward motor behaviors
not due to any specific neurologic disorder or damage. This term continues to


<<<PAGE 479>>>
be used to identify imprecise or delayed gross and fine motor behavior in
children, resulting in subtle motor inabilities but often significant social
rejection. Gross and fine motor impairment in developmental coordination
disorder is not from a medical condition, such as cerebral palsy, muscular
dystrophy, or a neuromuscular disorder. Currently, specific indications are
that perinatal problems, such as prematurity, low birth weight, and hypoxia
may contribute to the emergence of developmental coordination disorders.
Children with developmental coordination disorder are at higher risk for
language and learning disorders. A strong association exists between speech
and language problems and coordination problems, as well as an association
of coordination difficulties with hyperactivity, impulsivity, and reduced
attention span.
Children with developmental coordination disorder may resemble younger
children because of their inability to master motor activities typical for their
age group. For example, children with developmental coordination disorder
in elementary school may not be adept at bicycle riding, skateboarding,
running, skipping, or hopping. In the middle school years, children with this
disorder may have trouble in team sports, such as soccer, baseball, or
basketball. Fine motor skill manifestations of developmental coordination
disorder typically include clumsiness using utensils and difficulty with
buttons and zippers in the preschool-age group. In older children, using
scissors and more complex grooming skills, such as styling hair or putting on
makeup, is difficult. Peers often ostracize children with developmental
coordination disorder because of their poor skills in many sports, and they
often have longstanding difficulties with peer relationships. DSM-5
categorizes developmental coordination disorder as a Motor Disorder, along
with stereotypic movement disorder and tic disorders.
Clinical Features
The clinical signs suggesting the existence of developmental coordination
disorder are evident as early as infancy in some cases, when a child begins to
attempt tasks requiring motor coordination. The essential clinical feature is
significantly impaired performance in motor coordination. The difficulties in
motor coordination may vary with a child’s age and developmental stage
(Table 2-19).


<<<PAGE 480>>>
In infancy and early childhood, the disorder may manifest in delays in
developmental motor milestones, such as turning over, crawling, sitting,
standing, walking, buttoning shirts, and zipping up pants. Between the ages
of 2 and 4 years, clumsiness appears in almost all activities requiring motor
coordination. Affected children cannot hold objects and drop them easily,
their gait may be unsteady, they often trip over their own feet, and they may
bump into other children while attempting to go around them. Older children
may display impaired motor coordination in table games, such as putting
together puzzles or building blocks, and in any type of ball game. Although
no specific features are pathognomonic of developmental coordination
disorder, there is a delay in developmental milestones. Many children with
the disorder also have speech and language difficulties. Older children may
have secondary problems, including academic difficulties, as well as poor
peer relationships based on social rejection. Children with motor coordination
problems are more likely to have problems understanding subtle social cues,
and their peers often reject them. A recent study indicated that children with
motor difficulties perform more poorly on scales that measure the recognition
of static and changing facial expressions of emotion. This finding is likely to
be correlated to the clinical observations that children with motor
coordination have difficulties in social behavior and peer relationships.
Table 2-19
Manifestations of Developmental Coordination Disorder
Gross Motor Manifestations
Preschool age
Delays in reaching motor milestones, such as sitting, crawling, and
walking
Balance problems: falling, getting bruised frequently, and poor
toddling
Abnormal gait
Knocking over objects, bumping into things, and destructiveness
Primary-school age
Difficulty with riding bikes, skipping, hopping, running, jumping, and
doing somersaults


<<<PAGE 481>>>
Awkward or abnormal gait
Older
Poor at sports, throwing, catching, kicking, and hitting a ball
Fine Motor Manifestations
Preschool age
Difficulty learning dressing skills (tying, fastening, zipping, and
buttoning)
Difficulty learning feeding skills (handling knife, fork, or spoon)
Primary-school age
Difficulty assembling jigsaw pieces, using scissors, building with
blocks, drawing, or tracing
Older
Difficulty with grooming (putting on makeup, blow-drying hair, and
doing nails)
Messy or illegible writing
Difficulty using hand tools, sewing, and playing piano
Billy was brought for evaluation of suicidal ideation at 8 years of age,
after complaining to his parents that peers were bullying him for being
“bad” in sports and that nobody liked him. He only had one friend who
also laughed at him sometimes, because he always dropped the ball and
he looked “funny” while running. He was so upset about being rejected
by peers when he tried to play sports that he refused to go to physical
education class. Instead, he voluntarily went to the school counselor’s
office and stayed there until the period was over. Billy was already
irritated with a diagnosis of ADHD for which he took medication.
On top of that, he had difficulty with reading. Billy became so
distraught that one day he told his school counselor that he wanted to kill
himself. A developmental history revealed that he was delayed for sitting,
which he finally did at 10 months of age, and he could not walk without
falling over until 30 months of age. Billy’s parents were aware that he
was very clumsy, but they believed that he would outgrow that. Even at 8
years of age, Billy’s parents reported that, during meals, Billy often
spilled his drinks and was quite awkward when he used a fork. Some of


<<<PAGE 482>>>
his food typically fell off of his fork or spoon before it reached his mouth,
and he had great difficulty using a knife and a fork.
A comprehensive assessment of fine and gross motor skills
demonstrated the following: Billy was able to hop, but he could not skip
without briefly stopping after each step. Billy could stand with both feet
together but was unable to stand on tiptoe. Although Billy could catch a
ball, he held a ball bounced to himself at chest level, and was unable to
catch a ball bounced to him on the ground from a distance of 15 ft. The
Bruininks–Oseretsky Test of Motor Development, a test of agility and
coordination, revealed functioning levels commensurate with those of an
average 6-year-old child.
Billy was referred to a neurologist for a comprehensive evaluation
because he appeared to be generally weak, and his muscles seemed
floppy. Neurologic evaluation was negative for diagnosable neurologic
disorders, and his muscle strength was normal, despite his appearance.
Based on the negative neurologic examination and the finding of the
Bruininks-Oseretsky Test of Motor Development, Billy had a diagnosis
of developmental coordination disorder. Billy’s symptoms included mild
hypotonia and fine motor clumsiness.
After the diagnosis of developmental coordination disorder was made,
in addition to his already diagnosed ADHD and reading disorder, his
treatment plan included private sessions with an occupational therapist
who used perceptual-motor exercises to improve Billy’s fine motor skills,
targeting writing and use of utensils. His clinician requested an
Individualized Educational Plan (IEP) evaluation from the school to
obtain an adaptive physical education program. Also, the clinical team
requested that he have a reading tutor and that he sit close to the front of
the classroom. Billy was enrolled in a treatment program using motor
imagery training to reduce his clumsiness and improve coordination.
Billy was relieved to be receiving help, especially for his reading and
for sports activities, and no longer felt suicidal. Over 3 months of
treatment, Billy showed a noticeable improvement in his reading. His
mood improved further, mainly because he was receiving praise from his
teachers and parents. Billy’s classmates were not picking on him the way
they used to. As Billy began to feel better about himself, he began to play
sports informally with his peers, although not competitively. Billy was


<<<PAGE 483>>>
granted an adaptive physical education program in school, and he was not
required to play on teams. Instead, he practiced throwing and catching a
ball and playing basketball with a staff member.
Billy continued to show some degree of clumsiness, especially in his
fine motor skills over the next few years, yet he was cooperative, with the
occupational therapy interventions, his mood was bright, and he
demonstrated continual improvement. (Courtesy of Caroly Pataki, M.D.
and Sarah Spence, M.D.)
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of developmental coordination disorder depends on poor
performance in activities requiring coordination for a child’s age and
intellectual level. Diagnosis is based on a history of the child’s delay in
achieving early motor milestones, as well as on direct observation of current
deficits in coordination. An informal screen for developmental coordination
disorder involves asking the child to perform tasks involving gross motor
coordination (e.g., hopping, jumping, and standing on one foot); fine motor
coordination (e.g., finger-tapping and shoelace tying); and hand–eye
coordination (e.g., catching a ball and copying letters). We should consider
what is expected for a child’s age to judge possible poor performance. A
mildly clumsy child, but whose functioning is not impaired, does not qualify
for a diagnosis of developmental coordination disorder. Table 2-20 compares
the diagnostic approaches to developmental coordination disorder.
The diagnosis may be associated with below-normal scores on
performance subtests of standardized intelligence tests and by normal or
above-normal scores on verbal subtests. Specialized tests of motor
coordination can be useful, such as the Bender Visual Motor Gestalt Test, the
Frostig Movement Skills Test Battery, and the Bruininks-Oseretsky Test of
Motor Development. We should take into account the child’s age, and ensure
that there is not a better explanation, such as a neurologic or neuromuscular
condition. Examination, however, may occasionally reveal slight reflex
abnormalities and other soft neurologic signs.
Table 2-20


<<<PAGE 484>>>
Developmental Coordination Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic name

Developmental
Specific
Coordination Disorder
Developmental
Disorder of Motor
Function

Duration

Occurs during early
developmental period

Symptoms

Delayed development of Significant impairment
motor coordination
in motor coordination

Psychosocial
consequences
of symptoms

Functional impairment
(self-care, play, other
functions)

Exclusions (not
result of):

Another neurologic
condition
Intellectual disability
Visual impairment

General intellectual
retardation
A specific congenital or
neurologic disorder

Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes medical conditions that produce
coordination difficulties (e.g., cerebral palsy and muscular dystrophy). In
autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability, coordination usually
does not stand out as a significant deficit compared with other skills. Children
with neuromuscular disorders may exhibit more global muscle impairment
rather than clumsiness and delayed motor milestones. Neurologic
examination and workup usually reveal more extensive deficits in neurologic
conditions than in developmental coordination disorder. Extremely
hyperactive and impulsive children may be physically careless because of
their high levels of motor activity. Clumsy gross and fine motor behavior and
ADHD, as well as reading difficulties, are highly associated.
Comorbidity


<<<PAGE 485>>>
Developmental coordination disorder is strongly associated with ADHD,
specific learning disorder, particularly in reading, as well as language
disorder. Children with coordination difficulties have higher-than-expected
rates of language disorder, and studies of children with language disorder
report very high rates of “clumsiness.” Developmental coordination disorder
is also associated, but less strongly, with specific learning disorder with
impairment in mathematics, and in written expression. A study of children
with developmental coordination disorder reported that, although motor
coordination is critical for accuracy in tasks that require speed, poor motor
coordination does not correlate with the degree of inattention. Thus, in
children comorbid for ADHD and developmental coordination disorder,
children with the most severe ADHD do not necessarily have the worst
developmental
coordination
disorder.
Functional
neuroimaging,
pharmacologic, and neuroanatomical studies suggest that motor coordination
depends on the integration of sensory input and an action response, not purely
through sensorimotor function and higher-level thinking. Investigations of
comorbid developmental coordination disorder and ADHD are trying to
ascertain whether this comorbidity is due to overlapping genetic factors.
Peer relationship problems are common among children with
developmental coordination disorders because of rejection that often occurs
along with their poor performance in sports and games that require good
motor skill. Adolescents with coordination problems often exhibit poor selfesteem and academic difficulties. Recent studies underscore the importance
of attention to both victimization of children and adolescents with
developmental motor coordination by peers and the potential resulting
damage to self-worth. Children and adolescents with developmental
coordination disorder often are victims of bullying and have higher rates of
poor self-esteem that often deserves clinical attention.
Course and Prognosis
Historically, experts believed that developmental coordination spontaneously
improved over time. However, longitudinal studies have shown that motor
coordination problems can persist into adolescence and adulthood. When
mild to moderate clumsiness is persistent, some children can compensate by
developing interests in other skills. Some studies suggest a more favorable


<<<PAGE 486>>>
outcome for children who have average or above-average intellectual
capacity, in that they come up with strategies to develop friendships that do
not depend on physical activities. Clumsiness typically persists into
adolescence and adult life. One study following a group of children with
developmental coordination problems over a decade found that the clumsy
children remained less dexterous, showed poor balance and continued to be
physically awkward. The affected children were also more likely to have both
academic problems and poor self-esteem. Children with developmental
coordination disorder have also been shown to be at higher risk for obesity,
have difficulties with running, and are at greater risk of future cardiovascular
diseases.
Treatment
Interventions for children with developmental coordination disorder utilize
multiple modalities, including visual, auditory, and tactile materials targeting
perceptual-motor training for specific motor tasks. Two broad categories of
interventions are the following: (1) deficit-oriented approaches, including
sensory integration therapy, sensorimotor-oriented treatment, and processoriented treatment; and (2) task-specific interventions, including neuromotor
task training and cognitive orientation to daily occupational performance
(CO-OP). More recently, therapists incorporate motor imagery into treatment.
These approaches involve visual imagery exercises using a computer; they
have a broad range of foci, including predictive timing for motor tasks,
relaxation and mental preparation, visual modeling of fundamental motor
skills, and mental rehearsal of various tasks. This type of intervention derives
from the notion that improved internal representation of a movement task will
improve a child’s actual motor behavior.
The treatment of developmental coordination disorder generally includes
versions of sensory integration programs and modified physical education.
Sensory integration programs, usually administered by occupational
therapists, consist of physical activities that increase awareness of motor and
sensory function. For example, a child who bumps into objects often might
be given the task of trying to balance on a scooter, under supervision, to
improve balance and body awareness. Therapists often give children with
difficulty writing letters tasks to increase awareness of hand movements.


<<<PAGE 487>>>
School-based occupational therapies for motor coordination problems in
writing include utilizing mechanisms that provide resistance or vibration
during writing exercises, to improve grip, and practicing vertical writing on a
chalkboard to increase arm strength and stability while writing. These
programs have been shown to improve the legibility of student’s writing, but
not necessarily speed, because students learn to write with greater accuracy
and deliberate letter formation. Currently, many schools also allow and may
even encourage children with coordination difficulties that affect writing to
use computers to aid in writing reports and long papers.
Adaptive physical education programs help children enjoy exercise and
physical activities without the pressures of team sports. These programs
generally incorporate certain sports actions, such as kicking a soccer ball or
throwing a basketball. Children with coordination disorder may also benefit
from social skills groups and other prosocial interventions. The Montessori
technique may promote motor skill development, especially with preschool
children, because this educational program emphasizes the development of
motor skills. Small studies have suggested that exercise in rhythmic
coordination, practicing motor movements, and learning to use word
processing keyboards may be beneficial. Parental counseling may help
reduce parents’ anxiety and guilt about their child’s impairment, increase
their awareness, and facilitate their confidence to cope with the child.
An investigation of children with developmental coordination disorder
showed positive results using a computer game designed to improve the
ability to catch a ball. These children were able to improve their game scores
by practicing virtual catching without specific instructions on how to utilize
the visual cues. This has implications for treatment, in that certain types of
motor task coordination can be positively influenced through the practice of
specific motor tasks, even without overt instructions.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of developmental coordination disorder is about 5 to 6
percent of school-age children. The male-to-female ratio in referred
populations tends to show increased rates of the disorder in males, but
schools refer boys more often for testing and special education evaluations.
About two males for every one female are affected.


<<<PAGE 488>>>
Etiology
The causes of developmental coordination disorder are multifactorial and
likely include both genetic and developmental factors. Risk factors postulated
to contribute to this disorder include prematurity, hypoxia, perinatal
malnutrition, and low birth weight. Prenatal exposure to alcohol, cocaine, and
nicotine likely contribute to both low birth weight and cognitive and
behavioral abnormalities. Children born prematurely have developmental
coordination disorder rates of up to 50 percent. Researchers have proposed
that the cerebellum may be the neurologic substrate for comorbid cases of
developmental coordination disorder and ADHD. Neurochemical
abnormalities and parietal lobe lesions may contribute to coordination
deficits. Studies of postural control, that is, the ability to regain balance after
being in motion, indicate that children with developmental coordination
disorder who have adequate balance when standing still are unable to
accurately correct for movement, resulting in impaired balance, compared
with other children. A study concluded that, in children with developmental
coordination disorder, neural signals from the brain to particular muscles
involved in balance are neither being optimally sent or received. These
findings have also implicated the cerebellum as a potential anatomical site for
the dysfunction of developmental coordination disorder. There are several
theories regarding the mechanisms of developmental coordination disorder.
One example, called the automatization deficit hypothesis, suggests that
similar to dyslexia, children with developmental coordination disorder have
difficulty developing automatic motor skills. Another popular suggestion is
called the internal modeling deficit hypothesis, which suggests that children
with developmental coordination disorder are unable to perform the typical
internal cognitive models that predict the sensory consequences of motor
commands. In both scenarios, the cerebellum plays a vital role in motor
coordination and developmental coordination disorder.

STEREOTYPIC MOVEMENT DISORDER
Stereotypic movements include a diverse range of repetitive behaviors that
usually emerge in the early developmental period, appear to lack a clear
function, and sometimes cause an interruption in daily life. These movements
are typically rhythmic, such as hand flapping, body rocking, hand waving,


<<<PAGE 489>>>
hair-twirling, lip-licking, skin picking, or self-hitting. Stereotypic movements
often appear to be self-soothing or self-stimulating; however, they can result
in self-injury in some cases. Stereotypic movements appear to be involuntary;
however, they frequently can be suppressed with a concentrated effort.
Stereotypic movement disorder occurs with increased frequency in children
with autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability, but they also exist
in typically developing children. Stereotypic movements, such as headbanging, face slapping, eye-poking, or hand-biting, can cause significant selfharm. Nail-biting, thumb-sucking, and nose-picking are often not included as
symptoms of stereotypic movement disorder because they rarely cause
impairment. When impairment occurs, however, they can be included in
stereotypic movement disorder. Stereotypic movements share several features
with tics, including the repetitive, seemingly involuntary, and
characteristically identical nature of the movements each time they are
displayed. However, distinguishing features of stereotypical movements
compared to tics include a younger age of onset, lack of changing anatomical
locations, lack of premonitory “urge,” and decreased response to medication
management.
According to DSM-5, stereotypic movement disorder includes repetitive,
seemingly driven, and purposeless motor behavior that interferes with social,
academic, or other activities and may result in self-harm.
Diagnosis and Clinical Features
The presence of multiple repetitive stereotyped symptoms tends to occur
frequently among children with autism spectrum disorder and intellectually
disability, particularly when the intellectual disability is severe. Patients with
multiple stereotyped movements frequently have other significant mental
disorders, including disruptive behavior disorders or neurologic conditions.
In extreme cases, severe mutilation and life-threatening injuries can result
from self-inflicted trauma. Table 2-21 compares the diagnostic approaches to
diagnosing stereotypic movement disorder.
Table 2-21
Stereotypic Movement Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10


<<<PAGE 490>>>
Diagnostic name Stereotypic Movement Stereotyped Movement
Disorder
Disorders
Duration

Onset during the
developmental
period

Symptoms

Repetitive/seemingly
purposeless
movements

Movements that are:
Voluntary
Repetitive
Stereotyped
Seemingly purposeless
Movements outside of any
other psychiatric or
neurologic condition;
may include such things
as repeatedly rocking,
hand-flapping, or biting

Psychosocial
Marked interference in
consequences
activities and
of symptoms
functioning
Exclusions (not
result of):

Substance use
Tic disorder
Another medical
Trichotillomania
condition
Nail biting
Another mental
Nose-picking
disorder
Another neurologic
Another
disorder (i.e., movement
neurodevelopmental
disorders)
disorder
Another mental disorder

Symptom
specifiers

With self-injurious
behavior
Without self-injurious
behavior
Associated with known


<<<PAGE 491>>>
medical or genetic
condition,
neurodevelopmental
disorder or
environmental factor
Severity
specifiers

Mild: symptoms easily
suppressed by
sensory stimulus or
distraction
Moderate: significant
behavioral
modification needed
to control symptoms
Severe: continuous
measures taken to
prevent harm or
injury

Head-Banging. Head-banging exemplifies a stereotypic movement disorder
that can result in functional impairment. Typically, head-banging begins
during infancy, between 6 and 12 months of age. Infants strike their heads
with a definite rhythmic and monotonous continuity against the crib or
another hard surface. They seem to be absorbed in the activity, which can
persist until they become exhausted and fall asleep. The head-banging is
often transitory but sometimes persists into middle childhood. Head-banging
that is a component of temper tantrums differs from stereotypic head-banging
and ceases after the tantrums, and controlling their secondary gains.
Nail-Biting. Nail-biting begins as early as 1 year of age and increases in
incidence until age 12. Most cases are not sufficiently severe to meet the
DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for stereotypic movement disorder. In rare cases,
children cause physical damage to the fingers themselves, usually by
associated biting of the cuticles, which leads to secondary infections of the
fingers and nail beds. Nail-biting seems to occur or increase in intensity when
a child is either anxious or stressed. Some of the most severe nail-biting


<<<PAGE 492>>>
occurs in children with severe or profound intellectual disability. However,
many nail-biters have no obvious emotional disturbance.
Tim, a 14-year-old with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and severe
intellectual disability, was evaluated when he transferred to a new private
school for children with ASD. Observed in his classroom, he was a small
boy who appeared younger than his age. He held his hands in his pockets
and spun around in place. When offered a toy, he took it and manipulated
it for a while. When prompting him to engage in various tasks that
required that he take his hands out of his pockets, he began hitting his
head with his hands. If the teacher held his hands, he hit his head with his
knees. He was adept in contorting himself so that he could hit or kick
himself in almost any position, even while walking. Soon, his face and
forehead were covered with bruises.
He had delayed development in all spheres, and he never developed
language. He lived at home and attended a special educational program.
His self-injurious behaviors developed early in life, and, when his parents
tried to stop him, he became aggressive. Gradually, he became too
difficult to manage in public school, and, at 5 years of age, his parents
placed him in a special school. The self-abusive and self-restraining (i.e.,
holding his hands in his pockets) behavior was present throughout his
stay there, and, virtually all of the time, he tried several secondgeneration antipsychotics with only minimal improvement. Although the
psychiatrist’s notes mentioned some improvement in his self-injurious
behavior, it was continuing and fluctuating. The school system
transferred him to a new school because of lack of progress and
difficulties in managing him as he became bigger and stronger. His
intellectual functioning was within the 34 to 40 intelligence quotient (IQ)
range. His adaptive skills were poor. He required full assistance in selfcare, could not provide even for his own simple needs and required
constant supervision for his safety.
In a few months, Tim settled into the routine in his new school. His
self-injurious behavior fluctuated. He could reduce or stop the behavior
by restraining himself. For example, he learned to hold his hands in his
pockets or inside his shirt. He also might manipulate an object with his


<<<PAGE 493>>>
hands. If left to himself, he could contort himself, while holding his
hands inside his shirt. Because the stereotypic self-injurious and selfrestraining behavior interfered with his daily activities and education, it
became a primary focus of a behavior modification program. For a few
months, he did well, especially when he developed a good relationship
with a new teacher, who was firm, consistent, and nurturing. With him,
Tim could successfully engage in some school tasks. When the teacher
left, Tim regressed. To prevent injuries, the staff started blocking his selfhitting with a pillow. They offered him activities that he liked and in
which he could engage without resorting to self-injury. After several
months, his antipsychotic medication was slowly discontinued, over 11
months, without any behavioral deterioration. (Adapted from case
material from Bhavik Shah, M.D.)
Pathology and Laboratory Examination. No specific laboratory
measures are helpful in the diagnosis of stereotypic movement disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of stereotypic movement disorder includes OCD
and tic disorders, both of which are exclusionary criteria in DSM-5. Although
stereotypic movements can often be voluntarily suppressed, and are not
spasmodic, it is difficult to differentiate these features from tics in all cases.
A study of stereotyped movements compared with tics found that stereotyped
movements tended to be longer in duration, and displayed more rhythmic
qualities than tics. Tics seemed to occur more when a child was in an “alone”
condition, rather than when the child was in a play condition, whereas
stereotypic movements occurred with the same frequency in these two
different conditions. Stereotypic movements seem to be self-soothing,
whereas tics are often associated with distress.
Differentiating dyskinetic movements from stereotypic movements can be
difficult. Because antipsychotic medications can sometimes suppress
stereotypic movements, clinicians should note any stereotypic movements
before initiating treatment with an antipsychotic agent. Stereotypic movement
disorder may be diagnosed concurrently with substance-related disorders
(e.g., amphetamine use disorders), severe sensory impairments, CNS and


<<<PAGE 494>>>
degenerative disorders
schizophrenia.

(e.g.,

Lesch–Nyhan

syndrome),

and

severe

Course and Prognosis
The duration and course of stereotypic movement disorder vary, and the
symptoms may wax and wane. Up to 60 to 80 percent of normal toddlers
show transient rhythmic activities that seem purposeful and comforting and
tend to disappear by 4 years of age. When stereotypic movements emerge
more severely later in childhood, they typically range from brief episodes
occurring under stress to an ongoing pattern in the context of a chronic
condition, such as ASD or intellectual disability. Even in chronic conditions,
stereotypic behaviors may come and go. In many cases, stereotypic
movements are prominent in early childhood and diminish as the child ages.
The severity of the dysfunction caused by stereotypic movements varies
with the frequency, amount, and degree of associated self-injury. Children
who exhibit frequent, severe, self-injurious stereotypic behaviors have the
poorest prognosis. Repetitive episodes of head-banging, self-biting, and eyepoking can be difficult to control without physical restraints. Most nail-biting
is benign and often does not meet the diagnostic criteria for stereotypic
movement disorder. In severe cases in which the child repetitively damages
his nail beds, bacterial and fungal infections can occur. Although chronic
stereotypic movement disorders can severely impair daily functioning,
several treatments help control the symptoms.
Treatment
When stereotypic movements occur in the absence of any other symptoms or
disorders, they may not warrant pharmacologic treatment. Treatment
modalities yielding the most promising effects include behavioral techniques,
such as habit reversal and differential reinforcement of other behavior, as
well as pharmacologic interventions. A recent report on utilizing both habit
reversal (in which the therapist trains the child to replace the undesired
repetitive behavior with a more acceptable behavior) and reinforcement for
reducing the unwanted behavior, indicated that these treatments had efficacy
among 12 typically developing children between 6 and 14 years. One case
report detailed a successful habit reversal treatment of a 3-year-old with


<<<PAGE 495>>>
severe stereotypic movements, which was largely implemented at home by
her parents.
Pharmacologic interventions have been used in clinical practice to
minimize self-injury in children whose stereotyped movements caused
significant harm to their bodies. Small open-label studies have reported some
benefit from atypical antipsychotics, and case reports have indicated the use
of SSRIs in the management of self-injurious stereotypies. The dopamine
receptor antagonists have been tried most often for treating stereotypic
movements and self-injurious behavior. The SSRI agents may be influential
in diminishing stereotypies; however, this is still under investigation. Open
trials suggest that both clomipramine and fluoxetine may decrease selfinjurious behaviors and other stereotypic movements in some patients.
Epidemiology
Repetitive movements are common in infants and young children, with
greater than 60 percent of parents of children between the ages of 2 and 4
years reporting transient emergence of these behaviors. The most frequent
age of onset is in the second year of life. Epidemiologic surveys estimate that
up to 7 percent of otherwise typically developing children exhibit stereotypic
behaviors. A prevalence of about 15 to 20 percent in children younger than
the age of 6 years has been reported for displaying stereotypic behavior, with
diminishing rates over time. The prevalence of self-injurious behaviors,
however, is in the range of 2 to 3 percent among children and adolescents
with intellectual disability. Stereotypic movements appear to occur in about
twice as many boys as girls. Determining which cases are sufficiently severe
to confirm a diagnosis of stereotypic movement disorder may be difficult.
Stereotypic behaviors occur in 10 to 20 percent of children with intellectual
disability, with increased rates being proportional to the level of severity.
Self-injurious behaviors frequently occur in genetic syndromes, such as
Lesch–Nyhan syndrome and children with sensory impairments, such as
blindness and deafness.
Etiology
The etiology of stereotypic movement disorder includes environmental,
genetic, and neurobiologic factors. Although the neurobiologic mechanisms


<<<PAGE 496>>>
of stereotypic movement disorder have yet to be proven, given their
similarity to other involuntary movements, stereotypic movement disorder is
hypothesized to originate from the basal ganglia. Dopamine and serotonin are
likely to be involved in their emergence. Dopamine agonists tend to induce or
increase stereotypic behaviors, whereas dopamine antagonists sometimes
decrease them. One study found that 17 percent of typically developing
children with stereotypic movement disorder had a first-degree relative with
the disorder, and 25 percent had a first- or second-degree relative with
stereotypic movement disorder. Transient stereotypic behaviors in very
young children can be considered a normal developmental phenomenon.
Genetic factors likely play a role in some stereotypic movements, such as the
X-linked recessive deficiency of enzymes leading to Lesch–Nyhan syndrome,
which has predictable features including intellectual disability,
hyperuricemia, spasticity, and self-injurious behaviors. Other minimal
stereotypic movements that do not usually cause impairment (e.g., nailbiting) appear to run in families as well. Some stereotypic behaviors seem to
emerge or become exaggerated in situations of neglect or deprivation; such
behaviors as head-banging correlate with psychosocial deprivation.

TOURETTES DISORDER
Tics are neuropsychiatric events characterized by brief, rapid motor
movements or vocalizations in response to irresistible premonitory urges.
Although frequently rapid, tics may include more complex patterns of
movements and longer vocalizations. Converging evidence from many lines
of research suggests that the production of tics involves dysfunction in the
basal ganglia region of the brain, particularly of dopaminergic transmission in
the cortico-striatothalamic circuits. Because tic disorders are significantly
more common in children than in adults, the postulated alterations in
dopamine circuitry in many affected children appear to improve over time.
Tics may be transient or chronic, with a waxing and waning course. Tics
typically emerge at age 5 to 6 years of age and tend to reach their highest
severity between 10 and 12 years. About one half to two-thirds of children
with tic disorders will be much improved or in remission by adolescence or
early adulthood. We distinguish tic disorder by the type of tics, their
frequency, and the pattern in which they emerge over time. Motor tics most


<<<PAGE 497>>>
commonly affect the muscles of the face and neck, such as eye-blinking,
head-jerking, mouth-grimacing, or head-shaking. Typical vocal tics include
throat-clearing, grunting, snorting, and coughing. Tics are repetitive muscle
contractions resulting in movements or vocalizations that are involuntary.
However, patients can sometimes voluntarily suppress them. Children and
adolescents may exhibit tic behaviors that occur after a stimulus or in
response to a premonitory internal urge.
The most widely studied and most severe tic disorder is Gilles de la
Tourette syndrome, also known as Tourette disorder. Georges Gilles de la
Tourette (1857–1904) first described a patient with a syndrome, which
became known as Tourette disorder in 1885, while he was studying with
Jean-Martin Charcot in France. De la Tourette noted a syndrome in several
patients that included multiple motor tics, coprolalia, and echolalia. Tics
often consist of motions we might use in volitional movements. One half to
two-thirds of children with Tourette disorder exhibit a reduction in or
complete remission of tic symptoms during adolescence. There are many
common comorbid psychiatric disorders and behavioral problems likely to
emerge along with Tourette disorder. For example, the relationship between
Tourette disorder, ADHD, and OCD is not clear. Epidemiologic surveys
indicate that more than half of children with Tourette disorder also meet
criteria for ADHD. There appears to be a bidirectional relationship between
Tourette disorder and OCD, with 20 to 40 percent of Tourette disorder
patients meeting full criteria for OCD. First-degree relatives of patients with
OCD have higher rates of tic disorders compared to the general population.
There are a few small reports suggesting that the obsessive-compulsive
symptoms most likely to occur in Tourette disorder are characteristically
related to ordering and symmetry, counting, and repetitive touching. In
contrast, OCD symptoms in the absence of tic disorders usually stem from
fears of contamination and fear of harming. Motor and vocal tics can be
simple or complex. Simple motor tics are those composed of repetitive, rapid
contractions of functionally similar muscle groups—for example, eyeblinking, neck-jerking, shoulder-shrugging, and facial-grimacing. Common
simple vocal tics include coughing, throat-clearing, grunting, sniffing,
snorting, and barking. Complex motor tics appear to be more purposeful and
ritualistic than simple tics. Common complex motor tics include grooming
behaviors, the smelling of objects, jumping, touching behaviors, echopraxia


<<<PAGE 498>>>
(imitation of observed behavior), and copropraxia (display of obscene
gestures). Complex vocal tics include repeating words or phrases out of
context, coprolalia (use of obscene words or phrases), palilalia (a person
repeating their own words), and echolalia (repetition of the last-heard words
of others).
Although older children and adolescents with tic disorders may be able to
suppress their tics for minutes or hours, young children are often not
cognizant of their tics or experience their urges to perform their tics as
irresistible. Sleep, relaxation, or absorption in activity can all attenuate tics.
Tics often disappear during sleep.
Diagnosis and Clinical Features
A diagnosis of Tourette disorder depends on a history of multiple motor tics
that generally emerge over months or years and the emergence of at least one
vocal tic at some point. According to the DSM-5, tics may wax and wane in
frequency but must have persisted for more than a year since the first tic
emerged to meet the diagnosis. The average age of onset of tics is between 4
and 6 years of age, although in some cases, tics may occur as early as 2 years
of age. The peak age for the severity of tics is between 10 and 12 years of
age. For a diagnosis of Tourette disorder, the onset must occur before the age
of 18 years. Table 2-22 compares the diagnostic approaches to Tourette
disorder.
In Tourette disorder, typically, the initial tics are in the face and neck. Over
time, the tics tend to occur in a downward progression. The most commonly
described tics are those affecting the face and head, the arms and hands, the
body and lower extremities, and the respiratory and alimentary systems. In
these areas, the tics take the form of grimacing; forehead puckering;
eyebrow-raising; eyelid-blinking; winking; nose-wrinkling; nostril-trembling;
mouth-twitching; displaying the teeth; biting the lips and other parts; tongueextruding; protracting the lower jaw; nodding, jerking, or shaking the head;
twisting the neck; looking sideways; head-rolling; hand-jerking; arm-jerking;
plucking fingers; writhing fingers; fist-clenching; shoulder-shrugging; foot,
knee, or toe shaking; walking peculiarly; body writhing; jumping;
hiccupping; sighing; yawning; snuffing; blowing through the nostrils;
whistling; belching; sucking or smacking sounds; and clearing the throat.


<<<PAGE 499>>>
Several assessment instruments are currently available that are useful in
making diagnoses of tic disorders, including comprehensive self-report
assessment tools, such as the Tic Symptom Self Report and the Yale Global
Tic Severity Scale, administered by a clinician (Table 2-23).
Table 2-22
Tourette Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic
name

Tourette
Disorder

Combined Vocal and Multiple Motor
Tic Disorder (de la Tourette)

Duration

>1 yr duration Presents in childhood/adolescence
(may include Usually persists into adulthood
waxing or
waning)
Onset before
the age of 18

Symptoms

Motor/vocal tics Motor tics
≥1 Vocal tic

Exclusions
Substance use
(not result Another
of):
medical
illness
If symptoms of
ONLY motor
OR vocal
tics,
diagnosis
would be of
“Persistent
(Chronic)
Motor or
Vocal Tic

NOTE: for tics that don’t meet above
criteria, consider:
Tic Disorder—Presence of a tic,
defined as an involuntary, fast,
repeated and nonrhythmic motor
movement or vocal production
that is sudden and seemingly
purposeless. Such tics are
experienced as urges that are
strong, but that can be


<<<PAGE 500>>>
Disorder”

suppressed variably.
Transient tic disorder (lasting <12
mo)
Chronic motor or vocal tic disorder
(lasting longer than a year)

Because Tourette disorder is frequently comorbid with attentional,
obsessional, and oppositional behaviors, these symptoms often emerge before
the tics. In some studies, more than 25 percent of children with Tourette
disorder received stimulants for a diagnosis of ADHD before receiving a
diagnosis of Tourette disorder. The most frequent initial symptom is an eyeblink tic, followed by a head tic or a facial grimace. Most complex motor and
vocal symptoms emerge several years after the initial symptoms. Coprolalia,
a very unusual symptom involving shouting or speaking socially
unacceptable or obscene words, occurs in less than 10 percent of patients and
rarely in the absence of comorbid psychiatric disturbance. Mental coprolalia
—in which a patient experiences a sudden, intrusive, socially unacceptable
thought or obscene word—occurs more often than coprolalia. In severe cases,
physical self-injury has occurred due to tic behaviors.
Jake, age 10 years, came to the Tourette Disorder Clinic for an evaluation
of motor tics in the head and neck, occasional coughing and grunting, and
a new symptom of throat-clearing many times per day. Jake had a history
of ADHD, which included significant hyperactivity and impulsive and
oppositional behavior. He is a fifth-grade student in a regular class at the
local public school. Before the consultation, parent and teacher ratings,
including the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL), Swanson, Nolan, and
Pelham-IV (SNAP-IV), Conners’ Parent and Teacher Questionnaires,
Tic Symptom Self-Report (TSSR), and medical history survey, were sent
to his family. His mother and the classroom teacher rated him well above
the norm for hyperactivity, inattention, and impulsiveness. He was failing
several subjects in school, often argued with adults, was occasionally
aggressive, and had few friends. His tics were moderate.
Jake’s mother recalled difficulties with overactivity, oppositional and
defiant behaviors, and behavior since preschool. At age 5, due to his


<<<PAGE 501>>>
activity level and argumentative and aggressive behavior, his
kindergarten teacher encouraged the family to obtain a psychiatric
consultation. Jake’s pediatrician made a diagnosis of ADHD and
recommended a trial of Concerta (methylphenidate extended-release
tablets) at 36 mg/day, which Jake began in the first grade. Within a week
of starting medication, Jake’s overly active and impulsive behavior
showed a dramatic improvement; however, he remained argumentative
and oppositional. However, when on his Concerta, Jake was able to stay
in his seat and complete his work and was better able to wait his turn on
the playground. The next few months went well; however, by early
spring, Jake seemed to be returning to some of his old ways. He disrupted
the class, talking out of turn and getting out of his seat. After an increase
in Concerta to 54 mg/day, in the spring of his first-grade year, however,
he began showing motor and phonic tics consisting of head-jerking, facial
movements, coughing, and grunting. He discontinued the Concerta to see
if this made a difference and, although the tics transiently decreased, they
came back in full force within a month. In hindsight, Jake’s mother
recalled that Jake had exhibited eye blinking and grunting before starting
the Concerta, but she had dismissed these events as unimportant, and they
did not seem to disrupt Jake’s daily life.
While Jake was off Concerta during a period when he began middle
school in the sixth grade, he was disruptive to his classes, and he began to
be severely teased by several classmates for his impulsivity, frequent
motor tics, and loud grunting and throat clearing. Jake became
despondent and began to refuse to go to school. At this point, his parents
and clinicians decided to place Jake in a special education class.
However, after several months of this placement, Jake felt worse about
himself, despised school, and begged to be returned to regular classes. At
this point, Jake’s pediatrician made the referral to a child and adolescent
psychiatrist at a local university Tourette Disorder Clinic.
During his evaluation at the Tourette Disorder Clinic, Jake was a
healthy child who was the product of an uncomplicated pregnancy, labor,
and delivery, and whose developmental milestones were appropriate.
Intellectual testing completed by the school psychologist revealed a fullscale IQ of 105. Jake’s mother noted that Jake has had longstanding
trouble falling asleep but sleeps through the night. Jake has always been


<<<PAGE 502>>>
described as argumentative and easily frustrated with frequent outbursts
of temper; however, when he is not having a tantrum, his mood is
generally upbeat.
Jake was noted by the child and adolescent psychiatrist to be of
average height and weight with no dysmorphic features. His speech was
rapid in tempo but normal in tone and volume. His speech is coherent and
developmentally appropriate, without evidence of thought disorder;
however, he had vocal tics, including grunting, coughing, and noticeable
throat clearing. Jake denied depressed mood or suicidal ideation,
although he reported distress about everyday issues such as being teased
by peers, not having enough friends, and his poor school performance.
Jake also denied recurring worries about contamination or harm coming
to him or family members, or fears of acting on unwanted impulses.
Other than mild touching habits involving the need to touch objects with
each hand three times or in combinations of three, Jake denies repetitive
rituals. Several motor tics occurred during the evaluation session,
including blinking, head-jerking, and shoulder tics. Jake was restless and
easily distracted throughout the session and often needed assistance with
entertaining himself when not directly involved in the conversation.
Given the history of enduring motor and phonic tics, confirmed by
direct observation, the diagnosis of Tourette disorder and ADHD, as well
as oppositional defiant disorder, were confirmed.
Jake and his family attended several sessions with the child and
adolescent psychiatrist to learn about the waxing and waning nature of tic
symptoms and the natural history of Tourette disorder, as well as ADHD.
Jake and his family were heartened to hear that, in general, tics tend to be
at their maximum around his age, and it was somewhat likely that Jake’s
tics would lessen over time or possibly fully remit. Jake began seeing a
behavioral psychologist specializing in habit reversal training. In this
treatment, Jake learned to engage in a behavior physically incompatible
with his tic (a competing response) each time he experienced the urge to
perform this tic. The competing response for Jake’s shoulder tic, which
consisted of raising his shoulders as far as he could, was to gently press
his shoulders down and extend his neck each time he felt the urge to
engage in this tic. With repeated practice of his competing response,
Jake’s urge to engage in this tic greatly diminished to the point where he


<<<PAGE 503>>>
was able to manage the urge without performing the tic. The treatment
team referred Jake to a child and adolescent psychiatrist who decided to
re-start the Concerta at 36 mg/day and titrated it back up to 54 mg/day
without worsening of the tics. Jake responded well to his behavioral
therapy, and over 8 weeks, he had learned how to become aware of the
urges that occurred before his tics and to replace his usual tics with lessdistressing and less-disruptive behaviors.
However, when Jake entered the seventh grade, he had an exacerbation
of his motor and vocal tics and was also touching objects repeatedly
throughout the day. Jake again became despondent, not wanting to go to
school. It was decided by his psychologist to add relaxation training to
his behavioral treatment, and his child and adolescent psychiatrist added
another medication to his pharmacologic regimen. His psychiatrist
prescribed risperidone, 0.5 mg/day, which was titrated up to 1 mg twice
daily. Jake became stabilized within a month and was able to continue in
his school and even went to some parties. Jake and his parents understood
the waxing and waning nature of his tics and were hopeful that they
would begin to see some decrease in his tic symptoms within the next
few years. At follow-up, when Jake was 15 years of age, Jake had
minimal tic symptoms; an occasional eye blink and rare throat clearing
was all that was observable. Jake was not currently in behavioral
treatment. However, over the years, he had, on a few occasions, received
some booster therapy sessions to brush up on his habit reversal training
when he had a minor exacerbation of tics. Jake had been taken off his
risperidone 2 years before without exacerbation of tics. Jake continued
well controlled on Concerta, did well in school, and became more
popular after joining the soccer team. (Adapted from L. Scahill M.S.N.,
Ph.D. and J.F. Leckman, M.D.)
Table 2-23
Clinical Assessment Tools in Tic Disorders
Domain

Type

Reliability Sensitive
and
to
Validity
Change


<<<PAGE 504>>>
Tics
Tic Symptom Self-Report

Parent/self

Good

Yes

Yale Global Tic Severity
Scale

Clinician

Excellent

Yes

Swanson, Nolan, and
Pelham-IV

Parent/teacher Excellent

Yes

Abbreviated Conners’
Questionnaire

Parent/teacher Excellent

Yes

Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder

Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Yale-Brown Obsessive
Compulsive Scale and
Children’s Yale-Brown
Obsessive Compulsive
Scale

Clinician

Excellent

Yes

National Institute of Mental Clinician
Health Global Obsessive
Compulsive Rating Scale

Excellent

Yes

Parent/teacher Excellent

No

General
Child Behavior Checklist

Pathology and Laboratory Examination. No specific laboratory
diagnostic test exists for Tourette disorder, but many patients with Tourette
disorder have nonspecific abnormal EEG findings. CT and MRI scans have
revealed no specific structural lesions, although about 10 percent of all
patients with Tourette disorder show some nonspecific abnormality on CT
scans.
Differential Diagnosis
We should differentiate tics from other movements and movement disorders


<<<PAGE 505>>>
(e.g., dystonic, choreiform, athetoid, myoclonic, and hemiballismic
movements) and the neurologic diseases that they may characterize (e.g.,
Huntington disease, parkinsonism, Sydenham chorea, and Wilson disease), as
listed in Table 2-24. We should also distinguish tremors, mannerisms, and
stereotypic movement disorder (e.g., head-banging or body-rocking) from tic
disorders. Stereotypic movement disorders, including movements such as
rocking, hand-gazing, and other self-stimulatory behaviors, seem to be
voluntary and often produce a sense of comfort, in contrast to tic disorders.
Although tics in children and adolescents may or may not feel controllable,
they rarely produce a sense of well-being. Compulsions are sometimes
difficult to distinguish from complex tics and may be on the same continuum
biologically. Tic disorders may also occur comorbidly with mood
disturbances. In a recent survey, the greater the severity of tics, the higher the
probability of both aggressive and depressive symptoms in children. When a
child experiences an exacerbation of tic symptoms, behavior and mood also
seem to deteriorate.
Course and Prognosis
Tourette disorder is a childhood-onset neuropsychiatric disorder
characterized by both motor and vocal tics, which usually emerge in early
childhood, with a natural history leading to reduction or complete resolution
of tics symptoms in most cases by adolescence or early adulthood. During
childhood, individual tic symptoms may decrease, persist, or increase, and
new symptoms may replace old ones. Severely afflicted persons may have
serious emotional problems, including major depressive disorder. Impairment
may also be associated with the motor and vocal tic symptoms of Tourette
disorder; however, in many cases, interference in function is exacerbated by
comorbid ADHD and OCD, both of which frequently coexist with the
disorder. When the above three disorders are comorbid, severe social,
academic, and occupational problems may ensue. Although most children
with Tourette disorder will experience a decline in the frequency and severity
of tic symptoms during adolescence, at present, no clinical measures exist to
predict which children may have persistent symptoms into adulthood.
Children with mild forms of Tourette disorder often have satisfactory peer
relationships, function well in school, and develop adequate self-esteem, and


<<<PAGE 506>>>
may not require treatment.
Table 2-24
Differential Diagnosis of Tic Disorders


<<<PAGE 507>>>

<<<PAGE 508>>>
Treatment
Psychoeducation is a useful intervention in order for families to gain an
understanding of the variability of tics, the natural history of the disorder, and
ways to support stress reduction. Families need to be well-informed
advocates for their children since it is easy to misinterpret tics as a child’s
purposeful misbehavior, rather than a response to an irresistible urge. The
subjective distress of the child and the functional disruptions caused by the
disorder argue for active treatment. In mild cases, children with tic disorders
who are functioning well socially and academically may not seek, nor require
treatment. In more severe cases, peers may ostracize children with tic
disorders, and the tics can disrupt academic work. We should consider a
variety of interventions, including psychosocial, pharmacologic, and schoolbased. A scale to measure tic severity, the Premonitory Urge for Tics Scale
(PUTS), is internally consistent and correlates with overall tic severity in
youths over 10 years of age.
The European clinical guidelines for Tourette syndrome and other tic
disorders summarized and reviewed the evidence-based treatments for
Tourette disorder and developed a consensus for psychosocial and
pharmacologic treatments. This guideline recommends that both behavioral
and pharmacologic interventions be considered in more severe cases, with
behavioral interventions typically the first line of treatment. Indications for
treatment include, but are not limited to, the following clinical presentations.
Tics require treatment when they cause social and emotional problems,
depression, or isolation. Children who are prone to severe persistent complex
motor tics or loud vocal tics may be the objects of bullying and social
rejection. In these cases, depressive symptoms commonly result. Tic


<<<PAGE 509>>>
reduction and psychoeducation to the school may help preserve healthy social
relationships, and to diminish depressive and anxiety symptoms. Tics may
also lead to impairment in academic achievement. School difficulties in
children with Tourette disorder are not uncommon, and reduction in tics may
support increased academic success. Tics may also lead to physical
discomfort, based on the repetitive musculoskeletal exertion, especially
concerning head and neck tics. In some children with Tourette disorder, tics
can worsen headaches and migraines. Behavioral and pharmacologic
interventions can both target tic reductions, which can lead to improved
quality of life.
Evidence-Based Behavioral and Psychosocial Treatment. The
Canadian guidelines for the evidence-based treatment of tic disorders:
behavioral therapy, deep brain stimulation and transcranial magnetic
stimulation, and a large multi-site RCT of “Comprehensive Behavioral
Intervention for Tics,” (CBIT) both found converging evidence supporting
habit-reversal training and exposure and response prevention as efficacious
treatments for tic reduction. In an RCT of CBIT, 61 children received habit
reversal training as their main component of treatment, and they also received
relaxation treatment and a functional intervention to identify situations that
worsened or sustained tics and strategies to decrease exposure to these
situations. The control group of 65 children received supportive
psychotherapy and psychoeducation. After 10 weeks of treatment, the
intervention group had a significantly reduced Yale Global Tic Severity Scale
Total Tic score compared with the control group.
HABIT REVERSAL. The primary components of habit reversal are awareness
training, in which the child uses self-monitoring to enhance awareness of tic
behaviors and the premonitory urges or sensations, indicating that a tic is
about to occur. In competing-response training, the patient learns to
voluntarily perform a behavior that is physically incompatible with the tic,
contingent on the onset of the premonitory urge or the tic itself, blocking
expression of the tic. The competing-response strategy relies on the selfreported observations of patients that tics occur in response to irresistible
premonitory urges in order to diminish the urge. Performing the tic satisfies
or reduces the premonitory urges, thus reinforcing the tics, and over time they


<<<PAGE 510>>>
become repeated entrenched behaviors. Competing-response training is
different from voluntary tic suppression in that the patient initiates a
voluntary behavior to manage the premonitory urge and thus disrupts the
reinforcement of the tic, rather than merely trying to suppress the tic.
Successful competing-response training significantly reduces the premonitory
urge and can decrease or eliminate the urge. For motor tics, the patient may
choose a less noticeable behavior, whereas for vocal tics, slow rhythmic
breathing is the most common voluntary competing response. Patients can
perform competing responses without disrupting usual activities.
EXPOSURE AND RESPONSE PREVENTION. The rationale for this treatment relies

on the notion that tics occur as a conditioned response to unpleasant
premonitory urges, and since the tics reduce the urge, they become associated
with the premonitory urge. Each time the tic reduces the urge, this
strengthens the association. Rather than using competing responses, as in
habit-reversal training, exposure and response prevention asks the patient to
suppress tics for increasingly prolonged periods in order to break the
association between the urges and the tics. Theoretically, if a patient learns to
resist performing the tic in response to the urge for long enough periods, the
urge may become more tolerable, or attenuate, and the need to perform the tic
may diminish.
Many other behavioral interventions, such as relaxation training, selfmonitoring, bio (neuro) feedback, and cognitive-behavioral treatment (CBT),
are not useful for reducing tics on their own. However, it may help to include
some of these strategies in comprehensive treatment programs for children
with tic disorders who are receiving habit-reversal training. Habit reversal has
been the most extensively researched behavioral treatment for tic disorders; it
is highly effective and is currently the first-line behavioral treatment for tic
disorders.
Evidence-Based Pharmacotherapy. Several reviews of pharmacologic
treatments for tics suggest that the following classes of pharmacologic agents
have an evidence base for treating tics: typical and atypical antipsychotics;
noradrenergic agents; and alternative treatments such as tetrabenazine,
topiramate, and tetrahydrocannabinol.
ATYPICAL AND TYPICAL ANTIPSYCHOTIC AGENTS. Risperidone, with its high


<<<PAGE 511>>>
affinity for dopamine D2 and serotonin 5-HT2 receptors, is the most wellstudied atypical antipsychotic in the treatment of tics. There is considerable
evidence for its efficacy. Multiple randomized, controlled studies in children
and adolescents have shown favorable results compared to placebo as well as
in head-to-head studies with the typical antipsychotics haloperidol and
pimozide. Risperidone was associated with fewer adverse events compared to
typical antipsychotics; however, it can cause weight gain, metabolic side
effects, and hyperprolactinemia. In a randomized, double-blind, parallelgroup study of Tourette disorder comparing risperidone to pimozide,
risperidone showed superiority in reducing comorbid obsessive-compulsive
symptoms as well as reducing tics. In other randomized clinical trials,
risperidone reduced tics in children, adolescents, and adults with mean daily
doses of 2.5 mg with a range of 1 to 6 mg.
Haloperidol and pimozide are the two most well-investigated and FDAapproved antipsychotic agents in the treatment of Tourette disorder.
However, atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone are often first-line
agents due to their safer side-effect profiles. Both haloperidol and pimozide
are efficacious in multiple randomized clinical trials in the treatment of
Tourette disorder. Both haloperidol and pimozide present significant risks for
extrapyramidal side effects; in a long-term naturalistic follow-up study,
haloperidol produces more significant acute dyskinesia and dystonia
compared to pimozide.
A third typical antipsychotic, fluphenazine, has been used in the United
States for many years in the treatment of tic disorders in the absence of robust
data supporting its efficacy. A small controlled study of fluphenazine,
trifluphenazine, and haloperidol found similar reductions in tics; however,
haloperidol has more extrapyramidal side effects and more sedation. The
frequency of sedation, dystonia, and akathisia of typical antipsychotics,
probably due to their predominant dopaminergic blockade in the nigrostriatal
pathways, limits their use and increases the appeal of the atypical
antipsychotics. Risperidone and pimozide had equal efficacy in one study of
children, adolescents, and adults with Tourette disorder.
Aripiprazole has become a pharmacologic agent of interest in the treatment
of tic disorders due to its mode of action; in addition to its D2 receptor
antagonistic actions, aripiprazole is also a partial D2 and 5-HT1A receptor


<<<PAGE 512>>>
agonist and a 5-HT2A antagonist. A multisite double-blind controlled study of
aripiprazole in children with Tourette disorder in China found a reduction in
tic behaviors in about 60 percent of the aripiprazole group compared to about
64 percent reduction in a group treated with tiapride, a benzamide with
selective D2 receptor antagonism. There was no significant difference
between the two groups. Although sedation and sleep disturbance are
common side effects with aripiprazole, weight gain is less pronounced than
with risperidone.
Olanzapine and ziprasidone are also efficacious in the treatment of tic
disorders in at least one RCT. Sedation and weight gain were prominent side
effects with olanzapine, and potential QT prolongation was an issue with
ziprasidone. Quetiapine is a potentially useful agent in the treatment of tics,
with its higher affinity for 5-HT2 receptors than for D2 receptors. However,
randomized clinical trials are needed. Clozapine, contrary to many other
atypical antipsychotics, is not useful in the treatment of tics.
NORADRENERGIC AGENTS.

Noradrenergic agents, including clonidine and
guanfacine, as well as atomoxetine, are frequently used in children as primary
treatments or adjunctive treatments for comorbid ADHD and tics. Several
studies have provided some evidence for the efficacy of clonidine, an α2adrenergic agent, in the treatment of tics in children, adolescents, and adults
with tic disorders. The largest randomized trial with oral clonidine compared
to placebo found a modest reduction in tics with clonidine. A multisite
randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial using the clonidine patch
in the treatment of tic disorders in children found a significant improvement
in tic symptoms (about 69 percent) compared to about 47 percent of the
children in the control group. The usual dose range for clonidine is from 0.05
mg orally three times daily to 0.1 mg four times daily, and for guanfacine, it
is from 1 to 4 mg/day. When used in these dosage ranges, adverse effects of
the α-adrenergic agents may include drowsiness, headache, irritability, and
occasional hypotension.
Guanfacine can treat children with ADHD successfully, although its
efficacy regarding reducing tics is controversial. In one randomized clinical
trial treating 34 children with ADHD and tics, guanfacine was superior to
placebo in the reduction of tics. In another double-blind placebo-controlled


<<<PAGE 513>>>
trial of 24 children with Tourette disorder, guanfacine was not superior to
placebo.
Atomoxetine, a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, was found to
reduce both tics and ADHD symptoms in a multicenter industry trial of 148
children. Atomoxetine also reduced both tics and ADHD in a subgroup of
patients in this study who had Tourette disorder. Additional studies are
needed to confirm the safety and efficacy of atomoxetine in the treatment of
children with Tourette disorder.
Given the frequent comorbidity of tic behaviors and obsessive-compulsive
symptoms or disorders, the SSRIs have been used alone or in combination
with antipsychotics in the treatment of Tourette disorder. They seem to be
useful, however, there have not been controlled trials yet to determine the
effect of SSRIs on tic reduction.
Although clinicians must weigh the risks and benefits of using stimulants
in cases of severe hyperactivity and comorbid tics, data suggest that
methylphenidate does not increase the rate or intensity of motor or vocal tics
in most children with hyperactivity and tic disorders.
ALTERNATIVE

AGENTS:

TETRABENAZINE,

TOPIRAMATE,

AND

TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL

Tetrabenazine. A vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 inhibitor,
tetrabenazine depletes presynaptic dopamine and serotonin and blocks
postsynaptic dopamine receptors. There are no randomized clinical trials of
this agent in the treatment of Tourette disorder in children; however, clinical
experience suggests that this agent may have benefit in tic reduction. In a
follow-up of 2 years of treatment in 77 children and adolescents, one study
reports tic reduction improvement in 80 percent of subjects. Side effects of
this agent include sedation, parkinsonism, depression, insomnia, anxiety, and
akathisia.
Topiramate. A GABAergic drug, used primarily as an anticonvulsant,
topiramate, was effective for reducing tics in a small randomized clinical trial
of children and adults with Tourette disorder. Side effects were minimal.
Although this does not confirm its efficacy, GABA-modulating agents
deserve further study in the treatment of tic disorders.


<<<PAGE 514>>>
Tetrahydrocannabinol. A small randomized trial suggested that
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) may be safe and efficacious in the treatment of
tics without neuropsychological impairment. In this trial, reported adverse
effects included dizziness, fatigue, and dry mouth. Potential additional sideeffects include anxiety, depressive symptoms, tremor, and insomnia. This
small trial does not confirm efficacy for this agent in the treatment of tics.
Instead, it raises questions about the potential improvements in treatmentresistant tic disorders using this agent.
In summary, the most significant evidence for the safe and efficacious
pharmacologic treatment of Tourette disorder seems to be associated with the
atypical antipsychotics, in particular, risperidone. Pharmacologic treatment
may be combined with and enhanced by a variety of behavioral interventions
such as habit reversal and school interventions that may diminish stressful
situations in the school environment.
Epidemiology
The estimated prevalence of Tourette disorder ranges from 3 to 8 per 1,000
school-age children. Males are affected between two and four times more
often than females. The unique features of Tourette disorder, in which tics
wax and wane and may change in character, frequency, and severity over
relatively short periods, have made ascertainment of its prevalence
challenging. Furthermore, remission of tics is particularly age-dependent in
that tics tend to emerge and increase from ages 5 to 10 years of age, and in
many cases, decrease in frequency and severity after the age of 10 to 12
years. At age 13 years, however, using stringent criteria, the prevalence rate
for Tourette disorder drops to 0.3 percent. The lifetime prevalence of
Tourette disorder is estimated to be approximately 1 percent.
Etiology
Genetic Factors. Twin studies, adoption studies, and segregation analysis
studies all support a genetic basis, albeit a complex one, for Tourette
disorder. Twin studies indicate that concordance for the disorder in
monozygotic twins is significantly higher than that in dizygotic twins.
Tourette disorder and chronic motor or vocal tic disorder are likely to occur


<<<PAGE 515>>>
in the same families; this lends support to the view that the disorders are part
of a genetically determined spectrum. The sons of mothers with Tourette
disorder seem to be at the highest risk for the disorder. Evidence in some
families suggests an autosomal dominant transmission for Tourette disorder.
Studies of an extended family pedigree suggest that transmission of Tourette
disorder is bilinear; that is, Tourette disorder appears to be inherited through
an autosomal pattern in some families, intermediate between dominant and
recessive. A study of 174 unrelated probands with Tourette disorder
identified a higher than chance occurrence of a rare sequence variant in
SLITRK1, believed to be a candidate gene on chromosome 13q31.
Up to half of all patients with Tourette disorder also have ADHD, and up
to 40 percent of those with Tourette disorder also have OCD. These frequent
comorbidities with Tourette disorder can lead to a plethora of overlapping
symptoms. Family studies have provided compelling evidence for the
association between tic disorders and OCD. First-degree relatives of persons
with Tourette disorder are at high risk for the development of Tourette
disorder, chronic motor or vocal tic disorder, and OCD. The current
understanding of the genetic bases of Tourette disorder implicates multiple
vulnerability genes that may serve to mediate the type and severity of tics.
Candidate genes associated with Tourette disorder include dopamine receptor
genes, dopamine transporter genes, several noradrenergic genes, and
serotonergic genes.
Neuroimaging Studies. A functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
study of brain activity 2 seconds before and after a tic found that paralimbic
and sensory association areas were involved. Furthermore, evidence suggests
that voluntary tic suppression involves deactivation of the putamen and
globus pallidus, along with partial activation of regions of the prefrontal
cortex and caudate nucleus. Compelling, but indirect, evidence of dopamine
system involvement in tic disorders includes the observations that
pharmacologic agents that antagonize dopamine (haloperidol, pimozide, and
fluphenazine) suppress tics and that agents that increase central dopaminergic
activity (methylphenidate, amphetamines, and cocaine) tend to exacerbate
tics. The relation of tics to neurotransmitter systems is complex and not yet
well understood; for example, in some cases, antipsychotic medications, such
as haloperidol, are not effective in reducing tics, and the effect of stimulants


<<<PAGE 516>>>
on tic disorders reportedly varies. In some cases, Tourette disorder has
emerged during treatment with antipsychotic medications.
More direct analyses of the neurochemistry of Tourette disorder have been
possible utilizing brain proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS).
Neuroimaging studies using cerebral blood flow in PET and SPECT suggest
that alterations of activity may occur in various brain regions in patients with
Tourette disorder compared to controls, including the frontal and orbital
cortex, striatum, and putamen. An investigation examining the cellular
neurochemistry of patients with Tourette disorder utilizing MRS of the
frontal cortex, caudate nucleus, putamen, and thalamus demonstrated that
these patients had a reduced amount of choline and N-acetylaspartate in the
left putamen along with reduced levels bilaterally in the putamen. In the
frontal cortex, patients with Tourette disorder were found to have lower
concentrations of N-acetylaspartate bilaterally, lower levels of creatine on the
right side, and reduced myoinositol on the left side. These results suggest that
deficits in the density of neuronal and nonneuronal cells are present in
patients with the disorder. Abnormalities in the noradrenergic system have
been implicated in some cases by the reduction of tics with clonidine. This
adrenergic agonist reduces the release of norepinephrine in the CNS and,
thus, may reduce activity in the dopaminergic system. Abnormalities in the
basal ganglia are known to result in various movement disorders, such as
Huntington disease, and are likely sites of disturbance in Tourette disorder.
Immunologic Factors and Postinfection. An autoimmune process and,
in particular, one that is secondary to group A β-hemolytic streptococcal
infection, is a potential mechanism for the development of tics and obsessivecompulsive symptoms in some cases. Data have been conflicting and
controversial, and this mechanism appears to be unlikely as an etiology of
Tourette disorder in most cases. One case-control study found little evidence
of the development or exacerbation of tics, or obsessions or compulsions, in
children with well-documented and treated group A β-hemolytic
streptococcal infections.

PERSISTENT (CHRONIC) MOTOR OR VOCAL TIC
DISORDER


<<<PAGE 517>>>
Chronic motor or vocal tic disorder is defined as the presence of either motor
tics or vocal tics, but not both. Tics may wax and wane but must have
persisted for more than 1 year since the first tic onset to meet the diagnosis
for persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder. According to DSM-5, this
disorder must have its onset before the age of 18 years. We would not
diagnose chronic motor or vocal tic disorder if the patient already has
Tourette disorder.
Diagnosis and Clinical Features
The onset of chronic motor or vocal tic disorder typically occurs in early
childhood. Chronic vocal tics are considerably rarer than chronic motor tics.
Chronic vocal tics, in the absence of motor tics, are typically less
conspicuous than the vocal tics in Tourette disorder. The vocal tics are
usually not loud or intense and are not mainly from the vocal cords; they
consist of grunts or other noises caused by thoracic, abdominal, or
diaphragmatic contractions.
Differential Diagnosis
We should differentiate chronic motor tics from a variety of other motor
movements, including choreiform movements, myoclonus, restless legs
syndrome, akathisia, and dystonias. Involuntary vocal utterances can occur in
certain neurologic disorders, such as Huntington disease and Parkinson
disease.
Course and Prognosis
Children whose tics emerge between the ages of 6 and 8 years seem to have
the best outcomes. Symptoms often last for 4 to 6 years and remit in early
adolescence. Children whose tics involve the limbs or trunk may have less
prompt remission than those with only facial tics.
Treatment
The treatment of chronic motor or vocal tic disorder depends on several
factors, including the severity and frequency of the tics; the patient’s
subjective distress; the effects of the tics on school or work, job performance,
and socialization; and the presence of any other concomitant mental disorder.


<<<PAGE 518>>>
Psychotherapy may help minimize the secondary social difficulties caused by
severe tics. Behavioral techniques, particularly habit reversal treatments, are
effective in treating chronic motor or vocal tic disorder. When severe,
atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone may reduce the tics. If not
effective, typical antipsychotics such as pimozide or haloperidol may be
helpful. Behavioral interventions are the first line of treatment.
Epidemiology
The rate of chronic motor or vocal tic disorder is 100 to 1,000 times greater
than that of Tourette disorder in school-age children. School-age boys are at
the highest risk. The estimated prevalence of chronic motor or vocal tic
disorder is from 1 to 2 percent.
Etiology
Chronic motor or vocal tic disorder, as well as Tourette disorder, tend to
aggregate in the same families. Twin studies have found a high concordance
for either Tourette disorder or chronic motor tics in monozygotic twins. This
finding supports the importance of hereditary factors in the transmission of
tic disorders.


<<<PAGE 519>>>
2.7 Feeding and Eating Disorders of
Infancy or Early Childhood
Feeding and eating disorders of infancy and childhood are persistent
disturbances in eating or eating-related behaviors that can lead to significant
impairments in physical health and psychosocial functioning. The DSM-5
category Feeding and Eating Disorders includes three disorders that are
often, but not always, associated with infancy and early childhood: pica,
rumination disorder, and avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (formerly
known as feeding disorder of infancy or early childhood). As these are
specialized diagnoses that are usually made in collaboration between a
pediatrician, a child psychiatrist, and often a pediatric gastroenterologist, we
discuss them only briefly. Anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and bingeeating disorder are also part of that DSM category, however they are more
often associated with young adulthood and we discuss them in Chapter 13.

PICA
Pica is persistent eating of nonnutritive substances. Typically, no specific
biologic abnormalities account for pica. In many cases, we only discover the
disorder when medical problems such as intestinal obstruction, intestinal
infections, or poisonings arise, such as lead poisoning due to the ingestion of
lead-containing paint chips. Pica is more frequent in the context of autism
spectrum disorder or intellectual disability; we only diagnose pica when it is
of sufficient severity and persistence to warrant clinical attention. Pica can
emerge in young children, adolescents, or adults; however, a minimum of 2
years of age is suggested by DSM-5 in the diagnosis of pica, in order to
exclude developmentally appropriate mouthing of objects by infants that may
accidentally result in ingestion. Pica occurs in both males and females, and in
rare cases, a cultural belief in the spiritual or medicinal benefit of ingesting
nonfood substances may be the cause. In this context, we would not diagnose
pica. Among adults, certain forms of pica, including geophagia (clay eating)
and amylophagia (starch eating), have been reported in pregnant women.


<<<PAGE 520>>>
Diagnosis and Clinical Features
Eating nonedible substances repeatedly after 18 months of age is not typical;
however, DSM-5 suggests a minimum age of 2 years when making a
diagnosis of pica. Pica behaviors, however, may begin in infants 12 to 24
months of age. Specific substances ingested vary with their accessibility, and
they increase with a child’s mastery of locomotion, and the resultant
increased independence and decreased parental supervision. Typically,
infants may ingest paint, plaster, string, hair, and cloth, whereas older
toddlers and young children with pica may ingest dirt, animal feces, small
stones, and paper. The clinical implications can be benign or life-threatening,
depending on the objects ingested. Among the most severe complications are
lead poisoning (usually from lead-based paint), intestinal parasites after
ingestion of soil or feces, anemia and zinc deficiency after ingestion of clay,
severe iron deficiency after ingestion of large quantities of starch, and
intestinal obstruction from the ingestion of hairballs, stones, or gravel. Except
in autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability, pica often remits by
adolescence. Pica associated with pregnancy is usually limited to the
pregnancy itself.
Chantal was 2½ years of age when her mother urgently brought her to her
pediatrician due to severe abdominal pain and lack of appetite. Chantal’s
mother complained that she still put everything in her mouth but refused
to eat regular food. The pediatrician observed Chantal to be pale, thin,
and withdrawn. She sucked her thumb and quietly looked down while her
mother reported that Chantal often chewed on newspapers and put plaster
in her mouth.
The medical examination revealed that Chantal was anemic and
suffered from lead poisoning. She was hospitalized, and a child
psychiatric evaluation revealed that Chantal’s mother was overwhelmed,
caring for five young children, and had little affection for Chantal.
Chantal’s mother was a single mother, living with her five children and
four other family members in a three-bedroom apartment in an old
housing project. Her 7-year-old daughter had behavior problems, and her
6- and 4-year-old sons were impulsive and hyperactive and required
constant supervision. Chantal’s 18-month-old sister was an engaging and


<<<PAGE 521>>>
active little girl, whereas Chantal was withdrawn, and would sit quietly,
rocking herself, sucking her thumb, or chewing on newspaper.
The treatment plan included the involvement of social services and
protective services to remove any lead paint from the walls in their
current apartment, seek better living arrangements for the family, and
provide a safe environment for the children. Chantal’s mother received
guidance in enrolling Chantal in a preschool program, and her older sister
and two brothers in an after-school program that provided structure and
stimulation, and some respite time for her mother. Chantal, her mother,
and her younger sister started family therapy to help their mother’s
understanding of her children’s needs and to increase her positive
interactions with Chantal. Once Chantal’s mother felt more supported and
less overwhelmed, she was able to become more empathic and warm
toward Chantal. When Chantal began chewing on paper, her mother
learned to instead engage her in a play activity rather than screaming at
her and grabbing her mouth. Chantal and her mother continued in therapy
for a year, during which their relationship gradually became more
interactive and warm, while Chantal’s chewing behaviors decreased, and
even her thumb sucking abated.
Pathology and Laboratory Examination. No single laboratory test
confirms or rules out a diagnosis of pica, but several laboratory tests are
useful because abnormal levels of lead are sometimes associated. Levels of
iron and zinc in serum should be determined and corrected if low. In rare
cases, when this is the etiology, giving the patient oral iron and zinc may
ameliorate the pica. A hemoglobin level should be determined to rule out
anemia.
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of pica includes avoidance of food, anorexia, or
rarely iron and zinc deficiencies. Pica may occur in conjunction with failure
to thrive and be comorbid with schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder, and
Kleine–Levin syndrome. In psychosocial dwarfism, a dramatic but reversible
endocrinologic and behavioral form of failure to thrive, children often show
bizarre behaviors, including ingesting toilet water, garbage, and other


<<<PAGE 522>>>
nonnutritive substances. Lead intoxication may be associated with pica. In
children who exhibit pica that warrants clinical intervention, along with a
known medical disorder, we should diagnose both disorders.
In some areas of the world and among certain cultures, such as the
Australian aborigines, rates of pica in pregnant women are reportedly high.
According to DSM-5, however, if such practices are culturally accepted, the
diagnostic criteria for pica are not met.
Course and Prognosis
The prognosis for pica is usually good, and typically in children with normal
intellectual function, pica generally remits spontaneously within several
months. In childhood, pica usually resolves with increasing age; in pregnant
women, pica resolves after delivery. In some adults with pica, particularly
those who also have autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability, pica
can continue for years. Follow-up data on these populations are too limited to
permit conclusions.
Treatment
The first step in determining the appropriate treatment of pica is to investigate
the specific situation whenever possible. When pica occurs in the context of
child neglect or maltreatment, those circumstances must be immediately
corrected. Exposure to toxic substances, such as lead, must also be
eliminated. No definitive treatment exists for pica per se beyond education
and behavior modification. Treatments emphasize psychosocial,
environmental, behavioral, and family guidance approaches. It is essential to
address significant psychosocial stressors. When lead is present in the
surroundings, it must be eliminated or rendered inaccessible, or the child and
their family should move.
When pica persists in the absence of any toxic manifestations, we should
use behavioral techniques. Techniques include positive reinforcement,
modeling, behavioral shaping, and overcorrection treatment. Increasing
parental attention, stimulation, and emotional nurturance may yield positive
results. A study found that pica occurred most frequently in impoverished
environments, and in some patients, correcting an iron or zinc deficiency has
eliminated pica. Medical complications (e.g., lead poisoning) that develop


<<<PAGE 523>>>
secondarily to the pica also require treatment.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of pica is unclear. A survey of a large clinic population
reported that 75 percent of 12-month-old infants and 15 percent of 2- to 3year-old toddlers placed nonnutritive substances in their mouth; however, this
behavior is developmentally appropriate and typically does not result in
ingestion. Pica is common among children and adolescents with autism
spectrum disorder and intellectual disability. Up to 15 percent of persons with
severe intellectual disability have engaged in pica. Pica appears to affect both
sexes equally.
Etiology
Pica is most often a transient disorder that typically lasts for several months
and then remits. In younger children, those with developmental speech and
social developmental delays are more likely to have it. Among adolescents
with pica, a substantial number of them exhibited depressive symptoms and
using substances. Nutritional deficiencies in minerals such as zinc or iron
(found in, e.g., dirt or ice) may rarely be a cause. In some cases of pica, we
also find severe child maltreatment in the form of parental neglect and
deprivation. Lack of supervision, as well as in adequate feeding of infants
and toddlers, may increase the risk of pica.

RUMINATION DISORDER
Rumination is an effortless and painless regurgitation of partially digested
food into the mouth soon after a meal, which is either swallowed or spit out.
We can observe rumination in developmentally normal infants who put their
thumb or hand in the mouth, suck their tongue rhythmically, and arch their
back to initiate regurgitation. We may observe this pattern in infants who
receive inadequate emotional interaction and have learned to soothe and may
stimulate themselves through rumination. However, rumination syndromes
also occur in children and adolescents, in which case rumination is a
functional gastrointestinal disorder. The pathophysiology of rumination is not
well understood; however, it often involves a rise in intragastric pressure


<<<PAGE 524>>>
generated by either voluntary or unintentional contraction of the abdominal
wall muscles causing movement of gastric contents back up into the
esophagus. The onset of the disorder can occur in infancy, childhood, or
adolescence. In infants, it typically occurs between 3 and 12 months of age,
and once the regurgitation occurs, the food may be swallowed or spit out.
Infants who ruminate strain with their backs arched and head back to bring
the food back into their mouths and appear to find the experience pleasurable.
Infants who are “experienced” ruminators can bring up the food through
tongue movements and may not spit out the food at all, but hold it in their
mouths and re-swallow it. The disorder is not common in older children,
adolescents, and adults. It varies in severity and is sometimes associated with
medical conditions, such as hiatal hernia, leading to esophageal reflux. In its
most severe form, the disorder can cause malnutrition and be fatal.
We can diagnose rumination disorder even if an infant is a healthy weight.
Failure to thrive, therefore, is not a necessary criterion of this disorder, but it
is sometimes a sequela. According to DSM-5, the disorder must be present
for at least 1 month after a period of normal functioning, and not better
accounted for by gastrointestinal illness, or psychiatric or medical conditions.
Doctors have recognized rumination for hundreds of years. An awareness
of the disorder is essential to avoid misdiagnosis and unwarranted tests and
treatment. Rumination comes from the Latin ruminare, which means, “to
chew the cud.” The Greek equivalent is merycism, the act of regurgitating
food from the stomach into the mouth, re-chewing the food, and reswallowing it.
Diagnosis and Clinical Features
The DSM-5 notes that the essential feature of the disorder is repeated
regurgitation and re-chewing of food for at least 1 month after a period of
normal functioning. Patients bring partially digested food into their mouth
without nausea, retching, or disgust; on the contrary, it may appear to be
pleasurable. This activity may be distinguished from vomiting by painless
and purposeful movements observable in some infants who induce it. The
food is then ejected from the mouth or swallowed. A characteristic position
of straining and arching of the back, with the head held back, is observed.
The infant makes sucking movements with the tongue and gives the


<<<PAGE 525>>>
impression of gaining considerable satisfaction from the activity. Usually, the
infant is irritable and hungry between episodes of rumination.
Initially, rumination may be challenging to distinguish from the
regurgitation that frequently occurs in healthy infants. In infants with
persistent and frequent rumination behaviors, however, the differences are
apparent. Although spontaneous remissions are common, secondary
complications can develop, such as progressive malnutrition, dehydration,
and lowered resistance to disease. Failure to thrive, with the absence of
growth and developmental delays in all areas, can occur in the most severe
cases. Additional complications may occur if the mother of a given infant
with rumination becomes discouraged by the persistent symptoms, viewing it
as her feeding failure, as this may lead to more tension and more rumination
after feedings.
Luca was 9 months old when his pediatrician referred him to a
gastroenterologist, and by his gastroenterologist for psychiatric
evaluation due to persistent and frequent rumination. Luca was born fullterm and had developed typically until 6 weeks of age when he began to
regurgitate large amounts of milk just after feedings. He was evaluated
and diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux, and the gastroenterologist
had his mother thicken his feedings. Luca responded well to the
treatment; his regurgitation diminished, and he gained weight adequately.
Luca continued to do well, and his mother decided to go back to work
when Luca was 8 months old. Luca’s mother transitioned his care to a
young nanny who cared for Luca while she worked. Luca and the nanny
seemed to have a warm relationship; however, he started again to
regurgitate his meals soon after his mother left the house. The
regurgitation seemed to increase in frequency and intensity within 2
weeks of the mother’s return to work. At this point, Luca regurgitated
after almost every meal, and he was losing weight. A gastroenterologist
evaluated Luca, and during the barium swallow, his doctor noted that
Luca put his hand in his mouth, which seemed to induce the
regurgitation. Luca was administered some medication for
gastroesophageal reflux; however, he continued to induce regurgitation
after meals with increasing frequency, prompting the psychiatric


<<<PAGE 526>>>
consultation.
Observation of mother and infant during feeding at home revealed that
as soon as Luca finished feeding, he purposefully placed his hand in his
mouth and induced the regurgitation. When his mother restricted his
hand, Luca moved his tongue back and forth in a rhythmic manner until
he regurgitated again. Luca engaged in this rhythmic tongue movement
repeatedly, even when he could not bring up any more milk, and
appeared to be enjoying this behavior.
Due to Luca’s poor nutritional state and moderate dehydration, the
doctor hospitalized him and inserted a nasojejunal tube for feedings.
When Luca was awake during feedings, a special duty nurse or his
parents played with him and distracted him during attempts to put his
hand in his mouth or thrust his tongue rhythmically. Luca became
increasingly engaged in this playful activity, and his ruminative activity
decreased accordingly. After 1 week in the hospital, they started small
feedings; however, Luca again successfully was able to bring up his food
by his rumination activity, and the treatment team had to stop oral
feedings. At this point, Luca’s mother decided to stop working and take
Luca home to continue an intensive behavioral “distracting” intervention
in order to interrupt his rumination during meals. Luca’s mother started
small feedings while playing with him during and after feedings, and was
able to interest him in other activities so that he would not ruminate.
After 4 weeks of slow increments in his feedings, Luca was able to take
all his feedings by mouth without ruminating, and they removed his
nasojejunal tube. Luca and his mother continued to use stimulating and
distracting activities during and just after meals, which over time, became
more attractive to Luca than his previous ruminating behavior.
Pathology and Laboratory Examination. No specific laboratory
examination is pathognomonic of rumination disorder; however, rumination
disorder is not uncommonly associated with gastrointestinal abnormalities.
Clinicians should evaluate other physical causes of vomiting, such as pyloric
stenosis and hiatal hernia, before making the diagnosis of rumination
disorder. Rumination disorder can lead to states of malnutrition and
dehydration. In very severe cases, laboratory measures of endocrinologic


<<<PAGE 527>>>
function, serum electrolytes, and a hematologic workup may determine the
need for medical intervention.
Differential Diagnosis
To make the diagnosis of rumination disorder, clinicians must rule out
primary gastrointestinal congenital anomalies, infections, and other medical
illnesses that could account for frequent regurgitation. Pyloric stenosis is
usually associated with projectile vomiting and is generally evident before 3
months of age when rumination has its onset. Rumination occurs with both
autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability in which stereotypic
behaviors and eating disturbances are not uncommon. Rumination behavior
may occur comorbidly in youth with severe anxiety disorders as well.
Rumination disorder may also occur in patients with other eating disorders,
such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa.
Course and Prognosis
Rumination disorder has a high rate of spontaneous remission. Indeed, many
cases of rumination disorder may develop and remit without ever being
diagnosed. Limited data are available about the prognosis of rumination
disorder in adolescents and adults. Behavioral interventions using habitreversal techniques may significantly lead to improved prognosis.
Treatment
The treatment of rumination disorder is often a combination of education and
behavioral techniques. Sometimes, an evaluation of the mother–child
relationship reveals deficits that can be influenced by offering guidance to the
mother. Behavioral interventions, such as habit-reversal, can reinforce an
alternate behavior that becomes more compelling than the behaviors leading
to regurgitation. Aversive behavioral interventions, such as squirting lemon
juice into the infant’s mouth whenever rumination occurs, have been used in
the past to diminish rumination behavior. Although aversive behavioral
interventions have anecdotal support, current recommendations support the
use of habit-reversal techniques.
When features of child maltreatment or neglect may have contributed to
rumination behaviors in an infant, treatments include improvement of the


<<<PAGE 528>>>
child’s psychosocial environment, increased tender loving care from the
mother or caretakers, and psychotherapy for the mother or both parents.
Anatomical abnormalities, such as hiatal hernia, are not uncommon and must
be evaluated, in some cases leading to surgical repair. In severe cases in
which malnutrition and weight loss have occurred, treatment may include
jejunal tube placement before implementing other treatments.
Medication is not a standard part of the treatment of rumination. Case
reports, however, cite a variety of medications, including metoclopramide,
cimetidine, and even antipsychotics such as haloperidol, as helpful. The
treatment of adolescents with rumination disorder is often complicated and
includes a multidisciplinary approach consisting of individual psychotherapy,
nutritional intervention, and pharmacologic treatment for frequent comorbid
anxiety and depressive symptoms.
Epidemiology
Rumination is a rare disorder. It seems to be more common among male
infants and emerges between 3 months and 1 year of age. It persists more
frequently among children, adolescents, and adults with intellectual
disability. Adults with rumination usually are normal weight.
Etiology
Rumination is associated with high intragastric pressure and the ability to
contract the abdominal wall to cause retrograde movement of the gastric
contents into the esophagus. Several studies have elucidated other
gastrointestinal symptoms such as gastroesophageal reflux that may
accompany rumination.
In a study of 2,163 children in Sri Lanka between the ages of 10 and 16
years, it was found that rumination behaviors were present in 5.1 percent of
boys and 5.0 percent of girls. In 94.5 percent of youth who ruminated, the
regurgitation occurred in the first hour after the meal, and 73.6 percent
reported re-swallowing of the regurgitated food, whereas the rest spit it out.
Only 8.2 percent of this sample reported daily episodes of regurgitation,
whereas 62.7 percent experienced weekly symptoms. Associated
gastrointestinal symptoms reported in this sample included abdominal pain,
bloating, and weight loss. Approximately 20 percent of youth with


<<<PAGE 529>>>
rumination in this sample also experienced other gastrointestinal symptoms.
Another survey of 147 patients from 5 to 20 years of age found the mean age
of onset of rumination was 15 years, and these patients were symptomatic
after each meal; 16 percent of this sample met criteria for a psychiatric
disorder, 3.4 percent had anorexia or bulimia nervosa, and 11 percent had a
surgical procedure. Additional gastrointestinal symptoms in this sample
included abdominal pain in 38 percent, constipation in 21 percent, nausea in
17 percent, and diarrhea in 8 percent. In some cases, vomiting secondary to
gastroesophageal reflux or an acute illness precedes a pattern of rumination
that lasts for several months. In many cases, children classified as ruminators
have gastroesophageal reflux or hiatal hernia.
It appears, for some infants, that the rumination behavior is self-soothing
or produces a sense of relief, leading to a continuation of behaviors to bring it
about. In youth with autism spectrum disorder or intellectual disability,
rumination may serve as a self-stimulatory behavior. Overstimulation and
tension is likely a contributing factor in rumination. Behaviorists attribute
persistent rumination to the positive reinforcement of pleasurable selfstimulation and to the attention a baby receives from others as a consequence
of the disorder.

AVOIDANT/RESTRICTIVE FOOD INTAKE DISORDER
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, formerly known as feeding disorder
of infancy or early childhood, is characterized by a lack of interest in food, or
its avoidance based on the sensory features of the food or the perceived
consequences of eating. This newly included DSM-5 disorder adds more
detail about the nature of the eating problems and includes adolescents and
adults. The disorder is manifested by a persistent failure to meet nutritional or
energy needs, as evidenced by one or more of the following: significant
weight loss or failure to achieve expected weight, nutritional deficiency,
dependence on enteral feedings or nutritional supplements, or marked
interference with psychosocial functioning. It may take the form of outright
food refusal, food selectivity, eating too little, food avoidance, and delayed
self-feeding. We should not make the diagnosis in the context of anorexia
nervosa or bulimia nervosa, or if caused by a medical condition, by another
mental disorder, or by a genuine lack of available food.


<<<PAGE 530>>>
Infants and children with the disorder may be withdrawn, irritable,
apathetic, or anxious. Because of the avoidant behavior during feeding, there
is less touching and holding between mothers and infants during the feeding
process compared with other children. Some reports suggest that food
avoidance or restriction may be relatively longstanding; however, in many
cases, normal adult functioning is eventually achieved.
Differential Diagnosis
We should differentiate the disorder from structural problems with the
infants’ gastrointestinal tract that may be contributing to discomfort during
the feeding process. Because feeding disorders and organic causes of
swallowing difficulties often coexist, it is essential to rule out medical
reasons for feeding difficulties. A study of videofluoroscopic evaluation of
children with feeding and swallowing problems revealed that clinical
evaluation was 92 percent accurate in identifying those children at increased
risk of aspiration. This type of evaluation is necessary before
psychotherapeutic interventions in cases where a medical contribution to
feeding problems is suspected.
Course and Prognosis
Most infants identified with feeding disorder within the first year of life and
who receive treatment do not go on to develop malnutrition, growth delay, or
failure to thrive. When feeding disorders have their onset later, in children 2
to 3 years of age, growth and development can be affected when the disorder
lasts for several months. In older children or adolescents, the feeding disorder
typically interferes with social functioning until treated. About 70 percent of
infants who persistently refuse food in the first year of life continue to have
some eating problems during childhood.
Jennifer was 6 months old when she saw a child psychiatrist for feeding
difficulties, irritability, and poor weight gain since birth. She was small
and slight, but she did not appear to be lethargic or malnourished. Her
parents were college-educated, and both had pursued their professional
careers until Jennifer was born. Although Jennifer was full-term and
weighed 7 pounds at birth, she had been unable to breastfeed due to


<<<PAGE 531>>>
turning away and not ingesting enough milk. When she was 4 weeks old,
Jennifer’s mother had reluctantly switched her to bottle feedings because
Jennifer was losing weight. Although her intake improved somewhat on
bottle feedings, she gained weight very slowly and was still less than 8 lb
at 3 months of age. Since then, she had gained a minimal amount each
month to maintain a low but adequate weight. Jennifer’s mother appeared
tired and described that Jennifer would drink only up to about 6 oz at a
time, or two bites of baby food, and then wiggle and cry; and refuse to
continue with the feeding. However, after a few hours, she might cry
again as if she were hungry. However, she could not settle her into a good
rhythm of feeding and continued attempts to feed her would lead her to
cry inconsolably. Jennifer’s mother described approximately 10 to 15
attempts at feeding her both liquids and solids in 24 hours. Jennifer was
reported to be an irritable and fussy infant, who cried multiple times
during the day and at night, and woke her family often during the night
with her crying. Jennifer’s developmental milestones, such as sitting up,
tracking, and making sounds, were normal.
The observation of mother–infant interactions during feeding and play
revealed that Jennifer was a very alert and wiggly baby who had
difficulty sitting still. While drinking from the bottle, she would kick her
feet and move around, and if the bottle slipped out of her mouth, she did
not try to recapture it. When eating baby foods, she was not interested,
and her mother had to coax her to open her mouth. This upset Jennifer,
and she would start crying. Jennifer’s mother reported that she was
always anxious during meals, and would try to convince Jennifer to take
spoonfuls of baby food while sitting in her high chair. After repeated
unsuccessful attempts of adequate feeding, Jennifer and her mother both
appeared exhausted and took a break.
The history and examination revealed that Jennifer was a very active
and excitable baby who had difficulty keeping calm during feedings.
After reviewing the videotape with the mother, the therapist explored
ways in which the mother could better facilitate calming Jennifer before
and during meals. Using a quiet corner in the house and singing to
Jennifer before meals resulted in Jennifer remaining calmer during meals,
and she was able to drink more substantial amounts of milk, eat more
solid foods, and waited longer between meals. This improvement, in turn,


<<<PAGE 532>>>
relieved her mother’s anxiety and helped both to have calmer
interactions. (Adapted by Caroly Pataki, M.D.)
Treatment
Most interventions for feeding disorders aim to optimize the interaction
between the mother and infant during feedings and identifying any factors
that can be changed to promote better ingestion. The psychiatrist helps the
mother to become more aware of the infant’s stamina for the length of
individual feedings, the infant’s biologic regulation patterns, and the infant’s
fatigue level to increase the level of engagement between mother and infant
during feeding.
Some experts have proposed a transactional model of intervention for
infants who exhibit the “difficult” temperamental traits of emotional
intensity, stubbornness, lack of hunger cues, and irregular eating and sleeping
patterns. The treatment includes education for the parents regarding the
temperamental traits of the infant, exploration of the parents’ anxieties about
the infant’s nutrition, and training for the parents regarding changing their
behaviors to promote internal regulation of eating in the infant. Parents are
encouraged to feed the infant regularly at 3- to 4-hour intervals and offer only
water between meals. The parents learn to deliver praise to the infant for any
self-feeding efforts, regardless of the amount of food ingested. Furthermore,
parents learn to limit any distracting stimulation during meals and give
attention and praise to positive eating behaviors rather than intense negative
attention to inappropriate behavior during meals. This training process for
parents is intense and is brief. Many parents can facilitate improved eating
patterns in the infant as a result. If the mother or caregiver is unable to
participate in the intervention, it may be necessary to include additional
caregivers to contribute to feeding the infant. In rare cases, an infant may
require hospitalization until they receive adequate nutrition. If an infant tires
before ingesting an adequate amount of nutrition, it may be necessary to
begin treatment with the placement of a nasogastric tube for supplemental
oral feedings.
For older children with failure-to-thrive syndromes, hospitalization and
nutritional supplementation may be necessary. Medication is not a standard
component of treatment for feeding disorders; however, there are anecdotal


<<<PAGE 533>>>
reports of preadolescents with failure-to-thrive and feeding disorders who
were comorbid for anxiety and mood symptoms and who received enteral
nutritional interventions in addition to risperidone, and who were observed to
have an increase in oral intake and accelerated weight gain.
Epidemiology
Between 15 and 35 percent of infants and young children have transient
feeding difficulties. A study of restrictive eating difficulties in Swedish 9and 12-year-olds found that restrictive eating problems were present in 0.6
percent of their sample. However, another study of avoidant eating patterns in
young children in Germany found that some degree of avoidance was present
in up to 53 percent of children. Thus, we should separate avoidant eating
behaviors without impairment of nutritional state or psychosocial functioning
from restricted eating disturbances leading to significant functional
impairment. A survey of feeding problems in nursery school children
revealed a prevalence of 4.8 percent with equal gender distribution. In that
study, children with feeding problems exhibited more somatic complaints,
and mothers of affected infants exhibited an increased risk of anxiety
symptoms. Data from community samples estimate a prevalence of failure to
thrive syndromes in approximately 3 percent of infants, with approximately
half of those infants exhibiting feeding disorders.

2.8 Trauma- and Stressor-Related
Disorders in Children
This section includes disorders in which a traumatic or significantly stressful
event is a necessary diagnostic criterion, according to the DSM-5. Included
here are reactive attachment disorder, disinhibited social engagement
disorder, and PTSD. ICD-10 also includes a category of disorders of social
functioning with onset specific to childhood and adolescence. Although we
cover PTSD in Chapter 10, it can present differently in children and has
important implications for child development. Hence we discuss that in this
chapter.


<<<PAGE 534>>>
DSM-IV divided reactive attachment disorder into two subtypes:
emotionally withdrawn/inhibited and indiscriminately social/disinhibited. In
DSM-5, however, the preceding two subtypes have been defined as two
distinct disorders, with the DSM-5 reactive attachment disorder equivalent to
the previous emotionally withdrawn/inhibited subtype, and disinhibited social
engagement disorder representing the previous social disinhibited subtype.

REACTIVE ATTACHMENT DISORDER AND
DISINHIBITED SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT DISORDER
Reactive attachment disorder and disinhibited social engagement disorder are
clinical disorders characterized by aberrant social behaviors in a young child
that reflect grossly negligent parenting and maltreatment that disrupted the
development of normal attachment behavior. A diagnosis of either reactive
attachment disorder or disinhibited social engagement disorder rests on the
presumption that the cause is caregiving deprivation. DSM-III was the first to
define the disorder in 1980. It derives from attachment theory, which
describes the quality of a child’s affective relationship with primary
caregivers, usually parents. This fundamental relationship is the product of a
young child’s need for protection, nurturance, and comfort, and the
interaction of the parents and child in fulfilling these needs.
Based on observations of a young child and parents during a brief
separation and reunion, designated the “strange situation procedure,”
pioneered by Mary Ainsworth and colleagues, researchers have designated a
child’s basic pattern of attachment to be characterized as secure, insecure, or
disorganized. Children who exhibit secure attachment behavior experience
their caregivers as emotionally available and appear to be more exploratory
and well adjusted than children who exhibit insecure or disorganized
attachment behavior. Insecure attachment results from a young child’s
perception that the caregiver is not consistently available. In contrast,
disorganized attachment behavior in a child results from experiencing both
the need for proximity to the caregiver and apprehension in approaching the
caregiver. These early patterns of attachment influence a child’s future
capacities for affect regulation, self-soothing, and relationship building.
According to the DSM-5, reactive attachment disorder is a consistent pattern
of emotionally withdrawn responses toward adult caregivers, limited positive


<<<PAGE 535>>>
affect, sadness, and minimal social responsiveness to others, and concomitant
neglect, deprivation, and lack of appropriate nurturance from caregivers.
Reactive attachment disorder is, presumably, due to grossly pathologic
caregiving received by the child. The pattern of care may exhibit a disregard
for a child’s emotional or physical needs or repeated changes of caregivers,
as when a child is frequently relocated during foster care. The symptoms are
not due to autism spectrum disorder, and the child must have a developmental
age of at least 9 months.
Pathologic caretaking can result in two distinct disorders: reactive
attachment disorder, in which the disturbance takes the form of the child’s
constantly failing to initiate and respond to most social interactions in a
developmentally normal way; and disinhibited social engagement disorder, in
which the disturbance takes the form of undifferentiated, unselective, and
inappropriate social relatedness, with familiar and unfamiliar adults.
In disinhibited social engagement disorder, according to DSM-5, a child
actively approaches and interacts with unfamiliar adults in an overly familiar
way, either verbally or physically. They check for or seek out their caregiver
less often and are willing to go with unfamiliar adults without hesitation.
These behaviors in disinhibited social engagement disorder are not accounted
for by impulsivity, although socially disinhibited behavior is predominant.
These patterns of disinhibited, developmentally inappropriate behaviors are
presumed to be caused by pathogenic caregiving. Thus, for both reactive
attachment disorder and disinhibited social engagement disorder, aberrant
caretaking is presumed to be the predominant cause of the child’s
inappropriate behaviors. However, there have been cases of less severe
disturbances in parenting that may also be associated with young children
who exhibit some characteristics of reactive attachment disorder or
disinhibited social engagement disorder.
These disorders may also result in a picture of failure to thrive, in which an
infant shows physical signs of malnourishment and does not exhibit the
expected developmental motor and verbal milestones.
Diagnosis and Clinical Features
Children with reactive attachment disorder and disinhibited social
engagement disorder may initially be identified by a preschool teacher or by a


<<<PAGE 536>>>
pediatrician based on direct observation of the child’s inappropriate social
responses. These diagnoses rely at least partially on documented evidence of
pervasive disturbance of attachment leading to inappropriate social behaviors
present before the age of 5 years. The clinical picture varies greatly,
depending on a child’s chronologic and mental ages, but expected social
interaction and liveliness are not present. Often, the child is not progressing
developmentally or is frankly malnourished. Perhaps the most common
clinical picture of an infant with reactive attachment disorder is the
nonorganic failure to thrive. Such infants usually exhibit hypokinesis,
dullness, listlessness, and apathy, with poverty of spontaneous activity.
Infants look sad, joyless, and miserable. Some infants also appear frightened
and watchful, with a radar-like gaze.
Table 2-25
Reactive Attachment Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic
name

Reactive Attachment
Disorder

Reactive Attachment
Disorder of Childhood

Duration

Begins < age 5

Begins < age 5

Symptoms

Emotional inhibition, rarely
seeking or responding to
comfort when distressed
Social and emotional
disturbance:
• ↓ emotional/social
responsiveness
• ↓ affect
• Fear, sadness or
irritability in nonthreatening interactions
with adults
History of insufficient care:
• Neglect

Abnormal social
relationships
Emotional disturbances
that are reactive to
environmental change
May be present:
Fear
Aggression
Hypervigilance
Failure to thrive
History of neglect or
abuse


<<<PAGE 537>>>
• Deprivation
• Repeated changes in
caregivers
• Institutional care
Child has developmental age
of ≥9 mo
Required
Symptoms in each category
number of ≥2 of the social/emotional
symptoms
disturbance symptoms
Exclusions
Autism spectrum disorder
(not result
of):
Course
specifiers

Persistent: >12 mo

Severity
specifiers

Severe: all symptoms, high
severity

Asperger syndrome
Disinhibited attachment
disorder of childhood

Table 2-25 compares the diagnostic approaches to reactive attachment
disorder, and Table 2-26 compares them for disinhibited social engagement
disorder.
Infants may exhibit delayed responsiveness to a stimulus that would elicit
fright or withdrawal from a healthy infant. Infants with failure to thrive and
reactive attachment disorder appear significantly malnourished, and many
have protruding abdomens. Occasionally, they have foul-smelling, celiac-like
stools. In unusually severe cases, a clinical picture of marasmus appears.
The infant’s weight is often below the third percentile and markedly below
the appropriate weight for his or her height. If serial weights are available, the
weight percentiles may have decreased progressively because of an actual
weight loss or a failure to gain weight as height increases. Head
circumference is usually average for the infant’s age. Muscle tone may be
weak. The skin may be colder and paler or more mottled than the skin of a
healthy child. Laboratory findings may indicate coincident malnutrition,
dehydration, or concurrent illness. Bone age is usually retarded. Growth


<<<PAGE 538>>>
hormone levels are usually normal or elevated, a finding suggesting that
growth failure in these children is secondary to caloric deprivation and
malnutrition. Cortisol secretion in children with reactive attachment disorder
or disinhibited social engagement disorder is lower than in typically
developing children. For children with failure to thrive, improvement
physically and weight gain generally rapidly occurs after hospitalization.
Socially, the infants with reactive attachment disorder usually show little
spontaneous activity and a marked diminution of both initiative toward others
and reciprocity in response to the caregiving adult or examiner. Both mother
and infant may be indifferent to separation on hospitalization or to
termination of subsequent hospital visits. The infants frequently show none of
the normal upset, fretting, or protest about hospitalization. Older infants
usually show little interest in their environment. They may not play with toys,
even if encouraged; however, they rapidly or gradually take an interest in and
relate to their caregivers in the hospital.
Table 2-26
Disinhibited Social Engagement Disorder

Diagnostic
name

DSM-5

ICD-10

Disinhibited Social
Engagement Disorder

Disinhibited
Attachment
Disorder of
Childhood

Duration
Symptoms

Begins during the first
5 yr of age
Disinhibited social behavior:
• ↓ hesitation around adult
strangers
• ↑ familiarity with adult
strangers
• ↓ checking back with
caregivers in unfamiliar
situations

Abnormal pattern of
social functioning
• Nonselective
attachment
behavior
• Attention seeking
• Overly friendly
behaviors


<<<PAGE 539>>>
• Willing/less hesitant to go
off with an adult stranger
History of insufficient care:
• Neglect
• Deprivation
• Repeated changes in
caregivers
• Institutional care
Required
number of
symptoms

Each category
≥2 symptoms of disinhibited
social behavior
All of the above, with child
having developmental age
of ≥9 mo

Exclusions
(not result
of):

ADHD

Course
specifiers

Persistent: >12 mo

Severity
specifiers

Severe: if all symptom criteria
met at relatively high level

Asperger syndrome
Hyperkinetic disorder
Reactive attachment
disorder of
childhood

Children with disinhibited social engagement disorder appear to be overly
friendly and familiar with little fear.
His adoptive parents brought a 7-year-old boy for evaluation because of
hyperactivity and inappropriate social behavior at school. They adopted
him at 4 years of age, after living most of his life in a Chinese orphanage
in which he received care from a rotating shift of caregivers. Although he
had been below the 5th percentile for height and weight on arrival, he


<<<PAGE 540>>>
quickly approached the 15th percentile in his new home. However, his
adoptive parents were frustrated by his inability to bond with them. They
had initially worried about an intellectual problem, although testing and
his capacity to engage almost any adult and many children verbally
suggested otherwise. He appeared to be too friendly, talking to anyone
and often following strangers willingly. He showed little empathy when
others were hurt, and yet he would sit on the laps of teachers and students
without asking. He was frequently injured because of seemingly reckless
behavior, although he had an extremely high pain tolerance. His parents
focused on problem behaviors at home to decrease his impulsive
behavior, which improved with much prompting; however, he remained
oddly overfriendly at home and in school. The psychiatrist diagnosed the
child with disinhibited social engagement disorder. (Adapted from Neil
W. Boris, M.D. and Charles H. Zeanah, Jr., M.D.)
Pathology and Laboratory Examination. Although no single specific
laboratory test can make a diagnosis, many children with reactive attachment
disorder have disturbances of growth and development. Thus, establishing a
growth curve and examining the progression of developmental milestones
may help determine whether associated phenomena, such as failure to thrive,
are present.
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of reactive attachment disorder and disinhibited
social engagement disorder must take into account that many other
psychiatric disorders may arise in conjunction with maltreatment, including
depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, and PTSD. Psychiatric disorders to
consider in the differential diagnosis include language disorders, autism
spectrum disorder, intellectual disability, and metabolic syndromes. Children
with autism spectrum disorder are typically well nourished and of ageappropriate size and weight, and are generally alert and active, despite their
impairments in reciprocal social interactions. Significant intellectual
disability is often present in children with an autism spectrum disorder,
whereas when intellectual disability occurs with reactive attachment disorder
or disinhibited social engagement disorder, it is generally relatively mild.


<<<PAGE 541>>>
Children with disinhibited social engagement disorder often show comorbid
ADHD, PTSD, and language disorder or delay. Furthermore, children with
disinhibited social engagement disorder symptoms may have complex
neuropsychiatric problems.
Course and Prognosis
Most of the data available on the natural course of children with reactive
attachment disorder and disinhibited social engagement disorder come from
follow-up studies of children in residential facilities with histories of severe
neglect. Findings from these studies suggest that children with reactive
attachment disorder, who are later adopted into caring environments, improve
in their attachment behaviors and may normalize over time. Children with
disinhibited social engagement disorder, however, appear to have more
difficulty developing attachments to new caregivers. Children with
disinhibited social engagement disorder who exhibit indiscriminate social
behavior also tend to have poor peer relationships. The duration and severity
of the neglect influence the prognosis for both disorders. The degree of
resulting impairment does as well. Constitutional and nutritional factors
interact in children, who may either respond resiliently to treatment or
continue to fail to thrive. The amount of treatment and rehabilitation that the
family receives affects the child. Children who have multiple problems
stemming from pathogenic caregiving may recover physically faster and
more completely than they do emotionally.
Treatment
The first consideration in treating reactive attachment disorder or disinhibited
social engagement disorder is a child’s safety. Thus, the management of these
disorders must begin with a comprehensive assessment of the current level of
safety and adequate caregiving. When there is suspicion of maltreatment
persisting in the home, usually, the first decision is whether to hospitalize the
child or to attempt treatment while the child remains in the home. If we
suspect neglect or emotional, physical, or sexual abuse, we must report it to
the appropriate law enforcement and child protective services in the area. The
therapeutic strategy depends on the child’s physical and emotional state and
the level of pathologic caregiving. We should determine the nutritional status


<<<PAGE 542>>>
of the child and the presence of ongoing physical abuse or threat.
Hospitalization is necessary for children with malnourishment.
Along with an assessment of the child’s physical well-being, an evaluation
of the child’s emotional condition is essential. Immediate intervention must
address the parents’ awareness and capacity to participate in altering the
injurious patterns that have heretofore ensued. The treatment team must begin
to improve the unsatisfactory relationship between caregiver and child. This
intervention usually requires extensive and intensive therapy and education
with the mother or with both parents when possible.
In one study, parents of 120 children between 11.7 and 31.9 months,
identified as being at risk for neglect, were randomly assigned to an
intervention for at-risk parents called Attachment and Biobehavioral Catchup (ABC) or to a control intervention. The purpose of the ABC intervention
was to decrease frightening behavior toward the infant by parents and to
increase sensitive and nurturing interactions between parents and infants. The
investigators manualized the intervention to guide the parents in how to
provide those interactions with their infants. They evaluated the children after
10 sessions, and the 60 children who received the ABC intervention showed
significantly lower rates of disorganized attachment (32 percent), and higher
rates of secure attachment (52 percent) compared to those who received the
control intervention (disorganized attachment 57 percent; secure attachment
33 percent). The authors concluded that we could enhance parental
nurturance and sensitivity through a comprehensive and explicit intervention
such as the ABC intervention, and can measure significant improvements in
attachment behaviors in young children after 10 sessions.
The caregiver–child relationship is the basis of the assessment of reactive
attachment disorder and disinhibited social engagement disorder symptoms
and the substrate from which to modify attachment behaviors. Structured
observations allow a clinician to determine the range of attachment behaviors
established with various family members. We may work closely with the
caregiver and the child to facilitate higher sensitivity in their interactions.
Three primary psychotherapeutic modalities help promote bonds between
children and caregivers. First, a clinician can target the caregiver to promote
positive interaction with a child who does not yet have the repertoire to
respond positively. Second, a clinician can work with the child and the
caregiver together as a dyad to advocate for practicing appropriate positive


<<<PAGE 543>>>
reinforcement for each other. Through the use of videotapes, therapists can
view parent–child interactions and suggest modifications to increase positive
engagement. The third modality for clinical intervention is through individual
work with the child. Working with the child and caregiver together is often
more effective in producing more emotionally meaningful exchanges than
working with the parent or child individually.
Psychosocial interventions for families in which a child has reactive
attachment disorder or disinhibited social engagement disorder include (1)
psychosocial support services, including hiring a homemaker, improving the
physical condition of the apartment, or obtaining adequate housing,
improving the family’s financial status, and decreasing the family’s isolation;
(2) psychotherapeutic interventions, including individual psychotherapy,
psychotropic medications, and family or marital therapy; (3) educational
counseling services, including mother–infant or mother–toddler groups, and
counseling to increase awareness and understanding of the child’s needs and
to develop parenting skills; and (4) provisions for close monitoring of the
progression of the patient’s emotional and physical well-being. Sometimes,
separating a child from the stressful home environment temporarily, as in
hospitalization, allows the child to break out of the accustomed pattern. A
neutral setting, such as the hospital, is the best place to start with families
who are genuinely available emotionally and physically for intervention. If
interventions are not feasible or inadequate or if they fail, we must consider
placing the child with relatives or in foster care, adoption, or in a group home
or residential treatment facility.
Epidemiology
Few data exist on the prevalence, sex ratio, or familial pattern of reactive
attachment disorder and disinhibited social engagement disorder. Both
disorders probably occur in less than 1 percent of the population. A study of
1,646 children aged 6 to 8 years old, living in a deprived sector of urban
United Kingdom, found that the prevalence of reactive attachment disorder in
this population was 1.4 percent. However, other studies of selected high-risk
populations have estimated that about 10 percent of young children with
documented neglectful and grossly pathologic caregiving exhibit reactive
attachment disorder, and up to 20 percent of children in this situation exhibit


<<<PAGE 544>>>
disinhibited social engagement disorder. In a retrospective report of children
in one county of the United States who were removed from their homes
because of neglect or abuse before the age of 4 years, 38 percent exhibited
signs of either reactive attachment disorder or disinhibited social engagement
disorder. Another study established the reliability of the diagnosis by
reviewing videotaped assessments of at-risk children interacting with
caregivers, along with a structured interview with the caregivers. Given that
pathogenic care, including maltreatment, occurs more frequently in the
presence of general psychosocial risk factors, such as poverty, disrupted
families, and mental illness among caregivers, these circumstances are likely
to increase the risk of reactive attachment disorder and disinhibited social
engagement disorder.
Etiology
The core features of reactive attachment disorder and disinhibited social
engagement disorder are disturbances of normal attachment behaviors. The
inability of a young child to develop normative social interactions that
culminate in aberrant attachment behaviors in reactive attachment disorder is
inherent in the disorder’s definition. Reactive attachment disorder and
disinhibited social engagement disorder are presumably due to maltreatment
of the child, including emotional neglect, physical abuse, or both. Grossly
pathogenic care of an infant or young child by the caregiver presumably
causes the markedly disturbed social relatedness that is evident. The
emphasis is on the unidirectional cause; that is, the caregiver does something
inimical or neglects to do something essential for the infant or child. In
evaluating a patient for whom such a diagnosis is appropriate, however,
clinicians should consider the contributions of each member of the caregiver–
child dyad and their interactions. Clinicians should weigh such things as
infant or child temperament, deficient or defective bonding, a
developmentally disabled child, and a particular caregiver–child mismatch.
The likelihood of neglect increases with a parental psychiatric disorder,
substance abuse, intellectual disability, the parent’s harsh upbringing, social
isolation, deprivation, and premature parenthood (i.e., adolescent). These
factors compromise parental ability to attend to the needs of the child, as the
parents focus primarily on their existence. Frequent changes of the primary


<<<PAGE 545>>>
caregivers, for example, from multiple foster care placements or repeated
lengthy hospitalizations, may also lead to impaired attachment. In the general
population, a study of 1,600 children found that those children with reactive
attachment disorder/disinhibited social engagement disorder showed a
constellation of symptoms characterized by early symptomatic syndromes
eliciting neurodevelopmental clinical examinations (ESSENCE). Some of the
associated
symptoms
in
children
with
reactive
attachment
disorder/disinhibited social engagement disorder include a higher risk of
failure to gain weight as neonates, feeding difficulty, and poor impulse
control. These traits are likely to emerge because of both genetic and
environmental factors. The authors found that children with reactive
attachment disorder/disinhibited social engagement disorder were more likely
to have multiple psychiatric comorbidities, lower IQs compared to the
general population, and more behavioral problems. Thus, a broad assessment
may be necessary to identify symptoms and disorders associated with
reactive attachment disorder/disinhibited social engagement disorder.

POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER OF INFANCY,
CHILDHOOD, AND ADOLESCENCE
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), formerly grouped with anxiety
disorders, now has its own chapter in DSM-5 along with other disorders
caused by trauma or stress. Chapter 10 describes this disorder in detail. The
purpose here is to focus on how the disorder presents in children.
In the United States, the rates of children and adolescents exposed to
violence and traumatic events are incredibly high. In a nationally
representative sample of children and adolescents, exposure to a traumatic
event was 60 percent, with a lifetime rate ranging from 80 to 90 percent.
Traumatic events can include physical or sexual abuse, domestic violence,
motor vehicle accidents, severe medical illnesses, or natural or humancreated disasters. A significant number of children and adolescents who
experience traumatic events will develop PTSD. In children younger than the
age of 6 years, spontaneous and intrusive memories may be expressed in their
play, or occur in frightening dreams; it may be challenging to connect these
intrusive thoughts to a traumatic event. The child may also display
inexplicable agitation, fear, or disorganization.


<<<PAGE 546>>>
Diagnosis and Clinical Features
For PTSD to ensue, exposure to a traumatic event consisting of either direct
personal experience or witnessing an event involving the threat of death,
serious injury, or severe harm must occur. The most common traumatic
exposures for children and adolescents include physical or sexual abuse;
domestic, school, or community violence; being kidnapped; terrorist attacks;
motor vehicle or household accidents; or disasters, such as floods, hurricanes,
tornadoes, fires, explosions, or airline crashes. A child with PTSD
experiences either intrusive memories of the event, recurrent frightening
dreams, dissociative reactions including flashbacks in which the child feels as
if the traumatic event is recurring, or intense psychological distress when
exposed to reminders of the trauma.
Symptoms of PTSD include reexperiencing the traumatic event in at least
one of the following ways. Children may have intrusive thoughts, memories,
or images that spontaneously recur, or body sensations that remind them of
the event. In very young children, it is common to observe play that includes
elements of the traumatic event, or behaviors, such as inappropriate sexual
behaviors. Children may experience periods during which they either act or
feel as though the event is taking place presently; this is a dissociative event
usually described by adults as “flashbacks.”
Another critical symptom cluster of PTSD is avoidance, in which children
may make active physical efforts to avoid the places, people, or situations
that would present traumatic reminders of the event. The third cluster of
diagnostic criteria for PTSD is negative alterations in cognition and mood
following the trauma. In children 6 years or younger, according to DSM-5,
negative alterations in cognition may take the form of socially withdrawn
behavior, reduction of expressing positive emotions, diminished interest in
play, and feelings of shame, fear, and confusion. In children older than 6
years of age, these may take the form of an inability to remember parts of a
traumatic event, that is, psychological amnesia or persistent negative feelings
about oneself, including horror, anger, guilt, or shame. After a traumatic
event, children may experience a sense of detachment from their usual play
activities (“psychological numbing”) or a diminished capacity to feel
emotions. Older adolescents may express a fear that they expect to die young
(sense of foreshortened future).


<<<PAGE 547>>>
Other typical responses to traumatic events include symptoms of
hyperarousal that were not present before the traumatic exposure, such as
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep, hypervigilance regarding safety,
and increased checking that doors are locked or exaggerated startle reaction.
In some children, hyperarousal can present as a generalized inability to relax
with increased irritability, outbursts, and impaired ability to concentrate.
To meet the diagnostic criteria for PTSD, according to the DSM-5, the
symptoms must be present for at least 1 month and cause distress and
impairment in critical functional areas of life. When all of the diagnostic
symptoms of PTSD are met following the traumatic event, persist for at least
3 days, but resolve within 1 month, we diagnose it as acute stress disorder.
When the full syndrome of PTSD persists beyond 3 months, it is chronic
PTSD. In some cases, the PTSD symptoms increase over time, and it is not
until more than 6 months have elapsed after the exposure to the trauma that
the whole syndrome emerges; in that case, the diagnosis is PTSD, delayed
onset.
It is not uncommon for children and adolescents with PTSD to experience
feelings of guilt, mainly if they have survived the trauma and others in the
situation did not. They may blame themselves for the demise of the others
and may go on to develop a comorbid depressive episode. Childhood PTSD
is also associated with increased rates of other anxiety disorders, depressive
episodes, substance use disorders, and attentional difficulties. DSM-5
includes a specifier With dissociative symptoms, which can present as either
Depersonalization, in which there are recurrent experiences of feeling
detached, as if outside of one’s own body, or Derealization, in which the
world feels unreal, dreamlike, and distant. A final specifier, With delayed
expression, indicates that the full diagnostic criteria were not met until 6
months after the traumatic event, although some symptoms may present
earlier.
Pathology and Laboratory Examination. Although reports indicate
some alterations in both neurophysiologic and neuroimaging studies of
children and adolescents with PTSD, no current laboratory tests can help in
making this diagnosis.
Differential Diagnosis


<<<PAGE 548>>>
Several overlapping symptoms exist between childhood PTSD and
presentations of childhood anxiety disorders, such as separation anxiety
disorder, OCD, or social anxiety disorder, in which recurrent intrusive
thoughts or avoidant behaviors occur. Children with depressive disorders
often exhibit withdrawal and a sense of isolation from peers as well as guilt
about life events over which they have no control. Irritability, poor
concentration, sleep disturbance, and decreased interest in usual activities
occur in both PTSD and major depressive disorder.
Children who have lost a loved one in a traumatic event may go on to
experience both PTSD and a major depressive disorder when bereavement
persists beyond its expected course. Children with PTSD may also be
confused with children who have disruptive behavior disorders because they
often show poor concentration, inattention, and irritability. It is critical to
elicit a history of traumatic exposure and evaluate the chronology of the
trauma and the onset of the symptoms to make an accurate diagnosis of
PTSD.
Course and Prognosis
For some children and adolescents with milder forms of PTSD, symptoms
may persist for 1 to 2 years, after which they diminish and attenuate. In more
severe circumstances, however, PTSD syndromes persist for many years or
decades in children and adolescents, with spontaneous remission in only a
portion of them.
The prognosis of untreated PTSD has become an issue of growing concern
for researchers and clinicians who have documented a variety of severe
comorbidities and psychobiological abnormalities associated with PTSD. In
one study, children and adolescents with severe PTSD were at risk for
decreased intracranial volume, diminished corpus callosum area, and lower
IQs compared to children without PTSD. Children and adolescents with
histories of physical and sexual abuse have higher rates of depression and
suicidality themselves and in their offspring as well. This risk highlights the
importance of early recognition and treatment of PTSD that may significantly
improve the long-term outcome among youth.
Treatment


<<<PAGE 549>>>
Trauma-Focused Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy. Randomized
clinical trials have provided evidence for the efficacy of trauma-focused CBT
in the treatment of PTSD in children and adolescents. We would administer
this treatment over 10 to 16 treatment sessions. The treatment includes nine
components itemized in the acronym PRACTICE. Trauma-focused CBT
entails the inclusion of gradual exposure to feared stimuli as a critical
element. Such stimuli encompass places, people, sounds, and situations. The
first component of trauma-focused CBT is Psychoeducation regarding the
nature of typical emotional and physiologic reactions to traumatic events and
PTSD. Next, Parenting Skills involve sessions focused on guiding parents on
providing praise, administering a time out, contingency reinforcement
programs, and troubleshooting for specific symptoms in a given child.
Component 3 is Relaxation, in which children learn to utilize muscle
relaxation, focused breathing, affective modulation, thought-stopping, and
other cognitive techniques to diminish feelings of helplessness and distress.
Component 4 is Affective Expression and Modulation, geared to help children
and their parents to identify their feelings, interrupt disturbing thoughts with
positive imagery, and teach positive self-talk and social skills building.
Component 5 is Cognitive coping and processing, which deals specifically
with reviewing the Cognitive Triangle, in which the therapist and child
explore the relationship between thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. The child
would learn to challenge unhelpful thoughts with practice. In Component 6,
Trauma narrative, the story of the traumatic event and its sequelae are
developed over time by the child, with the therapist’s support, using a
depiction of words, art, or another creative form. Eventually, they share this
with the parent. Component 7, In Vivo Exposure and Mastery of Trauma
Reminders, is a session that reviews with the child how to deal with situations
that are a reminder of the trauma and how to maintain control over distressing
feelings associated with it. Component 8 is Conjoint Child-Parent Sessions;
this component may involve several sessions in which the child and parent
share their understanding of the process of the therapy and the gains that they
have made. Finally, Component 10, Enhancing future safety, involves
sessions that focus on the changes made in the family to ensure the safety of
the child. These final sessions also promote healthy communication between
the child and the parents.
A variant of trauma-focused CBT for PTSD is called eye movement


<<<PAGE 550>>>
desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR), in which the therapist combines
exposure and cognitive reprocessing interventions with directed eye
movements. This technique is not as well accepted as the more extensive
trauma-focused CBT detailed above.
Cognitive-Behavioral Intervention for Trauma in Schools (CBITS).
CBITS is an intervention that administers treatment in the school setting for
children who screen positive for PTSD and whose parents agree to treatment
in school. It consists of ten weekly group sessions, one to three individual
imaginal exposure sessions, two to four optional sessions with parents, and
one parent education session. Similar to trauma-focused CBT (TF-CBT),
CBITS incorporates psychoeducation, relaxation training, cognitive coping
skills, gradual exposure to traumatic memories through a narrative, in vivo
exposure, and affect modulation, cognitive restructuring, and social problemsolving. In one RCT, 86 percent of students in the CBITS group reported
significantly decreased PTSD symptoms compared to the waitlist controls.
Students who received CBITS also reported lower depression scores. Among
parents whose children received CBITS treatment, 78 percent reported
decreased psychosocial problems in their children. After CBITS treatment,
the children sustained improvements in both the PTSD and depression
symptoms at 6 months.
Structured Psychotherapy for Adolescents Responding to
Chronic Stress (SPARCS). SPARCS consists of a group intervention,
generally administered in 16 sessions, with a focus on the needs of
adolescents between the ages of 12 and 19 years who have lived with chronic
trauma and may also carry a diagnosis of PTSD. Investigators have tested
SPARCS in a trial of multicultural teens and young adults with moderate or
severe trauma exposure. Most of the participants were female and comprised
multiple ethnic groups: 67 percent African American; 12 percent Latino; 21
percent Caucasian. SPARCS demonstrated efficacy in reducing traumatic
stress symptoms, mainly in the largest group, the African American group.
SPARCS utilizes cognitive-behavioral techniques and also incorporates many
of the components of TF-CBT. Also, SPARCS includes mindfulness
techniques and relaxation.


<<<PAGE 551>>>
Trauma Affect Regulation: Guide for Education and Therapy
(TARGET). TARGET, an affect regulation therapy, combines CBT
components, such as cognitive processing, with affect modulation. We would
usually consider this for adolescents between the ages of 13 and 19 who
experience maltreatment or chronic traumatic exposure to such things as
community violence or domestic violence. It usually requires 12 sessions,
which focus on past or current situations. As with SPARCS treatment,
gradual exposure may occur in the context of recounting past trauma but is
not a core component of the treatment. A randomized trial with 59 delinquent
girls aged 13 to 17 years who met full or partial criteria for PTSD found that
TARGET reduced anxiety, anger, depression, and PTSD cognitions.
TARGET is a promising treatment for girls with histories of delinquency,
especially to reduce anger and to enhance optimism and self-efficacy.
Psychopharmacological Treatment. Clinicians have used several
pharmacologic agents to treat children and adolescents with PTSD, often
focused on diminishing intrusive thoughts, hyperarousal, and avoidance, with
some success and mixed results. Given the frequent comorbidity of
depressive disorder, anxiety disorders, and behavioral problems associated
with PTSD, we might use a multitude of psychopharmacological agents.
Psychiatrists often use antidepressant agents as adjuncts to psychosocial
treatments in youth with PTSD. Although sertraline and paroxetine are
approved by the FDA in the treatment of PTSD in adults, there is scant
evidence to support their use for the core symptoms of PTSD in youth. An
RCT of TF-CBT plus sertraline compared to TF-CBT plus placebo in 24
children with PTSD found that both groups had a significant reduction in
PTSD symptoms, with no significant difference between the groups. One
multicenter placebo-controlled study of 131 children aged 6 to 17 years with
PTSD tested sertraline over 10 weeks. Results showed sertraline to be a safe
treatment; however, it was not effective when compared to placebo. An RCT
using citalopram did not show the superiority of citalopram over placebo in
the treatment of core PTSD symptoms. There is, however, evidence
suggesting that the use of SSRIs in traumatized children with burns may be
preventive regarding the development of PTSD. Published literature
demonstrates that up to 50 percent of children with moderate to severe burns
develop PTSD. Thus preventive strategies are essential. A randomized


<<<PAGE 552>>>
controlled study of sertraline to prevent PTSD found that children who
received sertraline, flexibly dosed between 25 and 150 mg/day, had a
decrease in parent-reported symptoms of PTSD over 8 weeks compared to a
placebo group. Among the child-reported symptoms, however, there was no
significant difference between the two groups.
Psychiatrists sometimes use antiadrenergic agents to treat dysregulation of
the noradrenergic system in adults and youth with PTSD. α2-Agonists such as
clonidine and guanfacine, for example, have been used to decrease
norepinephrine release, whereas centrally acting β-antagonists such as
propranolol, and α1-antagonists such as prazosin, are hypothesized to
improve hyperarousal and intrusive thoughts through attenuation of
norepinephrine postsynaptically. Although there are some data in adults with
PTSD to support the use of these agents, there are mainly case reports for
youths. There is a suggestion that guanfacine may reduce nightmares in
children with PTSD and that clonidine may diminish symptoms of
reenactment of traumatic events in children. One report of propranolol
treatment in 11 pediatric patients with PTSD from sexual or physical abuse
with a mean age of 8.5 years, who exhibited agitation and hyperarousal,
indicated some decrease in symptoms in 8 of the 11 children studied. Another
open study of transdermal clonidine treatment of preschoolers with PTSD
suggests that clonidine may be efficacious in this population in decreasing
activation and hyperarousal. An additional open trial of oral clonidine with
dosage ranges of 0.05 to 0.1 mg twice daily similarly suggests that this
medication may provide some relief for the symptoms of hyperarousal,
impulsivity, and agitation in young children with PTSD.
Second-generation antipsychotics such as risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole have been studied in adults with
PTSD with mixed results. Risperidone and aripiprazole both have FDA
approval for use in children and adolescents with aggression, severe
behavioral dyscontrol, and severe psychiatric disorders; however, there are no
controlled trials with children with PTSD. For example, there is one case
series of three preschool-age children who exhibited symptoms of acute
stress disorder and who had severe thermal burns improved after being
treated with risperidone.
In children and adolescents with PTSD, there is one open-label trial of


<<<PAGE 553>>>
carbamazepine and one trial of sodium valproate. In the carbamazepine trial,
all 28 improved at blood levels of 10 to 11.5 micrograms/mL. In the sodium
valproate trial, there was some improvement at higher doses of the drug.
Clinicians also use benzodiazepines to treat anxiety symptoms in patients
with PTSD, although there are no controlled trials to support their use in
youth with PTSD.
Given that many children and adolescents with PTSD have comorbid
depressive and anxiety disorders, we would recommend SSRIs as a first-line
pharmacologic option.
Epidemiology
Epidemiologic studies of children 9 to 17 years of age have found 3-month
prevalence rates of PTSD ranging from 0.5 to 4 percent. An epidemiologic
survey of preschoolers aged 4 to 5 years found a rate of 1.3 percent of PTSD.
Children exposed chronically to trauma, such as child abuse, or traumas
resulting in a broader disruption of entire communities, such as war, have the
highest risk of developing PTSD. In addition to the staggering rate of the fullblown disorder of PTSD among youth, several studies indicate that most
children exposed to severe or chronic trauma develop PTSD symptoms
sufficiently severe to disrupt functioning, even in the absence of the full
diagnosis.
Etiology
Biologic Factors. Risk factors in children for developing PTSD include
preexisting anxiety disorders and depressive disorders. A prospective study
found that among children exposed to traumatic events, those with anxiety
disorders and teacher ratings of externalizing behavior problems by the age of
6 years were at increased risk for PTSD. Furthermore, children with an IQ
higher than 115 at age 6 years were at lower risk for developing PTSD. Also,
among children exposed to trauma, those who developed PTSD were at
higher risk of developing comorbid disorders such as depression. This
comorbidity suggests that a genetic predisposition for anxiety disorders, as
well as a family history indicating an increased risk of depressive disorders,
may predispose a trauma-exposed child to develop PTSD. Children with


<<<PAGE 554>>>
PTSD exhibit increased excretion of adrenergic and dopaminergic
metabolites, smaller intracranial volume and corpus callosum, memory
deficits, and lower IQs compared with age-matched controls. Adults with
PTSD have been found to have an overactive amygdala and decreased
hippocampal volume. Whether the above findings are sequelae of PTSD or
markers of vulnerability to the disorder remains a focus of investigation.
Psychological Factors. Although the exposure to trauma is the initial
etiologic factor in the development of PTSD, the enduring symptoms typical
of PTSD, such as avoidance of the place where the trauma occurred, can be
conceptualized, in part, as the result of both classical and operant
conditioning. Extreme physiologic responses may accompany the fear of a
given traumatic event, such as an adolescent who was terrorized by an attack
by a group of students near a school, who then develops an extreme adverse
physiologic reaction each time he or she is near the school. This reaction is an
example of classical conditioning in that a neutral cue (the school) has
become paired with an intensely fearful past event. Operant conditioning
occurs when a child learns to avoid traumatic reminders to prevent distressing
feelings from arising. For example, if a child was in a motor vehicle accident,
the child may then refuse to ride in cars altogether to prevent adverse
physiologic reactions and fear from occurring.
Another mechanism in developing and maintaining symptoms of PTSD is
through modeling, which is a form of learning. For example, when parents
and children experience traumatic events, such as natural disasters, children
may emulate parental responses, such as avoidance, withdrawal, or extreme
expressions of fear, and “learn” to respond to their memories of the traumatic
event in the same manner.
Social Factors. Family support and reactions to traumatic events in
children may play a significant role in the development of PTSD in that
adverse parental emotional reactions to a child’s abuse may increase that
child’s risk of developing PTSD. Lack of parental support and
psychopathology among parents—especially maternal depression—have
been identified as risk factors in the development of PTSD after a child
experiences a traumatic event.


<<<PAGE 555>>>
2.9 Depressive Disorders and Suicide in
Children and Adolescents
Chapter 7 discusses depressive disorders in detail. This section focuses on the
presentation of this disorder in youths.
Depressive disorders in youth represent a significant public health concern,
in that they are prevalent and result in long-term adverse effects on the
individual’s cognitive, social, and psychological development. These
disorders affect approximately 2 to 3 percent of children and up to 8 percent
of adolescents, so the need for early identification and access to evidencebased interventions such as CBTs and antidepressant agents, is essential.
Although significant depression runs in families, with the highest risk in
children whose parents experienced early-onset depression, twin studies have
demonstrated that major depression is only moderately heritable,
approximately 40 to 50 percent, highlighting environmental stressors and
adverse events as significant contributors to major depressive disorder in
youth. The core features of major depression in children, adolescents, and
adults bear a striking resemblance; however, the developmental level of the
child or adolescent influences the clinical presentation. The DSM-5 uses the
same criteria for major depressive disorder in youth as in adults, except that
for children and adolescents, irritable mood may replace a depressed mood in
the diagnostic criteria.
Most children and adolescents with depressive disorders neither attempt
nor complete suicide; however, severely depressed youth often have suicidal
ideation, and suicide remains the most severe risk of major depression.
Nevertheless, many depressed youths do not ever have suicidal ideation, and
many children and adolescents who engage in suicidal behavior do not have a
depressive disorder. There is epidemiologic evidence to suggest that
depressed youth with recurrent active suicidal ideation, including a plan, and
who have made prior attempts, are at higher risk to complete suicide,
compared to youth who express only passive suicidal ideation.
Mood disorders in children and adolescents have been studied increasingly
over the last two decades, culminating in large sample multisite RCTs such as
the Treatment of Adolescent Depression Study (TADS), which provides


<<<PAGE 556>>>
evidence of the efficacy of both CBT as well as SSRIs. Furthermore, when
the preceding modalities are combined, the highest efficacy is achieved.
Increased recognition of depressive disorders in preschool populations has
sparked clinicians and researchers to develop psychosocial interventions such
as the Parent–Child Interaction Therapy Emotion Development (PCIT-ED),
which target treatment specifically for this age group. The expression of
disturbed and depressed mood appears to vary with the developmental stage.
Very young children with major depression are sad, listless, or apathetic,
even though they may not articulate these feelings verbally. Perhaps
surprisingly, mood-congruent auditory hallucinations occur in young children
with major depression. Somatic complaints such as headaches and
stomachaches, withdrawn and sad appearance, and poor self-esteem are more
universal symptoms. Patients in late adolescence with more severe forms of
depression often display pervasive anhedonia, severe psychomotor
retardation, delusions, and a sense of hopelessness. Symptoms that appear
with the same frequency, regardless of age and developmental status, include
suicidal ideation, depressed or irritable mood, insomnia, and diminished
ability to concentrate.
Developmental issues, however, influence the expression of depressive
symptoms. For example, unhappy young children who exhibit recurrent
suicidal ideation are rarely able to propose a realistic suicide plan or to carry
out such a plan. Children’s moods are especially vulnerable to the influences
of severe social stressors, such as chronic family discord, abuse and neglect,
and academic failure. Many young children with major depressive disorder
have histories of abuse, neglect, and families with significant psychosocial
burdens such as parental mental illness, substance abuse, or poverty. Children
who develop depressive disorders amid acute toxic family stressors may have
remission of depressive symptoms when the stressors diminish or when in a
more nurturing family environment. Depressive disorders are generally
episodic, albeit typically lasting close to a year; however, their onset may be
insidious and remain unidentified until significant impairment in peer
relationships, deterioration in academic function, or withdrawal from
activities emerges. ADHD, oppositional defiant disorder, and conduct
disorder are not infrequently comorbid with a major depressive episode. In
some cases, conduct disturbances or disorders occur in the context of a major
depressive episode and resolve with the resolution of the depressive episode.


<<<PAGE 557>>>
Clinicians must clarify the chronology of the symptoms to determine whether
a given behavior (e.g., poor concentration, defiance, or temper tantrums) was
present before the depressive episode and is unrelated to it or whether the
behavior is occurring for the first time and is related to the depressive
episode.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Major Depressive Disorder
It is easiest to diagnose major depressive disorder in children when the
disorder is acute and occurs in a child without previous psychiatric
symptoms. Often, however, the onset is insidious, and the disorder occurs in
a child who has had several years of difficulties with hyperactivity, separation
anxiety disorder, or intermittent depressive symptoms.
A major depressive episode in a prepubertal child is likely to be manifest
by somatic complaints, psychomotor agitation, and mood-congruent
hallucinations. Anhedonia is also frequent, but anhedonia, as well as
hopelessness, psychomotor retardation, and delusions, are more common in
adolescent and adult major depressive episodes than in those of young
children. Adults have more problems than depressed children and adolescents
with sleep and appetite. In adolescence, negativistic or frankly antisocial
behavior and the use of alcohol or illicit substances can occur and may justify
the additional diagnoses of oppositional defiant disorder, conduct disorder,
and substance use disorder. Feelings of restlessness, irritability, aggression,
reluctance to cooperate in family ventures, withdrawal from social activities,
and isolation from peers often occur in adolescents. School difficulties are
likely. Depressed adolescents may become less attentive to personal
appearance and show increased sensitivity to rejection by peers and in
romantic relationships.
Children can be reliable reporters about their emotions, relationships, and
difficulties in psychosocial functions. They may, however, refer to depressive
feelings in terms of anger, or feeling “mad” rather than sad. Clinicians should
assess the duration and periodicity of the depressive mood to differentiate
relatively universal, short-lived, and sometimes frequent periods of sadness,
usually after a frustrating event, from a valid, persistent depressive mood.


<<<PAGE 558>>>
The younger the child, the more imprecise his or her time estimates are likely
to be.
Mood disorders tend to be chronic if they begin early. Childhood-onset
may be the most severe form of mood disorder and tends to appear in
families with a high incidence of mood disorders and alcohol use disorder.
The children are likely to have such secondary complications as conduct
disorder, alcohol and other substance use disorders, and antisocial behavior.
Functional impairment associated with a depressive disorder in childhood
extends to practically all areas of a child’s psychosocial world; school
performance and behavior, peer relationships, and family relationships all
suffer. Only highly intelligent and academically oriented children with no
more than a moderate depression can compensate for their difficulties in
learning by substantially increasing their time and effort. Otherwise, school
performance is invariably affected by a combination of difficulty
concentrating, slowed thinking, lack of interest and motivation, fatigue,
sleepiness, depressive ruminations, and preoccupations. Sometimes a
clinician may misdiagnose a learning disorder as major depression. Learning
problems secondary to depression, even when longstanding, are corrected
rapidly after a child’s recovery from the depressive episode.
Children and adolescents with severe forms of major depressive disorder
may have hallucinations or delusions. Usually, these psychotic symptoms are
thematically consistent with the depressed mood, occur with the depressive
episode (usually at its worst), and do not include certain types of
hallucinations (such as conversing voices and a commenting voice, which are
specific to schizophrenia). Depressive hallucinations usually consist of a
single voice speaking to the person from outside his or her head, with
derogatory or suicidal content. Depressive delusions center on themes of
guilt, physical disease, death, nihilism, deserved punishment, personal
inadequacy, and (sometimes) persecution. These delusions are rare in
prepuberty, probably because of cognitive immaturity, but are present in
about half of psychotically depressed adolescents.
Alcohol or drug use can complicate adolescent depression. One study
found that up to 17 percent of adolescents with depressive disorder received
an initial evaluation due to substance abuse.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia)


<<<PAGE 559>>>
In children and adolescents, persistent depressive disorder consists of a
depressed or irritable mood for most of the day, for more days than not, for at
least 1 year. DSM-5 notes that in children and adolescents, irritable mood can
replace the depressed mood criterion for adults and that the duration criterion
is not 2 years but 1 year for children and adolescents. According to the DSM5 diagnostic criteria, two or more of the following symptoms must
accompany the depressed or irritable mood: low self-esteem, hopelessness,
poor appetite or overeating, insomnia or hypersomnia, low energy or fatigue,
or poor concentration or difficulty making decisions. During the year of the
disturbance, these symptoms do not resolve for more than 2 months at a time.
Also, the diagnostic criteria for dysthymic disorder specify that during the
first year, no major depressive episode emerges. To meet the DSM-5
diagnostic criteria for persistent depressive disorder, a child must not have a
history of a manic or hypomanic episode. Persistent depressive disorder is
also not diagnosed if the symptoms occur exclusively during a chronic
psychotic disorder or if they are the direct effects of a substance or a general
medical condition. DSM-5 provides specifiers for early-onset (before 21
years of age) or late-onset (after 21 years of age).
A child or adolescent with persistent depressive disorder may have had a
major depressive episode before developing persistent depressive disorder;
however, it is much more common for a child with persistent depressive
disorder for more than 1 year to develop a concurrent episode of major
depressive disorder. In this case, both depressive diagnoses apply (double
depression). Persistent depressive disorder in youth is known to have an
average age of onset that is several years earlier than the typical onset of
major depressive disorder. Occasionally, youth fulfill the criteria for
persistent depressive disorder, except that their episode does not last for a
whole year, or they experience remission from symptoms for more than 2
months. These mood presentations in youth may predict additional mood
disorder episodes in the future. Current knowledge suggests that the longer,
more recurrent, and less directly related to social stress these episodes are, the
higher the likelihood of future severe mood disorder. When minor depressive
episodes follow a significant stressful life event by less than 3 months, it is
more likely to be an adjustment disorder.
Bereavement


<<<PAGE 560>>>
Bereavement is a state of grief related to the death of a loved one, which
presents with an overlap of symptoms characteristic of a major depressive
episode. Typical depressive symptoms associated with bereavement include
feelings of sadness, insomnia, diminished appetite, and, in some cases,
weight loss. Grieving children may become withdrawn and appear sad and
avoid even their favorite activities.
In DSM-5, bereavement is not a mental disorder; however, uncomplicated
bereavement is a condition that may be a focus of clinical attention. Children
during a typical bereavement period may also meet the criteria for major
depressive disorder. Symptoms indicating major depressive disorder
exceeding typical bereavement include intense guilt related to issues beyond
those surrounding the death of the loved one, preoccupation with death other
than thoughts about being dead to be with the deceased person, morbid
preoccupation with worthlessness, marked psychomotor retardation,
prolonged severe functional impairment, and hallucinations other than
transient perceptions of the voice of the deceased person.
The duration of bereavement varies; in children, the duration may depend
partly on the support system in place. For example, a child may feel
devastated and abandoned if they have to leave their home after the death of
an only parent. Children who lose loved ones may feel a sense of guilt that
death may have occurred because they were “bad” or did not perform as
expected.
Ryan was a 12-year-old seventh grader in middle school who was
brought to the emergency room in handcuffs by police after walking into
oncoming traffic right after school. Ryan walked in front of a city bus;
the driver began honking at the boy who kept ambling into the traffic.
Two police stationed in their car across the street from the school heard
the bus honking and noticed Ryan and confronted him. The police were
about to issue the boy a citation for crossing against the red light;
however, when they inquired as to why he had crossed against the traffic
light, he informed them that he was trying to kill himself. The police
handcuffed Ryan, placed him in the police car without a struggle, and
brought him to the local hospital’s emergency room. Ryan’s mother was
contacted and met her son in the emergency room. Ryan was physically


<<<PAGE 561>>>
intact, without injury, and a team of child psychiatrists evaluated him.
When asked what had happened, Ryan became tearful. He said he walked
in front of the bus in the hope of being hit and killed. Ryan reported that
numerous peers had bullied him over the last 2 years because he is short
and overweight. Ryan reported that on this day, a girl in his class had
pushed him down and started hitting him and laughing at him. Ryan
reported that peer teased and assaulted him and called him stupid and fat.
Ryan has some friends who usually defend him, but on this day, his
friends were not close by, and he became desperate. Ryan disclosed,
however, that even before this day, he has been sad for the last 2 years
and thought about suicide recurrently over the last year.
Ryan was a relatively good student, earning good grades, especially in
math, although he was failing history. Upon a separate interview with
Ryan’s mother, she did not know of any of Ryan’s problems. She felt the
team was mistaken and that she should take Ryan home.
Ryan had previously seen a counselor in school a few times last year,
but the issues of depression or suicide did not come up. Ryan has an older
brother and a younger brother who are well adjusted. When interviewing
Ryan and his mother together, Ryan was able with some encouragement
to let his mother know how depressed, hopeless, and suicidal he felt, and
why. Ryan’s mother burst into tears, and Ryan tried to comfort his
mother.
Ryan was placed on a 72-hour hold and referred to a children’s
psychiatric inpatient unit for further evaluation and treatment. There the
team treated him with an SSRI antidepressant as well as psychoeducation
and family sessions. He and his family continued treatment after his
hospitalization.
Pathology and Laboratory Examination
No laboratory test is useful for diagnosis. If a child or adolescent also
complains of symptoms of hypothyroidism, that is, dry skin, coldness,
lethargy, for example, then a screening test for thyroid function may be
indicated.
Rating scales for depressive symptoms administered by us to the child and
parent may be helpful in the evaluation. The Children’s Depression Rating


<<<PAGE 562>>>
Scale-Revised (CDRS-R) is a 17-item instrument administered by the
clinician separately to the parent and child or adolescent. The clinician scores
a rating for each item using the information from both the parent and the
child. The scale assesses affective, somatic, cognitive, and psychomotor
symptoms. A cumulative score of 40 is a marker for moderate depression and
a score of 45 or higher for significant depression.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A substance-induced mood disorder may be challenging to differentiate from
other mood disorders until detoxification occurs. Anxiety symptoms and
disorders often coexist with depressive disorders. Of particular importance in
the differential diagnosis is the distinction between agitated depressive or
manic episodes and ADHD, in which the persistent excessive activity and
restlessness are confusing. Prepubertal children generally do not show classic
forms of agitated depression, such as hand-wringing and pacing. Instead, an
inability to sit still, irritability, and frequent temper tantrums are the most
common symptoms. Sometimes, the correct diagnosis becomes evident only
after remission of the depressive episode.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
The course and prognosis of major depression in youths depend on the
severity of illness. Also important is the rapidity of interventions, and the
degree of response to the interventions. In general, 90 percent of youth
recover from a first episode of moderate to severe major depressive disorder
within 1 to 2 years. The age of onset, episode severity, and the presence of
comorbid disorders also influence course and prognosis. In general, the
younger the age of onset, the higher the recurrence of multiple episodes, and
the presence of comorbid disorders predict a poorer prognosis. The mean
length of an untreated episode of major depression in children and
adolescents is about 8 to 12 months; the cumulative probability of recurrence
is 20 to 60 percent within 2 years and 70 percent by 5 years. The most
significant risk for relapse is in the 6 months to 1 year after discontinuing
treatment. Depressed children who live in families with high levels of chronic
conflict are more likely to have relapses. The relapse rate for childhood


<<<PAGE 563>>>
depression into adulthood is also high. In a community sample, 45 percent of
adolescents with a history of major depression developed another episode of
major depression in early adulthood.
Youth with major depression are at higher risk for the development of a
future bipolar disorder, compared to adults. Overall estimates of children with
an episode of major depression developing bipolar disorder are about 20 to
40 percent. Clinical characteristics of a depressive episode in youth
suggesting the highest risk of developing bipolar I disorder include
hallucinations and delusions, psychomotor retardation, and a family history
of bipolar illness. In a longitudinal study of prepubertal children with major
depression, 33 percent developed bipolar I disorder, whereas 48 percent went
on to develop bipolar II or bipolar disorder not otherwise specified by early
adulthood.
Depressive disorders are associated with short- and long-term peer
relationship difficulties and complications, compromised academic
achievement, and persistently low self-esteem. Persistent depressive disorder
has an even more protracted recovery than major depressive disorder; the
mean episode length is about 4 years. Early-onset persistent depressive
disorder is associated with significant risks of comorbidity with major
depressive disorder (70 percent), bipolar disorder (13 percent), and future
substance abuse (15 percent). The risk of suicide, which accounts for about
12 percent of adolescent mortalities, is significant among adolescents with
depressive disorders.

TREATMENT
The AACAP practice parameters, as well as a consensus of experts who
developed the Texas Children’s Medication Algorithm Project (TMAP),
made evidence-based recommendations for the treatment of children and
adolescents with depressive disorders. These include psychoeducation and
supportive interventions for youth with mild forms of depression. For youth
with moderate to severe depression or recurrent episodes of major depression
with significant impairment and with active suicidal thoughts or behaviors or
psychosis, the optimal intervention includes both pharmacotherapy and CBT.
CBT or interpersonal therapy (IPT) alone may be sufficient for moderate
depression, especially when continuing treatment for 6 months or longer.


<<<PAGE 564>>>
Psychiatric Hospitalization
We should assess for suicidal thoughts, behaviors, and a history of suicidal
behavior in every child or adolescent with major depression. Safety is the
most immediate consideration in assessing depression in youth, that is, a
determination as to whether immediate psychiatric hospitalization is
necessary. Depressed children and adolescents who express suicidal thoughts
or behaviors most often require some extended evaluation in the safety of the
psychiatric hospital to provide maximal protection from self-destructive
impulses and behaviors.
Evidence-Based Treatment Studies
The Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) divided 439
adolescents between 12 and 17 years of age into three treatment groups of 12
weeks, composed of either fluoxetine alone (10 to 40 mg/day), fluoxetine
with the same dose range in combination with CBT, or CBT alone. Based on
ratings of the Children’s Depression Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R),
combination treatment had significantly superior response rates compared
with either treatment alone. Based on CGI scores at 12 weeks, rates of much
or very much improved were 71 percent for the combined treatment group,
60.6 percent for the fluoxetine group, 43.2 percent for the CBT alone group,
and 34.4 percent for the placebo group. At 12 weeks, combination treatment
was the optimal strategy in the treatment of adolescent depression. By the end
of 9 months of treatment, however, response rates for each group had
converged, so that response for the combination group was 86 percent,
fluoxetine group response was about 81 percent, and CBT-alone group
response rate was 81 percent. The long-term effectiveness of treatments for
adolescent depression demonstrates that for moderately ill adolescents,
fluoxetine, CBT, or the combination is efficacious. However, the addition of
CBT to fluoxetine decreased persistent suicidal ideation and potential
treatment-related emergence of suicidal ideation.
A second large multicenter randomized placebo-controlled trial, Treatment
of SSRI-Resistant Depression in Adolescents (TORDIA), included
adolescents with major depression who had not responded to a 2-month trial
with an SSRI antidepressant. The investigators in this study randomly
assigned 334 adolescents between 12 and 18 years of age to a different SSRI


<<<PAGE 565>>>
agent (either citalopram, paroxetine, citalopram, or another antidepressant
class, venlafaxine) with or without concurrent CBT. The SSRI plus CBT
group and the venlafaxine plus CBT group had higher response rates of
improvement (54.8 percent) than the group on medications alone (40.5
percent). There were no differences found in the response rates between
antidepressant agents.
Psychosocial Interventions
CBT is an efficacious intervention for the treatment of moderately severe
depression in children and adolescents. CBT aims to challenge maladaptive
beliefs and enhance problem-solving abilities and social competence. A
review of controlled cognitive-behavioral studies in children and adolescents
revealed that, as with adults, both children and adolescents showed consistent
improvement with these methods. Other “active” treatments, including
relaxation techniques, were also shown to be helpful as an adjunctive
treatment for mild to moderate depression. Findings from one large
controlled study comparing cognitive-behavioral interventions with
nondirective supportive psychotherapy and systemic behavioral family
therapy showed that 70 percent of adolescents had some improvement with
each of the interventions; cognitive-behavioral intervention had the most
rapid effect. Another controlled study comparing a brief course of CBT with
relaxation therapy favored the cognitive-behavioral intervention. At a 3- to 6month follow-up, however, no significant differences existed between the
two treatment groups. This effect resulted from relapse in the cognitivebehavioral group, along with continued recovery in some patients in the
relaxation group. Factors that seem to interfere with treatment responsiveness
include the presence of comorbid anxiety disorder that probably was present
before the depressive episode. Longer-term CBT is efficacious in the
treatment of depression and has the advantage of mitigating suicidal ideation.
Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) focuses on improving depression
through a focus on ways in which depression interferes with interpersonal
relationships and overcoming these challenges. The four main areas of focus
with interpersonal psychotherapy include loss, interpersonal disputes, role
transition, and interpersonal deficits. A modification of interpersonal therapy
to more specifically address depression for adolescents (IPT-A) includes a


<<<PAGE 566>>>
focus on separation from parents, authority figures, peer pressures, and
dyadic relationships. IPT-A has been studied on an outpatient basis as well as
in a school-based clinic setting. A 12-week study of 48 adolescents with
major depression randomly assigned to IPT-A or clinical monitoring found
that the group receiving IPT-A showed decreased depressive symptoms,
increased social functioning, and improved problem solving compared to the
other group. In the school-based health clinic, depressed adolescents were
randomly assigned to IPT-A or treatment as usual for 16 weeks. Trained
clinic staff administered the treatment. At the end of 16 weeks, those
adolescents receiving IPT-A had more significant symptom reduction and
improved overall functioning, especially older and more severely depressed
adolescents seemed to benefit most significantly.
PCIT-ED for preschool depression, a modification of PCIT historically
used in the treatment of disruptive disorders for children, was piloted in an
RCT for 54 depressed preschoolers. Fifty-four depressed young children
from ages 3 to 7 years received either PCIT-ED or psychoeducation with
their caregivers. PCIT-ED was manualized and consisted of three modules
conducted over 14 sessions in 12 weeks. The core modules of PCIT—ChildDirected Interaction (CDI) and Parent-Directed Interaction (PDI)—were
utilized and limited to four sessions each. The focus of these modules is to
strengthen the parent–child relationship by coaching parents in positive play
techniques, giving effective directives to the child, and responding to
disruptive behavior in firm but not punitive ways. The novel portion of the
treatment targeting the preschool depression consisted of a 6-week Emotion
Development (ED) module, which focused on helping the parent to be a more
effective emotion guide and affect regulator for the child. As part of the ED
module, the parent learns to accurately recognize their emotions as well as
the child’s and serves to help regulate the child’s emotions. The team
developed a psychoeducation control condition, Developmental Education
and Parenting Intervention (DEPI), for parents using small group sessions.
The DEPI condition was designed to educate parents about child
development and emphasized emotional and social development without
individual coaching or practice with behavioral techniques as provided in the
PCIT-ED group. Primary outcome measures included parent’s report of the
child’s symptoms of depression using a structured instrument, the Preschool
Age Psychiatric Assessment (PAPA), and the investigators measured


<<<PAGE 567>>>
depression severity pretreatment and posttreatment using parent ratings on
the Preschool Reelings Checklist-Scale Version (PFC-S), a 20-item checklist.
Results revealed that both groups showed significant improvement, with
particular improvement in the PCIT-ED group concerning emotion
recognition, child executive functioning, and parenting stress. This pilot
study indicates that PCIT-ED is a promising novel intervention for preschool
depression that deserves further investigation.
Pharmacotherapy
Fluoxetine and escitalopram have FDA approval in the treatment of major
depression in adolescents. Three RCTs of fluoxetine in depressed children
and adolescents demonstrate its efficacy. The common side effects are similar
as for adults: headache, gastrointestinal symptoms, sedation, and insomnia.
Short-term randomized clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of
citalopram and sertraline compared with placebo in the treatment of major
depression in children and adolescents. Sertraline was efficacious in two
multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of 376 children and
adolescents. The doses of sertraline ranged from 50 to 200 mg a day or
placebo. Nearly 70 percent of the subjects had a greater than 40 percent
decrease in depression rating scale scores (compared with 56 percent in the
placebo group). The most common side effects are anorexia, vomiting,
diarrhea, and agitation.
Citalopram has been demonstrated in one RCT in the United States to be
efficacious in 174 children and adolescents treated with citalopram at doses
of 20 to 40 mg a day or placebo for 8 weeks. Significantly more of the group
on citalopram showed improvement compared with placebo on the
depression rating scale (CDRS-R). A significantly increased response rate
(response defined as less than 28 on CDRS-R) of 35 percent occurred in the
citalopram group, compared with 24 percent of the placebo group. Common
side effects that emerged included headache, nausea, insomnia, rhinitis,
abdominal pain, dizziness, fatigue, and flu-like symptoms.
RCTs to date that have not shown efficacy on primary outcome measures
include those using mirtazapine and tricyclic antidepressants. A metaanalysis of SSRI trials in depressed children and adolescents found the
efficacy of SSRIs compared to placebo with an average response rate of 60


<<<PAGE 568>>>
percent for the SSRI compared to 49 percent for placebo.
Starting doses of SSRIs for prepubertal children are lower than doses
recommended for adults, but adolescents usually use the same doses as
adults.
A potential side effect of SSRIs in depressed children is behavioral
activation or induction of hypomanic symptoms. We should discontinue the
medication in those cases to see if the symptoms resolve. Activation due to
SSRIs, however, does not necessarily predict a diagnosis of bipolar disorder.
Venlafaxine was effective in the TORDIA study; however, adverse effects,
including increased blood pressure, have made this agent a second-line
choice compared to the SSRIs.
Tricyclic antidepressants lack good data and have significant cardiac risks,
including arrhythmias, and we do not recommend them.
FDA Warning and Suicidality. In September 2004, the FDA received
information from their Psychopharmacologic Drug and Pediatric Advisory
Committee indicating, based on their review of reported suicidal thoughts and
behavior among depressed children and adolescents who participated in
randomized clinical trials with nine different antidepressants, an increased
risk of suicidality in those children who were on active antidepressant
medications. Although there were no suicides, the rates of suicidal thinking
and behaviors were 2 percent for patients on placebo, versus 4 percent among
patients on antidepressant medications. The FDA, following the
recommendation of their advisory committees, instituted a “black-box”
warning to the health professional label of all antidepressant medication
indicating the increased risk of suicidal thoughts and behaviors in children
and adolescents, and the need for close monitoring for these symptoms.
Several reviews since 2004, however, concluded that the data do not indicate
a significant increase in the risk of suicide or serious suicide attempts after
starting treatment with antidepressant drugs.
Duration of Treatment. Based on available longitudinal data and the
natural history of major depression in children and adolescents, current
recommendations include maintaining antidepressant treatment for 1 year in a
depressed child who has achieved a good response, and to then discontinue
the medication at a time of relatively low stress for a medication-free period.


<<<PAGE 569>>>
Pharmacologic Treatment Strategies for Resistant Depression.
Pharmacologic recommendations, per an expert consensus panel that
developed the TMAP, as well as the Treatment of SSRI-resistant Adolescents
with Depression Study (TORDIA), in the treatment of children or adolescents
who have not responded to treatment with an SSRI agent, is to change to
another SSRI medication. If a child is not responsive to the second SSRI
medication, then either a combination of antidepressants or augmentation
strategies may be reasonable choices as well as an antidepressant from
another class of medications.
Electroconvulsive Therapy
ECT is rarely used for adolescents, although published case reports indicate
its efficacy in adolescents with depression and mania. Currently, case reports
suggest that ECT may be a relatively safe and useful treatment for
adolescents who have persistent severe affective disorders, particularly with
psychotic features, catatonic symptoms, or persistent suicidality.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Depressive disorders increase in frequency with increasing age in the general
population. Mood disorders among preschool-age children are estimated to
occur in about 0.3 percent of community samples, and 0.9 percent in clinic
settings. The prevalence of major depression in school-age children is 2 to 3
percent. Depression in referred samples of school-age children occurs at the
same frequency in boys as in girls, with some surveys indicating a slightly
increased rate among boys. In adolescents, the prevalence rate of major
depression is from 4 to 8 percent and two to three times more likely in
females than males. By age 18 years, the cumulative incidence of major
depression is 20 percent. Children with a family history of major depression
in a first-degree relative are about three times more likely to develop the
disorder than in those without family histories of affective disorders. The
prevalence of persistent depressive disorder in children ranges from 0.6 to 4.6
percent and in adolescence increases to 1.6 to 8 percent. Children and
adolescents with persistent depressive disorder have a high likelihood of
developing major depressive disorder at some point after 1 year of persistent
depressive disorder. The rate of developing a major depression on top of


<<<PAGE 570>>>
persistent depressive disorder (double depression) within 6 months of
persistent depressive disorder is estimated to be about 9.9 percent.
Among psychiatrically hospitalized children and adolescents, the rates of
major depressive disorder are close to 20 percent for children and 40 percent
for adolescents.

ETIOLOGY
Considerable evidence indicates that major depression in youth is the same
fundamental disorder experienced by adults and that its neurobiology is likely
to be an interaction of genetic vulnerability and environmental stressors. The
etiology of the depressive disorders is discussed in Chapter 7.

SUICIDE
In the United States, suicide is the third leading cause of death among
adolescents, after accidental death and homicide. Throughout the world,
suicide rarely occurs in children who have not reached puberty. In the last 15
years, the rates of both completed suicide and suicidal ideation have
decreased among adolescents. This decrease appears to coincide with the
increase in SSRI medications prescribed to adolescents with mood and
behavioral disturbance.
Suicidal Ideation and Behavior
Suicidal ideation, gestures, and attempts are frequently, but not always,
associated with depressive disorders. Reports indicate that as many as half of
suicidal individuals express suicidal intentions to a friend or a relative within
24 hours before enacting suicidal behavior.
Suicidal ideation occurs in all age groups and with the highest frequency in
children and adolescents with severe mood disorders. More than 12,000
children and adolescents are hospitalized in the United States each year
because of suicidal threats or behavior, but completed suicide is rare in
children younger than 12 years of age. A young child is hardly capable of
designing and carrying out a realistic suicide plan. Cognitive immaturity
seems to play a protective role in preventing even children who wish they
were dead from committing suicide. Completed suicide occurs about five


<<<PAGE 571>>>
times more often in adolescent boys than in girls, although the rate of suicide
attempts is at least three times higher among adolescent girls than among
boys. Suicidal ideation is not a static phenomenon; it can wax and wane with
time. The decision to engage in suicidal behavior may be made impulsively
without much forethought, or the decision may be the culmination of
prolonged rumination.
The method of the suicide attempt influences the morbidity and completion
rates, independent of the severity of the intent to die at the time of the suicidal
behavior. The most common method of completed suicide in children and
adolescents is the use of firearms, which accounts for about two-thirds of all
suicides in boys and almost one-half of suicides in girls. The second most
common method of suicide in boys, occurring in about one-fourth of all
cases, is hanging; in girls, about one-fourth commit suicide through the
ingestion of toxic substances. Carbon monoxide poisoning is the next most
common method of suicide in boys, but it occurs in less than 10 percent;
suicide by hanging and carbon monoxide poisoning are equally frequent
among girls and account for about 10 percent each. Additional risk factors in
suicide include a family history of suicidal behavior, exposure to family
violence, impulsivity, substance abuse, and availability of lethal methods.
Gender differences in nonfatal suicidal behavior among ninth-grade
adolescents in a survey of students in 100 high schools found that 19.8
percent of female students had serious suicidal thoughts, and 10.8 percent of
females attempted suicide. In male students, 9.3 percent had a history of
suicidal thoughts, and 4.9 percent attempted suicide. In this study, female
students showed evidence of higher levels of mood and anxiety problems,
whereas males had a slightly higher level of disruptive behavior problems.
Female students reported higher levels of depression, anxiety, somatic
complaints, and increased levels of emotional and behavioral problems than
males. In young adolescents, even without meeting full criteria for psychiatric
disorders, females report more psychopathology along with a higher
likelihood of nonfatal suicidal behavior.
Diagnosis and Clinical Features
The characteristics of adolescents who attempt suicide and those who
complete suicide are similar, and up to 40 percent of suicidal persons have


<<<PAGE 572>>>
made a previous attempt. Direct questioning of children and adolescents
about suicidal thoughts is necessary because studies have consistently shown
that caregivers are frequently unaware of these ideas in their children.
Suicidal thoughts (i.e., children talking about wanting to harm themselves)
and suicidal threats (e.g., children stating that they want to jump in front of a
car) are more common than suicide completion.
Most older adolescents with suicidal behavior meet the criteria for one or
more psychiatric disorders, often including major depressive disorder, bipolar
disorder, and psychotic disorders. Youth with mood disorders in combination
with substance abuse and a history of aggressive behavior are at particularly
high risk for suicide. The most common precipitating factors in younger
adolescent suicide completers appear to be impending disciplinary actions,
impulsive behavioral histories, and access to loaded guns, particularly in the
home. Adolescents without mood disorders with histories of disruptive and
violent, aggressive, and impulsive behavior may be susceptible to suicide
during family or peer conflicts. High levels of hopelessness, poor problemsolving skills, and a history of aggressive behavior are risk factors for
suicide. A less common profile of an adolescent who completes suicide is one
of high achievement and perfectionistic character traits facing a perceived
failure, such an academically proficient adolescent humiliated by a poor
grade on an examination.
Findings from a World Health Organization mental health survey reveals
that a range of psychiatric disorders increases the risk of suicidal ideation
across the lifespan. Youth with psychiatric disorders characterized by severe
anxiety and poor impulse control are at higher risk to act on suicidal ideation.
In psychiatrically disturbed and vulnerable adolescents, suicide behavior may
represent impulsive responses to recent stressors. Typical precipitants of
suicidal behavior include conflicts and arguments with family members and
boyfriends or girlfriends. Alcohol and other substance use can further
predispose an already vulnerable adolescent to suicidal behavior. In other
cases, an adolescent attempts suicide in anticipation of punishment after
being caught by the police or other authority figures for a forbidden behavior.
About 40 percent of youth who complete suicide had previous psychiatric
treatment, and about 40 percent had made a previous suicide attempt. A child
who has lost a parent by any means before age 13 is at higher risk for mood
disorders and suicide. The precipitating factors include loss of face with


<<<PAGE 573>>>
peers, a broken romance, school difficulties, unemployment, bereavement,
separation, and rejection. There are reports of clusters of suicides that occur
among adolescents who know one another and go to the same school.
Suicidal behavior can precipitate other such attempts within a peer group
through identification—so-called copycat suicides. Some studies have found
a transient increase in adolescent suicides after television programs in which
the central theme was the suicide of a teenager.
The tendency of disturbed young persons to imitate highly publicized
suicides has been referred to as Werther syndrome, after the protagonist in
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe’s novel, The Sorrows of Young Werther. The
novel, in which the hero kills himself, was banned in some European
countries after its publication more than 200 years ago because of a rash of
suicides by young men who read it; some dressed like Werther before killing
themselves or left the book open at the passage describing his death. In
general, although imitation may play a role in the timing of suicide attempts
by vulnerable adolescents, the overall suicide rate does not seem to increase
when media exposure increases. In contrast, direct exposure to peer suicide
increases the risk of depression and PTSD rather than suicide.
Treatment
The prognostic significance of suicidal ideation and behaviors in adolescents
ranges from relatively low lethality to high risk for completion. One of the
challenges in addressing suicide is to identify children and adolescents with
suicidal ideation, and particularly to treat those who have untreated
psychiatric disorders, as the risk of completed suicide increases with age, as
does the onset of an untreated psychiatric disorder. We should always
evaluate adolescents who come to medical attention because of suicidal
attempts to determine whether hospitalization is necessary. Pediatric patients
who present to the emergency room with suicidal ideation benefit from an
intervention that occurs in the emergency room to ensure that the patient is
transitioned to outpatient care when hospitalization is not necessary. We
should hospitalize youths who fall into high-risk groups until the acute
suicidality is no longer present. Adolescents at higher risk include those who
have made previous suicide attempts, especially with a lethal method, males
older than 12 years of age with histories of aggressive behavior or substance


<<<PAGE 574>>>
abuse, use of a lethal method, and severe major depressive disorder with
social withdrawal, hopelessness, and persistent suicidal ideation.
Relatively few adolescents evaluated for suicidal behavior in a hospital
emergency room subsequently receive ongoing psychiatric treatment. Factors
that may increase the probability of psychiatric treatment include
psychoeducation for the family in the emergency room, diffusing acute
family conflict, and setting up an outpatient follow-up during the emergency
room visit. Emergency room discharge plans often include providing an
alternative if suicidal ideation reoccurs, and a telephone hotline number
provided to the adolescent and the family in case suicidal ideation reappears.
Scant data exist to evaluate the efficacy of various interventions in
reducing suicidal behavior among adolescents. CBT alone and in
combination with SSRIs decreased suicidal ideation in depressed adolescents
over time in the TADS, a large multisite study; however, these interventions
do not work immediately, so we should take safety precautions for high-risk
situations. Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), a long-term behavioral
intervention useful for individuals or groups of patients, can reduce suicidal
behavior in adults, but there are no significant studies in adolescents.
Components of DBT include mindfulness training to improve selfacceptance, assertiveness training, instruction on avoiding situations that may
trigger self-destructive behavior, and increasing the ability to tolerate
psychological distress. This approach warrants investigation among
adolescents.
Given the reduction in completed suicide among adolescents over the last
decade, during the same period in which SSRI treatment in the adolescent
population has markedly risen, SSRIs may have been instrumental in this
effect. Given the risk of the increased rate of suicidal thoughts and behaviors
among depressed children and adolescents (indicated in randomized clinical
trials with antidepressant medications and leading to the “black-box” warning
for all antidepressants for depressed youth), we must closely monitor youths
for increased suicidality while taking antidepressants.
Epidemiology
In a study of 9- to 16-year-olds in 3 months, passive suicidal thoughts were
approximately 1 percent, suicidal ideation with a plan was 0.3 percent, and


<<<PAGE 575>>>
suicide attempt was 0.25 percent. In adolescents 14 to 18 years, the current
rate of suicidal ideation was 2.7 percent, and the annual incidence was 4.3
percent. Among this population of adolescents, the lifetime prevalence of
suicide attempts was 7.1 percent, with a much higher rate of suicidal behavior
for girls than for boys: 10.1 percent compared to 3.8 percent. Completed
suicide rates in youth are much less common in children and younger teens
10 to 14 years, with a slighter lower rate of 0.95 per 100,000 for females
compared to 1.71 per 100,000 for males. In older adolescents 15 to 19 years
of age, completed suicide is considerably lower for females, 3.52 per 100,000
compared to males, 12.65 per 100,000 in the United States in 2004.
Etiology
Universal features in adolescents who resort to suicidal behaviors are the
inability to synthesize viable solutions to ongoing problems and the lack of
coping strategies to deal with immediate crises. Therefore, a narrow view of
the options available to deal with recurrent family discord, rejection, or
failure contributes to a decision to commit suicide.
Genetic Factors. Completed suicide and suicidal behavior are two to four
times more likely to occur in individuals with a first-degree family member
with similar behavior. Family suicide risk studies support a genetic
contribution to suicidal behavior. There is also a higher concordance for
suicide among monozygotic twins compared to dizygotic twins. Recent
studies have investigated the possible contributions of the short allele of the
serotonin transporter promoter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) to suicidal
behaviors, although, to date, the evidence has not been consistent. Current
studies are seeking to investigate correlations between genetic vulnerability
and environment and timing interactions as multiple variables that may
interact to increase the risk of suicidal behavior.
Biologic Factors. Investigators have found a relationship between altered
central serotonin with suicide as well as impulsive aggression. This
relationship is also true in adults. Studies document a reduction in the density
of serotonin transporter receptors in the prefrontal cortex and serotonin
receptors among individuals with suicidal behaviors. Postmortem studies in
adolescents who have completed suicide show the most significant alterations


<<<PAGE 576>>>
in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus, brain regions that are also
associated with emotion regulation and problem-solving. These studies have
found altered serotonin metabolites, alteration in 5-HT2A binding, and
decreased activity of protein kinase A and C. Decreased levels of the
serotonin metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) are found in the
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of depressed adults who attempted suicide by
violent methods. Meta-analyses suggest an association between the short Sallele of the serotonin transporter promoter gene and depression as well as
suicidal behavior, particularly when combined with adverse life events.
Psychosocial Factors. Although severe major depressive illness is the
most significant risk factor for suicide, increasing its risk by 20 percent,
many severely depressed individuals are not suicidal. A sense of
hopelessness, impulsivity, recurrent substance use, and a history of
aggressive behavior have been associated with an increased risk of suicide.
Exposure to violent and abusive homes results in a wide range of
psychopathological symptoms. Aggressive, self-destructive, and suicidal
behaviors seem to occur with the greatest frequency among youth who have
endured chronically stressful family lives. The most significant family risk
factor for suicidal behavior is maltreatment, including physical and sexual
abuse and neglect. The single largest association is between sexual abuse and
suicidal behavior. Large community studies have provided data suggesting
that youth at risk for suicidal behavior include those who feel disconnected,
isolated, or alienated from peers. Sexual orientation is a risk factor, with
increased rates of suicidal behavior of two to six times among youth who
identify themselves as gay, lesbian, or bisexual. Protective factors mitigating
the risk of suicidal behavior are youth who have a secure connection to
school and peers, even in the face of other risk factors.

2.10 Early-Onset Bipolar Disorder
Early-onset bipolar disorder has been recognized in children as a rare
disorder with greater continuity with its adult counterpart when it occurs in
adolescents than in prepubertal children. Over the last decade, there has been


<<<PAGE 577>>>
a significant increase in the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder made in youth
referred to psychiatric outpatient clinics and inpatient units. Questions have
arisen regarding the phenotype of bipolar disorder in youth, mainly because
of the continuous irritability and mood dysregulation and lack of discrete
mood episodes in most prepubertal children who have received the diagnosis.
The “atypical” bipolar symptoms among prepubertal children often include
extreme mood dysregulation, severe temper tantrums, intermittent aggressive
or explosive behavior, and high levels of distractibility and inattention. This
constellation of mood and behavior disturbance in the majority of prepubertal
children with a current diagnosis of bipolar disorder is nonepisodic, although
some fluctuation in mood may occur. The high frequency of the above
symptoms in combination with chronic irritability has led to the inclusion of
a new mood disorder in youth in DSM-5 called Disruptive Mood
Dysregulation Disorder, and we discuss that in the next section. Many
children with nonepisodic mood disorders often have past histories of severe
ADHD, making the diagnosis of bipolar disorder even more complicated.
Family studies of children with ADHD have not revealed an increased rate of
bipolar I disorder. Children with “atypical” bipolar disorders, however, are
frequently severely impaired, are challenging to manage in school and at
home, and often require psychiatric hospitalization. Longitudinal follow-up
studies are underway with groups of children diagnosed with subthreshold
bipolar disorders and nonepisodic mood disorders, to determine how many
will develop classic bipolar disorder. In one recent study of 140 children with
bipolar disorder not otherwise specified (i.e., the presence of distinct manic
symptoms but subthreshold for manic episodes), 45 percent developed
bipolar I or bipolar II illness over a follow-up period of 5 years. In another
study, investigators followed 84 children with “severe mood dysregulation”
who also had at least three manic symptoms plus distractibility for
approximately 2 years. The investigators found that only one child
experienced a hypomanic or mixed episode. Although childhood severe
mood dysregulation is common in community samples—one study reported a
lifetime prevalence of 3.3 percent in youth 9 to 19 years of age—its
relationship to future bipolar disorder remains questionable. A longitudinal
community-based study that followed children and adolescents with
nonepisodic irritability over 20 years found that these children were at higher
risk for depressive disorders and generalized anxiety disorder than bipolar


<<<PAGE 578>>>
disorders.
Among adults and older adolescents with bipolar disorder who present
with classic manic episodes, a major depressive episode typically precedes a
manic episode. A classic manic episode in an adolescent, similar to in a
young adult, may emerge as a distinct departure from a preexisting state often
characterized by grandiose and paranoid delusions and hallucinatory
phenomena. According to DSM-5, the criteria for a manic episode in children
or adults are the same. We discuss these in Chapter 6.
When mania appears in an adolescent, there is a high incidence of
psychotic features, including delusions and hallucinations, which most
typically involve grandiose notions about their power, worth, and
relationships. Persecutory delusions and flight of ideas are also common.
Overall, gross impairment of reality testing is common in adolescent manic
episodes. In adolescents with major depressive disorder destined for bipolar I
disorder, those at highest risk have family histories of bipolar I disorder and
exhibit acute, severe depressive episodes with psychosis, hypersomnia, and
psychomotor retardation.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Early-onset bipolar disorder often includes extreme irritability that is severe
and persistent and may include aggressive outbursts and violent behavior. In
between outbursts, children with the broad diagnosis may continue to be
angry or dysphoric. It is rare for a prepubertal child to exhibit grandiose
thoughts or euphoric mood; for the most part, children diagnosed with earlyonset bipolar disorder are intensely emotional with a fluctuating but
overriding negative mood. Current diagnostic criteria for bipolar disorders in
children and adolescents in DSM-5 are the same as those used in adults (see
Chapter 6, Tables 6-2 and 6-3). The clinical picture of early-onset bipolar
disorder, however, is complicated by the prevalence of comorbid psychiatric
disorders.
Pathology and Laboratory Examination
No specific laboratory indices are currently helpful in making the diagnosis
of bipolar disorders among children and adolescents.


<<<PAGE 579>>>
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The most critical clinical entities to distinguish from early-onset bipolar
disorder are also the disorders with which it is most frequently comorbid.
Included are ADHD, oppositional defiant disorder, conduct disorder, anxiety
disorders, and depressive disorders.
Although childhood ADHD tends to have its onset earlier than pediatric
mania, current evidence from family studies supports the presence of ADHD
and bipolar disorders as highly comorbid in children, and the concurrence is
not because of the overlapping symptoms that the two disorders share. In a
recent study of more than 300 children and adolescents who attended a
psychopharmacology clinic and received a diagnosis of ADHD, bipolar
disorder was also evident in almost one-third of those children with ADHD
who had combined–type and hyperactive-types. It was less frequent (i.e., in
less than 10 percent) in children with ADHD, inattentive-type.

COMORBIDITY
ADHD is the most common comorbid condition among youth with earlyonset bipolar disorder and occurs in up to 90 percent of prepubertal children
and up to 50 percent of adolescents diagnosed with bipolar disorder.
Comorbid ADHD creates a significant source of diagnostic confusion in
children with early-onset bipolar disorder since the two disorders share many
diagnostic criteria, including distractibility, hyperactivity, and talkativeness.
Even when removing the overlapping symptoms from the diagnostic count, a
significant percentage of children with bipolar disorder continued to meet the
full criteria for ADHD. This implies that both disorders, with their distinct
features, are present in many cases.
Children and adolescents with bipolar disorder have higher-than-expected
rates of panic and other anxiety disorders. In youth with the narrow
phenotype of bipolar disorders, up to 77 percent have an anxiety disorder.
The lifetime prevalence of panic disorder was 21 percent among subjects
with the broader phenotype of bipolar disorder compared with 0.8 percent in
those without mood disorders. Patients diagnosed with bipolar disorder who
have comorbid high levels of anxiety symptoms are reported as adults to have
higher risks of alcohol abuse and suicidal behavior. On the other hand,


<<<PAGE 580>>>
children who exhibit the broader phenotype of bipolar disorder are at higher
risk of going on to have anxiety disorders as well as depressive disorders.
Jeanie is a 13-year-old adopted teen who was hospitalized after assaulting
her adoptive mother, causing bruises on her arms and legs from Jeanie’s
kicks and punches. Jeanie had a long history of excessively severe
tantrums, which include assaultive and self-injurious behavior, since
before her parents adopted her when she was three. Jeanie had always
been a child who was irritable and explosive, with a short fuse, who
could blow up with minimal provocation, even when things were going
her way. Jeanie had become increasingly hard to manage at home,
refused to go to school, yelled and screamed for hours on a daily basis,
and often hit and kicked her adoptive parents by the time she was 10
years old. Jeannie was in residential treatment from age 11 to almost 13,
where the clinicians diagnosed her with bipolar disorder and started
lithium and citalopram. She was doing so well there that Jeanie’s
adoptive mother decided to take her home. After a few weeks at home,
however, Jeanie began to decompensate, having daily explosive tantrums,
becoming aggressive and out of control. On multiple occasions, she had
hurt herself and her adoptive mother and father. Upon arriving at the
hospital, Jeanie was calm; however, her adoptive mother refused to
consider taking her home until undergoing a full psychiatric evaluation
and treatment for unsafe behaviors. The child psychiatrist initially
evaluated Jeanie, after which she went to a pediatric inpatient unit to
await a psychiatric bed. The psychiatrist learned that Jeanie had been
born prematurely to a teenage mother and placed in multiple foster homes
until she was adopted. Jeanie was a small girl who appeared younger than
her stated age, although her demeanor was bossy and pedantic. Jeanie’s
biologic family history was unknown, and although she had at least one
stigmata of fetal alcohol syndrome, her IQ was in the average range, and
there was no other evidence to corroborate this possibility. On mental
status examination in the hospital, Jeanie reported that things were fine,
that she was not depressed, and that she did not get along with kids her
age but that she had a few friends. Jeanie admitted that she had a bad
temper and that she did not remember what she did after she was in a


<<<PAGE 581>>>
rage. Jeanie’s affect was odd, and she seemed to enjoy having the
psychiatrist as her audience. Jeanie denied suicidal ideation or past
attempts and denied having been a danger to herself or her adoptive
parents. Jeanie seemed annoyed when she was asked about the reasons
for her placement in a residential facility, and she became irritable when
questioned about the reasons for her current admission. The team then
transferred Jeanie to an adolescent psychiatric inpatient unit to start a trial
of an atypical antipsychotic. The team recommended that her psychiatrist
reconsider a more structured school program, either a day program or
residential facility. The diagnosis of bipolar disorder remained in
question, as she did not meet the narrow phenotype for this disorder.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
There are several pathways regarding the course and prognosis of children
diagnosed with early-onset bipolar disorder. Those who present with severe
mood dysregulation at an early age, without discrete mood cycles, are most
likely to develop anxiety and depressive disorders as they mature. Youths
who present in adolescence with a recognizable manic episode are most
likely to continue to meet the criteria for bipolar I disorder in adulthood. In
both cases, long-term impairment is considerable.
A longitudinal study of 263 child and adolescent inpatients and outpatients
with bipolar disorder followed for an average of 2 years found that
approximately 70 percent recovered from their index episode within that
period. Half of these patients had at least one recurrence of a mood disorder
during this time, more frequently a depressive episode than a mania. There
were no differences in the rates of recovery for children and adolescents
whose diagnosis was bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, or bipolar
disorder not otherwise specified. However, those whose diagnosis was
bipolar disorder not otherwise specified had a significantly longer duration of
illness before recovery, with less frequent recurrences once they recovered.
About 19 percent of patients changed polarity once per year or less, 61
percent shifted five or more times per year, about half cycled more than ten
times per year, and about one-third cycled more than 20 times per year.
Predictors of more rapid cycling included lower socioeconomic status (SES),


<<<PAGE 582>>>
presence of lifetime psychosis, and bipolar disorder not otherwise specified
diagnosis. Over the follow-up period, about 20 percent of subjects with
bipolar II disorder converted to bipolar I disorder, and 25 percent of the
bipolar disorder not otherwise specified subjects developed bipolar I disorder
or bipolar II disorder during the follow-up period.
Similar to the natural history of bipolar disorders in adults, children have a
wide range of symptom severity in manic and depressed episodes. The more
frequent diagnostic conversions from bipolar II disorder to bipolar I disorder
among children and adolescents, compared with adults, highlight the lack of
stability of the bipolar II disorder diagnosis in youth. This is also the case
concerning conversion from bipolar disorder not otherwise specified to other
bipolar disorders. When bipolar disorder occurs in young children, recovery
rates are lower. Also, there is a higher likelihood mixed states and rapid
cycling, and higher rates of polarity changes compared with those who
develop bipolar disorders in late adolescence or early adulthood.

TREATMENT
Treatment of early-onset bipolar disorder incorporates multimodal
interventions including pharmacotherapy, psychoeducation, psychosocial
intervention with the family and the child, and school interventions to
optimize a child’s school adjustment and achievement.
Pharmacotherapy
Two classes of medications—atypical antipsychotics and mood-stabilizing
agents—are the most well-studied agents that provide efficacy in the
treatment of early-onset bipolar disorders. Eight RCTs have shown the
efficacy of atypical antipsychotic agents in the treatment of bipolar disorder
in youth between the ages of 10 and 17 years. These studies compared an
atypical antipsychotic to placebo, or compared an atypical antipsychotic to a
mood stabilizer, or added an antipsychotic to a mood-stabilizing agent. The
atypical antipsychotics included olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone,
aripiprazole, and ziprasidone. All five of the atypical antipsychotic studies
demonstrated significant efficacy in the treatment of early-onset bipolar
manic or mixed states. A recent trial comparing quetiapine and valproate
found that both were efficacious, but the quetiapine was superior in the speed


<<<PAGE 583>>>
of its effect. In another trial comparing risperidone and sodium valproate
treatment for bipolar disorder in youth, risperidone had more rapid
improvement and a higher final reduction in manic symptoms compared to
sodium valproate.
Mood-stabilizing agents have been used in open trials and anecdotally with
early-onset bipolar illness with little evidence of efficacy at this time. In trials
using lithium or sodium valproate for the treatment of early-onset bipolar
disorder, responses were less robust compared to results with atypical
antipsychotics. Controlled trials have provided some evidence suggesting that
lithium is efficacious in the management of aggression behavior disorders.
Although lithium is approved for adolescent mania, more research is needed
to know if lithium is useful for more classic forms of mania in adolescents.
The Collaborative Lithium Trials (CoLT) established a set of protocols to
establish the safety and potential efficacy of lithium in youth, and to develop
studies to provide evidence-based dosing of lithium for youth. A group of
researchers studied the first-dose pharmacokinetics of lithium carbonate in
youth and found that clearance and volume correlate with total body weight
in youth, and particularly with fat-free mass. The difference in body size was
consistent with the pharmacokinetics of lithium metabolism in children and
adults. An open-label trial of lamotrigine in the treatment of bipolar
depression among youth provides possible support for its use in children and
adolescents.
Current evidence suggests a faster response and a more robust effect with
atypical antipsychotics compared to mood-stabilizing agents in the treatment
of early-onset bipolar disorder. However, given the severity and impairment
of bipolar disorder in youth, when there is only partial recovery, we should
consider adding another agent.
Psychosocial Treatment
Psychosocial treatment interventions for early-onset bipolar illness have
included a family-focused treatment. This treatment consists of several
sessions of psychoeducation, then sessions focusing on current stressors and a
mood management plan, and then several sessions of communication
enhancement training and problem-solving skills training. The use of this
type of intervention for youths diagnosed with bipolar disorder or at risk (by


<<<PAGE 584>>>
family history or subthreshold symptoms) is of value. Adjunctive familyfocused psychoeducational treatment modified for children and adolescents
reduces the relapse rate. Children and adolescents treated with moodstabilizing agents in addition to a psychosocial intervention showed
improvement in depressive symptoms, manic symptoms, and behavioral
disturbance over 1 year.
A year-long trial of a modified Family Focused Treatment-High Risk in
youth with bipolar disorder showed significant improvement in mood
disturbance, especially depressive mood and hypomania, and improved
psychosocial functioning. Family-focused treatment for high-risk youth is a
promising intervention that deserves further investigation as a longitudinal
follow-up to determine the course of youth at risk to develop bipolar disorder.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
The prevalence rates of bipolar disorder among youth vary depending on the
age group studied, and on whether the diagnostic criteria are applied
narrowly, restricting it to discrete mood episodes or more broadly, to include
nonepisodic mood and behavioral states. In younger children, bipolar
disorder is infrequent, with no cases of bipolar I disorder identified in
children between the ages of 9 and 13 years by the Great Smokey Mountain
Study. However, severe mood dysregulation, often a prominent feature in
prepubertal children receiving a diagnosis of bipolar disorder, was found in
3.3 percent of an epidemiologic sample. In adolescents, bipolar disorder is
more frequent, found to range from 0.06 to 0.1 percent of the general
population of 16-year-olds in studies using a narrow definition of bipolar I
disorder. The prevalence of subthreshold symptoms of bipolar illness was 5.7
percent in one study to at least 10 percent in another. Follow-up studies into
adulthood revealed that the subthreshold manic symptoms predicted high
levels of impairment with progression to depression and anxiety disorders,
not bipolar I or II disorders.
Community use of the diagnosis of bipolar disorder in youth has increased
markedly over the last 15 years in both outpatient and inpatient psychiatric
settings. One survey suggested there was a 40-fold increase in the diagnosis
of early-onset bipolar disorder at outpatient clinics from the 1990s to the
2000s. Furthermore, from 2000 through 2006, the rate of youth hospitalized


<<<PAGE 585>>>
with a primary diagnosis of bipolar disorder nearly doubled.

ETIOLOGY
Genetic Factors
High rates of bipolar disorder occur in the relatives of the narrow phenotype
of early-onset bipolar disorder compared to young adult-onset of bipolar
disorder. The high rates of comorbid ADHD among children with early-onset
bipolar disorder have led to questions regarding the co-transmission of these
disorders in family members. However, children with the broader phenotype
of bipolar disorder, that is, severe mood dysregulation without episodes of
mania, have not been found to have higher rates of bipolar disorder in family
members, which suggests that the narrow and broad phenotypes of bipolar
disorder may be distinct and separate entities. Nearly 25 percent of adolescent
offspring of families with probands with bipolar disorder experienced a mood
disorder by the age of 17 years old, compared to 4 percent of controls, with
approximately 8 percent representing bipolar I, bipolar II, or bipolar disorder
not otherwise specified. Most of the risk in the offspring, therefore, is for
unipolar major depressive disorder. Disruptive behavior disorders did not
increase, in a longitudinal study, in the offspring of families with a bipolar
proband, compared to controls. The combination of ADHD and bipolar
disorder is not found as frequently in relatives of children with ADHD alone
compared with first-degree relatives of children with the combination.
Although bipolar disorder appears to have a significant heritable
component, its mode of inheritance remains unknown. Several research
groups have concluded that early-onset bipolar disorder is a more severe form
of the illness, characterized by more mixed episodes, greater psychiatric
comorbidity, more lifetime psychotic symptoms, poorer response to
prophylactic lithium treatment, and a greater heritability. The European
collaborative study of early-onset bipolar disorder (France, Germany, Ireland,
Scotland, Switzerland, England, and Slovenia) carried out a genome-wide
linkage analysis of both the narrow and the broad phenotype of early-onset
bipolar disorder. This group concluded that a genetic factor located in the
2q14 region is either specifically involved in the etiology of early-onset
bipolar disorder, or that a gene in this region exerts influence as a modifier of


<<<PAGE 586>>>
other genes in the development of bipolar disorder in this age group. Other
linkage regions that were found by this collaborative did not pertain only to
the early-onset group of bipolar disorder, suggesting that there may be some
genetic factors common to early-onset and adult-onset bipolar disorder. This
conclusion is consistent with the increased incidence of adult-onset bipolar
disorder among siblings of early-onset disease. Further genome-wide studies
are needed to elucidate the genetic etiology of early-onset bipolar disorder.
Neurobiologic Factors
Converging data suggest that early-onset bipolar disorder is associated with
both structural and functional brain alterations in prefrontal cortical and
subcortical regions associated with the processing and regulation of
emotional stimuli. MRI studies suggest that altered development of white
matter and a decreased amygdalar volume are found more frequently in this
population than in the general population.
Functional MRI (fMRI) studies are essential in that they can identify
altered brain function in vulnerable populations such as youth with earlyonset bipolar disorder at baseline. They can also elucidate functional changes
toward normalization in brain functioning after various treatments, and
potentially identify pretreatment neural predictors of good response to
various treatments. An fMRI study of pediatric bipolar patients documented
pretreatment brain activity and posttreatment effects of a trial of risperidone
versus sodium valproate. This double-blind study included 24 unmedicated
manic patients with a mean age of 13 years, randomized to either risperidone
or sodium valproate treatment, and 14 healthy controls examined over 6
weeks. Before treatment, the patient group showed increased amygdala
activity compared to healthy controls, which was poorly controlled by the
higher ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) and the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC), which exert influence on the amygdala to control emotional
regulation and processing. Increased amygdala activity at baseline predicted
poorer treatment response to both risperidone and sodium valproate in the
patient group. Patients were given an affective color-matching word task
involving matching positive words (i.e., happiness, achievement, success),
negative words (i.e., disappointment, depression, or rejection), or neutral
words, with one of two colored circles displayed on a screen while


<<<PAGE 587>>>
administering the fMRI. Higher pretreatment right amygdala activity during a
word task with positive and negative words in the risperidone group and
higher pretreatment left amygdala activity with a positive word task in the
sodium valproate group, predicted a poor response on the Young Mania
Rating Scale. Increased amygdala activity in early-onset bipolar patients
might be a potential biomarker predicting resistance and poor treatment
response to both risperidone and sodium valproate.
Neuropsychological Studies
Impairments in verbal memory, processing speed, executive function,
working memory, and attention are common in early-onset bipolar disorder.
Data suggest that on tasks of working memory, processing speed, and
attention, children and adolescents with comorbid bipolar disorder and
ADHD demonstrate more pronounced impairments compared with those
without ADHD. Other studies found that children with bipolar disorder make
a higher number of emotion recognition errors compared with controls. The
children more frequently identified faces as “angry” when presented with
adult faces; however, these errors did not occur when they looked at
children’s faces. Impaired perception of facial expression also occurs in
studies of adults with bipolar disorder.

2.11 Disruptive Mood Dysregulation
Disorder
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, a new inclusion in the DSM-5,
describes severe, developmentally inappropriate, and recurrent temper
outbursts at least three times per week, along with a persistently irritable or
angry mood between temper outbursts. To meet diagnostic criteria, the
symptoms must be present for at least a year, and the onset of symptoms must
be present by the age of 10 years old. Clinicians usually diagnose these
children with bipolar disorder or a combination of oppositional defiant
disorder, ADHD, and intermittent explosive disorder. Recent longitudinal
data suggest, however, that these children do not typically develop classic


<<<PAGE 588>>>
bipolar disorder in late adolescence or early adulthood. Instead, studies
suggest that youth with chronic irritability and severe mood dysregulation are
at higher risk for future unipolar depressive disorders and anxiety disorders.
Some experts include hyperarousal as a symptom, but DSM-5 does not.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
The DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
require outbursts that are grossly out of proportion to the situation. These
temper outbursts present with verbal rages or physical aggression toward
people or property and are inappropriate for the child’s developmental level.
Temper outbursts occur, on average, three or more times per week, with
variations in mood between outbursts. Symptoms must exhibit before age 10
years, be present for at least 12 months, and be present within at least two
settings (i.e., home and school). We would not diagnose this in children
younger than 6 years or older than 18 years. In between temper outbursts, the
child’s mood is persistently irritable and angry, and this mood is observable
by others, such as parents, teachers, or peers. A diagnosis of bipolar disorder
would take precedence over this one, and the symptoms cannot occur only
during a major depressive episode. Table 2-27 compares the diagnostic
approaches.
Table 2-27
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic
name

Disruptive Mood
Dysregulation
Disorder

Unspecified Behavioral and
Emotional Disorders with
onset usually occurring in
childhood and adolescence

Duration

Outbursts occurring
≥3/wk
Occurs for ≥12 mo
No more than 3 mo
during that time


<<<PAGE 589>>>
when criteria not met
Onset between ages 6
and 10 yr
Symptoms

• Recurrent
inappropriate
outbursts
(verbal/physical)
• Developmentally
inappropriate
• Irritable/angry
most days
between outbursts
• Irritable/mad most
days

Required
All the above
number of
symptoms
Exclusions
(not result
of):

• Another mental
disorder
• Substance use
• Another neurologic
disorder
Cannot co-occur with:
• Oppositional
defiant disorder
• Intermittent
explosive disorder
• Bipolar disorder

Daniel, a 12-year-old seventh-grade boy, was brought to his pediatrician
by his mother. His rages and inappropriate tantrums were exasperating
her. Daniel was on the floor in the waiting room, pounding his hands on


<<<PAGE 590>>>
the floor, yelling at his mother, “Get me out of here!” and crying. His
mother had bruises on both legs from Dylan’s kicks, and she appeared
distressed. Daniel’s mother walked into the office, leaving Daniel on the
floor in the waiting room and burst into tears. “I cannot deal with him
anymore.” She recounted the problems that Daniel had been having for
the last 2 years: Severe recurrent tantrums four to five times/week. “He
tantrums like a 6-year-old, and even when he is not having a tantrum, he
is perpetually angry and irritable.” She reported that Daniel had lost all of
his friends due to his short fuse and frequent verbal and physical
outbursts. He was almost always irritable, even on his birthday. Daniel’s
mother wonders whether there is anything physically wrong with him,
but physical examination and routine blood tests reveal no abnormalities.
Daniel’s tantrums had lessened somewhat last summer during the 2month summer vacation; however, as soon as school resumed, he was
back to consistent irritability. After an interview with Daniel, his
pediatrician determined that he was not acutely suicidal; however, he
required urgent psychotherapeutic intervention. Daniel started cognitivebehavioral therapy with a clinical psychologist and also saw a child and
adolescent psychiatrist for possible medication. Daniel resisted
psychotherapy; however, after several sessions, Daniel’s parents felt
more hopeful than they had in a long time, and learned that Daniel’s
problems were not “all their fault.” Daniel agreed to begin a trial of
fluoxetine, titrated to 30 mg over several weeks, and after about a month,
it became clear that his irritability had diminished noticeably. Daniel still
had many problems with peers, and he still had one or two tantrums per
week; however, the tantrums were becoming less prolonged and less
intense. Daniel seemed genuinely happy when a classmate invited him to
a birthday party, and he was able to interact successfully with his peers
during the party without any conflicts. Daniel continues to benefit from
CBT, and he remains on fluoxetine 40 mg a day. Daniel is still a
“temperamental” boy, but he is doing well in school, has rekindled
several friendships, and can participate in family gatherings without a
major tantrum.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS


<<<PAGE 591>>>
Bipolar Disorder
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder closely resembles the broad
phenotype of bipolar disorder. Although not episodic, it has been theorized
by some clinicians and researchers that the chronic and persistent symptoms
of mood disturbance and irritability may be an early developmental
presentation of bipolar disorder. Disruptive mood dysregulation, however,
does not meet formal diagnostic criteria for mania in bipolar disorder,
because irritability in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is chronic and
nonepisodic.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is similar to oppositional defiant
disorder in that they both include irritability, temper outbursts, and anger.
Oppositional defiant disorder includes symptoms of annoyance and defiance,
which disruptive mood dysregulation disorder does not have. Disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder requires that irritable outbursts be present in at
least two settings, whereas oppositional defiant disorder requires that they be
present in only one setting.

COMORBIDITY
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder often co-occurs with other
psychiatric disorders. The most common comorbidities are ADHD (94
percent), oppositional defiant disorder (84 percent), anxiety disorders (47
percent), and major depressive disorder (20 percent). The relationship of
severe mood dysregulation and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder to
bipolar disorder has been a topic of clinical investigation. Some experts
consider youths with severe mood dysregulation and hyperarousal symptoms
to be part of the broad phenotype of pediatric bipolar disorder. However, the
term “severe mood dysregulation” was utilized by researchers for these youth
because it remains unclear whether these youth go on to meet the criteria for
a bipolar disorder. Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is not considered
episodic and may coexist with ADHD. Current evidence does not support its
continuity with an emerging bipolar disorder.


<<<PAGE 592>>>
COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is a chronic disorder. Longitudinal
studies thus far have shown that patients with disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder in childhood have a high risk of progressing to major depressive
disorder, dysthymic disorder, and anxiety disorders over time.

TREATMENT
The current treatment of disruptive mood dysregulation focuses on
symptomatic interventions because we do not understand its etiology. If
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is confirmed to resemble unipolar
depression and anxiety disorders in its pathophysiology, and it is often
comorbid with ADHD, then SSRIs and stimulants would likely be the
pharmacologic agents of first choice. However, if the pathophysiology of
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is like that of bipolar disorder, then
first-line treatments for youth would include atypical antipsychotic agents
and mood stabilizers. There are scant treatment studies of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder in the literature. One controlled trial of youths with
symptoms of severe mood dysregulation and ADHD symptoms who did not
respond to stimulants responded to sodium valproate combined with
behavioral psychotherapy compared to placebo and behavioral
psychotherapy. There are treatment studies underway of youth who exhibit
symptoms of severe mood dysregulation utilizing an SSRI plus a stimulant
compared to a stimulant and placebo.
Psychosocial interventions such as cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy are
likely to be an essential component of treatment for youth with disruptive
dysregulation disorder, and psychosocial interventions targeting children
diagnosed with bipolar disorder may be beneficial.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Most of the epidemiologic data applied to disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder come from children and adolescents with severe mood
dysregulation, which includes hyperarousal symptoms. Because disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder differs from severe mood dysregulation disorder
only in the absence of hyperarousal symptoms, the epidemiologic data from


<<<PAGE 593>>>
the severe mood dysregulation disorder studies is a useful proxy for
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Severe mood dysregulation has a
lifetime prevalence of 3 percent in children aged 9 to 19 years. Within that
percentage, males (78 percent) are more prevalent than females (22 percent).
The mean age of onset is 5 to 11 years of age.

2.12 Disruptive Behaviors of Childhood
Disruptive behaviors, especially oppositional patterns and aggressive
behaviors, are among the most frequent reasons for child and adolescent
psychiatric evaluation. Demonstration of impulsive and oppositional
behaviors are developmentally normative in young children; many youths
who continue to display excessive patterns in middle childhood will find
other forms of expression as they mature and will no longer demonstrate
these behaviors in adolescence or adulthood. The origin of stable patterns of
oppositional defiant behavior is widely accepted as a convergence of multiple
contributing factors, including biologic, temperamental, learned, and
psychological conditions. Risk factors for the development of aggressive
behavior in youth include childhood maltreatment such as physical or sexual
abuse, neglect, emotional abuse, and overly harsh and punitive parenting.

OPPOSITIONAL DEFIANT DISORDER
Oppositional defiant disorder describes enduring patterns of negativistic,
disobedient, and hostile behavior toward authority figures, as well as an
inability to take responsibility for mistakes, leading to placing blame on
others. Children with oppositional defiant disorder frequently argue with
adults and become easily annoyed by others, leading to a state of anger and
resentment. Children with oppositional defiant disorder may have difficulty
in the classroom and with peer relationships, but generally do not resort to
physical aggression or significantly destructive behavior.
In contrast, children with conduct disorder engage in severe, repeated acts
of aggression that can cause physical harm to themselves and others and
frequently violate the rights of others.
In oppositional defiant disorder, a child’s temper outbursts, active refusal


<<<PAGE 594>>>
to comply with rules, and annoying behaviors exceed expectations for these
behaviors for children of the same age. The disorder is an enduring pattern of
negativistic, hostile, and defiant behaviors in the absence of significant
violations of the rights of others.
Diagnosis and Clinical Features
Children with oppositional defiant disorder often argue with adults, lose their
temper, and are angry, resentful, and easily annoyed by others at a level and
frequency that is outside of the expected range for their age and
developmental level. Frequently, youth with oppositional defiant disorder
actively defy adults’ requests or rules and deliberately annoy other persons.
They tend to blame others for their own mistakes and misbehavior, more
often than is appropriate for their developmental age. Manifestations of the
disorder are almost invariably present in the home, but they may not be
present at school or with other adults or peers. In some cases, the child has
symptoms outside the home from the start; in others, it starts at home and
later moves beyond that. Typically, symptoms of the disorder are most
evident in interactions with adults or peers whom the child knows well. Thus,
a child with oppositional defiant disorder may not show signs of the disorder
when examined clinically. Although children with oppositional defiant
disorder may be aware that others disapprove of their behavior, they may still
justify it as a response to unfair or unreasonable circumstances. The disorder
appears to cause more distress to those around the child than to the child.
Table 2-28 compares the diagnostic approaches to oppositional defiant
disorder.
Table 2-28
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic name

Oppositional Defiant
Disorder

Oppositional
Defiant Disorder

Duration

≥6 mo
For age <5: occurs more


<<<PAGE 595>>>
days than not
For age ≥5: occurs at least
1/wk
Symptoms

• Losing temper
• Sensitive/easily
annoyed
• Angry/resentful
• Arguing with authority
figures
• Refusing request from
authorities or rules
• Deliberately annoys
others
• Blames others for
mistakes/behaviors
• Spiteful/Vindictiveness
(at least 2× in 6 mo)

Required number
of symptoms

≥4 symptoms

Psychosocial
consequences
of symptoms

Marked distress and/or
impairment

Exclusions (not
result of):

Substance use
Another mental illness

Severity specifiers Mild: symptoms in 1 setting
Moderate: symptoms in 2
settings
Severe: symptoms in ≥3
settings

Defined as a
conduct disorder
in younger
children
Predominant
symptoms:
• Disobedience
• Defiance
• Disruptive
behavior

No delinquent,
severely
aggressive or
dissocial
behaviors


<<<PAGE 596>>>
The DSM-5 has divided oppositional defiant disorder into three types:
angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant behavior, and vindictiveness. A
child may meet diagnostic criteria for oppositional defiant disorder with a 6month pattern of at least four symptoms from the three types above.
Angry/Irritable children with oppositional defiant disorder often lose their
tempers, are easily annoyed, and feel irritable much of the time.
Argumentative/Defiant children display a pattern of arguing with authority
figures and adults such as parents, teachers, and relatives. Children with this
type of oppositional defiant disorder actively refuse to comply with requests,
deliberately break the rules, and purposely annoy others. These children often
do not take responsibility for their actions, and often blame others for their
misbehavior. Children with the Vindictive type of oppositional defiant
disorder are spiteful and have shown vindictive or spiteful actions at least
twice in 6 months to meet the diagnostic criteria.
Chronic oppositional defiant disorder or irritability almost always
interferes with interpersonal relationships and school performance. Peers
often reject these children, and they may become isolated and lonely. Despite
adequate intelligence, they may do poorly or fail in school due to their lack of
cooperation, reduced participation, and inability to accept help. Secondary to
these difficulties are low self-esteem, poor frustration tolerance, depressed
mood, and temper outbursts. Adolescents who are ostracized may turn to
alcohol and illegal substances as a modality to fit in with peers. Chronically
irritable children often develop mood disorders in adolescence or adulthood.
Pathology and Laboratory Examination. No specific laboratory tests or
pathologic findings help diagnose oppositional defiant disorder. Because
some children with oppositional defiant disorder become physically
aggressive and violate the rights of others as they age, they may share some
characteristics with people with high levels of aggression, such as low CNS
serotonin.
Differential Diagnosis
Oppositional behaviors are both healthy and adaptive within an expected
range at specific developmental stages. We should distinguish periods of
normative negativism from oppositional defiant disorder. Developmentally


<<<PAGE 597>>>
appropriate oppositional behavior is neither considerably more frequent nor
more intense than that seen in other children of the same mental age.
According to the DSM-5, we should not diagnose oppositional defiant
disorder in the presence of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. (See
Section 2.11 for a further discussion of disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder.)
Oppositional defiant behavior occurring temporarily in reaction to a
stressor should be diagnosed as an adjustment disorder. When features of
oppositional defiant disorder appear during conduct disorder, schizophrenia,
or a mood disorder, we should not diagnose oppositional defiant disorder.
Oppositional and negativistic behaviors can also be present in ADHD,
cognitive disorders, and mental retardation. Whether we diagnose
oppositional defiant disorder along with ADHD depends on the severity,
pervasiveness, and duration of such behavior. Some young children who
receive a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder go on in several years to
meet the criteria for conduct disorder. Some investigators believe that the two
disorders may be developmental variants of each other, with conduct disorder
being the natural progression of oppositional defiant behavior when a child
matures. Most children with oppositional defiant disorder, however, do not
later meet the criteria for conduct disorder, and up to one-fourth of children
with oppositional defiant disorder may not meet the diagnosis several years
later.
The subtype of oppositional defiant disorder that tends to progress to
conduct disorder is one in which aggression is prominent, for example, the
Angry/Irritable type and the Vindictive type. Many children who have
ADHD and oppositional defiant disorder develop conduct disorder before the
age of 12 years. Many children who develop conduct disorder have a history
of oppositional defiant disorder. Overall, the current consensus is that two
subtypes of oppositional defiant disorder may exist. One type, which is likely
to progress to conduct disorder, includes some symptoms of conduct disorder
(e.g., fighting, bullying). The other type, which is characterized by less
aggression and fewer antisocial traits, does not progress to conduct disorder.
However, in either case, when both oppositional defiant disorder and conduct
disorder are present, according to DSM-5, they may be diagnosed
concurrently.


<<<PAGE 598>>>
Jackson, age 8 years, was brought to the clinic for evaluation of
irritability, negativity, and defiant behavior by his mother. She
complained that he had frequent, prolonged tantrums, triggered by not
“getting his way.” Jackson’s mother described the tantrums as consisting
of shouting, cursing, crying, slamming doors, and sometimes throwing
books or objects on the floor. Jackson had been having troubles in school
as well, and his teacher had reported to the family that he seemed to have
a habit of provoking other students as well as the teacher by making
noises, rocking in his seat, and whistling in class. Recently, at home,
Jackson was kicking his foot against his mother’s chair, and she asked
him to stop. He looked at her and continued to kick her chair until she
became angry and sent him to his room. He then started yelling and stated
that he wasn’t doing anything and that his mother was just picking on
him. Jackson’s mother reported that she has given up on asking him to
help with chores because it inevitably results in an argument. Jackson
appeared sullen and irritable during the interview. He insisted that his
problems are all his mother’s fault, and she is always nagging him
unfairly. During the interview with his mother, Jackson interrupted her
several times to say that she was lying, and contradicted her story.
Despite Jackson’s behavioral problem, he has been able to succeed
academically and scores highly on standardized tests. His mother reports
that Jackson used to have some friends in kindergarten, but as he aged, he
has lost almost all of his friends because he has difficulty sharing his
things and tends to be bossy. Jackson’s mother reports that ever since his
sister was born when he was 2 years old, he has been aggressive and
rivalrous toward her. Jackson’s parents separated and divorced when he
was 3. He has had no contact with his father since then. Jackson’s mother
was depressed for a year after the divorce until she sought treatment. She
has always felt guilty that his father is not in his life, and Jackson blames
her for not having his father around. She believes his behaviors have
become worse since she recently started dating again.
Course and Prognosis
The course of oppositional defiant disorder depends on the severity of the


<<<PAGE 599>>>
symptoms and the ability of the child to develop more adaptive responses to
authority. The stability of oppositional defiant disorder varies over time, with
approximately 25 percent of children with the disorder no longer meeting
diagnostic criteria. Persistence of oppositional defiant symptoms poses an
increased risk of additional disorders, such as mood disorders, conduct
disorder, and substance use disorders. Positive outcomes are more likely for
intact families who can modify their expression of demands and give less
attention to the child’s argumentative behaviors.
An association exists between oppositional defiant disorder and ADHD, as
well as with mood disorders. In children who have a long history of
aggression and oppositional defiant disorder, there is a higher risk of the
development of conduct disorder and later substance use disorders. Parental
psychopathology, such as antisocial personality disorder and substance abuse,
appears to be more common in families with children who have oppositional
defiant disorder than in the general population, which creates additional risks
for chaotic and troubled home environments. The prognosis for oppositional
defiant disorder in a child depends somewhat on family functioning and the
development of comorbid psychopathology.
Treatment
The primary treatment of oppositional defiant disorder is family intervention
using both direct training of the parents in child management skills and
careful assessment of family interactions. The goals of this intervention are to
reinforce more prosocial behaviors and to diminish undesired behaviors at the
same time. Cognitive-behavioral therapists emphasize teaching parents how
to alter their behavior to discourage the child’s oppositional behavior by
diminishing attention to it, and Parent Child Interaction therapy focuses on
selectively reinforcing and praising appropriate behavior and ignoring or not
reinforcing undesired behavior.
Children with oppositional defiant behavior may also benefit from
individual psychotherapy in which they role-play and “practice” more
adaptive responses. In the therapeutic relationship, the child can learn new
strategies to develop a sense of mastery and success in social situations with
peers and families. In the safety of a more “neutral” relationship, children
may discover that they are capable of less provocative behavior. Often, we


<<<PAGE 600>>>
must help restore the child’s self-esteem must before they can make more
positive responses to external control. Parent–child conflict strongly predicts
conduct problems; patterns of harsh physical and verbal punishment,
particularly evoke the emergence of aggression in children. Replacing harsh,
punitive parenting and increasing positive parent–child interactions may
positively influence the course of oppositional and defiant behaviors.
Epidemiology
Oppositional and negativistic behavior, in moderation, is developmentally
normal in early childhood and adolescence. Epidemiologic studies of
negativistic traits in nonclinical populations found such behavior in 16 to 22
percent of school-age children. Although oppositional defiant disorder can
begin as early as 3 years of age, it typically is noted by 8 years of age and
usually not later than early adolescence. Oppositional defiant disorder occurs
at rates ranging from 2 to 16 percent with increased rates reported in boys
before puberty, and an equal sex ratio reported after puberty. The prevalence
of oppositional defiant behavior in males and females diminishes in youth
older than 12 years of age.
Etiology
The most dramatic example of typical oppositional behavior peaks between
18 and 24 months, the “terrible twos,” when toddlers are dramatically
expressing their growing autonomy. Pathology begins when this
developmental phase persists abnormally, authority figures overreact, or
oppositional behavior recurs considerably more frequently than in most
children of the same mental age. Among the criteria included in oppositional
defiant disorder, irritability appears to be the one most predictive of later
psychiatric disorders, whereas the other elements may be considered
components of temperament.
Children exhibit a range of temperamental predispositions to strong will,
stable preferences, or high assertiveness. Parents who model more extreme
ways of expressing and enforcing their own will may contribute to the
development of chronic struggles with their children, which the children then
reenact with other authority figures. What begins for an infant as an effort to
establish self-determination may become transformed into an exaggerated


<<<PAGE 601>>>
behavioral pattern. In late childhood, environmental trauma, illness, or
chronic incapacity, such as mental retardation, can trigger oppositionality as a
defense against helplessness, anxiety, and loss of self-esteem. Another
normative oppositional stage occurs in adolescence as an expression of the
need to separate from the parents and to establish an autonomous identity.
Classic psychoanalytic theory implicates unresolved conflicts as fueling
defiant behaviors targeting authority figures. Behaviorists have observed that
in children, oppositionality may be a reinforced, learned behavior through
which a child exerts control over authority figures; for example, if having a
temper tantrum when making a request of the child coerces the parents to
withdraw their request, then tantrum behavior becomes strongly reinforced.
Also, increased parental attention during a tantrum can reinforce the
behavior.

CONDUCT DISORDER
Aggressive patterns of behavior are among the most frequent reasons
psychiatrists see children and adolescents. Although the demonstration of
impulsive behaviors is developmentally normative in children, many youths
who continue to display excessive patterns of aggression in middle childhood
generally require intervention. Children who develop enduring patterns of
aggressive behaviors that begin in early childhood and violate the
fundamental rights of peers and family members, however, may be destined
for an entrenched pattern of conduct disordered behaviors over time.
Controversy remains as to whether a set of “voluntary” behaviors can
constitute a valid psychiatric disorder or whether it is more accurate to see
them as maladaptive responses to adverse events, harsh or punitive parenting,
or a threatening environment. Longitudinal studies have demonstrated that,
for some youth, early patterns of disruptive behavior may become a lifelong
pervasive repertoire culminating in adult antisocial personality disorder. The
etiology of enduring patterns of aggressive behavior is widely accepted as a
convergence of multiple contributing factors, including biologic,
temperamental, learned, and psychological conditions. Risk factors for the
development of aggressive behavior in youth include childhood maltreatment
such as physical or sexual abuse, neglect, emotional abuse, and overly harsh
and punitive parenting. Chronic exposure to violence in the media, including


<<<PAGE 602>>>
television, video games, and music videos, may promote lower levels of
empathy in children, which may add a risk factor for the development of
aggressive behavior.
Conduct disorder is an enduring set of behaviors in a child or adolescent
that evolves, usually characterized by aggression and violation of the rights
of others. Youth with conduct disorder often demonstrate behaviors in the
following four categories: physical aggression or threats of harm to people,
destruction of their property or that of others, theft or acts of deceit, and
frequent violation of age-appropriate rules. Conduct disorder is associated
with many other psychiatric disorders, including ADHD, depression, and
learning disorders. It is also associated with certain psychosocial factors,
including childhood maltreatment, harsh or punitive parenting, family
discord, lack of appropriate parental supervision, lack of social competence,
and low socioeconomic level. The DSM-5 criteria require three persistent
specific behaviors of 15 conduct disorder symptoms listed, over the past 12
months, with at least one of them present in the past 6 months. Conduct
disorder symptoms include bullying, threatening, or intimidating others, and
staying out at night despite parental prohibition. DSM-5 also specifies that
when truancy from school is a symptom, it begins before 13 years of age. The
disorder may be diagnosed in a person older than 18 years only if the person
does not meet the criteria for antisocial personality disorder.
DSM-5 includes specifiers denoting the severity of the disorder, including
“mild” in which there are few conduct problems above those needed to make
the diagnosis and behaviors cause only minor harm to others. In “moderate”
cases, symptoms exceed the minimum; however, there is less confrontation
that may cause harm to individuals than in “severe” cases. According to
DSM-5, the “severe” level shows many conduct problems over the minimal
diagnostic criteria or conduct problems that cause considerable harm to
others. DSM-5 has also added the following specifier: “With limited
prosocial emotions.” For this, the individual must show a persistent
interpersonal and emotional pattern that can be characterized by at least two
of the following: (1) Lack of remorse or guilt, (2) callous lack of empathy,
(3) unconcerned about performance, (4) shallow or deficient affect.
Individuals with conduct disorder who qualify for this specifier are more
likely to have a childhood-onset type and meet the criteria for a “severe”
disorder. Children with conduct disorder engage in severe, repeated acts of


<<<PAGE 603>>>
aggression that can cause physical harm to themselves and others and
frequently violate the rights of others. Children with conduct disorder usually
have behaviors characterized by aggression to persons or animals, destruction
of property, deceitfulness or theft, and multiple violations of rules, such as
truancy from school. These behavioral patterns cause distinct difficulties in
school life as well as in peer relationships. Conduct disorder has three
subtypes based on the age of onset of the disorder. Childhood-onset subtype,
in which at least one symptom has emerged repeatedly before age 10 years;
adolescent-onset type, in which no characteristic persistent symptoms occur
until after age 10 years; and unspecified-onset, in which age of onset is
unknown. Although some young children show persistent patterns of
behavior consistent with violating the rights of others or destroying property,
the diagnosis of conduct disorder in children appears to increase with age.
Epidemiologic surveys indicate that geographic locations representing a
broad range of different cultures are not associated with significant variability
in prevalence rates of either oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder.
A longitudinal study of population density and antisocial behaviors in youth
found no relationship in children 4 to 13 years of age between conduct
problems and density of the living area. However, higher rates of conduct
problems were self-reported by youths 10 to 17 years who lived in higherdensity communities.
Table 2-29
Conduct Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic
name

Conduct Disorder

Conduct Disorder

Duration

≥1 criteria for ≥6 mo
Other symptoms occur over
≥12 mo

≥6 mo

Symptoms

• Bullying others
• Initiating physical fights
• Using weapon to inflict

Repeated and pervasive
pattern of antisocial
behavior


<<<PAGE 604>>>
serious harm
• Aggression
• Physical cruelty to
• Defiance
others
May be
• Physical cruelty to
• Angry
animals
• Cruel
• Confronting and robbing
• Bullying
someone
• Destructive
• Forcing sex
• Lying
• Fire setting
• Truant/running away
• Property damage
from home
• Breaking into properties
• Lying for personal gain
• Stealing valuable items
• Staying out late against
parent’s will < age 13
• Running away from
home ≥2 times (or once
with prolonged
absence)
• Frequent truancy <age
13
Required
≥3
number of
symptoms
Exclusions
(not result
of):
Symptom
specifiers

Age appropriate
behavior
With limited prosocial
Conduct disorder
emotions: demonstrating
confined to the family
at least two of the
context (within nuclear
following over 12 mo in
family)
multiple contexts:
Unsocialized conduct
• Lack of remorse or guilt
disorder (predominant


<<<PAGE 605>>>
• Callous-–lack of
empathy
• Unconcerned about
performance
• Shallow or deficient
affect

Course
specifiers

Childhood onset type: <
age 10
Adolescent onset type: ≥
age 10
Unspecified onset

Severity
specifiers

Mild: minimal symptoms,
minor harm/consequences
Moderate: intermediate
symptoms and
consequences
Severe: many symptoms,
considerable harm caused

aggression, often
toward other children)
Socialized conduct
disorder (despite
aggression, there is
good integration into
their peer group)

Diagnosis and Clinical Features
Conduct disorder does not develop overnight. Instead, many symptoms
evolve until a consistent pattern develops that involves violating the rights of
others. Very young children are unlikely to meet the criteria for the disorder
because they are not developmentally able to exhibit the symptoms typical of
older children with conduct disorder. A 3-year-old does not break into
someone’s home, steal with confrontation, force someone into sexual
activity, or deliberately use a weapon that can cause serious harm. School-age
children, however, can become bullies, initiate physical fights, destroy
property, or set fires. Table 2-29 compares the diagnostic approaches to
conduct disorder.
The average age of onset of conduct disorder is younger in boys than in
girls. Boys most commonly meet the diagnostic criteria by 10 to 12 years of


<<<PAGE 606>>>
age, whereas girls met them closer to 14 to 16 years of age.
Children who meet the criteria for conduct disorder express their overt
aggressive behavior in various forms. Aggressive antisocial behavior can take
the form of bullying, physical aggression, and cruel behavior toward peers.
Children may be hostile, verbally abusive, impudent, defiant, and negativistic
toward adults. Persistent lying, frequent truancy, and vandalism are common.
In severe cases, destructiveness, stealing, and physical violence often occur.
Some adolescents make little effort to conceal their antisocial behavior.
Sexual behavior and regular use of tobacco, liquor, or illicit psychoactive
substances begin unusually early for such children and adolescents. Suicidal
thoughts, gestures, and acts are frequent in children and adolescents with
conduct disorder who are in conflict with peers, family members, or the law
and are unable to problem-solve their difficulties.
Some children with aggressive behavioral patterns have impaired social
attachments, as evidenced by their difficulties with peer relationships. Some
may befriend a much older or younger person or have superficial
relationships with other antisocial youngsters. Many children with conduct
problems have poor self-esteem, although they may project an image of
toughness. They may lack the skills to communicate in socially acceptable
ways and appear to have little regard for the feelings, wishes, and welfare of
others. Children and adolescents with conduct disorders often feel guilt or
remorse for some of their behaviors, but try to blame others to avoid
punishment.
Many children and adolescents with conduct disorder suffer from the
deprivation of having few of their dependency needs met and may have had
either overly harsh parenting or a lack of appropriate supervision. The
deficient socialization of many children and adolescents with conduct
disorder can be expressed in physical violation of others and, for some, in
sexual violation of others. Severe punishments for behavior in children with
conduct disorder almost invariably increase their maladaptive expression of
rage and frustration rather than ameliorating the problem.
In evaluation interviews, children with aggressive conduct disorders are
typically uncooperative, hostile, and provocative. Some have a superficial
charm and compliance until they discuss their problem behaviors. Then, they
often deny any problems. If the interviewer persists, the child may attempt to
justify misbehavior or become suspicious and angry about the source of the


<<<PAGE 607>>>
examiner’s information and perhaps bolt from the room. Most often, the child
becomes angry with the examiner and expresses resentment of the
examination with open belligerence or sullen withdrawal. Their hostility is
not limited to adult authority figures, but they also direct it to their peers and
younger children. They often bully those who are smaller and weaker. By
boasting, lying, and expressing little interest in a listener’s responses, such
children reveal their lack of trust in adults to understand their position.
Evaluation of the family situation often reveals severe marital disharmony,
which initially may center on disagreements about the management of the
child. Because of a tendency toward family instability, parent surrogates are
often in the picture. Children with conduct disorder are more likely to be
unplanned or unwanted babies. The parents of children with conduct
disorder, especially the father, have higher rates of antisocial personality
disorder or alcohol use disorder. Aggressive children and their families show
a stereotyped pattern of impulsive and unpredictable verbal and physical
hostility. A child’s aggressive behavior rarely seems directed toward any
definable goal and offers little pleasure, success, or even sustained
advantages with peers or authority figures.
In other cases, conduct disorder includes repeated truancy, vandalism, and
physical severe aggression or assault against others by a gang, such as
mugging, gang fighting, and beating. Usually, children who become part of a
gang have the skills for age-appropriate friendships. They are likely to show
concern for the welfare of their friends or their gang members and are
unlikely to blame them or inform on them. In most cases, gang members have
a history of adequate or even excessive conformity during early childhood
that ended when the youngster became a member of the delinquent peer
group, usually in preadolescence or during adolescence. Also present in
history is some evidence of early problems, such as marginal or poor school
performance, mild behavior problems, anxiety, and depressive symptoms.
Some family social or psychological pathology is usually evident. Patterns of
paternal discipline are rarely ideal and can vary from harshness and excessive
strictness to inconsistency or relative absence of supervision and control. The
mother has often protected the child from the consequences of early mild
misbehavior but does not seem to encourage delinquency actively.
Delinquency, also called juvenile delinquency, is most often associated with
conduct disorder but can also result from other psychological or neurologic


<<<PAGE 608>>>
disorders.
Pathology and Laboratory Examination. No specific laboratory test or
neurologic pathology helps make the diagnosis of conduct disorder. Some
evidence indicates that amounts of certain neurotransmitters, such as
serotonin in the CNS, are low in some persons with a history of violent or
aggressive behavior toward others or themselves. Whether this association is
related to the cause or is the effect of violence or is unrelated to the violence
is not clear.
Differential Diagnosis
Disturbances of conduct, including impulsivity and aggression, may occur in
many childhood psychiatric disorders, ranging from ADHD to oppositional
defiant disorder, to disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, to major
depression, to bipolar disorder, specific learning disorders, and psychotic
disorders. Therefore, clinicians must obtain a comprehensive history of the
chronology of the symptoms to determine whether the conduct disturbance is
a transient or an enduring pattern. Isolated acts of aggressive behavior do not
justify a diagnosis of conduct disorder; an entrenched pattern must be
present. The relationship of conduct disorder to oppositional defiant disorder
is still under debate. Typically, we think of oppositional defiant disorder as a
mild precursor of conduct disorder, without the violation of rights, likely to
be diagnosed in younger children who may be at risk for conduct disorder.
Children who progress from oppositional defiant disorder to conduct disorder
over time maintain their oppositional characteristics, and some evidence
indicates that the two disorders are independent. Currently, in the DSM-5,
oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder are considered distinct, but
they can coexist. Many children with oppositional defiant disorder do not
develop conduct disorder, and conduct disorder emerging in adolescence is
not necessarily preceded by oppositional defiant disorder. The main
distinguishing clinical feature between these two disorders is that in conduct
disorder, the youths violate the fundamental rights of others, whereas, in
oppositional defiant disorder, hostility and negativism fall short of seriously
violating the rights of others.
Mood disorders are often present in children who exhibit irritability and


<<<PAGE 609>>>
aggressive behavior. We should rule out both major depressive disorder and
bipolar disorder, but the full syndrome of conduct disorder can occur during
the onset of a mood disorder. Substantial comorbidity exists between conduct
disorder and depressive disorders. A recent report concludes that the high
correlation between the two disorders arises from shared risk factors for both
disorders rather than a causal relation. Thus, a series of factors, including
family conflict, adverse life events, an early history of conduct disturbance,
level of parental involvement, and affiliation with delinquent peers,
contribute to the development of affective disorders and conduct disorder.
This comorbidity is not the case with oppositional defiant disorder, which we
cannot diagnose if it occurs exclusively during a mood disorder.
ADHD and learning disorders are commonly associated with conduct
disorder. Usually, the symptoms of these disorders predate the diagnosis of
conduct disorder. Substance use disorders are also more common in
adolescents with conduct disorder than in the general population. Evidence
indicates an association between fighting behaviors as a child and substance
use as an adolescent. Once there is a pattern of drug use, this pattern may
interfere with the development of positive mediators, such as social skills and
problem-solving, which could enhance the remission of the conduct disorder.
Thus, once substance abuse develops, it may promote the continuation of the
conduct disorder. OCD also frequently seems to coexist with disruptive
behavior disorders. All the disorders described here should be noted when
they co-occur. Children with ADHD often exhibit impulsive and aggressive
behaviors that may not meet the full criteria for conduct disorder.
Damien, age 12 years, was referred for psychiatric evaluation after being
picked up by police for truancy and running away from home. Damien
explained that he just wanted to get out of his house and see his friends.
He does not like to be at home because his mother tries to tell him what
to do. Damien’s mother says that he left and stayed out overnight
multiple times in the past year, but that he usually returns the next
morning. She complains that he is always in trouble. He has shoplifted on
several occasions that she knows of, the first time at age 8 years. She
suspects that he also steals from neighbors or school. The police have
been involved on many occasions, including for truancy, staying out all


<<<PAGE 610>>>
night, stealing from a neighborhood store, and smoking marijuana.
Damien has a quick temper, and his mother knows he was involved in
several fights over the past year in the neighborhood. Damien is
particularly cruel to his younger brother, continually taunting and teasing
him.
Damien’s mother stated that he continually lies, sometimes for no
apparent reason. When he was 6 years of age, he was fascinated with fire
and set several small fires at home, fortunately with no serious injury or
damage. Damien’s mother was tearful when she disclosed that Damien is
just like his no-good father and that she wished she never had him.
Damien initially refused to answer questions and turned away scowling,
but gradually began to talk. Damien presented a tough image with an
indifferent attitude toward the interviewer. Damien denied any abuse at
home, saying that he ran off because he was bored. However, upon
further questioning, Damien admitted that his mother’s previous
boyfriend, who was in the home when Damien was between 6 and 8
years of age, used to hit him with a belt when he got out of line. Damien
justified his behaviors as just having fun. He said others provoked the
fights. Damien also denied using weapons, although he bragged about
breaking the nose of another youth.
Damien’s school records indicate that he required an Individualized
Educational Plan (IEP) when he was in the second grade and was
evaluated for symptoms of ADHD when he was in first grade. His
psychiatrist prescribed methylphenidate; however, the family did not
continue with treatment, and he is currently on no medication. Damien is
currently in sixth-grade special education classes, having failed and
repeated fifth grade. Damien’s grades are failing, and he may have to
repeat sixth grade. Damien admits to truancy on several occasions this
year in addition to his problems with completing schoolwork. His
previous evaluation indicates that child protective services evaluated the
family for possible neglect when he was 5 years of age after he and his
brother were found barefoot on the street late one evening without his
mother. Damien’s family was referred for counseling and never attended.
Both Damien’s parents have a history of drug and alcohol abuse.
Damien’s birth was unplanned, and his mother used drugs during
pregnancy. His parents separated soon after his birth, and his mother


<<<PAGE 611>>>
returned to live with her parents briefly. Damien and his mother moved to
live with her boyfriend when Damien was 1 year of age after she became
pregnant with his younger brother. Damien’s mother’s relationship ended
within a year, and only Damien, his mother, and his brother live in their
apartment. Damien’s mother has worked several different jobs, and
Damien wonders if she has a drinking problem.
Comorbidity
ADHD and conduct disorder often coexist, with ADHD often predating the
development of conduct disorder, and not infrequently substance abuse. CNS
injury, dysfunction, or damage predispose a child to impulsivity and
behavioral disturbances, which sometimes evolve into conduct disorder.
Course and Prognosis
Negative prognostic signs for conduct disorder include young age, high
number of symptoms, and severe symptoms. This finding is true partly
because those with severe conduct disorder seem to be most vulnerable to
comorbid disorders later in life, such as mood disorders and substance use
disorders. A longitudinal study found that, although assaultive behavior in
childhood and parental criminality predict a high risk for incarceration later
in life, the diagnosis of conduct disorder does not correlate with
imprisonment. Mild symptoms, no coexisting psychopathology, and normal
intellectual functioning are good prognostic signs.
Treatment
Psychosocial Interventions. Early sustained preventive interventions
(e.g., at a kindergarten age) can significantly alter the course and prognosis of
aggressive behavior. A screening program used with kindergarteners
predicted lifetime disruptive behavior disorder by age 18 years, with the
highest risk group demonstrating an 82 percent chance of a disruptive
behavior diagnosis without intervention. One prevention program, the Fast
Track Preventive Intervention, randomized 891 kindergarteners to either a
10-year prevention program or a control condition. The 10-year intervention


<<<PAGE 612>>>
included parent behavior management, child social cognitive skills, reading,
home visiting, mentoring, and classroom curricula. The children in the Fast
Track Intervention were less likely to develop conduct disorder during those
10 years and for 2 years after that.
A meta-analysis of controlled trials of CBT programs indicates that CBT
can result in significant reductions in conduct-disordered symptoms in
children and adolescents. CBT treatment interventions that are proven to be
efficacious include the following:
Kazdin’s Problem-Solving Skills Training (PSST) in which a 12-week
sequential program helps children develop problem-solving solutions when
faced with conflictual situations. Assignments called “supersolvers” provide
vignette situations in which children can practice these techniques. Therapists
can add a companion program, Parent Management Training (PMT), to the
intervention, but PSST can be useful even without the parent component.
Another CBT-based intervention, the Incredible Years (IY), targeting young
children from 3 to 8 years, is administered over 22 weeks and delivers
sessions to the child and has a parent training component and a teacher
training. Another CBT-based intervention is the Anger Coping Program, an
18-session intervention for school-age children in grades 4 to 6 focused on a
child’s increased development of emotion recognition and regulation, and
managing anger. Anger coping strategies include distraction, self-talk,
perspective taking, goal setting, and problem-solving.
Overall, treatment programs have been more successful in decreasing overt
symptoms of conduct, such as aggression, than the covert symptoms, such as
lying or stealing. Treatment strategies for young children that focus on
increasing social behavior and social competence reduce aggressive behavior.
In one study, 548 third graders were administered a school-based intervention
instead of a regular health curriculum in several public schools in North
Carolina, called Making Choices: Social Problem Solving Skills for Children
(MC), along with supplemental teacher and parent components. Compared
with third graders receiving the routine health curriculum, children exposed
to the MC program were rated lower on the posttest social and overt
aggression, and higher on social competence. Also, they scored higher on
information-processing skills. These findings support the notion that schoolbased prevention programs have the potential to strengthen social and
emotional skills and diminish aggressive behavior among normal populations


<<<PAGE 613>>>
of school-age children. School settings can also use behavioral techniques to
promote socially acceptable behavior toward peers and to discourage covert
antisocial incidents.
Psychopharmacologic
Interventions.
The
efficacy
of
psychopharmacologic interventions includes several placebo-controlled
studies of risperidone for aggression in youth associated with disruptive
behavior disorders or mental retardation. Also, risperidone is superior to
placebo in reducing aggressive behavior in a large 6-month placebosubstitution study. One randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial
with quetiapine also showed efficacy for aggressive behavior. Early studies
of antipsychotics, most notably haloperidol, reported decreased aggressive
and assaultive behaviors in children with a variety of psychiatric disorders.
Atypical antipsychotics risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, ziprasidone, and
aripiprazole have generally replaced the older antipsychotics in clinical
practice due to their comparable efficacy and improved side effect profiles.
Side effects of second-generation antipsychotics include sedation, increased
prolactin levels (with risperidone use), and extrapyramidal symptoms,
including akathisia. In general, however, the atypical antipsychotics appear to
be well tolerated. A study of sodium valproate in youth with conduct disorder
showed that those who responded most robustly exhibited aggression
characterized by agitation, dysphoria, and distress. Although early trials
suggested that carbamazepine was useful to control aggression, a doubleblind, placebo-controlled study did not show the superiority of
carbamazepine over placebo in decreasing aggression. A pilot study found
that clonidine may decrease aggression. The SSRIs, including fluoxetine,
sertraline, paroxetine, and citalopram, are used clinically to target symptoms
of impulsivity, irritability, and mood lability, which frequently accompany
conduct disorder. Conduct disorder often coexists with ADHD, learning
disorders, and, over time, mood disorders, and substance-related disorders;
thus, we also need to treat concurrent disorders.
Epidemiology
In the United States, conduct disorder ranges from 6 to 16 percent for males,
and from 2 to 9 percent for females. The ratio of conduct disorder in males


<<<PAGE 614>>>
compared to females ranges from 4:1 to as much as 12:1. Conduct disorder
occurs with higher frequency in the children of parents with antisocial
personality disorder and alcohol use disorder than in the general population.
The prevalence of conduct disorder and antisocial behavior is associated with
socioeconomic factors, as well as parental psychopathology.
Etiology
A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies indicates that the most critical risk
factors that predict conduct disorder include impulsivity, physical or sexual
abuse or neglect, poor parental supervision and harsh and punitive parental
discipline, low IQ, and poor school achievement.
Parental Factors. Harsh, punitive parenting characterized by severe
physical and verbal aggression is associated with the development of
children’s maladaptive aggressive behaviors. Chaotic home conditions are
associated with conduct disorder and delinquency. Divorce itself is not
necessarily a risk factor, but the persistence of hostility, resentment, and
bitterness between divorced parents may be the more significant contributor
to maladaptive behavior. Parental psychopathology, child abuse, and
negligence often contribute to conduct disorder. Sociopathy, alcohol use
disorder, and substance use disorder in the parents are associated with
conduct disorder in their children. Parents may be so negligent that a child’s
care is shared by relatives or assumed by foster parents. Many such parents
were scarred by their upbringing and tended to be abusive, negligent, or
engrossed in getting their personal needs met.
Studies indicate that parents of children with conduct disorder have high
rates of severe psychopathology, including psychotic disorders. Data show
that children who exhibit a pattern of aggressive behavior often experience
physically or emotionally harsh parenting.
Genetic Factors. A study of more than 6,000 male, female, and oppositesex twins found that genetic and environmental factors accounted for
proportionally the same amount of variance in males and females. Genetic or
shared environmental factors exert different effects on males and females in
childhood conduct disorder, but by adulthood, the gender-specific influences
on antisocial behavior are no longer apparent. The sex-specific effects on


<<<PAGE 615>>>
antisocial behavior in youth along with the replicated finding of a potential
role for the X-linked monoamine oxidase A gene in the etiology of antisocial
behavior leads to the need for further genetic investigation of conduct
disorder on the X chromosome and for analyses of these behaviors to be done
separately by gender.
Sociocultural Factors. Youth living in population-dense areas have
higher rates of aggression and delinquency. Unemployed parents, lack of a
supportive social network, and lack of positive participation in community
activities seem to predict conduct disorder. Associated findings that may
influence the development of conduct disorder in urban areas are exposure to
and prevalence of substance use. A survey of alcohol use and mental health
in adolescents found that weekly alcohol use among adolescents is associated
with increased delinquent and aggressive behavior. Significant interactions
between frequent alcohol use and age indicated that those adolescents with
weekly alcohol use at younger ages were most likely to exhibit aggressive
behaviors and mood disorders. Although drug and alcohol use does not cause
conduct disorder, it increases the risks associated with it. Drug intoxication
itself can also aggravate the symptoms. Thus, all factors that increase the
likelihood of regular substance use may promote and expand the disorder.
Violent Video Games and Violent Behavior. Longitudinal studies
corroborate the contribution of media violence, including video gaming in
middle-school children, with the expression of aggression in those
adolescents. A review of the literature on the effect of violent video games on
children and adolescents revealed that violent video game playing is related
to aggressive affect, physiologic arousal, and aggressive behaviors. It stands
to reason that the degree of exposure to violent games and the more
restriction of activity would be related to a greater preoccupation with violent
themes.
Psychological Factors. Poor emotion regulation among youth is
associated with higher rates of aggression and conduct disorder. Emotion
regulation is associated with social competence and can be observed even in
children of preschool age—those children with greater degrees of emotion
dysregulation exhibit higher levels of aggression. Poor modeling of impulse


<<<PAGE 616>>>
control and the chronic lack of having their own needs met leads to a less
developed sense of empathy.
Neurobiologic Factors. Neuroimaging studies utilizing MRI have used
voxel-based morphometry methods to compare structural brain differences
between children with conduct disorder compared to healthy controls. Studies
have reported that children with conduct disorder had decreased gray matter
in limbic brain structures and the bilateral anterior insula and left amygdala
compared to healthy controls. A study investigated structural brain
differences in children comorbid for oppositional defiant disorder or conduct
disorder and ADHD compared to those with ADHD alone and healthy
controls. Findings included decreased gray matter in ADHD and ADHD
comorbid for oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder compared to
controls in regions including bilateral temporal and occipital cortices and the
left amygdala.
Neurotransmitter studies in children with conduct disorder suggest a low
level of plasma dopamine β-hydroxylase, an enzyme that converts dopamine
to norepinephrine, leading to a hypothesis of decreased noradrenergic
functioning in conduct disorder. Other studies of conduct-disordered juvenile
offenders have found high plasma serotonin levels in the blood. Evidence
indicates that blood serotonin levels correlate inversely with levels of 5HIAA in the CSF and that low 5-HIAA levels in CSF correlate with
aggression and violence.
NEUROLOGIC FACTORS.

An EEG study investigating resting frontal brain
electrical activity, emotional intelligence, aggression, and rule-breaking in
10-year-old children found that aggressive children had significantly higher
relative right frontal brain activity at rest compared with nonaggressive
children. Frontal resting brain electrical activity likely reflects the ability to
regulate emotion. Boys tended to show lower emotional intelligence than
girls and more significant aggressive behavior than girls. No relationship,
however, was found between emotional intelligence and pattern of frontal
EEG activation.
Child Abuse and Maltreatment. Evidence shows that children
chronically exposed to violence, physical or sexual abuse, and neglect,


<<<PAGE 617>>>
particularly at a young age, are at high risk for demonstrating aggression. A
study of female caregivers exposed to intimate partner violence revealed a
strong association with offspring aggression and mood disturbance. Severely
abused children and adolescents tend to be hypervigilant; in some cases, they
misperceive benign situations as directly threatening and respond defensively
with violence. Not all expressed aggressive behavior in adolescents is
synonymous with conduct disorder; however, youth with a repetitive pattern
of hypervigilance and violent responses are likely to violate the rights of
others.

2.13 Anxiety Disorders of Infancy,
Childhood, and Adolescence: Separation
Anxiety Disorder, Generalized Anxiety
Disorder, and Social Anxiety Disorder
(Social Phobia)
Anxiety disorders are among the most common disorders in youth, affecting
10 to 20 percent of children and adolescents. Although observable anxiety
behaviors mark normative development in infants, anxiety disorders in
childhood predict a wide range of psychological difficulties in adolescence,
including additional anxiety disorders, panic attacks, and depressive
disorders. Fear is an expected response to a real or perceived threat; however,
anxiety is the anticipation of future danger. The main characteristic of all the
anxiety disorders is a recurrent emotional and physiologic arousal in response
to excessive perceptions of perceived threat or danger. Anxiety disorders
commonly found in youth include separation anxiety disorder, generalized
anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, and selective mutism. We classify
them by how the anxiety is experienced, the situations that trigger it, and the
course that it tends to follow.
Separation anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and social
anxiety disorder in children are often considered together in the evaluation
process and differential diagnosis, and in developing treatment strategies,


<<<PAGE 618>>>
because they are highly comorbid and have overlapping symptoms. A child
with separation anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, or social
anxiety disorder has a 60 percent chance of having at least one of the other
two disorders as well. Of children with one of the above anxiety disorders, 30
percent have all three of them. Children and adolescents may also have
additional comorbid anxiety disorders such as specific phobia or panic
disorder. Separation anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and social
anxiety disorder are distinguished from each other by the types of situations
that elicit excessive anxiety and avoidance behaviors.

SEPARATION ANXIETY DISORDER
Separation anxiety is a universal human developmental phenomenon
emerging in infants younger than 1 year of age and marking a child’s
awareness of separation from his or her mother or primary caregiver.
Normative separation anxiety peaks between 9 and 18 months and will
diminish by about 2½ years of age, enabling young children to develop a
sense of comfort away from their parents in preschool. Separation anxiety or
stranger anxiety most likely evolved as a human response that has survival
value. The expression of transient separation anxiety is also typical in young
children entering school for the first time. Approximately 15 percent of
young children display intense and persistent fear, shyness, and social
withdrawal when faced with unfamiliar settings and people. Young children
with this pattern of significant behavioral inhibition are at higher risk for the
development of separation anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and
social anxiety disorder. Behaviorally inhibited children, as a group, exhibit
characteristic physiologic traits, including higher than average resting heart
rates, higher morning cortisol levels than average, and low heart rate
variability. Separation anxiety disorder is developmentally inappropriate and
excessive anxiety related to separation from the primary attachment figure.
According to the DSM-5, separation anxiety disorder is a level of fear or
anxiety regarding separation from their parents or primary caregiver which is
beyond developmental expectations.
Furthermore, there may be a pervasive worry that harm will come to a
parent upon separation, which leads to extreme distress and sometimes
nightmares. The DSM-5 requires the presence of at least three symptoms


<<<PAGE 619>>>
related to excessive worry about separation from a significant attachment
figure for at least 4 weeks. The worries often take the form of refusal to go to
school, fears, and distress on separation, repeated complaints of physical
symptoms such as headaches and stomachaches when anticipating separation,
and nightmares related to separation issues.

GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
Children with generalized anxiety disorder have significant distress in
activities of daily life, often focused on the child’s fears of incompetence in
many areas, including school performance and in social settings. Also,
children with generalized anxiety disorder, according to DSM-5, experience
at least one of the following symptoms: restlessness, being easily fatigued,
“mind going blank,” irritability, muscle tension, or sleep disturbance.
Children with generalized anxiety disorder tend to feel fearful in multiple
settings and expect more negative outcomes when faced with academic or
social challenges, compared with peers. Children and adolescents with
generalized anxiety disorder may experience symptoms of autonomic
hyperarousal such as tachycardia, shortness of breath, or dizziness, and are
more likely than nonanxious youth to experience sweating, nausea, or
diarrhea when they become anxious. Children and adolescents with
generalized anxiety disorder tend to be overly concerned about potential
natural disasters such as earthquakes or floods, and these worries can
interfere with their daily activities. Finally, children and adolescents with
generalized anxiety disorder are continuously worried about the quality of
their performance in academics, sports, and other activities, and often seek
excessive reassurance about their performance.

SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER (SOCIAL PHOBIA)
Children who experience intense discomfort and distress in social situations
and are impaired by their fear of scrutiny or humiliation have the diagnosis of
social anxiety disorder. Their distress may be expressed in the form of crying,
tantrums, avoidance, freezing, or even becoming “mute” in these situations.
According to DSM-5, this disorder is characterized by consistent anxiety and
distress in almost all social situations. Any situation in which the child feels


<<<PAGE 620>>>
exposed to possible scrutiny by others can provoke fear or anxiety, and the
child will often try to avoid these feared social situations. Children must
experience anxiety in the presence of peers, not only with adults, in order to
receive the diagnosis. A child or adolescent with social anxiety disorder may
exhibit the performance only type, which targets a specific type of
performing, such as fear of public speaking. The performance-only type
typically manifests in school or academic settings in which one must perform
public presentations, such as in front of classmates in school.
Social anxiety disorder has significant implications for future
accomplishments, since it is associated with lower levels of satisfaction in
leisure activities, increased rates of school dropout, less productivity in the
workplace as adults, and increased rates of remaining single. Despite the
significant impairment caused by social anxiety disorder, up to half of the
individuals with the disorder do not receive treatment.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Separation anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety
disorder are highly related in children and adolescence because, in most
children, overlapping symptoms, as well as comorbid disorders, emerge.
Generalized anxiety disorder is the most common anxiety disorder among
youth, more common in adolescents than in younger children; in almost onethird of these cases, a child with generalized anxiety disorder also exhibits
separation anxiety disorder and social anxiety disorder.
Diagnostic criteria for separation anxiety disorder, according to the DSM5, include three of the following symptoms for at least 4 weeks: persistent
and excessive worry about losing, or possible harm befalling, significant
attachment figures; persistent and excessive worry that an untoward event can
lead to separation from a significant attachment figure; persistent reluctance
or refusal to go to school or elsewhere because of fear of separation;
persistent and excessive fear or reluctance to be alone or without major
attachment figures at home or without significant adults in other settings;
persistent reluctance or refusal to go to sleep without being near a major
attachment figure or to sleep away from home; repeated nightmares involving
the theme of separation; repeated complaints of physical symptoms,
including headaches and stomachaches, when separation from significant


<<<PAGE 621>>>
attachment figures is anticipated; and recurrent excessive distress when
separation from home or significant attachment figures is anticipated or
involved. Table 2-30 lists the criteria for separation anxiety disorder.
The following case history demonstrates separation anxiety disorder along
with autonomic arousal symptoms.
Jake was a 9-year-old boy who was referred for outpatient evaluation by
his family physician. He refused to sleep in his room alone at night and
exhibited violent tantrums each morning in order to avoid going to
school. Jake expressed recurrent fears that something terrible would
happen to his mother. He worried that she would get into a car accident
or that there would be a fire at home, and his mother would die.
Developmental history revealed that Jake was anxious and irritable as an
infant and toddler. He had trouble adjusting to babysitters in the
preschool years. There was a history of panic disorder, agoraphobia in the
mother, and major depression in his father. Jake became more concerned
and territorial over his mother when his father left the family, and his
mother became depressed. Jake always kept track of his mother’s
whereabouts and insisted that she stay at home.
Nighttime was a particularly difficult time at home. When Jake’s
mother tried to get Jake to remain in his room, Jake would whine and cry
and insist that his mother lie in bed with him until he is asleep. He also
expected his mother to sleep across the hall from his room throughout the
evening. Jake’s mother reported that each evening her son would get up
and peek through the crack in her bedroom door, as frequently as every
10 minutes, to be sure that she was still there. Jake reported frequent
nightmares that his mother died and that monsters prevented him from
rescuing his mother, taking him away from his family forever.
During the daytime, Jake would shadow his mother around the house.
Jake would agree to play a game with his sister in the lower level of the
house only if his mother was nearby. When Jake’s mother went upstairs,
he would interrupt the game and follow her upstairs. He refused to sleep
at a friend’s house. Frequently, at home, as the evening progressed, Jake
described a queasy sensation in his stomach mixed with feelings of
sadness.


<<<PAGE 622>>>
On school days, Jake usually complained of stomachaches and tried to
stay home. Jake appeared distressed and panicky and would become
violent when his mother attempted to drop him off at school. Once at
school, he seemed calmer and less distressed, but frequently was seen in
the nurse’s office, complaining of nausea and seeking to be sent home.
(Adapted from case material from Gail A. Bernstein, M.D. and Anne E.
Layne, Ph.D.)
The essential feature of separation anxiety disorder is extreme anxiety
precipitated by separation from parents, home, or other familiar surroundings.
In contrast, in generalized anxiety disorder, fears are extended to adverse
outcomes for all kinds of events, including academics, peer relationships, and
family activities. In generalized anxiety disorder, a child or adolescent
experiences at least one recurrent physiologic symptom, such as restlessness,
poor concentration, irritability, or muscle tension. In social anxiety disorder,
the child’s fears peak during performance situations involving exposure to
unfamiliar people or situations. Children and adolescents with social anxiety
disorder have extreme concerns about being embarrassed, humiliated, or
negatively judged. In each of the preceding anxiety disorders, the child’s
experience can approach terror or panic. The distress is higher than that
normally expected for the child’s developmental level and is not otherwise
explainable. Morbid fears, preoccupations, and ruminations characterize
separation anxiety disorder. Children with anxiety disorders overestimate the
probability of danger and the likelihood of a negative outcome. Children with
separation anxiety disorder and generalized anxiety disorder become overly
fearful that someone close to them will be hurt or that something terrible will
happen to them or their families, especially when they are away from their
families. Many children with anxiety disorders are preoccupied with health
and worry that their families or friends will become ill. Fears of getting lost,
being kidnapped, and losing the ability to be in contact with their families are
predominant among children with separation anxiety disorder.
Table 2-30
Separation Anxiety Disorder


<<<PAGE 623>>>
DSM-5
Diagnostic name Separation Anxiety
Disorder
Duration

Children: ≥4 wk
Adults: ≥6 mo

Symptoms

Inappropriate fear of
separation from a
loved one or
attachment figure:
• Distressed when
separated or
anticipating
separation
• Worries about losing
them or harm
coming to them
• Worry about possible
forced separation
• Hesitant to leave
person or home
• Fears being alone,
without the person
• Needs to be near
that person to sleep
• Nightmares about
separation
• Physical symptoms
of anxiety when
separated or
anticipating
separation

Required
number of

≥3

ICD-10
Separation Anxiety
Disorder of Childhood

• Fear of separation
causes anxiety
• Anxiety during early
childhood
• Severity is
inappropriate to
situations and
stage of
development


<<<PAGE 624>>>
symptoms
Psychosocial
Marked distress and/or
consequences
psychosocial
of symptoms
impairment
Exclusions (not
result of):
Comments

Impaired functioning

Another mental disorder
Note: classified as an
Emotional disorder
with onset specific to
childhood

Adolescents with anxiety disorders may not directly express their worries;
however, their behavioral patterns often reflect either separation anxiety or
other anxiety if they exhibit discomfort about leaving home, engage in
solitary activities because of fears about how they will perform in front of
peers, or have distress when away from their families. Separation anxiety
disorder in children is often manifested at the thought of travel or in the
course of travel away from home. Children may refuse to go to camp, a new
school, or even a friend’s house. Frequently, a continuum exists between
mild anticipatory anxiety before separation to pervasive anxiety after the
separation has occurred. Premonitory signs include irritability, difficulty
eating, whining, staying in a room alone, clinging to parents, and following a
parent everywhere. Often, when a family moves, a child displays separation
anxiety by intense clinging to the mother figure. Sometimes, geographical
relocation anxiety causes feelings of acute homesickness or
psychophysiological symptoms that break out when the child is away from
home or is going to a new country. The child yearns to return home and
becomes preoccupied with fantasies of how much better the old home was.
Integration into the new life situation may become extremely difficult.
Children with anxiety disorders may retreat from social or group activities
and express feelings of loneliness because of their self-imposed isolation.
Sleep difficulties are frequent in children and adolescents with any anxiety
disorder or in severe separation anxiety; a child or adolescent may require
having someone remain with him or her until he or she falls asleep. An


<<<PAGE 625>>>
anxious child may awaken and go to a parent’s bed or even sleep at the
parents’ door to diminish anxiety. Nightmares and morbid fears may be
expressions of anxiety.
Associated features of most anxiety disorders include fear of the dark and
imaginary worries. Children may have the feeling that eyes are staring at
them and monsters are reaching out for them in their bedrooms. Children
with separation anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and social
anxiety disorder often complain of somatic symptoms and may be more
sensitive to changes in their bodies compared to youth without anxiety
disorders. Children with separation anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety
disorder, or social anxiety disorder are often more emotionally sensitive than
peers and more easily brought to tears. Frequent somatic complaints
accompanying anxiety disorders include gastrointestinal symptoms, nausea,
vomiting, and stomachaches; unexplained pain in various parts of the body;
sore throats; and flu-like symptoms. Older children and adolescents typically
complain of somatic experiences classically reported by adults with anxiety,
such as cardiovascular and respiratory symptoms—palpitations, dizziness,
faintness, and feelings of strangulation. Physiologic signs of anxiety are a
part of the diagnostic criteria for generalized anxiety disorder, but they are
more often also experienced by children with separation anxiety and social
anxiety disorder than the general population. The following case history
demonstrates a young adolescent with generalized anxiety disorder.
Rachel was a 13-year-old girl referred for an evaluation by her
pediatrician based on her chronic gastrointestinal complaints without any
organic illness. In the interview, Rachel appeared withdrawn and meek
but responsive to questions. She endorsed several worries that included
concerns about her health, her parents’ safety, her school performance,
and her peer relationships. Rachel’s most significant worries were related
to her health and safety. Rachel’s mother reported that Rachel had
recently been very reluctant to play outside because she feared she would
contract Lyme disease from a tick bite or West Nile virus from a
mosquito bite. Rachel was also very distressed by news reports about
catastrophic events locally and around the world (e.g., kidnapping, crime,
terrorism). Her family and teachers described Rachel as overly


<<<PAGE 626>>>
conscientious about her schoolwork and as often being concerned about
adult matters (e.g., finances, parents’ job security). Symptoms that
accompanied Rachel’s worries primarily involved stomach pain and
problems with falling asleep. Rachel tended to be quite perseverative,
repetitively verbalizing her worries even after receiving reassurance.
Rachel admitted that she worried for hours each day and could not “turn
off” her worried thoughts.
Rachel was the product of a healthy pregnancy and delivery. Her
medical history was unremarkable, except for frequent gastrointestinal
pain since kindergarten. Rachel was described as irritable and difficult to
soothe as an infant. Her developmental milestones were within normal
limits. She was described as very obedient and had no history of
externalizing behavior problems. She was very concerned about her
academic performance from an early age and earned A’s with an
occasional B. Rachel was somewhat shy in social situations but wellliked by her peers. Family history included depression in her maternal
grandmother and a maternal history of generalized anxiety disorder,
social anxiety, and separation anxiety disorder as a child. Rachel had two
younger siblings who were high achievers and without notable problems.
(Adapted from case material from Gail A. Bernstein, M.D. and Ann E.
Layne, Ph.D.)
The next case history demonstrates an adolescent with multiple anxiety
and depressive disorders.

Kate is a 15-year-old tenth grader who lives with her biologic parents and
two sisters, ages 9 and 14 years. Kate is a very articulate teen who has
always been a good student, although she never volunteers answers in
school unless her teachers call on her. She gets along well with her sisters
when at home, but ever since she entered high school in the ninth-grade
year, she declines invitations to go to friends’ homes, has turned down
opportunities to go to parties, and has even stopped going on outings with
her sisters to the neighborhood mall and the movies. Kate reports that she
gets too nervous and blushes when she is with friends outside of the
classroom at school because she cannot think of anything to say to them.


<<<PAGE 627>>>
She reports that she is embarrassed to go shopping or to the movies with
her sisters because they often run into neighborhood peers along the way
and stop to chat, and this makes her feel “stupid,” because even though
she is the oldest, she does not say anything and believes that her sisters’
friends will laugh at her shyness. Recently, one of her former best friends
confronted her about why she had stopped “hanging out” with her
friends. Kate had stopped eating lunch with her friends in school because
she felt humiliated when they would talk about their weekend plans, and
even when they invited her to join, she would just look the other way and
ignore the conversation. Kate had become isolated, even in school, and
admitted to her sister that she was lonely. Kate was brought for an
evaluation after her younger sister commented to her mother that Kate
spent all of her time alone whenever her sisters saw their friends and that
she looked sad and stressed out whenever she was around peers. Kate
was down, always in poor spirits, and had stopped interacting with her
sisters. On rare occasions, Kate’s younger sister had invited Kate to
parties or friend’s homes, but Kate had declined and burst into tears.
Kate was evaluated by a child psychiatrist who made the diagnoses of
social anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and major
depression and recommended a combination of treatment options,
including cognitive-behavioral therapy and a trial of fluoxetine. Kate and
her family decided to try the medication first. Kate started 10 mg of
fluoxetine, and over the next month was titrated to a dose of 20 mg. By
the third week of the medication trial, Kate was noticeably less resistant
to going out with her sisters to places where they were likely to encounter
peers. Her sisters noticed that she did not seem as stressed and started to
sit with peers at lunch in the school cafeteria occasionally. She stated that
she did not feel as self-conscious as she used to in class and was willing
to go to a friend’s house. She still declined to go to a birthday party of a
peer that she did not know very well. Kate continued on the same
medication, and within 2 months, she was significantly less anxious in
social situations. She occasionally complained of a stomachache but
tolerated the medication well. Her family was impressed when she
requested they plan a birthday party for her 16th birthday and decided to
invite 10 friends.


<<<PAGE 628>>>
Pathology and Laboratory Examination
No specific laboratory measures help in the diagnosis of separation anxiety
disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, or social anxiety disorder.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The presence of separation anxiety is a developmentally expected feature in a
young child and often does not represent an impairing condition. Thus
clinical judgment must be used in distinguishing normal anxiety from
separation anxiety disorder in this age group. In older school-age children, a
child experiencing more than normal distress is apparent when refusing
school regularly. For children who resist school, it is essential to distinguish
whether fear of separation, general worry about performance, or more
specific fears of humiliation in front of peers or the teacher are driving the
resistance. In many cases in which anxiety is the primary symptom, all three
of the above-feared scenarios come into play. In generalized anxiety disorder,
the focus of the anxiety is not mainly separation.
Table 2-31
Common Characteristics in Childhood Anxiety Disorders
Criteria

Separation
Anxiety
Disorder

Social
Anxiety
Disorder

Generalized
Anxiety Disorder

Minimum duration to
establish diagnosis

At least 4 wk

Persistent,
typically at
least 6 mo

At least 6 mo

Precipitating stressors Separation from
home or
attachment
figures

Social
situations
with peers
or other
specific
situations

Pressure for any
type of
performance,
activities which are
scored, school
performance

Peer relationships

Tentative,

May appear overly

Good when no


<<<PAGE 629>>>
separation is
involved

overly
inhibited

eager to please,
peers sought out
for reassurance

Sleep

Reluctance or
May
refusal to sleep
experience
away from
insomnia
home or not
near
attachment
figure

Often difficulty falling
asleep

Psychophysiological
symptoms

Stomachaches,
May exhibit
Stomachaches,
headaches
blushing,
nausea, lump in
nausea,
inadequate
the throat,
vomiting,
eye contact,
shortness
palpitations,
soft voice,
breath, dizziness,
dizziness when
or rigid
palpitations when
anticipating
posture
anticipating
separation
performing an
activity

Differential diagnosis

GAD, Soc AD,
GAD, SAD,
SAD, Soc AD,
major
major
attentiondepressive
depressive
deficit/hyperactivity
disorder, panic
disorder,
disorder,
disorder with
dysthymic
obsessiveagoraphobia,
disorder,
compulsive
PTSD,
selective
disorder, major
oppositional
mutism,
depressive
defiant disorder
agoraphobia
disorder, PTSD

GAD, generalized anxiety disorder; Soc AD, social anxiety disorder; SAD, separation anxiety
disorder; PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder.
Adapted from Sidney Werkman, M.D.

When depressive disorders occur in children, we should evaluate for
possible comorbidities, such as separation anxiety disorder, as well. We can


<<<PAGE 630>>>
make a comorbid diagnosis of separation anxiety disorder and depressive
disorder when the patient meets both criteria; the two diagnoses often coexist.
Panic disorder with agoraphobia is uncommon before 18 years of age; the
fear is of being incapacitated by a panic attack rather than of separation from
parental figures. School refusal is a frequent symptom in separation anxiety
disorder but is not pathognomonic of it. Children with other diagnoses, such
as specific phobias, or social anxiety disorder, or fear of failure in school
because of learning disorder, may also lead to school refusal. When school
refusal occurs in an adolescent, the severity of the dysfunction is generally
higher than when it emerges in a young child. Table 2-31 presents similar and
distinguishing characteristics of childhood separation anxiety disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
The course and the prognosis of separation anxiety disorder, generalized
anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder are varied and are related to the
age of onset, the duration of the symptoms, and the development of comorbid
anxiety and depressive disorders. Young children who can maintain
attendance in school, after-school activities and peer relationships generally
have a better prognosis than children or adolescents who refuse to attend
school and withdraw from social activities. The large multisite randomized
clinical trial Child/Adolescent Anxiety Multimodal Study (CAMS) provided
acute treatment for children and adolescents with one or more anxiety
disorders with sertraline medication alone, CBT alone, or both together. The
investigators found that predictors of future remission included younger age
of initiation of treatment, lower severity of anxiety, absence of a comorbid
depressive or anxiety disorder, and the absence of social anxiety disorder as
the primary anxiety disorder. A follow-up study of children and adolescents
with mixed anxiety disorders over 3 years reported that up to 82 percent no
longer met the criteria for the anxiety disorder at follow-up. Of the group
followed, 96 percent of those with separation anxiety disorder were remitted
at follow-up. Most children who recovered did so within the first year. Early
age of onset and later age at diagnosis were factors in this study that
predicted slower recovery. Close to one-third of the group studied, however,
had developed another psychiatric disorder within the follow-up period, and


<<<PAGE 631>>>
50 percent of these children developed another anxiety disorder. Studies have
shown significant overlap between separation anxiety disorder and depressive
disorders. In cases with multiple comorbidities, the prognosis is more
guarded. Longitudinal data indicate that some children with severe school
refusal continue to resist attending school into adolescence and remain
impaired for many years.

TREATMENT
The treatment of child and adolescent separation anxiety disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder are often considered
together, given the frequent comorbidity and overlapping symptomatology of
these disorders. A multimodal comprehensive treatment approach usually
includes psychotherapy, most often CBT, family education, family
psychosocial intervention, and pharmacologic interventions, such as SSRIs.
The best evidence-based treatments for childhood anxiety disorders include
CBT and SSRIs. The comparative efficacy of CBT, SSRI medication, and
their combination (CBT + SSRI) in the treatment of childhood anxiety
disorders was investigated in the NIMH-funded CAMS. This double-blind,
placebo-controlled, multi-site study included 488 children and adolescents
with separation anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, or social
anxiety disorder. The investigators treated them with either CBT alone, SSRI
medication (sertraline) alone, both CBT and sertraline, or placebo. After an
acute treatment phase of 12 weeks, those in the combined CBT + sertraline
group had an 80.7 percent response rate of much or very much improved on
the clinical global improvement (CGI) rating. Response rates for the CBTonly and sertraline-only groups were 59.7 and 54.9 percent, respectively. The
placebo response was 23.7 percent. Over time, during an open follow-up, the
combination of CBT plus sertraline continued to provide the most efficacy.
All three treatments—CBT, sertraline, and their combination—were superior
to placebo and thus effective treatments in childhood anxiety, but combined
treatment was most likely to help children and adolescents with anxiety
disorders. A trial of CBT may be applied first, if available, when a child can
function sufficiently to engage in daily activities while obtaining this
treatment. For a child with severe impairment, however, a combination of
treatments is recommended. CBT is a first-line evidence-based treatment for


<<<PAGE 632>>>
childhood anxiety disorders. A meta-analysis reviewed 16 RCTs of CBT for
childhood anxiety disorders and found CBT to be consistently superior to a
wait-list control group or a psychological placebo group. Exposure-based
CBT has received the most empiric support among psychotherapeutic
interventions for anxiety disorders in youth and is superior to wait-list control
groups in reducing impairment and symptoms of anxiety.
Several psychosocial interventions have been designed specifically for
anxiety disorders in young children. In a randomized clinical trial of CBT for
4- to 7-year-old children, the children received a manualized intervention
called “Being Brave: A Program for Coping with Anxiety for Young
Children and their Parents.” The intervention used a combination of parentonly sessions and child-and-parent sessions. Response rate, measured as
much or very much improved on the Clinical Global Improvement Scale for
Anxiety, was 69 percent among completers versus 32 percent of the wait-list
controls. The treated children showed significantly better CGI improvement
on social anxiety disorder, separation anxiety disorder, and specific phobia,
but not on generalized anxiety disorder. This treatment, a developmentally
modified parent–child CBT, shows promise in young children.
Coaching Approach behavior and Leading by Modeling (the CALM
program) is an intervention aimed at treating anxiety disorders in children
younger than 7 years of age, who are too young for traditional CBT. The
CALM program draws on previous work with children aged 2 to 7 years
through interventions that target a child’s undesired behavior by modifying
parents’ behavior, called PCIT. The CALM program is a 12-session manualbased intervention that provides live, individualized coaching via a bug-inthe-ear receiver worn by the parent during sessions. It incorporates exposure
tasks and promotes “brave” behavior with parent coaching. A pilot study
using the CALM program with nine patients with a mean age of 5.4 years
found that all treatment completers (seven patients and families) were global
responders, and all but one showed functional improvement. Adapting the
PCIT model for anxiety disorders in young children appears to be a
promising approach to treating anxiety in early childhood.
A meta-analysis of RCTs of antidepressant agents for childhood anxiety
provides evidence that multiple SSRIs, including fluvoxamine, fluoxetine,
sertraline, and paroxetine, are efficacious in the treatment of childhood
anxiety. Based on this evidence, SSRIs are the first choice of medication in


<<<PAGE 633>>>
the treatment of anxiety disorders in children and adolescents.
A large, multisite investigation by the NIMH (Research Units in Pediatric
Psychopharmacology [RUPP]) confirmed the safety and efficacy of
fluvoxamine in the treatment of childhood separation anxiety disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder. This double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of 128 children and adolescents revealed that 76
percent of children in the group treated with fluvoxamine showed significant
improvement compared with 29 percent of those in the placebo group.
Response to medication was noticeable after only 2 weeks of treatment.
Fluvoxamine dosages ranged from 50 to 250 mg/day in children and up to
300 mg/day in adolescents. Children and adolescents with less comorbid
depressive symptoms had the best response. Youths who responded
continued fluvoxamine for 6 months, and almost all of them continued to be
responders at the 6-month mark.
Several other randomized clinical trials have also supported the efficacy of
SSRIs in the treatment of child and adolescent anxiety disorders. A
randomized, controlled trial found fluoxetine, at a dose of 20 mg/day, to be
safe and effective for children with these disorders, with minor side effects
including gastrointestinal distress, headache, and drowsiness. Also, a
randomized clinical trial for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder in
children lends support for the efficacy of sertraline. Finally, a large industry
randomized clinical trial of paroxetine in the treatment of children with social
anxiety disorder found that paroxetine was associated with a response in 78
percent of children treated. The dose of paroxetine was 10 to 50 mg/day.
The FDA has placed a “black box” warning on antidepressants, including
all of the SSRI agents, used in the treatment of any childhood disorder,
because of concerns about increased suicidality; however, no individual
childhood anxiety study has found a statistically significant increase in
suicidal thoughts or behaviors.
Currently, we do not recommend using tricyclic drugs due to their
potentially serious cardiac adverse effects. Other agents, including buspirone
and β-adrenergic receptor antagonists such as propranolol, have been used
clinically in children with anxiety disorders, but currently, no data support
their efficacy. Diphenhydramine may be used in the short term to control
sleep disturbances in children with anxiety disorders. Open trials and one
double-blind, placebo-controlled study suggested that alprazolam, a


<<<PAGE 634>>>
benzodiazepine, may help to control anxiety symptoms in separation anxiety
disorder. Clonazepam has been studied in open trials and may be useful in
controlling symptoms of panic and other anxiety symptoms.
Although SSRIs and CBT alone and in combination have demonstrated
efficacy in the treatment of anxiety disorders in youth, approximately 20 to
35 percent of children and adolescents with anxiety disorders do not appear
to benefit. Several novel agents may be useful, some based on their effect on
the NMDA system. For example, D-cycloserine (DCS), currently FDA
approved in the treatment of pediatric tuberculosis, is a partial receptor
agonist of the NMDA system and is hypothesized to augment the benefits of
exposure treatment for phobias. Some evidence suggests that DCS may
increase the speed of exposure interventions; however, there is no proof of
long-term gains. Riluzole is an antiglutamatergic agent that decreases
glutamatergic transmission by inhibiting glutamate release and inactivation of
sodium channels in cortical neurons and blocking GABA reuptake. Due to its
antiglutamatergic effects, riluzole may provide augmentation in the treatment
of OCD and generalized anxiety disorder. Another agent, memantine, an
NMDA receptor antagonist with FDA approval in the treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease, has been hypothesized to decrease anxiety due to its
influence on the glutamatergic system. Published case reports have provided
mixed results.
Although most childhood anxiety disorders wax and wane over time,
school refusal associated with separation anxiety disorder is a psychiatric
emergency. A comprehensive treatment plan involves the child, the parents,
and the child’s peers and school. Family interventions are critical in the
management of separation anxiety disorder, especially in children who refuse
to attend school, so that firm encouragement of school attendance is
maintained while providing appropriate support. When a return to a full
school day is overwhelming, the treatment team and school should help
arrange a program so the child can progressively increase the time spent at
school. Graded contact with an object of anxiety is a form of behavior
modification useful for any type of separation anxiety. Some severe cases of
school refusal require hospitalization. Cognitive-behavioral modalities
include exposure to feared separations and cognitive strategies, such as
coping self-statements aimed at increasing a sense of autonomy and mastery.


<<<PAGE 635>>>
In summary, evidence-based treatments for anxiety disorders have focused
on SSRIs and CBT. SSRIs are both safe and efficacious in the treatment of
childhood anxiety disorders; however, in severe disorders, the evidence
suggests that optimal treatment is to provide both CBT and SSRI
antidepressant agents simultaneously.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
The prevalence of anxiety disorders has varied with the age group of the
children surveyed and the diagnostic instruments used. The lifetime
prevalence of any anxiety disorder in children and adolescents ranges from
10 to 27 percent. Anxiety disorders are common in preschoolers as well, and
follow a similar epidemiologic profile as in older children. An epidemiologic
survey using the PAPA found that 9.5 percent of preschoolers met criteria for
any anxiety disorder, with 6.5 percent exhibiting generalized anxiety
disorder, 2.4 percent meeting criteria for separation anxiety disorder, and 2.2
percent meeting criteria for social anxiety disorder. Separation anxiety
disorder is estimated to be about 4 percent in children and young adolescents.
Separation anxiety disorder is more common in young children than in
adolescents and occurs equally in boys and girls. The onset may occur during
preschool years, but is most common in children 7 to 8 years of age. The rate
of generalized anxiety disorder in school-age children is estimated to be
approximately 3 percent, the rate of social anxiety disorder is 1 percent, and
the rate of simple phobias is 2.4 percent. In adolescents, lifetime prevalence
for panic disorder is 0.6 percent; the prevalence of generalized anxiety
disorder is 3.7 percent.

ETIOLOGY
Biopsychosocial Factors
Multiple investigations have found evidence for the influences of parental
psychopathology and parenting styles on the emergence of anxiety disorders
in childhood. Longitudinal studies have found that parental overprotection
correlates with an increased risk of the development of anxiety disorders in
children, and insecure parent–child attachment is associated with higher-thanexpected rates of anxiety disorders in childhood. It is also well known that


<<<PAGE 636>>>
maternal depression and anxiety have led to an increased risk of anxiety and
depression in children. Psychosocial factors, in conjunction with a child’s
temperament, influence the degree of separation anxiety evoked in situations
of brief separation and exposure to unfamiliar environments. The
temperamental trait of shyness and withdrawal in unfamiliar situations is
associated with a higher risk of developing separation anxiety disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, or all three during
childhood and adolescence.
External life stresses often coincide with the development of the disorder.
The death of a relative, a child’s illness, a change in a child’s environment, or
a move to a new neighborhood or school is frequent in the histories of
children with separation anxiety disorder. In a vulnerable child, these changes
probably intensify anxiety.
Neurophysiologic correlations exist with behavioral inhibition (extreme
shyness); children with this constellation have a higher resting heart rate and
an acceleration of heart rate with tasks requiring cognitive concentration.
Additional physiologic correlates of behavioral inhibition include elevated
salivary cortisol levels, elevated urinary catecholamine levels, and more
significant papillary dilation during cognitive tasks.
Neuroimaging studies of adolescents with anxiety show increased
activation of the amygdala compared to nonanxious adolescents when
presented with anxiety-provoking stimuli. Furthermore, anxious adolescents
maintain the hyperactivation of the amygdala over time, rather than showing
an attenuation of the effect as in nonanxious adolescents. Structural studies of
the amygdala in adolescents with anxiety have led to conflicting results, with
some studies finding increased amygdala volumes, whereas other studies are
finding decreased amygdala volumes.
Social Learning Factors
Fear, in response to a variety of unfamiliar or unexpected situations, may be
unwittingly communicated from parents to children by direct modeling. If a
parent is fearful, the child will probably have a phobic adaptation to new
situations, especially to a school environment. There are much data to suggest
that overprotective parenting promotes increased interpersonal sensitivity in
healthy children and increases the risk of social anxiety disorder in children


<<<PAGE 637>>>
with behavioral inhibition or other anxiety disorders such as separation
anxiety disorder. Some parents appear to teach their children to be anxious by
overprotecting them from expected dangers or by exaggerating the dangers.
For example, a parent who cringes in a room during a lightning storm teaches
a child to do the same. A parent who is afraid of mice or insects conveys the
affect of fright to a child.
Conversely, a parent who becomes angry with a child when the child
expresses fear of a given situation, for example, when exposed to animals,
may promote a phobic concern in the child by exposing the child to the
intensity of the anger expressed by the parent. When parents have anxiety
disorders, this magnifies the social learning factors in the development of
anxiety reactions. These factors may be pertinent in the development of
separation anxiety disorder as well as in generalized anxiety disorder and
social anxiety disorder. A recent study found no association between
psychosocial hardships, such as ongoing family conflict, and behavioral
inhibition among young children. It appears that temperamental
predisposition to anxiety disorders emerges as a highly heritable constellation
of traits and due to psychosocial stressors.
Genetic Factors
Genetic studies suggest that genes account for at least one-third of the
variance in the development of anxiety disorders. Heritability for anxiety
disorders in children and adolescents ranges from 36 to 65 percent, with the
highest estimates found in younger children with anxiety disorders. Two
heritable characteristics—behavioral inhibition (the tendency toward fear and
withdrawal in new situations) and physiological hyperarousal—have both
been found to impart significant risk factors for the future development of an
anxiety disorder. However, although the temperamental constellation of
behavioral inhibition, excessive shyness, the tendency to withdraw from
unfamiliar situations, and the eventual emergence of anxiety disorders have a
genetic contribution, one-third to two-thirds of young children with
behavioral inhibition do not appear to go on to develop anxiety disorders.
Family studies have shown that the offspring of adults with anxiety
disorders are at an increased risk of having an anxiety disorder themselves.
Separation anxiety disorder and depression in children overlap, and the


<<<PAGE 638>>>
presence of an anxiety disorder increases the risk of a future episode of a
depressive disorder. The current consensus on the genetics of anxiety
disorders suggests that what is inherited is a general predisposition toward
anxiety, causing heightened levels of arousal, emotional reactivity, and
increased negative affect, all of which increase the risk of developing
separation anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety
disorder.


<<<PAGE 639>>>
2.14 Selective Mutism
Selective mutism, believed to be related to social anxiety disorder, although
an independent disorder, is characterized in a child by persistent lack of
speaking in one or more specific social situations, most typically, the school
setting. A child with selective mutism may remain wholly silent or nearsilent, in some cases only whispering in a school setting. Although selective
mutism often begins before age 5 years, it may not be apparent until the child
should be reading or speaking aloud in school. The current conceptualization
of selective mutism highlights a convergence of underlying social anxiety,
along with an increased likelihood of speech and language problems leading
to the failure to speak in certain situations. Typically, children with the
disorder are silent during stressful situations, whereas some may verbalize
almost inaudibly single-syllable words. Despite an increased risk for delayed
speech and language acquisition in children with selective mutism, children
with this disorder are fully capable of speaking competently when not in a
socially anxiety-producing situation. Some children with the disorder will
communicate with eye contact or nonverbal gestures but not verbally when at
school. Otherwise, children with selective mutism speak fluently at home and
in many familiar settings. Selective mutism is believed to be related to social
anxiety disorder because of its expression primarily in selective social
situations.
Table 2-32
Selective Mutism
DSM-5
Diagnostic name Selective Mutism
Duration

≥1 mo (not 1st
month of school)

Symptoms

Persistent lack of
speech

ICD-10
Elective Mutism

Persistent lack of speech
• In certain social situations


<<<PAGE 640>>>
• In certain
social
situations
• Occurs when
expected to
speak
• Has ability to
speak
appropriately
in other
situations

• Has ability to speak
appropriately in other
situations
• Related to specific
emotions
• For example: anxiety,
social withdrawal, and
sensitivity

Psychosocial
Presence of
consequences
psychosocial
of symptoms
impairment
Exclusions (not
result of):

Comments

Another mental
Pervasive developmental
disorder
disorders
Communication
Developmental disorders of
disorder
speech and language
Lack of proficiency Transient mutism as part of
with the spoken
separation anxiety in young
language in a
children
given situation
Note: classified under
Disorders of social
functioning with onset
specific to childhood and
adolescence

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
The diagnosis of selective mutism is not difficult to make after it is clear that
a child has adequate language skills in some environments but not in others.
The mutism may have developed gradually or suddenly after a disturbing
experience. The age of onset can range from 4 to 8 years. Mute periods are


<<<PAGE 641>>>
most commonly manifested in school or outside the home; in rare cases, a
child is mute at home but not in school. Children who exhibit selective
mutism may also have symptoms of separation anxiety disorder, school
refusal, and delayed language acquisition. Because social anxiety is almost
always present in children with selective mutism, behavioral disturbances,
such as temper tantrums and oppositional behaviors, may also occur in the
home. Compared to children with other anxiety disorders, except social
anxiety disorder, children with selective mutism tend to have less social
competence and more social anxiety. Table 2-32 lists the criteria for selective
mutism.
Janine is a 6-year-old Chinese American first-grade girl who lives with
her biologic mother, father, and siblings. Janine’s parents reported a 2year history of not speaking at school, beginning in kindergarten, or to
any children or adults outside of her family, despite speaking at home. At
home, she reportedly is animated and quite talkative with her immediate
family and a few young cousins as well. Although she speaks to adult
relatives outside of her immediate family, her communication is often
limited to one-word responses to their questions. By her parents’ report,
Janine also exhibits extreme social anxiety, to the point of “freezing” in
certain situations when the attention is on her. At the time of her
evaluation, Janine had not received prior treatment. Janine speaks fluent
English as well as Mandarin, and, according to her parents, met all
developmental milestones on time and appeared to have above-average
intelligence. They also reported that Janine enjoys dancing, singing, and
imaginative play with her sisters.
During the initial evaluation, Janine failed to make eye contact or
respond verbally to the intake clinician. Janine’s parents reported that this
behavior is typical of her when in a new situation but that she
communicates nonverbally and makes eye contact with most people once
she “gets to know them.” On request, Janine’s parents provided a
videotaped recording of Janine playing at home with her sisters. In the
video, Janine was animated and was speaking spontaneously and fluently
without apparent impairment. Janine received diagnoses of selective
mutism and social anxiety disorder. The psychiatrist recommended CBT,


<<<PAGE 642>>>
and Janine began to see a therapist.
The therapist instructed Janine and her mother to come up with lists of
easy, medium, and most challenging “speaking” situations and lists of
small, medium, and large rewards. These lists then became the basis for
assignments for exposures and reinforcement for speaking tasks that
gradually increased in difficulty. CBT sessions included time with Janine
and her mother together to review past and future assignments and time
with Janine and the therapist alone.
When treatment began, Janine did not communicate at all verbally or
nonverbally with the therapist. The therapist gradually developed a
rapport with Janine utilizing less stressful tasks such as whispering to her
mother with the therapist in the corner, then nodding yes or no, pointing,
whispering to a stuffed animal, whispering to her mother while facing the
therapist, and eventually responding to the therapist directly. The
therapist used animal puppets to enable Janine to “warm-up” without
talking directly to the therapist. After three sessions, Janine began to
speak to the therapist in a whisper. Janine received stickers for
completing each speaking assignment, and, after filling up the sticker
charts, she received rewards (a small toy or treat from the reward list).
The therapist gave Janine assignments that involved her teacher and
classmates. These were implemented gradually and included waving to
the teacher, playing an audiotape of her saying “hello” to the teacher,
whispering “hello” to the teacher, speaking “hello” to the teacher in a
regular voice, and so on. After 14 sessions, Janine could speak in
complete sentences during class when called on. She also spoke to her
teacher in front of several other students.
During the last few sessions, Janine’s mother took an increasingly
active role in assigning and following up on speaking assignments. When
Janine entered the second grade, it took only a few days for her to speak
to her teacher and most peers in class. After completion of therapy,
Janine’s mother continued to monitor Janine’s speaking behaviors and to
promote speaking in new situations by encouraging (and rewarding)
Janine’s gradual successes with novel people and situations. (Adapted
from case material from Lindsey Bergman, Ph.D., and John Piacentini,
Ph.D.)


<<<PAGE 643>>>
Pathology and Laboratory Examination
No specific laboratory measures are useful in the diagnosis or treatment of
selective mutism.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Differential diagnosis of children who are silent in social situations
emphasizes ruling out communications disorder, autism spectrum disorder,
and social anxiety disorder. Social anxiety disorder may be comorbid with
selective mutism. Once confirming that the child is fully capable of speaking
when comfortable, but not in stressful situations, we should consider an
anxiety disorder. Shy children may exhibit a transient muteness in new,
anxiety-provoking situations. These children often have histories of not
speaking in the presence of strangers and of clinging to their mothers. Most
children who are mute on entering school improve spontaneously and may be
described as having transient adaptation shyness. We should distinguish
between selective mutism and intellectual disabilities, pervasive
developmental disorders, and expressive language disorder. In these
disorders, the child may have an inability, rather than a refusal, to speak. In
mutism secondary to conversion disorder, the mutism is pervasive. Children
introduced into an environment which uses a different language may be
reticent to begin using the new language. We should only diagnose selective
mutism when children also refuse to converse in their native language and
when they have gained communicative competence in the new language but
refuse to speak it.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Children with selective mutism are often excessively shy during the
preschool years, but the onset of the full disorder is usually not evident until
age 5 or 6 years. Many very young children with early symptoms of selective
mutism in a transitional period when entering preschool have a spontaneous
improvement over several months and never fulfill the criteria for the
disorder. A typical pattern for a child with selective mutism is to speak
almost exclusively at home with the nuclear family but not elsewhere,
especially not at school. Consequently, a child with selective mutism may


<<<PAGE 644>>>
have academic difficulties or even failure due to a lack of participation.
Children with selective mutism are typically shy, anxious, and at increased
risk for a depressive disorder. Many children with early-onset selective
mutism remit with or without treatment. Recent data suggest that fluoxetine
may influence the course of selective mutism, and treatment enhances
recovery. Children in whom the disorder persists often have difficulty
forming social relationships. Teasing and scapegoating by peers may cause
them to refuse to go to school. Some children with any form of severe social
anxiety are rigid, compulsive, negativistic, and prone to temper tantrums and
oppositional and aggressive behavior at home. Other children with the
disorder tolerate the feared situation by communicating with gestures, such as
nodding, shaking the head, and saying “Uh-huh” or “No.” In one follow-up
study, about one-half of children with selective mutism improved within 5 to
10 years. Children who do not improve by age 10 years appear to have a
long-term course and a worse prognosis. As many as one-third of children
with selective mutism, with or without treatment, may develop other
psychiatric disorders, particularly other anxiety disorders and depression.

TREATMENT
The optimal treatment is a multimodal approach using psychoeducation for
the family, CBT, and SSRIs as needed. Preschool children may also benefit
from a therapeutic nursery. For school-age children, individual CBT is the
first-line treatment. Family education and cooperation are beneficial.
Published data on the successful treatment of children with selective mutism
is scant. However, reasonable evidence indicates that children with social
anxiety disorder respond to various SSRIs, and, currently, CBT treatments
have also demonstrated efficacy in children with anxiety disorders.
A recent report of 21 children with selective mutism treated in an open trial
with fluoxetine suggested that this medication may be useful for childhood
selective mutism. Reports have confirmed the efficacy of fluoxetine in the
treatment of adult social anxiety disorder and at least one double-blind,
placebo-controlled study using fluoxetine with children with mutism. A large
NIMH-funded study of anxiety disorders in children and adolescents called
Research Units in Pediatric Psychopharmacology (RUPP), has shown distinct
superiority of fluvoxamine over placebo in the treatment of a variety of


<<<PAGE 645>>>
childhood anxiety disorders. Children with selective mutism may benefit
similarly to those with social anxiety disorder, given the current belief that it
is a subgroup of social anxiety disorder. SSRI medications that have been
shown in randomized, placebo-controlled trials to have benefit in the
treatment of children with social anxiety disorder include fluoxetine (20 to 60
mg/day), fluvoxamine (50 to 300 mg/day), sertraline (25 to 200 mg/day), and
paroxetine (10 to 50 mg/day).

EPIDEMIOLOGY
The prevalence of selective mutism varies with age, with younger children at
increased risk for the disorder. According to the DSM-5, the point prevalence
of selective mutism using clinic or school samples ranges between 0.03 and 1
percent, depending on whether a clinical or community sample is studied. A
sizeable epidemiologic survey in the United Kingdom reported a prevalence
rate of selective mutism to be 0.69 percent in children 4 to 5 years of age.
Another survey in the United Kingdom identified 0.06 percent of 7-year-olds
as having selective mutism. Young children are more vulnerable to the
disorder than older ones. Selective mutism appears to be more common in
girls than in boys. Clinical reports suggest that many young children
spontaneously “outgrow” this disorder as they age; the longitudinal course of
the disorder remains to be studied.

ETIOLOGY
Genetic Contribution
Selective mutism may have many of the same etiologic factors leading to the
emergence of social anxiety disorder. In contrast to other childhood anxiety
disorders, however, children with selective mutism are at higher risk for
delayed onset of speech or speech abnormalities that may be contributory.
However, in addition to the speech and language factor, one survey found
that 90 percent of children with selective mutism met diagnostic criteria for
social anxiety disorder. These children showed high levels of social anxiety
without notable psychopathology in other areas, according to parent and
teacher ratings. Thus, selective mutism may not represent a distinct disorder
but may be a subtype of social anxiety disorder. Maternal anxiety,


<<<PAGE 646>>>
depression, and heightened dependence needs occur in families of children
with selective mutism, similar to families with children who exhibit other
anxiety disorders.
Parental Interactions
Maternal overprotection and anxiety disorders in parents may exacerbate
interactions that unwittingly reinforce selective mutism behaviors. Children
with selective mutism usually speak freely at home and only exhibit
symptoms when under social pressure either in school or other social
situations. Some children seem predisposed to selective mutism after early
emotional or physical trauma; thus, some clinicians refer to the phenomenon
as traumatic mutism rather than selective mutism.
Speech and Language Factors
Selective mutism is conceptualized as an anxiety-based refusal to speak;
however, a higher-than-expected proportion of children with the disorder
have a history of speech delay. An intriguing finding suggests that children
with selective mutism are at higher risk for a disturbance in auditory
processing, which may interfere with the efficient processing of incoming
sounds. For the most part, however, speech and language problems in
children with selective mutism are subtle and cannot account for the
diagnosis.

2.15 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder in
Childhood and Adolescence
Data suggest that up to 25 percent of cases of OCD have their onset by 14
years of age. The overall clinical presentation of OCD in youth is similar to
that in adults; however, compared to adults, children and adolescents with
OCD more often do not consider their obsessional thoughts or repetitive
behaviors to be unreasonable. In milder cases of OCD, a trial of CBT is the
initial intervention. OCD in youth is often treated successfully with SSRIs or
CBT alone or in combination. The results of a large-scale, randomized,


<<<PAGE 647>>>
placebo-controlled study called the Pediatric OCD Treatment Study (POTS),
demonstrated that the highest rates of remission in pediatric OCD are with a
combination of both serotonergic agents and CBT treatment.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Children and adolescents with obsessions or compulsions present for
treatment due to the excessive time that they devote to their intrusive
thoughts and repetitive rituals. Some children see their compulsive rituals as
reasonable responses to their extreme fears and anxieties. Nevertheless, they
are aware of their discomfort and inability to carry out usual daily activities
promptly due to the compulsions, such as getting ready to leave their homes
to go to school each morning.
The most commonly reported obsessions in children and adolescents
include extreme fears of contamination—exposure to dirt, germs, or disease
—followed by worries related to harm befalling themselves, family members,
or fear of harming others due to losing control over aggressive impulses. Also
commonly reported are obsessional needs for symmetry or exactness,
hoarding, and excessive religious or moral concerns. Typical compulsive
rituals among children and adolescents involve cleaning, checking, counting,
repeating behaviors, or arranging items. Associated features in children and
adolescents with OCD include avoidance, indecision, doubt, and slowness to
complete tasks. In most cases of OCD among youth, obsessions and
compulsions are present. According to the DSM-5, diagnosis of OCD is
identical to that of adults, with the note that young children may not be able
to articulate the aims of their compulsions in diminishing their anxiety. The
DSM-5 has also added the following specifiers: with good, fair, poor, or
absent insight; that is, the greater the belief in the OCD obsessions and
compulsions, the weaker the insight. An additional specifier indicates
whether the individual has a current or past history of a tic disorder. We
discuss this disorder in Chapter 9, where Table 9-4 designates the DSM-5
diagnostic criteria for OCD.
Many children and adolescents who develop OCD have an insidious onset
and may hide their symptoms as long as possible so that their rituals will not
be challenged or disrupted. A minority of children, particularly males with
early-onset, may have a rapid unfolding of multiple symptoms within a few


<<<PAGE 648>>>
months. OCD is often comorbid with anxiety disorders, ADHD, and tic
disorders, especially Tourette syndrome. Children with comorbid OCD and
tic disorders are more likely to exhibit counting, arranging, or ordering
compulsions and less likely to manifest excessive washing and cleaning
compulsions. The high comorbidity of OCD, Tourette syndrome, and ADHD
has led investigators to postulate a shared genetic vulnerability to all three of
these disorders. It is crucial to search for comorbidity in children and
adolescents with OCD so that the treatments can be optimal.
Jason, a 12-year-old boy in the sixth grade, was brought for evaluation by
his parents, who expressed concerns over his repeated questions and
anxiety regarding developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS). Jason was a high-functioning and well-adjusted boy who
abruptly began to exhibit extremely disruptive behaviors related to his
fears of AIDS approximately 2 to 3 months before the evaluation. Jason’s
new behaviors included relentless concerns about contracting illness,
washing rituals, repeated expressions of uncertainty over his behavior,
seeking reassurance, repeating rituals, and avoidance.
Jason repeatedly expressed his fear and belief that he was at risk for
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) through exposure to multiple
strangers who were infected. For example, while riding in the car, if
Jason saw a stranger from the window who appeared to him to be illkempt, he experienced a surge of extreme anxiety and obsessively
agonized about whether the stranger could have AIDS and had exposed
him to it. Despite his parents’ reassurances about his safety and lack of
exposure to illness, Jason insisted on vigorously washing for
approximately 1 hour each time he reached home after being out. Jason
continually expressed doubts about his behavior. He often asked his
parents, “Did I use the s___ word? Did I use the f___ word?”
Reassurance was only slightly calming. Jason, previously an excellent
student, began to lose the ability to focus on schoolwork. While reading
passages from assigned materials, Jason frequently experienced severe
anxiety, wondering if he had missed a word or misunderstood the
sentence, and proceeded to reread the material. Completing a page of
written material began to take Jason 30 to 60 minutes. Over several


<<<PAGE 649>>>
weeks, he was less and less able to complete assignments, following
which he became very distressed over his deteriorating grades.
During Jason’s evaluation, his family history suggested that Jason’s
older sister had experienced a period in which she, too, had similar but
milder anxieties, with less interference in functioning, and she had never
received any treatment for those symptoms.
At the intake interview, Jason presented as a preoccupied and sad boy
who was cooperative with questioning. He did not volunteer much
information, and he allowed his parents to recount the extent of his
symptoms. Jason believed that his relentless concerns were reasonable
and that he required repeated reassurance from his parents in order to
continue his daily activities. Jason met full diagnostic criteria for OCD.
Symptoms of depression were present but not sufficient for major
depressive disorder.
He began CBT; however, Jason was so fearful of deviating from his
rituals that he was unable to participate fully in his treatment, and he
became despondent about his future. Jason refused to go to school due to
his increasing distress associated with reading and his shame regarding
his diminishing academic performance. Given his limited progress during
the first 2 months of CBT, his psychiatrist added fluoxetine, titrated to 40
mg/day. Over 3 weeks, there was some improvement, and Jason was
more amenable to cooperating with his CBT treatment. CBT and SSRI
treatment continued over the next 3 months regularly. Over time, Jason
finally began to show some flexibility with his rituals, and he was able to
decrease the amount of time he spent with rituals. Once he had found
some relief from his symptoms, Jason was able to focus more on his
schoolwork and his family life. Follow-up over the next year was
positive; Jason had maintained his gains from treatment, with only
minimal interference from residual OCD symptoms. Jason’s academic
achievement improved, he was able to engage in activities with friends,
and he spent almost no time preoccupied with obsessional thoughts of
illness and cleansing rituals. (Adapted from a case courtesy of James T.
McCracken, M.D.)
Pathology and Laboratory Examination


<<<PAGE 650>>>
No specific laboratory measures are useful in the diagnosis of OCD.
Even when the onset of obsessions or compulsions appears to be associated
with a recent infection with GABHS, antigens and antibodies to the bacteria
do not indicate a causal relationship between GABHS and OCD.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Developmentally appropriate rituals in the play and behavior of young
children should not be confused with OCD in that age group. Preschoolers
often engage in ritualistic play and request a predictable routine such as
bathing, reading stories, or selecting the same stuffed animal at bedtime to
promote a sense of security and comfort. These routines allay
developmentally normal fears and lead to reasonable completion of daily
activities. On the other hand, extreme fears drive the obsessions or
compulsions, and this significantly interferes with daily function because of
the excessive time that they consume and the extreme distress that ensues
when they are interrupted. The rituals of preschoolers generally become less
rigid by the time they enter grade school, and school-age children do not
typically experience a surge of anxiety when they encounter small changes in
their routine.
Children and adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder, separation
anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder experience intense worries that
they repeatedly express; however, these are mundane compared to
obsessions, which are often so extreme that they appear bizarre. A child with
generalized anxiety disorder typically worries repeatedly about performance
on academic examinations, whereas a child with OCD may experience
repeated intrusive thoughts that he may harm someone he loves. The
compulsions of OCD are not present in other anxiety disorders; however,
children with autism spectrum disorders often display repetitive behaviors
that may resemble OCD. In contrast with the rituals of OCD, children with
autism spectrum disorder are not responding to anxiety, but are more often
exhibiting stereotyped behaviors that are self-stimulating or self-comforting.
Children and adolescents with tic disorders such as Tourette syndrome
may display complex repetitive, compulsive behaviors similar to the
compulsions seen in OCD. Children and adolescents with tic disorders are at
higher risk for the development of concurrent OCD.


<<<PAGE 651>>>
Severe OCD symptoms may be difficult to distinguish from delusional
symptoms, especially when the obsessions and compulsions are bizarre. In
most adults, and often in youth with OCD, despite an inability to control their
obsessions or resist completing compulsions, insight into their lack of
reasonableness is preserved. That is, an individual’s conviction in their
beliefs often does not reach delusional intensity. When insight is present and
underlying anxiety can be described, even in the face of significant
dysfunction due to bizarre obsessions and compulsions, the diagnosis of OCD
is suspect.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
OCD with onset in childhood and adolescence is most often a chronic,
waxing, and waning disorder with variability in severity and outcome.
Follow-up studies suggest that up to 40 to 50 percent of children and
adolescents recover from OCD with minimal residual symptoms. A study of
childhood OCD treatment with sertraline resulted in close to 50 percent of
participants experiencing complete remission and partial remission in another
25 percent with a follow-up time of 1 year. Predictors of the best outcome
were in those children and adolescents without comorbid disorders, including
tic disorders and ADHD. A study of 142 children and adolescents with OCD
followed over 9 years at the Maudsley Hospital in England found 41 percent
to have a persistence of OCD, with 40 percent exhibiting an additional
psychiatric diagnosis at follow-up. The main predictor for persistent OCD
was the duration of illness at the time of the initial assessment.
Approximately half of the follow-up group was still receiving treatment, and
half believed that they needed continued treatment.
Neuropsychological functioning may also play a role in outcome and
prognosis. A study of 63 youth with OCD who completed the Rey-Osterrieth
Complex Figure (ROCF) along with specific subtests of the Wechsler
Intelligence Scale for Children, Third Edition (WISC-III), found that 5minute recall accuracy from the ROCF was positively correlated with
response to treatment, particularly CBT. These findings imply that poorer
performance on the ROCF and poor response to therapy may be in part due to
executive functioning difficulties and that treatment may need to be modified
to account for these obstacles.


<<<PAGE 652>>>
Overall, the prognosis is hopeful for most children and adolescents with
mild to moderate OCD. In about 10 percent of cases, OCD may represent a
prodrome of a psychotic disorder in children and adolescents. In youth with
subthreshold OCD symptoms, there is a high risk of developing the full OCD
disorder within 2 years. Childhood OCD is responsive to available
treatments, resulting in improvement, if not complete remission, in the
majority of cases.

TREATMENT
CBT and SSRIs are both efficacious treatments for OCD in youth. CBT
geared toward children of varying ages is based on the principle of
developmentally appropriate exposure to the feared stimuli coupled with
response prevention, leading to diminishing anxiety over time on exposure to
feared situations. CBT manuals can ensure that the therapist can make
developmentally appropriate interventions and that the child and parents
receive comprehensive education.
Treatment guidelines for children and adolescents with mild to moderate
OCD recommend a trial of CBT before initiating medication. However, the
POTS, a multi-site National Institute of Health (NIH)–funded investigation of
sertraline and CBT, each alone and in combination, for the treatment of
childhood-onset OCD, revealed that the combination was superior to either
treatment alone. Each treatment alone also provided encouraging levels of
response. The mean daily dose of sertraline was 133 mg/day in the group
administered the combination treatment, and 170 mg/day for the sertraline
alone group. Improvement with the pharmacologic intervention of childhood
OCD usually occurs within 8 to 12 weeks of treatment. Most children and
adolescents who experienced remission with acute treatment using SSRIs
were still responsive over a year. Among youth with OCD who obtain a
partial response to a therapeutic trial of SSRI treatment, augmentation with a
short-term OCD-specific CBT leads to a significantly greater response.
Evidence shows that higher treatment expectations by patients and families
link to better treatment response, greater compliance with home-based CBT
assignments, less drop out of treatment, and reduced impairment.
In addition to individual CBT, both family and group CBT interventions
are efficacious in the treatment of childhood OCD. Family CBT (FCBT)


<<<PAGE 653>>>
intervention in the treatment of OCD in youth increases the response rates. A
controlled comparison of family CBT and psychoeducation and relaxation
(PRT) in 71 families of children with OCD showed that clinical remission
rates in the FCBT group were significantly higher than those in the PRT
group. The FCBT treatment reduced parent involvement and accommodation
in their affected child’s symptoms, which led to decreased symptomatology.
A randomized controlled study investigating web-camera delivered FCBT
(W-CBT) compared to a waitlist condition assigned 31 families to one of the
above conditions. Assessments were conducted immediately before and after
treatment and at a 3-month follow-up for the W-CBT group. The W-CBT
group was superior to the waitlist control group on all primary outcome
measures, with large effect sizes. Eighty-one percent of the W-CBT group
responded, compared to 13 percent of the waitlist group. The children
maintained the gains at the 3-month follow-up assessment. The authors
conclude that W-CBT may be efficacious in the treatment of OCD in youth
and may be a promising tool for future dissemination.
Exposure and response prevention (ERP) was studied in a group format in
youth with OCD in a community-based program. Group-based ERP was
effective in reducing OCD symptom severity and depressive symptoms, but
not anxiety symptoms, in a naturalistic treatment setting for children with
OCD and comorbid anxiety or depressive features.
Multiple randomized clinical trials establish the efficacy of SSRIs for OCD
in youth. A meta-analysis of 13 studies of SSRIs, including sertraline,
fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, and paroxetine, has provided evidence of the
efficacy of SSRIs with a moderate effect size. A randomized controlled
clinical trial of citalopram versus fluoxetine in youth with OCD found that
citalopram was as safe and effective as fluoxetine for the treatment of OCD
in children and adolescents. There have been no apparent differences in the
rate of response for the individual SSRIs.
Currently, three SSRIs: sertraline (at least 6 years), fluoxetine (at least 7
years), and fluvoxamine (at least 8 years), as well as clomipramine (at least
10 years), have received FDA approval for the treatment of OCD in youth.
The black-box warning for antidepressants used in children for any disorder,
including OCD, is applicable so that close monitoring for suicidal ideation or
behavior is mandated when using these agents in children.
Typical side effects that emerge with the use of SSRIs include insomnia,


<<<PAGE 654>>>
nausea, agitation, tremor, and fatigue. Dosage ranges for the various SSRIs
found to have efficacy in randomized clinical trials are the following:
fluoxetine (20 to 60 mg), sertraline (50 to 200 mg), fluvoxamine (up to 200
mg), and paroxetine (up to 50 mg).
Clomipramine was the first antidepressant studied in the treatment of OCD
in childhood and the only tricyclic antidepressant that has FDA approval for
the treatment of anxiety disorders in childhood. Clomipramine was
efficacious in doses up to 200 mg, or 3 mg/kg, whichever is less.
Nevertheless, clomipramine is not recommended as a first-line treatment due
to its higher potential risks compared to other SSRIs, including the
cardiovascular risk of hypotension and arrhythmia and seizure risk.
Pediatric patients with OCD who respond only partially to medications
tend to have at least moderate to severe OCD symptoms, high ratings of
global impairment, and significant comorbidity even after their partial
response to an adequate trial of medication. Augmentation strategies with
medications to enhance serotonergic effects, such as with atypical
antipsychotics (e.g., risperidone), have demonstrated increased response
when SSRIs yield a partial response. Aripiprazole augmentation in 39
adolescents with OCD who did not respond to two trials of monotherapy with
SSRIs led to 59 percent of patients being rated as improved or very much
improved. Patients who responded to aripiprazole were less impaired at
baseline in functional impairment but not in the clinical severity of their
OCD. Aripiprazole’s final mean dose was 12.2 mg/day. This agent may be
useful for pediatric OCD and warrants further controlled trials.
Given the lack of data on discontinuation, recommendations for
maintaining medication such as stabilization, education about relapse risk,
and tapering medication during the summer are likely in order to minimize
academic compromise in case of relapse. For children and adolescents with
more severe or multiple episodes of significant exacerbation of symptoms,
treatment for more than a year is recommended. Overall, the efficacy of
treatment for children and adolescents with OCD is high with choices of
SSRIs and CBT.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
OCD is common among children and adolescents, with a point prevalence of


<<<PAGE 655>>>
about 0.5 percent and a lifetime prevalence of 2 to 4 percent. The rate of
OCD among youth rises exponentially with increasing age, with rates of 0.3
percent in children between the ages of 5 and 7 years, rising to rates between
0.6 and 1 percent among teens. According to the DSM-5, the prevalence of
OCD in the United States is 1.2 percent, with a slightly higher rate in
females. Rates of OCD among adolescents are higher than those for
schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. Among young children with OCD, there
appears to be a slight male predominance, which diminishes with age.

ETIOLOGY
Genetic Factors
Genetic factors contribute significantly to the development of OCD in earlyonset illness. The rate of OCD among first-degree relatives of children and
adolescents who develop OCD is 10 times greater than for the general
population. Twin studies have shown that the concordance rates for OCD are
higher for monozygotic twins (0.57) than for dizygotic twins (0.22); however,
nongenetic factors play a role that may be equal to or greater than genetic
contributions in some cases. OCD is a heterogeneous disorder that has been
recognized for decades to run in families. Also, the presence of subclinical
symptom constellations in family members appears to breed true. Genetic
linkage studies have revealed evidence of susceptibility loci on chromosomes
1q, 3q, 6q, 7p, 9p, 10p, and 15q. The OCD collaborative genetics study found
that the Sapap3 gene was associated with grooming disorders and may be a
promising candidate gene for OCD. There is evidence that the glutamate
receptor–modulating genes may also be associated with and play a role in the
emergence of OCD. Family studies have suggested a relationship between
OCD and tic disorders such as Tourette syndrome. OCD and tic disorders
likely share susceptibility factors, which may include both genetic and
nongenetic factors.
Neuroimmunology
Immunologic contributions to the emergence of OCD are likely related to an
inflammatory process in the basal ganglia associated with an immune
response to a systemic infection that may trigger OCD and tics. A prototype


<<<PAGE 656>>>
of this hypothesis has been the controversial association of OCD symptoms
in a small subgroup of children and adolescents following documented
exposure to or infection with group A β-hemolytic streptococcus (GABHS).
Under this hypothesis, cases of infection-triggered OCD have been termed
Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with
Streptococcus (PANDAS), and parallel an autoimmune process leading to a
movement disorder much like Sydenham chorea following rheumatic fever.
Some evidence from MRI studies has documented a proportional relationship
between the size of the basal ganglia and the severity of OCD symptoms in a
small sample. GABHS may be one of many physiologic stressors that can
lead to an increase or emergence of OCD or tics; however, a prospective
longitudinal study of youth with PANDAS followed over 2 years found no
evidence of a temporal association between GABHS infections and OCD
symptom exacerbations in children who met the criteria for PANDAS. The
presentation of OCD in children and adolescents due to acute exposure to
GABHS represents a minority of OCD cases in youth and remains
controversial.
Neurochemistry
The evidence that SSRIs diminish symptoms of OCD, along with findings of
altered sensitivity to the acute administration of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)
agonists in individuals with OCD, supports the probability of serotonin’s role
in OCD. Also, the dopamine system is likely influential in OCD, especially in
light of the frequent comorbidity of OCD with tic disorders in childhood.
Clinical observations have indicated that obsessions and compulsions worsen
with stimulants, as with patients who have comorbid ADHD. Dopamine
antagonists, administered along with SSRIs, may augment the effectiveness
of SSRIs in the treatment of OCD. Evidence suggests that multiple
neurotransmitter systems may play a role in OCD.
Neuroimaging
Both CT and MRI of untreated children and adults with OCD have revealed
smaller volumes of basal ganglia segments compared to healthy controls. A
meta-analysis of voxel-based morphometry (VBM) to assess gray matter
density compared 343 OCD patients with 318 healthy controls and found that


<<<PAGE 657>>>
gray matter density in OCD patients was smaller in parietofrontal cortical
regions (including the supramarginal gyrus, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
and the orbitofrontal cortex), but larger in the basal ganglia (the putamen) and
anterior prefrontal cortex, compared to healthy controls. Increased gray
matter volume in the basal ganglia of patients with OCD has been reported in
other studies as well. These structural abnormalities in the prefrontal-basal
ganglia are likely to be integrally involved in the pathophysiology of OCD. It
is not clear whether the increases in gray matter in individuals with OCD
occur before or after the symptoms emerge. In children, there is evidence of
increased thalamic volume. Adult studies have provided evidence of
hypermetabolism of frontal cortical-striatal-thalamocortical networks in
untreated individuals with OCD. Of interest, imaging studies of before and
after treatment have revealed that both medication and behavioral
interventions lead to a reduction of orbitofrontal and caudate metabolic rates
in children and adults with OCD.

2.16 Early-Onset Schizophrenia
Early-onset schizophrenia comprises childhood-onset and adolescent-onset
schizophrenia. Childhood-onset schizophrenia is a rare and virulent form of
schizophrenia now recognized as a progressive neurodevelopmental disorder.
Childhood-onset is characterized by a more chronic course, with severe social
and cognitive consequences and increased negative symptoms compared to
adult-onset schizophrenia. Childhood-onset schizophrenia is an onset of
psychotic symptoms before 13 years, believed to represent a subgroup of
patients with schizophrenia with an increased heritable etiology, and evidence
of widespread abnormalities in the development of brain structures including
the cerebral cortex, white matter, hippocampus, and cerebellum. Children
diagnosed with childhood-onset schizophrenia have higher than average rates
of premorbid developmental abnormalities that appear to be nonspecific
markers of abnormal brain development. Early-onset schizophrenia is an
onset of disease before 18 years, including childhood-onset as well as
adolescent-onset schizophrenia. Early-onset schizophrenia is associated with
severe clinical course, poor psychosocial functioning, and increased severity


<<<PAGE 658>>>
of brain abnormalities. Despite the more severe course, current evidence
supports the efficacy of both psychosocial and pharmacologic interventions
in the management of childhood-onset and, particularly, adolescent-onset
schizophrenia.
Children with childhood-onset schizophrenia have more significant deficits
in measures of IQ, memory, and tests of perceptuomotor skills compared with
adolescent-onset schizophrenia. Increased impairment in childhood-onset
schizophrenia of cognitive measures such as IQ, working memory, and
perceptuomotor skills may be premorbid markers of illness rather than
sequelae of the disorder. Although cognitive impairments are more
considerable in younger patients with schizophrenia, the clinical presentation
of schizophrenia remains remarkably similar across the ages, and the
diagnosis of childhood-onset schizophrenia is continuous with that in
adolescents and adults, with one exception: in childhood-onset schizophrenia,
a failure to achieve expected social and academic functioning may replace a
deterioration in functioning. Chapter 5 discusses the features of the disorder
in detail.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
All of the symptoms included in adult-onset schizophrenia may be manifest
in children and adolescents with the disorder. However, youth with
schizophrenia are more likely to have a premorbid history of social rejection,
poor peer relationships, clingy withdrawn behavior, and academic trouble
than those with adult-onset schizophrenia. Some children with schizophrenia
evaluated in middle childhood have early histories of delayed motor
milestones and language acquisition similar to some symptoms of autism
spectrum disorder.
The onset of schizophrenia in childhood is frequently insidious, starting
with inappropriate affect or unusual behavior; it may take months or years for
a child to meet all of the diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia.
Auditory hallucinations commonly occur in children with schizophrenia.
The voices may reflect an ongoing critical commentary or command
hallucinations may instruct children to harm or kill themselves or others.
Hallucinatory voices may sound human or animal, or “bizarre,” for example,
identified as “a computer in my head,” “Martians,” or the voice of someone


<<<PAGE 659>>>
familiar, such as a relative. The childhood-onset schizophrenia project at the
NIMH found high rates across all hallucination modalities. However, there
were unexpectedly high rates of tactile, olfactory, and visual hallucinations
among this study group of patients with childhood-onset schizophrenia.
Visual hallucinations were associated with lower IQ and earlier age at onset
of disease. Visual hallucinations are often frightening; affected children may
“see” images of the devil, skeletons, scary faces, or space creatures. Transient
phobic visual hallucinations occur in severely anxious or traumatized
children who do not develop major psychotic disorders. Visual, tactile, and
olfactory hallucinations may be a marker of more severe psychosis.
Delusions occur in up to half of children and adolescents with
schizophrenia, in various forms, including persecutory, grandiose, and
religious. Delusions increase in frequency with increased age. Blunted or
inappropriate affect appears almost universally in children with
schizophrenia. Children with schizophrenia may giggle inappropriately or cry
without being able to explain why. Formal thought disorders, including
loosening of associations and thought blocking, are common features among
youth with schizophrenia. Illogic thinking and poverty of thought are also
often present. Unlike adults with schizophrenia, children with schizophrenia
do not have poverty of speech content, but they speak less than other children
of the same intelligence and are ambiguous in the way they refer to persons,
objects, and events. The communication deficits observable in children with
schizophrenia include unpredictably changing the topic of conversation
without introducing the new topic to the listener (loose associations).
Children with schizophrenia also exhibit illogical thinking and speaking and
tend to underuse self-initiated repair strategies to aid in their communication.
When an utterance is unclear or vague, normal children attempt to clarify
their communication with repetitions, revision, and more detail. Children
with schizophrenia, on the other hand, fail to aid communication with
revision, fillers, or starting over. These deficits are examples of negative
symptoms in childhood schizophrenia.
Although core phenomena for schizophrenia seem to be universal across
the age span, a child’s developmental level significantly influences the
presentation of the symptoms. Delusions of young children are less complex,
therefore, than those of older children; for example, age-appropriate content,
such as animal imagery and monsters, is likely to be a source of delusional


<<<PAGE 660>>>
fear in young children. According to the DSM-5, a child with schizophrenia
may experience deterioration of function, along with the emergence of
psychotic symptoms, or the child may never achieve the expected level of
functioning.
A 12-year-old sixth-grade boy named Ian, with a longstanding history of
social isolation, academic problems, and temper outbursts, began to
develop concerns that his parents might be poisoning his food. Over the
next year, his symptoms progressed with increased suspiciousness and
fearfulness, preoccupation with food, and beliefs that Satan was trying to
communicate with him. Ian also appeared to be responding to auditory
hallucinations that he believed were coming from the radio and
television, which he found frightening and commanded him to harm his
parents. Ian had also been informing his mother that their food had a
strange smell and that he thought someone had poisoned it. At night, Ian
would see frightening figures in his room. During this time, his parents
also observed bizarre behaviors, including talking and yelling to himself,
perseverating about devils and demons, and finally, assaulting family
members because he thought they were evil. On one occasion, Ian
scratched himself with a kitchen knife to “please God.” No predominant
mood symptoms emerged, and there was no history of substance abuse
found.
Developmentally, Ian was the product of a full-term pregnancy
complicated by a difficult labor and forceps delivery. His milestones,
both motor and speech, were delayed by about 6 months. However, his
pediatrician reassured his parents that this was within the limits of
healthy development. As a younger child, Ian tended to be quiet and
socially awkward. His intellectual function was tested and was in the
average range; however, academic achievement testing was consistently
below grade level. Ian remained lonely and isolated, and he had great
difficulty making friends.
Ian has had no medical problems, and his immunizations were up to
date.
Ian’s family psychiatric history was significant for depression in a
maternal aunt and a completed suicide in a maternal great-grandparent.


<<<PAGE 661>>>
Ian was sent by ambulance to the hospital for the first time from school
when he tried to jump off a balcony on the second story of his school in
response to auditory hallucinations commanding him to kill himself.
During his hospitalization, his parents reluctantly consented to a
risperidone trial. The psychiatrist titrated Ian to 3 mg/day. His auditory
hallucinations improved moderately after 2 weeks of treatment. However,
he continued to be suspicious and mistrustful of his physicians and
family.
Ian’s family was perplexed as to what had caused Ian’s severe
symptoms, and the hospital treatment team met with his parents multiple
times during his hospitalization to reassure them that they had not caused
his illness and that their continued support might improve his chances of
improvement. After discharge from the hospital 30 days later, Ian was
placed in a special education program in a nonpublic school, and he was
assigned a psychotherapist who met regularly with him individually and
with his family. At the time of discharge from the hospital, Ian’s
symptoms had moderately improved, although he still had auditory
hallucinations intermittently. Over the next 5 years after the onset of his
illness, Ian had many exacerbations of his psychosis, and he was
hospitalized nine times, including placement in a long-term residential
program. Ian had received trials of olanzapine, quetiapine, and
aripiprazole, each of which seemed to lead to improvement for a while,
after which he was no longer responsive to the medications. Ian
continued to receive individual cognitive-behavioral therapy and family
therapy, and his family was very supportive. Even with these
interventions, Ian’s mental status continued to display tangential and
disorganized thinking, paranoid delusions, loose associations,
perseverative speech patterns, and a flat, at times, inappropriate affect. He
had periods in which he resorted to pacing and muttering to himself, with
no social interaction with others unless initiated by adults. Finally, Ian
achieved significant improvement after being placed on clozapine
therapy, although he remained mildly symptomatic. (Adapted from a case
by Jon M. McClellan, M.D.)
Pathology and Laboratory Examinations


<<<PAGE 662>>>
No specific laboratory tests are diagnostically specific for childhood-onset
schizophrenia.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Making a diagnosis of childhood-onset schizophrenia is challenging. Very
young children who report hallucinations, apparent thought disorders,
language delays, and an inability to differentiate reality from fantasy may be
manifesting phenomena better accounted for by other disorders such as
PTSD, or sometimes developmental immaturity.
Nevertheless, the differential diagnosis of childhood-onset schizophrenia
includes autism spectrum disorder, bipolar disorders, depressive disorders,
psychotic disorders, multicomplex developmental syndromes, drug-induced
psychosis, and psychosis caused by organic disease states. Children with
childhood-onset schizophrenia have frequent comorbidities, including
ADHD, oppositional defiant disorder, and major depression. Children with
schizotypal personality disorder have some traits in common with children
who meet diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia. Blunted affect, social
isolation, eccentric thoughts, ideas of reference, and bizarre behavior occur in
both disorders; however, in schizophrenia, overt psychotic symptoms, such as
hallucinations, delusions, and incoherence, must be present at some point.
Hallucinations alone, however, are not evidence of schizophrenia; patients
must show either a deterioration of function or an inability to meet an
expected developmental level to warrant the diagnosis of schizophrenia.
Auditory and visual hallucinations can appear as self-limited events in
nonpsychotic young children who are experiencing extreme stress or anxiety
related to unstable home lives, abuse, or neglect or in children experiencing a
significant loss.
Psychotic phenomena are common among children with major depressive
disorder, in which both hallucinations and, less commonly, delusions may
occur. The congruence of mood with psychotic features is most pronounced
in depressed children, although children with schizophrenia may also seem
sad. The hallucinations and delusions of schizophrenia are more likely to
have a bizarre quality than those of children with depressive disorders. In
children and adolescents with bipolar I disorder, it often is challenging to
distinguish a first episode of mania with psychotic features from


<<<PAGE 663>>>
schizophrenia if the child has no history of previous depressions. Grandiose
delusions and hallucinations are typical of manic episodes, but clinicians
often must follow the natural history of the disorder to confirm the presence
of a mood disorder. Autism spectrum disorders share some features with
schizophrenia, most notably difficulty with social relationships, an early
history of delayed language acquisition, and ongoing communication deficits.
However, hallucinations, delusions, and formal thought disorder are core
features of schizophrenia and not the usual features of autism spectrum
disorder. Autism spectrum disorder is usually diagnosed by 3 years of age,
whereas schizophrenia with childhood-onset usually manifests after 5 years
of age.
Among adolescents, alcohol and other substance abuse sometimes can
result in a deterioration of function, psychotic symptoms, and paranoid
delusions. Amphetamines, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), and
phencyclidine (PCP) may lead to a psychotic state. Sudden, flagrant onset of
paranoid psychosis may suggest substance-induced psychotic disorder.
Medical conditions that can induce psychotic features include thyroid
disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, and temporal lobe disease.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Significant predictors of the course and outcome of childhood and early-onset
schizophrenia include the child’s premorbid level of functioning, the age of
onset, IQ, response to psychosocial and pharmacologic interventions, degree
of remission after the first psychotic episode, and degree of family support.
Early age at onset and children with comorbid developmental delays, learning
disorders, lower IQ, and premorbid behavioral disorders, such as ADHD and
conduct disorder, are less treatment responsive and likely to have the most
guarded prognoses. Predictors of a poorer course of childhood-onset
schizophrenia include a family history of schizophrenia, young age and
insidious onset, developmental delays and lower level of premorbid function,
and chronicity or length of a first psychotic episode. Psychosocial and family
stressors are known to influence the relapse rate in adults with schizophrenia,
and high expression of negative emotion (EE) likely affects children with
childhood-onset schizophrenia as well.
An essential factor in the outcome is the accuracy and stability of the


<<<PAGE 664>>>
diagnosis of schizophrenia. One study reported that one-third of children who
received an initial diagnosis of schizophrenia later have bipolar disorder in
adolescence. Children and adolescents with bipolar I disorder may have a
better long-term prognosis than those with schizophrenia. The NIMH-funded
Treatment of Early-Onset Schizophrenia reported the outcome of
neurocognitive functioning in 8- to 19-year-old youth with schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorders who participated in a randomized, double-blind
clinical trial comparing molindone, olanzapine, and risperidone. The three
medication groups yielded no group differences in neurocognitive
functioning over a year; however, when data from the three groups were
combined, a significant modest improvement was observed in several
domains of neurocognitive functioning. The authors concluded that
antipsychotic intervention in youth with early-onset schizophrenia spectrum
disorders led to modest improvement in neurocognitive function.

TREATMENT
The treatment of childhood-onset schizophrenia requires a multimodal
approach, including psychoeducation for families, pharmacologic
interventions, psychotherapeutic interventions, social skills interventions, and
appropriate educational placement. A recent RCT investigated the
effectiveness of several psychosocial interventions on youth in an early
prodromal stage characterized by changes in cognitive and social behavior.
The interventions, termed integrated psychological interventions, specifically
included CBT, group skills training, cognitive remediation therapy,
multifamily psychoeducation, and supportive counseling on the prevention of
psychosis. Of interest, the integrated psychological intervention was more
effective than standard treatments in delaying the onset of psychosis over a 2year follow-up period. These results sparked interest in the potential utility of
psychosocial interventions to mediate psychosis and to alter the relapse rate
and severity of illness over time. Children with childhood-onset
schizophrenia may have less robust responses to antipsychotic medications
than adolescents and adults. Family education and ongoing therapeutic family
interventions are critical to maintaining the maximum level of support for the
patient. Monitoring the most appropriate educational setting for a child with
childhood-onset schizophrenia is essential, especially given the frequent


<<<PAGE 665>>>
social skills deficits, attention deficits, and academic difficulties that often
accompany childhood-onset schizophrenia.
Pharmacotherapy
Second-generation antipsychotics, serotonin-dopamine antagonists, are the
current mainstay pharmacologic treatments for children and adolescents with
schizophrenia. Current data include six randomized clinical trials in youth
investigating the efficacy of second-generation antipsychotics for early-onset
schizophrenia, with limited support for one agent over the others. Although
clozapine, a serotonin receptor antagonist with some dopamine (D2)
antagonism, may be more effective in reducing positive and negative
symptoms, it remains a choice of last resort in youth based on its side effects.
To date, however, evidence from multisite randomized clinical trials supports
some efficacy of risperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole, and clozapine in the
treatment of childhood- and adolescent-onset schizophrenia. Two randomized
clinical trials using risperidone in adolescents with schizophrenia found
risperidone at doses up to 3 mg/day to be superior to placebo. A multisite
randomized 6-week controlled trial of olanzapine in adolescents with
schizophrenia found that it was more efficacious than a placebo. An RCT of
aripiprazole at two fixed doses found that it was superior to placebo in the
treatment of positive symptoms of adolescent schizophrenia; however, more
than 40 percent of subjects in the active medication group did not achieve
remission. Finally, clozapine is more effective than haloperidol in improving
both positive and negative symptoms in treatment-resistant schizophrenia in
youth. More recently, a study compared clozapine to high doses of
olanzapine and found that response rates were about twice as high for
clozapine as olanzapine (66 percent vs. 33 percent) when the investigators
defined response as 30 percent or better reduction in symptoms on the Brief
Psychiatric Rating Scale and improvement on the Clinical Global Impression
Scale. The Treatment of Early-Onset Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders
Study compared the efficacy of risperidone and olanzapine with those of
molindone, a mid-potency first-generation antipsychotic. In this study,
lacking a placebo group, each of these agents provided a similar therapeutic
effect; however, fewer than half of the patients responded optimally. Despite
the limited randomized controlled studies of second-generation


<<<PAGE 666>>>
antipsychotics for the treatment of schizophrenia in youth, the FDA is
progressively approving the use of these agents for pediatric schizophrenia
and bipolar illness. In 2007, the FDA approved the use of risperidone and
aripiprazole for the treatment of schizophrenia in 13- to 17-year-olds. The
FDA approved the use of olanzapine and quetiapine in 2009 for the treatment
of schizophrenia in 13- to 17-year-olds. Lurasidone and paliperidone were
approved by the FDA in 2017 for the treatment of schizophrenia in
adolescents.
A double-blind, randomized 8-week controlled trial compared the efficacy
and safety of olanzapine to clozapine in childhood-onset schizophrenia.
Children with childhood-onset schizophrenia who were resistant to at least
two previous treatments with antipsychotics were randomized to treatment
for 8 weeks with either olanzapine or clozapine followed by a 2-year openlabel follow-up. Using the Clinical Global Impression of Severity of
Symptoms Scale and Schedule for the Assessment of Negative/Positive
Symptoms, clozapine was associated with a significant reduction in all
outcome measures. In contrast, olanzapine showed improvement on some
measures but not on all. The only statistically significant measure in which
clozapine was superior to olanzapine was in alleviating negative symptoms
compared with baseline. Clozapine was associated with more adverse events,
such as lipid abnormalities and a seizure in one patient.
Several studies have provided evidence that risperidone, a benzisoxazole
derivative, is as effective as the older high-potency first-generation
antipsychotics, such as haloperidol, and causes less frequent severe side
effects in the treatment of schizophrenia in older adolescents and adults.
Published case reports and limited more extensive controlled studies have
supported the efficacy of risperidone in the treatment of psychosis in children
and adolescents. Risperidone can cause weight gain and dystonic reactions
and other extrapyramidal adverse effects in children and adolescents.
Olanzapine is generally well tolerated for extrapyramidal adverse effects
compared with first-generation antipsychotics and risperidone, but it is
associated with moderate sedation and significant weight gain.
Psychosocial Interventions
Psychosocial interventions aimed at family education and patient and family


<<<PAGE 667>>>
support are critical components of the treatment plan for childhood-onset
schizophrenia. Although there are not yet RCTs of psychosocial interventions
in children and adolescents with schizophrenia, family therapy,
psychoeducation, and social skills training have been shown to lead to
improved clinical symptoms in young adults with a first episode of
schizophrenia, and reviews of the adult literature support the benefit of CBT
and cognitive remediation as adjunctive treatments to pharmacologic agents
in adults. Psychotherapists who work with children with schizophrenia must
take into account a child’s developmental level in order to support the child’s
reality testing and be sensitive to the child’s sense of self. Long-term
supportive family interventions and cognitive-behavioral and remediation
interventions, combined with pharmacotherapy, are likely to be the most
effective approach to early-onset schizophrenia.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Childhood-onset schizophrenia affects less than 1 in 40,000 children. For
adolescents, this increases by at least 50-fold. Childhood-onset schizophrenia
resembles the more severe forms of adult schizophrenia, although it has
exceptionally high comorbidity rates. Comorbid disorders include ADHD,
depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, speech and language disorders, and
motor disturbances.
Boys seem to have a slight preponderance among children diagnosed with
schizophrenia, with an estimated ratio of about 1.67 boys to 1 girl. Boys often
become identified at a younger age than girls do. Schizophrenia rarely is
diagnosed in children younger than 5 years of age. The prevalence of
schizophrenia among the parents of children with schizophrenia is about 8
percent, which is about twice the prevalence in the parents of patients with
adult-onset schizophrenia.

ETIOLOGY
Childhood-onset schizophrenia is a neurodevelopmental disorder in which
complex interactions between genes and the environment result in abnormal
early brain development. The consequences of the aberrant brain
development in schizophrenia may not be fully evident until adolescence or


<<<PAGE 668>>>
early adulthood; however, data support the hypothesis that white matter
abnormalities and disturbances in myelination in childhood lead to abnormal
connectivity between brain regions. The aberrant connectivity in various
regions of the brain is likely a significant contributing factor in the psychotic
symptoms and cognitive deficits in childhood-onset schizophrenia.
Genetic Factors
Estimates of heritability for childhood-onset schizophrenia have been as high
as 80 percent. Children with childhood-onset schizophrenia have higher rates
of schizophrenia among their relatives than do patients with adult-onset
schizophrenia.
Endophenotype Markers for Childhood-Onset Schizophrenia.
Currently, no reliable method can identify persons at the highest risk for
schizophrenia in a given family. Neurodevelopmental abnormalities and
higher-than-expected rates of neurologic soft signs and impairments in
sustaining attention and in strategies for information processing appear
among children at high risk. Increased rates of disturbed communication
styles exist in family members of individuals with schizophrenia. Reports
have documented higher-than-expected neuropsychological deficits in
attention, working memory, and premorbid IQ among children who later
develop schizophrenia and its spectrum disorders.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Studies
An NIMH prospective study of more than 100 patients with childhood-onset
schizophrenia and their typically developing siblings has demonstrated
progressive loss of gray matter, delayed and disrupted white matter growth,
and a decline in cerebellar volume in those with childhood-onset
schizophrenia. Although siblings of children with childhood-onset
schizophrenia also showed some of these brain disruptions, the gray matter
abnormalities were normalized over time in the siblings, indicating a
protective mechanism in siblings that was not present in those children with
childhood-onset schizophrenia. Furthermore, the hippocampal volume loss
across the age span appears to be static among children with childhood-onset
schizophrenia. An MRI NIMH study of more than 100 children with


<<<PAGE 669>>>
childhood-onset schizophrenia and their typically developing siblings,
studied for about two decades, documented that in childhood-onset
schizophrenia, progressive brain gray matter loss occurs continuously over
time. This gray matter shrinkage occurs with ventricular increases, with a
pattern of loss originating in the parietal region and proceeding frontally to
dorsolateral prefrontal and temporal cortices, including superior temporal
gyri. Studies of childhood-onset schizophrenia at the NIMH provided
evidence that early loss of parietal gray matter followed by frontal and
parietal gray matter loss is more pronounced in childhood-onset
schizophrenia than in schizophrenia with later onset. Other research utilized
diffusion tensor images from children with childhood-onset schizophrenia
versus controls and found increased diffusivities in the posterior corona
radiata in children with childhood-onset schizophrenia, which implicated
abnormal connectivity with the parietal lobes. These results contrasted with
findings among subjects with later onset of schizophrenia in whom there
were more abnormalities in the frontal lobes.

ATTENUATED PSYCHOSIS SYNDROME
Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome (APS) is a new diagnostic category included
in DSM-5 as a condition for further study. It is a syndrome characterized by
subthreshold psychotic symptoms, less severe than those found in psychotic
disorders, but which are often present in prodromal psychotic states.
Debate and controversy among clinicians and researchers have surrounded
the inclusion of APS in the DSM-5. Some believe that the identification and
treatment of a prodromal syndrome of a psychotic disorder would either
delay or diminish the severity of the future psychotic illness. However, others
believe that identification of a prodromal syndrome, which may rarely, if
ever, progress to a full psychotic illness, would lead to unnecessary exposure
to antipsychotic agents with unpredictable and possibly harmful effects.
There is an agreement, however, that patients with subthreshold prodromal
psychotic symptoms are often impaired and need psychological and
psychiatric intervention.
A recent meta-analysis reported that the rate of onset of psychotic
disorders in those patients with prodromal psychotic symptoms was 18
percent at 6 months, 22 percent at 1 year, 29 percent at 2 years, and 36


<<<PAGE 670>>>
percent at 3 years. In a follow-up study, of those with prodromal symptoms
who went on to develop a threshold psychotic illness, 73 percent met the
criteria for schizophrenia.
In children and adolescents, psychotic symptoms are not necessarily a
hallmark of a threshold psychotic disorder compared to adults. For example,
in 50 percent of children with major depressive episodes, psychotic
symptoms were present. Also, epidemiologic studies have found that
globally, auditory hallucinations occur in 9 percent to 21 percent of children
and 8.4 percent of adolescents. Thus, in youth, the association between
subthreshold psychotic symptoms and the emergence of future psychotic
illness may not be a reliable predictor. Nevertheless, identification and follow
up of youth with APS may provide an increased understanding of the
longitudinal significance of these symptoms.
Diagnosis
Attenuated psychosis syndrome, according to DSM-5, is based on the
presence of at least one of the following: delusions, hallucinations, or
disorganized speech, which causes functional impairment. Although the
symptoms may not have progressed to full psychotic severity, they must have
been present at least once per week for 1 month and must have emerged or
worsened in the past year. The symptoms must cause impairment and warrant
clinical attention.
Attenuated delusions are described as either suspiciousness, persecutory or
grandiose, resulting in a lack of trust in others, and a sense of danger.
Attenuated delusions, in contrast to delusions of threshold illness, may lead to
loosely organized beliefs about hostile intentions of others or danger;
however, the delusions are not as fixed as they become in full-blown
psychotic illness. Attenuated hallucinations include altered sensory
perceptions such as the perception of murmurs, rumblings, or shadows that
are disturbing, but which youth may doubt and challenge. Disorganized
communication or speech may present as vague or confusing explanations or
circumstantial or tangential communication. When severe but still in the
attenuated range, thought blocking or loose associations may emerge;
however, in contrast to psychotic illness, redirection is possible, and one can
usually achieve a logical conversation. Although impairment is present in


<<<PAGE 671>>>
APS, the individual retains awareness and insight into the mental changes
that are occurring.
Treatment
A recent review of the literature on treatment trials with patients at ultra-highrisk for psychosis found that early intervention with both psychological
interventions and pharmacologic agents can reduce symptoms and either
delay or prevent the onset of a full psychotic illness. Other studies, however,
found mixed results for early psychological or pharmacologic interventions to
prevent the onset of psychotic illness. One study found that most patients
who became frankly psychotic did so within a few months after joining the
study, making it difficult to determine if these patients were already
exhibiting early signs of the onset of schizophrenia when identified as
prodromal.
A variety of treatment approaches exist, including treatment with
risperidone, olanzapine, omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (w-3PUFA),
CBT, cognitive therapy (CT), and one using an integrated psychological
intervention (IPI) including cognitive approaches, psychoeducation, and
social skills intervention. A review of treatment effectiveness in APS found
that receiving treatment was associated with a lower risk of psychotic illness
at 1 year, 2 years, and 3 years. Given the limited data, however, it is not clear
which interventions are most efficacious. Therefore, until additional
treatment trials provide efficacy data, the safest choices for treatment of APS
include psychological interventions rather than the use of antipsychotic
agents. In summary, APS identifies a group of patients with psychotic-like
phenomena that warrant interventions in order to improve their distress and
functional levels. Further study is needed, however, to determine the
relationship between APS and the development of schizophrenia and other
psychotic illnesses.
Etiology
Genetic Factors. Family studies have demonstrated that genetic factors
influence vulnerability for schizophrenia spectrum disorders and other
psychotic disorders. To the extent that APS and schizophrenia are related,


<<<PAGE 672>>>
genetic contributions are likely to be significant. Adoption and twin studies
have confirmed that monozygotic twins have about a 50 percent concordance
rate for schizophrenia compared to dizygotic twins who have a concordance
rate of about 10 percent. Also, adopted children of parents with schizophrenia
do not have higher rates of schizophrenia; but biologic children of
schizophrenic parents do. However, genetic factors do not account fully for
the emergence of schizophrenia spectrum disorders, since there is only a 50
percent concordance of exhibiting these disorders among monozygotic twins.
Environmental factors also play an essential role.
Environmental Factors. Early environmental factors that increase the risk
of developing schizophrenia include fetal malnutrition, hypoxia at birth, and
possibly prenatal infections. Other environmental factors include trauma,
stress, social adversity, and isolation. Finally, gene-environment interactions
may influence an individual’s sensitivity to adverse environmental events.

2.17 Adolescent Substance Use Disorders
Substance use is a public health concern among American youth. The most
common substances used by adolescents in the United States are tobacco,
alcohol, and marijuana. There are many other substances that adolescents
may abuse. These include cocaine, heroin, inhalants, phencyclidine (PCP),
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), dextromethorphan, anabolic steroids, and
various club drugs, including 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA
or Ecstasy), flunitrazepam, gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), and ketamine.
Approximately 20 percent of 8th graders in the United States have tried
illicit drugs, and about 30 percent of 10th through 12th graders have used an
illicit substance. Alcohol remains the most common substance used and
abused by adolescents. Binge drinking occurs in about 6 percent of
adolescents, and teens with alcohol use disorders are at higher risk of
problems with other substances as well.
The DSM-5 combines abuse and dependence under the diagnosis of
substance use disorder. It also contains diagnoses for intoxication,
withdrawal, and substance-induced disorders. These apply to youths as well


<<<PAGE 673>>>
as adults. Some experts are concerned about the relevance of the criteria to
adolescents, especially regarding tolerance and withdrawal. Some adolescents
may develop tolerance to alcohol, for example, without any impairment.
Withdrawal may have clinical significance. However, it does not correlate
well with the level of severity.
Many risk and protective factors influence the age of onset and severity of
substance use among adolescents. Psychosocial risk factors mediating the
development of substance use disorders include parent modeling of substance
use, family conflict, lack of parental supervision, peer relationships, and
individual stressful life events. Protective factors that mitigate substance use
among adolescents include variables such as stable family life, strong parent–
child bond, consistent parental supervision, investment in academic
achievement, and a peer group that models prosocial family and school
behaviors. Interventions that diminish risk factors are likely to mitigate
substance use.
Approximately one of five adolescents has used marijuana or hashish.
Approximately one-third of adolescents have used cigarettes by age 17 years.
Studies of alcohol use among adolescents in the United States have shown
that by 13 years of age, one-third of boys and almost one-fourth of girls have
tried alcohol. By 18 years of age, 92 percent of males and 73 percent of
females reported trying alcohol, and 4 percent reported using alcohol daily.
Of high school seniors, 41 percent reported using marijuana; 2 percent
reported using the drug daily.
Drinking among adolescents follows adult demographic drinking patterns:
The highest proportion of alcohol use occurs among adolescents in the
northeast; whites are more likely to drink than are other groups; among
whites, Roman Catholics are the least likely nondrinkers. The four most
common causes of death in persons between the ages of 10 and 24 years are
motor vehicle accidents (37 percent), homicide (14 percent), suicide (12
percent), and other injuries or accidents (12 percent). In pediatric trauma
centers, more than one-third of adolescents need treatment for alcohol or drug
use.
Studies considering alcohol and illicit drug use by adolescents as
psychiatric disorders have demonstrated a higher prevalence of substance
use, particularly alcoholism, among biologic children of alcoholics than
among adopted youth. This finding is supported by family studies of genetic


<<<PAGE 674>>>
contributions, by adoption studies, and by observing children of substance
users reared outside the biologic home.
Numerous risk factors influence the emergence of adolescent substance
abuse. These include parental belief in the harmlessness of substances, lack
of anger control in families of substance abusers, lack of closeness and
involvement of parents with children’s activities, maternal passivity,
academic difficulties, comorbid psychiatric disorders such as conduct
disorder and depression, parental and peer substance use, impulsivity, and
early onset of cigarette smoking. The higher the number of risk factors, the
more likely it is that an adolescent will be a substance user.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Chapter 4 discusses the substance-related disorders and their diagnoses,
including substance use, substance intoxication, and substance withdrawal
disorder.
We should make a diagnosis of alcohol or drug use in adolescents through
a careful interview, observations, laboratory findings, and history provided
by reliable sources. Many nonspecific signs may point to alcohol or drug use,
and clinicians must be careful to corroborate hunches before jumping to
conclusions. Substance use exists on a continuum with experimentation (the
mildest use), regular use without visible impairment, abuse, and, finally,
dependence. Changes in academic performance, nonspecific physical
ailments, changes in relationships with family members, changes in one’s
peer group, unexplained phone calls, or changes in personal hygiene may
indicate substance use in an adolescent. Many of these also occur with
depression, prodromal psychotic disorders, and adjustment issues, for
example, to a new school.
Substance use is related to a variety of behaviors, including early sexual
experimentation, risky driving, destruction of property, stealing, “heavy
metal” or electronic dance music (EDM), and, occasionally, preoccupation
with cults or Satanism. Although none of these behaviors necessarily predicts
substance use, at the extreme, many of these behaviors reflect alienation from
the mainstream of developmentally expected social behavior. Adolescents
with inadequate social skills may use a substance as a modality to join a peer
group. In some cases, adolescents begin their substance use at home with


<<<PAGE 675>>>
their parents, who also use substances to enhance their social interactions.
Although no evidence indicates what determines a typical adolescent user of
alcohol or drugs, many substance users seem to have underlying social skills
deficits, academic difficulties, and less than optimal peer relationships.
Nicotine
Nicotine is one of the most addictive substances known; it involves
cholinergic receptors and enhancing acetylcholine, serotonin, and βendorphin release. Young teens who smoke cigarettes are also exposed to
other drugs more frequently than nonsmoking peers.
Alcohol
Alcohol use in adolescents rarely results in the sequelae observed in adults
with chronic use of alcohol, such as withdrawal seizures, Korsakoff
syndrome, Wernicke aphasia, or cirrhosis of the liver. One report, however,
has stated that adolescent exposure to alcohol may result in diminished
hippocampal brain volume. Because the hippocampus is involved with
attention, it is conceivable that adolescent alcohol use could result in
compromised cognitive function, especially concerning attention.
Marijuana
The short-term effects of the active ingredient in marijuana,
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), include impairment in memory and learning,
distorted perception, diminished problem-solving ability, loss of
coordination, increased heart rate, anxiety, and panic attacks. Abrupt
cessation of heavy marijuana use by adolescents can result in a withdrawal
syndrome characterized by insomnia, irritability, restlessness, drug craving,
depressed mood, and nervousness followed by anxiety, tremors, nausea,
muscle twitches, increased sweating, myalgia, and general malaise.
Typically, the withdrawal syndrome begins 24 hours after the last use, peaks
at 2 to 4 days, and diminishes after 2 weeks. Marijuana use correlates with an
increased risk of psychiatric disorders. Poor cognitive functioning has been
associated with chronic marijuana use, although it is not clear whether
marijuana impairs cognitive function. Deficits in verbal learning, memory,
and attention occur in chronic marijuana users, and both acute and chronic


<<<PAGE 676>>>
marijuana use is associated with changes in cerebral blood flow to specific
brain regions, which can be detected by PET. Functional imaging studies
suggest that there is less activity in brain regions involved with attention and
memory in chronic marijuana users. A 15-year follow-up of 50,465 Swedish
males in the military reported that participants who had used marijuana by 18
years of age were 2.4 times more likely to develop schizophrenia. Risks
associated with chronic marijuana use include higher rates of motor vehicle
accidents, impaired respiratory function, increased risk of cardiovascular
disease, and potential increased risk for psychotic symptoms and disorders.
Cocaine
Cocaine can be sniffed or snorted, injected, or smoked. Crack is the term
given to cocaine that has been changed to a free base for smoking. Cocaine’s
effects include constriction of peripheral blood vessels, dilated pupils,
hyperthermia, increased heart rate, and hypertension. High doses or
prolonged use of cocaine can induce paranoid thinking. There is an
immediate risk of death secondary to cardiac arrest or from seizures followed
by respiratory arrest. In contrast to stimulants used to treat ADHD, such as
methylphenidate, cocaine quickly crosses the blood-brain barrier and moves
off the dopamine transporter within 20 minutes; methylphenidate remains
bound to dopamine for long periods.
Heroin
Heroin, a derivative of morphine, is produced from a poppy plant. Heroin
usually appears as a white or brown powder that users can snort, but more
commonly, they take it intravenously. Withdrawal symptoms include
restlessness, muscle and bone pain, insomnia, diarrhea and vomiting, cold
flashes with goosebumps, and kicking movements. Withdrawal occurs within
a few hours after use; symptoms peak between 48 and 72 hours later and
remit within about a week.
Club Drugs
Adolescents who frequent nightclubs, raves, bars, or music clubs also
frequently use MDMA, GHB, flunitrazepam (Rohypnol), and ketamine.
GHB, flunitrazepam (a benzodiazepine), and ketamine (an anesthetic) are


<<<PAGE 677>>>
primarily depressants and can be added to drinks without detection because
they are often colorless, tasteless, and odorless. Congress passed The DrugInduced Rape Prevention and Punishment Act after finding that these drugs
were used in date rapes. MDMA is a derivative of methamphetamine, a
synthetic with both stimulant and hallucinogenic properties. MDMA can
inhibit serotonin and dopamine reuptake. MDMA can result in dry mouth,
increased heart rate, fatigue, muscle spasm, and hyperthermia.
Lysergic Acid Diethylamide
LSD is odorless, colorless, and has a slightly bitter taste. Higher doses of
LSD can produce visual hallucinations and delusions and, in some cases,
panic. The sensations experienced after the ingestion of LSD usually
diminish after 12 hours. Flashbacks can occur up to 1 year after use. LSD can
produce tolerance; that is, after multiple uses, one needs more to feel the
same degree of intoxication.

COMORBIDITY
Rates of alcohol and marijuana use are reportedly higher in relatives of youth
with depression and anxiety disorders. On the other hand, mood disorders are
common among those with alcoholism. Evidence indicates another strong
link between early antisocial behavior, conduct disorder, and substance
abuse. Substance abuse is a form of behavioral deviance that, unsurprisingly,
is associated with other forms of social and behavioral deviance. Early
intervention with children who show early signs of social deviance and
antisocial behavior may conceivably impede the processes that contribute to
later substance abuse.
It is essential to know about all comorbid disorders, which may show
differential responses to treatment. Surveys of adolescents with alcoholism
show rates of 50 percent or higher for additional psychiatric disorders,
especially mood disorders. A recent survey of adolescents who used alcohol
found that more than 80 percent met the criteria for another disorder. The
disorders most frequently present were depressive disorders, disruptive
behavior disorders, and drug use disorders. These rates of comorbidity are
even higher than those for adults. The diagnosis of alcohol use disorder was
likely to follow, rather than precede, other disorders; that a large proportion


<<<PAGE 678>>>
of adolescents with alcoholism have a previous childhood disorder may have
both etiologic and treatment implications. In this survey, the onset of alcohol
use disorders did not systematically precede other substance use disorders. In
50 percent of cases, alcohol use followed drug use. Alcohol use may be a
gateway to drug use but is not in most cases. The presence of other
psychiatric disorders was associated with an earlier onset of alcohol use
disorder, but it did not seem to indicate a more protracted course of
alcoholism.

TREATMENT
Interventions for substance use disorders in adolescents first require effective
screening and identification of those teens in need of treatment. Once
identifying a substance use disorder in a teen, we have a variety of treatment
options.
Per the goals of the U.S. Substance Abuse Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA), a school-based alcohol and drug Screening,
Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) has been initiated in a
study with 629 adolescents ages 14 to 17 years in 13 participating high
schools in New Mexico. Initially, school-based health centers provided
substance use screenings for all students seen in the clinic for any reason.
Once identified, substance-using adolescents were offered either brief
intervention by clinic staff (85.1 percent of those identified), whereas 14.9
percent received brief treatment or referral to treatment. The brief
intervention was based on motivational interviewing to help the student to
gain motivation for behavioral change, with referral for more intensive
treatment if needed. Students who received the intervention, regardless of the
severity of their substance use, reported decreases in self-reported drinking to
intoxication at the 6-month follow-up.
The students reporting drug use self-reported using less at follow-up.
Forty-two percent of the students reported alcohol use, and 37 percent
reported intoxication. Eighty-five percent of study participants who reported
drug use reported only marijuana use in the month before entering the study.
The frequency of alcohol and marijuana as the most predominant substances
in this age group is consistent with epidemiologic data. Overall, this schoolbased intervention had the advantage of being easily accessible to adolescents


<<<PAGE 679>>>
and provided a graded option for treatment according to the severity of
substance use. This study suggests that school-based programs for identifying
and providing brief interventions for high school students is viable and merits
further study.
Treatment of substance use disorders in adolescents can directly prevent
the substance use behaviors, provide education for the patient and family, and
address cognitive, emotional, and psychiatric factors that influence the
substance use in a variety of settings such as a residential milieu, group, and
individual psychosocial session.
One validated instrument used as a guide for clinicians in the treatment of
adolescent substance use designates levels of care appropriate for the
symptoms. This instrument, called the Child and Adolescent Levels of Care
Utilization Services (CALOCUS), outlines six levels of care:

0: Basic services (prevention)
1: Recovery maintenance (relapse prevention)
2: Outpatient (once per week visits)
3: Intensive outpatient (2 or more visits per week)
4: Intensive integrated services (day treatment, partial hospitalization,
wraparound services)
5: Nonsecure, 24-hour medically monitored service (group home,
residential treatment facility)
6: Secure 24-hour medical management (inpatient psychiatric or highly
programmed residential facility)

Treatment settings that serve adolescents with alcohol or drug use
disorders include inpatient units, residential treatment facilities, halfway
houses, group homes, partial hospital programs, and outpatient settings.
Components of adolescent alcohol or drug use treatment include individual
psychotherapy, drug-specific counseling, self-help groups (Alcoholics
Anonymous [AA], Narcotics Anonymous [NA], Alateen, Al-Anon),
substance abuse education and relapse prevention programs, and random
urine drug testing. Family therapy and psychopharmacologic intervention are


<<<PAGE 680>>>
also useful to add.
Before deciding on the most appropriate treatment setting for a particular
adolescent, a screening process must take place in which structured and
unstructured interviews help to determine the types of substances they are
using as well as the quantities and frequencies. Determining coexisting
psychiatric disorders is also critical. Rating scales can document pretreatment
and posttreatment severity of abuse. The Teen Addiction Severity Index (TASI), the Adolescent Drug and Alcohol Diagnostic Assessment (ADAD), and
the Adolescent Problem Severity Index (APSI) are several severity-oriented
rating scales. The T-ASI is broken down into dimensions that include family
function, school or employment status, psychiatric status, peer social
relationships, and legal status.
After obtaining most of the information about substance use and the
patient’s overall psychiatric status, we must choose a treatment strategy, and
an appropriate setting must be determined. Two very different approaches to
the treatment of substance use disorders are the Minnesota model and the
multidisciplinary professional model. The Minnesota model relies on the
premise of AA; it is an intensive 12-step program with a counselor who
functions as the primary therapist. The program uses self-help participation
and group processes. Inherent in this treatment strategy is the need for
adolescents to admit that substance use is problematic and that help is
necessary. Furthermore, they must be willing to work toward altering their
lifestyle to eradicate substance use.
The multidisciplinary professional model consists of a team of mental
health professionals that usually is led by a physician. Following a casemanagement model, each member of the team has specific areas of treatment
for which he or she is responsible. Interventions may include CBT, family
therapy, and pharmacologic intervention. This approach usually is suited for
adolescents with comorbid psychiatric diagnoses.
Cognitive-behavioral approaches to psychotherapy for adolescents with
substance use generally require that adolescents be motivated to participate in
treatment and refrain from further substance use. The therapy focuses on
relapse prevention and maintaining abstinence.
Psychopharmacological interventions for adolescent alcohol and drug users
are still in their early stages. The presence of mood disorders indicates the
need for antidepressants, and generally, the SSRIs are the first line of


<<<PAGE 681>>>
treatment. Occasionally, we might choose to substitute the illicit drug with
another drug that is more amenable to the treatment situation; for example,
using methadone instead of heroin. Adolescents are required to have
documented attempts at detoxification and consent from an adult before they
can enter such a treatment program.
Peter, a 16-year-old 11th grader, was admitted to substance abuse
treatment for the second time, following a relapse and threats of suicide.
Peter reported a longstanding history of ADHD, but he had been a good
student and not had any difficulties until middle school. Peter reported an
onset of substance use at age 13 years, a rapid progression in substance
involvement since age 14 years, and current use of marijuana daily,
drinking alcohol up to five times each week, and experimentation with a
variety of substances, such as LSD and Ecstasy. After being discharged
from the psychiatric hospital, Peter attended teen group sessions focusing
on his substance use problems. Family sessions led to the realization that
Peter’s mother had been depressed for some time, and she entered into
her own treatment. Peter was improving concerning his substance use;
however, his depressive symptoms increased following 4 weeks of
abstinence. His psychiatrist started him on fluoxetine. After titrating the
medication to 30 mg, Perter remained on it for a month, at which time he
showed improvement in mood and treatment compliance. Peter continued
to attend teen AA meetings and outpatient therapy. The family conflict
soon recurred, however, and Peter became noncompliant with outpatient
treatment, medication, and meetings. He resumed old relationships with
substance-using peers and relapsed into daily marijuana use and
occasional alcohol use. (Courtesy of Oscar G. Bukstein, M.D.)
Efficacious treatments for cigarette smoking cessation include nicotinecontaining gum, patches, or nasal spray or inhaler. Bupropion aids in
diminishing cravings for nicotine and is beneficial in the treatment of
smoking cessation.
Because comorbidity influences treatment outcome, it is essential to pay
attention to other disorders, such as mood disorders, anxiety disorders,
conduct disorder, or ADHD during the treatment of substance use disorders.


<<<PAGE 682>>>
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Alcohol
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Youth Risk Behavior Survey
found that 72.5 percent of high school students had tried at least one
alcoholic drink, and 24.2 percent reported an episode of heavy drinking in the
month preceding the survey. Findings from the Monitoring the Future Survey
suggest that about 39 percent of adolescents have used alcohol before the
eighth grade. Another survey found that drinking was a significant problem
for 10 to 20 percent of adolescents. Seventy percent of eighth grade students
reported drinking, and 54 percent reported drinking within the past year, 27
percent reported having gotten drunk at least once, and 13 percent reported
binge drinking in the 2 weeks before the survey. By the 12th grade, 88
percent of high school students reported drinking, and 77 percent drank
within the past year; 5 percent of 8th-grade students, 1.3 percent of 10th
grade students, and 3.6 percent of 12th grade students reported daily alcohol
use. In the age range of 13 to 17 years, in the United States, reports indicate
there are 3 million problem drinkers and 300,000 adolescents with alcohol
dependence. The gap between male and female alcohol consumers is
narrowing.
Marijuana
For the last two decades, marijuana has been one of the most widely used
drugs by young people in developed countries, and recently it has become
highly used globally. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
estimated that 3.9 percent of people worldwide between ages 15 years and 64
use marijuana. Marijuana is the most commonly used illicit drug among high
school students in the United States. About 10 percent of those who try
marijuana become daily users and 20 to 30 percent become weekly users.
Marijuana is a “gateway drug” because the strongest predictor of future
cocaine use is frequent marijuana use during adolescence. Of 8th-, 10th-, and
12th-grade students, 10, 23, and 36 percent, respectively, report using
marijuana, a slight decrease from the year preceding the survey. Of 8th-,
10th-, and 12th-grade students, 0.2, 0.8, and 2 percent, respectively, report


<<<PAGE 683>>>
daily marijuana use. Prevalence rates for marijuana are highest among Native
American males and females; these rates are nearly as high in white males
and females and Mexican American males. The lowest annual rates occur in
Latin American females, African American females, and Asian American
males and females.
Cocaine
The annual cocaine use reported by high school seniors decreased by more
than 30 percent between 1990 and 2000. Currently, about 0.5 percent of 8thgrade students, 1 percent of 10th-grade students, and 2 percent of 12th-grade
students are estimated to have used cocaine. Crack cocaine use, however, is
increasing in prevalence and is most common among those between the ages
of 18 and 25.
Crystal Methamphetamine
Crystal methamphetamine, or “ice,” was at a relatively low level of use in
adolescence about one decade ago of 0.5 percent, and has steadily increased
to a recent rate of 1.5 percent among 12th graders.
Opioids
A survey of 7,374 high school seniors found that 12.9 percent reported
nonmedical use of opioids. Of users, more than 37 percent reported intranasal
administration of prescription opioids.
Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD)
About 3 percent of 8th-grade students, 6 percent of 10th-grade students, and
9 percent of 12th-grade students used LSD. Of 12th-grade students, 0.1
percent report daily use. The current LSD rates are lower than the rates of
LSD use during the past two decades.
3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)
MDMA has increased in popularity over the last decade. In the United States,
5 percent of 10th graders and 8 percent of 12th graders use the drug. This is
true even though its perceived danger has dramatically increased among


<<<PAGE 684>>>
adolescents. There have been accidental adolescent deaths due to MDMA.
Gamma-Hydroxybutyrate (GHB)
Gamma-hydroxybutyrate, a club drug, has been found in surveys to have an
annual prevalence rate of 1.1 percent for 8th graders, 1.0 percent for 10th
graders, and a 1.6 percent rate of use for 12th graders.
Ketamine
Ketamine, another club drug, was found recently to have a rate of 1.3 percent
annual prevalence for 8th graders, 2.1 percent for 10th graders, and 2.5
percent rate for 12th graders.
Flunitrazepam (Rohypnol)
Flunitrazepam (Rohypnol), a third club drug, has been found to have an
annual prevalence rate of about 1 percent for all high school grades
combined.
Anabolic Steroids
Despite reported knowledge of the risks of anabolic steroids among high
school students, surveys over the last 5 years found rates of anabolic steroid
use to be 1.6 percent among 8th graders and 2.1 percent among 10th graders.
Up to 45 percent of 10th and 12th graders reported knowledge of the risks of
anabolic steroids; however, over the last decade, it appears that high school
seniors reported less disapproval of their use.
Inhalants
The use of inhalants in the form of glue, aerosols, and gasoline is relatively
more common among younger than older adolescents. Among 8th-, 10th-,
and 12th-grade students, 17.6, 15.7, and 17.6 percent, respectively, report
using inhalants; 0.2 percent of 8th-grade students, 0.1 percent of 10th-grade
students, and 0.2 percent of 12th-grade students report daily use of inhalants.
Multiple Substance Use
Among adolescents enrolled in substance abuse treatment programs, 96


<<<PAGE 685>>>
percent are polydrug users; 97 percent of adolescents who abuse drugs also
use alcohol.

ETIOLOGY
Genetic Factors
The concordance for alcoholism is reportedly higher among monozygotic
than dizygotic twins. Studies of children of alcoholics reared away from their
biologic homes have shown that these children have about a 25 percent
chance of becoming alcoholics.
Psychosocial Factors
Among adolescents, substance use, particularly marijuana use, is strongly
influenced by peers, and especially for those adolescents who report using
marijuana for relaxation, the drug is used to escape from stress and as a social
activity. There are data to suggest, however, that marijuana use is also
associated with both social anxiety disorder and depressive symptoms.
Among young adolescents who start using alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana at
an early age, data suggest that they often come from families with low
parental supervision. The risk of early initiation of substances is most
significant for children below 11 years of age. Increased parental supervision
during middle childhood years may diminish drug and alcohol sampling and
ultimately diminish the risk of using marijuana, cocaine, or inhalants in the
future.
References
Intellectual Disabilities
American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities.
Overview of intellectual disability: definition, classifications and systems
of support. 2010.
Arnold LE, Farmer C, Kraemer HC, Davies M, Witwer A, Chuang S,
DiSilvestro R, McDougle CJ, McCracken J, Vitello B, Aman M, Scahill L,
Posey DJ, Swiezy NB. Moderators, mediators, and other predictors of
risperidone response in children with autistic disorder and irritability. J


<<<PAGE 686>>>
Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2010;20:83–93.
Boulet S, Boyle C, Schieve L. Trends in health care utilization and health
impact of developmental disabilities, 1997–2005. Arch Pediatr Adolesc
Med. 2009;163:19–26.
Correia Filho AG, Bodanase R, Silva TL, Alvarez JP, Aman M, Rohde LA.
Comparison of risperidone and methylphenidate for reducing ADHD
symptoms in children and adolescents with moderate intellectual disability.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2005;44:748.
Ellison JW, Rosengeld JA, Shaffer LG. Genetic basis of intellectual
disability. Annu Rev Med. 2013;64:441–450.
Fowler MG, Gable AR, Lampe MA, Etima M, Owor M. Perinatal HIV and
its prevention: progress toward an HIV-free generation. Clin Perinatol.
2010;37:699–719.
Gothelf D, Furfaro JA, Penniman LC, Glover GH, Reiss AL. The
contribution of novel brain imaging techniques to understanding the
neurobiology of intellectual disability and developmental disabilities. Ment
Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev. 2005;11:331.
Ismail S, Buckley S, Budacki R, Jabbar A, Gallicano GI. Screening,
diagnosing and prevention of fetal alcohol syndrome: Is this syndrome
treatable? Dev Neurosci. 2010;32:91–100.
Obi O, Braun KVN, Baio J, Drews-Botsch C, Devine O, Yeargin-Allsopp M.
Effect of incorporating adaptive functioning scores on the prevalence of
intellectual disability. Am J Intellect Dev Disabil. 2011;116:360–370.
Reyes M, Croonenberghs J, Augustybs I, Eerdekens M. Long-term use of
risperidone in children with disruptive behavior disorders and subaverage
intelligence: efficacy, safety, and tolerability. J Child Adolesce
Psychopharmacol. 2006;16:260–272.
Rowles BM, Findling RL. Review of pharmacotherapy options for the
treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and ADHDlike symptoms in children and adolescents with developmental disorders.
Dev Disabil Res Rev. 2010;16:273–282.
Stuart H. United Nations convention on the rights of persons with disabilities:
a roadmap for change. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2012;25:365–369.
Sturgeon X, Le T, Ahmed MM, Gardiner KJ. Pathways to cognitive deficits
in Down syndrome. Prog Brain Res. 2012;197:73–100.
United Nations General Assembly. Convention on the Rights of Persons with


<<<PAGE 687>>>
Disabilities (CRPD). Geneva: United Nations; December 13, 2006.
Wijetunge LS, Chatterji S, Wyllie DJ, Kind PC. Fragile X syndrome: from
targets to treatments. Neuropharmacology. 2013;68:83–96.
Willen EJ. Neurocognitive outcomes in pediatric HIV. Ment Retard Dev
Disabil Res Rev. 2006;12:223–228.
Communication Disorders
Adams C, Lockton E, Freed J, Gaile J, Earl G, McBean K, Nash J, Green J,
Vail A, Law J. The Social Communication Intervention Project: a
randomized controlled trial of the effectiveness of speech and language
therapy for school-age children who have pragmatic and social
communication problems with or without autism spectrum disorder. Int J
Lang Commun Disord. 2012;47:233–244.
Blumgart E, Tran Y, Craig A. Social anxiety in adults who stutter. Depress
Anxiety. 2010;27:687–692.
Boulet SL, Boyle CA, Schieve LA. Health care use and health and functional
impact of developmental disabilities among US children 1997–2005. Arch
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2009;163:19–26.
Bressman T, Beitchman JH. Communication disorder not otherwise
specified. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3534.
Cantwell DP, Baker LP. Psychiatric and Developmental Disorders in
Children with Communication Disorders. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Press; 1991.
Cone-Wessen B. Prenatal alcohol and cocaine exposure: influences on
cognition, speech, language and hearing. J Commun Disord. 2005;38:279.
Gibson J, Adams C, Lockton E, Green J. Social communication disorder
outside autism? A diagnostic classification approach to delineating
pragmatic language impairment, high functioning autism and specific
language impairment. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2013;54:1186–1197.
Huerta M, Bishop SL, Duncan A, Hus V, Lord C. Application of DSM-5
criteria for autism spectrum disorder to three samples of children with
DSM-IV diagnoses of pervasive developmental disorders. Am J
Psychiatry. 2012;169:1056–1064.
Jones M, Onslow M, Packman A, O’Brian S, Hearne A, Williams S, Ormond


<<<PAGE 688>>>
T, Schwarz I. Extended follow-up of a randomised controlled trial of the
Lidcombe Program of early stuttering intervention. Int J Lang Commun
Disord. 2008;43:649–661.
Kefalianos E, Onslow M, Block S, Menzies R, Reilly S. Early stuttering,
temperament and anxiety: two hypotheses. J Fluency Disord.
2012;37:151–163.
Koyama E, Beitchman JH, Johnson CJ. Expressive language disorder. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3509.
Koyama E, Beitchman JH, Johnson CJ. Mixed receptive-expressive language
disorder. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3516.
Koyama E, Johnson CJ, Beitchman JH. Phonological disorder. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3522.
Kroll R, Beitchman JH. Stuttering. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. II.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3528.
Latterman C, Euler HA, Neumann K. A randomized control trial to
investigate the impact of the lidcombe program on early stuttering in
German-speaking preschoolers. J Fluency Disord. 2008;33:52–65.
Law J, Garrett Z, Nye C. Speech and language therapy interventions for
children with primary speech and language delay or disorder. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2003;(3):CD00410.
Leevers HJ, Roesler CP, Flax J, Benasich AA. The Carter Neurocognitive
Assessment for children with severely compromised expressive language
and motor skills. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2005;46:287.
Marshall AJ. Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) in school-aged
children with specific language impairment. Int J Lang Commun Disord.
2011;46:397–410.
McLaughlin MR. Speech and language delay in children. Am Fam Physician.
2011;83:1183–1188.
McPartland JC, Reichow B, Volkmar FR. Sensitivity and specificity of the


<<<PAGE 689>>>
proposed DMS-5 diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum disorder. J Am
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2012;51:368–383.
Millard SK, Nicholas A, Cook FM. Is parent-child interaction therapy
effective in reducing stuttering? J Speech Hearing Res. 2008;51:636–650.
Nass RD, Trauner D. Social and affective impairments are important
recovery after acquired stroke in children. CNS Spectr. 2004;9(6):420.
Norbury CF. Practitioner Review: social (pragmatic) communication disorder
conceptualization, evidence and clinical implications. J Child Psychol
Psychiatry. 2014;55(3):204–216.
Onslow M, O’Brien S. Management of childhood stuttering. J Paediatr Child
Health. 2013;49:E112–E115.
Packman A, Onslow M. Searching for the cause of stuttering. Lancet.
2002;360:655–656.
Petursdottir AI, Carr JE. A review of recommendations for sequencing
receptive and expressive language instruction. J Appl Behav Anal.
2011;44:859–876.
Ramus F, Marshall DR, Rosen S, van der Lely HK. Phonological deficits in
specific language impairment and developmental dyslexia: towards a
multidimensional model. Brain. 2012;136:630–645.
Reilly S, Wake M, Ukoumunne OC, Bavin E, Prior M, Cini E, Conway L,
Eadie P, Bretherton L. Predicting language outcomes at 4 years of age:
findings from early language in Victoria study. Pediatrics.
2010;126:e1530–e1537.
Reisinger LM, Cornish KM, Fombonne E. Diagnostic differentiation of
autism spectrum disorders and pragmatic language impairment. J Autism
Dev Disord. 2011;41:1694–1704.
Ripley K, Yuill N. Patterns of language impairment and behavior in boys
excluded from school. Br J Educ Psychol. 2005;75:37.
Rvachew S, Grawburg M. Correlates of phonological awareness in
preschoolers with speech sound disorders. J Speech Lang Hear Res.
2006;49:74–87.
Smith BL, Smith TD, Taylor L, Hobby M. Relationship between intelligence
and vocabulary. Percept Mot Skills. 2005;100:101.
Snowling MJ, Hulme C. Interventions for children’s language and literacy
difficulties. Int J Commun Dis. 2012;47:27–34.
Somerville MJ, Mervis CB, Young EJ, Seo EJ, Del Campo M, Bamforth S,


<<<PAGE 690>>>
Peregrine E, Loo W, Lilley M, Perez-Jurado LA, Morris CA, Scherer SW,
Osborne LR. Severe expressive-language delay related to duplication of
the Williams-Beuren locus. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1655.
Trajkovski N, Andrews C, Onslow M, O’Brian S, Packman A, Menzies R. A
phase II trial of the Westmead Program: syllable-timed speech treatment
for preschool children who stutter. Int J Speech Lang Pathol.
2011;13:500–509.
Verhoeven L, van Balkom H, eds. Classification of Developmental Language
Disorders. Theoretical Issues and Clinical Implications. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum; 2004:xii+450.
Wake M, Levickis P, Tobin S, Zens N, Law J, Gold L, Ukoumunne OC,
Goldfield S, Le Ha ND, Skeat J, Reilly S. Improving outcomes of
preschool language delay in the community: protocol for the language for
learning randomized controlled trial. BMC Pediatr. 2012;12:96–107.
Wake M, Tobin S, Girolametto L, Ukomunne OC, Gold L, Levickis P,
Sheehan J, Goldfeld S, Reilly S. Outcomes of population based language
promotion for slow to talk toddlers at ages 2 and 3 years: let’s learn
language cluster randomised clinical trial. BMJ. 2011;343:d4741.
Yaruss JS, Coleman CE, Quesal RW. Stuttering in school-age children: a
comprehensive approach to treatment. Lang Speech Hear Serv Sch.
2012;43:536–548.
Autism
Akins RS, Angkustiri K, Hansen RL. Complementary and alternative
medicine in autism: an evidence-based approach to negotiating safe and
efficacious interventions with families. Neurotherapeutics. 2010;7:307–
319.
Aman MG, Arnold LE, McDougle CJ, Vitiello B, Scahill L, Davies M,
McCracken JT, Tierney E, Nash PL, Posey DJ, Chuang S, Martin A, Shah
B, Gonzalez HM, Swiezy NB, Ritz L, Koenig K, McGough J, Ghuman JK,
Lindsay RL. Acute and long-term safety and tolerability of risperidone in
children with autism. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2005;15:869.
Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network Surveillance
Year 2006 Principal Investigators; Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC). Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders—autism and
developmental disabilities monitoring network, United States, 2006.


<<<PAGE 691>>>
MMWR Surveill Summ. 2009;58:1–20.
Baron-Cohen S, Knickmeyer RC, Belmonte MK. Sex differences in the
brain: implications for explaining autism. Science. 2005;310:819.
Bishop DV, Mayberry M, Wong D, Maley A, Hallmayer J. Characteristics of
the broader phenotype in autism: a study of siblings using the children’s
communication checklist-2. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet.
2006;141B:117–122.
Boyd BA, McDonough SG, Bodfish JW. Evidence-based behavioral
interventions for repetitive behaviors in autism. J Autism Dev Disord.
2012;1236–1248.
Canitano R, Scandurra V. Psychopharmacology in autism: an update. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2011;35:18–28.
Carminati GG, Deriaz N, Bertschy G. Low-dose venlafaxine in three
adolescents and young adults with autistic disorder improves self-injurious
behavior and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)-like
symptoms. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2006;30:312.
Constantino JN, Lajonchere C, Lutz M, Gray T, Abbacchi A, McKenna K,
Singh D, Todd RD. Autistic social impairment in the siblings of children
with pervasive developmental disorders. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:294–
296.
Danfors T, von Knorring AL, Hartvig P, Langstrom B, Moulder R,
Stromberg B, Tortenson R, Wester U, Watanabe Y, Eeg-Olofsson O.
Tetrahydrobiopterin in the treatment of children with autistic disorder: a
double-blind placebo-controlled crossover study. J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2005;25:485.
Gadow KD, DeVincent CJ, Pomeroy J. ADHD symptom subtypes in children
with pervasive developmental disorder. J Autism Dev Disord.
2006;36(2):271–283.
Gardener H, Spiegelman D, Buka SL. Perinatal and neonatal risk factors for
autism: a comprehensive meta-analysis. Pediatrics. 2011;128:344–355.
Hazlett HC, Poe, M, Gerig C, Smith RG, Provenzale J, Ross A, Gilmore J,
Piven J. Magnetic resonance imaging and head circumference study of
brain size in autism: birth through age 2 years. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2005;62:1366.
Huffman LC, Sutcliffe TL, Tanner ISD, Feldman HM. Management of
symptoms in children with autism spectrum disorders: a comprehensive


<<<PAGE 692>>>
review of pharmacologic and complementary-alternative medicine
treatments. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2011;32:56–68.
Kasari C, Lawton K. New directions in behavioral treatment of autism
spectrum disorders. Curr Opin Neurol. 2010;23:137–143.
Ke JY, Chen CL, Chen YJ, Chen CH, Lee LF, Chiang TM. Features of
developmental functions and autistic profiles in children with fragile X
syndrome. Chang Gung Med J. 2005;28:551.
Koyama T, Tachimori H, Osada H, Kurita H. Cognitive and symptom
profiles in high-functioning pervasive developmental disorder not
otherwise specified and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Autism
Dev Disord. 2006;36(3):373–380.
Lehmkuhl, HD, Storch E, Bodfish JW, Geffken GR. Brief Report: exposure
and response prevention for obsessive compulsive disorder in a 12-yearold with autism. J Autism Dev Disord. 2008;38:977–981.
Mandell DS, Novak MM, Zubritsky CD. Factors associated with age of
diagnosis among children with autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics.
2005;116:1480.
Miano S, Ferri R. Epidemiology and management of insomnia in children
with autistic spectrum disorders. Pediatr Drugs. 2010;12:75–84.
Nazeer A. Psychopharmacology of autistic spectrum disorders in children
and adolescents. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2011;58:85–97.
Owley T, Walton L, Salt J, Guter SJ, Winnega M, Leventhal BL, Cook EH.
An open–label trial of escitalopram in pervasive developmental disorders.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2005;44:343.
Research Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology Autism Network.
Randomized, controlled crossover trial of methylphenidate in pervasive
developmental disorders with hyperactivity. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2005;62:1266–1274.
Research Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology Autism Network.
Risperidone treatment of autistic disorder: longer-term benefits and blinded
discontinuation after 6 months. Am J Psychiatry. 2005;162:1361–1369.
Robinson EB, Koenen KC, McCormick MC, Munir K, Hallet V, Happe F,
Plomin R, Ronald A. Evidence that autistic traits show the same etiology
in the general population an at the quantitative extremes (5 percent, 2.5
percent, and 1 percent). Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68:1113–1121.
Rogers SJ, Vismara LA. Evidence-based comprehensive treatments for early


<<<PAGE 693>>>
autism. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. 2008;37:8–38.
Ronald A, Hoekstra RA. Autism spectrum disorders and autistic traits: a
decade of new twin studies. Am J Med Genet Part B. 2011;156:255–274.
Stigler KA, McDonald BC, Anand A, Saykin AJ, McDougle CJ. Structural
and functional magnetic resonance imaging of autism spectrum disorders.
Brain Res. 2011;1380:146–161.
Sugie Y, Sugie H, Fukuda T, Ito M. Neonatal factors in infants with autistic
disorder and typically developing infants. Autism. 2005;5:487–494.
Tanaka JW, Wolf JM, Klaiman C, Koenig K, Cockburn J, Herlihy L, Brown
C, Stahl S, Kaiser MD, Schultz RT. Using computerized games to teach
face recognition skills to children with autism spectrum disorder: the Let’s
Face it! Program. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2010;51:944–952.
Vanderbuilt Evidence-Based Practice Center, Nashville TN. Therapies for
children with autism spectrum disorders. Comparative Effectiveness
Review. 2011;26:1–13.
Veenstra-VanderWeele J, Blakely RD. Networking in Autism: leveraging
genetic, biomarker and model system findings in the search for new
treatments. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2012;37:196–212.
Volkmar FR, Klin A, Schultz RT, State M. Pervasive developmental
disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:540.
Wang M, Reid D. Virtual reality in pediatric neurorehabilitation: attention
deficit
hyperactivity
disorder,
autism
and
cerebral
palsy.
Neuroepidemiology. 2011;36:2–18.
Wink LK, Erickson CA, McDougle CJ. Pharmacologic treatment of
behavioral symptoms associated with autism and other pervasive
developmental disorders. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2010;12:529–538.
Zuddas A, Zanni R, Usala T. Second generation antipsychotics (SGAs) for
non-psychotic disorders in children and adolescents: a review of the
randomized controlled trials. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011;21:600–
620.
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
Antshel KM, Hargrave TM, Simonescu M, Kaul P, Hendricks K, Faraone
SV. Advances in understanding and treating ADHD. BMC Med. 2011;9:7.


<<<PAGE 694>>>
Clarke AR, Barry RJ, Dupuy FE, Heckel LD, McCarthy R, Selikowitz M,
Johnstone SJ. Behavioural differences between EEG-defined subgroups of
children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Clin Neurophysiol.
2011;122:1333–1341.
Cortese S, Kelly C, Chabernaud C, Proal E, Di Martino A, Milham MP,
Castellanos FX. Toward systems neuroscience of ADHD: a meta-analysis
of 55 fMRI studies. Am J Psychiatry. 2012;169:1038–1055.
Elbe D, MacBride A, Reddy D. Focus on lisdexamfetamine: a review of its
use in child and adolescent psychiatry. J Can Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2010;19:303–314.
Greenhill LL, Hechtman L. Attention-deficit disorders. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3560.
Hammerness PG, Perrin JM, Shelley-Abrahamson R, Wilens TE.
Cardiovascular risk of stimulant treatment in pediatric attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder: update and clinical recommendations. J Am
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011;50:978–990.
Hechtman L. Comorbidity and neuroimaging in attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder. Can J Psychiatry. 2009;54:649–650.
Kratochvil CJ, Lake M, Pliszka SR, Walkup JT. Pharmacologic management
of treatment-induced insomnia in ADHD. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2005;44:499.
McGough J. Adult manifestations of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3572.
Molina BSG, Hinshaw SP, Swanson JM, Arnold LE, Vitiello B, Jenson PS,
Epstien JN, Hoza BM, Hechtman L, Abikoff HB, Elliot GR, Greenhill LL,
Newcorn JH, Wells KC, Wigal T, Gibbons RD, Hur K, Houck PR, The
MTA Cooperative Group. The MTA at 8 years: prospective follow-up of
children treated for combined type ADHD in a multisite study. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2009;48:484–500.
MTA Cooperative Group. A 14-month randomized clinical trial of treatment
strategies for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Multimodal treatment
study of children with ADHD. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1999;56:1073–1086.


<<<PAGE 695>>>
Pelham WE, Manos MJ, Ezzell CE, Tresco KE, Gnagy EM, Hoffman MT,
Onyango AN, Fabiano GA, Lopez-Williams A, Wymbs BT, Caserta D,
Chronis AM, Burrows-Maclean L, Morse G. A dose-ranging study of a
methylphenidate transdermal system in children with ADHD. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2005;44:522.
Ratner A, Laor N, Bronstein Y, Weizman A, Toren P. Six-week open-label
reboxetine treatment in children and adolescents with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2005;44:428.
Sassi RB. In this issue/Abstract thinking: from pixels to voxels: television,
brain, and behavior. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2013;52:665–
666.
Stevens LJ, Kuczek T, Burgess JR, Hurt E, Arnold LE. Dietary sensitivities
and ADHD symptoms: thirty-five years of research. Clin Pediatr.
2011;50:279–293.
Tresco KE, Lefler EK, Power TJ. Psychosocial interventions to improve the
school performance of students with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Mind Brain. 2011;1:69–74.
Weiss M, Tannock R, Kratochvil C, Dunn D, Velez-Borras J, Thomason C,
Tamura R, Kelsey D, Stevens L, Allen AJ. A randomized, placebocontrolled study of once-daily atomoxetine in the school setting in children
with ADHD. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2005;44:647.
Learning Disorders
Archibald LMD, Cardy JO, Joanisse MF, Ansari D. Language, reading, and
math learning profiles in an epidemiological sample of school age children.
PLoS One. 2013;8:e77463.
Badian NA. Persistent arithmetic, reading, or arithmetic and reading
disability. Ann Dyslexia. 1999;49:43–70.
Bergstrom KM, Lachmann T. Does noise affect learning? A short review on
noise effects on cognitive performance in children. Front Psychol.
2013;4:578.
Bernstein S, Atkinson AR, Martimianakis MA. Diagnosing the learner in
difficulty. Pediatrics. 2013;132:210–212.
Bishop DV. Genetic influences on language impairment and literacy
problems in children: same or different? J Child Psychol Psychiatry.


<<<PAGE 696>>>
2001;42:189–198.
Butterworth B, Kovas Y. Understanding neurocognitive developmental
disorders can improve education for all. Science. 2013;340:300–305.
Catone WV, Brady SA. The inadequacy of Individual Educational Program
(IEP) goals for high school students with word-level reading difficulties.
Ann Dyslexia. 2005;55:53.
Cragg L, Nation K. Exploring written narrative in children with poor reading
comprehension. Educ Psychol. 2006;26:55–72.
Endres M, Toso L, Roberson R, Park J, Abebe D, Poggi S, Spong CY.
Prevention of alcohol-induced developmental delays and learning
abnormalities in a model of fetal alcohol syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol.
2005;193:1028.
Flax JF, Realpe-Bonilla T, Hirsch LS, Brzustowicz LM, Bartlett CW, Tallal
P. Specific language impairment in families: evidence for co-occurrence
with reading impairments. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2003:46:530–543.
Fletcher JM. Predicting math outcomes: reading predictors and comorbidity.
J Learn Disabil. 2005;38:308.
Gersten R, Jordan NC, Flojo JR. Early identification and interventions for
students with mathematics difficulties. J Learn Disabil. 2005;38:305.
Gordon N. The “medical” investigation of specific learning disorders. Pediatr
Neurol. 2004;2(1):3.
Hedges JH, Adolph KE, Amso D, Bavelier D, Fiez J, Krubitzer L, McAuley
JD, Newcombe NS, Fitzpatrick SM, Ghajar J. Play, attention, and learning:
how do play and timing shape the development of attention and influence
classroom learning? Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2013;1292:1–20.
Jura MB, Humphrey LH. Neuropsychological and cognitive assessment of
children. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2005;895.
Lewis C, Hitch GJ, Peter W. The prevalence of specific arithmetic difficulties
and specific reading difficulties in 9- to 10-year-old boys and girls. J Child
Psychol Psychiatry. 1994;35:283–292.
Meeks J, Adler A, Kunert K, Floyd L. Individual psychotherapy of the
learning-disabled adolescent. In: Flaherty LT, ed. Adolescent Psychiatry:
Developmental and Clinical Studies. Vol. 28. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic
Press; 2004:231.


<<<PAGE 697>>>
Plomin R, Kovas Y. Generalist genes and learning disabilities. Psychol Bull.
2005;131:592.
Tannock R. Disorder of written expression and learning disorder not
otherwise specified. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 8th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2005:3123.
Tannock R. Mathematics disorder. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 8th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2005:3116.
Tannock R. Reading disorder. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2005:3107.
Vadasy PF, Sanders EA, Peyton JA. Relative effectiveness of reading
practice or word-level instruction in supplemental tutoring: how text
matters. J Learn Disabil. 2005;38:364.
Motor Coordination Disorders
Blank R, Smits-Engelsman B, Polatajko H, Wilson P, European Academy for
Childhood Disability. European Academy of Childhood Disability:
recommendations on the definition, diagnosis and intervention of
developmental coordination disorder (long version). Dev Med Child
Neurol. 2012;54:54–93.
Cairney J, Veldhuizen S, Szatmari P. Motor coordination and emotionalbehavioral problems in children. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2010;23:324–329.
Deng S, Li WG, Ding J, Wu J, Shang Y, Li F, Shen X. Understanding the
mechanisms of cognitive impairments in developmental coordination
disorder. Pediatr Res. 2014;75:210–216.
Dewey D, Bottos S. Neuroimaging of developmental motor disorders. In:
Dewey D, Tupper DE, eds. Developmental Motor Disorders: A
Neuropsychological Perspective. New York: Guilford Press; 2004:26.
Edwards J, Berube M, Erlandson K. Developmental coordination disorder in
school-aged children born very preterm and/or at very low birth weight: a
systematic review. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2011;32:678–687.
Geuze RH. Postural control in children with developmental coordination
disorder. Neural Plast. 2005;12:183.
Groen SE, de Blecourt ACE, Postema K, Hadders-Algra M. General


<<<PAGE 698>>>
movements in early infancy predict neuromotor development at 9 to 12
years of age. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2005;47(11):731.
Kargerer FA, Cfontreras-Vidal JL, Bo J, Clark JE. Abrupt, but not gradual
visuomotor distortion facilitates adaptation in children with developmental
coordination disorder. Hum Mov Sci. 2006;25:622–633.
Liberman L, Ratzon N, Bart O. The profile of performance skills and
emotional factors in the context of participation among young children
with developmental coordination disorder. Res Dev Disabil. 2013;34:87–
94.
Pataki CS, Mitchell WG. Motor skills disorder: developmental coordination
disorder. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3501.
Williams J, Thomas PR, Maruff P, Butson M, Wilson PH. Motor, visual and
egocentric transformations in children with developmental coordination
disorder. Child Care Health Dev. 2006;32:633–647.
Wilson PH, Ruddock S, Smits-Engelsman B, Polatajko H. Understanding
performance deficits in developmental coordination disorder: a metaanalysis of recent research. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2013;55:217–228.
Zwicker JG, Harris SR, Klassen AF. Quality of life domains affected in
children with developmental coordination disorder: a systematic review.
Child Care Health Dev. 2013;39:562–580.
Zwicker JG, Missiuna C, Harris SR, Boyd LA. Brain activation associated
with motor skill practice in children with developmental motor
coordination disorder: an fMRI study. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2011;29:145–
152.
Zwicker JG, Missiuna C, Harris SR, Boyd LA. Developmental coordination
disorder: a review and update. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2012;6:573–581.
Movement Disorders
Barry S, Baird G, Lascelles K, Bunton P, Hedderly T. Neurodevelopmental
movement disorders—an update on childhood motor stereotypies. Dev
Med Child Neurol. 2011;53:979–985.
Doyle RL. Stereotypic movement disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz
P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3642.


<<<PAGE 699>>>
Edwards MJ, Lang AE, Bhatia KP. Stereotypies: a critical appraisal and
suggestion of a clinically useful definition. Mov Disord. 2012;27:179–185.
Fernandez AE. Primary versus secondary stereotypic movements. Rev
Neurol. 2004;38(Suppl 1):21.
Freeman KA, Duke DC. Power of magic hands: parent-driven application of
habit reversal to treat complex stereotypy in a 3-year-old. Health Psychol.
2013;32:915–920.
Freeman RD, Soltanifar A, Baer S. Stereotypic movement disorder: easily
missed. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2010;52:733–738.
Harris KM, Mahone EM, Singer HS. Nonautistic motor stereotypies: clinical
features and longitudinal follow-up. Pediatr Neurol. 2008;38:267–272.
Luby JL. Disorders of infancy and early childhood not otherwise specified.
In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 8th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2005:3257.
Mahone EM, Bridges D, Prahme C, Singer HS. Repetitive arm and hand
movements (complex motor stereotypies) in children. J Pediatr.
2004;145:391.
Melnick SM, Dow-Edwards DL. Correlating brain metabolism with
stereotypic and locomotor behavior. Behav Res Methods Instrum Comput.
2003;35:452.
Miller JM, Singer HS, Bridges DD, Waranch HR. Behavioral therapy for
treatment of stereotypic movements in nonautistic children. J Child
Neurol. 2006;21:119.
Muehlmann AM, Lewis MH. Abnormal repetitive behaviours: shared
phenomenology and pathophysiology. J Intellect Disabil Res.
2012;56:427–440.
Presti MF, Watson CJ, Kennedy RT, Yang M, Lewis MH. Behavior-related
alterations of striatal neurochemistry in a mouse model of stereotyped
movement disorder. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2004;77:501.
Stein DJ, Grant JE, Franklin ME, Keuthen N, Lochner C, Singer HS, Woods
DW. Trichotillomania (hair pulling disorder) skin picking disorder, and
stereotypic movement disorder: toward DSM-V. Dep Anxiety.
2010;27:611–626.
Zinner SH, Mink JW. Movement disorders I: Tics and stereotypies. Pediatr
Rev. 2010;31:223–232.


<<<PAGE 700>>>
Tic Disorders
Debes NM, Hansen A, Skov L, Larsson H. A functional magnetic resonance
imaging study of a large clinical cohort of children with Tourette
syndrome. J Child Neurol. 2011;26:560–569.
Du YS, Li HF, Vance A, Zhong YQ, Jiao FY, Wang HM. Randomized
double-blind multicentre placebo-controlled clinical trial of the clonidine
adhesive patch for the treatment of tic disorders. Aust N Z J Psychiatry.
2008;42:807–813.
Eddy CM, Rickards HE, Cavanna AE. Treatment strategies for tics in
Tourette syndrome. Ther Adv Neurol Disord. 2011;4:25–45.
Hartmann A, Worbe Y. Pharmacological treatment of Gilles de la Tourette
syndrome. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2013;37:1157–1161.
Janovic J, Jimenez-Shahed J, Brown L. A randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of topiramate in the treatment of Tourette
syndrome. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2010;81:70–73.
Jummani R, Coffey BJ. Tic disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3609.
Knight T, Stevvers T, Day L, Lowerison M, Jette N, Pringsheim T.
Prevalence of tic disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Pediatr
Neurol. 2012;47:77–90.
Kraft JT, Dalsgaard S, Obel C, Thomsen PH, Henriksen TB, Scahill L.
Prevalence and clinical correlates of tic disorders in a community sample
of school-age children. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2012;21:5–13.
Liu ZS, Chen YH, Zhong YQ, Zou LP, Wang H, Sun D. A multicentre
controlled study on aripiprazole treatment for children with Tourette
syndrome in China. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2011;49:572–576.
Paschou P. The genetic basis of Gilles de la Tourette syndrome. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev. 2013;37:1026–1039.
Piacentini J, Woods DW, Scahill L, Wilhelm S, Peterson AL, Chang S.
Behavior therapy for children with Tourette disorder. A randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2010;303:1929–1937.
Porta M, Sassi M, Cavallazzi M, Fornari M, Brambilla A, Servello D.
Tourette’s syndrome and the role of tetrabenzine: review and personal
experience. Clin Drug Investig. 2008;28:443–459.


<<<PAGE 701>>>
Roessner V, Plessen KJ, Rothenberger A, Ludolph AG, Rizzo R, Skov L.
European clinical guidelines for Tourette syndrome and other tic disorders.
Part II: pharmacologic treatment. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2011;20:173–196.
Rothenbertger A, Roessner V. Functional neuroimaging investigations of
motor networks in Tourette syndrome. Behav Neurol. 2013;27:47–55.
Scharf JM, Miller LL, Mathews CA, Ben-Shlomo Y. Prevalence of Tourette
syndrome and chronic tics in the population-based Avon longitudinal study
of parents and children cohort. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2012;51:192–201.
Spencer TJ, Sallee FR, Gilbert DL, Dunn DW, McCracken JT, Coffey BJ.
Atomoxetine treatment of ADHD in children with comorbid Tourette
syndrome. J Atten Disord. 2008;11:470–481.
Steeves T, McKinlay BD, Gorman D, Billinghurst L, Day L, Carrol A, Dion
Y, Doja A, Luscombe S, Sandor P, Pringsheim T. Canadian guidelines for
the evidence-based treatment of tic disorders: behavioural therapy, deep
brain stimulation and transcranial magnetic stimulation. Can J Psychiatry.
2012;57:144–151.
Storch EA, Murphy TK, Geffken GR, Sajid M, Allen P, Roberti JW,
Goodman WK. Reliability and validity of the Yale Global Tic Severity
Scale. Psychol Assess. 2005;17:486.
Thomas R, Cavanna AE. The pharmacology of Tourette syndrome. J Neural
Transm. 2013;120(4):689–694.
Verdellen C, Griendt JVD, Hartmann A, Murphy T, the ESSTS Guidelines
Group. European clinical guidelines for Tourette syndrome and other tic
disorders. Part III: behavioural and psychosocial interventions. Eur Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011;20:97–207.
Weisman H, Qureshi IA, Leckman JF, Scahill L, Bloch MH. Systematic
review: pharmacological treatment of tic disorders—Efficacy of
antipsychotic and alpha-2 adrenergic agonist agents. Neurosci Biobehav
Rev. 2013;37(6):1162–1171.
Woods DW, Piacentini JC, Scahill L, Peterson AL, Wilhelm S, Chang S.
Behavior therapy for tics in children: acute and long-term effects on
psychiatric and psychosocial functioning. J Child Neurol. 2011;7:858–865.
Feeding Disorders


<<<PAGE 702>>>
Araujo CL, Victora CG, Hallal PC, Gigante DP. Breastfeeding and
overweight in childhood: evidence from the Pelotas 1993 birth cohort
study. Int J Obes. 2005;30(3):500.
Berger-Gross P, Colettoi DJ, Hirschkorn K, Terranova E, Simpser EF. The
effectiveness of risperidone in the treatment of three children with feeding
disorders. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2004;14:621.
Bryant-Waugh R. Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder: an illustrative
case example. Int J Eat Disord. 2013;46:420–423.
Bryant-Waugh R. Feeding and eating disorders in children. Curr Opin
Psychiatry. 2013;26:537–542.
Call C, Walsh BT, Attia E. From DSM-IV to DSM-5: changes to eating
disorder diagnoses. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2013;26:532–536.
Chatoor I. Feeding and eating disorders of infancy or early childhood. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3597.
Chial HJ, Camilleri M, Williams DE, Litzinger K, Perrault J. Rumination
syndrome in children and adolescents: diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis.
Pediatrics. 2003;111:158–162.
Cohen E, Rosen Y, Yehuda B, Iancu I. Successful multidisciplinary treatment
in an adolescent case of rumination. Isr J Psychiatry Relat Sci.
2004;41:222.
DeMatteo C, Matovich D, Hjartarson A. Comparison of clinical and
videofluoroscopic evaluation of children with feeding and swallowing
difficulties. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2005;47:149.
Equit M, Palmke M, Beckner N, Moritz AM, Becker S, von Gontard A.
Eating problems in young children: a population based study. Acta
Paediatr. 2013:102(2):149–155.
Esparo G, Canals J, Ballespi S, Vinas F, Domenech E. Feeding problems in
nursery children: prevalence and psychosocial factors. Acta Pediatr
2004;93:663.
Feldaman R, Keren M, Gross-Rozval O, Tyano S. Mother-child touch
patterns in infant feeding disorders: relation to maternal, child, and
environmental factors. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2004;43:1089.
Hughes SO, Anderson CB, Power TG, Micheli N, Jaramillo S, Nicklas TA.


<<<PAGE 703>>>
Measuring feeding in low-income African-American and Hispanic parents.
Appetite. 2006;46(2):215.
Jacobi C, Agras WS, Bryson S, Hammer LD. Behavioral validation,
precursors, and concomitants of picky eating in childhood. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2003;42:76.
Lewinsohn PM, Holm-Denoma JM, Gau JM, Joiner TE Jr, Striegel-Moore R,
Bear P, Lamoureux B. Problematic eating and feeding behaviors of 36month-old children. Int J Eat Disord. 2005;38(3):208–219.
Linscheid TN. Behavioral treatments for pediatric feeding disorders. Behav
Modif. 2006;30:6–23.
Liu YL, Malik N, Sanger GJ, Friedman MI, Andrews PL. Pica—A model of
nausea? Species differences in response to cisplatin. Physiol Behav.
2005;85(3):271–277.
Ornstein RM, Rosen DS, Mammel K, Callahan ST, Forman S. Distribution of
eating disorders in children and adolescents using the proposed DSM-5
criteria for feeding and eating disorders. J Adolesc Health. 2013;53:303–
305.
Rajindrajith S, Devanarayana NM, Perera BJC. Rumination syndrome in
children and adolescents: a school survey assessing prevalence and
symptomatology. BMC Gastroenterol. 2012;12:163–169.
Rastam M, Taljemark J, Tajnia A. Eating problems and overlap with ADHD
and autism spectrum disorders in a nationwide twin study of 9- and 12year-old children. Sci World J. 2013;15:315429.
Tack J, Blondeau K, Boecxstaens V, Rommel N. Review article: the
pathophysiology, differential diagnosis and management of rumination
syndrome. Ailment Pharmacol Ther. 2011;33:782–788.
Uher R, Rutter M. Classification of feeding and eating disorders: review of
evidence and proposals for ICD-11. World Psychiatry. 2012;11:80–92.
Williams DE, McAdam D. Assessment, behavioral treatment, and prevention
of pica: clinical guidelines and recommendations for practitioners. Res
Develop Disab. 2012;33:2050–2057.
Attachment Disorders
Bernard K, Dozier M, Carlson E, Bick J, Lewis-Morrarty, Lindheim O.
Enhancing attachment organization among maltreated children: results of a
randomized clinical trial. Child Dev. 2012;83:623–636.


<<<PAGE 704>>>
Boris NW, Zeanah CH. Reactive attachment disorder of infancy, childhood
and adolescence. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. II.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3636.
Boris NW, Zeanah CH, Work Group on Quality Issues. Practice parameter
for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents with reactive
attachment disorder of infancy and early childhood. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2005;44:1206.
Chaffin M, Hanson R, Saunders BE, Nichols T, Barnett D, Zeanah C,
Berliner L, Egeland B, Newman E, Lyon T, LeTourneau E, Miller-Perrin
C. Report of the APSAC task force on attachment therapy, reactive
attachment disorder, and attachment problems. Child Maltreat.
2006;11:76.
Heller SS, Boris NW, Fuselier SH, Pate T, Koren-Karie N, Miron D.
Reactive attachment disorder in maltreated twins follow-up: from 18
months to 8 years. Attach Hum Dev. 2006;8:63.
Kay C, Green J. Reactive attachment disorder following maltreatment:
systematic evidence beyond the institution. J Abnorm Child Psychol.
2013;41:571–581.
Kocovska E, Puckering C, Follan M, Smillie M, Gorski C.
Neurodevelopmental problems in maltreated children referred with
indiscriminate friendliness. Res Dev Disabil. 2012;33:1560–1565.
Kocovska E, Wilson P, Young D, Wallace AM, Gorski C. Cortisol secretion
in children with symptoms of reactive attachment disorder. Psychiatr Res.
2013;209:74–77.
Minnis H, Macmillan S, Pritchett R, Young D, Wallace B. Prevalence of
reactive attachment disorder in a deprived population. Br J Psychiatry.
2013;202:342–346.
O’Connor TG, Marvin RS, Rutter M, Olrick J, Britner PA. The ERA Study
Team. Child–parent attachment following early institutional deprivation.
Dev Psychopathol. 2003;15:19–38.
O’Connor TG, Zeanah CH. Attachment disorders: assessment strategies and
treatment approaches. Attach Hum Dev. 2003;5:223–244.
Pritchett R, Pritchett J, Marshall E, Davidson C, Minnis H. Reactive
attachment disorder in the general population: a hidden ESSENCE
disorder. Sci World J. 2013;2013:818157.


<<<PAGE 705>>>
Task Force on Research Diagnostic Criteria: Infancy Preschool. Research
diagnostic criteria for infants and preschool children. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2003;42:1504–1512.
Zeanah CH, Scheeringa MS, Boris NW, Heller SS, Smyke AT, Trapani J.
Reactive attachment disorder in maltreated toddlers. Child Abuse Negl.
2004;28:877.
Zeanah CH, Smyke T, Dumitrescu A. Attachment disturbances in young
children II: indiscriminate behavior and institutional care. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2002;41:983.
Zilberstein K. Clarifying core characteristics of attachment disorders: a
review of current research and theory. Am J Orthopsychiatry. 2006;76:55.
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
Breslau N. The epidemiology of trauma, PTSD, and other posttraumatic
disorders. Trauma Violence Abuse. 2009;10:198–210.
Cohen JA. Posttraumatic stress disorder in children and adolescents. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins; 2009:3678.
Cohen JA, Mannarino AP, Deblinger E. Treating Trauma and Traumatic
Grief in Children and Adolescents. New York: The Guilford Press; 2009.
Cohen JA, Mannarino AP, Perel JM, Staron V. A pilot randomized controlled
trial of combined trauma-focused CBT and sertraline for childhood PTSD
symptoms. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2007;46:811–819.
Davis TE III, May A, Whiting SE. Evidence-based treatments of anxiety and
phobia in children and adolescents: current status and effects on the
emotional response. Clin Psychol Rev. 2011;31:592–602.
Dorsey S, Briggs EC, Woods BA. Cognitive behavioral treatment for
posttraumatic stress disorder in children and adolescents. Child Adolesc
Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2011;20:255–269.
Finkelhor D, Ormrod RK, Turner HA. The developmental epidemiology of
childhood victimization. J Interpers Violence. 2009;24:711–731.
Finkelhor D, Turner H, Omrod R, Hamby SL. Violence, abuse, and crime
exposure in a national sample of children and youth. Pediatrics.
2009;124:1–13.
Ford JD, Steinberg KL, Hawke J, Levine J, Xhang W. Randomized trial


<<<PAGE 706>>>
comparison of emotion regulation and relational psychotherapies for PTSD
in girls involved in delinquency. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol.
2012;41:27–37.
Huemer J, Erhart F, Steiner H. Posttraumatic stress disorder in children and
adolescents: a review of psychopharmacological treatment. Child
Psychiatry Hum Dev. 2010;41:624–640.
Jaycox LH, Cohen JA, Mannarino AP, Walker DW, Langley AK,
Gegenheimer KL, Children’s mental health care following Hurricane
Katrina: a field trial of trauma-focused psychotherapies. J Traum Stress.
2010;23:223–231.
Jaycox, LH, Langley AK, Dean KL. Support for students exposed to trauma:
the SSET program: group leader training manual, lesson plans and lesson
materials and worksheets. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Health. 2009.
Meighen KG, Hines LA, Lagges AM. Risperidone treatment of preschool
children with thermal burns and acute stress disorder. J Child Adolesc
Psychopharmacol. 2007;17:223–232.
Robb AS, Cueva JE, Sporn J, Vanderberg DG. Sertraline treatment of
children and adolescents with posttraumatic stress disorder: a double-blind
placebo-controlled trial. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2010;20:463–
471.
Rynn M, Puliafico A, Heleniak C, Rikhi P, Ghalib K, Vidair H. Advances in
pharmacotherapy for pediatric anxiety disorders. Depress Anxiety.
2011;28:76–87.
Depression and Suicide
Bayer JK, Rapee RM, Hiscock H, Ukoumunne OC, Mihalopoulos C, Wake
M. Translational research to prevent internalizing problems in early
childhood. Depress Anxiety. 2011;28:50–57.
Brent D, Emslie E, Clarke G, Wagner KD, Asarnow JR, Keller M, Ritz, L,
Iyengar S, Abebe K, Birmaher B, Ryan N, Kennard B, Hughers C, DeBar
L, McCracken J, Strober M, Suddath R, Spirito A, Leonard H, Meham N,
Pora G, Onorato M, Zelazny J. Switching to another SSRI or to
venlafaxine with or without cognitive behavioral therapy for adolescents
with SSRI-resistant depression: the TORIDA randomized controlled trial.
JAMA. 2008:299:901–913.
Christiansen E, Larsen KJ. Young people’s risk of suicide attempts after


<<<PAGE 707>>>
contact with a psychiatric department—A nested case-control design using
Danish register data. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2011;52:102.
Correll CU, Kratocvil CJ, March J. Developments in pediatric
psychopharmacology: focus on stimulants, antidepressants and
antipsychotics. J Clin Psychiatry. 2011;72:655–670.
Field T. Prenatal depression effects on early development: a review. Infant
Behav Dev. 2011;34:1–14.
Frodl T, Reinhold E, Koutsoulieris N, Donohoe G, Bondy B, Reiser M,
Moller Hj, Meisenzahl EM. Childhood stress, serotonin transporter gene
and brain structures in major depression. Neuropsychopharmacology.
2010;35:1383–1390.
Gould MS, Greenberg T, Velting DM, Shaffer D. Youth suicide risk and
preventive interventions: a review of the past ten years. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2003;42:386.
Hall WD. How have the SSRI antidepressants affected suicide risk? Lancet.
2006;367(9527):1959.
Harro J, Kiive E. Droplets of black bile? Development of vulnerability and
resilience to depression in young age. Psychoneuroendocrinology.
2011;36:380–392.
Heiligenstein JH, Hoog SL, Wagner KD, Findling RL, Galil N, Kaplan S,
Busner J, Nilsson ME, Brown EB, Jacobson JG. Fluoxetine 40–60 mg
versus fluoxetine 20 mg in the treatment of children and adolescents with a
less-than-complete response to nine-week treatment with fluoxetine 10–20
mg: a pilot study. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2006;16(1–2):207.
Hughes CW, Emslie GJ, Crimson ML, Posner K, Birmaher B, Ryan N,
Jensen P, Curry J, Vitiello B, Lopez M, Shon SP, Piszka SR, Trivedi MH,
The Texas Consensus Conference Panel on Medication Treatment of
Childhood Major Depressive Disorder. Texas Children’s Medication
Algorithm Project: update from Texas Consensus Conference Panel on
medication treatment of childhood major depressive disorder. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2007;46:667–686.
Kaess M, Parzer P, Haffner J, Steen R, Roos J, Klett M, Brunner R, Resch F.
Explaining gender differences in non-fatal suicidal behavior among
adolescents: a population-based study. BMC Public Health. 2011;11:597–
603.
Luby J, Lenze S, Tillman R. A novel early intervention for preschool


<<<PAGE 708>>>
depression: findings from a pilot randomized controlled trial. J Child
Psychol Psychiatry. 2012;53:313–322.
March J, Silva S, Petrycki S. The TADS Team. The Treatment for
Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS): long-term effectiveness and
safety outcomes. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;64:1132–1143.
Newton AS, Hamm MP, Bethell J, Rhodes AE, Bryan CJ, Tjosvold L, Ali S,
Logue E, Manion ID. Pediatric suicide-related presentations: a systematic
review of mental health care in the emergency room department. Ann
Emerg Med. 2010;56:649–659.
Nock MK, Hwang I, Sampson N, Kessler RC, Angermeyer M, Beautrais A,
Borges G, Bromet E, Bruffaerts R, de Girolamo G, de Graaf R, Florescu S,
Gureje O, Haro JM, Hu C, Huang Y, Karam EG, Kawakami N, Kovess V,
Levinson D, Postada-Villa J, Sagar R, Tomov T, Viana MC, Williams DR.
Cross-national analysis of the associations among mental disorders and
suicidal behavior: findings from the WHO World Mental Health Surveys.
PLoS Med. 2009;6:1–13.
Olfson M, Shaffer D, Marcus SC, Greenberg T. Relationship between
antidepressant medication treatment and suicide in adolescents. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2003;60:978.
Rosso IM, Cintron CM, Steingard RJ, Renshaw PF, Young AD, YurgelunTodd DA. Amygdala and hippocampus volumes in pediatric major
depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2005;57(1):21.
Von Knorring AL, Olsson GI, Thomson PH, Lemming OM, Hulten A. A
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of citalopram in
adolescents with major depressive disorder. J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2006;26:311.
Wagner KD. Pharmacotherapy for major depression in children and
adolescents. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2005;29:819.
Wagner KD, Brent DA. Depressive disorders and suicide in children and
adolescents. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3652.
Whittington CJ, Kendall T, Fonagy P, Cotrell D, Cotgrove A, Boddington E.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in childhood depression: systematic
review of published versus unpublished data. Lancet. 2004;363:1341.
Zalsman G. Timing is critical: gene, environment and timing interactions in


<<<PAGE 709>>>
genetics of suicide in children and adolescents. Eur Psychiatry.
2010;25:284–286.
Bipolar Disorder
Axelson DA, Birmaher B, Strober M, Goldstein BI, Ha W, Gill MK,
Goldstein TR, Yen S, Hower H, Hunt JI, Liao F, Iyengar S, Dickstein D,
Kim E, Ryan ND, Frankel E, Keller MB. Course of subthreshold bipolar
disorder in youth: diagnostic progression from bipolar disorder not
otherwise specified. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011;50:1001–
1016.
Carlson GA. Bipolar disorder and mood dysregulation. Proceedings; AACAP
2011 Psychopharmacology Update Institute: Controversies in Child and
Adolescent Psychopharmacology. 2011;257–284.
Carlson GA, Myer SE. Early-onset bipolar disorder. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3663.
Correll CU, Kratochvil CJ, March JS. Developments in pediatric
psychopharmacology: focus on stimulants, antidepressants and
antipsychotics. J Clin Psychiatry. 2011;72:655–670.
Correll CU, Sheridan EM, DelBello MP. Antipsychotic and mood stabilizer
efficacy and tolerability in pediatric and adult patients with bipolar I
mania: a comparative analysis of acute, randomized, placebo-controlled
trials. Bipolar Disord. 2010;12:116–141.
Findling RL, Landersdorfer CB, Kafantaris V, Pavulari M, McNamara NK,
McClellan J, Frazier JA, Sikich L, Kowatch R, Lingler J, Faber J, TaylorZapata P, Jusko WJ. First-dose pharmacokinetics of lithium carbonate in
children and adolescents. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2010;30:404–410.
Larsky T, Krieger A, Elixhauser A, Vitiello B. Children’s hospitalizations
with a mood disorder diagnosis in general hospitals in the United States
2000–2006. Child Adolesc Psychiatry Mental Health. 2011;5:27–34.
Mathieu F, Dizier M-H, Etain B, Jamain S, Rietschel M, Maier W, Albus M,
McKeon P, Roche S, Blackwood D, Muir W, Henry C, Malafosse A,
Preisig M, Ferrero F, Cichon S, Schumacher J, Ohlraun S, Propping P,
Jamra RA, Schulze TG, Zelenica D, Charon C, Marusic A, Dernovsek MC,
Gurling H, Nothen M, Lathrop M, Leboyer M, Bellivier F. European


<<<PAGE 710>>>
collaborative study of early-onset bipolar disorder: evidence for
heterogeneity on 2q14 according to age at onset. Am J Med Genet Part B.
2010;153B:1425–1433.
McNamara RK, Nandagopal JJ, Strakowski SM, DelBello M. Preventive
strategies for early-onset bipolar disorder. Toward a clinical staging model.
CNS Drugs. 2010;24:983–996.
Miklowitz DJ, Chang KD, Taylor DO, George EL, Singh MK, Schneck CD,
Dickinson LM, Howe ME, Garber J. Early psychosocial intervention for
youth at risk for bipolar I or II disorder: a one-year treatment development
trial. Bipolar Disord. 2011;13:67–75.
Moreno C, Laje G, Blancvo C, Jiang H, Schmidtg AB, Olfson M. National
trends in the outpatient diagnosis and treatment of bipolar disorder in
youth. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;64:1032–1039.
Nieto RG, Castellanos FX. A meta-analysis of neuropsychological
functioning in patients with early onset schizophrenia and pediatric bipolar
illness. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. 2011;40:266–280.
Nurnberger JI, McInnis M, Reich SW, Kastelic E, Wilcox HC, Glowinski A,
Mitchell P, Fisher C, Erpe M, Gershon E, Berrettini W, Laite G,
Schweitzer R, Rhoadarmer K, Coleman VV, Cai X, Azzouz F, Liu H,
Kamali M, Brucksch C, Monahan PO. A high-risk study of bipolar
disorder. Childhood clinical phenotypes as precursors of major mood
disorders. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68:1012–1020.
Pavulari MN, Henry DB, Findling RL, Parnes S, Carbray JA, Mohammed T,
Janicak PG, Sweeney JA. Double-blind randomized trial of risperidone
versus sodium valproate in pediatric bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disord.
2010;12:593–605.
Pavulari MN, Passarotti AM, Lu LH, Carbray JA, Sweeney JA. Double-blind
randomized trial of risperidone versus sodium valproate in pediatric
bipolar disorder: fMRI outcomes. Psychiatry Res. 2011;193:28–37.
Stringaris A, Baroni A, Haimm C, Brotman M, Lowe CH, Myers F, Rustgi E,
Wheeler W, Kayser R, Towbin K, Leibenluft E. Pediatric bipolar disorder
versus severe mood dysregulation: risk for manic episodes on follow-up. J
Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010;49:397–405.
Versace Am Ladouceur CD, Romero S, Birmaher B, Axelson DA, Kupfer
DJ, Phillips ML. Altered development of white matter in youth at high
familial risk for bipolar disorder: a diffusion tensor imaging study. J Am


<<<PAGE 711>>>
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010;49:1249–1259.
Mood Dysregulation Disorder
Blader JC, Schooler NR, Jensen PS, Pliszka SR, Kafantaris V. Adjunctive
sodium valproate versus placebo for children with ADHD and aggression
refractory to stimulant monotherapy. Am J Psychiatry. 2009;166:1392–
1401.
Brotman MA, Schmajuk M, Rich BA, Dickstein DP, Guyer AE, Costello EJ,
Egger HL, Angold A, Pine DS, Leibenluft E. Prevalence, clinical
correlates, and longitudinal course of severe mood dysregulation in
children. Biol Psychiatry. 2006;60:991–997.
Copeland WE, Angold A, Costello J, Egger H. Prevalence, comorbidity, and
correlates of DSM-5 proposed disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Am
J Psychiatry. 2013;170:173.
Fristad MA, Verducci JS. Walters K, Young ME. Impact of multifamily
psychoeducational psychotherapy in treating children aged 8 to 12 years
with mood disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2009;66:1013–1021.
Leibenluft E. Severe mood dysregulation, irritability, and the diagnostic
boundaries of bipolar disorder in youths. Am J Psychiatry. 2011;168:129.
Leibenluft E, Cohen P, Gorrindo T, Brook JS, Pine DS. Chronic versus
episodic irritability in youth: a community based longitudinal study of
clinical and diagnostic associations. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol.
2006;16:456–466.
Margulies DM, Weintraub S, Basile J, Grover PJ, Carlson GA. Will
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder reduce false diagnosis of bipolar
disorder in children? Bipolar Disord. 2012;14:488.
Stringaris A, Barona A, Haimm C, Brotman MA, Lowe CH, Myers F, Rustgi
E, Wheeler W, Kayser R, Towbin K, Leibenluft E. Pediatric bipolar
disorder versus severe mood dysregulation: risk for manic episodes on
follow-up. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010;49:397.
West AE, Pavuluri MN. Psychosocial treatments for childhood and
adolescent bipolar disorder. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am.
2009;18:471–482.
Yearwood EL, Meadows-Oliver M. Mood dysregulation disorders. In:
Yearwood EL, Pearson GS, Newland JA, eds. Child and Adolescent
Behavioral Health: A Resource for Advance Practice Psychiatric and


<<<PAGE 712>>>
Primary Care Practitioners in Nursing. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons
Inc.; 2012:165.
Zonneyvlle-Bender MJ, Matthys W, van de Wiel NM, Lochman JE.
Preventive effects of treatment of disruptive behavior disorder in middle
childhood on substance use and delinquent behavior. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2007;46:33.
Conduct and Oppositional Defiant Disorder
Boxer P, Huesmann LR, Bushman BJ, O’Brien M, Moceri D. The role of
violent media preference in cumulative developmental risk for violence
and general aggression. J Youth Adolesc. 2009;38:417–428.
Canino G, Polanczyk G, Bauermeister JJ, Rhode LA, Frick P. Does the
prevalence of CD and ODD vary across cultures? Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr
Epidemiol. 2010;45:695–704.
Correll CU, Kratochvil CJ, March J. Developments in pediatric
psychopharmacology: focus on stimulants, antidepressants, and
antipsychotics. J Clin Psychiatry. 2011;72:655–670.
Dodge KA, Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. The effects of the
Fast Track Preventive Intervention on the development of conduct disorder
across childhood. Child Develop. 2011;82:331–345.
Harden KP, D’Onofrio BM, Van Hulle C, Turkheimer E, Rodgers JL,
Waldman ID, Lahey BB. Population density and youth antisocial behavior.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2009;50:999–1008.
Huebner T, Vloet TD, Marx I, Konrad K, Fink GR, Herpetz SC, HerpetzDahlmann B. Morphometric brain abnormalities in boys with conduct
disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2008;47:540–547.
Kim HW, Cho SC, Kim BN, Kim JW, Shin MS, Yeo JY. Does oppositional
defiant disorder have temperament and psychopathological profiles
independent of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder? Compr Psychiatry.
2010;51:412–418.
LeBlanc JC, Binder CE, Armenteros JL, Aman MG, Want JS, Hew H,
Kusumakar V. Risperidone reduces aggression in boys with a disruptive
behavior disorder and below average intelligence quotient: analysis of two
placebo-controlled randomized trials. Int Clin Psychopharmacol.
2005;20:275.
Lochman JE, Powell NP, Boxmeyer CL, Jimenez-Camargo L. Cognitive-


<<<PAGE 713>>>
behavioral therapy for externalizing disorders in children and adolescents.
Child Adolesc Psychiatric Clin N Am. 2011;20:305–318.
Meier MH, Slutske WS, Heath AC, Martin NG. Sex differences in the
genetic and environmental influences on childhood conduct disorder and
adult antisocial behavior. J Abnorm Psychol. 2011;120:377–388.
Murray J, Farrington DP. Risk factors for conduct disorder and delinquency:
key findings from longitudinal studies. Can J Psychiatry. 2010;55:633–
642.
Padhy R, Saxena K, Remsing L, Heumer J, Plattner B, Steiner H.
Symptomatic response to sodium valproate in subtypes of conduct
disorder. Child Psychiatry Hum Dev. 2011;42:584–593.
Patel NC, Crismon ML, Hoagwood K, Jensen PS. Unanswered questions
regarding atypical antipsychotic use in aggressive children and
adolescents. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2005;15:270.
Pelletier J, Collett B, Gimpel G, Crowley S. Assessment of disruptive
behaviors in preschoolers: psychometric properties of the disruptive
behavior disorders rating scale and school situations questionnaire. J
Psychoeduc Assess. 2006;24:3–18.
Reyes M, Buitelaar J, Toren P, Augustyns I, Eerdekens M. A randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled study of risperidone maintenance
treatment in children and adolescents with disruptive behavior disorders.
Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:402–410.
Rutter M. Research review: child psychiatric diagnosis and classification:
concepts, finding, challenges and potential. J Child Psychol Psychiatry.
2011;52:647–660.
Santesso DL, Reker DL, Schmidt LA, Segalowitz SJ. Frontal
electroencephalogram activation asymmetry, emotional intelligence, and
externalizing behaviors in 10-year-old children. Child Psychiatr Hum Dev
2006;36:311–328.
Sasayam D, Hayashida A, Yamasue H, Yuzuru H, Kaneko T, Kasai K,
Washizuka S, Amano N. Neuroanatomical correlates of attention-deficithyperactivity disorder accounting for comorbid oppositional defiant
disorder and conduct disorder. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2010:64:394–
402.
Van Huylle CA, Waldman ID, D’Onofrio BM, Rodgers JL, Rthouz PJ, Lahey
BB. Developmental structure of genetic influences on antisocial behavior


<<<PAGE 714>>>
across childhood and adolescence. J Abnorm Psychol. 2009;118:711–734.
Webster-Stratton C, Reid JM. The Incredible Years parents, teachers and
children training series. In: Weisz JR, Kadin AE, eds. Evidence-Based
Psychotherapies for Children and Adolescents. 2nd ed. New York:
Guildford; 2010:194–210.
Zahrt DM, Melzer-Lange MD. Aggressive behavior in children and
adolescents. Pediatr Rev. 2011;32:325–331.
Zuddas A, Zanni R, Usala T. Second generation antipsychotics (SGAs) for
non-psychotic disorders in children and adolescents: a review of the
randomized controlled studies. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011;21:600–
620.
Anxiety Disorders
Bittner A, Egger HL, Erkanli A. What do childhood anxiety disorders
predict? J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2007;48:1174–1183.
Comer JS, Puliafico AC, Ascenbrand SG, McKnight K, Robin JA, Goldfine
ME, Albano AM. A pilot feasibility evaluation of the CALM Program for
anxiety disorders in early childhood. J Anxiety Disord. 2012;26:40–49.
Compton SN, Walkup JT, Albano AM, Piacentini JC, Birmaher B, Sherrill
JT, Ginsburg GS, Rynn MA, McCracken JT, Waslick BD, Iyengar S,
Kendall PC, March JS. Child/Adolescent Anxiety Multimodal Study
(CAMS): rationale, design, and methods. Child Adolesc Psychiatry Ment
Health. 2010;4:1.
Connolly SC, Suarez L, Sylvester C. Assessment and treatment of anxiety
disorders in children and adolescents. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2011;13:99–
110.
Davis TE III, May A, Whiting SE. Evidence-based treatment of anxiety and
phobia in children and adolescents: current status and effects on the
emotional response. Clin Psychol Rev. 2011;31:592–602.
Ginsburg GS, Kendall PC, Sakolsky D, Compton SN, Piacentini J, Albano
AM, Walkup JT, Sherrill J, Coffey KA, Rynn MA, Keeton CP, McCracken
JT, Bergman L, Iyengar S, Birmaher B, March J. Remission after acute
treatment in children and adolescents with anxiety disorders: findings from
The CAMS. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2011;79:806–813.
Hanna GL, Fischer DJ, Fluent TE. Separation anxiety disorder and school
refusal in children and adolescents. Pediatr Rev. 2006;27:56–63.


<<<PAGE 715>>>
Hirshfeld-Becker DR, Masek B, Henin A, Blakely LR, Pollock-Wurman RA,
McQuade J, DePetrillo L, Briesch J, Ollendick TH, Rosenbaum JF,
Biederman J. Cognitive behavioral therapy for 4- to 7-year-old children
with anxiety disorders: a randomized clinical trial. J Consult Clin Psychol.
2010;78:498–510.
Otani K, Suzuki A, Matsumoto Y, Kamata M. Parental overprotection
increases interpersonal sensitivity in healthy subjects. Compr Psychiatry.
2009;50:54–57.
Reinblatt SP, Walkup JT. Psychopharmacologic treatment of pediatric
anxiety disorders. Child Adolesc Psychiatric Clin N Am. 2005;14:877.
Rockhill C, Kodish I, DiBassisto C, Macias M, Varley C, Ryan S. Anxiety
disorders in children and adolescents. Curr Prob Pediatr Adolesc Health
Care. 2010;40:A1–A4;65–100.
Rynn M, Puliafico A, Heleniak C, Rikhi P, Ghalib K, Vidair H. Advances in
pharmacotherapy for pediatric anxiety disorders. Depress Anxiety.
2011;28:76–87.
Schneider S, Blatter-Meunier J, Herren C, Adornetto C, In-Albon T, Lavallee
K. Disorder-specific cognitive-behavioral therapy for separation anxiety
disorder in young children: a randomized waiting-list–controlled group.
Psychother Psychosom. 2011;80:206–215.
Vanderwerker LC, Jacobs SC, Parkes CM, Prigerson HG. An exploration of
associations between separation anxiety in childhood and complicated
grief in later life. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2006;194(2):121–123.
Walkup JT, Albano AM, Piacentini J. Cognitive behavioral therapy,
sertraline, or a combination in childhood anxiety. N Engl J Med.
2008;359:2753–2766.
Selective Mutism
Bergman RL, Lee JC. Selective mutism. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3694.
Carbone D, Schmidt LA, Cunningham CC, McHolm AE, Edison S, St. Pierre
J, Boyle JH. Behavioral and socio-emotional functioning in children with
selective mutism: a comparison with anxious and typically developing
children across multiple informants. J Abnorm Child Psychol.
2010;38:1057–1067.


<<<PAGE 716>>>
Davis TE III, May A, Whiting SE. Evidence-based treatment of anxiety and
phobia in children and adolescents: current status and effects on the
emotional response. Clin Psychol Rev. 2011;31:592–602.
Kehle TJ, Bray MA, Theodore LA. Selective mutism. In: Bear GG, Minke
KM, eds. Children’s Needs III: Development, Prevention, and
Intervention. Washington, DC: National Association of School
Psychologists; 2006:293.
Rynn M, Puliafico A, Heleniak C, Rikhi P, Ghalib K, Vidair H. Advances in
pharmacotherapy for pediatric anxiety disorders. Depress Anxiety.
2011;28:76–87.
Schwartz RH, Freedy AS, Sheridan MJ. Selective mutism: are primary care
physicians missing the silence? Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2006;45:43–48.
Scott S, Beidel DC. Selective mutism: an update and suggestions for future
research. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2011;13:251–257.
Toppelberg CO, Tabors P, Coggins A, Lum K, Burger C. Differential
diagnosis of selective mutism in bilingual children. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2005;44(6):592–595.
Wagner KD, Berard R, Stein MB, Wetherhold E, Carpenter DJ, Perera P,
Gee M, Davy K, Machin A. A multicenter, randomized, double-blind,
placebo controlled trial of paroxetine in children and adolescents with
social anxiety disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2004;61:1153.
Waslick B. Psychopharmacology intervention for pediatric anxiety disorders:
a research update. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2006;1:51.
Yeganeh R, Beidel DC, Turner SM. Selective mutism: more than social
anxiety? Depress Anxiety. 2006;23(3):117.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Alaghband-Rad J, Hakimshooshtary M. A randomized controlled clinical
trial of citalopram versus fluoxetine in children and adolescents with
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2009;18:131–135.
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Practice parameter
for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescent with
obsessive-compulsive disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2012;51:98–113.
Bienvenu OJ, Wany Y, Shugart YY, Welch JM, Fyer AJ, Rauch SL,


<<<PAGE 717>>>
McCracken JT, Rasmussen SA, Murphy DL, Cullen B, Valle D, HoenSaric R, Greenberg BD, Pinto A, Knowles JA, Piacentini J, Pauls DL,
Liang KY, Willour VL, Riddle M, Samuels JF, Feng G, Nestadt G. Sapap3
and pathological grooming in humans: results from the OCD collaborative
genetics study. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatry Genet.
2009;150B:710–720.
Flessner CA, Allgair A, Garcia A, Freeman J, Sapyta J, Franklin ME, Foa E,
March J. The impact of neuropsychological functioning on treatment
outcome in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder. Depress Anxiety.
2010;27:365–371.
Franklin ME, Sapyta J, Freeman JB, Khanna M, Compton S, Almirall D,
Moore P, Choate-Summers M, Garcia A, Edson AL, Foa EB, March JS.
Cognitive behavior therapy augmentation of pharmacotherapy in pediatric
obsessive-compulsive disorder: the Pediatric OCD Treatment Study II
(POTS II) randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2011;306:1224–1232.
Freeman J, Sapyta J, Garcia A, Fitzgerald D, Khanna M, Choate-Summers
M, Moore P, Chrisman A, Haff N, Naeem A, March J, Franklin M. Still
struggling: characteristics of youth with OCD who are partial responders to
medication treatment. Child Psychiatry Hum Dev. 2011;42:424–441.
Leckman JF, King RA, Gilbert DL, Coffey BJ, Singer HS, Dure LS 4th,
Grantz H, Katsovich L, Lin H, Lombroso PJ, Kawikova I, Johnson DR,
Kurlan RM, Kaplan EL. Streptococcal upper respiratory tract infections
and exacerbations of tic and obsessive-compulsive symptoms: a
prospective longitudinal study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2011;50:108–118.
Lewin AB, Peris TS, Bergman L, McCracken JT, Piacentini J. The role of
treatment expectancy in youth receiving exposure-based CBT for
obsessive compulsive disorder. Behav Res Ther. 2011;49:536–543.
Lewin AB, Piacentini J. Obsessive-compulsive disorder in children. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3671.
Masi G, Pfanner C, Millepiedi S, Berloffa S. Aripiprazole augmentation in 39
adolescents with medication-resistant obsessive-compulsive disorder. J
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2010;30:688–693.
Micali N, Hayman I, Perez M, Hilton K, Nakatani E, Turner C, Mataiz-Cois


<<<PAGE 718>>>
D. Long-term outcomes of obsessive-compulsive disorder: follow-up of
142 children and adolescents. Br J Psychiatry. 2010;197:128–134.
Olino TM, Gillo S, Rowe D, Palermo S, Nuhfer EC, Birmaher B, Gilbert AR.
Evidence for successful implementation of exposure and response
prevention in a naturalistic group format for pediatric OCD. Depress
Anxiety. 2011;4:342–348.
Pediatric OCD Treatment Study Team. Cognitive-behavior therapy,
sertraline, and their combination for children and adolescents with
obsessive-compulsive disorder: the Pediatric OCD Treatment Study
(POTS) randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;292:1969.
Piacentini J, Bergman RL, Chang S, Langley A, Peris T, Wood JJ,
McCracken J. Controlled comparison of family cognitive behavioral
therapy and psychoeducation/relaxation training for child obsessivecompulsive disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011;50:1149–
1161.
Radua J, Mataiz-Cois D. Voxel-wise meta-analysis of grey matter changes in
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Br J Psychiatry. 2009;195:393–402.
Rotge JY, Langbour N, Guehl D, Bioulac B, Jaafari N, Allard M, Aouizerate
B, Burbaud P. Gray matter alterations in obsessive-compulsive disorder: an
anatomical
likelihood
estimation
meta-analysis.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010;35:686–691.
Storch EA, Caporino NE, Morgan JR, Lewin AB, Rojas A, Brauer L, Larson
MJ, Murphy TK. Preliminary investigation of web-camera delivered
cognitive-behavioral therapy for youth with obsessive-compulsive
disorder. Psychiatry Res. 2011;189:407–412.
Szeszko PR, MacMillan S, McMeniman M, Chen S, Baribault K, Lim KO,
Ivey J, Rose M, Banerjee SP, Bhandari R, Moore GJ, Rosenberg DR.
Brain structural abnormalities in psychotropic drug-naive pediatric patients
with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2004;161:1049–
1056.
Waslick B. Psychopharmacology intervention for pediatric anxiety disorders:
a research update. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2006;1:51.
Psychotic Disorders
Addington J, Epstein I, Liu L, French P, Boydell KM. A randomized
controlled trial of cognitive behavioral therapy for individuals at clinical


<<<PAGE 719>>>
high risk of psychosis. Schizophr Res. 2011;125:54–61.
Amminger GP, Schafer MR, Papageorgiou K, Klier CM, Cotton SM. Longchain w-3 fatty acids for indicated prevention of psychotic disorder: a
randomized placebo-controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2010;67:146–
154.
Arango C. Attenuated psychotic symptoms syndrome: how it may affect
child and adolescent psychiatry. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2011;20:67–70.
Bechdolf A, Wagner M, Ruhrman S, Harrigan S, Putzfeld V, Pukrop R,
Brockhaus-Dumke A, Berning J, Janssen B, Decker P, Bottlender R,
Maurer K, Möller HJ, Gaebel W, Häfner H, Maier W, Klosterkötter J.
Preventing progression to first episode psychosis in early initial prodromal
states. Br J Psychiatry. 2012;200:22–29.
Biswas P, Malhotra S, Malhotra A, Gupta N. Comparative study of
neuropsychological correlates in schizophrenia with childhood onset,
adolescence and adulthood. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2006;15:360.
Clark C, Narr KL, O’Neill J, Levitt J, Siddarth P, Phillips O, Toga A, Caplan
R. White matter integrity, language, and childhood onset schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Res. 2012;138:150–156.
Correll CU. Symptomatic presentation and initial treatment for schizophrenia
in children and adolescents. J Clin Psychiatry. 2010;71:11.
David CN, Greenstein D, Clasen L, Gochman P, Miller R, Tossell JW, Mattai
AA, Gogtay N, Rapoport JL. Childhood onset schizophrenia: high rate of
visual hallucinations. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011;50:681–
686.
Fagerlund B, Pagsberg AK, Hemmingsen RP. Cognitive deficits and levels of
IQ in adolescent onset schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders.
Schizophr Res. 2006;85(1–3):30.
Findling RL, Johnson JL, McCLellan J, Frazier JA, Vitiello B, Hamer RM,
Lieberman JA, Ritz L, McNamara NK, Lingler J, Hlastala S, Pierson L,
Puglia M, Maloney AE, Kaufman EM, Noyes N, Sikich L. Double-blind
maintenance safety and effectiveness findings from the treatment of EarlyOnset Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders (TEOSS) study. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010;49:583–594.
Findling RL, Robb A, Nyilas M, Forbes RA, Jin N, Ivanova S, Marcus R,
McQuade RD, Iwamoto T, Carson WH. A multiple-center, randomized,


<<<PAGE 720>>>
double-blind, placebo-controlled study of oral aripiprazole for treatment of
adolescents with schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 2008;165:1432–1441.
Frazier JA, Giuliano AJ, Johnson JL, Yakutis L, Youngstrom EA, Breiger D,
Sikich L, Findling RL, McClellan J, Hamer RM, Vitiello B, Lieberman JA,
Hooper SR. Neurocognitive outcomes in the Treatment of Early-Onset
Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2012;51:496–505.
Fusar-Poli P, Bechdolf A, Taylor M, Carpenter W, Yung A, McGuire P. At
risk for schizophrenia or affective psychosis? A meta-analysis of
DSM/ICD diagnostic outcomes in individuals at high clinical risk.
Schizophr Bull. 2013;39:923–932.
Fusar-Poli P, Bonoldi I, Yung AR. Predicting psychosis: a meta-analysis of
transition outcomes in individuals at high clinical risk. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2012;69:220–229.
Fusar-Poli P, Borgwardt S, Bechdolf A, Addington J, Riecher-Rossler A,
Schultze-Lutter F, Keshavan M, Wood S, Ruhrmann S, Seidman LJ,
Valmaggia L, Cannon T, Velthorst E, De Haan L, Cornblatt B, Bonoldi I,
Birchwood M, McGlashan T, Carpenter W, McGorry P, Klosterkötter J,
McGuire P, Yung A. The psychosis high-risk state. A comprehensive stateof-the-art review. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013;70:107–120.
Gentile S. Clinical usefulness of second-generation antipsychotics in treating
children and adolescents diagnosed with bipolar or schizophrenic
disorders. Pediatr Drugs. 2011;13:291–302.
Haas M, Eerdekens M, Kushner SF, Singer J, Augustyns I, Quiroz J, Pandina
G, Kusumakar V. Efficacy, safety and tolerability of two risperidone
dosing regimens in adolescent schizophrenia: a double-blind study. Br J
Psychiatry. 2009;194:158–164.
Haas M, Unis AS, Armenteros J, Copenhaver MD, Quiroz JA, Kushner SF.
A 6-week randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study of the
efficacy and safety of risperidone in adolescents with schizophrenia. J
Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2009;19:611–621.
Jacobs E, Kline E, Schiffman J. Defining treatment as usual for attenuated
psychosis syndrome: a survey of community practitioners. Psychiatr Serv.
2012;63:1252–1256.
Jacquet H, Rapoport JL, Hecketsweiler B, Bobb A, Thibaut F, Frebourg T,
Campion D. Hyperprolinemia is not associated with childhood onset


<<<PAGE 721>>>
schizophrenia. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2006;141:192.
Kryzhanovskaya L, Schulz SC, McDougle C, Frazier J, Dittmann R,
Robertson-Plouch C, Bauer T, Xu W, Wang W, Carlson J, Tohen M.
Olanzapine versus placebo in adolescents with schizophrenia: a 6-week,
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2009;48:60–70.
Kumra S, Kranzler H, Gerbine-Rosen G, Kester HM, De Thomas C,
Kafantaris V, Correll C, Kane J. Clozapine and ‘high-dose’ olanzapine in
refractory early-onset schizophrenia: a 12-week randomized and doubleblind comparison. Biol Psychiatry. 2008;63:524–529.
McGlashan TH, Zipursky RB, Perkins D, Addington J, Miller T, Woods SW,
Hawkins KA, Hoffman RE, Preda A, Epstein I, Addington D, Lindborg S,
Trzaskoma Q, Tohen M, Breier A. Randomized, double-blind trial of
olanzapine versus placebo in patients prodromally symptomatic for
psychosis. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:790–799.
McGorry PD, Nelson B, Amminger GP, Bechdolf A, Francey SM, Berger G,
Riecher-Rössler A, Klosterkötter J, Ruhrmann S, Schultze-Lutter F,
Nordentoft M, Hickie I, McGuire P, Berk M, Chen EY, Keshavan MS,
Yung AR. Intervention in individuals at ultra-high risk for psychosis: a
review and future directions. J Clin Psychiatry. 2009;70:1206–1212.
McGorry PD, Yung AR, Phillips LJ, Yuen HP, Francey S, Cosgrave EM,
Germano D, Bravin J, McDonald T, Blair A, Adlard S, Jackson H.
Randomized controlled trial of interventions designed to reduce the risk of
progression to first episode psychosis in a clinical sample with
subthreshold symptoms. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2002;59:921–928.
McGurk SR, Twamlety EW, Sitezer DL, McHugo JG, Mueser KT. A metaanalysis of cognitive remediation in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry.
2007;164:1791–1802.
Morrison AP, French P, Walford L, Lewis SW, Kilcommons A, Green J,
Parker S, Bentall R. Cognitive therapy for the prevention of psychosis in
people at ultra-high risk: randomised controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry.
2004;185:291–297.
Peterson L, Jeppesen P, Thorup A, Abel MB, Øhlenschlaeger J, Christenson
TØ, Krarup G, J⊘rgensen P, Nordentoft M. A randomised multicentre trial
of integrated verus standard treatment of patients with a first episode of
psychotic illness. BMJ. 2005;331:602.


<<<PAGE 722>>>
Phillips LJ, Nelson B, Yuen HP, Francey SM, Simmons M. Randomized
controlled trial of interventions for young people at ultra-high risk of
psychosis; study design and baseline characteristics. Aust N Z J Psychiatry.
2009;43:818–829.
Preti A, Cella M. Randomized-controlled trails in people at ultra high risk of
psychosis: a review of treatment effectiveness. Schizophr Res.
2010;123:30–36.
Rapoport JL, Gogtay N. Childhood onset schizophrenia: support for a
progressive neurodevelopmental disorder. Int J Dev Neurosci.
2011;29:251–258.
Remschmidt J, Theisen FM. Early-onset schizophrenia. Neuropsychobiology.
2012;66:63–69.
Schimmelmann BG, Schmidt AJ, Carbon M, Correll CU. Treatment of
adolescents with early-onset schizophrenia spectrum disorders: in search of
a rational, evidence-informed approach. Curr Opin Psychiatry.
2013;26:219–230.
Seal JL, Gornick MC, Gotgay N, Shaw P, Greenstein DK, Coffee M,
Gochman PA, Stromberg T, Chen Z, Merriman B, Nelson SF, Brooks J,
Arepalli S, Wavrant-De Vrieze F, Hardy J, Rapoport JL, Addington AM.
Segmental uniparental isodisomy on 5q32-qter in a patient with childhoodonset schizophrenia. J Med Genet. 2006;43(11):887–892.
Shaw P, Sporn A, Gogtay N, Overman GP, Greenstein D, Gochman P,
Tossell JW, Lenane M, Rapoport JL. Childhood onset schizophrenia: a
double-blind clozapine-olanzapine comparison. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2006;63:721–730.
Shrivastava A, McGorry PD, Tsuang M, Woods SW, Cornblatt BA, Corcoran
C, Carpenter W. “Attenuated psychotic symptoms syndrome” as a risk
syndrome of psychosis, diagnosis in DSM-V: the debate. Indian J
Psychiatry. 2011;53:57–65.
Sikich L. Early onset psychotic disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3699.
Sikich L, Frazier JA, McClellan J, Findling RL, Vitiello B, Ritz L, Ambler D,
Puglia M, Maloney AE, Michael E, De Jong S, Slifka K, Noyes N,
Hlastala S, Pierson L, McNamara NK, Delporto-Bedoya D, Anderson R,
Hamer RM, Lieberman JA. Double-blind comparison of first-and second-


<<<PAGE 723>>>
generation antipsychotics in early-onset schizophrenia and schizoaffective
disorder: findings from the treatment of early-onset schizophrenia
spectrum disorders (TEOSS) study. Am J Psychiatry. 2008;165:1420–
1431.
Starling J, Williams LM, Hainsworth C, Harris AW. The presentation of
early-onset psychotic disorders. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2013;47:43–50.
Vyas NS, Gogtay N. Treatment of early onset of schizophrenia: recent trends,
challenges and future considerations. Front Psychiatry. 2012;3:1–5.
Vyas NS, Patel NH, Puri BK. Neurobiology and phenotypic expression in
early-onset schizophrenia. Early Interv Psychiatry. 2011;5:3–14.
Yung AR, Phillips LJ, Nelson B, Francey SM, Panyuen H, Simmons MB,
Ross ML, Kelly D, Baker K, Amminger GP, Berger G, Thompson AD,
Thampi A, McGorry PD. Randomized controlled trial of interventions for
young people at ultra-high risk for psychosis: 6-month analysis. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2011;72:430–440.
Yung AR, Woods SW, Ruhrmann S, Addington J, Schultze-Lutter F. Wither
the attenuated psychosis syndrome? Schizophr Bull. 2012;38:1130–1134.
Substance Use Disorders
Buckner JD, Heimberg RG, Schneier FR, Liu SM, Want S, Blanco C. The
relationship between cannabis use disorder and social anxiety disorder in
the National Epidemiologic Study of Alcohol and Related Conditions
(NESARC). Drug Alcohol Depend. 2012;124:128–134.
Bukstein O. Adolescent substance abuse. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3818.
Eaton DK, Kann L, Kinchen S, Shanklin S, Ross J, Hawkins J, Harris WA,
Lowry R, McManus T, Chyen D, Lim C, Whittle L, Brener ND, Wechsler
H; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Youth risk behavior
surveillance—United States, 2009. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2010;59(5):1–
142.
Fiorentini A, Volunteri LS, Draogna F, Rovera C, Maffini M, Mauri MC,
Altamura CA. Substance-induced psychoses: a critical review of the
literature. Curr Drug Abuse Rev. 2011;4:228–240.
Fraser S, Hides L, Philips L, Proctor D, Lubman DI. Differentiating first
episode substance induced primary psychotic disorders with concurrent


<<<PAGE 724>>>
substance use in young people. Schizophr Res. 2012;136:110–115.
Giedd J, Stocvkman M, Weele C. Anatomic magnetic resonance imaging of
the developing child and adolescent brain. In: Reyna VF; Chapman SB,
Dougherty MR, Copnfrey J, eds. The Adolescent Brain: Learning,
Reasoning, and Decision Making. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association; 2012.
Harrow BS, Tompkins CP, Mitchell PD, Smith KW, Soldz S, Kasten L,
Fleming K. The impact of publicly funded managed care on adolescent
substance abuse treatment outcomes. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse.
2006;32(3):379.
Johnston LD, O’Malley PM, Bachman JG, Schulenberg JE. Monitoring the
Future: National Survey Results on Drug Use. 1975–2007. Vol 3
Secondary School Students. Bethesda, MD. National Institute on Drug
Abuse; 2008.
Kaminer Y, Winters KC. Proposed DSM-5 substance use disorders for
adolescents: If you build it, will they come? Am J Addict. 2012;21:280–
281.
Lenk KM, Erickson DJ, Wonters KC, Nelson TF, Toomey TL. Screening
services for alcohol misuse and abuse at four-year colleges in the U.S. J
Subst Abuse Treat. 2012;43:352–358.
McCabe SE, West BT, Teter CJ, Boyd CJ. Medical and nonmedical use of
prescription opioids among high school seniors in the United States. Arch
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2012;166:797–802.
Mitchell SG, Gryczynski J, Gonzales A, Moseley A, Peterson T, O’Grady
KE, Schwartz RP. Screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment
(SBIRT) for substance use in a school-based program: services and
outcomes. Am J Addict. 2012;21:S5–S13.
Tavolacci MP, Ladner J, Grigioni S, Richard L, Villet H, Dechelotte P.
Prevalence and association of perceived stress, substance use and
behavioral addictions: a cross-sectional study among university students in
France, 2009–2011. BMC Public Health. 2013;13:724–732.
Winters KC. Advances in the science of adolescent drug involvement:
implications for assessment and diagnosis—experience from the United
States. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2013;26:318–324.
Winters KC, Martim CS, Chung T. Substance use disorders in DSM-V.
When applied to adolescents. Addiction. 2011;106:882–884.


<<<PAGE 725>>>
Yuma-Guerrero PJ, Lawson KA, Velasquez MM, von Sternberg K, Maxson
T, Garcia N. Screening, brief intervention, and referral for alcohol use in
adolescents: a systematic review. Pediatrics. 2012;130:115–122.


<<<PAGE 726>>>
3
Neurocognitive Disorders
Advances in molecular biology diagnostic techniques and medication
management have significantly improved the ability to recognize and treat
cognitive disorders. Cognition includes memory, language, orientation,
judgment, conducting interpersonal relationships, performing actions
(praxis), and problem-solving. Cognitive disorders reflect disruption in one or
more of these domains. Frequently, behavioral symptoms complicate the
disorder. Cognitive disorders exemplify the complex interface among
neurology, medicine, and psychiatry in that medical or neurologic conditions
often lead to cognitive disorders that, in turn, are associated with behavioral
symptoms. Of all psychiatric conditions, cognitive disorders best demonstrate
how biologic insults result in behavioral symptomatology. The clinician must
carefully assess the history and context of the presentation of these disorders
before arriving at a diagnosis and treatment plan.
Cognitive disorders tend to defy Occam’s razor, challenging clinicians and
nosologists with multiplicity, comorbidity, and unclear boundaries. These are
most concerning for elderly adults, the demographic group most at risk for
cognitive disorders. Dementias of late-life are particularly problematic in this
regard. Existing, although often unrecognized, dementia is a significant risk
factor for superimposed delirium. Moreover, certain dementias, such as
dementia with Lewy bodies or late stages of Alzheimer disease, may have
chronic clinical presentations virtually indistinguishable from delirium except
for temporal onset and the lack of an identifiable acute source.
Similarly, behavioral syndromes complicate the course of nearly all
subjects developing progressive dementia. These syndromes include anxiety,
depression, sleep problems, psychosis, and aggression. These symptoms can
be as distressing and disabling as the primary cognitive disorder. Some of


<<<PAGE 727>>>
these behavioral syndromes, such as psychosis, may themselves result from
independent underlying biologies and may be additive with the primary
neurodegenerative process.
The boundaries between types of dementia and between dementia and
healthy aging can be similarly diffuse. Neuropathologic studies of both
clinical and population samples have revealed a surprising truth. The most
common neuropathologic presentation associated with dementia reveals
mixtures of Alzheimer disease, vascular, and Lewy body pathologies. Pure
syndromes are relatively less common, although often the dementia is
ascribed to one of the coexisting pathologies. Strategies regarding how to
understand or reconcile multiple pathologies in the clinic are needed,
although they lag.

DEFINITION
The definitions of cognitive disorders follow. We will then describe each
separately.
Delirium
Delirium describes a condition of short-term confusion and changes in
cognition. There are four subcategories based on several causes: (1) general
medical condition (e.g., infection), (2) substance-induced (e.g., cocaine,
opioids, phencyclidine [PCP]), (3) multiple causes (e.g., head trauma and
kidney disease), and (4) other or multiple etiologies (e.g., sleep deprivation,
medications).
Dementia (Major Neurocognitive Disorder)
Dementia, also referred to as major neurocognitive disorder, in the fifth
edition of DSM (DSM-5), is marked by severe impairment in memory,
judgment, orientation, and cognition. The subcategories are (1) dementia of
the Alzheimer type (Alzheimer Dementia), which usually occurs in persons
older than 65 years of age and is manifested by progressive intellectual
disorientation and dementia, delusions, or depression; (2) vascular dementia,
caused by vessel thrombosis or hemorrhage; (3) human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) disease; (4) head trauma; (5) Pick disease or frontotemporal lobar


<<<PAGE 728>>>
degeneration; (6) prion disease such as Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD),
which is caused by a slow-growing transmittable virus; (7) substanceinduced, caused by toxin or medication (e.g., gasoline fumes, atropine); (8)
multiple etiologies; and (9) not specified (if the cause is unknown).
In DSM-5, mild neurocognitive disorder describes a less severe form of
dementia.
Amnestic Disorder
Amnestic disorders are major neurocognitive disorders caused by other
medical conditions. They are marked primarily by memory impairment in
addition to other cognitive symptoms. The causes include (1) medical
conditions (hypoxia), (2) toxins or medications (e.g., marijuana, diazepam),
and (3) unknown causes.

CLINICAL EVALUATION
During history taking, the clinician seeks to elicit the development of the
illness. Subtle cognitive disorders, fluctuating symptoms, and progressing
disease processes may be tracked effectively. The clinician should obtain a
detailed rendition of changes in the patient’s daily routine involving such
factors as self-care, job responsibilities, and work habits; meal preparation;
shopping and personal support; interactions with friends; hobbies and sports;
reading interests; religious, social, and recreational activities; and ability to
maintain personal finances. Understanding the past life of each patient
provides an invaluable source of baseline data regarding changes in function,
such as attention and concentration, intellectual abilities, personality, motor
skills, and mood and perception. The examiner explores what the patient
considers essential to their lifestyle and how the clinical condition affects
these. This helps to assess both the disease and the success of future
therapies.
Table 3-1
Neuropsychiatric Mental Status Examination
A. General Description
1. General appearance, dress, sensory aids (glasses, hearing aid)


<<<PAGE 729>>>
2. Level of consciousness and arousal
3. Attention to environment
4. Posture (standing and seated)
5. Gait
6. Movements of limbs, trunk, and face (spontaneous, resting, and
after instruction)
7. General demeanor (including evidence of responses to internal
stimuli)
8. Response to examiner (eye contact, cooperation, ability to focus
on interview process)
9. Native or primary language
B. Language and Speech
1. Comprehension (words, sentences, simple and complex
commands, and concepts)
2. Output (spontaneity, rate, fluency, melody or prosody, volume,
coherence, vocabulary, paraphasic errors, complexity of usage)
3. Repetition
4. Other aspects
a. Object naming
b. Color naming
c. Body part identification
d. Ideomotor praxis to command
C. Thought
1. Form (coherence and connectedness)
2. Content
a. Ideational (preoccupations, overvalued ideas, delusions)
b. Perceptual (hallucinations)
D. Mood and Affect
1. Internal mood state (spontaneous and elicited; sense of humor)
2. Future outlook
3. Suicidal ideas and plans
4. Demonstrated emotional status (congruence with mood)
E. Insight and Judgment


<<<PAGE 730>>>
1. Insight
a. Self-appraisal and self-esteem
b. Understanding of current circumstances
c. Ability to describe personal, psychological, and physical
status
2. Judgment
a. Appraisal of major social relationships
b. Understanding of personal roles and responsibilities
F. Cognition
1. Memory
a. Spontaneous (as evidenced during interview)
b. Tested (incidental, immediate repetition, delayed recall, cued
recall, recognition; verbal, nonverbal; explicit, implicit)
2. Visuospatial skills
3. Constructional ability
4. Mathematics
5. Reading
6. Writing
7. Fine sensory function (stereognosis, graphesthesia, two-point
discrimination)
8. Finger gnosis
9. Right–left orientation
10. “Executive functions”
11. Abstraction
Courtesy of Eric D. Caine, M.D., and Jeffrey M. Lyness, M.D.

Mental Status Examination
After taking a thorough history, the clinician’s primary tool is the assessment
of the patient’s mental status. As with the physical examination, the mental
status examination is a means of surveying functions and abilities to allow a
definition of personal strengths and weaknesses. It is a repeatable, structured
assessment of symptoms and signs that promotes effective communication
among clinicians. It also establishes the basis for future comparison, essential


<<<PAGE 731>>>
for documenting therapeutic effectiveness, and it allows comparisons
between different patients, with a generalization of findings from one patient
to another. Table 3-1 lists the components of a comprehensive
neuropsychiatric mental status examination.
Cognition
When testing cognitive functions, the clinician should evaluate memory;
visuospatial and constructional abilities; and reading, writing, and
mathematical abilities. The assessment of abstraction ability is also practical.
However, many things can affect proverb interpretation, such as culture and
education, and any interpretation should happen in that context.

PATHOLOGY AND LABORATORY EXAMINATION
As with all medical tests, we should interpret psychiatric evaluations in the
context of thorough clinical and laboratory assessments. Psychiatric and
neuropsychiatric patients require a careful physical examination, particularly
when issues exist that involve etiologically related or comorbid medical
conditions. When consulting internists and other medical specialists, the
clinician must ask specific questions to focus on the differential diagnostic
process and use the consultation most effectively. In particular, most
systemic medical or primary cerebral diseases that lead to psychopathological
disturbances also manifest with a variety of peripheral or central
abnormalities.
A screening laboratory evaluation is sought initially and may be followed
by a variety of ancillary tests to increase the diagnostic specificity. Table 3-2
lists such procedures, some of which we also describe below.
Electroencephalography
Electroencephalography (EEG) is an easily accessible, noninvasive test of
brain dysfunction that has a high sensitivity for many disorders but relatively
low specificity. Beyond its recognized uses in epilepsy, EEG’s highest utility
is in detecting altered electrical rhythms associated with mild delirium, spaceoccupying lesions, and continuing complex partial seizures (in which the
patient remains conscious, although behaviorally impaired). EEG is also


<<<PAGE 732>>>
sensitive to metabolic and toxic states, often showing a diffuse slowing of
brain activity. We discuss the EEG in more detail in Chapter 1.
Computed Tomography and Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have
proved to be powerful neuropsychiatric research tools. Recent developments
in MRI allow the direct measurement of structures such as the thalamus,
basal ganglia, hippocampus, and amygdala, as well as temporal and apical
areas of the brain and the structures of the posterior fossa. MRI has mostly
replaced CT as the most utilitarian and cost-effective method of imaging in
neuropsychiatry. CT is still the test of choice for patients with acute cerebral
hemorrhages or hematomas, but these patients infrequently present in
psychiatric settings. MRI better discriminates the interface between gray and
white matter and is useful in detecting a variety of white matter lesions in the
periventricular and subcortical regions. The pathophysiologic significance of
such findings remains to be defined. White matter abnormalities occur in
younger patients with multiple sclerosis or HIV infection and older patients
with hypertension, vascular dementia, or dementia of the Alzheimer type.
The prevalence of these abnormalities increases in healthy, aging individuals
who have no defined disease process. In general, the highest utility of
neuroimaging in the evaluation of patients with dementia arises from what it
may exclude (tumors, vascular disease) rather than what it can demonstrate
specifically.
Table 3-2
Screening Laboratory Tests
General Tests
Complete blood cell count
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Electrolytes
Glucose
Blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine
Liver function tests
Serum calcium and phosphorus


<<<PAGE 733>>>
Thyroid function tests
Serum protein
Levels of all drugs
Urinalysis
Pregnancy test for women of childbearing age
Electrocardiography
Ancillary Laboratory Tests
Blood
Blood cultures
Rapid plasma reagin test
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing (enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay [ELISA] and Western blot)
Serum heavy metals
Serum copper
Ceruloplasmin
Serum B12, red blood cell (RBC) folate levels
Urine
Culture
Toxicology
Heavy metal screen
Electrography
Electroencephalography
Evoked potentials
Polysomnography
Nocturnal penile tumescence
Cerebrospinal fluid
Glucose, protein
Cell count
Cultures (bacterial, viral, fungal)
Cryptococcal antigen
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test
Radiography
Computed tomography
Magnetic resonance imaging


<<<PAGE 734>>>
Positron emission tomography
Single photon emission computed tomography
Courtesy of Eric D. Caine, M.D., and Jeffrey M. Lyness, M.D.

Brain Biopsy
A brain needle biopsy can diagnose a variety of disorders: Alzheimer disease,
autoimmune encephalopathy, and tumors. It is conducted stereotactically and
indicated when no other investigative techniques such as MRI or lumbar
puncture have been sufficient to make a diagnosis. The procedure is not
without risk in that seizures may occur if scar tissue forms at the biopsy site.
Neuropsychologic Testing
Neuropsychologic testing provides a standardized, quantitative, reproducible
evaluation of a patient’s cognitive abilities. Such procedures may be useful
for initial evaluation and periodic assessment. Tests are available that assess
abilities across the broad array of cognitive domains, and many offer
comparative normative groups or adjusted scores based on normative
samples. The clinician seeking neuropsychologic consultation should
understand enough about the strengths and weaknesses of selected procedures
to benefit fully from the results obtained.

3.1 Delirium
Delirium is an acute decline in both the level of consciousness and cognition
with particular impairment in attention. A life-threatening yet potentially
reversible disorder of the central nervous system (CNS), delirium often
involves perceptual disturbances, abnormal psychomotor activity, and sleep
cycle impairment. Health care workers often underrecognize delirium. Part of
the problem is that the syndrome has a variety of other names (Table 3-3).
The hallmark symptom of delirium is an impairment of consciousness,
usually occurring in association with global impairments of cognitive
functions. Abnormalities of mood, perception, and behavior are common
psychiatric symptoms. Tremor, asterixis, nystagmus, incoordination, and


<<<PAGE 735>>>
urinary incontinence are common neurologic symptoms. Classically, delirium
has a sudden onset (hours or days), a brief and fluctuating course, and rapid
improvement when we can identify the cause and eliminate it, but each of
these characteristic features can vary in individual patients. Physicians must
recognize delirium to identify and treat the underlying cause and to avert the
development of delirium-related complications such as accidental injury
because of the patient’s clouded consciousness.
Table 3-3
Delirium by Other Names
Intensive care unit psychosis
Acute confusional state
Acute brain failure
Encephalitis
Encephalopathy
Toxic metabolic state
Central nervous system toxicity
Paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis
Sundowning
Cerebral insufficiency
Organic brain syndrome
Table 3-4
Delirium

Name

DSM-5

ICD-10

Delirium

Delirium, not induced by
alcohol and other
psychoactive
substances
Delirium, not
superimposed on
dementia


<<<PAGE 736>>>
Delirium, superimposed on
dementia
Other delirium
Delirium, unspecified
Symptoms

Impaired
Nonspecific organic
attention/awareness
cognitive syndrome with
disturbed
Acute onset, change from
consciousness,
baseline. May fluctuate
awareness, memory,
throughout the day
motor function, sleep,
Symptoms develop
and emotion, with
acutely, represent a
variable duration and
change from baseline,
severity; it can be acute
and may fluctuate
or subacute
Impairment of other
cognitive functions
• Memory
• Language
• Orientation
• Perception
Evidence for physiologic
cause of the impairment
(from history,
examination, laboratory
or other data)

Required
All the above categories
number of
symptoms
Exclusions
A neurocognitive disorder
(not result Coma or other cause of
of):
reduced arousal
Symptom
specifiers

Hyperactive
Hypoactive


<<<PAGE 737>>>
Mixed level of activity
Based on cause:
• Substance intoxication
delirium, with or
without use disorder
(specify severity of
use:
mild/moderate/severe)
• Substance withdrawal
delirium, with or
without use disorder
(specify severity of
use:
mild/moderate/severe)
• Medication-induced
delirium
• Delirium due to
another medical
condition
• Delirium due to
multiple etiologies
Course
Acute: hours to days
Specifiers Persistent: weeks to
months
Comments

If due to substance use,
use “mental and
behavioral disorders due
to psychoactive
substances”

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Table 3-4 compares the diagnostic approaches to delirium. Usually, the cause
is one or more systemic or cerebral derangements that affect brain function.


<<<PAGE 738>>>
A 70-year-old woman, Mrs. K, was brought to the emergency department
by the police. The police had responded to complaints from neighbors
that Mrs. K was wandering the neighborhood and was not taking care of
herself. When the police found Mrs. K in her apartment, she was dirty,
foul-smelling, and wearing nothing but a bra. Her apartment was also
filthy with garbage and rotting food everywhere.
When interviewed, Mrs. K would not look at the interviewer and was
confused and unresponsive to most of the questions asked. She knew her
name and address but not the date. She was unable to describe the events
that led to her admission.
The next day, the supervising psychiatrist attempted to interview Mrs.
K. Her facial expression was still unresponsive, and she still did not know
the month or the name of the hospital. She explained that the neighbors
called the police because she was “sick” and that she did indeed feel sick
and weak, with pains in her shoulder. She also reported not eating for
three days. She denied ever being in a psychiatric hospital or hearing
voices but acknowledged seeing a psychiatrist at one point because she
had trouble sleeping. She said the doctor had prescribed medication, but
she could not remember the name.
Table 3-5 lists the core features of delirium.
Associated clinical features are often present and may be prominent. The
EEG usually shows diffuse slowing of background activity, although patients
with delirium caused by alcohol or sedative-hypnotic withdrawal have lowvoltage fast activity.
The primary neurotransmitter hypothesized to be involved in delirium is
acetylcholine, and the major neuroanatomical area is the reticular formation.
The reticular formation of the brainstem is the principal area regulating
attention and arousal; the major pathway implicated in delirium is the dorsal
tegmental pathway, which projects from the mesencephalic reticular
formation to the tectum and thalamus. Several studies have reported that a
variety of delirium-inducing factors result in decreased acetylcholine activity
in the brain. One of the most common causes of delirium is toxicity from too
many prescribed medications with anticholinergic activity. Researchers have


<<<PAGE 739>>>
suggested other pathophysiologic mechanisms for delirium. In particular, the
delirium associated with alcohol withdrawal correlates with hyperactivity of
the locus ceruleus and its noradrenergic neurons. Serotonin and glutamate are
also likely involved.
Table 3-5
Core Features of Delirium
• Altered consciousness (usually decreased level)
• Altered attention (diminished ability to focus, sustain, or shift
attention)
• Other cognitive dysfunctions:
• Disorientation (especially to time and space)
• Impaired memory
• Typical course:
• Relatively rapid onset (usually hours to days)
• Brief duration (usually days to weeks)
• Marked, unpredictable fluctuations in severity
• Sometimes worse at night (sundowning), ranging from periods
of lucidity to severe cognitive impairment and disorganization

PHYSICAL AND LABORATORY EXAMINATIONS
Delirium is usually diagnosed at the bedside and presents as a sudden onset
of symptoms. A bedside mental status examination—such as the Mini-Mental
State Examination—can be used to document the cognitive impairment and
to provide a baseline from which to measure the patient’s clinical course. The
physical examination often reveals clues to the cause of the delirium (Table
3-6). The presence of a known physical illness or a history of head trauma or
alcohol or other substance use disorder increases the likelihood of the
diagnosis.
The laboratory workup of a patient with delirium should include standard
tests and additional studies indicated by the clinical situation (Table 3-7). In
delirium, the EEG characteristically shows a generalized slowing of activity
and may be useful in differentiating delirium from depression or psychosis.


<<<PAGE 740>>>
The EEG of a delirious patient sometimes shows focal areas of hyperactivity.
In rare cases, it may be challenging to differentiate delirium related to
epilepsy from delirium related to other causes.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Delirium versus Dementia
Several clinical features help distinguish delirium from dementia (Table 3-8).
The major differential points between dementia and delirium are the time to
development of the condition and the fluctuation in the level of attention in
delirium compared with relatively consistent attention in dementia. The time
to development of symptoms is usually short in delirium, and except for
vascular dementia caused by stroke, it is usually gradual and insidious in
dementia. Although both conditions include cognitive impairment, the
changes in dementia are more stable over time and, for example, usually do
not fluctuate over a day. A patient with dementia is usually alert; a patient
with delirium has episodes of decreased consciousness. Occasionally,
delirium occurs in a patient with dementia, a condition known as beclouded
dementia. A dual diagnosis of delirium exists when there is a definite history
of preexisting dementia.
Delirium versus Schizophrenia or Depression
We should differentiate delirium from schizophrenia and depressive disorder.
Some patients with psychotic disorders, usually schizophrenia or manic
episodes, can have periods of extremely disorganized behavior challenging to
distinguish from delirium. In general, however, the hallucinations and
delusions of patients with schizophrenia are more constant and better
organized than those of patients with delirium. Patients with schizophrenia
usually experience no change in their level of consciousness or their
orientation. Patients with hypoactive symptoms of delirium may appear
somewhat similar to severely depressed patients, but their confusion can help
differentiate, as can an EEG. Other psychiatric diagnoses to consider in the
differential diagnosis of delirium are brief psychotic disorder,
schizophreniform disorder, and dissociative disorders. Patients with factitious
disorders may attempt to simulate the symptoms of delirium but usually


<<<PAGE 741>>>
reveal the factitious nature of their symptoms by inconsistencies on their
mental status examinations, and an EEG can easily separate the two
diagnoses.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Although the onset of delirium is usually sudden, prodromal symptoms (e.g.,
restlessness and fearfulness) can occur in the days preceding the onset of
florid symptoms. The symptoms of delirium usually persist as long as the
causally relevant factors are present, although delirium generally lasts less
than 1 week. After identification and removal of the causative factors, the
symptoms of delirium usually recede over a 3- to 7-day period, although
some symptoms may take up to 2 weeks to resolve completely. The older the
patient and the longer the patient has been delirious, the longer the delirium
takes to resolve. Recall of what transpired during a delirium, once it is over,
is characteristically spotty; a patient may refer to the episode as a bad dream
or a nightmare only vaguely remembered. As stated in the discussion on
epidemiology, the occurrence of delirium is associated with a high mortality
rate in the ensuing year, primarily because of the severe nature of the
associated medical conditions that lead to delirium.
Whether delirium progresses to dementia has not been demonstrated in
carefully controlled studies, although many clinicians believe that they have
seen such a progression. A clinical observation that has been validated by
some studies, however, is that depression or posttraumatic stress may follow
a delirium.

TREATMENT
In treating delirium, the primary goal is to treat the underlying cause. When
the underlying condition is anticholinergic toxicity, physostigmine salicylate,
1 to 2 mg intravenously or intramuscularly, may help. We may have to repeat
the dose every 15 to 30 minutes. The other important goal of treatment is to
provide physical, sensory, and environmental support. Physical support is
necessary so that delirious patients do not get into situations in which they
may have accidents. Patients with delirium should be neither sensory
deprived nor overly stimulated by the environment. A familiar person staying


<<<PAGE 742>>>
in the room, such as a friend or relative, may help. Familiar pictures and
decorations; the presence of a clock or a calendar; and regular orientations to
person, place, and time help make patients with delirium comfortable.
Delirium can sometimes occur in older patients wearing eye patches after
cataract surgery (“black-patch delirium”). Such patients can be helped by
placing pinholes in the patches to let in some stimuli or by occasionally
removing one patch at a time during recovery.
Pharmacotherapy
The three significant delirium symptoms that may require pharmacologic
treatment are psychosis, agitation, and insomnia. A commonly used drug for
psychosis is haloperidol. Depending on a patient’s age, weight, and physical
condition, the initial dose may range from 2 to 5 mg intramuscularly,
repeated in an hour if the patient remains agitated. As soon as the patient is
calm, oral medication in liquid concentrate or tablet form should begin. Two
daily oral doses should suffice, mostly at bedtime. The oral equivalent is
about 1.5 times the parenteral dose. The effective total daily dose of
haloperidol may range from 5 to 40 mg for most patients with delirium.
Haloperidol may cause a prolonged QT interval. Clinicians should evaluate
baseline and periodic electrocardiograms as well as monitor the cardiac status
of the patient. Droperidol is a butyrophenone available as an alternative
intravenous (IV) formulation, although careful monitoring of the
electrocardiogram may be prudent with this treatment. The U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) issued a Black Box Warning because of cases of
patients with QT prolongation and torsades de pointes receiving droperidol.
Because of its potential for serious proarrhythmic effects and death, it should
be used only in patients who do not respond well to other treatments.
Phenothiazines should be avoided in delirious patients because these drugs
are associated with significant anticholinergic activity.
Table 3-6
Physical Examination of the Delirious Patient
Parameter

Finding

Clinical Implication

1. Pulse

Bradycardia

Hypothyroidism


<<<PAGE 743>>>
Stokes–Adams syndrome
Increased intracranial
pressure
Tachycardia

Hyperthyroidism
Infection
Heart failure

2. Temperature

Fever

Sepsis
Thyroid storm
Vasculitis

3. Blood pressure

Hypotension

Shock
Hypothyroidism
Addison disease

Hypertension

Encephalopathy
Intracranial mass

4. Respiration

Tachypnea

Diabetes
Pneumonia
Cardiac failure
Fever
Acidosis (metabolic)

Shallow

Alcohol or other
substance intoxication

5. Carotid vessels

Bruits or
decreased
pulse

Transient cerebral
ischemia

6. Scalp and face

Evidence of
trauma


<<<PAGE 744>>>
7. Neck

Evidence of
nuchal rigidity

Meningitis
Subarachnoid
hemorrhage

8. Eyes

Papilledema

Tumor
Hypertensive
encephalopathy

Pupillary
dilatation

Anxiety
Autonomic overactivity
(e.g., delirium tremens)

9. Mouth

Tongue or cheek Evidence of generalized
lacerations
tonic–clonic seizures

10. Thyroid

Enlarged

Thyroid dysfunction

11. Heart

Arrhythmia

Inadequate cardiac
output, possibility of
emboli

Cardiomegaly

Heart failure
Hypertensive disease

12. Lungs

Congestion

Primary pulmonary failure
Pulmonary edema
Pneumonia

13. Breath

14. Liver

Alcohol
Ketones

Diabetes

Enlargement

Cirrhosis
Liver failure


<<<PAGE 745>>>
15. Nervous system
a. Reflexes—muscle Asymmetry with Mass lesion
stretch
Babinski signs
Cerebrovascular disease
Preexisting dementia
Snout

Frontal mass
Bilateral posterior cerebral
artery occlusion

b. Abducent nerve
(sixth cranial
nerve)

Weakness in
lateral gaze

Increased intracranial
pressure

c. Limb strength

Asymmetrical

Mass lesion
Cerebrovascular disease

d. Autonomic

Hyperactivity

Anxiety
Delirium

From Strub RL, Black FW. Neurobehavioral Disorders: A Clinical Approach. Philadelphia: FA
Davis; 1981:121, with permission.

Table 3-7
Laboratory Workup of the Patient with Delirium
Standard studies
Blood chemistries (including electrolytes, renal and hepatic
indexes, and glucose)
Complete blood count with white cell differential
Thyroid function tests
Serologic tests for syphilis
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody test
Urinalysis
Electrocardiogram


<<<PAGE 746>>>
Electroencephalogram
Chest radiograph
Blood and urine drug screens
Additional tests when indicated
Blood, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid cultures
B12, folic acid concentrations
Computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging brain scan
Lumbar puncture and CSF examination
Agitation is a poorly defined symptom that can range from distressed
anxiety to physical aggression. Because of the ambiguity of the term,
agitation is challenging to study. However, some scales are available to aid
research, such as the Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale. Many medications
have anecdotal support. However, studies on the pharmacologic treatment of
agitation in delirium are disappointing. The antipsychotics are most
commonly used. The approach is analogous to the above approach for
psychosis in delirium, with adjustments for the severity and prolongation of
the delirium. Sodium valproate given IV may be useful when antipsychotics
fail. For severe agitation, dexmedetomidine, an α2-adrenoreceptor agonist
that is used as a sedative, can help sedate a patient, mainly a mechanically
ventilated patient, without the deliriogenic effects of many other sedatives.
Second-generation antipsychotics, such as risperidone, clozapine,
olanzapine, quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole, may be considered for
delirium management, but clinical trial experience with these agents for
delirium is limited. Ziprasidone appears to have an activating effect and may
not be appropriate in delirium management. Olanzapine is available for
intramuscular (IM) use and as a rapidly disintegrating oral preparation. These
routes of administration may be preferable for some patients with delirium
who are poorly compliant with medications or who are too sedated to
swallow medications safely.
Insomnia is difficult to treat. Benzodiazepines might be helpful; however,
they risk worsening a patient’s confusion. Also, there is no conclusive
evidence to support the use of benzodiazepines in non–alcohol-related
delirium. If pain is the cause, a physician should not hesitate to prescribe


<<<PAGE 747>>>
opioids for both their analgesic and sedative effects (Table 3-9). Melatonin is
occasionally used but with mixed support and low-quality studies.
Treatment in Special Populations
Parkinson Disease. In Parkinson disease, antiparkinsonian agents can
cause delirium. If coexistent dementia is present, delirium is twice as likely to
develop in patients with Parkinson disease with dementia receiving
antiparkinsonian agents than in those without dementia. Decreasing the
dosage of the antiparkinsonian agent has to be weighed against a worsening
of motor symptoms. If we cannot reduce the antiparkinsonian agents, or if the
delirium persists after we do, an antipsychotic may help. However, this risks
worsening the disorder. The FDA has approved pimavanserin for psychosis
in Parkinson’s. It appears to be an inverse agonist and antagonist activity of
serotonin 5-HT2A and possibly 5-HT2C, with no appreciable affinity for
dopamine. Clozapine may also help and has empirical support. Quetiapine
has not been as rigorously studied as clozapine and may have parkinsonian
side effects, but it is used in clinical practice to treat psychosis in Parkinson
disease.
Table 3-8
Frequency of Clinical Features of Delirium Contrasted with
Dementia
Symptom

Delirium

Dementia

Mental Status Examination
Memory

Impaired, more Impaired, more long-term than
short-term
short-term
than longterm

Attention

Poor

Orientation

Grossly
Varies
disorganized

Impaired although usually to a
lesser degree


<<<PAGE 748>>>
Sensorium

Prominent
Rare hallucinations
hallucinations
(esp. visual
or tactile)

Thought
content

May be
paranoid

Judgment,
Grossly
social skills
impaired
and
behavior

May be paranoid
Initially relatively intact, worsens
with time (depending on areas
affected with frontal cortical
damage causing more
impairment)

Physical Examination
Vital signs

Often abnormal Dependent on cause

Neurologic
May be
examination
abnormal
Comorbid
medical
illnesses

Dependent on cause

Acute illnesses Dependent on cause

Course
Onset

Acute

Usually insidious

Short-term
course

Fluctuates
throughout
day

Varies, but generally more stable

Long-term
course

May improve
Usually chronic and progressive.
(depending
May be gradual or stepwise
on underlying
depending on cause
cause)

Associated Features
Comorbid

Acute illnesses Dependent on cause


<<<PAGE 749>>>
medical
illnesses
Most likely
associated
illnesses

Metabolic,
toxic, or
infectious
illnesses

Neurodegenerative or vascular
disorders

Terminally Ill Patients. When delirium occurs in the context of a terminal
illness, issues about advanced directives and the existence of a health care
proxy become more significant. This scenario emphasizes the importance of
early development of advance directives for health care decision making
while a person can communicate the wishes regarding the extent of
aggressive diagnostic tests at life’s end. The focus may change from an
aggressive search for the etiology of the delirium to one of palliation,
comfort, and assistance with dying.
Table 3-9
Pharmacologic Treatment of Delirium
Pharmacologic
Agent

Dosage

Side Effects

Comments

Typical
Antipsychotics
Haloperidol

Atypical
Antipsychotics

0.5–1 mg
Extrapyramidal
p.o. twice
side (EPS)
a day
effects
(may be Prolonged QTc
given
every 4–
6 hr as
needed,
too)
All can prolong
QTc duration

Most commonly
used
Can be given
intramuscularly


<<<PAGE 750>>>
Risperidone

0.5–1 mg a EPS concerns
day

Limited data in
delirium

Olanzapine

5–10 mg a
day

Higher mortality
in dementia
patients

Quetiapine

25–150 mg More sedating
a day

Metabolic
syndrome

Benzodiazepine
Lorazepam

0.5–3 mg a Respiratory
day and
depression,
as
paradoxical
needed
agitation
every 4
hr

Best use in
delirium
secondary to
alcohol or
benzodiazepine
withdrawal
Can worsen other
types of
delirium

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Delirium is a common disorder, with most incidence and prevalence rates
reported in elderly adults. In community studies, 1 percent of elderly persons
age 55 years or older have delirium (13 percent in the age 85 years and older
group in the community). Among elderly emergency department patients, 5
to 10 percent have delirium. At the time of admission to medical wards,
between 15 and 21 percent of older patients meet the criteria for deliriumprevalent cases. Of patients free of delirium at the time of hospital admission,
5 to 30 percent reported subsequent incidences of delirium during
hospitalization. Delirium occurs in 10 to 15 percent of general surgical
patients, 30 percent of open-heart surgery patients, and more than 50 percent
of patients treated for hip fractures. Delirium occurs in 70 to 87 percent of
intensive care unit patients and up to 83 percent of all patients receiving end
of life care. Sixty percent of patients in nursing homes or post-acute care


<<<PAGE 751>>>
settings have delirium. An estimated 21 percent of patients with severe burns
and 30 to 40 percent of patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(AIDS) have episodes of delirium during hospitalization. Delirium develops
in 80 percent of terminally ill patients. The causes of postoperative delirium
include the stress of surgery, postoperative pain, insomnia, pain medication,
electrolyte imbalances, infection, fever, and blood loss. Table 3-10 shows the
incidence and prevalence rates for delirium across settings.
Table 3-10
Delirium Incidence and Prevalence in Multiple Settings
Population

Prevalence Range
(%)

Incidence Range
(%)

General medical inpatients

10–30

3–16

Medical and surgical
inpatients

5–15

10–55

General surgical inpatients

N/A

9–15
postoperatively

Critical care unit patients

16

16–83

Cardiac surgery inpatients

16–34

7–34

Orthopedic surgery
patients

33

18–50

Emergency department

7–10

N/A

Terminally ill cancer
patients

23–28

83

Institutionalized elderly

44

33

N/A, not available.

The risk for delirium could be conceptualized into two categories,
predisposing and precipitating factors (Tables 3-11 and 3-12). Current
approaches to delirium focus primarily on the precipitation factors and do


<<<PAGE 752>>>
little to address the predisposing factors. Managing predisposing factors for
delirium becomes essential in decreasing future episodes of delirium and the
morbidity and mortality associated with it.
Table 3-11
Predisposing Factors for Delirium
Demographic characteristics
Age 65 years and older
Male sex
Cognitive status
Dementia
Cognitive impairment
History of delirium
Depression
Functional status
Functional dependence
Immobility
History of falls
Low level of activity
Sensory impairment
Hearing
Visual
Decreased oral intake
Dehydration
Malnutrition
Drugs
Treatment with psychoactive drugs
Treatment with drugs with anticholinergic properties
Alcohol abuse
Coexisting medical conditions
Severe medical diseases
Chronic renal or hepatic disease
Stroke
Neurologic disease


<<<PAGE 753>>>
Metabolic derangements
Infection with human immunodeficiency virus
Fractures or trauma
Terminal diseases
Adapted from Inouye SK. Delirium in older persons. N Engl J Med. 2016;354(11):1157.

Table 3-12
Precipitating Factors for Delirium
Drugs
Sedative–hypnotics
Narcotics
Anticholinergic drugs
Treatment with multiple drugs
Alcohol or drug withdrawal
Primary neurologic diseases
Stroke, nondominant hemispheric
Intracranial bleeding
Meningitis or encephalitis
Intercurrent illnesses
Infections
Iatrogenic complications
Severe acute illness
Hypoxia
Shock
Anemia
Fever or hypothermia
Dehydration
Poor nutritional status
Low serum albumin levels
Metabolic derangements
Surgery
Orthopedic surgery
Cardiac surgery


<<<PAGE 754>>>
Prolonged cardiopulmonary bypass
Noncardiac surgery
Environmental
Admission to intensive care unit
Use of physical restraints
Use of bladder catheter
Use of multiple procedures
Pain
Emotional stress
Prolonged sleep deprivation
Adapted from Inouye SK. Delirium in older persons. N Engl J Med. 2016;354(11):1157.

Advanced age is a significant risk factor for the development of delirium.
Approximately 30 to 40 percent of hospitalized patients older than age 65
years have an episode of delirium, and another 10 to 15 percent of elderly
persons exhibit delirium on admission to the hospital. Of nursing home
residents older than age 75 years, 60 percent have repeated episodes of
delirium. Male gender is also an independent risk factor for delirium.
Delirium is a poor prognostic sign. Rates of institutionalization are
increased threefold for patients 65 years and older who exhibit delirium while
in the hospital. The 3-month mortality rate of patients who have an episode of
delirium is estimated to be 23 to 33 percent. The 1-year mortality rate for
patients who have an episode of delirium may be as high as 50 percent.
Elderly patients who experience delirium while hospitalized have a 21 to 75
percent mortality rate during that hospitalization. After discharge, up to 15
percent of these persons die within 1 month, and 25 percent die within 6
months.

ETIOLOGY
The significant causes of delirium are CNS disease (e.g., epilepsy), systemic
disease (e.g., sepsis, cardiac failure), and either intoxication or withdrawal
from pharmacologic or toxic agents (Table 3-13). When evaluating patients
with delirium, clinicians should assume that any drug that a patient has taken
could be a cause for delirium.


<<<PAGE 755>>>
Table 3-13
Common Causes of Delirium
Central
nervous
system
disorder

Seizure (postictal, nonconvulsive status, status)

Migraine
Head trauma, brain tumor, subarachnoid
hemorrhage, subdural, epidural hematoma,
abscess, intracerebral hemorrhage, cerebellar
hemorrhage, nonhemorrhagic stroke, transient
ischemia
Metabolic
disorder

Electrolyte abnormalities
Diabetes, hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, or insulin
resistance

Systemic
illness

Infection (e.g., sepsis, malaria, erysipelas, viral,
plague, Lyme disease, syphilis, or abscess)
Trauma
Change in fluid status (dehydration or volume
overload)
Nutritional deficiency
Burns
Uncontrolled pain
Heat stroke
High altitude (usually >5,000 m)

Medications

Pain medications (e.g., postoperative meperidine or
morphine)


<<<PAGE 756>>>
Antibiotics, antivirals, and antifungals
Steroids
Anesthesia
Cardiac medications
Antihypertensives
Antineoplastic agents
Anticholinergic agents
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
Serotonin
syndrome
Over-theHerbals, teas, and nutritional supplements
counter
preparations
Botanicals

Jimsonweed, oleander, foxglove, hemlock,
dieffenbachia, and Amanita phalloides

Cardiac

Cardiac failure, arrhythmia, myocardial infarction,
cardiac assist device, cardiac surgery

Pulmonary

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypoxia,
SIADH, acid–base disturbance

Endocrine

Adrenal crisis or adrenal failure, thyroid abnormality,
parathyroid abnormality

Hematologic

Anemia, leukemia, blood dyscrasia, stem cell
transplant

Renal

Renal failure, uremia, SIADH

Hepatic

Hepatitis, cirrhosis, hepatic failure

Neoplasm

Neoplasm (primary brain, metastases,
paraneoplastic syndrome)


<<<PAGE 757>>>
Drugs of
abuse

Intoxication and withdrawal

Toxins

Intoxication and withdrawal
Heavy metals and aluminum

SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone.

3.2 Dementia (Major Neurocognitive
Disorder)
Dementia refers to a disease process marked by progressive cognitive
impairment in clear consciousness. Dementia does not refer to low
intellectual functioning or mental retardation because these are
developmental and static conditions, and the cognitive deficits in dementia
represent a decline from a previous level of functioning. Dementia involves
multiple cognitive domains, and cognitive deficits cause significant
impairment in social and occupational functioning. There are several types of
dementias based on etiology: Alzheimer disease, dementia of Lewy bodies,
vascular dementia, frontotemporal dementia, traumatic brain injury (TBI),
HIV, prion disease, Parkinson disease, and Huntington disease. Other
medical and neurologic conditions can cause dementia, as can various
substances.
The critical clinical points of dementia are the identification of the
syndrome and the clinical workup of its cause. The disorder can be
progressive or static, permanent, or reversible. We always assume an
underlying cause, although, in rare cases, it is impossible to determine a
specific cause. The potential reversibility of dementia is related to the
underlying pathologic condition and the availability and application of
effective treatment. Approximately 15 percent of people with dementia have
reversible illnesses if we can initiate treatment before irreversible damage
takes place.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES


<<<PAGE 758>>>
Table 3-14 compares the approaches to the general diagnosis of dementia.
DSM-5 makes a distinction between major and minor cognitive disorders
based upon levels of functioning, but the underlying etiology is similar.
Table 3-14
Approaches to the General Diagnosis of Dementia
DSM-5
Major and Mild Neurocognitive Disorders

ICD-10
Dementias

Symptoms

Significant (Major) or moderate (Minor) Defined by
decline in cognitive functioning:
the
specific
• Attention
cause of
• Executive function
Dementia
• Learning/Memory
• Language
• Perceptual–motor
• Social cognition
(For each of the specific diagnoses,
one should specify whether major or
minor in the diagnosis [i.e., minor
neurocognitive disorder with Lewy
bodies])

Required
number of
symptoms

≥1; see above criteria

Exclusions (not
result of):

• Delirium
• Another mental disorder

Psychosocial
Impact

Some impairments in ability to
independently perform activities of
daily living

Symptom
Specifiers

See specifiers for the specific disorders See
specifiers
With or without behavioral disturbance


<<<PAGE 759>>>
for the
specific
disorders
Severity
Specifiers

Based on what is impaired and level of
impairment and this refers to the
current level:
Mild: instrumental activities of daily
life (e.g., cooking, paying bills)
impaired
Moderate: basic activities of daily life
impaired (e.g., eating, dressing)
Severe: impaired in all activities, fully
dependent on others

DSM-5 specifics a variety of types of dementia based on their cause.
Tables 3-15 to 3-24 compare the diagnostic approaches to the major
etiologies.
We make a diagnosis of dementia from the clinical examination, including
a mental status examination, and on information from the patient’s family,
friends, and employers. Complaints of a personality change in a patient older
than age 40 years suggest that we should consider a diagnosis of dementia.
Clinicians should note patients’ complaints about intellectual impairment
and forgetfulness as well as evidence of patients’ evasion, denial, or
rationalization aimed at concealing cognitive deficits. Excessive orderliness,
social withdrawal, or a tendency to relate events in minute detail can be
characteristic, and sudden outbursts of anger or sarcasm can occur. We
should observe the patient’s appearance and behavior. Lability of emotions,
sloppy grooming, uninhibited remarks, silly jokes, or a dull, apathetic, or
vacuous facial expression and manner suggest the presence of dementia,
especially when coupled with memory impairment.
Memory impairment is typically an early and prominent feature in
dementia, especially in dementias involving the cortex, such as dementia of
the Alzheimer type. Early in the course of dementia, memory impairment is
mild and usually most marked for recent events; people forget telephone
numbers, conversations, and events of the day. As the course of dementia


<<<PAGE 760>>>
progresses, memory impairment becomes severe, and the patient can only
retain the earliest learned information (e.g., a person’s place of birth).
Since memory is vital for orientation to person, place, and time, orientation
can be progressively affected during a dementing illness. For example,
patients with dementia may forget how to get back to their rooms after going
to the bathroom. No matter how severe the disorientation seems, however,
patients show no impairment in their level of consciousness.
Table 3-15
Neurocognitive Disorder due to Alzheimer Disease
DSM-5

ICD-10

Neurocognitive Disorder due to
Alzheimer Disease

Dementia in Alzheimer
Disease

Mild

Dementia in Alzheimer
disease with early
onset

Major

Symptoms
Symptoms
Dementia in Alzheimer
disease with late
• ↓
• ↓
onset
memory/learning
memory/learning
+ ≥1 other
Dementia in Alzheimer
• Progressive
cognitive
disease, atypical or
decline, no
domain
mixed type
significant
periods of
• Progressive
Dementia in Alzheimer
stability
decline, no
disease, unspecified
significant
• No evidence of
Early onset: begins <
periods of
mixed causes
age 65, rapid
stability
progression of
Probable: evidence
• No evidence of
functioning, involves
of a genetic cause
mixed causes
higher levels of
(family
cognition
history/genetic
Probable: evidence
testing)
of a genetic cause Late onset: begins ≥
(family
age 65, with slower
Possible: Above not
history/genetic
progression,
met, all three


<<<PAGE 761>>>
symptoms present

testing) OR all
preferentially affects
three symptoms
memory
Possible: Some but Symptoms presenting
not all the
with insidious onset,
probable criteria
progressive decline
met
over years, and
include characteristic
neuropathology and
neurochemical
features

Table 3-16
Frontotemporal Neurocognitive Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Frontotemporal Neurocognitive Disorder

Dementia in Pi
Disease Circum
Brain Atrophy

Behavioral Variant

Language Variant

Progressive dem
Onset middle ag
Affected: social
Affected: language (word
Affected:
cognition/executive function
finding, naming, grammar,
skills
less spontaneous speech)
Spared:
Later:
learning/memory/perceptual– Spared:
memory/mood
motor function
learning/memory/perceptual–
function
motor function
Associated Symptoms (≥3):
Probable:
• Disinhibition
• evidence of a genetic
• Apathy
cause (family
• ↓ sympathy/empathy
history/genetic testing)
• Perseveration/stereotypies
• Neuroimaging evidence of
• Hyperorality/dietary
frontal/temporal pathology
changes
Possible:
Probable:
Some but not all the
• evidence of a genetic
probable criteria met


<<<PAGE 762>>>
cause (family
history/genetic testing)
• Neuroimaging evidence of
frontal/temporal pathology
Possible:
• Some but not all the
probable criteria met
Table 3-17
Neurocognitive Disorder with Lewy Bodies
DSM-5

ICD-10

Neurocognitive Disorder
with Lewy Bodies

Dementia in Other Specified
Diseases Classified Elsewhere

Core:
Disorder is listed but not defined.
• Fluctuating:
• cognition
• attention
• alertness
• Recurrent well-formed
visual hallucinations
• Parkinsonian symptoms
(after cognitive decline)
Suggestive:
• REM sleep behavior
disorder
• Severe neuroleptic
sensitivity
Probable: ≥2 core features or
1 core/1 suggestive
Possible: 1 core feature
Table 3-18


<<<PAGE 763>>>
Vascular Neurocognitive Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Vascular Neurocognitive
Disorder

Vascular Dementia

History + imaging/physical
findings of cerebrovascular
(CV) disease
Cognitive decline typical of
vascular pathology (≥1):
• Cognitive decline after CV
event
• Cognitive areas mainly
complex attention/frontalexecutive function
Probable (≥1):
• Neuroimaging evidence of
CV disease in brain
• Neurocognitive symptoms
are associated with the CV
events
• Clinical/genetic evidence of
CV disease
Possible:
• No neuroimaging
• No documented temporal
relationship between CV
events and cognitive
changes

Vascular dementia of acute
onset: cognitive symptoms
develop after stroke(s)
Multi-infarct dementia:
progressive symptoms after
repeated transient ischemic
attacks
Subcortical Vascular dementia:
H/O hypertension, mainly white
matter injury
Mixed cortical and subcortical
vascular dementia
Other vascular dementia
Vascular dementia, unspecified

Table 3-19
Neurocognitive Disorder due to Traumatic Brain Injury


<<<PAGE 764>>>
DSM-5

ICD-10

Neurocognitive Disorder due to Dementia in Other Specified
Traumatic Brain Injury
Diseases Classified Elsewhere
H/O traumatic brain injury, with
Disorder is listed but not defined.
associated noncognitive
symptoms
Neurocognitive symptoms (≥1):
• Loss of consciousness
• Amnesia following trauma
• Confusion/disorientation
• Neuroimaging evidence of
injury/Neurologic symptoms
Table 3-20
Neurocognitive Disorder due to HIV Infection
DSM-5

ICD-10

Neurocognitive Disorder due
to HIV Infection

Dementia in Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)

HIV diagnosis
HIV diagnosis
Associated cognitive symptoms Associated cognitive symptoms
Table 3-21
Neurocognitive Disorder due to Prion Disease
DSM-5

ICD-10

Neurocognitive Disorder due to
Prion Disease

Dementia in CreutzfeldtJakob Disease

Cognitive impairment:
Subtle onset
Rapid progression
Additional features:

Significant neurologic
symptoms
Subacute course
Progressive rapid decline


<<<PAGE 765>>>
Motor symptoms, such as
myoclonus/ataxia
Biochemical marker on testing
Table 3-22
Neurocognitive Disorder due to Parkinson Disease
DSM-5

ICD-10

Neurocognitive Disorder due to
Parkinson Disease

Dementia in Parkinson
Disease

Occurring in the context of
Parkinson disease
Subtle onset
Gradual progression
Probable (both of the following:)
Possible (one of the following:)
• No evidence of mixed etiology
• Parkinson disease precedes
cognitive symptoms

Occurring in the context of
Parkinson’s disease

Table 3-23
Neurocognitive Disorder due to Huntington Disease
DSM-5

ICD-10

Neurocognitive Disorder due to
Huntington Disease

Huntington Disease

Occurring in the context of
Huntington disease
Subtle onset
Gradual progression

Occurring in the context of
Huntington disease
Caused by autosomal
dominant gene
Slow progression
Motor symptom (chorea)


<<<PAGE 766>>>
Dementing processes that affect the cortex, primarily dementia of the
Alzheimer type and vascular dementia, can affect patients’ language abilities.
Psychiatric and Neurologic Changes
Personality. Changes in the personality of a person with dementia are
especially disturbing for their families. Preexisting personality traits may
accentuate during the development of dementia. Patients with dementia may
also become introverted and seem to be less concerned than they previously
were about the effects of their behavior on others. Persons with dementia who
have paranoid delusions are generally hostile to family members and
caretakers. Patients with frontal and temporal involvement are likely to have
marked personality changes and may be irritable and explosive.
Hallucinations and Delusions. An estimated 20 to 30 percent of patients
with dementia (primarily patients with dementia of the Alzheimer type) have
hallucinations, and 30 to 40 percent have delusions, primarily of a paranoid
or persecutory and unsystematized nature, although complex and sustained.
Some patients also report well-systematized delusions. Physical aggression
and other forms of violence are common in demented patients who also have
psychotic symptoms.
Mood. In addition to psychosis and personality changes, depression and
anxiety are significant symptoms in an estimated 40 to 50 percent of patients
with dementia, although the full syndrome of depressive disorder may be
present in only 10 to 20 percent. Patients with dementia also may exhibit
pathologic laughter or crying—that is, extremes of emotions—with no
apparent provocation.
Cognitive Change. In addition to the aphasias in patients with dementia,
apraxias and agnosias are common. Other neurologic signs that can be
associated with dementia are seizures, seen in approximately 10 percent of
patients with dementia of the Alzheimer type and 20 percent of patients with
vascular dementia, and atypical neurologic presentations, such as
nondominant parietal lobe syndromes. Primitive reflexes, such as the grasp,
snout, suck, tonic-foot, and palmomental reflexes, may be present on


<<<PAGE 767>>>
neurologic examination, and myoclonic jerks are present in 5 to 10 percent of
patients.
Table 3-24
Additional Diagnosis Types of Dementia in DSM-5
Neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition: In the
context of some other disorder not listed among the neurocognitive
disorders
Neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies
Substance/medication-induced neurocognitive disorder
Unspecified neurocognitive disorder
Patients with vascular dementia may have additional neurologic symptoms,
such as headaches, dizziness, faintness, weakness, focal neurologic signs, and
sleep disturbances, possibly attributable to the location of the cerebrovascular
disease. Pseudobulbar palsy, dysarthria, and dysphagia are also more
common in vascular dementia than in other dementing conditions.
Abstractions and the Catastrophic Reaction. Patients with dementia
also exhibit a reduced ability to apply what Kurt Goldstein called the
“abstract attitude.” Patients have difficulty generalizing from a single
instance, forming concepts, and grasping similarities and differences among
concepts. Furthermore, the ability to solve problems, to reason logically, and
to make sound judgments is compromised. Goldstein also described a
catastrophic reaction marked by agitation secondary to the subjective
awareness of intellectual deficits under stressful circumstances. Persons
usually attempt to compensate for defects by using strategies to avoid
demonstrating failures in intellectual performance; they may change the
subject, make jokes, or otherwise divert the interviewer. Lack of judgment
and poor impulse control appear commonly, particularly in dementias that
primarily affect the frontal lobes. Examples of these impairments include
coarse language, inappropriate jokes, neglect of personal appearance and
hygiene, and a general disregard for the conventional rules of social conduct.
Sundowner Syndrome. Sundowner syndrome is characterized by


<<<PAGE 768>>>
drowsiness, confusion, ataxia, and accidental falls. It occurs in older people
who are overly sedated and in patients with dementia who react adversely to
even a small dose of a psychoactive drug. The syndrome also occurs in
demented patients when external stimuli, such as light and interpersonal
orienting cues, are diminished.
Vascular Dementia
The general symptoms of vascular dementia are the same as those for
dementia of the Alzheimer type, but the diagnosis of vascular dementia
requires either clinical or laboratory evidence in support of a vascular cause
of dementia. Vascular dementia is more likely to show a decremental,
stepwise deterioration than is Alzheimer disease.
Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia
DSM lists substance-induced persisting dementia in two places, with the
dementias, and with the substance-related disorders. The specific substances
it cross-references are alcohol, inhalants, sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics,
and other or unknown substances.
Alcohol-Induced Persisting Dementia. For alcohol-induced persisting
dementia, the patient must meet the criteria for dementia. Because amnesia
can also occur in the context of Korsakoff psychosis, it is essential to
distinguish between memory impairment accompanied by other cognitive
deficits (i.e., dementia) and amnesia caused by thiamine deficiency. To
complicate matters, however, evidence also suggests that other cognitive
functions, such as attention and concentration, may also be impaired in
Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome. Also, alcohol abuse is frequently associated
with mood changes, so poor concentration and other cognitive symptoms
often observed in the context of major depression must also be ruled out.
Prevalence rates differ considerably according to the population studied and
the diagnostic criteria used, although alcohol-related dementia roughly
accounts for 4 percent of dementias.
Pathology, Physical Findings, and Laboratory Examination
We should perform a comprehensive laboratory workup when evaluating a


<<<PAGE 769>>>
patient with dementia. The purposes of the workup are to detect reversible
causes of dementia and to provide the patient and family with a definitive
diagnosis. The range of possible causes of dementia mandates selective use
of laboratory tests. The evaluation should follow informed clinical suspicion
based on the history and physical and mental status examination results. The
continued improvements in brain imaging techniques, particularly MRI, have
made the differentiation between dementia of the Alzheimer type and
vascular dementia, in some cases, somewhat more straightforward than in the
past. Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) can be a useful
adjunctive test to detect patterns of brain metabolism in various types of
dementias.
A general physical examination is a routine component of the workup for
dementia. It may reveal evidence of systemic disease causing brain
dysfunction, such as an enlarged liver and hepatic encephalopathy, or it may
demonstrate systemic disease related to particular CNS processes. The
detection of Kaposi sarcoma, for example, should alert the clinician to the
probable presence of AIDS and the associated possibility of AIDS dementia
complex. Focal neurologic findings, such as asymmetrical hyperreflexia or
weakness, are seen more often in vascular than in degenerative disease.
Frontal lobe signs and primitive reflexes occur in many disorders and often
point to more significant progression.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Dementia of the Alzheimer Type versus Vascular Dementia
Classically, vascular dementia has been distinguished from dementia of the
Alzheimer type by the decremental deterioration that can accompany
cerebrovascular disease over time. Although the discrete, stepwise
deterioration may not be apparent in all cases, focal neurologic symptoms are
more common in vascular dementia than in dementia of the Alzheimer type,
as are the standard risk factors for cerebrovascular disease.
Vascular Dementia versus Transient Ischemic Attacks
Transient ischemic attacks (TIAs) are brief episodes of focal neurologic
dysfunction lasting less than 24 hours (usually 5 to 15 minutes). Although a


<<<PAGE 770>>>
variety of mechanisms may be responsible, the episodes are frequently the
result of microembolization from a proximal intracranial arterial lesion that
produces transient brain ischemia, and the episodes usually resolve without
significant pathologic alteration of the parenchymal tissue. Approximately
one-third of persons with untreated TIAs experience a brain infarction later;
therefore, recognition of TIAs is an essential clinical strategy to prevent brain
infarction.
Clinicians should distinguish episodes involving the vertebrobasilar system
from those involving the carotid arterial system. In general, symptoms of
vertebrobasilar disease reflect a transient functional disturbance in either the
brainstem or the occipital lobe; carotid distribution symptoms reflect
unilateral retinal or hemispheric abnormality. Anticoagulant therapy,
antiplatelet agglutinating drugs such as aspirin, and extracranial and
intracranial reconstructive vascular surgery are effective in reducing the risk
of infarction in patients with TIAs.
Delirium
In general, delirium has a rapid onset, brief duration, cognitive impairment
fluctuation during the day; nocturnal exacerbation of symptoms; marked
disturbance of the sleep–wake cycle; and prominent disturbances in attention
and perception (Table 3-8).
Depression
Some patients with depression have symptoms of cognitive impairment
challenging to distinguish from symptoms of dementia. The clinical picture is
sometimes referred to as pseudodementia, although the term depressionrelated cognitive dysfunction is preferable and more descriptive (Table 3-25).
Patients with depression-related cognitive dysfunction generally have
prominent depressive symptoms, more insight into their symptoms than do
demented patients, and often a history of depressive episodes. Fortunately,
memory impairment from depression usually responds to antidepressant
medication.
Table 3-25
Major Clinical Features Differentiating Depression-Related


<<<PAGE 771>>>
Cognitive Dysfunction from Dementia
Depression

Dementia

Clinical Course and History
Family always aware of
dysfunction and its severity

Family often unaware of dysfunction
and its severity

Onset can be dated with some Onset can be dated only within
precision
broad limits
Symptoms of short duration
before medical help is
sought

Symptoms usually of long duration
before medical help is sought

Rapid progression of
symptoms after onset

Slow progression of symptoms
throughout course

History of previous psychiatric
dysfunction common

History of previous psychiatric
dysfunction unusual

Complaints and Clinical
Behavior
Patients usually complain
much of cognitive loss

Patients usually complain little of
cognitive loss

Patients’ complaints of
Patients’ complaints of cognitive
cognitive dysfunction usually
dysfunction usually vague
detailed
Patients emphasize disability

Patients conceal disability

Patients highlight failures

Patients delight in accomplishments,
however trivial

Patients make little effort to
perform even simple tasks

Patients struggle to perform tasks
Patients rely on notes, calendars,
and so on to keep up


<<<PAGE 772>>>
Patients usually communicate
strong sense of distress

Patients often appear unconcerned

Affective change often
pervasive

Affect labile and shallow

Loss of social skills often early
and prominent

Social skills often retained

Behavior often incongruent
with severity of cognitive
dysfunction

Behavior usually compatible with
severity of cognitive dysfunction

Nocturnal accentuation of
dysfunction uncommon

Nocturnal accentuation of
dysfunction common

Clinical Features Related to Memory, Cognitive, and Intellectual
Dysfunctions
Attention and concentration
often well preserved

Attention and concentration usually
faulty

“Don’t know” answers typical

Near-miss answers frequent

On tests of orientation, patients On tests of orientation, patients
often give “don’t know”
often mistake unusual for usual
answers
Memory loss for recent and
remote events usually
severe

Memory loss for recent events
usually more severe than for
remote events

Memory gaps for specific
periods or events common

Memory gaps for specific periods
unusuala

Marked variability in
performance on tasks of
similar difficulty

Consistently poor performance on
tasks of similar difficulty

aExcept when caused by delirium, trauma, seizures, and so on.

Reprinted with permission from Wells CE. Pseudodementia. Am J Psychiatry. 1979;136:898.


<<<PAGE 773>>>
Malingering and Factitious Disorder
Persons who attempt to simulate memory loss, as in factitious disorder, do so
erratically and inconsistently. In true dementia, one loses memory for time
and place before memory for person, and recent memory before remote
memory.
Schizophrenia
Although schizophrenia can be associated with some acquired intellectual
impairment, its symptoms are much less severe than are the related symptoms
of psychosis and thought disorder.
Normal Aging
Aging is not necessarily associated with any significant cognitive decline, but
minor memory problems can occur as a normal part of aging. We sometimes
call these normal occurrences benign senescent forgetfulness, age-associated
memory impairment, or normal benign age-related senescence. They are
distinguished from dementia by their minor severity and because they do not
interfere significantly with a person’s social or occupational behavior.
Other Disorders
Intellectual disability, which does not include memory impairment, occurs in
childhood. Amnestic disorder is a circumscribed loss of memory and no
deterioration. We should rule out a pituitary disorder, but they are a rare
cause.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
The classic course of dementia is onset in the patient’s 60s (although there
may be subtle earlier signs), with gradual deterioration over 5 to 10 years,
leading eventually to death. The age of onset and the rapidity of deterioration
vary among different types of dementia and within individual diagnostic
categories. The average survival expectation for patients with dementia of the
Alzheimer type is approximately 8 years, with a range of 1 to 20 years. Data
suggest that in persons with an early onset of dementia or with a family
history of dementia, the disease is likely to have a rapid course. In a recent


<<<PAGE 774>>>
study of 821 persons with Alzheimer disease, the median survival time was
3.5 years. After diagnosing dementia, patients must have a complete medical
and neurologic workup because 10 to 15 percent of all patients with dementia
have a potentially reversible condition if we initiate treatment before
permanent brain damage occurs.
The most common course of dementia begins with several subtle signs that
may, at first, be ignored by both the patient and the people closest to the
patient. Gradual onset of symptoms is most commonly associated with
dementia of the Alzheimer type, vascular dementia, endocrinopathies, brain
tumors, and metabolic disorders. Conversely, the onset of dementia resulting
from head trauma, cardiac arrest with cerebral hypoxia, or encephalitis can be
sudden. Although the symptoms of the early phase of dementia are subtle,
they become conspicuous as dementia progresses, and family members may
then bring a patient to a physician’s attention. People with dementia may be
sensitive to the use of benzodiazepines or alcohol, which can precipitate
agitated, aggressive, or psychotic behavior. In the terminal stages of
dementia, patients become empty shells of their former selves—profoundly
disoriented, incoherent, amnestic, and incontinent of urine and feces.
With psychosocial and pharmacologic treatment and possibly because of
the self-healing properties of the brain, the symptoms of dementia may
progress slowly for a time or may even recede somewhat. Symptom
regression is certainly a possibility in reversible dementias (dementias caused
by hypothyroidism, normal pressure hydrocephalus [NPH], and brain tumors)
after initiating treatment. The course of dementia varies from a steady
progression (commonly seen with dementia of the Alzheimer type) to an
incrementally worsening dementia (commonly seen with vascular dementia)
to stable dementia (as may be seen in dementia related to head trauma).
Psychosocial Determinants
The severity and course of dementia can be affected by psychosocial factors.
The higher a person’s premorbid intelligence and education, the better they
can compensate for intellectual deficits. People who have a rapid onset of
dementia use fewer defenses than do those who experience an insidious
onset. Anxiety and depression can intensify and aggravate the symptoms.


<<<PAGE 775>>>
TREATMENT
The first step in the treatment of dementia is the verification of the diagnosis.
Accurate diagnosis is imperative because the progression may be halted or
even reversed if one provides appropriate therapy. Preventive measures are
essential, particularly in vascular dementia. Such measures might include
changes in diet, exercise, and control of diabetes and hypertension.
Pharmacologic agents might include antihypertensive, anticoagulant, or
antiplatelet agents. Blood pressure control should aim for the higher end of
the normal range because it may improve cognitive function in patients with
vascular dementia. Blood pressure below the normal range can worsen
cognitive function in patients with dementia. The choice of an
antihypertensive agent can be significant in that β-adrenergic receptor
antagonists are associated with exaggeration of cognitive impairment.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and diuretics have not been
linked to exaggeration of cognitive impairment and may lower blood pressure
without affecting cerebral blood flow, which presumably correlates with
cognitive function. Surgical removal of carotid plaques may prevent
subsequent vascular events in carefully selected patients. The general
treatment approach to patients with dementia is to provide supportive medical
care; emotional support for the patients and their families; and pharmacologic
treatment for specific symptoms, including disruptive behavior.
Psychosocial Therapies
The deterioration of mental faculties has significant psychological meaning
for patients with dementia. The experience of a sense of continuity over time
depends on memory. Patients lose recent memory before remote memory in
most cases of dementia, and many patients are profoundly distressed by
clearly recalling how they used to function while observing their noticeable
deterioration. At the most fundamental level, the self is a product of brain
functioning. Patients’ identities begin to fade as the illness progresses, and
they can recall less and less of their past. Emotional reactions ranging from
depression to severe anxiety to catastrophic terror can stem from the
realization that the sense of self is disappearing.
Patients often benefit from supportive and educational psychotherapy in
which the clinician clearly explains the nature and course of their illness.


<<<PAGE 776>>>
They may also benefit from assistance in grieving and accepting the extent of
their disability and from attention to self-esteem issues. We should try to
maximize any areas of intact functioning by helping patients identify
activities in which successful functioning is possible. A psychodynamic
assessment of defective functions and cognitive limitations can also be
useful. Clinicians can help patients find ways to deal with the defective
functions, such as keeping calendars for orientation problems, making
schedules to help structure activities, and taking notes for memory problems.
Psychodynamic interventions with family members of patients with
dementia may be of great assistance. Those who take care of a patient
struggle with feelings of guilt, grief, anger, and exhaustion as they watch a
family member gradually deteriorate. A common problem that develops
among caregivers involves their self-sacrifice in caring for a patient. They
often suppress any developing resentment from this self-sacrifice because of
the guilt feelings it produces. Clinicians can help caregivers understand the
complex mixture of feelings associated with seeing a loved one decline and
can provide understanding as well as permission to express these feelings.
Clinicians must also be aware of the caregivers’ tendencies to blame
themselves or others for patients’ illnesses and must appreciate the role that
patients with dementia play in the lives of family members.
Pharmacotherapy
Clinicians may prescribe sedative-hypnotics for insomnia and anxiety,
antidepressants for depression, and antipsychotic drugs for delusions and
hallucinations, but they should be aware of the possible adverse drug effects
that may be worse in older people (e.g., disinhibition, confusion, and
oversedation). In general, we should avoid drugs with high anticholinergic
activity.
Donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine, and tacrine are cholinesterase
inhibitors used to treat mild to moderate cognitive impairment in Alzheimer
disease. They reduce the inactivation of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine
and thus potentiate the cholinergic neurotransmitter, which in turn produces a
modest improvement in memory and goal-directed thought. These drugs are
most useful for persons with mild to moderate memory loss who have
sufficient preservation of their basal forebrain cholinergic neurons to benefit


<<<PAGE 777>>>
from augmentation of cholinergic neurotransmission.
Donepezil is well tolerated and widely used. We rarely use tacrine because
of its potential for hepatotoxicity. Fewer clinical data are available for
rivastigmine and galantamine, which appear more likely to cause
gastrointestinal (GI) and neuropsychiatric adverse effects than does
donepezil. None of these medications prevent the progressive neuronal
degeneration of the disorder.
Memantine protects neurons from excessive amounts of glutamate, which
may be neurotoxic. Sometimes we may combine the drug with donepezil. It
appears to improve dementia sometimes.
Other Treatment Approaches. There are many drugs under development
for cognitive-enhancing activity and this is a very active area of drug
research. Novel strategies are focusing on the β-amyloid plaques and
neurofibrillary tangles associated with Alzheimer and some other
neurodegenerative disorders. In the case of amyloid plaques, attempts to
reduce their formation, aggregation and to increase their clearance are
underway, and several monoclonal and polyclonal antibody vaccines are
being tested.
Estrogen replacement therapy may reduce the risk of cognitive decline in
postmenopausal women. However the data is correlational and clinical trials
to date are largely disappointing. A variety of other interventions have been
proposed to improve cognitive outcomes in dementia, including cognitive
stimulation, music therapy, reminiscence therapy, omega 3 fish oil, statins,
ginkgo biloba, aromatherapy, or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs;
however, all lack sufficient evidence to make any recommendation. Exercise
improves cognition in healthy adults, and there is some evidence of benefit in
dementia, particularly in the early stages.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
With the aging population, the prevalence of dementia is rising. The
prevalence of moderate to severe dementia in different population groups is
approximately 5 percent in the general population older than 65 years of age,
20 to 40 percent in the general population older than 85 years of age, 15 to 20
percent in outpatient general medical practices, and 50 percent in chronic care


<<<PAGE 778>>>
facilities.
Of all patients with dementia, 50 to 60 percent have the most common type
of dementia, dementia of the Alzheimer type (Alzheimer disease). Dementia
of the Alzheimer type increases in prevalence with increasing age. For
persons age 65 years, the prevalence for men is 0.6 percent and women, 0.8
percent. These rates increase with age, and at age 90, about one-fifth of
people have the disorder. For all of these figures, 40 to 60 percent of cases
are moderate to severe. The rates of prevalence (men to women) are 11 and
14 percent at age 85 years, 21 and 25 percent at age 90 years, and 36 and 41
percent at age 95 years. Patients with dementia of the Alzheimer type occupy
more than 50 percent of nursing home beds. More than 2 million persons
with dementia live at home. By 2050, current predictions suggest that there
will be 14 million Americans with Alzheimer disease and, therefore, more
than 18 million people with dementia.
The second most common type of dementia is vascular dementia, which is
causally related to cerebrovascular diseases. Hypertension predisposes a
person to the disease. Vascular dementias account for 15 to 30 percent of all
dementia cases. Vascular dementia is most common in persons between the
ages of 60 and 70 and is more common in men than in women.
Approximately 10 to 15 percent of patients have coexisting vascular
dementia and dementia of the Alzheimer type.
Other common causes of dementia, each representing 1 to 5 percent of all
cases, include head trauma; alcohol-related dementias; and various movement
disorder-related dementias, such as Huntington disease and Parkinson
disease. Because dementia is a reasonably general syndrome, it has many
causes, and clinicians must embark on a careful clinical workup of a patient
with dementia to establish its cause.

ETIOLOGY
The most common causes of dementia in individuals older than 65 years of
age are (1) Alzheimer disease, (2) vascular dementia, and (3) mixed vascular
and Alzheimer disease. Other illnesses that account for approximately 10
percent include Lewy body dementia, Pick disease, frontotemporal
dementias, NPH, alcoholic dementia, infectious dementia, such as HIV or
syphilis, and Parkinson disease. Many types of dementias evaluated in


<<<PAGE 779>>>
clinical settings can be attributable to reversible causes, such as metabolic
abnormalities (e.g., hypothyroidism), nutritional deficiencies (e.g., vitamin
B12 or folate deficiencies), or dementia syndrome caused by depression. See
Table 3-26 for a review of possible etiologies of dementia.
Dementia of the Alzheimer Type
In 1907, Alois Alzheimer first described the condition that later assumed his
name. He described a 51-year-old woman with a 4½-year course of
progressive dementia. The final diagnosis of Alzheimer disease requires a
neuropathologic examination of the brain; nevertheless, we can diagnose
dementia of the Alzheimer type in the clinical setting after excluding other
causes of dementia.
Genetic Factors. Although the cause of dementia of the Alzheimer type
remains unknown, researchers have made impressive progress toward
understanding the molecular basis of the amyloid deposits that are a hallmark
of the disorder’s neuropathology. Studies suggest as many as 40 percent of
patients have a family history of dementia of the Alzheimer type. Thus,
genetic factors are likely to play some part in the development of the
disorder. Additional support for a genetic influence is the concordance rate
for monozygotic twins, which is higher than the rate for dizygotic twins (43
percent vs. 8 percent, respectively). In several well-documented cases, the
disorder has been transmitted in families through an autosomal dominant
gene, although such transmission is rare. Alzheimer-type dementia has shown
linkage to chromosomes 1, 14, and 21.
Table 3-26
Possible Etiologies of Dementia
Degenerative dementias
Alzheimer disease
Frontotemporal dementias (e.g., Pick disease)
Parkinson disease
Lewy body dementia
Idiopathic cerebral ferrocalcinosis (Fahr disease)


<<<PAGE 780>>>
Progressive supranuclear palsy
Miscellaneous
Huntington disease
Wilson disease
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Neuroacanthocytosis
Psychiatric
Pseudodementia of depression
Cognitive decline in late-life schizophrenia
Physiologic
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Metabolic
Vitamin deficiencies (e.g., vitamin B12, folate)
Endocrinopathies (e.g., hypothyroidism)
Chronic metabolic disturbances (e.g., uremia)
Tumor
Primary or metastatic (e.g., meningioma or metastatic breast or
lung cancer)
Traumatic
Dementia pugilistica, posttraumatic dementia
Subdural hematoma
Infection
Prion diseases (e.g., Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease, bovine
spongiform encephalitis, Gerstmann–Sträussler syndrome)
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)
Syphilis
Cardiac, vascular, and anoxia
Infarction (single or multiple or strategic lacunar)
Binswanger disease (subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy)
Hemodynamic insufficiency (e.g., hypoperfusion or hypoxia)
Demyelinating diseases
Multiple sclerosis
Drugs and toxins
Alcohol


<<<PAGE 781>>>
Heavy metals
Irradiation
Cognitive dysfunction due to medications (e.g., anticholinergics)
Carbon monoxide
AMYLOID PRECURSOR PROTEIN. The gene for amyloid precursor protein (APP)

is on the long arm of chromosome 21. The process of differential splicing
yields four forms of the APP. The β/A4 protein, the principal constituent of
senile plaques, is a 42-amino acid peptide that is a breakdown product of
APP. Down syndrome (trisomy 21) has three copies of the APP gene, and
with a mutation at codon 717 in the APP gene, a pathologic process results in
the excessive deposition of β/A4 protein. Whether the processing of abnormal
APP is of primary causative significance in Alzheimer disease is unknown.
However, many research groups are studying both the standard metabolic
processing of APP and its processing in patients with dementia of the
Alzheimer type in an attempt to answer this question.
MULTIPLE E4 GENES. One study implicated gene E4 in the origin of Alzheimer

disease. People with one copy of the gene have Alzheimer disease three times
more frequently than do those with no E4 gene, and people with two E4
genes have the disease eight times more frequently than do those with no E4
gene. Diagnostic testing for this gene is not contributory because it is found
in persons without dementia and not found in all cases of dementia.
Neuropathology. The classic gross neuroanatomical observation of a brain
from a patient with Alzheimer disease is diffuse atrophy with flattened
cortical sulci and enlarged cerebral ventricles. The classic and
pathognomonic microscopic findings are senile plaques, neurofibrillary
tangles, neuronal loss (particularly in the cortex and the hippocampus),
synaptic loss (perhaps as much as 50 percent in the cortex), and
granulovascular degeneration of the neurons. Neurofibrillary tangles (Fig. 31) are composed of cytoskeletal elements, primarily phosphorylated tau
protein, although other cytoskeletal proteins are also present. Neurofibrillary
tangles are not unique to Alzheimer disease; they also occur in Down
syndrome, dementia pugilistica (punch-drunk syndrome), Parkinson–


<<<PAGE 782>>>
dementia complex of Guam, Hallervorden–Spatz disease, and the brains of
healthy people as they age. Neurofibrillary tangles are common in the cortex,
the hippocampus, the substantia nigra, and the locus ceruleus.
Senile plaques, also referred to as amyloid plaques, more strongly indicate
Alzheimer disease, although they are also seen in Down syndrome and, to
some extent, in healthy aging. Senile plaques are composed of a particular
protein, β/A4, and astrocytes, dystrophic neuronal processes, and microglia.
The number and the density of senile plaques present in postmortem brains
correlate with the severity of the disease.
Neurotransmitters. The neurotransmitters usually implicated in the
pathophysiologic condition of Alzheimer disease are acetylcholine and
norepinephrine, both of which are likely hypoactive in Alzheimer disease.
Several studies have reported data consistent with the hypothesis that specific
degeneration of cholinergic neurons is present in the nucleus basalis of
Meynert in persons with Alzheimer disease. Other data supporting a
cholinergic deficit in Alzheimer disease demonstrate decreased acetylcholine
and choline acetyltransferase concentrations in the brain. Choline
acetyltransferase is the critical enzyme for the synthesis of acetylcholine, and
a reduction in choline acetyltransferase concentration suggests a decrease in
the number of cholinergic neurons present. Additional support for the
cholinergic deficit hypothesis comes from the observation that cholinergic
antagonists, such as scopolamine and atropine, impair cognitive abilities,
whereas cholinergic agonists, such as physostigmine and arecoline, enhance
cognitive abilities. The decrease in norepinephrine-containing neurons in the
locus ceruleus found in some pathologic examinations of Alzheimer disease
brains suggests decreased norepinephrine activity in the disease. Two other
neurotransmitters implicated in the pathophysiologic condition of Alzheimer
disease are the neuroactive peptides somatostatin and corticotropin; there are
decreased concentrations of both in persons with Alzheimer disease.
Other Causes. Another theory to explain the development of Alzheimer
disease is that an abnormality in the regulation of membrane phospholipid
metabolism results in membranes that are less fluid—that is, more rigid—
than usual. Several investigators are using molecular resonance spectroscopic
imaging to assess this hypothesis directly in patients with dementia of the


<<<PAGE 783>>>
Alzheimer type. Some have suggested that aluminum toxicity is a causative
factor because of the high levels of aluminum found in the brains of some
patients with Alzheimer disease, but this is no longer considered a significant
etiologic factor. Excessive stimulation by the transmitter glutamate that may
damage neurons is another theory of causation.

FIGURE 3-1
Photomicrographs of Alzheimer disease neuropathology. A: Deposition of
insoluble fibrillar Aβ into plaques begins in the neocortex, labeled here using an
antibody against Aβ and appearing as reddish-brown deposits (arrows). B:
Bielchowsky stain of neocortex from an individual who died in advanced stages of
Alzheimer disease (Braak stage VI). The Aβ plaques appear as dark brown in this
preparation (arrows) and can be seen to be associated with dystrophic neuronal


<<<PAGE 784>>>
processes (arrowheads) in which insoluble microtubule-associated protein τ
(MAPT) aggregates appear as black deposits. This neurofibrillary pathology also
appears extensively throughout the neuropil, and several neurofibrillary tangles
can be seen (open arrowheads). C: Bielchowsky stain of neocortex from an
individual who died in a less advanced disease stage (Braak stage IV). Although
some neurofibrillary tangles are still evident (open arrowheads), the degree of
neurofibrillary pathology in the neuropil is substantially diminished. D: Isolated
neurofibrillary tangles (open arrowheads) in entorhinal cortex that can be seen in
normal aging (Bielchowsky stain). Notice the lack of Aβ plaques and limited
neuropil involvement. Aβ, Beta amyloid. (All images obtained at 200×
magnification and provided courtesy of Dr. Ronald L. Hamilton, Department of
Pathology, Division of Neuropathology, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine.)

FIGURE 3-2
Gross appearance of the cerebral cortex on coronal section from a patient with
vascular dementia. The multiple bilateral lacunar infarcts involve the thalamus, the
internal capsule, and the globus pallidus. (Courtesy of Daniel P. Perl, M.D.)

Familial Multiple System Tauopathy with Presenile Dementia. A
recently discovered type of dementia, familial multiple system tauopathy,
shares some brain abnormalities found in people with Alzheimer disease. The
gene that causes the disorder is likely on chromosome 17. The symptoms of
the disorder include short-term memory problems and difficulty maintaining
balance and walking. The onset of the disease is in the 40s and 50s. Persons
with the disease live an average of 11 years after the onset of symptoms.


<<<PAGE 785>>>
As in patients with Alzheimer disease, tau protein builds up in neurons and
glial cells of persons with familial multiple system tauopathy. Eventually, the
protein buildup kills brain cells. The disorder is not associated with the senile
plaques seen with Alzheimer disease.
Mr. J, a 70-year-old retired businessman, was brought to psychiatric
services on referral by the family physician. His wife claimed that Mr. J
had become so forgetful that she was afraid to leave him alone, even at
home. Mr. J retired at age 62 years after experiencing a decline in work
performance during the previous 5 years. He also slowly gave up hobbies
he once enjoyed (photography, reading, golf) and became increasingly
quiet. However, his growing forgetfulness went unnoticed at home. Then
one day, while walking in an area he knew well, he could not find his
way home. From then on, his memory failure began to increase. He
would forget appointments, misplace things, and lose his way around the
neighborhood he resided in for 40 years. He failed to recognize people,
even those he knew for many years. His wife had to start bathing and
dressing him because he forgot how to do so himself.
On examination, Mr. J could not recall the time or place. He was only
able to recall his name and place of birth. Mr. J seemed lost during the
interview, only responding to questions with an occasional shrug of his
shoulders. When asked to name objects or to recall words or numbers,
Mr. J appeared tense and distressed. Mr. J had difficulty following
instructions and was unable to dress or undress. His general medical
condition was good. Laboratory examinations showed abnormalities on
Mr. J’s EEG and CT scans.
Vascular Dementia
The primary cause of vascular dementia, formerly referred to as multi-infarct
dementia, is presumed to be multiple areas of cerebral vascular disease,
resulting in a symptom pattern of dementia. Vascular dementia is most
common in men, especially those with preexisting hypertension or other
cardiovascular risk factors. The disorder affects primarily small- and
medium-sized cerebral vessels, which undergo infarction and produce


<<<PAGE 786>>>
multiple parenchymal lesions spread over wide areas of the brain (Fig. 3-2).
The causes of the infarctions can include occlusion of the vessels by
arteriosclerotic plaques or thromobemboli from distant origins (e.g., heart
valves). An examination of a patient may reveal carotid bruits, funduscopic
abnormalities, or enlarged cardiac chambers.
Binswanger Disease. Binswanger disease, also known as subcortical
arteriosclerotic encephalopathy, is characterized by the presence of many
small infarctions of the white matter that spare the cortical regions (Fig. 3-3).
Although Binswanger disease was previously considered a rare condition, the
advent of sophisticated and powerful imaging techniques, such as MRI, has
revealed that the condition is more common than previously thought.

FIGURE 3-3
Binswanger disease. Cross-section demonstrating extensive subcortical white
matter infarction, with sparing of the overlying gray matter. (Courtesy of Dushyant


<<<PAGE 787>>>
Purohit, M.D., Neuropathology Division, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY.)

FIGURE 3-4
Pick disease gross pathology. This demonstrates the marked frontal and temporal
atrophy seen in frontotemporal dementias, such as Pick disease. (Courtesy of
Dushyant Purohit, M.D., Neuropathology Division, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY.)

Frontotemporal Dementia (Pick Disease)
In contrast to the parietal–temporal distribution of pathologic findings in
Alzheimer disease, Pick disease is a preponderance of atrophy in the
frontotemporal regions. These regions also have neuronal loss, gliosis, and
neuronal Pick bodies, which are masses of cytoskeletal elements. Pick bodies
are seen in some postmortem specimens but are not necessary for the
diagnosis. The cause of Pick disease is unknown, but the disease constitutes
approximately 5 percent of all irreversible dementias. It is most common in
men, especially those who have a first-degree relative with the condition.
Pick disease is difficult to distinguish from dementia of the Alzheimer type.
However, the early stages of Pick disease are more often characterized by
personality and behavioral changes, with relative preservation of other
cognitive functions, and it typically begins before 75 years of age. Familial
cases may have an earlier onset, and some studies have shown that
approximately half of the cases of Pick disease are familial (Fig. 3-4).


<<<PAGE 788>>>
Features of Klüver–Bucy syndrome (e.g., hypersexuality, placidity,
hyperorality) are much more common in Pick disease than in Alzheimer
disease.
Table 3-27
Clinical Criteria for Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB)
The patient must have sufficient cognitive decline to interfere with
social or occupational functioning. Of note, early in the illness,
memory symptoms may not be as prominent as attention,
frontosubcortical skills, and visuospatial ability. Probable DLB
requires two or more core symptoms, whereas possible DLB only
requires one core symptom.
Core features
Fluctuating levels of attention and alertness
Recurrent visual hallucinations
Parkinsonian features (cogwheeling, bradykinesia, and resting
tremor)
Supporting features
Repeated falls
Syncope
Sensitivity to neuroleptics
Systematized delusions
Hallucinations in other modalities (e.g. auditory, tactile)
Adapted from McKeith LG, Galasko D, Kosaka K. Consensus guidelines for the clinical and
pathologic diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB): Report of the consortium on DLB
international workshop. 1996;47:1113–1124, with permission.

Lewy Body Disease
Lewy body disease is clinically similar to Alzheimer disease. However, it
commonly presents with hallucinations, parkinsonian features, and
extrapyramidal signs (Table 3-27). Lewy inclusion bodies are in the cerebral
cortex (Fig. 3-5). The exact incidence is unknown. These patients often have
Capgras syndrome (reduplicative paramnesia) as part of the clinical picture.


<<<PAGE 789>>>
FIGURE 3-5
Photomicrographs of Lewy body pathology. A: Abnormal accumulation of αsynuclein aggregates demonstrated by immunocytochemistry in the amygdala of
a subject with dementia. Lewy bodies appear as dense intracellular inclusions
(arrows), but staining of neuronal processes can be seen throughout the neuropil
(arrowheads). In individuals in whom Lewy body pathology occurs concurrently
with Alzheimer disease, the amygdala is often the only region affected. B: Classic
appearance of a Lewy body (arrow) in a large pigmented neuron of the substantia
nigra. C: Lewy body pathology in the neocortex. Both Lewy bodies (arrows) and
substantial labeling of neuronal processes in the neuropil (arrowheads) are
evident. (Magnification for [A] and [B] 200×, for [C] 400×. All images provided
courtesy of Dr. Ronald L. Hamilton, Department of Pathology, Division of
Neuropathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.)

Table 3-28
Distinguishing
Dementias

Features

of

Subcortical

and

Cortical

Characteristic Subcortical
Dementia

Cortical
Dementia

Language

Aphasia early FAS test

No aphasia
(anomia, if
severe)

Recommended
Tests

Boston Naming
test
WAIS-R
vocabulary
test
Memory

Impaired recall

Recall and

Wechsler


<<<PAGE 790>>>
(retrieval) >
recognition
(encoding)

recognition
impaired

memory
scale;
Symbol Digit
Paired
Associate
Learning
(Brandt)

Attention and
immediate
recall

Impaired

Impaired

WAIS-R digit
span

Visuospatial
skills

Impaired

Impaired

Picture
arrangement,
object
assembly and
block design;
WAIS
subtests

Calculation

Preserved until late

Involved early Mini-Mental
State

Frontal system Disproportionately
abilities
affected
(executive
function)

Degree of
Wisconsin Card
impairment
Sorting Test;
consistent
Odd Man Out
with other
test; Picture
involvement
Absurdities

Speed of
cognitive
processing

Slowed early

Normal until
late in
disease

Personality

Apathetic, inert

Unconcerned MMPI

Mood

Depressed

Euthymic

Trail making A
and B: Paced
Auditory
Serial
Addition Test
(PASAT)

Beck and


<<<PAGE 791>>>
Hamilton
depression
scales
Speech

Dysarthric

Articulate until Verbal fluency
late
(Rosen,
1980)

Posture

Bowed or extended Upright

Coordination

Impaired

Normal until
late

Motor speed
and control

Slowed

Normal

Adventitious
movements

Chorea, tremor, tics, Absent
dystonia
(Alzheimer
dementia—
some
myoclonus)

Abstraction

Impaired

Impaired

Finger-tap;
grooved
pegboard

Category test
(Halstead
Battery)

From Pajeau AK, Román GC. HIV encephalopathy and dementia. In: J Biller, RG Kathol, eds.
The Psychiatric Clinics of North America: The Interface of Psychiatry and Neurolgy. Vol. 15.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1992:457.

Huntington Disease
Huntington disease is classically associated with the development of
dementia. The dementia seen in this disease is the subcortical type of
dementia, characterized by more motor abnormalities and fewer language
abnormalities than in the cortical type of dementia (Table 3-28). The
dementia of Huntington disease exhibits psychomotor slowing and difficulty
with complex tasks, but memory, language, and insight remain relatively
intact in the early and middle stages of the illness. As the disease progresses,
however, the dementia becomes complete; the features distinguishing it from


<<<PAGE 792>>>
dementia of the Alzheimer type are the high incidence of depression and
psychosis in addition to the classic choreoathetoid movement disorder.
Parkinson Disease
As with Huntington disease, parkinsonism is a disease of the basal ganglia,
commonly associated with dementia and depression. An estimated 20 to 30
percent of patients with Parkinson disease have dementia, and an additional
30 to 40 percent have measurable impairment in cognitive abilities. The slow
movements of persons with Parkinson disease parallel the slow thinking of
some affected patients, a feature that clinicians may refer to as bradyphrenia.
Mr. M, 77 years of age, came for a neurologic examination because he
noticed his memory was slipping, and he was having difficulty
concentrating, which interfered with his work. He complained of
slowness and losing his train of thought. His wife stated that he was
becoming withdrawn and was more reluctant to participate in activities he
usually enjoyed. He denied symptoms of depression other than feeling
mildly depressed about his disabilities. Two years prior, Mr. M
developed an intermittent resting tremor in his right hand and a shuffling
gait. Although a psychiatrist considered a diagnosis of Parkinson disease,
the neurologist did not confirm it.
During an initial neurologic examination, Mr. M’s spontaneous speech
was hesitant and unclear (dysarthric). Cranial nerve examination was
normal. Motor tone was increased slightly in the neck and all limbs. He
performed alternating movements in his hands slowly. He had a slight
intermittent tremor of his right arm at rest. Reflexes were symmetrical.
Three weeks later, the patient had a neuropsychologic examination. On
the examination, Mr. M had impairment of memory, naming, and
constructional abilities.
HIV-Related Dementia
Encephalopathy in HIV infection is associated with dementia and is called
acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) dementia complex, or HIV
dementia. Patients infected with HIV experience dementia at an annual rate


<<<PAGE 793>>>
of approximately 14 percent. An estimated 75 percent of patients with AIDS
have involvement of the CNS at the time of autopsy. The development of
dementia in people infected with HIV parallels the appearance of
parenchymal abnormalities in MRI scans. Cryptococcus or Treponema
pallidum can cause other infectious dementias.
Table 3-29
Criteria for Clinical Diagnosis of HIV Type 1-Associated
Dementia Complex
Laboratory evidence for systemic human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) type 1 infection with confirmation by Western blot,
polymerase chain reaction, or culture.
Acquired abnormality in at least two cognitive abilities for a period of
at least 1 mo: attention and concentration, speed of processing
information, abstraction and reasoning, visuospatial skills, memory
and learning, and speech and language. The decline should be
verified by reliable history and mental status examination. History
should be obtained from an informant, and examination should be
supplemented by neuropsychological testing.
Cognitive dysfunction causes impairment in social or occupational
functioning. Impairment should not be attributable solely to severe
systemic illness.
At least one of the following:
Acquired abnormality in motor function verified by clinical
examination (e.g., slowed rapid movements, abnormal gait,
incoordination, hyperreflexia, hypertonia, or weakness),
neuropsychological tests (e.g., fine motor speed, manual
dexterity, or perceptual motor skills), or both.
Decline in motivation or emotional control or a change in social
behavior. This may be characterized by a change in personality
with apathy, inertia, irritability, emotional lability, or a new onset
of impaired judgment or disinhibition.
This does not exclusively occur in the context of a delirium.
Evidence of another etiology, including active central nervous system


<<<PAGE 794>>>
opportunistic infection, malignancy, psychiatric disorders (e.g.,
major depression), or substance abuse, if present, is not the cause
of the previously mentioned symptoms and signs.
Adapted from Working Group of the American Academy of Neurology AIDS Task Force.
Nomenclature and research case definitions for neurologic manifestations of human
immunodeficiency virus–type 1 (HIV-1) infection. Neurology. 1991;41:778–785, with
permission.

The diagnosis of AIDS dementia complex is made by confirmation of HIV
infection and exclusion of alternative pathology to explain cognitive
impairment. The American Academy of Neurology AIDS Task Force
developed research criteria for the clinical diagnosis of CNS disorders in
adults and adolescents (Table 3-29). The AIDS Task Force criteria for AIDS
dementia complex require laboratory evidence for systemic HIV, at least two
cognitive deficits, and the presence of motor abnormalities or personality
changes. Personality changes manifest with apathy, emotional lability, or
behavioral disinhibition. The AIDS Task Force criteria also require the
absence of clouding of consciousness or evidence of another etiology that
could produce cognitive impairment. We should assess for cognitive, motor,
and behavioral changes using physical, neurologic, and psychiatric
examinations, in addition to neuropsychologic testing.
Head Trauma–Related Dementia
Dementia can be a sequela of head trauma. The so-called punch-drunk
syndrome (dementia pugilistica) occurs in boxers after repeated head trauma
over many years. The symptoms include emotional lability, dysarthria, and
impulsivity. It also occurs in professional football players who developed
dementia after repeated concussions over many years.
Mrs. S, 75 years of age, was brought to the emergency department after
being found wandering her neighborhood in a confused and disoriented
state. She was in good health until a few months before, when her
husband had minor surgery, requiring 10-day hospitalization. About a
month after her husband returned home, he and their two adult children,
who do not reside with them, reported a noticeable change in Mrs. S’s
mental status. Mrs. S became hyperactive and appeared to have excessive


<<<PAGE 795>>>
energy, was agitated and irritable, and had difficulty sleeping at night.
At the examination, Mrs. S was disoriented to time and place, agitated,
and confused. Her husband revealed upon an interview that Mrs. S has
for many years suffered from dizziness and lightheadedness upon
standing and occasionally suffered from falls, none of which caused any
significant damage. Not long before her confused symptoms began, Mrs.
S had suffered a fall one night, and her husband found her the next
morning lying next to the bed in a confused state. Because of her history
of falls, neither Mr. S nor Mrs. S thought much of the incident. A CT
scan revealed the presence of a subdural hematoma, which was surgically
evacuated. Afterward, Mrs. S’s confusion and disorientation cleared, and
she returned to her normal state of functioning.

3.3 Major or Minor Neurocognitive
Disorder due to Another Medical Condition
(Amnestic Disorders)
The amnestic disorders cause impairment in memory as the primary sign and
symptom, although other signs of cognitive decline may coexist. The authors
of Synopsis believe amnestic disorder to be a clinically useful descriptive
category of illness, but they are coded in DSM-5 as a neurocognitive disorder
due to another medical condition with the specific medical condition noted.
The amnestic disorders are a broad category that results from a variety of
diseases and conditions that have amnesia as the primary complaint. The
syndrome is defined primarily by impairment in the ability to create new
memories. Three different etiologies exist: amnestic disorder caused by a
general medical condition (e.g., head trauma), substance-induced persisting
amnestic disorder (e.g., caused by carbon monoxide poisoning or chronic
alcohol consumption), and amnestic disorder not otherwise specified for
cases in which the etiology is unclear.

DIAGNOSIS


<<<PAGE 796>>>
The recognition of amnestic disorder occurs when there is impairment in the
ability to learn new information or the inability to recall previously learned
information, as a result of which there is significant impairment in social or
occupational functioning and which is caused by a general medical condition
(including physical trauma). Amnestic disorder may be transient, lasting for
hours or days, or chronic, lasting weeks or months. We can make a diagnosis
of substance-induced persisting amnestic disorder when evidence suggests
that the symptoms are causatively related to the use of a substance. The
DSM-5 refers clinicians to specific diagnoses within substance-related
disorders: alcohol-induced disorder, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic-induced
disorder, and other (or unknown) substance-induced disorder.

CLINICAL FEATURES AND SUBTYPES
The central symptom of amnestic disorders is the development of a memory
disorder characterized by an impairment in the ability to learn new
information (anterograde amnesia) and an inability to recall previously
remembered knowledge (retrograde amnesia). The symptom must result in
significant problems for patients in their social or occupational functioning.
The time in which a patient is amnestic can begin directly at the point of
trauma or include a period before the trauma. The patient can also lose
memory for the time during the physical insult (e.g., during a cerebrovascular
event).
Short-term and recent memory is usually impaired. Patients cannot
remember what they had for breakfast or lunch, the name of the hospital, or
their doctors. In some patients, the amnesia is so profound that the patient
cannot orient themselves to place and time, although the patient rarely loses
orientation to person. Overlearned information or remote events usually
remain intact, but there can be amnesia for even the less remote past (over the
past decade). Immediate memory (tested, for example, by asking a patient to
repeat six numbers) remains intact. With improvement, patients may
experience a gradual shrinking of the time for which they lose memory,
although some patients experience a gradual improvement in memory for the
entire period.
The onset of symptoms can be sudden, as in trauma, cerebrovascular
events, and neurotoxic chemical assaults, or gradual, as in nutritional


<<<PAGE 797>>>
deficiency and cerebral tumors. The amnesia can be of short duration.
A variety of other symptoms can be associated with amnestic disorders.
For patients with other cognitive impairments, a diagnosis of dementia or
delirium is more appropriate than a diagnosis of an amnestic disorder. Both
subtle and gross changes in personality can accompany the symptoms of
memory impairment in amnestic disorders. Patients may be apathetic, lack
initiative, have unprovoked episodes of agitation, or appear to be overly
friendly or agreeable. Patients with amnestic disorders can also appear
bewildered and confused and may attempt to cover their confusion with
confabulatory answers to questions. Characteristically, patients with amnestic
disorders do not have good insight into their neuropsychiatric conditions.
A local nursing home transferred a 73-year-old survivor of the Holocaust
to the psychiatric unit. She was born in Germany to a middle-class
family. Her internment in a concentration camp cut short her education.
She immigrated to Israel after liberation from the concentration camp and
later to the United States, where she married and raised a family.
Premorbidly, she was described as a quiet, intelligent, and loving woman
who spoke several languages. At 55 years of age, she had a significant
carbon monoxide exposure when a gas line leaked while she and her
husband slept. Her husband died of carbon monoxide poisoning, but the
patient survived after a period of coma. After being stabilized, she
displayed significant cognitive and behavioral problems. She had
difficulty with learning new information and making appropriate plans.
She retained the ability to perform activities of daily living but could not
be relied on to pay bills, buy food, cook, or clean, despite appearing to
have retained the intellectual ability to do these tasks. She moved to a
nursing home after several difficult years at home and in the homes of
relatives. In the nursing home, she was able to learn her way about the
facility. She displayed little interest in scheduled group activities,
hobbies, reading, or television. She had frequent behavioral problems.
She repeatedly pressed staff to get her sweets and snacks and cursed them
vociferously with racial epithets and disparaging comments on their
weight and dress. On one occasion, she scratched the cars of several staff
members with a key. Neuropsychological testing demonstrated severe


<<<PAGE 798>>>
deficits in her delayed recall, intact performance on language and general
knowledge measures, and moderate deficits in domains of executive
function, such as concept formation and cognitive flexibility. She
responded immediately to firmly set limits and rewards, but deficits in
memory prevented long-term incorporation of these boundaries.
Management involved the development of a behavioral plan and
empirical trials of medications aimed at the amelioration of irritability.
Although one might suggest this is not a pure amnestic disorder, by far
the most disabling symptom for this patient was her memory loss.
Cerebrovascular Diseases
Cerebrovascular diseases affecting the hippocampus involve the posterior
cerebral and basilar arteries and their branches. Infarctions are rarely limited
to the hippocampus; they often involve the occipital or parietal lobes. Thus,
common accompanying symptoms of cerebrovascular diseases in this region
are focal neurologic signs involving vision or sensory modalities.
Cerebrovascular diseases affecting the bilateral medial thalamus, particularly
the anterior portions, are often associated with symptoms of amnestic
disorders. A few case studies report amnestic disorders from the rupture of an
aneurysm of the anterior communicating artery, resulting in infarction of the
basal forebrain region.
Multiple Sclerosis
The pathophysiologic process of multiple sclerosis involves the seemingly
random formation of plaques within the brain parenchyma. When the plaques
occur in the temporal lobe and the diencephalic regions, symptoms of
memory impairment can occur. The most common cognitive complaints in
patients with multiple sclerosis involve impaired memory, which occurs in 40
to 60 percent of patients. Characteristically, digit span memory is normal, but
immediate recall and delayed recall of information are impaired. Memory
impairment can affect both verbal and nonverbal material.
Korsakoff Syndrome
Korsakoff syndrome is an amnestic syndrome caused by thiamine deficiency,


<<<PAGE 799>>>
most commonly associated with the poor nutritional habits of people with
chronic alcohol use disorder. Other causes of poor nutrition (e.g., starvation),
gastric carcinoma, hemodialysis, hyperemesis gravidarum, prolonged IV
hyperalimentation, and gastric plication can also result in thiamine
deficiency. Korsakoff syndrome is often associated with Wernicke
encephalopathy, which is the associated syndrome of confusion, ataxia, and
ophthalmoplegia. In patients with these thiamine deficiency–related
symptoms, the neuropathologic findings include hyperplasia of the small
blood vessels with occasional hemorrhages, hypertrophy of astrocytes, and
subtle changes in neuronal axons. Although the delirium clears up within a
month or so, the amnestic syndrome either accompanies or follows untreated
Wernicke encephalopathy in approximately 85 percent of all cases.
Patients with Korsakoff syndrome typically demonstrate a change in
personality as well, such that they display a lack of initiative, diminished
spontaneity, and a lack of interest or concern. These changes appear frontal
lobe–like, similar to the personality change ascribed to patients with frontal
lobe lesions or degeneration. Indeed, such patients often demonstrate
executive function deficits on neuropsychological tasks involving attention,
planning, set-shifting, and inferential reasoning consistent with frontal pattern
injuries. For this reason, Korsakoff syndrome is not a pure memory disorder,
although it certainly is a useful paradigm of the more common clinical
presentations for the amnestic syndrome.
The onset of Korsakoff syndrome can be gradual. Recent memory tends to
be affected more than is remote memory, but this feature is variable.
Confabulation, apathy, and passivity are often prominent symptoms in the
syndrome. With treatment, patients may remain amnestic for up to 3 months
and then gradually improve over the ensuing year. Administration of
thiamine may prevent the development of additional amnestic symptoms, but
the treatment seldom reverses severe amnestic symptoms when they are
present. Approximately one-third to one-fourth of all patients recover
completely, and approximately one-fourth of all patients have no
improvement in their symptoms.
Alcoholic Blackouts
Some persons with severe alcohol abuse may exhibit the syndrome


<<<PAGE 800>>>
commonly referred to as an alcoholic blackout. Characteristically, these
persons awake in the morning with a conscious awareness of being unable to
remember a period the night before during which they were intoxicated.
Sometimes specific behaviors (hiding money in a secret place, and provoking
fights) are associated with the blackouts.
Electroconvulsive Therapy
Electroconvulsive therapy treatments are usually associated with retrograde
amnesia for several minutes before the treatment and anterograde amnesia
after the treatment. The anterograde amnesia usually resolves within 5 hours.
Mild memory deficits may remain for 1 to 2 months after a course of ECT
treatments, but the symptoms are entirely resolved 6 to 9 months after
treatment.
Head Injury
Head injuries (both closed and penetrating) can result in a wide range of
neuropsychiatric symptoms, including dementia, depression, personality
changes, and amnestic disorders. Amnestic disorders caused by head injuries
are commonly associated with a period of retrograde amnesia leading up to
the traumatic incident and amnesia for the traumatic incident itself. The
severity of the brain injury correlates somewhat with the duration and
severity of the amnestic syndrome. However, the best correlate of eventual
improvement is the degree of clinical improvement in the amnesia during the
first week after the patient regains consciousness.
Transient Global Amnesia
Transient global amnesia is the abrupt loss of the ability to recall recent
events or to remember new information. The syndrome includes mild
confusion and a lack of insight into the problem, a clear sensorium, and,
occasionally, the inability to perform some well-learned complex tasks.
Episodes last from 6 to 24 hours. Studies suggest that transient global
amnesia occurs in 5 to 10 cases per 100,000 persons per year, although for
patients older than age 50 years, the rate may be as high as 30 cases per
100,000 persons per year. The pathophysiology is unknown, but it likely
involves ischemia of the temporal lobe and the diencephalic brain regions.


<<<PAGE 801>>>
Several studies of patients with SPECT have shown decreased blood flow in
the temporal and parietotemporal regions, particularly in the left hemisphere.
Patients with transient global amnesia almost universally experience
complete improvement, although one study found that approximately 20
percent of patients may have a recurrence of the episode, and another study
found that approximately 7 percent of patients may have epilepsy. Patients
with transient global amnesia differ from patients with TIAs in that fewer
patients have diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, and hypertriglyceridemia, but
more have hypertension and migrainous episodes.

PATHOLOGY AND LABORATORY EXAMINATION
Quantitative neuropsychologic testing can aid the diagnosis of amnestic
disorder. Standardized tests also are available to assess recall of well-known
historical events or public figures to characterize an individual’s inability to
remember previously learned information. Performance on such tests varies
among individuals with amnestic disorder. Subtle deficits in other cognitive
functions may occur in individuals with amnestic disorder. Memory deficits,
however, constitute the predominant feature of the mental status examination
and account largely for any functional deficits. No specific or diagnostic
features are detectable on imaging studies such as MRI or CT. Damage of
midtemporal lobe structures is typical, however, and may reflect enlargement
of the third ventricle or temporal horns or in structural atrophy detected by
MRI.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Table 3-30 lists the significant causes of amnestic disorders. To make the
diagnosis, clinicians must obtain a patient’s history, conduct a complete
physical examination, and order all appropriate laboratory tests. Other
diagnoses, however, can be confused with amnestic disorders.
Dementia and Delirium
Amnestic disorders can be distinguished from delirium because they occur in
the absence of a disturbance of consciousness and are striking for the relative
preservation of other cognitive domains.


<<<PAGE 802>>>
Table 3-30
Major Causes of Amnestic Disorders
Thiamine deficiency (Korsakoff syndrome)
Hypoglycemia
Primary brain conditions
Seizures
Head trauma (closed and penetrating)
Cerebral tumors (especially thalamic and temporal lobe)
Cerebrovascular diseases (especially thalamic and temporal lobe)
Surgical procedures on the brain
Encephalitis due to herpes simplex
Hypoxia (including nonfatal hanging attempts and carbon
monoxide poisoning)
Transient global amnesia
Electroconvulsive therapy
Multiple sclerosis
Substance-related causes
Alcohol use disorders
Neurotoxins
Benzodiazepines (and other sedative-hypnotics)
Many over-the-counter preparations (particularly anticholinergic or
antihistaminic drugs)
Table 3-31
Comparison of Syndrome Characteristics in Dementia of the
Alzheimer Type (DAT) and Amnestic Disorder
Characteristic

DAT

Amnestic Disorder

Onset

Insidious

Can be abrupt

Course

Progressive
deterioration

Static or
improvement

Anterograde

Impaired

Impaired


<<<PAGE 803>>>
memory
Retrograde memory Impaired

Temporal gradient

Episodic memory

Impaired

Impaired

Semantic memory

Impaired

Intact

Language

Impaired

Intact

Praxis or function

Impaired

Intact

Table 3-31 outlines the critical distinctions between Dementia of the
Alzheimer type (DAT) and amnestic disorders. Both disorders can have an
insidious onset with slow progression, as in a Korsakoff psychosis in a
chronic drinker. Amnestic disorders, however, can also develop
precipitously, as in Wernicke encephalopathy, transient global amnesia, or
anoxic insults. Although DAT progresses relentlessly, amnestic disorders
tend to remain static or even improve after removing the offending cause. In
terms of the actual memory deficits, the amnestic disorder and DAT still
differ. DAT has an impact on retrieval in addition to encoding and
consolidation. The deficits in DAT extend beyond memory to general
knowledge (semantic memory), language, praxis, and general function. This
is not the case for amnestic disorders. The dementias associated with
Parkinson disease, AIDS, and other subcortical disorders demonstrate
disproportionate impairment of retrieval, but relatively intact encoding and
consolidation. The subcortical pattern dementias are also likely to display
motor symptoms, such as bradykinesia, chorea, or tremor, that are not
components of the amnestic disorders.
Normal Aging
Some minor impairment in memory may accompany healthy aging, but the
requirement that the memory impairment causes significant impairment in
social or occupational functioning should exclude normal aging from the
diagnosis.
Dissociative Disorders


<<<PAGE 804>>>
The dissociative disorders can sometimes be challenging to differentiate from
amnestic disorders. Patients with dissociative disorders, however, are more
likely to have lost their orientation to self and may have more selective
memory deficits than do patients with amnestic disorders. For example,
patients with dissociative disorders may not know their names or home
addresses, but they are still able to learn new information and remember
selected memories. Dissociative disorders are also often associated with
emotionally stressful life events involving money, the legal system, or
troubled relationships.
Factitious Disorders
Patients with factitious disorders who are mimicking an amnestic disorder
often have inconsistent results on memory tests and have no evidence of an
identifiable cause. These findings, coupled with evidence of primary or
secondary gain for a patient, should suggest a factitious disorder.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
The course of an amnestic disorder depends on its etiology and treatment,
particularly acute treatment. Generally, amnestic disorder has a static course.
We see little improvement over time, but also no progression of the disorder.
The exceptions are the acute amnesias, such as transient global amnesia,
which resolves entirely over hours to days, and the amnestic disorder
associated with head trauma, which improves steadily in the months after the
trauma. Amnesia secondary to processes that destroy brain tissue, such as
stroke, tumor, and infection, are irreversible, although it is, static once the
disease process is halted.

TREATMENT
The primary approach to treating amnestic disorders is to treat the underlying
cause. Although a patient is amnestic, supportive prompts about the date, the
time, and the patient’s location can be helpful and can reduce the patient’s
anxiety. After the resolution of the amnestic episode, psychotherapy of some
type (cognitive, psychodynamic, or supportive) may help patients incorporate
the amnestic experience into their lives.


<<<PAGE 805>>>
Psychotherapy
Psychodynamic interventions may be of considerable value for patients who
have amnestic disorders that result from insults to the brain. Understanding
the course of recovery in such patients helps clinicians to be sensitive to the
narcissistic injury inherent in damage to the CNS.
The first phase of recovery, in which patients are incapable of processing
what happened because the ego defenses are overwhelmed, requires
clinicians to serve as a supportive auxiliary ego who explains to a patient
what is happening and provides missing ego functions. In the second phase of
recovery, as the realization of the injury sets in, patients may become angry
and feel victimized by the malevolent hand of fate. They may view others,
including the clinician, as harmful or destructive, and clinicians must contain
these projections without becoming punitive or retaliatory. Clinicians can
build a therapeutic alliance with patients by explaining slowly and clearly
what happened and by explaining the patient’s internal experience. The third
phase of recovery is integrative. As a patient accepts what has happened, a
clinician can help the patient form a new identity by connecting current
experiences of the self with past experiences. Grieving over the lost faculties
may be an essential feature of the third phase.
Most patients who are amnestic because of brain injury engage in denial.
Clinicians must respect and empathize with the patient’s need to deny the
reality of what has happened. Insensitive and blunt confrontations destroy
any developing therapeutic alliance and can cause patients to feel attacked. In
a sensitive approach, clinicians help patients accept their cognitive limitations
by exposing them to these deficits bit by bit over time. When patients fully
accept what has happened, they may need assistance in forgiving themselves
and any others involved, so that they can get on with their lives. Clinicians
must also be wary of being seduced into thinking that all of the patient’s
symptoms are directly related to the brain insult. An evaluation of preexisting
personality disorders, such as borderline, antisocial, and narcissistic
personality disorders, must be part of the overall assessment; many patients
with personality disorders place themselves in situations that predispose them
to injuries. These personality features may become a crucial part of the
psychodynamic psychotherapy.
Centers for cognitive rehabilitation have rehabilitation-oriented therapeutic


<<<PAGE 806>>>
milieu designed to promote recovery from brain injury, especially that from
traumatic causes. Despite the high cost of extended care at these sites, which
provide both long-term institutional and daytime services, there is limited
data to define therapeutic effectiveness for the heterogeneous groups of
patients who participate in such tasks as memory retaining.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
No adequate studies have reported on the incidence or prevalence of amnestic
disorders. We are most likely to see them with alcohol use disorders and head
injury. In general practice and hospital settings, the frequency of amnesia
related to chronic alcohol abuse has decreased, and the frequency of amnesia
related to head trauma has increased.

ETIOLOGY
The major neuroanatomical structures involved in memory and the
development of an amnestic disorder are particular diencephalic structures
such as the dorsomedial and midline nuclei of the thalamus and midtemporal
lobe structures such as the hippocampus, the mamillary bodies, and the
amygdala. Although amnesia is usually the result of bilateral damage to these
structures, some cases of unilateral damage result in an amnestic disorder,
and evidence indicates that the left hemisphere may be more critical than the
right hemisphere in the development of memory disorders. Many studies of
memory and amnesia in animals have suggested that other brain areas may
also be involved in the symptoms accompanying amnesia. Frontal lobe
involvement can result in such symptoms as confabulation and apathy, which
occurs in patients with amnestic disorders.
Amnestic disorders have many potential causes (see Table 3-30). Thiamine
deficiency, hypoglycemia, hypoxia (including carbon monoxide poisoning),
and herpes simplex encephalitis all have a predilection for damaging the
temporal lobes, particularly the hippocampi, and thus can be associated with
the development of amnestic disorders. Similarly, when tumors,
cerebrovascular diseases, surgical procedures, or multiple sclerosis plaques
involve the diencephalic or temporal regions of the brain, the symptoms of an
amnestic disorder may develop. General insults to the brain, such as seizures,


<<<PAGE 807>>>
ECT, and head trauma, can also result in memory impairment. Transient
global amnesia is presumed to be a cerebrovascular disorder involving
transient impairment in blood flow through the vertebrobasilar arteries.
Many drugs are associated with the development of amnesia, and clinicians
should review all drugs taken, including nonprescription drugs, in the
diagnostic workup of a patient with amnesia. Benzodiazepines are the most
commonly used prescription drugs associated with amnesia. All
benzodiazepines can be associated with amnesia, especially if combined with
alcohol. Triazolam has a reputation for causing amnesia. However, at
standard doses, it is no more likely to cause memory loss than the other
benzodiazepines. When using higher doses or combining it with alcohol, it
can cause anterograde amnesia.

3.4 Neurocognitive and Other Psychiatric
Disorders due to a General Medical
Condition
Increasingly, scientific views of mental illness recognize that, whether caused
by an identifiable anomaly (e.g., brain tumor), a neurotransmitter disturbance
of unclear origin (e.g., schizophrenia), or a consequence of deranged
upbringing or environment (e.g., personality disorder), all mental disorders
ultimately share one common underlying theme: aberration in brain function.
The treatments for those conditions, whether psychological or biologic,
attempt to restore normal brain functioning.
The differential diagnosis for a mental syndrome in a patient should always
include consideration of (1) any general medical condition that a patient may
have and (2) any prescription, nonprescription, or illegal substances that a
patient may be taking. Although some specific medical conditions are
classically associated with mental syndromes, a much larger number of
general medical conditions may occasionally cause mental syndromes.
The mental disorders caused by a general medical condition span the entire
spectrum of diagnostic categories. Thus, one can have a cognitive disorder,
mood disorder, sleep disorder, anxiety disorder, and psychotic disorder to


<<<PAGE 808>>>
mention but a few that are caused or aggravated by a medical condition. In
this section, neurocognitive disorders due to a general medical condition are
described, including epilepsy, autoimmune disorders, and AIDS, of which
psychiatrists should be aware.

SPECIFIC DISORDERS
Epilepsy
Epilepsy is the most common chronic neurologic disease in the general
population and affects approximately 1 percent of the population in the
United States. For psychiatrists, the significant concerns about epilepsy are
consideration of an epileptic diagnosis in psychiatric patients, the
psychosocial ramifications of a diagnosis of epilepsy for a patient, and the
psychological and cognitive effects of commonly used anticonvulsant drugs.
Concerning the first of these concerns, 30 to 50 percent of all persons with
epilepsy have psychiatric difficulties sometime during their illness. The most
common behavioral symptom of epilepsy is a change in personality.
Psychosis and violence occur much less often than was previously believed.
Definitions. A seizure is a transient paroxysmal pathophysiologic
disturbance of cerebral function caused by a spontaneous, excessive
discharge of neurons. Patients are said to have epilepsy if they have a chronic
condition characterized by recurrent seizures. The ictus, or ictal event, is the
seizure itself. The nonictal periods include the preictal, postictal, and
interictal periods. The ictal symptoms depend mainly on the brain origin for
the seizure and how the activity spreads in the brain. The ictal event
influences the interictal symptoms as do other neuropsychiatric and
psychosocial factors, such as coexisting psychiatric or neurologic disorders,
the presence of psychosocial stressors, and premorbid personality traits.
Classification. The two major categories of seizures are partial and
generalized. Partial seizures involve epileptiform activity in localized brain
regions. Generalized seizures involve the entire brain (Fig. 3-6). Table 3-32
outlines the classification system.


<<<PAGE 809>>>
FIGURE 3-6
Electroencephalographic recording during generalized tonic–clonic seizure
showing rhythmic sharp waves and muscles artifact during tonic phase, spikeand-wave discharges during clonic phase, and attenuation of activity during
postictal state. (Courtesy of Barbara F. Westmoreland, M.D.)
GENERALIZED SEIZURES. Generalized tonic–clonic seizures exhibit the classic

symptoms of loss of consciousness, generalized tonic–clonic movements of
the limbs, tongue biting, and incontinence. Although the diagnosis of the ictal
events of the seizure is relatively straightforward, the postictal state,
characterized by a slow, gradual recovery of consciousness and cognition,
occasionally presents a diagnostic dilemma for a psychiatrist in an emergency


<<<PAGE 810>>>
department. The recovery period from a generalized tonic–clonic seizure
ranges from a few minutes to many hours, and the clinical picture is that of a
gradually clearing delirium. The most common psychiatric problems
associated with generalized seizures involve helping patients adjust to a
chronic neurologic disorder and assessing the cognitive or behavioral effects
of anticonvulsant drugs.
Absence Seizure (Petit Mal). A complicated type of generalized seizure for a
psychiatrist to diagnose is an absence or petit mal seizure. The epileptic
nature of the episodes may go unrecognized because the characteristic motor
or sensory manifestations of epilepsy may be absent or so slight that they do
not arouse suspicion. Petit mal epilepsy usually begins in childhood between
the ages of 5 and 7 years and ceases by puberty. Brief disruptions of
consciousness, during which the patient suddenly loses contact with the
environment, are characteristic of petit mal epilepsy, but the patient has no
actual loss of consciousness and no convulsive movements during the
episodes. The EEG produces a characteristic pattern of three-per-second
spike-and-wave activity (Fig. 3-7). In rare instances, petit mal epilepsy begins
in adulthood. Adult-onset petit mal epilepsy can present as sudden, recurrent
psychotic episodes or deliriums that appear and disappear abruptly. The
symptoms may include a history of falling or fainting spells.
Table 3-32
International Classification of Epileptic Seizures
I. Partial seizures (seizures beginning locally)
A. Partial seizures with elementary symptoms (generally without
impairment of consciousness)
1. With motor symptoms
2. With sensory symptoms
3. With autonomic symptoms
4. Compound forms
B. Partial seizures with complex symptoms (generally with
impairment of consciousness; temporal lobe or psychomotor
seizures)


<<<PAGE 811>>>
1. With impairment of consciousness only
2. With cognitive symptoms
3. With affective symptoms
4. With psychosensory symptoms
5. With psychosensory symptoms (automatisms)
6. Compound forms
C. Partial seizures secondarily generalized
II. Generalized seizures (bilaterally symmetrical and without local
onset)
A. Absence (petit mal) seizures
B. Myoclonus
C. Infantile spasms
D. Clonic seizures
E. Tonic seizures
F. Tonic–clonic seizures (grand mal)
G. Atonic seizures
H. Akinetic seizures
III. Unilateral seizures
IV. Unclassified seizures (because of incomplete data)
Adapted from Gastaut H. Clinical and electroencephalographical classification of epileptic
seizures. Epilepsia. 1970;11:102, with permission.


<<<PAGE 812>>>
FIGURE 3-7
Petit mal epilepsy characterized by bilaterally synchronous, 3-Hz spike and slowwave activity.

Partial seizures can be simple (without alterations in
consciousness) or complex (with an alteration in consciousness). Somewhat
more than half of all patients with partial seizures have complex partial
seizures. Other terms used for complex partial seizures are temporal lobe
epilepsy, psychomotor seizures, and limbic epilepsy; these terms, however,
are not accurate descriptions of the clinical situation. Complex partial
epilepsy, the most common form of epilepsy in adults, affects approximately
3 of 1,000 persons. About 30 percent of patients with complex partial
seizures have a major mental illness such as depression.
PARTIAL SEIZURES.

Symptoms
Preictal events (auras) in complex partial epilepsy
include autonomic sensations (e.g., fullness in the stomach, blushing, and
changes in respiration); cognitive sensations (e.g., déjá vu, jamais vu, forced
thinking, dreamy states); affective states (e.g., fear, panic, depression,
PREICTAL SYMPTOMS.


<<<PAGE 813>>>
elation); and, classically, automatisms (e.g., lip-smacking, rubbing, chewing).
ICTAL SYMPTOMS. Brief, disorganized, and uninhibited behavior characterizes

the ictal event. Although some defense attorneys may claim otherwise, rarely
does a person exhibit organized, directed violent behavior during an epileptic
episode. The cognitive symptoms include amnesia for the time during the
seizure and a period of resolving delirium after the seizure. A seizure focus
can be found on an EEG in 25 to 50 percent of all patients with complex
partial epilepsy (Fig. 3-8). The use of sphenoidal or anterior temporal
electrodes and sleep-deprived EEGs may increase the likelihood of finding an
EEG abnormality. We might obtain multiple normal EEGs for a patient with
complex partial epilepsy; therefore, we cannot use normal EEGs to exclude a
diagnosis of complex partial epilepsy. The use of long-term EEG recordings
(usually 24 to 72 hours) can help clinicians detect a seizure focus in some
patients. Nasopharyngeal leads probably do not add much to the sensitivity of
an EEG and cause discomfort for the patient.
INTERICTAL SYMPTOMS

Personality Disturbances. The most frequent psychiatric abnormalities
reported in patients with epilepsy are personality disorders, and they are
especially likely to occur in patients with epilepsy of temporal lobe origin.
The most common features are religiosity, a heightened experience of
emotions—a quality usually called viscosity of personality—and changes in
sexual behavior. The syndrome in its complete form is relatively rare, even in
those with complex partial seizures of temporal lobe origin. Many patients
are not affected by personality disturbances; others have a variety of
disturbances that differ strikingly from the classic syndrome.
A striking religiosity may be manifested not only by increased
participation in overtly religious activities but also by unusual concern for
moral and ethical issues, preoccupation with right and wrong, and heightened
interest in global and philosophical concerns. The hyperreligious features can
sometimes seem like the prodromal symptoms of schizophrenia and can
result in a diagnostic problem in an adolescent or a young adult.
The symptom of viscosity of personality is usually most noticeable in a
patient’s conversation, which is likely to be slow, serious, ponderous,


<<<PAGE 814>>>
pedantic, overly replete with nonessential details, and often circumstantial.
The listener may grow bored but be unable to find a courteous and successful
way to disengage from the conversation. The speech tendencies are often
mirrored in the patient’s writing and result in a symptom known as
hypergraphia, which some clinicians consider virtually pathognomonic for
complex partial epilepsy.
Changes in sexual behavior can include hypersexuality, deviations in
sexual interest, such as fetishism and transvestism, and, most commonly,
hyposexuality. The hyposexuality is characterized both by a lack of interest
in sexual matters and by reduced sexual arousal. Some patients with the onset
of complex partial epilepsy before puberty may fail to reach an average level
of sexual interest after puberty, although this characteristic may not disturb
the patient. For patients with the onset of complex partial epilepsy after
puberty, the change in sexual interest may be bothersome and worrisome.
Psychotic Symptoms. Interictal psychotic states are more common than ictal
psychoses. Schizophrenia-like interictal episodes can occur in patients with
epilepsy, particularly those with temporal lobe origins. An estimated 10
percent of all patients with complex partial epilepsy have psychotic
symptoms. Risk factors for the symptoms include female gender, lefthandedness, the onset of seizures during puberty, and a left-sided lesion.


<<<PAGE 815>>>
FIGURE 3-8
An interictal encephalograph in a patient with complex partial seizures reveals
frequent left temporal spike discharges and rare, independent right temporal
sharp-wave activity. (From Cascino GD. Complex partial seizures: Clinical
features and differential diagnosis. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 1992;15:377, with
permission.)

The onset of psychotic symptoms in epilepsy is variable. Classically,
psychotic symptoms appear in patients who have had epilepsy for a long
time, and the development of personality changes related to the epileptic
brain activity precedes the onset of psychotic symptoms. The most
characteristic symptoms of psychoses are hallucinations and paranoid
delusions. Patients usually remain warm and appropriate in affect, in contrast
to the abnormalities of affect commonly seen in patients with schizophrenia.
The thought disorder symptoms in patients with psychotic epilepsy are most
commonly those involving conceptualization and circumstantiality rather
than the classic schizophrenic symptoms of blocking and looseness.
Violence. Episodic violence has been a problem in some patients with
epilepsy, especially epilepsy of temporal and frontal lobe origin. Whether the
violence is a manifestation of the seizure itself or is of interictal


<<<PAGE 816>>>
psychopathological origin is uncertain. Most evidence points to the extreme
rarity of violence as an ictal phenomenon. Only in rare cases should violence
in the patient with epilepsy be attributed to the seizure itself.
Mood Disorder Symptoms. Mood disorder symptoms, such as depression and
mania, are seen less often in epilepsy than are schizophrenia-like symptoms.
The mood disorder symptoms that do occur tend to be episodic and appear
most often when the epileptic foci affect the temporal lobe of the
nondominant cerebral hemisphere. The importance of mood disorder
symptoms may be attested to by the increased incidence of attempted suicide
in people with epilepsy.
Diagnosis. A correct diagnosis of epilepsy can be particularly tricky when
the ictal and interictal symptoms of epilepsy are severe manifestations of
psychiatric symptoms in the absence of significant changes in consciousness
and cognitive abilities. Psychiatrists, therefore, must maintain a high level of
suspicion during the evaluation of a new patient and must consider the
possibility of an epileptic disorder even in the absence of the classic signs and
symptoms. Another differential diagnosis to consider is psychogenic
nonepileptic seizures (previously called pseudoseizures), in which a patient
has some conscious control over mimicking the symptoms of a seizure (Table
3-33).
For patients who have previously received a diagnosis of epilepsy, we
should consider the appearance of new psychiatric symptoms as possibly
representing an evolution in their epileptic symptoms. The appearance of
psychotic symptoms, mood disorder symptoms, personality changes, or
symptoms of anxiety (e.g., panic attacks) should cause a clinician to evaluate
the control of the patient’s epilepsy and to assess the patient for the presence
of an independent mental disorder. In such circumstances, the clinician
should evaluate the patient’s compliance with the anticonvulsant drug
regimen and should consider whether the psychiatric symptoms could be
adverse effects from the antiepileptic drugs themselves. When psychiatric
symptoms appear in a patient who has had epilepsy diagnosed or considered
as a diagnosis in the past, the clinician should obtain results of one or more
EEG examinations.
In patients who have not previously received a diagnosis of epilepsy, four


<<<PAGE 817>>>
characteristics should cause a clinician to be suspicious of the possibility: the
abrupt onset of psychosis in a person previously regarded as psychologically
healthy, the abrupt onset of delirium without a recognized cause, a history of
similar episodes with an abrupt onset and spontaneous recovery, and a history
of previous unexplained falling or fainting spells.
Table 3-33
Differentiating Features of Psychogenic
Seizures (PNES) and Epileptic Seizures
Feature

Nonepileptic

Epileptic
Seizures

PNES

Nocturnal seizure

Common

Uncommon

Stereotyped aura

Usually

None

Cyanotic skin changes
during seizures

Common

None

Self-injury

Common

Rare

Incontinence

Common

Rare

Postictal confusion

Present

None

Body movements

Tonic or clonic Nonstereotyped and
or both
asynchronous

Affected by suggestion

No

Yes

Spike and waveforms

Present

Absent

Postictal slowing

Present

Absent

Interictal abnormalities

Variable

Variable

Clinical Features

EEG Features

EEG, electroencephalogram.
From Stevenson JM, King JH. Neuropsychiatric aspects of epilepsy and epileptic seizures. In:
Hales RE, Yodofsky SC, eds. American Psychiatric Press Textbook of Neuropsychiatry.


<<<PAGE 818>>>
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press; 1987:220.

Treatment. First-line drugs for generalized tonic–clonic seizures are
valproate and phenytoin. First-line drugs for partial seizures include
carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and phenytoin. Ethosuximide and valproate
are first-line drugs for absence (petit mal) seizures. Table 3-34 lists the drugs
used for various types of seizures. Carbamazepine and valproic acid may help
control the symptoms of irritability and outbursts of aggression, as do the
typical antipsychotic drugs. Psychotherapy, family counseling, and group
therapy may be useful in addressing the psychosocial issues associated with
epilepsy. Also, clinicians should be aware that many antiepileptic drugs cause
mild to moderate cognitive impairment, and we should consider an
adjustment of the dosage or a change in medications if symptoms of
cognitive impairment are a problem in a patient.
Brain Tumors
Brain tumors and cerebrovascular diseases can cause virtually any psychiatric
symptom or syndrome, but cerebrovascular diseases, by the nature of their
onset and symptom pattern, are rarely misdiagnosed as mental disorders. In
general, tumors cause fewer psychopathological signs and symptoms than
cerebrovascular diseases affecting a similar volume of brain tissue. The two
critical approaches to the diagnosis of either condition are a comprehensive
clinical history and a complete neurologic examination. The performance of
the appropriate brain imaging technique is usually the final diagnostic
procedure; the imaging should confirm the clinical diagnosis.
Clinical Features, Course, and Prognosis. Mental symptoms occur at
some time during the illness in approximately 50 percent of patients with
brain tumors. In approximately 80 percent of these patients with mental
symptoms, the tumors are located in frontal or limbic brain regions rather
than in parietal or temporal regions. Whereas meningiomas are likely to cause
focal symptoms by compressing a limited region of the cortex, gliomas are
likely to cause diffuse symptoms. Delirium is most often a component of
rapidly growing, large, or metastatic tumors. If a patient’s history and a
physical examination reveal bowel or bladder incontinence, a frontal lobe
tumor should be suspected; if the history and examination reveal


<<<PAGE 819>>>
abnormalities in memory and speech, we should suspect a temporal lobe
tumor.
COGNITION. Impaired intellectual functioning often accompanies the presence

of a brain tumor, regardless of its type or location.
LANGUAGE SKILLS. Disorders of language function may be severe, mainly if

tumor growth is rapid. Defects of language function often obscure all other
mental symptoms.
Table 3-34
Commonly Used Anticonvulsant Drugs
Drug

Use

Carbamazepine Generalized tonic–clonic, partial

Maintenance
Dosage
(mg/day)
600–1,200

Clonazepam

Absence, atypical myoclonic

2–12

Ethosuximide

Absence

1,000–2,000

Gabapentin

Complex partial seizures
(augmentation)

900–3,600

Lamotrigine

Complex partial seizures,
generalized (augmentation)

300–500

Oxcarbazepine Partial

600–2,400

Phenobarbital

Generalized tonic–clonic

100–200

Phenytoin

Generalized tonic–clonic, partial,
status epilepticus

300–500

Primidone

Partial

750–1,000

Tiagabine

Generalized

32–56

Topiramate

Complex partial seizures
(augmentation)

200–400


<<<PAGE 820>>>
Valproate

Absence, myoclonic, generalized
tonic–clonic, akinetic, partial
seizures

750–1,000

Zonisamide

Generalized

400–600

MEMORY. Loss of memory is a frequent symptom of brain tumors. Patients

with brain tumors exhibit an amnestic syndrome and retain no memory of
events that occurred since the illness began. Events of the immediate past,
even painful ones, are lost. Patients, however, retain old memories and are
unaware of their loss of recent memory.
Prominent perceptual defects are often associated with
behavioral disorders, mainly because patients must integrate tactile, auditory,
and visual perceptions to function normally.
PERCEPTION.

AWARENESS. Alterations of consciousness are common late symptoms of

increased intracranial pressure caused by a brain tumor. Tumors arising in the
upper part of the brainstem can produce a unique symptom called akinetic
mutism, or vigilant coma. The patient is immobile and mute yet alert.
Colloid Cysts. Although they are not brain tumors, colloid cysts located in
the third ventricle can exert physical pressure on structures within the
diencephalon and produce such mental symptoms as depression, emotional
lability, psychotic symptoms, and personality changes. The classic associated
neurologic symptoms are position-dependent intermittent headaches.
Head Trauma
Head trauma can result in an array of mental symptoms and lead to a
diagnosis of dementia due to head trauma or to mental disorder not otherwise
specified due to a general medical condition (e.g., postconcussional disorder).
The postconcussive syndrome remains controversial because it focuses on the
full range of psychiatric symptoms, some serious, that can follow what seems
to be minor head trauma.
Pathophysiology. Head trauma is a common clinical situation; an


<<<PAGE 821>>>
estimated 2 million incidents involve head trauma each year. Head trauma
most commonly occurs in people 15 to 25 years of age and has a male-tofemale predominance of approximately 3 to 1. Gross estimates based on the
severity of the head trauma suggest that virtually all patients with severe head
trauma, more than half of patients with moderate head trauma, and about 10
percent of patients with mild head trauma have ongoing neuropsychiatric
sequelae resulting from the head trauma. Head trauma can be divided grossly
into penetrating head trauma (e.g., trauma produced by a bullet) and blunt
trauma, in which there is no physical penetration of the skull. Blunt trauma is
far more common than penetrating head trauma. Motor vehicle accidents
account for more than half of all the incidents of blunt CNS trauma; falls,
violence, and sports-related head trauma account for most of the remaining
cases (Fig. 3-9).
Whereas brain injury from penetrating wounds localizes to the areas
directly affected by the missile, brain injury from blunt trauma involves
several mechanisms. During the actual head trauma, the head usually moves
back and forth violently, so that the brain repeatedly hits against the skull as
it and the skull mismatch their rapid deceleration and acceleration. This
crashing results in focal contusions, and the stretching of the brain
parenchyma produces diffuse axonal injury. Later developing processes, such
as edema and hemorrhaging, can result in further damage to the brain.
Symptoms. The two significant clusters of symptoms related to head
trauma are those of cognitive impairment and behavioral sequelae. After a
period of posttraumatic amnesia, there is usually a 6- to 12-month period of
recovery, after which the remaining symptoms are likely to be permanent.
The most common cognitive problems are decreased speed in information
processing, decreased attention, increased distractibility, deficits in problemsolving and in the ability to sustain an effort, and problems with memory and
learning new information. A variety of language disabilities can also occur.


<<<PAGE 822>>>
FIGURE 3-9
Severe contusion of the frontal poles has resulted in their atrophy and distortion.
(Courtesy of Dr. H. M. Zimmerman.)

Behaviorally, the significant symptoms involve depression, increased


<<<PAGE 823>>>
impulsivity, increased aggression, and changes in personality. Alcohol can
exacerbate these symptoms, and it is often involved in the head trauma event
itself. A debate has ensued about how preexisting character and personality
traits affect the development of behavioral symptoms after head trauma. We
do not have the critical studies needed to answer the question definitively, but
the weight of opinion is leaning toward a biologically and neuroanatomically
based association between the head trauma and the behavioral sequelae.
Treatment. The treatment of the cognitive and behavioral disorders in
patients with head trauma is similar to the treatment approaches used in other
patients with these symptoms. One difference is that patients with head
trauma may be particularly susceptible to the side effects associated with
psychiatric drugs; therefore, we should initiate treatment with these agents in
lower dosages than usual, and they should be titrated upward more slowly
than usual. We can use standard antidepressants to treat depression and either
anticonvulsants or antipsychotics for aggression and impulsivity. Other
approaches to the symptoms include lithium, calcium channel blockers, and
β-adrenergic receptor antagonists.

FIGURE 3-10
Multiple sclerosis. Irregular, seemingly punched out zones of demyelination are
evident in this section through the level of the fourth ventricle. Myelin stain. 2.6×.
(Courtesy of Dr. H. M. Zimmerman.)


<<<PAGE 824>>>
Clinicians must support patients through individual or group
psychotherapy and should support the primary caretakers through couples
and family therapy. Patients with minor and moderate head trauma often
rejoin their families and restart their jobs; therefore, all involved parties need
help to adjust to any changes in the patient’s personality and mental abilities.
Demyelinating Disorders
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a major demyelinating disorder. Other
demyelinating disorders include amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS),
metachromatic leukodystrophy, adrenoleukodystrophy, gangliosidoses,
subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, and Kufs disease. All of these disorders
can be associated with neurologic, cognitive, and behavioral symptoms.
Multiple Sclerosis. MS consists of multiple episodes of symptoms,
pathophysiologically related to multifocal lesions in the white matter of the
CNS (Fig. 3-10). The cause remains unknown, but studies have focused on
slow viral infections and disturbances in the immune system. The estimated
prevalence of MS in the Western Hemisphere is 50 per 100,000 people. The
disease is much more frequent in cold and temperate climates than in the
tropics and subtropics and more common in women than in men; it is
predominantly a disease of young adults. In most patients, the onset occurs
between the ages of 20 and 40 years.
The neuropsychiatric symptoms of MS include cognitive and behavioral
types. Research reports have found that 30 to 50 percent of patients with MS
have mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and that 20 to 30 percent of them
have severe cognitive impairments. Although evidence indicates that patients
with MS experience a decline in their general intelligence, memory is the
most commonly affected cognitive function. The severity of the amnesia and
the neurologic symptoms do not correlate well. Nor do they correlate with the
duration of the illness.
The behavioral symptoms associated with MS are varied and can include
euphoria, depression, and personality changes. Psychosis is a rare
complication. Approximately 25 percent of persons with MS exhibit a
euphoric mood. This mood is not hypomanic but somewhat more cheerful
than their situation warrants and not necessarily in character with their


<<<PAGE 825>>>
disposition before the onset of MS. Only 10 percent of patients with MS have
a sustained and elevated mood, although it is still not genuinely hypomanic.
Depression, however, is common; it affects 25 to 50 percent of patients with
MS and results in a higher rate of suicide than is seen in the general
population. Risk factors for suicide in patients with MS are male sex, the
onset of MS before age 30 years, and a relatively recent diagnosis of the
disorder. Personality changes are also frequent in patients with MS; they
affect 20 to 40 percent of patients and often include irritability or apathy.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. ALS is a progressive, noninherited
disease of asymmetrical muscle atrophy. It begins in adult life and progresses
over months or years to involve all the striated muscles except the cardiac
and ocular muscles. In addition to muscle atrophy, patients have signs of
pyramidal tract involvement. The illness is rare and occurs in approximately
1.6 persons per 100,000 annually. A few patients have concomitant dementia.
The disease progresses rapidly, and death generally occurs within 4 years of
onset.
Infectious Diseases
Herpes Simplex Encephalitis. Herpes simplex encephalitis, the most
common type of focal encephalitis, most commonly affects the frontal and
temporal lobes. The symptoms often include anosmia, olfactory and gustatory
hallucinations, and personality changes and can also involve bizarre or
psychotic behaviors. Complex partial epilepsy may also develop in patients
with herpes simplex encephalitis. Although the mortality rate for the infection
has decreased, many patients exhibit personality changes, symptoms of
memory loss, and psychotic symptoms.
Rabies Encephalitis. The incubation period for rabies ranges from 10
days to 1 year, after which symptoms of restlessness, overactivity, and
agitation can develop. Hydrophobia, present in up to 50 percent of patients, is
characterized by an intense fear of drinking water. The fear develops from the
severe laryngeal and diaphragmatic spasms that the patients experience when
they drink water. When rabies encephalitis develops, the disease is fatal
within days or weeks.


<<<PAGE 826>>>
Neurosyphilis. Neurosyphilis (also known as general paresis) appears 10 to
15 years after the primary Treponema infection. Since the advent of
penicillin, neurosyphilis has become a rare disorder, although AIDS is
associated with reintroducing neurosyphilis into medical practice in some
urban settings. Neurosyphilis generally affects the frontal lobes and results in
personality changes, the development of poor judgment, irritability, and
decreased care for self. Delusions of grandeur develop in 10 to 20 percent of
affected patients. The disease progresses with the development of dementia
and tremor until patients are paretic. The neurologic symptoms include
Argyll Robertson pupils, which are small, irregular, and unequal and have
light-near reflex dissociation, tremor, dysarthria, and hyperreflexia.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination shows lymphocytosis, increased
protein, and a positive result on a Venereal Disease Research Laboratory
(VDRL) test.
Chronic Meningitis. Chronic meningitis is becoming more common than
earlier because of the immunocompromised condition of people with AIDS.
The usual causative agents are Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Cryptococcus
spp., and Coccidioides spp. The usual symptoms are headache, memory
impairment, confusion, and fever.
Subacute
Sclerosing
Panencephalitis. Subacute sclerosing
panencephalitis is a disease of childhood and early adolescence, with a 3-to-1
male-to-female ratio. The onset usually follows either an infection with
measles or vaccination for measles. The initial symptoms may be behavioral
change, temper tantrums, sleepiness, and hallucinations, but the classic
symptoms of myoclonus, ataxia, seizures, and intellectual deterioration
eventually develop. The disease progresses relentlessly to coma and death in
1 to 2 years.
Lyme Disease. Lyme disease is caused by infection with the spirochete
Borrelia burgdorferi transmitted through the bite of the deer tick (Ixodes
scapularis), which feeds on infected deer and mice. About 16,000 cases are
reported annually in the United States.
A characteristic bull’s eye rash occurs at the site of the tick bite followed
shortly after that by flulike symptoms. Impaired cognitive functioning and


<<<PAGE 827>>>
mood changes are associated with the illness and may be the presenting
complaint. These include memory lapses, difficulty concentrating, irritability,
and depression.
No clear-cut diagnostic test is available. About 50 percent of patients
become seropositive to B. burgdorferi. The prophylaxis vaccine is not always
effective and is controversial. Treatment consists of a 14- to 21-day course of
doxycycline, which results in a 90 percent cure rate. Specific psychiatric
drugs can help treat the psychiatric sign or symptom (e.g., a benzodiazepine
for anxiety). Left untreated, about 60 percent of persons develop a chronic
condition. Such patients may get an erroneous diagnosis of a primary
depression rather than one secondary to the medical condition. Support
groups for patients with chronic Lyme disease are essential. Group members
provide each other with emotional support that helps improve their quality of
life.
Prion Disease. Prion disease is a group of related disorders caused by a
transmissible infectious protein known as a prion. Included in this group are
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD), Gerstmann–Sträussler–Scheinker disorder
(GSS), fatal familial insomnia (FFI), and kuru. A variant of CJD (vCJD), also
called “mad cow disease,” appeared in 1995 in the United Kingdom and is
attributed to the transmission of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)
from cattle to humans. Collectively, these disorders are also known as
subacute spongiform encephalopathy because of shared neuropathologic
changes that consist of (1) spongiform vacuolization, (2) neuronal loss, and
(3) astrocyte proliferation in the cerebral cortex. Amyloid plaques may or
may not be present.
ETIOLOGY. Prions are transmissible agents but differ from viruses in that they

lack nucleic acid. Prions are mutated proteins generated from the human
prion protein gene (PrP), located on the short arm of chromosome 20.
The PrP mutates into a disease-related isoform PrP-Super-C (PrPSc), which
can replicate and is infectious. The neuropathologic changes that occur in
prion disease are presumed to be caused by direct neurotoxic effects of PrPSc.
The specific prion disease that develops depends on the mutation of PrP
that occurs. Mutations at PrP 178N/129V cause CJD, mutations at
178N/129M cause FFI, and mutations at 102L/129M cause GSS and kuru.


<<<PAGE 828>>>
Other mutations of PrP occur, and research continues in this vital area of
genomic identification. Some mutations are both fully penetrant and
autosomal dominant and account for inherited forms of prion disease. For
example, both GSS and FFI are inherited disorders, and about 10 percent of
cases of CJD are also inherited. Prenatal testing for the abnormal PrP gene is
available; whether or not we should do routine testing is an open question.
CREUTZFELDT–JAKOB DISEASE. First described in 1920, CJD is an invariably

fatal, rapidly progressive disorder that occurs mainly in middle-aged or older
adults. It manifests initially with fatigue, flu-like symptoms, and cognitive
impairment. As the disease progresses, focal neurologic findings such as
aphasia and apraxia occur. Psychiatric manifestations are protean and include
emotional lability, anxiety, euphoria, depression, delusions, hallucinations, or
marked personality changes. The disease progresses over months, leading to
dementia, akinetic mutism, coma, and death.
The rates of CJD range from one to two cases per 1 million persons a year
worldwide. The infectious agent self-replicates and can be transmitted to
humans by inoculation with infected tissue and sometimes by ingestion of
contaminated food. Iatrogenic transmission has been reported via
transplantation of contaminated cornea or dura mater or to children via
contaminated supplies of human growth hormone derived from infected
persons. Neurosurgical transmission also occurs. Household contacts are not
at higher risk for developing the disease than the general population unless
there is direct inoculation.
Diagnosis requires a pathologic examination of the cortex, which reveals
the classic triad of spongiform vacuolation, loss of neurons, and astrocyte cell
proliferation. The cortex and basal ganglia are most affected. An
immunoassay test for CJD in the CSF shows promise in supporting the
diagnosis; however, this needs more testing. Although not specific for CJD,
EEG abnormalities are present in nearly all patients, consisting of a slow and
irregular background rhythm with periodic complex discharges. CT and MRI
studies may reveal cortical atrophy later in the course of the disease. SPECT
and positron emission tomography (PET) reveal heterogeneously decreased
uptake throughout the cortex.
No known treatment exists for CJD. Death usually occurs within 6 months
after diagnosis.


<<<PAGE 829>>>
VARIANT CJD. In 1995, a vCJD appeared in the United Kingdom. The patients

affected all died; they were young (younger than age 40 years), and none had
risk factors of CJD. At autopsy, pathologists found a prion disease. The
disease was transmitted between cattle and cattle to humans in the 1980s.
BSE appears to have originated from sheep scrapie–contaminated feed given
to cattle. Scrapie is a spongiform encephalopathy found in sheep and goats
that does not cause human disease; however, it is transmissible to other
animal species.
There have been more than 200 reported cases of vCJD to date, with the
majority in the United Kingdom. Four cases have been reported in the United
States. Clinicians must be alert to the diagnosis in young people with
behavioral and psychiatric abnormalities in association with cerebellar signs
such as ataxia or myoclonus. The psychiatric presentation of vCJD is not
specific. Most patients have reported depression, withdrawal, anxiety, and
sleep disturbance. Paranoid delusions have occurred. Neuropathologic
changes are similar to those in CJD, with the addition of amyloid plaques.
Epidemiologic data gathering is ongoing. The incubation period for vCJD
and the number of infected meat products required to cause infection is
unknown. One patient had been a vegetarian for 5 years before contracting
the disease. vCJD can be diagnosed antemortem by examining the tonsils
with Western blot immunostains to detect PrPSc in lymphoid tissue.
Diagnosis relies on the development of progressive neurodegenerative
features in persons who have ingested contaminated meat or brains. No cure
exists, and death usually occurs within 2 to 3 years after diagnosis.
Prevention is dependent on careful monitoring of cattle for disease and
feeding them grain instead of meat byproducts.
KURU. Kuru is an epidemic prion disease found in New Guinea that is caused

by cannibalistic funeral rituals in which the practitioners eat the brains of the
deceased. Women are more affected by the disorder than men, presumably
because they participate in the ceremony to a greater extent. Death usually
occurs within 2 years after symptoms develop. Neuropsychiatric signs and
symptoms consist of ataxia, chorea, strabismus, delirium, and dementia.
Pathologic changes are similar to those with other prion diseases: neuronal
loss, spongiform lesions, and astrocytic proliferation. The cerebellum is most
affected. Iatrogenic transmission of kuru has occurred when doctors


<<<PAGE 830>>>
transplanted infected dura mater and corneas into normal recipients. Since the
cessation of cannibalism in New Guinea, the incidence of the disease has
decreased drastically.
GERSTMANN–STRäUSSLER–SCHEINKER DISEASE. First described in 1928, GSS

is a neurodegenerative syndrome characterized by ataxia, chorea, and
cognitive decline leading to dementia. The cause is a mutation in the PrP
gene that is fully penetrant and autosomal dominant; thus, the disease is
inherited, and affected families have been identified over several generations.
Genetic testing can confirm the presence of abnormal genes before onset.
Pathologic changes characteristic of prion disease are present: spongiform
lesions, neuronal loss, and astrocyte proliferation. Amyloid plaques occur in
the cerebellum. The onset of the disease occurs between 30 and 40 years of
age. The disease is fatal within 5 years of onset.
FATAL FAMILIAL INSOMNIA. FFI is an inherited prion disease that primarily

affects the thalamus. A syndrome of insomnia and autonomic nervous system
dysfunction consisting of fever, sweating, labile blood pressure, and
tachycardia occurs that is debilitating. Onset is in middle adulthood, and
death usually occurs in 1 year. No treatment currently exists.
Determining how prions mutate to produce disease
phenotypes and determining how they transmit between different mammalian
species are essential areas of research. Public health measures to prevent
transmission of animal disease to humans are ongoing and must be relentless,
mainly because these disorders are invariably fatal within a few years of
onset. Developing genetic interventions that prevent or repair damage to the
normal prion gene offers the best hope of a cure. Psychiatrists must manage
cases of persons who have the disease and those with hypochondriacal fears
of having contracted the disease. In some patients, such fears can reach
delusional proportions. Treatment is symptomatic and involves anxiolytics,
antidepressants, and psychostimulants, depending on symptoms. Supportive
psychotherapy may be of use in early stages to help patients and families
cope with the illness.
Preventing unintentional human-to-human or animal-to-human
transmission of prions remains the best way to limit the scope of these
FUTURE DIRECTIONS.


<<<PAGE 831>>>
diseases. Sporadic cases of CJD will still appear, however, because of the
rare spontaneous mutation of the normal prion protein into the abnormal
form. At present, little exists to offer patients with prion disease other than
supportive treatment and emotional support.
Immune Disorders
The primary immune disorder in contemporary society is HIV and AIDS, but
other immune disorders such as lupus erythematosus and autoimmune
disorders that affect brain neurotransmitters (discussed below) can also
present diagnostic and treatment challenges to mental health clinicians.
HIV Infection and AIDS. HIV is a retrovirus related to the human T-cell
leukemia viruses (HTLV) and to retroviruses that infect animals, including
nonhuman primates. At least two types of HIV exist, HIV-1 and HIV-2. HIV1 is the causative agent for most HIV-related diseases; HIV-2, however,
seems to be causing an increasing number of infections in Africa. Other types
of HIV may exist, currently classified as HIV-O. HIV is present in the blood,
semen, cervical and vaginal secretions, and, to a lesser extent, in saliva, tears,
breast milk, and the CSF of those who are infected. HIV usually transmits
through sexual intercourse or the transfer of contaminated blood from one
person to another. Health providers should be aware of the guidelines for safe
sexual practices and should advise their patients to practice safe sex (Table 335). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines for the
prevention of HIV from infected to uninfected persons is listed in Table 3-36.
After infection with HIV, AIDS develops in 8 to 11 years, although this
time is gradually increasing because of early treatment. When a person is
infected with HIV, the virus primarily targets T4 (helper) lymphocytes, socalled CD4+ lymphocytes, to which the virus binds because a glycoprotein
(gp120) on the viral surface has a high affinity for the CD4 receptor on T4
lymphocytes. After binding, the virus can inject its ribonucleic acid (RNA)
into the infected lymphocyte, where the RNA is transcribed into
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) by the action of reverse transcriptase. The
resultant DNA can then be incorporated into the host cell’s genome and
translated and eventually transcribed when the lymphocyte divides. After
lymphocytes have produced viral proteins, the various components of the


<<<PAGE 832>>>
virus assemble, and new mature viruses bud off from the host cell.
Table 3-35
AIDS Safe-Sex Guidelines
Safe Sexual Behaviors and Risk-Reduction Strategies for patients
with HIV
• Adhering to ART and ongoing medical care, even if viral load is
undetectable.
• Communicating HIV status with others.
• Correctly and consistently using condoms (to prevent STDs) and
appropriate non–oil-based lubricants, even when negotiation of
use occurs in the heat of the moment.
• Assessing relative risk of HIV transmission associated with
various sexual activities (e.g., oral sex is less risky than
receptive anal sex).
• Discussing how alcohol and/or drug use can impair judgment.
• Using PrEP for some HIV-negative partners, including women
planning to become pregnant.
• Using PEP for emergencies for HIV-negative or unknown status
partners (e.g., if a condom breaks or is not used and the patient
is not virally suppressed).
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Safer sexual behavior.
https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/clinicians/treatment/safer-sex.html#discussion-topics

Table 3-36
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Guidelines for
the Prevention of HIV Transmission from Infected to
Uninfected Persons
Infected persons should be counseled to prevent the further
transmission of HIV by:
1. Informing prospective sex partners of their infection with HIV so
they can take appropriate precautions. Abstention from sexual
activity with another person is one option that would eliminate any


<<<PAGE 833>>>
risk of sexually transmitted HIV infection.
2. Protecting a partner during any sexual activity by taking
appropriate precautions to prevent that person’s coming into
contact with the infected person’s blood, semen, urine, feces,
saliva, cervical secretions, or vaginal secretions. Although the
efficacy of using condoms to prevent infections with HIV is still
under study, the consistent use of condoms should reduce the
transmission of HIV by preventing exposure to semen and infected
lymphocytes.
3. Informing previous sex partners and any persons with whom
needles were shared of their potential exposure to HIV and
encouraging them to seek counseling and testing.
4. For IV drug abusers, enrolling or continuing in programs to
eliminate the abuse of IV substances. Needles, other apparatus,
and drugs must never be shared.
5. Never sharing toothbrushes, razors, or other items that could
become contaminated with blood.
6. Refraining from donating blood, plasma, body organs, other tissue,
or semen.
7. Avoiding pregnancy until more is known about the risks of
transmitting HIV from the mother to the fetus or newborn.
8. Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces on which blood or other body
fluids have spilled in accordance with previous recommendations.
9. Informing physicians, dentists, and other appropriate health
professionals of antibody status when seeking medical care, so
that the patient can be appropriately evaluated.
HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; IV, intravenous.
From Centers for Disease Control (CDC). Additional recommendations to reduce sexual and
drug abuse-related transmission of human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathyassociated virus. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 1986;35:152.
DIAGNOSIS

Serum Testing. Techniques are now widely available to detect the presence of
anti-HIV antibodies in humans. The conventional test uses blood (time to
result, 3 to 10 days), and the rapid test uses an oral swab (time to result, 20


<<<PAGE 834>>>
minutes). Both tests are 99.9 percent sensitive and specific. Health care
workers and their patients must understand that the presence of HIV
antibodies indicates infection, not immunity to infection. Those who test
positive have been exposed to the virus, have the virus within their bodies,
have the potential to transmit the virus to another person, and will almost
certainly eventually develop AIDS. Those who test negative either have not
been exposed to HIV or were exposed but have not yet developed antibodies;
the latter is possible if the exposure was less than a year prior.
Seroconversion most commonly occurs 6 to 12 weeks after infection,
although in rare cases, seroconversion can take 6 to 12 months.
COUNSELING. Although specific groups of persons who are at high risk for

contracting HIV are a priority, anyone who wants a test should have it. We
should try to ascertain the reason for the request, to detect unspoken concerns
and motivations that may merit psychotherapeutic intervention.
Counseling should include a discussion of past practices that may have put
the testee at risk for HIV infection and safe sexual practices. During posttest
counseling, counselors should explain that a negative test finding implies that
the person should espouse safe sexual behavior and avoid shared needles to
remain free of infection. Those with positive results must receive counseling
about safe practices and potential treatment options. They may need
additional psychotherapeutic interventions if anxiety or depressive disorders
develop after they discover that they are infected. A person may react to a
positive HIV test finding with a syndrome similar to posttraumatic stress
disorder. Adjustment disorder with anxiety or depressed mood may develop
in as many as 25 percent of those informed of a positive HIV test result.
CONFIDENTIALITY. No one should be given an HIV test without previous

knowledge and consent, although various jurisdictions and organizations,
such as the military, now require HIV testing for all inhabitants or members.
The results of an HIV test can be shared with other members of a medical
team, although no one else should have the information except for
exceptional circumstances. We should advise the patient against disclosing
the result of HIV testing too readily to employers, friends, and family
members; the information could result in discrimination in employment,
housing, and insurance.


<<<PAGE 835>>>
The major exception to restriction of disclosure is the need to notify
potential and past sexual or IV substance use partners. If a treating physician
knows that a patient who is HIV infected is putting another person at risk of
becoming infected, the physician may try either to hospitalize the infected
person involuntarily (to prevent danger to others) or to notify the potential
victim. Clinicians should be aware of the laws about such issues, which vary
among the states. These guidelines also apply to inpatient psychiatric wards
when a patient with HIV infection may have had sex with other patients.
CLINICAL FEATURES

Nonneurologic Factors. About 30 percent of persons infected with HIV
experience a flulike syndrome 3 to 6 weeks after becoming infected; most
never notice any symptoms immediately or shortly after their infection. The
flulike syndrome includes fever, myalgia, headaches, fatigue, GI symptoms,
and sometimes a rash. The syndrome may include splenomegaly and
lymphadenopathy.
The most common infection in persons affected with HIV who have AIDS
is Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, which is characterized by a chronic,
nonproductive cough and dyspnea, sometimes sufficiently severe to result in
hypoxemia and its resultant cognitive effects. For psychiatrists, the
importance of these nonneurologic, nonpsychiatric complications lies in their
biologic effects on patients’ brain function (e.g., hypoxia in P. carinii
pneumonia) and their psychological effects on patients’ moods and anxiety
states.
Neurologic Factors. An extensive array of disease processes can affect the
brain of a patient infected with HIV (Table 3-37). The most important
diseases for mental health workers to be aware of are HIV mild
neurocognitive disorder and HIV-associated dementia.
Psychiatric Syndromes. HIV-associated dementia presents with the typical
triad of symptoms seen in other subcortical dementias—memory and
psychomotor speed impairments, depressive symptoms, and movement
disorders. Patients may initially notice slight problems with reading,
comprehension, memory, and mathematical skills, but these symptoms are


<<<PAGE 836>>>
subtle and may be overlooked or discounted as fatigue and illness. The
Modified HIV Dementia Scale is a useful bedside screen and can document
disease progress with serial administration. The development of dementia in
HIV-infected patients is generally a poor prognostic sign, and 50 to 75
percent of patients with dementia die within 6 months.
Table 3-37
Conditions Associated with Human Immunodeficiency
Virus (HIV) Infection
Bacterial infections, multiple or recurrenta
Candidiasis of bronchi, trachea, or lungs
Candidiasis, esophageal
Cervical cancer, invasiveb
Coccidioidomycosis, disseminated or extrapulmonary
Cryptococcosis, extrapulmonary
Cryptosporidiosis, chronic intestinal (>1 mo duration)
Cytomegalovirus disease (other than liver, spleen, or nodes)
Cytomegalovirus retinitis (with loss of vision)
Encephalopathy, HIV-related
Herpes simplex, chronic ulcers (>1 mo duration); or bronchitis,
pulmonitis, or esophagitis
Histoplasmosis, disseminated or extrapulmonary
Isosporiasis, chronic intestinal (>1 mo duration)
Kaposi sarcoma
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia or pulmonary lymphoid hyperplasiaa
Lymphoma, Burkitt’s (or equivalent term)
Lymphoma, immunoblastic (or equivalent term)
Lymphoma, primary, of brain
Mycobacterium avium complex or Mycobacterium kansasii,
disseminated or extrapulmonary
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, any site (pulmonaryb or
extrapulmonary)
Mycobacterium, other species or unidentified species, disseminated


<<<PAGE 837>>>
or extrapulmonary
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia
Pneumonia, recurrentb
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Salmonella septicemia, recurrent
Toxoplasmosis of brain
Wasting syndrome due to HIV
aChildren younger than 13 years old.
bAdded in the 1993 expansion of the AIDS surveillance case definition for adolescents and

adults.
Adapted from 1993 revised classification system for HIV infection and expanded surveillance,
case definition for AIDS among adolescents and adults. MMWR Recomm Rep. 1992:41.

HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (also known as HIV
encephalopathy) involves impaired cognitive functioning and reduced mental
activity that interferes with work, domestic, and social functioning. No
laboratory findings are specific to the disorder, and it occurs independently of
depression and anxiety. Progression of HIV-associated dementia usually
occurs but may be prevented by early treatment.
Delirium can result from the same causes that lead to dementia in patients
with HIV. Clinicians have classified delirious states characterized by both
increased and decreased activities. Delirium in patients infected with HIV is
probably underdiagnosed, but it should always precipitate a medical workup
of a patient infected with HIV to determine whether a new CNS-related
process has begun.
Patients with HIV infection may have any of the anxiety disorders, but
generalized anxiety disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and obsessivecompulsive disorder (OCD) are particularly common.
Adjustment disorder with anxiety or depressed mood occurs in 5 to 20
percent of HIV-infected patients. The incidence of adjustment disorder in
HIV-infected patients is higher than usual in some special populations, such
as military recruits and prison inmates.
Depression is a significant problem in HIV and AIDS. Approximately 4 to
40 percent of HIV-infected patients meet the criteria for depressive disorders.
Major depression is a risk factor for HIV infection by its impact on behavior,
intensification of substance abuse, exacerbation of self-destructive behaviors,


<<<PAGE 838>>>
and promotion for poor partner choice in relationships. The pre-HIV infection
prevalence of depressive disorders may be higher than usual in some groups
who are at risk for contracting HIV. Depression can hinder effective
treatment in infected persons. Patients with major depression are at increased
risk of disease progression and death. HIV increases the risk of developing
major depression through a variety of mechanisms, including direct injury to
subcortical areas of the brain, chronic stress, worsening social isolation, and
intense demoralization. Depression is higher in women than in men.
Mania can occur at any stage of HIV infection for individuals with
preexisting bipolar disorder. AIDS mania is a type of mania that most
commonly occurs in late-stage HIV infections and is associated with
cognitive impairment. AIDS mania has a somewhat different clinical profile
than bipolar mania. Patients tend to have cognitive slowing or dementia, and
irritability is more characteristic than euphoria. AIDS mania is usually quite
severe in its presentation and malignant in its course. It seems to be more
chronic than episodic, has infrequent spontaneous remissions, and usually
relapses with the cessation of treatment. One clinically significant
presentation is the delusional belief that one has discovered the cure for HIV
or has been cured, which may result in high-risk behaviors and the spread of
the HIV infection.
Substance abuse is a primary vector for the spread of HIV. This is true not
only for IV drug users and their partners but others impaired by substances.
All addictions tend to increase impulsive and unsafe behaviors. Ongoing
substance abuse has grave medical implications for HIV-infected patients.
The accumulation of medical sequelae from chronic substance abuse can
accelerate the process of immunocompromise and amplify the progressive
burdens of the HIV infection itself. In addition to the direct physical effects
caused by drugs, active substance use is highly associated with both
nonadherence and reduced access to antiretroviral medication.
Suicidal ideation and suicide attempts may increase in patients with HIV
infection and AIDS. The risk factors for suicide among persons infected with
HIV include having friends who died from AIDS, recent notification of HIV
seropositivity, relapses, complicated social issues relating to homosexuality,
inadequate social and financial support, and the presence of dementia or
delirium.
Psychotic symptoms are usually later-stage complications of HIV


<<<PAGE 839>>>
infection. They require an immediate medical and neurologic evaluation and
often require management with antipsychotic medications.
The worried well are people in high-risk groups who, although they tested
negative and are disease-free, are anxious about contracting the virus.
Repeated negative test results reassure some, but others cannot be reassured.
Their worry well status can progress quickly to generalized anxiety disorder,
panic attacks, OCD, and a somatic symptom and related disorder.
TREATMENT. Prevention is the primary approach to HIV infection. Primary

prevention involves protecting persons from getting the disease; secondary
prevention involves modification of the disease’s course. All persons with
any risk of HIV infection should be informed about safe-sex practices and
about the necessity to avoid sharing contaminated hypodermic needles. The
assessment of patients infected with HIV should include a complete sexual
and substance use history, a psychiatric history, and an evaluation of the
support systems available to them.
Pharmacotherapy. A growing list of agents that act at different points in viral
replication has raised the hope that HIV might be permanently suppressed or
eradicated from the body. These agents divide into five major drug classes.
Reverse transcriptase inhibitors (RTIs) interfere with the critical step during
the HIV life cycle known as reverse transcription. There are two types of
RTIs: nucleoside/nucleotide RTIs (NRTIs), which are faulty DNA building
blocks, and nonnucleoside RTIs (NNRTIs), which bind to RT, interfering
with its ability to convert the HIV RNA into HIV DNA. Protease inhibitors
interfere with the protease enzyme that HIV uses to produce infectious viral
particles. Fusion or entry inhibitors interfere with the virus’s ability to fuse
with the cellular membrane, thereby blocking entry into the host cell.
Integrase inhibitors block integrase, the enzyme HIV uses to integrate the
genetic material of the virus into its target host cell. Multidrug combination
products combine drugs from more than one class into a single product. The
most common of this class of drugs is the highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART). Table 3-38 lists the available agents in each of these categories.
Antiretroviral agents have many adverse effects. Of importance to
psychiatrists is that protease inhibitors can increase levels of certain
psychotropic drugs such as bupropion, meperidine, various benzodiazepines,


<<<PAGE 840>>>
and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). We should take caution
when prescribing psychiatric drugs to persons taking protease inhibitors.
Psychotherapy. Major psychodynamic themes for patients infected with HIV
involved self-blame, self-esteem, and issues regarding death. The entire range
of psychotherapeutic approaches may be appropriate for patients with HIVrelated disorders. Both individual and group therapy can be useful. Individual
therapy may be either short term or long term and may be supportive,
cognitive, behavioral, or psychodynamic. Group therapy techniques can
range from psychodynamic to completely supportive. It is crucial to include
direct counseling regarding substance use and its potential adverse effects on
the health of the patient. Specific treatments for particular substance-related
disorders should be initiated if necessary for the total well-being of the
patient.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
is an autoimmune disease that involves inflammation of multiple organ
systems. The officially accepted diagnosis of SLE requires a patient to have 4
of 11 criteria that have been defined by the American Rheumatism
Association. Between 5 and 50 percent of patients with SLE have mental
symptoms at the initial presentation, and approximately 50 percent eventually
show neuropsychiatric manifestations. The primary symptoms are depression,
insomnia, emotional lability, nervousness, and confusion. Treatment with
steroids commonly induces further psychiatric complications, including
mania and psychosis.
Autoimmune Disorders Affecting Brain Neurotransmitters. A
group of autoimmune receptor-seeking disorders exists that causes
encephalitis that mimics schizophrenia. Among those is anti-NMDA (Nmethyl D-aspartate)-receptor encephalitis that causes dissociative symptoms,
amnesia, and vivid hallucinations. The disorder occurs mostly in women; the
memoir Brain on Fire vividly chronicled the writer’s experience with it.
There is no treatment, although intravenous immunoglobulins have proved
useful. Recovery does occur, but some patients might require prolonged
intensive care.


<<<PAGE 841>>>
Table 3-38
Antiretroviral Agents
Generic Names

Trade
Name

Usual
Abbreviation

Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
Nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Lamivudine and zidovudine

Combivir

Emtricitabine

Emtriva

FTC

Lamivudine

Epivir

3TC

Abacavir and lamivudine

Epzicom

Zidovudine, azidothymidine

Retrovir

Abacavir, zidovudine, and lamivudine

Trizivir

Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate and
emtricitabine

Truvada

Didanosine, dideoxyinosine

Videx

ddl

Enteric-coated didanosine

Videx EC

ddl EC

Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate

Viread

TDF

Stavudine

Zerit

d4t

Abacavir sulfate

Ziagen

ABC

ZDV or AZT

Nonnucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
Rilpivirine

Edurant

Etravirine

Intelence

Delavirdine

Rescriptor DLV

Efavirenz

Sustiva

EFV

Nevirapine

Viramune

NVP


<<<PAGE 842>>>
Protease Inhibitors
Amprenavir

Agenerase APV

Tipranavir

Aptivus

TPV

Indinavir

Crixivan

IDV

Saquinavir mesylate

Invirase

SQV

Lopinavir and ritonavir

Kaletra

LPV/RTV

Fosamprenavir calcium

Lexiva

FOS-APV

Ritonavir

Norvir

RTV

Darunavir

Prezista

Atazanavir sulfate

Reyataz

ATV

Delfinavir mesylate

Viracept

NFV

Enfuvirtide

Fuzeon

T-20

Maraviroc

Selzentry

Fusion/Entry Inhibitors

Multi-Class Combination Products
Efavirenz, emtricitabine, and tenofovir
disoproxil fumarate

Atripla

Emtricitabine, rilpivirine, and tenofovir
disoproxil fumarate

Complera

Endocrine Disorders
Thyroid Disorders. Hyperthyroidism includes symptoms of confusion,
anxiety, and an agitated, depressive syndrome. Patients may also complain of
being easily fatigued and of feeling generally weak. Insomnia, weight loss
despite increased appetite, tremulousness, palpitations, and increased
perspiration are also common symptoms. Serious psychiatric symptoms


<<<PAGE 843>>>
include impairments in memory, orientation, and judgment, manic
excitement, delusions, and hallucinations.
In 1949, Irvin Asher named hypothyroidism “myxedema madness.” In its
most severe form, hypothyroidism includes symptoms of paranoia,
depression, hypomania, and hallucinations. Slowed thinking and delirium can
also be symptoms. The physical symptoms include weight gain, a deep voice,
thin and dry hair, loss of the lateral eyebrow, facial puffiness, cold
intolerance, and impaired hearing. Approximately 10 percent of all patients
have residual neuropsychiatric symptoms after hormone replacement therapy.
Parathyroid Disorders. Dysfunction of the parathyroid gland results in
the abnormal regulation of calcium metabolism. Excessive secretion of
parathyroid hormone causes hypercalcemia, which can result in delirium,
personality changes, and apathy in 50 to 60 percent of patients and cognitive
impairments in approximately 25 percent of patients. Neuromuscular
excitability, which depends on proper calcium ion concentration, is reduced,
and muscle weakness may appear.
Hypocalcemia can occur with hypoparathyroidism and can result in
neuropsychiatric symptoms of delirium and personality changes. If the
calcium level decreases gradually, clinicians may see the psychiatric
symptoms without the characteristic tetany of hypocalcemia. Other symptoms
of hypocalcemia are cataract formation, seizures, extrapyramidal symptoms,
and increased intracranial pressure.
Adrenal Disorders. Adrenal disorders disturb the normal secretion of
hormones from the adrenal cortex and produce significant neurologic and
psychological changes. Chronic adrenocortical insufficiency (Addison’s
disease) is usually the result of adrenocortical atrophy or granulomatous
invasion caused by tuberculous or fungal infection. Patients with this disorder
exhibit mild mental symptoms, such as apathy, easy fatigability, irritability,
and depression. Occasionally, confusion or psychotic reactions develop.
Cortisone or one of its synthetic derivatives is effective in correcting such
abnormalities.
Excessive quantities of cortisol produced endogenously by an
adrenocortical tumor or hyperplasia (Cushing syndrome) lead to a secondary
mood disorder, a syndrome of agitated depression, and often suicide.


<<<PAGE 844>>>
Decreased concentration and memory deficits may also be present. Psychotic
reactions, with schizophrenia-like symptoms, are seen in a few patients. The
administration of high doses of exogenous corticosteroids typically leads to a
secondary mood disorder similar to mania. Severe depression can follow the
termination of steroid therapy.
Pituitary Disorders. Patients with total pituitary failure can exhibit
psychiatric symptoms, particularly postpartum women who have
hemorrhaged into the pituitary, a condition known as Sheehan syndrome.
Patients have a combination of symptoms, especially of thyroid and adrenal
disorders, and can show virtually any psychiatric symptom.
Metabolic Disorders
A common cause of organic brain dysfunction, metabolic encephalopathy can
produce alterations in mental processes, behavior, and neurologic functions.
We should consider the diagnosis whenever recent and rapid changes in
behavior, thinking, and consciousness occur. The earliest signals are likely to
be impairment of memory, particularly recent memory, and impairment of
orientation. Some patients become agitated, anxious, and hyperactive; others
become quiet, withdrawn, and inactive. As metabolic encephalopathies
progress, confusion or delirium gives way to decreased responsiveness,
stupor, and, eventually, death.
Hepatic Encephalopathy. Severe hepatic failure can result in hepatic
encephalopathy, characterized by asterixis, hyperventilation, EEG
abnormalities, and alterations in consciousness. The alterations in
consciousness can range from apathy to drowsiness to coma. Associated
psychiatric symptoms are changes in memory, general intellectual skills, and
personality.
Uremic Encephalopathy. Renal failure is associated with alterations in
memory, orientation, and consciousness. Restlessness, crawling sensations on
the limbs, muscle twitching, and persistent hiccups are associated symptoms.
In young people with brief episodes of uremia, the neuropsychiatric
symptoms tend to be reversible; in older people with prolonged episodes of
uremia, the neuropsychiatric symptoms can be irreversible.


<<<PAGE 845>>>
Hypoglycemic Encephalopathy. Hypoglycemic encephalopathy can be
caused either by excessive endogenous production of insulin or by excessive
exogenous insulin administration. The premonitory symptoms, which do not
occur in every patient, include nausea, sweating, tachycardia, and feelings of
hunger, apprehension, and restlessness. As the disorder progresses,
disorientation, confusion, and hallucinations, as well as other neurologic and
medical symptoms, can develop. Stupor and coma can occur, and residual
and persistent dementia can sometimes be a serious neuropsychiatric sequela
of the disorder.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis. Diabetic ketoacidosis begins with feelings of
weakness, easy fatigability, and listlessness and increasing polyuria and
polydipsia. Headache and, sometimes, nausea and vomiting appear. Patients
with diabetes mellitus have an increased likelihood of chronic dementia with
general arteriosclerosis.
Acute Intermittent Porphyria. The porphyrias are disorders of heme
biosynthesis that result in excessive accumulation of porphyrins. The triad of
symptoms is acute, colicky abdominal pain, motor polyneuropathy, and
psychosis. Acute intermittent porphyria is an autosomal dominant disorder
that affects more women than men and has its onset between ages 20 and 50
years. The psychiatric symptoms include anxiety, insomnia, lability of mood,
depression, and psychosis. Some studies have found that between 0.2 and 0.5
percent of chronic psychiatric patients may have undiagnosed porphyrias.
Barbiturates precipitate or aggravate the attacks of acute porphyria, and we
should never use them in this disorder (less a concern in modern treatments,
however some headache treatments, e.g., Fioricet and Fiorinal, remain
popular). We should also avoid those or similar medications in relatives or
people with the disease.
Nutritional Disorders
Niacin Deficiency. Dietary insufficiency of niacin (nicotinic acid) and its
precursor tryptophan are associated with pellagra, a globally occurring
nutritional deficiency disease seen in association with alcohol abuse,
vegetarian diets, and extreme poverty and starvation. The neuropsychiatric


<<<PAGE 846>>>
symptoms of pellagra include apathy, irritability, insomnia, depression, and
delirium; the medical symptoms include dermatitis, peripheral neuropathies,
and diarrhea. Traditionally, some refer to the course of pellagra as the “five
Ds”: dermatitis, diarrhea, delirium, dementia, and death. The response to
treatment with nicotinic acid is rapid, but dementia from prolonged illness
may improve only slowly and incompletely.
Thiamine Deficiency. Thiamine (vitamin B1) deficiency leads to beriberi,
characterized chiefly by cardiovascular and neurologic changes, and to
Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome, which is most often associated with chronic
alcohol abuse. Beriberi occurs primarily in Asia and areas of famine and
poverty. The psychiatric symptoms include apathy, depression, irritability,
nervousness, and poor concentration; severe memory disorders can develop
with prolonged deficiencies.
Cobalamin Deficiency. Deficiencies in cobalamin (vitamin B12) arise
because of the failure of the gastric mucosal cells to secrete a specific
substance, intrinsic factor, required for the normal absorption of vitamin B12
in the ileum. The deficiency state is characterized by the development of a
chronic macrocytic megaloblastic anemia (pernicious anemia) and by
neurologic manifestations resulting from degenerative changes in the
peripheral nerves, the spinal cord, and the brain. Neurologic changes occur in
approximately 80 percent of all patients. These changes are commonly
associated with megaloblastic anemia, but they occasionally precede the
onset of hematologic abnormalities.
Mental changes, such as apathy, depression, irritability, and moodiness, are
frequent. In a few patients, encephalopathy and its associated delirium,
delusions, hallucinations, dementia, and sometimes paranoid features are
prominent and are sometimes called megaloblastic madness. The neurologic
manifestations of vitamin B12 deficiency can be rapidly and entirely arrested
by early and continued administration of parenteral vitamin therapy.
Toxins
Environmental toxins are becoming an increasingly severe threat to physical
and mental health in contemporary society.


<<<PAGE 847>>>
Mercury. Either inorganic or organic mercury can cause mercury poisoning.
Inorganic mercury poisoning results in the “mad hatter” syndrome
(previously seen in workers in the hat industry who softened mercurycontaining felt by putting it in their mouths), with depression, irritability, and
psychosis. Associated neurologic symptoms are headache, tremor, and
weakness. Contaminated fish or grain can cause organic mercury poisoning
and result in depression, irritability, and cognitive impairment. Associated
symptoms are sensory neuropathies, cerebellar ataxia, dysarthria,
paresthesias, and visual field defects. Mercury poisoning in pregnant women
causes abnormal fetal development. No specific therapy is available, although
chelation therapy with dimercaprol may help with acute poisoning.
Lead. Lead poisoning occurs when the amount of lead ingested exceeds the
body’s ability to eliminate it. It takes several months for toxic symptoms to
appear.
The signs and symptoms of lead poisoning depend on the level of lead in
the blood. When lead reaches levels above 200 mg/L, symptoms of severe
lead encephalopathy occur, with dizziness, clumsiness, ataxia, irritability,
restlessness, headache, and insomnia. Later, an excited delirium occurs, with
associated vomiting and visual disturbances, and progresses to convulsions,
lethargy, and coma.
Treatment of lead encephalopathy should be instituted as rapidly as
possible, even without laboratory confirmation, because of the high mortality
rate. The treatment of choice to facilitate lead excretion is intravenous
administration of calcium disodium edetate (calcium disodium versenate)
daily for 5 days.
Manganese. Early manganese poisoning (sometimes called manganese
madness) causes symptoms of headache, irritability, joint pains, and
somnolence. An eventual picture appears of emotional lability, pathologic
laughter, nightmares, hallucinations, and compulsive and impulsive acts
associated with periods of confusion and aggressiveness. Lesions involving
the basal ganglia and pyramidal system result in gait impairment, rigidity,
monotonous or whispering speech, tremors of the extremities and tongue,
masked facies (manganese mask), micrographia, dystonia, dysarthria, and
loss of equilibrium. The psychological effects tend to clear 3 or 4 months


<<<PAGE 848>>>
after the patient’s removal from the site of exposure, but neurologic
symptoms tend to remain stationary or to progress. No specific treatment
exists for manganese poisoning, other than removal from the source of
poisoning. The disorder occurs in persons working in refining ore, brick
workers, and those making steel casings.
Arsenic. Chronic arsenic poisoning most commonly results from prolonged
exposure to herbicides containing arsenic or from drinking water
contaminated with arsenic. Silicon-based computer chip manufacturing also
uses arsenic. Early signs of toxicity are skin pigmentation, GI complaints,
renal and hepatic dysfunction, hair loss, and a characteristic garlic odor to the
breath. Encephalopathy eventually occurs, with generalized sensory and
motor loss. Chelation therapy with dimercaprol can help successfully treat
arsenic poisoning.

3.5 Mild Cognitive Impairment
The past decade has seen the emergence of a new concept, mild cognitive
impairment (MCI), which is defined as the presence of mild cognitive decline
not warranting the diagnosis of dementia but with preserved basic activities
of daily living.
DSM-5 classifies MCI as mild neurocognitive disorder due to multiple
etiologies or unspecified neurocognitive disorder. It will most likely receive
more attention in future revisions of the DSM.

DEFINITION
Although the term mild cognitive impairment has been in use for more than
25 years, it became a diagnostic category because of the need to fill the gap
between cognitive changes associated with aging and cognitive impairment
suggestive of dementia. The criteria proposed by the Mayo Clinic
Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (MCADRC) are listed in Table 3-39.
At this time, there are no international diagnostic criteria for MCI.
Table 3-39


<<<PAGE 849>>>
Mild Cognitive Impairment Original Criteria
1. Memory complaint, preferably qualified by an informant
2. Memory impairment for age and education
3. Preserved general cognitive function
4. Intact activities of daily living
5. Not demented
Table 3-40
Terms Related to Mild Cognitive Impairment

Historical Perspective
The imprecise border between normal aging-related cognitive decline and
dementia-related cognitive impairment has been described for several
decades. Thus, in 1962, Kral introduced the terms benign senescent
forgetfulness (forgetfulness for less essential facts and awareness of
problems) and malignant senescent forgetfulness (memory problems for
recent events and lack of awareness). In 1986, the National Institutes of
Mental Health (NIMH) recommended the term age-associated memory
impairment for age-related normal memory changes. In 1994, the
International Psychogeriatrics Association presented the concept of ageassociated cognitive decline, which described cognitive deficits, including
but not limited to memory impairment, in the absence of dementia or other
affecting cognitive conditions. Cognitive impairment no dementia was
introduced in 1997 by the Canadian Study of Health and Aging to describe


<<<PAGE 850>>>
the presence of nondemented cognitive impairment regardless of the
underlying process (neurologic, psychiatric, medical). Several other
classifications, including age-consistent memory impairment and late-life
forgetfulness, are defined on the bases of performance on various cognitive
tests (Table 3-40).
The exact place of MCI in the psychiatric nosology will be challenging.
Based on the current definition of MCI, functional impairment is an
exclusion criterion for MCI, but the same “functional impairment” is one of
the standard criteria for defining psychiatric disorders. Further developments
in finding biologic markers for MCI will probably contribute to a more solid
conceptualization and, hopefully, treatment of patients with prodromal
dementia.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
The clinical picture of MCI is a function of the criteria used to define it.
Memory impairment is necessary but has been challenging to quantify. One
measure has been an objective loss of memory or other cognitive domain that
is more than 1.5 standard deviations below the mean for individuals of
similar age and education. Some have suggested subjective complaints of
memory loss be a marker, but this runs the risk of many false-positive
diagnoses.
Assessment
Neuropsychological Assessment. Most experts agree that earlier
deficits occur in episodic (vs. semantic) memory. There is no consensus
among experts concerning which memory tests and which cutoffs to use.
There is a lack of norms, test scores do not have normal distributions, and
multiple demographic characteristics influence test performance. Several
experts have proposed that a scale such as the delayed recall task from the
Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer Disease might be useful in
detecting Alzheimer disease in the earliest stages. Brief mental status
instruments (e.g., the Mini-Mental State Examination) are relatively
insensitive for the detection of memory problems in MCI.


<<<PAGE 851>>>
Biomarkers. In the past decade, researchers have studied several markers of
progression from MCI to dementia of the Alzheimer type. Among these,
apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4) allele carrier status has been one of the most
prominent variables. For the amnestic MCI, APOE4 is a risk factor for a
more rapid progression to Alzheimer disease. Several CSF markers are also
possible predictors of disease progression: Pathologic low concentrations of
Aβ42 (the 42 amino acid form of β-amyloid), as well as pathologic high
concentrations of total tau (t-tau) and phospho tau (p-tau), may differentiate
early Alzheimer disease from normal aging. Locating alterations in the
expression of proteins involved in the pathogenetic pathways of Alzheimer
disease (proteomic approach) is another approach used to help early detection
of Alzheimer disease. We can identify several proteins (cystatin C, β-2
microglobulin, and BEGF polypeptides) through new techniques, and
currently, there are several proteins from both CSF and blood that correlate
with Alzheimer disease pathology.
Genetics. Because MCI is likely a prodromal stage for several disorders
(dementia of the Alzheimer type frontotemporal or vascular dementia),
different genes are probably related to MCI. Four genes have a relationship
with Alzheimer disease: the APP gene, presenilin-1 (PSEN1), presenilin-2
(PSEN2), and the apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene. Because the first three
genes are involved in rare autosomal dominant forms of Alzheimer disease,
screening for each of these mutations will have minimal value for the
diagnosis of MCI in the general population. The APOE gene, a common
genetic risk factor for early as well as for late-onset Alzheimer disease, has
been studied more thoroughly in relationship to MCI, but the results have
been inconsistent. Because the etiology of MCI is heterogeneous, a very large
number of different genes likely underlie the pathology of MCI. We have not
discovered many of these genes.


<<<PAGE 852>>>
FIGURE 3-11
Positron emission tomography images obtained with the amyloid-imaging agent
Pittsburgh Compound-B ([carbon-11]-PIB) in a normal individual with mild
cognitive impairment (MCI; center images) and a patient with mild Alzheimer
disease (AD) (far right). Some MCI patients have control-like levels of amyloid,
some have Alzheimer disease–like levels of amyloid, and some have intermediate
levels. (Courtesy of William E. Klunk, M.D., University of Pittsburgh, Department
of Psychiatry, Pittsburgh, PA. All rights retained.)

Neuroimaging. Advances in neuroimaging studies aim to develop
measures allowing the differentiation between MCI and healthy aging as well
as within MCI among subjects who will convert to dementia of the
Alzheimer type or will remain stable over time.
Structural studies of volumetric MCI showed early changes in the medial
temporal structures, including neuronal atrophy, decreased synaptic density,
and overall neuronal loss. Atrophy of the hippocampal volume and entorhinal
cortex occur in MCI. Hippocampal formation atrophy predicts the rate of
progression from MCI to dementia of the Alzheimer type. Three-dimensional
modeling techniques have localized shape alteration and specific regions of
atrophy within the hippocampus. Other methods, such as tensor-based
morphometry, allow tracking brain changes in detail, quantifying tissue
growth or atrophy throughout the brain and indicating the local rate at which
one loses tissue. Other innovations in neuroimaging include MR relaxometry,
imaging of iron deposition, diffusion tensor imaging, and high-field MRI
scanning.
Perhaps the most promising development has been the advent of PET
tracer compounds that visualize amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.


<<<PAGE 853>>>
These new compounds—Pittsburgh Compound B (carbon-11-PIB) and
fluorine-18-FDDNP—track pathology changes in the preclinical stages of
Alzheimer disease. These specific tracers allow investigators to visualize the
pathologic process and are also used to monitor progression from MCI to
Alzheimer disease. However, the burden of β-amyloid plaques does not
always correlate with the clinical stages, because some MCI subjects can
present with a minimal burden similar to healthy control participants, but
others have amyloid burden comparable to Alzheimer disease participants. A
single biomarker will probably be insufficient to identify incipient Alzheimer
disease. Thus, the combination of several markers further increases the
accuracy of the prediction and will probably become the norm as described
by recent studies (the combination of decreased parietal rCBF and CSF
biomarkers as Aβ42, t-tau, and p-tau) (Fig. 3-11).
Diagnostic Differential
The Cognitive Continuum. The cognitive continuum describes the subtle
pathway from age-related cognitive decline to MCI to dementia. Per this
model, there is an overlap at both ends of MCI, which indicates that it can be
quite challenging to identify the transition points (Fig. 3-12). In practice,
differentiating MCI from age-related cognitive decline resides mainly on
neuropsychological testing, showing a cognitive decline more severe for age
and less education. The primary differentiation between MCI and dementia of
the Alzheimer type resides in the lack of functional impairment in MCI.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
The typical rate at which MCI patients progress to dementia of the Alzheimer
type is 10 to 15 percent per year and is associated with progressive loss of
function. However, several studies have indicated that the diagnosis is not
stable in both directions; patients can either convert to dementia of the
Alzheimer type or revert to normal. This variability in course relates to the
heterogeneous source of the subjects (clinical vs. community) as well as to
the heterogeneous definition criteria used by different studies. Amnestic MCI
occurs with increased morbidity compared with reference subjects.


<<<PAGE 854>>>
FIGURE 3-12
Cognitive continuum showing the overlap in the boundary between normal aging
and the mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease. (Reprinted with
permission from Petersen RC, ed. Mild Cognitive Impairment: Aging to
Alzheimer’s Disease. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.)

TREATMENT
There are no FDA-approved treatments for MCI at this time. MCI treatment
involves adequate screening and diagnosis. Ideally, MCI treatment would
also include improvement of memory loss, together with the prevention of
further cognitive decline to dementia. Cognitive training programs may be
mildly beneficial for compensating memory difficulties in MCI. Most likely,
controlling vascular risk factors (high blood pressure, hypercholesterolemia,
diabetes mellitus) helps to prevent the progression of MCI cases with
underlying vascular pathology. Currently, sensitive tools (imaging techniques
or biomarkers) are not available for MCI screening in the general population.
In the primary care setting, clinicians should maintain a high suspicion for
subjective cognitive complaints and should corroborate these complaints with
collateral information whenever possible. Also, identifying reversible causes
of cognitive impairment (hypothyroidism, vitamin B12 deficiency,
medication-induced cognitive impairment, depression) can further benefit
some of the prodromal dementia MCI cases.
Currently, there is no evidence for the long-term efficacy of
pharmacotherapies in reversing MCI. Several epidemiologic studies indicated
a reduced risk of dementia in persons taking antihypertensive medications,


<<<PAGE 855>>>
cholesterol-lowering drugs, antioxidants, and anti-inflammatory and estrogen
therapy, but no randomized controlled trials verify these data. Concerning
cognitive enhancers, most trials have ambiguous results (Table 3-41). Most
of these studies had several problems, including (1) obtaining homogeneous
samples and identifying potential beneficiaries of treatment; (2) treating a
broader population, which led to large percentages of negative responses and
problematic side effects; and (3) translation of the MCI construct into
multiple cultures and languages and using dementia of the Alzheimer type
diagnosis as the primary outcome, given the variability of this diagnosis in
different countries.
Advances in MCI detection will be paramount for early detection and
treatment of patients with Alzheimer disease; experts agree that diseasemodifying treatments for Alzheimer disease will focus on cognitively intact
individuals at increased risk. The field of identifying sensitive and specific
biomarkers (biologic and neuroimaging markers) will probably witness
exponential development in the coming years.


<<<PAGE 856>>>
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY OF MCI
The recognition that Alzheimer disease pathology may exist in the brain long
before the presence of clinical symptoms led to the focus on preclinical stages
to characterize initial impairments that are associated with an increased risk
of progression to Alzheimer disease.
The clinical expression of MCI is a result of the interaction among several
risk factors and several protective factors. The most significant risk factors
are related to the different types of neurodegeneration witnessed in
dementias. There are different subtypes of MCI, most notably ones associated
with amnesia. Other risk factors include the APOE4 allele status and
cerebrovascular events in the form of either cerebrovascular accident or
lacunar disease. The role of chronic exposure to high levels of cortisol, as
seen in late-life depression, is also hypothesized to increase the risk for
cognitive impairment through hippocampal volume reduction. The notion of
“brain reserve” suggests that effects of brain size and neuron density may be
protective against dementia despite the presence of neurodegeneration (a
more significant number of neurons and synaptic connections and a bigger
brain volume would protect against clinical manifestations of Alzheimer
disease, despite the presence of neurodegeneration) (Fig. 3-13).


<<<PAGE 857>>>
FIGURE 3-13
Outcome of clinical phenotypes of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) according to
presumed etiology. AD, Alzheimer disease; Depr, depression; DLB, dementia with
Lewy bodies; FRD, frontotemporal dementia; VaD, vascular dementia. (Adapted
with permission from Petersen RC, ed. Mild Cognitive Impairment: Aging to
Alzheimer’s Disease. New York: Oxford University Press; 2003.)

Table 3-41
Treatment Trials for MCI


<<<PAGE 858>>>
References
Delirium
Caraceni A, Grassi L. Delirium: Acute Confusional States in Palliative


<<<PAGE 859>>>
Medicine. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2011.
Franco JG, Trzepacz PT, Meagher DJ, Kean J, Lee Y, Kim J-L, Kishi Y,
Furlanetto LM, Negreiros D, Huang M-C, Chen C-H, Leonard M, de Pablo
J. Three core domains of delirium validated using exploratory and
confirmatory factor analyses. Psychosomatics. 2013;54(3):227–238.
Hosie A, Davidson PM, Agar M, Sanderson CR, Philips J. Delirium
prevalence, incidence, and implications for screening in specialist
palliative care inpatient settings: A systematic review. Palliat Med.
2013;27(6):486–498.
Juliebö V, Björo K, Krogseth M, Skovlund E, Ranhoff AH, Wyller TB. Risk
factors for preoperative and postoperative delirium in elderly patients with
hip fracture. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009;57(8):1354–1361.
Kiely DK, Marcantonio ER, Inouye SK, Shaffer ML, Bergmann MA, Yang
FM, Fearing MA, Jones RN. Persistent delirium predicts greater mortality.
J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009;57(1):55–61.
Maldonado JR, Wysong A, van der Starre PJA, Block T, Miller C, Reitz BA.
Dexmedetomidine and the reduction of postoperative delirium after cardiac
surgery. Psychosomatics. 2009;50(3):216–217.
Morandi A, McCurley J, Vasilevskis EE. Tools to detect delirium
superimposed on dementia: A systematic review. Erratum. J Am Ger Soc.
2113;61:174.
O’Mahony R, Murthy L, Akunne A, Young J, Guideline Development
Group. Synopsis of the National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence guideline for prevention of delirium. Ann Intern Med.
2011;154(11):746–711.
Pisani MA, Kong SYJ, Kasl SV, Murphy TE, Araujo KLB, Van Ness PH.
Days of delirium are associated with 1-year mortality in an older intensive
care unit population. Am J Respir Crit Care. 2009;180(11):1092–1097.
Popeo DM. Delirium in older adults. MT Sinai J Med. 2011;78(4):571–582.
Singh Joy, Subhashni D. Delirium directly related to cognitive impairment.
Am J Nurs. 2011;111(1):65.
Solai LKK. Delirium. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2109:1153.
Thomas E, Smith JE, Forrester DA, Heider G, Jadotte YT, Holly C. The
effectiveness of non-pharmacological multi-component interventions for


<<<PAGE 860>>>
the prevention of delirium in non-intensive care unit older adult
hospitalized patients: A systematic review. JBI Database Syst Rev
Implement Rep. 2014;12(4):180–232.
Witlox J, Eurelings LSM, de Jonghe JFM, Kalisvaart KJ, Eikelenboom P,
van Gool WA. Delirium in elderly patients and the risk of postdischarge
mortality, institutionalization, and dementia: A meta-analysis.
JAMA.2010;304(4):443–451.
Yang FM, Marcantonio ER, Inouye SK, Kiely DK, Rudolph JL, Fearing MA,
Jones RN. Phenomenological subtypes of delirium in older persons:
Patterns, prevalence, and prognosis. Psychosomatics. 2009;50(3):248–254.
Dementia (Major Neurocognitive Disorder)
Balzer D. Neurocognitive disorders in DSM-5. Am J Psych.
2013;170(6):585–587.
Blanc-Lapierre A, Bouvier G, Gruber A, Leffondré K, Lebailly P, Fabrigoule
C, Baldi I. Cognitive disorders and occupational exposure to
organophosphates: Results from the PHYTONER study. Am J Epidemiol.
2013;177(10):1086–1096.
Bondi MW, Salmon DP, Kaszniak AW. The neuropsychology of dementia.
In: Grant I, Adams KM, eds. Neuropsychological Assessment of
Neuropsychiatric and Neuromedical Disorders. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford
University Press; 2009:159.
Brand BL, Stadnik R. What contributes to predicting change in the treatment
of dissociation: Initial levels of dissociation, PTSD, or overall distress? J
Trauma Dissociation. 2013;14(3):328–341.
Bugnicourt J-M, Godefroy O, Chillon J-M, Choukroun G, Massy ZA.
Cognitive disorders and dementia in CKD: The neglected kidney-brain
axis. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;24(3):353–363.
Bugnicourt J-M, Guegan-Massardier E, Roussel M, Martinaud O, Canaple S,
Triquenot-Bagan A, Wallon D, Lamy C, Leclercq C, Hannequin D,
Godefroy O. Cognitive impairment after cerebral venous thrombosis: A
two-center study. J Neurol. 2013;260(5):1324–1331.
Clare L, Whitaker CJ, Nelis SM, Martyr A, Markova IS, Roth I, Woods RT,
Morris RG. Self-concept in early stage dementia: Profile, course,
correlates, predictors and implications for quality of life. Int J Geriatr
Psychiatry. 2013;28(5):494–503.


<<<PAGE 861>>>
Craft S. The role of metabolic disorders in Alzheimer disease and vascular
dementia: Two roads converged. Arch Neurol. 2009;66(3):300–305.
Elvish R, Lever S-J, Johnstone J, Cawley R, Keady J. Psychological
interventions for carers of people with dementia: A systematic review of
quantitative and qualitative evidence. Counsel Psychother Res.
2013;13(2):106–125.
Fields J, Dumaop W, Langford TD, Rockenstein E, Masliah E. Role of
neurotrophic factor alterations in the neurodegenerative process in HIV
associated neurocognitive disorders. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol.
2014;9(2):102–116.
Goldman J, Stebbins G, Merkitch D, Dinh V, Bernard B, DeToledo-Morrell
L, Goetz C. Hallucinations and dementia in Parkinson’s disease: Clinically
related but structurally distinct (P5. 257). Neurology. 2014;82(10
Suppl):P5-257.
Graff-Radford NR, Woodruff BK. Frontotemporal dementia. Semin Neurol.
2007;27:48.
Hansen KF, Karenlina K, Sakamoto K, Wayman GA, Impey S, Obrietan K.
miRNA-132: A dynamic regulator of cognitive capacity. Brain Struct
Funct. 2013;218(3):817–831.
Insausti R, Annese J, Amaral DG, Squire LR. Human amnesia and the medial
temporal lobe illuminated by neuropsychological and neurohistological
findings for patient E.P. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;110(21):E1953–
E1962.
Jack CR Jr, Lowe VJ, Senjem ML, Weigand SD, Kemp BJ, Shiung MM,
Knopman DS, Boeve BF, Klunk WE, Mathis CA, Petersen RC. 11C PiB
and structural MRI provide complementary information in imaging of
Alzheimer’s disease and amnestic mild cognitive impairment. Brain.
2008;131(Pt 3):665–680.
Kemp PM, Holmes C. Imaging in dementia with Lewy bodies: A review.
Nucl Med Commun. 2007;28(7):511–519.
Launer LJ. Epidemiologic insight into blood pressure and cognitive disorders.
In: Yaffe K, ed. Chronic Medical Disease and Cognitive Aging: Toward a
Healthy Body and Brain. New York: Oxford University Press; 2013:1.
Mayeux R, Reitz C, Brickman AM, Haan MN, Manly JJ, Glymour MM,
Weiss CC, Yaffe K, Middleton L, Hendrie HC, Warren LH, Hayden KM,
Welsh-Bohmer KA, Breitner JCS, Morris JC. Operationalizing diagnostic


<<<PAGE 862>>>
criteria for Alzheimer’s disease and other age-related cognitive impairment
—Part 1. Alzheimers Dement. 2011;7(1):15–34.
McLaren AN, LaMantia MA, Callahan CM. Systematic review of nonpharmacologic interventions to delay functional decline in communitydwelling patients with dementia. Aging Ment Health. 2013;17(6):655–666.
Mitchell SL, Teno JM, Kiely DK, Shaffer ML, Jones RN, Prigerson HG,
Volicer L, Given JL, Hamel MB. The clinical course of advanced
dementia. N Engl J Med. 2009;361(16):1529–1538.
Nervi A, Reitz C, Tang MX, Santana V, Piriz A, Reyes D, Lantigua R,
Medrano M, Jiménez-Velázquez IZ, Lee JH, Mayeux R. Familial
aggregation of dementia with Lewy bodies. Arch Neurol. 2011;68(1):90–
93.
Nguyen TP, Soukup VM, Gelman BB. Persistent hijacking of brain
proteasomes in HIV-associated dementia. Am J Pathol. 2010;176(2):893–
902.
Panza F, Frisardi V, Capurso C, D’Introno A, Colacicco AM, Imbimbo BP,
Santamato A, Vendemiale G, Seripa D, Pilotto A, Capurso A, Solfrizzi V.
Late-life depression, mild cognitive impairment, and dementia: Possible
continuum? Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2010;18(2):98–116.
Richards SS, Sweet RA. Dementia. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:1167.
Schneider JA, Arvanitakis Z, Bang W, Bennett DA. Mixed brain pathologies
account for most dementia cases in community-dwelling older persons.
Neurology. 2007;69(24):2197–2204.
Sonnen JA, Larson EB, Crane PK, Haneuse S, Li G, Schellenberg GD, Craft
S, Leverenz JB, Montine TJ. Pathological correlates of dementia in a
longitudinal, population-based sample of aging. Ann Neurol.
2007;62(4):406–413.
Sweet RA. Cognitive disorders: Introduction. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:1152.
Verdelho A, Madureira S, Moleiro C, Ferro JM, Santos CO, Erkinjuntti T,
Pantoni L, Fazekas F, Visser M, Waldemar G, Wallin A, Hennerici M,
Inzitari D; LADIS Study. White matter changes and diabetes predict
cognitive decline in the elderly: The LADIS study. Neurology.


<<<PAGE 863>>>
2010;75(2):160–167.
Watson PD, Voss JL, Warren DE, Tranel D, Cohen NJ. Spatial
reconstruction by patients with hippocampal damage is dominated by
relational memory errors. Hippocampus. 2013;23(7):570–580.
Weiner MF. Cognitive disorders as psychobiological processes. In: Weiner
MF, Lipton AM. The American Psychiatric Publishing Textbook of
Alzheimer Disease and Other Dementias. Arlington, VA: American
Psychiatric Publishing; 2009:137.
Zarit SH, Zarit JM. Disorders of aging: Delirium, dementia and other
cognitive problems. In: Zarit SH, Zarit JM. Mental Disorders in Older
Adults: Fundamentals of Assessment and Treatment. 2nd ed. New York:
Guilford Press; 2007:40.
Major or Minor Neurocognitive Disorder due to Another Medical
Condition (Amnestic Disorders)
Andreescu C, Aizenstein HJ. Amnestic disorders and mild cognitive
impairment. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:1198.
Auyeunga M, Tsoi TH, Cheung CM, Fong DYT, Li R, Chan JKW, Lau KY.
Association of diffusion weighted imaging abnormalities and recurrence in
transient global amnesia. J Clin Neurosci. 2011;18(4):531–534.
Gerridzen IJ, Goossensen MA. Patients with Korsakoff syndrome in nursing
homes: Characteristics, comorbidity, and use of psychotropic drugs. Int
Psychogeriatr. 2014;26(1):115–121.
Kearney H, Mallon P, Kavanagh E, Lawler L, Kelly P, O’Rourke K.
Amnestic syndrome due to meningovascular neurosyphilis. J Neurol.
2010;257(4):669–671.
McLaren AN, LaMantia MA, Callahan CM. Systematic review of nonpharmacologic interventions to delay functional decline in communitydwelling patients with dementia. Aging Ment Health. 2013;17(6):655–666.
Purohit V, Rapaka R, Frankenheim J, Avila A, Sorensen R, Rutter J. National
Institute on Drug Abuse symposium report: Drugs of abuse, dopamine, and
HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders/HIV-associated dementia. J
Neurovirol. 2013;19(2):119–122.
Race E, Verfaellie M. Remote memory function and dysfunction in


<<<PAGE 864>>>
Korsakoff’s syndrome. Neuropsychol Rev. 2012;22(2):105–116.
Rogalski EJ, Rademaker A, Harrison TM, Helenowski I, Johnson N, Bigio E,
Mishra M, Weintraub S, Mesulam MM. ApoE E4 is a susceptibility factor
in amnestic but not aphasic dementias. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord.
2011;25(2):159–163.
Tannenbaum C, Paquette A, Hilmer S, Holroyd-Leduc J, Carnahan R. A
systematic review of amnestic and non-amnestic mild cognitive
impairment induced by anticholinergic, antihistamine, GABAergic and
opioid drugs. Drugs Aging. 2012;29(8):639–658.
van Geldorp B, Bergmann HC, Robertson J, Wester AJ, Kessels RPC. The
interaction of working memory performance and episodic memory
formation in patients with Korsakoff’s amnesia. Brain Res. 2012;1433:98–
103.
Neurocognitive and Other Disorders due to a General Medical Condition
Boyd AD, Riba M. Depression and pancreatic cancer. J Natl Compr Canc
Netw. 2007;5(1):113–116.
Cahalan S. Brain on Fire. New York: Simon & Schuster; 2013.
Carrico AW, Riley ED, Johnson MO, Charlebois ED, Neilands TB, Remien
RH, Lightfoot MA, Steward WT, Weinhardt LS, Kelly JA, RotheramBorus MJ, Morin SF, Chesney MA. Psychiatric risk factors for HIV
disease progression: The role of inconsistent patterns of antiretroviral
therapy utilization. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2011;56(2):146–150.
Clare L, Whitaker CJ, Nelis SM, Martyr A, Markova IS, Roth I, Woods RT,
Morris RG. Self-concept in early stage dementia: Profile, course,
correlates, predictors and implications for quality of life. Int J Geriatr
Psychiatry. 2013;28(5):494–503.
Cohen MA, Goforth HW, Lux JZ, Batista SM, Khalife S, Cozza KL, Soffer J,
eds. Handbook of AIDS Psychiatry. New York: Oxford University Press;
2010.
Dalmau J, Lancaster E, Martinez-Hernandez E, Rosenfeld MR, BaliceGordon R. Clinical experience and laboratory investigations in patients
with anti-NMDAR encephalitis. Lancet Neurol. 2011;10(1):63–74.
Elvish R, Lever S-J, Johnstone J, Cawley R, Keady J. Psychological
interventions for carers of people with dementia: A systematic review of
quantitative and qualitative evidence. Counsel Psychother Res.


<<<PAGE 865>>>
2013;13:106.
Goldstein BI, Fagiolini A, Houck P, Kupfer DJ. Cardiovascular disease and
hypertension among adults with bipolar I disorder in the United States.
Bipolar Disord. 2009;11(6):657–662.
Grossman CI, Gordon CM. Mental health considerations in secondary HIV
prevention. AIDS Behav. 2010;14(2):263–271.
Gur RE, Yi JJ, McDonald-McGinn DM, Tang SX, Calkins ME, Whinna D,
Souders MC, Savitt A, Zackai EH, Moberg PJ, Emanuel BS, Gur RC.
Neurocognitive development in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: Comparison
with youth having developmental delay and medical comorbidities. Mol
Psychiatry. 2014;21.
Iudicello JE, Woods SP, Cattie JE, Doyle K, Grant I; HIV Neurobehavioral
Research Program Group. Risky decision-making in HIV-associated
neurocognitive disorders (HAND). Clin Neuropsychol. 2013;27(2):256–
275.
Kennedy CA, Hill JM, Schleifer SJ. HIV/AIDS and substance use disorders.
In: Frances RJ, Miller SI, Mack AH, eds. Clinical Textbook of Addictive
Disorders. 3rd ed. New York: The Guildford Press; 2011:411.
Lavery LL, Whyte EM. Other cognitive and mental disorders due to a general
medical condition. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:1207.
Lippmann S, Perugula ML. Delirium or dementia? Innov Clin Neurosci.
2016;13(9–10):56–57.
Martins IP, Lauterbach M, Luis H, Amaral H, Rosenbaum G, Slade PD,
Townes BD. Neurological subtle signs and cognitive development: astudy
in late childhood and adolescence. Child Neuropsychol. 2013;19(5):466–
478.
Pressler SJ, Subramanian U, Kareken D, Perkins SM, Gradus-Pizlo I, Sauve
MJ, Ding Y, Kim JS, Sloan R, Jaynes H, Shaw RM. Cognitive deficits in
chronic heart failure. Nurs Res. 2010;59(2):127–139.
Price CC, Tanner JJ, Monk TG. Postoperative cognitive disorders. In:
Mashour GA, Lydic R, eds. Neuroscientific Foundations of
Anesthesiology. New York: Oxford University Press; 2011:255.
Rao V, Bertrand M, Rosenberg P, Makley M, Schretlen DJ, Brandt J, Mielke
MM. Predictors of new-onset depression after mild traumatic brain injury.


<<<PAGE 866>>>
J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2010;22(1):100–104.
Simioni S, Cavassini M, Annoni JM, Abraham AR, Bourquin I, Schiffer V,
Calmy A, Chave JP, Giacobini E, Hirschel B, Du Pasquier RA. Cognitive
dysfunction in HIV patients despite long-standing suppression of viremia.
AIDS. 2010;24(9):1243–1250.
Mild Cognitive Impairment
Aggarwal NT, Wilson RS, Beck TL, Bienias JL, Berry-Kravis E, Bennett
DA. The apolipoprotein E epsilon4 allele and incident Alzheimer’s disease
in persons with mild cognitive impairment. Neurocase. 2005;11(1):3–7.
Andreescu C, Aizenstein HJ. Amnestic disorders and mild cognitive
impairment. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:1198.
Birks J, Flicker L. Donepezil for mild cognitive impairment. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2006;(3):CD006104.
Breitner JCS. Mild cognitive impairment and progression to dementia: New
findings. Neurology. 2014;82(4):e34–e35.
Doody RS, Ferris SH, Salloway S, Meuser TM, Murthy AK, Li C, Goldman
R: Identifying amnestic mild cognitive impairment in primary care: A
feasibility study. Clin Drug Investig. 2011;31(7):483–491.
Edwards ER, Spira AP, Barnes DE, Yaffe K. Neuropsychiatric symptoms in
mild cognitive impairment: Differences by subtype and progression to
dementia. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2009;24(7):716–722.
Gallagher D, Coen R, Kilroy D, Belinski K, Bruce I, Coakley D, Walsh B,
Cunningham C, Lawlor BA. Anxiety and behavioural disturbance as
markers of prodromal Alzheimer’s disease in patients with mild cognitive
impairment. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2011;26(2):166–172.
Goldberg TE, Koppel J, Keehlisen L, Christen E, Dreses-Werringloer U,
Conejero-Goldberg C, Gordon ML, Davies P. Performance-based
measures of everyday function in mild cognitive impairment. Am J
Psychiatry. 2010;167(7):845–853.
Hendrix SB, Welsh-Bohmer KA. Separation of cognitive domains to improve
prediction of progression from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer’s
disease. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2013;5(3):22.
Mecocci P, Polidori MC, Praticó D. Antioxidant clinical trials in mild


<<<PAGE 867>>>
cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. In: Praticó D, Mecocci P,
eds. Studies on Alzheimer’s disease. New York: Springer
Science+Business Media; 2013:223.
Pedersen KF, Larsen JP, Tysnes O-B, Alves G. Prognosis of mild cognitive
impairment in early Parkinson disease: The Norwegian ParkWest study.
JAMA Neurol. 2013;70(5):580–586.
Roberts JS, Karlawish JH, Uhlmann WR, Petersen RC, Green RC. Mild
cognitive impairment in clinical care: A survey of American Academy of
Neurology members. Neurology. 2010;75(5):425–431.
Rog LA, Fink JW. Mild cognitive impairment and normal aging. In: Ravdin
LD, Katzen HL, eds. Handbook on the Neuropsychology of Aging and
Dementia. New York: Springer Science+Business Media; 2013:239.
Smith CN, Frascino JC, Hopkins RO, Squire LR. The nature of anterograde
and retrograde memory impairment after damage to the medial temporal
lobe. Neuropsychologia. 2013;51(13):2709–2714.
Wang L, Goldstein FC, Veledar E, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Meltzer CC, Holder
CA, Mao H. Alterations in cortical thickness and white matter integrity in
mild cognitive impairment measured by whole-brain cortical thickness
mapping and diffusion tensor imaging. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol.
2009;30(5):893–899.
Zola SM, Manzanares CM, Clopton P, Lah JJ, Levey AI. A behavioral task
predicts conversion to mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease.
Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2013;28(2):179–184.


<<<PAGE 868>>>
4
Substance Use and Addictive
Disorders
4.1 General Features of the SubstanceRelated Disorders
This chapter covers substance use disorders with descriptions of the clinical
phenomena associated with the following: alcohol; caffeine; cannabis;
hallucinogens (including phencyclidine [PCP]); inhalants; opioids; sedatives,
hypnotics, and anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine); tobacco; anabolicandrogenic steroids (AAS); and other substances, such as nitrous oxide and γhydroxybutyrate. We also discuss gambling disorder, as DSM-5 reclassified
this as a non–substance-related addictive disorder in the most recent (fifth)
edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM5).
The substance use disorders share many features; however, the range of
substances is broad in that there are differences in the pharmacology,
intoxication, and associated behaviors that make for unique effects with many
of the substances. For that reason, we begin with a general description of the
substance use disorders in this section and discuss the features of each
specific disorder in the following subsections of the chapter.

THE CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Behavioral, physical, and psychological dependence (see terminology below)
are the hallmark of substance use disorders. While the direct effects of a


<<<PAGE 869>>>
substance on behavioral, physical, and psychological function will vary
depending on the particular substance used, the overall impact of the
substance in causing impaired functioning has a similar pattern, regardless of
substance. The symptoms typically fall within one of four categories,
including pharmacologic symptoms, symptoms of impaired use, impairment
in social domains, and use in risky or hazardous situations.
Terminology
Various terms have been used over the years to refer to drug abuse. For
example, the term dependence has been and is used in one of two ways when
discussing substance use disorders. In behavioral dependence, the emphasis
is on substance-seeking activities and related evidence of pathologic use
patterns, whereas physical dependence refers to the physical (physiologic)
effects of multiple episodes of substance use. Psychological dependence, also
referred to as habituation, is characterized by a continuous or intermittent
craving (i.e., intense desire) for the substance to avoid a dysphoric state.
Somewhat related to dependence are the words addiction and addict. The
word addict has acquired a pejorative connotation that ignores the concept of
substance abuse as a medical disorder. The internet and other popular
mediums have trivialized Addiction, as in the terms TV addiction and
chocolate addiction (or more commonly, “chocoholic”); however, the term
still has value. There are common neurochemical and neuroanatomical
substrates found among all addictions, whether it is to substances or
gambling, sex, stealing, or eating. These various addictions may have similar
effects on the activities of specific reward areas of the brain.

DIAGNOSIS
There are three major diagnostic categories in the DSM-5: (1) Substance Use
Disorder; (2) Substance Intoxication; (3) Substance Withdrawal. Also, DSM
includes a category of Substance-Induced Mental Disorder, to account for
presentations of a psychiatric disorder that are likely due to a substance. This
possibility is among the standard rule out criteria for most DSM-5 and ICD10 mental disorders.
For both DSM-5 and ICD-10, the diagnoses are generic and do not differ
among substances. Thus, we believe it is preferable to understand the overall


<<<PAGE 870>>>
diagnostic criteria, with the understanding that we can then apply them to
each of the substances discussed in later sections. In DSM-5, the disorders
are substance-specific. Therefore, when diagnosing a disorder, the clinician
should indicate the specific substance or drug used or that caused intoxication
or withdrawal.
Substance Use Disorder
Substance use disorder is the diagnostic term for the prolonged use and abuse
of a substance. When used, the specific substance is identified, for example,
“alcohol use disorder” or “opioid use disorder.”
Table 4-1 lists the diagnostic approaches to substance use disorder in
DSM-5 and ICD-10.
Substance Intoxication
Substance intoxication is the diagnosis used to describe a syndrome
characterized by specific signs and symptoms resulting from recent ingestion
or exposure to the substance. As with substance use disorder, in practice, the
specific substance is identified, for example, “alcohol intoxication” or
“opioid intoxication.” Table 4-2 lists the diagnostic approaches to substance
intoxication in DSM-5 and ICD-10.
Substance Withdrawal
Substance withdrawal is the diagnosis used to describe a substance-specific
syndrome that results from the abrupt cessation of heavy and prolonged use
of a substance. As with substance use disorder, in practice, the specific
substance is identified, for example, “alcohol withdrawal” or “opioid
withdrawal.” Table 4-3 lists the diagnostic approaches to substance
withdrawal in DSM-5 and ICD-10.
Table 4-1
Substance Use Disorder
Substance Use Disorder
Disorder

DSM-5

ICD-10


<<<PAGE 871>>>
Diagnostic name Alcohol use disorder
Cannabis use disorder
Hallucinogen use disorder
Inhalant use disorder
Opioid use disorder
Sedative/hypnotic/anxiolytic
use disorder
Stimulant use disorder
Tobacco use disorder

Mental and
behavioral
disorders due to
• Use of alcohol
• Use of opioids
• Use of
cannabinoids
• Use of
sedatives or
hypnotics
• Use of cocaine
• Use of other
stimulants,
including
caffeine
• Use of
hallucinogens
• Use of tobacco
• Use of volatile
solvents
Indicate if includes
a dependence
syndrome

Duration

Symptoms occur within 12
mo

Symptoms

Physiologic Symptoms:
Tolerance and
withdrawal states
1. Tolerance
2. Withdrawal (does not apply Adverse health
effects of use:
to inhalants and
physiologic,
hallucinogens)
cognitive or
Symptoms typical of addiction
behavioral
or obsessive use
Craving or difficulty
3. Craving to use
controlling


<<<PAGE 872>>>
4. Using more than intended
substance use
5. Difficulty stopping or
Use despite
reducing use
acknowledging
adverse
6. Spending significant time
consequences of
devoted to the substance
use
(using, obtaining,
recovering)
Prioritizing the
substance over
7. Use despite acknowledging
other
health problems (physical,
psychosocial
mental) because of use
obligations
Psychosocial sequelae of use
8. Using despite social,
occupational or other
adverse consequences
9. Neglecting other
responsibilities because of
use
10. Neglecting other activities
because of use
11. Risky or dangerous
behaviors or situations
because of use
Required
number of
symptoms

Two or more of the above

Psychosocial
Marked impairment and/or
consequences
distress
of symptoms
Exclusions

Psychotic state
Nonalcoholic
Korsakoff
psychosis or
syndrome


<<<PAGE 873>>>
Symptom
specifiers

In a controlled
Associated
environment: (i.e., access
specifiers:
to the substance is
Psychotic
restricted)
disorder
(following
On maintenance therapy:
substance use)
(tobacco or opioids)
Amnesic
For hallucinogens or
syndrome
inhalants, specify the
(chronic
specific substance
memory loss
because of
use)

Course
specifiers

In early remission: no
symptoms for 3–12 mo
(craving may still be
present)
In sustained remission: no
symptoms for >12 mo
(craving may still be
present)

Severity
specifiers

Severity is measured by the
number of symptoms
present.
See DSM-5 for ranges.

Comments

Applies to the following
substances:
• Alcohol
• Cannabis
• Opioids
• Sedatives, hypnotics,
anxiolytics
• Stimulants
• Hallucinogens

Note: ICD
additionally
defines “harmful
use” as pattern of
use causing harm
to health, both
physical and/or
mental. This
classification is
independent of


<<<PAGE 874>>>
• Inhalants
• Tobacco

presence of a
dependence
syndrome.

Table 4-2
Substance Intoxication
Substance Intoxication
Disorder

DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic
name

Alcohol intoxication
Caffeine intoxication
Cannabis intoxication
Hallucinogen intoxication
Inhalant intoxication
Opioid intoxication
Sedative/hypnotic/anxiolytic
intoxication
Stimulant intoxication

Mental and
behavioral
disorders due to
• Use of alcohol
• Use of opioids
• Use of
cannabinoids
• Use of
sedatives or
hypnotics
• Use of cocaine
• Use of other
stimulants,
including
caffeine
• Use of
hallucinogens
• Use of tobacco
• Use of volatile
solvents
Indicate if acute
intoxication

Duration

Not specified

Not specified


<<<PAGE 875>>>
Symptoms

Recent use of substance
Mood or behavioral problems
resulting from that use
One or more substance-specific
symptoms of intoxication (see
individual substances for
descriptions of the intoxication
state)

Some mental
change resulting
from substance
use: cognitive,
psychological or
behavioral
Symptoms due to
the substance
resolve when
stopped

Required
Specific to substance:
number of
Stimulants: ≥2
symptoms
Caffeine: ≥5 or more symptoms
Sedative/hypnotic/anxiolytics:
≥1
Opioids: ≥1
Inhalants: ≥2
Hallucinogens: ≥2 plus change
in perception or alertness
Cannabis: ≥2
Alcohol: ≥1
Exclusions

Medical condition
Other mental disorder
Intoxication with another
substance

Symptom
For cannabis, opioids, or
specifiers
stimulants: with perceptual
disturbance: hallucinations but
no loss or reality testing and
not delirious
Comments

Applies to the following
substances:
• Alcohol

Intoxication due to
poisoning


<<<PAGE 876>>>
• Cannabis
• Opioids
• Sedatives, hypnotics,
anxiolytics
• Stimulants
• Hallucinogens
• Inhalants
• Caffeine

COMORBIDITY
Comorbidity is the occurrence of two or more psychiatric disorders in a
single patient at the same time. People seeking treatment for alcohol, cocaine,
or opioid dependence have a high prevalence of additional psychiatric
disorders; some studies have shown that up to 50 percent of addicts have a
comorbid psychiatric disorder. Although opioid, cocaine, and alcohol abusers
with current psychiatric problems are more likely to seek treatment, those
who do not seek treatment are not necessarily free of comorbid psychiatric
problems; such persons may have social supports that enable them to deny
the impact that drug use is having on their lives. Two extensive
epidemiologic studies have shown that even among representative samples of
the population, those who meet the criteria for alcohol or drug abuse and
dependence (excluding tobacco dependence) are also far more likely to meet
the criteria for other psychiatric disorders.
In various studies, a range of 35 to 60 percent of patients with substance
abuse or substance dependence also meet the diagnostic criteria for antisocial
personality disorder. The range is even higher when investigators include
persons who meet all the antisocial personality disorder diagnostic criteria,
except the requirement that the symptoms started at an early age. That is, a
high percentage of patients with substance abuse or substance dependence
diagnoses have a pattern of antisocial behavior, whether it was present before
the substance use started or developed during substance use. Patients with
substance abuse or substance dependence diagnoses who have antisocial
personality disorder are likely to use more illegal substances; to have more
psychopathology; to be less satisfied with their lives; and to be more


<<<PAGE 877>>>
impulsive, isolated, and depressed than patients with antisocial personality
disorders alone.
Table 4-3
Substance Withdrawal
Withdrawal
Disorder

DSM-5

Diagnostic name Alcohol withdrawal
Caffeine withdrawal
Cannabis withdrawal
Opioid withdrawal
Sedative/hypnotic/anxiolytic
withdrawal
Stimulant withdrawal
Tobacco withdrawal

ICD-10
Mental and
behavioral
disorders due
to
• Use of
alcohol
• Use of
opioids
• Use of
cannabinoids
• Use of
sedatives or
hypnotics
• Use of
cocaine
• Use of other
stimulants,
including
caffeine
• Use of
hallucinogens
• Use of
tobacco
• Use of
volatile
solvents


<<<PAGE 878>>>
Indicate
withdrawal
state
Duration

Onset is specific to substance:
sedatives/hypnotics/anxiolytics,
stimulants: hours to days
alcohol and cannabis: none listed
opioids: minutes to days
caffeine, tobacco: within 24 hr

Symptoms

No or reduced use after prolonged
or heavy use
Substance-specific symptoms (see
individual substances for typical
symptoms of withdrawal)

Required
number of
symptoms

Specific to substance:
sedatives/hypnotics/anxiolytics:
≥2
alcohol: ≥2
stimulants: ≥2 plus dysphoric
mood
opioids: ≥3
caffeine: ≥3

• Group of
symptoms
occurring
with
cessation or
reduction of a
substance
following
period of
prolonged
and/or
regular use
• Symptoms
are time
limited and
substancespecific


<<<PAGE 879>>>
cannabis: ≥3
tobacco: ≥4
Psychosocial
Distress and/or impairment in
consequences
functioning
of symptoms
Exclusions

Medical condition
Other mental disorder
Intoxication with or withdrawal from
another substance

Symptom
specifiers

For alcohol and
Withdrawal state
sedative/hypnotic/anxiolytic
with delirium
withdrawal: with perceptual
disturbance: hallucinations but no
loss or reality testing and not
delirious

Comments

Applies to the following substances:
• Alcohol
• Cannabis
• Opioids
• Sedatives, hypnotics,
anxiolytics
• Stimulants
• Tobacco
• Caffeine

Depression and Suicide
Depressive symptoms are common among persons diagnosed with substance
abuse or substance dependence. About one-third to one-half of all those with
opioid abuse or opioid dependence and about 40 percent of those with
alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence meet the criteria for major depressive
disorder sometime during their lives. Substance use is also a major
precipitating factor for suicide. Persons who abuse substances are about 20


<<<PAGE 880>>>
times more likely to die by suicide than the general population. About 15
percent of persons with alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence commit suicide.
This frequency of suicide is second only to the frequency in patients with
major depressive disorder.

TREATMENT APPROACH
Some persons who develop substance-related problems recover without
formal treatment, especially as they age. For those patients with less severe
disorders, such as nicotine addiction, relatively brief interventions are often
as effective as more intensive treatments. Because these brief interventions
do not change the environment, alter drug-induced brain changes, or provide
new skills, a change in the patient’s motivation (cognitive change) probably
has the best impact on the drug-using behavior. For those individuals who do
not respond or whose dependence is more severe, a variety of interventions
described below appear to be effective.
It is useful to distinguish among specific procedures or techniques (e.g.,
individual therapy, family therapy, group therapy, relapse prevention, and
pharmacotherapy) and treatment programs. Most programs use several
specific procedures and involve a variety of professional disciplines as well
as nonprofessionals who have special skills or personal experience with the
specific substance problem. The best treatment programs combine specific
procedures and disciplines with meeting the needs of the individual patient
after a careful assessment.
There is no generally accepted classification system for either the specific
procedures used in treatment or programs using various combinations of
procedures. This lack of standardized terminology for categorizing
procedures and programs presents a problem, even when we narrow the field
of interest to treatment for a single substance, such as alcohol, tobacco, or
cocaine. Except in carefully monitored research projects, even the definitions
of specific procedures (e.g., individual counseling, group therapy, and
methadone maintenance) tend to be so imprecise that usually just what
transactions occur cannot be inferred. Nevertheless, for descriptive purposes,
programs are often broadly grouped based on one or more of their salient
characteristics: whether the program aims to merely control acute withdrawal
and consequences of recent drug use (detoxification) or focuses on longer-


<<<PAGE 881>>>
term behavioral change (rehabilitation); whether the program makes
extensive use of pharmacologic interventions; and whether the program
mainly uses individual therapy, Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or other 12step principles, or therapeutic community principles. For example, the
National Institute on Drug Abuse suggested the following categories of
treatment: long-term residential treatment, short-term residential treatment,
outpatient treatment programs, individualized drug counseling, group
counseling, and treatments for individuals involved in the criminal justice
system.
Selecting a Treatment
Not all interventions apply to all types of substance use disorders, and some
of the more coercive interventions used for illicit drugs do not apply to legal
substances, such as tobacco. Addictive behaviors do not change abruptly but
through a series of stages. Experts propose five stages in this gradual process:
precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance. For
some types of addictions, the therapeutic alliance improves when the
treatment approach is tailored to the patient’s stage of readiness to change.
Interventions for some drug use disorders may have a specific pharmacologic
agent as a critical component; for example, disulfiram, naltrexone, or
acamprosate for alcoholism; methadone, levomethadyl acetate, or
buprenorphine for heroin addiction; and nicotine delivery devices,
varenicline, or bupropion for tobacco dependence.
In general, brief interventions (e.g., a few weeks of detoxification, whether
in or out of a hospital) used for persons who are severely dependent on illicit
opioids have limited effect on outcome measured a few months later.
Substantial reductions in illicit drug use, antisocial behaviors, and psychiatric
distress among patients dependent on cocaine or heroin are much more likely
following treatment lasting at least 3 months. Such a time-in-treatment effect
occurs across very different modalities, from residential therapeutic
communities to ambulatory methadone maintenance programs. Although
some patients appear to benefit from a few days or weeks of treatment, a
substantial percentage of users of illicit drugs drop out (or are dropped) from
treatment before they have achieved significant benefits.
Treatment outcomes vary widely; this is partly due to the great variety of


<<<PAGE 882>>>
patients that enter treatment as well as their circumstances. Programs based
on similar philosophical principles and using what seem to be similar
therapeutic procedures vary greatly in effectiveness, however. Some of the
differences among programs that seem to be similar reflect the range and
intensity of services offered. Programs with a professionally trained staff that
provide more comprehensive services to patients with more severe
psychiatric difficulties are more likely able to retain those patients in
treatment and help them make positive changes. Differences in the skills of
individual counselors and professionals can strongly affect outcomes.
Such generalizations concerning programs serving illicit drug users may
not hold for programs dealing with those seeking treatment for alcohol,
tobacco, or even cannabis problems uncomplicated by heavy use of illicit
drugs. In such cases, relatively brief periods of individual or group
counseling can produce long-lasting reductions in substance use. The
outcomes usually considered in programs dealing with illicit drugs have
typically included measures of social functioning, employment, and criminal
activity, as well as decreased drug-using behavior.
Treatment of Comorbidity
Treatment of the severely mentally ill (primarily those with schizophrenia
and schizoaffective disorders) who are also drug-dependent continues to pose
problems for clinicians. Although some specialized facilities use both
antipsychotic drugs and therapeutic community principles, for the most part,
specialized addiction agencies have difficulty treating these patients.
Generally, integrated treatment in which the same staff can treat both the
psychiatric disorder and the addiction is more effective than either parallel
treatment (mental health and a specialty addiction program providing care
concurrently) or sequential treatment (treating either the addiction or the
psychiatric disorder first and then dealing with the comorbid condition).
Services and Outcome
The extension of managed care into the public sector has produced a
significant reduction in the use of hospital-based detoxification and the
virtual disappearance of residential rehabilitation programs for alcoholics.
Managed-care organizations, however, tend to assume that the relatively brief


<<<PAGE 883>>>
courses of outpatient counseling that are effective with private-sector
alcoholic patients are also useful with patients who are dependent on illicit
drugs and who have minimal social supports. For the present, the trend is to
provide the care that costs the least over the short term and to ignore studies
showing that more services can produce better long-term outcomes.
Treatment is often a worthwhile social expenditure. For example, the
treatment of antisocial illicit drug users in outpatient settings can decrease
antisocial behavior and reduce rates of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
seroconversion that more than offset the treatment cost. Treatment in a prison
setting can decrease postrelease costs associated with drug use and rearrests.
Despite such evidence, problems exist in maintaining public support for the
treatment of substance dependence in both the public and private sectors.
This lack of support suggests that these problems continue to be viewed, at
least in part, as moral failings rather than as medical disorders.
The Epidemiology of Substance Use Disorders
The National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA) and other agencies, such as the
National Survey of Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), conduct periodic surveys
of the use of illicit drugs in the United States. As of 2017, more than 19
million persons older than the age of 12 years (about 7 percent of the total US
population) had a substance-related disorder in the past year.
In general, more men than women abuse substances. Those who use
substances earlier are more likely to develop a disorder. Among ethnic and
racial groups in the United States, the highest lifetime rate is among
American Indian or Alaska Natives; whites are more affected than blacks or
African Americans. There is a sociodemographic effect as well. For example,
those with some college education use more substances than those with less
education, and the unemployed have higher rates than those with either parttime or full-time employment.
We will discuss the specific epidemiology of various substances in the
appropriate section. Also, a comprehensive survey of drug use and trends in
the United States is available at www.samhsa.gov.

ETIOLOGY
Substance use disorders are complicated psychiatric conditions, and, like


<<<PAGE 884>>>
other psychiatric disorders, both biologic factors and environmental
circumstances are etiologically significant.
The model of substance use disorders is the result of a process in which
multiple interacting factors influence drug-using behavior and the loss of
judgment for decisions about using a given drug. Although the actions of a
given drug are critical in the process, we cannot assume that all drugdependent people experience the effects of a particular drug similarly, or have
the same set of motivating factors. Furthermore, different factors may be
more or less important at different stages of the process. Thus, drug
availability, social acceptability, and peer pressures may be the significant
determinants of initial experimentation with a drug. However, other factors,
such as personality and individual biology, probably are more important in
how the effects of a given drug are perceived and the degree to which
repeated drug use produces changes in the central nervous system (CNS).
Still, other factors, including the particular actions of the drug, may represent
primary determinants of whether drug use progresses to drug dependence. In
contrast, others may still be valuable influences on the likelihood that drug
use (1) leads to adverse effects or (2) to successful recovery from
dependence.
We often hear the assertion that addiction is a “brain disease,” meaning
that the critical processes that transform voluntary drug-using behavior to
compulsive drug use are changes in the structure and neurochemistry of the
brain of the drug user. Sufficient evidence now indicates that such changes in
relevant parts of the brain do occur. The perplexing and unanswered question
is whether these changes are both necessary and sufficient to account for the
drug-using behavior. Many argue that they are not, that the capacity of drugdependent individuals to modify their drug-using behavior in response to
positive reinforcers or aversive contingencies indicates that the nature of
addiction is more complex and requires the interaction of multiple factors.
The central element of drug dependence is the drug-using behavior itself.
The decision to use a drug is influenced by immediate social and
psychological situations as well as by the person’s more remote history. The
use of the drug initiates a sequence of consequences that can be rewarding or
aversive and which, through a process of learning, can result in a greater or
lesser likelihood that the drug-using behavior will repeat. For some drugs, use
also initiates the biologic processes associated with tolerance, physical


<<<PAGE 885>>>
dependence, and sensitization. In turn, tolerance can reduce some of the
adverse effects of the drug, permitting or requiring the use of larger doses,
which then can accelerate or intensify the development of physical
dependence. Above a certain threshold, the aversive qualities of a withdrawal
syndrome provide a distinct recurrent motive for further drug use.
Sensitization of motivational systems can increase the salience of drugrelated stimuli.
The Neurobiology of Substance Use Disorders
Genetic Factors. Strong evidence from studies of twins, adoptees, and
siblings brought up separately indicates that the cause of alcohol abuse has a
genetic component. Many less conclusive data show that other types of
substance abuse or substance dependence have a genetic pattern in their
development. Researchers have used restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP) in the study of substance use disorders, and
preliminary results show associations with genes that affect dopamine
production.
Neurochemical Factors
RECEPTORS AND RECEPTOR SYSTEMS. Except for alcohol, researchers have

identified particular neurotransmitters or neurotransmitter receptors involved
with most substances of abuse. Some researchers base their studies on such
hypotheses. The opioids, for example, act on opioid receptors. A person with
too little endogenous opioid activity (e.g., low concentrations of endorphins)
or with too much activity of an endogenous opioid antagonist may be at risk
for developing an opioid use disorder. Even in a person with completely
normal endogenous receptor function and neurotransmitter concentration, the
long-term use of a particular substance of abuse may eventually modulate
receptor systems in the brain so that the presence of the exogenous substance
is needed to maintain homeostasis. Such a receptor-level process may be the
mechanism for developing tolerance within the CNS. Demonstrating
modulation of neurotransmitter release and neurotransmitter receptor function
has proved difficult, however, and recent research focuses on the effects of
substances on the second-messenger system and gene regulation.


<<<PAGE 886>>>
Pathways and Neurotransmitters. The primary neurotransmitters
possibly involved in developing substance use disorders are the opioid,
catecholamine (mainly dopamine), and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
systems. The dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) are
particularly important. These neurons project to the cortical and limbic
regions, especially the nucleus accumbens. This pathway is probably
involved in the sensation of reward and may represent the primary mediator
of the effects of such substances as amphetamine and cocaine. The locus
ceruleus, the largest group of adrenergic neurons, probably mediates the
effects of the opiates and the opioids. These pathways have collectively been
called the brain-reward circuitry.
The Psychology of Substance Use Disorders
Psychodynamic Factors. The range of psychodynamic theories about
substance abuse reflects the various popular theories during the last 100
years. According to classic theories, substance abuse is a masturbatory
equivalent (some heroin users describe the initial “rush” as similar to a
prolonged sexual orgasm), a defense against anxious impulses, or a
manifestation of oral regression (i.e., dependency). New psychodynamic
formulations relate substance use as a reflection of disturbed ego functions
(i.e., the inability to deal with reality). As a form of self-medication, alcohol
may control panic, opioids may diminish anger, and amphetamines may
alleviate depression. Some addicts have great difficulty recognizing their
inner emotional states, a condition called alexithymia (i.e., being unable to
find words to describe their feelings).
Learning and Conditioning. Drug use, whether occasional or
compulsive, can be viewed as behavior maintained by its consequences.
Drugs can reinforce antecedent behaviors by terminating some noxious or
aversive state such as pain, anxiety, or depression. In some social situations,
drug use, apart from its pharmacologic effects, can be reinforced if it results
in special status or the approval of friends. Each use of the drug evokes rapid
positive reinforcement, either as a result of the rush (the drug-induced
euphoria), alleviation of disturbed affects, alleviation of withdrawal
symptoms, or any combination of these effects. Also, some drugs may


<<<PAGE 887>>>
sensitize neural systems to the reinforcing effects of the drug. Eventually, the
paraphernalia (needles, bottles, cigarette packs) and behaviors associated with
substance use can become secondary reinforcers, as well as cues signaling the
availability of the substance, and in their presence, craving or a desire to
experience the effects increases.
Drug users respond to the drug-related stimuli with increased activity in
limbic regions, including the amygdala and the anterior cingulate. A variety
of drugs can have this effect, including cocaine, opioids, and cigarettes
(nicotine). Of interest, cocaine-related stimuli can activate the same regions
that are affected by sexual stimuli in both healthy controls and cocaine users.
In addition to the operant reinforcement of drug-using and drug-seeking
behaviors, other learning mechanisms probably play a role in dependence and
relapse. Opioid and alcohol withdrawal phenomena can be conditioned (in
the Pavlovian or classical sense) to environmental or interoceptive stimuli.
For a long time after withdrawal (from opioids, nicotine, or alcohol), the
addict exposed to environmental stimuli previously linked with substance use
or withdrawal may experience conditioned withdrawal, conditioned craving,
or both. The feeling of craving may be independent of feelings of withdrawal.
Conditions associated with the availability or use of a substance, such as
watching someone else use heroin or light a cigarette or being offered some
drug by a friend, bring about the most intense craving. Preexisting
pathologies may superimpose on those learning and conditioning phenomena;
however, the development of powerfully reinforced substance-seeking
behavior does not require preexisting difficulties.

4.2 Alcohol-Related Disorders
Alcohol is a potent drug that causes both acute and chronic changes in almost
all neurochemical systems. Thus alcohol abuse can produce severe,
temporary psychological symptoms including depression, anxiety, and
psychoses. Increasing levels of regular alcohol consumption can cause
tolerance. Chronic use can cause such intense adaptation of the body that
stopping drinking can precipitate withdrawal syndromes, including insomnia,
autonomic nervous system hyperactivity, and anxiety. Therefore, in an


<<<PAGE 888>>>
adequate evaluation of life problems and psychiatric symptoms in a patient,
the clinician must consider the possibility that the clinical situation reflects
the effects of alcohol.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
The DSM-5 and ICD-10 include several diagnoses related to alcohol, they
generally follow the template for all substance use disorders (see Section 4.1
and Tables 4-1 through 4-3). A need for daily use of large amounts of alcohol
for adequate functioning, a regular pattern of heavy drinking limited to
weekends, and long periods of sobriety interspersed with binges of heavy
alcohol intake lasting for weeks or months strongly suggest an alcohol use
disorder. The drinking patterns are often associated with certain behaviors:
the inability to cut down or stop drinking; repeated efforts to control or
reduce excessive drinking by “going on the wagon” (periods of temporary
abstinence) or by restricting drinking to certain times of the day; binges (e.g.,
remaining intoxicated throughout the day for at least 2 days); occasional
consumption of large amounts of alcohol in a sitting (e.g., a fifth of spirits or
the equivalent in wine or beer); amnestic periods for events occurring while
intoxicated (blackouts); the continuation of drinking despite a severe physical
disorder that the person knows the alcohol is exacerbating; and drinking
nonbeverage alcohol, such as fuel and commercial products containing
alcohol. Also, persons with alcohol use disorders show impaired social or
occupational functioning because of alcohol use (e.g., violence while
intoxicated, absence from work, job loss), legal difficulties (e.g., arrest for
intoxicated behavior and traffic accidents while intoxicated), and arguments
or difficulties with family members or friends about excessive alcohol
consumption.
Mark, a 45-year-old divorced man, was examined in a hospital
emergency room because he had been confused and unable to care for
himself for the preceding 3 days. His brother, who brought him to the
hospital, reported that the patient had consumed large quantities of beer
and wine daily for more than 5 years. His home life and job were
reasonably stable until his divorce 5 years prior. The brother indicated


<<<PAGE 889>>>
that Mark’s drinking pattern since the divorce had been approximately
five beers and a fourth of wine a day. Mark often experienced blackouts
from drinking and missed days of work frequently. As a result, Mark has
lost several jobs in the past 5 years. Although he usually provides for
himself marginally with small jobs, 3 days earlier, he ran out of money
and alcohol and resorted to panhandling on the streets for cash to buy
food. Mark had been poorly nourished, having one meal per day at best,
and was relying on beer as his prime source of nourishment.
On examination, Mark alternates between apprehension and chatty,
superficial warmth. He is keyed up and continually talks in a rambling
and unfocused manner. His recognition of the physician varies; at times,
he recognizes him, and other times he becomes confused and believes the
doctor to be his other brother who lives in another state. On two
occasions, he referred to the physician by said brother’s name and asked
when he arrived in town, evidently having lost track of the interview up
to that point. He has a gross hand tremor at rest and is confused about the
time. He believes he is in a parking lot rather than a hospital. Efforts at
memory and calculation testing fail because Mark’s attention shifts so
rapidly.
Table 4-4
Levels of Impairment
Concentrations
Level
(mg/dL)

at

Different

Blood

Alcohol

Likely Impairment

20–30

Slowed motor performance and decreased thinking
ability

30–80

Increases in motor and cognitive problems

80–200

Increases in incoordination and judgment errors
Mood lability
Deterioration in cognition

200–300

Nystagmus, marked slurring of speech, and alcoholic


<<<PAGE 890>>>
blackouts
>300

Impaired vital signs and possible death

Alcohol Intoxication
The DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for alcohol intoxication use the standard
approach for all substance intoxications (see Section 4.1 and Table 4-3) and
include evidence of recent ingestion of ethanol, maladaptive behavior, and at
least one of several possible physiologic correlates of intoxication. As a
conservative approach to identifying blood levels that are likely to have
significant effects on driving abilities, the legal definition of intoxication in
most states in the United States requires a blood concentration of 80- or 100mg ethanol per deciliter of blood (mg/dL), which is the same as 0.08 to 0.10
g/dL. Table 4-4 lists the rough estimates of the levels of impairment likely to
be seen at various blood alcohol concentrations for most people. Anyone who
does not show significant levels of impairment in motor and mental
performance at approximately 150 mg/dL probably has significant
pharmacodynamic tolerance.
Alcohol Withdrawal
Alcohol withdrawal, even without delirium, can be severe; it can include
seizures and autonomic hyperactivity. Conditions that may predispose to, or
aggravate, withdrawal symptoms include fatigue, malnutrition, physical
illness, and depression. The DSM-5 criteria for alcohol withdrawal require
the cessation or reduction of alcohol use that was heavy and prolonged as
well as the presence of specific physical or neuropsychiatric symptoms. The
diagnosis also allows for the specification “with perceptual disturbances.”
The classic sign of alcohol withdrawal is tremulousness. However, the
spectrum of symptoms can expand to include psychotic and perceptual
symptoms (e.g., delusions and hallucinations), seizures, and the symptoms of
delirium tremens (DTs), called alcohol delirium in DSM-5.
Table 4-5 outlines the progression of alcohol withdrawal from mild to life
threatening symptoms. These are rough approximates, and there is great
variation, for example, the syndrome of withdrawal sometimes skips the
usual progression and, for example, goes directly to DTs.


<<<PAGE 891>>>
Table 4-5
The Progression of Alcohol Withdrawal Symptoms
Symptoms

Usual Time to Present

Mild

Tremulousness

6–8 hr

Moderate

Perceptual disturbances

8–12 hr

Severe

Seizures

12–24 hr

Life threatening Delirium tremens

Within 72 hr

The tremor of alcohol withdrawal can be similar to either physiologic
tremor, with a continuous tremor of high amplitude and of more than 8 Hz, or
familial tremor, with bursts of tremor activity slower than 8 Hz. Other
symptoms of withdrawal include general irritability and gastrointestinal (GI)
symptoms (e.g., nausea and vomiting). Also standard are symptoms of
autonomic hyperactivity, including anxiety, arousal, sweating, facial flushing,
mydriasis, tachycardia, and mild hypertension. Patients experiencing alcohol
withdrawal are generally alert but may startle easily.
Twenty-nine-year-old Mr. F had been a heavy drinker for 8 years. One
evening after work, he started drinking with friends and drank throughout
the evening. He fell asleep in the early morning hours and, upon
awakening, had a strong desire to drink and decided not to attend work.
He had several Bloody Mary’s instead of food because the food did not
appeal to him. He went to a local bar in the afternoon and consumed large
quantities of beer. That evening he met with some friends and continued
to drink.
This drinking pattern continued for the next week. At the beginning of
the following week, Mr. F attempted to have a cup of coffee but found his
hands too shaky to hold the cup. He eventually managed to pour himself
some wine in a glass and drank as much as he could. His hands then
became less shaky, but he now felt nauseous and began having dry
heaves. He tried to drink repeatedly, but he could not keep the alcohol
down. He felt very ill and anxious, so he contacted his physician, who


<<<PAGE 892>>>
recommended he report to a hospital.
Upon evaluation, Mr. F was alert. He had a marked resting and
intention tremor of the hands, and his tongue and eyelids were tremulous.
He was oriented and had no memory impairment. When inquired about
his drinking, Mr. F admitted to drinking several drinks each day for the
past 8 years but claimed that his drinking never interfered with his work
or his relations with colleagues or friends. He denied having any
aftereffects from his drinking other than mild hangovers. He denied ever
having a binge such as this before and denied ever needing to drink daily
to function adequately. He admitted, however, that he has never tried to
reduce or stop drinking.
Withdrawal Seizures. Seizures associated with alcohol withdrawal are
stereotyped, generalized, and tonic–clonic in character. Patients often have
more than one seizure 3 to 6 hours after the first seizure. Status epilepticus is
relatively rare and occurs in less than 3 percent of patients. Seizure activity in
patients with known alcohol abuse histories should still prompt clinicians to
consider other causative factors, such as head injuries, CNS infections, CNS
neoplasms, and other cerebrovascular diseases. Long-term severe alcohol
abuse can result in hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, and hypomagnesemia—all
of which can also be associated with seizures.
Delirium. We should always carefully monitor patients with recognized
alcohol withdrawal symptoms to prevent progression to alcohol withdrawal
delirium, the most severe form of the withdrawal syndrome, also known as
DTs. Alcohol withdrawal delirium is a medical emergency that can result in
significant morbidity and mortality. Patients with delirium are a danger to
themselves and others. Because of the unpredictability of their behavior,
patients with delirium may be assaultive or suicidal. They may act on
hallucinations or delusional thoughts as if they were genuine dangers.
Untreated, DTs have a mortality rate of 20 percent. This high rate of
mortality is usually a result of an intercurrent medical illness such as
pneumonia, renal disease, hepatic insufficiency, or heart failure. Although
withdrawal seizures commonly precede the development of alcohol
withdrawal delirium, delirium can also appear unheralded. The essential


<<<PAGE 893>>>
feature of the syndrome is delirium occurring within 1 week after a person
stops drinking or reduces the intake of alcohol. In addition to the symptoms
of delirium, the features of alcohol intoxication delirium include a variety of
symptoms, including autonomic symptoms, perceptual, and psychomotor. We
list these in Table 4-6.
Table 4-6
Delirium Tremens Symptoms
Delirium
Confusion
Disorientation
Hallucinations (tactile common)
Delusions
Autonomic hyperactivity
Tachycardia
Diaphoresis
Fever
Hypertension
Anxiety
Insomnia
Fluctuating levels of psychomotor activity (ranging from lethargy to
agitation)
About 5 percent of hospital patients with alcohol-related disorders have
DTs. Because the syndrome usually develops on the third hospital day, a
patient admitted for an unrelated condition may unexpectedly have an
episode of delirium; this may be the first sign of a previously undiagnosed
alcohol-related disorder. Episodes of DTs usually begin in a patient’s 30s or
40s after 5 to 15 years of heavy drinking, typically of the binge type. Physical
illness (e.g., hepatitis or pancreatitis) predisposes to the syndrome; a person
in good physical health rarely has DTs during alcohol withdrawal.
R, a 40-year-old man, was admitted to the orthopedic department of a


<<<PAGE 894>>>
general hospital after experiencing a fall down his stairs and breaking his
leg. On the third day of his hospital stay, he became increasingly nervous
and started to tremble. He was unable to sleep at night, talked
incoherently, and was very anxious. Mr. R, when asked, denied an
alcohol problem other than an occasional glass of wine.
When asked directly, his wife admitted that Mr. R drank large
quantities of wine for over 4 years. During the previous year, his drinking
would begin every evening when he came home from work and would
not end until he fell asleep. On the evening of admission, the fall
occurred before he was able to consume any alcohol.
During the few weeks before his admission, Mr. R had eaten very
little. On several occasions, Mrs. R noticed that Mr. R was unable to
recall even essential events from the previous day. He had a car accident
3 years prior but without significant injury. Mr. R had no other major
health problems. His relationship with Mrs. R became problematic after
he began drinking, and Mrs. R was seriously contemplating divorce. Mr.
R had a tense relationship with his four children, and he often argued
with them. Recently, the children have been trying to avoid Mr. R as
much as possible.
On examination, Mr. R’s speech was rambling and incoherent. He
believed that he was still at work and that he had a job to finish. At times
he thought the physicians and nurses were his coworkers. At times he
picked at bugs that he could see on his bedsheets. He was disoriented in
time and was startled easily by sounds from outside the room. He was
sweating profusely and could not hold a glass without spilling some of
the contents.
Alcohol-Induced Disorders
Alcohol-Induced Persisting Dementia. Alcohol-induced persisting
dementia is a poorly studied, heterogeneous long-term cognitive problem that
can develop in the course of alcoholism. Patients have decreased intellectual
functioning, cognitive abilities, and memory. Recent memory difficulties are
consistent with global cognitive impairment, an observation that helps to
distinguish this from alcohol-induced persisting amnestic disorder. Brain


<<<PAGE 895>>>
functioning tends to improve with abstinence, but perhaps half of all affected
patients have long-term and even permanent disabilities in memory and
thinking. Approximately 50 to 70 percent of these patients have increased
brain ventricles and shrinkage of the cerebral sulci. However, these changes
appear to be wholly or partially reversible after a year of abstinence.
Alcohol-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder. The essential feature
of alcohol-induced persisting amnestic disorder is a disturbance in short-term
memory caused by prolonged heavy use of alcohol. Because the disorder
usually occurs in persons who have been drinking heavily for many years, it
is rare in persons younger than age 35.
WERNICKE–KORSAKOFF SYNDROME. The classic names for alcohol-induced

persisting amnestic disorder are Wernicke encephalopathy (a set of acute
symptoms) and Korsakoff syndrome (a chronic condition). Whereas
Wernicke encephalopathy is entirely reversible with treatment, only about 20
percent of patients with Korsakoff syndrome recover. The pathophysiologic
connection between the two syndromes is thiamine deficiency, caused either
by poor nutritional habits or by malabsorption problems. Thiamine is a
cofactor for several critical enzymes and may also be involved in the
conduction of the axon potential along the axon and synaptic transmission.
The neuropathologic lesions are symmetrical and paraventricular, involving
the mammillary bodies, the thalamus, the hypothalamus, the midbrain, pons,
medulla, fornix, and cerebellum.
Wernicke encephalopathy, also called alcoholic encephalopathy, is an
acute neurologic disorder characterized by ataxia (affecting the gait
primarily), vestibular dysfunction, confusion, and a variety of ocular motility
abnormalities, including horizontal nystagmus, lateral orbital palsy, and gaze
palsy. These eye signs are usually bilateral but not necessarily symmetrical.
Other eye signs may include a sluggish reaction to light and anisocoria
(unequal pupillary size). Wernicke encephalopathy may clear spontaneously
in a few days or weeks or may progress to Korsakoff syndrome.
Korsakoff syndrome is the chronic amnestic syndrome that can follow
Wernicke encephalopathy. The cardinal features of Korsakoff syndrome are
impaired mental syndrome (especially recent memory) and anterograde
amnesia in an alert and responsive patient. The patient may or may not have


<<<PAGE 896>>>
the symptom of confabulation.
Blackouts. Blackouts are similar to episodes of transient global amnesia in
that they are discrete episodes of anterograde amnesia that occur in
association with alcohol intoxication. The periods of amnesia can be
particularly distressing when persons fear that they have unknowingly
harmed someone or behaved imprudently while intoxicated. During a
blackout, persons have relatively intact remote memory but experience a
specific short-term memory deficit in which they are unable to recall events
that happened in the previous 5 or 10 minutes. Because their other intellectual
faculties are well preserved, they can perform complicated tasks and appear
normal to casual observers. This deficit is directly caused by alcohol, which
can block the consolidation of new memories into old memories, a process
that likely involves the hippocampus and related temporal lobe structures.
Alcohol-Induced Psychotic Disorder. Approximately 3 percent of
alcoholic persons experience auditory hallucinations or paranoid delusions in
the context of heavy drinking or withdrawal. The most common auditory
hallucinations are voices, but they are often unstructured. The voices are
characteristically maligning, reproachful, or threatening, although some
patients report that the voices are pleasant. The hallucinations usually last less
than a week, but during that week, impaired reality testing is frequent. After
the episode, most patients realize the hallucinatory nature of the symptoms.
Hallucinations after alcohol withdrawal are considered rare, and the
syndrome is distinct from alcohol withdrawal delirium in that the patient has
a clear sensorium. The hallucinations can occur at any age but usually, appear
in persons abusing alcohol for a long time. Although the hallucinations
usually resolve within a week, some linger; in these cases, clinicians must
consider other psychotic disorders in the differential diagnosis.
Mr. G was a 40-year-old unemployed man living alone in a studio
apartment and was brought to the hospital by the police. He contacted
them, complaining that he heard voices of men on the street below his
window talking about him and threatening to kill him. He stated that
every time he looked out the window, the men had always disappeared.


<<<PAGE 897>>>
Mr. G had a 15-year history of almost daily alcohol use. He was
intoxicated each day and often experienced shakes upon awakening in the
morning. On the previous day, he had only one glass of beer instead of
his usual four because of gastrointestinal problems. He was fully alert and
oriented.
Alcohol-Induced Mood Disorder. Heavy intake of alcohol over several
days results in many of the symptoms observed in major depressive disorder,
but the intense sadness markedly improves within several days to 1 month of
abstinence. Eighty percent of people with alcoholism report having histories
of intense depression, including 30 to 40 percent who were depressed for two
or more weeks at a time. However, only 10 to 15 percent of alcoholic persons
have ever had depression that meets the criteria for major depressive disorder
when they have not been drinking heavily.
Even severe substance-induced depressions are likely to improve fairly
rapidly with abstinence, without specific treatment for the depression. A
logical approach for these substance-induced conditions is to teach the patient
how to best view and deal with the temporary sadness through education and
cognitive-behavioral treatment and to watch and wait at least 2 to 4 weeks
before starting antidepressant medications.
A primary care doctor requested a consult for a 42-year-old woman with
alcohol use disorder who complained of persisting severe depressive
symptoms despite 5 days of abstinence. In the initial stage of the
interview, she noted that she had “always been depressed” and felt that
she “drank to cope with the depressive symptoms.” Her current complaint
included a prominent sadness that had persisted for several weeks,
difficulties concentrating, initial and terminal insomnia, and a feeling of
hopelessness and guilt.
From a detailed discussion of the patient’s history, it became clear that
there had been no major depressive episodes before her mid-20s when
alcohol use disorder began. During 1 year of abstinence related to the
birth and infancy of her son, her mood had significantly improved. The
psychiatrist made a provisional diagnosis of an alcohol-induced mood
disorder.


<<<PAGE 898>>>
The psychiatrist offered the patient education, reassurance, and
cognitive therapy to help her to deal with the depressive symptoms but
did not prescribe antidepressant medications. The depressive symptoms
remained at their original intensity for several additional days and then
began to improve. After 3 weeks of abstinence, the patient was no longer
significantly depressed, although she had some minor mood swings for
several additional weeks. (Courtesy of Marc A. Shuckit, M.D.)
Alcohol-Induced Anxiety Disorder. Anxiety symptoms fulfilling the
diagnostic criteria for alcohol-induced anxiety disorder are also common in
the context of acute and protracted alcohol withdrawal. Almost 80 percent of
alcoholic persons report panic attacks during at least one acute withdrawal
episode; their complaints can, at times, be sufficiently intense for the
clinician to consider diagnosing panic disorder. Similarly, during the first 4
weeks or so of abstinence, people with severe alcohol problems are likely to
avoid some social situations for fear of being overwhelmed by anxiety (i.e.,
they have symptoms resembling social phobia); their problems can at times
be severe enough to resemble agoraphobia. However, when patients only
show symptoms of anxiety in the context of heavy drinking, or shortly after
abstinence, then the symptoms are likely to diminish and disappear over time.
A primary care physician referred a 48-year-old woman for evaluation
and treatment of her recent onset of panic attacks. These episodes
occurred two to three times per week over the preceding 6 months, with
each lasting typically between 10 and 20 minutes. Panic symptoms
occurred regardless of levels of life stress and were not due to any
medications or medical conditions. The workup included an evaluation of
her laboratory test values, which revealed a carbohydrate-deficient
transferrin (CDT) level of 28 U/L and a γ-glutamyltransferase value of
47. All other blood tests were within normal limits.
The atypical age of onset of the panic attacks, along with the blood
results, encouraged the clinician to probe further regarding the pattern of
alcohol-related life problems with both the patient and, separately, her
spouse. This approach revealed a history of alcohol use disorder with an
onset at approximately 35 years of age, with no evidence of panic


<<<PAGE 899>>>
disorder before that date. During her periods of abstinence, the patient
had no significant panic attacks after about 2 weeks. A working diagnosis
of an alcohol use disorder, severe with an alcohol-induced anxiety
disorder characterized by panic attacks, was made, and the patient was
encouraged to abstain. The psychiatrist also recommended that the
primary care doctor appropriately treat the patient for possible
withdrawal symptoms. Over the subsequent 3 weeks after a taper of
benzodiazepines used for the treatment of withdrawal, the panic
symptoms diminished in intensity and subsequently disappeared.
(Courtesy of Marc A. Schuckit, M.D.)
Alcohol-Induced Sexual Dysfunction. The formal diagnosis of
symptoms of sexual dysfunction associated with alcohol intoxication is
alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction, and we discuss this in the chapter on
sexual dysfunctions (see Chapter 16).
Alcohol-Induced Sleep Disorder. We discuss alcohol-induced sleep
disorders in the sleep disorders chapter (see Chapter 15).
Unspecified Alcohol-Related Disorder. The DSM-5 uses the diagnosis
of unspecified alcohol-related disorder for alcohol-related disorders that do
not meet the diagnostic criteria for any of the other diagnoses.
Table 4-7
Neurologic and Medical Complications of Alcohol Use
Alcohol intoxication
Acute intoxication
Pathologic intoxication (atypical, complicated, unusual)
Blackouts
Alcohol withdrawal syndromes
Tremulousness (the shakes or the jitters)
Alcoholic hallucinosis (horrors)
Withdrawal seizures (rum fits)
Delirium tremens (shakes)


<<<PAGE 900>>>
Nutritional diseases of the nervous system secondary to alcohol
abuse
Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome
Cerebellar degeneration
Peripheral neuropathy
Optic neuropathy (tobacco–alcohol amblyopia)
Pellagra
Alcoholic diseases of uncertain pathogenesis
Central pontine myelinolysis
Marchiafava–Bignami disease
Fetal alcohol syndrome
Myopathy
Alcoholic dementia
Alcoholic cerebral atrophy
Systemic diseases due to alcohol with secondary neurologic
complications
Liver disease
Hepatic encephalopathy
Acquired (non-Wilsonian) chronic hepatocerebral degeneration
Gastrointestinal diseases
Malabsorption syndromes
Postgastrectomy syndromes
Possible pancreatic encephalopathy
Cardiovascular diseases
Cardiomyopathy with potential cardiogenic emboli and
cerebrovascular disease
Arrhythmias and abnormal blood pressure leading to
cerebrovascular disease
Hematologic disorders
Anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia (could possibly lead to
hemorrhagic cerebrovascular disease)
Infectious disease, especially meningitis (especially pneumococcal
and meningococcal)
Hypothermia and hyperthermia
Hypotension and hypertension


<<<PAGE 901>>>
Respiratory depression and associated hypoxia
Toxic encephalopathies, including alcohol and other substances
Electrolyte imbalances leading to acute confusional states and,
rarely, local neurologic signs and symptoms
Hypoglycemia
Hyperglycemia
Hyponatremia
Hypercalcemia
Hypomagnesemia
Hypophosphatemia
Increased incidence of trauma
Epidural, subdural, and intracerebral hematoma
Spinal cord injury
Posttraumatic seizure disorders
Compressive neuropathies and brachial plexus injuries (Saturday
night palsies)
Posttraumatic symptomatic hydrocephalus (normal pressure
hydrocephalus)
Muscle crush injuries and compartmental syndromes
Other Alcohol-Related Neurologic Disorders. We are restricting our
discussion to the significant neuropsychiatric syndromes associated with
alcohol use. The complete list of neurologic syndromes is lengthy, Table 4-7
provides an example list of some neurologic and medical complications of
alcohol use.
Alcoholic pellagra encephalopathy is one diagnosis of potential interest to
psychiatrists presented with a patient who appears to have Wernicke–
Korsakoff syndrome but who does not respond to thiamine treatment. We list
the symptoms of alcoholic pellagra in Table 4-8.
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. Data indicate that women who are pregnant or
are breast-feeding should not drink alcohol. Fetal alcohol syndrome, the
leading cause of intellectual disability in the United States, occurs when
mothers who drink alcohol expose fetuses to alcohol in utero. The alcohol
inhibits intrauterine growth and postnatal development. Microcephaly,


<<<PAGE 902>>>
craniofacial malformations, and limb and heart defects are common in
affected infants. Short adult stature and development of a range of adult
maladaptive behavior are also associated with fetal alcohol syndrome.
Table 4-8
Possible Symptoms of Alcohol Pellagra
Confusion, ranging from mild to full delirium
Clouding of consciousness
Myoclonus
Oppositional hypertonias
Fatigue
Apathy
Irritability
Anorexia
Insomnia
Women with alcohol-related disorders have a 35 percent risk of having a
child with defects. Although the precise mechanism of the damage to the
fetus is unknown, the damage seems to result from exposure in utero to
ethanol or its metabolites; alcohol may also cause hormone imbalances that
increase the risk of abnormalities.
Laboratory Tests
The adverse effects of alcohol appear in standard laboratory tests, which can
be useful diagnostic aids in identifying persons with alcohol-related
disorders. Table 4-9 lists some of the more useful tests, all of which are
related to the damaging effects of alcohol.
Table 4-9
Laboratory Test Associated with Heavy Drinking
State Markers of Heavy Drinking Useful in Screening for AUDs
Test

Relevant Range
of Results


<<<PAGE 903>>>
γ-glutamyltransferase (GGT)
Carbohydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT)

>35.0 U/L
>3.0%

Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)

>91.0 μm3

Serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase
(aspartate aminotransferase)

>45.0 IU/L

Serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (alanine
aminotransferase)

>45.0 IU/L

COMORBIDITY
The psychiatric diagnoses most associated with alcohol-related disorders are
other substance-related disorders, antisocial personality disorder, mood
disorders, and anxiety disorders. Although the data are somewhat
controversial, most suggest that persons with alcohol-related disorders have a
markedly higher suicide rate than the general population.
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Researchers and clinicians have frequently reported a relation between
antisocial personality disorder and alcohol-related disorders. Some studies
suggest that antisocial personality disorder is particularly common in men
with an alcohol-related disorder and can precede the development of an
alcohol-related disorder. Other studies, however, suggest that antisocial
personality disorder and alcohol-related disorders are entirely distinct entities
that are not causally related.
Mood Disorders
About 30 to 40 percent of persons with an alcohol-related disorder meet the
diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder sometime during their
lifetimes. Depression is more common in women than in men with these
disorders. Several studies reported that depression is likely to occur in
patients with alcohol-related disorders who have a high daily consumption of
alcohol and a family history of alcohol abuse. Persons with alcohol-related
disorders and major depressive disorder are at significant risk for attempting


<<<PAGE 904>>>
suicide and are likely to have other substance-related disorder diagnoses.
Some clinicians recommend antidepressant drug therapy for depressive
symptoms that remain after 2 to 3 weeks of sobriety. Patients with bipolar
disorder are at risk of developing an alcohol-related disorder; they may use
alcohol to self-medicate their manic episodes.
Anxiety Disorders
Many persons use alcohol for its efficacy in alleviating anxiety. Although the
comorbidity between alcohol-related disorders and mood disorders is widely
recognized, perhaps 25 to 50 percent of all persons with alcohol-related
disorders also meet the diagnostic criteria for an anxiety disorder. Phobias
and panic disorder are particularly frequent comorbid diagnoses in these
patients. Persons with anxiety may use alcohol to self-medicate symptoms of
agoraphobia or social phobia. Still, an alcohol-related disorder is likely to
precede the development of panic disorder or generalized anxiety disorder.
Suicide
Most estimates of the prevalence of suicide among persons with alcoholrelated disorders range from 10 to 15 percent, although alcohol use itself may
be involved in a much higher percentage of suicides. Some investigators have
questioned whether the suicide rate among persons with alcohol-related
disorders is as high as the numbers suggest. Table 4-10 lists factors
associated with suicide among persons with alcohol-related disorders.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Between 10 and 40 percent of alcoholic persons enter some formal treatment
program. Several prognostic signs are favorable. Table 4-11 lists some of the
most predictive factors, and the combination of these predicts at least a 60
percent chance for one or more years of abstinence. Few studies have
documented the long-term course, but researchers agree that 1 year of
abstinence is associated with a good chance for continued abstinence over an
extended period. Alcoholic persons with severe drug problems (especially
intravenous drug use or cocaine or amphetamine use disorders) and those
who are homeless may have only a 10 to 15 percent chance of achieving 1


<<<PAGE 905>>>
year of abstinence, however.
Table 4-10
Factors Associated with Suicide in Persons with Alcohol
Use Disorder
Presence of a major depressive episode
Weak psychosocial support systems
A serious coexisting medical condition
Unemployment
Living alone
Accurately predicting whether any specific person will achieve or maintain
abstinence is impossible, but the prognostic factors listed earlier are
associated with an increased likelihood of abstinence. The factors reflecting
life stability, however, probably explain only 20 percent or less of the course
of alcohol use disorders. Many other factors, some that may be hard to
measure, also affect the clinical course significantly. These somewhat
intangible factors are likely to include motivational levels and the quality of
the patient’s social support system.
In general, alcoholic persons with preexisting independent major
psychiatric disorders—such as antisocial personality disorder, schizophrenia,
and bipolar disorder—are likely to run the course of their independent
psychiatric illness. Clinicians should treat the patient with bipolar disorder
who has alcoholism with appropriate pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy.
The same can be said for an antisocial personality disorder, schizophrenia, or
other psychiatric disorders. The goal is to minimize the symptoms of the
independent psychiatric disorder in the hope that better life stability will be
associated with a better prognosis for the patient’s alcohol problems.

TREATMENT OF ALCOHOL USE DISORDERS
Three general steps are involved in treating the alcoholic person:
intervention, detoxification, and rehabilitation. These approaches assume that
we have already addressed the patient’s medical functioning and addressed
any psychiatric emergencies. Thus, for example, an alcoholic person with


<<<PAGE 906>>>
symptoms of depression sufficiently severe to be suicidal requires inpatient
hospitalization for at least several days until the suicidal ideation disappears.
Similarly, a person presenting with cardiomyopathy, liver difficulties, or GI
bleeding first needs adequate treatment of the medical emergency.
The patient with alcohol use disorder must then be brought face-to-face
with the reality of the disorder (intervention), be detoxified if needed, and
begin rehabilitation. The essentials of these three steps for an alcoholic
person with independent psychiatric syndromes closely resemble the
approaches used for the primary alcoholic person without independent
psychiatric syndromes. In the former case, however, we should apply these
treatments after stabilizing the psychiatric disorder as much as possible.
Table 4-11
Alcohol Use Disorders: Positive Prognostic Signs
No premorbid antisocial personality disorder
Good psychosocial functioning
Stable job
Stable family
No legal problems
Adherence to treatment
Intervention
The goal of intervention is to use the principles of motivational interviewing
and brief interventions to help patients recognize the adverse consequences
likely to occur if they do not stop drinking. A discussion of the presenting
complaint (e.g., insomnia or depression) is a useful way to both show
empathy and enhance motivation for change. As part of an intervention, we
would emphasize how alcohol either created or contributed to these problems
and reassure the patient that abstinence is possible. If the person does not
respond to the first brief intervention or motivational interview, we can use
the same nonjudgmental but persistent approach each time an alcohol-related
problem arises. It is the persistence rather than exceptional interpersonal
skills that usually gets results. A single intervention is rarely sufficient. Most
alcoholic persons need a series of reminders of how alcohol contributed to


<<<PAGE 907>>>
each developing crisis before they seriously consider abstinence as a longterm option.
JP, a 47-year-old physician, was confronted regarding his alcohol-related
behaviors by his wife and 21-year-old daughter. They told him about his
slurred speech on several recent occasions when the daughter called
home, as well as a large number of wine bottles in the trash each week.
JP’s wife complained of the hours he spent alone in his study and his
practice of staying up after she went to bed, retiring later with alcohol on
his breath. She also related her concern about his consumption of about
10 or 12 drinks at a recent party. He also tended to isolate himself from
the other guests. She then reminded him of his need to pack liquor when
they go on trips where alcohol may not be readily available, and the
tremor of his hands some mornings after being drunk the night before.
The family shared their concern directly with JP at a time when he was
not actively intoxicated, emphasizing specific times and events when his
impairment with alcohol occurred. They had also made an appointment
with the clinician at an alcohol and drug treatment program to facilitate
the next step if the intervention was successful. (Adapted from Marc A.
Schuckit, M.D.)
Detoxification
Most persons with alcohol use disorder have relatively mild symptoms when
they stop drinking. If the patient is in relatively good health, is adequately
nourished, and has a sound social support system, the depressant withdrawal
syndrome usually resembles a mild case of the flu. Even intense withdrawal
syndromes rarely approach the severity of symptoms described by some early
textbooks in the field.
The essential first step in detoxification is a thorough physical
examination. In the absence of a severe medical disorder or combined drug
abuse, severe alcohol withdrawal is unlikely. The second step is to offer rest,
adequate nutrition, and multiple vitamins, especially those containing
thiamine.


<<<PAGE 908>>>
Seizures. Seizures can occur suddenly and without other signs of
withdrawal. About 1 percent of patients may have a single grand mal
convulsion; the rare person has multiple fits, with the peak incidence on the
second day of withdrawal.
Such patients require neurologic evaluation to rule out an independent
seizure disorder. Assuming no other cause for the seizures is found,
benzodiazepines are the treatment of choice for managing alcohol-related
seizures. Anticonvulsants, although often used (particularly before the cause
of the seizure is known), do not appear to offer additional benefit.
Mild or Moderate Withdrawal. Withdrawal develops because the brain
has physically adapted to the presence of a brain depressant and cannot
function adequately in the absence of the drug. Giving sufficient brain
depressant on the first day to diminish symptoms and then weaning the
patient off the drug over the next 5 days offers most patients optimal relief. It
also minimizes the possibility that severe withdrawal will develop. Any CNS
depressant (including benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or even alcohol) can
work, but most clinicians choose a benzodiazepine for its relative safety.
Many studies have found that benzodiazepines control most of the symptoms
associated with alcohol withdrawal. We can give adequate treatment with
either short-acting drugs (e.g., lorazepam), or long-acting substances (e.g.,
chlordiazepoxide and diazepam). We may choose to give benzodiazepines
orally or parenterally; however, we should not give intramuscular (IM)
diazepam or chlordiazepoxide as their IM absorption is erratic. We should
titrate the dosage of the benzodiazepine, starting with a high dosage and
lowering the dosage as the patient recovers. We should aim to give sufficient
benzodiazepines to keep patients calm and sedated but not so sedated that we
cannot arouse them for procedures and examinations.
Although benzodiazepines are the standard treatment for alcohol
withdrawal, studies have shown that carbamazepine in daily doses of 800 mg
is as effective as benzodiazepines and has the added benefit of minimal abuse
liability. Carbamazepine use is gradually becoming common in the United
States and Europe.
Table 4-12 gives an example of withdrawal treatment using
chlordiazepoxide. When giving a long-acting agent, such as
chlordiazepoxide, the clinician must avoid producing excessive sleepiness


<<<PAGE 909>>>
through overmedication; if the patient is sleepy, it is best to omit the next
scheduled dose. When taking a short-acting drug, such as lorazepam, the
patient must not miss any dose because rapid changes in benzodiazepine
concentrations in the blood can precipitate severe withdrawal.
A social model program of detoxification saves money by avoiding
medications while using social supports. This less-expensive regimen can be
helpful for mild or moderate withdrawal syndromes. Some clinicians also use
β-adrenergic receptor antagonists (e.g., propranolol) or α-adrenergic receptor
agonists (e.g., clonidine) to block the symptoms of sympathetic hyperactivity.
However, these medications do not appear to be superior to benzodiazepines.
Unlike the brain depressants, these other agents are not effective treatments
for seizures or delirium.
Table 4-12
An Example Treatment for Alcohol Withdrawal
Day 1: chlordiazepoxide 25 mg by mouth 3–4 times daily, hold if
sedated
1–2 additional doses if
The patient is jittery
Has increased tremor
Has autonomic dysfunction
Day 2: give the total dose used on day 1 minus 20% divided across
3–4 doses
Following days: continue a 20% decrease until no further medication
is needed (4–5 days)
Severe Withdrawal. For the approximately 1 percent of alcoholic patients
with extreme autonomic dysfunction, agitation, and confusion—that is, those
with alcohol withdrawal delirium, or DTs—no optimal treatment has yet been
developed. The best treatment for DTs is prevention. When that is not
possible, the first step is to ask why such a severe and relatively uncommon
withdrawal syndrome has occurred. The answer often relates to a severe
concomitant medical problem that needs immediate treatment.
Once a delirium appears, the treatment remains similar to that for the
standard withdrawal but with higher doses. Example regimens are 50 to 100


<<<PAGE 910>>>
mg of chlordiazepoxide given every 4 hours orally, or lorazepam, given
intravenously (IV) if oral medication is not possible. A high-calorie, highcarbohydrate diet supplemented by multivitamins is also essential.
Physically restraining patients with the DTs is risky; they may fight against
the restraints to a dangerous level of exhaustion. When patients are disorderly
and uncontrollable, it may be preferable to use a seclusion room. Adjunctive
antipsychotic medications, such as haloperidol, are sometimes used to control
severe agitation and hallucinations. However, antipsychotic medications may
reduce the seizure threshold in patients. Dehydration, often exacerbated by
diaphoresis and fever, can be corrected with fluids given by mouth or IV.
Anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea often occur during withdrawal. The
emergence of focal neurologic symptoms, lateralizing seizures, increased
intracranial pressure, or evidence of skull fractures or other indications of
CNS pathology should prompt clinicians to examine a patient for neurologic
disease.
Warm, supportive psychotherapy in the treatment of DTs is essential.
Patients are often bewildered, frightened, and anxious because of their
tumultuous symptoms, and skillful verbal support is imperative.
Protracted Withdrawal. Symptoms of anxiety, insomnia, and mild
autonomic overactivity are likely to continue for 2 to 6 months after the acute
withdrawal has disappeared. These protracted withdrawal symptoms may
enhance the probability of relapse. Although there is little evidence that
medications are helpful, it is possible that some of the medications used for
the rehabilitation phase, especially acamprosate, may work by diminishing
some of these symptoms. The clinician should warn the patient that some
level of sleep problems or feelings of nervousness might remain after acute
withdrawal and discuss cognitive and behavioral approaches that might be
appropriate to help the patient feel comfortable.
Rehabilitation
For most patients, rehabilitation includes three major components, which are
listed in Table 4-13. These components happen at a difficult time: the patient
may still be experiencing withdrawal symptoms as well as life crises.
Repetition will be necessary, with frequent reminders of how vital abstinence


<<<PAGE 911>>>
is, and that it helps the patient develop new day-to-day support systems and
coping styles.
Table 4-13
Three Components of Alcohol Rehabilitation
Continued efforts to increase and maintain high levels of motivation
for abstinence
Work to help the patient readjust to a lifestyle free of alcohol
Relapse prevention
Table 4-14
Stages of Alcohol Rehabilitation Treatment
Early intensive period (2–4 wk)
Intervention (withdrawal treatment, preventing craving)
Optimizing physical and psychological functioning
Enhancing motivation
Reaching out to the family
Long term (3–6 mo)
Individual and group counseling
Judicious avoidance of psychotropic medications unless needed for
independent disorders
Involvement in self-help groups such as AA
No single major life event, traumatic life period, or identifiable psychiatric
disorder is known to be the sole cause of alcoholism. Regardless of any
possible cause, after years of alcohol use, it develops a life of its own. Many
alcoholic persons believe that the cause was depression, anxiety, life stress,
or pain syndromes. However, usually, the reality is that alcohol contributed to
the mood disorder, accident, or life stress, not vice versa.
The treatment approach remains the same regardless of setting, including
both inpatient and outpatient treatments. The selection of the more intensive
(and expensive) inpatient mode often depends on several factors. These
include whether there are additional severe medical or psychiatric syndromes,


<<<PAGE 912>>>
what other options are available, and whether the patient has previously failed
outpatient treatment.
The treatment process in either setting involves an intensive early phase,
which lasts 2 to 4 weeks, followed by longer-term care. Table 4-14 lists some
of the approaches used in these phases.
Counseling
Counseling efforts in the first several months should focus on day-to-day life
issues to help patients maintain a high level of motivation for abstinence and
to enhance their functioning. Psychotherapy techniques that provoke anxiety
or that require deep insights are not likely to be of benefit during the early
months of recovery and, at least theoretically, may impair efforts to maintain
abstinence. Thus, this discussion focuses on the efforts likely to characterize
the first 3 to 6 months of care.
Both individual and group counseling is an option, and few data suggest
that either approach is superior. The technique used is not likely to matter
much and usually boils down to simple day-to-day counseling or almost any
behavioral or psychotherapeutic approach focusing on the here and now.
Treatment sessions should explore the consequences of drinking, the likely
future course of alcohol-related life problems, and the marked improvement
that results from abstinence. Whether in an inpatient or an outpatient setting,
individual or group counseling is usually offered a minimum of three times a
week for the first 2 to 4 weeks, followed by less intense efforts, perhaps once
a week, for the subsequent 3 to 6 months.
Much time in counseling deals with how to build a lifestyle free of alcohol.
Discussions cover the need for a sober peer group, a plan for social and
recreational events without drinking, and approaches for reestablishing
communication with family members and friends.
The third major component, relapse prevention, first identifies situations in
which the risk for relapse is high. The counselor must help the patient
develop modes of coping for when the craving for alcohol increases or when
an event or emotional state makes a return to drinking likely. An essential
part of relapse prevention is reminding the patient about the appropriate
attitude toward slips. Short-term experiences with alcohol should not be an
excuse for returning to regular drinking. Recovery is not an “all or none”


<<<PAGE 913>>>
game. Instead, it is a process of trial and error; patients use slips as
information to identify high-risk situations and to develop more appropriate
coping techniques.
Most treatment efforts recognize the effects that alcoholism has on the
significant persons in the patient’s life, and an essential aspect of recovery
involves helping family members and close friends understand alcoholism
and realize that rehabilitation is an ongoing process that lasts for 6 to 12 or
more months. Couples and family counseling and support groups for relatives
and friends help the persons involved to rebuild relationships, to learn how to
avoid protecting the patient from the consequences of any drinking in the
future, and to be as supportive as possible of the alcoholic patient’s recovery
program.
Medication Treatment
Following detoxification, there is little reason to prescribe antidepressant or
anxiety medications if the patient does not have an independent psychiatric
disorder. Lingering levels of anxiety and insomnia as part of a reaction to life
stresses and protracted abstinence should be treated with behavior
modification approaches and reassurance. Medications for these symptoms
are likely to lose their effectiveness much faster than the symptoms will
disappear, and the patient may increase the dose, leading to subsequent
problems. Similarly, sadness and mood swings can linger at low levels for
several months. Controlled clinical trials, however, indicate no benefit in
prescribing antidepressant medications or lithium to treat the average
alcoholic person who has no independent or long-lasting psychiatric disorder.
The mood disorder will clear before the medications can take effect, and
patients who resume drinking while on the medications face significant
potential dangers. With little or no evidence that the medications are
effective, the dangers significantly outweigh any potential benefits from their
routine use.
Data from double-blind trials support modest effects for two medications
offered in the context of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). The first
involves the opioid antagonist naltrexone, which appears to decrease the
craving for alcohol or blunt the rewarding effects of drinking. The
COMBINE study (Combined Pharmacotherapies and Behavioral


<<<PAGE 914>>>
Interventions) demonstrated that naltrexone improves clinical outcomes, and
a Cochrane review of naltrexone concluded that naltrexone was effective in
reducing heavy drinking days. The typical dose is 50 mg/day, and side effects
include mild GI upset and lethargy.
The second medication, acamprosate, antagonizes neuronal overactivity
related to the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate, at least in part, by acting
as an antagonist to N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Acamprosate
may diminish mild anxiety, mood swings, and other sleep difficulties
associated with the protracted withdrawal syndrome observed after the first 4
to 5 days of abstinence. The typical dose is about 2,000 mg divided into three
doses per day and is associated with relatively mild side effects of GI
problems such as diarrhea.
A third possible drug of interest is the alcohol-sensitizing agent disulfiram.
Disulfiram is given in daily doses of 250 mg before discharging the patient
from the intensive first phase of outpatient rehabilitation or inpatient care.
The goal is to place the patient in a condition in which drinking alcohol
precipitates an uncomfortable physical reaction, including nausea, vomiting,
and a burning sensation in the face and stomach. Few data support
disulfiram’s effectiveness, most likely because patients stop it when they
resume drinking. Many clinicians have stopped routinely prescribing the
agent, partly in recognition of the dangers associated with the drug itself:
mood swings, rare instances of psychosis, the possibility of increased
peripheral neuropathies, the relatively rare occurrence of other significant
neuropathies, and potentially fatal hepatitis. Moreover, we should not give
disulfiram to patients with preexisting heart disease, cerebral thrombosis,
diabetes, and some other conditions, because an alcohol reaction to the
disulfiram could be fatal.
Table 4-15 gives a summary of medications used for alcohol dependence.
Two other medications, while not yet approved for the treatment of alcohol
use disorders, are worth brief mention. Several studies using the
anticonvulsant topiramate have reported improvement in drinking patterns.
Additionally, some data suggest that the 5-HT3 ondansetron might be
beneficial in alcohol use disorder treatment. No evidence exists that
antidepressant medications, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), lithium, or antipsychotic medications, are significantly effective in


<<<PAGE 915>>>
the treatment of alcoholism.
Alcoholics Anonymous
Clinicians must recognize the potential importance of self-help groups such
as AA. Members of AA have help available 24 hours a day, associate with a
sober peer group, learn that it is possible to participate in social functions
without drinking, and are given a model of recovery by observing the
accomplishments of sober members of the group.
Learning about AA usually begins during inpatient or outpatient
rehabilitation. The clinician can play a significant role in helping patients
understand the differences between specific groups. Some groups are single
gender, others are mixed. Certain groups may differ by socioeconomic level
as well, or place great emphasis on religion. Such specialized groups may be
a practical approach. Anyone can suffer from alcoholism, but a person may
be more likely to stick with a group toward which they feel some affinity.
Patients with coexisting psychiatric disorders may need some additional
education about AA. The clinician should remind them that some members of
AA may not understand their unique needs for medications and should arm
the patients with ways of coping when group members inappropriately advise
against medications. Although challenging to evaluate using double-blind
controls, most studies indicate that participation in AA is associated with
improved outcomes, as well as being cost-efficient.
Treatment of Alcohol-Related Disorders
Treatment of Alcohol-Induced Amnestic Disorders. In the early
stages, Wernicke encephalopathy responds rapidly to large doses of
parenteral thiamine, which is likely effective at preventing the progression to
Korsakoff syndrome. The dosage of thiamine is usually initiated at 100 mg
by mouth two to three times daily and continued for 1 to 2 weeks. In patients
with alcohol-related disorders who are receiving IV administration of glucose
solution, it is good practice to include 100 mg of thiamine in each liter of the
glucose solution.
Table 4-15


<<<PAGE 916>>>
Medications for Treating Alcohol Dependence

Action

Naltrexone

Acamprosate

Disulfiram

Blocks opioid
receptors,
resulting in
reduced
craving and
reduced
reward in
response to
drinking

Not well
Inhibits
understood.
intermediate
Likely an NMDA
metabolism of
receptor
alcohol,
antagonist and
causing a
positive allosteric
buildup of
modulator of
acetaldehyde
GABAa receptors
and a reaction
of flushing,
sweating,
nausea, and
tachycardia if a
patient drinks
alcohol

Contraindications Currently using Severe renal
Concomitant use
opioids or in
impairment (CrCl
of alcohol or
acute opioid
≤30 mL/min)
alcoholwithdrawal;
containing
anticipated
preparations or
need for
metronidazole;
opioid
coronary artery
analgesics;
disease; severe
acute
myocardial
hepatitis or
disease
liver failure
Precautions

Other hepatic
disease;
renal
impairment;
history of

Moderate renal
High impulsivity—
impairment
likely to drink
(dose
while using it;
adjustment for
psychoses
CrCl between 30
(current or


<<<PAGE 917>>>
suicide
attempts. If
opioid
analgesia is
required,
larger doses
may be
required, and
respiratory
depression
may be
deeper and
more
prolonged

and 50 mL/min);
depression or
suicidality

history);
diabetes
mellitus;
epilepsy;
hepatic
dysfunction;
hypothyroidism;
renal
impairment;
rubber contact
dermatitis

Serious adverse
reactions

Will precipitate Anxiety;
Hepatitis; optic
severe
depression. Rare
neuritis;
withdrawal if
events include
peripheral
patient is
the following:
neuropathy;
dependent on
suicide attempt,
psychotic
opioids;
acute kidney
reactions.
hepatotoxicity
failure, heart
Pregnancy
(uncommon
failure,
Category C.
at usual
mesenteric
doses).
arterial
Pregnancy
occlusion,
Category C.
cardiomyopathy,
deep
thrombophlebitis,
and shock.
Pregnancy
Category C.

Common side
effects

Nausea;
abdominal
pain;
constipation;

Diarrhea;
flatulence;
nausea;
abdominal pain;

Metallic
aftertaste;
dermatitis


<<<PAGE 918>>>
dizziness;
headache;
anxiety;
fatigue

headache; back
pain; infection;
flu syndrome;
chills;
somnolence;
decreased libido;
amnesia;
confusion

Examples of drug Opioid
No clinically
interactions
analgesics
relevant
(blocks
interactions
action);
known
yohimbine
(use with
naltrexone
increases
negative drug
effects)

Usual adult
dosage

Amitriptyline;
anticoagulants
such as
warfarin;
diazepam;
isoniazid;
metronidazole;
phenytoin;
theophylline;
warfarin; any
nonprescription
drug-containing
alcohol

Oral dose: 50
Oral dose: 666 mg Oral dose: 250
mg daily
(two 333-mg
mg daily (range
before
tablets) three
125–500 mg)
prescribing:
times daily or, for
before
evaluate for
patients with
prescribing:
possible
moderate renal
warn that the
current opioid
impairment (CrCl
patient should
use; consider
30–50 mL/min),
not take
a urine
reduce to 333
disulfiram for at
toxicology
mg (one tablet)
least 12 hr after
screen for
three times daily
drinking and
opioids,
before
that a
including
prescribing:
disulfiramsynthetic
establish
alcohol reaction


<<<PAGE 919>>>
opioids.
Obtain liver
function tests
Follow-up:
monitor liver
function tests
periodically

abstinence

can occur up to
2 wk after the
last dose; and
(2) warn about
alcohol in the
diet (e.g.,
sauces and
vinegars) and
in medications
and toiletries
Follow-up:
monitor liver
function tests
periodically

CrCl, creatinine clearance; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid.

Treatment of Korsakoff syndrome is also thiamine given 100 mg by mouth
two to three times daily; the treatment regimen should continue for 3 to 12
months. Few patients who progress to Korsakoff syndrome ever fully
recover, although many have some improvement in their cognitive abilities
with thiamine and nutritional support.
In a patient who appears to have Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome but who
does not respond to thiamine treatment, one should consider the diagnosis of
alcoholic pellagra encephalopathy (see Other Alcohol-Related Neurologic
Disorders). Such patients have a niacin (nicotinic acid) deficiency, and the
specific treatment is 50 mg of niacin by mouth four times daily or 25 mg
parenterally two to three times daily.
Treatment of Alcohol Withdrawal-Related Hallucinations. The
treatment of alcohol withdrawal-related hallucinations is much like the
treatment of DTs—benzodiazepines, adequate nutrition, and fluids, if
necessary. If this regimen fails or for long-term cases, clinicians may add
antipsychotics.
Treatment of Idiosyncratic Alcohol Intoxication. In treating
idiosyncratic alcohol intoxication, clinicians must help protect patients from


<<<PAGE 920>>>
harming themselves and others. Physical restraint may be necessary, but it is
difficult because of the abrupt onset of the condition. Once restraining the
patient, it may be helpful to inject an antipsychotic, such as haloperidol, to
control assaultiveness. We should differentiate this condition from other
causes of abrupt behavioral change, such as complex partial epilepsy. Some
persons with the disorder reportedly showed temporal lobe spiking on an
EEG after ingesting small amounts of alcohol.
Table 4-16
Alcohol Epidemiology
Condition

Population (%)

Ever had a drink

90

Current drinker

60–70

Temporary problems

40+

Alcohol use disorder (AUD) lifetime

Male: 15+
Female: 10+

AUDs in psychiatric patients

30

The percentages listed here are approximations generated across studies.
From Kaplan and Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. 2017.

Epidemiology
Alcohol use disorder is among the most common psychiatric disorders
observed in the Western world. Alcohol-related problems in the United States
contribute to 88,000 deaths each year, with nearly 10,000 deaths as a result of
alcohol-impaired driving. According to data from the World Health
Organization (WHO), alcohol is the fifth leading risk factor for premature
death and disability across the world. Table 4-16 lists some composite
epidemiologic data on alcohol use.
Prevalence of Drinking. At some time during life, 90 percent of the
population in the United States drinks, with most people beginning their
alcohol intake in the early to middle teens. By the end of high school, 80


<<<PAGE 921>>>
percent of students have consumed alcohol, and more than 60 percent have
been intoxicated. At any time, two of three men are drinkers, with a ratio of
persisting alcohol intake of approximately 1.3 men to 1.0 women, and the
highest prevalence of drinking from the middle or late teens to the mid-20s.
Men and women with higher education and income are most likely to
imbibe, and, among religious denominations, Jewish persons have the highest
proportion who consume alcohol but among the lowest rates of alcohol use
disorders. Other ethnicities, such as the Irish, have higher rates of severe
alcohol problems, but they also have significantly higher rates of abstentions.
Some estimates show that more than 60 percent of men and women in some
Native American and Inuit tribes have at some time had an alcohol use
disorder. In the United States, the average adult consumes 2.4 gallons of
absolute alcohol a year, a considerable decrease from 5 gallons of absolute
alcohol yearly intake in the 1700s.
Drinking alcohol-containing beverages is generally considered an
acceptable habit in the United States. About 90 percent of all US residents
have consumed alcohol at least once in their lives. About 56 percent of all US
adults used alcohol in the past month. Alcohol is the third leading preventable
cause of death in the United States, behind tobacco use and poor diet/physical
inactivity. Excessive alcohol use is associated with 2.5 million years of
potential life lost in the United States each year and causes 10 percent of all
deaths among working adults. Although persons involved in automotive
fatalities do not always meet the diagnostic criteria for an alcohol-related
disorder, drunk drivers are involved in about 31 percent of all automotive
fatalities. Alcohol use and alcohol-related disorders are associated with about
25 percent of all suicides.

PATHOLOGY
Effects of Alcohol
The term alcohol refers to a large group of organic molecules that have a
hydroxyl group (–OH) attached to a saturated carbon atom. Ethyl alcohol,
also called ethanol, is the standard form of drinkable alcohol, sometimes
referred to as beverage alcohol. The chemical formula for ethanol is CH3–
CH2–OH.


<<<PAGE 922>>>
The characteristic tastes and flavors of alcohol-containing beverages result
from their methods of production, which produce various congeners in the
final product, including methanol, butanol, aldehydes, phenols, tannins, and
trace amounts of various metals. Although the congeners may confer some
differential psychoactive effects on the various alcohol-containing beverages,
these differences are minimal compared with the effects of ethanol itself. A
single drink typically contains about 12 g of ethanol, which is the content of
12 oz of beer (7.2 proof, 3.6 percent ethanol in the United States), one 4-oz
glass of nonfortified wine, or 1 to 1.5 oz of an 80-proof (40 percent ethanol)
liquor (e.g., whiskey or gin). In calculating patients’ alcohol intake, however,
clinicians should be aware that beers vary in their alcohol content, that beers
are available in small and large cans and mugs, that glasses of wine range
from 2 to 6 oz, and that mixed drinks at some bars and in most homes contain
2 to 3 oz of liquor. Nonetheless, using the moderate sizes of drinks, clinicians
can estimate that a single drink increases the blood alcohol level of a 150-lb
man by 15 to 20 mg/dL, which is about the concentration of alcohol that an
average person can metabolize in 1 hour.
The possible beneficial effects of alcohol have been publicized, especially
by the makers and the distributors of alcohol. Some epidemiologic data
suggest that one or two glasses of red wine each day lower the incidence of
cardiovascular disease; these findings, however, are highly controversial.
Absorption. The stomach absorbs about 10 percent of consumed alcohol,
and the small intestine absorbs the rest. It takes about 30 to 90 minutes to
reach peak blood concentration, depending on whether the alcohol was
ingested on an empty stomach (which enhances absorption) or with food
(which delays absorption). Also, rapid drinking reduces the time to peak
concentration; slower drinking increases it. Absorption is most rapid, with
beverages containing 15 to 30 percent alcohol (30 to 60 proof). There is some
dispute about whether carbonation (e.g., in champagne and drinks mixed with
seltzer) enhances the absorption of alcohol.
The body has protective devices against inundation by alcohol. For
example, if the concentration of alcohol in the stomach becomes too high,
mucus is secreted, and the pyloric valve closes. These actions slow the
absorption and keep the alcohol from passing into the small intestine, where
there are no significant restraints on absorption. Thus, a large amount of


<<<PAGE 923>>>
alcohol can remain unabsorbed in the stomach for hours. Furthermore,
pylorospasm often results in nausea and vomiting.
Once the bloodstream absorbs the alcohol, it distributes to all body tissues.
Alcohol uniformly dissolves in the body’s water, so tissues containing a high
proportion of water receive a high concentration of alcohol. The intoxicating
effects are more significant for a given blood alcohol concentration when the
concentration is rising than when it is falling (the Mellanby effect). For this
reason, the rate of absorption bears directly on the intoxication response.
Metabolism. Hepatic oxidation accounts for about 90 percent of alcohol
metabolism. The remaining 10 percent is excreted unchanged by the kidneys
and lungs. The rate of oxidation by the liver is constant and independent of
the body’s energy requirements. The body can metabolize about 15 mg/dL
per hour, with a range of 10 to 34 mg/dL per hour. That is, the average person
oxidizes three-fourths of an ounce of 40 percent (80 proof) alcohol in an
hour. In persons with a history of excessive alcohol consumption,
upregulation of the necessary enzymes results in rapid alcohol metabolism.
Two enzymes metabolize alcohol: alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and
aldehyde dehydrogenase. ADH catalyzes the conversion of alcohol into
acetaldehyde, which is a toxic compound; aldehyde dehydrogenase catalyzes
the conversion of acetaldehyde into acetic acid. Disulfiram inhibits aldehyde
dehydrogenase. Some studies have shown that women have a lower ADH
blood content than men; this fact may account for woman’s tendency to
become more intoxicated than men after drinking the same amount of
alcohol. The decreased function of alcohol-metabolizing enzymes in some
Asian persons can also lead to more rapid intoxication and toxic symptoms.
Alcohol’s Effects on the Brain
Biochemistry. Alcohol has prominent effects on almost all neurochemical
systems, with different actions during intoxication versus withdrawal.
Perhaps the most potent effects are on GABA complexes in the brain,
especially on the GABA-A receptor (GABAA), contributing to the sedating,
sleep-inducing, anticonvulsant, and muscle-relaxing properties of alcohol.
Ethanol also impacts NMDA receptors, with dampened stimulatory effects
during intoxication and heightened activity during withdrawal. Alcohol


<<<PAGE 924>>>
acutely increases dopamine and its metabolites, and chronic drinking changes
dopamine receptor numbers and sensitivity, with related effects on
intoxication and craving, in part through changes in the pleasure centers in
the VTA of the brain. Alcohol also increases serotonin in the synapses and
upregulates serotonin receptors, and acutely enhances the functioning of the
opioid-related brain systems and impacts adenosine, acetylcholine, and
cannabinoid 1 (CB1) receptors.
Behavioral Effects. Alcohol is a depressant, much like the barbiturates and
the benzodiazepines, with which alcohol has some cross-tolerance and crossdependence. At a level of 0.05 percent alcohol in the blood, thought,
judgment, and restraint are loosened and sometimes disrupted. At a
concentration of 0.1 percent, voluntary motor actions usually become
perceptibly clumsy. Most states define legal intoxication as a 0.08 percent
blood alcohol level. At 0.2 percent, the function of the entire motor area of
the brain is measurably depressed, and the parts of the brain that control
emotional behavior are also affected. At 0.3 percent, a person is commonly
confused or may become stuporous; at 0.4 to 0.5 percent, the person falls into
a coma. At higher levels, the primitive centers of the brain that control
breathing and heart rate are affected, and death ensues secondary to direct
respiratory depression or the aspiration of vomitus. Persons with long-term
histories of alcohol use disorders, however, can tolerate much higher
concentrations of alcohol than can alcohol-naïve persons; their alcohol
tolerance may cause them to appear less intoxicated than they are.
Sleep Effects. Although alcohol consumed in the evening usually increases
the ease of falling asleep (decreased sleep latency), alcohol also has adverse
effects on sleep architecture. Specifically, alcohol use is associated with a
decrease in rapid eye movement sleep (REM or dream sleep) and deep sleep
(stage 4) and more sleep fragmentation, with more and longer episodes of
awakening. Therefore, the idea that drinking alcohol improves a person’s
sleep is a myth.
Other Physiologic Effects
LIVER. The most significant adverse effects of alcohol use are related to liver


<<<PAGE 925>>>
damage. Alcohol use, even as short as week-long episodes of increased
drinking, can result in an accumulation of fats and proteins, which produce
the appearance of a fatty liver, sometimes found on physical examination as
an enlarged liver. The association between fatty infiltration of the liver and
severe liver damage remains unclear. Alcohol use, however, is associated
with the development of alcoholic hepatitis and hepatic cirrhosis.
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM. Long-term heavy drinking is associated with

developing esophagitis, gastritis, achlorhydria, and gastric ulcers. The
development of esophageal varices can accompany particularly heavy alcohol
use; the rupture of the varices is a medical emergency often resulting in death
by exsanguination. Disorders of the small intestine occasionally occur, and
pancreatitis, pancreatic insufficiency, and pancreatic cancer are also
associated with heavy alcohol use. Heavy alcohol intake can adversely affect
the normal processes of food digestion and absorption. Alcohol use disorders
also appear to inhibit the intestine’s capacity to absorb various nutrients, such
as vitamins and amino acids. This effect, coupled with the often poor dietary
habits of those with alcohol-related disorders, can cause serious vitamin
deficiencies, particularly of the B vitamins.
OTHER BODILY SYSTEMS. A significant intake of alcohol is associated with

increased blood pressure, dysregulation of lipoprotein and triglyceride
metabolism, and increased risk for myocardial infarction and cerebrovascular
disease. Alcohol can affect the hearts of nonalcoholic persons who do not
usually drink, increasing the resting cardiac output, the heart rate, and the
myocardial oxygen consumption. Evidence indicates that alcohol intake can
adversely affect the hematopoietic system and can increase the incidence of
cancer, particularly head, neck, esophageal, stomach, hepatic, colonic, and
lung cancer. Acute intoxication may also be associated with hypoglycemia,
which, when unrecognized, may be responsible for some of the sudden deaths
of persons who are intoxicated. Muscle weakness is another side effect of
alcohol use disorders.
Alcohol intake also raises the blood concentration of estradiol in women.
The increase in estradiol correlates with the blood alcohol level.
DRUG INTERACTIONS. The interaction between alcohol and other substances


<<<PAGE 926>>>
can be dangerous, even fatal. Certain substances, such as alcohol and
phenobarbital, are metabolized by the liver, and their prolonged use can lead
to the acceleration of their metabolism. When persons with alcohol-related
disorders are sober, this accelerated metabolism makes them unusually
tolerant to many drugs such as sedatives and hypnotics; when they are
intoxicated, however, these drugs compete with the alcohol for the same
detoxification mechanisms, and potentially toxic concentrations of all
involved substances can accumulate in the blood.
The effects of alcohol and other CNS depressants are usually synergistic.
Sedatives, hypnotics, and drugs that relieve pain, motion sickness, head
colds, and allergy symptoms must be used with caution by persons with
alcohol-related disorders. Narcotics depress the sensory areas of the cerebral
cortex and can produce pain relief, sedation, apathy, drowsiness, and sleep;
high doses can result in respiratory failure and death. Increasing the dosages
of sedative–hypnotic drugs, such as chloral hydrate and benzodiazepines,
especially when combining them with alcohol, produces a range of effects
from sedation to motor and intellectual impairment to stupor, coma, and
death. Because sedatives and other psychotropic drugs can potentiate the
effects of alcohol, it is important to warn patients about the dangers of
combining CNS depressants and alcohol, particularly when they are driving
or operating machinery.

ETIOLOGY
Many factors affect the decision to drink, the development of temporary
alcohol-related difficulties, and the development of alcohol use disorders.
The initiation of drinking probably depends mainly on social, religious, and
personality characteristics, although genetic characteristics might also
contribute. The reasons for beginning to drink may differ from the factors
that later lead to an alcohol use disorder.
A similar interplay between genetic and environmental influences
contributes to many medical and psychiatric conditions, and, thus, a review
of these factors in alcohol use disorders offers information about complex
genetic disorders overall. Dominant or recessive genes, although relevant,
explain only rare conditions. Most disorders have some level of genetic
predisposition that usually relates to a series of different genetically


<<<PAGE 927>>>
influenced characteristics, each of which increases or decreases the risk for
the disorder.
A series of genetic influences likely combine to explain approximately 60
percent of the proportion of risk for alcohol use disorders, with the
environment responsible for the remaining proportion of the variance. The
divisions offered in this section, therefore, are more heuristic than real,
because it is the combination of a series of psychological, sociocultural,
biologic, and other factors that are responsible for the development of severe,
repetitive alcohol-related life problems.
Psychological Theories
A variety of theories assume that we use alcohol to reduce tension, increase
feelings of power, and decrease the effects of psychological pain. Perhaps the
most considerable interest has been paid to the observation that people with
alcohol-related problems often report that alcohol decreases their feelings of
nervousness and helps them cope with the day-to-day stresses of life. The
psychological theories are built, in part, on the observation among
nonalcoholic people that the intake of low doses of alcohol in a tense social
setting or after a stressful day enhances feelings of well-being and improved
ease of interactions. In high doses, especially at falling blood alcohol levels,
however, most measures of muscle tension and psychological feelings of
nervousness and tension are increased. Thus, the tension-reducing effects of
this drug might have an impact most on light to moderate drinkers or add to
the relief of withdrawal symptoms, but play a minor role in causing alcohol
use disorders. The theories that focus on alcohol’s potential to enhance one’s
esteem are challenging to evaluate definitively.
Psychodynamic Theories. Related to the disinhibiting or anxietylowering effects of lower doses of alcohol is the hypothesis that some people
may use this drug to help them deal with self-punitive harsh superegos and
unconscious stress. Also, classic psychoanalytical theory hypothesizes that at
least some people with alcohol use disorders may have become fixated at the
oral stage of development and use alcohol to relieve their frustrations by
taking the substance by mouth. Hypotheses regarding arrested phases of
psychosexual development, although heuristically useful, have had little


<<<PAGE 928>>>
effect on the usual treatment approaches and are not the focus of extensive
ongoing research.
Similarly, most studies have not been able to document an “addictive
personality” present in most individuals with alcohol use disorders and
associated with a propensity to lack control of the intake of a wide range of
substances and foods. Although patients often have pathologic scores on
personality during intoxication, withdrawal, and early recovery, many of
these characteristics predate alcoholism, and most disappear with abstinence.
Similarly, prospective studies of children of alcoholics without any cooccurring psychiatric disorders show a high risk for alcohol use disorders. As
elsewhere described, one exception is the extreme impulsivity seen in the 15
to 20 percent of alcoholic men with an antisocial personality disorder,
because they have high risks for criminality, violence, and multiple substance
use disorders.
Behavioral Theories. Expectations about the rewarding effects of
drinking, cognitive attitudes toward responsibility for one’s behavior, and
subsequent reinforcement after alcohol intake all contribute to the decision to
drink again after the first experience with alcohol and to continue to imbibe
despite problems. These issues are critical in efforts to modify drinking
behaviors in the general population, and they contribute to some important
aspects of rehabilitation of alcohol use disorders.
Sociocultural Theories. Sociocultural theories often extrapolate from
social groups that have high and low rates of alcohol use disorders. Theorists
hypothesize that ethnic groups, such as Jews, who introduce children to
modest levels of drinking during religious rituals and eschew drunkenness,
have low rates of alcohol use disorders. However, other groups have similar
practices, such as French Catholics, but have higher rates of alcohol use
disorders. Recent studies have found little evidence to suggest that
introducing children to modest drinking in the home impacts the risks for
heavy drinking and alcohol problems. So, it is likely that cultural attitudes
toward drinking, drunkenness, and personal responsibility for consequences
are essential contributors to the rates of alcohol-related problems in a society.
In the final analysis, social and psychological theories are probably highly
relevant because they outline factors that contribute to the onset of drinking,


<<<PAGE 929>>>
the development of temporary alcohol-related life difficulties, and even
alcohol use disorders. The problem is how to gather relatively definitive data
to support or refute the theories.
Childhood History. Researchers have identified several factors in the
childhood histories of persons with later alcohol-related disorders and in
children at high risk for having an alcohol-related disorder because one or
both of their parents are affected. In experimental studies, children at high
risk for alcohol-related disorders possess, on average, a range of deficits on
neurocognitive testing. These deficits include a low amplitude of the P300
wave on evoked potential testing and a variety of abnormalities on
electroencephalography (EEG) recordings. Studies of high-risk offspring in
their 20s have also shown a generally blunted effect of alcohol compared
with that seen in persons whose parents lacked an alcohol-related disorder.
These findings suggest that a heritable biologic brain function may
predispose a person to an alcohol-related disorder. A childhood history of
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), conduct disorder, or both,
increases a child’s risk for an alcohol-related disorder as an adult. Personality
disorders, especially antisocial personality disorder, as noted earlier, also
predispose a person to an alcohol-related disorder.
Table 4-17
Evidence that Alcohol Has a Genetic Influence
Close relatives have a 3–4 times increased risk for severe alcohol
problems
The rate of alcohol problems increases with:
The number of relatives with AUDs
The severity of their illness
The closeness of their genetic relationship to the person studied
Higher concordance for severe AUDs identical twins than fraternal
twins in most investigations, which estimate that genes explain 40–
60% of the variance
Adoption studies show increased risk for children of patients with
AUDs even when separated from their biologic parents since birth


<<<PAGE 930>>>
and raised without any contact
The risk is not enhanced when the adoptive parents have AUD
Animals studies support the role of genes
Genetic Factors
Table 4-17 lists some lines of evidence that support the conclusion that genes
have an essential influence on alcoholism. Twin studies suggest that genes
explain 60 percent of the variance, with the remainder relating to nonshared,
probably adult environmental influences. Animal studies support the
importance of a variety of yet-to-be-identified genes in the free-choice use of
alcohol, subsequent levels of intoxication, and some consequences.

4.3 Cannabis-Related Disorders
Cannabis is the most widely used illegal drug in the world. Over the past 40
years, cannabis use has become a standard part of youth culture in most
developed societies, with first use now occurring in the mid-to-late teens. In
the United States, there is a movement to legalize cannabis at the state level,
with some states allowing the use of cannabis for medical purposes only and
others for recreational use.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Most young people use cannabis to experience a “high,” characterized by
feelings of mild euphoria, relaxation, and perceptual alterations. Cognitive
changes include impaired short-term memory and attention that makes it easy
for the user to become lost in pleasant reverie and have difficulty sustaining
goal-directed mental activity. Motor skills, reaction time, motor coordination,
and many forms of skilled psychomotor activity are impaired while the user
is intoxicated.

DIAGNOSIS
The DSM-5 and ICD-10 include several diagnoses related to cannabis, and


<<<PAGE 931>>>
they generally follow the template for all substance use disorders (see Section
4.1 and Tables 4-1 through 4-3). The DSM-5 includes the diagnoses of
cannabis intoxication, cannabis intoxication delirium, cannabis withdrawal,
cannabis use disorder, cannabis-induced psychotic disorder, cannabisinduced anxiety disorder, cannabis-induced sleep disorder, and unspecified
cannabis-related disorder. The ICD-10 includes cannabis-related disorders
under the general heading of “Mental and behavioral disorders due to
psychoactive substance use.”
Cannabis Intoxication
Cannabis intoxication commonly heightens users’ sensitivities to external
stimuli and subjectively slows the appreciation of time. In high doses, users
may experience depersonalization and derealization. Cannabis use impairs
motor skills, and this effect remains after the euphoriant effects have
resolved. For 8 to 12 hours after using cannabis, users’ impaired motor skills
interfere with the operation of motor vehicles and other heavy machinery.
Moreover, these effects are additive to those of alcohol.
Mr. M was an unemployed 20-year-old man who lived with his parents.
He was brought to a hospital by some friends in a state of anxiety and
agitation. He had been out at a restaurant, and after a couple of beers, he
decided to have some cannabis. He had smoked cannabis on previous
occasions; however, this time, he ate a lump of cannabis despite warnings
from his friends. After about half an hour, Mr. M appeared tense and
anxious and complained that everything was changing. He could see the
faces of his friends increasing to about three times their original size. The
room became distorted, and its proportions and colors kept altering. He
felt that the other guests in the restaurant were talking about him and his
friends menacingly, so he suddenly rushed outside because he felt that he
was in danger. He became increasingly agitated and started running down
the middle of the street, dodging in and out among the traffic. Eventually,
his friends were able to catch him. They were unable to quiet his anxiety,
however, and had a hard time persuading him to go with them to the
hospital.
On examination, Mr. M appeared tense and apprehensive, looking


<<<PAGE 932>>>
around the room as if he felt uneasy with the surroundings. He denied
perceptual symptoms and did not believe that he was the subject of
persecution. He was fully aware of his surroundings, but his attention was
fleeting, and he did not always answer questions. There was no marked
impairment of memory, and he was fully oriented.
Physical examination revealed conjunctival injection and an increased
pulse rate of 120 beats/min, but otherwise, there were no abnormalities.
The neurologic examination also revealed no abnormalities. In the course
of a few hours, Mr. M quieted down and eventually left the hospital with
his friends.
Cannabis Intoxication Delirium. Cannabis intoxication can markedly
impair cognition and performance. Even modest doses of cannabis impair
memory, reaction time, perception, motor coordination, and attention. High
doses that also impair users’ levels of consciousness have marked effects on
cognitive measures.
Cannabis Withdrawal
Studies have shown that cessation of use in daily cannabis users results in
withdrawal symptoms within 1 to 2 weeks of cessation. Table 4-18 lists
typical cannabis withdrawal symptoms.
Table 4-18
Cannabis Withdrawal Symptoms
Irritability
Cannabis cravings
Nervousness
Anxiety
Insomnia
Disturbed or vivid dreaming
Decreased appetite
Weight loss
Depressed mood


<<<PAGE 933>>>
Restlessness
Headache
Chills
Stomach pain
Sweating
Tremors
Cannabis Use Disorder
People who use cannabis daily for weeks to months are most likely to
develop a cannabis use disorder. The risk of developing cannabis use disorder
is around one in ten for anyone who uses cannabis. The earlier the age of first
use, the more often cannabis has been used, and the longer it is used, the
higher the risk of developing the disorder.
Cannabis-Induced Psychotic Disorder
Cannabis-induced psychotic disorder, in which there is a genuine psychotic
process, is rare; transient paranoid ideation, however, is common.
Florid psychosis is somewhat commonplace in countries in which some
persons have long-term access to high potency cannabis. The psychotic
episodes are sometimes called “hemp insanity.” Cannabis use rarely causes
the “bad-trip” experience we associate with hallucinogen intoxication. When
cannabis-induced psychotic disorder does occur, the affected person is likely
to have a preexisting personality disorder.
Cannabis-Induced Anxiety Disorder
Cannabis-induced anxiety disorder is common during acute intoxication,
which in many persons, induces short-lived anxiety states often provoked by
paranoid thoughts. In such circumstances, ill-defined and disorganized fears
may induce a panic attack. Anxiety symptoms are the most common adverse
effect of moderate cannabis use and correlate with the dose taken.
Inexperienced users are much more likely to experience anxiety symptoms
than are experienced users.
A friend gave a 35-year-old married man who was naïve to cannabis two


<<<PAGE 934>>>
“joints.” The man smoked the first of the two in the same manner that he
usually smoked a cigarette (in about 3 to 5 minutes). Noting no
significant effects, he proceeded immediately to smoke the second in the
same amount of time. Within 30 minutes, he began to experience rapid
heartbeat, dry mouth, mounting anxiety, and the delusional belief that his
throat was closing up and that he was going to die. That belief induced
further panic, and the patient was brought to the emergency department
of a local hospital during the experience. There, the emergency team
could not reassure him that he would not die. After sedating him with
diazepam, some of his anxiety diminished. He eventually went to sleep,
and on awakening after 5 hours, he was asymptomatic with full recall of
previous events.
Unspecified Cannabis-Related Disorders
DSM-5 includes the category unspecified cannabis-related disorders for
cannabis disorders that do not fit into the other diagnoses. Examples could be
episodes of depressive or hypomanic symptoms, although these symptoms
may suggest long-term cannabis use.
When either sleep disorder or sexual dysfunction symptoms are related to
cannabis use, they almost always resolve within days or a week after
cessation.
Flashbacks. There are case reports of persons who have experienced
sensations related to cannabis intoxication after the short-term effects of the
substance have disappeared. Whether flashbacks are related to cannabis use
alone or the concomitant use of other substances (intended or tainted)
remains a subject of debate.
Cognitive Impairment. Clinical and experimental evidence indicates that
the long-term use of cannabis may produce subtle forms of cognitive
impairment in the higher cognitive functions of memory, attention, and
organization and the integration of complex information. This evidence
suggests that the longer the period of heavy cannabis use, the more
pronounced the cognitive impairment. Nonetheless, because the impairments
in performance are subtle, it remains to be determined how significant they


<<<PAGE 935>>>
are for everyday functioning. It also remains to be investigated whether these
impairments resolve after an extended period of abstinence from cannabis.
Amotivational Syndrome. A controversial cannabis-related syndrome is
amotivational syndrome. Whether the syndrome is related to cannabis use or
reflects characterologic traits in a subgroup of persons regardless of cannabis
use is under debate. Traditionally, a person’s unwillingness to persist in a
task—be it at school, at work, or in any setting that requires prolonged
attention or tenacity—characterizes the syndrome, which is associated with
long-term heavy use. People with the syndrome become apathetic and
anergic, may gain weight, or appear slothful.

COMORBIDITY
Cannabis is often referred to as a “gateway drug,” meaning that cannabis
users are at high risk for other substance use disorders. Also, cannabis use
may be comorbid with depression, anxiety, conduct disorder, and suicidality.

TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION
Treatment of cannabis use rests on the same principles as the treatment of
other substances of abuse—abstinence and support. Abstinence involves
direct interventions, such as hospitalization, or careful monitoring on an
outpatient basis by the use of urine drug screens, which can detect cannabis
for up to 4 weeks after use. We can use individual, family, and group
psychotherapies to support the patient. Education should be a cornerstone of
both abstinence and support programs. A patient who does not understand the
intellectual reasons for addressing a substance use disorder has little
motivation to stop. For some patients, an antianxiety drug may be useful for
short-term relief of withdrawal symptoms. For other patients, cannabis use
may be due to an underlying depressive disorder that may respond to specific
antidepressant treatment.
Medical Use of Marijuana
People have used marijuana as a medicinal herb for centuries, and cannabis
was listed in the US Pharmacopeia until the end of the 19th century as a


<<<PAGE 936>>>
remedy for anxiety, depression, and GI disorders, among others.
Cannabis is currently a controlled substance, and the Drug Enforcement
Agency (DEA) does not recognize any medical use for the substance. Despite
this, patients and doctors have used the drug, sometimes illegally, to treat a
variety of disorders, including nausea secondary to chemotherapy, HIVassociated weight loss, multiple sclerosis (MS) chronic pain, epilepsy, and
glaucoma. We currently live in a time of differing views and conflicting laws
regarding the use of cannabis. The US federal government continues to
consider the drug to be illegal under any circumstances; the Supreme Court
confirmed this in 2001. However, as of 2020, 15 states have legalized the
recreational and medicinal use of marijuana, along with the District of
Columbia, and several US territories. Many other states have some degree of
medical exemption or have decriminalized the drug. Table 4-19 lists the
status of cannabis laws in the United States and territories as of 2020,
however this remains a rapidly changing field.
Dronabinol, a synthetic form of THC, has been approved by the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of anorexia-associated
weight loss in HIV and nausea and vomiting associated with chemotherapy;
dronabinol is also under investigation for the treatment of obstructive sleep
apnea. Nabilone, which is a synthetic cannabinoid, has been approved for the
treatment of nausea and vomiting associated with chemotherapy. In 2013,
cannabidiol was granted orphan drug status for the treatment of certain rare,
intractable types of epilepsy in children. Additionally, nabiximols, an oral
spray consisting of natural cannabis extracts, is currently being investigated
for the treatment of cancer pain. A 2019 study found that nabiximols reduced
cannabis use among individuals with cannabis use disorder when used along
with concurrent behavioral therapy. Nabiximols is currently available by
prescription in several countries outside of the United States for patients with
neuropathic pain, MS, and other conditions.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Cannabis is the most widely used illegal drug in the United States, with an
estimated 24 million users aged 12 and older in 2016 (approximately 9
percent of the population). Of those individuals, roughly 4 million met
criteria for a marijuana use disorder in the past year.


<<<PAGE 937>>>
Prevalence and Recent Trends
The Monitoring the Future survey of adolescents in school indicates that 36
percent of twelfth graders used marijuana in the past year, which is slightly
lower than the most recent peak in the 1990s (39 percent in 1997). Annual
marijuana use by eighth and tenth graders is significantly lower than the
corresponding rates in the 1990s; in 2018, the prevalence of marijuana use
was 28 percent in tenth graders (compared to 35 percent in 1997) and 11
percent in eighth-graders (compared to 18 percent in 1997).
Demographic Correlates
Rates of cannabis use in the user’s lifetime, the past year, and the past week
are consistently higher among males than females, as are daily use and longterm daily use.
Table 4-19
The Legal Status of Cannabis as of 2020
Illegal
Alabama
Idaho
Kansas
Nebraskaa
North Carolinaa
South Carolina
Tennessee
Wyoming
Fully Legal
Alaska
California
Colorado
District of Columbia
Illinois
Maine


<<<PAGE 938>>>
Massachusetts
Michigan
Nevada
Oregon
Vermont
Washington
Arizonab
Montanab
New Jerseyb
South Dakotab
Medicinal Use
Arkansas
Connecticuta
Delawarea
Florida
Hawaiia
Louisiana
Marylanda
Minnesotaa
Missouria
New Hampshirea
New Mexicoa
New Yorka
North Dakotaa
Ohioa
Oklahoma
Pennsylvania
Rhode Islanda
Utah
West Virginia
Mississippia
CBD Oil Only


<<<PAGE 939>>>
Georgia
Indiana
Iowa
Kentucky
Texas
Virginiaa
Wisconsin
aDecliminalized.
bAs of 2020 election, enactment is pending as of this date.

Information on the relationship between ethnicity and cannabis use is
limited. Even in the extensive Monitoring the Future survey, samples from
several years have to be combined to make reliable comparisons between the
three largest ethnic groups. These show that African American students have
lower rates of use in all grades than white or Hispanic students.

PATHOLOGY
Cannabis Preparations
The plant Cannabis sativa is the source for cannabis preparations. It has been
used in China, India, and the Middle East for approximately 8,000 years,
primarily for its fibers and secondarily for its medicinal properties. The plant
occurs in male and female forms. The female plant contains the highest
concentrations of cannabinoids. Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) is
primarily responsible for the psychoactive effects of cannabis. The most
potent forms of cannabis come from the flowering tops of the plants or from
the dried, black-brown, resinous exudate from the leaves, called hashish or
hash. The cannabis plant is usually cut, dried, chopped, and rolled into
cigarettes (commonly called “joints”). The common names for cannabis are
marijuana, grass, pot, weed, tea, and Mary Jane, although there are many
other names. The potency of marijuana preparations has increased in recent
years because of improved agricultural techniques used in cultivation so that
plants may contain up to 15 or 20 percent THC.
Physical Effects of Cannabis Use


<<<PAGE 940>>>
Table 4-20 lists the most common physical effects of cannabis use. There is
no documented case of death caused by cannabis intoxication alone; this
reflects the substance’s lack of effect on the respiratory rate. The most serious
potential adverse effects of cannabis use are those caused by inhaling the
same carcinogenic hydrocarbons present in conventional tobacco, and some
data indicate that heavy cannabis users are at risk for chronic respiratory
disease and lung cancer. The practice of smoking cannabis-containing
cigarettes to their very ends, so-called “roaches,” further increases the intake
of tar (particulate matter).
Many reports indicate that long-term cannabis use is associated with other
serious effects, also listed in Table 4-20. These reports, however, have not
been conclusively replicated, and the association between these findings and
cannabis use is uncertain.
Table 4-20
Physical Effects of Cannabis Use
Common
Dilation of the conjunctival blood vessels (red eyes)
Mild tachycardia
Increased appetite
Dry mouth
Orthostatic hypotension (higher doses)
Heavy chronic use (some of these are controversial)
Chronic respiratory disease
Lung cancer
Cerebral atrophy
Seizure susceptibility
Chromosomal damage
Birth defects
Impaired immune reactivity
Alterations in testosterone concentrations
Dysregulation of menstrual cycles


<<<PAGE 941>>>
Neuropharmacology
As stated above, the principal component of cannabis is Δ9-THC; however,
the cannabis plant contains more than 400 chemicals, of which about 60 are
chemically related to Δ9-THC. In humans, Δ9-THC rapidly converts to 11hydroxy-Δ9-THC, the metabolite that is active in the CNS.
A specific receptor for the cannabinols has been identified, cloned, and
characterized. The cannabinoid receptor, a member of the G-protein–linked
family of receptors, is linked to the inhibitory G protein (Gi), which inhibits
adenylyl cyclase. The highest concentrations of the cannabinoid receptor are
in the basal ganglia, hippocampus, and cerebellum, with lower concentrations
in the cerebral cortex. The brainstem lacks this receptor, explaining the
drug’s minimal effects on respiratory and cardiac functions. Studies in
animals have shown that cannabinoids affect monoamine and GABA
neurons.
According to most studies, animals do not self-administer cannabinoids as
they do most other substances of abuse. It is not clear whether the
cannabinoids stimulate the so-called reward centers of the brain, such as the
dopaminergic neurons of the VTA. Tolerance to cannabis does develop,
however, as does psychological dependence. The evidence for physiologic
dependence is not as strong. Withdrawal symptoms in humans are limited to
modest increases in irritability, restlessness, insomnia, and anorexia and mild
nausea; all these symptoms appear only when a person abruptly stops taking
high doses of cannabis.
When smoking cannabis, the euphoric effects appear within minutes, peak
in about 30 minutes, and last 2 to 4 hours. Some motor and cognitive effects
last 5 to 12 hours. Oral cannabis is also frequent, usually as an additive in
baked goods, such as brownies and cakes. It requires about two to three times
as much oral cannabis to be as potent as smoked cannabis. Many variables
affect the psychoactive properties of cannabis, including the potency of the
cannabis used, the route of administration, the smoking technique, the effects
of pyrolysis on the cannabinoid content, the dose, the setting, and the user’s
experience, expectations, and unique biologic vulnerability to the effects of
cannabinoids.


<<<PAGE 942>>>
4.4 Opioid-Related Disorders
The word opioid describes a class of psychoactive compounds, both naturally
occurring and chemically synthesized, that are related to opiates: alkaloid
compounds found as natural products in the opium poppy plant, Papaver
somniferumi.
Many synthetic opioids have been manufactured, including meperidine,
methadone, pentazocine, and propoxyphene.
Humans have used opioids for analgesic and other medicinal purposes for
thousands of years, but they also have a long history of misuse for their
psychoactive effects. Continued opioid misuse can result in abuse and
dependence and cause disturbances in mood, behavior, and cognition that can
mimic other psychiatric disorders. In developed countries, the opioid drug
most frequently associated with abuse and dependence is heroin; however,
there is growing public health concern about prescription opioids, which are
widely available and have significant abuse liability. Opioid addiction affects
the young and the old, the wealthy and the poor, and the professional and the
unemployed. Over the last few decades, there have been significant advances
in treatment and understanding of opioid use disorder. Opioid use disorder is
often a chronic, relapsing disorder amenable to medical treatment and
intervention. Table 4-21 lists various opioids that are used therapeutically in
the United States, except for heroin.
Table 4-21
Opioids Available in the United States
Proprietary Name

Trade Name

Morphine
Heroin (diacetylmorphine)
Hydromorphone
(dihydromorphinone)

Dilaudid

Oxymorphone
Numorphan
(dihydrohydroxymorphinone)


<<<PAGE 943>>>
Levorphanol

Levo-Dromoran

Methadone

Dolophine

Meperidine (pethidine)

Demerol, Pethadol

Fentanyl

Sublimaze

Codeine
Hydrocodone
(dihydrocodeinone)

Hycodan, Others

Drocode (dihydrocodeine)

Synalgos-Dc, Compal

Oxycodone
(dihydrohydroxycodeinone)

Roxicodone, Oxycontin, Percodan,
Percocet, Vicodin

Propoxyphene

Darvon, Others

Buprenorphine

Buprenex (parenteral), Sublocade
(subcutaneous, extended-release)

Pentazocine

Talwin

Nalbuphine

Nubain

Butorphanol

Stadol

CLINICAL FEATURES
Opioids can be taken orally, snorted intranasally, and injected intravenously
or subcutaneously. Opioids are subjectively addictive because of the euphoric
high (the rush) that users experience, especially those who take the
substances intravenously. The associated symptoms include a feeling of
warmth, heaviness of the extremities, dry mouth, itchy face (especially the
nose), and facial flushing. A period of sedation follows the initial euphoria,
known in street parlance as “nodding off.” Opioid use can induce dysphoria,
nausea, and vomiting in opioid-naive persons.
Diagnosis


<<<PAGE 944>>>
The DSM-5 and ICD-10 include several diagnoses related to opioids, and
they generally follow the template for all substance use disorders (see Section
4.1 and Tables 4-1 through 4-3). These include opioid use disorder, opioid
intoxication, opioid withdrawal, opioid-induced sleep disorder, and opioidinduced sexual dysfunction. Opioid intoxication delirium can occur in
hospitalized patients. Opioid-induced psychotic disorder, opioid-induced
mood disorder, and opioid-induced anxiety disorder, by contrast, are
uncommon with µ-agonist opioids but can occur with some mixed agonist–
antagonist opioids acting at other receptors. The diagnosis of opioid-related
disorder not elsewhere classified is for situations that do not meet the criteria
for any of the other opioid-related disorders.
Opioid Use Disorder
Opioid use disorder is a pattern of maladaptive use of an opioid drug, leading
to clinically significant impairment or distress and occurring within 12
months.
A surgeon referred a 42-year-old public relations executive to psychiatry
after discovering the executive sneaking large quantities of a codeinecontaining cough medicine into the hospital. The patient had been a
heavy cigarette smoker for 20 years and had a chronic, hacking cough.
He had come into the hospital for a hernia repair and found the pain from
the incision unbearable when he coughed.
A back operation 5 years previously had led his doctors to prescribe
codeine to help relieve the incisional pain at that time. Over the
intervening 5 years, however, the patient had continued to use codeinecontaining tablets and had increased his intake to 60 to 90 mg daily. He
stated that he often “just took them by the handful—not to feel good, you
understand, just to get by.” He spent considerable time and effort
developing a circle of physicians and pharmacists to whom he would
“make the rounds” at least three times a week to obtain new supplies of
pills. He had tried several times to stop using codeine but had failed.
During this period, he lost two jobs because of lax work habits, and his
wife of 11 years divorced him.


<<<PAGE 945>>>
Opioid Intoxication
Opioid intoxication includes maladaptive behavioral changes and specific
physical symptoms of opioid use. In general, altered mood, psychomotor
retardation, drowsiness, slurred speech, and impaired memory and attention
in the presence of other indicators of recent opioid use strongly suggest a
diagnosis of opioid intoxication.
Opioid Withdrawal
Opioid withdrawal develops after the cessation of or reduction in opioid use
that has been heavy and prolonged. The withdrawal syndrome also occurs
when administering an opioid partial agonist such as buprenorphine or an
opioid antagonist such as naloxone or naltrexone to a patient who is regularly
taking an opioid agonist. The withdrawal symptoms are usually the
physiologic opposite of the intoxication symptoms. The withdrawal
syndrome consists of severe muscle cramps and bone aches, profuse diarrhea,
abdominal cramps, rhinorrhea, lacrimation, piloerection or gooseflesh (from
which derives the term cold turkey for the abstinence syndrome), yawning,
fever, pupillary dilation, hypertension, tachycardia, and temperature
dysregulation, including hypothermia and hyperthermia. Persons with opioid
dependence seldom die from opioid withdrawal unless they have a severe
preexisting physical illness such as cardiac disease. Residual symptoms—
such as insomnia, bradycardia, temperature dysregulation, and a craving for
opioids—can persist for months after withdrawal. Associated features of
opioid withdrawal include restlessness, irritability, depression, tremor,
weakness, nausea, and vomiting. At any time during the abstinence
syndrome, a single injection of morphine or heroin eliminates all the
symptoms.
The general rule about the onset and duration of withdrawal symptoms is
that substances with short durations of action tend to produce short, intense
withdrawal syndromes, and substances with long durations of action produce
prolonged but mild withdrawal syndromes. An exception to the rule, narcotic
antagonist-precipitated withdrawal after long-acting opioid misuse can be
severe. See Section 4.1, Table 4-3 for the diagnostic criteria for substance
withdrawal.
When an opioid antagonist precipitates an abstinence syndrome, the


<<<PAGE 946>>>
symptoms begin within seconds of such an intravenous injection and peak in
about 1 hour. Opioid craving rarely occurs in the context of analgesic
administration for pain from physical disorders or surgery. The full
withdrawal syndrome, including an intense craving for opioids, usually
occurs only secondary to abrupt cessation of use in persons with longstanding
opioid misuse.
Morphine and Heroin. The morphine and heroin withdrawal syndrome
begin 6 to 8 hours after the last dose, usually after a 1- to 2-week period of
continuous use or after the administration of a narcotic antagonist. The
withdrawal syndrome reaches its peak intensity during the second or third
day and subsides during the next 7 to 10 days, but some symptoms may
persist for 6 months or longer.
Methadone. Methadone withdrawal usually begins 1 to 3 days after the last
dose and ends in 10 to 14 days.
Opioid Intoxication Delirium. Opioid intoxication delirium is most likely
to happen when using opioids in high doses, or mixing them with other
psychoactive compounds, or when a person with preexisting CNS disorder
(e.g., brain damage or epilepsy) uses them.
Opioid-Induced Psychotic Disorder. The opioid-induced psychotic
disorder can begin during opioid intoxication. Clinicians can specify whether
hallucinations or delusions are the predominant symptoms.
Opioid-Induced Mood Disorder. An opioid-induced mood disorder can
begin during opioid intoxication. Opioid-induced mood disorder symptoms
can have a manic, depressed, or mixed nature, depending on a person’s
response to opioids. A person who comes to psychiatric attention with
opioid-induced mood disorder usually has mixed symptoms, combining
irritability, expansiveness, and depression.
Opioid-Induced Sleep Disorder and Opioid-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction. Opioid-induced sleep disorder and opioid-induced sexual
dysfunction are common, and both hypersomnia and insomnia are common
complaints of patients who either have opioid use disorder or use opioids


<<<PAGE 947>>>
regularly for therapeutic purposes. Common sexual dysfunctions for chronic
opioid users include erectile dysfunction and orgasmic difficulties.
Unspecified Opioid-Related Disorder. The DSM-5 includes diagnoses
for other opioid-related disorders with symptoms of delirium, abnormal
mood, psychosis, abnormal sleep, and sexual dysfunction. Clinical situations
that do not fit into these categories exemplify appropriate cases for the use of
the DSM-5 diagnosis of an unspecified opioid-related disorder.

COMORBIDITY
Nearly 70 percent of men and 75 percent of women with opioid use disorder
in their lifetimes have an additional psychiatric disorder. The most common
comorbid disorders include mood disorders, antisocial personality disorder,
anxiety disorders, and alcohol use disorder. Table 4-22 highlights the need to
develop a broad-based treatment program that also addresses patients’
associated psychiatric disorders.
In addition to the morbidity and mortality associated directly with the
opioid-related disorders, the association between the transmission of both
hepatitis and the HIV with intravenous opioid and opiate use is recognized as
a leading national health concern.

TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION
Methadone is the current gold standard in the treatment of opioid use disorder
with physiologic dependence. Methadone is used for detoxification and as a
maintenance agent.
The opioid partial agonist buprenorphine binds to the receptor but activates
it only partially. Due to buprenorphine’s high affinity (binding strength) to
the receptor and a low dissociation from the receptor, it often functions as an
antagonist (blocker), preventing compounds with lower receptor affinity from
activating the receptor. If a patient is actively using an agonist at the time
they receive a dose of buprenorphine, the buprenorphine will abruptly
displace the agonist from the receptor. Since the buprenorphine only has a
partial effect at the receptor, it will cause a sudden drop in the level of agonist
effect, resulting in a precipitated withdrawal. Buprenorphine is used to assist
detoxification and as a maintenance agent.


<<<PAGE 948>>>
Opioid antagonists (e.g., naloxone, nalmefene, and naltrexone) bind to the
receptor but do not exert any activity. These medications function as
antagonists—they compete for binding at the receptor with agonists and
partial agonists, and if the dose of the antagonist is high enough, they may
displace the agonist from the receptor and prevent the agonist from binding to
the receptor and exerting any effect. Naloxone reverses an overdose; as it is a
short-acting agent, it can be dosed very accurately without the risk of an
unnecessarily prolonged effect. Naltrexone is a long-acting agent used
following detoxification as a strategy to prevent recurrent physiologic
dependence and relapse.
Overdose Treatment
The first task in overdose treatment is to ensure an adequate airway.
Tracheopharyngeal secretions should be aspirated, and it may be necessary to
insert an airway. The patient should be ventilated mechanically until the
clinicians can give naloxone. Naloxone is administered intravenously at a
slow rate—initially about 0.8 mg per 70 kg of body weight. Signs of
improvement (increased respiratory rate and pupillary dilation) should occur
promptly. In patients physiologically dependent on opioids, too much
naloxone may produce signs of withdrawal. If no response to the initial
dosage occurs, clinicians can repeat the naloxone administration after
intervals of a few minutes. If there is no response after 4 to 5 mg, some think
that nonopioid substances may be contributing to the CNS depression. The
duration of action of naloxone is short compared with that of many opioids,
such as methadone and levomethadyl acetate, and repeated administration
may be required to prevent recurrence of opioid toxicity.
Table 4-22
Substance
and
Non–Substance-Related
Disorders in Opioid Users

Psychiatric


<<<PAGE 949>>>
Medically Supervised Withdrawal and Detoxification
Opioid Agents for Treating Opioid Withdrawal


<<<PAGE 950>>>
METHADONE. Methadone is a synthetic narcotic (an opioid) that substitutes for

heroin. When given to addicts to replace their typical substance of abuse, the
drug suppresses withdrawal symptoms. The initial dose of methadone is
usually 20 to 30 mg orally; if objective signs of withdrawal persist after the
first dose, clinicians can repeat the dose after approximately 2 to 4 hours. As
a general rule, initial stabilization does not require more than 40 mg during
the first 24 hours, although it can be higher in the inpatient setting if clear
signs of moderate or severe withdrawal are present after the first 6 to 10
hours of the observation period. After 24 to 48 hours of dose stabilization, the
patient’s methadone dose can be gradually reduced by 10 to 20 percent or by
5 mg/day. Most patients can complete inpatient detoxification within 1 week.
In the case of detoxification with methadone in an outpatient setting, the
first-day dose should not exceed 40 mg. Over the next few days, clinicians
may titrate the dose (generally by no more than 10-mg increments every 2 to
3 days) until the patient has no discernible withdrawal symptoms. In most
cases, the dose of 40 to 60 mg/day is sufficient to prevent any opioid
withdrawal; however, this dose may not be adequate to eliminate craving. If
the patient continues to use opioids, the dose of methadone can increase. In
that case, clinicians should postpone detoxification and the goal becomes
stabilization—no withdrawal symptoms, craving, or opioid use. Generally, a
period of dose stabilization, at a minimum of 4 weeks in duration, is
necessary before a slow dose reduction schedule. In the outpatient setting,
gradual dose reductions (e.g., 3 percent per week), have a higher likelihood
of success, with even slower reductions once the total daily dose is down to
20 to 30 mg/day.
BUPRENORPHINE. As with methadone, buprenorphine is an opioid agonist

used for treating opioid withdrawal. Physicians can dispense it on an
outpatient basis, but they must demonstrate that they have received
specialized training in its use. Buprenorphine is available in several
formulations, including as monotherapy or combination therapy with
buprenorphine plus naloxone. The monotherapy versions include a parenteral
formulation and an extended-release subcutaneous injection. The
combination product is preferred, as it carries a lower risk of diversion and
misuse.
Buprenorphine can be used for detoxification in an inpatient setting under


<<<PAGE 951>>>
direct monitoring. The first dose of buprenorphine begins when the patient
experiences at least moderate severity of withdrawal, with several, preferably
objective, signs present. The first dose of buprenorphine is generally 2 mg,
and subsequent 2-mg doses are given every 2 to 4 hours until the successful
elimination of withdrawal. Usually, the total daily dose needed to suppress
withdrawal on the first day effectively is 8 to 12 mg. Buprenorphine taper is
usually started on the second day, while the daily dose is decreased by 2 mg
every day, with 1 mg decreases on the last 2 days of taper. The complete
taper usually takes 5 to 7 days, and the long elimination half-life of
buprenorphine (31 to 35 hours) helps to extend the effect after
discontinuation.
Buprenorphine can also assist detoxification in the outpatient setting. The
strategy is generally similar to the methadone-assisted detoxification. Ideally,
the first day’s dosing should occur under medical supervision to minimize the
risk of buprenorphine-precipitated withdrawal. The physician usually
instructs patients to arrive in withdrawal, which typically starts 12 hours after
the last dose of a short-acting opioid or 24 hours after a long-acting opioid
like methadone. The first dose of buprenorphine is usually 2 mg, and if there
are no signs of precipitated withdrawal, subsequent 2-mg doses are given at
the clinic every 2 hours, with additional doses given to take at home, until the
elimination of withdrawal. If withdrawal worsens after the first
buprenorphine dose, it is best to wait for 4 to 6 hours before giving the next
buprenorphine dose while the precipitated withdrawal can be treated
symptomatically with medications such as clonidine. Usually, the total daily
dose needed on the first day is 8 to 12 mg. Clinicians can use subsequent
daily dose increases of 2 to 4 mg to relieve opioid withdrawal and initiate
opioid abstinence. Once establishing a period of stabilization, slow dose
reductions can begin, usually in 2-mg dose increments and usually at weekly
intervals. As with methadone, slower dosage reduction schedules are usually
better tolerated and less likely to prompt relapse.
Table 4-23
Nonopioid Medications Used to Treat Withdrawal
Target Symptom

Medication Class

Example


<<<PAGE 952>>>
Autonomic symptoms
(e.g., sweating,
restlessness, tremor,
and rhinorrhea)

α2-agonist

Clonidine

Anxiety and psychomotor
agitation

Benzodiazepines
Lorazepam
(usually reserved for
the inpatient setting)

Insomnia

Hypnotics

Zolpidem,
zopiclone

Sedating
antidepressants

Trazodone

Atypical antipsychotics Quetiapine
Musculoskeletal pain

GI distress and diarrhea

Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs

Ibuprofen

Antispasmodic agents

Cyclobenzaprine

Antiemetic agents

Prochlorperazine

Peripheral μ-opioid
receptor agonists

Loperamide

Symptomatic Treatment of Opioid Withdrawal. It is also possible to
treat an opioid withdrawal with nonopioid medications, primarily targeting
several uncomfortable withdrawal symptoms. Table 4-23 lists some of these
medications and their uses.
Medications for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
For some individuals, opioid detoxification is not successful, and others may
not feel ready for detoxification, although they may desire freedom from the
daily struggle associated with opioid use and the associated psychosocial
problems. In these individuals, opioid substitution therapy with either
methadone or buprenorphine may be appropriate. For patients who can
complete opioid detoxification, antagonist therapy can help them to maintain


<<<PAGE 953>>>
abstinence.
Opioid Substitution Therapy. Opioid substitution therapy has several
advantages. First, it frees persons with opioid use disorder from using
injectable heroin or other illicit opioids and, thus, reduces the chance of
spreading HIV or hepatitis through contaminated needles. Second, opioid
agonists produce minimal euphoria and rarely cause drowsiness or depression
when taken for a long time. Third, opioid agonists allow patients to engage in
gainful employment instead of criminal activity. The major disadvantage of
opioid agonist use is that patients remain dependent on a narcotic.
Meta-analytical studies show methadone’s clear superiority
over treatments without medication on improving treatment retention and
reducing heroin or other illicit opioid use. The majority of patients treated in
methadone programs also show decreased nonopioid drug use, criminal
behavior, symptoms of depression, and increased gainful employment.
The effectiveness of opioid maintenance treatment depends on the dose
and the quality of the additional services provided. The optimal dose is
generally in the 80 to 120 mg/day range, with some patients requiring higher
doses to achieve an optimal clinical response. Among the most common side
effects of methadone are constipation, excessive sweating, decreased libido,
and sexual dysfunction. In the United States, methadone can be dispensed
only at an outpatient opioid treatment program (OTP) certified by SAMHSA
and registered with the DEA or to a hospitalized patient in an emergency.
SAMHSA-certified OTP facilities provide daily doses of methadone under
direct supervision until the patient is stable enough to receive take-home
doses.
METHADONE.

BUPRENORPHINE/NALOXONE COMBINATION. Buprenorphine is a high-affinity

partial μ-opioid receptor agonist, κ-receptor antagonist, and ORL-1 agonist.
At lower doses of up to 16 mg, buprenorphine has a dose-dependent opiatelike effect, but at higher doses, there is progressively less increase in opiatelike effects. There is a ceiling to the μ-opioid agonist effects of
buprenorphine, which limits respiratory depression and other adverse effects,
increasing its safety profile. Buprenorphine has poor bioavailability and is
usually administered sublingually as a tablet or as a film.


<<<PAGE 954>>>
Naloxone is mixed with the buprenorphine in a four to one ratio; this is to
decrease the risk of abuse. Because naloxone has poor sublingual
bioavailability, it exerts minimal effect when taking the preparation as
prescribed, but if it is dissolved and injected by an opioid-dependent person,
it blocks some of the effects of buprenorphine and may precipitate
withdrawal.
Treatment with buprenorphine is best suited for individuals who present
with at least mild withdrawal symptoms. Unlike methadone, there is little
concern about overdose during treatment initiation. However, combining
buprenorphine with benzodiazepines or other sedative–hypnotics can produce
excessive sedation, and there are case reports of fatalities associated with
parenteral misuse of buprenorphine and a benzodiazepine. Common side
effects of buprenorphine include constipation, nausea, headache, upset
stomach, excessive sweating, somnolence, and decreased interest in sex. In
the United States, to prescribe buprenorphine, physicians must complete a
training course and receive a waiver granted by the DEA.
OPIOID ANTAGONISTS. Opioid antagonists block or antagonize the effects of

opioids. Unlike methadone, they do not exert narcotic effects and do not
cause dependence. Opioid antagonists include naloxone, which is used in the
treatment of opioid overdose because it reverses the effects of narcotics, and
naltrexone, the longest-acting (72 hours) antagonist. The theory for using an
antagonist for opioid-related disorders is that blocking opioid agonist effects,
particularly euphoria, discourages persons with physiologic dependence on
opioids from substance-seeking behavior and, thus, deconditions this
behavior. The major weakness of the antagonist treatment model is the lack
of any mechanism that compels a person to continue to take the antagonist.
Naltrexone can be taken orally or in a long-acting injectable formulation.
Psychotherapy
The entire range of psychotherapeutic modalities is appropriate for treating
opioid-related disorders. Individual psychotherapy, behavioral therapy, CBT,
family therapy, support groups (e.g., Narcotics Anonymous [NA]), and social
skills training may all prove useful for specific patients. Patients with few
social skills should receive social skills training. Most patients living with


<<<PAGE 955>>>
family members should also receive family therapy.
Therapeutic Communities
Therapeutic communities are residences in which all members have a
substance abuse problem.
Abstinence is the rule; to be admitted to such a community, a person must
show a high level of motivation. The goals are to effect a complete change of
lifestyle, including abstinence from substances; to develop personal honesty,
responsibility, and useful social skills; and to eliminate antisocial attitudes
and criminal behavior.
Education and Needle Exchange
Although the essential treatment of opioid use disorders is encouraging
persons to abstain from opioids, education about the transmission of HIV
must receive equal attention. It is essential to teach persons with opioid use
disorders who use intravenous or subcutaneous routes of administration safesex practices. Free needle-exchange programs are often subject to intense
political and societal pressures but, where allowed, should be made available
to persons with opioid use disorders. Several studies have indicated that
unsafe needle sharing is common when it is difficult to obtain enough clean
needles and is also common in persons with legal difficulties, severe
substance problems, and psychiatric symptoms.
Narcotic Anonymous
NA is a self-help group of abstinent drug addicts modeled on the 12-step
principles of AA. Such groups now exist in most large cities and can provide
useful group support. Although the scientific evidence supportive of the
usefulness of such groups has been very limited, observational studies
support its effectiveness, and therefore, patients receiving pharmacologic
treatments should be encouraged to participate in the self-help groups.
Pregnant Women with Opioid Use Disorders
Illicit opioid use during pregnancy is associated with adverse effects for both
the pregnant woman and the fetus but is not associated with any specific
teratogenic effects. However, there is a higher risk of infections,


<<<PAGE 956>>>
preeclampsia, miscarriage, premature rupture of membranes, and premature
labor as well as stillbirths, premature infants, and infants with low birth
weight and neonatal opioid withdrawal (also called the neonatal abstinence
syndrome). Infants who survive may be infected with HIV and other diseases
as a result of maternal high-risk behavior and are at risk of sudden infant
death syndrome (SIDS). Most of these risks can be substantially reduced with
methadone or buprenorphine maintenance treatment.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
The use and dependence rates derived from national surveys do not
accurately reflect fluctuations in drug use among opioid-dependent and
previously opioid-dependent populations. When the supply of illicit heroin
increases in purity or decreases in price, use among that vulnerable
population tends to increase, with subsequent increases in adverse
consequences (emergency department visits) and requests for treatment. The
number of current (past month) heroin users in the United States is about
475,000 in those ages 12 and up. That number grows to 3.3 million, or
approximately 1.2 percent of the population, for current (past month) pain
relievers. The majority (53 percent) of individuals who misuse pain relievers
report obtaining them from friends or family. When considering all opioid
use over the past year, the number is staggering: 11.8 million individuals 12
years old and older used opioids in the past year, representing approximately
4.4 percent of the population.

PATHOLOGY
Effects of Opioids
The physical effects of opioids include respiratory depression, pupillary
constriction, smooth muscle contraction (including the ureters and the bile
ducts), constipation, and changes in blood pressure, heart rate, and body
temperature. The brainstem mediates the respiratory depressant effects.
Adverse Effects
The most common and most serious adverse effect associated with opioid-


<<<PAGE 957>>>
related disorders is the potential transmission of hepatitis and HIV through
the use of contaminated needles by more than one person. Persons can
experience idiosyncratic allergic reactions to opioids, which result in
anaphylactic shock, pulmonary edema, and death if they do not receive
prompt and adequate treatment. Another serious adverse effect is an
idiosyncratic drug interaction between meperidine and monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAOIs), which can produce gross autonomic instability, severe
behavioral agitation, coma, seizures, and death. Opioids and MAOIs should
not be given together for this reason.
Opioid Overdose
Death from an overdose of an opioid is usually attributable to respiratory
arrest from the respiratory depressant effect of the drug. The symptoms of
overdose include marked unresponsiveness, coma, slow respiration,
hypothermia, hypotension, and bradycardia. When presented with the clinical
triad of coma, pinpoint pupils, and respiratory depression, clinicians should
consider opioid overdose as a primary diagnosis. They can also inspect the
patient’s body for needle tracks in the arms, legs, ankles, groin, and even the
dorsal vein of the penis.
Neuropharmacology
The primary effects of the opioid drugs are mediated via the opioid receptors,
discovered in the early 1970s. The µ-opioid receptors are involved in the
regulation and mediation of analgesia, respiratory depression, constipation,
and drug dependence; the κ-opioid receptors, with analgesia, diuresis, and
sedation; and the Δ-opioid receptors, with analgesia.
In 1975, the enkephalins, two endogenous pentapeptides with opioid-like
actions, were identified. This discovery led to the identification of three
classes of endogenous opioids within the brain. These include the endorphins,
the dynorphins, and the enkephalins. Eric Simon was one of the discoverers,
and he coined the term “endorphin,” which was a contraction of
“endogenous” and “morphine.” Endorphins are involved in neural
transmission and pain suppression. They are released naturally in the body
when a person is physically hurt or severely stressed, and they may account
for the absence of pain during acute injuries.


<<<PAGE 958>>>
The endogenous opioids also have significant interactions with other
neuronal systems, such as the dopaminergic and noradrenergic
neurotransmitter systems. Several types of data indicate that the VTA
dopaminergic neurons (which project to the cerebral cortex and the limbic
system) mediate the rewarding properties of opioids.
Heroin, the most commonly abused opioid, is more lipid-soluble than
morphine. It crosses the blood–brain barrier faster and has a more rapid and
pleasurable onset than morphine. First introduced as a treatment for morphine
addiction, heroin is more dependence-producing than morphine. Codeine,
which occurs naturally as about 0.5 percent of the opiate alkaloids in opium,
is absorbed quickly through the GI tract and is subsequently transformed into
morphine in the body. Results of at least one study using positron emission
tomography (PET) have suggested that one effect of all opioids is decreased
cerebral blood flow (CBF) in selected brain regions in persons with opioid
dependence. There is compelling evidence indicating that the endorphins are
involved in other addictions, such as alcoholism, cocaine, and cannabinoid
addiction. The opioid antagonist, naltrexone, has shown value in mitigating
alcohol addiction.
Tolerance and Dependence. Tolerance to all actions of opioid drugs
does not develop uniformly. Tolerance to some actions of opioids can be so
high that a 100-fold increase in dose is required to produce the original effect.
For example, terminally ill cancer patients may need 200 to 300 mg a day of
morphine, whereas a dose of 60 mg can easily be fatal to an opioid-naive
person. The symptoms of opioid withdrawal do not appear unless a person
has been using opioids for a long time or when cessation is particularly
abrupt, as occurs when a person takes an opioid antagonist. The long-term
use of opioids results in changes in the number and sensitivity of opioid
receptors, which mediate at least some of the effects of tolerance and
withdrawal. Although long-term use is associated with increased sensitivity
of dopaminergic, cholinergic, and serotonergic neurons, the effect of opioids
on the noradrenergic neurons is probably the primary mediator of the
symptoms of opioid withdrawal. Short-term use of opioids appears to
decrease the activity of the noradrenergic neurons in the locus ceruleus; longterm use activates a compensatory homeostatic mechanism within the
neurons, and opioid withdrawal results in rebound hyperactivity. This


<<<PAGE 959>>>
hypothesis also explains why clonidine, an α2-adrenergic receptor agonist
that decreases the release of norepinephrine, is useful in the treatment of
opioid withdrawal symptoms.

ETIOLOGY
Psychosocial Factors
Social attitudes, peer pressure, individual temperament, and drug availability
all predispose people to problematic opioid use. Social stigma is less with
prescription opioids than heroin, and prescription opioids are believed to be
safer in comparison to heroin and are more widely available. As prescription
opioid users develop some functional impairments, their opioid use often
transitions to heroin and the IV route of administration due to lower cost and
increasing tolerance for slower-acting agents. The presence of a significant
number of opioid users in a geographic area can also create a subculture of
opioid experimentation. In the United States, areas in which the prevalence of
opioid use disorder is high also often have associated high crime rates,
unemployment rates, and poorly performing school systems. While
correlation does not equal causation, these factors can all be conceptualized
as contributing to reduced resistance to opioid use and may worsen the
prognosis and treatment efficacy. Most urban heroin users are children of
single parents or divorced parents and are from families in which at least one
other member has a substance-related disorder. Children from such settings
are at high risk for opioid use disorder, especially if they also evidence
behavioral problems in school or other signs of conduct disorder.
Biologic and Genetic Factors
Evidence now exists for common and drug-specific, genetically transmitted
vulnerability factors that increase the likelihood of developing drug
dependence. Individuals who abuse a substance from any category are more
likely to abuse substances from other categories. Twin studies estimate that
around 50 to 60 percent of the liability for heroin addiction is genetic.
Ongoing linkage and genome-wide association studies continue to
investigate promising targets for understanding the genetics and genomics of
opioid use disorder.


<<<PAGE 960>>>
4.5 Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or AnxiolyticRelated Disorders
Anxiolytic or sedative–hypnotic drugs are on a continuum with their hypnotic
or sleep-inducing effects. In addition to their psychiatric indications,
clinicians also use these drugs as antiepileptics, muscle relaxants, anesthetics,
and anesthetic adjuvants. Alcohol and all drugs of this class are crosstolerant, and their effects are additive. Physical and psychological
dependence develops to these drugs, and all are associated with withdrawal
symptoms. In the practice of psychiatry and addiction medicine, the drug
class that is most important clinically is the benzodiazepines.
The three major groups of drugs associated with this class of substancerelated disorders are benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and barbiturate-like
substances. We discuss each below.
Clinical Features
Specific Agents
BENZODIAZEPINES. Many benzodiazepines, differing primarily in their half-

lives, are available in the United States. Examples of benzodiazepines are
diazepam, flurazepam, oxazepam, and chlordiazepoxide. Benzodiazepines are
used primarily as anxiolytics, hypnotics, antiepileptics, and anesthetics, as
well as for alcohol withdrawal. After their introduction in the United States in
the 1960s, benzodiazepines rapidly became the most prescribed drugs; about
15 percent of all persons in the United States have had a benzodiazepine
prescribed by a physician. Increasing awareness of the risks for dependence
on benzodiazepines and increased regulatory requirements, however, have
decreased the number of benzodiazepine prescriptions. The DEA classifies all
benzodiazepines as Schedule IV controlled substances.
Flunitrazepam, a benzodiazepine used in Mexico, South America, and
Europe but not available in the United States, has become a drug of abuse.
When taken with alcohol, it may lead to promiscuous sexual behavior and
rape. It is illegal to bring flunitrazepam into the United States. Although


<<<PAGE 961>>>
misused in the United States, it remains a standard anxiolytic in many
countries.
Nonbenzodiazepine sedatives such as zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone
—the so-called Z drugs—have clinical effects similar to the benzodiazepines
and are also subject to misuse and dependence.
Barbiturates were popular before the introduction of
benzodiazepines, but because of their high abuse potential, their use is much
rarer today. Secobarbital was popular in the 1960s through the 1980s. It
acquired many nicknames, including “reds,” “red devils,” “seggies,” and
“downers,” among many others. Pentobarbital was also popular, and its
nicknames included “yellow jackets,” “yellows,” and “nembies.” A
secobarbital–amobarbital combination was also widely available, and was
called “reds and blues,” “rainbows,” “double-trouble,” and “tooies.”
Pentobarbital, secobarbital, and amobarbital are now under the same federal
legal controls as morphine.
The first barbiturate, barbital, was introduced in the United States in 1903.
Barbital and phenobarbital, introduced shortly after that, are long-acting
drugs with half-lives of 12 to 24 hours. Amobarbital is an intermediate-acting
barbiturate with a half-life of 6 to 12 hours. Pentobarbital and secobarbital are
short-acting barbiturates with half-lives of 3 to 6 hours. Although barbiturates
are useful and effective sedatives, they are highly lethal, with only ten times
the standard dose producing coma and death.
BARBITURATES.

BARBITURATE-LIKE SUBSTANCES. The most commonly abused barbiturate-like

substance is methaqualone. Various manufacturers produced it in the United
States until being discontinued in 1985. It is often used by young persons
who believe that the substance heightens the pleasure of sexual activity. The
street names for methaqualone include “mandrakes” (from the United
Kingdom preparation Mandrax) and “soapers” (from the brand name Sopor).
“Luding out” (from the brand name Quaalude) means getting high on
methaqualone, often along with alcohol.
Other barbiturate-like substances include meprobamate, a carbamate
derivative that has weak efficacy as an antianxiety agent but has musclerelaxant effects, chloral hydrate, a hypnotic that is highly toxic to the GI
system and when combined with alcohol, is known as a “Mickey Finn”; and


<<<PAGE 962>>>
ethchlorvynol, a rapidly acting sedative agent with anticonvulsant and
muscle-relaxant properties. All are subject to abuse.
Patterns of Abuse
Oral Use. Sedatives and hypnotics are usually taken orally, either
occasionally to achieve a time-limited specific effect or regularly to obtain a
constant, usually mild, intoxication state. The occasional use pattern is
associated with young persons who take the substance to achieve specific
effects—relaxation for an evening, intensification of sexual activities, and a
short-lived period of mild euphoria. The user’s personality and expectations
about the substance’s effects, as well as the setting, also affect the substanceinduced experience. The regular use pattern is associated with middle-aged,
middle-class persons who usually obtain the substance from a family
physician as a prescription for insomnia or anxiety. Abusers of this type may
have prescriptions from several physicians, and the pattern of abuse may go
undetected until apparent signs of a substance use disorder are noticed by the
person’s family, coworkers, or physicians.
Intravenous Use. A severe form of misuse involves the intravenous use of
this class of substances. The users are mainly young adults who are
intimately involved with illegal substances. Intravenous barbiturate use is
associated with a pleasant, warm, drowsy feeling, and users may be inclined
to use barbiturates more than opioids because barbiturates are less costly. The
physical dangers of injection include transmission of HIV, cellulitis, vascular
complications from accidental injection into an artery, infections, and allergic
reactions to contaminants. Intravenous use is associated with rapid and
profound tolerance and dependence and severe withdrawal syndrome.
Overdose
Benzodiazepines. In contrast to the barbiturates and the barbiturate-like
substances, the benzodiazepines have a large margin of safety when taken in
overdoses, a feature that has contributed significantly to their rapid
acceptance. The ratio of the lethal dose to effective dose is about 200 to 1 or
higher, because of the minimal degree of respiratory depression associated


<<<PAGE 963>>>
with the benzodiazepines. Table 4-24 lists the equivalent therapeutic doses of
benzodiazepines. Even when users take grossly excessive amounts (more
than 2 g) in suicide attempts, the symptoms include only drowsiness,
lethargy, ataxia, some confusion, and mild depression of the user’s vital
signs. The most lethal overdoses occur when the user takes a benzodiazepine
in combination with other sedatives, such as alcohol. In such cases, small
doses of benzodiazepines can cause death. The availability of flumazenil, a
specific benzodiazepine antagonist, has reduced the lethality of the
benzodiazepines. Flumazenil can be used in emergency departments to
reverse the effects of benzodiazepines.
Table 4-24
Approximate
Therapeutic
Benzodiazepines

Equivalent

Doses

Generic Name

Trade Name

Dose (mg)

Alprazolam

Xanax

1

Chlordiazepoxide

Librium

25

Clonazepam

Klonopin

0.5–1.0

Clorazepate

Tranxene

15

Diazepam

Valium

10

Estazolam

Prosom

1

Flurazepam

Dalmane

30

Lorazepam

Ativan

2

Oxazepam

Serax

30

Temazepam

Restoril

20

Triazolam

Halcion

0.25

Quazepam

Doral

15

Zolpidem

Ambien

10

of


<<<PAGE 964>>>
Zaleplon

Sonata

10

Barbiturates. Barbiturates are lethal when taken in an overdose because
they induce respiratory depression. In addition to intentional suicide attempts,
accidental or unintentional overdoses are common. Barbiturates in home
medicine cabinets are a common cause of fatal drug overdoses in children. As
with benzodiazepines, the lethal effects of the barbiturates are additive to
those of other sedatives or hypnotics, including alcohol and benzodiazepines.
Barbiturate overdose can induce coma, respiratory arrest, cardiovascular
failure, and death.
The lethal dose varies with the route of administration and the degree of
tolerance for the substance. For the most commonly abused barbiturates, the
ratio of the lethal dose to effective dose ranges between 3:1 and 30:1.
Dependent users often take an average daily dose of 1.5 g of a short-acting
barbiturate, and some take as much as 2.5 g a day for months.
The lethal dose is not much higher for the long-term abuser than for the
neophyte. Tolerance develops quickly, to the point at which withdrawal in a
hospital becomes necessary to prevent accidental death from overdose.
Barbiturate-Like Substances. The barbiturate-like substances vary in
their lethality and are usually intermediate between the relative safety of the
benzodiazepines and the high lethality of the barbiturates. An overdose of
methaqualone, for example, can result in restlessness, delirium, hypertonia,
muscle spasms, convulsions, and, in very high doses, death. Unlike
barbiturates, methaqualone rarely causes severe cardiovascular or respiratory
depression, and most fatalities result from combining methaqualone with
alcohol.

DIAGNOSIS
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use Disorder
The DSM-5 and ICD-10 include several diagnoses related to sedatives, and
they generally follow the template for all substance use disorders (see Section
4.1 and Tables 4-1 through 4-3).


<<<PAGE 965>>>
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication
The intoxication syndromes induced by all these drugs are similar. Table 425 lists some of the common symptoms. Blood toxicology is the best way to
confirm the diagnosis.
Benzodiazepines. Behavioral disinhibition is a typical result of
benzodiazepine intoxication. It can potentially result in hostile or aggressive
behavior in users, most commonly when they also take alcohol.
Benzodiazepine intoxication is associated with less euphoria than is
intoxication by other drugs in this class. This characteristic is the basis for the
lower abuse and dependence potential of benzodiazepines than of
barbiturates.
Barbiturates and Barbiturate-Like Substances. The clinical
syndrome of barbiturate (and barbiturate-like substance) intoxication is
indistinguishable from alcohol intoxication, at least in lower doses. Table 425 lists both symptoms common to all sedative–hypnotics as well as
additional symptoms associated with barbiturates. Sluggishness usually
resolves after a few hours, but, depending primarily on the half-life of the
abused substance, the effects on judgment, mood, and motor skills may
remain for 12 to 24 hours.
Table 4-25
Sedative–Hypnotic Intoxication Symptoms
Common symptoms
Incoordination
Dysarthria
Nystagmus
Impaired memory
Gait disturbance
Severe cases: stupor, coma, or death
Barbiturate intoxication (additional symptoms)
Sluggishness
Slow speech


<<<PAGE 966>>>
Slow comprehension
Faulty judgment
Disinhibited sexual aggressive impulses
Narrowed range of attention
Emotional lability
Exaggerated basic personality traits
Hostility
Argumentativeness
Moroseness
Paranoid and suicidal ideation
Neurologic symptoms: nystagmus, diplopia, strabismus, ataxic gait,
positive Romberg sign, hypotonia, and decreased superficial
reflexes
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal
Benzodiazepines. The severity of the withdrawal syndrome associated
with the benzodiazepines varies with the average dose and the duration of
use, but a mild withdrawal syndrome can follow even short-term use of
relatively low doses of benzodiazepines. A significant withdrawal syndrome
is likely to occur at the cessation of dosages in the range of 40 mg a day for
diazepam, for example, although 10 to 20 mg a day, taken for a month, can
also result in a withdrawal syndrome when stopping it. The onset of
withdrawal symptoms usually occurs 2 to 3 days after the cessation of use,
but with long-acting drugs, such as diazepam, the latency before onset can be
5 or 6 days. The symptoms include anxiety, dysphoria, intolerance for bright
lights and loud noises, nausea, sweating, muscle twitching, and sometimes
seizures (generally at dosages of 50 mg a day or more of diazepam). Table 426 lists the signs and symptoms of benzodiazepine withdrawal.
Barbiturates and Barbiturate-Like Substances. The withdrawal
syndrome for barbiturate and barbiturate-like substances range from mild
symptoms (e.g., anxiety, weakness, sweating, and insomnia) to severe
symptoms (e.g., seizures, delirium, cardiovascular collapse, and death).


<<<PAGE 967>>>
Persons who have been abusing phenobarbital in the range of 400 mg a day
may experience mild withdrawal symptoms; those who have been abusing
the substance in the range of 800 mg a day can experience orthostatic
hypotension, weakness, tremor, and severe anxiety. About 75 percent of these
persons have withdrawal-related seizures. Users of dosages higher than 800
mg a day may experience anorexia, delirium, hallucinations, and repeated
seizures.
Most symptoms appear in the first 3 days of abstinence, and seizures
generally occur on the second or third day, when the symptoms are worst. If
seizures do occur, they always precede the development of delirium. The
symptoms rarely occur more than a week after stopping the substance. A
psychotic disorder, if it develops, starts on the third to the eighth day. The
various associated symptoms generally run their course within 2 to 3 days but
can last as long as 2 weeks.
Table 4-26
Signs
and
Symptoms
Discontinuation Syndrome

of

the

Benzodiazepine

The following signs and symptoms may be seen when
benzodiazepine therapy is discontinued; they reflect the return of
the original anxiety symptoms (recurrence), worsening of the
original anxiety symptoms (rebound), or emergence of new
symptoms (true withdrawal):
• Disturbances of mood and cognition
anxiety, apprehension, dysphoria, pessimism, irritability, obsessive
rumination, and paranoid ideation
• Disturbances of sleep
insomnia, altered sleep–wake cycle, and daytime drowsiness
• Physical signs and symptoms
tachycardia, elevated blood pressure, hyperreflexia, muscle
tension, agitation/motor restlessness, tremor, myoclonus, muscle
and joint pain, nausea, coryza, diaphoresis, ataxia, tinnitus, and
grand mal seizures
• Perceptual disturbances


<<<PAGE 968>>>
hyperacusis, depersonalization, blurred vision, illusions, and
hallucinations
Other Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Disorders
Delirium. Delirium that is indistinguishable from DTs associated with
alcohol withdrawal is seen more commonly with barbiturate withdrawal than
with benzodiazepine withdrawal. Delirium associated with intoxication can
be seen with either barbiturates or benzodiazepines if the dosages are
sufficiently high.
Neurocognitive Disorders. The diagnosis of this disorder is complex
because it is difficult to know whether a neurocognitive disorder is due to the
substance use itself or associated features of substance use.
Psychotic Disorders. The psychotic symptoms of barbiturate withdrawal
can be indistinguishable from those of alcohol-associated DTs. Agitation,
delusions, and hallucinations are usually visual, but sometimes tactile or
auditory features develop after about 1 week of abstinence. Psychotic
symptoms associated with intoxication or withdrawal are more common with
barbiturates than with benzodiazepines. DSM-5 diagnoses them as sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal with perceptual disturbances when reality
testing is intact (the individual is aware the drug is causing the psychotic
symptoms). If reality testing is not intact (the individual believes the
hallucinations are real), a diagnosis of substance/medication-induced
psychotic disorder is more appropriate. Clinicians can further specify whether
delusions or hallucinations are the predominant symptoms, including the type
(e.g., auditory, visual, or tactile).
Other Disorders. Sedative, hypnotic, and anxiolytic use may also cause
mood disorders, anxiety disorders, sleep disorders, and sexual dysfunctions.
Unspecified Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related Disorder.
When none of the previously discussed diagnostic categories is appropriate
for a person with sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-related disorder, and he
or she does not meet the diagnostic criteria for any general substance-related


<<<PAGE 969>>>
disorder, the appropriate diagnosis is an unspecified sedative-, hypnotic-, or
anxiolytic-related disorder.

TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION
Withdrawal
Benzodiazepines. Because some benzodiazepines are eliminated from the
body slowly, symptoms of withdrawal can continue to develop for several
weeks. To prevent seizures and other withdrawal symptoms, clinicians should
gradually reduce the dosage. Table 4-27 lists guidelines for treating
benzodiazepine withdrawal.
Barbiturates. To avoid sudden death during barbiturate withdrawal,
clinicians must follow conservative clinical guidelines. Clinicians should not
give barbiturates to a comatose or grossly intoxicated patient. A clinician
should attempt to determine a patient’s usual daily dose of barbiturates and
then verify the dosage clinically. For example, a clinician can give a test dose
of 200 mg of pentobarbital every hour until a mild intoxication occurs, but
withdrawal symptoms are absent (Table 4-28). The clinician can then taper
the total daily dose at a rate of about 10 percent of the total daily dose. Once
the correct dosage is determined, the clinician can use a long-acting
barbiturate for the detoxification period. During this process, the patient may
begin to experience withdrawal symptoms, in which case the clinician should
halve the daily decrement.
Table 4-27
Guidelines for Treatment of Benzodiazepine Withdrawal
1. Evaluate and treat concomitant medical and psychiatric conditions.
2. Obtain drug history and urine and blood samples for drug and
ethanol assay.
3. Determine required dose of benzodiazepine or barbiturate for
stabilization, guided by history, clinical presentation, drug–ethanol
assay, and (in some cases) challenge dose.
4. Detoxification from supratherapeutic dosages:


<<<PAGE 970>>>
a. Hospitalize if there are medical or psychiatric indications, poor
social supports, or polysubstance dependence, or the patient is
unreliable.
b. Some clinicians recommend switching to longer-acting
benzodiazepine for withdrawal (e.g., diazepam, clonazepam);
others recommend stabilizing on the drug that patient was taking
or on phenobarbital.
c. After stabilization reduce dosage by 30% on the second or third
day and evaluate the response, keeping in mind that symptoms
that occur after decreases in benzodiazepines with short
elimination half-lives (e.g., lorazepam) appear sooner than with
those with longer elimination half-lives (e.g., diazepam).
d. Reduce dosage further by 10–25% every few days if tolerated.
e. Use adjunctive medications if necessary—carbamazepine, βadrenergic receptor antagonists, valproate, clonidine, and
sedative antidepressants have been used but their efficacy in
the treatment of the benzodiazepine abstinence syndrome has
not been established.
5. Detoxification from therapeutic dosages:
a. Initiate 10–25% dose reduction and evaluate response.
b. Dose, duration of therapy, and severity of anxiety influence the
rate of taper and need for adjunctive medications.
c. Most patients taking therapeutic doses have uncomplicated
discontinuation.
6. Psychological interventions may assist patients in detoxification
from benzodiazepines and in the long-term management of
anxiety.
Courtesy of Domenici A. Ciraulo, M.D., and Ofra Sarid-Segal, M.D.

Table 4-28
Pentobarbital
Withdrawal

Test

Dose

Procedure

Symptoms After Test Dose Estimated 24-Hr
of 200 mg Oral
Oral

for

Barbiturate

Estimated 24-Hr
Oral


<<<PAGE 971>>>
Pentobarbital

Pentobarbital
Dose (mg)

Phenobarbital
Dose (mg)

Level I: asleep but arousable;
withdrawal symptoms not
likely

0

0

Level II: mild sedation;
patient may have slurred
speech, ataxia, nystagmus

500–600

150–200

Level III: patient is
comfortable: no evidence
of sedation; may have
nystagmus

800

250

1,000–1,200

300–600

Level IV: no drug effect

In the withdrawal procedure, phenobarbital can substitute for the more
commonly abused short-acting barbiturates. The effects of phenobarbital last
longer, and because barbiturate blood levels fluctuate less, phenobarbital does
not cause observable toxic signs or a severe overdose. An adequate dose is 30
mg of phenobarbital for every 100 mg of the short-acting substance.
Clinicians should maintain the user for at least 2 days at that level before
reducing the dose further. The regimen is analogous to the substitution of
methadone for heroin.
After withdrawal is complete, the patient must overcome the desire to start
retaking the substance. Although clinicians sometimes try to substitute a
nonbarbiturate sedative or hypnotic for a barbiturate, this often replaces one
substance dependence with another. If a user is to remain substance-free,
follow-up treatment, usually with psychiatric help and community support, is
vital. Otherwise, a patient will almost certainly return to barbiturates or a
substance with similar hazards.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
According to the NSDUH, approximately 500,000 individuals aged 12 and
older used sedatives in the past month. Persons older than 26 years have the


<<<PAGE 972>>>
highest use. In 2016, more than 600,000 individuals met the criteria for a
tranquilizer use disorder in the past year. Benzodiazepines are probably not
abused as frequently as other substances to get “high,” or inducing a euphoric
feeling. Instead, people use them to experience a general relaxed feeling.

PATHOLOGY
Neuropharmacology
The benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and barbiturate-like substances all have
their primary effects on the GABAA receptor complex, which contains a
chloride ion channel, a binding site for GABA, and a well-defined binding
site for benzodiazepines. The barbiturates and barbiturate-like substances
probably bind somewhere on the GABAA receptor complex. When one of
these substances binds to the complex, the effect is to increase the affinity of
the receptor for its endogenous neurotransmitter, GABA. GABA then
increases the flow of chloride ions through the channel into the neuron. The
influx of negatively charged chloride ions into the neuron is inhibitory and
hyperpolarizes the neuron relative to the extracellular space.
Although all the substances in this class induce tolerance and physical
dependence, we best understand the mechanisms for the benzodiazepines.
Long-term benzodiazepine use attenuates the usual agonist effects on the
receptor. Specifically, GABA stimulation of the GABAA receptors results in
less chloride influx than was caused by GABA stimulation before the
benzodiazepine administration. This downregulation of receptor response is
not caused by a decrease in receptor number or by a decreased affinity of the
receptor for GABA. The basis for the downregulation seems to be in the
coupling between the GABA binding site and the activation of the chloride
ion channel. This decreased efficiency in coupling may be regulated within
the GABAA receptor complex itself or by other neuronal mechanisms.
Misuse Liability and Other Risks of Long-Term Use
Surveys of prescribing practices, patient-initiated dosage changes, and
recreational or nonmedical benzodiazepine use along with reports from
emergency departments, medical examiners, and law enforcement agencies


<<<PAGE 973>>>
provide a complex picture of the public health implications of the
benzodiazepines. The vast majority of medical and psychiatric patients use
benzodiazepines appropriately, although rates of misuse by patients
dependent on alcohol and other drugs may be higher than individuals with
anxiety or insomnia without a history of substance use problems.
Furthermore, long-term use is high among patients with psychiatric disorders
and the elderly, with the latter group being sensitive to drug toxicity.
Also, long-term use of benzodiazepines may increase the risk of
developing dementia. A recent meta-analysis found that this risk is higher for
those taking benzodiazepines with a longer half-life and for those who have
been taking benzodiazepines for a longer duration (more than 3 years),
although other data suggest that there may not be an increased risk for
dementia.

4.6 Stimulant-Related Disorders
CLINICAL FEATURES
Types of Stimulants
Amphetamines. The racemic amphetamine sulfate (Benzedrine) was first
synthesized in 1887, and Smith, Kline, and French marketed it as a
decongestant in the early 1930s. In 1930, benzedrine sulfate was introduced
for the treatment of narcolepsy, postencephalitic parkinsonism, depression,
and lethargy. In the 1970s, a variety of social and regulatory factors began to
curb widespread amphetamine distribution. The current US FDA–approved
indications for amphetamine are limited to ADHD; however, they are used
for many symptoms, some of which we list in Table 4-29.
Table 4-29
Some Indications for Amphetamines
FDA approved
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder


<<<PAGE 974>>>
Narcolepsy
Off label uses
Obesity
Depression and dysthymia
Chronic fatigue syndrome
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
Cancer-related fatigue
End-of-life care (depressive symptoms)
Dementia
Multiple sclerosis
Fibromyalgia
Neurasthenia
PREPARATIONS. The main amphetamines currently available and used in the

United States are dextroamphetamine, methamphetamine, a mixed
dextroamphetamine-amphetamine salt, and the amphetamine-like compound
methylphenidate. These drugs go by such street names as ice, crystal, crystal
meth, and speed. As a general class, the amphetamines also called analeptics,
sympathomimetics, stimulants, and psychostimulants. The typical
amphetamines are used to increase performance and to induce a euphoric
feeling, for example, by students studying for examinations, by long-distance
truck drivers on trips, by business people with pressing deadlines, by athletes
in competition, and by soldiers during wartime. Although not as addictive as
cocaine, amphetamines are nonetheless addictive drugs.
Other amphetamine-like substances are ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, and
phenylpropanolamine (PPA). These drugs, PPA in particular, can
dangerously exacerbate hypertension, precipitate a toxic psychosis, cause an
intestinal infarction, or result in death. The safety margin for PPA is
particularly narrow, and three to four times the standard dose can result in
life-threatening hypertension. In 2005, the FDA recalled medications
containing PPA, and in 2006, they prohibited the sale of over-the-counter
(OTC) medications containing ephedrine and regulated the sale of OTC
medications containing pseudoephedrine, which was used illegally to make
methamphetamine.


<<<PAGE 975>>>
Amphetamine-type drugs with abuse potential also include
phendimetrazine (which is Schedule II of the Controlled Substance Act
[CSA]), and diethylpropion, benzphetamine, and phentermine (which are
Schedules III or IV of the CSA). All of these drugs, most likely, are capable
of causing all of the listed amphetamine-induced disorders. Modafinil, used
in the treatment of narcolepsy, also has stimulant and euphorigenic effects in
humans, but its toxicity and likelihood of producing amphetamine-induced
disorders are unknown.
Methamphetamine is a potent form of amphetamine that abusers of the
substance inhale, smoke, or inject intravenously. Its psychological effects last
for hours and are particularly powerful. Unlike cocaine (see discussion later
in this section), which is imported, methamphetamine is a synthetic drug that
can be manufactured domestically in illicit laboratories.
Other agents called substituted, or designer amphetamines are discussed
separately later in this section.
Cocaine. People have used cocaine in its raw form for more than 15
centuries. In the United States, cycles of widespread stimulant misuse and
associated problems have occurred for more than 100 years. Cocaine and
cocaine use disorders became a major public health issue in the 1980s when
an epidemic of use spread throughout the country. Due to education and
intervention, cocaine use has since declined. However, high rates of legal,
psychiatric, medical, and social problems related to cocaine use still exist;
thus, cocaine-related disorders remain a significant public health issue.
Cocaine is an alkaloid derived from the shrub Erythroxylum coca, which is
indigenous to South America, where the leaves of the shrub are chewed by
local inhabitants to obtain the stimulating effects. The cocaine alkaloid was
first isolated in 1855 and first used as a local anesthetic in 1880. It continues
to be used, especially for eye, nose, and throat surgery, for which its
vasoconstrictive and analgesic effects are helpful. In 1884, Sigmund Freud
made a study of cocaine’s general pharmacologic effects, and, for some time,
according to his biographers, he was addicted to the drug. In the 1880s and
1890s, cocaine was widely touted as a cure for many ills, and the 1899 Merck
Manual listed it. It was the active ingredient in the beverage Coca-Cola until
1903. In 1914, as its addictive effects became known, cocaine was classified
as a narcotic, alongside morphine and heroin.


<<<PAGE 976>>>
METHODS OF USE. Because drug dealers often dilute cocaine powder with

sugar or procaine, street cocaine varies greatly in purity. Amphetamines are
occasionally combined with cocaine. The most common method of using
cocaine is inhaling the finely chopped powder into the nose; a practice
referred to as “snorting” or “tooting.” Other methods of ingesting cocaine are
subcutaneous or intravenous injection and smoking (freebasing). Freebasing
involves mixing street cocaine with chemically extracted pure cocaine
alkaloid (the freebase) to get an increased effect. Smoking is also the method
used to ingest crack cocaine. Inhaling is the least dangerous method of
cocaine use; intravenous injection and smoking are the most dangerous. The
most direct methods of ingestion are often associated with cerebrovascular
diseases, cardiac abnormalities, and death. Although users can take cocaine
orally, they rarely do this as it is the least effective route.
Crack. Crack, a freebase form of cocaine, is extremely potent. Dealers sell it
in small, ready-to-smoke amounts, often called “rocks.” Crack cocaine is
highly addictive; even one or two experiences with the drug can cause an
intense craving for more. Users may resort to extremes of behavior to obtain
the money to buy more crack. Reports from urban emergency departments
have also associated extremes of violence with crack abuse.
Substituted
Amphetamines.
MDMA
(3,4methylenedioxymethamphetamine) is one of a series of substituted
amphetamines
that
also
includes
MDEA,
MDA
(3,4methylenedioxyamphetamine), DOB (2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromoamphetamine),
PMA (paramethoxyamphetamine), and others. These drugs produce
subjective effects resembling those of amphetamine and lysergic acid
diethylamide (LSD), and in that sense, MDMA and similar analogs may
represent a distinct category of drugs.
A methamphetamine derivative that came into use in the 1980s, MDMA
was not technically subject to legal regulation at the time. Although a
considered “designer drug,” meaning synthesized to evade legal regulation, in
reality, it was synthesized and patented in 1914. At one time, it was legal and
used as an aid for psychotherapy. However, the FDA never approved the
drug. Its use raised questions of both safety and legality, because the related
amphetamine derivatives MDA, DOB, and PMA had caused several overdose


<<<PAGE 977>>>
deaths, and MDA was known to cause extensive destruction of serotonergic
nerve terminals in the CNS. Using emergency scheduling authority, the DEA
made MDMA a Schedule I drug under the CSA, along with LSD, heroin, and
marijuana. Despite its illegal status, MDMA continues to be manufactured,
distributed, and used in the United States, Europe, and Australia. Its use is
frequent at extended dances (“raves”) popular with adolescents and young
adults.
Currently, no established clinical uses exist for MDMA, although before
its regulation, there were several reports of its beneficial effects as an adjunct
to psychotherapy.
After taking usual doses (100 to 150 mg), MDMA users experience an
elevated mood and, according to various reports, increased self-confidence
and sensory sensitivity, peaceful feelings coupled with insight, empathy, and
closeness to persons, and decreased appetite. The effect on concentration
varies with both increased and decreased concentration reported. Users also
report dysphoric reactions, psychotomimetic effects, and even psychosis.
Higher doses seem more likely to produce psychotomimetic effects.
Sympathomimetic effects of tachycardia, palpitation, increased blood
pressure, sweating, and bruxism are common. The subjective effects are
prominent for about 4 to 8 hours, but that can vary widely depending on the
dose and route of administration. The drug is usually taken orally but is also
snorted and injected. Users report both tachyphylaxis and some tolerance.
Although not as toxic as MDA, MDMA can cause various toxicities as
well as fatal overdoses. It does not appear to be neurotoxic when injected into
the brains of animals, but humans and animals do metabolize it to MDA. In
animals, MDMA produces selective, long-lasting damage to serotonergic
nerve terminals. It is not clear whether the levels of the MDA metabolite
reached in humans after the usual doses of MDMA suffice to produce lasting
damage.
“Bath Salts”. Catha edulis, or “Khat,” is a plant indigenous to Eastern
Africa and Southern Arabia. It releases a variety of psychoactive chemicals,
including the stimulants cathinone and cathine. Khat is chewed like tobacco
and held between the cheek and gums after chewing. The National Institute
on Drug Abuse estimates that as many as 10 million people worldwide use
Khat, including many in Eastern Africa and the Middle East, as well as an


<<<PAGE 978>>>
unknown number of immigrants to the United States.
In the mid-2000s, synthetic cathinones began to appear, marketed as “legal
high” chemicals. They were packaged under labels including “screen
cleaner,” “jewelry cleaner,” and most notoriously “bath salts.” Produced as
powders (generally marked “not for human consumption”), users can ingest
them by oral, intranasal, inhaled (smoked) or intravenous routes. These
compounds are substituted cathinones that are chemically modified to avoid
regulatory control. There are a large number of specific compounds in the
class, and a given package often contains a mix of agents, further increasing
the risk of toxicity. Generally, substituted cathinones increase synaptic
catecholamine levels by inhibiting the dopamine, serotonin, and
norepinephrine reuptake transporters in a fashion similar to cocaine. Most
also facilitate catecholamine release, similar to methamphetamine. Animal
models indicate strong reinforcing properties of these compounds, suggesting
that they are highly addictive.
“Club Drugs”. Club drugs is a generic term for drugs associated with dance
clubs, bars, and all-night dance parties (raves). They include LSD, γhydroxybutyrate (GHB), ketamine, methamphetamine, MDMA (ecstasy), and
Rohypnol or “roofies” (flunitrazepam). These represent various classes of
drugs, with different chemical structures and a range of physical and
subjective effects. GHB, ketamine, and Rohypnol are sometimes called date
rape drugs because they produce disorienting and sedating effects, and often
users cannot recall what occurred during all or part of an episode under the
influence of the drug. These drugs may be given surreptitiously, such as
slipped into a beverage, or a person might be convinced to take the drug, not
understanding its effect.
Emergency department mentions of GHB, ketamine, and Rohypnol are
relatively few. Of the club drugs, methamphetamine is the substance that
accounts for the largest share of treatment admissions.

DIAGNOSIS
Stimulant Use Disorder
The DSM-5 and ICD-10 include several diagnoses related to stimulant use


<<<PAGE 979>>>
disorder, and they generally follow the template for all substance use
disorders (see Section 4.1 and Tables 4-1 through 4-3).
Amphetamine dependence can result in a rapid downward spiral of a
person’s abilities to cope with work- and family-related obligations and
stresses. A person who abuses amphetamines requires increasingly high
doses of amphetamine to obtain the usual high, and physical signs of chronic
amphetamine use (e.g., decreased weight and paranoid ideas) almost always
develop with continued use.
Mr. H, a 35-year-old married man, was admitted to a psychiatric hospital
because he felt persecuted by gang members who were out to kill him. He
could not explain why they wished to kill him, but he heard voices from
people whom he suspected to be mob drug dealers, and they were
discussing that they should kill him. He used methamphetamine for
several years, so he had dealt with drug dealers before. He began using at
age 27 at the persuasion of a friend to try it. After injecting 20 mg, he felt
euphoric and powerful, and his sleepiness and fatigue disappeared. After
a few tries, Mr. H found that he could not stop using it. He always
thought about how he would obtain the drug and started increasing the
dosage he used. During times that he could not get methamphetamine, he
felt lethargic and sleepy and became irritable and dysphoric. Mr. H’s wife
learned of his drug use and attempted to persuade him to stop using it. He
lost his job 2 months before his admission as he was repeatedly abusive
to work colleagues because he felt that they were trying to harm him.
With no income, Mr. H had to cut down his use of methamphetamine to
only occasional usage. He finally decided to quit when his wife
threatened to divorce him. Once he stopped using, he felt fatigued,
seemed gloomy, and often sat in his favorite chair and did nothing. After
a few weeks, Mr. H told his wife that he did not wish to leave the house
because he had heard dealers on the street talking about him. He wanted
all doors and windows locked, and he refused to eat in fear that the
people were poisoning his food.
On examination, Mr. H seemed withdrawn, only giving short answers
to questions. He was in clear consciousness and fully oriented and
showed no marked impairment of cognitive functions. Physical and


<<<PAGE 980>>>
neurologic testing showed no abnormalities except needle scars on his
arms from methamphetamine injections. An EEG was normal.
Clinically and practically, clinicians may suspect cocaine use disorder
in patients with unexplained changes in personality. Frequent changes
associated with cocaine use are irritability, impaired ability to
concentrate, compulsive behavior, severe insomnia, and weight loss.
Colleagues at work and family members may notice a person’s general
and increasing inability to perform the expected tasks associated with
work and family life. The patient may show new evidence of increased
debt or inability to pay bills on time because of the vast sums used to buy
cocaine. Individuals with cocaine use disorder often excuse themselves
from work or social situations every 30 to 60 minutes to find a secluded
place to inhale more cocaine. Because of the vasoconstricting effects of
cocaine, users almost always develop nasal congestion, which they may
attempt to self-medicate with decongestant sprays.

Mr. D, a 45-year-old married man, was referred by his therapist to a
private outpatient substance use treatment program for evaluation and
treatment of a possible cocaine problem. According to the therapist, Mr.
D’s wife expressed concern for a possible substance use problem on
several occasions. A few days prior, Mr. D admitted to the therapist and
his wife that he “occasionally” used cocaine for the past year. His wife
insisted that he obtain treatment for his drug problem or else she would
file for divorce. Mr. D reluctantly conceded to treatment but insisted that
his cocaine use was not a problem and that he felt capable of stopping
without entering a treatment program.
During the initial evaluation interview, Mr. D reported that he
currently used cocaine, intranasally, 3 to 5 days a week and that this
pattern has been continuing for a year and a half. On average, he
consumes a total of 1 to 2 g of cocaine weekly. He mostly uses cocaine at
work, in his office, or the bathroom. He usually started thinking about
cocaine during his drive to work in the morning and once at work, was
unable to avoid thinking about the cocaine in his desk drawer. Despite his
attempts at distraction and postponing use, he usually takes his first line


<<<PAGE 981>>>
of cocaine within an hour of arriving at work. On some days, he will take
another two to three lines during the day, but, on days where he is
frustrated and stressed, he may take a line or two every hour from
morning until late afternoon. He rarely uses cocaine at home and never
uses it in front of his wife or his three daughters. He occasionally takes a
line or two during a weekday evening or weekends at home when
everyone else is out of the house. He denies using alcohol or any other
illicit drugs. He denies any history of alcohol or drug abuse and any
history of emotional or marital problems.
Stimulant Intoxication
The diagnostic criteria for stimulant intoxication emphasize behavioral and
physical signs and symptoms of stimulant use (Table 4-30). Persons use
stimulants for their characteristic effects of elation, euphoria, heightened selfesteem, and perceived improvement on mental and physical tasks. With high
doses, symptoms of intoxication include agitation, irritability, impaired
judgment, impulsive and potentially dangerous sexual behavior, aggression, a
generalized increase in psychomotor activity, and potentially, symptoms of
mania. The significant associated physical symptoms are tachycardia,
hypertension, and mydriasis.
Table 4-30
Signs and Symptoms of Stimulant Intoxication
• Mydriasis
• Psychomotor agitation or retardation
• Tachycardia or bradycardia
• Perspiration or chills
• Cardiac arrhythmias or chest pain
• Elevated or lowered blood pressure
• Dyskinesias
• Dystonias
• Weight loss
• Nausea or vomiting


<<<PAGE 982>>>
• Muscular weakness
• Respiratory depression
• Confusion, seizures, or coma
Mrs. T, a 38-year-old married businesswoman, was admitted to the
psychiatric service after a 3-month period in which she became
increasingly mistrustful of others and suspicious of business associates.
She took statements from others out of context, twisting their words and
making inappropriately hostile and accusatory comments. On one
occasion, Mrs. T physically attacked a coworker in a bar, accusing the
coworker of having an affair with her husband and plotting with other
coworkers to kill her.
One year previously, Mrs. T’s physician prescribed her
methylphenidate for narcolepsy due to daily irresistible sleep attacks and
episodes of a sudden loss of muscle tone when she became emotionally
excited. After taking the medication, Mrs. T became asymptomatic and
was able to work effectively and have an active social life with family
and friends.
In the 5 months before admission, Mrs. T had been using increasingly
large doses of methylphenidate to maintain alertness late at night because
of an increased amount of work that she could not complete during the
day. She reported that during this time, she often could feel her heart
racing and that she had trouble sitting still.

Mr. P, an 18-year-old man, was brought to a hospital emergency
department via ambulance in the middle of the night. He was
accompanied by a friend who called the ambulance as he felt that Mr. P
was going to die. Mr. P was agitated and argumentative, his breathing
was irregular and rapid, his pulse was rapid, and he had dilated pupils.
His friend eventually admitted that they had used much cocaine that
evening.
When his mother arrived at the hospital, Mr. P’s condition had
somewhat improved, although his loud singing created a commotion in


<<<PAGE 983>>>
the emergency department. His mother states that Mr. P has some
disciplinary problems; he is disobedient, resentful, and violently
argumentative. He was arrested on a few occasions for shoplifting and for
driving while intoxicated. His mother suspected that Mr. P was using
drugs due to his behavior and because she heard him talk to his friends
about drugs. However, she has no direct proof of his use.
Within 24 hours, Mr. P was well and willing to talk. He boastfully
stated that he had been using alcohol and various drugs regularly since he
was 13. It started with just alcohol and marijuana, but once he entered
high school and became acquainted with older teenagers, he
experimented with other drugs such as speed and cocaine. By the time he
was 16, he was using combinations of alcohol, speed, marijuana, and
cocaine. He settled on just cocaine after a year of mixing drugs.
Mr. P frequently skipped school, and, when he attended school, he was
usually intoxicated. To support his habit, he acquired money in various
schemes, such as borrowing money from friends that he had no intention
of paying back or stealing car radios or stealing from his mother.
Despite his blatant admission of drug use, Mr. P denies having a
problem. When asked about his ability to control his drug use, he
defensively replied that, of course, he could, but as he does not see a
problem, he has not tried.
Stimulant Withdrawal
After stimulant intoxication, a “crash” occurs with symptoms of anxiety,
tremulousness, dysphoric mood, lethargy, fatigue, nightmares (accompanied
by rebound REM sleep), headache, profuse sweating, muscle cramps,
stomach cramps, and insatiable hunger. The withdrawal symptoms generally
peak in 2 to 4 days and are resolved in 1 week. The most serious withdrawal
symptom is depression, which can be particularly severe after the sustained
use of high doses of stimulants and which can be associated with suicidal
ideation or behavior. A person in the state of withdrawal can experience
powerful and intense cravings for cocaine, mainly because taking cocaine can
eliminate unpleasant withdrawal symptoms. Persons experiencing cocaine
withdrawal often attempt to self-medicate with alcohol, sedatives, hypnotics,
or antianxiety agents such as diazepam.


<<<PAGE 984>>>
Stimulant Intoxication Delirium
Delirium associated with stimulant use generally results from high doses of a
stimulant or sustained use, and so sleep deprivation affects the clinical
presentation. The combination of stimulants with other substances and the
use of stimulants by a person with preexisting brain damage can also cause
delirium. It is not uncommon for university students who are using
amphetamines to cram for examinations to exhibit this type of delirium.
Stimulant-Induced Psychotic Disorder
The hallmark of stimulant-induced psychotic disorder is the presence of
paranoid delusions and hallucinations, which occurs in up to 50 percent of
those who misuse stimulants. Auditory hallucinations are also common, but
visual and tactile hallucinations are less common than paranoid delusions.
Cocaine can also cause the sensation of bugs crawling beneath the skin
(formication). The presence of these symptoms depends on the dose, duration
of use, and the user’s sensitivity to the substance. Cocaine-induced psychotic
disorders are most familiar with intravenous use and crack users, and the
psychotic symptoms are more common in men than in women. The treatment
of choice for amphetamine-induced psychotic disorder is the short-term use
of an antipsychotic medication such as haloperidol.
Mr. H is a 20-year-old college student who was functioning well until the
weeks of his finals when he began taking large amounts of cocaine
because he felt he was unprepared for his tests. He began having
delusional beliefs that the police were following him at the request of his
parents to spy on him. He also believed that his roommate would give
reports to them about his study habits and social life. He was brought to
the emergency department after he threatened to harm his roommate if he
continued to report on him.
During his evaluation, Mr. P reported sleeplessness and auditory
hallucinations that told him that his roommate was conspiring against
him. He was very agitated and paced continuously. After admission to the
hospital, Mr. P was given antipsychotics and sleeping medications and
recovered in 3 days.


<<<PAGE 985>>>
Stimulant-Induced Mood Disorder
Stimulant-induced mood disorder includes the diagnoses of stimulantinduced bipolar disorder and stimulant-induced depressive disorder, either of
which can begin during either intoxication or withdrawal. In general,
intoxication is associated with manic or mixed mood features, whereas
withdrawal is associated with depressive mood features.
Stimulant-Induced Anxiety Disorder
The onset of stimulant-induced anxiety disorder can occur during intoxication
or withdrawal. Stimulants can induce symptoms similar to those seen in panic
disorder and phobic disorders, in particular.
Stimulant-Induced Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
The onset of stimulant-induced obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) can
occur during intoxication or withdrawal. After high doses of stimulants, some
individuals develop time-limited stereotyped behaviors or rituals (i.e., picking
at clothing, and arranging and rearranging items purposelessly) that share
some features with the type of compulsions seen in OCD.
Stimulant-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
People sometimes use amphetamines as an antidote to the sexual side effects
of serotonergic agents such as fluoxetine, but stimulants are often misused by
persons to enhance sexual experiences. High doses and long-term use are
associated with erectile disorder and other sexual dysfunctions.
Stimulant-Induced Sleep Disorder
Stimulant-induced sleep disorder can begin during either intoxication or
withdrawal, and sleep dysfunction can vary depending on the onset.
Stimulant intoxication can produce insomnia and sleep deprivation, whereas
persons undergoing stimulant withdrawal can experience hypersomnolence
and nightmares.

COMORBIDITY
Studies of the prevalence of non–substance-related psychiatric disorders


<<<PAGE 986>>>
among individuals with stimulant use disorders have consistently found
elevated levels of psychiatric disorders in this population. Results from the
community-based Epidemiological Catchment Area (ECA) Study
demonstrated elevated rates of non–substance-related mental disorders in
those with cocaine use disorders. In this study, the estimated lifetime
prevalence rate for mental disorders was 76 percent or 11 times that found in
the general population; nearly 85 percent of those with cocaine use disorders
also had co-occurring alcohol use disorders. Studies that have compared
treatment-seeking individuals with cocaine use disorders to those who do not
seek treatment have demonstrated higher rates of major depression and
ADHD among the former group. Likewise, most studies report high levels of
co-occurring other substance use disorders in individuals with amphetaminetype stimulant use disorders. Mood disorders, psychotic disorders, and
anxiety disorders are also common. While psychotic symptoms are most
commonly methamphetamine-induced, mood and anxiety disorders are often
not substance-induced.

TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION
Detoxification and Early Treatment
The stimulant withdrawal syndrome is distinct from that of opioids, alcohol,
or sedative–hypnotic agents as the physiologic effects are not severe enough
to require inpatient or residential drug withdrawal. Thus, it is generally
possible to engage in a therapeutic trial of outpatient withdrawal before
deciding whether the patient will need a more intensive or controlled setting
to stop the drug. Patients withdrawing from stimulants typically experience
fatigue, dysphoria, disturbed sleep, and some craving; some may experience
depression. No pharmacologic agents reliably reduce the intensity of
withdrawal, but recovery over a week or two is generally uneventful. It may
take longer, however, for sleep, mood, and cognitive function to recover
fully.
Most stimulant users do not come to treatment voluntarily. Their
experience with the substance is too positive, and the adverse effects are
perceived as too minimal to warrant seeking treatment.
The major hurdle to overcome in the treatment of cocaine-related disorders


<<<PAGE 987>>>
is the user’s intense craving for the drug. Although animal studies have
shown that cocaine is a potent inducer of self-administration, these studies
have also shown that animals limit their use of cocaine when investigators
add negative reinforcers to the cocaine intake. In humans, negative
reinforcers may take the form of work and family-related problems brought
on by cocaine use. Therefore, clinicians must take a broad treatment approach
and include social, psychological, and perhaps biologic strategies in the
treatment program.
Attaining abstinence from stimulants in patients may require complete or
partial hospitalization to remove them from the social settings in which they
had obtained or used stimulants. Frequent, unscheduled urine testing is
almost always necessary to monitor patients’ continued abstinence, especially
in the first weeks and months of treatment. Relapse prevention therapy (RPT)
relies on cognitive and behavioral techniques in addition to hospitalization
and outpatient therapy to achieve the goal of abstinence.
Psychosocial Therapies
Psychological intervention usually involves individual, group, and family
modalities. In individual therapy, therapists should focus on the dynamics
leading to stimulant use, the perceived positive effects of the stimulant, and
other ways to achieve these effects. Group therapy and support groups, such
as NA, often focus on discussions with other persons who use stimulants and
on sharing experiences and effective coping methods. Family therapy is often
an essential component of the treatment strategy. Typical issues discussed in
family therapy are the ways the patient’s past behavior has harmed the family
and the responses of family members to these behaviors. Therapy should also
focus, however, on the future and on changes in the family’s activities that
may help the patient stay off the drug and direct energies in different
directions. Clinicians can use this approach for outpatient treatment.
Network Therapy. Network therapy is a specialized type of combined
individual and group therapy designed to ensure greater success in the officebased treatment of addicted patients. Network therapy uses both
psychodynamic and cognitive-behavioral approaches to individual therapy
while engaging the patient in a group support network. The group, composed


<<<PAGE 988>>>
of the patient’s family and peers, is used as a therapeutic network joining the
patient and therapist at intervals in therapy sessions. The approach promotes
group cohesiveness as a vehicle for engaging patients in this treatment. This
network is managed by the therapist to provide cohesiveness and support and
to promote compliance with treatment. Although network therapy has not
received systematic, controlled evaluation, it is frequently applied in the
psychiatric practice because it is one of the few manualized approaches
designed for use by individual practitioners in an office setting.
Pharmacologic Adjuncts
Presently, no pharmacologic treatments produce decreases in stimulant use.
However, investigators have explored several agents, and those are
summarized below.
Amphetamines. Multiple medications have been investigated as potential
treatment options for amphetamine-type stimulant disorders, though the
results have been mostly disappointing. Most serotonergic medications
studied have not demonstrated efficacy, though mirtazapine has shown some
effectiveness in a small sample of men who have sex with men. The opioidreceptor antagonist naltrexone and the dopamine antidepressant bupropion
have both shown promise in those with less severe amphetamine use
disorders, but little effect on more dependent individuals. Other medications,
including topiramate, aripiprazole, baclofen, gabapentin, and modafinil, have
demonstrated little effectiveness in this population.
Cocaine. A variety of pharmacologic agents, most approved for other uses,
have been, and are being tested clinically for the treatment of cocaine use
disorder and relapse.
Cocaine users presumed to have preexisting ADHD or mood disorders
have been treated with methylphenidate and lithium, respectively. Those
drugs are of little or no benefit in patients without the disorders, and
clinicians should adhere strictly to diagnostic criteria before using either of
them in the treatment of cocaine use disorder. In patients with ADHD, slowrelease forms of methylphenidate may be less likely to trigger cocaine
craving, but the impact of such pharmacotherapy on cocaine use is not clear.
Investigators have explored many pharmacologic agents on the premise


<<<PAGE 989>>>
that chronic cocaine use alters the function of multiple neurotransmitter
systems, especially the dopaminergic and serotonergic transmitters regulating
hedonic tone, and that cocaine induces a state of relative dopaminergic
deficiency. Although the evidence for such alterations in dopaminergic
function has been growing, it has been challenging to demonstrate that agents
theoretically capable of modifying dopamine function can alter the course of
treatment.
Tricyclic antidepressant drugs yielded some positive results when used
early in treatment with minimally drug-dependent patients; however, they are
of little or no use inducing abstinence in moderate or severe cases.
Also tried but not confirmed effective in controlled studies are other
antidepressants, such as bupropion, MAOIs, SSRIs, antipsychotics, lithium,
several different calcium channel inhibitors, and anticonvulsants. Several
studies have found increased rates of abstinence with the use of topiramate
for cocaine use disorders; however, there are also negative trials of
topiramate in this population.
Disulfiram has demonstrated potential benefits in the pharmacotherapy of
cocaine use disorder. Disulfiram has long been used in the treatment of
alcohol use disorder because it inhibits an enzyme involved in the
metabolism of ethanol. Though disulfiram was initially considered a potential
treatment option for individuals with both alcohol and cocaine use disorders,
studies demonstrated that disulfiram appears to have a direct effect on the
metabolism of dopamine and cocaine itself; it acts as an inhibitor of
dopamine β-hydroxylase, thereby slowing the breakdown of synaptic
dopamine and increasing dopamine levels. Individuals who are coadministered cocaine and disulfiram describe more negative responses to
cocaine, including anxiety, restlessness, and paranoia. These reactions may,
in part, explain the effects of disulfiram in decreasing cocaine use. Issues
affecting treatment response to disulfiram include challenges with treatment
nonadherence, risks of inducing psychotic symptoms with combined cocaine
and disulfiram use, and risks of serious medical consequences if a patient
were to consume alcohol, given the frequent co-occurrence of alcohol and
cocaine use disorders.

EPIDEMIOLOGY


<<<PAGE 990>>>
Amphetamines
According to the 2017 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH),
0.3 percent of persons 12 years or older were current users of
methamphetamine, and 5.4 percent have a lifetime history of
methamphetamine use. In 2016, 684,000 individuals older than 12 years met
the criteria for a methamphetamine use disorder, representing 0.3 percent of
the population.
Cocaine
Cocaine Use. In 2016, 1.9 million (0.7 percent) persons aged 12 years or
older used cocaine in the past month. Persons aged 18 to 25 (1.6 percent) had
a higher rate of past-month cocaine use than persons aged 26 or older (0.6
percent) and youths aged 12 to 17 (0.1 percent). The lifetime rate of cocaine
use by persons aged 12 years and older is 14.9 percent.
Cocaine Use Disorder. In 2016, more than 850,000 (0.3 percent) persons
aged 12 or older met the criteria for a cocaine use disorder. Persons aged 18
to 25 (0.6 percent) had the highest rate of meeting criteria for cocaine use
disorder in the past year, followed by persons aged 26 or older (0.3 percent)
and youths aged 12 to 17 (0.1 percent).

PATHOLOGY
As a result of actions in the CNS, stimulants can produce a sense of alertness,
euphoria, and well-being. Users may experience decreased hunger and less
need for sleep. Performance impaired by fatigue is usually improved. Some
users believe that cocaine enhances sexual performance.
Adverse Effects
Stimulant use can cause medical complications both as a result of direct toxic
effects and because of complications related to methods of preparation and
administration. Stimulants are potent sympathomimetic drugs, causing
physiologic effects, including vasoconstriction, increased heart rate, and
elevated blood pressure through adrenergic stimulation. The combination of
increased myocardial demand with constriction of coronary blood vessels can


<<<PAGE 991>>>
precipitate angina pectoris and even myocardial infarction. Acute
hypertension associated with stimulant use can also predispose to arterial
hemorrhages, such as hemorrhagic stroke or aortic dissection.
Vasoconstriction can involve damage to other end organs, including the
brain, kidneys, or intestines. With intranasal use, decreased blood flow to the
nasal mucosa frequently causes nasal symptoms (e.g., rhinorrhea, nosebleeds)
and mucosal ulceration. A combination of vasoconstriction and bruxism
associated with the use of methamphetamine causes markedly poor dentition,
or “meth mouth.” Grand mal seizures are frequent with stimulant overdose
and may occur with routine use as well. Furthermore, individuals who misuse
stimulants regularly may develop neuropsychological deficits, including
problems with attention, learning, and memory. In many cases, these
abnormalities persist during periods of abstinence.
Stimulant misuse can also precipitate behaviors that place an individual at
increased risk of harm by violence or accidental injury. Unsafe sexual
behaviors may lead to the transmission of HIV or other sexually transmitted
diseases. The drugs can cause accidental injury, for example, driving while
intoxicated. The associated illegal behaviors involved in obtaining cocaine or
methamphetamine can also increase one’s risk of violent injury.
Neuropharmacology
Amphetamines. All the amphetamines are rapidly absorbed orally and
have a rapid onset of action, usually within 1 hour, when taken orally. The
classic amphetamines are also taken intravenously and have an almost
immediate effect by this route. Users can also inhale (“snort”) nonprescribed
amphetamines or designer amphetamines. Tolerance develops with both
classic and designer amphetamines, although amphetamine users respond by
taking more of the drug. Amphetamine is less addictive than cocaine, as
evidenced by experiments on rats in which not all animals spontaneously
self-administered low doses of amphetamine.
The classic amphetamines (i.e., dextroamphetamine, methamphetamine,
and methylphenidate) produce their primary effects by causing the release of
catecholamines, particularly dopamine, from presynaptic terminals. The
effects are particularly potent for the dopaminergic neurons projecting from
the VTA to the cerebral cortex and the limbic areas. Some neuroscientists call


<<<PAGE 992>>>
this the reward circuit pathway, and its activation is probably the primary
addicting mechanism for the amphetamines. The designer amphetamines
cause the release of catecholamines (dopamine and norepinephrine) and
serotonin, the neurotransmitter implicated as the significant neurochemical
pathway for hallucinogens. Therefore, the clinical effects of designer
amphetamines are a blend of the effects of classic amphetamines and those of
hallucinogens.
Cocaine. In vitro animal studies using radiolabeled cocaine or cocaine
analogs demonstrate high amounts of binding in dopamine-rich brain regions,
including the caudate-putamen and the VTA. Moderate levels of cocaine
binding also occur in the substantia nigra, amygdala, hypothalamus, and
locus coeruleus. In humans, cocaine rapidly permeates the striatum, then
quickly redistributes out of it with a half-life of about 20 minutes. The time
course of self-reported “high” closely follows this pattern of rapid uptake and
clearance.
Drug-related reinforcement is most strongly related to the dopaminergic
projections from the VTA to the nucleus accumbens. Cocaine administration
causes transient increases in extracellular dopamine levels in these regions by
binding to the presynaptic dopamine transporter (DAT), thereby inhibiting
dopamine reuptake. Subjective euphoria appears to be a function of both
DAT occupancy (with a threshold of 50 percent occupancy to be detectable)
and rapidity of onset, with the most robust responses occurring when
dopaminergic neurotransmission is increasing dynamically.

ETIOLOGY
Genetic Factors
The most convincing evidence to date of a genetic influence on cocaine use
disorder comes from studies of twins. Monozygotic twins have higher
concordance rates for stimulant use disorder (cocaine, amphetamines, and
amphetamine-like drugs) than dizygotic twins. The analyses indicate that
genetic factors and unique (unshared) environmental factors contribute
equally to the development of stimulant dependence.
Sociocultural Factors


<<<PAGE 993>>>
Social, cultural, and economic factors are potent determinants of initial use,
continuing use, and relapse. Excessive use is far more likely in countries
where cocaine is readily available. Different economic opportunities may
influence certain groups more than others to engage in selling illicit drugs,
and selling is more likely to be carried out in familiar communities than in
communities where the seller runs a high risk of arrest.
Learning and Conditioning
Learning and conditioning are also considered important in perpetuating
cocaine use. Each inhalation or injection of cocaine yields a “rush” and a
euphoric experience that reinforces the antecedent drug-taking behavior.
Also, the environmental cues associated with substance use become
associated with the euphoric state so that, long after a period of cessation,
such cues (e.g., white powder and paraphernalia) can elicit memories of the
euphoric state and reawaken craving for cocaine.
In cocaine abusers (but not in healthy controls), cocaine-related stimuli
activate brain regions subserving episodic and working memory and produce
EEG arousal (desynchronization). Increased metabolic activity in the limbicrelated regions, such as the amygdala, parahippocampal gyrus, and
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, reportedly correlates with reports of craving for
cocaine, but the degree of EEG arousal does not.


<<<PAGE 994>>>
4.7 Tobacco-Related Disorders
Tobacco use disorder is among the most prevalent, deadly, and costly of
substance use disorders. It is also one of the most ignored, particularly by
psychiatrists. Despite recent research that shows commonalities between
tobacco use disorder and other substance use disorders, tobacco use disorder
differs from other substance use disorders in unique ways. Tobacco does not
cause behavioral problems; therefore, few tobacco-dependent persons seek
psychiatric treatment, nor are they referred. Tobacco is a legal drug, and most
persons who stop tobacco use have done so without treatment. Thus a
common but erroneous view is that, unlike alcohol and other illicit drugs,
most smokers do not need treatment.
Several trends may change the reluctance of psychiatrists to play a role in
treating tobacco use disorders: (1) the growing recognition that most
psychiatric patients smoke and many die from the consequences of tobacco
use disorders; (2) remaining smokers will be more and more likely to have
psychiatric problems, which suggests that many need intensive treatments;
and (3) the development of multiple pharmacologic agents to aid smokers in
quitting.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Behaviorally, the stimulatory effects of nicotine produce improved attention,
learning, reaction time, and problem-solving ability. Tobacco users also
report that cigarette smoking lifts their mood, decreases tension, and lessens
depressive feelings. Results of studies of the effects of nicotine on CBF
suggest that short-term nicotine exposure increases CBF without changing
cerebral oxygen metabolism, but long-term nicotine exposure decreases CBF.
In contrast to its stimulatory CNS effects, nicotine acts as a skeletal muscle
relaxant.

DIAGNOSIS
Tobacco Use Disorder


<<<PAGE 995>>>
The DSM-5 includes a diagnosis for tobacco use disorder characterized by
craving, persistent and recurrent use, tolerance, and withdrawal when
stopping tobacco. Dependence on tobacco develops quickly, probably
because nicotine activates the VTA dopaminergic system, the same system
affected by cocaine and amphetamine. The development of dependence is
enhanced by substantial social factors that encourage smoking in some
settings and by the powerful effects of tobacco company advertising. Persons
are likely to smoke if their parents or siblings smoke and serve as role
models. Several recent studies have also suggested a genetic diathesis toward
tobacco dependence. Most persons who smoke want to quit and have tried
many times to quit but have been unsuccessful.
Tobacco Withdrawal
The DSM-5 does not have a diagnostic category for tobacco intoxication, but
it does have a diagnostic category for nicotine withdrawal. Withdrawal
symptoms can develop within 2 hours of smoking the last cigarette; they
generally peak in the first 24 to 48 hours and can last for weeks or months.
The common symptoms include an intense craving for tobacco, tension,
irritability, difficulty concentrating, drowsiness and paradoxical trouble
sleeping, decreased heart rate and blood pressure, increased appetite and
weight gain, decreased motor performance, and increased muscle tension. A
mild syndrome of tobacco withdrawal can appear when a smoker switches
from regular to low-nicotine cigarettes.

TREATMENT
For those who already smoke, psychiatrists should advise them to quit
smoking. For patients who are ready to stop smoking, it is best to set a “quit
date.” Most clinicians and smokers prefer abrupt cessation, but because no
good quality data indicate that abrupt cessation is better than gradual
cessation, patient preference for gradual cessation should be respected. Brief
advice should focus on the need for medication or group therapy, weight gain
concerns, high-risk situations, making cigarettes unavailable, and so forth.
Because relapse is often rapid, the first follow-up phone call or visit should
be 2 to 3 days after the quit date. These strategies may double self-initiated
quit rates. Table 4-31 presents a model, “The 5 A’s” for helping tobacco


<<<PAGE 996>>>
cessation that uses a motivational interviewing approach.
Ms. H was a 45-year-old patient with schizophrenia who smoked 35
cigarettes per day. She began her cigarette use at approximately 20 years
of age during the prodromal stages of her first psychotic break. During
the first 20 years of treatment, no psychiatrist or physician advised her to
stop smoking.
When the patient was 43 years of age, her primary physician
recommended smoking cessation. Ms. H attempted to stop on her own
but lasted only 48 hours, partly because her housemates and friends
smoked. During a routine medication check, her psychiatrist
recommended that she stop smoking, and Ms. H described her prior
attempts. The psychiatrist and Ms. H discussed ways to avoid smokers
and had the patient announce her intent to quit and request that her
friends try not to smoke around her and to offer encouragement for her
attempt to quit. The psychiatrist also noted that Ms. H became irritable,
slightly depressed, and restless and that she had insomnia during prior
cessation attempts, and thus recommended medications. Ms. H chose to
use a nicotine patch plus nicotine gum as needed.
The psychiatrist had Ms. H call 2 days after she attempted to quit
smoking. At this point, Ms. H stated that the patch and gum were helping.
One week later, the patient returned after having relapsed back to
smoking. The psychiatrist praised Ms. H for not smoking for 4 days. He
suggested that Ms. H contact him again if she wished to try to stop again.
Seven months later, during another medication check, the psychiatrist
again asked Ms. H to consider cessation, but she was reluctant.
Two months later, Ms. H called and said she wished to try again. This
time, the psychiatrist and Ms. H listed several activities that she could do
to avoid being around friends who smoked, phoned Ms. H’s boyfriend to
ask him to assist her in stopping, asked the nurses on the inpatient ward
to call Ms. H to encourage her, plus enrolled Ms. H in a support group for
the next 4 weeks. This time the psychiatrist prescribed the non-nicotine
medication varenicline and followed her with 15-minute visits for each of
the first 3 weeks. She had two “slips” but did not go back to smoking and
remained an ex-smoker. (Adapted from John R. Hughes, M.D.)


<<<PAGE 997>>>
Table 4-31
The 5 Major Steps to Intervention (The 5 A’s)
1. Ask: Identify and document tobacco use status for every patient at
every visit.
2. Advise: In a clear, strong, and personalized manner, urge every
tobacco user to quit.
3. Assess: Is the tobacco user willing to make a quit attempt at this time?
4. Assist: For the patient willing to make a quit attempt, use counseling
and pharmacotherapy to help him or her quit. (See
https://www.ahrq.gov/prevention/guidelines/tobacco/clinicians/index.html
for materials to help).
5. Arrange: Schedule follow-up contact, in person or by telephone,
preferably within the first week after the quit date.
Source: Five Major Steps to Intervention (The “5 A’s”). Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality, Rockville, MD. Content last reviewed: December 2012. Accessed November 30,
2020. https://www.ahrq.gov/prevention/guidelines/tobacco/5steps.html

Psychosocial Therapies
Behavior therapy is the most widely accepted and well-proved psychological
therapy for smoking. Skills training and relapse prevention identify high-risk
situations and plan and practice behavioral or cognitive coping skills for
those situations in which smoking occurs. Stimulus control involves
eliminating cues for smoking in the environment. Aversive therapy has
smokers smoke repeatedly and rapidly to the point of nausea, which
associates smoking with unpleasant, rather than pleasant, sensations.
Aversive therapy appears to be effective but requires a good therapeutic
alliance and patient compliance.
Hypnosis. Some patients benefit from a series of hypnotic sessions. The
hypnotist gives suggestions about the benefits of not smoking, which the
patient assimilates into their cognitive framework. The clinician can also use
posthypnotic suggestions that cause cigarettes to taste unpleasant or to
produce nausea.


<<<PAGE 998>>>
Psychopharmacological Therapies
Table 4-32 lists the pharmacotherapies typically used for tobacco use
disorder.
Table 4-32
FDA-Approved Medications for Smoking Cessation
Product

Route of
Availability Usual Dose
Administration

Nicotine Replacement Medications
NicoDerm, Habitrol,
Generic versions

Patch

OTC

Nicorette, Commit,
Generic versions

Oral (Gum,
Lozenge)

OTC

Nicotrol

Inhaled (Nasal
Spray,
Inhaler)

Prescription

Varies by
product and
amount a
person has
smoked. See
manufacturer
guidelines
for specific
instructions

Non-Nicotine Medications
Bupropion (marketed Pill
as Zyban, however
brand discontinued
by manufacturer, in
US)

Prescription Starting: 150
mg × 3 days
After 3 days
increase to
150 twice a
day
Begin 1 wk


<<<PAGE 999>>>
before
quitting
Varenicline Tartrate
(Chantix)

Pill

Prescription Days 1–3: 0.5
mg once
daily
Days 4–7: 0.5
mg twice
daily
Day 8–End of
treatment: 1
mg twice
daily

Source: US Food and Drug Administration, www.fda.gov

Nicotine Replacement Therapies. All nicotine replacement therapies
double cessation rates, presumably because they reduce nicotine withdrawal.
Hospitals may use these therapies on the wards to reduce withdrawal.
Replacement therapies use a short period of maintenance of 6 to 12 weeks,
often followed by a gradual reduction period of another 6 to 12 weeks.
Nicotine polacrilex gum is an OTC product that releases nicotine via
chewing and buccal absorption. A 2 mg variety for those who smoke fewer
than 25 cigarettes a day and a 4 mg variety for those who smoke more than
25 cigarettes a day are available. Smokers are to use one to two pieces of
gum per hour up to a maximum of 24 pieces per day after abrupt cessation.
Venous blood concentrations from the gum are one-third to one-half
between-cigarette levels. Acidic beverages (coffee, tea, soda, and juice)
should not be used before, during, or after gum use because they decrease
absorption. Compliance with the gum has often been a problem. Adverse
effects are minor and include unpleasant taste and sore jaws. About 20
percent of those who quit take the gum for long periods, but 2 percent use it
for longer than a year; long-term use does not appear to be harmful. The
significant advantage of nicotine gum is its ability to provide relief in highrisk situations.
Nicotine lozenges deliver nicotine and are also available in 2- and 4-mg
forms; they are useful, especially for patients who smoke a cigarette


<<<PAGE 1000>>>
immediately on awakening. Generally, 9 to 20 lozenges a day are used during
the first 6 weeks, with a decrease in dosage after that. Lozenges offer the
highest level of nicotine of all nicotine replacement products. Users must
suck the lozenge until dissolved and not swallow it. Side effects include
insomnia, nausea, heartburn, headache, and hiccups.
Nicotine patches also sold over the counter, are available in a 16-hour, notaper preparation and a 24- or 16-hour tapering preparation. Patches are
administered each morning and produce blood concentrations about half
those of smoking. Compliance is high, and the only significant adverse
effects are rashes and, with 24-hour wear, insomnia. Using gum and patches
in high-risk situations increases quit rates by another 5 to 10 percent. After 6
to 12 weeks, patients should discontinue the patch.
Nicotine nasal spray, available only by prescription, produces nicotine
concentrations in the blood that are more similar to those from smoking a
cigarette, and it appears to be especially helpful for heavily dependent
smokers. The spray, however, causes rhinitis, watering eyes, and coughing in
more than 70 percent of patients.
The nicotine inhaler, also available only by prescription, was designed to
deliver nicotine to the lungs, but the nicotine is absorbed in the upper throat.
It delivers 4 mg per cartridge, and resultant nicotine levels are low. The
primary asset of the inhaler is that it provides a behavioral substitute for
smoking. The inhaler doubles quit rates. These devices require frequent
puffing—about 20 minutes to extract 4 mg of nicotine—and have minor
adverse effects.
Non-Nicotine Medications. Non-nicotine therapy may help smokers who
object philosophically to the notion of replacement therapy and smokers who
fail replacement therapy. Bupropion is an antidepressant medication that has
both dopaminergic and adrenergic actions. Bupropion SR started at 150
mg/day for 3 days and increased to 150 mg twice a day for 6 to 12 weeks.
Daily dosages of 300 mg double quit rates in smokers with and without a
history of depression. In one study, a combined bupropion and nicotine patch
had higher quit rates than either alone. Adverse effects include insomnia and
nausea, but these are rarely significant. Contraindications to use of bupropion
include a seizure disorder (the risk of seizures in those appropriately screened
is less than 1 in 1,000), current/past bulimia or anorexia nervosa,


<<<PAGE 1001>>>
rennet/concurrent MAOI, or other bupropion use. Though bupropion at one
point carried a black box warning regarding neuropsychiatric adverse events
during smoking cessation, the FDA has since removed this warning. This
medication can be started 1 to 2 weeks before a quit date and used for up to 6
months post quit. Of interest, another antidepressant, nortriptyline, appears to
be useful for smoking cessation as well.
Varenicline is a partial agonist at the α4β2 neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor; it both relieves craving and withdrawal and, unlike other
medications, reduces the reinforcing effects of nicotine by blocking
dopaminergic stimulation responsible for smoking reinforcement/reward.
While there were concerns about the FDA-issued black box warnings for
neuropsychiatric adverse events (depressed mood, agitation, changes in
behavior, suicidal ideation, and suicide), more recent research of varenicline
in psychiatric patients has found that psychiatric symptoms do not worsen nor
does the risk of suicide increase. The FDA has removed the black box
warning associated with neuropsychiatric adverse events from varenicline.
There is also a concern for potential cardiovascular adverse events in patients
taking varenicline (“a small, increased risk of certain cardiovascular adverse
events in people who have a cardiovascular disease”). Clinicians should
counsel patients on these risks and monitor for symptoms related to mental
status and cardiac status.
Combined Psychosocial and Pharmacologic Therapy
Several studies have shown that combining nicotine replacement and
behavior therapy increases quit rates over either therapy alone.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
The 2018 Monitoring the Future Survey reported that nicotine use via
cigarettes is currently at a historic low. Thirty-day smoking rates among
eighth, tenth and twelfth graders were 2.2 percent, 4.2 percent, and 7.6
percent, respectively. However, vaping, which involves the use of a batterypowered device to heat a liquid to or other substances until it aerosolizes
chemicals for inhalation, increased significantly in 2018. Popular
manufacturers of vaping liquids commonly sell them in flavors that are
especially appealing to adolescents. Thirty-day nicotine vaping prevalence


<<<PAGE 1002>>>
rates in the eighth, tenth, and twelfth graders were 6 percent, 16 percent, and
21 percent, respectively, and were substantially higher than cigarette use. The
increase in nicotine vaping was particularly high for tenth and twelfth graders
(increasing by 9 and 11 percent for these grades).
The WHO estimates that there are 1 billion smokers worldwide, and more
men than women smoke. Although the prevalence of smoking is decreasing
overall, the number of persons smoking in the Eastern Mediterranean and
African regions is increasing.
Tobacco is commonly smoked in cigarettes, as well as in cigars, snuff,
chewing tobacco, and pipes. Additionally, there is an increasing prevalence
of vaping and the use of e-cigarettes.
Currently, about 14 percent of Americans smoke. Dependence features
appear to develop quickly. Classroom and other programs to prevent
initiation are only mildly effective, but increased taxation does decrease
initiation.
Nearly 70 percent of smokers indicate that they want to quit, and, as of
2015, more than 50 percent reported that they tried to quit in the past year.
On a given attempt, only 30 percent remain abstinent for even 2 days, and
only 5 to 10 percent stop permanently. Most smokers make 5 to 10 attempts,
however, so eventually 50 percent of “ever smokers” quit. In the past, 90
percent of successful attempts to quit involved no treatment. With the advent
of OTC and non-nicotine medications in 1998, about one-third of all attempts
involved the use of medication.
In terms of the diagnosis of tobacco use disorder per se, about 20 percent
of the population develop tobacco dependence at some point, making it one
of the most prevalent psychiatric disorders. Approximately 85 percent of
current daily smokers are tobacco-dependent. Tobacco withdrawal occurs in
about 50 percent of smokers who try to quit.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
regional differences exist in smoking throughout the United States. The 11
states with the highest prevalence of current smoking are Kentucky, West
Virginia, Louisiana, Ohio, Indiana, Missouri, Oklahoma, Arkansas,
Mississippi, Tennessee, and Alabama. Those states with the lowest
prevalence are Utah and California.
Education


<<<PAGE 1003>>>
Level of education attainment correlated with tobacco use. Of adults who had
not completed high school, 23 percent smoked cigarettes (and of those with a
GED, 37 percent smoked), whereas only 7 percent of college graduates
smoked.
Psychiatric Patients
Psychiatrists must be particularly concerned and knowledgeable about
tobacco use disorders because of the high proportion of psychiatric patients
who smoke. Approximately 50 percent of all psychiatric outpatients, 70
percent of outpatients with bipolar I disorder, almost 90 percent of
outpatients with schizophrenia, and 70 percent of patients with substance use
disorder smoke. Moreover, data indicate that patients with depressive
disorders or anxiety disorders are less successful in their attempts to quit
smoking than other persons; thus, a holistic health approach for these patients
probably includes helping them address their smoking habits in addition to
the primary mental disorder. The high percentage of patients with
schizophrenia who smoke may be due to tobacco’s ability to reduce their
extraordinary sensitivity to outside sensory stimuli and to increase their
concentration. In that sense, such patients are self-monitoring to relieve
distress.
Death
Death is the primary adverse effect of cigarette smoking. Tobacco use is
associated with more than 400,000 premature deaths each year in the United
States, which is 20 percent of all deaths. Individuals who smoke tend to die
10 years earlier than nonsmokers. Cancer causes chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, other lung diseases, cancer, heart disease, stroke, and
diabetes. The increased use of chewing tobacco and snuff (smokeless
tobacco) is associated with the development of oropharyngeal cancer.
Researchers have found that tobacco smoke causes nearly 30 percent of
cancer deaths in the United States, making tobacco the single most lethal
carcinogen in the United States. Smoking (mainly cigarette smoking) causes
cancer of the lung, upper respiratory tract, esophagus, bladder, and pancreas
and probably of the stomach, liver, and kidney. Smokers are 15 to 30 times
more likely than nonsmokers to develop lung cancer, and lung cancer has


<<<PAGE 1004>>>
surpassed breast cancer as the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in
women. Despite these staggering statistics, smokers can dramatically lower
their chances of developing smoke-related cancers by merely quitting.

PATHOLOGY
Neuropharmacology
The psychoactive component of tobacco is nicotine, which affects the CNS
by acting as an agonist at the nicotinic subtype of acetylcholine receptors.
About 25 percent of the nicotine inhaled during smoking reaches the
bloodstream, through which nicotine reaches the brain within 15 seconds.
The half-life of nicotine is about 2 hours. Nicotine likely produces its positive
reinforcing and addictive properties by activating the dopaminergic pathway
projecting from the VTA to the cerebral cortex and the limbic system. In
addition to activating this dopamine reward system, nicotine causes an
increase in the concentrations of circulating norepinephrine and epinephrine
and an increase in the release of vasopressin, β-endorphin,
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and cortisol. These hormones
contribute to the primary stimulatory effects of nicotine on the CNS.
Adverse Effects of Nicotine
Nicotine is a highly toxic alkaloid. Doses of 60 mg in an adult are fatal
secondary to respiratory paralysis; doses of 0.5 mg are delivered by smoking
an average cigarette. In low doses, the signs and symptoms of nicotine
toxicity include nausea, vomiting, salivation, pallor (caused by peripheral
vasoconstriction), weakness, abdominal pain (caused by increased
peristalsis), diarrhea, dizziness, headache, increased blood pressure,
tachycardia, tremor, and cold sweats. Toxicity is also associated with an
inability to concentrate, confusion, and sensory disturbances. Nicotine is
further associated with a decrease in the user’s amount of REM sleep.
Tobacco use during pregnancy is associated with an increased incidence of
low–birth-weight babies and an increased incidence of newborns with
persistent pulmonary hypertension.
Health Benefits of Smoking Cessation


<<<PAGE 1005>>>
Smoking cessation has significant and immediate health benefits for persons
of all ages and provides benefits for persons with and without smokingrelated diseases. Former smokers live longer than those who continue to
smoke. Smoking cessation decreases the risk of lung cancer and other
cancers, myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular diseases, and chronic lung
diseases. Women who stop smoking before pregnancy or during the first 3 to
4 months of pregnancy reduce their risk of having low–birth-weight infants to
that of women who never smoked. The health benefits of smoking cessation
substantially exceed any risks from the average 5-lb (2.3-kg) weight gain or
any adverse psychological effects after quitting.

4.8 Caffeine-Related Disorders
Caffeine affects various neurobiologic and physiologic systems and produces
significant psychological effects. Caffeine is not associated with any lifethreatening illnesses, but its use can result in psychiatric symptoms and
disorders. The habitual use of caffeine and its widely accepted integration
into daily customs can lead to an underestimation of the role that caffeine
may play in one’s daily life and can make the recognition of caffeineassociated disorders particularly challenging. Hence, the clinician should be
familiar with caffeine, its effects, and associated problems.

CLINICAL FEATURES AND DIAGNOSIS
Caffeine use is associated with five disorders: caffeine intoxication, caffeine
withdrawal, caffeine use disorder, caffeine-induced anxiety disorder, and
caffeine-induced sleep disorder. The diagnosis of caffeine intoxication or
other caffeine-related disorders depends primarily on a comprehensive
history of a patient’s intake of caffeine-containing products. The history
should cover whether a patient had experienced any symptoms of caffeine
withdrawal during periods when caffeine consumption was either stopped or
severely reduced. Table 4-33 lists some essential diagnoses to consider in the
differential for caffeine-related disorders. The differential diagnosis should
include the abuse of caffeine-containing OTC medications, anabolic steroids,
and other stimulants, such as amphetamines and cocaine. A urine sample may


<<<PAGE 1006>>>
be needed to screen for these substances. The differential diagnosis should
also include hyperthyroidism and pheochromocytoma.
Table 4-33
Differential Diagnosis for Caffeine-Related Disorders
Generalized anxiety disorder
Panic disorder with or without agoraphobia
Bipolar II disorder
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Sleep disorders
Caffeine Intoxication
After the ingesting 50 to 100 mg of caffeine, the common symptoms can be
pleasant (e.g., alertness) or only mildly annoying (diuresis). As the dose
increases, the symptoms become more concerning; Table 4-34 lists these.
Caffeine intoxication generally occurs above 250 mg. The annual incidence
of intoxication is about 10 percent of the population. Above 10 g of caffeine
—almost impossible to achieve with usual caffeinated beverages but possible
with pills or other supplements—caffeine can be fatal.
Table 4-34
Symptoms and Signs of Caffeine Use
Mild to
Alertness A mild A sense of
Diuresis Cardiac
Moderate
sense
improved
muscle
Use (50–
of
verbal and
stimulation
100 mg)
wellmotor
being
performance


<<<PAGE 1007>>>
Table 4-35
Symptoms of Caffeine Withdrawal
Headache
Fatigue
Anxiety
Irritability
Mild depressive symptoms
Impaired psychomotor performance
Nausea
Vomiting
Craving for caffeine
Muscle pain and stiffness
Ms. B, a 30-year-old, went for consultation due to “anxiety attacks.” The
attacks occurred mid- to late afternoon when Ms. B became restless,
nervous, and quickly excited and sometimes was noticed to be flushed,
sweating, and, according to coworkers, “talking a mile a minute.” In
response to questioning, Ms. B admitted to consuming six to seven cups
of coffee each day before the time the attacks usually occurred.
Caffeine Withdrawal
The appearance of withdrawal symptoms reflects the tolerance and
physiologic dependence that develop with continued caffeine use. Several
epidemiologic studies have reported symptoms of caffeine withdrawal in 50
to 75 percent of all caffeine users studied.
Table 4-35 lists the symptoms of caffeine withdrawal; the most common
ones are headache and fatigue. The amount of caffeine and the abruptness of
stopping it correlate with the number and severity of the withdrawal
symptoms. Caffeine withdrawal symptoms begin about 12 to 24 hours after


<<<PAGE 1008>>>
the last dose, peak in 24 to 48 hours, and resolve within 1 week.
The induction of caffeine withdrawal can sometimes be iatrogenic.
Physicians often ask their patients to discontinue caffeine intake before
specific medical procedures, such as endoscopy, colonoscopy, and cardiac
catheterization. Also, physicians often recommend that patients with anxiety
symptoms, cardiac arrhythmias, esophagitis, hiatal hernias, fibrocystic
disease of the breast, and insomnia stop caffeine intake. Some persons decide
that it would be good for them to stop using caffeine-containing products. In
all these situations, caffeine users should taper the use of caffeine-containing
products over a 7- to 14-day period rather than stop abruptly.
Mr. F was a 43-year-old attorney whose wife brought him for a
psychiatric consultation. Mr. F had been complaining of fatigue, loss of
motivation, sleepiness, headache, nausea, and difficulty concentrating.
His symptoms occurred mostly over the weekends. He withdrew from
weekend social activities due to his symptoms, which worried Mrs. F
because he seems fine during the week. Mr. F is in good health with no
recent history of medical disorders.
Mr. F worked in hectic law practice, many times working 60-hour
weeks, and barely sees his family during the week. At work, he is often
anxious, restless, and always busy. He worries about his job so much that
he has difficulty sleeping on weeknights. He denies any marital or family
problems, apart from those related to his insisting on working on the
weekend.
At work, Mr. F regularly consumes approximately four to five cups of
coffee per day. He cut out coffee on the weekends because he felt that it
might be contributing to his anxiety and sleeplessness.
Caffeine Use Disorder
Some people with problematic caffeine consumption might have a caffeine
use disorder. DSM-5 includes this diagnosis in Section III, meant for
conditions requiring further study. No studies have examined the course and
prognosis for patients with a diagnosis of caffeine use disorder. Subjects with
caffeine use disorder have reported continued use of caffeine despite repeated


<<<PAGE 1009>>>
efforts to discontinue their caffeine use.
Ms. G was a 35-year-old married homemaker with three children aged 8,
6, and 2. She took no prescription medications, took a multivitamin and
vitamins C and E daily, did not smoke, and had no history of psychiatric
problems. She drank moderate amounts of alcohol on the weekends, had
smoked marijuana in college but had not used it since, and had no other
history of illicit drug use.
She had started consuming caffeinated beverages while in college, and
her current beverage of choice was caffeinated diet cola. Ms. G had her
first soft drink early in the morning, shortly after getting out of bed, and
she jokingly called it her “morning hit.” She spaced out her bottles of soft
drinks over the day, with her last bottle at dinnertime. She typically drank
four to five 20-oz bottles of caffeinated diet cola each day.
She and her husband had argued about her caffeinated soft drink use in
the past, and her husband had believed she should not drink caffeinated
soft drinks while pregnant. However, she had continued to do so during
each of her pregnancies. Despite a desire to stop drinking caffeinated soft
drinks, she was unable to do so. She described having a strong desire to
drink caffeinated soft drinks, and if she resisted this desire, she found that
she could not think of anything else. She drank caffeinated soft drinks in
her car, which had a manual transmission, and noted that she fumbled
while shifting and holding the soft drink and spilled it in the car. She also
noted that her teeth had become yellowed, and she suspected this was
related to her tendency to swish the soft drink in her mouth before
swallowing it. When asked to describe a time when she stopped using
soft drinks, Ms. G reported that she ran out of it on the day one of her
children was to have a birthday party, and she did not have time to leave
her home to buy more. In the early afternoon of that day, a few hours
before the scheduled start of the party, she felt extreme lethargy, a severe
headache, irritability, and craving for a soft drink. She called her husband
and told him she planned to cancel the party. She then went to the
grocery store to buy soft drinks, and after drinking two bottles, she felt
well enough to host the party.
Although initially expressing interest in decreasing or stopping her


<<<PAGE 1010>>>
caffeinated soft drink use, Ms. G did not attend scheduled follow-up
appointments after her first evaluation. When finally contacted at home,
she reported she had only sought help initially at her husband’s request,
and she had decided to try to cut down on her caffeine use on her own.
(Courtesy of Eric Strain, M.D.)
Caffeine-Induced Disorders
Caffeine-Induced Anxiety Disorder. The anxiety related to caffeine use
can resemble that of generalized anxiety disorder. Patients with the disorder
may be perceived as “wired,” overly talkative, and irritable; they may
complain of not sleeping well and of having too much energy. Caffeine can
induce and exacerbate panic attacks in persons with a panic disorder.
Although there is no conclusive proof of a causative relation between
caffeine and panic disorder, it is prudent to advise patients with panic
disorder to avoid caffeine.
Mr. B was a 28-year-old male graduate student who was in good health
and had no history of previous psychiatric evaluation or treatment. He
took no medications, did not smoke or consume alcohol, and had no
current or past history of illicit drug use.
His chief complaint was that he had begun feeling mounting “anxiety”
when working in the laboratory where he was pursuing his graduate
studies. His work had been progressing well, and he felt his relationship
with his advisor was excellent and supportive, and he could not identify
any problems with staff or peers that might explain his anxiety. He had
been working long hours, but found the work exciting and had recently
had his first paper accepted for publication.
Despite these successes, he reported feeling “crescendoing anxiety” as
his day would progress. He noted that by the afternoon, he would be
experiencing palpitations, bursts of his heart racing, tremors in his hands,
and an overall feeling of “being on edge.” He also noted nervous energy
in the afternoons. These experiences were occurring daily and seemed
confined to the laboratory (although he admitted he was in the laboratory


<<<PAGE 1011>>>
every day of the week).
During the history-taking, it became clear that Mr. B consumed large
amounts of coffee. The staff made a large urn of caffeinated coffee each
morning, and Mr. B routinely started with a large mug of coffee.
Throughout the morning, he would consume three to four mugs of coffee
(the equivalent of about six or eight 6-oz cups of coffee) and continued
this for the afternoon. He occasionally had a single can of a caffeinated
soft drink and used no other forms of caffeine regularly. Mr. B estimated
that he drank a total of six to eight or more mugs of coffee per day (which
was estimated to be at least 1,200 mg of caffeine per day). Once pointed
out to him, he realized that this level of caffeine consumption was
considerably higher than at any other time in his life. He admitted he
liked the taste of coffee and felt a burst of energy in the morning when he
drank coffee that helped him start his day.
Mr. B and his physician developed a plan to decrease his caffeine use
by tapering off caffeine. Mr. B was successful in decreasing his caffeine
use and had a reasonable resolution of his anxiety symptoms once his
daily coffee use had markedly decreased. (Courtesy of Laura M. Juliano,
Ph.D., and Roland R. Griffiths, Ph.D.)
Caffeine-Induced Sleep Disorder. Caffeine is associated with a delay in
falling asleep, inability to remain asleep, and early morning awakening.
Caffeine-Related Disorder Not Elsewhere Classified. This category
includes caffeine-related disorders that do not meet the criteria for caffeine
use disorder, caffeine intoxication, caffeine withdrawal, caffeine-induced
anxiety disorder, or caffeine-induced sleep disorder.

COMORBIDITY
Persons with caffeine-related disorders are more likely to have additional
substance-related disorders than are those without diagnoses of caffeinerelated disorders. About two-thirds of those who consume large amounts of
caffeine daily also use sedative and hypnotic drugs. Significant caffeine
consumption is associated with major depression, generalized anxiety
disorder, panic disorder, antisocial personality disorder, and other substance


<<<PAGE 1012>>>
use disorders, including alcohol, cannabis, and cocaine.
Caffeine Use and Nonpsychiatric Illnesses
Despite a great deal of research, no one has conclusively demonstrated a
significant health risk from routine caffeine use. Nonetheless, caffeine use is
considered relatively contraindicated for various conditions; Table 4-36 lists
these. Some of these are very controversial; for example, there may be a mild
association between higher-daily caffeine use in women and delayed
conception and slightly lower birth weight. Studies, however, have not found
such associations, and effects, when found, are usually with relatively high
daily dosages of caffeine (e.g., the equivalent of five cups of brewed coffee
per day). For a woman who is considering pregnancy, especially if there is
some difficulty in conceiving, it may be useful to counsel stopping caffeine
use. Similarly, for a woman who becomes pregnant and has moderate- to
high-daily caffeine consumption, a discussion about decreasing her daily
caffeine use may be warranted.
Table 4-36
Possible Contraindications to Caffeine Use
Generalized anxiety disorder
Panic disorder
Primary insomnia
Gastroesophageal reflux
Cardiovascular disease (particularly hypertension and
hypercholesterolemia)
Pregnancy
Infertility

TREATMENT
Analgesics, such as aspirin, usually control the headaches and muscle aches
that may accompany caffeine withdrawal. Rarely do patients require
benzodiazepines to relieve withdrawal symptoms. When using
benzodiazepines, we should restrict them to small doses and short durations,


<<<PAGE 1013>>>
about 7 to 10 days at the longest.
The first step to reducing or eliminating caffeine is to have the patient
determine their daily consumption of caffeine. A daily food diary can help
determine an accurate dose. We may have to educate the patient about the
many sources of caffeine in the diet. After several days of diet tracking, we
can review the diary with the patient and determine the average-daily caffeine
dose.
After obtaining an accurate accounting of all caffeine use, we can work
with the patient to decide on a reasonable taper. A typical schedule would be
a decrease of 10 percent every few days. Because most of the caffeine usually
comes from beverages, gradually substituting decaffeinated beverages for
caffeinated ones can be a simple strategy. The diary should be maintained,
and the progress monitored. The tapering should be individualized for each
patient so that the rate of caffeine decrease minimizes withdrawal symptoms.
Although abrupt withdrawal is possible, most patients find the withdrawal too
uncomfortable.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Caffeine is the most widely consumed psychoactive substance in the world.
In the United States, 87 percent of children and adults consume foods and
beverages containing caffeine. Caffeine is found in more than 60 species of
plants and belongs to the methylxanthine class of alkaloids, which also
includes theobromine (found in chocolate) and theophylline (often used in the
treatment of asthma).
Many drinks, foods, prescription medicines, and OTC medicines contain
caffeine (Table 4-37). The mean caffeine intake among adults (over age 22)
in the United States was estimated to be 300 mg/day, although, among coffee
drinkers, the mean intake was 375 mg/day. A cup of coffee generally
contains 100 to 150 mg of caffeine; tea contains about one-third as much.
Many OTC medications contain one-third to one-half as much caffeine as a
cup of coffee, and some migraine medications and OTC stimulants contain
more caffeine than a cup of coffee. Cocoa, chocolate, and soft drinks contain
significant amounts of caffeine, enough to cause some symptoms of caffeine
intoxication in small children when they ingest a candy bar and a 12-oz cola
drink.


<<<PAGE 1014>>>
Table 4-37
Caffeine Content of Common Foods and Medications
Product

Serving Size
(Volume or
Weight)

Typical
Range
Caffeine
(mg)
Content (mg)

BEVERAGES
Coffee
Brewed/Drip

12 oz

200

107–
420

Instant

12 oz

140

40–
260

Espresso

1 oz

70

60–95

Decaffeinated

12 oz

8

0–20

Starbucks drip

12 oz

260

Starbucks cappuccino

12 oz

75

Starbucks espresso

1 oz

75

Starbucks bottled
Frappuccino

9.5 oz

90

Starbucks decaffeinated

12 oz

20

Brewed

6 oz

40

30–90

Instant

6 oz

30

10–35

Canned or Bottled

12 oz

20

8–32

12 oz

40

22–69

Tea

Soft drinks
Typical caffeinated soft
drink


<<<PAGE 1015>>>
Mountain Dew/Diet Mt.
Dew

12 oz

54

Diet Coke

12 oz

47

Sunkist/Diet Sunkist

12 oz

41

Dr. Pepper/Diet Dr.
Pepper

12 oz

41

Pepsi

12 oz

38

Diet Pepsi

12 oz

36

Pepsi Max

12 oz

69

Coke Classic

12 oz

35

A & W Cream Soda

12 oz

29

Barq’s Root Beer

12 oz

23

A & W Diet Cream Soda

12 oz

22

A & W Root Beer

12 oz

0

7UP/Diet 7UP

12 oz

0

Fanta Orange

12 oz

0

Sprite/Diet Sprite

12 oz

0

Canada Dry Ginger Ale

12 oz

0

Cocoa/Hot Chocolate

6 oz

7

2–10

Chocolate Milk

6 oz

4

2–7

Typical amount

16.9 oz

60

60–
200

Water Joe

16.9 oz

60

Caffeinated water


<<<PAGE 1016>>>
Buzzwater

16.9 oz

100 or 200

Typical amount

varies

varies

AMP

16 oz

142

Red Bull

8.4 oz

80

Full Throttle

16 oz

160

Monster

16 oz

160

Rockstar

16 oz

160

Spike Shooter

8.4 oz

300

VPX Redline Energy

8 oz

316

Wired-X-344

16 oz

344

Rage inferno

24 oz

375

Typical

varies

varies

5-hour energy

2 oz

200

5-hour energy extra
strength

2 oz

230

10-hour energy shot

1.93 oz

422

Hershey’s Chocolate Bar

1.55 oz

9

Hershey’s Special Dark

1.45 oz

18

Kit Kat Wafer Bar

1.5 oz

6

Reese’s Peanut Butter

1.6 oz

4

Energy drinks

Energy Shots

FOODS
Chocolate

50–
500


<<<PAGE 1017>>>
Cups
Miscellaneous Foods
Penguin Peppermints

1 mint

7

Starbucks Classic Coffee
Ice Cream

4 oz

30

Dannon Coffee Yogurt

6 oz

30

Jolt Caffeinated Gum

1 stick

33

Powerbar Tangerine
Powergel

41 g

50

Stay-Alert Caffeinated
Gum

1 stick

100

Fiorinal

2 capsules

80

Fioricet/Esgic/Many
others

2 tablets

80

Cafergot

2 tablets

200

Norgesic

2 tablets

60

Typical

1 tablet

100 or 200

Vivarin

1 tablet

200

PRESCRIPTION
MEDICATIONS
Headache/Migraine/Pain

OVER-THE-COUNTER
MEDICATIONS
Stimulants

No-Doz/No-Doz Maximum 1 tablet

100 or 200

100–
200


<<<PAGE 1018>>>
Strength
Ultra Pep-Back

1 tablet

200

Goody’s Headache
Powder

1 powder
packet

32.5

BC Fast Pain Relief

1 powder
packet

33.3

BC Arthritis Pain and
Influenza

1 powder
packet

38

Anacin Advanced
Headache

2 tablets

130

Excedrin Extra Strength

2 tablets

130

2 tablets

100

Midol Menstrual Complete 2 caplets

120

Pamprin Max

2 caplets

130

Typical

1 or 2 tablets

varies

Dexatrim Max

1 caplet

50

Metabolife Weight
Management

2 tablets

101

Metabolife Ultra

2 caplets

150

Hydroxycut Weight Loss

2 caplets

200

Analgesics

Menstrual Pain
Relief/Diuretics
Diurex Water Pills

DIETARY
SUPPLEMENTS/WEIGHT
LOSS PRODUCTS
50–
300


<<<PAGE 1019>>>
Formula
Leptopril

2 capsules

220

Stacker 2

1 capsule

253

Stacker 3

1 capsule

254

Twinlab Ripped Fuel

2 capsules

220

Swarm Extreme Energizer 1 capsule

300

Xenadrine EFX

200

2 capsules

Caffeine values for all brand name products were obtained directly from product labels, the
manufacturer’s website, or customer service department.
Data from Juliano LM, Ferre S, Griffiths RR. The pharmacology of caffeine. In: Ries RK, Fiellin
DA, Miller SC, Saitz R, eds. ASAM Principles of Addiction Medicine. 5th ed. Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:180–200; McCusker RR, Fuehrlein B, Goldberger BA,
Gold MS, Cone EJ. Caffeine content of decaffeinated coffee. J Anal Toxicol. 2006;30(8):611;
McCusker RR, Goldberger BA, Cone EJ. Caffeine content of specialty coffees. J Anal Toxicol.
2003;27(7):520.

Special Populations
Cigarette smokers consume more caffeine than nonsmokers. This observation
may reflect a shared genetic vulnerability to caffeine use and cigarette
smoking. It may also be related to increased rates of caffeine elimination in
cigarette smokers. Preclinical and clinical studies indicate that regular
caffeine use can potentiate the reinforcing effects of nicotine.
Heavy use and clinical dependence on alcohol are associated with heavy
use and clinical dependence on caffeine as well. Individuals with anxiety
disorders tend to report lower levels of caffeine use, although one study
showed that a more significant proportion of heavy caffeine consumers also
use benzodiazepines. Several studies have also shown high-daily amounts of
caffeine use in psychiatric inpatients. For example, several studies have
found that such patients consume the equivalent of an average of five or more
cups of brewed coffee each day. Finally, high-daily caffeine consumption
occurs in prisoners.

PATHOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY


<<<PAGE 1020>>>
After exposure to caffeine, several factors influence continued consumption,
such as the pharmacologic effects of caffeine, caffeine’s reinforcing effects,
genetic predispositions to caffeine use, and personal attributes of the
consumer.
Neuropharmacology. Caffeine, a methylxanthine, is more potent than the
other methylxanthine, theophylline. The half-life of caffeine in the human
body is 3 to 10 hours, and the time of peak concentration is 30 to 60 minutes.
Caffeine readily crosses the blood–brain barrier. Caffeine acts primarily as an
antagonist of adenosine receptors. Adenosine receptors activate an inhibitory
G protein (Gi), which then inhibits the formation of the second-messenger
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Caffeine intake, therefore, results
in an increase in intraneuronal cAMP concentrations in neurons with
adenosine receptors.
Three cups of coffee are estimated to deliver enough caffeine to the brain
caffeine to occupy about 50 percent of the adenosine receptors. Several
experiments indicate that caffeine, especially at high doses or concentrations,
can affect dopamine and noradrenergic neurons. Specifically, caffeine may
enhance dopamine activity, a hypothesis that could explain clinical reports
associating caffeine intake with an exacerbation of psychotic symptoms in
patients with schizophrenia. Activation of noradrenergic neurons may be
involved in the mediation of some symptoms of caffeine withdrawal.
Subjective Effects and Reinforcement. The subjective effect of single
low to moderate doses of caffeine (i.e., 20 to 200 mg) is usually pleasurable.
Studies have shown that these doses result in increased ratings on measures
such as well-being, energy and concentration, and motivation to work. Also,
these doses of caffeine produce decreases in ratings of feeling sleepy or tired.
In the range of 300 to 800 mg (the equivalent of several cups of brewed
coffee ingested at once), subjects tend to rate the effects of caffeine as more
unpleasant, with feelings of anxiety and nervousness. Animal studies have
generally found it difficult to demonstrate that caffeine functions as a
reinforcer. However, well-controlled studies in humans have shown that
people choose caffeine over placebo when given a choice under controlled
experimental conditions. In habitual users, caffeine’s ability to suppress
withdrawal symptoms also reinforces the effects of caffeine. Thus, the profile


<<<PAGE 1021>>>
of caffeine’s subjective effects and its ability to function as a reinforcer
contribute to the regular use of caffeine.
Genetics and Caffeine Use. Some genetic predisposition may exist to
continued coffee use after exposure to coffee. Some studies have shown
higher concordance rates for monozygotic twins for total caffeine
consumption, heavy use, caffeine tolerance, caffeine withdrawal, and caffeine
intoxication, with heritabilities ranging between 35 and 77 percent.
Multivariate structural equation modeling of caffeine use, cigarette smoking,
and alcohol use suggest that a common genetic factor—polysubstance use—
underlies the use of these three substances.
Effects on Cerebral Blood Flow. Most studies have found that caffeine
results in global cerebral vasoconstriction, with a resultant decrease in CBF,
although this effect may not occur in persons over 65 years of age. According
to one study, tolerance does not develop to these vasoconstrictive effects, and
the CBF shows a rebound increase after withdrawal from caffeine. Some
clinicians believe that caffeine use can cause a similar constriction in the
coronary arteries and produce angina in the absence of atherosclerosis.

4.9 Hallucinogen-Related Disorders
CLINICAL FEATURES
Hallucinogens, by definition, are intoxicants. Table 4-38 lists some of the
psychological effects of hallucinogenic drugs. Hallucinations are usually
visual, often of geometric forms and figures, but auditory and tactile
hallucinations can occur. The sense of self is much changed, sometimes to
the point of depersonalization, merging with the external world to the point of
feeling separation of oneself from one’s body.
Table 4-38
Psychological Effects of Hallucinogens
Heightened perceptions (richer colors, sharpened contours, richer


<<<PAGE 1022>>>
responses to music, smells or tastes)
Synesthesia
Changes in body image
Alterations in time and space
Intense, labile emotions
Suggestibility
Either sensitivity or detachment from others
Awareness of internal organs
The recovery of lost early memories
The release of unconscious material in symbolic form
Regression and the apparent reliving of past events, including birth
Introspective reflection and feelings of religious and philosophical
insight
Depersonalization
Derealization
Anxiety, panic attacks
Flashbacks (hallucinogen-persisting perception disorder)
Mood disorders
Anxiety disorders
Psychosis
Delirium
Table 4-39
Overview of Representative Hallucinogens


<<<PAGE 1023>>>
Specific Substances
Hallucinogens are natural and synthetic substances that are variously called
psychedelics or psychotomimetics. The hallucinogens are classified as
Schedule I controlled substances; the US FDA has decreed that they have no
medical use and high abuse potential.
Table 4-39 lists some natural and synthetic hallucinogens. The most
common naturally occurring hallucinogens are psilocybin, derived from
certain mushrooms, and mescaline, derived from peyote cactus. The classic
synthetic hallucinogen is LSD, synthesized in 1938 by Albert Hoffman, who
accidentally ingested the drug and experienced the first LSD trip. Some
researchers include some of the so-called designer amphetamines, such as
3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDMA), as hallucinogens, but we include
them among the stimulants.
Phencyclidine
and
Ketamine.
Phencyclidine
(PCP;
1-1
[phenylcyclohexyl] piperidine), also known as angel dust, was developed as a
novel anesthetic in the late 1950s. This drug and the closely related
compound ketamine were called dissociative anesthetics, because subjects


<<<PAGE 1024>>>
taking them were awake but insensitive to, or dissociated from, the
environment. Phencyclidine and ketamine exert their unique behavioral
effects by blocking NMDA-type receptors for the excitatory neurotransmitter
glutamate. They can cause a variety of symptoms, from anxiety to psychosis.
Phencyclidine and ketamine are classified as Schedule II and Schedule III
controlled substances, respectively. Although somewhat different from
standard hallucinogens, both DSM-5 and we include among the
hallucinogens given their psychological effects.
LSD. LSD is the prototype for a large class of hallucinogenic compounds
with well-studied structure–activity relationships. LSD is a synthetic base
derived from the lysergic acid nucleus from the ergot alkaloids. That family
of compounds was discovered in rye fungus and was responsible for lethal
outbreaks of St. Anthony’s fire in the Middle Ages. The compounds are also
present in morning glory seeds in low concentrations. Researchers have
studied many homologs and analogs of LSD, but none more potent than LSD.
Table 4-40 lists the physiologic symptoms from LSD, which are typically
few and mild. Usually, somatic symptoms appear first, then mood and
perceptual changes, and, finally, psychological changes. The effects may
overlap, and depending on the particular hallucinogen, the time of onset and
offset varies. The intensity of LSD effects in a nontolerant user generally is
proportional to dose, with 25 µg as an approximate threshold dose.
The significant difference between LSD, psilocybin, and mescaline is
potency. A 100-µg dose of LSD is roughly equivalent to 10 to 15 mg of
psilocybin, which is equivalent to 300 to 400 mg of mescaline. With
mescaline, the onset of symptoms is slower and more nausea and vomiting
occur, but in general, the perceptual effects are more similar than different.
Tolerance, particularly to the sensory and other psychological effects, is
evident as soon as the second or third day of repeated LSD use. Four to 6
days free of LSD is necessary to lose significant tolerance. Tolerance is
associated with frequent use of any of the hallucinogens.
Table 4-40
Physiologic Symptoms of LSD
Common:


<<<PAGE 1025>>>
Dilated pupils
Increased deep tendon motor reflexes
Muscle tension
Mild motor incoordination
Ataxia
Occasional:
Increased heart rate
Increased respiration
Hypertension
Nausea
Decreased appetite
Salivation
Sweating
Blurred vision
Cross-tolerance among these hallucinogens occurs, but not between
amphetamine and LSD, despite the chemical similarity of amphetamine and
mescaline. Previously distributed as tablets, liquid, powder, and gelatin
squares, in recent years, LSD has been commonly distributed as “blotter
acid.” Sheets of paper are soaked with LSD, and dried and perforated into
small squares. Manufacturers stamp popular designs on the paper. Each sheet
contains as many as a few hundred squares; one square containing 30 to 75
µg of LSD is one chewed dose, more or less. Planned massive ingestion is
uncommon but massive ingestion happens by accident.
The onset of action of LSD occurs within an hour, peaks in 2 to 4 hours,
and lasts 8 to 12 hours. LSD is a sympathomimetic, and death caused by
cardiac or cerebrovascular pathology related to hypertension or hyperthermia
can occur. Some reports suggest that LSD can cause a syndrome similar to
neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Death can also result from physical injury
when LSD impairs a person’s judgment: people may run into traffic or
attempt to fly. The psychological effects are usually well tolerated, but when
persons cannot recall experiences or appreciate that the experiences are
substance-induced, they may fear the onset of insanity.
There is no clear evidence that LSD causes drastic personality changes or


<<<PAGE 1026>>>
chronic psychosis. Some heavy users of hallucinogens, however, may
experience chronic anxiety or depression.
Many persons maintain that a single experience with LSD has given them
an increased creative capacity, new psychological insights, relief from
neurotic or psychosomatic symptoms, or a desirable change in personality. In
the 1950s and 1960s, researchers were interested in the possible
pharmacologic effects of LSD. However, results have been inconsistent. The
principal value of these drugs for science has been for the basic
neurosciences.
Phenethylamines. Phenethylamines are compounds with chemical
structures similar to those of the neurotransmitters dopamine and
norepinephrine. Mescaline (3,4,5-trimethoxyphenethylamine), a classic
hallucinogen in every sense of the term, was the first hallucinogen and is
described below.
Another series of phenethylamine analogs with hallucinogenic properties is
the 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA)–related amphetamines. MDMA
or ecstasy is the currently most popular and, to society, the most troublesome
member of this large family of drugs. It is more a relatively mild stimulant
than a hallucinogen. MDMA produces an altered state of consciousness with
sensory changes and, most notable for some users, a feeling of enhanced
personal interactions.
MESCALINE. Mescaline derives from the peyote cactus, which grows in the

southwestern United States and northern Mexico. Mescaline human
pharmacology was characterized in 1896 and synthesized 23 years later.
Although we have recognized many psychoactive plants since antiquity, only
mescaline’s structure was understood, until we discovered LSD.
People usually take mescaline as peyote “buttons,” picked from the small
blue-green cacti Lophophora williamsii and Lophophora diffusa. The buttons
are the dried, round, fleshy cacti tops. Mescaline is the active hallucinogenic
alkaloid in the buttons. The use of peyote is legal for the Native American
Church members in some states. Adverse reactions to peyote are rare during
structured religious use. Peyote usually is not consumed casually because of
its bitter taste and sometimes severe nausea and vomiting that precede the
hallucinogenic effects.


<<<PAGE 1027>>>
The many structural variations of mescaline are relatively well
characterized. One analog, 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine (DOM),
also known as STP, an unusually potent amphetamine with hallucinogen
properties, had a relatively brief period of illicit popularity in the 1960s.
However, it appears to have disappeared from the illicit market.
Psilocybin and Its Analogs. An unusual collection of tryptamines has its
origin in the world of fungi. The natural prototype is psilocybin itself. As
many as 100 species of mushroom, mainly of the Psilocybe genus contain
psilocybin or related homologs.
People usually ingest psilocybin as mushrooms. Many species of
psilocybin-containing mushrooms exist worldwide. In the United States,
large Psilocybe cubensis (gold caps) grow in Florida and Texas and are easily
grown with cultivation kits advertised in drug-oriented magazines and on the
internet. The tiny Psilocybe semilanceata (liberty cap) grows in lawns and
pastures in the Pacific Northwest. Psilocybin remains active when the
mushrooms are dried or cooked into foods.
Psilocybin mushrooms are used in religious activities by Mexican Indians.
They are valued in Western society by users who prefer to ingest a mushroom
rather than a synthetic chemical. Of course, one danger of eating wild
mushrooms is misidentification and ingestion of a poisonous variety.
Although not originating from mushrooms, another analog of psilocybin is
N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT). Many plants contain this substance, which
is also found normally in human biofluids at very low concentrations. When
DMT is taken parenterally or by sniffing, a brief, intense hallucinogenic
episode can result. As with mescaline, DMT is one of the oldest, best
documented, but least potent of the tryptamine hallucinogens. Researchers
have evaluated synthesized homologs of DMT in humans, and have described
the structure–activity relationships.
Phencyclidine. Phencyclidine and its related compounds are sold as a
crystalline powder, paste, liquid, or drug-soaked paper (blotter). Most
commonly, drug dealers add PCP to a cannabis- or parsley-containing
cigarette. Experienced users report that the effects of 2 to 3 mg of smoked
PCP occur in about 5 minutes and plateau in 30 minutes. The bioavailability
of PCP is about 75 percent when taken by intravenous administration and


<<<PAGE 1028>>>
about 30 percent when smoked. The half-life of PCP in humans is about 20
hours, and the half-life of ketamine in humans is about 2 hours.
Table 4-41
Effects of PCP
Physical
Nystagmus
Hypertension
Hyperthermia
Less common:
Head-rolling movements
Stroking
Grimacing
Muscle rigidity on stimulation
Vomiting
Psychological
Euphoria
Labile emotions
Bodily warmth
Tingling
Peaceful floating sensations
Depersonalization
Feelings of isolation and estrangement
Auditory and visual hallucinations
Alterations of body image
Distortions of space and time perception
Paranoia
Delusions
Intensified dependence
Confusion
Disorganization of thought
Irritability


<<<PAGE 1029>>>
Depression
Behavioral
Repetitive chanting speech
Aggressive behavior
The amount of PCP varies greatly from PCP-laced cigarette to cigarette; 1
g can make as few as four or as many as several dozen cigarettes. Less than 5
mg of PCP is considered a low dose, and doses above 10 mg are considered
high. Dose variability makes it difficult to predict the effect, although
smoking PCP is the easiest and most reliable way for users to titrate the dose.
Persons who have just taken PCP are frequently uncommunicative, appear
to be oblivious, and report active fantasy production. They can have a range
of side effects, such as those listed in Table 4-41.
The short-term effects last 3 to 6 hours and sometimes give way to a mild
depression in which the user becomes irritable, somewhat paranoid, and
occasionally belligerent or assaultive. The effects can last for several days.
Users sometimes find that it takes 1 to 2 days to recover completely;
laboratory tests show that PCP can remain in the patient’s blood and urine for
more than a week.
Ketamine. Ketamine is a dissociative anesthetic agent, derived initially from
PCP, which is available for use in human and veterinary medicine. It has
become a drug of abuse, with sources primarily from stolen supplies. It is
available as a powder or in a solution for intranasal, oral, inhalational, or
(rarely) intravenous use. Ketamine functions by working at the NMDA
receptor and, as with PCP, can cause hallucinations and a dissociated state in
which the patient has an altered sense of the body and reality and little
concern for the environment.
Ketamine causes cardiovascular stimulation and no respiratory depression.
On physical examination, the patient may be hypertensive and tachycardic,
have increased salivation and bidirectional or rotary nystagmus, or both. The
onset of action is within seconds when used intravenously, and analgesia
lasting 40 minutes and dissociative effects lasting for hours may occur.
Clinicians should monitor a patient’s cardiovascular status and administer
supportive care. There have been reports of dystonic reactions and


<<<PAGE 1030>>>
flashbacks, but a more common complication is a lack of concern for the
environment or personal safety.
Ketamine has a briefer duration of effect than PCP. Peak ketamine levels
occur approximately 20 minutes after intramuscular injection. After
intranasal administration, the duration of effect is approximately 1 hour.
Ketamine is N-demethylated by liver microsomal cytochrome P450 (CYP),
especially CYP3A, into norketamine. Ketamine, norketamine, and
dehydronorketamine are detectable in urine, with half-lives of 3, 4, and 7
hours, respectively. Urinary ketamine and norketamine levels vary widely
from individual to individual and can range from 10 to 7,000 ng/mL after
intoxication. As of yet, there are no formal studies of the relationship
between serum ketamine levels and clinical symptoms. Often, Ketamine is
combined with other drugs of abuse, especially cocaine. Ketamine may
enhance cocaine metabolism. Recent years have seen a growing number of
ketamine infusion clinics for the treatment of depression, along with the FDA
approval of esketamine nasal spray for treatment-resistant depression.
Additional Hallucinogens
CANTHINONES. Canthinones are alkaloids similar to amphetamines naturally

found in the khat plant and synthetically made and known as “bath salts.”
They are CNS stimulants that cause a massive release of dopamine, and a
single dose can last up to 8 hours. They produce profound toxic effects that
can lead to seizures, strokes, or death. Hallucinations and delusions are
common. They are swallowed, injected, or “snorted” to produce the desired
euphoric effect.
Ibogaine is a complex alkaloid found in the African shrub
Tabernanthe iboga. Ibogaine is a hallucinogen at the 400-mg dose range. The
plant originates in Africa, where it is used in traditional ceremonies. It has not
been a popular hallucinogen because of its unpleasant somatic effects when
taken at hallucinogenic doses. However, psychiatrists may encounter patients
exposed to ibogaine because of therapeutic claims.
IBOGAINE.

AYAHUASCA. Ayahuasca, currently a popular subject of internet hallucinogen

websites, initially referred to a decoction from one or more South American


<<<PAGE 1031>>>
plants. The substance contains the alkaloids harmaline and harmine. Both of
those β-carboline alkaloids have hallucinogenic properties, but it also causes
significant nausea. Amazon tribes discovered that adding leaves from plants
containing substantial amounts of DMT enhanced the visual and sacramental
impact of ayahuasca. Thus, when people use ayahuasca, it is often in
combination with other drugs.
In recent years, the term ayahuasca has evolved to a less specific term to
refer to any mixture of two things that are hallucinogenic when taken in
combination. For example, harmine and harmaline are available as fine
chemicals and, when taken along with many botanicals containing DMT,
result in a mixture with hallucinogen properties, initially intense but usually
of brief duration.
SALVIA DIVINORUM. American Indians in northern Oaxaca, Mexico, have used

Salvia divinorum as a medicine and as a sacred sacrament, which is now
widely discussed, advertised, and sold on the internet. Chewing the plant or
smoking dried leaves can produce hallucinogen effects. Salvinorin-A, an
active component in the plant, is parenterally potent, active at 250-µg doses
when smoked, and of scientific and potential medical interest because it binds
to the opioid κ-receptor.

DIAGNOSIS
Hallucinogen Use Disorder
Long-term hallucinogen use is uncommon. Some long-term users of PCP are
said to be “crystallized,” a syndrome characterized by dulled thinking,
decreased reflexes, loss of memory, loss of impulse control, depression,
lethargy, and impaired concentration. Although psychological dependence
occurs, it is rare, in part because each LSD experience is different and in part
because there is no reliable euphoria.
B, a 16-year-old boy from divorced parents, was admitted to the
psychiatric unit of a local hospital. During the previous night, he slashed
his wrists, severing nerves and tendons in his left hand, and drifted in and
out of consciousness during the night. He finally contacted the mother of


<<<PAGE 1032>>>
a friend who lived nearby in the morning who immediately brought him
to the hospital.
B had a history of juvenile delinquency from the age of 13 when he
began hanging out with some older boys at his junior high school. He and
his friends shoplifted, stole, smoked marijuana, and took LSD. B’s grades
dropped, and he got in trouble at school on two occasions for getting into
fights with other students.
On admission, B stated that he did not intend to commit suicide when
he slashed his wrist. After some questioning, he revealed that he had been
“dropping acid” with some friends, and after they left, he thought he
heard the sirens of police cars approaching his home. He did not wish to
get arrested, so he slashed his wrist and then lost consciousness. He
denies feeling depressed, although he claims his life is pointless and felt
it made no difference whether he lived or died.
Hallucinogen Intoxication
The hallmarks of hallucinogen intoxication are maladaptive behavioral and
perceptual changes, along with particular physiologic signs (Table 4-42). The
differential diagnosis for hallucinogen intoxication includes anticholinergic
and amphetamine intoxication and alcohol withdrawal. The preferred
treatment for hallucinogen intoxication is talking down the patient; during
this process, guides can reassure patients that the symptoms are druginduced, that they are not going crazy, and that the symptoms will resolve
shortly. In the most severe cases, dopaminergic antagonists—for example,
haloperidol—or benzodiazepines—for example, diazepam—can be used for a
limited time. Hallucinogen intoxication usually lacks a withdrawal syndrome.
Table 4-42
Physiologic Changes from Hallucinogens
1. Pupillary dilation
2. Tachycardia
3. Sweating
4. Palpitations


<<<PAGE 1033>>>
5. Blurring of vision
6. Tremors
7. Incoordination
Short-term PCP intoxication can have potentially severe complications and
should be considered a psychiatric emergency. Some patients may present
within hours of ingesting PCP, but often 2 to 3 days elapse before they seek
psychiatric help. Persons who lose consciousness are brought for help earlier
than those who remain conscious. Most patients recover completely within a
day or two, but some remain psychotic for as long as 2 weeks. Patients
presenting in a coma often exhibit disorientation, hallucinations, confusion,
and difficulty communicating on regaining consciousness. These symptoms
may also occur in noncomatose patients, but their symptoms appear to be less
severe. Behavioral disturbances sometimes are severe; they can include
public masturbation, stripping off clothes, violence, urinary incontinence,
crying, and inappropriate laughing. Patients frequently have amnesia for the
entire period of the psychosis.
Police brought a 17-year-old male patient to the emergency room after
finding him disoriented on the street. As the police attempted to question
him, he became increasingly agitated; when they attempted to restrain
him, he became assaultive. Attempts to question or to examine him in the
emergency department evoked increased agitation.
Initially, it was impossible to determine vital signs or to draw blood.
Based on the observation of horizontal, vertical, and rotatory nystagmus,
clinicians made a preliminary diagnosis of PCP intoxication. Within a
few minutes of being placed in a darkened examination room, his
agitation markedly decreased. Blood pressure was 170/100; other vital
signs were within normal limits. The patient agreed to take 20 mg of
diazepam orally. Thirty minutes later, he was less agitated and could be
interviewed, although he responded to questions in a fragmented fashion
and was slightly dysarthric. He stated that he must have inadvertently
taken a larger-than-usual dose of “dust,” which he reported having used
once or twice a week for several years. He denied using any other
substance and any history of mental disorder. He was confused and


<<<PAGE 1034>>>
disoriented to time and place. The qualitative toxicology screen revealed
PCP and no other drugs. Results of neurologic examination were within
normal limits, but he had brisk deep tendon reflexes. Some 90 minutes
after arrival, his temperature, initially normal, was elevated to 38°C, his
blood pressure had increased to 182/110, and he was poorly responsive to
stimulation. He was admitted to a medical bed. His blood pressure and
level of consciousness continued to fluctuate over the ensuing 18 hours.
Results of hematologic and biochemical analyses of blood, as well as
urinalyses, remained within normal limits. A history obtained from his
family revealed that the patient had had multiple emergency room visits
for complications from PCP use during the previous several years. He
had completed a 30-day residential treatment program and had
participated in several outpatient programs but had consistently relapsed.
The doctors discharged the patient, with a referral to an outpatient
treatment program, after his vital signs and level of consciousness had
been within normal limits for 8 hours. At discharge, nystagmus and
dysarthria were no longer present. (Courtesy of Daniel C. Javitt, M.D.,
Ph.D., and Stephen R. Zukin, M.D.)
Hallucinogen-Persisting Perception Disorder
Long after ingesting a hallucinogen, a person can experience a flashback of
hallucinogenic symptoms. The DSM-5 calls this syndrome hallucinogenpersisting perception disorder and ICD-10 refers it as post hallucinogen
perception disorder. Table 4-43 lists the comparative criteria for each
disorder.
According to studies, from 15 to 80 percent of users of hallucinogens
report having experienced flashbacks. They can be triggered by emotional
stress, sensory deprivation (e.g., monotonous driving), or use a psychoactive
substance, such as alcohol or marijuana.
Flashbacks are spontaneous, transitory recurrences of the substanceinduced experience. Table 4-44 gives some examples of flashbacks. The
episodes usually last a few seconds to a few minutes, but sometimes last
longer. Most often, even in the presence of distinct perceptual disturbances,
the person has insight into the pathologic nature of the disturbance. Suicidal
behavior, major depressive disorder, and panic disorder are potential


<<<PAGE 1035>>>
complications.
When diagnosing this disorder several other similar syndromes should be
considered in the differential. Migraines and seizures can cause flashbacklike experiences. Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) can also cause
flashbacks. In addition, a variety of visual system abnormalities can cause
perceptual problems that may resemble flashbacks.
Table 4-43
Flashbacks
Flashbacks Due to Hallucinogen Use
Disorder

DSM-5

Diagnostic name HallucinogenPersisting
Perception
Disorder
Symptoms

1.

Required
number of
symptoms

Both of the above

ICD-10
Post hallucinogen perception
disorder

• Substance-induced changed
Reexperiencing,
in cognition, personality,
following
affect, behavior persisting
cessation of
beyond generally accepted
use, of
period, with onset of
perceptual
symptoms directly related to
symptoms that
use of substance
were present
• Flashbacks are episodic,
during
short duration, and
intoxication
frequently identical or similar
2. Symptoms
to perceptual distortions
cause distress
experienced during acute
or functional
intoxication
impairment


<<<PAGE 1036>>>
Psychosocial
Significant
consequences
distress and/or
of symptoms
impairment
Exclusions

Result of:
• Medical
condition
• Another
mental
disorder

Result of:
• Alcohol- or psychoactive
substance-induced
Korsakov syndrome
• Alcohol- or psychoactive
substance-induced
psychotic state

Table 4-44
Examples of Flashbacks
Visual distortion
Geometric hallucinations
Hallucinations of sounds or voices
False perceptions of movement in peripheral fields
Flashes of color
Trails of images from moving objects
Positive afterimages and halos
Macropsia
Micropsia
Time expansion
Physical symptoms
Relived intense emotions
A 20-year-old undergraduate presented with a chief complaint of “seeing
the air.” The visual disturbance consisted of perception of white pinpoint
specks too numerous to count in both the central and peripheral visual
fields. They were always present along with the perception of trails of
moving objects left behind as they passed through the patient’s visual
field. Attending a hockey game was difficult, as the brightly dressed


<<<PAGE 1037>>>
players left streaks of their images against the white of the ice for seconds
at a time. The patient also described the false perception of movement in
stable objects, usually in his peripheral visual fields, halos around
objects, and positive and negative afterimages. Other symptoms included
mild depression, daily bitemporal headache, and a loss of concentration
in the last year.
The visual syndrome had gradually emerged over the last 3 months
following experimentation with the hallucinogenic drug LSD-25 on three
separate occasions. He feared he had sustained “brain damage” from the
drug experience. He denied using any other agents. He had smoked
marijuana twice a week for 7 months at age 17.
The patient had consulted two ophthalmologists, who found no visual
abnormality. A neurologist’s examination also proved negative. A
therapeutic trial of an anticonvulsant medication resulted in a 50 percent
improvement in the patient’s visual symptoms and remission of his
depression.
Hallucinogen Intoxication Delirium
Hallucinogen intoxication delirium is a relatively rare disorder beginning
during intoxication in those who have ingested pure hallucinogens. An
estimated 25 percent of all PCP-related emergency room patients may meet
the criteria for hallucinogen intoxication delirium. Hallucinogens are often
mixed with other substances, however, and those other substances or the
subsequent drug–drug interactions can also cause delirium.
Hallucinogen-Induced Psychotic Disorders
If a patient using a hallucinogen has psychotic symptoms and inadequate
reality testing, a diagnosis of a hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorder may
be warranted. The course of this can be variable. Occasionally, a protracted
psychotic episode is difficult to distinguish from a classic psychosis, such as
from schizophrenia. Whether a chronic psychosis after drug ingestion is the
result of drug ingestion, is unrelated, or is a combination of both the drug
ingestion and predisposing factors is currently unanswerable. In some cases,
however, the person had some predisposing disorder, such as schizoid


<<<PAGE 1038>>>
personality disorder.
A 22-year-old photography student presented to the hospital with an
inappropriate mood and bizarre thinking. She had no prior psychiatric
history. Nine days before admission, she ingested one or two psilocybin
mushrooms. Following the immediate ingestion, the patient began to
giggle. She then described euphoria, which progressed to auditory
hallucinations and belief in the ability to broadcast her thoughts on the
media. Two days later, she repeated the ingestion and continued to
exhibit psychotic symptoms to the day of admission. When examined,
she heard voices telling her she could be president and reported the
sounds of “lambs crying.” She continued to giggle inappropriately,
bizarrely turning her head from side to side ritualistically. She continued
to describe euphoria, but with an intermittent sense of hopelessness in a
context of thought blocking. Her self-description was “feeling lucky.”
She received haloperidol, 10 mg twice a day, benztropine 1 mg three
times a day, and lithium carbonate 300 mg twice a day. On this regimen,
her psychosis improved after 5 days.
Hallucinogen-Induced Mood Disorder
Unlike cocaine-induced mood disorder and amphetamine-induced mood
disorder, in which the symptoms are somewhat predictable, mood disorder
symptoms accompanying hallucinogen abuse can vary. Abusers may
experience manic-like symptoms with grandiose delusions or depression-like
feelings and ideas or mixed symptoms. As with the hallucinogen-induced
psychotic disorder symptoms, the symptoms of hallucinogen-induced mood
disorder usually resolve after elimination from the body.
Hallucinogen-Induced Anxiety Disorder
Hallucinogen-induced anxiety disorder also varies in its symptom pattern, but
few data about symptom patterns are available. Anecdotally, emergency
department physicians who treat these patients frequently find that the
syndrome resembles panic disorder. Anxiety is probably the most common
symptom causing a PCP-intoxicated person to seek help in an emergency


<<<PAGE 1039>>>
room.
Unspecified Hallucinogen-Related Disorder
When a patient with a hallucinogen-related disorder does not meet the criteria
for any of the standard hallucinogen-related disorders, this diagnosis may
apply. An example would be a withdrawal syndrome associated with a
hallucinogen, which has been occasionally reported, although DSM-5 does
not include this diagnosis.

TREATMENT
Hallucinogen Intoxication
The most necessary treatment is reassurance and supportive care. Patients
experiencing intense and unpleasant hallucinogen intoxication can be helped
by a quiet environment, verbal reassurance, and the passage of time. More
rapid relief of severe anxiety is likely after oral administration of 20 mg of
diazepam or a parenteral benzodiazepine if oral use is not practical. Anxiety
and other symptoms generally diminish within 20 minutes of medication
administration, compared to hours with only psychological and
environmental support; however, perceptual symptoms may persist. Patients
may need gentle restraint if they present a danger to themselves or others, but
clinicians should avoid restraints if possible. Antipsychotic medications,
particularly if given at excessive doses, may worsen symptoms and are best
avoided unless the diagnosis remains unclear and the behavior is
unmanageable. The marketing of lower doses of LSD and a more
sophisticated approach to the treatment of casualties by drug users
themselves have combined to reduce the appearance of this once-common
disorder in psychiatric treatment facilities.
Phencyclidine. Treatment of PCP intoxication aims to reduce systemic
PCP levels and to address significant medical, behavioral, and psychiatric
issues. For intoxication and PCP-induced psychotic disorder, although the
resolution of current symptoms and signs is paramount, the long-term goal of
treatment is to prevent relapse to PCP use. PCP levels can fluctuate over
many hours or even days, especially after oral administration. A prolonged


<<<PAGE 1040>>>
period of clinical observation is, therefore, mandatory before concluding that
no severe or life-threatening complications will ensue.
Trapping of ionized PCP in the stomach has led to the suggestion of
continuous nasogastric suction as a treatment for PCP intoxication. This
strategy, however, can be needlessly intrusive and can induce electrolyte
imbalances. The preferred treatment is to administer activated charcoal,
which binds PCP and diminishes its toxic effects in animal studies.
Trapping of ionized PCP in urine has led to the suggestion of urinary
acidification as an aid to drug elimination. This strategy, however, may be
ineffective and is potentially dangerous. The urine only excretes a small
portion of PCP, metabolic acidosis itself carries significant risks, and acidic
urine can increase the risk of renal failure secondary to rhabdomyolysis.
Hemodialysis and hemoperfusion are also ineffective, given the substantial
volume of distribution of PCP.
No drug is known to function as a direct PCP antagonist. Any compound
binding to the PCP receptor, located within the ion channel of the NMDA
receptor, would block NMDA receptor-mediated ion fluxes, as PCP does.
NMDA receptor mechanisms predict that pharmacologic strategies promoting
NMDA receptor activation (e.g., administration of a glycine site agonist
drug) would promote rapid dissociation of PCP from its binding sites. To
date, there have been no clinical trials of NMDA agonists for PCP or
ketamine intoxication in humans.
Because PCP disrupts sensory input, environmental stimuli can cause
unpredictable, exaggerated, distorted, or violent reactions. A cornerstone of
treatment, therefore, is to minimize sensory inputs. Patients should be
evaluated and treated in a quiet and calm environment. Precautionary
physical restraint is recommended by some authorities, with the risk of
rhabdomyolysis from struggling against the restraints balanced by the
avoidance of violent or disruptive behavior. Both antipsychotics and
benzodiazepines are useful as sedatives, and neither is demonstrably superior.
As PCP is an anticholinergic at high doses, drugs with anticholinergic
properties (including some antipsychotics) should be avoided.
Hallucinogen-Persisting Perception Disorder. Treatment for
hallucinogen-persisting perception disorder is palliative. The first step in the
process is to identify the disorder; it is not uncommon for the patient to


<<<PAGE 1041>>>
consult several specialists before receiving a diagnosis. Pharmacologic
approaches include long-acting benzodiazepines, such as clonazepam and, to
a lesser extent, anticonvulsants, including valproic acid and carbamazepine.
No drug is entirely adequate. Antipsychotics should only be used for
psychotic symptoms because their side effects could exacerbate symptoms.
The second dimension of treatment is behavioral. We should instruct the
patient to avoid gratuitous stimulation in the form of OTC drugs, caffeine,
and alcohol, and avoidable physical and emotional stressors. Marijuana
smoke is a particularly strong intensifier of the disorder, even when passively
inhaled.
Finally, three comorbid conditions are associated with hallucinogenpersisting perception disorder: panic disorder, major depression, and alcohol
use disorder. All these conditions require primary prevention and early
intervention.
Hallucinogen-Induced Psychosis. Treatment of hallucinogen-induced
psychosis does not differ from conventional treatment for other psychoses. In
addition to antipsychotic medications, several agents are reportedly effective,
including lithium carbonate, carbamazepine, and electroconvulsive therapy.
Antidepressant drugs, benzodiazepines, and other anticonvulsants may have a
role as well. Unlike schizophrenia, patients with this disorder lack negative
symptoms—they have positive symptoms of psychosis but can still relate
well to the psychiatrist. Also important are supportive, educational, and
family therapies. The goals of treatment are the control of symptoms,
minimal use of hospitals, daily work, the development and preservation of
social relationships, and the management of comorbid illnesses such as
alcohol use disorder.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
People have used hallucinogens for thousands of years, and drug-induced
hallucinogenic states have been part of social and religious rituals. The
discovery of LSD in 1943 increased the use and misuse of hallucinogens
because it is easy and inexpensive to make such synthetic hallucinogens.
They are also more potent than their botanical counterparts, and the
development of synthetic hallucinogens is mostly responsible for the


<<<PAGE 1042>>>
psychiatric disorders associated with these drugs.
The incidence of hallucinogen use has had two notable periods of increase.
Between 1965 and 1969, there was a 10-fold increase in the estimated annual
number of initiates. This increase was driven primarily by the use of LSD.
The second peak in first-time hallucinogen use occurred from around 1992
until 2000, fueled mainly by ecstasy (MDMA). Decreases in the initiation of
both LSD and ecstasy were evident between then and 2013, coinciding with
an overall drop in hallucinogen incidence from 1.6 to 1.1 million.
The NSDUH found that approximately 0.5 percent of persons age 12 years
or older reported current use of hallucinogens. In 2016, the NSDUH added
questions
about
the
use
of
ketamine,
DMT/AMT
(αmethyltryptamine)/“Foxy” (5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine [5-MeODMT]), and Salvia divinorum; for this reason, it is not possible to compare
current rates of use with past rates. The lifetime prevalence of hallucinogen
use disorder is about 0.6 to 1.7 percent. Approximately 5 percent of those
with a lifetime history of hallucinogen use may develop hallucinogen
dependence.
Hallucinogen use is most common among young (15 to 35 years of age)
white men. About 60 percent of hallucinogen users are men. Persons 26 to 34
years of age show the highest use of hallucinogens, with 16 percent having
used a hallucinogen at least once. Persons 18 to 25 years of age have the
highest recent use of a hallucinogen. The ratio of whites to blacks who have
used a hallucinogen is 2:1; the white to Hispanic ratio is about 1.5:1.
Cultural factors influence the use of hallucinogens; their use in the western
United States is significantly higher than in the southern United States.
Hallucinogen use is associated with less morbidity and less mortality than
many other substances of abuse. For example, one study found that only 1
percent of substance-related emergency department visits were related to
hallucinogens, compared with 40 percent for cocaine-related problems. Of
persons visiting the emergency department for hallucinogen-related reasons,
however, more than 50 percent were younger than 20 years of age. Currently,
there may be a resurgence in the popularity of hallucinogens among youths.
Phencyclidine
Phencyclidine and some related substances are relatively easy to synthesize in


<<<PAGE 1043>>>
illegal laboratories and relatively inexpensive to buy on the street. The
variable quality of the laboratories, however, results in a range of potency
and purity. PCP use varies most markedly with geography. Most users of
PCP also use other substances, particularly alcohol, but also opiates, opioids,
marijuana, amphetamines, and cocaine. Marijuana products often include
PCP, with severe untoward effects on users. The actual rate of PCP use
disorder is not known, but PCP is associated with 3 percent of substance
abuse deaths and 32 percent of substance-related emergency department
visits nationally.

PATHOLOGY
Neuropharmacology
LSD is a reasonable prototype for this group, although there is considerable
variation. LSD probably acts on the serotonergic system—but exactly how,
and in what direction, is not clear. Data at this time suggest that LSD acts as a
partial agonist at postsynaptic serotonin receptors.
Most hallucinogens are well absorbed after oral ingestion, although some
are inhaled, smoked, or injected. Tolerance to hallucinogens develops rapidly
and is virtually complete after 3 or 4 days of continuous use. Tolerance also
reverses quickly, usually in 4 to 7 days. Most people do not experience
physical dependence or withdrawal, but they can develop psychological
dependence, especially if they find the hallucinations pleasant or useful.
Phencyclidine and Ketamine. PCP and ketamine antagonize the NMDA
subtype of glutamate receptors. PCP binds to a site within the NMDAassociated calcium channel and prevents the influx of calcium ions. PCP also
activates the dopaminergic neurons of the VTA, which project to the cerebral
cortex and the limbic system. Activation of these neurons is usually involved
in mediating the reinforcing qualities of PCP.
Tolerance for the effects of PCP occurs in humans, although physical
dependence generally does not occur. In animals that are administered more
PCP per pound for longer times than most humans, PCP does induce physical
dependence. Physical withdrawal in humans is rare, likely because the doses
and durations are much lower. Although the physical dependence on PCP is


<<<PAGE 1044>>>
rare in humans, psychological dependence on both PCP and ketamine is
common.
PCP usually comes from illicit laboratories, so impurities are likely. One
such contaminant is 1-piperidenocyclohexane carbonitrite, which releases
hydrogen cyanide in small quantities when ingested. Another contaminant is
piperidine, which can be recognized by its strong, fishy odor.

4.10 Inhalant-Related Disorders
Inhalant drugs (also called volatile substances or solvents) are volatile
hydrocarbons that vaporize to gaseous fumes at room temperature and are
inhaled through the nose or mouth to enter the bloodstream via the
transpulmonary route. These compounds are commonly found in many
household products and are divided into four commercial classes: (1) solvents
for glues and adhesives; (2) propellants (e.g., for aerosol paint sprays, hair
sprays, and shaving cream); (3) thinners (e.g., for paint products and
correction fluids); and (4) fuels (e.g., gasoline, propane). These drugs likely
share some similar pharmacologic properties despite their chemical
differences.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Persons, especially adolescents, like to inhale these products for their
intoxicating effect. Inhalants are associated with several problems, including
conduct disorder, mood disorders, suicidality, and physical abuse or neglect
and sexual abuse. In some cases, early time-limited use of inhalants may
signal a lifelong problem with externalizing behaviors and risk-taking
propensity. A smaller subgroup uses inhalants chronically, and such use can
cause multiple sequelae, including significant behavioral and organ pathology
from the drugs’ toxicity.
In small initial doses, inhalants can be disinhibiting and produce feelings
of euphoria and excitement as well as pleasant floating sensations, the effects
for which persons presumably use the drugs. High doses of inhalants can
cause psychological symptoms of fearfulness, sensory illusions, auditory and
visual hallucinations, and distortions of body size. The neurologic symptoms


<<<PAGE 1045>>>
can include slurred speech, decreased speed of talking, and ataxia. Long-term
use can be associated with irritability, emotional lability, and impaired
memory.
Tolerance for the inhalants does develop for some users; a withdrawal
syndrome can accompany the cessation of inhalant use. The withdrawal
syndrome does not occur frequently; when it does, it includes sleep
disturbances, irritability, jitteriness, sweating, nausea, vomiting, tachycardia,
and (sometimes) delusions and hallucinations.

DIAGNOSIS
The DSM-5 describes several disorders related to inhalants, including
inhalant use disorder, inhalant intoxication, inhalant intoxication delirium,
inhalant-induced neurocognitive disorder, inhalant-induced psychotic
disorder, inhalant-induced mood and anxiety disorders, and other inhalantinduced disorders. The DSM-5 excludes anesthetic gases (e.g., nitrous oxide
and ether) and short-acting vasodilators (e.g., amyl nitrite) from the inhalantrelated disorders, these are classified within the generic category of “other (or
unknown) substance-related disorders.” ICD-10 follows a similar approach.
Inhalant Use Disorder
Most persons probably use inhalants for a short time without developing
dependence or abuse. Nonetheless, dependence and abuse of inhalants occur.
Inhalant Intoxication
The diagnostic criteria for inhalant intoxication specify the presence of
maladaptive behavioral changes and at least two physical symptoms. People
who become intoxicated on inhalants may have apathy, diminished social and
occupational functioning, impaired judgment, and impulsive or aggressive
behavior. They can also have nausea, anorexia, nystagmus, depressed
reflexes, and diplopia. With high doses and long exposures, a user’s
neurologic status can progress to stupor and unconsciousness, and a person
may later be amnestic for the period of intoxication. Clinicians can
sometimes identify a recent user of inhalants by rashes around the patient’s
nose and mouth; unusual breath odors; the residue of the inhalant substances


<<<PAGE 1046>>>
on the patient’s face, hands, or clothing; and irritation of the patient’s eyes,
throat, lungs, and nose. The disorder can be chronic, as in the following case.
A 16-year-old single Hispanic female came to a university substancetreatment program for evaluation. The patient had been convicted for
auto theft, using a weapon, and being out of control by her family. By age
15, she had regularly been using inhalants and drinking alcohol heavily.
She had tried typewriter-erasing fluid, bleach, tile cleaner, hairspray, nail
polish, glue, and gasoline, but preferred spray paint. She had sniffed paint
many times each day for about 6 months at age 15, using a maximum of
eight paint cans per day. The patient said, “It blacks out everything.”
Sometimes she had lost consciousness, and she believed that the paint
had impaired her memory and made her “dumb.” (Courtesy of Thomas J.
Crowley, M.D.)
Inhalant Intoxication Delirium. The inhalants can directly cause
delirium. Also, their interactions with other substances or the hypoxia caused
by their use can cause delirium. If the delirium results in severe behavioral
disturbances, short-term treatment with a dopamine receptor antagonist, such
as haloperidol, may be necessary. Clinicians should avoid benzodiazepines
because of the possibility of increasing the patient’s respiratory depression.
Inhalant-Induced
Neurocognitive
Disorder.
Inhalant-induced
neurocognitive disorder, as with delirium, may result from the neurotoxic
effects of the inhalants themselves, the neurotoxic effects of the metals (e.g.,
lead) commonly used in inhalants; or the impact of frequent and prolonged
periods of hypoxia. Dementia caused by inhalants is likely to be irreversible
in all but the mildest cases.
Inhalant-Induced Psychotic Disorder. Clinicians can specify
hallucinations or delusions as predominant symptoms. Paranoid states are
probably the most common psychotic syndromes during inhalant
intoxication.
Inhalant-Induced Mood Disorder and Inhalant-Induced Anxiety


<<<PAGE 1047>>>
Disorder. Inhalant-induced mood disorder and inhalant-induced anxiety
disorder allow the classification of inhalant-related disorders characterized by
prominent mood and anxiety symptoms. Depressive disorders are the most
common mood disorders associated with inhalant use, and panic disorders
and generalized anxiety disorder are the most common anxiety disorders.
Other Inhalant-Induced Disorders. Other Inhalant-Induced Disorder is
the recommended DSM-5 diagnosis for inhalant-related disorders that do not
fit into one of the diagnostic categories discussed earlier.

TREATMENT
Inhalant intoxication, as with alcohol intoxication, usually requires no
medical attention and resolves spontaneously. However, possible effects of
the intoxication, such as coma, bronchospasm, laryngospasm, cardiac
arrhythmias, trauma, or burns, need treatment. Otherwise, care primarily
involves reassurance, quiet support, and attention to vital signs and level of
consciousness. Sedative drugs, including benzodiazepines, are
contraindicated because they worsen inhalant intoxication.
No established treatment exists for the cognitive and memory problems of
inhalant-induced neurocognitive disorder. Severely deteriorated, inhalantdependent, homeless adults could benefit from street outreach and extensive
social service. Patients may require comprehensive support within their
families or in foster or domiciliary care.
The course and treatment of inhalant-induced psychotic disorder are like
those of inhalant intoxication. The disorder is brief, lasting a few hours to (at
most) a very few weeks beyond the intoxication. Vigorous treatment of such
life-threatening complications as respiratory or cardiac arrest is indicated,
together with conservative management of the intoxication itself. Symptoms
such as confusion, panic, and psychosis require special attention to patient
safety. Severe agitation may require cautious control with haloperidol (5 mg
intramuscularly per 70 kg body weight). Clinicians should avoid sedative
drugs because they may aggravate psychosis. Inhalant-induced anxiety and
mood disorders may precipitate suicidal ideation, and we should carefully
evaluate patients for that possibility. Antianxiety medications and
antidepressants are not useful in the acute phase of the disorder; they may be


<<<PAGE 1048>>>
of use in cases of coexisting anxiety or depressive illness.
Day Treatment and Residential Programs
Day treatment and residential programs have been used successfully,
especially for adolescent abusers with combined substance use disorders and
other psychiatric disorders. Treatment addresses the comorbid state, which, in
most cases, is conduct disorder or, in some other cases, may be ADHD, major
depressive disorder, persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), and PTSD.
Treatment for abuse or neglect, both very common in these patients, is also
important. Both group and individual therapy that are behaviorally oriented
are employed, with immediate rewards for progress toward objectively
defined goals in treatment and consequences for lapses to previous behaviors.
Patients attend on-site schools with special education teachers, together with
planned recreational activities, and the programs provide birth control
consultations. The patients’ families, often very chaotic, are engaged in
modifications of structural family therapy or multisystemic therapy, both of
which have reasonable empirical support. Participation in 12-step programs is
required. Treatment interventions are coordinated carefully with interventions
by community social workers and probation officers. We can monitor
progress with urine and breath samples analyzed for alcohol and other drugs
at intake and frequently during treatment.
Treatment usually lasts 3 to 12 months. Table 4-45 lists some goals for
treatment.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Inhalant substances are readily available, legal, and inexpensive. These three
factors contribute to the high use of inhalants among poor persons and young
persons. Approximately 0.2 percent of persons age 12 and older in the United
States are current users of inhalants. Adolescents (ages 12 to 17) are more
likely to use inhalants than individuals in other age groups. According to the
NSDUH, in 2016, only 0.2 percent of adults were using inhalants. In contrast,
twice to three times as many adolescents were using inhalants. In adolescents,
males and females use inhalants almost equally (with a slight increase in use
for females), while in adults, inhalant use is rare in females.


<<<PAGE 1049>>>
Table 4-45
Goals of Treatment for Inhalant Disorder
Has practiced a plan to stay abstinent
Is showing fewer antisocial behaviors
Has a plan to continue any needed psychiatric treatment (e.g.,
treatment for comorbid depression)
Has a plan to live in a supportive, drug-free environment
Is interacting with the family in a more productive way
Is working or attending school
Is associating with drug-free, nondelinquent peers
Inhalant use among adolescents may be most common in those whose
parents or older siblings use illegal substances, or among adolescents who
have experienced childhood trauma or maltreatment. Inhalant use among
adolescents is also associated with an increased likelihood of conduct
disorder or antisocial personality disorder.
Pathology
Neuropharmacology. Inhalants most used by American adolescents are
gasoline, glue (which usually contains toluene), spray paint, solvents,
cleaning fluids, and assorted other aerosols. Sniffing vapor through the nose
or huffing (taking deep breaths) through the mouth leads to transpulmonary
absorption with very rapid drug access to the brain. Breathing through a
solvent-soaked cloth, inhaling fumes from a glue-containing bag, huffing
vapor sprayed into a plastic bag, or breathing vapor from a gasoline can are
common. Approximately 15 to 20 breaths of 1 percent gasoline vapor
produce several hours of intoxication. Inhaled toluene concentrations from a
glue-containing bag may reach 10,000 ppm, and people may inhale fumes
from several tubes each day. By comparison, one study of just 100 ppm of
toluene showed that a 6-hour exposure produced a temporary
neuropsychological performance decrement of approximately 10 percent.
Inhalants generally act as a CNS depressant. Tolerance for inhalants can
develop, although withdrawal symptoms are usually relatively mild.


<<<PAGE 1050>>>
Inhalants are rapidly absorbed through the lungs and quickly delivered to
the brain. The effects appear within 5 minutes and can last for 30 minutes to
several hours, depending on the inhalant substance and the dose. The
concentrations of many inhalant substances in the blood increase when
combined with alcohol, perhaps because of the competition for hepatic
enzymes.
Although about one-fifth of an inhalant substance is excreted unchanged
by the lungs, the liver metabolizes the remainder. Inhalants are detectable in
the blood for 4 to 10 hours after use, and blood samples should be taken in
the emergency department when inhalant use is suspected.
Much like alcohol, inhalants have specific pharmacodynamic effects that
are not well understood. Because their effects are generally similar and
additive to the effects of other CNS depressants (e.g., ethanol, barbiturates,
and benzodiazepines), some investigators have suggested that inhalants
operate by enhancing the GABA system. Other investigators have suggested
that inhalants work through membrane fluidization, which may also be a
pharmacodynamic effect of ethanol.
Organ Pathology and Neurologic Effects. Inhalants are associated
with many potentially dangerous adverse effects. The most serious of these is
death, which can result from respiratory depression, cardiac arrhythmias,
asphyxiation, aspiration of vomitus, or accident or injury (e.g., driving while
intoxicated with inhalants).
Placing an inhalant-soaked rag and one’s head into a plastic bag, a standard
procedure for inhalant users can cause coma and suffocation.
Chronic inhalant users may have numerous neurologic problems.
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) reveal
diffuse cerebral, cerebellar, and brainstem atrophy with white matter disease,
a leukoencephalopathy. Single-photon emission CT (SPECT) of former
solvent-abusing adolescents showed both increases and decreases in blood
flow in different cerebral areas. Several studies of house painters and factory
workers exposed to solvents for long periods also have found evidence of
brain atrophy on CT scans, with decreased CBF.
Neurologic and behavioral signs and symptoms can include hearing loss,
peripheral neuropathy, headache, paresthesias, cerebellar signs, persisting
motor impairment, parkinsonism, apathy, poor concentration, memory loss,


<<<PAGE 1051>>>
visual–spatial dysfunction, impaired processing of linguistic material, and
lead encephalopathy. White matter changes, or pontine atrophy on MRI, have
been associated with worse intelligence quotient (IQ) test results. The
combination of organic solvents with high concentrations of copper, zinc, and
heavy metals can cause brain atrophy, temporal lobe epilepsy, decreased IQ,
and a variety of EEG changes.
Other serious adverse effects associated with long-term inhalant use
include irreversible hepatic disease or renal damage (tubular acidosis) and
permanent muscle damage associated with rhabdomyolysis. Additional
adverse effects include cardiovascular and pulmonary symptoms (e.g., chest
pain and bronchospasm) as well as GI symptoms (e.g., pain, nausea,
vomiting, and hematemesis). There are several clinical reports of toluene
embryopathy, with signs such as those of fetal alcohol syndrome. These
include low birth weight, microcephaly, shortened palpebral fissures, small
face, low-set ears, and other dysmorphic signs. These babies reportedly
develop slowly, show hyperactivity, and have cerebellar dysfunction. No
convincing evidence indicates, however, that toluene, the best-studied
inhalant, produces genetic damage in somatic cells.

4.11 Anabolic-Androgenic Steroid Use
The anabolic-androgenic steroids (AAS) are a family of hormones that
includes testosterone, the natural male hormone, which, together with
numerous synthetic analogs of testosterone, have been developed over the
last 70 years (Table 4-46). These drugs exhibit various degrees of anabolic
(muscle building) and androgenic (masculinizing) effects; none of these
drugs display purely anabolic effects in the absence of androgenic effects. It
is important not to confuse the AAS (testosterone-like hormones) with
corticosteroids (cortisol-like hormones such as hydrocortisone and
prednisone).
Table 4-46
Examples of Commonly Used Anabolic Steroids


<<<PAGE 1052>>>
Compounds Usually Administered Orally Department:
Fluoxymesterone (Halotestin, Android-F, Ultandren)
Methandienone (formerly called Methandrostenolone; Dianabol)
Methyltestosterone (Android, Testred, Virilon)
Mibolerone (Cheque Dropsa)
Oxandrolone (Anavar)
Oxymetholone (Anadrol, Hemogenin)
Mesterolone (Mestoranum, Proviron)
Stanozolol (Winstrol)
Compounds Usually Administered Intramuscularly:
Nandrolone decanoate (Deca-Durabolin)
Nandrolone phenpropionate (Durabolin)
Methenolone enanthate (Primobolan Depot)
Boldenone undecylenate (Equipoisea)
Stanozolol (Winstrol-Va)
Testosterone esters blends (Sustanon, Sten)
Testosterone cypionate
Testosterone enanthate (Delatestryl)
Testosterone propionate (Testoviron, Androlan)
Testosterone undecanoate (Andriol, Restandol)
Trenbolone acetate (Finajet, Finaplixa)
Trenbolone hexahydrobencylcarbonate (Parabolan)
aVeterinary compound.

Note: Many of the brand names listed in this table are from other countries, but they are
included because of the widespread illicit use of foreign steroid preparations in the United
States.

Corticosteroids are hormones secreted by the adrenal gland, rather than by
the testes. Corticosteroids have no muscle-building properties and, hence,
little abuse potential; they treat many inflammatory conditions such as poison
ivy or asthma. AAS, by contrast, have only limited legitimate medical
applications, such as in the treatment of hypogonadal men and diseases
associated with muscle wasting, such as acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS) and cancer. AAS, however, are widely used illicitly,


<<<PAGE 1053>>>
especially by boys and young men seeking to gain increased muscle mass and
strength, either for athletic purposes or to improve personal appearance.
AAS do not have a diagnostic category in the DSM-5; instead, it is coded
as one of the other or unknown substance-related disorders. ICD-10 includes
the diagnosis in the category “Abuse of non–dependence-producing
substances,” which also includes antacids, herbal remedies, and vitamins.

CLINICAL FEATURES AND DIAGNOSIS
Steroids may initially induce euphoria and hyperactivity. After relatively
short periods, however, their use can become associated with less desirable
symptoms. Studies have reported that 2 to 15 percent of anabolic steroid
abusers experience hypomanic or manic episodes, and a smaller percentage
may have psychotic symptoms. Also disturbing is a correlation between
steroid abuse and violence (“roid rage” in the parlance of users). Steroid
abusers with no record of antisocial behavior or violence have committed
murders and other violent crimes.
Steroids are addictive substances. When abusers stop taking steroids, they
can become depressed, anxious, and concerned about the physical state of
their bodies. Some male and female weight lifters may have muscle
dysmorphia, a form of body dysmorphic disorder in which the individual
feels that he or she is not sufficiently muscular and lean. There are some
similarities between an athlete’s and a patient with anorexia nervosa’s selfperception; to an observer, both groups seem to distort the realistic
assessment of the body.
Iatrogenic addiction is a consideration given the increasing number of
geriatric patients who are receiving testosterone from their physicians in an
attempt to increase libido and reverse some aspects of aging.
Mr. A is a 26-year-old single man. He is 69 in tall and presently weighs
204 lb, with a body fat of 11 percent. He reports that he began lifting
weights at age 17, at which time he weighed 155 lb. About 2 years after
beginning his weight lifting, he began taking AAS, which he obtained
through a friend at his gymnasium. His first “cycle” (course) of AAS,
lasting for 9 weeks, involved methandienone, 30 mg a day, orally, and


<<<PAGE 1054>>>
testosterone cypionate, 600 mg a week, intramuscularly. During these 9
weeks, he gained 20 lb of muscle mass. He was so pleased with these
results that he took five further cycles of AAS over the next 6 years.
During his most ambitious cycle, approximately 1 year ago, he used
testosterone cypionate, 600 mg/wk; nandrolone decanoate, 400 mg a
week; stanozolol, 12 mg a day; and oxandrolone, 10 mg a day.
During each of the cycles, Mr. A has noted euphoria, irritability, and
grandiose feelings. These symptoms were most prominent during his
most recent cycle when he felt “invincible.” During this cycle, he also
noted a decreased need for sleep, racing thoughts, and a tendency to
spend excessive amounts of money. For example, he impulsively
purchased a $2,700 stereo system when he could not afford to spend
more than $500. He also became uncharacteristically irritable with his
girlfriend, and on one occasion, put his fist through the side window of
her car during an argument, an act inconsistent with his normally mildmannered personality. After this cycle of AAS ended, he became mildly
depressed for about 2 months.
Mr. A has used several drugs to lose weight in preparation for
bodybuilding contests. These include ephedrine, amphetamine,
triiodothyronine, and thyroxin. Recently, he has also begun to use the
opioid agonist–antagonist nalbuphine intravenously (IV) to treat muscle
aches from weight lifting. He also used oral opioids, such as controlledrelease oxycodone, at least once a week. He uses oral opioids sometimes
to treat muscle aches, but often to get high. He reports that the use of
nalbuphine and other opioids is widespread among other AAS users of
his acquaintance.
Mr. A exhibits characteristic features of muscle dysmorphia. He
regularly checks his appearance, including his reflection in windows or
even in the back of a spoon. He becomes anxious if he misses even one
day of working out at the gym, and acknowledges that his preoccupation
with weight lifting has cost him both social and occupational
opportunities. Although he has a 48-in chest and 19-in biceps, he has
frequently declined invitations to go to the beach or a swimming pool for
fear that he would look too small when seen in a bathing suit. He is
anxious because he has lost some weight since the end of his previous
cycle of AAS and is eager to resume another cycle of AAS soon.


<<<PAGE 1055>>>
(Adapted from Harrison G. Pope, Jr., M.D., and Kirk J. Brower, M.D.)
Anabolic Steroid–Induced Mood Disorders
Table 4-47 lists some typical symptoms associated with anabolic steroid use.
Although athletes using these drugs have long recognized that syndromes of
anger and irritability could be associated with AAS use, the scientific
literature did not recognize this syndrome until the late 1980s and 1990s.
Since then, a series of observational field studies of athletes have suggested
that some AAS users develop prominent hypomanic or even manic symptoms
during AAS use.
A possible severe consequence of AAS-induced mood disorders may be
violent or even homicidal behavior. Several published reports have
anecdotally described individuals with no apparent history of psychiatric
disorder, no criminal record, and no history of violence, who committed
violent crimes, including murder, while under the influence of AAS.
Although a causal link is difficult to establish in these cases, lawyers have
presented evidence of AAS use in forensic settings as a possible mitigating
factor in criminal behavior.
Table 4-47
Symptoms Associated with Anabolic Steroid Use
Euphoria
Hyperactivity
Irritability
Anger
Aggressiveness
Hypomania
Mania
Violent behavior (“Roid Rage”)
Homicidal behavior
Suicide
Psychosis
Withdrawal symptoms: somatization, depression


<<<PAGE 1056>>>
Depressive syndromes induced by AAS have occurred, and suicide is a
risk. A brief and self-limited syndrome of depression occurs upon AAS
withdrawal, probably as a result of the depression of the hypothalamic–
pituitary–gonadal axis after exogenous AAS administration.
Anabolic Steroid–Induced Psychotic Disorder
Psychotic symptoms are rare in association with anabolic steroid use, but
they occasionally occur, primarily in individuals who were using the
equivalent of more than 1,000 mg of testosterone a week. Usually, these
symptoms consist of grandiose or paranoid delusions, generally occurring in
the context of a manic episode, although occasionally occurring in the
absence of a frank manic syndrome. In most cases reported, psychotic
symptoms have disappeared promptly (within a few weeks) after the
discontinuation of the offending agent, although temporary treatment with
antipsychotic agents was sometimes required.
Other Anabolic Steroid–Related Disorders
Symptoms of anxiety disorders, such as panic disorder and social phobia, can
occur during AAS use. AAS use may serve as a “gateway to the use of opioid
agonists or antagonists, such as nalbuphine, or to use of frank opioid agonists,
such as heroin.”

TREATMENT
Abstinence is the treatment goal of choice for patients manifesting AAS use
disorders. To the extent that users of AAS abuse other addictive substances
(including alcohol), traditional treatment approaches for substance-related
disorders may be used. Nevertheless, AAS users may differ from other
addicted patients in several ways that have implications for treatment. First,
the euphorigenic and reinforcing effects of AAS may only become apparent
after weeks or months of use in conjunction with intensive exercising. When
compared with immediately and passively reinforcing drugs, such as cocaine,
heroin, and alcohol, AAS use may entail more delayed gratification. Second,
AAS users may manifest a more significant commitment to culturally
endorsed values of physical fitness, success, victory, and goal directedness


<<<PAGE 1057>>>
than users of other illicit drugs. Finally, AAS users are often preoccupied
with their physical attributes and may rely excessively on these attributes for
self-esteem. Treatment, therefore, depends on a therapeutic alliance and a
thorough and nonjudgmental understanding of the patient’s values and
motivations for using AAS.
Though there are no controlled trials of treatment for AAS-related
disorders, following the generally recommended approaches for the related
idiopathic syndrome may be appropriate. For example, muscle dysmorphia
may improve with CBTs or the use of SSRIs.
AAS Withdrawal
Supportive therapy and monitoring are essential for treating AAS withdrawal
because suicidal depressions can occur. Hospitalization may be required
when suicidal ideation is severe. Patients should be educated about the
possible course of withdrawal and reassured that symptoms are time-limited
and manageable. Clinicians should reserve antidepressant agents for patients
whose depressive symptomatology persists for several weeks after AAS
discontinuation and who likely have a comorbid depressive disorder. SSRIs
are the preferred agents because of their favorable adverse effect profile and
their effectiveness in a reported case series of treated AAS users with major
depressive disorder. Physical withdrawal symptoms are not life threatening
and do not ordinarily require pharmacotherapy. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may be useful to treat musculoskeletal pain
and headaches. AAS-induced hypogonadism, including loss of libido, erectile
dysfunction, and possible major depression, may begin during AAS
withdrawal and can sometimes be prolonged, requiring treatment by an
endocrinologist. Patients with AAS-induced hypogonadism may benefit from
physiologic exogenous doses of testosterone, gradually tapered over time, as
well as clomiphene (to restore hypothalamic–pituitary–testicular [HPT]
function) and HCG (to stimulate the testis to resume production of
testosterone and spermatozoa).

EPIDEMIOLOGY
It is difficult to estimate the lifetime prevalence of illicit AAS use in the
United States because most available data rely on anonymous surveys of


<<<PAGE 1058>>>
students, particularly students of high school age. There are two serious
problems with the use of these data. First, the median age of onset of AAS
use, both in the United States and other countries, is approximately 23 years
of age—older than for any other major category of illicit drugs. Second,
anonymous surveys are vulnerable to serious errors in the opposite direction
as a result of false-positive responses to the survey questions about
“steroids.” When asking students a typical survey question, such as whether
they have used “steroid pills or shots without a doctor’s prescription,” they
may falsely respond in the affirmative when in fact they have taken only
corticosteroids, or have purchased nutritional supplements OTC that they
mistakenly believed were steroids. After allowing for these sources of error,
the true prevalence of AAS in high school girls is close to 0 percent and in
boys about 1 percent. However, by adulthood, perhaps 3 to 4 percent of
American men have used AAS at some time in their lives, and approximately
1.8 percent of American women have used AAS. In general, males are more
likely to take AAS than females, and athletes are more likely to take AAS
than nonathletes.
The current high rates of steroid use among younger individuals appear to
represent an essential shift in the epidemiology of steroid use. In the 1970s,
most users were competition bodybuilders or other elite athletes. Since then,
however, it appears that an increasing number of young men, and
occasionally even young women may use these drugs purely to enhance
personal appearance rather than for any athletic purpose.

PATHOLOGY
Pharmacology
All steroid drugs—including AAS, estrogens, and corticosteroids—are
synthesized in vivo from cholesterol and resemble cholesterol in their
chemical structure. Testosterone has a four-ring chemical structure containing
19 carbon atoms.
Average testosterone plasma concentrations for men range from 300 to
1,000 ng/dL. Generally, 200 mg of testosterone cypionate taken every 2
weeks restores physiologic testosterone concentrations in a hypogonadal
male. A eugonadal male who initiates physiologic dosages of testosterone has


<<<PAGE 1059>>>
no net gain in testosterone concentrations because exogenously administered
AAS shut down endogenous testosterone production via feedback inhibition
of the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis. Consequently, illicit users take
higher than therapeutic dosages to achieve supraphysiologic effects. The
dose–response curve for anabolic effects may be logarithmic, which could
explain why illicit users generally take 10 to 100 times the therapeutic
dosages. Doses in this range usually require combinations of oral and injected
AAS, which illicit AAS users often do. Transdermal testosterone, available
by prescription for testosterone replacement therapy, may also be used.
Therapeutic Indications. The AAS are indicated primarily for
testosterone deficiency (male hypogonadism), hereditary angioedema (a
congenital skin disorder), and some rare forms of anemia caused by bone
marrow or renal failure. Women may use AAS for metastatic breast cancer,
osteoporosis, endometriosis, and adjunctive treatment of menopausal
symptoms. However, these are not first-line treatments. In men, they have
been used experimentally as a male contraceptive and for treating major
depressive disorder and sexual disorders in eugonadal men. Recently, they
have been used to treat wasting syndromes associated with AIDS. Controlled
studies have also suggested that testosterone has antidepressant effects in
some men infected with HIV with major depressive disorder and is also a
supplementary (augmentation) treatment in some depressed men with low
endogenous testosterone levels who are refractory to conventional
antidepressants.
Adverse Reactions
The most common adverse medical effects of AAS involve the
cardiovascular, hepatic, reproductive, and dermatologic systems.
The AAS produce an adverse cholesterol profile by increasing levels of
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and decreasing levels of high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol. High-dose use of AAS can also activate hemostasis
and increase blood pressure. Isolated case reports of myocardial infarction,
cardiomyopathy, left ventricular hypertrophy, and stroke among users of
AAS, including fatalities, have appeared.
Among the AAS-induced endocrine effects in men are testicular atrophy


<<<PAGE 1060>>>
and sterility, both usually reversible after discontinuing AAS, and
gynecomastia, which may persist until surgical removal. In women,
shrinkage of breast tissue, irregular menses (diminution or cessation), and
masculinization (clitoral hypertrophy, hirsutism, and deepened voice) can
occur. Masculinizing effects in women may be irreversible. Androgens taken
during pregnancy could cause the masculinization of a female fetus.
Dermatologic effects include acne and male pattern baldness. Abuse of AAS
by children has led to concerns that AAS-induced premature closure of bony
epiphyses could cause shortened stature. Other uncommon adverse effects
include edema of the extremities caused by water retention, exacerbation of
tic disorders, sleep apnea, and polycythemia.

ETIOLOGY
The primary reason for taking illicit AAS is to enhance either athletic
performance or physical appearance. Taking AAS is reinforced because they
can produce the athletic and physical effects that users desire, especially
when combined with proper diet and training. Further reinforcement derives
from winning competitions and from social admiration for physical
appearance. AAS users also perceive that they can train more intensively for
longer durations with less fatigue and with decreased recovery times between
workouts.
Although the anabolic or muscle-building properties of AAS are important
to those seeking to enhance athletic performance and physical appearance,
psychoactive effects may also be valuable in the persistent and dependent use
of AAS. Anecdotally, some AAS users report feelings of power,
aggressiveness, and euphoria, which become associated with and can
reinforce AAS taking.

4.12 Gambling Disorder
Although not related to a substance, gamblers share many features in
common with other addictive disorders.

CLINICAL FEATURES


<<<PAGE 1061>>>
Pathologic gamblers often appear overconfident, somewhat abrasive,
energetic, and free-spending. They often show apparent signs of personal
stress, anxiety, and depression. They commonly have the attitude that money
is both the cause of and the solution to all their problems. As their gambling
increases, they may lie to obtain money and to continue gambling while
hiding the extent of their gambling. They make no serious attempt to budget
or save money. When without borrowing resources, they are likely to engage
in antisocial behavior to obtain money for gambling. Their criminal behavior
is typically nonviolent, such as forgery, embezzlement, or fraud, and they
consciously intend to return or repay the money.
Complications include alienation from family members and acquaintances,
the loss of life accomplishments, suicide attempts, and association with fringe
and illegal groups. Arrest for nonviolent crimes may lead to imprisonment.

DIAGNOSIS
DSM-5 refers to this disorder as gambling disorder, whereas ICD-10 calls it
pathologic gambling; Table 4-48 lists their comparative approaches to the
disorder.
Previous editions of the DSM include pathologic gambling disorder in the
impulse-control disorder category because of the patient’s preoccupation or
compulsion to gamble. However, the criteria for the disorder are more similar
to substance-related disorders, given the compulsive behavior, tolerance, and
withdrawal effects that develop. Substance use is often comorbid with
gambling. Thus, in DSM-5, gambling disorder is included in the section on
substance use and addictive disorders and is diagnosed as a non–substancerelated disorder. ICD-10 continues to include it among the habit and impulse
disorders, referring to it as pathologic gambling.
Gerry was a 35-year-old former auto dealership owner. Two of his uncles
were compulsive gamblers, and his paternal grandfather had major
depressive disorder. He played poker and had been a racecourse habitué
since the age of 15 years. He had dropped out of college after a few
months and became a car sales representative. Soon he was promoted to
showroom manager and then went out on his own. By age 32 years, he


<<<PAGE 1062>>>
was a multimillionaire owner of a dealership chain, happily married with
two children.
Gerry continued to gamble frequently. He was a successful weekend
sports bettor, as well as a consistent winner at weekly gin rummy and
poker games and occasional jaunts to Las Vegas and Atlantic City.
In the context of his wife giving birth to a stillborn child, Gerry started
going to casinos more often, gradually increasing the size of bets at
blackjack and craps. His sports wagers also escalated. His games at home
gradually became boring—“there was zilch action.” He began
frequenting an illegal local poker parlor that featured high-stake action.
Over several years, Gerry slipped into a typical gambling spiral. He
accumulated several million dollars in debts and lied to family and
colleagues about his whereabouts. He raided his business and personal
accounts, including his children’s college funds, maxed out credit cards,
and borrowed from loan sharks at exorbitant rates. He grew profoundly
depressed and seriously thought of killing himself in a car crash so that
his insurance would “take care of my family after I am gone.”
Gerry’s dire situation was unmasked when his Porsche was
repossessed one Sunday morning. Initially, his wife threatened to divorce
him. However, a wealthy relative intervened and bailed him out. He
swore never to gamble again, entered Gamblers Anonymous, and within
2 months, resumed his frantic gambling.
Over the next decade, Gerry underwent four more episodes of recovery
and relapse. His wife divorced him, he lost his dealerships, and he had to
declare bankruptcy. Gerry finally enrolled in a pilot dual-diagnostic
recovery program, where he was diagnosed with atypical bipolar
disorder. His treatment included Gamblers Anonymous meetings,
individual and family counseling, and pharmacotherapy with bupropion
and lamotrigine.
Gerry eventually reconciled with his wife and family. He returned to
selling cars, started living modestly, and continued to attend Gamblers
Anonymous meetings regularly. However, he declared emphatically that
he always considers himself one step away from becoming a “degenerate
gambler” again. (Courtesy of Harvey Roy Greenberg, M.D.)


<<<PAGE 1063>>>
Table 4-48
Gambling Disorder
Gambling Disorder
Disorder

DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic
Name

Gambling
Disorder

Pathologic Gambling

Duration

Symptoms
present within a
12-month
period

Symptoms

• Needing higher Pattern of gambling that is
stakes to
dominant in the patient’s life
achieve the
and resulting in adverse
same thrill
consequences in social,
• Becomes
occupational, family, and
irritable when
other areas of life
trying to stop
• Unsuccessful
attempts at
reducing
gambling
• Preoccupation
with thoughts
about gambling
• Gambling in
response to
distress
• Gambling to
recoup prior
losses
• Lies to hide
gambling
• Losses due to


<<<PAGE 1064>>>
gambling: jobs,
relationships,
other
opportunities
• Borrows or
steals money
from others for
gambling
Required
number of
symptoms

Four or more of
the above

Psychosocial
Marked
consequences
impairment
of symptoms
and/or distress
Exclusions

Manic episode

Course
specifiers

Episodic: meets
criteria more
than once over
time, separated
by at least
several months
Persistent:
continuous over
several years
In early
remission: no
symptoms for
3–12 mo
In sustained

• Excessive gambling by manic
patients
• Gambling and betting NOS
• Gambling in dissocial
personality disorder


<<<PAGE 1065>>>
remission: no
symptoms for
>12 mo
Severity
specifiers

Severity is
measured by
the number of
symptoms
present
See DSM-5 for
ranges

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Social gambling is distinguished from pathologic gambling in that the former
occurs with friends, on special occasions, and with predetermined acceptable
and tolerable losses. Gambling that is symptomatic of a manic episode can
usually be distinguished from pathologic gambling by the history of a marked
mood change and the loss of judgment preceding the gambling.
Manic-like mood changes are frequent in pathologic gambling, but they
always follow winning and are usually succeeded by depressive episodes
because of subsequent losses. Persons with an antisocial personality disorder
may have problems with gambling. When both disorders are present,
clinicians should diagnose both.

COMORBIDITY
Significant comorbidity occurs between pathologic gambling and mood
disorders (especially major depression and bipolarity) and other substance
use and addictive disorders (notably, alcohol, stimulant, caffeine, and tobacco
use disorders). Comorbidity also exists with ADHD (particularly in
childhood), various personality disorders (notably, narcissistic, antisocial, and
borderline personality disorders), and disruptive, impulse control, and
conduct disorders. Although many pathologic gamblers have obsessive
personality traits, full-blown OCD is uncommon in this group.


<<<PAGE 1066>>>
Table 4-49
The Four Phases of Pathologic Gambling
1. The winning phase, ending with a big win, equal to about a year’s
salary, which hooks patients. Women usually do not have a big win
but use gambling as an escape from problems.
2. The progressive-loss phase, in which patients structure their lives
around gambling and then move from being excellent gamblers to
being stupid ones who take considerable risks, cash in securities,
borrow money, miss work, and lose jobs.
3. The desperate phase, with patients frenziedly gambling with large
amounts of money, not paying debts, becoming involved with loan
sharks, writing bad checks, and possibly embezzling.
4. The hopeless stage of accepting that losses can never be made
up, but the gambling continues because of the associated arousal
or excitement. The disorder may take up to 15 yr to reach the last
phase, but then, within a year or two, patients have totally
deteriorated.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Pathologic gambling usually begins in adolescence for men and late in life
for women. The disorder waxes and wanes and tends to be chronic. Table 449 lists the four phases of pathologic gambling.

TREATMENT
Gamblers seldom come forward voluntarily to be treated. Legal difficulties,
family pressures, or other psychiatric complaints bring gamblers to treatment.
Gamblers Anonymous (GA) was founded in Los Angeles in 1957 and
modeled on AA. It is accessible, at least in large cities, and is an effective
treatment for gambling in some patients. GA is a method of inspirational
group therapy that involves public confession, peer pressure, and the
presence of reformed gamblers (as with sponsors in AA) available to help
members resist the impulse to gamble. The dropout rate from GA is high,
however. Hospitalization may sometimes help by removing patients from


<<<PAGE 1067>>>
their environments. Clinicians should not start insight-oriented psychotherapy
until patients have been away from gambling for 3 months. At this point,
patients who are pathologic gamblers may become excellent candidates for
this form of psychotherapy. Family therapy is often valuable. CBT (e.g.,
relaxation techniques combined with visualization of gambling avoidance)
has had some success.
Psychopharmacological treatment, once largely unsuccessful, now plays a
significant role in the management of pathologic gamblers. Useful agents
include antidepressants, notably SSRIs and bupropion; mood stabilizers,
including sustained-release lithium and antiepileptics such as lamotrigine;
atypical antipsychotics; and opioid agents such as naltrexone. In many
patients, it is difficult to determine whether an antidepressant or mood
stabilizer alleviates gambling cravings directly or via treatment of a comorbid
condition, particularly depressive or bipolar disorders.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Although we lack comprehensive worldwide statistics, available information
indicates that 1 to 2 percent of the general population are problem gamblers.
Problem gambling is more common in men and young adults than in women
and older adults; however, escalation has been noted in the poor, notably
poor minorities, adolescents, elderly retirees, and women. Pathologic
gambling is associated with intimate partner violence—both as a perpetrator
(for both men and women) and as a victim (typically women only). However,
this violence is also due to comorbid psychiatric and substance use disorders.

ETIOLOGY
Psychosocial Factors
Several factors have been described as predisposing persons to develop the
disorder: loss of a parent by death, separation, divorce, or desertion before a
child is 15 years of age; inappropriate parental discipline (absence,
inconsistency, or harshness); exposure to, and availability of, gambling
activities for adolescents; a family emphasis on material and financial
symbols; and a lack of family emphasis on saving, planning, and budgeting.
Psychoanalytic theory has focused on several core character difficulties.


<<<PAGE 1068>>>
Edmund Bergler suggested that compulsive gamblers have an unconscious
desire to lose and gamble to relieve unconscious feelings of guilt, though
these ideas are questionable. Another suggestion is that the gamblers are
narcissists whose grandiose and omnipotent fantasies lead them to believe
they can control events and even predict their outcome. Learning theorists
view uncontrolled gambling as resulting from erroneous perceptions about
control of impulses.
Biologic Factors
Many studies indicate that pathologic gamblers suffer from complex
neurotransmitter dysregulation, similar to the abnormalities found in
substance use disorders and patients with other behavioral/impulsive
problems. Most major neurotransmitters have, at some point, been implicated
as a significant factor in the dysfunction of cerebral sites and pathways
mediating behavioral arousal, inhibition/disinhibition, reward/reinforcement,
and psychophysiological stress.
The particular focus on the role of increased dopaminergic activity in
pathologic gambling arose from the serendipitous discovery that
approximately one-third of patients receiving dopamine agonists for
Parkinson disease develop the illness without any previous history. The
gambling excesses of these patients usually disappear upon withdrawal of the
offending drug.

4.13 Other Disorders Related to the
Addictive Disorders
INTERNET GAMING DISORDER
Also called Internet Addiction, such persons spend almost all their waking
hours at their computer. Their patterns of use are repetitive and constant, and
they are unable to resist intense urges to use the computer or to “surf” the
internet. Internet addicts may gravitate to certain sites that meet specific
needs (e.g., shopping, sex, and interactive games, among others). In DSM-5,
there is a condition proposed for further study called “internet gaming


<<<PAGE 1069>>>
disorder,” which refers to persons who continually use the internet to play
games to the extent that it interferes with social relations and work
performance. However, as mentioned earlier, the disorder need not be limited
to games. Other activities may be involved. General population surveys show
a wide range of reported prevalence, from 0 to almost 50 percent, with some
of the highest percentages reported in South Asian countries.
Table 4-50
Symptoms of Internet Gaming Disorder
Activities associated with Gaming
Preoccupation w/ gaming
Withdrawal (discomfort when deprived of gaming)
Tolerance (spending more time to achieve same enjoyment from the
game)
Compulsive Behavior
Lack of control around gaming
Social or Occupational Dysfunction
Decreased alternative activities
Negative effects on personal relationships, occupational or school
performance due to gaming
Lying to loved ones or clinicians about the frequency of gaming
Relying on gaming to improve mood
Continued use despite recognize the harmful effects of compulsive
gaming
Table 4-50 lists some of the common symptoms and effects of the disorder.
They are organized so as to be consistent with the DSM-5 approach to
substance use disorder (see Section 4.1).
Internet Use and Victims
The combination of anonymity, convenience, and escape (the ACE model)
promotes the internet as a focus of psychopathology. It can be easy to conceal
one’s identity and even create alternate identities using various internet
platforms. The resulting deception can take a malignant turn as sexual


<<<PAGE 1070>>>
predators deceive their victims with false identities only to exploit and harm
them when they meet. These contacts are unregulated and difficult to detect
except by monitoring and checking the computers used. There are frequent
reports of minors having been lured into sometimes lethal situations by
sexual predators. Occasionally there is a report of a couple that met to marry
only to discover they had missed verifying crucial details, such as each
other’s sex.
Some people who make little use of the internet nonetheless become
victims and enter treatment. The suicide of one teenager after reading
untruths entered by a peer’s malicious mother (“cyberbullying”) has inspired
laws to criminalize such behavior. Internet identity theft is also rampant. An
underreported and growing problem, medical identity theft, is harder to detect
and remedy, often requiring painstaking record correction.

MOBILE OR CELL PHONE COMPULSION
Some persons compulsively use mobile or smartphones. Often these
individuals find themselves engaging in many of the same patterns of
behavior as those with the proposed internet gaming disorder, though the
focus is not specifically on the internet or gaming. These individuals may be
preoccupied with checking for new messages (text or email), new social
media posts, or other smartphone-related activities.

REPETITIVE SELF-MUTILATION
Persons who repeatedly cut themselves or do damage to their bodies may do
so in a compulsive manner. Parasuicidal behavior is typical in, but not limited
to, borderline personality disorder. Compulsive body piercing or tattooing
may be a symptom of a paraphilia or a depressive equivalent.
In DSM-5, there is a proposed diagnosis called “non-suicidal self-injury”
to refer to persons who repeatedly damage their bodies, who, however, do not
wish to die, contrasted with those persons who harm themselves with real
suicidal intent. Most individuals who engage in this behavior do so to obtain
relief from dysphoric states or to resolve a conflict. Cutting the skin or
inflicting bodily pain may release endorphins or raise dopamine levels in the
brain, both of which contribute to a euthymic or elated mood, thus alleviating


<<<PAGE 1071>>>
depressed states of mind in those who practice self-mutilation.

COMPULSIVE SEXUAL BEHAVIOR
Some persons repeatedly seek out sexual gratification, often in perverse ways
(e.g., exhibitionism). They are unable to control their behavior and may not
experience feelings of guilt after an episode of acting-out behavior.
Sometimes called sexual addiction, we discuss this condition in the chapter
on sexual disorders (Chapter 16).
References
Achar S, Rostamian A, Narayan SM. Cardiac and metabolic effects of
anabolic-androgenic steroid abuse on lipids, blood pressure, left ventricular
dimensions, and rhythm. Am J Cardiol. 2010;106(6):893.
Agrawal A, Wetherill L, Dick DM, Xuei X, Hinrichs A, Hesselbrock V,
Kramer J, Nurnberger JI Jr, Schuckit M, Bierut LJ, Edenberg HJ, Foroud
T. Evidence for association between polymorphisms in the cannabinoid
receptor 1 (CNR1) gene and cannabis dependence. Am J Med Genet.
2009;150B:736.
“Alcohol Facts and Statistics.” Alcohol Facts and Statistics, National Institute
on
Alcohol
Abuse
and
Alcoholism,
August
2018.
www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-facts-and-statistics.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association; 2013.
Anton RF, O’Malley SS, Ciraulo DA, Cisler RA, Couper D, Donovan DM,
Gastfriend DR, Hosking JD, Johnson BA, LoCastro JS, Longabaugh R,
Mason BJ, Mattson ME, Miller WR, Pettinati HM, Randall CL, Swift R,
Weiss RD, Williams LD, Zweben A; COMBINE Student Research Group.
Combined pharmacotherapies and behavioral interventions for alcohol
dependence: the COMBINE study: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2006;295:2003–2017.
Arehart-Treichel J. Smoking high on list of suicide-risk factors. Psychiatr
News. 2011;46:16.
Ashley LL, Boehlke KK. Pathological gambling: A general overview. J
Psychoactive Drugs. 2012;44:27.


<<<PAGE 1072>>>
Auta J, Kadriu B, Giusti P, Costa E, Guidotti A. Anticonvulsant, anxiolytic,
and non-sedating actions of imidazenil and other imidazo-benzodiazepine
carboxamide derivatives. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2010;95(4):383.
Baggish AL, Weiner RB, Kanayama G, Hudson JI, Picard MH, Hutter AM
Jr, Pope HJ Jr. Long-term anabolic-androgenic steroid use is associated
with left ventricular dysfunction. Circ Heart Fail. 2010;3:472.
Baillie AJ, Sannibale C, Stapinski LA, Teesson M, Rapee RM, Haber PS. An
investigator-blinded randomized study to compare the efficacy of
combined CBT for alcohol use disorders and social anxiety disorder versus
CBT focused on alcohol alone in adults with comorbid disorders: The
Combined Alcohol Social Phobia (CASP) trial protocol. BMC Psychiatry.
2013;13:199.
Balster RL, Cruz SL, Howard MO, Dell CA, Cottler LB. Classification of
abused inhalants. Addiction. 2009;104:878.
Baltazar A, Hopkins G, McBride D, Vanderwaal C, Pepper S, Mackey S.
Parental influence on inhalant use. J Child Adolesc Subst Abuse.
2013;22(1):25–37.
Barceloux DG. Amphetamines and phenethylamine derivatives. In: Medical
Toxicology of Drug Abuse: Synthesized Chemicals and Psychoactive
Plants. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons; 2012:3.
Barceloux DG. Barbiturates (amobarbital, butalbital, pentobarbital,
secobarbital). In: Medical Toxicology of Drugs Abuse: Synthesized
Chemicals and Psychoactive Plants. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons
Inc.; 2012:467.
Barnett SR, Riddle MA. Anxiolytics and sedative/hypnotics:
Benzodiazepines, buspirone, and other. In: Martin A, Scahill L, Kratochvil
C, eds. Pediatric Psychopharmacology: Principles and Practice. New
York: Oxford University Press Inc.; 2011:338.
Barry DT, Beitel M, Cutter CJ, Joshi D, Falcioni J, Schottenfeld RS.
Conventional and nonconventional pain treatment utilization among opioid
dependent individuals with pain seeking methadone maintenance
treatment: A needs assessment study. J Addict Med. 2010;4:81.
Basile JR, Binmadi NO, Zhou H, Yang Y-H, Paoli A, Proia P.
Supraphysiological doses of performance enhancing anabolic-androgenic
steroids exert direct toxic effects on neuron-like cells. Front Cell Neurosci.
2013;7:69.


<<<PAGE 1073>>>
Bender E. Troubling trends found in teen inhalant use. Psychiatr News.
2009;44:6.
Benowitz NL. Neurobiology of nicotine addiction: Implications for smoking
cessation treatment. Am J Med. 2008;121:S3.
Bhargava S, Arora RR. Cocaine and cardiovascular complications. Am J
Ther. 2011;18(4):e95.
Bhorkar AA, Dandekar MP, Nakhate KT, Subhedar NK, Kokare DM.
Involvement of the central melanocortin system in the effects of caffeine
on anxiety-like behavior in mice. Life Sci. 2014;95(2):72–80.
Blazer DG, Wu LT. Patterns of tobacco use and tobacco-related psychiatric
morbidity and substance use among middle-aged and older adults in the
United States. Aging Ment Health. 2012;16:296.
Bogenschutz MP, Ross S. Hallucinogen-related disorders. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1312–1327.
Bohnert ASB, Valenstein M, Bair MJ, Ganoczy D, McCarthy JF, Ilgen MA,
Blow FC. Association between opioid prescribing patterns and opioid
overdose-related deaths. JAMA. 2011;305:1315.
Bokor G, Anderson PD. Ketamine: An update on its abuse. J Pharm Pract.
2014;27:582–586.
Bonder BR. Substance-related disorders. In: Bonder BR, ed.
Psychopathology and Function. 4th ed. Thorofare, NJ: SLACK Inc.;
2010:103.
Bosco D, Plastino M, Colica C, Bosco F, Arianna S, Vecchio A, Galati F,
Cristiano D, Consoli A, Consoli D. Opioid antagonist naltrexone for the
treatment of pathological gambling in Parkinson Disease. Clin
Neuropharmacol. 2012;35:118.
Buckner JD, Silgado J, Schmidt NB. Marijuana craving during a public
speaking challenge: Understanding marijuana use vulnerability among
women and those with social anxiety disorder. J Behav Ther Exp
Psychiatry. 2011;42:104.
Butt MS, Sultan MT. Coffee and its consumption: Benefits and risks. Crit
Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2011;51:363.
Cairney S, O’Connor N, Dingwall KM. A prospective study of
neurocognitive changes 15 years after chronic inhalant abuse. Addiction.
2013;108(6):1107–1114.


<<<PAGE 1074>>>
Callaghan RC, Cunningham JK, Sajeev G, Kish SJ. Incidence of Parkinson’s
disease among hospital patients with methamphetamine-use disorders. Mov
Disord. 2010;25(14):2333.
Caraci F, Pistarà V, Corsaro A, Tomasello F, Giuffrida ML, Sortino MA,
Nicoletti F, Copani A. Neurotoxic properties of the anabolic androgenic
steroids nandrolone and methandrostenolone in primary neuronal cultures.
J Neurosci Res. 2011;89(4):592.
Carter GT, Flanagan AM, Earleywine M, Abrams DI, Aggarwal SK,
Grinspoon L. Cannabis in palliative medicine: Improving care and
reducing opioid-related morbidity. Am J Hosp Palliat Care. 2011;28:297.
Cash H, Rae CD, Steel AH, Winkler A. Internet addiction: A brief summary
of research and practice. Curr Psychiatry Rev. 2012;8:292–298.
Catts VS, Catts SV. Psychotomimetic effects of PCP, LSD, and ecstasy:
Pharmacological models of schizophrenia? In: Sachdev PS, Keshavan MS,
eds. Secondary Schizophrenia. New York: Cambridge University Press;
2010:141.
Choo ED, McGregor AJ, Mello MJ, Baird J. Gender, violence and brief
interventions for alcohol in the emergency department. Drug Alcohol
Depend. 2013;127:115.
Clark CT, Richards EM, Antoine DG II, Chisolm MS. Perinatal toluene use:
Associated risks and considerations. Addict Disord Treat. 2011;10:1.
Clark R, Samnaliev M, McGovern MP. Impact of substance disorders on
medical expenditures for Medicaid beneficiaries with behavioral health
disorders. Psychiatr Serv. 2009;60:35.
Cohen AS, Buckner JD, Najolia GM, Stewart DW. Cannabis and
psychometrically-defined schizotypy: Use, problems and treatment
considerations. J Psychiatr Res. 2011;45:548.
Colfax GN, Santos GM, Das M, Santos DM, Matheson T, Gasper J, Shoptaw
S, Vittinghoff E. Mirtazapine to reduce methamphetamine use: a
randomized controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68:1168–1175.
Comer SD, Sullivan MA, Whittington RA, Vosburg SK, Kowalczyk WJ.
Abuse liability of prescription opioids compared to heroin in morphinemaintained heroin abusers. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008;33(5):1179.
Connery HS. Medication-assisted treatment of opioid use disorder: review of
the evidence and future directions. Harv Rev Psychiatry. 2015;23:63–75.
Crane CA, Easton CJ, Devine S. The association between phencyclidine use


<<<PAGE 1075>>>
and partner violence: An initial examination. J Addict Dis. 2013;32:150.
Crean RD, Crane NA, Mason BJ. An evidence-based review of acute and
long-term effects of cannabis use on executive cognitive functions. J
Addict Med. 2011;5:1.
Crean RD, Tapert SF, Minassian A, MacDonald K, Crane NA, Mason BJ.
Effects of chronic, heavy cannabis use on executive functions. J Addict
Med. 2011;5:9.
Cunningham-Williams RM, Gattis MN, Dore PM, Shi P, Spitznagel EL.
Towards DSM-V: Considering other withdrawal-like symptoms of
pathological gambling disorder. Int J Methods Psychiatr Res. 2009;18:13.
“Current Cigarette Smoking Among Adults in the United States.” Smoking &
Tobacco Use, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, February 4,
2019.
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/adult_data/cig_smoking/index.h
Dome P, Lazary J, Kalapos MP, Rihmer Z. Smoking, nicotine and
neuropsychiatric disorders. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2010;34:295.
Driscoll MD, Arora A, Brennan ML. Intramuscular anabolic steroid injection
leading to life-threatening clostridial myonecrosis: A case report. J Bone
Joint Surg Am. 2011;93(16):e92 1–3.
Ehlers CL, Gizer IR, Vieten C, Wilhelmsen KC. Linkage analyses of
cannabis dependence, craving, and withdrawal in the San Francisco family
study. Am J Med Genet. 2010;153B:802.
Ersche KD, Jones PS, Williams GB, Turton AJ, Robbins TW, Bullmore ET.
Abnormal brain structure implicated in stimulant drug addiction. Science.
2012;335:601.
“Fact Sheets—Alcohol Use and Your Health.” Alcohol and Public Health,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, January 3, 2018.
www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-sheets/alcohol-use.htm.
Fantegrossi WE, Murnane KS, Reissig CJ. The behavioral pharmacology of
hallucinogens. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008;75:17.
Fazel S, Långström N, Hjern A, Grann M, Lichtenstein P. Schizophrenia,
substance abuse, and violent crime. JAMA. 2009;301(19):2016.
Fiore M, Jean C, Baker T, Bailey W, Benowitz N. Treating Tobacco Use and
Dependence: Clinical Practice Guideline. Washington, DC: US Public
Health Service; 2008.
Fontanilla D, Johannessen D, Hajipour AR, Cozzi NV, Jackson MB, Ruoho


<<<PAGE 1076>>>
AE. The hallucinogen N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) is an endogenous
sigma-1 receptor regulator. Science. 2009;323:934.
Frances RJ, Miller SI, Mack AH, eds. Clinical Textbook of Addictive
Disorders. 3rd ed. New York: The Guildford Press; 2011.
Fridberg DJ, Skosnik PD, Hetrick WP, O’Donnell BF. Neural correlates of
performance monitoring in chronic cannabis users and cannabis-naïve
controls. J Psychopharmacol. 2013;27:515.
Garland EL, Howard MO. Adverse consequences of acute inhalant
intoxication. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2011;19:134.
Garland EL, Howard MO. Phenomenology of adolescent inhalant
intoxication. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2010;18:498.
Geraci MJ, Peele J, McCoy SL, Elias B. Phencyclidine false positive induced
by lamotrigine (Lamictal) on a rapid urine toxicology screen. Int J Emerg
Med. 2010;3(4):327.
Grant JE, Kim SW, Potenza MN. Advances in the pharmacological treatment
of pathological gambling. J Gambl Stud. 2003;19:85.
Greenberg HR. Pathological gambling. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1799–1811.
Grella CE, Karno MP, Warda US, Niv N, Moore AA. Gender and
comorbidity among individuals with opioid use disorders in the NESARC
study. Addict Behav. 2009;34:498–504.
Griffin O, Fritsch AL, Woodward VH, Mohn RS. Sifting through the
hyperbole: One hundred year of marijuana coverage in The New York
Times. Deviant Behav. 2013;34:767.
Gros DF, Milanak ME, Brady KT, Back SE. Frequency and severity of
comorbid mood and anxiety disorders in prescription opioid dependence.
Am J Addict. 2013;22(3):261–265.
Gunderson EW, Kirkpatrick MG, Willing LM, Holstege CP. Substituted
cathinone products: A new trend in “bath salts” and other designer
stimulant drug use. J Addict Med. 2013;7(3):153–162.
Hall WD, Degenhardt L. Cannabis-related disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1303–1312.
Hall MT, Edwards JD, Howard MO. Accidental deaths due to inhalant
misuse in North Carolina: 2000–2008. Subst Use Misuse. 2010;45:1330.


<<<PAGE 1077>>>
Hall MT, Howard MO, McCabe SE. Subtypes of adolescent
sedative/anxiolytic misusers: A latent profile analysis. Addict Behav.
2010;35(10):882.
Haller DL, Acosta MC. Characteristics of pain patients with opioid-use
disorder. Psychosomatics. 2010;51:257.
Haney M. Neurobiology of stimulants. In: Galantar M, Kleber HD, eds.
Textbook of Substance Abuse Treatment. 3rd ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Publishing; 2008:143.
Harper AD. Substance-related disorders. In: Thornhill J, ed. NMS Psychiatry.
6th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2011:109.
Hasin DS, O’Brien CP, Auriacombe M. DSM-5 criteria for substance use
disorders: Recommendations and rationale. Am J Psychiatry.
2013;170:834.
Hatsukami DK, Benowitz NL, Donny E, Henningfield J, Zeller M. Nicotine
reduction: Strategic research plan. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15(6):1003–
1013.
He Q, Chen X, Wu T, Li L, Fei X. Risk of dementia in long-term
benzodiazepine users: Evidence from a meta-analysis of observational
studies. J Clin Neurol. 2019;15:9–19.
Herlitz LC, Markowitz GS, Farris AB, Schwimmer JA, Stokes MB, Kunis C,
Colvin RB, D’Agati VD. Development of focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis after anabolic steroid abuse. J Am Soc Nephrol.
2010;21:163.
Hoblyn JC, Balt SL, Woodard SA, Brooks JO. Substance use disorders as
risk factors for psychiatric hospitalization in bipolar disorder. Psychiatr
Serv. 2009;60:55.
Hodgins DC. Reliability and validity of the Sheehan Disability Scale
modified for pathological gambling. BMC Psychiatry. 2013;13:177.
Hodgins DC, Fick GH, Murray R, Cunningham JA. Internet-based
interventions for disordered gamblers: Study protocol for a randomized
controlled trial of online self-directed cognitive-behavioral motivational
therapy. BMC Public Health. 2013;13:10.
Hoque R, Chesson AL Jr. Zolpidem-induced sleepwalking, sleep related
eating disorder, and sleep-driving: Fluorine-18-flourodeoxyglucose
positron emission tomography analysis, and a literature review of other
unexpected clinical effects of zolpidem. J Clin Sleep Med. 2009;5(5):471.


<<<PAGE 1078>>>
Houston CM, McGee TP, MacKenzie G, Troyano-Cuturi K, Rodriguez PM,
Kutsarova E, Diamanti E, Hosie AM, Frank NP, Brickley SG. Are
extrasynaptic GABAA receptors important targets for sedative/hypnotic
drugs? J Neurosci. 2012;32:3887.
Howard MO, Bowen SE, Garland EL. Inhalant-related disorders. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1328–
1342.
Howard MO, Bowen SE, Garland EL, Perron BE, Vaughn MG. Inhalant use
and inhalant use disorders in the United States. Addict Sci Clin Pract.
2011;6:18.
Howe CQ, Sullivan MD. The missing ‘P’ in pain management: how the
current opioid epidemic highlights the need for psychiatric services in
chronic pain care. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2014;36(1):99–104.
Hurd YL, Michaelides M, Miller ML, Jutras-Aswad D. Trajectory of
adolescent cannabis use on addiction vulnerability. Neuropharmacology.
2014;76:416–424.
Husten CG, Deyton LR. Understanding the Tobacco Control Act: Efforts by
the US Food and Drug Administration to make tobacco-related morbidity
and mortality part of the USA’s past, not its future. Lancet.
2013;381(9877):1570–1580.
Iannucci RA, Weiss RD. Stimulant-related disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1280–1291.
Incerti M, Vink J, Roberson R, Benassou I, Abebe D, Spong CY. Prevention
of the alcohol-induced changes in brain-derived neurotrophic factor
expression using neuroprotective peptides in a model of fetal alcohol
syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2010;202(5):457.
Jackson KM, Bucholz KK, Wood PK, Steinley D, Grant JD, Sher KJ.
Towards the characterization and validation of alcohol use disorder
subtypes: integrating consumption and symptom data. Psychol Med.
2014;44(01):143–159.
Jann M, Kennedy WK, Lopez G. Benzodiazepines: a major component in
unintentional prescription drug overdoses with opioid analgesics. J Pharm
Pract. 2014;27(1):5–16.
Johnson BA. Medication treatment of different types of alcoholism. Am J


<<<PAGE 1079>>>
Psychiatry. 2010;167:630.
Johnson BA, Marzani-Nissen G. Alcohol. Clinical Aspects. In: Johnson BA,
ed. Addiction Medicine: Science and Practice. New York: Springer;
2011:381.
Jones HE. Treating opioid use disorders during pregnancy: Historical,
current, and future directions. Subst Abus. 2013;34(2):89–91.
Jones RT. Hallucinogen-related disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz
P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:1331.
Jonjev ZS, Bala G. High-energy drinks may provoke aortic dissection. Coll
Antropol. 2013;37:227.
Juliano LM, Griffiths RR. Caffeine-related disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1291–1303.
Kanayama G, Brower KJ, Wood RI, Hudson JI, Pope HG Jr. Issues for DSMV: Clarifying the diagnostic criteria for anabolic-androgenic steroid
dependence. Am J Psychiatry. 2009;166:642.
Kanayama G, Hudson JI, Pope HG Jr. Illicit anabolic-androgenic steroid use.
Horm Behav. 2010;58:111.
Kanayama G, Hudson JI, Pope HG Jr. Long-term psychiatric and medical
consequences of anabolic-androgenic steroid abuse: a looming public
health concern? Drug Alcohol Depend. 2008;98:1.
Kanayama G, Hudson JI, Pope HG. Demographic and psychiatric features of
men with anabolic-androgenic steroid dependence: a comparative study.
Drug Alcohol Depend. 2009;102:130.
Kanayama G, Kean J, Hudson JI, Pope HG Jr. Cognitive deficits in long-term
anabolic-androgenic steroid users. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013;130(1–
3):208–214.
Karoly HC, Harlaar N, Hutchison KE. Substance use disorders: A theorydriven approach to the integration of genetics and neuroimaging. Ann N Y
Acad Sci. 2013;1282:71.
Kendler KS, Myers J, Gardner CO. Caffeine intake, toxicity, and dependence
and lifetime risk for psychiatric and substance use disorders: an
epidemiologic and co-twin control analysis. Psychol Med. 2006;36:1717–
1725.
Kennedy DO, Haskell CF. Cerebral blood flow and behavioural effects of


<<<PAGE 1080>>>
caffeine in habitual and non-habitual consumers of caffeine: A near
infrared spectroscopy study. Biol Psychol. 2011;86:298.
Kessler RC, Hwang I, LaBrie R, Petuhova M, Sampson NA, Winters KC,
Shaffer HJ. DSM-IV pathological gambling in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Psychol Med. 2008;38:1351.
Kohmura K, Iwamoto K, Aleksic B, Sasada K, Kawano N, Katayama H,
Noda Y, Noda A, Lidaka T, Ozaki N. Effects of sedative antidepressants
on prefrontal cortex activity during verbal fluency task in healthy subjects:
A
near-infrared
spectroscopy
study.
Psychopharmacology.
2013;226(1):75–81.
Kosten TR, Newton TF, De La Garza R II, Haile CN, eds. Cocaine and
Methamphetamine Dependence: Advances in Treatment. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Association; 2012.
Krenek M, Maisto SA. Life events and treatment outcomes among
individuals with substance use disorders: A narrative review. Clin Psychol
Rev. 2013;33:470.
Lakhan SE, Kirchgessner A. Anti-inflammatory effects of nicotine in obesity
and ulcerative colitis. J Transl Med. 2011;9:129.
Larance B, Degenhardt L, Copeland J, Dillon P. Injecting risk behaviour and
related harm among men who use performance- and image-enhancing
drugs. Drug Alcohol Rev. 2008;27:679.
Lee NK, Pohlman S, Baker A, Ferris J, Kay-Lambkin F. It’s the thought that
counts: Craving metacognitions and their role in abstinence from
methamphetamine use. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2010;38(3):245.
Leeman RF, Potenza MN. Similarities and differences between pathological
gambling and substance use disorders: a focus on impulsivity and
compulsivity. Psychopharmacology. 2012;219:469.
Lieberman JA III, Sylvester L, Paik S. Excessive sleepiness and self-reported
shift work disorder: an Internet survey of shift workers. Postgrad Med.
2013;125:162.
Ling W, Casadonte P, Bigelow G, Kampman KM, Patkar A, Bailey GL,
Rosenthal RN, Beebe KL. Buprenorphine implants for treatment of opioid
dependence. JAMA. 2010;304:1576.
Lintzeris N, Bhardwaj A, Mills L, Dunlop A, Copeland J, McGregor I, Bruno
R, Gugusheff J, Phung N, Montebello M, Chan T, Kirby A, Hall M,
Jefferies M, Luksza J, Shanahan M, Kevin R, Allsop D; Agonist


<<<PAGE 1081>>>
Replacement for Cannabis Dependence (ARCD) study group. Nabiximols
for the treatment of cannabis dependence: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA Intern Med. 2019;179(9):1242–1253.
Liu S, Lane SD, Schmitz JM, Waters AJ, Cunningham KA, Moeller FG.
Relationship between attentional bias to cocaine-related stimuli and
impulsivity in cocaine-dependent subjects. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse.
2011;37(2):117.
López-Muñoz F, Álamo C, García-García P. The discovery of
chlordiazepoxide and the clinical introduction of benzodiazepines: Half a
century of anxiolytic drugs. J Anxiety Disord. 2011;25(4):554.
Ludden AB, Wolfson AR. Understanding adolescent caffeine use:
Connecting use patterns with expectancies, reasons, and sleep. Health
Educ Behav. 2010;37:330.
Luo SX, Bisaga A. Opioid use and related disorders: From neuroscience to
treatment. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters
Kluwer; 2017:1352–1373.
Luoma JB, Kohlenberg BS, Hayes SC, Fletcher L. Slow and steady wins the
race: A randomized clinical trial of acceptance and commitment therapy
targeting shame in substance use disorders. J Consult Clin Psychol.
2012;80:43.
MacKillop J, Miranda R Jr, Monti PM, Ray LA, Murphy JG, Rohsenow DJ,
McGeary JE, Swift RM, Tidey JW, Gwaltney CJ. Alcohol demand,
delayed reward discounting, and craving in relation to drinking and alcohol
use disorders. J Abnorm Psychol. 2010;11:106.
MacLean KA, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Mystical experiences occasioned
by the hallucinogen Psilocybin lead to increases in the personality domain
of openness. J Psychopharmacol. 2011;25:1453.
Magdum SS. An overview of Khat. Addict Disord Treat. 2011;10(2):72.
Mahler SV, Hensley-Simon M, Tahsili-Fahadan P, LaLumiere RT, Thomas
C, Fallon RV, Kalivas PW, Aston-Jones G. Modafinil attenuates
reinstatement of cocaine seeking: role for cystine-glutamate exchange and
metabotropic glutamate receptors. Addict Biol. 2014;19(1):49–60.
Mahoney CR, Brunyé TT, Giles GE. Caffeine effects on aggression and risky
decision making. In: Kanarek RB, Lieberman HR, eds. Diet, Brain,
Behavior: Practical Implications. Boca Raton: Taylor & Frances Group,


<<<PAGE 1082>>>
LLC; 2012:293.
Mahoney JJ III, Hawkins RY, De La Garza R II, Kalechstein AD, Newton
TF. Relationship between gender and psychotic symptoms in cocainedependent and methamphetamine-dependent participants. Gend Med.
2010;7(5):414.
Maisto SA, Galizo M, Conner GJ. Hallucinogens. In: Drug Use and Abuse.
6th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth; 2011:283.
Margerison-Zilko C, Cubbin C. Socioeconomic disparities in tobacco-related
health outcomes across racial/ethnic groups in the United States: National
Health Interview Survey 2010. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15(6):1161–1165.
Mariani JJ. Chapter 24: Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-related disorders.
In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters
Kluwer; 2017:1374–1390.
Marino EN, Rosen KD, Gutierrez A, Eckmann M, Ramamurthy S, Potter JS.
Impulsivity but not sensation seeking is associated with opioid analgesic
misuse risk in patients with chronic pain. Addict Behav. 2013;38(5):2154–
2157.
Martins SS, Keyes KM, Storr CL, Zhu H, Chilcoat HD. Pathways between
nonmedical opioid use/dependence and psychiatric disorders: Results from
the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions.
Drug Alcohol Depend. 2009;103:16.
McCann UD. Amphetamine, methylphenidate, and excessive sleepiness. In:
Thropy MJ, Billiard M, eds. Sleepiness: Causes, Consequences, and
Treatment. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2011:401.
MeぅdrasУ M, Brona A, JózУków P. The central effects of androgenicanabolic steroid use. J Addict Med. 2018;2(3):184–192.
Miller PM, Anton RF. Biochemical alcohol screening in primary health care.
Addict Behav. 2004;29:1427–1437.
Minozzi S, Cinquini M, Amato L, Davoli M, Farrell MF, Pani PP, Vecchi S.
Anticonvulsants for cocaine dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2015;CD006754.
Moberg CA, Curtin JJ. Alcohol selectively reduces anxiety but not fear:
startle response during unpredictable versus predictable threat. J Abnorm
Psychol. 2009;118(2):335.
Mojtabai R, Chen LY, Kaufmann CN, Crum RM. Comparing barriers to


<<<PAGE 1083>>>
mental health treatment and substance use disorder treatment among
individuals with comorbid major depression and substance use disorders. J
Subst Abuse Treat. 2014;46(2):268–273.
Moore EA. The Amphetamine Debate: The Use of Adderall, Ritalin, and
Related Drugs for Behavior Modification, Neuroenhancement, and AntiAging Purposes. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co Inc.; 2011.
Morgan T, White H, Mun E. Changes in drinking before a mandated brief
intervention with college students. J Stud Alcohol Drugs. 2008;69:286.
Mushtaq N, Beebe LA, Vesely SK, Neas BR. A multiple motive/multidimensional approach to measure smokeless tobacco dependence. Addict
Behav. 2014;39(3):622–629.
Nickerson LD, Ravichandran C, Lundahl LH, Rodolico J, Dunlap S, Trksak
GH, Lukas SE. Cue reactivity in cannabis-dependent adolescents. Psychol
Addict Behav. 2011;25:168.
NIDA. “Principles of Drug Addiction Treatment: A Research-Based Guide
(Third Edition).” National Institute on Drug Abuse, January 17, 2018.
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/principles-drug-addictiontreatment-research-based-guide-third-edition. Accessed August 24, 2019.
Nilsen P. Brief alcohol intervention—where to from here? Challenges remain
for research and practice. Addiction. 2010;105(6):954.
NSDUH, Monitoring the Future. https://www.drugabuse.gov/relatedtopics/trends-statistics/monitoring-future.
Odlaug BL, Marsh PJ, Kim SW, Grant JE. Strategic vs. nonstrategic
gambling: Characteristics of pathological gamblers based on gambling
preference. Ann Clin Psychiatry. 2011;3:105.
Oleski J, Cox BJ, Clara I, Hills A. Pathological gambling and the structure of
common mental disorders. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2011;199:956.
Oreskovich MR, Kaups KL, Balch CM, Hanks JB, Satele D, Sloan J,
Meredith C, Buhl A, Dyrbye LN, Shanafelt TD. Prevalence of alcohol use
disorders among American surgeons. Arch Surg. 2012;147(2):168.
Oviedo-Joekes E, Brissette S, Marsh DC, Lauzon P, Guh D, Anis A,
Schechter MT. Diacetylmorphine versus methadone for the treatment of
opioid addiction. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:777.
Pacek LR, Martins SS, Crum RM. The bidirectional relationships between
alcohol, cannabis, co-occurring alcohol and cannabis use disorders with
major depressive disorder: results from a national sample. J Affect Disord.


<<<PAGE 1084>>>
2013;148:188.
Perron BE, Glass JE, Ahmedani BK, Vaughn MG, Roberts DE, Wu LT. The
prevalence and clinical significance of inhalant withdrawal symptoms
among a national sample. Subst Abuse Rehabil. 2011;2:69.
Perron BE, Howard MO, Maitra S, Vaughn MG. Prevalence, timing, and
predictors of transitions from inhalant use to inhalant use disorders. Drug
Alcohol Depend. 2009;100:277.
Perron BE, Mowbray O, Bier S, Vaughn MG, Krentzman A, Howard MO.
Service use and treatment barriers among inhalant users. J Psychoactive
Drugs. 2011;43:69.
Petry NM. Discounting of probabilistic rewards is associated with gambling
abstinence in treatment-seeking pathological gamblers. J Abnorm Psychol.
2012;121:151.
Pope HG, Brower KJ. Treatment of anabolic-androgenic steroid-related
disorders. In: Galanter M, Kleber H, eds. The American Psychiatric
Publishing Textbook of Substance Abuse Treatment. 4th ed. Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2008:237.
Pope HG Jr, Kanayama G. Anabolic-androgenic steroid abuse. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1390–
1404.
Pope HG Jr, Kanayama G, Hudson JI. Risk Factors for illicit anabolicandrogenic steroid use in male weightlifters: A cross-sectional cohort
study. Biol Psychiatry. 2012;71:254.
Rasmussen C, Bisnaz J. Executive functioning in children with Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorders: Profiles and age-related differences. Child
Neuropsychol. 2009;15(3):201.
Reissig CJ, Strain EC, Griffiths RR. Caffeinated energy drinks—A growing
problem. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2009;99:1.
Renner JA, Suzuki J. Opiates and prescription drugs. In: Johnson BA, ed.
Addiction Medicine: Science and Practice. Vol. 1. New York: Springer,
LLC; 2011:463.
Rich BA, Webster LR. A review of forensic implications of opioid
prescribing with examples from malpractice cases involving opioid-related
overdose. Pain Med. 2011;12:S59.
Roberts A, Landon J, Sharman S, Hakes J, Suomi A, Cowlishaw S. Gambling


<<<PAGE 1085>>>
and physical intimate partner violence: results from the national
epidemiologic survey on alcohol and related conditions (NESARC). Am J
Addict. 2018;27:7–14.
Rodrigues R, Ramos S, Almeida N. Anabolic androgenic steroids in
psychiatric practice. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2012;22:S403.
Roman J. Nicotine-induced fibronectin expression might represent a common
mechanism by which tobacco promotes lung cancer progression and
obstructive airway disease. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2012;9:85.
Rösner S, Hackl-Herrwerth A, Leucht S, Vecchi S, Srisurapanont M, Soyka
M. Opioid antagonists for alcohol dependence. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2010;(12):CD001867.
Ruiz P, Strain EC. The Substance Abuse Handbook. 2nd ed. Philadelphia,
PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2014.
Sagoe D, Molde H, Andreassen CS, Torsheim T, Pallesen S. The global
epidemiology of anabolic-androgenic steroid use: A meta-analysis and
meta-regression analysis. Ann Epidemiol. 2014;24(5):383–398.
Saland SK, Rodefer JS. Environmental enrichment ameliorates
phencyclidine-induced cognitive deficits. Pharmacol Biochem Behav.
2011;98(3):455.
Saleh T, Badshah A, Afzal K. Spontaneous acute subdural hematoma
secondary to cocaine abuse. South Med J. 2010;103(7):714.
Sanchez ZM, Ribeiro LA, Moura YG, Noto AR, Martins SS. Inhalants as
intermediate drugs between legal and illegal drugs among middle and high
school students. J Addict Dis. 2013;32(2):217–226.
Santamarina RD, Besocke AG, Romano LM, Ioli PL, Gonorazky SE.
Ischemic stroke related to anabolic abuse. Clin Neuropharmacol.
2008;31(2):80.
Schatzberg AF, Cole JO, DeBattista C. Phencyclidine. In: Manual of Clinical
Psychopharmacology. 7th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Publishing; 2010:588.
Schuckit MA. Alcohol-related disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1264–1279.
Scott KD, Scott AA. Adolescent inhalant use and executive cognitive
functioning. Child Care Health Dev. 2014;40(1):20–28.
Sepkowitz KA. Energy drinks and caffeine-related adverse effects. JAMA.


<<<PAGE 1086>>>
2013;309:243.
Shaffer HJ, Martin R. Disordered gambling: Etiology, trajectory, and clinical
considerations. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2011;7:483.
Smetaniuk P. A preliminary investigation into the prevalence and prediction
of problematic cell phone use. J Behav Addict. 2014;3:41–53.
Smith HS, Kirsh KL, Passik SD. Chronic opioid therapy issues associated
with opioid abuse potential. J Opioid Manag. 2009;5:287.
Spiegel D. Trance formations: Hypnosis in brain and body. Depress Anxiety.
2013;30(4):342–352.
Stafford LD, Wright C, Yeomans MR. The drink remains the same: Implicit
positive associations in high but not moderate or non-caffeine users.
Psychol Addict Behav. 2010;24:274.
Strain EC. Chapter 11: Substance-related disorders: Introduction. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1262–
1264.
Suh JJ, Pettinati HM, Kampman KM, O’Brien CP. The status of disulfiram: a
half of a century later. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2006;26:290–302.
Svrakic DM, Lustman PJ, Mallya A, Lynn TA, Finney R, Svrakic NM.
Legalization, decriminalization & medicinal use of cannabis: A scientific
and public health perspective. Mo Med. 2012;109:90.
Tavares H, Zilberman ML, el-Guebaly N. Are there cognitive and
behavioural approaches specific to the treatment of pathological gambling?
Can J Psychiatry. 2003;48:22.
Testa A, Giannuzzi R, Sollazzo F, Petrongolo L, Bernardini L, Dain S.
Psychiatric emergencies (part II): psychiatric disorders coexisting with
organic diseases. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2013;17:65.
Todd G, Noyes C, Flavel SC, Della Vedova CB, Spyropoulos P, Chatterton
B, Berg D, White JM. Illicit stimulant use is associated with abnormal
substantia nigra morphology in humans. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56438.
Toneatto T, Brands B, Selby P. A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial of naltrexone in the treatment of concurrent alcohol use
disorder and pathological gambling. Am J Addict. 2009;18:219.
Unger A, Jung E, Winklbaur B, Fischer G. Gender issues in the
pharmacotherapy of opioid-addicted women: Buprenorphine. J Addict Dis.
2010;29:217.


<<<PAGE 1087>>>
Unger JB. The most critical unresolved issues associated with race, ethnicity,
culture, and substance use. Subst Use Misuse. 2012;47:390.
Vallée M, Vitiello S, Bellocchio L, Hébert-Chatelain E, Monlezun S, MartinGarcia E, Kasanetz F, Baillie GL, Panin F, Cathala A, Roullot-Lacarrière
V, Fabre S, Hurst DP, Lynch DL, Shore DM, Deroche-Gamonet V,
Spampinato U, Revest JM, Maldonado R, Reggio PH, Ross RA, Marsicano
G, Piazza PV. Pregnenolone can protect the brain from cannabis
intoxication. Science. 2014;343(6166):94–98.
Van der Pol P, Liebregts N, de Graaf R, Ten Have M, Korf DJ, van den Brink
W, van Laar M. Mental health differences between frequent cannabis users
with and without dependence and the general population. Addiction.
2013;108:1459.
Vergés A, Jackson KM, Bucholz KK, Grant JD, Trull TJ, Wood PK, Sher KJ.
Deconstructing the age-prevalence curve of alcohol dependence: Why
“maturing out” is only a small piece of the puzzle. J Abnorm Psychol.
2012;121:511.
Vilar-Lopez R, Takagi M, Lubman DI. The effects of inhalant misuse on
attentional networks. Dev Neuropsychol. 2013;38(2):126–136.
Vinkers CH, Klanker M, Groenink L, Korte SM, Cook JM, Van Linn ML,
Hopkins SC, Olivier B. Dissociating anxiolytic and sedative effects of
GABAAergic drugs using temperature and locomotor responses to acute
stress. Psychopharmacology. 2009;204(2):299.
Vogel M, Knopfli B, Schmid O, Prica M, Strasser J, Prieto L, Wiesbeck GA,
Dursteler-Macfarland KM. Treatment or “high”: Benzodiazepine use in
patients on injectable heroin or oral opioids. Addict Behav.
2013;38(10):2477.
Warbrick T, Mobascher A, Brinkmeyer J, Musso F, Stoecker T, Shah NJ,
Vossel S, Winterer G. Direction and magnitude of nicotine effects on the
fMRI BOLD response are related to nicotine effects on behavioral
performance. Psychopharmacology. 2011;215:333.
Weaver MF, Schnoll SH. Ketamine and phencyclidine. In: Johnson BA, ed.
Addiction Medicine: Science and Practice. Vol. 1. New York: Springer,
LLC; 2011:603.
Webster LR, Dasgupta N. Obtaining adequate data to determine causes of
opioid-related overdose deaths. Pain Med. 2011;12:S86.
Weinberger AH, Desai RA, McKee SA. Nicotine withdrawal in U.S. smokers


<<<PAGE 1088>>>
with current mood, anxiety, alcohol use, and substance use disorders. Drug
Alcohol Depend. 2010;108:7.
Weinberger AH, Sofuoglu M. The impact of cigarette smoking on stimulant
addiction. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse. 2009;35:12.
Weinstein A, Lejoyeux M. Internet addiction or excessive internet use. Am J
Drug Alcohol Abuse. 2010;36:277–283.
Weiss RD, Iannucci RA. Cocaine-related disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:1318.
Wilson D, da Silva Lobo DS, Tavares H, Gentil V, Vallada H. Family-based
association analysis of serotonin genes in pathological gambling disorder:
Evidence of vulnerability risk in the 5HT-2A receptor gene. J Mol
Neurosci. 2013;49(3):550–553.
Winhusen T, Lewis D, Adinoff B, Brigham G, Kropp F, Donovan DM,
Seamans CL, Hodgkins CC, Dicenzo JC, Botero CL, Jones DR, Somoza E.
Impulsivity is associated with treatment non-completion in cocaine- and
methamphetamine-dependent patients but differs in nature as a function of
stimulant-dependence diagnosis. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2013;44(5):541–
547.
Witton J, Reed KD. Cannabis and mental health. Int J Clin Rev. 2010;11:7.
Wood KE. Exposure to bath salts and synthetic tetrahydrocannabinol from
2009 to 2012 in the United States. J Pediatr. 2013;163:213.
Wu LT, Ringwalt CL, Yang C, Reeve BB, Pan JJ, Blazer DG. Construct and
differential item functioning in the assessment of prescription opioid use
disorders among American adolescents. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2009;48:563.
Wu LT, Woody GE, Yang C, Li JH, Blazer DG. Recent national trends in
Salvia divinorum use and substance-use disorders among recent and
former Salvia divinorum users compared with nonusers. Subst Abuse
Rehabil. 2011;2:53.
Wynn J, Hudyma A, Hauptman E, Houston TN, Faragher JM. Treatment of
problem gambling: development, status, and future. Drugs and Alcohol
Today. 2014;14(1):6.
Yang A, Palmer AA, de Wit H. Genetics of caffeine consumption and
responses to caffeine. Psychopharmacology. 2010;211:245.


<<<PAGE 1089>>>
Ziedonis DM, Tonelli ME, Das S. Tobacco-related disorders. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1342–1352.


<<<PAGE 1090>>>
5
Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other
Psychotic Disorders
Although we tend to discuss schizophrenia as if it is a single disease, it likely
comprises a group of disorders with heterogeneous etiologies, which includes
patients whose clinical presentations, treatment response, and courses of
illness vary. Signs and symptoms are variable and include changes in
perception, emotion, cognition, thinking, and behavior. The expression of
these symptoms varies across patients and over time, but the effect of the
illness is always severe and is usually long-lasting. The disorder usually
begins before age 25 years, persists throughout life, and affects persons of all
social classes. Both patients and their families often suffer from inadequate
care and social ostracism because of widespread ignorance about the
disorder. Schizophrenia is one of the most common of the severe mental
disorders, but its essential nature remains to be clarified. Thus, it is
sometimes referred to as a syndrome, as a group of disorders, or, as in the
fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-5), the schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Clinicians should appreciate
that the diagnosis of schizophrenia is based entirely on psychiatric history
and mental status examination. There is no laboratory test for schizophrenia.
Because schizophrenia begins early in life, causes significant and longlasting impairments, makes heavy demands for hospital care, and requires
ongoing clinical care, rehabilitation, and support services, the financial cost
of the illness in the United States likely exceeds that of all cancers combined.
Patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia account for 15 to 45 percent of
homeless Americans, and about 5% of patients with schizophrenia per year
are homeless. Worldwide, schizophrenia is one of the top 25 leading causes


<<<PAGE 1091>>>
of disability. This fact is striking, given its relatively low prevalence.
However, this disorder affects not only individuals but families, caregivers,
and societies overall. For this reason, indirect costs are enormous and often
underestimated.

THE CLINICAL PRESENTATION
No clinical sign or symptom is pathognomonic for schizophrenia; every sign
or symptom seen in schizophrenia occurs in other psychiatric and neurologic
disorders. Therefore, a patient’s history is essential for the diagnosis of
schizophrenia; clinicians cannot diagnose schizophrenia only by results of a
single mental status examination, as symptoms change with time. For
example, a patient may have intermittent hallucinations and a varying ability
to perform adequately in social situations, or significant symptoms of a mood
disorder may come and go. The clinician should also take into account the
patient’s educational level, intellectual ability, and cultural and subcultural
membership. An impaired ability to understand abstract concepts, for
example, may reflect either the patient’s education or intelligence. Religious
organizations and cults may have customs that seem strange to outsiders but
are typical to those within the cultural setting.
The appearance of a patient with schizophrenia can range from that of a
completely disheveled, screaming, agitated person to an obsessively
groomed, completely silent, and immobile person. Between these two
extremes, patients may be talkative and may exhibit bizarre postures. Their
behavior may become agitated or violent, apparently in an unprovoked
manner, but usually in response to hallucinations. Patients with schizophrenia
are often poorly groomed, fail to bathe, and dress too warmly for the
prevailing temperatures. Other odd behaviors include tics, stereotypies,
mannerisms, and, occasionally, echopraxia, in which patients imitate the
posture or the behavior of the examiner.
Patient AB, a 32-year-old woman, began to lose weight and became
careless about her work, which deteriorated in quality and quantity. She
believed that other women at her place of employment were circulating
slanderous stories concerning her and complained that a young man


<<<PAGE 1092>>>
employed in the same plant had put his arm around her and insulted her.
Her family demanded that the charge be investigated, which showed not
only that the charge was without foundation but also that the man in
question had not spoken to her for months. One day she returned home
from work, and as she entered the house, she laughed loudly, watched her
sister-in-law suspiciously, refused to answer questions, and at the sight of
her brother began to cry. She refused to go to the bathroom, saying that a
man was looking in the windows at her. She ate no food, and the next day
she declared that her sisters were “bad women,” that everyone was
talking about her, and that someone had been having sexual relations with
her, and although she could not see him, he was “always around.”
The patient was admitted to a public psychiatric hospital. As she
entered the admitting office, she laughed loudly and repeatedly screamed
in a loud tone, “She cannot stay here; she’s got to go home!” She
grimaced and performed various stereotyped movements of her hands.
When seen on the ward an hour later, she paid no attention to questions,
although she talked to herself in a childish tone. She moved about
constantly, walked on her toes in a dancing manner, pointed aimlessly
about, and put out her tongue and sucked her lips in the manner of an
infant. At times she moaned and cried like a child but shed no tears. As
the months passed, she remained silly, childish, preoccupied, and
inaccessible, grimacing, gesturing, pointing at objects in a stereotyped
way, and usually chattering to herself in a peculiar high-pitched voice,
with little of what she said being understood. Her condition continued to
deteriorate, she remained unkempt, and she presented a picture of
extreme introversion and regression, with no interest either in the
activities of the institution or in her relatives who visited her. (Adapted
from case of Arthur P. Noyes, M.D., and Lawrence C. Kolb, M.D.)
Catatonic stupor, often referred to simply as catatonia, is a condition in
which patients seem completely lifeless and may exhibit such signs as
muteness, negativism, and automatic obedience. Waxy flexibility, once a
common sign in catatonia, has become rare, as has manneristic behavior. A
person with a less extreme subtype of catatonia may show marked social
withdrawal and egocentricity, a lack of spontaneous speech or movement,


<<<PAGE 1093>>>
and an absence of goal-directed behavior. Patients with catatonia may sit
immobile and speechless in their chairs, respond to questions with only short
answers, and only move when directed. Other overt behavior may include
odd clumsiness or stiffness in body movements.
Localizing and nonlocalizing neurologic signs (also known as hard and
soft signs, respectively) are more common in patients with schizophrenia than
in other psychiatric patients. Nonlocalizing signs include dysdiadochokinesia,
astereognosis, primitive reflexes, and diminished dexterity. The presence of
neurologic signs and symptoms correlates with increased severity of illness,
affective blunting, and a poor prognosis. Other abnormal neurologic signs
include tics, stereotypies, grimacing, impaired fine motor skills, abnormal
motor tone, and abnormal movements. Most patients are not aware of their
abnormal involuntary movements.
In addition to the disorder of smooth ocular pursuit (saccadic movement),
patients with schizophrenia have an elevated blink rate. The elevated blink
rate may reflect hyperdopaminergic activity.
The inability of schizophrenia patients to perceive the prosody of speech or
to inflect their speech is characteristic of disorders of the nondominant
parietal lobe. Other parietal lobe–like symptoms in schizophrenia include the
inability to carry out tasks (i.e., apraxia), right–left disorientation, and a lack
of concern about the disorder.
Mood
Two common affective symptoms in schizophrenia are reduced emotional
responsiveness, sometimes severe enough to warrant the label of anhedonia,
and overly active and inappropriate emotions such as extremes of rage,
happiness, and anxiety. A flat or blunted affect can be a symptom of the
illness itself, of the parkinsonian adverse effects of antipsychotic
medications, or depression, and differentiating these symptoms can be a
clinical challenge. Overly emotional patients may describe exultant feelings
of omnipotence, religious ecstasy, terror at the disintegration of their souls, or
paralyzing anxiety about the destruction of the universe. Other feeling tones
include perplexity, a sense of isolation, overwhelming ambivalence, and
depression.


<<<PAGE 1094>>>
Thoughts
Psychotic disorders are, first and foremost, thought disorders and the disorder
may affect either the process or content of their thought or both. A
schizophrenia patient’s thoughts may be challenging to understand and elicit.
However, this is essential, as thought symptoms may represent the core
symptoms of schizophrenia.
Disorders of thought concern the way we formulate ideas and languages.
We sometimes call these formal thought disorders. The examiner infers a
disorder from what and how the patient speaks, writes, or draws. The
examiner may also assess the patient’s thought process by observing their
behavior, especially in carrying out discrete tasks (e.g., in occupational
therapy).
When mild, thought disorders might present as stilted or vague. As it
worsens, associations become looser. The patient may display
circumstantiality, tangential thinking, perseverative thinking, neologisms,
echolalia, verbigeration, word salad, and mutism.
Delusions
Delusions, the most obvious example of a disorder of thought content, are
varied in schizophrenia and may assume persecutory, grandiose, religious, or
somatic forms.
Patients may believe that an outside entity controls their thoughts or
behavior or, conversely, that they extraordinarily control outside events (such
as causing the sun to rise). Patients may have an intense and consuming
preoccupation with esoteric, abstract, symbolic, psychological, or philosophic
ideas. Patients may also worry about allegedly life-threatening but bizarre
and implausible somatic conditions, such as the presence of aliens inside the
patient’s testicles affecting his ability to father children.
The phrase loss of ego boundaries describes the lack of a clear sense of
where the patient’s own body, mind, and influence end and where those of
other animate and inanimate objects begin. For example, patients may think
that other persons, the television, or the newspapers are referring to them
(ideas of reference). Thought control, in which outside forces are controlling
what the patient thinks or feels, is common, as is thought broadcasting, in
which patients think others can read their minds or that they can broadcast


<<<PAGE 1095>>>
their thoughts through televisions.
Other signs of a loss of ego boundaries include the sense that the patient
has physically fused with an external object (e.g., a tree or another person) or
that the patient has disintegrated and fused with the entire universe (cosmic
identity). With such a state of mind, some patients with schizophrenia doubt
their gender or their sexual orientation. These symptoms should not be
confused with gender identity problems.
Hallucinations
Any of the five senses may be affected by hallucinatory experiences in
patients with schizophrenia. The most common hallucinations, however, are
auditory, with voices that are often threatening, obscene, accusatory, or
insulting. Two or more voices may converse among themselves, or a voice
may comment on the patient’s life or behavior.
A 48-year-old man, who had been diagnosed with schizophrenia while in
the army at age 21 years, led an isolated and often frightened existence,
living alone and supported by disability payments. Although he would
confirm that he had chronic auditory hallucinations, he was never
comfortable with discussing the content of these hallucinations, and a
review of records showed this was a long-term pattern for the patient.
Otherwise the patient had good rapport with his psychiatrist and was
enthusiastic about the possibility of participating in a study of a novel
antipsychotic agent. During the informed consent procedure, the patient
asked about the possibility that the new medication might decrease his
chronic auditory hallucinations. When it was acknowledged that any
response was possible, including decreases in his hallucinations, the
patient broke off the discussion abruptly and left the office. At a later
visit, he reported that his most reliable pleasure in life was nightly
discussions of gossip with hallucinations of voices he believed belonged
to 17th-century French courtiers, and the chance that he might lose these
conversations and the companionship they offered was too frightening for
him to consider. (Adapted from Stephen Lewis, M.D., P. Rodrigo
Escalona, M.D., and Samuel J. Keith, M.D.)


<<<PAGE 1096>>>
Visual hallucinations are common, but tactile, olfactory, and gustatory
hallucinations are unusual; their presence should prompt the clinician to
consider the possibility of an underlying medical or neurologic disorder that
is causing the entire syndrome.
Psychotic disorders can affect other senses, as well. For example,
cenesthetic hallucinations are unfounded sensations of altered states in bodily
organs. Examples of cenesthetic hallucinations include a burning sensation in
the brain, a pushing sensation in the blood vessels, and a cutting sensation in
the bone marrow. Bodily distortions may also occur.
Cognition
Patients with schizophrenia are usually oriented to person, time, and place.
The lack of such orientation should prompt clinicians to investigate the
possibility of a medical or neurologic brain disorder. Some patients with
schizophrenia may give incorrect or bizarre answers stemming from their
delusions, such as “I am Christ; this is heaven, and it is AD 35.”
Memory, as tested in the mental status examination, is usually intact, but
there can be minor cognitive deficiencies. It may not be possible, however, to
get the patient to attend closely enough to the memory tests for the ability to
be assessed adequately.
A significant development in the understanding of the psychopathology of
schizophrenia is the appreciation of subtle cognitive impairment. In
outpatients, cognitive impairment is a better predictor of the level of function
than is the severity of psychotic symptoms. Patients with schizophrenia
typically exhibit subtle cognitive dysfunction in the domains of attention,
executive function, working memory, and episodic memory. Although a
substantial percentage of patients have average intelligence quotients, every
person who has schizophrenia may have cognitive dysfunction compared
with what he or she would be able to do without the disorder. Although these
impairments cannot function as diagnostic tools, they are strongly related to
the functional outcome of the illness and, for that reason, have clinical value
as prognostic variables, as well as for treatment planning.
The cognitive impairment seems already to be present when patients have
their first episode and appear largely to remain stable throughout the early
illness. There may be a small subgroup of patients who have true dementia in


<<<PAGE 1097>>>
late life that is not due to other cognitive disorders, such as Alzheimer
disease. Cognitive impairments are also present in attenuated forms in
nonpsychotic relatives of schizophrenia patients.
The cognitive impairments of schizophrenia have become the target of
pharmacologic and psychosocial treatment trials. Hopefully, effective
treatments for these impairments will become available soon.
Insight and Judgment and Reliability
Classically, patients with schizophrenia have poor insight into the nature and
severity of their disorder. The so-called lack of insight is associated with poor
compliance with treatment. When examining schizophrenia patients,
clinicians should carefully define various aspects of insight, such as
awareness of symptoms, trouble getting along with people, and the reasons
for these problems. Such information can be clinically useful in tailoring a
treatment strategy and theoretically useful in postulating what areas of the
brain contribute to the observed lack of insight (e.g., the parietal lobes).
A patient with schizophrenia is no less reliable than any other psychiatric
patient. The nature of the disorder, however, requires the examiner to verify
relevant information through additional sources.
Safety Concerns
Patients with schizophrenia may be agitated and have little impulse control
when ill. They may also have decreased social sensitivity and appear to be
impulsive when, for example, they grab another patient’s cigarettes, change
television channels abruptly, or throw food on the floor. Some impulsive
behavior, including suicide and homicide attempts, may be in response to
hallucinations commanding the patient to act.
Violent behavior (excluding homicide) is common among untreated
schizophrenia patients, and the increased odds of a patient with schizophrenia
committing acts of violence, compared to the general population, is 49% to
68%. Delusions of a persecutory nature, previous episodes of violence, and
neurologic deficits are risk factors for violent or impulsive behavior. If a
clinician feels fearful in the presence of a schizophrenic patient, they should
take this as an internal clue that the patient may be on the verge of acting out
violently. In such cases, the clinician should terminate the interview or


<<<PAGE 1098>>>
conduct it with an attendant at the ready.
Suicide. Suicide is the single leading cause of premature death among
people with schizophrenia. The lifetime prevalence of suicidality in patients
with schizophrenia is about 34.5 percent. Suicide attempts are made by 20 to
50 percent of the patients, with long-term rates of suicide estimated to be 10
to 13 percent. According to DSM-5, approximately 5 to 6 percent of
schizophrenic patients die by suicide, but this is probably an underestimation.
Often, suicide in schizophrenia seems to occur “out of the blue,” without
prior warnings or expressions of verbal intent. The most crucial factor is the
presence of a major depressive episode. Epidemiologic studies indicate that
up to 80 percent of schizophrenia patients may have a major depressive
episode at some time in their lives. Some data suggest that those patients with
the best prognosis (few negative symptoms, preservation of capacity to
experience affects, better abstract thinking) can paradoxically also be at the
highest risk for suicide. The profile of the patient at most significant risk is a
young man who once had high expectations, declined from a higher level of
functioning, realizes that his dreams are not likely to come true, and has lost
faith in the effectiveness of treatment. Other possible contributors to the high
rate of suicide include command hallucinations and drug abuse. Two-thirds
or more of schizophrenic patients who commit suicide have seen an
unsuspecting clinician within 72 hours of death. A large pharmacologic study
suggests that clozapine may have particular efficacy in reducing suicidal
ideation in schizophrenia patients with prior hospitalizations for suicidality.
Adjunctive antidepressant medications may be effective for alleviating
cooccurring major depression in schizophrenia.
Homicide. Despite the sensational attention that the news media provides
when a patient with schizophrenia murders someone, the available data
indicate that these patients are no more likely to commit homicide than is a
member of the general population. When a patient with schizophrenia does
commit homicide, it may be for unpredictable or bizarre reasons based on
hallucinations or delusions. Possible predictors of homicidal activity are a
history of previous violence, dangerous behavior while hospitalized, and
hallucinations or delusions involving violence.


<<<PAGE 1099>>>
The Symptoms of Schizophrenia Can be Divided into Three
Groupings
We can divide the symptoms of schizophrenia into three groups: positive,
negative, and cognitive.
Positive Symptoms Are Abnormal Behaviors. Positive symptoms are
symptoms that are present and usually observable. These are the symptoms
associated with an acute psychotic episode and are primarily disorders of
thought and presentation. They include hallucinations, delusions, and other
bizarre behaviors. Table 5-1 lists examples of positive symptoms.
Negative Symptoms Are the Absence of Normal Behaviors.
Negative symptoms are defined by their absence and sometimes also called
deficit symptoms. They are commonly associated with the progression of the
illness. These include the absence of affect, the absence of thought, the
absence of motivation, the absence of pleasure, and the absence of attention.
Table 5-2 lists examples of negative symptoms.
Cognitive Symptoms Are Impairments in Normal Cognitive
Functions. The cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia may be subtle,
particularly early in the disease process, but are very impairing and account
for much of the disability associated with this disorder. They include
impairments of attention, working memory, and executive functioning.
Table 5-1
Positive Symptoms
Hallucinations
Auditory hallucinations
Voices commenting
Voices conversing
Somatic or tactile hallucinations
Olfactory hallucinations
Visual hallucinations
Delusions


<<<PAGE 1100>>>
Persecutory delusions
Delusions of jealousy
Delusions of guilt or sin
Grandiose delusions
Religious delusions
Somatic delusions
Delusions of reference
Delusions of being controlled
Delusions of mind reading
Thought broadcasting
Thought insertion
Thought withdrawal
Bizarre behavior
Clothing and behavior
Social and sexual behavior
Aggressive behavior
Repetitive or stereotyped behavior
Positive formal thought disorder
Derailment
Tangentiality
Incoherence
Illogicality
Circumstantiality
Pressure of speech
Distractible speech
Clanging
Table 5-2
Negative Symptoms
Affective flattening or blunting
Unchanging facial expressions


<<<PAGE 1101>>>
Decreased spontaneous movement
Paucity of expressive gesture
Poor eye contact
Affective nonresponsivity
Inappropriate affect
Lack of vocal inflections
Alogia
Poverty of speech
Poverty of content of speech
Blocking
Increased latency of response
Avolition—apathy
Grooming and hygiene
Impersistence at work or school
Physical anergia
Anhedonia—asociality
Recreational interests and activities
Sexual interest and activities
Intimacy and closeness
Relationships with friends
Attention
Social inattentiveness
Inattentiveness during testing
Presentation in Special Populations
The Disorder in Children and Adolescents. A small minority of
patients manifest schizophrenia in childhood. Such children may at first
present diagnostic problems, particularly with differentiation from mental
retardation and autistic disorder. Recent studies have established that we
should base our diagnosis of childhood schizophrenia on the same symptoms
used for adult schizophrenia. Its onset is usually insidious, its course tends to


<<<PAGE 1102>>>
be chronic, and the prognosis is mostly unfavorable.
The Disorder in Older People. Late-onset schizophrenia is clinically
indistinguishable from schizophrenia but has an onset after age 45 years. This
condition tends to appear more frequently in women and tends to be
characterized by a predominance of paranoid symptoms. The prognosis is
favorable, and these patients usually do well on antipsychotic medication.

DIAGNOSIS
Schizophrenia
Table 5-3 compares the different approaches to diagnosing schizophrenia.
The patient should have evidence of a psychotic disorder. However, the
presence of hallucinations or delusions is not necessary for a diagnosis of
schizophrenia; the patient’s disorder is diagnosed as schizophrenia when the
patient demonstrates any two of the several symptoms included under the
broad category of “psychotic symptoms.” These symptoms should persist for
an extended time: 6 months for DSM-5 and 1 month for ICD-10. The DSM-5
diagnostic criteria include course specifiers (i.e., prognosis) that offer
clinicians several options and describe actual clinical situations.
Catatonic Type. The catatonic type of schizophrenia, which was prevalent
several decades ago, has become rare in Europe and North America. The
classic feature of the catatonic type is a marked disturbance in motor
function; this disturbance may involve stupor, negativism, rigidity,
excitement, or posturing.
Table 5-3
Schizophrenia
DSM-5
Diagnostic name Schizophrenia
Duration

Symptoms present
continuously for
at least 6 mo

ICD-10
Schizophrenia


<<<PAGE 1103>>>
Symptoms

Delusions
Hallucinations
Disorganization of
speech
Disorganization of
behavior or
catatonia
Negative
symptoms

Required number ≥2, including at
of symptoms
least 1 of the
first 3 listed

Thought distortions
Perceptual disorders
Negative affect, often blunted
Possible cognitive dysfunction
Other possible symptoms:
• Thought echo
• Thought insertion or
withdrawal
• Thought broadcasting
• Delusional perception
• Delusions of control,
influence, or passivity
• Hallucinatory voices
• Disordered/disorganized
thinking
• Negative symptoms
Defined by the first three
listed, although the other
symptoms are considered
common

Psychosocial
Functional
consequences
impairment
of symptoms
Exclusions (not
Substances
better
Other medical
explained by):
conditions
Other psychiatric
conditions

Other neurologic diseases
Schizoaffective disorder
Epilepsy
Psychoactive substances

Symptom
Specifiers

Paranoid schizophrenia
—primarily defined by
delusions. Less or no
disturbance of affect or

With catatonia,
defined as
presence of
three or more


<<<PAGE 1104>>>
of the following:
volition
• ↓ psychomotor Hebephrenic schizophrenia
activity/stupor
—negative affect with
inappropriate mood, social
• Catalepsy
isolation and unpredictable
(holding a
behavior
posture for an
extended
Catatonic schizophrenia
period)
—psychomotor changes,
such as posturing, odd
• Waxy flexibility
mannerisms/affect, stupor
(hold a
vs. agitation
position but
movable to a Undifferentiated
new posture
Schizophrenia
as if made of Residual schizophrenia
wax)
—chronic illness and
• Mutism
cognitive changes
resulting from a prolonged
• Negativism
psychotic illness
• Posturing
Simple schizophrenia—slow
• Odd
progressive development
mannerisms
of changes in behavior and
• Stereotypic
functioning, affective
behaviors
blunting without preceding
• Agitation
psychotic symptoms
• Grimacing
Other Schizophrenia
• Echolalia
Schizophrenia unspecified
(imitating
another’s
speech)
• Echopraxia
(imitating
another’s
movements)
Course specifiers First episode,
currently in


<<<PAGE 1105>>>
acute episode
First episode,
currently in
partial
remission:
currently less
symptoms than
needed for
diagnosis
First episode,
currently in
full remission:
0 symptoms
Multiple
episodes,
currently in
acute episode:
≥2 episodes
Multiple
episodes,
currently in
partial
remission
Multiple
episodes,
currently in
full remission
Continuous
Unspecified
AC, age 32 years, was admitted to the hospital. On arrival, he was noted
to be an asthenic, poorly nourished man with dilated pupils, hyperactive
tendon reflexes, and a pulse rate of 120 beats/min. He showed many
mannerisms, laid down on the floor, pulled at his foot, made undirected


<<<PAGE 1106>>>
violent striking movements, struck attendants, grimaced, assumed rigid
and strange postures, refused to speak, and appeared to be having
auditory hallucinations. When seen later in the day, he was found to be in
a stuporous state. His face was without expression, he was mute and
rigid, and he paid no attention to those about him or to their questions.
His eyes were closed, and his eyelids could be separated only with effort.
There was no response to pinpricks or other painful stimuli.
He gradually became accessible, and when asked concerning himself,
he referred to his stuporous period as sleep and maintained that he had no
recollection of any events occurring during it. He said, “I didn’t know
anything. Everything seemed to be dark as far as my mind is concerned.
Then I began to see a little light, like the shape of a star. Then my head
got through the star gradually. I saw more and more light until I saw
everything in a perfect form a few days ago.” He explained his mutism by
saying that he had been afraid he would “say the wrong thing” and that he
“didn’t know exactly what to talk about.” From his obviously inadequate
emotional response and his statement that he was “a scientist and an
inventor of the most extraordinary genius of the 20th century,” it was
plain that he was still far from well. (Adapted from case of Arthur P.
Noyes, M.D., Lawrence C. Kolb, M.D.)
Sometimes the patient shows a rapid alternation between extremes of
excitement and stupor. Associated features include stereotypies, mannerisms,
and waxy flexibility. Mutism is particularly common. During catatonic
excitement, patients need careful supervision to prevent them from hurting
themselves or others. Patients also often require medical care because of
malnutrition, exhaustion, hyperpyrexia, or self-inflicted injury.
Subtypes from Previous Versions of DSM. Previous versions of the
DSM described subtypes of schizophrenia based predominantly on the
clinical features. These were: paranoid, disorganized, catatonic,
undifferentiated, and residual subtype. DSM-5 no longer includes these as
experts in the field frequently questioned their validity. ICD-10 does continue
to include them. Although having some face validity for clinicians, they have
only a weak relationship to biologic variables, poor long-term stability, and


<<<PAGE 1107>>>
poor predictive value.
Schizoaffective Disorder
Schizoaffective disorder has features of both schizophrenia and mood
disorders. In current diagnostic systems, patients can receive the diagnosis of
schizoaffective disorder if they fit into one of the following six categories: (1)
patients with schizophrenia who have mood symptoms, (2) patients with a
mood disorder who have symptoms of schizophrenia, (3) patients with both
mood disorder and schizophrenia, (4) patients with a third psychosis
unrelated to schizophrenia and mood disorder, (5) patients whose disorder is
on a continuum between schizophrenia and mood disorder, and (6) patients
with some combination of the above. Clinicians frequently use a preliminary
diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder when they are uncertain of the
diagnosis.
It remains unclear whether the disorder is a subtype of schizophrenia, a
mood disorder, or the simultaneous expression of each. It is unlikely that this
represents a simultaneous expression of both disorders, as it appears to be
more common than would be expected for coincidental co-occurrence.
Schizoaffective disorder may also be a third distinct type of psychosis, one
that is unrelated to either schizophrenia or a mood disorder. The most likely
possibility is that schizoaffective disorder is a heterogeneous group of
disorders encompassing all of these possibilities. As will be discussed below,
the genetic abnormalities in schizophrenia overlap with that for mood
disorders, making an overlap between the disorders more likely.
In the DSM-5 criteria for schizoaffective disorder, the clinician must
accurately diagnose the mood disorder, making sure it meets the criteria of
either a manic or depressive episode but also determining the exact length of
each episode (not always easy or even possible). Table 5-4 compares the
diagnostic approaches to schizoaffective disorder.
The length of each episode is critical for two reasons. First, to meet the
requirement that the psychotic symptoms must also occur independently of
the mood symptoms, it is essential to know when the affective episode ends,
and the psychosis continues. Second, the relative lengths of the mood and
psychotic episodes should be roughly equal, which requires us to know the
course of the episodes.


<<<PAGE 1108>>>
Mrs. P is a 47-year-old, divorced, unemployed woman who lived alone
and who experienced chronic psychotic symptoms despite treatment with
olanzapine 20 mg per day and citalopram 20 mg per day. She believed
that she was getting messages from God and the police department to go
on a mission to fight against drugs. She also believed that an organized
crime group was trying to stop her in this pursuit. The onset of her illness
began at age 20 years when she experienced the first of several
depressive episodes. She also described periods when she felt more
energetic and talkative, had a decreased need for sleep, and was more
active, sometimes cleaning her house throughout the night. About 4 years
after the onset of her symptoms, she began to hear “voices” that became
stronger when she was depressed but were still present and disturbed her
even when her mood was euthymic. About 10 years after her illness
began, she developed the belief that policemen were everywhere and that
the neighbors were spying on her. She was hospitalized voluntarily. Two
years later, she had another depressive episode, and the auditory
hallucinations told her she could not live in her apartment. She was tried
on lithium, antidepressants, and antipsychotic medications but continued
to be chronically symptomatic with mood symptoms as well as psychosis.
Mrs. P demonstrates a “classic” presentation of schizoaffective
disorder in which clear depressive and hypomanic episodes are present in
combination with continuous psychotic illness and first-rank symptoms.
Her course is typical of many individuals with schizoaffective disorder.
Schizophreniform Disorder
The symptoms of schizophreniform are similar to those of schizophrenia.
However, with schizophreniform disorder, the symptoms are short term,
lasting at least 1 month but less than 6 months. Patients with
schizophreniform disorder should then return to their baseline level of
functioning.
Like schizoaffective disorder, schizophreniform disorder appears to be a
heterogeneous disorder. Many patients seem to have a disorder that is similar
to schizophrenia, while others may have a disorder more like a mood
disorder.


<<<PAGE 1109>>>
Table 5-5 compares the diagnostic approaches to schizophreniform
disorder.
The disorder is an acute psychotic disorder with a rapid onset. It lacks a
long prodromal phase. Although many patients with schizophreniform
disorder may experience functional impairment at the time of an episode,
they are unlikely to report a progressive decline in social and occupational
functioning. The initial symptom profile is the same as for schizophrenia in
that two or more psychotic symptoms must be present.
By definition, patients with schizophreniform disorder have the symptoms
for at least a month and return to their baseline state within 6 months. In
some instances, the illness is episodic, with more than one episode occurring
after long periods of full remission. If the combined duration of
symptomatology exceeds 6 months, however, then schizophrenia should be
considered.
Mr. C, a 28-year-old accountant, was brought to the emergency
department by the police in handcuffs. He was disheveled and shouted
and struggled with the police officers. It was apparent that he was hearing
voices because he would respond to them with shouts such as, “Shut up! I
told you I won’t do it!” However, when confronted about the voices, he
denied hearing anything. Mr. C had a hypervigilant stare and jumped at
the slightest noise. He stated that he must run away quickly because he
knew he would be killed shortly otherwise.
Mr. C was functioning well until 2 months before hospitalization. He
was an accountant at a prestigious company and had close friends and a
live-in girlfriend. Most people who knew him would describe him as
friendly, but he was occasionally quarrelsome.
When his girlfriend suddenly broke off the relationship and moved out
of their apartment, Mr. C was distressed. However, he was convinced that
he could win her back, so he began to “accidentally” run into her at her
job or her new apartment with flowers and various gifts. When she
strongly told him that she wanted nothing more to do with him and
requested that he leave her alone, Mr. C was convinced that she wanted
him dead. He became so preoccupied with this notion that his work began
to suffer. Out of fear for his life, Mr. C took off from work frequently,


<<<PAGE 1110>>>
and when he did report to work, he was often tardy and did subpar work,
making many errors. His supervisor confronted Mr. C about his behavior,
threatening termination if it continued. Mr. C was embarrassed and
resented his supervisor for the confrontation. He believed that his exgirlfriend had hired the supervisor to kill him.
His beliefs were confirmed by a voice that would mock him. The voice
told him time and again that he should quit his job, relocate to another
city, and forget about his ex-girlfriend, but Mr. C refused, believing it
would give them “more satisfaction than they deserved.” He continued
working, albeit cautiously, all the while fearing for his life.
Through it all, Mr. C believed himself to be the lone victim. He would
awake abruptly at night from nightmares but would be able to fall right
back to sleep. He had not lost any weight and had no other vegetative
symptoms. His affect alternated between rage and terror. His mind was
unusually alert and active, but he was not otherwise hyperactive,
excessively energetic, or expansive. He did not display any formal
thought disorder.
Mr. C was hospitalized and treated with antipsychotic medication. His
symptoms remitted after several weeks of treatment, and he was well and
able to return to work shortly after discharge.
Table 5-4
Schizoaffective Disorder
DSM-5
Diagnostic name Schizoaffective Disorder
Duration

Mood symptoms present
majority of time during
the illness
However, there is also a 2wk period of psychotic
symptoms without mood
symptoms

ICD-10
Schizoaffective
disorders


<<<PAGE 1111>>>
Symptoms

Meets criteria for a major
depressive or manic
episode
Meets criteria for
Schizophrenia

Symptoms of
affective episode
and
schizophrenic
symptoms

Required number See criteria for the
of symptoms
individual disorders
Psychosocial
Functional impairment
consequences
of symptoms
Exclusions (not
Substance use
better
Another mental illness
explained by): Another medical condition
Symptom
Specifiers

Schizophrenia
Depressive/manic
episodes

Bipolar Type: manic
Schizoaffective
episode
disorder, manic
type
Depressive Type:
depressive episode
Schizoaffective
disorder,
With catatonia:
depressive type
See Table 5-3 for catatonia
Schizoaffective
symptoms
disorder, mixed
type
Schizoaffective
disorder,
unspecified
Other
schizoaffective
disorder

Course specifiers First episode, currently in
acute episode
First episode, currently in
partial remission:


<<<PAGE 1112>>>
currently less symptoms
than needed for
diagnosis
First episode, currently in
full remission: 0
symptoms
Multiple episodes,
currently in acute
episode: ≥2 episodes
Multiple episodes,
currently in partial
remission
Multiple episodes,
currently in full
remission
Continuous
Unspecified
Table 5-5
Schizophreniform Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic
name

Schizophreniform
Disorder

Acute and Transient psychotic
disorder

Duration

≥1 mo, but <6 mo

<1 mo on average

Symptoms

Same as
schizophrenia
(see Table 5-3)

Symptoms of schizophrenia,
including:
Thought echo
Thought insertion or
withdrawal
Thought broadcasting
Delusional perception
Delusions of control,
influence, or passivity


<<<PAGE 1113>>>
Hallucinatory voices
Disordered/disorganized
thinking
Negative symptoms
May or may not be associated
with polymorphic (unstable,
frequently changing)
delusions, hallucinations
and/or behavioral symptoms
Required
Same as
number of
schizophrenia
symptoms
(see Table 5-3)
Exclusions
Same as
(not better
schizophrenia
explained
(see Table 5-3)
by):
Symptom
With catatonia:
Specifiers See Table 5-3 for
catatonia
symptoms
Course
specifiers

With good
prognostic
features:
≥2 of following:
Psychotic
symptoms
within 4 wk of
initial behavioral
changes
Confusion
Good premorbid
function
No negative

If symptoms persist, diagnosis
should be changed to
schizophrenia


<<<PAGE 1114>>>
symptoms
Without good
prognostic
features
Perhaps 60 to 80 percent of patients with this disorder will later develop
schizophrenia. The remaining may have relapses of similar time-limited
episodes of the disease, whereas some, although unfortunately only a few
patients, will have only a single episode.
Brief Psychotic Disorder
Brief psychotic disorder is defined as a psychotic condition that involves the
sudden onset of psychotic symptoms, which lasts 1 day or more but less than
1 month. Remission is full, and the individual returns to the premorbid level
of functioning. Brief psychotic disorder is an acute and transient psychotic
syndrome. The exact incidence and prevalence of brief psychotic disorder is
not known, but it is generally considered uncommon. The disorder occurs
more often among younger patients (20s and 30s) than among older patients.
Brief psychotic disorder is more common in women than in men. Such
epidemiologic patterns are sharply distinct from those of schizophrenia.
Some clinicians indicate that the disorder may be seen most frequently in
patients from low socioeconomic classes and in those who have experienced
disasters or major cultural changes (e.g., immigrants). The age of onset in
industrialized settings may be higher than in developing countries. Table 5-6
compares the diagnostic approaches to brief psychotic disorder.
The cause of the disorder is not known, however it is common in patients
with personality disorders. Persons who have gone through major
psychosocial stressors may be at greater risk for subsequent brief psychotic
disorder.
The symptoms of brief psychotic disorder always include at least one
major symptom of psychosis, such as hallucinations, delusions, and
disorganized thoughts, usually with an abrupt onset, but do not always
include the entire symptom pattern seen in schizophrenia. Some clinicians
have observed that labile mood, confusion, and impaired attention may be
more common at the onset of brief psychotic disorder than at the onset of


<<<PAGE 1115>>>
eventually chronic psychotic disorders. Characteristic symptoms in brief
psychotic disorder include emotional volatility, strange or bizarre behavior,
screaming or muteness, and impaired memory of recent events. Some of the
symptoms suggest a diagnosis of delirium and warrant a medical workup,
especially to rule out adverse reactions to drugs.
Table 5-6
Brief Psychotic Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic
name

Brief Psychotic
Disorder

See Table 5-5 definition of
Acute and Transient
psychotic disorder—ICD
10 does not distinguish
between these two
disorders

Duration

≥1 day, <1 mo with
return to baseline

Symptoms

Same as for
schizophrenia (see
Table 5-3) except
negative symptoms
not included

Required
1 of first 3 symptoms
number of
(delusions,
symptoms
hallucinations or
disorganized
speech) +/behavioral
symptoms
Exclusions
Culturally sanctioned
(not better
response/behavior
explained Another mental illness


<<<PAGE 1116>>>
by):

Substance use
Another medical
condition

Symptom
With marked
Specifiers
stressors
Without marked
stressors
With catatonia:
See Table 5-3 for
catatonia
symptoms
Course
specifiers

With peripartum
onset: during
pregnancy or ≤4 wk
after delivery

A 20-year-old man was admitted to the psychiatric ward of a hospital
shortly after starting military duty. During the first week after his arrival
to the military base, he thought the other recruits looked at him in a
strange way. He watched the people around him to see whether they were
out “to get” him. He heard voices calling his name several times. He
became increasingly suspicious and after another week had to be
admitted for psychiatric evaluation. There he was guarded, scowling,
skeptical, and depressed. He gave the impression of being very shy and
inhibited. His psychotic symptoms disappeared rapidly when he was
treated with an antipsychotic drug. However, he had difficulties in
adjusting to hospital life. Transfer to a long-term medical hospital was
considered, but after 3 months, a decision was made to discharge him to
his home. He was subsequently judged unfit to return to military services.
The patient was the eldest of five siblings. His father was an
intemperate drinker who became angry and brutal when drunk. The
family was poor, and there were constant fights between the parents. As a
child, the patient was inhibited and fearful and often ran into the woods


<<<PAGE 1117>>>
when troubled. He had academic difficulties.
When the patient got older, he preferred to spend time alone and
disliked being with people. He occasionally took part in local parties.
Although he was never a heavy drinker, he often got into fights when he
had a drink or two.
The patient was reinterviewed by hospital personnel at 4 years, 7 years,
and 23 years after his admission. He has had no recurrences of any
psychotic symptoms and has been fully employed since 6 months after he
left the hospital. He married, and at the last follow-up, he had two grown
children.
After leaving the hospital, the patient worked for 2 years in a factory.
For the past 20 years, he has managed a small business, and it has run
well. He has been very happy at work and in his family life. He has made
an effort to overcome his tendency toward isolation and has several
friends.
The patient believes that his natural tendency is to be socially isolated
and that his disorder was connected with the fact that in the military, he
was forced to deal with other people. (Adapted from Laura J. Fochtmann,
M.D., Ramin Mojtabai, M.D., Ph.D., M.P.H., and Evelyn J. Bromet,
Ph.D.)
Delusional Disorder
The diagnosis of delusional disorder is made when a person exhibits one or
more delusions of at least 1 month’s duration that cannot be attributed to
other psychiatric disorders. The delusions are often nonbizarre, meaning that
the delusions are about situations that can occur in real life, such as being
followed, infected, loved at a distance, and so on; that is, they usually have to
do with phenomena that, although not real, are nonetheless possible. Several
types of delusions may be present. Table 5-7 compares the diagnostic
approaches to delusional disorder.
Table 5-7
Delusional Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10


<<<PAGE 1118>>>
Diagnostic name Delusional Disorder
Duration

≥1 mo

Symptoms

Delusions (see symptom
specifiers for examples)

Required number ≥1
of symptoms

Delusional
Disorder

Delusions
Persistent
+/hallucinations
≥1 delusions

Psychosocial
No marked functional
consequences
impairment
of symptoms
Exclusions (not
Schizophrenia
better
Another medical condition
explained by): Substance use
Another mental illness

Symptom
Specifiers

Erotomanic type
Grandiose type
Jealous type
Persecutory type
Somatic type
Mixed type
Unspecified type
With bizarre content: if not
related to reality or a life
experience or not possible,
include this specifier

Course specifiers First episode, currently in
acute episode

Personality
disorder
Psychosis
Psychogenic
reaction
Schizophrenia


<<<PAGE 1119>>>
First episode, currently in
partial remission: currently
less symptoms than needed
for diagnosis
First episode, currently in full
remission: 0 symptoms
Multiple episodes, currently
in acute episode: ≥2
episodes
Multiple episodes, currently
in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently
in full remission
Continuous
Unspecified
Patients are usually well groomed and well dressed, without evidence of
gross disintegration of personality or of daily activities, yet they may seem
eccentric, odd, suspicious, or hostile. They are sometimes litigious and may
make this inclination clear to the examiner. The most remarkable feature of
patients with delusional disorder is that the mental status examination shows
them to be quite normal except for a markedly abnormal delusional system.
Patients may attempt to engage clinicians as allies in their delusions, but a
clinician should not pretend to accept the delusion; this collusion further
confounds reality and sets the stage for eventual distrust between the patient
and the therapist.
Patients’ moods are consistent with the content of their delusions. A
patient with grandiose delusions is euphoric; one with persecutory delusions
is suspicious. Whatever the nature of the delusional system, the examiner
may sense some mild depressive qualities.
By definition, patients with delusional disorder do not have prominent or
sustained hallucinations. A few delusional patients have other hallucinatory
experiences—virtually always auditory rather than visual. They also have
generally normal cognition apart from their delusion.
The disorders can be of several types, and in the diagnosis the clinician


<<<PAGE 1120>>>
should specify the type. The types include: persecutory (believing others are
trying to harm them), jealous (believing that a lover or partner is unfaithful),
erotomanic (believing that another person, often of higher status, is in love
with them), somatic (believing the person has some physical disorder), and
grandiose (a “delusion of grandeur”). There is also a mixed and unspecified
type, for delusions that are a combination of types or not described by one of
the categories. Of these types, persecutory and jealous are probably the most
common.
Mrs. S, a 62-year-old-woman, was referred to a psychiatrist because of
reports of being unable to sleep. She had previously worked full time
taking care of children, and she played tennis almost every day and
managed her household chores. However, she had now become
preoccupied with the idea that her downstairs neighbor was doing a
variety of things to harass her and wanted to get her to move away. At
first, Mrs. S based her belief on certain looks that he gave her and
damage done to her mailbox, but later she felt he might be leaving empty
bottles of cleaning solutions in the basement so she would be overcome
by fumes. As a result, the patient was fearful of falling asleep, convinced
that she might be asphyxiated and unable to awaken in time to get help.
She felt somewhat depressed and thought her appetite might be decreased
from the stress of being harassed. However, she had not lost weight and
still enjoyed playing tennis and going out with friends. At one point she
considered moving to another apartment but then decided to fight back.
The episode had gone on for 8 months when her daughter persuaded her
to have a psychiatric assessment. In the interview, Mrs. S was pleasant
and cooperative. Except for mild depressive symptoms and the specific
delusion about being harassed by her neighbor, her mental status was
normal.
Mrs. S had a past history of depression 30 years before, which
followed the death of a close friend. She saw a counselor for several
months and found this helpful, but she was not treated with medication.
For the current episode, she agreed to take medications, although she
believed her neighbor was more in need of treatment than she was. Her
symptoms improved somewhat with risperidone 2 mg at bedtime and


<<<PAGE 1121>>>
clonazepam 0.5 mg every morning and at bedtime.
This patient presented with a single delusion regarding her neighbor
that was within the realm of possibility (i.e., not bizarre). Other areas of
her functioning were normal. Although mild depressive symptoms were
present, she did not meet criteria for major depressive disorder. Her prior
symptoms of depression appeared to be related to a normal bereavement
reaction and had not required pharmacotherapy or hospitalization. Thus,
her current presentation is one of delusional disorder, persecutory type
and not major depressive disorder with psychotic features. In terms of
treatment, the ability to create a working alliance with the patient,
avoiding the discussion of the veracity of her delusion, and focusing on
her anxiety, depression, and difficulty falling asleep enabled her
psychiatrist to introduce the medications with beneficial results.
(Courtesy of Laura J. Fochtmann, M.D., Ramin Mojtabai, M.D., Ph.D.,
M.P.H., and Evelyn J. Bromet, Ph.D.)

Mr. M was a 51-year-old married white man who lived with his wife in
their own home and who worked full time driving a sanitation truck.
Before his hospitalization, he became concerned that his wife was having
an affair. He began to follow her, kept notes on his observations, and
badgered her constantly about this, often waking her up in the middle of
the night to make accusations. Shortly before admission, these arguments
led to physical violence, and he was brought to the hospital by police. In
addition to concerns about his wife’s fidelity, Mr. M reported feelings of
depression over his wife’s “betrayal of [their] marriage vows,” but he
noted no changes in sleep, appetite, or work-related functioning. He was
treated with a low dose of an antipsychotic medication and described
being less concerned about his wife’s behavior. After discharge, he
remained on medications and was seen by a psychiatrist monthly, but 10
years later, he continued to believe that his wife was unfaithful. His wife
noted that he sometimes became upset about the delusion but that he had
not become aggressive or required readmission.
This patient experienced a fixed, encapsulated delusion of jealousy that
did not interfere with his other activities and that showed a partial


<<<PAGE 1122>>>
response to antipsychotic medications. Although he initially reported
feeling somewhat depressed over his wife’s perceived infidelity, he did
not have other symptoms suggestive of a major depressive episode.
(Courtesy of Laura J. Fochtmann, M.D., Ramin Mojtabai, M.D., Ph.D.,
M.P.H., and Evelyn J. Bromet, Ph.D.)
Little is known about the epidemiology of delusional disorder as it is rare,
and is, likely, a heterogeneous group of disorders that manifest as delusions.
Despite many theories, the causes are not known. Many patients with the
disorder can function well in society and never come to psychiatric attention.
Psychiatrists may only meet them when they are evaluating them for another
disorder, such as major depressive disorder. Other times, a physician may
request a psychiatric consult for a patient they are evaluating for some other
medical disorder and notice some odd responses. The disorder appears to be
stable over time. Although reliable data are limited, patients with persecutory,
somatic, and erotomanic delusions are thought to have a better prognosis than
patients with grandiose and jealous delusions.
Other Psychotic Disorders
Patients may present with psychotic symptoms that are not easily described
by one of the psychotic disorders. Some examples include patients with
persistent auditory hallucination but no other symptoms, or delusions that
present with significant mood symptoms. In some cases a clinician may
consider the symptoms that seem psychotic to be so minor as not to deserve a
diagnosis of a typical disorder; these can include very transient symptoms or
presentations where the patient seems to have full insight into their delusions
or hallucinations.
One pattern of psychosis that deserves mention is the presence of
delusional symptoms in a partner of an individual with delusional disorder,
commonly called “shared psychosis,” or folie á deux. It is probably rare, but
incidence and prevalence figures are lacking, and the literature consists
almost entirely of case reports.
The disorder is characterized by the transfer of delusions from one person
to another. Both persons are closely associated for a long time and typically
live together in relative social isolation. In its most common form (and the


<<<PAGE 1123>>>
one recognized in DSM-5), the individual who first has the delusion (the
primary case) is often chronically ill and typically is the influential member
of a close relationship with a more suggestible person (the secondary case)
who also develops the delusion. The person in the secondary case is
frequently less intelligent, more gullible, more passive, or more lacking in
self-esteem than the person in the primary case. If the pair separates, the
secondary person may abandon the delusion, but this outcome is not seen
uniformly. The occurrence of the delusion is attributed to the strong influence
of the more dominant member. Old age, low intelligence, sensory
impairment, cerebrovascular disease, and alcohol abuse are among the factors
associated with this peculiar form of psychotic disorder. A genetic
predisposition to idiopathic psychoses has also been suggested as a possible
risk factor.
Other special forms have been reported, such as folie simultanée, in which
two persons become psychotic simultaneously and share the same delusion.
Occasionally, more than two individuals are involved (e.g., folie á trois,
quatre, cinq; also folie á famille), but such cases are especially rare. The most
common relationships in shared psychotic disorder are sister–sister, husband–
wife, and mother–child, but other combinations have also been described.
Almost all cases involve members of a single family.
A 52-year-old man was referred by the court for inpatient psychiatric
examination, charged with disturbing the peace. He had been arrested for
disrupting a trial, complaining of harassment by various judges. He had
walked into a courtroom, marched to the bench, and begun to berate the
probate judge. While in the hospital, he related a detailed account of
conspiratorial goings-on in the local judiciary. A target of certain judges,
he claimed he had been singled out for a variety of reasons for many
years: he knew what was going on; he had kept records of wrongdoings;
and he understood the significance of the whole matter. He refused to
elaborate on the specific nature of the conspiracy. He had responded to it
with frequent letters to newspapers, the local bar association, and even to
a Congressional subcommittee. His mental state, apart from his story and
a mildly depressed mood, was entirely normal.
A family interview revealed that his wife and several grown children


<<<PAGE 1124>>>
shared the belief in a judicial conspiracy directed against the patient.
There was no change in delusional thinking in the patient or the family
after 10 days of observation. The patient refused follow-up.
In this case, protection is provided by others who share the delusion
and believe in the reasonableness of the response; such cases are
uncommon, if not rare. (Courtesy of TC Manschreck, M.D.)

OBJECTIVE TESTS FOR THE DISORDER
Schizophrenia and the other psychotic disorders remain clinical diagnoses
and no tests are sensitive or specific enough for diagnostic purposes. Most
tests, such as serologic testing, are mainly used to rule out other causes of
psychosis (such as syphilis or anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis). However,
some tests are abnormal on average when comparing groups of patients with
schizophrenia to patients without the disorder. Examples include
computerized electroencephalogram (EEG), which show differences in eventrelated potentials.
Diagnostic and Rating Scales for Schizophrenia
Several diagnostic interviews and rating scales exist for schizophrenia. Some
are useful for diagnosing the disorder, although they are mainly used in
research settings.
Most scales measure the outcomes of various interventions, not the
presence of a diagnosis. They focus on measuring clinical symptoms
associated with the disorder. These include the Positive and Negative
Syndrome Scale (PANSS), and the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS),
both of which can track the significant symptoms of the disorder. We can
assess for extrapyramidal symptoms with a variety of instruments, but the
Simpson Angus Scale (SAS), the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale
(AIMS) and Barnes Akathisia Rating Scale (BARS) are most common.
Psychological Testing
Patients with schizophrenia generally perform poorly on a wide range of
neuropsychological tests. Vigilance, memory, and concept formation are
most affected and consistent with pathologic involvement in the


<<<PAGE 1125>>>
frontotemporal cortex.
Objective measures of neuropsychological performance, such as the
Halstead–Reitan battery and the Luria–Nebraska battery, often give abnormal
findings, such as bilateral frontal and temporal lobe dysfunction, including
impairments in attention, retention time, and problem-solving ability. Motor
ability is also impaired, possibly related to brain asymmetry.
Intelligence Tests. When comparing groups of patients with schizophrenia
with groups of psychiatric patients without schizophrenia or from the general
population, schizophrenia patients tend to score lower on intelligence tests.
Statistically, the evidence suggests that low intelligence is often present at the
onset, and intelligence may continue to deteriorate with the progression of the
disorder.
Projective and Personality Tests. Projective tests, such as the
Rorschach test and the Thematic Apperception Test, may indicate bizarre
ideation. Personality inventories, such as the Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory, often give abnormal results in schizophrenia, but the
contribution to diagnosis and treatment planning is minimal.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS FOR PSYCHOTIC
DISORDERS
Secondary Psychotic Disorders
A wide range of nonpsychiatric medical conditions and a variety of
substances can induce symptoms of psychosis and catatonia (Table 5-8). The
most appropriate diagnosis for such symptoms is a psychotic disorder due to
a general medical condition, catatonic disorder due to a general medical
condition, or substance-induced psychotic disorder.
When evaluating a patient with psychotic symptoms, clinicians should
follow the general guidelines for assessing nonpsychiatric conditions. First,
clinicians should aggressively pursue an undiagnosed nonpsychiatric medical
condition when a patient exhibits any unusual or rare symptoms or any
variation in the level of consciousness. Second, clinicians should attempt to
obtain a complete family history, including a history of medical, neurologic,


<<<PAGE 1126>>>
and psychiatric disorders. Third, clinicians should consider the possibility of
a nonpsychiatric medical condition, even in patients with previous diagnoses
of schizophrenia. A patient with schizophrenia is just as likely to have a brain
tumor that produces psychotic symptoms, as is a patient without
schizophrenia.
Table 5-8
Potential Medical Etiologies of Delusional Syndromes
Disease or Disorder Examples
Class
Neurodegenerative
disorders

Alzheimer disease, Pick disease, Huntington
disease, basal ganglia calcification,
multiple sclerosis, metachromatic
leukodystrophy

Other central nervous Brain tumors, especially temporal lobe and
system disorders
deep hemispheric tumors; epilepsy,
especially complex partial seizure
disorder; head trauma (subdural
hematoma); anoxic brain injury; fat
embolism
Vascular disease

Atherosclerotic vascular disease, especially
when associated with diffuse,
temporoparietal, or subcortical lesions;
hypertensive encephalopathy;
subarachnoid hemorrhage, temporal
arteritis

Infectious disease

HIIV/AIDS encephalitis lethargica,
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease, syphilis,
malaria, acute viral encephalitis

Metabolic disorder

Hypercalcemia, hyponatremia, hypoglycemia,
uremia, hepatic encephalopathy, porphyria

Endocrinopathies

Addison disease, Cushing syndrome, hyper-


<<<PAGE 1127>>>
or hypothyroidism, panhypopituitarism
Vitamin deficiencies

Vitamin B12 deficiency, folate deficiency,
thiamine deficiency, niacin deficiency

Medications

Adrenocorticotropic hormones, anabolic
steroids, corticosteroids, cimetidine,
antibiotics (cephalosporins, penicillin),
disulfiram, anticholinergic agents

Substances

Amphetamines, cocaine, alcohol, cannabis,
hallucinogens

Toxins

Mercury, arsenic, manganese, thallium

Mood Disorders
A patient with a major depressive episode may present with delusions and
hallucinations, as can a patient with bipolar disorder. Delusions seen with
psychotic depression are typically mood-congruent and involve themes such
as guilt, self-depreciation, deserved punishment, and incurable illnesses. In
mood disorders, psychotic symptoms resolve entirely with the resolution of
depression. A depressive episode that is this severe may also result in loss of
functioning, a decline in self-care, and social isolation, but these are
secondary to the depressive symptoms and should not be confused with the
negative symptoms of schizophrenia.
A full-blown manic episode often presents with delusions and sometimes
hallucinations. Delusions in mania are most often mood-congruent and
typically involve grandiose themes. The flight of ideas seen in mania may, at
times, be confused with the thought disorder of schizophrenia. Special
attention during the mental status examination of a patient with a flight of
ideas is required to note whether the associative links between topics are
conserved. However, the conversation is awkward for the observer to follow
because of the patient’s accelerated rate of thinking.
Personality Disorders
Various personality disorders may have some features of schizophrenia.
Schizotypal, schizoid, and borderline personality disorders are personality


<<<PAGE 1128>>>
disorders with several overlapping symptoms. A severe obsessivecompulsive personality disorder may mask an underlying schizophrenic
process. Personality disorders, unlike schizophrenia, have mild symptoms
and a history of occurring throughout a patient’s life; they also lack an
identifiable date of onset.
Malingering and Factitious Disorders
For a patient who imitates the symptoms of schizophrenia but does not have
the disorder, either malingering or factitious disorder may be an appropriate
diagnosis. Although truly mimicking the symptoms of schizophrenia is
difficult, especially in front of an experienced clinician, persons have faked
schizophrenic symptoms and have been admitted into and treated at
psychiatric hospitals. The condition of patients who are entirely in control of
their symptom production may qualify for a diagnosis of malingering; such
patients usually have some apparent financial or legal reason to want to be
considered mentally ill. The condition of patients who are less in control of
their falsification of psychotic symptoms may qualify for a diagnosis of
factitious disorder. Some patients with schizophrenia, however, may falsely
complain of an exacerbation of psychotic symptoms to obtain increased
assistance benefits or to gain admission to a hospital.

COMORBIDITY
Substance Use Disorders
Comorbid substance use disorders in patients with schizophrenia are
widespread, with a lifetime prevalence of 74%. Tobacco, alcohol, cannabis,
and cocaine use disorders are most common, and almost half of the patients
with schizophrenia will have a severe problem with drugs or alcohol during
their lifetime.
The link between the two disorders is not clear, and experts in the field
have proposed several explanations. The diathesis-stress model suggests that
a biologically vulnerable person, when encountering external stress (of which
a substance may be one), is more likely to develop schizophrenia. The selfmedication hypothesis suggests that patients use substances to lessen their
symptoms or side effects. The shared vulnerability model suggests that both


<<<PAGE 1129>>>
schizophrenia and substance use disorders share a common etiology and
pathology. More research is required. However, the available evidence
supports a shared vulnerability, in which a shared genetic risk or
environmental insult leads to dysfunctions in specific key circuits, such as
reward pathways. The result is the increased use of substances during
adolescence, as well as the development of schizophrenia.
Complex Partial Epilepsy
Schizophrenia-like psychoses occur more frequently than expected in patients
with complex partial seizures, especially seizures involving the temporal
lobes. Factors associated with the development of psychosis in these patients
include a left-sided seizure focus, medial temporal location of the lesion, and
an early onset of seizures. Some psychotic symptoms are similar to
symptoms of patients with complex partial epilepsy and may reflect the
presence of a temporal lobe disorder when seen in patients with
schizophrenia.
Obesity
Patients with schizophrenia appear to be more obese, with higher body mass
indexes (BMIs) than age- and gender-matched cohorts in the general
population. This obesity is due, at least in part, to the effect of many
antipsychotic medications, as well as poor nutritional balance and decreased
motor activity. This weight gain, in turn, contributes to an increased risk of
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, an increased risk of diabetes, and
other obesity-related conditions such as hyperlipidemia and obstructive sleep
apnea.
Diabetes Mellitus
Schizophrenia is associated with an increased risk of type II diabetes mellitus.
This comorbidity is probably due, in part, to the association with obesity
noted above, but there is also evidence that some antipsychotic medications
cause diabetes through a direct mechanism.
Cardiovascular Disease
Many

antipsychotic

medications

have

direct

effects

on

cardiac


<<<PAGE 1130>>>
electrophysiology. Also, obesity, increased rates of smoking, diabetes, and
hyperlipidemia, and a sedentary lifestyle all independently increase the risk
of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.
HIV
Patients with schizophrenia appear to have a risk of HIV infection that is 1.5
to 2 times that of the general population. This association is likely due to
increased risk behaviors, such as unprotected sex, multiple partners, and
increased drug use.
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
Rates of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are increased in
schizophrenia compared with the general population. The increased
prevalence of smoking is a prominent contributor to this problem; it is not
clear whether this is the only one.
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Patients with schizophrenia have a reduced risk of rheumatoid arthritis than is
found in the general population. Researchers have replicated this inverse
association several times, the significance of which is unknown. GWAS
studies also indicate negative genetic correlations, suggesting that they may
have shared pathogenesis but differential risks. The exact nature of this
relationship remains a mystery and is an ongoing subject of investigation.

COURSE
Onset of Schizophrenia
Premorbid Signs and Symptoms. In theoretical formulations of the
course of schizophrenia, premorbid signs and symptoms appear before the
prodromal phase of the illness. The differentiation implies that premorbid
signs and symptoms exist before the disease process evidences itself and that
the prodromal signs and symptoms are parts of the evolving disorder. In the
typical, but not invariable, premorbid history of schizophrenia, patients had
schizoid or schizotypal personalities characterized as quiet, passive, and


<<<PAGE 1131>>>
introverted; as children, they had few friends. Preschizophrenic adolescents
may have no close friends and no dates and may avoid team sports. They may
enjoy watching movies and television, listening to music, or playing
computer games to the exclusion of social activities. Some adolescent
patients may show a sudden onset of obsessive-compulsive behavior as part
of the prodromal picture.
A premorbid pattern of symptoms may be the first evidence of illness,
although the importance of the symptoms is usually recognized only
retrospectively. Nevertheless, although the family members often believe the
disorder began with the first hospitalization, signs and symptoms have often
been present for months or even years. The signs may have started with
complaints about somatic symptoms, such as headache, back and muscle
pain, weakness, and digestive problems. The initial diagnosis may be
malingering, chronic fatigue syndrome, or somatic symptom disorder. Family
and friends may eventually notice that the person has changed and is no
longer functioning well in occupational, social, and personal activities.
During this stage, a patient may begin to develop an interest in abstract ideas,
philosophy, and the occult or religious questions (Fig. 5-1). Additional
prodromal signs and symptoms can include markedly peculiar behavior,
abnormal affect, unusual speech, bizarre ideas, and strange perceptual
experiences.


<<<PAGE 1132>>>
FIGURE 5-1
Schizophrenia patient schema. This illustrates his fragmented, abstract, and
overly inclusive thinking and preoccupation with religious ideologies and
mathematical proofs. (Courtesy of Heinz E. Lehmann.)

Emergence of Symptoms. Characteristically, the symptoms begin in
adolescence and are followed by the development of prodromal symptoms in
days to a few months. Social or environmental changes, such as going away
to college, using a substance, or a relative’s death, may precipitate the
disturbing symptoms, and the prodromal syndrome may last a year or more
before the onset of overt psychotic symptoms.


<<<PAGE 1133>>>
Duration. The classic course of schizophrenia is one of exacerbations and
remissions. After the first psychotic episode, a patient gradually recovers and
may then function relatively normally for a long time. Patients usually
relapse, however, and the pattern of illness during the first 5 years after the
diagnosis generally indicates the patient’s course. Further deterioration in the
patient’s baseline functioning follows each relapse of psychosis. This failure
to return to baseline functioning after each relapse was historically thought to
be the primary distinction between schizophrenia and mood disorders.
Sometimes a clinically observable postpsychotic depression follows a
psychotic episode, and the schizophrenia patient’s vulnerability to stress is
usually lifelong. Positive symptoms tend to become less severe with time, but
the socially debilitating negative or deficit symptoms may increase in
severity.
An unmarried man, 27 years old, was brought to the mental hospital
because he had on several occasions become violent toward his father.
For a few weeks, he had hallucinations and heard voices. The voices
eventually ceased, but he then adopted a strange way of life. He would sit
up all night, sleep all day, and become very angry when his father tried to
get him out of bed. He did not shave or wash for weeks, smoked
continuously, ate very irregularly, and drank enormous quantities of tea.
In the hospital, he adjusted rapidly to the new environment and was
found to be generally cooperative. He showed no marked abnormalities
of mental state or behavior, except for his lack of concern for just about
anything. He kept to himself as much as possible and conversed little
with patients or staff. His personal hygiene had to be supervised by the
nursing staff; otherwise, he would quickly become dirty and untidy.
Six years after his admission to the hospital, he is described as shiftless
and careless, sullen and unreasonable. He lies on a couch all day long.
Although many efforts have been made to get the patient to accept
therapeutic work assignments, he refuses to consider any kind of regular
occupation. In the summer, he wanders about the hospital grounds or lies
under a tree. In the winter, he wanders through the tunnels connecting the
various hospital buildings and is often seen stretched out for hours under
the warm pipes that carry the steam through the tunnels. (Courtesy of


<<<PAGE 1134>>>
Heinz E. Lehmann, M.D.)
Although about one-third of all schizophrenia patients have some marginal
or integrated social existence, most have lives characterized by aimlessness,
inactivity, frequent hospitalizations, and, in urban settings, homelessness and
poverty.
Other Disorders
Schizoaffective Disorder. The course of schizoaffective disorder is
intermediate between schizophrenia and mood disorders, with a better course
and prognosis than for schizophrenia and a worse one than for bipolar
disorder or major depressive disorder.
Schizophreniform Disorder. Patients with schizophreniform disorder
who do not develop schizophrenia have a better outcome than do patients
with schizophrenia.

PROGNOSIS
Having a diagnosis of schizophrenia is associated with a reduction of life
expectancy by as much as 20 percent. Persons with schizophrenia have a
higher mortality rate from accidents and natural causes than the general
population. Institution- or treatment-related variables do not explain the
increased mortality rate. However, the higher rate may be related to the fact
that the diagnosis and treatment of medical and surgical conditions in
schizophrenia patients can be clinical challenges, and in some cases, clinical
neglect may be a factor.
Reported remission rates range from 10 to 60 percent, and a reasonable
estimate is that 20 to 30 percent of all schizophrenia patients can lead
somewhat normal lives. About 20 to 30 percent of patients continue to
experience moderate symptoms, and 40 to 60 percent of patients remain
significantly impaired by their disorder for their entire lives. Patients with
schizophrenia do much poorer than patients with mood disorders, although 20
to 25 percent of mood disorder patients are also severely disturbed at longterm follow-up.


<<<PAGE 1135>>>
Prognostic Indicators
Several studies have shown that over the 5- to 10-year period after the first
psychiatric hospitalization for schizophrenia, only about 10 to 20 percent of
patients can be described as having a good outcome. More than 50 percent of
patients can be described as having a poor outcome, with repeated
hospitalizations, exacerbations of symptoms, episodes of major mood
disorders, and suicide attempts. Despite these glum figures, schizophrenia
does not always run a deteriorating course, and several factors have been
associated with a good prognosis (Table 5-9).
Negative symptoms are rare for schizophreniform disorder, but when they
occur, they are considered a poor prognostic feature, and many patients with
negative symptoms will later develop schizophrenia.

TREATMENT APPROACH
Although antipsychotic medications are the mainstay of the treatment for
schizophrenia, research has found that psychosocial interventions, including
psychotherapy, can augment clinical improvement. The complexity of
schizophrenia usually renders any single therapeutic approach inadequate to
deal with the multifaceted disorder. Psychosocial modalities should be
integrated into the drug treatment regimen and should support it. Patients
with schizophrenia benefit more from the combined use of antipsychotic
drugs and psychosocial treatment than from either treatment used alone.
Table 5-9
Positive
and
Schizophrenia

Negative

Positive Prognostic Factors
Acute onset
Female sex
Living in a developed country
Poor Prognostic Factors
Insidious onset
Childhood or adolescent onset

Prognostic

Factors

for


<<<PAGE 1136>>>
Poor premorbid functioning
Cognitive impairment
Hospitalization
The development of effective antipsychotic drugs and changes in political
and popular attitudes toward the treatment and the rights of persons who are
mentally ill have dramatically changed the patterns of hospitalization for
schizophrenia patients since the mid-1950s. Despite these changes,
readmissions after the first hospitalization are frequent, perhaps 40 to 60
percent within 2 years. Patients with schizophrenia occupy about 50 percent
of all psychiatric hospital beds and account for about 16 percent of all
psychiatric patients who receive any treatment.
In current practice, hospitalization is indicated for diagnostic purposes, for
stabilization of medications, for patients’ safety because of suicidal or
homicidal ideation, and for grossly disorganized or inappropriate behavior,
including the inability to take care of basic needs such as food, clothing, and
shelter. Establishing an active association between patients and community
support systems is also a primary goal of hospitalization.
Short stays of 4 to 6 weeks are just as effective as long-term
hospitalizations, and hospital settings with active behavioral approaches
produce better results than do custodial institutions. Hospital treatment plans
should orient toward practical issues of self-care, quality of life, employment,
and social relationships. During hospitalization, clinicians should coordinate
with aftercare facilities, including family homes, foster families, board-andcare homes, and halfway houses. Daycare centers and home visits by
therapists or nurses can help patients remain out of the hospital for long
periods and can improve the quality of their daily lives.
Pharmacotherapy
Patients usually first present for the treatment of acute psychotic symptoms,
which require immediate attention. Treatment during the acute phase focuses
on alleviating the most severe psychotic symptoms. This phase usually lasts
from 4 to 8 weeks.
Antipsychotic medications are considered the mainstay of treatment, both
in the acute and maintenance phases of the illness. Table 5-10 lists the


<<<PAGE 1137>>>
second-generation and commonly used first generation antipsychotics.
Most guidelines recommend starting with a second-generation
antipsychotic. Although they are likely the most effective for patients with
severe symptoms, and predominantly positive symptoms, they are useful
across a broad range of symptoms and severity. There is little guidance for
choosing a specific medication: some studies suggest they have individual
differences in efficacy. However, the most significant difference between the
drugs is in their side effects, and we should consider these carefully when
choosing a treatment.
Agitation is a typical symptom in the acute phase. Clinicians have several
options for managing agitation that results from psychosis. Antipsychotics
and benzodiazepines can result in a relatively rapid calming of patients. With
highly agitated patients, intramuscular administration of antipsychotics
produces a more rapid effect. An advantage of an antipsychotic is that a
single intramuscular injection of a first- or second-generation antipsychotic
can often calm the patient without excessive sedation. Low-potency
antipsychotics are often associated with sedation and postural hypotension,
mainly when administering them intramuscularly. Intramuscular ziprasidone
and olanzapine are similar to their oral counterparts in not causing substantial
extrapyramidal side effects during acute treatment. This can be a significant
advantage over haloperidol or fluphenazine, which can cause frightening
dystonias or akathisia in some patients. A rapidly dissolving oral formulation
of olanzapine may also be helpful as an alternative to an intramuscular
injection.
Benzodiazepines are also useful for agitation during acute psychosis.
Lorazepam has the advantage of reliable absorption when administering it
either orally or intramuscularly. The use of benzodiazepines may also reduce
the amount of antipsychotic that is needed to control psychotic patients.
Treating Side Effects. Patients frequently experience the side effects of an
antipsychotic before they experience clinical improvement. Whereas a
clinical response may take days or weeks after starting a drug, side effects
may begin almost immediately. First-generation antipsychotics most
commonly cause extrapyramidal side effects, and in the case of low potency,
first-generation antipsychotics, sedation and postural hypotension, whereas
second-generation antipsychotics cause weight gain and metabolic


<<<PAGE 1138>>>
derangements.
EXTRAPYRAMIDAL SIDE EFFECTS. Most first-generation antipsychotics cause

extrapyramidal side effects, including parkinsonian symptoms, dystonias, and
akathisia. Although less common in second-generation antipsychotics,
extrapyramidal effects can still occur.
Clinicians have several alternatives for treating these side effects. These
include reducing the dose of the antipsychotic, adding an antiparkinson
medication, and changing the patient to a medication that is less likely to
cause extrapyramidal side effects. The most effective antiparkinson
medications are anticholinergic antiparkinson drugs. However, these
medications have additional side effects, including dry mouth, constipation,
blurred vision, and, often, memory loss. Also, these medications are often
only partially effective, leaving patients with substantial amounts of lingering
extrapyramidal side effects. Centrally acting β-blockers, such as propranolol,
may help treat akathisia. Most patients respond to dosages between 30 and 90
mg per day.
If prescribing conventional antipsychotics, clinicians may consider
prescribing prophylactic antiparkinson medications for patients who are
likely to experience disturbing extrapyramidal side effects. These include
patients who have a history of extrapyramidal side effect sensitivity and those
treated with relatively high doses of high-potency drugs. Prophylactic
antiparkinson medications may help when prescribing high-potency drugs for
young men, who tend to have an increased vulnerability for developing
dystonias. Again, these patients should be candidates for newer drugs.
Some individuals are highly sensitive to extrapyramidal side effects at the
dose that is necessary to control their psychosis. For many of these patients,
medication side effects may seem worse than the illness itself. These patients
should be treated routinely with a medication less likely to cause
extrapyramidal side effects. Risperidone may cause extrapyramidal side
effects even at low doses—for example, 0.5 mg—but the severity and risk are
increased at higher doses—for example, more than 6 mg. Olanzapine and
ziprasidone are also associated with dose-related parkinsonism and akathisia.
About 20 to 30 percent of patients on long-term
treatment with a first-generation antipsychotic will exhibit symptoms of
TARDIVE DYSKINESIA.


<<<PAGE 1139>>>
tardive dyskinesia. About 3 to 5 percent of young patients receiving a firstgeneration drug develop tardive dyskinesia each year. The risk in elderly
patients is much higher. Although severely disabling dyskinesia is
uncommon, it can affect walking, breathing, eating, and talking when it
occurs. Individuals who are more sensitive to acute extrapyramidal side
effects appear to be more vulnerable to developing tardive dyskinesia.
Patients with comorbid cognitive or mood disorders may also be more
vulnerable to tardive dyskinesia than those with only schizophrenia.
Table 5-10
Pharmacologic, Formulation and Dosing Information for
Second-Generation Antipsychotics and Selected FirstGeneration Antipsychotics


<<<PAGE 1140>>>
The abnormal movements usually begin while the patient is receiving an
antipsychotic or within 4 weeks of discontinuing an oral antipsychotic or 8
weeks after the withdrawal of a depot antipsychotic.
There is a lower risk of tardive dyskinesia with new-generation drugs.
However, there still is some risk of tardive dyskinesia with newer drugs.
Recommendations for preventing and managing tardive dyskinesia
include: (1) using the lowest effective dose of antipsychotics; (2) prescribing
cautiously with children, elderly patients, and patients with mood disorders;
(3) examining patients regularly for evidence of tardive dyskinesia; (4)
considering alternatives to the current antipsychotic and considering dosage
reduction when observing tardive dyskinesia; and (5) considering several
options if the tardive dyskinesia worsens, including discontinuing the
antipsychotic or switching to a different drug. Clozapine is effective in
reducing severe tardive dyskinesia or tardive dystonia.
OTHER SIDE EFFECTS. Sedation and postural hypotension can be significant

side effects for patients treated with low-potency first-generation drugs, such
as perphenazine. These effects are often most severe during the initial dosing


<<<PAGE 1141>>>
of these medications. As a result, patients treated with these medications—or
with clozapine—may require weeks to reach a therapeutic dose. Although
most patients develop tolerance to sedation and postural hypotension,
sedation may continue to be a problem. In these patients, daytime drowsiness
may interfere with a patient’s attempts to return to community life.
All antipsychotics elevate prolactin levels, which can result in galactorrhea
and irregular menses. Long-term elevations in prolactin and the resultant
suppression in gonadotropin-releasing hormone can cause suppression in
gonadal hormones. These, in turn, may have effects on libido and sexual
functioning. There is also concern that elevated prolactin may cause
decreases in bone density and lead to osteoporosis. The concerns about
hyperprolactinemia, sexual functioning, and bone density are based on
experiences with prolactin elevations related to tumors and other causes. It is
unclear if these risks are also associated with the lower elevations that occur
with prolactin-elevating drugs.
HEALTH MONITORING IN PATIENTS RECEIVING ANTIPSYCHOTICS. Because of the

effects of the second-generation antipsychotics on insulin metabolism,
psychiatrists should monitor several health indicators, including BMI, fasting
blood glucose, and lipid profiles. We should weigh patients and calculate
their BMIs for every visit for at least 6 months after a medication change.
Clozapine. Clozapine is considered the most effective of antipsychotics,
particularly in patients who have been unresponsive to other treatments.
However, it is a challenging drug to administer, given its risk of both severe
side effects (agranulocytosis in approximately 0.3 percent of those taking it,
seizures in as high as 5 percent of those on doses above 600 mg, and, more
rarely, myocarditis) and common ones (hypersalivation, sedation,
tachycardia, weight gain, and postural hypotension). The concerns over
agranulocytosis have resulted in a monitoring system in the United States in
which patients who receive clozapine must be in a program of weekly blood
monitoring for the first 6 months and biweekly monitoring for the next 6
months, and monthly after that.
These limitations have relegated clozapine to a later treatment option, and
most guidelines recommend considering it after a patient has failed at least
two other antipsychotic trials.


<<<PAGE 1142>>>
Duration and Prophylaxis
In the stable or maintenance phase, the illness is in a relative stage of
remission. The goals during this phase are to prevent psychotic relapse and to
assist patients in improving their level of functioning. Newer medications,
with a substantially reduced risk of tardive dyskinesia, have diminished one
of the major concerns about long-term treatment. During this phase, patients
are usually in a relative state of remission with only minimal psychotic
symptoms. Stable patients who are maintained on an antipsychotic have a
much lower relapse rate than patients who have their medications
discontinued. Data suggest that 16 to 23 percent of patients receiving
treatment will experience a relapse within 1 year, and 53 to 72 percent will
relapse without medications.
We should maintain patients experiencing a first episode of psychosis for
at least a year. However, such patients still have a high chance of relapsing at
least once over the following 5 years, and some experts believe that 1 year is
inadequate. This is a particular concern when patients have achieved
functional employment status or are involved in educational programs
because they have a lot to lose if they experience another psychotic
decompensation.
For patients experiencing two or more episodes, most experts recommend
that we consider indefinite treatment.
Acute Treatment Failures
Addressing Noncompliance. Noncompliance with long-term
antipsychotic treatment is very high. An estimated 40 to 50 percent of
patients become noncompliant within 1 or 2 years. Long-acting injectable
antipsychotics were developed to help improve adherence, particularly in
patients likely to discontinue daily oral medications. Although there is some
controversy in the literature, the weight of data suggests that long-term depot
formulations do help adherence and decrease relapse, mainly when
considered in real-world settings.
When beginning long-acting drugs, some oral supplementation is
necessary while achieving peak plasma levels. Fluphenazine, haloperidol,
risperidone, paliperidone, aripiprazole, and olanzapine have long-acting


<<<PAGE 1143>>>
injectable formulations.
There are several advantages to using long-acting injectable medication.
Clinicians quickly know when noncompliance occurs and have some time to
initiate appropriate interventions before the medication effect dissipates.
Also, there is less day-to-day variability in blood levels, making it easier to
establish a minimum effective dose. Finally, many patients prefer it to
managing daily dosage schedules.
Selecting Second Treatment Options. When giving patients with acute
schizophrenia an antipsychotic medication, approximately 60 percent will
improve to the extent that they will achieve a complete remission or
experience only mild symptoms. The remaining 40 percent of patients will
improve but still demonstrate variable levels of positive symptoms that are
resistant to the medications. One meta-analysis of available studies found that
patients who did not show at least some response to treatment by the second
week were less likely to benefit from the drug, and a treatment change may
be the best option.
Rather than categorizing patients into responders and nonresponders, it is
more accurate to consider the degree to which the illness improves with
medication. Some resistant patients are so severely ill that they require
chronic institutionalization. Others respond to an antipsychotic with
substantial suppression of their psychotic symptoms but demonstrate
persistent symptoms, such as hallucinations or delusions.
Before considering a patient a poor responder to a particular drug, it is vital
to assure that they received an adequate trial of the medication. A 4- to 6week trial on an adequate dose of an antipsychotic represents a reasonable
trial for most patients. Patients who demonstrate even a mild amount of
improvement during this period may continue to improve at a steady rate for
3 to 6 months. It may be helpful to confirm that the patient is receiving an
adequate amount of the drug by monitoring the plasma concentration; that
said, most of the accepted levels pertain to first-generation drugs, and there is
less rationale for obtaining levels in patients who receive second-generation
drugs. However, in any patient, a deficient plasma concentration may indicate
that the patient has been noncompliant or, more commonly, only partially
compliant. It may also suggest that the patient is a rapid metabolizer of the
antipsychotic or is not absorbing the drug adequately. Under these conditions,


<<<PAGE 1144>>>
raising the dose may be helpful. If the level is relatively high, clinicians
should consider whether side effects may be interfering with therapeutic
response.
If the patient is responding poorly, one may increase the dose above the
usual therapeutic level; however, higher than recommended doses usually do
not improve response. Changing to another drug is preferable.
As discussed earlier, clozapine is useful for patients who respond poorly to
other antipsychotics. Double-blind studies comparing clozapine with other
antipsychotics indicated that clozapine had the most evident advantage over
conventional drugs in patients with the most severe psychotic symptoms, as
well as in those who had previously responded poorly to other antipsychotics.
Researchers and clinicians have tried several adjunctive medications, most
with mixed success. These include lamotrigine, mirtazapine, donepezil, Dalanine, D-serine, estradiol, memantine, and allopurinol.
Other Somatic Treatments
Researchers have studied electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) in both acute and
chronic schizophrenia. Studies in recent-onset patients indicate that ECT is
about as effective as antipsychotic medications and more effective than
psychotherapy. Other studies suggest that supplementing antipsychotic
medications with ECT is more effective than antipsychotic medications
alone. Antipsychotic medications should be administered during and after
ECT treatment.
Some initial studies have suggested neuromodulation, using transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) or transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS),
may be useful for treating hallucinations or negative symptoms.
Although we no longer consider psychosurgery to be appropriate
treatment, some research centers practice it on a limited experimental basis
for severe, intractable cases.
Psychosocial Therapy
Psychotherapy is considered an essential part of treatment for schizophrenia,
and patients who receive psychotherapy along with medications tend to have
better adherence to therapy, less negative symptoms, and better overall
functioning.


<<<PAGE 1145>>>
Currently, there is no convincing evidence to suggest that any single
psychotherapeutic approach is preferable to another, although all tend to
emphasize structured approaches rather than open-ended, exploratory
methods. Psychosocial therapies include a variety of methods to increase
social abilities, self-sufficiency, practical skills, and interpersonal
communication in schizophrenia patients. The goal is to enable persons who
are severely ill to develop social and vocational skills for independent living.
Many sites use these approaches, including hospitals, outpatient clinics,
mental health centers, day hospitals, and home or social clubs.
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy. Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) has
been used in schizophrenia patients to improve cognitive distortions, reduce
distractibility, and correct errors in judgment. There are reports of
ameliorating delusions and hallucinations in some patients using this method.
Patients who might benefit generally have some insight into their illness, and
clinicians usually use this approach after treating an acute psychotic episode.
The approach generally incorporates cognitive restructuring, self-monitoring,
and graded coping skills. Although at least one randomized controlled study
showed a benefit for CBT as a sole treatment, most experts recommend it in
combination with antipsychotic treatment.
Social Skills Training. Social skills training, also called behavioral skills
therapy, can be directly supportive and useful for a patient. In addition to the
psychotic symptoms seen in patients with schizophrenia, other noticeable
symptoms involve the way the person relates to others, including poor eye
contact, unusual delays in response, odd facial expressions, lack of
spontaneity in social situations, and inaccurate perception or lack of
perception of emotions in other people. Behavioral skills training addresses
these behaviors through the use of videotapes of others and the patient, roleplaying in therapy, and homework assignments for practicing the specific
skills. Social skills training can reduce relapse rates and the need for
hospitalization.
Group Therapy. Group psychotherapy for patients with schizophrenia can
help improve social functioning and decrease negative symptoms. Group
therapy for persons with schizophrenia generally focuses on real-life plans,


<<<PAGE 1146>>>
problems, and relationships. Groups may be behaviorally oriented,
psychodynamically or insight-oriented, or supportive. Some investigators
doubt that dynamic interpretation and insight therapy are valuable for typical
patients with schizophrenia. However, group therapy is effective in reducing
social isolation, increasing the sense of cohesiveness, and improving reality
testing for patients with schizophrenia. Groups led in a supportive manner
appear to be most helpful for schizophrenia patients.
Family-Oriented Therapies. Family therapy can be a significant adjunct
to treatment and reduces relapse and rehospitalization rates compared to
patients receiving standard care. Such therapy generally includes practical
approaches such as psychoeducation and problem-solving training. Because
patients with schizophrenia are often discharged in an only partially remitted
state, a family to which a patient returns can often benefit from a brief but
intensive (as often as daily) course of family therapy. The therapy should
focus on the immediate situation and should include identifying and avoiding
potentially troublesome situations. When problems do emerge with the
patient in the family, the aim of the therapy should be to resolve the problem
quickly.
In wanting to help, family members often encourage a relative with
schizophrenia to resume regular activities too quickly, both from ignorance
about the disorder and from denial of its severity. Without being overly
discouraging, therapists must help both the family and the patient understand
and learn about schizophrenia and must encourage discussion of the
psychotic episode and the events leading up to it. Ignoring the psychotic
episode, a common occurrence, often increases the shame associated with the
event and does not exploit the freshness of the episode to understand it better.
Psychotic symptoms often frighten family members, and talking openly with
the psychiatrist and with the relative with schizophrenia often eases all
parties. Therapists can direct later family therapy toward the long-range
application of stress-reducing and coping strategies and the patient’s gradual
reintegration into everyday life.
Therapists must control the emotional intensity of family sessions with
patients with schizophrenia. The excessive expression of emotion during a
session can damage a patient’s recovery process and undermine potentially
successful future family therapy. Several studies have shown that family


<<<PAGE 1147>>>
therapy is especially useful in reducing relapses.
Case Management and Assertive Community Treatment. Because a
variety of professionals with specialized skills, such as psychiatrists, social
workers, and occupational therapists, among others, are involved in a
treatment program, it is helpful to have one person aware of all the forces
acting on the patient. The case manager helps coordinate this and ensures that
the patient keeps appointments and complies with treatment plans. The case
manager may also make home visits and even accompany the patient to work.
The success of the program depends on the educational background, training,
and competence of the individual case manager, which vary. Most important
is maintaining a small caseload (less than 20 cases per manager), which can
be challenging for overtaxed and underfunded systems.
The Assertive Community Treatment (ACT) program was initially
developed by researchers in Madison, Wisconsin, in the 1970s, for the
delivery of services for persons with chronic mental illness. Patients are
assigned to one multidisciplinary team (e.g., case manager, psychiatrist,
nurse, general physicians). The team has a fixed caseload of patients and
delivers all services when and where needed by the patient, 24 hours a day, 7
days a week. ACT is a mobile and intensive intervention that provides
treatment, rehabilitation, and support activities. These include home delivery
of medications, monitoring of mental and physical health, in vivo social
skills, and frequent contact with family members. There is a high staff-topatient ratio (1:12). ACT programs can effectively decrease the risk of
rehospitalization for persons with schizophrenia, but they are labor-intensive
and expensive programs to administer.
Although the evidence is low in quality, there is some evidence to suggest
that intensive case management can reduce hospitalization time and increase
adherence to treatment. Intensive case management approaches seem to be
most effective when they incorporate ACT.
Individual Psychotherapy. Studies of the effects of individual
psychotherapy in the treatment of schizophrenia suggest that therapy is
helpful and that the effects are additive to those of pharmacologic treatment.
In psychotherapy with a schizophrenia patient, developing a therapeutic
relationship that the patient experiences as safe is critical. The therapist’s


<<<PAGE 1148>>>
reliability, the emotional distance between the therapist and the patient, and
the genuineness of the therapist as interpreted by the patient all affect the
therapeutic experience. When considering psychotherapy for a patient with
schizophrenia, we should think in decades, rather than sessions, months, or
even years.
The best predictor of psychotherapy outcome is probably the strength of
the therapeutic alliance. Schizophrenia patients who can form a positive
therapeutic alliance are likely to remain in psychotherapy, to remain
compliant with their medications, and to have good outcomes at 2-year
follow-up evaluations.
The relationship between clinicians and patients differs from that
encountered in the treatment of nonpsychotic patients. Establishing a
relationship is often challenging. Persons with schizophrenia are desperately
lonely, yet defend against closeness and trust; they are likely to become
suspicious, anxious, or hostile or to regress when someone attempts to draw
close.
Therapists should scrupulously respect a patient’s distance and privacy and
should demonstrate simple directness, patience, sincerity, and sensitivity to
social conventions in preference to premature informality and the
condescending use of first names. The patient is likely to perceive
exaggerated warmth or professions of friendship as attempts at bribery,
manipulation, or exploitation. In the context of a professional relationship,
however, flexibility is essential in establishing a working alliance with the
patient.
Vocational Therapy and Supported Employment. A variety of
methods and settings can help patients regain old skills or develop new ones.
These include sheltered workshops, job clubs, and part-time or transitional
employment programs. Enabling patients to become gainfully employed is
both a means toward and a sign of recovery. Many schizophrenia patients are
capable of performing high-quality work despite their illness. Others may
exhibit exceptional skill or even brilliance in a limited field as a result of
some distinctive aspects of their disorder.
Supported employment focuses on helping patients to obtain competitive
employment as opposed to sheltered workshops. It has strong data for helping
patients to find and maintain jobs; it also is associated with less need for


<<<PAGE 1149>>>
treatment and improved self-esteem. It is less consistently associated with
overall disease outcomes.
Art Therapy. Many schizophrenia patients benefit from art therapy, which
provides them with an outlet for their constant bombardment of imagery. It
helps them communicate with others and share their inner, often frightening
world with others.
Cognitive Remediation. Cognitive remediation or cognitive training is a
behavioral therapy that attempts to improve cognitive processes. It uses
computer-generated exercises to influence neural networks to improve
cognition, including working memory. This can then improve social
functioning. One metanalysis determined that its effect size is in the medium
range.
National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI). The NAMI and similar
organizations offer support groups for family members and friends of patients
who are mentally ill and for patients themselves. These organizations offer
emotional and practical advice about obtaining care in the sometimes
complex health care delivery system and are useful sources to which to refer
family members. NAMI has also waged a campaign to destigmatize mental
illness and to increase government awareness of the needs and rights of
persons who are mentally ill and their families.

THE EPIDEMIOLOGY OF THE DISORDERS
Incidence and Prevalence
The worldwide lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia is about 0.7 percent. One
meta-analysis of 101 prevalence rates published between 1990 and 2015
found that the mean global lifetime prevalence of psychotic disorders
worldwide was 7.49 per 1,000 individuals. However, there was an extensive
range across studies representing an approximately five-fold difference.
These variations could largely be accounted for by the different methodologic
approaches of different studies, including different populations and settings
studied, different diagnostic criteria and diagnoses included, and differences
in the study quality.


<<<PAGE 1150>>>
Table 5-11 lists some of the major epidemiologic studies of schizophrenia.
In the United States, about 0.05 percent of the total population is treated
for schizophrenia in any single year. Perhaps only one-half of all patients
with schizophrenia will obtain treatment, despite the severity of the disorder.
Sex
Schizophrenia is equally prevalent in men and women. The two sexes differ
in the onset and course of illness. The onset of schizophrenia is earlier for
men. Also, more than half of all male schizophrenia patients, but only onethird of all female schizophrenia patients, will be hospitalized for the disorder
before age 25 years. Some studies have indicated that men are more likely to
be impaired by negative symptoms than are women and that women are more
likely to have better social functioning than are men before disease onset. In
general, the outcome for female schizophrenia patients is better than that for
male schizophrenia patients.
Table 5-11
Selected Prevalence Studies of Schizophrenia


<<<PAGE 1151>>>
Age
In the United States, the peak ages of onset are between 10 and 25 years for
men and 25 and 35 years for women. Unlike men, women display a bimodal
age distribution, with a second peak occurring in middle age—approximately
3 to 10 percent of women with schizophrenia present with disease onset after
age 40 years. About 90 percent of patients in treatment for schizophrenia are
between 15 and 55 years old. The onset of schizophrenia before age 10 years
or after age 60 years is scarce. Late-onset schizophrenia refers to the
occurrence of the disorder after age 45 years.
Other Factors Affecting Epidemiology


<<<PAGE 1152>>>
Seasonality of Birth. Persons who develop schizophrenia are more likely
to have been born in the winter or early spring. In the Northern Hemisphere,
including the United States, persons with schizophrenia are more often born
in the months from January to April. In the Southern Hemisphere, persons
with schizophrenia are more often born in the months from July to
September.
Maternal Factors Affecting the Fetus. Complications during delivery,
maternal malnutrition during pregnancy, as well as other illnesses, appear to
be risk factors for schizophrenia.
Early Life Experiences. Childhood trauma, social isolation, and other
types of deprivation also seem to be risk factors.
Urban Upbringing. Several studies, mainly from the 1990s, have
suggested that being born or living in a city is a risk for schizophrenia. This
has been reported in various countries. The relationship appears to be more
convincing for being raised in rather than being born in a city. The
relationship may be “dose-related,” meaning that the larger the city, the
higher the risk.
Cannabis. There is an association between cannabis use and psychosis, and
the use of cannabis may increase the risk of schizophrenia by as much as
40%, particularly in heavy users.
Cognitive Deficits May also be a Risk Factor. More recent research
has suggested that cognitive deficits, such as poor verbal learning and
memory and slower processing speed, can be a predictor of impending
psychosis.
Other Psychotic Disorders
Schizoaffective disorder is less common than schizophrenia, possibly in the
range of 0.5 to 0.8 percent, although the varying criteria used in different
studies limits the findings. The sex differences are more typical of mood
disorders in which there is a higher ratio of women than men having the
depressed subtype but a similar ratio with the bipolar subtype. The bipolar


<<<PAGE 1153>>>
subtype may be more common in younger persons than in adults, who are
more commonly depressed. As with schizophrenia, women tend to get it later
than men.
We know little about the incidence, prevalence, and sex ratio of
schizophreniform disorder. It appears to be about half as common as
schizophrenia, more common in men, and most common in adolescents and
young adults. The relatives of patients with schizophreniform disorder are
more likely to have mood disorders than are the relatives of patients with
schizophrenia. Many of those mood disorders include psychotic symptoms,
however.

THE NEUROBIOLOGY OF THE DISORDER
Anatomic Findings
In the 19th century, neuropathologists failed to find a neuropathologic basis
for schizophrenia, and thus they classified schizophrenia as a functional
disorder. By the end of the 20th century, however, researchers had better
tools and made significant strides in revealing a potential neuropathologic
basis for schizophrenia.
Cerebral Ventricles. Computed tomography (CT) scans of patients with
schizophrenia have consistently shown lateral and third ventricular
enlargement and some reduction in cortical volume. Reduced volumes of
cortical gray matter have been demonstrated during the earliest stages of the
disease. Several investigators have attempted to determine whether the
abnormalities detected by CT are progressive or static. Some studies have
concluded that the lesions observed on CT scan are present at the onset of the
illness and do not progress. Other studies, however, have concluded that the
pathologic process visualized on CT scan continues to progress during the
illness. Thus, whether an active pathologic process is continuing to evolve in
schizophrenia patients is still uncertain.
Reduced Symmetry. There is a reduced symmetry in several brain areas
in schizophrenia, including the temporal, frontal, and occipital lobes. This
reduced symmetry is believed by some investigators to originate during fetal
life and to be indicative of a disruption in brain lateralization during


<<<PAGE 1154>>>
neurodevelopment.
Limbic System. Because of its role in controlling emotions, researchers
believe that the limbic system is involved in the pathophysiology of
schizophrenia. Studies of postmortem brain samples from schizophrenia
patients have shown a decrease in the size of the region, including the
amygdala, the hippocampus, and the parahippocampal gyrus. This
neuropathologic finding agrees with the observation made by magnetic
resonance imaging studies of patients with schizophrenia. The hippocampus
is not only smaller in size in schizophrenia but is also functionally abnormal,
as indicated by disturbances in glutamate transmission. Brain tissue sections
also show the disorganization of the neurons within the hippocampus in some
patients with schizophrenia.
Prefrontal Cortex. There is considerable evidence from postmortem brain
studies that support anatomical abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex in
schizophrenia. Functional deficits in the prefrontal brain imaging region have
also been demonstrated. Of interest, several symptoms of schizophrenia
mimic those found in persons with prefrontal lobotomies or frontal lobe
syndromes.
Thalamus. Some studies of the thalamus show evidence of volume
shrinkage or neuronal loss in particular subnuclei. The medial dorsal nucleus
of the thalamus, which has reciprocal connections with the prefrontal cortex,
has been reported to contain a reduced number of neurons. The total number
of neurons, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes is reduced by 30 to 45 percent in
schizophrenia patients. This putative finding does not appear to be due to the
effects of antipsychotic drugs, because the volume of the thalamus is similar
in size between patients with schizophrenia treated chronically with
medication and neuroleptic-naive subjects.
Basal Ganglia and Cerebellum. The basal ganglia and cerebellum have
been of theoretical interest in schizophrenia for at least two reasons. First,
many patients with schizophrenia show odd movements, even in the absence
of medication-induced movement disorders. The odd movements can include
an awkward gait, facial grimacing, and stereotypies. Because the basal


<<<PAGE 1155>>>
ganglia and cerebellum are involved in the control of movement, disease in
these areas is implicated in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Second,
the movement disorders involving the basal ganglia (e.g., Huntington disease,
Parkinson disease) are the ones most commonly associated with psychosis.
Neuropathologic studies of the basal ganglia have produced variable and
inconclusive reports about cell loss or the reduction of volume of the globus
pallidus and the substantia nigra. Studies have also shown an increase in the
number of D2 receptors in the caudate, putamen, and the nucleus accumbens.
The question remains, however, whether the increase is secondary to the
patient having received antipsychotic medications. Some investigators have
begun to study the serotonergic system in the basal ganglia; the clinical
usefulness of antipsychotic drugs that are serotonin antagonists suggests a
role for serotonin in psychotic disorders.
Physiologic Findings
Functional Imagining. PET studies have shown a variety of
neurotransmitter abnormalities, including increased dopamine levels in the
ventral striatum and reduced levels in the frontal cortex.
Studies using magnetic resonance spectroscopy have demonstrated
increased glutamate levels, particularly in the prefrontal and medial temporal
areas. Furthermore, concentrations of N-acetyl aspartate, a marker of
neurons, were lower in the hippocampus and frontal lobes of patients with
schizophrenia.
Electrophysiologic Findings. Electroencephalographic studies indicate
that many schizophrenia patients have abnormal records, increased sensitivity
to activation procedures (e.g., frequent spike activity after sleep deprivation),
decreased alpha activity, increased theta and delta activity, possibly more
epileptiform activity than usual, and possibly more left-sided abnormalities
than usual. Schizophrenia patients also exhibit an inability to filter out
irrelevant sounds and are extremely sensitive to background noise. The
flooding of sound that results makes concentration difficult and may be a
factor in the production of auditory hallucinations. This sound sensitivity may
be associated with a genetic defect.


<<<PAGE 1156>>>
Evoked Potentials. A large number of abnormalities are seen in the
evoked potential of patients with schizophrenia. The P300 is most studied; it
is a large, positive evoked-potential wave that occurs about 300 milliseconds
after a sensory stimulus is detected. The primary source of the P300 wave is
likely in the limbic system structures of the medial temporal lobes. In patients
with schizophrenia, the P300 is statistically smaller than in comparison
groups. Abnormalities in the P300 wave are also common in children who,
because they have affected parents, are at high risk for schizophrenia.
Whether the characteristics of the P300 represent a state or a trait
phenomenon remains controversial. Other evoked potentials reported to be
abnormal in patients with schizophrenia are the N100 and the contingent
negative variation. The N100 is a negative wave that occurs about 100
milliseconds after a stimulus, and the contingent negative variation is a
slowly developing, negative-voltage shift following the presentation of a
sensory stimulus that is a warning for an upcoming stimulus. The evokedpotential data likely indicates that, although patients with schizophrenia are
unusually sensitive to a sensory stimulus (larger early evoked potentials),
they compensate for the increased sensitivity by blunting the processing of
information at higher cortical levels (indicated by smaller late evoked
potentials).
Eye Movement Dysfunction. The inability to follow a moving visual
target accurately is the defining basis for the disorders of smooth visual
pursuit and disinhibition of saccadic eye movements seen in patients with
schizophrenia. Eye movement dysfunction may be a trait marker for
schizophrenia; it is independent of drug treatment and clinical state and also
occurs in first-degree relatives of probands with schizophrenia. Various
studies have reported abnormal eye movements in 50 to 85 percent of
patients with schizophrenia compared with about 25 percent in psychiatric
patients without schizophrenia and fewer than 10 percent in
nonpsychiatrically ill control participants.
Prepulse Inhibition Deficits. Prepulse inhibition refers to a dysfunction
of sensorimotor gating. Usually, a prepulse or weak stimulus, such as a noise,
can decrease the startle reaction to a subsequent more substantial stimulus,
such as a louder noise. As early as the 1970s, researchers found that patients


<<<PAGE 1157>>>
with schizophrenia lacked this normal inhibition, and this was later found in
the relatives of schizophrenia patients as well. Dopamine regulates
sensorimotor gating, which adds additional support for the importance of
dopamine in schizophrenia.
Neurotransmitters and Receptors
Excessive dopamine release in patients with schizophrenia is associated with
the severity of positive psychotic symptoms. Positron emission tomography
studies of dopamine receptors have shown that patients with schizophrenia
have increases in subcortical synaptic dopamine content and increased
subcortical synthesis capacity. These appear localized to the area of the
associative striatum. These abnormalities, particularly increased subcortical
synaptic dopamine content, are associated with the positive symptoms of
schizophrenia and positive treatment response. However, the dopamine
abnormalities are not merely due to the symptoms, as these abnormalities
precede the onset of illness. They also occur in individuals considered to be
at high risk for schizophrenia.
In addition to dopamine, there are increased levels of glutamate and
decreased levels of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Some patients with
schizophrenia show a loss of GABAergic neurons in the hippocampus.
Postmortem studies in schizophrenia have demonstrated decreased
muscarinic and nicotinic receptors in the caudate-putamen, hippocampus, and
selected regions of the prefrontal cortex. These receptors play a role in the
regulation of neurotransmitter systems involved in cognition, which is
impaired in schizophrenia.
As a result of these neurotransmitter alterations, there are alterations in a
variety of receptors. For example, N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors
appear to hypofunction as a result of glutamate and dopamine excesses.
Psychoneuroimmunology
Several immunologic abnormalities are associated with patients who have
schizophrenia. The abnormalities include decreased T-cell interleukin-2
production, reduced number and responsiveness of peripheral lymphocytes,
abnormal cellular and humoral reactivity to neurons, and the presence of
brain-directed (antibrain) antibodies. The data can be interpreted variously as


<<<PAGE 1158>>>
representing the effects of a neurotoxic virus or an endogenous autoimmune
disorder.
The observation further strengthens the hypothesis that several
autoimmune diseases can cause psychosis, such as systemic lupus
encephalitis. Similarly, some types of immune encephalitis, such as antiNMDA receptor encephalitis, can cause a psychotic illness that resembles
schizophrenia, at least early in the illness.
Psychoneuroendocrinology
Many reports describe neuroendocrine differences between groups of patients
with schizophrenia and groups of control subjects. For example, the results of
the dexamethasone-suppression test are abnormal in various subgroups of
patients with schizophrenia, although the test lacks practical or predictive
value.
Some data suggest decreased concentrations of luteinizing hormone or
follicle-stimulating hormone, perhaps correlated with age of onset and length
of illness. Two additional reported abnormalities may correlate with the
presence of negative symptoms: a blunted release of prolactin and growth
hormone on gonadotropin-releasing hormone or thyrotropin-releasing
hormone stimulation and a blunted release of growth hormone on
apomorphine stimulation.
Infections
The support for infections being operative in schizophrenia is mostly indirect.
As already mentioned, persons with schizophrenia may be more likely to be
born in the winter months, thus suggesting a season-specific risk factor such
as a virus (there are other explanations, however, such as changes in diet).
Epidemiologic data show a high incidence of schizophrenia after prenatal
exposure to influenza during several epidemics of the disease. Some studies
show that the frequency of schizophrenia increases after exposure to
influenza during the second trimester of pregnancy. Influenza is, of course,
more prevalent during the winter than other seasons. Other data supporting a
viral hypothesis are an increased number of physical anomalies at birth, an
increased rate of pregnancy and birth complications, seasonality of birth
consistent with a viral infection, geographical clusters of adult cases, and


<<<PAGE 1159>>>
seasonality of hospitalizations.
Viral theories stem from the fact that several specific viral theories have
the power to explain the particular localization of pathology necessary to
account for a range of manifestations in schizophrenia without overt febrile
encephalitis.
Environmental Factors
In addition to infections, a variety of other factors, particularly in the prenatal
period, can contribute a small but significant risk for schizophrenia. These
include birth complications, trauma after delivery, nutritional deficiencies,
and other factors that may negatively affect healthy development.
Our Understanding of the Genetics of Schizophrenia
Studies of Inheritance Patterns. At least as early as the 1930’s, twin and
family studies demonstrated that schizophrenia was an inherited disorder.
The heritability of schizophrenia is estimated to be about 60 to 80 percent.
The likelihood of a person having schizophrenia correlates with the
closeness of the relationship to an affected relative (e.g., first- or seconddegree relative). In the case of monozygotic twins who have an identical
genetic endowment, there is an approximately 50 percent concordance rate
for schizophrenia. This rate is four to five times the concordance rate in
dizygotic twins or the rate of occurrence found in other first-degree relatives
(i.e., siblings, parents, or offspring). The role of genetic factors is further
reflected by the drop-off in the occurrence of schizophrenia among secondand third-degree relatives, in whom one would hypothesize a decreased
genetic loading. The finding of a higher rate of schizophrenia among the
biologic relatives of an adopted-away person who develops schizophrenia,
compared with the adoptive, nonbiologic relatives who raise the patient,
provides further support to the genetic contribution to the etiology of
schizophrenia.
Nevertheless, the monozygotic twin data demonstrate the fact that
individuals who are genetically vulnerable to schizophrenia do not inevitably
develop schizophrenia; other factors (e.g., environment) must be involved in
determining a schizophrenia outcome. If a vulnerability–liability model of


<<<PAGE 1160>>>
schizophrenia is correct in its postulation of an environmental influence, then
other biologic or psychosocial environmental factors may prevent or cause
schizophrenia in genetically vulnerable individuals.
Some data indicate that the age of the father correlates with the
development of schizophrenia. In studies of schizophrenia patients with no
history of illness in either the maternal or paternal line, those born from
fathers older than the age of 60 years were vulnerable to developing the
disorder. Presumably, spermatogenesis in older men is subject to more
significant epigenetic damage than in younger men.
Genetic Studies. The modes of genetic transmission in schizophrenia are
unknown, but many genes are associated with schizophrenia. Newer studies
using more direct methods, such as comparative genomic hybridization, small
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chips, next generation sequencing (NGS),
GWAS, and the Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeatsassociated Nuclease 9 (CRISPR/Cas9) genomic editing have revolutionized
the genetic research of schizophrenia, and the number of genes associated
with schizophrenia continues to rise. Many of these are likely chance
findings. However, at least some are plausible candidates for contributing to
schizophrenia vulnerability.
Linkage and association genetic studies have provided strong evidence for
several specific candidate genes. The best candidates are those involved in
synaptic transmission, including those for various monoamine receptors and
those involved in glutamate release and signaling.
Given the role dopamine plays in schizophrenia, it is no surprise that many
genetic studies have concentrated on genes involved in dopamine regulation.
For example, some studies implicate catecholamine O-methyltransferase
(COMT) polymorphism, which is involved in dopamine metabolism (as well
as other catecholamines).
Copy number variation (CNV) studies suggest that perhaps between 2 to 5
percent of schizophrenia may be due, in part, to genetic variants that are
highly penetrant but very rare. These included genes that were involved in
regulating synaptic function and neurodevelopment. An example of a rare
variant that is associated with psychosis is the 22q11.2 microdeletion, which
causes 22q11.2 deletion or velocardiofacial syndrome (also called DiGeorge
syndrome), which occurs in about 1 in 4,000 live births.


<<<PAGE 1161>>>
However, most of the risk is explained by common alleles, numbering in
the hundreds, each having a small effect on risk. GWAS studies have yielded
several loci of interest, including the DRD genes which encode the dopamine
receptors, as well as several other loci involved in functions thought essential
to the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. These include genes involved with
glutamate, calcium signaling, dendritic spine formation, and other aspects of
neuronal and neurodevelopmental function. As will be described in greater
detail below, subsequent research has focused on genes related to the immune
system and involved in synaptic pruning.
Many implicated genes do not code for proteins such as those described
above, but have a role in genetic processing, affecting transcription and
various epigenetic factors.
The extensive and sometimes conflicting findings are likely related to the
heterogeneity of the disorder, and researchers are working to develop
endophenotypes that more closely map to the genetics of the disorder. For
example, prepulse inhibition is a likely candidate for a schizophrenia
endotype. Researchers have identified several other endophenotype traits.
These have the benefit of being measurable and lend themselves to
quantitative analysis.

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DISORDER
Family Dynamics
In a classic early study of 4-year old British children, children rated as having
a poor mother–child relationship had a six-fold increase in the risk for
schizophrenia. However, this leaves open the question of which came first,
the poor relationship or the child’s disease-related inability to form close
relationships. It is telling that those who were adopted away from their
mothers were more likely to develop schizophrenia if raised in adverse
circumstances. In another study, children of schizophrenic mothers raised in a
kibbutz (a type of commune) were more likely to develop schizophrenia than
children raised in a family home. Nevertheless, no well-controlled evidence
indicates that a specific family pattern plays a causative role in the
development of schizophrenia. Some patients with schizophrenia do come
from dysfunctional families, just as do many nonpsychiatrically ill persons. It


<<<PAGE 1162>>>
is crucial, however, not to overlook pathologic family behavior that can
significantly increase the emotional stress with which a vulnerable patient
with schizophrenia must cope.

ETIOLOGY
Biologic Theories
The Dopamine Hypothesis. The simplest formulation of the dopamine
hypothesis of schizophrenia posits that schizophrenia results from too much
dopaminergic activity. The theory evolved from two observations. First, the
efficacy and the potency of many antipsychotic drugs (i.e., the dopamine
receptor antagonists [DRAs]) correlate with their ability to act as antagonists
of the dopamine type 2 (D2) receptor. Second, drugs that increase
dopaminergic activity, notably cocaine and amphetamine, are
psychotomimetic. There is also support from the fact that certain functions
that are regulated by dopamine (e.g., prepulse inhibition) are abnormal in
patients with schizophrenia.
The basic theory does not comment on whether dopaminergic
hyperactivity results from too much dopamine, too many dopamine receptors,
hypersensitivity of the receptors to dopamine, or a combination of these.
Which dopamine tracts in the brain are involved is also not specified.
Historically, models of schizophrenia suggested that dysfunctions in the
mesolimbic pathway were responsible for the positive symptoms of
schizophrenia. This was due to a variety of observations, including that
seizures and tumors in these regions produced schizophrenia-like symptoms.
Also, amphetamines, which can induce psychosis, seemed to affect the
nucleus accumbens, and antipsychotics injected in this area seemed to reverse
this effect.
However, subsequent research suggests that the striatum (usually thought
to be involved in motor function) plays an important role. This is suggested
by functional neuroimaging studies, which found that the most significant
differences in dopamine function found for schizophrenic patients were in the
dorsal striatum and associated projections. This relation is also true for
people at high risk for schizophrenia. This area has an integrative role, and


<<<PAGE 1163>>>
dysfunctions in this area could explain the associative deficits that occur in
schizophrenia. Also, as this area has a vital role in habit formation, it may
argue for a model of psychosis as a habitual or rigid type of thinking, in
which a person has difficulty considering alternative explanations for an
experience.
Serotonin. Current hypotheses posit serotonin excess as a cause of both
positive and negative symptoms in schizophrenia. The robust serotonin
antagonist activity of clozapine and other second-generation antipsychotics
coupled with the effectiveness of clozapine to decrease positive symptoms in
chronic patients has contributed to the validity of this proposition.
GABA. Some have implicated the inhibitory amino acid neurotransmitter γaminobutyric acid (GABA) in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia based on
the finding that some patients with schizophrenia have a loss of GABAergic
neurons in the hippocampus. GABA has a regulatory effect on dopamine
activity, and the loss of inhibitory GABAergic neurons could lead to the
hyperactivity of dopaminergic neurons.
Neuropeptides. Neuropeptides, such as substance P and neurotensin, are
localized with the catecholamine and indoleamine neurotransmitters and
influence the action of these neurotransmitters. Alteration in neuropeptide
mechanisms could facilitate, inhibit, or otherwise alter the pattern of firing in
these neuronal systems.
Glutamate. Glutamate is also of interest, as ingestion of phencyclidine, a
glutamate antagonist, produces an acute syndrome similar to schizophrenia.
The hypotheses proposed about glutamate include those of hyperactivity,
hypoactivity, and glutamate-induced neurotoxicity.
Acetylcholine and Nicotine. As noted, some studies suggest deficits in
muscarinic and nicotinic receptors. These receptors play a role in the
regulation of neurotransmitter systems involved in cognition, which is
impaired in schizophrenia.
Neural Circuits (The Disconnect Hypothesis). There has been a
gradual evolution from conceptualizing schizophrenia as a disorder that


<<<PAGE 1164>>>
involves discrete areas of the brain to a perspective that views schizophrenia
as a disorder of brain neural circuits. For example, as mentioned previously,
the basal ganglia and cerebellum are reciprocally connected to the frontal
lobes, and the abnormalities in frontal lobe function seen in some brain
imaging studies may be due to disease in either area rather than in the frontal
lobes themselves. It is possible that an early developmental lesion of the
dopaminergic tracts to the prefrontal cortex results in the disturbance of the
prefrontal and limbic system function and leads to the positive and negative
symptoms and cognitive impairments observed in patients with
schizophrenia.
Of particular interest in the context of neural circuit hypotheses linking the
prefrontal cortex and limbic system are studies demonstrating a relationship
between hippocampal morphologic abnormalities and disturbances in
prefrontal cortex metabolism or function (or both). Data from functional and
structural imaging studies in humans suggest that whereas dysfunction of the
anterior cingulate basal ganglia thalamocortical circuit underlies the
production of positive psychotic symptoms, dysfunction of the dorsolateral
prefrontal circuit underlies the production of primary, enduring negative or
deficit symptoms. There is a neural basis for cognitive functions that are
impaired in patients with schizophrenia. The observation of the relationship
among impaired working memory performance, disrupted prefrontal neuronal
integrity, altered prefrontal, cingulate, and inferior parietal cortex, and altered
hippocampal blood flow provides strong support for disruption of the normal
working memory neural circuit in patients with schizophrenia. The
involvement of this circuit, at least for auditory hallucinations, has been
documented in several functional imaging studies that contrast hallucinating
and nonhallucinating patients.
Viruses, Neurotoxicity, and Neuroinflammation. Most carefully
conducted investigations that have searched for evidence of neurotoxic viral
infections in schizophrenia have had negative results. However, as noted,
indirect epidemiologic data support a viral role. Nonetheless, the inability to
detect genetic evidence of viral infection reduces the significance of all
circumstantial data. The possibility of autoimmune brain antibodies has some
data to support it; the pathophysiologic process, if it exists, however,
probably explains only a subset of the population with schizophrenia.


<<<PAGE 1165>>>
The neurotoxicity hypothesis suggests that psychosis can be toxic,
increasing stress levels and associated cortisol, leading to brain changes.
Also, the use of exogenous toxins such as cannabis and alcohol may further
contribute. There is also some evidence that antipsychotic medications could
contribute as well. As described below, however, the lack of evidence for
neurodegeneration argues against this process.
Many studies have suggested that neuroinflammation plays a role in the
pathogenesis of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia and certain autoimmune
diseases have overlapping clinical, epidemiologic, and genetic features.
Furthermore, at least a subset of patients with schizophrenia has laboratory
findings indicating immune activation. These findings may be particularly
prominent in patients with structural brain changes, although these results are
inconsistent.
Several GWAS studies have found implicated genes that regulate the
immune response, particularly the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
region and specific genes involved in synaptic pruning, lending more support
for the neurodevelopmental hypothesis, discussed next.
Increasing Evidence Suggests that Schizophrenia Is a
Neurodevelopmental Disorder. Schizophrenia is likely a disorder of
neurodevelopment, in which the standard neural structure does not develop
properly. Earlier researchers speculated that this would be the case based on
the observation that many patients who developed schizophrenia in early
adulthood had motor and cognitive impairments as younger persons. Also, as
discussed above, obstetrical complications are a risk factor for schizophrenia.
Furthermore, for many patients with schizophrenia, cognitive deficits do not
deteriorate significantly after illness onset. Evidence for this includes the lack
of gliosis found in the brains of schizophrenia patients, as well as no
consistent evidence of neurodegeneration, which suggests that the significant
deficits are not due to cell death but rather the lack of proper cell growth.
Also, many of the genes implicated in schizophrenia have relatively higher
expression before birth and are likely involved in early brain development.
Some of the genes may even affect the placenta, making it more sensitive to
environmental stress.
As noted, one of the strongest genetic associations found to date for
schizophrenia has been with variations in the MHC. These genes, particularly


<<<PAGE 1166>>>
the C4 alleles, are involved in synaptic pruning during critical developmental
periods, which occur during adolescence and adulthood, and may explain
why symptoms of schizophrenia only become apparent during this period.
Schizophrenia Likely Involves Multiple Dysfunctions at Various
Levels. We know from neurologic patients suffering various focal lesions
that the lesions causing hallucinations are often in the networks associated
with that sensory system; thus, visual hallucinations are associated with
occipital lesions as well as other areas along the visual pathway, such as the
striatum and thalamus. Similarly, auditory hallucinations can be caused by
lesions in the auditory cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, or thalamus.
However, most patients with these focal lesions retain insight and recognize
their hallucinations for what they are. Lesions in the corticostriatal networks
can cause loss of insight, and the dopamine-related dysfunctions in this
network likely account for the delusional beliefs about the hallucinations and
other disordered thoughts. Still, other circuits are involved in the affective
reaction to these abnormal experiences. In this way, the symptoms of
schizophrenia are probably due to multiple dysfunctions along several
networks.
This approach to understanding schizophrenia helps account for why
antipsychotics are only partly useful for treating schizophrenia. By
normalizing the dopamine dysfunction, antipsychotics decrease the
abnormally high dopamine signaling in the associative striatum, and reduce
the psychotic symptoms associated with the disorder. However, they are
acting only on this particular circuit, and therefore have little effect on the
negative and cognitive symptoms of the disorder.
Psychosocial Theories
If schizophrenia is a disease of the brain, it is likely to parallel diseases of
other organs (e.g., myocardial infarctions, diabetes) whose courses are
affected by psychosocial stress. Thus, clinicians should consider both
psychosocial and biologic factors affecting schizophrenia.
The disorder affects individual patients, each of whom has a unique
psychological makeup. Although many psychodynamic theories about the
pathogenesis of schizophrenia seem outdated, perceptive clinical


<<<PAGE 1167>>>
observations can help contemporary clinicians understand how the disease
may affect a patient’s psyche.
Psychoanalytic Theories. Sigmund Freud thought that schizophrenia
resulted from developmental fixations early in life. These fixations produce
defects in ego development, and he postulated that such defects contributed
to the symptoms of schizophrenia. Margaret Mahler and Paul Federn
concentrated on distortions in the mother–infant relationship, and Harry
Stack Sullivan viewed schizophrenia as a disturbance in interpersonal
relatedness. To Sullivan, schizophrenia is an adaptive method used to avoid
panic, terror, and disintegration of the sense of self. The source of pathologic
anxiety results from cumulative experiential traumas during development.
THE OBJECT RELATIONS DEFICIT MODEL OF SCHIZOPHRENIA. Object relationship

theory posits that relations with other people are “introjected” and applied to
new relationships. One can approach the challenge of new relationships by
drawing on the internal models one collects from past relationships. In the
case of schizophrenia, this normal process is disrupted, presumably due to
errors in neurodevelopment that affect the filters that interpret information
from the environment. Thus, the introjects one collects are distorted and
incomplete, and interpreted as dangerous and threatening. As a result, the
patient avoids relationships, thus having less chance for corrective
experiences. Reality becomes terrifying, and the reaction is to create an
alternate reality through psychotic thinking.
This theory has the benefit of accounting for both the positive and negative
symptoms of schizophrenia. It also points at potential treatments. For
example, the job of the therapist is to provide positive experiences that the
patient can introject to help correct their distorted world view.
Regardless of the theoretical model, all psychodynamic approaches rely on
the premise that psychotic symptoms have meaning in schizophrenia.
Patients, for example, may become grandiose after an injury to their selfesteem. Similarly, all theories recognize that human relatedness may be
terrifying for persons with schizophrenia. Although research on the efficacy
of psychotherapy with schizophrenia shows mixed results, concerned persons
who offer compassion and a sanctuary in the confusing world of
schizophrenia must be a cornerstone of any overall treatment plan. Long-term


<<<PAGE 1168>>>
follow-up studies show that some patients who bury psychotic episodes do
not benefit from exploratory psychotherapy, but those who can integrate the
psychotic experience into their lives may benefit from some insight-oriented
approaches. There is renewed interest in the use of long-term individual
psychotherapy in the treatment of schizophrenia, especially when combined
with medication.
Learning Theories. According to learning theorists, children who later
have schizophrenia learn irrational reactions and ways of thinking by
imitating parents who have significant emotional problems. In learning
theory, the poor interpersonal relationships of persons with schizophrenia
develop because of poor models for learning during childhood.

References
Barnes TR. A rating scale for drug-induced akathisia. Br J Psychiatry.
1989;154:672–676.
Bearden CE, Forsyth JK. The many roads to psychosis: Recent advances in
understanding risk and mechanisms. F1000Res. 2018;7:F1000 Faculty
Rev-1883.
Braff D, Stone C, Callaway E, Geyer M, Glick I, Bali L. Prestimulus effects
on human startle reflex in normals and schizophrenics. Psychophysiology.
1978;15(4):339–343.
Bramon E, Murray RM. A plausible model of schizophrenia must incorporate
psychological and social, as well as neuro developmental, risk factors.
Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2001;3(4):243–256.
Chong HY, Teoh SL, Wu DBC, Kotirum S, Chiou CF, Chaiyakunapruk N.
Global economic burden of schizophrenia: A systematic review.
Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2016;12:357–373.
Dewan MJ. The psychology of schizophrenia: Implications for biological and
psychotherapeutic treatments. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2016;204(8):564–569.
DiLalla LF, McCrary M, Diaz E. A review of endophenotypes in
schizophrenia and autism: The next phase for understanding genetic
etiologies. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2017;175(3):354–361.
Fischer M. Psychoses in the offspring of schizophrenic monozygotic twins
and their normal co-twins. Br J Psychiatry. 1971;118(542):43–52.


<<<PAGE 1169>>>
Furukawa TA, Levine SZ, Tanaka S, Goldberg Y, Samara M, Davis JM,
Cipriani A, Leucht S. Initial severity of schizophrenia and efficacy of
antipsychotics: Participant-level meta-analysis of 6 placebo-controlled
studies. JAMA Psychiatry. 2015;72(1):14–21.
Guy W. ECDEU Assessment Manual for Psychopharmacology (Rev. 1976.).
Rockville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public
Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration,
National Institute of Mental Health, Psychopharmacology Research
Branch, Division of Extramural Research Programs; 1976.
Jones C, Hacker D, Cormac I, Meaden A, Irving CB, Xia J, Shi C, Chen J.
Cognitive behavioral therapy plus standard care versus standard care plus
other psychosocial treatments for people with schizophrenia. Schizophr
Bull. 2019;45(2):284–286.
Jones P, Rodgers B, Murray R, Marmot M. Child development risk factors
for adult schizophrenia in the British 1946 birth cohort. Lancet.
1994;344(8934):1398–1402.
Kay SR, Fiszbein A, Opler LA. The positive and negative syndrome scale
(PANSS) for schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 1987;13(2):261–276.
Kendell RE, Cooper JE, Gourlay AJ, Copeland JR, Sharpe L, Gurland BJ.
Diagnostic criteria of American and British psychiatrists. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 1971;25(2):123–130.
Kesby J, Eyles D, McGrath J, Scott J. Dopamine, psychosis and
schizophrenia: The widening gap between basic and clinical neuroscience.
Transl Psychiatry. 2018;8(1):30.
Khokhar JY, Dwiel LL, Henricks AM, Doucette WT, Green AI. The link
between schizophrenia and substance use disorder: A unifying hypothesis.
Schizophr Res. 2018;194:78–85.
Kirson NY, Weiden PJ, Yermakov S, Huang W, Samuelson T, Offord SJ,
Greenberg PE, Wong BJO. Efficacy and effectiveness of depot versus oral
antipsychotics in schizophrenia: Synthesizing results across different
research designs. J Clin Psychiatry. 2013;74(6):568–575.
Kishimoto T, Robenzadeh A, Leucht C, Leucht S, Watanabe K, Mimura M,
Borenstein M, Kane JM, Correll CU. Long-acting injectable vs oral
antipsychotics for relapse prevention in schizophrenia: A meta-analysis of
randomized trials. Schizophr Bull. 2014;40(1):192–213.
Kondej M, Steぅpnicki P, Kaczor AA. Multi-target approach for drug


<<<PAGE 1170>>>
discovery against schizophrenia. Int J Mol Sci. 2018;19(10):3105.
Kumari V, Das M, Zachariah E, Ettinger U, Sharma T. Reduced prepulse
inhibition in unaffected siblings of schizophrenia patients.
Psychophysiology. 2005;42(5):588–594.
Leucht C, Heres S, Kane JM, Kissling W, Davis JM, Leucht S. Oral versus
depot antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia—A critical systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomised long-term trials. Schizophr Res.
2011;127(1–3):83–92.
Leucht S, Cipriani A, Spineli L, Mavridis D, Orey D, Richter F, Samara M,
Barbui C, Engel RR, Geddes JR, Kissling W, Stapf MP, Lässig B, Salanti
G, Davis JM. Comparative efficacy and tolerability of 15 antipsychotic
drugs in schizophrenia: A multiple-treatments meta-analysis. Lancet.
2013;382(9896):951–962.
Lieberman JA, First MB. Psychotic disorders. N Engl J Med.
2018;379(3):270–280.
Malavia TA, Chaparala S, Wood J, Chowdari K, Prasad KM, McClain L,
Jegga AG, Ganapathiraju MK, Nimgaonkar VL. Generating testable
hypotheses for schizophrenia and rheumatoid arthritis pathogenesis by
integrating epidemiological, genomic, and protein interaction data. NPJ
Schizophr. 2017;3:11.
McCutcheon RA, Abi-Dargham A, Howes OD. Schizophrenia, dopamine and
the striatum: From biology to symptoms. Trends Neurosci.
2019;42(3):205–220.
Mirsky AF, Silberman EK, Latz A, Nagler S. Adult outcomes of high-risk
children: Differential effects of town and kibbutz rearing. Schizophr Bull.
1985;11(1):150–154.
Moreno-Küstner B, Martín C, Pastor L. Prevalence of psychotic disorders
and its association with methodological issues. A systematic review and
meta-analyses. PLoS One. 2018;13(4):e0195687.
Morrison AP, Turkington D, Pyle M, Spencer H, Brabban A, Dunn G,
Christodoulides T, Dudley R, Chapman N, Callcott P, Grace T, Lumley V,
Drage L, Tully S, Irving K, Cummings A, Byrne R, Davies LM, Hutton P.
Cognitive therapy for people with schizophrenia spectrum disorders not
taking antipsychotic drugs: A single-blind randomised controlled trial.
Lancet. 2014;383(9926):1395–1403.
National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health (UK). Psychosis and


<<<PAGE 1171>>>
Schizophrenia in Adults: Treatment and Management: Updated Edition
2014; 2014. Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK248060/
Orfanos S, Banks C, Priebe S. Are group psychotherapeutic treatments
effective for patients with schizophrenia? A systematic review and metaanalysis. Psychother Psychosom. 2015;84(4):241–249.
Overall JE, Gorham DR. The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS): Recent
developments in ascertainment and scaling. Psychopharmacol Bull.
1988;24(1):97–99.
Pharoah F, Mari J, Rathbone J, Wong W. Family intervention for
schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;(12):CD000088.
Poloni N, Ielmini M, Caselli I, Lucca G, Gasparini A, Gasparini A, Lorenzoli
G, Callegari C. Oral antipsychotic versus long-acting injections
antipsychotic in schizophrenia spectrum disorder: A mirror analysis in a
real-world clinical setting. Psychopharmacol Bull. 2019;49(2):17–27.
Samara MT, Leucht C, Leeflang MM, Anghelescu IG, Chung YC, CrespoFacorro B, Elkis H, Hatta K, Giegling I, Kane JM, Kayo M, Lambert M,
Lin CH, Möller HJ, Pelayo-Terán JM, Riedel M, Rujescu D,
Schimmelmann BG, Serretti A, Correll CU, Leucht S. Early improvement
as a predictor of later response to antipsychotics in schizophrenia: A
diagnostic test review. Am J Psychiatry. 2015;172(7):617–629.
Sampson S, Mansour M, Maayan N, Soares-Weiser K, Adams CE.
Intermittent drug techniques for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2013;(7):CD006196.
Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium.
Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature.
2014;511(7510):421–427.
Sekar A, Bialas AR, de Rivera H, Davis A, Hammond TR, Kamitaki N,
Tooley K, Presumey J, Baum M, Van Doren V, Genovese G, Rose SA,
Handsaker RE; Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric
Genomics Consortium, Daly MJ, Carroll MC, Stevens B, McCarroll SA.
Schizophrenia risk from complex variation of complement component 4.
Nature. 2016;530(7589):177–183.
Simpson GM, Angus JW. A rating scale for extrapyramidal side effects. Acta
Psychiatr Scand Suppl. 1970;212:11–19.
Tomasik J, Rahmoune H, Guest PC, Bahn S. Neuroimmune biomarkers in
schizophrenia. Schizophr Res. 2016;176(1):3–13.


<<<PAGE 1172>>>
Volkow ND. Substance use disorders in schizophrenia—Clinical implications
of comorbidity. Schizophr Bull. 2009;35(3):469–472.
Walsh T, McClellan JM, McCarthy SE, Addington AM, Pierce SB, Cooper
GM, Nord AS, Kusenda M, Malhotra D, Bhandari A, Stray SM, Rippey
CF, Roccanova P, Makarov V, Lakshmi B, Findling RL, Sikich L,
Stromberg T, Merriman B, Gogtay N, Butler P, Eckstrand K, Noory L,
Gochman P, Long R, Chen Z, Davis S, Baker C, Eichler EE, Meltzer PS,
Nelson SF, Singleton AB, Lee MK, Rapoport JL, King MC, Sebat J. Rare
structural variants disrupt multiple genes in neurodevelopmental pathways
in schizophrenia. Science. 2008;320(5875):539–543.
Weinberger DR. Future of days past: Neurodevelopment and schizophrenia.
Schizophr Bull. 2017;43(6):1164–1168.
Wójciak P, Rybakowski J. Clinical picture, pathogenesis and psychometric
assessment of negative symptoms of schizophrenia. Psychiatr Pol.
2018;52(2):185–197.
Zareifopoulos N, Bellou A, Spiropoulou A, Spiropoulos K. Prevalence of
comorbid chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in individuals suffering
from schizophrenia and bipolar disorder: A systematic review. COPD.
2018;15(6):612–620.
Zhuo C, Hou W, Li G, Mao F, Li S, Lin X, Jiang D, Xu Y, Tian H, Wang W,
Cheng L. The genomics of schizophrenia: Shortcomings and solutions.
Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2019;93:71–76.


<<<PAGE 1173>>>
6
Bipolar Disorders
The bipolar disorders include bipolar disorder type I, commonly referred to
as manic depression, bipolar type II disorder, and cyclothymia. Historically,
we considered these mood disorders to be on a continuum with depressive
disorders—hence the concept of polarity, with depression at one end and
mania the other. Since the 1980s and the introduction of DSM-III, we
separated the bipolar disorders from depressive disorders mainly because the
disorders have different epidemiologic characteristics, courses, and
treatments. However, at various times experts in mood disorders have
reconsidered this separation, noting that many patients with major depressive
disorder have past episodes of at least some manic symptoms. Many
authorities see considerable continuity between recurrent depressive and
bipolar disorders. There continues to be widespread discussion and debate
about the bipolar spectrum, which incorporates classic bipolar disorder,
bipolar II, and recurrent depressions.

THE CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Manic Episodes
Manic patients are excited, talkative, sometimes amusing, and frequently
hyperactive. Their speech is usually rapid and loud and challenging to
interrupt. It is commonly referred to as pressured, appearing as if driven by
some unknown urgency. Pressured speech is considered a hallmark of mania.
An elevated, expansive, or irritable mood is the hallmark of a manic
episode. The elevated mood is euphoric and often infectious and can even
cause a countertransferential denial of illness by an inexperienced clinician.
Although uninvolved persons may not recognize the unusual nature of a


<<<PAGE 1174>>>
patient’s mood, those who know the patient recognize it as abnormal.
Alternatively, the mood may be irritable, especially when someone prevents a
patient from some unrealistic plan. Patients often exhibit a change of
predominant mood from euphoria early in the course of the illness to later
irritability. They also have a low frustration tolerance, which can lead to
feelings of anger and hostility. Manic patients may be emotionally labile,
switching from laughter to irritability to depression in minutes or hours.
Manic patients describe rapid thoughts, as inferred from their speech. As
the manic state increases, their speech contains puns, jokes, rhymes, or plays
on words. They may seem clever, even brilliant. Manic patients are often
easily distracted, and their cognitive functioning in the manic state is
unrestrained, with an accelerated flow of ideas. At a still higher activity level,
associations become loosened, the ability to concentrate fades, and flight of
ideas, clanging, and neologisms appear. In acute manic excitement, speech
can be incoherent and indistinguishable from that of a person with
schizophrenia.
The manic patient’s thought content includes themes of self-confidence
and self-aggrandizement.
At times, manic patients are grossly psychotic and disorganized and
require physical restraints and the intramuscular injection of sedating drugs.
A 37-year-old engineer had experienced three manic episodes for which
he had been hospitalized; all three episodes were preceded by several
weeks of moderate psychomotor retardation. Although he had responded
to lithium each time, once outside the hospital, he had been reluctant to
take it and eventually refused to do so. Now that he was “euthymic,” after
his third and most disruptive episode during which he had badly beaten
his wife, he could more accurately explain how he felt when manic. He
experienced mania as “God implanted in him,” so he could serve as
“testimony to man’s communication with God.” He elaborated as
follows: “Ordinary mortals will never, never understand the supreme
manic state which I’m privileged to experience every few years. It is so
vivid, so intense, so compelling. When I feel that way, there can be no
other explanation: To be manic is, ultimately, to be God. God himself
must be supermanic: I can feel it when mania enters through my left brain


<<<PAGE 1175>>>
like laser beams, transforming my sluggish thoughts, recharging them,
galvanizing them. My thoughts acquire such momentum, they rush out of
my head, to disseminate knowledge about the true nature of mania to
psychiatrists and all other ordinary mortals. That’s why I will never
accept lithium again—to do so is to obstruct the divinity in me.”
Although he was on the brink of divorce, he would not yield to his wife’s
plea to go back on lithium.
Delusions occur in 75 percent of all manic patients. Mood-congruent
manic delusions are often concerned with great wealth, extraordinary
abilities, or power. Bizarre and mood-incongruent delusions and
hallucinations also appear in mania.
A 29-year-old female college graduate, mother of two children, and wife
of a bank president, had experienced several manic and retarded
depressive episodes that had responded to lithium carbonate. She was
referred because she had developed the delusion that she had been
involved in an international plot. Careful probing revealed that the
delusion represented further elaboration, in a rather fantastic fashion, of a
grandiose delusion that she had experienced during her last postpartum
manic episode. She believed that she had played an important role in
uncovering the plot, thereby becoming a national hero. Nobody knew
about it, she contended, because the circumstances of the plot were top
secret. She further believed that she had saved her country from the
international scheme and suspected that she was singled out for
persecution by the perpetrators of the plot. At one point, she had even
entertained the idea that the plotters sent special radio communications to
intercept and to interrupt her thoughts. As is typical in such cases, she
was on a heavy dosage of a lithium–antipsychotic combination. The
consultation was requested because the primary mood symptoms were
under control, yet, she had not given up her grandiose delusion. She
flippantly remarked, “I must be crazy to believe in my involvement in an
international plot,” but she could not help but believe in it. Over several
months, seen typically in 60-minute sessions weekly, the patient had
developed sufficient trust that the psychiatrist could gently challenge her


<<<PAGE 1176>>>
beliefs.
She was, in effect, told that her self-professed role in the international
scheme was highly implausible and that someone with her superior
education and high social standing could not entertain a belief, to use her
own words, “as crazy as that.” She eventually broke into tears, saying
that everyone in her family was so accomplished and famous that to keep
up with them she had to be involved in something grand; in effect, the
international scheme, she said, was her only claim to fame: “Nobody ever
gives me credit for raising two kids, and throwing parties for my
husband’s business colleagues: My mother is a dean, my older brother
holds high political office; my sister is a medical researcher with five
discoveries to her credit [all true], and who am I? Nothing. Now, do you
understand why I need to be a national hero?” As she alternated, over
subsequent months, between such momentary flashes of insight and
delusional denial, antipsychotic medication was gradually discontinued.
Maintained on lithium, she now only makes passing reference to the
grand scheme. She was encouraged to pursue her career goal toward a
master’s degree in library science. (Courtesy of HS Akiskal, M.D.)
Grossly, orientation and memory are intact, although some manic patients
may be so euphoric that they answer questions testing orientation incorrectly.
Emil Kraepelin called the symptom delirious mania.
We know less about the cognitive deficits associated with bipolar disorder
than such chronic disorders like schizophrenia. However, there is some
evidence to suggest they share some common deficits.
Impaired judgment is a hallmark of manic patients. They may break laws
about credit cards, sexual activities, and finances and sometimes involve their
families in financial ruin. Manic patients also have little insight into their
disorder. Their disinhibition may result in other examples of poor judgment,
such as making phone calls during inappropriate times of the day. Pathologic
gambling, a tendency to disrobe in public places, wearing clothing and
jewelry of bright colors in unusual or outlandish combinations, and
inattention to small details (e.g., forgetting to hang up the telephone) are also
symptomatic of the disorder. Patients act impulsively, and at the same time,
with a sense of conviction and purpose. They are sometimes preoccupied


<<<PAGE 1177>>>
with religious, political, financial, sexual, or persecutory ideas that can evolve
into complex delusional systems. Occasionally, manic patients become
regressed and play with their urine and feces.
About 75 percent of all manic patients are assaultive or threatening at some
time. Manic patients are at increased risk for suicide. However, the most
significant risk seems to be when bipolar patients are depressed. Manic
patients often drink alcohol excessively, perhaps in an attempt to selfmedicate.
Depressive Episodes
The depressive episodes in bipolar disorder are similar to those described for
depressive disorders. Many experts in the field feel that there are qualitative
differences in the depressive episodes experienced by bipolar patients, and
researchers have attempted to find reliable differences between bipolar I
disorder depressive episodes and episodes of major depressive disorder, but
the differences are elusive. Although the data are inconsistent and
controversial, some clinicians report that the depressed patients who we later
diagnose as having bipolar disorder often have hypersomnia, psychomotor
retardation, psychotic symptoms, a history of postpartum episodes, a family
history of bipolar I disorder, and a history of antidepressant-induced
hypomania. Table 6-1 lists some differences between the depressive disorder
seen in bipolar disorder and major depression.
Table 6-1
Differentiating Characteristics of Bipolar and Unipolar
Depressions
Bipolar

Unipolar

History of mania or
hypomania (definitional)

Yes

No

Temperament and
personality

Cyclothymic and
extroverted

Dysthymic and
introverted

Sex ratio

Equal

More women
than men


<<<PAGE 1178>>>
Age of onset

Teens, 20s, and
30s

30s, 40s, and 50s

Postpartum episodes

More common

Less common

Onset of episode

Often abrupt

More insidious

Number of episodes

Numerous

Fewer

Duration of episode

3–6 mo

3–12 mo

Psychomotor activity

Retardation >
agitation

Agitation >
retardation

Sleep

Hypersomnia >
insomnia

Insomnia >
hypersomnia

Bipolar disorder

Yes

±

Unipolar disorder

Yes

Yes

Alcoholism

Yes

Yes

Most antidepressants

Induce
hypomania–
mania

±

Lithium carbonate

Prophylaxis

±

Family History

Pharmacologic Response

Bipolar Disorder in Children and Adolescents
It is easy to misdiagnose mania in adolescents as a conduct disorder,
antisocial personality disorder, or schizophrenia. Symptoms of mania in
adolescents may include psychosis, alcohol or other substance abuse, suicide
attempts, academic problems, philosophical brooding, OCD symptoms,
multiple somatic complaints, marked irritability resulting in fights, and other
antisocial behaviors. Although we can see many of these symptoms in
healthy adolescents, severe or persistent symptoms should cause clinicians to
consider bipolar I disorder in the differential diagnosis.


<<<PAGE 1179>>>
DIAGNOSIS
Patients with both manic and depressive episodes or patients with manic
episodes alone are said to have bipolar disorder. The terms unipolar mania
and pure mania are sometimes used for patients who are bipolar but who do
not have depressive episodes.
Three additional categories of mood disorders are hypomania,
cyclothymia, and dysthymia. Hypomania is an episode of manic symptoms
that do not meet the criteria for a manic episode. Cyclothymia and dysthymia
are disorders that represent less severe forms of bipolar disorder and major
depression, respectively.
Bipolar I Disorder
Bipolar I patients have at least one manic episode. It is what most people
mean when they refer to bipolar as a disorder. Table 6-2 compares the
different approaches to diagnosing bipolar I disorder.
Table 6-2
Bipolar I Disorder
Bipolar I Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Bipolar I Disorder

Bipolar Affective Disorder
*NOTE: ICD-10 does not
distinguish between
Bipolar I and II, requiring
only history of discrete
episodes of mania,
hypomania and/or
depression, with episodes
demarcated by switches in
mood/affect.

Duration

• Manic episode: 1
wk+


<<<PAGE 1180>>>
• Hypomanic
episode: 4 days+
• Major depressive
episode: 2 wk+
Symptoms

Manic or
• History of episodes of
hypomanic
mania, hypomania and/or
episodes
depression
• Abnormally ↑ or
• Switches in mood/affect
irritable mood
Mania
(required)
• Abnormally ↑ or irritable
• Grandiose
mood (required)
thoughts
• ↑ Activity
• ↓ Need for sleep • ↑ Talkativeness
• Pressured speech • Flight of ideas/racing
• Racing and
thoughts
expansive
• Social disinhibition
thoughts
• ↓ Need for sleep
• Distractibility
• Grandiose thoughts
• Hyperactivity
• Distractibility
• Impulsivity/high• Impulsivity/recklessness
risk activities
• Hypersexuality
Depressive
Hypomania
episodes
• Abnormally ↑ mood
• Similar to that for
(required)
major depressive • Psychomotor agitation
disorder
• ↑ Talkativeness
• Poor
concentration/distractibility
• ↓ Need for sleep
• Hypersexuality
• Impulsivity or ↑ spending
• Over-familiarity
Depressive episode


<<<PAGE 1181>>>
• Depressed mood
• Loss of interest or pleasure
• Decreased energy
Additional symptoms:
• Low self-esteem
• Excessive guilt or shame
• Recurrent thoughts of death
or suicide
• Poor concentration
• Psychomotor changes
• Sleep disturbance
• Change in appetite and/or
weight
Required
number of
symptoms

At least 1 manic
episode
• Abnormally ↑ or
irritable mood
(required)
≥3 of the other
symptoms (4 if
irritable mood)

Bipolar affective disorder,
current episode
hypomanic
• Hypomania
• History of a prior affective
episode (manic,
hypomanic, depressed,
mixed)
Bipolar affective disorder,
current episode manic
• Mania
• History of prior affective
episode (manic,
hypomanic, depressed,
mixed)
Bipolar disorder, current
episode
mild/moderate/severe
depression
• Depressive episode
• History of prior affective


<<<PAGE 1182>>>
episode (manic,
hypomanic, depressed,
mixed)
Bipolar disorder, current
episode mixed
• Mixture or rapid alternation
of hypomanic, manic and/or
depressive symptoms
• History of prior affective
episode (manic,
hypomanic, depressed,
mixed)
Exclusions (not Drug abuse
better
Medication effect
explained
Other medical
by):
condition
Other psychiatric
illness
Psychosocial
Impact

Manic episode:
impaired
functioning or
needing
hospitalization
Hypomanic
episode: No
impairment or
need for
hospitalization
Depressive
episode:
marked distress
and/or
psychosocial

Psychoactive substance use
Another mental disorder


<<<PAGE 1183>>>
impairment
Symptom
Specifiers

With mixed
Current episode hypomanic
features:
Current episode manic
• Either depressive
without psychotic
or
symptoms
manic/hypomanic Current episode manic with
episode
psychotic symptoms
• Additional
mood congruent
symptoms of
mood incongruent
depressive or
Current episode of
manic/hypomanic
depression
period (not full
Current episode mixed
criteria)
Currently in remission—no
With rapid cycling:
symptoms. History of
• ≥4 mood episodes
previous episodes.
in 1 yr
• ≥2-mo period of
partial/full
remission
between episodes
With melancholic
features:
Similar to that for
major depressive
disorder
With atypical
features:
Similar to that for
major depressive
disorder
With anxious
distress:
≥2 symptoms
among the


<<<PAGE 1184>>>
following:
• Feeling tense
• Restlessness
• Difficulty with
concentration
due to
worrying
• ↑ fear without
cause
• Fear of loss of
control
With moodcongruent
psychotic
features
With moodincongruent
psychotic
features
With catatonia
Severity
Specifiers

Mild—minimal
For current episode of
symptoms, no to
depression
minimal
Mild: 2–3 symptoms
impairment
Moderate: ≥4 symptoms,
and/or distress
including ≥2 among loss
Moderate
of pleasure, depressed
—moderate
mood, and low energy
symptomatology
Severe: symptoms are
and impairment
marked and distressing,
Severe—maximal
suicidal thoughts are
symptoms,
common
marked distress
without psychotic
and impairment
symptoms
with psychotic


<<<PAGE 1185>>>
symptoms
mood congruent
mood incongruent
Course
Specifiers

With peripartum
onset:
• Episode occurs
during pregnancy
or within 4 wk
after delivery
With seasonal
pattern
• Pattern present
for ≥2 yr
In partial
remission
In full remission

Patients with this disorder may have a single or recurrent episode. We
consider manic episodes as distinct when they are separated by at least 2
months without significant symptoms of mania or hypomania. The episodes
should not be due to another apparent cause, such as medication (including an
antidepressant).
Bipolar II Disorder
Bipolar patients have hypomania rather than mania—manic-type symptoms
that are not as severe or as impairing as full mania. Table 6-3 compares the
different approaches to diagnosing bipolar II disorder.
It is easy to confuse other disorders, including dramatic but normal moods,
with hypomania. For example, some patients with depression may be thrilled
and very euphoric once emerging from a depressive episode. Many
medications, including antidepressants, can induce hypomanic symptoms.
The diagnostic approaches attempt to help distinguish hypomania from these
other causes of a heightened mood.


<<<PAGE 1186>>>
Diagnostic Specifiers
Rapid Cycling. Some patients experience frequent manic episodes. When a
patient has at least four such episodes in a year, we diagnose them with the
rapid cycling subtype of bipolar I disorder. Patients with rapid cycling bipolar
I disorder are likely to be female and to have had depressive and hypomanic
episodes. No data indicate that rapid cycling has a familial pattern of
inheritance; thus, an external factor such as stress or drug treatment may
provoke rapid cycling.
Table 6-3
Bipolar II Disorder
Bipolar II Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Bipolar II Disorder

Bipolar Affective Disorder
*NOTE: ICD-10 does not
distinguish between Bipolar
I and II, requiring only
history of discrete episodes
of mania, hypomania
and/or depression, with
episodes demarcated by
switches in mood/affect.

Duration

See Table 6-2 for
hypomanic and
depressive
episodes

See Table 6-2

Symptoms

Hypomanic
episodes (see
Table 6-2)
Depressive
episodes (see
Table 6-2)

See Table 6-2


<<<PAGE 1187>>>
Required
number of
symptoms

≥1 hypomanic
episode
≥1 depressive
episode

Exclusions (not Drug abuse
Psychoactive substance use
better
Medication effect
Better explained by another
explained
mental disorder
Other medical
by):
condition
Another psychiatric
illness Diagnose
bipolar I if h/o
manic episode
Psychosocial
Impact

• Hypomanic
episode: NO
marked
impairment in
functioning and
NO
hospitalization
necessitated
• Depressive
episode: marked
distress and/or
impairment in
psychosocial
functioning

Symptom
Specifiers

Current episode
See Table 6-2
(see Table 6-2
for definitions)
Depressed
Hypomanic
With anxious
distress


<<<PAGE 1188>>>
With mixed
features
With rapid cycling
With melancholic
features
With atypical
features
With moodcongruent
psychotic
features
With moodincongruent
psychotic
features
With catatonia
Severity
Specifiers

Mild—minimal
See Table 6-2
symptoms, no
to minimal
impairment
and/or distress
Moderate
—moderate
symptomatology
and impairment
Severe—maximal
symptoms,
marked distress
and impairment
(note, impairment
occurs during
depressive
episode)

Course

With peripartum


<<<PAGE 1189>>>
Specifiers

onset—see
Table 6-2
With seasonal
pattern—see
Table 6-2
In partial
remission
In full remission

With Seasonal Pattern. As with depressive disorders, mania can occur
primarily during certain seasons. Some studies have found a higher
prevalence of manic episodes in the spring and summer months. However,
available research is most convincing for the seasonality of depressive
episodes.
With Peripartum Onset. Mania occurring after pregnancy is a critical
issue given the potential risk to the child.
Catatonia. Clinicians often do not associate catatonic symptoms with
bipolar I disorder because of the marked contrast between the symptoms of
stuporous catatonia and the classic symptoms of mania. They are associated
with depressive episodes, however.
Other Bipolar Disorders
Cyclothymia. Cyclothymic disorder has also been appreciated clinically for
some time as a less severe form of bipolar disorder. Patients with
cyclothymic disorder have at least 2 years of frequently occurring hypomanic
symptoms that cannot fit the diagnosis of a manic episode and of depressive
symptoms that cannot fit the diagnosis of a major depressive episode. Table
6-4 compares the different approaches to diagnosing cyclothymia.
Table 6-4
Cyclothymic Disorder


<<<PAGE 1190>>>
Cyclothymic Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Cyclothymic Disorder

Cyclothymia

Duration

≥2 yr (≥1 for children)
with depressive and
hypomanic symptoms
present ≥50% of the time

2-yr w/ periods of
depression and
elevated mood,
without ever
meeting criteria
for a depressive
episode or manic
episode

Symptoms

Hypomanic episodes (see
Table 6-2)
Depressive episodes (see
Table 6-2)

Unstable moods,
many periods of
depression or
mild elation
which are
insufficient to be
called
hypomania or
mild major
depressive
disorder

Required
number of
symptoms

Symptoms of hypomania and Several episodes,
depression present,
symptoms are
without ever meeting full
insufficient for a
criteria for a depressive
diagnosis of
episode or manic episode
hypomania,
major depression
or another bipolar
affective disorder

Exclusions (not • Substance use
better
• Medication effect
explained

Bipolar affective
disorder (though
history of bipolar


<<<PAGE 1191>>>
by):

• Other medical condition
• Other mental illness (i.e.,
Bipolar I or II)

affective disorder
may be present)

Psychosocial
Impact

Marked distress or
impairment in areas of
functioning

Symptom
Specifiers

With anxious distress:
Affective personality
including at least two
disorder
symptoms among feeling Cycloid personality
tense, restlessness,
Cyclothymic
difficulty with
personality
concentration due to
worrying, excessive fear
without identifiable cause,
fear of loss of control

Mr. B, a 25-year-old single man, came for evaluation due to irritability,
insomnia, jumpiness, and excessive energy. He reported that such
episodes lasted from a few days to a few weeks and alternated with
longer periods of feeling hopeless, dejected, and worn out with thoughts
of suicide. Mr. B reported having been this way for as long as he could
remember. He had never been treated for his symptoms. He denied using
drugs and said he had “only the occasional drink to relax.”
As a child, Mr. B went from one foster family to another and was an
irresponsible and trouble-making child. He frequently ran away from
home, was absent from school, and committed minor crimes. He ran
away from his last foster family at the age of 16 years and drifted ever
since, taking occasional odd jobs. When he became restless at one
location or job, he quickly moved on to the next. He did not have close
friends because he would form and end friendships quickly.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS


<<<PAGE 1192>>>
When a patient with bipolar I disorder has a depressive episode, the
differential diagnosis is the same as that for a patient with major depressive
disorder. However, when a patient is manic, there is a broad differential,
including other mood disorders, psychiatric disorders, medical disorders, and
substances. We list some of these in Table 6-5.
Psychotic Disorders
It can be tough to distinguish a manic episode from the acute psychosis of a
patient experiencing a psychotic episode. Although challenging, a differential
diagnosis is possible. Merriment, elation, and infectiousness of mood are
much more common in manic episodes than in schizophrenia. The
combination of a heightened mood, rapid speech, and hyperactivity weighs
toward mania. Mania often begins rapidly and is a marked change from
previous behavior. Family history is also helpful.
When evaluating patients with catatonia, clinicians should look carefully
for a history of manic or depressive episodes and a family history of mood
disorders. There is an unfortunate tendency to misdiagnose manic symptoms
in persons from minority groups (mainly Black and Hispanic) as
schizophrenic symptoms.
Personality Disorders
Hypomania can frequently be confused with the mood lability of personality
disorders, particularly borderline personality disorder. Patients with a
borderline personality disorder often have a severely disrupted life, similar to
that of patients with bipolar II disorder, because of the multiple episodes of
significant mood disorder symptoms.
Table 6-5
Differential Diagnosis of Mania
Medical
AIDS/HIV
Delirium
Hyperthyroidism
Postencephalitic syndrome


<<<PAGE 1193>>>
Substance induced
Antidepressant-induced mania
Steroid-induced mania
Amphetamine-induced mania
Cocaine-induced mania
Phencyclidine-induced mania
Alcohol intoxication
L-Dopa–induced mania
Bronchodilator-induced mania
Decongestant-induced mania
Psychiatric
Atypical psychosis
Bipolar disorder
Catatonic schizophrenia
Schizoaffective disorder
A 19-year-old single woman presented with the chief complaint that “all
men are bastards.” Since her early teens, with the onset of her menses,
she had complained of extreme variability in her moods on a nearly daily
basis; irritability with hostile outbursts was her main affect, although
more-protracted hypersomnic depressions with multiple overdoses and
wrist slashings had led to at least three hospitalizations. She also had
migrainous headaches that, according to her mother, had motivated at
least one of those overdoses. Despite her tempestuous and suicidal moods
that led to these hospitalizations, she complained of “inner emptiness and
a bottomless void.” She had used heroin, alcohol, and stimulants to
overcome this troubling symptom. She also gave history of ice cream
craving and frequent purging. She was talented in English and wrote
much-acclaimed papers on the American confessional poet Anne Sexton.
She said that she was mentally disturbed because of a series of stepfathers
who had all forced “oral rape” on her when she was between 11 and 15
years of age. She subsequently gave herself sexually to any man that she
met in bars, no longer knowing whether she was a “prostitute” or a “nice


<<<PAGE 1194>>>
little girl.” On two occasions, she had inflicted cigarette burns inside her
vagina “to feel something.” She had also engaged in a “brief lesbian
relationship” that ultimately left her “emptier” and guilt ridden;
nonetheless, she now believed that she should burn in hell because she
could not get rid of “obsessing” about the excitement of mutual
cunnilingus with her much older female partner. The patient’s mother,
who owned an art gallery, had been married five times and gave a history
of unmistakable hypomanic episodes; a maternal uncle had died from
alcohol-induced cirrhosis. The patient’s father, a prominent lawyer
known for his “temper and wit,” had committed suicide. The patient was
given phenelzine, eventually raised to 75 mg/day, at which point the
mother described her as “the sweet daughter she was before age 13.” At
her next premenstrual phase, the patient developed insomnia, ran away
from home at night, started “dancing like a go-go girl, met an incredibly
handsome man” of 45 years of age (a pornography shop owner), and had
a clandestine marriage to him. After many dose adjustments, she is now
maintained on a combination of lithium (900 mg/day) and divalproex 750
mg/day. The patient now attends college and has completed four
semesters in art history. In addition to control of her irritable and suicidal
moods, bulimic and migraine attacks have abated considerably. Her
marriage has been annulled on the basis that she was not mentally
competent at the time of the wedding. She is no longer promiscuous and
now expresses fear of intimacy with men that she is attracted to. She is
receiving individual psychotherapy for this problem.
Medical Conditions
In contrast to depressive symptoms, which are present in almost all
psychiatric disorders, manic symptoms are more distinctive. However, a wide
range of medical disorders and substances can cause manic symptoms.
Antidepressant treatment can also be associated with the precipitation of
mania in some patients.

COMORBIDITY
Whereas men more frequently present with substance use disorders, women


<<<PAGE 1195>>>
more frequently present with comorbid anxiety and eating disorders. In
general, patients with bipolar disorder more frequently show comorbidity of
substance use and anxiety disorders than do patients with unipolar major
depression. In the Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) study, the lifetime
history of substance use disorders, panic disorder, and OCD was
approximately twice as high among patients with bipolar I disorder (61
percent, 21 percent, and 21 percent, respectively) than in patients with
unipolar major depression (27 percent, 10 percent, and 12 percent,
respectively). Comorbid substance use disorders and anxiety disorders
worsen the prognosis of the illness and markedly increase the risk of suicide.
Although cyclothymic disorder is sometimes diagnosed retrospectively in
patients with bipolar I disorder, no identified personality traits are associated
explicitly with bipolar I disorder.

COURSE
The natural history of bipolar I disorder is such that it is often useful to make
a graph of a patient’s disorder and to keep it up to date as the treatment
progresses (Fig. 6-1).
Onset
About 5 to 10 percent of patients with an initial diagnosis of major depressive
disorder have a manic episode 6 to 10 years after the first depressive episode.
The mean age for this switch is 32 years, and it often occurs after two to four
depressive episodes.
Bipolar I disorder most often starts with depression (75 percent of the time
in women, 67 percent in men) and is a recurring disorder. Most patients
experience both depressive and manic episodes, although 10 to 20 percent
experience only manic episodes.
The incidence of bipolar I disorder in children and adolescents is about 1
percent, and the onset can be as early as age 8 years.
Manic symptoms are common in older persons, although the range of
causes is broad and includes nonpsychiatric medical conditions, dementia,
and delirium, as well as bipolar I disorder. The onset of true bipolar I disorder
in older persons is relatively uncommon.


<<<PAGE 1196>>>
Duration
The manic episodes typically have a rapid onset (hours or days) but may
evolve over a few weeks. An untreated manic episode lasts about 3 months;
therefore, clinicians should not discontinue giving drugs before that time.
Depressive episodes are generally similar to those for depressive disorders.
Of persons who have a single manic episode, 90 percent are likely to have
another. As the disorder progresses, the time between episodes often
decreases. After about five episodes, however, the interepisode interval often
stabilizes at 6 to 9 months. Of persons with bipolar disorder, 5 to 15 percent
have four or more episodes per year and are classified as rapid cyclers.
Bipolar II Disorder
The course and prognosis of bipolar II disorder indicate that the diagnosis is
stable because there is a high likelihood that patients with bipolar II disorder
will have the same diagnosis up to 5 years later. Bipolar II disorder is a
chronic disease that warrants long-term treatment strategies.

FIGURE 6-1
Graphing the course of a mood disorder. Prototype of a life chart. (Courtesy of
Robert M. Post, M.D.)


<<<PAGE 1197>>>
PROGNOSIS
Patients with bipolar I disorder have a poorer prognosis than do patients with
major depressive disorder. About 40 to 50 percent of patients with bipolar I
disorder may have a second manic episode within 2 years of the first episode.
Although lithium prophylaxis improves the course and prognosis of bipolar I
disorder, probably only 50 to 60 percent of patients achieve significant
control of their symptoms with lithium. About 7 percent of patients with
bipolar I disorder do not have a recurrence of symptoms; 45 percent have
more than one episode, and 40 percent have a chronic disorder. Patients may
have from 2 to 30 manic episodes, although the mean number is about 9.
About 40 percent of all patients have more than 10 episodes. On long-term
follow-up, 15 percent of all patients with bipolar I disorder are well, 45
percent are well but have multiple relapses, 30 percent are in partial
remission, and 10 percent are chronically ill. One-third of all patients with
bipolar I disorder have chronic symptoms and evidence of significant social
decline.
Prognostic Indicators
One 4-year follow-up study of patients with bipolar I disorder found that a
premorbid poor occupational status, alcohol dependence, psychotic features,
depressive features, interepisode depressive features, and male gender were
all factors that contributed to a poor prognosis. A short duration of manic
episodes, advanced age of onset, few suicidal thoughts, and few coexisting
psychiatric or medical problems predict a better outcome.

TREATMENT APPROACH
Hospitalization
It is best to treat patients with severe mania in the hospital where aggressive
dosing is possible, and it is possible to achieve an adequate response
relatively quickly. Manic patients may test the limits of ward rules, shift
responsibility for their acts onto others, or exploit the weaknesses of others,
and they can create conflicts among staff members.
Choosing a Treatment


<<<PAGE 1198>>>
Medications are the treatments of choice for patients with bipolar disorders.
However, psychotherapies can offer an essential adjunct to treatment.
Somatic Treatments
Pharmacotherapy
GENERAL CLINICAL GUIDELINES. We can divide the pharmacologic treatment of

bipolar disorders into acute and maintenance phases. Bipolar treatment,
however, also involves the formulation of different strategies for the patient
who is experiencing mania or hypomania or depression. Lithium and its
augmentation by antidepressants, antipsychotics, and benzodiazepines have
been the principal approach to the illness. However, three anticonvulsant
mood stabilizers—carbamazepine, valproate, and lamotrigine—are
commonly used options, as well as a series of atypical antipsychotics. Often,
it is necessary to try different medications before finding an optimal
treatment. Furthermore, although one strives for monotherapy, in the case of
bipolar disorder, polypharmacy is common.
Table 6-6
Recommendations for Pharmacologic Treatment of Acute
Mania
First line

Monotherapy: lithium, divalproex, divalproex ER,
olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine, quetiapine
XR, aripiprazole, ziprasidone, asenapine,
paliperidone ER, cariprazine
Adjunctive therapy with lithium or divalproex:
risperidone, quetiapine, olanzapine,
aripiprazole, asenapine

Second line

Monotherapy: carbamazepine, carbamazepine
ER, ECT, haloperidol
Combination therapy: lithium + divalproex

Third line

Monotherapy: chlorpromazine, clozapine,
tamoxifen


<<<PAGE 1199>>>
Combination therapy: lithium or divalproex +
haloperidol, lithium + carbamazepine,
adjunctive tamoxifen
Not
Monotherapy: gabapentin, topiramate, lamotrigine,
recommended
verapamil, tiagabine
Combination therapy: risperidone +
carbamazepine, olanzapine + carbamazepine
ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; XR or ER, extended release.
Modified from CANMAT/ISBD Guidelines.

Table 6-6 lists some recommended medications for treating acute mania.
Adherence to treatment, however, is often a problem because patients with
mania frequently lack insight into their illness and refuse to take medication.
Because impaired judgment, impulsivity, and aggressiveness combine to put
the patient or others at risk, we must medicate patients when we need to
protect themselves and others from harm.
INITIAL MEDICATION SELECTION. Figure 6-2 diagrams a strategy for selecting

and preparing a bipolar patient for pharmacotherapy.
Acute Mania. The treatment of acute mania, or hypomania, usually is the
most straightforward phase to treat. We can use agents alone or in
combination to bring the patient down from a high.
Lithium Carbonate. Lithium carbonate is considered the prototypical mood
stabilizer. However, because the onset of antimanic action with lithium can
be slow, we often supplement it in the early phases of treatment by atypical
antipsychotics, mood-stabilizing anticonvulsants, or high-potency
benzodiazepines. Therapeutic lithium levels are between 0.6 and 1.2 mEq/L.
The acute use of lithium has been limited in recent years by its unpredictable
efficacy, problematic side effects, and the need for frequent laboratory tests.
The introduction of newer drugs with more favorable side effects, lower
toxicity, and less need for frequent laboratory testing has resulted in a decline
in lithium use. For many patients, however, its clinical benefits can be
remarkable.


<<<PAGE 1200>>>
Anticonvulsants. Valproate (valproic acid or divalproex sodium) has
surpassed lithium in use for acute mania. Unlike lithium, valproate is only
indicated for acute mania, although most experts agree it also has
prophylactic effects. Normal dose levels of valproic acid are 750 to 2,500
mg/day, achieving blood levels between 50 and 120 µg/mL. Rapid oral
loading with 15 to 20 mg/kg of divalproex sodium from day 1 of treatment
has been well tolerated and associated with a rapid onset of response. Some
laboratory testing is required during valproate treatment.
Carbamazepine has been used worldwide for decades as a first-line
treatment for acute mania. The FDA approved it for acute mania in the
United States in 2004. Typical doses of carbamazepine to treat acute mania
range between 600 and 1,800 mg/day associated with blood levels of between
4 and 12 µg/mL. The keto congener of carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, is
better tolerated than carbamazepine, but the data for its efficacy are
conflicting. A Cochrane review concluded there is insufficient evidence for
this medication in acute mania.
Antipsychotics. The FDA approved many of the atypical antipsychotics for
use in bipolar disorder. We list them in Table 6-7. Compared with older
agents, such as haloperidol and chlorpromazine, atypical antipsychotics have
a lesser liability for excitatory postsynaptic potential and tardive dyskinesia;
many do not increase prolactin. However, many of them have the risk of
weight gain with its associated medical problems. Some patients, however,
require maintenance treatment with antipsychotic medication.
Acute Bipolar Depression
Lithium. There is limited evidence for lithium in bipolar depression. Early
studies were promising, but later placebo-controlled studies did not confirm
lithium’s efficacy. More extensive studies that included lithium did suggest
that lithium was at least as useful as other mood stabilizers for bipolar
depression.
Anticonvulsants. The most promising anticonvulsant has been lamotrigine,
which has several reasonable studies showing efficacy for bipolar depression.
Its major limitation is that it must be titrated gradually to prevent a severe


<<<PAGE 1201>>>
skin rash. Evidence for valproate and other anticonvulsants is limited.
Gabapentin and levetiracetam appear to be ineffective.
Antipsychotics. Several of the atypical antipsychotics have shown efficacy
for bipolar depression. Quetiapine has the best evidence. It appears that
quetiapine, in a modest dose (300 mg/day), is sufficient to improve
symptoms. Olanzapine, lurasidone, and cariprazine also have positive studies,
and the FDA approved lurasidone for this indication. Ziprasidone and
aripiprazole do not appear to be effective.
Antidepressants. It remains controversial whether antidepressants are useful
for the depressive phase of bipolar disorder. This is particularly true in
patients with rapid cycling and mixed states. They seem to be less effective
than for major depressive disorder and may induce cycling, mania, or
hypomania. The risk of inducing mania seems highest for tricyclic
antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and perhaps the serotonin
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors such as venlafaxine. Most experts agree
that antidepressants are not appropriate as monotherapy for patients with
bipolar disorder.
Whether we can use them as adjuncts is also controversial. Some
antidepressants have some evidence of efficacy for adjunctive therapy, such
as fluoxetine. On the whole, the available evidence suggests they may have
some usefulness when combined with a mood stabilizer.


<<<PAGE 1202>>>
FIGURE 6-2
Recommendations for treatment monitoring in bipolar disorder. (Used with
permission from ISBD safety monitoring guidelines.)

Electroconvulsive Therapy. Electroconvulsive therapy may also be useful
for patients with bipolar depression who do not respond to lithium or other
mood stabilizers and their adjuncts, particularly in cases in which strong
suicidal tendency presents as a medical emergency.
Other Agents. Various clinicians and researchers have tried many other
agents in an attempt to find more options for treatment. Most studies have not


<<<PAGE 1203>>>
been promising. Dopamine agonists, including modafinil and armodafinil,
have some preliminary evidence. Omega-3-fatty acid adjunctive therapy has
conflicting evidence. N-acetylcysteine (a glutathione precursor) has some
preliminary evidence. Ketamine and other glutamatergic modulators may
have a role in treatment-resistant patients.
Table 6-7
Atypical Antipsychotics for Bipolar Disorder: Efficacy
Summary and Dose Ranges

DURATION AND PROPHYLAXIS

Maintenance Treatment. Preventing recurrences of mood episodes is the
greatest challenge facing clinicians. Not only must the chosen regimen
achieve its primary goal—sustained euthymia—but the medications should
not produce unwanted side effects that affect functioning. Sedation, cognitive
impairment, tremor, weight gain, and rash are some side effects that lead to


<<<PAGE 1204>>>
treatment discontinuation.
Lithium, carbamazepine, and valproic acid, alone or in combination, are
the most widely used agents for the long-term treatment of patients with
bipolar disorder. For patients treated with long-term lithium, thyroid
supplementation is often necessary to treat lithium-induced hypothyroidism.
Lamotrigine has prophylactic antidepressant and, potentially, moodstabilizing properties. Lamotrigine appears to be superior at the acute and
prophylactic treatment of the depressive phase of illness compared to the
manic.
ACUTE TREATMENT FAILURES. Most patients will respond to treatment within 2

weeks. When they do not respond, we should consider using a different
approach. When patients do not respond to initial treatment, it makes sense to
try another first-line treatment as there are several from which to choose.
Most patients will respond to one of these treatments, at least during their
manic phase; depression may be more difficult.
In the rare case that first-line
treatment fails, other options include haloperidol, carbamazepine, and
combination treatment with lithium and valproate. If those fail, other
antipsychotics could be considered.
SELECTING SECOND TREATMENT OPTIONS.

Other Somatic Treatments. In addition to ECT (discussed above),
transcranial magnetic stimulation and magnetic seizure therapy have limited,
although promising, data.
Psychosocial Therapy
Psychotherapy can be a crucial adjunct for patients. The goals of this therapy
include helping treatment adherence, promoting stability, and avoiding risk
factors for the disorder. Cognitive-behavioral therapy, interpersonal and
social rhythm therapy, and family focused therapy are all reasonable
therapies to use. Table 6-8 summarizes psychotherapeutic treatments for
bipolar disorder, including the presumed underlying mechanism and sample
interventions.


<<<PAGE 1205>>>
Table 6-8
Efficacious Psychotherapeutic Treatments for Bipolar
Disorder
Treatment

Conceptualization of
Disorder Etiology

Sample
Interventions

Cognitivebehavioral
therapy

Biologic vulnerability
interacting with stress
Skills deficits limit ability to
manage symptoms

Identify and
challenge
automatic
thoughts that
interfere with
treatment
adherence
Engage in rewarding
activities that
provide increased
routine and
stability
Practice
communication
skills with
providers

Interpersonal
and social
rhythm
therapy

Interpersonal vulnerabilities Develop awareness
arising from early
of patterns in
attachment and learned
primary
relationship patterns, plus
relationships and
disruption of social
the therapeutic
rhythms
relationship
Track and stabilize
social rhythms
Interpersonal skills
training
Communication
analysis


<<<PAGE 1206>>>
Family-focused Biologic vulnerability
therapy
exacerbated by negative
expressed emotion in
family environment

Education regarding
the disorder,
including
precipitants, risk
factors, and
effective
treatment
Establish relapse
prevention plan,
agreed upon by
all involved family
members
Communication skills
training
Problem-solving
skills training

THE EPIDEMIOLOGY OF THE DISORDER(S)
Incidence and Prevalence
We show the US prevalence rates of different clinical forms of bipolar
disorder in Figure 6-3. The annual incidence of bipolar illness is usually
estimated to be less than 1 percent. Worldwide it is estimated to vary from
0.3 to 1.2 percent by country. However, it is difficult to estimate because it is
easy to miss milder forms of bipolar disorder.
Sex
In contrast to major depressive disorder, bipolar I disorder has a roughly
equal prevalence among men and women. Manic episodes are more common
in men, and depressive episodes are more common in women. When manic
episodes occur in women, they are more likely than men to present a mixed
picture (e.g., mania and depression). Women also have a higher rate of
having the rapid cycling subtype of bipolar I disorder.
Age


<<<PAGE 1207>>>
The onset of bipolar I disorder is earlier than that of major depressive
disorder. The age of onset for bipolar I disorder ranges from childhood (as
early as age 5 or 6 years) to 50 years or even older in rare cases, with a mean
age of 30 years. The overall prevalence of bipolar disorder in adolescents is
similar to adults. However, it increases with age; that is, the prevalence is
about 2 percent in 13- and 14-year-olds, but it doubles by age 18.
Other Factors
Bipolar I disorder is more common in divorced and single persons than
among married persons, but this difference may reflect the early onset and the
resulting marital discord characteristic of the disorder.
There is a higher than average incidence of bipolar I disorder in upper
socioeconomic groups. Bipolar I disorder is more common in persons who
did not graduate from college than in college graduates. This may also reflect
the relatively early age of onset for the disorder.

THE NEUROBIOLOGY OF THE DISORDER
Similar to the depressive disorders, the most consistent abnormality observed
in bipolar disorders is an increased frequency of abnormal hyperintensities in
subcortical regions, such as periventricular regions, the basal ganglia, and the
thalamus. We find this more commonly in bipolar I disorder than in
depressed adults. These hyperintensities likely reflect the deleterious
neurodegenerative effects of recurrent episodes.
Our Understanding of the Genetics of Bipolar Disorder
Studies of Inheritance Patterns. A family history of bipolar disorder
conveys a higher risk for mood disorders in general and, specifically, a much
greater risk for bipolar disorder. Unipolar depression is typically the most
common form of mood disorder in families of bipolar probands. One large
study found a threefold increase in the rate of bipolar disorder and a twofold
increase in unipolar disorder in the biologic relatives of bipolar probands.
First-degree relatives have an approximately 10-fold risk of developing the
disorder. Twin studies suggest that the heritability is between 0.7 and 0.8.


<<<PAGE 1208>>>
Genetic Studies. Linkage studies have historically implicated several
regions, most notably chromosomes 18q and 22q. Several linkage studies
have found evidence for the involvement of specific genes in clinical
subtypes. For example, the linkage evidence on 18q mainly derived from
bipolar II–bipolar II sibling pairs and families that had panic symptoms.
GWAS studies report an ever-growing list of associated loci. Current
evidence suggests a pattern of polygenic risk—many susceptible loci, each
with a small effect that contributes to the disorder. These genes do not appear
to be specific to bipolar disorder but rather overlap with other severe
psychiatric disorders, particularly schizophrenia. Studies have tended to focus
on genes that could give clues to etiology, such as genes involved in
neurodevelopment, or genes encoding for voltage-dependent calcium
channels.

FIGURE 6-3
Past year prevalence of bipolar disorder in US Adults. (Data from the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication [2001–2003].)

Perhaps the most important finding from genetic studies is that of the many
genes found to be associated with bipolar disorder, most of them are also
associated with schizophrenia.
Pathologic Imaging Findings


<<<PAGE 1209>>>
Structural Imaging. Individual studies have reported various areas of the
brain with variations in gray matter volume, including the striatum, thalamus,
amygdala, hippocampus, and pituitary—potentially meaningful findings as
these are traditionally regions of interest in this disorder given their presumed
functions. However, many of these are small studies with findings with
conflicting results. At least one meta-analysis concluded that the evidence
taken as a whole did not support morphologic differences in these areas.
There have been some consistent structural findings in other brain regions,
including the inferior frontal gyrus, left insula, cerebellum, and left
orbitofrontal gyrus, which are seen both in affected individuals and firstdegree relatives. Although the significance of these findings is not well
understood, many of these areas seem involved in emotional regulation, and
the inferior frontal gyrus may have a particular role in executive function,
particularly response inhibition. In several cases, the differences are of
increased thickness in bipolar patients, suggesting that these brain changes
may represent compensatory reactions to the disorder rather than etiologic
risk factors.
Functional Imaging. There are fewer fMRI or PET studies than there are
MRI studies; the majority examine the brain during the performance of
various cognitive or emotional tasks and suggest either increased or
decreased activations along various circuits. Consistent findings include
abnormalities along a network that includes the superior and medial frontal
cortex and insula, which showed increased activation compared with
controls. As many of the areas are involved in executive functioning and
working memory, this appears to be consistent with neuropsychological
studies of the disorder. Other areas may show decreased activation, including
the amygdala, basal ganglion, and limbic system. These findings may be
evidence for downregulation of specific circuits, perhaps in response to the
abnormal activity in the other circuits.
Inflammatory Markers
Some inflammatory markers, most notably interleukin-6, are elevated in
bipolar patients. Markers of inflammation may be particularly evident during
adolescence and become less evident in adulthood.


<<<PAGE 1210>>>
Other Neurochemical Findings. Some studies have found alterations in
brain-derived neurotrophic factor, and in at least one study, this alteration
may predict lithium responsiveness. Similarly, some studies of measures of
oxidative stress in bipolar patients showed abnormalities that related to
lithium response, however these findings are preliminary.
Assessment of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis suggests a
dysregulated system, as evidenced by increased ACTH and cortisol levels in
bipolar patients. However, these findings appear only to occur after
individuals become symptomatic, suggesting that this is a result of the
disorder.

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DISORDER
Psychological studies have focused on neuropsychological findings,
particularly of cognitive deficits associated with the disorder. Most
commonly reported are deficits of executive functioning and verbal memory
and learning. A variety of other related deficits, including deficits of
cognitive flexibility, psychomotor speed, and attention, are also reported,
although not consistently. Response inhibition is the executive function
focused on the ability to prevent one’s impulsive response to a situation when
such a response would be inappropriate in the environmental context. This
inhibition is often deficient in bipolar patients, as well as in first-degree
relatives without bipolar disorder. It is particularly deficient in individuals
who have bipolar disorder with psychotic features. Other executive function
deficits include general impulsivity and risk-taking behavior. We see some of
these same deficits with schizophrenia. However, they are less severe in
schizophrenia and less likely to be recognized before the disorder appears. It
may be that the cognitive deficits are indicative of a broader disorder that
crosses traditional diagnostic lines and represents a spectrum of disorders
defined by psychotic symptoms.

ETIOLOGY
Biologic Theories
As noted, several pathologic findings point at specific disrupted systems in
the brain, particularly areas involved in the regulation of emotions and


<<<PAGE 1211>>>
executive functioning. What remains unclear are which findings are the
results of the disorder and which are causative. For example, the significant
disruptions seen in the HPA axis in patients with bipolar disorder seem to
represent a neurobiologic scar that is seen only after symptoms occur.
As discussed above, converging evidence suggests that calcium signaling
may be, at least in part, implicated in the disorder. The genetic abnormalities
found in genes associated with voltage-gated calcium channels noted above,
as well as the clinical observation that certain drugs have mechanisms of
action involving calcium channels (e.g., antiepileptic drugs) lend support for
such a theory. Furthermore, preclinical cellular studies show some evidence
for increased intracellular calcium signaling in the neurons of bipolar
patients. The evidence for calcium channel abnormalities in high risk but
asymptomatic individuals, as well as first-degree relatives of patients with the
disorder, suggests that this may be involved in the etiology of the disorder.
Neurodevelopment likely plays a role as well, like schizophrenia, and the
fact that immunologic markers are more prevalent in bipolar individuals
during adolescence than adulthood appears to support a developmental
etiology for the disorder.
Psychosocial Theories
Most psychodynamic theories of mania view manic episodes as a defense
against underlying depression.
Ms. G, a 42-year-old housewife and mother of a 4-year-old boy,
developed symptoms of hypomania and later of frank mania without
psychosis, when her only son was diagnosed with acute lymphocytic
leukemia. A profoundly religious woman who had experienced 10 years
of difficulty with conception, Ms. G was a devoted mother. She reported
that she was usually rather down. Before her son’s illness, she used to
joke that she had become pregnant with him by divine intervention.
When her son was diagnosed and subsequently hospitalized, he required
painful medical tests and emergency chemotherapy, which made him
very ill. The doctors regularly barraged Ms. G with bad news about his
prognosis during the first few weeks of his illness.
Ms. G was ever present with her son at the hospital, never sleeping,


<<<PAGE 1212>>>
always caring for him, yet the pediatricians noted that as the child
became more debilitated and the prognosis more grim, she seemed to
bubble over with renewed cheerfulness, good humor, and high spirits.
She could not seem to stop herself from cracking jokes to the hospital
staff during her son’s painful procedures, and as the jokes became louder
and more inappropriate, the staff grew more concerned. During her
subsequent psychiatric consultation (requested by the pediatric staff), Ms.
G reported that her current “happiness and optimism” were justified by
her sense of “oneness” with Mary, the mother of God. “We are together
now, she and I, and she has become a part of me. We have a special
relationship,” she winked. Despite these statements, Ms. G was not
psychotic and said that she was “speaking metaphorically, of course, only
as a good Catholic would.” Her mania resolved when her son achieved
remission and was discharged from the hospital. (Courtesy of JC
Markowitz, M.D. and BL Milrod, M.D.)
However, such approaches to understanding bipolar disorder have become
less accepted as the biologic evidence has mounted. The role of the
environment, particularly psychosocial stress, is likely crucial in the etiology.
Karl Abraham, for example, believed that the manic episodes might reflect an
inability to tolerate a developmental tragedy, such as the loss of a parent. The
manic state may also result from a tyrannical superego, which produces
excessive self-criticism that is then replaced by euphoric self-satisfaction.
Bertram Lewin regarded the manic patient’s ego as overwhelmed by
pleasurable impulses, such as sex, or by feared impulses, such as aggression.
Melanie Klein also viewed mania as a defensive reaction to depression, using
manic defenses such as omnipotence, in which the person develops delusions
of grandeur.

References
Akiskal HS. Mood disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan
& Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia,
PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017.
Belvederi Murri M, Prestia D, Mondelli V, Pariante C, Patti S, Olivieri B,


<<<PAGE 1213>>>
Arzani C, Masotti M, Respino M, Antonioli M, Vassallo L, Serafini G,
Perna G, Pompili M, Amore M. The HPA axis in bipolar disorder:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology.
2016;63:327–342.
Craddock N, Sklar P. Genetics of bipolar disorder. Lancet.
2013;381(9878):1654–1662.
Fava GA, Rafanelli C, Tomba E, Guidi J, Grandi S. The sequential
combination of cognitive behavioral treatment and well-being therapy in
cyclothymic disorder. Psychother Psychosom. 2011;80(3):136–143.
Fusar-Poli P, Howes O, Bechdolf A, Borgwardt S. Mapping vulnerability to
bipolar disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis of neuroimaging
studies. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2012;37(3):170–184.
Geoffroy PA, Bellivier F, Scott J, Boudebesse C, Lajnef M, Gard S, Kahn JP,
Azorin JM, Henry C, Leboyer M, Etain B. Bipolar disorder with seasonal
pattern: clinical characteristics and gender influences. Chronobiol Int.
2013;30(9):1101–1107.
Gitlin M, Frye MA. Maintenance therapies in bipolar disorders. Bipolar
Disord. 2012;14(Suppl 2):51–65.
Harrison PJ, Geddes JR, Tunbridge EM. The emerging neurobiology of
bipolar disorder. Trends Neurosci. 2018;41(1):18–30.
Helseth V, Samet S, Johnsen J, Bramness JG, Waal H. Independent or
substance-induced mental disorders? An investigation of comorbidity in an
acute psychiatric unit. J Dual Diagn. 2013;9(1):78–86.
Mason BL, Brown ES, Croarkin PE. Historical underpinnings of bipolar
disorder diagnostic criteria. Behav Sci (Basel). 2016;6(3):14.
Mechri A, Kerkeni N, Touati I, Bacha M, Gassab L. Association between
cyclothymic temperament and clinical predictors of bipolarity in recurrent
depressive patients. J Affect Disord. 2011;132(1–2):285–288.
Merikangas KR, He JP, Burstein M, Swanson SA, Avenevoli S, Cui L,
Benjet C, Georgiades K, Swendsen J. Lifetime prevalence of mental
disorders in U.S. adolescents: results from the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication–Adolescent Supplement (NCS-A). J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010;49(10):980–989.
Ng F, Mammen OK, Wilting I, Sachs GS, Ferrier IN, Cassidy F, Beaulieu S,
Yatham LN, Berk M, Internatinal Society for Bipolar Disorders. The
International Society for Bipolar Disorders (ISBD) consensus guidelines


<<<PAGE 1214>>>
for the safety monitoring of bipolar disorder treatments. Bipolar Disord.
2009;11(6):559–595.
Özerdem A, Ceylan D, Can G. Neurobiology of risk for bipolar disorder.
Curr Treat Options Psychiatry. 2016;3(4):315–329.
Perugi G, Popovic D. Practical management of cyclothymia. In: Young AH,
Ferrier IN, Michalak EE, eds. Practical Management of Bipolar Disorders.
New York: Cambridge University Press; 2010:139.
Serretti A, Chiesa A, Calati R, Linotte S, Sentissi O, Papageorgiou K, Kasper
S, Zohar J, De Ronchi D, Mendlewicz J, Amital D, Montgomery S, Souery
D. Influence of family history of major depression, bipolar disorder, and
suicide on clinical features in patients with major depression and bipolar
disorder. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2013;263(2):93–103.
Tomba E, Rafanelli C, Grandi S, Guidi J, Fava GA. Clinical configuration of
cyclothymic disturbances. J Affect Disord. 2012;139(3):244–249.
Totterdell P, Kellett S, Mansell W. Cognitive behavioural therapy for
cyclothymia: cognitive regulatory control as a mediator of mood change.
Behav Cogn Psychother. 2012;40(4):412–424.
Vaingankar JA, Rekhi G, Subramaniam M, Abdin E, Chong SA. Age of
onset of life-time mental disorders and treatment contact. Soc Psychiatry
Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2013;48(5):835–843.
Van Meter AR, Youngstrom EA, Findling RL. Cyclothymic disorder: a
critical review. Clin Psychol Rev. 2012;32(4):229–243.


<<<PAGE 1215>>>
7
Depressive Disorders
THE CLINICAL PRESENTATION
A depressed mood and a loss of interest or pleasure are the key symptoms of
depression. Patients may say that they feel blue, hopeless, in the dumps, or
worthless. For a patient, the depressed mood often has a distinct quality that
differentiates it from the normal emotion of sadness or grief. Patients often
describe the symptom of depression as one of agonizing emotional pain.
Alternately they perceive it as a physical illness in which they feel exhausted
and unmotivated. Others report feeling little, being unable to cry, and finding
it difficult to experience any pleasure.
The classic presentation of a depressed patient is a person with a stooped
posture, decreased movement, and a downward averted gaze. In practice,
there is a considerable range of behaviors ranging from persons with no
observable symptoms to the catatonically depressed patient. Among
observable signs of depression, generalized psychomotor retardation is the
most often described, in which patients show little spontaneous movement.
At times it may be so severe as to be challenging to differentiate from
catatonia.
Ms. A, a 34-year-old literature professor, presented to a mood clinic with
the following complaint: “I am in a daze, confused, disoriented, staring.
My thoughts do not flow, my mind is arrested.… I seem to lack any sense
of direction, purpose.… I have such an inertia, I cannot assert myself. I
cannot fight; I have no will.”


<<<PAGE 1216>>>
Psychomotor agitation may occur, including such behaviors as hand
wringing and hair pulling. Many depressed patients have a decreased rate and
volume of speech; they respond to questions with single words and exhibit
delayed responses to questions.
When present, observable symptoms are helpful in the diagnosis; however,
the lack of such symptoms does not imply that a patient has no disorder. It is
not abnormal, for example, to encounter patients who can maintain a measure
of social appropriateness, even smiling and laughing when with others,
despite feeling internally miserable.
The most typical somatic symptoms of depression are called the
neurovegetative symptoms of depression and typically include a variety of
physical symptoms. Table 7-1 lists typical neurovegetative symptoms.
Almost all depressed patients (97 percent) complain about reduced energy;
they have difficulty finishing tasks, are impaired at school and work, and
have less motivation to undertake new projects. About 80 percent of patients
complain of trouble sleeping, especially early morning awakening (i.e.,
terminal insomnia) and multiple awakenings at night, during which they
ruminate about their problems. Many patients have decreased appetite and
weight loss, but others experience increased appetite and weight gain and
sleep longer than usual. These are sometimes called reversed neurovegetative
symptoms or atypical features.
Depression is, by definition, a mood disorder, and disturbances of mood
are at the core. Patients feel “bad” and may use words such as “sad,”
“depressed,” “blue,” “down,” or similar words to describe this feeling. Here
we use the term dysphoria to encompass these various depressive feelings as
a way to avoid the confusion inherent in using the word “depressed” to mean
both the diagnosis and the core symptom. Also, many patients are reluctant to
use the word “depressed” as they may have difficulty coming to terms with
their diagnosis. In such cases, other synonyms, including those above, may
seem less threatening to the patient.
Some patients deny dysphoria altogether, but instead, describe feeling
unable to enjoy things that are usually enjoyable to them. We call this
anhedonia or a lack of pleasure. In addition to dysphoria and anhedonia,
many depressed patients also report feeling anxious.
The critical point is that although sadness and even depression may be, in
themselves, normal reactions, when encountered in the context of a


<<<PAGE 1217>>>
depressive disorder, patients do not experience them as normal. Patients will
often feel genuinely ill and be able to distinguish their emotional state from
“normal” feelings of sadness. Many will first interpret this as indicative of
medical illness and present to their primary care doctor complaining of
feeling “sick” rather than depressed.
Depressed patients customarily have negative views of the world and
themselves. Their thought content often includes nondelusional ruminations
about loss, guilt, suicide, and death. About 10 percent of all depressed
patients have marked symptoms of a thought disorder, usually thought
blocking and profound poverty of content.
A 42-year-old civil servant said that she was so paralyzed by depression
that she felt that she had no personal initiative and volition left; she
believed that some malignant force had taken over her actions and that it
was commenting on every action that she was undertaking. The patient
recovered fully with thymoleptic medication. There is no reason to
believe that, in this patient, the feelings of somatic passability and
running commentary indicated a schizophrenic process.
Depressed patients may complain of either delusions or hallucinations
associated with their depressive episode: such patients may have a major
depressive episode with psychotic features, often called psychotic depression.
Delusions and hallucinations that are consistent with a depressed mood are
said to be mood-congruent. Mood-congruent delusions in a depressed person
include those of guilt, sinfulness, worthlessness, poverty, failure, persecution,
and terminal somatic illnesses (such as cancer and a “rotting” brain). The
content of mood-incongruent delusions or hallucinations is not consistent
with a depressed mood. For example, a mood-incongruent delusion in a
depressed person might involve grandiose themes of exaggerated power,
knowledge, and worth.
Table 7-1
Neurovegetative Symptoms of Depression
Common:


<<<PAGE 1218>>>
Fatigue, low energy
Inattention
Insomnia, early morning awakening
Poor appetite, associated weight loss
Sometimes included:
Decreased libido and sexual performance
Menstrual irregularities
Worse depression in the AM
About two-thirds of all depressed patients contemplate suicide, and 10 to
15 percent commit suicide. Those recently hospitalized with a suicide attempt
or suicidal ideation have a higher lifetime risk of successful suicide than
those never hospitalized for suicidal ideation.
Depressed patients with psychotic features occasionally consider killing a
person as a result of their delusional systems, but the most severely depressed
patients often lack the motivation or the energy to act impulsively or
violently. Patients with depressive disorders are at increased risk of suicide as
they begin to improve and regain the energy needed to plan and carry out
suicide (paradoxical suicide).
About 50 to 75 percent of all depressed patients have some measure of
cognitive impairment. Cognitive symptoms include subjective reports of an
inability to concentrate (84 percent of patients in one study) and impairments
in thinking (67 percent of patients in another study).
Most depressed patients are oriented, although some may not have
sufficient energy or interest to answer questions about these subjects during
an interview. Memory can be challenging to disentangle from concentration
difficulties. However, some patients appear to have genuine memory
difficulties in addition to other cognitive deficits.
Some depressed patients sometimes seem unaware of their depression and
do not complain of a mood disturbance even though they exhibit withdrawal
from family, friends, and activities that previously interested them. Other
depressed patients, particularly those with disordered thoughts, may be overly
negative, hyperbolic in their symptomatic description, and hopeless about
their future. It may be difficult to convince such patients that improvement is


<<<PAGE 1219>>>
possible.
We can assess judgment by reviewing patients’ actions in the recent past
and their behavior during the interview. Patients with particularly negative
outlooks should be cautioned not to make important life decisions (e.g.,
around a relationship or job) until they are “thinking normally” again.
In interviews and conversations, depressed patients may emphasize the bad
and minimize the good. They may be pessimistic about past treatment trials.
A common clinical mistake is to unquestioningly believe a depressed patient
who states that a previous trial of antidepressant medications did not work.
Such statements may be false, and they require a confirmation from another
source. Psychiatrists should not view patients’ misinformation as an
intentional fabrication; the admission of any hopeful information may be
impossible for a person in a depressed state of mind.
Other patients, particularly those with poor insight, may have difficulty
reporting symptoms or past episodes. Asking about changes in functioning
rather than emotional states may be helpful (“have there been times that you
felt unable to work, or care for your children?”).
Presentation in Special Populations
Depression in Children and Adolescents. School phobia and
excessive clinging to parents may be symptoms of depression in children.
Poor academic performance, substance abuse, antisocial behavior, sexual
promiscuity, truancy, and running away may be symptoms of depression in
adolescents.
Depression in Older People. Depression is more common in older
persons than it is in the general population. Various studies have reported
prevalence rates ranging from 25 to almost 50 percent, although the
percentage of these cases that are caused by major depressive disorder is
uncertain. Several studies indicate that depression in older persons correlates
with low socioeconomic status, the loss of a spouse, a concurrent physical
illness, and social isolation. Other studies have indicated that depression in
older persons is underdiagnosed and undertreated, perhaps particularly by
general practitioners. The underrecognition of depression in older persons
may occur because the disorder appears more often with somatic complaints


<<<PAGE 1220>>>
in older than in younger, age groups. Further, ageism may influence and
cause clinicians to accept depressive symptoms as usual in older patients.

DIAGNOSIS
Depressive disorders can take many forms, depending on their severity and
chronicity. The disorder that we most associate with “classic” depression is
major depressive disorder, and this is the disorder most often referred to
when someone reports that they suffer from depression. However, it is
essential to understand the different varieties of depressive disorders,
including those not included in some formal classifications, as all are
significant sources of morbidity.
Major Depressive Disorder
The primary feature of major depressive disorder is the occurrence of at least
one episode of major depression, which is significant depressive symptoms
that last for a significant time. Table 7-2 compares the different approaches to
diagnosing major depressive disorder.
With Psychotic Features. The presence of psychotic features in major
depressive disorder reflects severe disease and is a poor prognostic indicator.
We often categorize psychotic symptoms as either mood-congruent, that is, in
harmony with the mood disorder (“I deserve punishment because I am so
bad”), or mood-incongruent, not in harmony with the mood disorder. Patients
with mood-incongruent psychotic symptoms may be more likely to have a
comorbid primary psychotic disorder, such as schizoaffective disorder or
schizophrenia.
With Melancholic Features. Melancholia is one of the oldest terms used
in psychiatry, dating back to Hippocrates in the 4th century to describe the
dark mood of depression. We still use it to refer to a depression characterized
by severe anhedonia, early morning awakening, weight loss, and profound
feelings of guilt (often over trivial events). It is not uncommon for patients
who are melancholic to have suicidal ideation. Melancholia is associated with
changes in the autonomic nervous system and endocrine functions. For that
reason, we sometimes refer to melancholia as “endogenous depression” or


<<<PAGE 1221>>>
depression that arises in the absence of external life stressors or precipitants.
Table 7-2
Major Depressive Disorder
DSM-5
Diagnostic name Major Depressive
Disorder
Duration

2 wk

Symptoms

• Dysphoria or feeling
depressed
• Anhedonia
• ↑ or ↓ weight or
appetite
• ↑ or ↓ sleep
• ↑ or ↓ activity
• ↓ energy
• Depressing thoughts:
worthlessness, guilt
• ↓ concentration
• Suicidal ideation/plan

ICD-10
Major Depressive
Episode

• ↓ mood
• ↓ energy
• ↓ activity
• ↓ capacity for
enjoyment
• ↓ interest
• ↓ concentration
• Fatigue after even
minimal effort
• Disturbed sleep/early
morning awakening
• Disturbed appetite/ ↓
weight
• ↓ self esteem
• ↓ self-confidence
• Guilt or worthlessness
• Mood unreactive to
circumstances
• Anhedonia
• Worse symptoms in
the AM
• Psychomotor
disturbance: agitation
or retardation


<<<PAGE 1222>>>
• ↓ libido
Required number 5 (1 has to be one of
of symptoms
the first two listed)
Psychosocial
Distress or impaired
consequences
functioning (social,
of symptoms
occupational, or
other significant
areas)

Depends on severity

Exclusions (Not Medical illness
better
Substance
explained by): Other psychiatric
disorder
History of mania or
hypomania

Adjustment disorder
Conduct disorder
Recurrent depressive
disorder (which is
considered a
separate diagnosis)

Symptom
specifiers

With anxious distress Depressive reaction
• 2+ symptoms of
Psychogenic depression
anxiety
Reactive depression
With mixed features
• 3+ manic/hypomanic
symptoms during the
depressive episode
(if occur
independently,
diagnose bipolar
disorder)
With melancholic
features
• Loss of pleasure or
reactivity to pleasure
• 3+ of the following
• Severe
depression/despair
• Mood worse in AM


<<<PAGE 1223>>>
• Early morning
awakening
• Psychomotor
disturbance
• Anorexia/weight
loss
• Guilt
With atypical features
• Mood reactivity
• 2+ of following
• Increased
appetite/weight
• Hyposomnia
• Leaden paralysis
• Rejection sensitivity
With mood-congruent
psychotic features
With moodincongruent
psychotic features
With catatonia
• Must be present
during most of
depressive episode
With peripartum onset
With seasonal pattern
• Usually occurs during
a specific season
Course specifiers With psychotic
Recurrent Depressive
features
Disorder (Coded as
separate disorder):
• Psychotic symptoms
Repeated episodes of
occurring only during
the above symptoms.
the depressive


<<<PAGE 1224>>>
episode
• Mood-congruent
• Mood-incongruent
In partial remission
• Full criteria no
longer met
In full remission
• 0 symptoms for 2
mo
Severity
specifiers

Mild: minimal
symptoms
Moderate: between
mild and severe
Severe: # of symptoms
and
severity/dysfunction
well beyond that
required for
diagnosis

No mania.

Mild
• 2–3 symptoms
• Functions normal
despite distress
Moderate
• 4+ symptoms
• Difficulty with
functioning
Severe
• Several symptoms
marked and
distressing
• Loss of selfesteem/feels
worthless and guilty
• Suicidal ideation/acts
• Somatic symptoms of
depression
Severe with psychotic
symptoms
• As above but with
psychosis
Other
• Atypical depression


<<<PAGE 1225>>>
• Single episodes of
“masked depression”
Unspecified
With Atypical Features. Patients with major depressive disorder with
atypical features have specific, predictable characteristics. As described
above, these tend to be the reverse of the neurovegetative symptoms. They
may, for example, overeat or oversleep. Patients with atypical features have a
younger age of onset and more severe psychomotor slowing. They also are
more likely to have comorbid disorders, including anxiety disorders,
substance use disorder, or somatic symptom disorder. They are easy to
misdiagnose as having an anxiety disorder rather than a mood disorder.
Patients with atypical features may also have a long-term course, a diagnosis
of bipolar I disorder, or a seasonal pattern to their disorder.
Kevin, a 15-year-old adolescent, was referred to a sleep center to rule out
narcolepsy. His main complaints were fatigue, boredom, and a need to
sleep all the time. Although he had always started the day somewhat
slowly, he now could not get out of bed to go to school. That alarmed his
mother, prompting sleep consultation. Formerly a B student, he had been
failing most of his courses in the 6 months before referral. Psychological
counseling, predicated on the premise that his family’s recent move from
another city had led to Kevin’s isolation, had not been beneficial.
Extensive neurologic and general medical workup findings had also
proven negative. He slept 12 to 15 hours per day but denied cataplexy,
sleep paralysis, and hypnagogic hallucinations. During psychiatric
interview, he denied being depressed but admitted that he had lost interest
in everything except his dog. He had no drive, participated in no
activities, and had gained 30 lb in 6 months. He believed that he was
“brain damaged” and wondered whether it was worth living like that. The
question of suicide disturbed him because it was contrary to his religious
beliefs. These findings led to the prescription of an antidepressant. Not
only did the antidepressant reverse the presenting complaints, but it also
pushed him to the brink of a manic episode. (Courtesy of HS Akiskal,
M.D.)


<<<PAGE 1226>>>
With Catatonic Features. As a symptom, catatonia can be present in
several mental disorders, most commonly, schizophrenia and mood disorders.
The hallmark symptoms of catatonia are stupor, blunted affect, extreme
withdrawal, negativism, and marked psychomotor retardation. The presence
of catatonic features in patients with mood disorders may have prognostic
and treatment significance.
Postpartum Onset. We diagnose the postpartum subtype if the onset of
symptoms is within 4 weeks postpartum. Postpartum mental disorders
commonly include psychotic symptoms.
Seasonal Pattern. Patients with a seasonal pattern to their mood disorders
tend to experience depressive episodes during a particular season, most
commonly winter. The pattern has become known as seasonal affective
disorder (SAD), although DSM-5 does not use this term. There is some
controversy regarding whether this represents a subtype of major depressive
disorder or a distinct entity. Either way, the presence of the disorder has
implications for treatment, as patients with a seasonal pattern to their
depression may preferentially respond to light therapy.
Dysthymic Disorder
Dysthymic disorder (also called dysthymia) is the presence of depressive
symptoms that are less severe than those of major depressive disorder.
Although less severe than a major depressive disorder, it is often more
chronic. Table 7-3 compares the different approaches to diagnosing.
The most typical feature of dysthymia, also known as persistent depressive
disorder, is the presence of a depressed mood that lasts most of the day and is
present almost continuously. There are associated feelings of inadequacy,
guilt, irritability, and anger; withdrawal from society; loss of interest; and
inactivity and lack of productivity. The term dysthymia, which means “illhumored,” was introduced in 1980. Before that time, we tended to classify
patients having dysthymia as having “neurotic depression.”
Dysthymia is distinguished from major depressive disorder by the fact that
patients complain that they have always been depressed. Thus, most cases are


<<<PAGE 1227>>>
of early-onset, beginning in childhood or adolescence, and, almost always, by
a patient’s 20s.
Table 7-3
Dysthymic Disorder
DSM-5
Diagnostic name Persistent Depressive
Disorder
Duration

2+ yr (1+ yr for children)
≤2-mo symptom free
during illness

Symptoms

Depressed mood most of
the time
↓ appetite
↓ or ↑ sleep
↓ energy
↓ self-esteem
↓ concentration/decisionmaking ability
Hopelessness

ICD-10
Dysthymia [F43.1]

Chronically depressed
mood that does not
meet criteria for a
depressive
episode, though
criteria may have
been met in the
past

Required number First symptom and 2+ of
of symptoms
rest
Psychosocial
Distress and functional
consequences
impairment
of symptoms
Exclusions

History of bipolar disorder
Another mental illness
Substance
Another medical illness

Symptom

With pure dysthymic

Anxiety
Depression
Bereavement
Schizophrenia


<<<PAGE 1228>>>
specifiers

syndrome: criteria for
depressive episode not
met in the last 2 yr
With persistent major
depressive episode:
has met diagnostic
criteria for a
depressive episode for
entire 2-yr period
With intermittent major
depressive episode,
with current episode:
in current episode, 8
wk+ in last 2 yr with
subdiagnostic
symptoms episode
With intermittent major
depressive episode,
without current
episode: Not currently
in episode, 1+
depressive episode in
past 2 yr
With anxious distress
≥2 of following:
• Feeling tense
• Restlessness
• ↓ concentration due
to worrying
• ↑ fear without
apparent cause
• Fear of loss of control
With mixed features
—depressive or
manic/hypomanic


<<<PAGE 1229>>>
episode, + with
additional symptoms of
other episode but
subdiagnostic
With melancholic
features: see Table 72
With atypical features:
see Table 7-2
With psychotic features
• Mood-congruent
• Mood-incongruent
Course specifiers With peripartum onset—
episode is during
pregnancy or ≤4 wk
after delivery
Severity
specifiers

Mild: minimal symptoms
Moderate: between mild
and severe
Severe: # of symptoms
and
severity/dysfunction
well beyond that
required for diagnosis

A 27-year-old male grade-school teacher presented with the chief
complaint that life was a painful duty that had always lacked luster for
him. He said that he felt “enveloped by a sense of gloom” that was nearly
always with him. Although he was respected by his peers, he felt “like a
grotesque failure, a self-concept I have had since childhood.” He stated
that he merely performed his responsibilities as a teacher and that he had
never derived any pleasure from anything he had done in life. He said
that he had never had any romantic feelings; sexual activity, in which he


<<<PAGE 1230>>>
had engaged with two different women, had involved pleasureless
orgasm. He said that he felt empty, going through life without any sense
of direction, ambition, or passion, a realization that itself was tormenting.
He had bought a pistol to put an end to what he called his “useless
existence” but did not carry out suicide, believing that it would hurt his
students and the small community in which he lived. (Courtesy of HS
Akiskal, M.D.)
A late-onset subtype, much less prevalent and not well characterized
clinically, has been identified among middle-aged and geriatric populations,
mainly through epidemiologic studies in the community.
The family history of patients with dysthymia is typically replete with both
depressive and bipolar disorders, which is one of the more robust findings
supporting its link to primary mood disorder.
Other Diagnoses
Minor Depressive Disorder. Minor depressive disorder consists of
episodes of depressive symptoms that are less severe than those seen in major
depressive disorder. The difference between dysthymia and minor depressive
disorder is primarily the episodic nature of the symptoms in the latter.
Between episodes, patients with minor depressive disorder have a euthymic
mood, but patients with dysthymia have virtually no euthymic periods. DSM5 does not include this diagnosis. However, ICD-10 includes it as a mild type
of depressive episode. DSM-5 would diagnose it as an “Other Specified
Depressive Disorder.”
Recurrent Brief Depressive Disorder. Recurrent brief depressive
disorder consists of brief periods (less than 2 weeks) during which depressive
episodes are present. Patients with the disorder would meet the diagnostic
criteria for a major depressive disorder if their episodes lasted longer. Patients
with recurrent brief depressive disorder differ from patients with dysthymia
on two counts: they have an episodic disorder, and their symptoms are more
severe. ICD-10 lists this as an “Other Recurrent Mood Disorder,” whereas
DSM-5 would diagnose it as an “Other Specified Depressive Disorder.”


<<<PAGE 1231>>>
Double Depression. An estimated 40 percent of patients with major
depressive disorder also meet the criteria for dysthymia, a combination often
referred to as a double depression. Available data support the conclusion that
patients with double depression have poorer prognoses than patients with
major depressive disorder alone. The treatment of patients with double
depression should be directed toward both disorders because the resolution of
the symptoms of major depressive episode still leaves these patients with
significant psychiatric impairment.
Objective Rating Scales for Depression
There is a growing literature suggesting that the use of objective scales can
significantly improve the reliability of depressive diagnoses. They can also be
useful for tracking the course of an episode. Several validated scales exist.
Clinician Administered Scales. The Hamilton Rating Scale for
Depression (HAM-D) is a widely used depression scale. It contains up to 24
items, each rated on a 0 to 4 or 0 to 2 scale. The clinician evaluates the
patient’s answers to questions about feelings of guilt, thoughts of suicide,
sleep habits, and other symptoms of depression, and derives the ratings from
that interview. The usual scoring cutoffs are 10 to 13 for mild depression, 14
to 17 for mild-to-moderate depression, and >17 for moderate-to-severe
depression.
Self-Administered Scales. The Zung Self-Rating Depression Scale is a
20-item report scale. A normal range is 34 or less; a depressed score is 50 or
more. The scale provides a global index of the intensity of a patient’s
depressive symptoms, including the affective expression of depression.
The Raskin Depression Scale is a clinician-rated scale that measures the
severity of a patient’s depression, as reported by the patient and as observed
by the physician, on a 5-point scale of three dimensions: verbal report,
displayed behavior, and secondary symptoms. The scale has a range of 3 to
13; a normal score is 3, and a depressed score is 7 or more.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The symptoms of depressive disorders commonly overlap with other


<<<PAGE 1232>>>
syndromes and disorders. As a result, the differential is wide. Often a careful
history and examination will make the differential clear. In other cases, one
may have to observe the disorder over time before the diagnosis becomes
clear.
General Medical Disorders
It is essential to consider whether a patient’s depression is due to a general
medical condition. Failure to obtain a good clinical history or to consider the
context of a patient’s current life situation can lead to diagnostic errors.
Clinicians should have depressed adolescents tested for mononucleosis, and
we should test patients who are markedly overweight or underweight for
adrenal and thyroid dysfunctions. We should test patients with appropriate
risk factors for HIV, and older patients for viral pneumonia and other medical
conditions.
Table 7-4 lists some pharmacologic and medical conditions that can cause
depression.
Table 7-4
Pharmacologic Factors and Physical Diseases Associated
with Onset of Depression
Pharmacologic
Steroidal contraceptives
Reserpine, methyldopa
Anticholinesterase insecticides
Amphetamine or cocaine withdrawal
Alcohol or sedative–hypnotic withdrawal
Cimetidine, indomethacin
Phenothiazine antipsychotic drugs
Thallium, mercury
Cycloserine
Vincristine, vinblastine
Interferon


<<<PAGE 1233>>>
Endocrine–metabolica
Hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism
Hyperparathyroidism
Hypopituitarism
Addison disease
Cushing syndrome
Diabetes mellitus
Infectious
General paresis (tertiary syphilis)
Toxoplasmosis
Influenza, viral pneumonia
Viral hepatitis
Infectious mononucleosis
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome
Collagen
Rheumatoid arthritis
Lupus erythematosus
Nutritional
Pellagra
Pernicious anemia
Neurologic
Multiple sclerosis
Parkinson disease
Head trauma
Complex partial seizures
Sleep apnea
Cerebral tumors
Cerebrovascular infarction (and disease)
Neoplastic


<<<PAGE 1234>>>
Abdominal malignancies
Disseminated carcinomatosis
aCholesterol is not mentioned because low levels as a factor in depression have been

inconsistently reported.

Many neurologic and medical disorders and pharmacologic agents can
produce symptoms of depression. Patients with depressive disorders often
first visit their general practitioners with somatic complaints. We can detect
most medical causes of depressive disorders with a comprehensive medical
history, a complete physical and neurologic examination, and routine blood
and urine tests. The workup should include tests for thyroid and adrenal
functions because disorders of both of these endocrine systems can appear as
depressive disorders. In substance-induced mood disorder, a reasonable rule
of thumb is that any drug a depressed patient is taking should be considered a
potential factor in the mood disorder. Cardiac drugs, antihypertensives,
sedatives, hypnotics, antipsychotics, antiepileptics, antiparkinsonian drugs,
analgesics, antibacterials, and antineoplastics are all commonly associated
with depressive symptoms.
Neurologic Conditions
The most common neurologic problems that manifest depressive symptoms
are Parkinson disease, dementing illnesses, epilepsy, cerebrovascular
diseases, and tumors. About 50 to 75 percent of all patients with Parkinson
disease have marked symptoms of depressive disorder that do not correlate
with the patient’s physical disability, age, or duration of illness but do
correlate with the presence of abnormalities found on neuropsychological
tests. The motor symptoms of Parkinson disease can mask a depressive
disorder as the motor symptoms are similar. Depressive symptoms often
respond to antidepressant drugs or ECT. The interictal changes associated
with temporal lobe epilepsy can mimic a depressive disorder, especially if the
epileptic focus is on the right side. Depression is a frequent complicating
feature of cerebrovascular diseases, particularly in the 2 years after the
episode. Depression is more common in anterior brain lesions than in
posterior brain lesions and, in both cases, often responds to antidepressant
medications. Tumors of the diencephalic and temporal regions are


<<<PAGE 1235>>>
particularly likely to be associated with depressive disorder symptoms.
Dementia. Major depressive disorder can have a profound effect on
concentration and even memory, and can occasionally be confused with a
neurodegenerative illness such as Alzheimer disorder. At times the term
“pseudodementia” has been used to describe this. However, that may be illadvised as it implies that the cognitive symptoms are not genuine, which is
not the case. Clinicians can usually differentiate cognitive symptoms of a
major depressive disorder from the dementia of a disease, such as dementia
of the Alzheimer type, on clinical grounds. The cognitive symptoms in major
depressive disorder have a sudden onset, and other symptoms of the disorder,
such as self-reproach, are also present. A diurnal variation in the cognitive
problems, not seen in primary dementias, may occur. Whereas depressed
patients with cognitive difficulties often do not try to answer questions,
patients with dementia may confabulate. During an interview, depressed
patients can sometimes be coached and encouraged into remembering, an
ability that demented patients lack.
Other Mental Disorders
Depression can be a feature of virtually any mental disorder.
Other Mood Disorders. Clinicians must consider a range of diagnostic
categories before arriving at a final diagnosis. We should determine whether
a patient has had episodes of mania-like symptoms, which might indicate any
one of the bipolar disorders. The depressive episode of a bipolar disorder may
be identical to that of a major depressive disorder. However, there may be
certain features that are more predictive of a bipolar disorder, and we list
these in Table 7-5.
Table 7-5
Features of a Depressive Episode that Are More Predictive
of Bipolar Disorder
Early age at onset
Psychotic depression before 25 yr of age


<<<PAGE 1236>>>
Postpartum depression, especially one with psychotic features
Rapid onset and offset of depressive episodes of short duration (less
than 3 mo)
Recurrent depression (more than five episodes)
Depression with marked psychomotor retardation
Atypical features (reverse vegetative signs)
Seasonality
Bipolar family history
High-density three-generation pedigrees
Trait mood lability (cyclothymia)
Hyperthymic temperament
Hypomania associated with antidepressants
Repeated (at least three times) loss of efficacy of antidepressants
after initial response
Depressive mixed state (with psychomotor excitement, irritable
hostility, racing thoughts, and sexual arousal during major
depression)
From Akiskal. Mood disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017.

If a patient’s symptoms are solely depressive, the patient most likely has a
depressive disorder. Even then, we must differentiate between the various
depressive disorders discussed in this chapter. To do this, we must understand
the severity and the course of the disorder in detail.
Other Mental Disorders. Substance-related disorders, psychotic disorders
(Table 7-6), eating disorders, adjustment disorders, and somatoform disorders
are all commonly associated with depressive symptoms and should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of a patient with depressive
symptoms.


<<<PAGE 1237>>>
Perhaps the most challenging differential is that between anxiety disorders
with depression and depressive disorders with marked anxiety. Table 7-7
compares the unique features of depression with those of anxiety.
Table 7-6
Common Causes of Misdiagnosis of Mood Disorder as
Schizophrenia
Reliance on cross-sectional rather than longitudinal picture
Incomplete interepisodic recovery equated with schizophrenic defect
Equation of bizarreness with schizophrenic thought disorder
Ascribing irritable and cantankerous mood to paranoid delusions
Mistaking depressive anhedonia and depersonalization for
schizophrenic emotional blunting
Flight of ideas perceived as loose associations
Lack of familiarity with the phenomenologic approach in assessing
affective delusions and hallucinations
Heavy weight given to incidental Schneiderian symptoms
Adapted from Akiskal HS, Puzantian VR. Psychotic forms of depression and mania. Psychiatr
Clin North Am. 1979;2:419.

Table 7-7
Unique Cross-Sectional Profiles of Clinical Anxiety and
Depression
Anxiety

Depression

Hypervigilance

Psychomotor retardation

Severe tension and panic

Severe sadness

Perceived danger

Perceived loss

Phobic avoidance

Loss of interest—anhedonia


<<<PAGE 1238>>>
Doubt and uncertainty

Hopelessness—suicidal

Insecurity

Self-deprecation

Performance anxiety

Loss of libido
Early-morning awakening
Weight loss

Reprinted with permission from Akiskal HS. Toward a clinical understanding of the
relationship of anxiety and depressive disorders. In: Maser JP, Cloninger CR, eds.
Comorbidity of Mood and Anxiety Disorders. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press;
1990.

Uncomplicated Bereavement. Uncomplicated bereavement is not a
mental disorder even though about one-third of all bereaved spouses for a
time meet the diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder. Some patients
with uncomplicated bereavement do develop a major depressive disorder, but
we do not make this diagnosis unless the grief does not resolve. The severity
and course of symptoms are significant differences. Table 7-8 lists features
that would indicate that normal bereavement has progressed to a depressive
disorder.
A 75-year-old widow was brought to treatment by her daughter because
of severe insomnia and total loss of interest in daily routines after her
husband’s death 1 year before. She had been agitated for the first 2 to 3
months and thereafter “sank into total inactivity—not wanting to get out
of bed, not wanting to do anything, not wanting to go out.” According to
her daughter, she was married at 21 years of age, had four children, and
had been a housewife until her husband’s death from a heart attack. Her
past psychiatric history was negative; premorbid adjustment had been
characterized by compulsive traits. During the interview, she was dressed
in black; appeared moderately slowed; and sobbed intermittently, saying
“I search everywhere for him …. I don’t find him.” When asked about
life, she said, “Everything I see is black.” Although she expressed no
interest in food, she did not seem to have lost an appreciable amount of
weight. The patient declined psychiatric care, stating that she “preferred
to join her husband rather than get well.” She was too religious to commit


<<<PAGE 1239>>>
suicide, but by refusing treatment, she felt that she would “pine away …
find relief in death and reunion.” (Courtesy of HS Akiskal, M.D.)
In cases of severe bereavement, regardless of diagnosis, some suggest that
it would be clinically unwise to withhold antidepressants from many persons
experiencing such intense mourning.

COMORBIDITY
Individuals with major depressive disorders are at an increased risk of having
one or more additional comorbid disorders. The most frequent disorders are
alcohol abuse or dependence, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD), and social anxiety disorder. Conversely, individuals with substance
use disorders and anxiety disorders also have an elevated risk of lifetime or
current comorbid depressive disorders.
Table 7-8
Signs that a Bereaved Person Has Progressed to a
Depressive Disorder
Beliefs. Grieving persons and their relatives perceive bereavement
as a normal reaction, whereas those with depressive disorder
often view themselves as sick and may actually believe they are
losing their minds.
Emotional reactivity. Unlike the melancholic person, the grieving
person reacts to the environment and tends to show a range of
positive effects.
Psychomotor activity. Marked psychomotor retardation is not
observed in normal grief.
Guilt. Although bereaved persons often feel guilty about not having
done certain things that they believe might have saved the life of
the deceased loved one (guilt of omission), they typically do not
experience guilt of commission.
Delusions. Delusions of worthlessness or sin and psychotic


<<<PAGE 1240>>>
experiences in general point toward mood disorder.
Suicidal ideation. Active suicidal ideation is rare in grief but common
in major depressive disorder.
Behaviors. “Mummification” (i.e., keeping the belongings of the
deceased person exactly as they were before his or her death)
indicates serious psychopathology.
Anniversaries. Severe anniversary reactions should alert the
clinician to the possibility of psychopathology.
From Akiskal. Mood disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017.

Anxiety
In anxiety disorders, DSM-5 notes the existence of mixed anxiety–depressive
disorder. Significant symptoms of anxiety can and often do coexist with
significant symptoms of depression. Whether patients who exhibit significant
symptoms of both anxiety and depression are affected by two distinct disease
processes or by a single disease process that produces both sets of symptoms
are not yet resolved. Patients of both types may constitute a group of patients
with mixed anxiety–depressive disorder.
Substance Use Disorder
Alcohol dependence frequently coexists with mood disorders. Both patients
with major depressive disorder and those with bipolar I disorder are likely to
meet the diagnostic criteria for an alcohol use disorder. The available data
indicate that alcohol dependence is more strongly associated with a
coexisting diagnosis of depression in women than in men. In contrast, the
genetic and family data about men who have both a mood disorder and
alcohol dependence indicate that they are likely to have two genetically
distinct disease processes.
Substance-related disorders other than alcohol dependence are also
commonly associated with mood disorders. The abuse of substances may be
involved in precipitating an episode of illness or, conversely, may represent
patients’ attempts to treat their illnesses. Although manic patients seldom use
sedatives to dampen their euphoria, depressed patients often use stimulants,


<<<PAGE 1241>>>
such as cocaine and amphetamines, to relieve their depression.
Patients with dysthymia commonly meet the diagnostic criteria for a
substance-related disorder. This comorbidity can be logical; patients with
dysthymia tend to develop coping methods for their chronically depressed
state that involve substance abuse. Therefore, they are likely to use alcohol,
stimulants such as cocaine, or marijuana, the choice perhaps depending
primarily on a patient’s social context. The presence of a comorbid diagnosis
of substance abuse presents a diagnostic dilemma for clinicians; the longterm use of many substances can result in a symptom picture
indistinguishable from that of dysthymia.
Medical Conditions
Depression commonly coexists with medical conditions, especially in older
persons. When depression and medical conditions coexist, clinicians must try
to determine whether the underlying medical condition is
pathophysiologically related to the depression or whether any drugs that the
patient is taking for the medical condition are causing the depression. Many
studies indicate that the treatment of a coexisting major depressive disorder
can improve the course of the underlying medical disorder, including cancer.

COURSE
Studies of the course and prognosis of mood disorders have generally
concluded that mood disorders tend to have long courses and that patients
tend to have relapses.
Major Depressive Disorder
Onset. About 50 percent of patients having their first episode of major
depressive disorder exhibited significant depressive symptoms before the first
identified episode. Therefore, early identification and treatment of early
symptoms may prevent the development of a full depressive episode.
Although symptoms may have been present, patients with major depressive
disorder usually have not had a premorbid personality disorder. The first
depressive episode occurs before age 40 years in about 50 percent of patients.
Later onset is associated with the absence of a family history of mood


<<<PAGE 1242>>>
disorders, antisocial personality disorder, and alcohol abuse.
Duration. An untreated depressive episode lasts 6 to 13 months; most
treated episodes last about 3 months. The withdrawal of antidepressants
before 3 months has elapsed almost always results in the return of the
symptoms. As the course of the disorder progresses, patients tend to have
more frequent episodes that last longer. Over 20 years, the mean number of
episodes is five or six.
Other Depressive Disorders
About 50 percent of patients with dysthymia experience an insidious onset of
symptoms before age 25 years. Despite the early onset, patients often suffer
from the symptoms for a decade before seeking psychiatric help and may
consider early-onset dysthymia part of life. Patients with an early onset of
symptoms are at risk for either major depressive disorder or bipolar I disorder
in the course of their disorder. Studies of patients with the diagnosis of
dysthymia indicate that about 20 percent progressed to major depressive
disorder, 15 percent to bipolar II disorder, and fewer than 5 percent to bipolar
I disorder.
The prognosis for patients with dysthymia varies. Antidepressive agents
and specific types of psychotherapies (e.g., cognitive and behavior therapies)
have positive effects on the course and prognosis of dysthymia. The available
data about previously available treatments indicate that only 10 to 15 percent
of patients are in remission 1 year after the initial diagnosis. About 25 percent
of all patients with dysthymia never attain complete recovery. Overall,
however, the prognosis is good with treatment.

PROGNOSIS
Major depressive disorder is not a benign disorder. It tends to be chronic, and
patients tend to relapse. Patients hospitalized for the first episode of major
depressive disorder have about a 50 percent chance of recovering in the first
year. The percentage of patients recovering after repeated hospitalization
decreases with time. Many unrecovered patients remain affected by a
dysthymic disorder. About 25 percent of patients have a recurrence in the
first 6 months after leaving the hospital. Another 30 to 50 percent recur in the


<<<PAGE 1243>>>
following 2 years. About 50 to 75 percent of all patients will have a
recurrence within 5 years. The incidence of relapse is lower than these figures
in patients who continue prophylactic psychopharmacological treatment and
in patients who have had only one or two depressive episodes. In general, as
a patient experiences more and more depressive episodes, the time between
the episodes decreases, and the severity of each episode increases.
Prognostic Indicators
Many studies have focused on identifying both good and bad prognostic
indicators in the course of major depressive disorder. Table 7-9 lists some of
the positive and negative predictors.

TREATMENT APPROACH
The treatment of mood disorders is rewarding for psychiatrists. Specific
treatments are available for depressive episodes, and data indicate that
prophylactic treatment is also useful. We should be optimistic, as the
prognosis for each episode is excellent. This fact tends to be welcome news
for patients and families. Mood disorders are chronic, however, and the
psychiatrist must educate the patient and the family about future treatment
strategies.
Historically, patients with dysthymia either received no treatment or
received long-term, insight-oriented psychotherapy. Contemporary data
suggest that the treatments for dysthymia are similar to those for major
depressive disorder.
There are several treatment goals. First, the patient’s safety must be
guaranteed. Second, a complete diagnostic evaluation of the patient is
necessary. Third, we should initiate a treatment plan that addresses not only
the immediate symptoms but also the patient’s prospective well-being.
Although current treatment emphasizes pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy
addressed to the individual patient, stressful life events increase the chance of
relapse. Thus, treatment should address the number and severity of stressors
in patients’ lives.
Table 7-10 lists the phases of treatment and the typical goals and activities
for each phase.


<<<PAGE 1244>>>
Table 7-9
Prognostic Indicators for Depression
Positive Indicators
Clinical
Mild severity
No psychotic symptoms
Short hospital stay
No comorbid disease (medical/psychiatric)
No more than 1 hospitalization
Advanced age of onset
Psychosocial
Solid friendships during adolescence
Stable family functioning
Good social/occupational functioning in previous 5 yr
Negative Indicators
Comorbid dysthymic disorder and major depressive disorder
Substance use disorder
Anxiety symptoms
>1 previous episodes
Male
Hospitalization
The first and most critical decision a physician must make is whether to
hospitalize a patient or attempt outpatient treatment. Definite indications for
hospitalization are the risk of suicide or homicide, a patient’s grossly reduced
ability to get food and shelter, and the need for diagnostic procedures. A
history of rapidly progressing symptoms and the rupture of a patient’s natural
support systems are also indications for hospitalization.
A physician may safely treat dysthymia and other forms of milder
depression in the office, seeing the patient frequently. Clinical signs of
impaired judgment, weight loss, or insomnia should be minimal. The
patient’s support system should be reliable, neither overinvolved nor


<<<PAGE 1245>>>
withdrawing from the patient. Any adverse changes in the patient’s
symptoms or behavior or the attitude of the patient’s support system may
suffice to warrant hospitalization.
Patients with mood disorders are often unwilling to enter a hospital
voluntarily, and we may have to commit them involuntarily. These patients
often cannot make decisions because of their slowed thinking, negative
Weltanschauung (world view), and hopelessness.
Choosing a Treatment
Combined Treatments May Offer the Best Option. We often combine
medication and psychotherapy. If physicians view mood disorders as
fundamentally evolving from psychodynamic issues, their ambivalence about
the use of drugs may result in a poor response, noncompliance, and probably
inadequate dosages for too short a treatment period. Alternatively, if
physicians ignore the psychosocial needs of a patient, the outcome of
pharmacotherapy may be compromised. Several trials of a combination of
pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy for chronically depressed outpatients
have shown a higher response and higher remission rates for the combination
than for either treatment used alone.
Although combination remains the general—and our—recommendation—
we should point out that there are other views. Some have argued that most
data suggest that single treatment, either psychopharmacological or
psychotherapeutic, alone is sufficient for most people, and that combining
treatments exposes patients to unnecessary costs and adverse effects.
Somatic Treatments
Pharmacotherapy. The efficacy of pharmacotherapy for major depressive
disorder has been well established in more than 500 randomized controlled
studies. In general, all available antidepressants show an at least modest
effect compared with placebo. Efficacy is broadly similar across agents, at
least when compared against placebo. However, tolerability and acceptability
vary.
After establishing a diagnosis, we can formulate a pharmacologic treatment
strategy. Accurate diagnosis is crucial because unipolar and bipolar spectrum


<<<PAGE 1246>>>
disorders require different treatment regimens.
The objective of pharmacologic treatment is symptom remission, not just
symptom reduction. Patients with residual symptoms, as opposed to full
remission, are more likely to experience a relapse or recurrence of mood
episodes and to experience ongoing impairment of daily functioning.
The use of specific pharmacotherapy approximately doubles the chances
that a depressed patient will recover in 1 month. All currently available
antidepressants may take up to 3 to 4 weeks to exert significant therapeutic
effects, although they may begin to show their effects earlier. The choice of
antidepressants partly depends on the side effect profile that is least
objectionable to a given patient’s physical status, temperament, and lifestyle.
Chapter 21 discusses the many classes of antidepressants. Although most
antidepressants seem to have similar mechanisms of action and hence similar
efficacy, there are some variations across classes. This variation gives us
some diversity of choice. Although the first antidepressant drugs, the
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) and tricyclic antidepressants
(TCAs), are still in use, newer compounds have made the treatment of
depression more “clinician and patient-friendly.”
Table 7-10
Phases of Treatment
Treatment
Phase

Duration Goals

Acute and
8–12 wk Achieve
continuation
symptomatic
remission
Monitor side
effects
Restore function

Activities
Establish therapeutic
alliance
Provide
psychoeducation
Select optimal
antidepressant
treatment(s)
Supportive and
measurementbased care
Monitor progress


<<<PAGE 1247>>>
Maintenance

6–24 mo Return to full
or
function and
longer
quality of life
Prevention of
recurrence

Continue
psychoeducation
Rehabilitate
Manage
comorbidities
Monitor for
recurrence

Modified from Lam RW, McIntosh D, Wang J, Enns MW, Kolivakis T, Michalak EE, Sareen J,
Song WY, Kennedy SH, MacQueen GM, Milev RV, Parikh SV, Ravindran AV; CANMAT
Depression Work Group. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT)
2016 clinical guidelines for the management of adults with major depressive disorder: section
1. Disease burden and principles of care. Can J Psychiatry. 2016;61(9):510–523.

Table 7-11
SSRI and SNRI Antidepressant Medications and Their Side
Effect Profiles
Side Effect Frequency
Drug Class

Recommended 10–30%
Dose Range
(mg)

>30%

SSRI
Citalopram

20–40

Nausea, dry mouth, None
sweating

Escitalopram

10–20

Male sexual
dysfunction and
nausea

Fluoxetine

20–60

Nausea, dry mouth, None
somnolence,
nervousness,
anxiety,
insomnia,
tremor, anorexia

Fluvoxamine

100–300

Dry mouth,

None

Nausea


<<<PAGE 1248>>>
headaches,
somnolence,
agitation,
insomnia,
sweating, tremor,
anorexia,
dizziness,
constipation
Paroxetine

20–60

Nausea, diarrhea,
dry mouth,
headaches,
somnolence,
insomnia,
sweating,
asthenia, male
sexual
dysfunction,
dizziness

None

Sertraline

50–200

Nausea, diarrhea,
dry mouth,
headaches,
somnolence,
insomnia,
fatigue, tremor,
male sexual
dysfunction,
dizziness

None

75–375

Headaches,
Nausea
somnolence, dry
mouth,
dizziness,
nervousness,
insomnia,

SNRI
Venlafaxine


<<<PAGE 1249>>>
sweating, male
sexual
dysfunction
Desvenlafaxine

50–100

Dry mouth,
dizziness,
nausea,
sweating

None

Duloxetine

30–120

Nausea, dry mouth, None
constipation,
insomnia, male
sexual
dysfunction

Levomilnacipran

20–80

Nausea, dry mouth, None
headaches, male
sexual
dysfunction

Other Second-Generation and Novel Antidepressants
Agomelatinea

25–50

None

None

Bupropion

150–450

Insomnia, dry
mouth, nausea

Headaches

Mirtazapine

15–60

Dry mouth,
constipation,
increased
appetite, weight
gain

Somnolence

Moclobemidea

300–600

None

None

Vilazodone

10–40

Diarrhea, nausea,
headaches

None

Vortioxetine

10–20

Nausea

None

aNot routinely available in the United States.


<<<PAGE 1250>>>
Data from Kennedy SH, Lam RW, McIntyre RS, Tourjman SV, Bhat V, Blier P, Hasnain M,
Jollant F, Levitt AJ, MacQueen GM, McInerney SJ, McIntosh D, Milev RV, Müller DJ, Parikh
SV, Pearson NL, Ravindran AV, Uher R; CANMAT Depression Work Group. Canadian
Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) 2016 clinical guidelines for the
management of adults with major depressive disorder: section 3. Pharmacological treatments.
Can J Psychiatry. 2016;61(9):540–560; Kennedy SH, Rizvi SJ. Chapter 246: SSRIs and
related compounds. In: Stolerman I, ed. Encyclopedia of Pharmacology. New York: Springer;
2010.

Table 7-11 lists selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) by class as well as their
side-effect profiles.
GENERAL CLINICAL GUIDELINES. The most common clinical mistake leading to

an unsuccessful trial of an antidepressant drug is the use of too low a dosage
for too short a time. Unless adverse events prevent it, the dosage of an
antidepressant should be raised to the maximum recommended level and
maintained at that level for at least 4 or 5 weeks before a drug trial is
considered unsuccessful. Alternatively, if a patient is improving clinically on
a low dosage of the drug, this dosage should not be raised unless clinical
improvement stops before obtaining a maximal benefit. When a patient does
not begin to respond to appropriate dosages of a drug after 2 or 3 weeks,
clinicians may decide to obtain a plasma concentration of the drug if such a
test is available. The test may indicate either noncompliance or a particularly
unusual pharmacokinetic disposition of the drug and may thereby suggest an
alternative dosage.
INITIAL MEDICATION SELECTION. The available antidepressants do not differ in

overall efficacy, speed of response, or long-term effectiveness.
Antidepressants, however, do differ in their pharmacology, drug–drug
interactions, short- and long-term side effects, the likelihood of
discontinuation symptoms, and ease of dose adjustment. Most often, we start
with second- and third-generation antidepressants. Among them, the selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) remain the most commonly used
medications for depression.
Selection of the initial treatment depends on the chronicity of the
condition, course of illness (a recurrent or chronic course increases the
likelihood of subsequent depressive symptoms without treatment), family


<<<PAGE 1251>>>
history of illness and treatment response, symptom severity, concurrent
general medical or other psychiatric conditions, prior treatment responses to
other acute-phase treatments, potential drug–drug interactions, and patient
preference.
In general, approximately 45 to 60 percent of all outpatients with
uncomplicated (i.e., minimal psychiatric and general medical comorbidity),
nonchronic, nonpsychotic major depressive disorder who begin treatment
with medication respond (i.e., achieve at least a 50 percent reduction in
baseline symptoms); however, only 35 to 50 percent achieve remission (i.e.,
the virtual absence of depressive symptoms).
DURATION AND PROPHYLAXIS. We should maintain antidepressant treatment

for at least 6 months or the length of a previous episode, whichever is greater.
When discontinuing antidepressant treatment, the drug dose should be
tapered gradually over 1 to 2 weeks, depending on the half-life of the
particular compound.
Prophylactic treatment with antidepressants is effective in reducing the
number and severity of recurrences. One study concluded that when episodes
are less than 21/2 years apart, we should recommend prophylactic treatment.
Another factor suggesting prophylactic treatment is the seriousness of
previous depressive episodes. Episodes that have involved significant suicidal
ideation or impairment of psychosocial functioning may indicate that the risk
of stopping treatment is too considerable.
Prevention of new mood episodes (i.e., recurrences) is the aim of the
maintenance phase of treatment. Only patients with recurrent or chronic
depressions are candidates for maintenance treatment. Several studies
indicate that maintenance antidepressant medication appears to be safe and
effective for the treatment of chronic depression.
Clinical types of major
depressive episodes may have varying responses to particular antidepressants
or drugs other than antidepressants. Antidepressants with dual action on both
serotonergic and noradrenergic receptors may have greater efficacy in
melancholic depressions. We can treat patients with seasonal winter
depression with light therapy.
Treatment of major depressive episodes with psychotic features may
TREATMENT OF SPECIFIC DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS.


<<<PAGE 1252>>>
require a combination of an antidepressant and an atypical antipsychotic.
Several studies have also shown that ECT is useful for this indication—
perhaps more effective than pharmacotherapy.
For those with atypical symptom features, strong evidence exists for the
effectiveness of MAOIs. SSRIs and bupropion are also of use in atypical
depression.
COMORBID DISORDERS. The simultaneous presence of another disorder can

affect initial treatment selection. For example, the successful treatment of an
OCD associated with depressive symptoms usually results in remission of the
depression. Similarly, when panic disorder occurs with major depression,
medications with demonstrated efficacy in both conditions are preferred (e.g.,
tricyclics and SSRIs). In general, the nonmood disorder dictates the choice of
treatment in comorbid states.
Concurrent substance abuse raises the possibility of a substance-induced
mood disorder, which must be evaluated by history or by requiring
abstinence for several weeks. Abstinence often results in remission of
depressive symptoms in substance-induced mood disorders. For those with
continuing significant depressive symptoms, even with abstinence, an
independent mood disorder is diagnosed and treated.
General medical conditions are established risk factors in the development
of depression. The presence of a major depressive episode is associated with
increased morbidity or mortality of many general medical conditions (e.g.,
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, cerebrovascular disease, and cancer).
THERAPEUTIC USE OF SIDE EFFECTS. Choosing more sedating antidepressants

(such as mirtazapine or paroxetine) for more anxious, depressed patients or
more activating agents (bupropion) for more psychomotor-retarded patients is
not as helpful as one might think. For example, any short-term benefits with
paroxetine or mirtazapine on symptoms of anxiety or insomnia may become
liabilities over time. These drugs often continue to be sedating in the longer
run, which can lead to patients prematurely discontinuing medication and
increase the risk of relapse or recurrence. Some practitioners use adjunctive
medications, such as hypnotics or anxiolytics, combined with antidepressants
to provide more immediate symptom relief or to cover those side effects to
which most patients ultimately adapt.


<<<PAGE 1253>>>
Understanding a patient’s prior treatment history is essential because an
earlier response typically predicts future responses. A documented failure on
a properly conducted trial of a particular antidepressant class is grounds to
choose an agent from an alternative class. The history of a first-degree
relative responding to a particular drug is associated with a positive response
to the same class of agents in the patient.
Patients may not respond to medication,
because (1) they cannot tolerate the side effects, even in the face of an
excellent clinical response; (2) an idiosyncratic adverse event may occur; (3)
the clinical response is not adequate; or (4) the wrong diagnosis has been
made. Acute phase medication trials should last 4 to 6 weeks to allow for
adequate time for meaningful symptom reduction. Most (but not all) patients
who ultimately respond fully show at least a partial response by the fourth
week, assuming an adequate dose. A “partial response” is defined as at least a
20 to 25 percent reduction in pretreatment depressive symptom severity.
Patients who have not even a partial response in that time likely need a
change of treatment. More extended periods—8 to 12 weeks or longer—are
needed to define the ultimate degree of symptom reduction achievable with a
medication. Approximately half of patients require a second medication
treatment trial because the initial treatment is poorly tolerated or ineffective.
ACUTE TREATMENT FAILURES.

Selecting Second Treatment Options. When the initial treatment is
unsuccessful, switching to an alternative treatment or augmenting the current
treatment is a standard option. The choice between switching from the single
initial treatment to a new single treatment (as opposed to adding a second
treatment to the first one) rests on the patient’s prior treatment history, the
degree of benefit achieved with the initial treatment, and patient preference.
As a rule, switching rather than augmenting is preferred after an initial
medication failure. On the other hand, augmentation strategies are helpful
with patients who have gained some benefit from the initial treatment but
who have not achieved remission. A review of the different strategies
suggested there is some evidence suggesting that both strategies do confer
some benefit. However, the evidence is inadequate to suggest one strategy
over another.
When switching from one monotherapy to another, the usual suggestion is


<<<PAGE 1254>>>
to pick a medication in a different class. For example, we might switch from
an SSRI to an SNRI. However, when putting these assumptions to the test, it
is difficult to find any advantage for any particular strategy. For example, in
the landmark STAR*D study, which remains one of the most extensive
studies of treatment strategies following initial failure, although medication
switches were modestly helpful, both switches within and outside a class
were equally effective.
Among augmentation options, several approaches have reasonable
evidence. Several antipsychotics, most notably quetiapine and aripiprazole,
are effective for augmentation. Lithium augmentation is also effective for
augmenting both SSRIs and TCAs. There are also positive studies of thyroid
hormone. However, this strategy is rarely used in clinical practice owing to
the need for ongoing monitoring and potential adverse effects. Several other
agents have been studied, including bupropion, buspirone, lamotrigine,
methylphenidate, and pindolol; however, these have limited placebocontrolled data. One meta-analysis of the available data on switching
strategies concluded that quetiapine and aripiprazole have the best evidence
as augmentation agents. However, we should use these cautiously given their
side effect profile.
NOVEL PHARMACOLOGIC AGENTS

Ketamine. The anesthetic agent ketamine is effective in treatment-resistant
depression. It has a mechanism of action that inhibits the postsynaptic
glutamate-binding protein N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. Because
abnormalities in glutamatergic signaling seem to have a role in major
depressive disorder, this may account for its efficacy. Until recently,
ketamine was only available intravenously, limiting its use as we had to
monitor patients while they received an infusion of the drug over 30 minutes
in a clinical setting. The most common side effects are dizziness, headache,
and poor coordination, which are transitory. Dissociative symptoms,
including hallucinations, may also occur. A positive response is usually seen
within 24 hours, making this a genuinely novel substance in that it appears to
act much more rapidly than standard antidepressants. However, the effect
seems to be short-lived, and wears off after between 2 and 7 days, again
limiting its use. There are little data on longer-term treatment as well as
concern over associated adverse effects, particularly the psychogenic effect.


<<<PAGE 1255>>>
Also, the agent has an abuse potential, making it less attractive as a long-term
option.
More recently, esketamine in a nasal spray formulation was approved by
the FDA for treatment-resistant depression. Given the abuse risk, it is only
available through a restricted distribution system. Most of the supportive
evidence for the agent is from short-term use. However, one longer-term
study suggested that continuation treatment could be effective for some
patients.
Brexanolone. Brexanolone is an intravenous formulation of
allopregnanolone, which was approved by the FDA in 2019 for the treatment
of postpartum depression. It is a neuroactive steroid that also has a
neuroactive effect, functioning as an allosteric modulator of GABAA, which
may be central to the mechanism of postpartum depression. It is also only
available in the United States through a restricted program that requires
administrating the drug in a clinical setting over 60 hours. The most common
adverse effects are sleepiness, dry mouth, loss of consciousness, and flushing.
As with ketamine, brexanolone differs from standard antidepressants in its
apparent rapid effect, reducing depressive symptoms as early as 24 hours
after administration. In trials, the effect continued for at least 30 days. As of
this writing, phase 3 trials for an oral version of the medication have
promising results.

Other Somatic Treatments
NEUROSTIMULATION

Vagal Nerve Stimulation. Experimental stimulation of the vagus nerve in
several studies designed for the treatment of epilepsy found that patients
showed improved mood. This observation led to the use of left vagal nerve
stimulation (VNS) using an electronic device implanted in the skin, similar to
a cardiac pacemaker. Preliminary studies have shown that many patients with
chronic, recurrent major depressive disorder went into remission when treated
with VNS. The mechanism of action of VNS to account for improvement is
unknown. The vagus nerve connects to the enteric nervous system and, when
stimulated, may cause the release of peptides that act as neurotransmitters.


<<<PAGE 1256>>>
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation. Transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) shows promise as a treatment for depression. It involves the use of
very short pulses of magnetic energy to stimulate nerve cells in the brain. The
FDA has indicated this treatment for depression in adult patients who have
failed to achieve satisfactory improvement from one prior antidepressant
medication at or above the minimal effective dose and duration in the current
episode.
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) produces focal
secondary electrical stimulation of targeted cortical regions. It is
nonconvulsive, requires no anesthesia, has a safe side effect profile, and is
not associated with cognitive side effects.
The patients do not require anesthesia or sedation and remain awake and
alert. It is a 40-minute outpatient procedure that is prescribed by a
psychiatrist and performed in a psychiatrist’s office. The treatment is
typically administered daily for 4 to 6 weeks. The most common adverse
event related to treatment was scalp pain or discomfort.
TMS therapy is contraindicated in patients with implanted metallic devices
or nonremovable metallic objects in or around the head.
PHOTOTHERAPY. Phototherapy (light therapy) was introduced in 1984 as a

treatment for SAD (mood disorder with seasonal pattern). In this disorder,
patients typically experience depression as the photoperiod of the day
decreases with advancing winter. Women represent at least 75 percent of all
patients with seasonal depression, and the mean age of presentation is 40
years. Patients rarely present older than the age of 55 years with SAD.
Phototherapy typically involves exposing the affected patient to bright
light in the range of 1,500 to 10,000 lux or more, typically with a lightbox
that sits on a table or desk. Patients sit in front of the box for approximately 1
to 2 hours before dawn each day. Some patients may also benefit from
exposure after dusk. Alternatively, some manufacturers have developed light
visors, with a light source built into the brim of the hat. These light visors
allow mobility, but recent controlled studies have questioned the use of this
type of light exposure. Trials have typically lasted 1 week, but longer
treatment durations may be associated with a more significant response.
Phototherapy is usually well tolerated. Newer light sources tend to use
lower light intensities and come equipped with filters; patients are instructed


<<<PAGE 1257>>>
not to look directly at the light source. As with any effective antidepressant,
phototherapy, on rare occasions, has been implicated in switching some
depressed patients into mania or hypomania.
In addition to seasonal depression, the other significant indication for
phototherapy may be in sleep disorders. Phototherapy can decrease the
irritability and diminished functioning associated with shift work. Sleep
disorders in geriatric patients have reportedly improved with exposure to
bright light during the day. Likewise, some evidence suggests that jet lag
might respond to light therapy. Preliminary data indicate that phototherapy
may benefit some patients with OCD that has a seasonal variation.
Sleep disturbances are common in depression.
Depression can be associated with either hypersomnia or insomnia. Sleep
deprivation may temporarily relieve depression in those who have unipolar
depression. Approximately 60 percent of patients with depressive disorders
exhibit significant but transient benefits from total sleep deprivation. The
positive results usually reverse by the next night of sleep. Several strategies
have been used in an attempt to achieve a more sustained response to sleep
deprivation. One method used serial total sleep deprivation with a day or two
of normal sleep in between. This method does not achieve a sustained
antidepressant response because the depression tends to return during the
“normal sleep” days. Another approach used phase delay in the time patients
go to sleep each night, or partial sleep deprivation. In this method, patients
may stay awake from 2 AM to 10 PM daily. Up to 50 percent of patients get
same-day antidepressant effects from partial sleep deprivation, but this
benefit also tends to wear off in time. In some reports, however, serial partial
sleep deprivation has been used successfully to treat insomnia associated with
depression. The third, and probably most useful strategy combines sleep
deprivation with pharmacologic treatment of depression. Several studies have
suggested that total and partial sleep deprivation followed by immediate
treatment with an antidepressant or lithium sustains the antidepressant effects
of sleep deprivation. Likewise, several reports have suggested that sleep
deprivation accelerates the response to antidepressants. Sleep deprivation
may also improve premenstrual dysphoria.
SLEEP

DEPRIVATION.


<<<PAGE 1258>>>
Table 7-12
Evidence-Based Psychotherapies for Major Depressive
Disorder
Treatment

Conceptualization of
Disorder Etiology

Sample Interventions

Behavioral
therapy

Deficit of reinforcers,
Increase activity level
including pleasant
activities and positive
Structured goal setting
interpersonal
contacts
Interpersonal skills
training

Cognitivebehavioral
therapy

Interaction of beliefs with Identify and challenge
matching stressor
automatic thoughts
Engage in activities that
provide evidence
disproving
dysfunctional beliefs
Modify core beliefs by
reviewing evidence

Interpersonal
Interpersonal
Develop awareness of
psychotherapy
vulnerabilities arising
patterns in primary
from early attachment
relationships and the
and learned
therapeutic
relationship patterns
relationship
Interpersonal skills
training
Communication
analysis
Behavioral
marital

Marital distress
increases stress

Assertive
communication


<<<PAGE 1259>>>
therapy

while impairing
support resources

training
Active listening
exercises
Problem-solving skills
Increasing reinforcing
behaviors toward
spouse

Psychosocial Therapy
Three types of short-term psychotherapies—cognitive therapy, interpersonal
therapy, and behavior therapy—have extensive studies for the treatment of
major depressive disorder. In addition to these individual therapies, there are
positive studies for behavioral marital therapy as well. Table 7-12 lists the
evidence-based psychotherapies for major depressive disorder.
There are no generally accepted guidelines for choosing one therapy over
another. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Treatment of
Depression Collaborative Research Program did find some possible
predictors of good response to specific treatments. Table 7-13 summarizes
those findings.
Cognitive Therapy. Cognitive therapy, originally developed by Aaron
Beck, focuses on the cognitive distortions postulated to be present in major
depressive disorder. Such distortions include selective attention to the
negative aspects of circumstances and unrealistically morbid inferences about
consequences. For example, apathy and low energy result from a patient’s
expectation of failure in all areas. The goal of cognitive therapy is to alleviate
depressive episodes and prevent their recurrence by helping patients identify
and test negative cognitions; develop alternative, flexible, and positive ways
of thinking; and rehearse new cognitive and behavioral responses.
In this example, the therapist takes a cognitive approach when a patient
shows up late to an appointment.


<<<PAGE 1260>>>
Therapist: You mentioned that you were upset because you were late.
Can you tell me what you were thinking when you realized you were
late?
Patient: I figured you’d be angry.
Therapist: Okay, and when you thought I’d be angry, how did you feel?
Patient: Pretty nervous.
Therapist: So that is what we will focus on in here, how your thinking in
different situations influences how you feel. In this case, you were late,
thought “he’ll be angry,” and felt nervous. Our goal is to test out the
beliefs, like “he’ll be angry,” and change them when they aren’t healthy
or accurate. The great thing is that you sort of implicitly tested out the
belief that I’ll be angry by showing up. Was I angry?
Patient: You didn’t seem angry.
Table 7-13
Predictors of
Depression

Response

to

Several

Therapies

Treatment

Predictors

Interpersonal psychotherapy

Low social dysfunction
High depression severity

Cognitive-behavioral therapy

Low cognitive dysfunction

Pharmacotherapy

Low cognitive dysfunction
High depression severity
High work dysfunction

for

Data from Sotsky SM, Glass DR, Shea MT, Pilkonis PA, Collins JF, Elkin I, Watkins JT, Imber
SD, Leber WR, Moyer J, Oliveri ME. Patient predictors of response to psychotherapy and
pharmacotherapy: findings in the NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research
Program. Am J Psychiatry. 1991;148:997–1108.

Therapist: How anxious did you feel once we started talking?
Patient: Well, I’m feeling more comfortable.
Therapist: What thoughts do you have now about me being angry?


<<<PAGE 1261>>>
Patient: I don’t think you’re angry.
Therapist: So, this is an example of what we’re going to be doing in
therapy—I’ll be helping you to identify thoughts that make you feel bad.
We’re then going to work together to come up with ways to check them
out and change them if they’re not true or accurate. You checked out
whether I was angry by observing me, and you changed your thought,
and, now, I get the impression that you feel better.
Studies have shown that cognitive therapy is useful in the treatment of
major depressive disorder. Most studies found that cognitive therapy is equal
in efficacy to pharmacotherapy and is associated with fewer adverse effects
and better follow-up than pharmacotherapy. Some of the best-controlled
studies have indicated that the combination of cognitive therapy and
pharmacotherapy is more efficacious than either therapy alone, although
other studies have not found that additive effect.
Interpersonal Therapy. Interpersonal therapy, developed by Gerald
Klerman, focuses on one or two of a patient’s current interpersonal problems.
This therapy has two assumptions. First, current interpersonal problems are
likely to have their roots in early dysfunctional relationships. Second, current
interpersonal problems are likely to be involved in precipitating or
perpetuating the current depressive symptoms. Controlled trials have
indicated that interpersonal therapy is effective for treatment of major
depressive disorder and, not surprisingly, may be specifically helpful in
addressing interpersonal problems. Some studies indicate that interpersonal
therapy may be the most effective method for severe major depressive
episodes when the treatment choice is psychotherapy alone.
The interpersonal therapy program usually consists of 12 to 16 weekly
sessions and is characterized by an active therapeutic approach. Intrapsychic
phenomena, such as defense mechanisms and internal conflicts, are not
addressed. Discrete behaviors—such as lack of assertiveness, impaired social
skills, and distorted thinking—may be addressed but only in the context of
their meaning in, or their effect on, interpersonal relationships.
Behavior Therapy. Behavior therapy rests on the hypothesis that


<<<PAGE 1262>>>
maladaptive behavioral patterns result in a person’s receiving little positive
feedback and perhaps outright rejection from society. By addressing
maladaptive behaviors in therapy, patients learn to function in the world in
such a way that they receive positive reinforcement. Behavior therapy for
major depressive disorder has not yet been the subject of many controlled
studies. The limited data indicate that it is an effective treatment for major
depressive disorder.
Psychoanalytically Oriented Therapy. Although not as well researched
as those three therapies, many clinicians use psychoanalytically oriented
psychotherapy as their primary method. What differentiates the short-term
psychotherapy methods from the psychoanalytically oriented approach are
the active and directive roles of the therapist, the directly recognizable goals,
and the endpoints for short-term therapy.
The psychoanalytic approach to mood disorders uses psychoanalytic
theories about depression. The goal of psychoanalytic psychotherapy is to
effect a change in a patient’s personality structure or character, not merely to
alleviate symptoms. Improvements in interpersonal trust, capacity for
intimacy, coping mechanisms, the capacity to grieve, and the ability to
experience a wide range of emotions are some of the aims of psychoanalytic
therapy. Treatment often requires the patient to experience periods of
heightened anxiety and distress during therapy, which may continue for
several years.
Accumulating evidence is encouraging about the efficacy of dynamic
therapy. In a randomized, controlled trial comparing psychodynamic therapy
with cognitive-behavioral therapy, the outcome of the depressed patients was
the same in the two treatments.
Family Therapy. Family therapy is usually the first-line treatment for major
depressive disorder, but increasing evidence indicates that helping a patient
with a mood disorder to reduce and cope with stress can lessen the chance of
a relapse. We should consider family therapy if the disorder jeopardizes a
patient’s marriage or family functioning or if the mood disorder is promoted
or maintained by the family situation. Family therapy examines the role of
the mood-disordered member in the overall psychological well-being of the
whole family; it also examines the role of the entire family in the


<<<PAGE 1263>>>
maintenance of the patient’s symptoms. Patients with mood disorders have a
high rate of divorce, and about 50 percent of all spouses report that they
would not have married or had children if they had known that the patient
was going to develop a mood disorder.

THE EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DEPRESSION
Research on the epidemiology of depression, both in the United States and
worldwide, has considerably broadened our understanding of the disorder.
We have discovered that depression is much more common than once
thought. It is also one of the more debilitating disorders known to humanity,
as it often affects individuals during what should be their most productive
years. Hence the depressive disorders are one of the most costly disorders in
society.
Measuring the Incidence and Prevalence of Major Depressive
Disorder Is Challenging
Measuring the true incidence of major depressive disorder is complicated and
highly dependent on the methods used to collect the sample, definitions of the
disorder, and the particular instruments used to measure depression. For
example, studies that use self-assessment tend to report higher incidences
than studies using clinician-rated instruments. The timing of a study likely
affects the results as well. As depressive illness become less stigmatized,
persons may be more willing to endorse symptoms of the disorder to the
well-meaning strangers who knock at their door, call their phone, or email
them and identify themselves as researchers.
Incidence and Prevalence
In a reasonably recent meta-analysis, which included 90 studies from 30
countries done from 1994 to 2014, with combined data on more than 1
million participants, the point prevalence for depression was 12.9 percent, the
1-year prevalence was 7.2 percent, and the lifetime prevalence was 10.8
percent. There was significant heterogeneity among the different studies.


<<<PAGE 1264>>>
FIGURE 7-1
Lifetime prevalence of major depression across the world.

In the United States, the most recent epidemiologic data is from the
National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), sponsored by the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
Using a definition of a major depressive episode based on DSM-5, they found
the overall 1-year prevalence of a major depressive episode to be 7.1 percent,
hence very similar to the international data. Figure 7-1 summarizes some of
the international prevalence data as it related to per capita income.
Sex
An almost universal observation, independent of country or culture, is that
depression is more common in women than men. In the international metaanalysis, the aggregate prevalence for women was 14.4 percent versus 11.5
percent in men. In the United States, women were more likely to report a
major depressive episode in the past year (8.7 percent) than men (5.3
percent).
There are various possible explanations, both biologic, psychological, and
social, for this difference. A women’s unequal status in many societies may
make women more vulnerable to depression. Although this remains a valid
hypothesis, it is notable that in societies where women have gained a better
level of status, such as many Western societies, the ratio has not significantly
changed. Although the explanation is undoubtedly complex and
multifactorial, the weight of existing evidence suggests that biologic
differences between men and women, such as variations in hormonal levels,
do account for at least part of this difference.
Age


<<<PAGE 1265>>>
The mean age of onset for major depressive disorder is about 40 years, with
50 percent of all patients having an onset between the ages of 20 and 50
years. Major depressive disorder can also begin in childhood or old age.
Some epidemiologic data suggest that the incidence of major depressive
disorder may be increasing among younger persons. For example, in the
SAMHSA study, major depressive disorder was almost twice as prevalent in
adolescents as it was in adults, the most substantial difference being seen in
adolescent females who reported a 1-year prevalence of major depression of
20 percent. The highest 1-year prevalence for major depressive disorder was
in younger adults (adults ages 18 to 25).
Marital Status
Major depressive disorder occurs most often in persons without close
interpersonal relationships and in those who are divorced or separated.
Socioeconomic and Cultural Factors
There is no proven correlation between socioeconomic status and major
depressive disorder. Depression may be more common in rural areas than in
urban areas. However, the most recent international meta-analysis described
above did not find such a difference. It may be that technology and
globalization have been able to narrow the differences between rural and
urban settings.
Racial and ethnic differences may be particularly challenging to measure
and may be highly dependent on method, approach, and locale. In the
SAMSHA study, the highest prevalence was seen in White and Native
American respondents.

THE NEUROBIOLOGY OF DEPRESSION
Since the time of Kraepelin, researchers have examined the brains, bodies,
and behaviors of depressed patients in the search for clues of the underlying
pathology of depression. This search is complicated by the fact that most
experts on depression agree what we call major depressive disorder is not a
single disease, but rather a collection of disorders with overlapping
phenomenology but different etiologies and pathologies. Although this


<<<PAGE 1266>>>
assumption seems likely, we have yet to find definitive subtypes or distinct
patterns that we can confidently group into separate disorders. This area of
research is a rapidly changing field, and improvements in technology,
including higher-resolution imaging, more efficient genotyping, and more
powerful computing power are getting us closer to the search for valid
“biotypes” of depression.
What follows here are examples of pathologic findings, most of which
have been reasonably replicated by different investigators. Some are long
known, others are recent. However, the growing collection of pathologic
findings is helping us to understand what is happening when a patient says
that they are “depressed.”
Depression as a Disorder of Homeostasis
Depression and the Hypothalamic–Pituitary–Adrenal Axis. We
have known for more than 50 years that, on average, depressed patients have
an overactive hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis. Compared with
controls, depressed patients have increased cortisol levels over 24 hours. We
have documented elevated HPA activity in depression via excretion of
urinary-free cortisol (UFC), 24-hour (or shorter time segments) intravenous
(IV) collections of plasma cortisol levels, salivary cortisol levels, and tests of
the integrity of feedback inhibition. Evidence of increased HPA activity is
apparent in 20 to 40 percent of depressed outpatients and 40 to 60 percent of
depressed inpatients.
This hypercortisolemia is due to increased corticotropin-releasing hormone
(CRH) from the hypothalamus, along with decreased feedback inhibition. We
can test for a disturbance of feedback inhibition using the dexamethasone test
(DST). The DST was devised in the 1980s—patients were given
dexamethasone—a synthetic steroid. This should create a negative feedback
loop, and serum cortisol should decrease. However, depressed patients show
an initial decrease but then “escape” from the suppression and return to
abnormally high levels of cortisol. Although this is a replicable finding, it is
not useful enough to be a diagnostic test, as it is neither sensitive (many
patients diagnosed with depression have a normal DST) nor specific (many
other conditions, such as Cushing syndrome, or simple environmental stress,
can cause an abnormal DST).


<<<PAGE 1267>>>
Postmortem studies have shown increased neurons in the hypothalamus,
which is likely what is driving the increased activity. This neuronal increase
is likely in response to chronic stress.
Elevated HPA activity is a hallmark of the mammalian stress responses
and one of the most unambiguous links between depression and the biology
of chronic stress. Hypercortisolema in depression suggests one or more of the
following central disturbances: decreased inhibitory serotonin tone, increased
drive from norepinephrine, acetylcholine (ACh), or CRH; or decreased
feedback inhibition from the hippocampus. Some studies in depressed
humans indicate that a history of early trauma is associated with increased
HPA activity accompanied by structural changes (i.e., atrophy or decreased
volume) in the cerebral cortex.
DEPRESSION ALSO AFFECTS OTHER ENDOCRINE AND RELATED REGULATORY
SYSTEMS

Thyroid Axis Activity. Approximately 5 to 10 percent of people evaluated
for depression have previously undetected thyroid dysfunction, as reflected
by an elevated basal thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level or an increased
TSH response to a 500-mg infusion of the hypothalamic neuropeptide
thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH). Such abnormalities are often associated
with elevated antithyroid antibody levels and, unless corrected with hormone
replacement therapy, can compromise response to treatment. An even more
significant subgroup of depressed patients (e.g., 20 to 30 percent) shows a
blunted TSH response to TRH challenge. To date, the major therapeutic
implication of a blunted TSH response is evidence of an increased risk of
relapse despite preventive antidepressant therapy. Of note, unlike the
dexamethasone-suppression test (DST), blunted TSH response to TRH does
not usually normalize with effective treatment.
Growth Hormone. Growth hormone (GH) is secreted from the anterior
pituitary after stimulation by NE and dopamine. Somatostatin, a
hypothalamic neuropeptide, and CRH inhibit this secretion. Decreased CSF
somatostatin levels occur in depression, as do increased levels in mania.
Prolactin. Prolactin is released from the pituitary by serotonin stimulation
and inhibited by dopamine. Most studies have not found significant


<<<PAGE 1268>>>
abnormalities of basal or circadian prolactin secretion in depression, although
some see a blunted prolactin response to various serotonin agonists. This
response is uncommon among premenopausal women, suggesting that
estrogen has a moderating effect.
Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor. Various growth factor proteins, of
which brain-derived neurotrophic factor (or BDNF) is best understood, are
responsible for the ongoing maintenance of neurons in the brain, and
disruption of it causes a reduction in neuronal number and size. It is
challenging to measure BDNF in the living subjects, but postmortem studies
have suggested deficits in BDNF may correlate with psychopathology. For
example, some studies have found that in postmortem examination of persons
who died from suicide, the average BDNF in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and
hippocampus was lower than for control subjects. Indirect studies in live
patients, looking at BDNF in plasma rather than the brain (the correlation
between the two is not clear), found increases in serum BDNF in depressed
patients who responded to antidepressants.
BDNF may provide clues to the relationship between chronic stress and
depression as the activity of the gene coding for this growth factor decreases
with chronic stress, as does neurogenesis.
Similarly, animal studies show that a variety of factors, including
antidepressants, estrogen, lithium, and neurostimulation, all increase BDNF
in the brain, suggesting a possible common link between known treatments
for depression.
DEPRESSION ALSO DISRUPTS CIRCADIAN RHYTHM. It has also long been known

that depression is associated with a premature loss of deep (slow-wave) sleep
and an increase in nocturnal arousal. Four types of disturbance reflect the
latter: (1) an increase in nocturnal awakenings, (2) a reduction in total sleep
time, (3) increased phasic rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, and (4)
increased core body temperature. The combination of increased REM drive
and decreased slow-wave sleep results in a significant reduction in the first
period of non-REM (NREM) sleep, a phenomenon referred to as reduced
REM latency. Blunted secretion of GH may cause this reduction in latency,
which usually increases with sleep onset. It is very persistent, often lasting
beyond recovery from depression. Some patients manifesting a


<<<PAGE 1269>>>
characteristically abnormal sleep profile are known to be less responsive to
psychotherapy and to have a higher risk of relapse or recurrence and may
benefit preferentially from pharmacotherapy.
As with the HPA access, the association between sleep disturbances and
depression is common, but it is neither sensitive nor specific enough for
clinical use. About 40 percent of outpatients and 80 percent of inpatients
show a typical pattern of reduced REM latency, increased REM density, and
decreased sleep maintenance. False-negative findings are common in
younger, hypersomnolent patients, who may experience an increase in slowwave sleep during episodes of depression. Approximately 10 percent of
otherwise healthy individuals have abnormal sleep profiles, as do many
patients suffering from other medical or psychiatric disorders.
Neurotransmitter Deficits Are Involved. Much of the research into the
neurobiology of depression has centered on the role played by
neurotransmitters. This approach was understandable, given that most
somatic treatments for depression appear to act by influencing
neurotransmission. In the 1950s, researchers found that reserpine, an
antihypertensive that acts by inhibiting the release of monoamine
neurotransmitters, sometimes induced depression. During the same decade,
others discovered the earliest antidepressants. Although the discoveries were
serendipitous, it eventually became clear that they all interfered with the
catabolism of monoamine neurotransmitters, and researchers presumed that
this must be their mechanism of action. It was reasonable, then, to assume
that depression was due to abnormally low levels of these monoamines. Early
theories of depression explained the disorder as a deficit or imbalance in
neurotransmitters: hence depressed patients were often told that they had a
“chemical imbalance.” Such a simplistic theory was, of course, overly
optimistic, and subsequent neurochemical research did not find such simple
relationships. However, neurotransmitters do play an essential role in the
disorder, and subsequent findings have helped to clarify this role.
NOREPINEPHRINE. Perhaps the most compelling evidence for the central role

of the noradrenergic system in depression is the well-replicated finding that
antidepressant response is correlated with the downregulation or decreased
sensitivity of β-adrenergic receptors. Also, presynaptic β2-receptors appear to


<<<PAGE 1270>>>
have a role, as activation of these receptors results in a decrease in the
amount of norepinephrine released. Presynaptic β2-receptors are also located
on serotonergic neurons and regulate the amount of serotonin released.
Most modern antidepressants act on serotonin, rather than
norepinephrine, and as a result, serotonin has become the biogenic amine
neurotransmitter most commonly associated with depression. The
identification of multiple serotonin receptor subtypes has also increased the
excitement within the research community about the development of even
more specific treatments for depression. Besides treatment studies, other data
indicate that serotonin is involved in the pathophysiology of depression.
Depletion of serotonin may precipitate depression, and some patients with
suicidal impulses have low cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations of
serotonin metabolites and low concentrations of serotonin uptake sites on
platelets.
SEROTONIN.

DOPAMINE. Although norepinephrine and serotonin are the biogenic amines

most often associated with the pathophysiology of depression, dopamine may
also play a role. Dopamine activity may be reduced in depression and
increased in mania. The discovery of new subtypes of the dopamine receptors
and an increased understanding of the presynaptic and postsynaptic
regulation of dopamine function have further enriched research into the
relationship between dopamine and mood disorders. Drugs that reduce
dopamine concentrations, including the reserpine mentioned above, as well as
diseases that deplete dopamine such as Parkinson disease, all may cause
depressive symptoms. In contrast, drugs that increase dopamine
concentrations, such as tyrosine, amphetamine, and bupropion, reduce the
symptoms of depression.
OTHER NEUROTRANSMITTER DISTURBANCES. Acetylcholine (ACh) is found in

neurons that are distributed diffusely throughout the cerebral cortex.
Cholinergic neurons have reciprocal or interactive relationships with all three
monoamine systems. Abnormal levels of choline, which is a precursor to
ACh, have been found at autopsy in the brains of some depressed patients.
Cholinergic agonists can cause symptoms of lethargy, anergia, and
psychomotor retardation. In an animal model of depression, strains of mice


<<<PAGE 1271>>>
that are super- or subsensitive to cholinergic agonists have been found
susceptible or more resistant to animal models of depression. Cholinergic
agonists can induce changes in HPA activity and sleep that mimic those
associated with severe depression. Some patients with mood disorders in
remission, as well as their never-ill first-degree relatives, have a trait-like
increase in sensitivity to cholinergic agonists.
γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) has an inhibitory effect on ascending
monoamine pathways, particularly the mesocortical and mesolimbic systems.
Reductions of GABA occur in plasma, CSF, and brain GABA levels in
depression. Animal studies have also found that chronic stress can reduce and
eventually can deplete GABA levels. By contrast, antidepressants upregulate
GABA receptors, and some GABAergic medications have weak
antidepressant effects.
The amino acids glutamate and glycine are the primary excitatory and
inhibitory neurotransmitters in the CNS. Glutamate and glycine bind to sites
associated with the NMDA receptor and an excess of glutamatergic
stimulation can cause neurotoxic effects. Importantly, a high concentration of
NMDA receptors exists in the hippocampus. Glutamate, thus, may work in
conjunction with hypercortisolemia to mediate the deleterious neurocognitive
effects of severe recurrent depression. Emerging evidence suggests that drugs
that antagonize NMDA receptors have antidepressant effects.
The binding of a
neurotransmitter and a postsynaptic receptor triggers a cascade of membranebound and intracellular processes mediated by second messenger systems.
Second messengers regulate the function of neuronal membrane ion channels.
Increasing evidence also indicates that mood-stabilizing drugs act on these
second messengers.
SECOND MESSENGERS AND INTRACELLULAR CASCADES.

Immunologic Disturbance. Depressive disorders are associated with
several immunologic abnormalities, including decreased lymphocyte
proliferation in response to mitogens and other forms of impaired cellular
immunity. These lymphocytes produce neuromodulators, such as
corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), and cytokines, peptides known as
interleukins. There appears to be an association with clinical severity,
hypercortisolism, and immune dysfunction, and the cytokine interleukin-1


<<<PAGE 1272>>>
may induce gene activity for glucocorticoid synthesis.

Findings from Brain Imaging
The most consistent abnormality observed in
depressive disorders is the increased frequency of abnormal hyperintensities
in subcortical regions, such as periventricular regions, the basal ganglia, and
the thalamus. More common among elderly adults, these hyperintensities
appear to reflect the deleterious neurodegenerative effects of recurrent
affective episodes. Ventricular enlargement, cortical atrophy, and sulcal
widening also have been reported in some studies. Some depressed patients
also may have reduced hippocampal or caudate nucleus volumes, or both,
suggesting more focal defects in relevant neurobehavioral systems. Diffuse
and focal areas of atrophy are associated with increased illness severity,
bipolarity, and increased cortisol levels.
Also, specific structures appear reduced in volume in patients with
depression, for example, the hippocampus. This reduction may be due to
neuronal loss due to the neurotoxic effects of the increased cortisol found in
depressed patients. Although many areas of the brain are susceptible to this
toxic effect, the hippocampus is particularly vulnerable, as it is rich in
glutaminergic neurons. Other areas with reported brain loss include the PFC,
cingulate gyrus, and cerebellum.
STRUCTURAL

IMAGING.

The most widely replicated positron emission
tomography (PET) finding in depression is decreased anterior brain
metabolism, which is generally more pronounced on the left side. From a
different vantage point, depression may cause a relative increase in
nondominant hemispheric activity. Furthermore, a reversal of hypofrontality
occurs after shifts from depression into hypomania, such that higher left
hemisphere reductions occur in depression compared with more significant
right hemisphere reductions in mania. Other studies have observed more
specific reductions of reduced cerebral blood flow or metabolism, or both, in
the dopaminergically innervated tracts of the mesocortical and mesolimbic
systems in depression. Evidence suggests that antidepressants at least
partially normalize these changes.
FUNCTIONAL IMAGINING.


<<<PAGE 1273>>>
FIGURE 7-2
Key brain regions involved in affect and mood disorders. A: Orbital prefrontal
cortex and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. B: Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. C:
Hippocampus an˙˙d amygdala. D: Anterior cingulate cortex. (From Thase ME.
Mood disorders neurobiology. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. (eds.). Kaplan
& Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2017.)

In addition to a global reduction of anterior cerebral metabolism, increased
glucose metabolism occurs in several limbic regions, particularly among
patients with relatively severe recurrent depression and a family history of
mood disorder. During episodes of depression, increased glucose metabolism
correlates with intrusive ruminations.
One meta-analysis found three consistent differences when comparing
fMRI studies of depressed patients with healthy controls. They found
activation of the pulvinar nucleus of the thalamus, more significant response
to negative stimuli in the amygdala, insula and anterior cingulate, and lesser
response in the dorsal striatum and dorsal lateral PFC.
Figure 7-2 illustrates some of the brain regions thought to be most critical
to mood regulation.
Our Understanding of the Genetics of Depressive Disorders


<<<PAGE 1274>>>
Numerous family, adoption, and twin studies have long documented the
heritability of mood disorders. Recently, however, the primary focus of
genetic studies has been to identify specific susceptibility genes using
molecular genetic methods.
Studies of Inheritance Patterns. Depression aggregates within families
and meta-analytic studies suggest that first-degree relatives of persons with
major depressive disorder have an increased odds ratio of 2.84 for developing
the disease. Only limited adoption studies have been done, of varying quality
and with mixed results, and most of what we know about the genetic
contribution to the disorder comes from twin studies, which estimate the
heritability to be 37 percent. It appears that this heritability is higher in
women. The twin studies also concluded that shared environmental factors
did not play a significant role in the familial aggregation of the disorder.
Genetic Studies. Genome-wide association studies have not found
significant associations. Although there are various explanations for the lack
of replicated findings, it likely relates to the fact that GWAS is powered to
detect common variants, and that the genes relevant to depression risk are
rare.
Candidate gene studies, which instead focus on specific genes of interest,
have resulted in many reported findings. However, few of these are
replicated. The most considerable focus has been on genes that might have a
role in the proposed mechanism of depression, such as the gene involved in
the encoding of serotonin (HTR1A), the serotonin transporter
(5HTTP/SLC6A4), or the dopamine receptor (DRD4), and transporter
(SLC6A3). Although some have replicated the most significant associations
for these genes (most often for the 5HTTP/SLC6A4 gene), the effect size are
small, and the sample sizes are smaller than those using GWAS, leading
some experts to question the role of statistical error in the positive and
negative findings. If some or all of the candidate gene studies are significant,
the most likely interpretation of available findings is that much, or most of
the genetic heritability for depression is the result of many genes each
contributing a small effect, which only becomes meaningful when combined
across thousands of genes. It is also possible, however, that there is some
rare, still undetected genetic variant.


<<<PAGE 1275>>>
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF DEPRESSION
A great deal of psychological and sociologic research has also shed light on
the pathology of depression. Perhaps the most meaningful contributions come
from research on the role of stress and depression.
Stress and Depression
Some clinicians believe that life events play the primary or principal role in
depression; others suggest that life events have only a limited role in the
onset and timing of depression. The most compelling data indicate that the
life event most often associated with the development of depression is losing
a parent before age 11 years. The environmental stressor most often
associated with the onset of an episode of depression is the loss of a spouse.
Another risk factor is unemployment; persons out of work are three times
more likely to report symptoms of an episode of major depression than those
who are employed.
Personality
No single personality trait or type uniquely predisposes a person to
depression; all humans, of whatever personality pattern, can and do become
depressed under appropriate circumstances. Persons with certain personality
disorders—OCPD, histrionic, and borderline—may be at higher risk for
depression than persons with an antisocial or paranoid personality disorder.
The latter can use projection and other externalizing defense mechanisms to
protect themselves from their inner rage.

ETIOLOGY
As we can see, there is a great deal of data accumulating on various
pathologies and dysregulations in the brain and body that are associated with
depression. Many experts in the field have attempted to combine various
lines of research into a coherent explanation of what causes us to suffer from
a depressive disorder. Although there is no single unifying theory, several
theories have emerged over the last century that attempt to account for the
various clinical, psychological, and biologic findings in depression.


<<<PAGE 1276>>>
Biologic Theories
The Monoamine Hypothesis. As already noted, the fact that all known
antidepressants acted on the monoamines (particularly catecholamines as
noted above) coupled with the fact that drugs and diseases that deplete
monoamines (e.g., reserpine and Parkinson disease) can cause depressive
symptoms led to the supposition that depression is the result of some
deficiency or dysregulation in brain monoamines.
Although the theory became, and to a point remains, prevalent, several
lines of evidence suggested it was an inadequate explanation for the etiology
of depression. Most notably, antidepressants take weeks to work, even though
their presumed action of increasing monoamine levels happens quickly, often
within hours after administration. Also, there is no convincing evidence of
any neurochemical imbalance, for example, in studies of the CSF of
depressed patients or postmortem brain tissue.
As noted in our discussion of the pathology of depression, there is good
evidence to suggest that neurotransmitters do play an important role, and that
receptor or second messenger relationships may explain some of the
inconsistent findings. Some have attempted to modify the monoamine
hypothesis, suggesting that it remains true, but is more complicated than
initially thought. However, a consistent and coherent explanation of the role
of neurotransmitters remains elusive, and we still do not know whether their
relationship to depression is one of causation or a later effect of the disease.
Brain Dysfunction. Theories of brain dysregulation attempt to incorporate
both findings of dysregulation with the increased and decreased responses to
various negative stimuli observed in studies. Areas of interest include:
The amygdala. Part of the limbic system, the amygdala appears to be a
crucial way station for processing novel stimuli of emotional significance and
coordinating or organizing cortical responses.
The hippocampus. Adjacent to the amygdala, the hippocampus is most
associated with learning and memory. Emotional or contextual learning
appears to involve a direct connection between the hippocampus and the
amygdala. Also, the hippocampus regulates the HPA axis by inhibiting
activity.
The Prefrontal Cortex (PFC). We think of the PFC as the structure that


<<<PAGE 1277>>>
holds representations of goals and appropriate responses to obtain these
goals. There are areas of specialization. For example, whereas left-sided
activation of regions of the PFC is more involved in goal-directed or
appetitive behaviors, regions of the right PFC are implicated in avoidance
behaviors and inhibition of appetitive pursuits. Subregions in the PFC appear
to localize representations of behaviors related to reward and punishment.
The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). The ACC is involved in attention,
motivation, and environmental exploration and appears to help integrate
attentional and emotional inputs. The more rostral and ventral region has an
affective subdivision that connects extensively with limbic regions of the
brain. Activation of the ACC may facilitate control of emotional arousal,
particularly when thwarting goal when attainment encountering novel
problems.
There are various theories that attempt to integrate various pathologic
findings into an understanding of the etiology of depression. Although there
are many approaches and variations, many theories broadly fall into one of
two categories: neurogenesis hypotheses and neuroplastic hypotheses.
Neurogenesis Hypotheses. Neurogenesis hypotheses suppose that the
brain abnormalities leading to depression are the result of abnormalities in
development such that there is a deficit in the number of newborn neurons in
the brain.
There are several explanations for the cause of this deficit. Some versions
attempt to link the role of stress, particularly chronic stress, in causing
depression. Stress can cause increased activity in the HPA axis, which results
in increased glucocorticoid production. Glucocorticoids are known to
decrease neurogenesis. As neurogenesis continues in the adult hippocampus,
this may be an area preferentially affected by stress. The hippocampus is then
unable to adequately regulate the HPA axis, leading to continued elevated
glucocorticoid levels in the brain and further inhibition of neurogenesis.
Neuroplasticity Hypotheses. Neuroplasticity hypotheses propose that the
atrophy of already developed neurons causes depression. In this version,
rather than a deficit of nerve growth, atrophy occurs in already mature
neurons. As noted, chronic stress can increase glucocorticoid levels, which
can cause atrophy. It can also decrease the expression of BDNF, which is


<<<PAGE 1278>>>
essential for the survival, growth, and differentiation of neurons in the brain;
the result is atrophy. As this preferentially happens in the hippocampus, this
can account for the finding of decreased hippocampal volume in depressed
patients.
Psychosocial Theories
Life Events and Environmental Stress. A long-standing clinical
observation is that stressful life events more often precede first, rather than
subsequent, episodes of mood disorders. One theory proposed to explain this
observation is that the stress accompanying the first episode results in longlasting changes in the brain’s biology. As a result, a person has a high risk of
undergoing subsequent episodes of a mood disorder, even without an external
stressor.
Ms. C, a 23-year-old woman, became acutely depressed when she was
accepted to a prestigious graduate school. Ms. C had been working
diligently toward this acceptance for the past 4 years. She reported being
“briefly happy, for about 20 minutes” when she learned the good news
but rapidly slipped into a hopeless state in which she recurrently
pondered the pointlessness of her aspirations, cried constantly, and had to
physically stop herself from taking a lethal overdose of her roommate’s
insulin. In treatment, she focused on her older brother, who had regularly
insulted her throughout the course of her life, and how “he’s not doing
well.” She found herself very worried about him. She mentioned that she
was not used to being the “successful” one of the two of them. In
connection with her depression, it emerged that Ms. C’s brother had had a
severe, life-threatening, and disfiguring pediatric illness that had required
much family time and attention throughout their childhood. Ms. C had
become “used to” his insulting manner toward her. In fact, it seemed that
she required her brother’s abuse of her in order not to feel overwhelmed
by survivor guilt about being the “healthy, normal” child. “He might
insult me, but I look up to him. I adore him. Any attention he pays to me
is like a drug,” she said. Ms. C’s acceptance to graduate school had
challenged her defensive and essential compensatory image of herself as


<<<PAGE 1279>>>
being less successful, or damaged, in comparison with her brother,
thereby overwhelming her with guilt. Her depression remitted in
psychodynamic psychotherapy as she better understood her identification
with and fantasy submission to her brother. (Courtesy of J. C. Markowitz,
M.D. and B. L. Milrod, M.D.)
Psychodynamic Theories of Depression. The psychodynamic
understanding of depression defined by Sigmund Freud and expanded by
Karl Abraham is known as the classic view of depression. That theory
involves four key points: (1) disturbances in the infant–mother relationship
during the oral phase (the first 10 to 18 months of life) predispose to
subsequent vulnerability to depression; (2) depression can be linked to real or
imagined object loss; (3) introjection of the departed objects is a defense
mechanism invoked to deal with the distress connected with the object’s loss;
and (4) because the lost object is regarded with a mixture of love and hate,
feelings of anger are directed inward at the self.
Ms. E, a 21-year-old college student, presented with major depression
and panic disorder since early adolescence. She reported hating herself,
crying constantly, and feeling profoundly hopeless in part because of the
chronicity of her illness. Even at the time of presentation, she noted her
sensitivity to her mother’s moods. “My mother’s just always depressed,
and it makes me so miserable. I just don’t know what to do,” she said. “I
always want something from her, I don’t even know what, but I never get
it. She always says the wrong thing, talks about how disturbed I am, stuff
like that, makes me feel bad about myself.” In one session, Ms. E
poignantly described her childhood: “I spent a lot of time with my
mother, but she was always too tired, she never wanted to do anything or
play with me. I remember building a house with blankets over the coffee
table and peeking out, spying on her. She was always depressed and
negative, like a negative sink in the room, making it empty and sad. I
could never get her to do anything.” This patient experienced extreme
guilt in her psychotherapy when she began to talk about her mother’s
depression. “I feel so bad,” she sobbed. “It’s like I’m saying bad things
about her. And I love her so much, and I know she loves me. I feel it’s so


<<<PAGE 1280>>>
disloyal of me.” Her depression remitted in psychodynamic
psychotherapy as she became more aware of and better able to tolerate
her feelings of rage and disappointment with her mother. (Courtesy of J.
C. Markowitz M.D. and B. L. Milrod, M.D.)
Cognitive Theory. According to cognitive theory, depression results from
specific cognitive distortions present in persons susceptible to depression.
These distortions, referred to as depressogenic schemata, are cognitive
templates that perceive both internal and external data in ways that are altered
by early experiences. Aaron Beck postulated a cognitive triad of depression
that consists of (1) views about the self—a negative self-precept, (2) about
the environment—a tendency to experience the world as hostile and
demanding, and (3) about the future—the expectation of suffering and
failure. Therapy consists of modifying these distortions. We summarize the
elements of cognitive theory in Table 7-14.
Learned Helplessness. The learned helplessness theory of depression
connects depressive phenomena to the experience of uncontrollable events.
For example, when dogs in a laboratory are exposed to electrical shocks from
which they cannot escape, they showed behaviors that differentiate them
from dogs not exposed to such uncontrollable events. The dogs exposed to
the shocks would not cross a barrier to stop the flow of electric shock when
put in a new learning situation. They remained passive and did not move.
According to the learned helplessness theory, the shocked dogs learned that
outcomes were independent of responses, so they had both cognitive
motivational deficits (i.e., they would not attempt to escape the shock) and
emotional deficits (indicating decreased reactivity to the shock). In the
reformulated view of learned helplessness as applied to human depression,
internal causal explanations may produce a loss of self-esteem after adverse
external events. Behaviorists who subscribe to this theory often stress that
improvement of depression is contingent on the patient’s learning a sense of
control and mastery of the environment.
Table 7-14
Elements of Cognitive Theory


<<<PAGE 1281>>>
Element

Definition

Cognitive triad

Beliefs about oneself, the world, and the future

Schemas

Ways of organizing and interpreting experiences

Cognitive
distortions

Persistent ways of thinking that are inaccurate
and usually negatively biased

Arbitrary inference Drawing a specific conclusion without sufficient
evidence
Specific
abstraction

Focus on a single detail while ignoring other,
more important aspects of an experience

Overgeneralization Forming conclusions based on too little and too
narrow experience
Magnification and
minimization

Over- or undervaluing the significance of a
particular event

Personalization

Tendency to self-reference external events
without basis

Absolutist,
dichotomous
thinking

Tendency to place experience into all-or-none
categories

Courtesy of Robert M.A. Hirschfeld, M.D. and M. Tracie Shea, Ph.D.

Evolutionary Theory. Some theorists take an evolutionary perspective
toward depression. From this perspective, depression is an adaptive response
to perceived threats in the environment. From this perspective, depression is
an adaptive response to perceived threats in the environment, and the
tendency for depressed persons to withdraw from the environment in the face
of possible threats could be protective. Beyond threats of bodily harm, social
threats (e.g.,of exclusion or defeat) could also be considered threats in that
such social threats can reduce one’s perceived fitness, and hence, the
desirability of a mate. The depressive response in which one decreases
activity, withdraws from social situations, and approaches novel situations
with a negative bias (“that person will think I am a loser”) could be


<<<PAGE 1282>>>
interpreted as adaptive ways to reduce risk and avoid further social failures.
There are many varieties of evolutionary theory, some of which stress the
adaptive benefit of depression, others which see it as an outmoded response
which may have had a benefit in ancient societies, but is counterproductive in
our modern world. Other versions see the basic ability to vary mood as
adaptive but suggest depression is a dysregulation of that normal function.
These theories are difficult to test, as it is challenging to test the fitness of a
particular trait that is very common in a population.
Integrative Approaches
It remains difficult, if not impossible, to incorporate all the various
observations and research findings on depression into one grand unified
theory. However, the various attempts by investigators and theoreticians to
incorporate these findings have certain common features.
It seems clear that there exists some genetic vulnerability that puts persons
at risk for depression. Such persons who then encounter stress, either external
or internal, have epigenetic changes that differ from normal responses to
stress; for example, they may be less able to transcribe certain growth factors
in response to stress. This deficit results in subtle neuronal loss, and this loss
is particularly apparent in some vulnerable areas (e.g., the hippocampus). The
result is a disruption of the usual regulatory systems in the brain, causing
changes in the expressions of transmitters, hormones, and other regulatory
systems. This causes the physical changes that we associate with depression,
and our behavioral response to this is the subjective feeling of depression.

References
Akiskal. Mood disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia,
PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017.
Albert PR. Why is depression more prevalent in women? J Psychiatry
Neurosci. 2015;40(4):219–221.
Badcock PB, Davey CG, Whittle S, Allen NB, Friston KJ. The depressed
brain: an evolutionary systems theory. Trends Cogn Sci. 2017;21(3):182–
194.


<<<PAGE 1283>>>
Boku S, Nakagawa S, Toda H, Hishimoto A. Neural basis of major
depressive disorder: beyond monoamine hypothesis. Psychiatry Clin
Neurosci. 2018;72(1):3–12.
Cipriani A, Furukawa TA, Salanti G, Chaimani A, Atkinson LZ, Ogawa Y,
Leucht S, Ruhe HG, Turner EH, Higgins JPT, Egger M, Takeshima N,
Hayasaka Y, Imai H, Shinohara K, Tajika A, Ioannidis JPA, Geddes JR.
Comparative efficacy and acceptability of 21 antidepressant drugs for the
acute treatment of adults with major depressive disorder: a systematic
review and network meta-analysis. Lancet. 2018;391(10128):1357–1366.
Flint J, Kendler KS. The genetics of major depression. Neuron.
2014;81(3):484–503.
Hamilton JP, Etkin A, Furman DJ, Lemus MG, Johnson RF, Gotlib IH.
Functional neuroimaging of major depressive disorder: a meta-analysis and
new integration of base line activation and neural response data. Am J
Psychiatry. 2012;169(7):693–703.
Krause JS, Reed KS, McArdle JJ. Factor structure and predictive validity of
somatic and nonsomatic symptoms from the patient health questionnaire-9:
a longitudinal study after spinal cord injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil.
2010;91(8):1218–1224.
Lim GY, Tam WW, Lu Y, Ho CS, Zhang MW, Ho RC. Prevalence of
depression in the community from 30 countries between 1994 and 2014.
Sci Rep. 2018;8(1):2861.
Results from the 2017 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed
Tables,
SAMHSA,
CBHSQ.
https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/cbhsqreports/NSDUHDetailedTabs2017/NSDUHDetailedTabs2017.htm#tab856A. n.d. Accessed April 1, 2019.
Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR, Stewart JW, Nierenberg AA, Thase
ME, Ritz L, Biggs MM, Warden D, Luther JF, Shores-Wilson K,
Niederehe G, Fava M; STAR*D Study Team. Bupropion-SR, sertraline, or
venlafaxine-XR after failure of SSRIs for depression. N Engl J Med.
2006;354(12):1231–1242.
Santaguida P (Lina), MacQueen G, Keshavarz H, Levine M, Beyene J, Raina
P. Treatment for Depression After Unsatisfactory Response to SSRIs. In
AHRQ
Comparative
Effectiveness
Reviews.
2012.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK97406/.


<<<PAGE 1284>>>
Schildkraut JJ. The catecholamine hypothesis of affective disorders: a review
of supporting evidence. Am J Psychiatry. 1965;122(5):509–522.
Sullivan PF, Neale MC, Kendler KS. Genetic epidemiology of major
depression:
review
and
meta-analysis.
Am
J
Psychiatry.
2000;157(10):1552–1562.
Zhou X, Ravindran AV, Qin B, Del Giovane C, Li Q, Bauer M, Liu Y, Fang
Y, da Silva T, Zhang Y, Fang L, Wang X, Xie P. Comparative efficacy,
acceptability, and tolerability of augmentation agents in treatment-resistant
depression: systematic review and network meta-analysis. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2015;76(4):e487–e498.


<<<PAGE 1285>>>
8
Anxiety Disorders
Everyone experiences anxiety. The experience of anxiety has two
components: the awareness of the physiologic sensations (e.g., palpitations
and sweating) and the awareness of being nervous or frightened. It is a
diffuse, unpleasant, vague sense of apprehension, usually accompanied by
autonomic symptoms. Although the physical and emotional symptoms of
anxiety are similar to “fear,” it differs from fear in that it is not a response to
an overt danger, but rather an impending one. Both fear and anxiety are
normal adaptive responses to a potentially dangerous environment. They
make us better prepared to survive a danger, either through fight, flight, or
freezing, as the situation may warrant.
Much of psychology research and psychoanalytic thought is devoted to
understanding what we would consider being normal anxiety. This chapter
will concentrate, however, on pathologic anxiety: when it is inappropriately
triggered and maladaptive, hence an anxiety disorder.
Anxiety disorders are the most prevalent psychiatric syndromes in the U.S.
population. Nearly one-fifth of adults report a lifetime history of one of the
major anxiety disorders, and 1 in 10 suffer from a current anxiety disorder.
Anxiety disorders are associated with social impairment and, when occurring
in childhood, can interfere with healthy development, having consequences
for later social and occupational functioning. Worldwide, they are the sixth
most significant contributor to nonfatal health loss globally, and they explain
10 percent of the disability-adjusted life years for all mental, neurologic, and
substance use disorders, second only to major depression.

THE CLINICAL PRESENTATION


<<<PAGE 1286>>>
The anxious patient has a variety of symptoms, particularly cognitive and
physical. Some of the symptoms, particularly the autonomic ones, are
observable and quantifiable, making it easier to develop objective measures.
It also makes research on these disorders somewhat more straightforward.
Anxiety can have a variety of physical manifestations. The most common
is its effect on the autonomic system, including such symptoms as headache,
perspiration, palpitations, tightness in the chest, and mild stomach
discomfort. It can also produce motor symptoms, such as restlessness,
indicated by an inability to sit or stand still for long. The particular
constellation of symptoms present during anxiety tends to vary among
persons.
The anxious individual may describe themselves as “nervous” or
“frightened.” Their mood is frequently observable, particularly in patients
who are experiencing a panic attack, as a classically fearful expression: eyes
and mouth open, eyebrows raised. In patients with more chronic forms of
anxiety, the expression may be more blunted and more akin to a depressed
affect.
Thoughts may be more rapid, and in cases of severe anxiety, may become
more disorganized. In extreme forms, a person may have great difficulty
thinking clearly. For example, during a panic attack, a patient may ruminate
or stammer.
In the setting of acute anxiety, the thoughts are focused on the perceived
cause of the anxiety. Patients may catastrophize and overestimate the danger
they are facing. In the case of a panic attack, somatic concerns of death from
a cardiac or respiratory problem may be the primary focus of patients’
attention during panic attacks. Patients may believe that the palpitations and
chest pain indicate that they are about to die. As many as 20 percent of such
patients have syncopal episodes during a panic attack. The patients may
present in emergency departments as young, physically healthy persons who
nevertheless insist that they are about to die from a heart attack. As anxiety
becomes chronic, thoughts may take the form of more negative thinking.
Although hallucinations are rare, patients with severe anxiety may have
distortions in perception, not only of time and space but also of persons and
the meanings of events.
In the proper dose, anxiety can help attention by increasing our alertness
and focusing our attention. However, in excess, it can impair cognition.


<<<PAGE 1287>>>
Patients with severe anxiety can become confused. They can have difficulty
focusing their attention, and as a result, may have trouble with recall.
Usually, anxiety does not reach a level where it significantly affects insight
or judgment. However, patients can become selective in their interpretation of
the environment, focusing on specific aspects and neglecting others to prove
that they are justified in their reactions.
Although the patients do not tend to talk about suicidal ideation, they are at
increased risk of committing suicide. Some studies have found that the
lifetime risk of suicide in persons with panic disorder is higher than it is in
persons with no mental disorder.
Presentation in Special Populations
Anxiety has many possible disorders, and different populations can present
differently. For example, children or the elderly may present more with
somatic symptoms than adults.
Certain cultural groups may have syndromes unique to their group, some
of which represent culturally specific understandings of their body. Examples
include the multiple anxiety syndromes related to the fear of “wind attacks”
in Cambodians, or the syndrome of Ataque de Nervios (attack of nerves) in
Puerto Rican and Dominican patients. In most cases, anxiety symptoms do
not differ from those in other cultures. However, the emphasis may be on the
specific ones relevant to beliefs about the underlying cause. In most cases, a
full history and examination can elucidate the problem. It is often helpful to
seek a cultural consultation for an understanding of the particular syndrome.
In the past, there have been some broad overgeneralizations about different
ethnic or cultural groups. However, these often reflect a bias and are usually
not helpful.

DIAGNOSIS
Within this category, there are several disorders, including panic disorder
(with and without agoraphobia), agoraphobia (without a history of panic
disorder), specific phobia, social phobia, and generalized anxiety disorder.
Panic Disorder


<<<PAGE 1288>>>
Panic disorder is an acute intense attack of anxiety (a panic attack)
accompanied by feelings of impending doom. The anxiety occurs during
discrete periods of intense fear that can vary from several attacks during 1
day to only a few attacks during a year. Patients with panic disorder present
with several comorbid conditions, most commonly agoraphobia, which refers
to a fear of or anxiety regarding places from which escape might be difficult.
A panic attack is a sudden period of intense fear or apprehension that may
last from minutes to hours. It is a symptom, and many disorders and
situations besides panic disorder can cause panic attacks.
Mrs. K was a 35-year-old woman who initially presented for treatment at
the medical emergency department at a large university-based medical
center. She reported that while sitting at her desk at her job, she had
suddenly experienced difficulty breathing, dizziness, tachycardia,
shakiness, and a feeling of terror that she was going to die of a heart
attack. A colleague drove her to the emergency department, where she
received a full medical evaluation, including electrocardiography and
routine blood work, which revealed no sign of cardiovascular,
pulmonary, or other illness. She was subsequently referred for psychiatric
evaluation, where she revealed that she had experienced two additional
episodes over the past month, once when driving home from work and
once when eating breakfast. However, she had not presented for medical
treatment because the symptoms had resolved relatively quickly each
time, and she worried that if she went to the hospital without ongoing
symptoms, “people would think I’m crazy.” Mrs. K reluctantly took the
phone number of a local psychiatrist but did not call until she experienced
the fourth episode of a similar nature. (Courtesy of Erin B. McClureTone, Ph.D. and Daniel S. Pine, M.D.)
Table 8-1 compares the different approaches to diagnosing panic disorder.
Table 8-1
Panic Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10


<<<PAGE 1289>>>
Diagnostic
name

Panic Disorder

Duration

1 mo of worry after 1 panic
attack
Panic attacks occur during a
discrete period

Symptoms

Panic attacks:
Cardiopulmonary:
• Feeling short of breath
• Palpitations
• Chest discomfort
Gastrointestinal:
• Nausea or GI discomfort
Skin and systemic:
• Sweating
• Chills or feeling flushed
Neurologic:
• Tremulousness
• Dizziness
• Numbness or tingling
Psychiatric:
• Derealization or
depersonalization
• Fear of losing control
• Fear of dying
Symptoms are abrupt and
unpredictable
Persistent symptoms between
attacks, including:
Anticipatory anxiety: fearing
further attacks

Panic disorder
(episodic
paroxysmal
anxiety)

Recurrent attacks of
severe anxiety or
panic
Unpredictable
Physiologic
symptoms:
• Chest pain
• Palpitations
• Difficulty breathing
• Sweating
• Dizziness
Additional symptoms
• Depersonalization
• Derealization
• Fear of losing
control
• Fear of dying


<<<PAGE 1290>>>
Avoidance behaviors: trying
to avoid real or imagined
triggers to prevent another
attack
Required
Panic attack: 4+ symptoms
number of ≥1 attack
symptoms Avoidance behavior or
anticipatory anxiety: 1+
month
Exclusions
Substance use
(not result Another medical condition
of):
Another mental disorder
Comments

Another mental
illness

DSM-5 also includes a “Panic
Attack Specifier” for
discrete panic attacks
without the additional
criteria for a full panic
disorder

The diagnosis includes a variety of symptoms, including somatic,
cognitive, and mood. Patients can feel the physical symptoms in many organs
and systems, including cardiorespiratory, gastrointestinal, and otoneurologic.
Panic attacks can occur as a part of another mental disorder, particularly the
phobias and PTSD. They may or may not be associated with an identifiable
situational stimulus and unexpected panic attacks are not uncommon. Some
panic attacks do not fit easily into the distinction between unexpected and
expected. We call these situationally predisposed panic attacks. They may or
may not occur when encountering a specific trigger, or they may occur either
immediately after exposure or after a considerable delay.
In the DSM-5, to be diagnosed with a panic disorder, a patient must have
recurrent, unexpected attacks. This requirement is to help distinguish the
disorder from the phobias and other possible causes of panic attacks.
Agoraphobia


<<<PAGE 1291>>>
Agoraphobia refers to a fear of or anxiety regarding places from which
escape might be difficult. It can be the most disabling of the phobias because
it can significantly interfere with a person’s ability to function in work and
social situations outside the home. Although agoraphobia often coexists with
panic disorder, in that patients are afraid to leave the safety of home lest they
have a panic attack in a public place, DSM-5 considers agoraphobia a
separate condition that may or may not be comorbid with panic disorder.
Often patients with agoraphobia alone still have some measure of anxiety,
“panic-like” symptoms, although those symptoms may not reach the level of
an actual panic attack.
Mrs. W was a 33-year-old married woman. She visited an anxiety clinic,
reporting that she felt like she was having a heart attack whenever she left
her home. Her disorder began 8 years earlier while attending a yoga class
when she suddenly noticed a dramatic increase in her heartbeat, felt
stabbing pains in her chest, and had difficulty breathing. She began
sweating and trembling and felt dizzy. She immediately went to the
emergency department, where they performed an electrocardiogram. No
abnormalities were detected. Over the next few months, Mrs. W
experienced similar attacks of 15 to 30 minutes’ duration about four
times per month. She often sought medical advice after each episode, and
each time no physical abnormalities were detected. After experiencing a
few of these attacks, Mrs. W became afraid of having an attack away
from home and would not leave her home unless necessary, in which case
she needed to have her cell phone or be accompanied by someone. Even
so, she avoided crowded places such as malls, movie theaters, and banks,
where rapid escape is sometimes blocked. Her symptoms and avoidance
dominated her life, although she was aware that they were irrational and
excessive. She experienced mild depression and restlessness and had
difficulty sleeping.
Patients with agoraphobia rigidly avoid situations in which it would be
challenging to obtain help. They prefer to be accompanied by a friend or a
family member when leaving home, especially if their destination is crowded
or closed-in. Severely affected patients may simply refuse to leave the house.


<<<PAGE 1292>>>
Patients may be terrified that they are going “crazy.”
Table 8-2 compares the different approaches to diagnosing agoraphobia.
Several situations might cause anxiety, some involving confining spaces
(public transportation, elevators, stores), open spaces (parks, shopping
centers), or crowds. What they have in common is the fact that a person is
away from home and safety and cannot quickly return to it.
Specific Phobia
The term phobia refers to excessive fear of a specific object, circumstance, or
situation. A specific phobia is an intense, persisting fear of an object or
situation, considered dangerous. The fear should be out of proportion to the
actual threat. The diagnosis of specific phobia requires the development of
intense anxiety, even to the point of panic, when exposed to the feared object.
Persons with specific phobias may anticipate harm, such as being bitten by a
dog, or may panic at the thought of losing control; for instance, if they fear
elevators, they may also worry about fainting after the door closes.
Table 8-2
Agoraphobia
DSM-5
Diagnostic name Agoraphobia
Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Fear or anxiety from:
Public transportation
Open spaces
Confined spaces
Being in a line or in a crowd
Being alone outside of home
Avoidance of the situations, due
to:
Fear of having a panic attack
while there
Or, no access to a companion

ICD-10
Agoraphobia

Fear of:
Leaving
home
Going to a
public
place
Going to a
crowded
place
Traveling
alone


<<<PAGE 1293>>>
to help withstand the situation Avoidance of
anxietyFear and avoidance is out of
provoking
proportion to the potential
situations
threat
Frequently
associated
with panic
disorders
Required number At least 1 of the above sources of
of symptoms
fear
Psychosocial
Marked distress or impairment
consequences
of symptoms
Exclusions (not
result of):

Another medical condition
Another mental disorder

Comments

This is for cases in which the
above occurs without a panic
disorder, despite the fear of
having one

Table 8-3
Specific Phobia
DSM-5
Diagnostic name Specific Phobia
Duration

Persistent and
lasting ≥6 months

Symptoms

Fear/anxiety about
an object or
situation
Exposure to the
object/situation

ICD-10
Specific (Isolated) Phobias

Phobias, restricted to highly
specific situations,
objects, or activities
Exposure to the above
causes panic


<<<PAGE 1294>>>
causes
immediate
fear/anxiety
Avoidance
behaviors: of the
object or situation
The fear/anxiety is
out of proportion
to the likely threat
Required number All the above
of symptoms
Psychosocial
Marked distress or
consequences
impairment
of symptoms
Exclusions (not
result of):

Another mental
disorder

Symptom
specifiers

Animals
Natural environment
Blood–injection–
injury
Fear of blood
Fear of injections
and
transfusions
Fear of other
medical care
Fear of injury
Situational
Other

Comments

Also contains categories for
“Other phobic anxiety
disorder” and an
unspecified type


<<<PAGE 1295>>>
Mr. S was a successful lawyer who presented for treatment after his firm,
to which he had previously been able to walk from home, moved to a
new location that he could only reach by driving. Mr. S reported that he
was “terrified” of driving, particularly on highways. Even the thought of
getting into a car led him to worry that he would die in a fiery crash. His
thoughts were associated with intense fear and numerous somatic
symptoms, including a racing heart, nausea, and sweating. Although the
thought of driving was terrifying in and of itself, Mr. S became nearly
incapacitated when he drove on busy roads, often having to pull over to
vomit. (Courtesy of Erin B. McClure-Tone, Ph.D. and Daniel S. Pine,
M.D.)
Table 8-3 compares the different approaches to diagnosing specific phobia.
There are many possible objects of the fear, including things (animals),
environments (storms, dark rooms), situations (driving, flying, blood
injections), and many other things that do not fit into these categories. What
they have in common is the irrational fear that the object of one’s fear is
harmful or dangerous.
In each case, the anxiety usually occurs immediately after exposure to the
object or situation. The result is either avoidance or painful endurance. It
should last for at least 6 months.
Social Anxiety Disorder
Social anxiety disorder (also referred to as social phobia) involves the fear of
social situations, including situations that involve scrutiny or contact with
strangers. The term social anxiety reflects the distinct differentiation of social
anxiety disorder from a specific phobia, which is the intense and persistent
fear of an object or situation. Persons with social anxiety disorder are fearful
of embarrassing themselves in social situations (i.e., social gatherings, oral
presentations, meeting new people). They may have specific fears about
performing specific activities such as eating or speaking in front of others, or
they may experience a vague, nonspecific fear of “embarrassing oneself.” In
either case, the fear in social anxiety disorder is of the embarrassment that


<<<PAGE 1296>>>
may occur in the situation, not the situation itself.
Ms. B was a 29-year-old computer programmer who presented for
treatment after she was offered a promotion to a managerial position at
her firm. Although she wanted the raise and the increased responsibility
that would come with the new job, which she had agreed to try on a
probationary basis, Ms. B reported that she was reluctant to accept the
position because it required frequent interactions with employees from
other divisions of the company, as well as occasional public speaking.
She stated that she had always felt nervous around new people, whom she
worried would ridicule her for “saying stupid things” or committing a
social faux pas. She also reported feeling “terrified” to speak before
groups. These fears had not previously interfered with her social life and
job performance. However, since starting her probationary job, Ms. B
reported that they had become problematic. She noted that when she had
to interact with others, her heart started racing, her mouth became dry,
and she felt sweaty. At meetings, she had sudden thoughts that she would
say something very foolish or commit a terrible social gaffe that would
cause people to laugh. As a consequence, she had skipped several
important meetings and left others early. (Courtesy of Erin B. McClureTone, Ph.D. and Daniel S. Pine, M.D.)
Table 8-4 compares the different approaches to diagnosing social anxiety
disorder. Many people feel anxiety in social situations, and it is rare to find
the person who feels no anxiety over speaking in public or attending a party
where they will not know anyone. The key feature in social anxiety disorder
is that this anxiety is significant to the point of being disabling, meaning that
it is sufficient to cause clinically significant distress or impairment. It also
occurs while one is scrutinized, and includes a fear of negative judgment.
Furthermore, DSM-5 emphasizes that the fear should occur in situations in
which the individual is under scrutiny and that the fear is of being “negatively
evaluated” (embarrassed or rejected).
Table 8-4


<<<PAGE 1297>>>
Social Anxiety Disorder
DSM-5
Diagnostic name Social anxiety disorder

ICD-10
Social anxiety
disorder

Duration

≤6 mo

Symptoms

Fear of being
Fear of being
judged/scrutinized in
judged/scrutinized
social situation
by others
Fear that others will notice Avoidance
the anxiety, causing
behaviors: of the
additional judgment,
feared social
embarrassment, or
situations
rejection
May be associated
Avoidance behaviors: of the
with low selffeared social situations
esteem
The fear/anxiety is out of
May cause panic
proportion to the social
attacks
risk

Required number All the above
of symptoms
Psychosocial
Marked distress and/or
consequences
impairment
of symptoms
Exclusions (not
result of):

Another mental illness
Another medical illness

Symptom
specifiers

Performance only
(performance anxiety)

DSM-5 includes a specifier for performance anxiety (“performance only”),
in which the fear is limited to public speaking or performance.


<<<PAGE 1298>>>
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder is defined as excessive anxiety and worries
about several events or activities most of the time for at least 6 months. The
worry is difficult to control and is associated with somatic symptoms, such as
muscle tension, irritability, difficulty sleeping, and restlessness. The worry
usually involves a broad swath of everyday life, such as simple daily
activities, timeliness, finances, or health. These are ordinary worries for many
people. However, patients with a generalized anxiety disorder worry about
them to the point where catastrophe seems possible, likely, and imminent.
Another feature is that these concerns cannot be prioritized or put aside to
deal with more pressing matters that may pop up. This inability to prioritize
is a key feature that contributes to the pathologic effect that this disorder has
on functioning.
Mr. G was a successful, married, 28-year-old teacher who presented for a
psychiatric evaluation to treat mounting symptoms of worry and anxiety.
Mr. G noted that for the preceding year, he had become more and more
worried about his job performance. For example, although he had always
been a respected and popular lecturer, he found himself worrying about
his ability to engage students and convey the material effectively.
Similarly, although he had always been financially secure, he
increasingly worried that he was going to lose his wealth due to
unexpected expenses. Mr. G noted frequent somatic symptoms that
accompanied his worries. For example, he often felt tense and irritable
while he worked and spent time with his family, and he had difficulty
distracting himself from worries about the upcoming challenges for the
next day. He reported feeling increasingly restless, especially at night,
when his worries kept him from falling asleep. (Courtesy of Erin B.
McClure-Tone, Ph.D. and Daniel S. Pine, M.D.)
Table 8-5 compares the different approaches to diagnosing generalized
anxiety disorder. The distinction between generalized anxiety disorder and
normal anxiety is that the worry is excessive, difficult to control, and causes
impairment.


<<<PAGE 1299>>>
Objective Rating Scales for the Disorder
There are many scales for measuring anxiety. Some popular examples are the
Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI), Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
(HADS), and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder scale (GAD-7), but there are
many more. Many other broader scales include measures of anxiety. Some
scales measure anxiety per se, while others help to identify a specific
disorder. Scales may also differentiate between state and trait anxiety, which
is situational anxiety versus anxiety that seems characteristic for a person and
independent of the situation. An example for the latter is the State-Trait
Anxiety Inventory.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Distinguishing Between the Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety disorders have overlapping symptoms. Sometimes it is difficult to
distinguish between panic disorder, on the one hand, and specific and social
phobias, on the other hand. Some patients who experience a single panic
attack in a specific setting (e.g., an elevator) may go on to have long-lasting
avoidance of the specific setting, regardless of whether they ever have
another panic attack. These patients meet the diagnostic criteria for a specific
phobia, and clinicians must use their judgment about what is the most
appropriate diagnosis. In another example, a person who experiences one or
more panic attacks may then fear to speak in public. Although the clinical
picture is almost identical to the clinical picture in social anxiety disorder, we
would not diagnose a social anxiety disorder because the avoidance of the
public situation is based on fear of having a panic attack rather than on fear of
the public speaking itself.
Table 8-5
Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Diagnostic name

DSM-5

ICD-10

Generalized Anxiety
Disorder

Generalized Anxiety
Disorder


<<<PAGE 1300>>>
Duration

≤6 mo

Symptoms

Excessive
Persistent anxiety
anxiety/worry
Anxiety characterized by:
Difficulty controlling/
• Shaking
managing worry
• Muscle tension
Anxiety characterized
• Sweating
by:
• Lightheadedness
• Restlessness
• Palpitations
• Fatigue
• GI symptoms
• Poor concentration
• Irritability
• Muscle tension
• Insomnia

Required number
of symptoms

First two criteria and
3+ of the specific
symptoms

Psychosocial
consequences
of symptoms

Marked distress
and/or impairment

Exclusions (not
result of):

• Another mental
disorder
• Substance use
• Another medical
condition

Anxiety not associated
with an object, event,
or situation

Other Psychiatric Disorders
The differential diagnosis for agoraphobia includes all the psychiatric
disorders that can cause anxiety or depression. A panic disorder is the most
common cause of agoraphobia, and a separate diagnosis of agoraphobia is not
necessary. Other disorders include major depressive disorder, schizophrenia,
paranoid personality disorder, avoidant personality disorder, and dependent
personality disorder.


<<<PAGE 1301>>>
Medical Disorders
Many medical disorders can cause anxiety or have symptoms that overlap
with anxiety disorders.
Several medical conditions produce symptoms that are similar to panic
disorder. Panic attacks are associated with a variety of endocrinologic
disorders,
including
both
hypoand
hyperthyroid
states,
hyperparathyroidism, and pheochromocytomas. Episodic hypoglycemia
associated with insulinomas can also produce panic-like states, as can
primary neuropathologic processes. These include seizure disorders,
vestibular dysfunction, neoplasms, or the effects of both prescribed and illicit
substances on the CNS. Finally, disorders of the cardiac and pulmonary
systems, including arrhythmias, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and
asthma, can produce autonomic symptoms and accompanying crescendo
anxiety that can be difficult to distinguish from panic disorder. Clues of an
underlying medical etiology to panic-like symptoms include the presence of
atypical features during panic attacks, such as ataxia, alterations in
consciousness, or bladder dyscontrol, onset of panic disorder relatively late in
life, and physical signs or symptoms indicative of a medical disorder.

COMORBIDITY
Depressive symptoms are often present in panic disorder, and in some
patients, a depressive disorder coexists with the panic disorder, and
depression can complicate the symptom picture in anywhere from 40 to 80
percent of all patients, as estimated by various studies.
In addition to agoraphobia, other phobias and OCD can coexist with panic
disorder.
Alcohol and other substance use disorders occur in about 20 to 40 percent
of all patients, and OCD may also develop.

COURSE
Panic attacks, by definition, have a sudden onset and relatively short
duration. The first panic attack is often completely spontaneous, although
panic attacks occasionally follow excitement, physical exertion, sexual
activity, or moderate emotional trauma.


<<<PAGE 1302>>>
The attack often begins with 10 minutes of rapidly increasing symptoms.
The significant mental symptoms are extreme fear and a sense of impending
death and doom. Patients usually cannot name the source of their fear; they
may feel confused and have trouble concentrating. The physical signs often
include tachycardia, palpitations, dyspnea, and sweating. Patients often try to
leave whatever situation they are in to seek help. The attack generally lasts 20
to 30 minutes and rarely more than an hour.
Panic disorder usually has its onset in late adolescence or early adulthood,
although onset during childhood, early adolescence, and midlife do occur.
Some data implicate increased psychosocial stressors with the onset of panic
disorder, although in most cases, there are no identifiable psychosocial
stressors.
Panic disorder is a chronic disorder, although its course is variable, both
among patients and within a single patient. The available long-term follow-up
studies of panic disorder are difficult to interpret because they have not
controlled for the effects of treatment. Nevertheless, about 30 to 40 percent of
patients seem to be symptom-free at long-term follow-up, about 50 percent
have symptoms that are sufficiently mild not to affect their lives significantly,
and about 10 to 20 percent continue to have significant symptoms.
After the first one or two panic attacks, patients may be relatively
unconcerned about their condition; with repeated attacks, however, the
symptoms may become a significant concern. Between attacks, patients may
have anticipatory anxiety about having another attack. Patients may attempt
to keep the panic attacks secret and thereby cause their families and friends
concern about unexplained changes in behavior. The frequency and severity
of the attacks can fluctuate. Panic attacks can occur several times in a day or
less than once a month. Excessive intake of caffeine or nicotine can
exacerbate the symptoms.
When agoraphobia is part of a panic disorder, improving panic symptoms
often also improves agoraphobia. For rapid and complete reduction of
agoraphobia, behavior therapy is useful. Agoraphobia without a history of
panic disorder is often incapacitating and chronic, and depressive disorders
and alcohol use disorder often complicate its course.
The presence of comorbid disorders, particularly alcohol and substance use
disorders, complicates the course of anxiety disorders. Patients with good
premorbid functioning and symptoms of brief duration tend to have a


<<<PAGE 1303>>>
favorable prognosis.
Most of the other anxiety disorders also have long-term courses with
multiple relapses. Overall these are all chronic disorders. Generalized anxiety
disorder commonly has multiple relapses, although some may occur long
after the initial episode, sometimes giving a false sense of security. Clinicians
should regularly monitor the symptoms.
Most of these disorders also have an increased risk of suicide, and
clinicians should monitor this as well.

TREATMENT APPROACH
With treatment, most patients exhibit dramatic improvement in their anxiety
symptoms. Treatments include pharmacologic, psychologic, and combined
treatments for all anxiety disorders. Meta-analyses generally suggest that
pharmacologic treatment has the largest effect size of the various options.
However, depending on the anxiety disorder, there are many pharmacologic,
psychotherapeutic, and combined options available.
Hospitalization
Patients rarely require hospitalization unless they need a diagnostic workup,
for example, to rule out a medical cause. Also, we may hospitalize patients
with comorbid disorders such as substance use or those who are suicidal.
Pharmacotherapy
Among the medication options, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are the
first-line agents for most anxiety disorders, including panic disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder. Some non-SSRIs
are also useful, for example, venlafaxine for panic disorder, generalized
anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder. Tricyclic antidepressants are
useful for panic disorder as well, although less popular due to their side
effects. Many clinicians consider mirtazapine to be useful for anxiety
disorders, owing to its sedative effect. However, there are few studies of its
use for anxiety disorder.
Benzodiazepines remain one of the most popular medications used for
anxiety disorder, perhaps the most popular. Most treatment guidelines


<<<PAGE 1304>>>
suggest that they be mostly limited to short-term use, either as an adjunct to
SSRIs during the initial treatment phase or for acute use during exacerbations
of the anxiety. Generally, most guidelines recommend that we should only
consider long-term benzodiazepines for patients who do not respond or
cannot tolerate the SSRIs. The main concerns are the potential for
dependence, as well as the cognitive and other side effects. Tolerance to the
anxiolytic effects does not seem to develop.
Antipsychotics and anticonvulsants are not recommended as initial therapy
but may have some role for treatment-resistant patients. Among them,
quetiapine is popular and may be useful as a second-line treatment for
generalized anxiety disorder.
Buspirone is an azapirone, and effective for the treatment of generalized
anxiety disorders. It is given in three divided doses during the day. The time
to effect is similar to that for antidepressants, several weeks, and may take as
long as several months. It may be useful as an adjunct to antidepressants for
other anxiety disorders; however, most of the evidence is anecdotal.
β-Blockers, such as propranolol, are sometimes used for anxiety disorders,
particularly social anxiety disorder. However, the available evidence does not
support this use. Anecdotally, many consider it useful for social anxiety,
particularly performance anxiety. The presumed mechanism is the drug’s
ability to block many of the physiologic symptoms of anxiety. However,
there is little data to support this, and at least one study showed no effect.
One study concluded it might be useful for performance anxiety—
specifically musical performances—however, it also had significant side
effects that could impair performance.
Antihistamines, such as hydroxyzine, are also used, particularly as
alternatives to benzodiazepines for acute treatment. It has some evidence for
its use in generalized anxiety disorder. We know little about its long-term
effect.
Table 8-6 lists the common classes of drugs used for anxiety disorders and
the evidence supporting their use.
Treatment Approach. Table 8-7 gives some pointers for using
medications to treat patients with anxiety.
For most anxiety disorders, a conservative approach is, to begin with, an
SSRI. Benzodiazepines are most useful when a patient requires rapid control


<<<PAGE 1305>>>
of severe anxiety symptoms. In those cases, a short-term benzodiazepine,
such as lorazepam or alprazolam, is helpful in the short term. Concurrently,
an SSRI should be started and slowly increased.
For panic disorder, SSRIs or the serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor (SNRI) venlafaxine are first-line options. Tricyclic antidepressants
or MAOIs are effective but less preferably given their side effects. Other
agents, such as mirtazapine, are other second-line options. As mentioned, the
benzodiazepines are effective options but mainly used for short-term use or
exacerbations. Long-term antidepressant therapy is useful for preventing
relapse, with studies suggesting that the beneficial effects last for up to 1 to 3
years. When appropriate, maintenance therapy should be discontinued very
slowly.
For generalized anxiety disorder, the approach is similar, with SSRIs and
SNRIs being the first-line treatments. Reasonable alternatives if those are not
effective include agomelatine, pregabalin, buspirone, and quetiapine.
For social anxiety disorder, the approach is similar to those already
described, with SSRIs and SNRIs being the first-line choice. Pregabalin and
clonazepam also have strong evidence, although the same caveats for other
benzodiazepines apply to clonazepam. Phenelzine is effective as well but is
rarely used because of the side effects. Tricyclic antidepressants, buspirone,
and quetiapine are not recommended owing to their side effects. As noted
above, β-blockers may be useful for performance anxiety. However, their use
does not appear to generalize to other types of social anxiety.
Table 8-6
Evidence-Based Recommendations for Monotherapy of
Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety Disorders
Classes and
Agents

GAD

PD

SAD

SSRIs

First line

First line

First line

SNRIs

First line

First line

First line

TCAs

Second line

Second line

Not


<<<PAGE 1306>>>
recommended
MAOIs

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

RIMA-Moclobemide Insufficient
evidence

Insufficient
evidence

Second Line

Other Psychotropics Second line
—Agomelatine,
Buspirone,
Mirtazapine

Second line

Second line

Benzodiazepines

Second line

Second line

Second line

Atypical
Second line
Antipsychotics—
Quetiapine

Insufficient
evidence

Not
recommended

Anticonvulsant—
Pregabalin

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

Note: Beta-adrenergic blocking agents are recommended only for performance anxiety.
RIMA, reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor; GAD, generalized anxiety disorder; PD, panic
disorder; SAD, social anxiety disorder.

In the case of specific phobia, psychotherapies, particularly behavioral
therapies, are the first-line choice. SSRIs may be helpful, although there are
few studies of SSRIs for this disorder.
For agoraphobia, the main goal of pharmacotherapy is to treat the panic
attacks that are usually comorbid. Early studies did not support the use of
medications for “pure” agoraphobia; however, there has been little research
since.
Psychosocial Therapies
There is strong support for a variety of psychosocial therapies for anxiety
disorders, including cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), behavioral
therapies, and interpersonal therapy. Studies of CBT suggest it has a
substantial effect on generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and social
anxiety disorder, although this evidence is tempered by concerns about


<<<PAGE 1307>>>
treatment bias in the studies. Some treatment guidelines consider individual
CBT to be a first-line treatment for social anxiety disorder. Group
psychotherapy, mainly using CBT techniques, is also useful for social anxiety
disorder. In vivo exposure therapy is the treatment of choice for specific
phobia.
Cognitive Therapy. The two major foci of cognitive therapy for panic
disorder are instruction about a patient’s false beliefs and information about
panic attacks. The instruction about false beliefs centers on the patient’s
tendency to misinterpret mild bodily sensations as indicating impending
panic attacks, doom, or death. The information about panic attacks includes
explanations that when panic attacks occur, they are time-limited and not lifethreatening.
Table 8-7
Pharmacotherapy of Anxiety Disorders: Key Pointers
• SSRIs are the first-line option.
• Start low and go slow.
• Routine increase to higher doses not recommended, but a
subgroup might benefit.
• Concomitant benzodiazepines as initial therapy in the short term
may be useful.
• 8–12 weeks of pharmacotherapy at optimum doses may be
needed to assess efficacy.
• Good evidence for the benefit of maintenance treatment at least up
to 6 months.
Behavioral Therapies. In behavior therapy, the underlying assumption is
that change can occur without the development of psychologic insight into
underlying causes. Techniques include positive and negative reinforcement,
systematic desensitization, flooding, implosion, graded exposure, response
prevention, thought stopping, relaxation techniques, panic control therapy,
self-monitoring, and hypnosis. For patients with specific phobias, the
approach usually involves gradually increasing the patient’s exposure to the


<<<PAGE 1308>>>
feared stimulus (e.g., climbing to increasingly higher floors in a building for a
patient with a fear of heights) while practicing relaxation techniques until the
patient masters each successive step.
Interpersonal Psychotherapy. There is good evidence for interpersonal
psychotherapy, particularly interpersonal skills training for social anxiety
disorder. The assumption is that such patients have interpersonal deficits that
contribute to their anxiety and lack the skills to interact with others
effectively. The result is that patients experience more of the “punishments”
and less of the rewards from social interaction than most other people.
Virtual Therapy. Computer programs exist that allow us to treat a variety of
anxiety disorders, including agoraphobia, specific phobia, and social anxiety
disorder. As an example, patients with agoraphobia may experience a virtual
environment in which they are in a crowded space (e.g., a supermarket). As
they identify with the avatars in repeated computer sessions, they can learn to
master their anxiety until they are ready to try the exposure in real life. This
approach is particularly useful for situations that are not easily reproduced
inside or near a clinician’s office (i.e., flying).
Supportive Psychotherapy. Supportive psychotherapy involves the use
of psychodynamic concepts and a therapeutic alliance to promote adaptive
coping. Adaptive defenses are encouraged and strengthened, and maladaptive
ones are discouraged. The therapist assists in reality testing and may offer
behavioral advice. Although lacking empirical support, clinicians frequently
incorporate some degree of supportive psychotherapy as an adjunct to
medication.
Insight-Oriented Psychotherapy. In insight-oriented psychotherapy, the
goal is to increase the patient’s development of insight into psychologic
conflicts that, if unresolved, can manifest as symptomatic behavior. For a
time, it was the classic treatment for many types of anxiety, with the
assumption that the anxiety represented an underlying psychodynamic
conflict. Some studies suggest that psychodynamic psychotherapy can help
decrease anxiety symptoms, and may have a lasting effect. However, the
studies tend to have methodologic problems, and we lack the large,


<<<PAGE 1309>>>
comparative studies needed to determine efficacy.

THE EPIDEMIOLOGY OF THE DISORDER(S)
Incidence and Prevalence
Anxiety disorders make up one of the most common groups of psychiatric
disorders. The National Comorbidity Study reported that one of four persons
met the diagnostic criteria for at least one anxiety disorder and that there is a
12-month prevalence rate of 17.7 percent.
Most epidemiologic studies of panic disorder suggest a 12-month
prevalence between 0.2 and 1.1 percent. The lowest rate reported rate was 0.1
percent (Nigeria), and the highest was 6.9 percent (Italy), with a median of
2.3 percent.
Most epidemiologic studies of generalized anxiety disorder suggest a 12month prevalence between about 2.1 and 3.1 percent in the United States.
The ranges vary widely, with ranges from 0 percent (Nigeria) to 2.6 percent
(Germany).
The 12-month prevalence of social anxiety disorder varies widely across
regions. The United States has the highest reported rates (6.8 percent), and
China the lowest (0.2 percent). The median is about 4 percent to 5 percent. It
may be that these differences involve differing cultural concepts of social
fears or even difficulties in translating this concept to different cultures.
The 12-month prevalence of agoraphobia is mostly consistent across
regions, with a range from 0 (China) to 0.8 percent (U.S.). An exception is
South Africa, with a reported rate of 4.8 percent.
The rates of specific phobias vary widely, with a range of 1.9 percent
(China) to 8.7 percent (U.S.).
Table 8-8 compares the 12-month and lifetime prevalence of anxiety
disorders across different countries.
Sex
Women have higher rates of almost all anxiety disorders than do men. The
difference is twofold for most disorders. The exception is social anxiety
disorder, where the ratio is about equal. This difference is true across all ages
but is most evident during early and mid-adulthood.


<<<PAGE 1310>>>
Age
The anxiety disorders have one of the earliest onsets of all psychiatric
disorders. Most of the disorders begin in childhood or adolescence; the
median age is 12.
In general, phobic disorders are the most stable of the disorders over time.
Panic and generalized anxiety disorder are much like major depressive
disorder in that they tend to have exacerbations and remissions over the life
span.
Sociocultural and Ethnic Variables
Anxiety disorders appear to be common in persons of lower socioeconomic
status and educational level. However, these relationships are very complex.
Some studies have reported higher rates of anxiety disorders in African
Americans and lower rates in Hispanics.

THE NEUROBIOLOGY OF THE DISORDER
Genetics
Like most psychiatric disorders, anxiety disorders are complex disorders.
Studying anxiety disorders has an advantage over many, as fear and anxiety
are common to animals and are easily observed, at least compared to other
mental phenomena. Thus, animal models have much informed the research
on genetics and other aspects of the disorder. Here, we will, however,
concentrate on human studies.
Studies of Inheritance Patterns. A relatively large number of family
studies have supported the familial aggregation of the major anxiety
disorders, including panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, phobias,
and agoraphobia. For panic disorder, the familial risk was highest for earlyonset panic disorder. In the case of social anxiety disorder, it was strongest
for the generalized subtype.
Several large twin studies have demonstrated higher inheritance for
monozygotic than dizygotic twins, suggesting a genetic component. The
genetic contribution appears to be about 30 percent or more, perhaps as high
as 60 percent for the phobias.


<<<PAGE 1311>>>
Genetic Studies. Among candidate gene studies, linkage studies have had
inconsistent results, which is not a surprise, given the assumption that this is a
complex disorder. Thus we are unlikely to find highly penetrant genes.
Association studies usually rely on candidate genes, usually chosen for their
presumed relevance to the disorder or because of prior studies suggesting an
association. Most studied are the genes for the neurotransmitter systems and
the stress response. Again, the results have been inconsistent.
Genome-wide studies (GWAS) do not require the same a priori
assumptions or degree of penetrance. A limitation is the large sample sizes
needed, and this limits many of the genetic studies in psychiatry. The most
studied has been panic disorder. One study found support for immune-related
involvement for the disorder. Another study found two associated single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), a finding later replicated in another study.
The genes are involved in mRNA expression in the frontal cortex. Although
intriguing, the results remain preliminary. A large research collaboration, the
Psychiatric Genetics Consortium, has found several possible novel risk
genes; again, these results are tentative.
To date, there is little data on gene–environment interactions, given the
substantial sample sizes needed. However, with converging evidence
suggesting a role for both cumulative and specific life events, this is an
essential area for investigation. There is also limited but compelling evidence
for the role of epigenetics in anxiety disorders. However, this area is just
emerging.
Neuroimaging Studies
Preclinical data on fear circuitry has guided the search for neuroanatomical
associations with anxiety. Thus, the amygdala, and the other components of
the frontoamygdala connections (the perirhinal cortex, ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex (vlPFC), and anterior insula) have been the most studied.
Another focus is the hippocampus, which plays a critical role in fear learning
and extinction. Other areas include the posterior and lateral orbitofrontal
cortex (OFC), anterior insula, and vlPFC, which show increased
neurophysiologic activity in patients with phobias.
Table 8-8


<<<PAGE 1312>>>
Lifetime and 12-Month Prevalence Rates of DSM-IV Anxiety
Disorders in International Community Studies of Adults

Neurochemical systems are also a focus, including central noradrenergic
systems, central serotonergic and dopaminergic, and GABA systems.
Studies of fear conditioning in healthy humans are similar to those of
animals, confirming that the fear circuitry is conserved across species. The
amygdala, ventromedial PFC (vmPFC), and hippocampus have been
implicated in both PET and fMRI studies.
Studies of panic disorder suggest that there are abnormalities both when
patients are at rest and during an acute panic attack. In the resting state,


<<<PAGE 1313>>>
hippocampal and parahippocampal areas are implicated, whereas during
panic, the associations are in the insular and striatal regions, with reduced
activity in other regions such as the PFC. MRI studies also suggest
abnormalities of the gray matter volume in the parahippocampal and temporal
regions. Also interesting are MRI studies of brain lactate, which suggest an
exaggerated response to hypocapnia, suggesting a suffocation response.
Receptor-binding studies show abnormalities in GABA and serotonergic,
particularly 5-HT1A, binding.
Studies in specific phobias suggest activation of anterior paralimbic
regions and sensory association cortices related to the particular phobia (be it
visual, auditory, or other senses). These suggest hypersensitivity to specific
threat-related cues. Also, the amygdala is again implicated.
In social anxiety disorder, functional neuroimaging studies show an
exaggerated response to social stimuli, particularly in the medial temporal
lobe structures. Most commonly, investigators find amygdala
hyperresponsivity to social threats.
Unlike the other disorders, generalized anxiety disorder does not show
clear findings of amygdala hyperactivity. The core features are more typical
of emotional dysregulation, with disruptions of the functional connections
between the anterior cingulate and the amygdala, as well as the uncinate
fasciculus. This may suggest weaker frontoamygdala connectivity and fear
overgeneralization. Preliminary evidence suggests that effective treatments
target these areas, including CBT and pharmacotherapies.
Psychological Studies. Behavioral scientists have helped to elucidate the
psychology of fear and anxiety through both animal and human studies. A
full discussion of the psychological research is well beyond the scope of this
chapter, but most relevant to anxiety disorders are the work of Pavlov and
later scientists on the nature of conditioning. In the classic studies, the
scientist exposes an animal to an neutral stimulus, such as an auditory tone,
and then presents the tone while introducing an aversive stimulus, such as an
electric shock. With the repeated pairing of the two stimuli, the neutral
stimulus becomes associated with the aversive one, to the point where it
alone can elicit the same response even when removing the aversive stimulus.
The result is that the animal has been conditioned or learned to fear the
neutral stimuli. In behavioral science, the neutral stimulus is called the


<<<PAGE 1314>>>
conditioned stimulus and the aversive one the unconditioned stimulus. If the
scientist presents the conditioned stimulus without the unconditioned one and
repeats this often enough, the animal will no longer associate the two stimuli;
this is called extinction. How long extinction learning takes will depend on
the particular stimuli and the individual animal. It also can depend on
context, and a different setting can change the response. Behavioral studies
suggest that the animal does not forget the conditioning. Instead, it is now
competing with a new memory. Under appropriate circumstances, the
pairing, and associated fear response, can be reinstated.
As humans are animals, they experience conditioning and extinction as
well. The relevance to anxiety disorders, particularly phobias, should be
obvious. Research in conditioning has gone well beyond this simplified
description to identify and elaborate the many subtleties of conditioned
learning.

ETIOLOGY
Biologic Theories
Neurochemicals and the Fight-or-Flight Reaction. When we perceive
stress, our bodies activate certain neurotransmitters and neuropeptides. The
result is the “fight-or-flight” reaction. This response is adaptive in specific
contexts. However, overgeneralization of their reaction can be disabling and
underlies many of the anxiety disorders.
Chronic activation can cause alterations in a variety of systems. Some
evidence suggests that early-life stressors can cause this, making us
predisposed to anxiety disorders later in life. Why some of us are more
susceptible than others, under similar circumstances, is an area of active
investigation.
Several neurochemicals and systems are thought to be most relevant to the
mechanism between anxiety disorders, including the monoamines, the
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, corticotropin-releasing hormone
(CRH) and other chemicals. Broadly put, patients with anxiety disorders have
symptoms that suggest an exaggerated noradrenergic system output, along
with increased autonomic and sympathetic activation. Table 8-9 summarizes
the major neurochemical systems thought to be relevant to anxiety disorders.


<<<PAGE 1315>>>
Table 8-9
Neurochemical Systems Involved in Anxiety Disorders and
Related Treatment Approaches
Neurochemical

Brain Regions

Association with
Treatment
Anxiety Disorders Approaches
(Current and
Future)

Noradrenergic
system

Locus coeruleus, Unrestrained,
amygdala,
excessive
hippocampus,
system
hypothalamus,
activation
prefrontal
cortex

SNRIs first-line
therapy for
anxiety disorde
(along
SSRIs)
Propranolol for
performance
anxiety

Hypothalamic–
Hippocampus,
Dysregulated HPA
pituitary–adrenal
amygdala,
axis function
(HPA) axis
hypothalamus,
(excessive
prefrontal
cortisol release,
cortex
abnormal
feedback) in
some studies

Cortisol
administration
under study for
SAD and spide
phobia
Mifepristone unde
study for GAD
and PD

Corticotropinreleasing
hormone (CRH)

To date, CRH-1
receptor
antagonists hav
failed to
demonstrate
efficacy in
clinical trials

Prefrontal and
Persistently
cingulate
increased CRH
cortices,
concentration
amygdala,
hippocampus,
hypothalamus,
bed nucleus of
stria terminalis,
nucleus
accumbens,


<<<PAGE 1316>>>
periaqueductal
gray matter,
locus
coeruleus,
dorsal raphe
nuclei
Neurosteroids

Hippocampus,
amygdala,
cortex

Abnormal peripheral Paroxetine found t
levels of
increase
neurosteroids in
peripheral leve
PD; possibly
of
also in GAD and
allopregnanolo
SAD
in one study of
(inconsistent
PD patients, bu
findings)
not in a second
study
Synthetic analogs
neurosteroids
under
development

Arginine
vasopressin
(AVP)

Paraventricular
Single nucleotide
AVP V1b receptor
nucleus of
polymorphism in
antagonist
hypothalamus,
AVP V1b
(SSR149415)
septum,
receptor gene
failed to
hippocampus,
linked to PD
demonstrate
cortex
efficacy for GA
in a clinical tria
New AVP V1b
receptor
antagonists
currently under
study

Dopaminergic
system

Amygdala,
nucleus
accumbens,

Excessive
mesocortical
dopamine

Bupropion is an
NDRI used
primarily to trea


<<<PAGE 1317>>>
prefrontal
cortex

release,
persistently high
levels of
dopamine in
prefrontal cortex

depression,
sometimes
adjunct for
anxiety disorde

Low activity of
postsynaptic 5HT1A receptors
in PD and SAD

SSRIs and SNRIs
first-line therap
for anxiety
disorders

γ-amino butyric acid Substantia nigra, Reduced GABA-A
(GABA)
globus
and
pallidus,
benzodiazepine
hypothalamus,
binding in PD
periaqueductal Reduced GABA
gray matter,
levels in PD,
hippocampus,
possible
amygdala,
imbalance
anterior
between tonic
cingulate
GABAergic
inhibition and
glutamatemediated
excitation

Tiagabine, an SGR
(selective GAB
reuptake
inhibitor) and
vigabatrin
(inhibitor of
GABA
transaminase)
are potential
treatments
Tiagabine equivoc
findings in GAD
Topiramate (block
voltage-sensitiv
sodium
channels,
potentiates
GABA) mixed
findings in PD
Compounds
selective for
specific GABAreceptor

Serotonergic system Dorsal raphe
nuclei,
amygdala,
hippocampus,
prefrontal
cortex


<<<PAGE 1318>>>
subtypes under
development
Note: Gabapentin
and pregabalin
although
structurally
related to GAB
do not act on
GABA receptor
Glutamate

Amygdala,
hippocampus,
frontal and
cingulate
cortices

Possible imbalance Efficacy of DCS as
between tonic
adjunct to
GABAergic
exposure
inhibition and
therapy for
glutamateacrophobia, SA
mediated
and PD
excitation in PD Glycine transporte
inhibitors under
study
Metabotropic
receptor
modulators
under study
NMDA receptor
antagonism as
potential
anxiolytic—
preliminary
efficacy of
riluzole for GAD

Neuropeptide Y
(NPY)

Amygdala,
hippocampus,
brainstem,
nucleus
accumbens,

Low NPY levels in Intranasal
PTSD, less well
administration
studied in
may reduce
anxiety disorders
anxiety, under
investigation


<<<PAGE 1319>>>
locus
coeruleus,
hypothalamus

Y1 and Y2
receptors
potential target
for treatment

Galanin

Prefrontal cortex,
amygdala,
hippocampus,
locus
coeruleus

Very few studies in Potential of galani
patients with
modulators as
anxiety disorders
future approach
no known
Galanin gene
studies
polymorphism
associated with
PD, only in
women

Cholecystokinin
(CCK)

Cerebral cortex,
hippocampus,
amygdala,
caudate,
putamen,
thalamus,
hypothalamus

Lower CSF levels of To date, CCK-B
CCK in PD
receptor
antagonists hav
failed to
demonstrate
efficacy for GA
or PD

Oxytocin

Hypothalamus,
ventral
tegmental
area,
amygdala

Oxytocin gene
Intranasal oxytocin
receptor
administration
polymorphism
beneficial for
associated with
SAD, under
increased risk for
study; potential
anxiety in
benefit for GAD
individuals with
early life stress

Endocannabinoid
system

Prefrontal cortex, Dysregulation of
Cannabidiol
hypothalamus,
endocannabinoid
reduced anxiet
amygdala,
signaling
in patients with
hippocampus
SAD during
public speaking
under study


<<<PAGE 1320>>>
Studies of FAAH
inhibitors as
potential
treatment unde
way for PTSD
(no longer
classified as
anxiety disorde
needed in
anxiety
GAD, generalized anxiety disorder; PD, panic disorder; SAD, social anxiety disorder; NMDA,
N-methyl-D-aspartate; NDRI, norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitor; SSRI, selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor; SNRI, serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor; DCS, Dcycloserine; FAAH, fatty acid amide hydrolase.

Preclinical Studies of Fear Learning. As we mentioned above, the
ubiquity of fear and anxiety in many animals makes it relatively easy to study
through animal models. Using conditioned models of fear, researchers can
study the anatomical correlates of fear anxiety. It is daunting to summarize
the many aspects of what we know about the etiology of fear and anxiety. In
its broadest sense, one can imagine a stimulus, collected through afferent
systems. That stimulus is then processed and evaluated to assess whether it is
averse. This assessment involves including previous experiences and
environmental contexts associated with the stimulus. What results is a fear or
anxiety response, which employs a range of behavioral, endocrine, and
autonomic responses to react to that stimulus.
Many areas of the brain and connections between those areas are involved
in this response. For example, the amygdala plays a vital role. The amygdala
has many subnuclei, called the amygdaloid complex, each with a unique
function. The lateral nucleus of the amygdala (LA), for example, is the
primary interface for visual, auditory, and somatic sensory information
received from the thalamus and cortex. The connections between the
thalamus and this nucleus appear to be central to fear conditioning related to
these particular stimuli.
Once entering the L.A., it sends the neural representation of the stimulus to
various other amygdaloid nuclei. It is then modulated by an array of systems,


<<<PAGE 1321>>>
including ones that supply context from memory, or about different
homeostatic states in the body. Some of the most extensive projections are to
the basal (BA) nuclei, which are involved in forming the long-lasting traces
for fear conditioning. After much processing, including from other cortical
regions, the output nuclei of the amygdala organize the behavioral responses
that reflect the sum of the activity of the many nuclei. The central nucleus of
the amygdala then outputs this to various motor, autonomic, and
neuroendocrine systems involved in expressing fear. This includes the
hypothalamus, midbrain, and medulla. For example, the hypothalamus can
then activate the CRH to start the associated stress response. The
hippocampus, among other structures, also has a critical role in fear learning
and extinction and helps in the development of the emotional responses
associated with fear.
This discussion is just a brief introduction into what we know and theorize
about the neurobiology of anxiety disorders. Our Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry has a much expanded discussion as well as references to many of
the relevant articles. Figure 8-1 summarizes the stages of the fear response, as
well as some of the brain regions involved in these stages.

FIGURE 8-1
Neuroanatomical circuitry underlying fear and anxiety, organized by systems that
evaluate the salience of potentially threatening stimuli (to the left) and systems


<<<PAGE 1322>>>
that organize and mediate the expression of fear and anxiety behaviors (to the
right). BNST, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis; OFC, orbitofrontal cortex; PVN,
paraventricular nucleus. (From Charney DS, Drevets WC. The neurobiological
basis of anxiety disorders. In: Davis K, Charney DS, Coyle J, Nemeroff CB, eds.
Psychopharmacology. The Fifth Generation of Progress. New York: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2002:901.)

References
Baldwin DS, Anderson IM, Nutt DJ, Allgulander C, Bandelow B, den Boer
JA, Christmas DM, Davies S, Fineberg N, Lidbetter N, Malizia A,
McCrone P, Nabarro D, O’Neill C, Scott J, van der Wee N, Wittchen HU.
Evidence-based pharmacological treatment of anxiety disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder: a revision of
the 2005 guidelines from the British Association for Psychopharmacology.
J Psychopharmacol. 2014;28(5):403–439.
Bandelow B, Reitt M, Röver C, Michaelis S, Görlich Y, Wedekind D.
Efficacy of treatments for anxiety disorders: A meta-analysis. Int Clin
Psychopharmacol. 2015;30(4):183–192.
Bandelow B, Sher L, Bunevicius R, Hollander E, Kasper S, Zohar J, Möller
HJ; WFSBP Task Force on Mental Disorders in Primary Care; WFSBP
Task Force on Anxiety Disorders, OCD and PTSD. Guidelines for the
pharmacological treatment of anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive
disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder in primary care. Int J Psychiatry
Clin Pract. 2012;16(2):77–84.
Beck AT, Epstein N, Brown G, Steer RA. An inventory for measuring
clinical anxiety: Psychometric properties. J Consult Clin Psychol.
1988;56(6):893–897.
Craske MG, Rauch SL, Ursano R, Prenoveau J, Pine DS, Zinbarg RE. What
is an anxiety disorder? Depress Anxiety. 2009;26:1066–1085.
Crocq M-A. A history of anxiety: From Hippocrates to DSM. Dialogues Clin
Neurosci. 2015;17(3):319–325.
Dell’Osso B, Buoli M, Baldwin DS, Altamura AC. Serotonin norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) in anxiety disorders: A comprehensive review
of their clinical efficacy. Hum Psychopharmacol. 2010;25(1):17–29.
Depping AM, Komossa K, Kissling W, Leucht S. Second-generation
antipsychotics for anxiety disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;


<<<PAGE 1323>>>
(12):CD008120.
Dresler T, Guhn A, Tupak SV, Ehlis A-C, Herrmann MJ, Fallgatter AJ,
Deckert J, Domschke K. Revise the revised? New dimensions of the
neuroanatomical hypothesis of panic disorder. J Neural Transm (Vienna).
2013;120(1):3–29.
Fentz HN, Hoffart A, Jensen MB, Arendt M, O’Toole MS, Rosenberg NK,
Hougaard E. Mechanisms of change in cognitive behaviour therapy for
panic disorder: The role of panic self-efficacy and catastrophic
misinterpretations. Behav Res Ther. 2013;51:579–587.
Funayama T, Furukawa TA, Nakano Y, Noda Y, Ogawa S, Watanabe N,
Chen J, Noguchi Y. In-situation safety behaviors among patients with
panic disorder: Descriptive and correlational study. Psych Clin Neurosci.
2013;67:332–339.
Generoso MB, Trevizol AP, Kasper S, Cho HJ, Cordeiro Q, Shiozawa P.
Pregabalin for generalized anxiety disorder: An updated systematic review
and meta-analysis. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2017;32(1):49–55.
Goodwin RD, Stein DJ. Anxiety disorders and drug dependence: Evidence on
sequence and specificity among adults. Psych Clin Neurosci. 2013;67:167–
173.
Gorman JM, Kent JM, Sullivan GM, Coplan JD. Neuroanatomical hypothesis
of panic disorder, revised. Am J Psychiatry. 2000;157(4):493–505.
Gorman JM, Liebowitz MR, Fyer AJ, Stein J. A neuroanatomical hypothesis
for panic disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 1989;146(2):148–161.
Hamm AO. Specific phobias. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2009;32(3):577.
Hasin DS, Grant BF. The National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and
Related Conditions (NESARC) Waves 1 and 2: Review and summary of
findings. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2015;50(11):1609–1640.
Hofmann SG, Hinton DE. Cross-cultural aspects of anxiety disorders. Curr
Psychiatry Rep. 2014;16(6):450.
Julian LJ. Measures of anxiety. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) [Internet].
2011 Nov [cited November 24, 2019];63(0 11):5467–5472. Available
from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3879951/
Khalsa SS, Feinstein JS, Li W, Feusner JD, Adolphs R, Hurlemann R. Panic
anxiety in humans with bilateral amygdala lesions: Pharmacological
induction via cardiorespiratory interoceptive pathways. J Neurosci.
2016;36(12):3559–3566.


<<<PAGE 1324>>>
Klein DF. Historical aspects of anxiety. Dialogues Clin Neurosci.
2002;4(3):295–304.
Lovibond PF, Lovibond SH. The structure of negative emotional states:
comparison of the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS) with the Beck
Depression and Anxiety Inventories. Behav Res Ther. 1995;33(3):335–
343.
Marteau TM, Bekker H. The development of a six-item short-form of the
state scale of the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). Br J
Clin Psychol. 1992;31(3):301–306.
McLean CP, Asnaani A, Litz BT, Hofmann SG. Gender differences in
anxiety disorders: Prevalence, course of illness, comorbidity and burden of
illness. J Psychiatr Res. 2011;45:1027–1035.
Meyerbroker K, Morina N, Kerkhof G, Emmelkamp PM. Virtual reality
exposure treatment of agoraphobia: A comparison of computer automatic
virtual environment and head-mounted display. Stud Health Technol
Inform. 2011;167:51–56.
Naragon-Gainey K, Gallagher MW, Brown TA. A longitudinal examination
of psychosocial impairment across the anxiety disorders. Psycholog Med.
2013;43:1475.
Perna G, Daccò S, Menotti R, Caldirola D. Antianxiety medications for the
treatment of complex agoraphobia: Pharmacological interventions for a
behavioral condition. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2011;7:621–637.
Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients With Panic Disorder. In:
APA Practice Guidelines for the Treatment of Psychiatric Disorders:
Comprehensive Guidelines and Guideline Watches [Internet]. 1st ed.
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association; 2006 [cited July 26,
2020]. Available from: http://www.psychiatryonline.com/content.aspx?
aID=51396
Sanchez C, Reines EH, Montgomery SA. A comparative review of
escitalopram, paroxetine, and sertraline: Are they all alike? Int Clin
Psychopharmacol. 2014;29(4):185–196.
Shear MK, Vander Bilt J, Rucci P, Endicott J, Lydiard B, Otto MW, Pollack
MH, Chandler L, Williams J, Ali A, Frank DM. Reliability and validity of
a structured interview guide for the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (SIGHA). Depress Anxiety. 2001;13(4):166–178.
Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JBW, Löwe B. A brief measure for


<<<PAGE 1325>>>
assessing generalized anxiety disorder: The GAD-7. Arch Intern Med.
2006;166(10):1092–1097.
Steenen SA, van Wijk AJ, van der Heijden GJ, van Westrhenen R, de Lange
J, de Jongh A. Propranolol for the treatment of anxiety disorders:
Systematic
review
and
meta-analysis.
J
Psychopharmacol.
2016;30(2):128–139.
Stein DJ, Nesse RM. Threat detection, precautionary responses, and anxiety
disorders. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2011;35:1075–1079.
Vinkers CH, Olivier B. Mechanisms underlying tolerance after long-term
benzodiazepine use: A future for subtype-selective GABAA receptor
modulators? Adv Pharmacol Sci [Internet]. 2012;2012:416864 [cited July
26,
2020].
Available
from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3321276/
World Health Organization. Depression and other common mental disorders:
Global health estimates. 2017 [cited September 26, 2019]. Available from:
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/254610
Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospital anxiety and depression scale. Acta
Psychiatr Scand. 1983;67(6):361–370.
Zimmerman M, Clark H, McGonigal P, Harris L, Holst CG, Martin J.
Reliability and validity of the DSM-5 anxious distress specifier interview.
Compr Psychiatry. 2017;76:11–17.
Zimmerman M, Martin J, Clark H, McGonigal P, Harris L, Holst CG.
Measuring anxiety in depressed patients: A comparison of the Hamilton
anxiety rating scale and the DSM-5 Anxious Distress Specifier Interview. J
Psychiatr Res. 2017;93:59–63.


<<<PAGE 1326>>>
9
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related
Disorders
This chapter includes disorders characterized by repetitive, intrusive thoughts
and/or repeated mental acts or behaviors. These disorders include obsessivecompulsive disorder (OCD), body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), hoarding
disorder (HD), hair-pulling disorder (trichotillomania), and excoriation (skinpicking) disorder, as well as some related disorders.

THE CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
OCD is a diverse group of symptoms that include intrusive thoughts, rituals,
preoccupations, and compulsions. Obsessions are intrusive and unwanted
repetitive thoughts, urges, or impulses that often lead to a marked increase in
anxiety or distress. Compulsions are repetitive behaviors or mental acts that
are done in response to obsessions, or in a rigid, rule-bound way. These
recurrent obsessions or compulsions cause severe distress to the person. The
obsessions or compulsions are time-consuming and interfere significantly
with the person’s routine, occupational functioning, usual social activities, or
relationships. A patient with OCD may have only obsessions or only
compulsions, but in most cases, both obsessions and compulsions are present.
Obsessions and compulsions are the essential features of OCD. An idea or
an impulse intrudes itself insistently and persistently into a person’s
conscious awareness. Typical obsessions associated with OCD include
thoughts about contamination (“My hands are dirty”) or doubts (“I forgot to
turn off the stove”).


<<<PAGE 1327>>>
The typical patterns of OCD symptoms cluster within several limited
dimensions, including contamination/cleansing, forbidden thoughts/checking,
symmetry/ordering, and hoarding symptoms (see below). Most patients with
OCD typically have good insight into the fact that their OCD beliefs are not
real. However, some patients have poor insight, and a small number lack any
insight—their obsessions are delusional. Such patients may be misdiagnosed
with a psychotic disorder and receive inappropriate treatment.
The presentation of obsessions and compulsions is heterogeneous in adults
(Table 9-1) and children and adolescents (Table 9-2). The symptoms of an
individual patient can overlap and change with time, but OCD has four major
symptom patterns, as outlined below.
Contamination/Cleansing. The most common pattern is an obsession of
contamination, followed by washing or accompanied by compulsive
avoidance of the presumably contaminated object. The feared object is often
hard to avoid (e.g., feces, urine, dust, or germs). Patients may rub the skin off
their hands by excessive handwashing or may be unable to leave their homes
because of fear of germs. Although anxiety is the most common emotional
response to the feared object, obsessive shame and disgust are also common.
Patients with contamination obsessions usually believe that the contamination
is spread from object to object or person to person by the slightest contact.
Pathologic Doubt/Checking. The second most common pattern is an
obsession of doubt, followed by compulsions of checking. The obsession
often implies some danger of violence (e.g., forgetting to turn off the stove or
not locking a door). The checking may involve multiple trips back into the
house to check the stove, for example. These patients have obsessional selfdoubt and always feel guilty about having forgotten or committed something.
Intrusive/Forbidden Thoughts. In the third most common pattern, there
are intrusive obsessional thoughts without a compulsion. Patients usually
experience thoughts of a sexual or aggressive act that is reprehensible to the
patient. Patients obsessed with thoughts of aggressive or sexual acts may
report themselves to the police or confess to a priest. Suicidal ideation may
also be obsessive (and unlikely to be acted on), but we should assess for
actual risk.


<<<PAGE 1328>>>
Symmetry/Ordering. The fourth most common pattern is the need
for symmetry or precision, which can lead to a compulsion of
slowness. Patients can take hours to eat a meal or shave their
faces.
Other Symptom Patterns. Religious obsessions and compulsive
hoarding are common in patients with OCD. Compulsive
hairpulling and nail-biting are behavioral patterns related to OCD.
Masturbation may also be compulsive.
Ms. K was referred for psychiatric evaluation by her general practitioner.
In the interview, Ms. K described a long history of checking rituals that
had caused her to lose several jobs and had damaged numerous
relationships. She reported, for example, that she often had the thought
that she had not locked the door to the car. It was difficult for her to leave
her car until she had repeatedly checked that it was secure. She had
broken several car door handles with the vigor of her checking and had
been up to an hour late to work because she spent too much time
checking her car door.
Similarly, she had recurrent thoughts that she had left the door to her
apartment unlocked. She returned several times to check her door before
she left for work. She reported that checking doors decreased her anxiety
about security. Ms. K reported that she had occasionally tried to leave her
car or apartment without checking the door (e.g., when she was already
late for work). However, she found that she became so worried that
someone would steal her car or break into her apartment that she had
difficulty going anywhere. Ms. K reported that her obsessions about
security had become so extreme over the past 3 months that she had lost
her job due to recurrent tardiness. She recognized the irrational nature of
her obsessive concerns but could not bring herself to ignore them.
(Courtesy of Erin B. McClure-Tone, Ph.D., and Daniel S. Pine, M.D.)
Table 9-1
Obsessive-Compulsive Symptoms in Adults


<<<PAGE 1329>>>
Variable

%

Obsessions (N = 200)
Contamination

45

Pathologic doubt

42

Somatic

36

Need for symmetry

31

Aggressive

28

Sexual

26

Other

13

Multiple obsessions

60

Compulsions (N = 200)
Checking

63

Washing

50

Counting

36

Need to ask or confess

31

Symmetry and precision

28

Hoarding

18

Multiple comparisons

48

Course of illness (N = 100)a
Type
Continuous

85

Deteriorative

10

Episodic

2

Not present

71


<<<PAGE 1330>>>
Present

29

aAge at onset: men, 17.5 ± 6.8 years; women, 20.8 ± 8.5 years.

From Rasmussen SA, Eisen JL. The epidemiology and differential diagnosis of obsessive
compulsive disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 1992;(53 Suppl):4–10, with permission.

Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Persons with BDD have persistent preoccupations about one or more
perceived defects or flaws in one’s appearance. The defects or flaws appear
slight or are not observable to others. Their concerns about their appearance
result in a range of mental acts or behaviors, including comparing themselves
with others, checking in the mirror, or camouflaging their perceived flaws.
The most common concerns (Table 9-3) involve the face and head,
particularly those involving specific parts (e.g., the skin, nose shape and size,
hair), although symptoms may focus on any area of the body. Sometimes the
concern is vague and confusing to understand, such as extreme concern over
a “scrunchy” chin. Throughout their illness, patients worry about five to
seven different body areas. More than a quarter of patients are concerned
with the symmetry of their appearance.
Commonly associated symptoms include ideas or delusions of reference,
frequent mirror checking or avoidance of reflective surfaces, and attempts to
hide the presumed deformity. The ideas or delusions of reference are usually
about others noticing the alleged flaw. The effects on a person’s life can be
significant, and it is essential to assess for avoidance due to BDD symptoms,
which can range from minor social avoidance to being housebound. Patients
with BDD have less insight into the truth of their beliefs than those with
OCD. Only a quarter of BDD patients have reasonable insight, and around
one-third have absent insight.
Table 9-2
Reported Obsessions and Compulsions for 70 Consecutive
Child and Adolescent Patients
Major Presenting Symptom

No. (%) Reporting
Symptom at Initial
Interviewa


<<<PAGE 1331>>>
Obsession
Concern or disgust with bodily wastes or
secretions (urine, stool, saliva), dirt,
germs, environmental toxins

30 (43)

Fear something terrible may happen (fire,
death or illness of loved one, self, or
others)

18 (24)

Concern or need for symmetry, order, or
exactness

12 (17)

Scrupulosity (excessive praying or religious
concerns out of keeping with patient’s
background)

9 (13)

Lucky and unlucky numbers

6 (8)

Forbidden or perverse sexual thoughts,
images, or impulses

3 (4)

Intrusive nonsense sounds, words, or music

1 (1)

Compulsion
Excessive or ritualized handwashing,
showering, bathing, toothbrushing, or
grooming

60 (85)

Repeating rituals (e.g., going in and out of
door, up and down from chair)

36 (51)

Checking doors, locks, stove, appliances,
car brakes

32 (46)

Cleaning and other rituals to remove contact
with contaminants

16 (23)

Touching

14 (20)

Ordering and arranging

12 (17)


<<<PAGE 1332>>>
Measures to prevent harm to self or others
(e.g., hanging clothes a certain way)

11 (16)

Counting

13 (18)

Hoarding and collecting

8 (11)

Miscellaneous rituals (e.g., licking, spitting,
special dress pattern)

18 (26)

aMultiple symptoms recorded, so total exceeds 70.

From Rapoport JL. The neurobiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder. JAMA.
1988;260:2889, with permission.

Ms. R, a 28-year-old single woman, presented with the complaint that she
is “ugly” and that she feels others are laughing at her, despite family
telling her she was attractive. She first became preoccupied with her
appearance when she was 13. She became obsessed with her “facial
defects,” feeling, for example, that her nose was fat, or her eyes were too
far apart. Up until this point, Ms. R was confident, a good student, and
socially active. However, her fixation on her face caused her to withdraw
socially and have difficulty concentrating in school, which in turn hurt
her grades.
Ms. R dropped out of high school and went for her GED due to her
preoccupation. She began to frequently pick at “blemishes” and hairs on
her face. She frequently checked herself in mirrors and other reflective
surfaces (e.g., spoons, windows), and found herself thinking about her
defects almost daily. Her family and others could not convince her that
there was nothing wrong with her appearance.
Table 9-3
Location of Imagined Defects in 30 Patients with Body
Dysmorphic Disordera
Location

N

%

Hairb

19

63


<<<PAGE 1333>>>
Nose

15

50

Skinc

15

50

Eyes

8

27

Head, faced

6

20

Overall body build, bone structure

6

20

Lips

5

17

Chin

5

17

Stomach, waist

5

17

Teeth

4

13

Legs, knees

4

13

Breasts, pectoral muscles

3

10

Ugly face (general)

3

10

Ears

2

7

Cheeks

2

7

Buttocks

2

7

Penis

2

7

Arms, wrists

2

7

Neck

1

3

Forehead

1

3

Facial muscles

1

3

Shoulders

1

3

Hips

1

3

aTotal is greater than 100% because most patients had “defects” in more than one location.
bInvolved head hair in 15 cases, beard growth in 2 cases, and other body hair in 3 cases.
cInvolved acne in 7 cases, facial lines in 3 cases, and other skin concerns in 7 cases.


<<<PAGE 1334>>>
dInvolved concerns with shape in 5 cases and size in 1 case.

From Phillips KA, McElroy SL, Keck PE Jr., Pope HG, Hudson JL. Body dysmorphic disorder:
30 cases of imagined ugliness. Am J Psychiatry. 1993;150:303, with permission.

Hoarding Disorder
Persons with HD have persistent and profound difficulty discarding or
parting with their possessions. The disorder leads to significant congestion
and clutter and substantive distress or impairment, differentiating it from
regular collecting. Compulsive hoarding is a common and often disabling
phenomenon associated with impairment in such functions as eating,
sleeping, and grooming. Hoarding may result in health problems and poor
sanitation, particularly when hoarding of animals is involved. It may also lead
to injuries from fire or falling. As a rule, people with the disorder acquire
things of little or no value and cannot throw them away.
What drives the behavior appears to be the fear of losing items that the
patient believes will be needed later and a distorted belief about or an
emotional attachment to possessions. Most hoarders do not perceive their
behavior to be a problem. Many perceive their behavior to be reasonable and
part of their identity. Most hoarding patients accumulate possessions
passively rather than intentionally, thus clutter accumulates gradually.
Commonly hoarded items include newspapers, mail, magazines, old clothes,
bags, books, lists, and notes. Hoarding poses risks to not only the patient but
also to those around them. Clutter accumulated from hoarding has caused
deaths from fire or other accidents. It can also attract pest infestations that can
pose a health risk both to the patient and residents around them. Many
sufferers have been evicted from their homes or threatened with eviction as a
result of their hoarding. In severe cases, hoarding can interfere with work,
social interaction, and necessary activities such as eating or sleeping.
The pathologic nature of hoarding comes from the inability to organize
possessions and keep them organized. Many patients hoard rather than make
decisions about discarding items. Patients with HD also overemphasize the
importance of recalling information and possessions. For example, a hoarder
will keep old newspapers and magazines because they believe that important
information may be lost. Patients may believe that forgetting the information
will lead to severe consequences and prefer to keep their possessions within
sight so as not to forget them.


<<<PAGE 1335>>>
Ms. T, a 55-year-old single woman, presented to a therapist accompanied
by her adult son, who expressed concern about Ms. T’s inability to
“throw things away.” He reported that Ms. T’s home was extremely
cluttered with “needless things.” Whenever he attempted to help her
“organize things,” however, Ms. T would become agitated and
argumentative. Ms. T confirmed her son’s complaint and reported having
this difficulty for as long as she could remember, but never really viewed
it as a problem.
Over the past 5 years, Ms. T’s home had become increasingly cluttered
to the point that it became more and more challenging to move around
within it. She was able to keep the kitchen and bathroom relatively
clutter-free. However, boxes and bags filled with papers, magazines,
clothes, and miscellaneous gifts and trinkets filled the rest of her home.
Her living room was the most affected. Her son could no longer visit his
mother as so uncomfortable at her home. Ms. T admits that his avoidance
of her home has been a significant source of depression for her. Ms. T
had enjoyed entertaining her family and friends but had not done so in
years as she felt that her home was no longer suitable. She had made a
few attempts to clean out her home but was unable to discard most items.
When asked why she was keeping them, she replied, “I may need them
later.”
Hair-Pulling Disorder (Trichotillomania)
Hair-pulling disorder is a chronic disorder characterized by repetitive
hairpulling, leading to variable hair loss that may be visible to others. It is
also known as trichotillomania, from the Greek trich (hair) and tillein (to pull
or pluck), a term coined by a French dermatologist Francois Hallopeau in
1889. Although once considered rare, it appears to be relatively common. It
resembles both obsessive-compulsive and impulse control disorder: increased
tension before the hairpulling leads to the behavior and then subsequent relief
or satisfaction.
Hair-pulling disorder, or trichotillomania, is characterized by pulling out
one’s hair. The pulling is not for cosmetic reasons, but instead, individuals
often describe an irresistible urge to pull out their hair. This hairpulling


<<<PAGE 1336>>>
results in noticeable hair loss and is associated with repeated attempts to
decrease or stop hairpulling. Patients with hair-pulling disorder may
experience an increasing sense of tension before engaging in the behavior and
achieve a sense of release or gratification from pulling out their hair. All
areas of the body may be affected, most commonly the scalp (Fig. 9-1). Other
areas involved are eyebrows, eyelashes, and beard; trunk, armpits, and pubic
areas are less commonly involved.

FIGURE 9-1
Hair-pulling disorder (trichotillomania). Note the typical findings of an area of
incomplete alopecia involving the frontal and vertex scalp. (From Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009, with
permission.)

There are (at least) two types of hairpulling. Focused pulling is the use of
an intentional act to control unpleasant personal experiences, such as an urge,
bodily sensation (e.g., itching or burning), or thought. In contrast, automatic
pulling occurs outside the person’s awareness and, most often, during


<<<PAGE 1337>>>
sedentary activities. Most patients have a combination of these types.
The hair loss usually appears as short, broken strands near long, healthy
hairs in the affected areas. No abnormalities of the skin or scalp are present.
The hairpulling is usually painful, although pruritus and tingling may occur
in the affected area. Trichophagy, mouthing of the hair, may follow the hair
plucking. Complications of trichophagy include trichobezoars, malnutrition,
and intestinal obstruction. Patients usually deny the behavior and often try to
hide the resultant alopecia. The patients may also self-mutilate in other ways,
such as headbanging, nail-biting, scratching, gnawing, or excoriation.
Ms. C, a 27-year-old single woman, came to a local clinic complaining of
persistent hairpulling. She first started at age 11 when she began to pick
the hairs at the nape of her neck. She would persistently pick at the hair
until there was almost none left. Fortunately, her hair was long, so no one
noticed the lack of hair at the back of her neck. Over the years, her hair
picking progressed until she began picking hair from her entire head,
leaving noticeable small bald patches. She strategically hid the bald
patches by brushing over the remainder of her hair or with carefully
placed scarves and hats. Despite her habit, Ms. C’s daily functioning was
average. She earned good grades in school and was a year away from
getting her master’s degree.
Ms. C’s habit was constant, occurring every day, often without her
noticing it. She could only be reading an assignment for school, and
eventually, her hand would find its way into her hair to find hair to pull.
Soon she would notice a small pile of hairs in her book or on her lap,
indicating that she had been pulling her hair out for a while. Whenever
she tried to stop herself from pulling her hair, she would become
increasingly nervous and anxious until she resumed the hairpulling. Her
hair-pulling sessions lasted anywhere from 10 minutes to an hour.
Excoriation (Skin-Picking) Disorder
People with excoriation disorder repeatedly pick their skin, sufficiently to
cause lesions. Individuals with skin-pulling attempt to decrease or stop skinpicking; however, they are unable to do so. While some picking of scabs is


<<<PAGE 1338>>>
likely universal, in the case of excoriation disorder, the behavior causes
clinically significant distress or impairment. The historical literature
describes cases of “neurotic excoriation” or “psychogenic excoriation,”
however, it was only with Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-5) that the disorder became a separate diagnosis.
Skin-picking may be from any area of the body but is most commonly
from the face, followed by the hands, fingers, arms, and legs (Fig. 9-2).
Patients may pick from multiple sites. In severe cases, skin-picking can result
in physical disfigurement and medical consequences that require medical or
surgical interventions (e.g., skin grafts or radiosurgery).
Patients may experience tension before picking and relief or gratification
after picking. Patients may pick to relieve stress, tension, and other negative
feelings. Despite the feeling of relief felt from picking, patients often feel
guilty or embarrassed at their behavior. Up to 87 percent of patients report
feeling embarrassed by the picking and 58 percent report avoiding social
situations. Many patients use bandages, makeup, or clothing to hide their
picking. Of skin-picking patients, 15 percent report suicidal ideation due to
their behavior, and about 12 percent have attempted suicide.
Ms. J, a 22-year-old single woman, presented to a psychiatrist at the
urging of her dermatologist because of compulsively picking her facial
skin. She picked at it every day up to three times a day in sessions lasting
from 20 minutes to over an hour. She had massive scarring and lesions on
her face. She went to a physician 6 months prior when one of the lesions
had become infected.
Ms. J began picking her face at age 11 at the onset of puberty. At first,
she only picked at acne that formed on her face, but as the urge to pick
became greater, she started picking at clear patches of skin as well. Due
to the scaring and lesions, Ms. J became increasingly withdrawn and
avoided all social engagements. She reported feeling great tension before
picking, and only felt relief after she began picking.


<<<PAGE 1339>>>
FIGURE 9-2
Skin-picking disorder. Multiple erythematous and pigmented maculae and crusted
erosions on chin. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009, with permission.)

Obsessive-Compulsive or Related Disorder due to Another
Medical Condition
As with most psychiatric disorders, when OCD (or another disorder in this
category) is due to some other medical condition, we use a different
diagnosis. We include a discussion of medical causes of obsessive and
compulsive symptoms in our section on differential diagnosis.
Substance-Induced Obsessive-Compulsive or Related Disorder
Sometimes the symptoms described in this chapter may be due to a
substance, including drugs, medications, and alcohol (either during use or
during withdrawal), and is not part of a delirium. In such cases, we would use
this separate diagnosis.


<<<PAGE 1340>>>
Other Specified Obsessive-Compulsive or Related Disorder
This category is for patients who have symptoms characteristic of obsessivecompulsive and related disorder but do not meet the full criteria for any
specific obsessive-compulsive or related disorder. This diagnosis is
appropriate under three situations: (1) an atypical presentation, (2) another
specific syndrome not listed in DSM-5 (such as Olfactory Reference
Syndrome, described next), and (3) the information presented is insufficient
to make a full diagnosis of an obsessive-compulsive or related disorder.
Olfactory Reference Syndrome. People with olfactory reference
syndrome have a false belief that they have a foul body odor that is not
perceived by others. The preoccupation leads to repetitive behaviors such as
washing the body or changing clothes. Patients with the disorder may have
good, fair, poor, or absent insight into the behavior. The syndrome is
predominant in males and single persons. The mean age of onset is 25 years
of age. The belief of a subjective sense of smell that does not exist externally
may rise to the level of a somatic delusion, in which a diagnosis of a
delusional disorder may be more appropriate. The syndrome has been
frequently described in the psychiatric literature, usually classified as a
delusion of perception. Whether or not it deserves a unique diagnosis remains
controversial.
In assessing a patient with olfactory reference syndrome, it is essential to
exclude other medical causes. Some patients with temporal lobe epilepsy may
complain of smelling foul odors. Local irritations of the hippocampus from
pituitary tumors may also cause olfactory sensations. Patients with
inflammation of the frontal, ethmoidal, or sphenoidal sinuses may also have a
subjective sense of offensive odors. DSM-5 includes olfactory reference
syndrome in the “other specified” designation for the obsessive-compulsive
and related disorder of DSM-5.

DIAGNOSIS
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Table 9-4 lists the diagnostic approaches to OCD in DSM-5 and ICD-10. We
can usually diagnose OCD with a thorough psychiatric history and


<<<PAGE 1341>>>
examination. Patients often attempt to neutralize obsessions with
compulsions. These compulsions are usually not credibly connected to the
thoughts, or they are excessive. When assessing the negative impact of OCD
symptoms, it is important also to address avoidance of triggers of obsessions
and compulsions.
Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Table 9-5 lists the diagnostic approaches to BDD in DSM-5 and ICD-10. The
DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for BDD stipulate preoccupation with a perceived
defect in appearance or overemphasis of a slight defect. It also requires that at
some point during the disorder, the patient has compulsive behaviors or
mental acts related to the preoccupation. These compulsions may include
mirror checking, excessive grooming, or comparing their appearance to that
of others. The preoccupation causes patients significant emotional distress or
markedly impairs their ability to function in important areas.
Hoarding Disorder
Table 9-6 lists the diagnostic approaches to HD in DSM-5 and ICD-10. We
diagnose HD using the significant features of the disorder: patients acquire
large amounts of useless or valueless possessions, they cannot throw them
away, and this leads to significant clutter in living areas. If their space is not
cluttered, it is because others have stepped in to clean it. Finally, it should
cause significant distress or functional impairment. The fifth edition of the
DSM-5 includes diagnostic specifiers that relate to insight, which may be
rated poor, fair, or good. Some patients are completely unaware of the full
extent of the problem and resistant to treatment. At times, delusional beliefs
about hoarded items are present.
Hair-Pulling Disorder (Trichotillomania)
Table 9-7 lists the diagnostic approaches to hair-pulling disorder in DSM-5
and ICD-10. It emphasizes the repetitive and compulsive nature of the
behavior as well as the fact that it is not motivated by cosmetic reasons.
Excoriation (Skin-Picking) Disorder
Table 9-8 lists the diagnostic approaches to excoriation (skin-picking)


<<<PAGE 1342>>>
disorder in DSM-5 and ICD-10. DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for skin-picking
disorder require recurrent skin-picking resulting in skin lesions and repeated
attempts to decrease or stop picking. The skin-picking must cause clinically
relevant distress or impairment in functioning. The skin-picking behavior
cannot be attributed to another medical or mental condition and cannot be a
result of a substance use disorder (e.g., cocaine or methamphetamine use). A
thorough physical examination is crucial before a psychiatric diagnosis.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Medical Conditions
Several primary medical disorders can produce syndromes bearing a striking
resemblance to OCD.
OCD-like symptoms have been reported in children following group A
beta-hemolytic streptococcal infection and have been called pediatric
autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcus
(PANDAS). They may result from an autoimmune process that leads to
inflammation of the basal ganglia that disrupts cortical–striatal–thalamic axis
functioning.
The current conceptualization of OCD as a disorder of the basal ganglia
derives from the phenomenologic similarity between idiopathic OCD and
OCD-like disorders that are associated with basal ganglia diseases, such as
Sydenham chorea and Huntington disease. It is essential to search for the
neurologic signs of these disorders when assessing a patient with presumed
OCD. Also, OCD often develops before age 30 years, and new-onset OCD in
an older individual should raise questions about potential neurologic
contributions to the disorder.
Table 9-4
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Disorder

DSM-5

Diagnostic name Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder

ICD-10
Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder


<<<PAGE 1343>>>
Symptoms

1. Obsessions (Intrusive
thoughts that
accompany
behaviors and that
individuals may
attempt to ignore or
counteract through
action)
2. Compulsions
(repetitive actions,
commonly driven by
an obsessive
thought, performed to
relieve anxiety or
fear)

• Recurrent
obsessional
thoughts and/or
compulsive acts
• Obsessions:
ideas, images, or
impulses
occurring
recurrently
• Compulsions:
repeated
stereotyped
behaviors meant
to neutralize a
thought/anxiety
or prevent a
perceived
adverse event
• Attempts at
resisting thoughts
and behaviors are
frequently
unsuccessful and
cause worsening
anxiety

Required number Obsessive thoughts,
Presence of
of symptoms
compulsions, or both
obsessions,
compulsions, or both
Psychosocial
Symptoms and
consequences
behaviors consume
of symptoms
at least 1 hr/day or
cause significant
distress and
impairment


<<<PAGE 1344>>>
Exclusions (not
result of):

Medical illness
Substance
Other psychiatric
disorder

Symptom
specifiers

Tic related
• current or prior tic
disorder
With good or fair
insight
• understanding that
beliefs surrounding
actions may not be
true
With poor insight
• feeling that beliefs
surrounding actions
are likely true
With absent insight
and/or delusional
beliefs
• strong conviction
that beliefs
surrounding actions
are true

Severity
specifiers

With or without insight
(per above)

Obsessive-compulsive
personality disorder

• Predominantly
obsessional
thoughts or
ruminations
• Predominantly
compulsive acts
(obsessional
rituals)
• Mixed obsessional
thoughts and acts

Many medical disorders can cause alopecia. A biopsy may be necessary to
distinguish hair-pulling disorder from alopecia areata and tinea capitis.
Many dermatologic conditions can cause skin-picking. Conditions
associated with itching (such as scabies) can cause picking, as well as other
medical conditions (such as in Prader–Willi syndrome).


<<<PAGE 1345>>>
Tourette Disorder. OCD is closely related to Tourette disorder, as the two
conditions frequently co-occur, both in individuals over time and within
families. About 90 percent of persons with Tourette disorder have
compulsive symptoms, and as many as two-thirds meet the diagnostic criteria
for OCD.
Classically, patients with Tourette disorder have recurrent vocal and motor
tics that bear only a slight resemblance to OCD. The premonitory urges that
precede tics often strikingly resemble obsessions, however, and many of the
more complicated motor tics are very similar to compulsions.
Other Psychiatric Conditions
Many other psychiatric disorders include obsessive-compulsive symptoms,
and we must also rule out these conditions when diagnosing OCD. OCD
exhibits a superficial resemblance to obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder, which is associated with an obsessive concern for details,
perfectionism, and other similar personality traits. However, only OCD is
associated with genuine obsessions and compulsions. Worries in generalized
anxiety disorder are about real-life concerns, and they tend to be less
irrational and ego-dystonic than in OCD. Similarly, the ruminations of
depression and preoccupations of mania are typically mood-congruent and
ego-syntonic; in neither case are symptoms neutralized by compulsions.
Psychotic symptoms often lead to obsessive thoughts and compulsive
behaviors, bodily preoccupations, or hoarding behaviors that can be difficult
to distinguish from the obsessive-compulsive and related disorder. Patients
with psychotic disorders, however, cannot acknowledge the unreasonableness
of their behavior. Also, psychotic patients typically have a host of other
features that are not characteristic of OCD.
In some patients with BDD, their preoccupations have a delusional
intensity. In such cases, delusional disorder, somatic type can be made,
generally in addition to BDD, to capture the true nature of the patient’s
presentation.
Table 9-5
Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Body Dysmorphic Disorder


<<<PAGE 1346>>>
Disorder

DSM-5

Diagnostic name Body Dysmorphic Disorder

Symptoms

ICD-10
Body
Dysmorphic
Disorder

1. Preoccupation with physical Excessive
appearance and subjective
preoccupation
flaws
with image or
appearance
2. Presence of repetitive
behaviors at some point
during the disorder
• Checking
• Grooming
• Skin-picking
• Recurrent
thoughts/perseveration on
comparing physical
appearance to that of others

Required number Both of the above, causing
of symptoms
significant impairment
and/or distress and
excluding other causes of
symptoms
Psychosocial
Symptoms and behaviors
consequences
cause significant distress
of symptoms
and impairment

Exclusions (not
result of):

Medical illness
Substance
Eating disorder
Other psychiatric disorder

Significant
distress or
impairment in
areas of
functioning


<<<PAGE 1347>>>
Symptom
specifiers

With muscle dysmorphia
• preoccupation with
perceived low muscle
mass or small body build
With good or fair insight
• understanding that beliefs
may not be true
With poor insight
• feeling that beliefs are
likely true
With absent insight and/or
delusional beliefs
• strong conviction that
beliefs are true

Severity
specifiers

With or without insight (per
above)

Similarly, major depression is often associated with obsessive thoughts
that, at times, border on actual obsessions. However, in the case of major
depression, the obsessive symptoms are only found during a depressive
episode.
Individuals with an avoidant personality disorder or social phobia may
worry about being embarrassed by imagined or real defects in appearance.
However, this concern is usually not prominent, persistent, distressing, or
impairing.
Other psychiatric disorders may cause hoarding symptoms, including
autism spectrum disorders (where collections may reflect a specific interest)
and psychotic disorders. We should only diagnose HD if the hoarding
symptoms are independent of these other disorders.
Neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative conditions may be associated
with hoarding. For example, in Prader–Willi Syndrome, individuals are
characterized by hoarding of food, obesity, and skin-picking. Alzheimer
disease is another example. Damage to specific brain regions (anterior
ventromedial prefrontal and cingulate cortices) may cause excessive and


<<<PAGE 1348>>>
indiscriminate hoarding activity.
Patients with anorexia nervosa have a bodily preoccupation, but the focus
is on weight. In gender dysphoria, it is a discomfort with, or a sense of
wrongness about, one’s primary and secondary sex characteristics. In major
depressive disorder, there may be mood-congruent cognitions involving
appearance that occur exclusively during a major depressive episode.
Olfactory reference syndrome may result in other compulsive or repetitive
behaviors such as washing or changing one’s clothes. Individuals with BDD
have obsessional preoccupations about their appearance and may have
associated compulsive behaviors (e.g., mirror checking). We should only
include multiple diagnoses when the specific focus of concerns of the
obsessions extends beyond the usual focus of that disorder.
Some patients with OCD may hoard as a response to an unwanted
obsession. This situation is most familiar with obsessions around symmetry,
incompleteness, or fears of harm or contamination (e.g., keeping an object in
case discarding that object leads to harm). In contrast, in HD, there is no
associated obsession; instead, the individual wishes to retain saved items and
is distressed by the thought of discarding them. In some cases, both OCD and
HD may be comorbid. Skin-picking may also occur in response to obsessions
about contamination. Skin-picking is also common in BDD, but in these
individuals, it is a response to concerns about body appearance, and a second
diagnosis is not necessary.
Patients with factitious dermatitis or dermatitis artefacta pick their skin as
a type of self-inflicted injury and use more elaborate methods than simple
excoriation to self-induce skin lesions. It is seen in 0.3 percent of
dermatology patients and has a female:male ratio of 8:1. It can present at any
age but occurs most frequently in adolescents and young adults. It may
include a variety of skin lesions, such as blisters, ulcers, erythema, edema,
purpura, and sinuses. The morphology of factitious dermatitis lesions is often
bizarre and linear, with clear-cut, angulated, or geometric edges. The
presence of entirely healthy, unaffected skin adjacent to the horrific-looking
lesions is a clue to the diagnosis of factitious dermatitis (Fig. 9-3). Also, the
patient’s description of the history of the lesions is usually vague and lacks
detail about the appearance and evolution of the lesions.


<<<PAGE 1349>>>
Table 9-6
Hoarding Disorder
Hoarding Disorder
Disorder

DSM-5

Diagnostic name Hoarding Disorder
Symptoms

ICD-10
Hoarding Disorder

1. Excessive attachment • Difficulty parting with
to possessions
objects due to
perceived need to
2. Distress related to
save possessions
being separated from
items
• Distress and
functional impairment
3. Excessive
associated with being
accumulation of
separated from
possessions
possessions
4. Accumulation results
in significant distress,
impairment, and/or
safety/health
compromise

Required number All of the above
of symptoms
Psychosocial
Symptoms and
consequences
behaviors cause
of symptoms
significant distress
and impairment
Exclusions (not
result of):

Medical illness
Neurocognitive disorder
Other psychiatric
disorder

Symptom
specifiers

With excessive
acquisition
• hoarding

Symptoms and
behaviors cause
significant distress
and impairment


<<<PAGE 1350>>>
accompanied by
excessive
acquisition of
additional
possessions
With good or fair
insight
• understanding that
actions are
problematic
With poor insight
• belief that actions
may not be
problematic
With absent insight
and/or delusional
beliefs
• strong conviction
that actions are not
problematic
Severity
specifiers

With or without insight
(per above)

Normal Behaviors
Certain normal behaviors can become more prominent in specific individuals
without being a disorder. We live in a society concerned with appearance;
some persons are more concerned than others. Some of us are more careful
about avoiding contamination or germs and may wash or avoid touching
potentially infected persons or items. Living during a global pandemic
naturally blurs the line between contamination phobia and understandable
caution. We expect this overlap between pathologic and prudent to continue
long after the pandemic. Many of us occasionally remove stray hair, often for
cosmetic reasons. We may bite at a fingernail or pick at a scab. Collecting is
an enjoyable and sometimes lucrative hobby for many people.


<<<PAGE 1351>>>
Table 9-7
Hair-Pulling Disorder (Trichotillomania)
Trichotillomania
Disorder

DSM-5

Diagnostic name Trichotillomania
(Hair-Pulling
Disorder)
Symptoms

ICD-10
Trichotillomania

1. Recurrent
• Presence of noticeable
hairpulling causing
hair loss due to recurrent
hair loss
hairpulling
2. Hairpulling despite • Hair-pulling behavior
repeated attempts
preceded by increased
to change/end
anxiety that is relieved
behaviors
by hairpulling
3. Actions cause
distress and/or
impaired
functioning

Required number All of the above
of symptoms
Psychosocial
Symptoms and
consequences
behaviors cause
of symptoms
significant distress
and impairment
Exclusions (not
result of):

Medical illness
Other psychiatric
disorder

Pre-existing inflammation
of skin
Response to delusion or
hallucination
Stereotyped movement
disorder


<<<PAGE 1352>>>
Table 9-8
Excoriation (Skin-Picking)
Excoriation Disorder
Disorder

DSM-5

Diagnostic name Excoriation (Skin-Picking)
Disorder
Symptoms

ICD-10
Excoriation (SkinPicking)
Disorder

1. Recurrent skin-picking
See criteria for
causing lesions to the skin
obsessivecompulsive
2. Ongoing skin-picking
disorders
despite repeated attempts
to change/end behaviors
3. Actions cause distress
and/or impaired functioning

Required number All of the above
of symptoms
Psychosocial
Symptoms and behaviors
consequences
cause significant distress
of symptoms
and impairment
Exclusions (not
result of):

Other psychiatric disorder

Factitious
dermatitis

In each case, the behavior is desired, usually restricted (e.g., a collector
may only collect certain toys) and often enjoyable. These disorders, however,
represent impulsive behaviors that cause distress and impairment.

COMORBIDITY
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Persons with OCD are commonly affected by other mental disorders. The
lifetime prevalence for major depressive disorder in persons with OCD is


<<<PAGE 1353>>>
about 67 percent and for social phobia about 25 percent. Suicide is a risk for
all patients with OCD. Other common comorbid psychiatric diagnoses in
patients with OCD include alcohol use disorders, generalized anxiety
disorder, specific phobia, panic disorder, eating disorders, and personality
disorders. OCD exhibits a superficial resemblance to obsessive-compulsive
personality disorder, which is associated with an obsessive concern for
details, perfectionism, and other similar personality traits. The incidence of
Tourette disorder in patients with OCD is 5 to 7 percent, and 20 to 30 percent
of patients with OCD have a history of tics.

FIGURE 9-3
Typical self-produced lesions with scabbing. (From Douthwaite AH, ed. French’s


<<<PAGE 1354>>>
Index of Differential Diagnosis. 7th ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins; 1954,
with permission.)

Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Of the various obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, it appears that
BDD is the one most associated with comorbid depression with a lifetime
rate of 75 percent, as well as with suicidality, with 80 percent having
experienced suicidal ideation. About one-third of BDD patients have a
lifetime history of OCD, and around 30 percent of BDD patients experience
panic attacks triggered by appearance concerns. BDD is also associated with
high levels of rejection sensitivity and low self-esteem. Many patients with
BDD use substances to self-medicate symptoms of social anxiety or
emotional pain.
Hoarding Disorder
Comorbid OCD is common in patients with HD. Other prevalent comorbid
disorders include generalized anxiety disorder and major depressive disorder.
Hair-Pulling Disorder
Comorbid conditions include other body-focused repetitive behavior
disorders, with excoriation disorder the most common. OCD is also more
prevalent in hair-pulling disorder than in the general population. More than
half of treatment-seeking individuals with hair-pulling disorder have a
comorbid psychiatric disorder, with mood and anxiety disorders the most
common. Also, hair-pulling disorder can result in medical sequelae (e.g.,
trichobezoars) and decreased quality of life.
Excoriation Disorder
Comorbid conditions in excoriation disorder include other body-focused
repetitive behavior disorders, with hair-pulling disorder the most common.
OCD and BDD are also more prevalent in excoriation disorder than in the
general population. Other common comorbid psychiatric disorders in
excoriation disorder include mood and anxiety disorders.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS


<<<PAGE 1355>>>
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
The course of OCD is generally chronic, and in the absence of intervention,
symptoms may persist for decades. Nevertheless, recent data emphasize that
long-term outcomes can be positive. Thus, patients should be encouraged to
remain hopeful and to try a range of different evidence-based treatments.
Body Dysmorphic Disorder
The course of BDD is generally chronic, and in the absence of intervention,
symptoms may persist for decades. Earlier age of onset and more severe
symptoms at intake may predict a worse course.
Hoarding Disorder
HD has a somewhat later course than most obsessive-compulsive and related
disorders. In the absence of intervention, its course appears to be often
chronic and progressive. Hoarding symptoms often begin in childhood and
adolescence, with diagnostic criteria met only in the 30s, and worsening of
symptoms in each subsequent decade.
Hair-Pulling Disorder
There are relatively little data on the long-term course of hair-pulling
disorder. In the absence of intervention, its course is likely often chronic.
However, some data indicate that in a proportion of cases, remission does
occur.
Excoriation Disorder
Those data which exist on the long-term course of excoriation disorder
suggest that, without intervention, this is often chronic, albeit with
fluctuations in severity over time. As is the case in other obsessivecompulsive and related disorders, individuals often report that they have not
sought medical attention because they are embarrassed by their symptoms,
feel that they should stop the symptoms by themselves, or because they are
unaware that the symptoms may be part of a known condition or that there
are efficacious treatments.


<<<PAGE 1356>>>
TREATMENT
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Pharmacotherapy. Effective medications include clomipramine and
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs, which, along with
clomipramine and other serotonergic medications, are sometimes called
serotonin reuptake inhibitor [SRIs]). Head-to-head comparisons of
clomipramine and SSRIs show equal efficacy but better tolerability of the
SSRIs. In general, clinicians must use higher doses to achieve an optimal
effect. Examples are doses of 80 mg of fluoxetine or 200 mg of sertraline.
Some patients respond to even higher doses. Exceeding the recommended
doses is not, however, advisable for clomipramine or citalopram, due to
safety concerns. There is also some evidence that response to SRIs is slower
in OCD than in depression; clinicians are therefore encouraged to prescribe
an SRI for at least 12 weeks before deciding to switch agents or augment
with another psychotropic. A general rule of thumb is that we should
continue to use the dose that was required to obtain a response for at least 1
to 2 years. When discontinuing medication, there is a real risk of relapse, so
this should be done very gradually, with small adjustments made every few
months.
Patients who fail to respond to one SRI may respond to another.
The most extensive evidence base is for antipsychotics in adult OCD.
Among those, risperidone and aripiprazole are best supported as adjuncts.
Some studies have indicated that these are particularly useful in patients with
tics, but not all data are consistent. When a response to these agents occurs, it
typically happens relatively quickly (e.g., 4 weeks). When using dopamine
receptor blockers, it is crucial to monitor adverse events.
Memantine, riluzole, ketamine, lamotrigine, and N-acetylcysteine (NAC)
are other promising augmentation agents.
Psychotherapy. There is a long history of understanding OCD symptoms
from a psychodynamic perspective, but there is no rigorous evidence that a
psychodynamic approach is useful in the treatment of OCD. Instead,
empirical research on the psychotherapy of OCD has emerged from
behavioral and cognitive perspectives. Exposure and response prevention


<<<PAGE 1357>>>
(ERP) has proven to be a particularly effective component of treatment, with
more recent work also focusing on the potential role for cognitive and
mindfulness approaches. The essential principle of ERP is to minimize
avoidance of distressing cues, and instead to encourage in vivo exposure to
feared situations and imaginal exposure to feared consequences. After such
exposures, it is important not to engage in the usual compulsive response.
The therapist and patient then develop a hierarchy of gradual exposure to
more distressing cues and follow it. As in the case of pharmacotherapy, it is
essential to ensure that the dose and duration of ERP are sufficient.
Other cognitive approaches to OCD focus on thought distortions (e.g.,
inflated responsibility). The therapist and patient collaborate to test such
distortions and replace them with more adaptive thinking patterns. More
recently, mindfulness techniques have supplemented these approaches.
Family sessions may also be helpful, particularly with younger patients, to
better understand OCD and the principles of ERP.
Combined Treatment. Clinical guidelines indicate that either
pharmacotherapy or psychotherapy is a reasonable first-line intervention for
the management of OCD. In younger patients, it seems reasonable to begin
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) first. In patients with more severe
symptoms or comorbid depression, it seems reasonable to begin
pharmacotherapy first. There is some evidence that the combination of CBT
and pharmacotherapy is particularly useful.
Other Somatic Therapies. Targeted neurosurgical lesions to corticostriatal-thalamic-cortical (CSTC) tracts have been shown efficacious in a
proportion of highly treatment-refractory patients. Approaches have included
anterior cingulotomy and capsulotomy, among other techniques. The more
recent focus on neurosurgical work has been on deep brain stimulation, with
implantation of electrodes to stimulate specific brain regions. Transcranial
magnetic stimulation has also been studied for OCD, although data are not
yet sufficiently strong to motivate for routine clinical use. Electroconvulsive
therapy does not seem to be useful for OCD.
Body Dysmorphic Disorder
SSRIs are efficacious in the treatment of BDD, including delusional BDD.


<<<PAGE 1358>>>
There is some evidence that, as in the case of OCD, doses higher than those
ordinarily used in the treatment of depression are beneficial in BDD, as are
longer durations. Again, the duration of treatment should be longer, with
gradual tapering of dosage and close monitoring of emergent symptoms.
Patients who do not respond to one SRI may respond to another. There is
anecdotal evidence that buspirone augmentation of SRIs is useful in partial
responders. There is little controlled data on using dopamine receptor
blockers as augmenting agents; what exists is not encouraging. However,
clinicians have reported anecdotal evidence for using aripiprazole as an
augmenting agent. Also, irreversible MAOIs have some positive, although
experiential, reports.
Relation to Plastic Surgery. Few data exist about the number of patients
seeking plastic surgery who have BDD. One study found that only 2 percent
of the patients in a plastic surgery clinic had the diagnosis, but DSM-5
reports the figure to be 7 to 8 percent. The overall percentage may be much
higher, however. Surgical requests are varied: removal of facial sags, jowls,
wrinkles, or puffiness; rhinoplasty; breast reduction or enhancement; and
penile enlargement. Men who request penile enlargements and women who
request cosmetic surgery of the labia of the vagina or the lips of the mouth
may be suffering from this disorder. Commonly associated with the belief
about appearance is an unrealistic expectation of how much surgery will
correct the defect. As reality sets in, the person realizes they have not solved
their problems by merely altering a perceived cosmetic defect. These patients,
hopefully, will explore their feelings of inadequacy using psychotherapy. The
patients may take out their unfulfilled expectations and anger by taking legal
action against their plastic surgeons or becoming depressed.
Hoarding Disorder
HD is challenging to treat. Although it shows similarities to OCD, effective
treatments for OCD have shown little benefit for patients with HD. In one
study, only 18 percent of patients responded to medication and CBT. The
challenges posed by hoarding patients to typical CBT treatment include poor
insight into the behavior and low motivation and resistance to treatment.
The most effective treatment for the disorder is a cognitive-behavioral


<<<PAGE 1359>>>
model that includes training in decision making and categorizing; exposure
and habituation to discarding; and cognitive restructuring. Treatment includes
both office and in-home sessions. The role of the therapist in this model is to
assist in the development of decision-making skills, to provide feedback
about normal saving behavior, and to identify and challenge the patient’s
erroneous beliefs about possessions. The goal in treatment is to get rid of a
significant amount of possessions and make the living space livable. Also,
treatment can provide the patients with the skills to maintain a positive
balance between the number of possessions and livable space.
Evidence for pharmacologic treatment relies on limited and uncontrolled
data that support the use of SSRIs or venlafaxine.
Hair-Pulling Disorder
Early data indicated that hair-pulling disorder, like OCD and BDD,
responded more robustly to clomipramine than to desipramine.
Unfortunately, subsequent trials of SSRIs and venlafaxine in hair-pulling
disorder have not consistently demonstrated efficacy. The most significant
positive clinical trial to date is with NAC (1200 to 2400 mg/day), a
nutraceutical that acts on the glutamatergic system. However, a trial of NAC
in pediatric hair-pulling disorder was negative. There are small controlled
trials indicating that dopamine receptor blockers may also be useful in these
conditions. Given their favorable side-effect profile, it may be reasonable to
use NAC as a first-line agent in adults with hair-pulling disorder, to use
SSRIs when patients have comorbid conditions for which these agents are
efficacious, and to consider low-dose dopamine receptor blockers in more
treatment-refractory cases.
Habit reversal training (HRT) is a set of cognitive-behavioral techniques
that have been shown efficacious in the treatment of childhood and adult
hair-pulling disorder. Components of HRT include awareness training,
competing for response training, and social support. Also, therapists use
stimulus control (SC) to change the patient’s environment so that hairpulling
is more effortful or less reinforcing. Controlled trials of augmentation of
HRT/SC with acceptance and commitment therapy, dialectical behavior
therapy, or cognitive therapy, have also suggested efficacy in hair-pulling
disorder.


<<<PAGE 1360>>>
Excoriation Disorder
Excoriation disorder is challenging to treat, and there are few data on
effective treatments. Most patients do not actively seek treatment due to
embarrassment or because they believe their condition is untreatable. There is
support for the use of SSRIs. Studies comparing fluoxetine against placebo
have shown fluoxetine to be superior in reducing skin-picking.
Other agents have limited data. Lamotrigine has demonstrated inconsistent
results. Glutamatergic agents, such as the nutraceutical NAC, have some
positive, although anecdotal reports, as do dopamine receptor blockers.
Nonpharmacologic treatments include HRT and brief CBT.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
The rates of OCD are relatively consistent, with a lifetime prevalence in the
general population estimated at 2 to 3 percent. Community studies indicate a
higher prevalence of OCD in females, but in clinical contexts, there are
roughly equal numbers of male and female patients. The mean age of onset is
about 19 years, with early-onset more common in males. The onset of the
disorder typically occurs in adolescence or childhood, and onset after age 30
is rare.
Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Point prevalence estimates in the United States and elsewhere have ranged
from 1.7 to 2.4 percent, indicating that this is one of the more common
obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. Furthermore, clinical studies
have found high rates of BDD in general adult psychiatric inpatients, in
cosmetic surgery clinics, and dermatology clinics.
The mean age of onset is in adolescence. As in the case of OCD,
community studies indicate a higher prevalence of females with BDD, while
clinical reports indicate a roughly even male:female ratio.
Hoarding Disorder
Most prevalence studies of HD have not used DSM-5 diagnostic criteria.


<<<PAGE 1361>>>
Available data indicate that HD is remarkably prevalent in Western countries,
with one study that employed DSM-5 criteria yielding a point prevalence of
1.5 percent. The male:female ratio is estimated to be about 1. In contrast, in
clinics, females are more common than males, perhaps indicating greater
insight. Unlike the picture seen in most obsessive-compulsive and related
disorders, the prevalence of hoarding increases with age, and in clinical
settings, the average age of first treatment is around 50.
Hair-Pulling Disorder
Studies of select populations, such as college students, indicate that the point
prevalence of trichotillomania is around 0.5 to 2 percent. Age of onset is
typically at menarche, and female:male ratio is about 4:1 in adults. Pediatric
samples include an equal distribution between males and females.
Excoriation Disorder
Community-based prevalence studies of excoriation disorder have found a
point prevalence of 1.4 to 5.4 percent. Age of onset is somewhat more
variable than hair-pulling disorder, although the mean age is 12 years,
typically coinciding with the onset of puberty. Although many more females
than males have excoriation disorder, the ratio is more even than in the case
of hair-pulling disorder.

ETIOLOGY
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
OCD is now primarily viewed as a neuropsychiatric disorder that is mediated
by specific neurocircuits. From a cognitive-affective neuroscience
perspective, OCD has several specific neuropsychological impairments,
including cognitive inflexibility and alterations in the habit system. Early
clinical work established that OCD could be precipitated by damage to
striatal circuitry, as was seen in the global influenza epidemic in the early
20th century. More recent advances have delineated the role of
neuroanatomy, neurocircuitry, neurotransmitters, and other molecules
involved in the pathogenesis of OCD.
Cognitive and neuropsychological studies of OCD have found several


<<<PAGE 1362>>>
alterations, including a range of impairments in executive function, and with
evidence for cognitive inflexibility, motor impulsivity, and excessive habit
formation. Such work is consistent with the hypothesis that OCD represents
impaired control of automated, habitual behaviors.
Several brain regions, including the anterior cingulate, orbitofrontal cortex,
and striatum, have consistently been implicated in OCD. There is, however,
evidence that many other regions have an important role (Fig. 9-4). One
hypothesis has been that cortico–striatal–thalamic–cortical (CSTC) circuitry
plays a particularly important role in mediating the cognitive-affective
impairments seen in OCD, with activation or inhibition of different
components of this circuitry driving the compulsive and impulsive features of
obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. Early imaging work was seminal
in showing that both pharmacotherapy and CBT were able to normalize
functional alterations in CSTC circuitry in OCD.
Also, data indicate that a range of neurotransmitter systems contribute to
OCD, including serotonergic, dopaminergic, glutamatergic, and GABAergic
systems. A serotonin hypothesis of OCD has been influential; a range of
evidence points to the involvement of this system in OCD, and patients
respond to treatment with SRIs but not to treatment with noradrenergic
reuptake inhibitors. At the same time, there is relatively little evidence that
serotonin plays a causal role in OCD. Furthermore, a range of evidence
points to the involvement of the dopaminergic system in OCD, and, notably,
augmentation of serotonin reuptake blockers with dopamine receptor
blockers as a first-line intervention for treatment-refractory OCD. Most
recently, there has been some interest in other systems, including the
glutamatergic system, with evidence that some glutamatergic agents may be
useful in this condition.
Genetic findings may increasingly influence future work on the cognitiveaffective neuroscience of OCD. Twin and family studies indicate that genetic
susceptibility plays a role in OCD, and more so in childhood-onset OCD.
Body Dysmorphic Disorder
There is some evidence that specific cognitive-affective impairments
characterize BDD. For example, neuropsychological studies have suggested
deficits in executive functioning and visual processing. Brain imaging and


<<<PAGE 1363>>>
neurogenetic studies have provided some insights into the potential
mechanisms that underlie such deficits, and into potential overlaps with other
obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. For example, CSTC circuits may
be involved, as well as circuits involved in visual processing. Family and
twin data provide preliminary evidence for genetic susceptibility, as well as a
relationship to OCD. However, the etiology of BDD is still far from clear.
Hoarding Disorder
Patients with HD may demonstrate impairment in various neuropsychological
domains, including spatial planning, working memory, response inhibition,
and set-shifting. Structural and functional brain imaging studies have
indicated that the relevant neurocircuitry overlaps only partially with that
involved in OCD. Research on patients with neurologic disorders has
suggested that ventromedial prefrontal/anterior cingulate cortices and medial
temporal regions are involved in hoarding. Also, animal studies have pointed
to a possible role for the dopaminergic system in hoarding, and twin studies
indicate genetic susceptibility for developing pathologic hoarding.
Hair-Pulling Disorder
From a cognitive-affective neuroscience perspective, neuropsychological
investigations of hair-pulling disorder have demonstrated some evidence of
deficits in working memory and visual–spatial learning. Structural and
functional brain imaging studies have suggested some involvement of CSTC
circuits relevant to habit learning, although data is sparse. There is also
evidence of the involvement of brain regions associated with reward
processing and affect regulation. Family and twin studies provide evidence
for genetic susceptibility, as well as a relationship to OCD and other bodyfocused repetitive behaviors. Several candidate genes may be associated with
hair-pulling disorder, but the evidence is preliminary.


<<<PAGE 1364>>>
FIGURE 9-4
Brain regions implicated in the pathophysiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder.
(From Rosenberg DR, MacMillan SN, Moore GJ. Brain anatomy and chemistry
may predict treatment response in paediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2001;4(2):179–190, with permission.)

Excoriation Disorder
From a cognitive-affective neuroscience perspective, neuropsychological
investigations of excoriation disorder have demonstrated some overlap with
OCD regarding motor impulsivity. Brain imaging studies have similarly
suggested some involvement of CSTC circuitry, although the data is sparse,
and other regions also appear to be implicated. There is also some evidence
that suggests that the dopaminergic system plays a role in excoriation
disorder. Family and twin studies provide evidence for genetic susceptibility,
as well as a relationship to OCD and other body-focused repetitive behaviors.
As with hair-pulling disorder, preliminary evidence has identified several
candidate genes.

References
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of


<<<PAGE 1365>>>
Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association; 2013.
Bloch MH. Trichotillomania and other impulsive-control disorders. In:
Hudak R, Dougherty DD, eds. Clinical Obsessive-Compulsive Disorders in
Adults and Children. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2011:207.
Cicek E, Cicek IE, Kayhan F, Uguz F, Kaya N. Quality of life, family burden
and associated factors in relatives with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Gen
Hosp Psychiatry. 2013;35(3):253–258.
Conrado LA, Hounie AG, Diniz JB, Fossaluza V, Torres AR, Miguel EC,
Rivitti EA. Body dysmorphic disorder among dermatologic patients:
Prevalence and clinical features. J Am Acad Derm. 2010;63:235.
Del Casale A, Sorice S, Padovano A, Simmaco M, Ferracuti S, Lamis DA,
Rapinesi C, Sani G, Girardi P, Kotzalidis GD, Pompili M.
Psychopharmacological treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD). Curr Neuropharmacol. 2019;17(8):710–736.
DiMauro J, Genova M, Tolin DF, Kurtz MM. Cognitive remediation for
neuropsychological impairment in hoarding disorder: A pilot study. J
Obsess Compul Relat Disord. 2014;3(2):132–138.
Endrass T, Schuermann B, Kaufmann C, Spielberg R, Kniesche R, Kathmann
N. Performance monitoring and error significance in patients with
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biol Psychol. 2010;84:257.
Fang A, Hofmann SG. Relationship between social anxiety disorder and body
dysmorphic disorder. Clin Psychol Rev. 2010;30:1040.
Fang A, Matheny NL, Wilhelm S. Body dysmorphic disorder. Psychiatr Clin
North Am. 2014;37(3):287–300.
Feusner JD, Arienzo D, Li W, Zhan L, Gadelkarim J, Thompson PM, Leow
AD. White matter microstructure in body dysmorphic disorder and its
clinical correlates. Psychiatry Res. 2013;211(2):132–140.
Frost RO, Steketee G, Tolin DF. Comorbidity in hoarding disorder. Depress
Anxiety. 2011;28:876.
Frost RO, Tolin DF, Steketee G, Fitch KE, Selbo-Bruns A. Excessive
acquisition in hoarding. J Anxiety Disord. 2009;23:632.
Gillan CM, Papmeyer M, Morein-Zamir S, Sahakian BJ, Fineberg NA,
Robbins TW, de Wit S. Disruption in the balance between goal-directed
behavior and habit learning in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Am J
Psychiatry. 2011;168:718.


<<<PAGE 1366>>>
Goes F, McCusker M, Bienvenu O, Mackinnon DF, Mondimore FM,
Schweizer B, National Institute of Mental Health Genetics Initiative
Bipolar Disorder Consortium; Depaulo JR, Potash JB. Co-morbid anxiety
disorders in bipolar disorder and major depression: Familial aggregation
and clinical characteristics of co-morbid panic disorder, social phobia,
specific phobia and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Psychol Med.
2012;42(7):1449–1459.
Grant JE, Chamberlain SR. Trichotillomania. Am J Psychiatry.
2016;173(9):868–874.
Grant JE, Odlaug BL, Chamberlain SR, Keuthen NJ, Lochner C, Stein DJ.
Skin picking disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2012;169(11):1143–1149.
Grant JE, Odlaug BL, Kim SW. A clinical comparison of pathologic skin
picking and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Compr Psychiatry.
2010;51:347.
Grant JE, Stein DJ, Woods DW, Keuthen NJ, eds. Trichotillomania, Skin
Picking, and Other Body-Focused Repetitive Behaviors. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Publishing; 2011.
Greenberg JL, Falkenstein M, Reuman L, Fama J, Marques L, Wilhelm S.
The phenomenology of self-reported body dysmorphic disorder by proxy.
Body Image. 2013;10(2):243–246.
Grisham JR, Norberg MM, Williams AD, Certoma SP, Kadib R.
Categorization and cognitive deficits in compulsive hoarding. Behav Res
Ther. 2010;48:886.
Hall BJ, Tolin DF, Frost RO, Steketee G. An exploration of comorbid
symptoms and clinical correlates of clinically significant hoarding
symptoms. Depress Anxiety. 2013;30(1):67–76.
Hirschtritt MW, Bloch MH, Mathews CA. Obsessive-compulsive disorder:
Advances in diagnosis and treatment. JAMA. 2017;317(13):1358–1367.
Iervolino AC, Perroud N, Fullana MA, Guipponi M, Cherkas L, Collier DA,
Mataix-Cols D. Prevalence and heritability of compulsive hoarding: A
twin study. Am J Psychiatry. 2009;116:1156.
Kelly MM, Didie ER, Phillips KA. Personal and appearance-based rejection
sensitivity in body dysmorphic disorder. Body Image. 2014;11(3):260–265.
Keuthen NJ, Rothbaum BO, Falkenstein MJ, Meunier S, Timpano KR, Jenike
MA, Welch SS. DBT-enhanced habit reversal treatment for
trichotillomania: 3- and 6-month follow-up results. Depress Anxiety.


<<<PAGE 1367>>>
2011;28:310.
Kumar B. The mind-body connection: An integrated approach to the
diagnosis of colonic trichobezoar. Int J Psychiatry Med. 2011;41:263.
Lee HJ, Franklin SA, Turkel JE, Goetz AR, Woods DW. Facilitated
attentional disengagement from hair-related cues among individuals
diagnosed with trichotillomania: An investigation based on the exogenous
cueing paradigm. J Obsess Compul Relat Disord. 2012;1:8.
Levy HC, McLean CP, Yadin E, Foa EB. Characteristics of individuals
seeking treatment for obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behav Ther.
2013;44(3):408–416.
Lochner C, Seedat S, Stein DJ. Chronic hair-pulling: Phenomenology-based
subtypes. J Anxiety Disord. 2010;24:196.
Mancuso SG, Knoesen NP, Castle DJ. Delusional versus nondelusional body
dysmorphic disorder. Compr Psychiatry. 2010;51.177.
Markarian Y, Larson MJ, Aldea MA, Baldwin SA, Good D, Berkeljon A,
Murphy TK, Storch EA, McKay D. Multiple pathways to functional
impairment in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Clin Psychol Rev.
2010;30:78.
McDonald KE. Trichotillomania: Identification and treatment. J Counsel
Dev. 2012;90:421.
Miller JL, Angulo M. An open-label pilot study of N-acetylcysteine for skinpicking in Prader–Willi syndrome. Am J Med Gen. 2014;164(2):421–424.
Nestadt G, Di C, Riddle M, Grados MA, Greenberg BD, Fyer AJ,
McCracken JT, Rauch SL, Murphy DL, Rasmussen SA, Cullen B, Pinto A,
Knowles JA, Piacentini J, Pauls DL, Bienvenu OJ, Wang Y, Liang KY,
Samuels JF, Roche KB. Obsessive-compulsive disorder: Subclassification
based on co-morbidity. Psychol Med. 2009;39(9):1491–1501.
Nordsletten AE, Reichenberg A, Hatch SL, Fernandez de la Cruz L, Pertusa
A, Hotopf M, Mataix-Cols D. Epidemiology of hoarding disorder. Br J
Psychiatry. 2013;203(6):445–452.
Odlaug BL, Grant JE. Pathological skin-picking. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse.
2010;36:296.
Odlaug BL, Kim SW, Grant JE. Quality of life and clinical severity in
pathological skin picking and trichotillomania. J Anxiety Disord.
2010;24:823.
Panza KE, Pittenger C, Bloch MH. Age and gender correlates of pulling in


<<<PAGE 1368>>>
pediatric trichotillomania. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2013;52(3):241–249.
Park LE, Calogero RM, Young AF, Diraddo AM. Appearance-based
rejection sensitivity predicts body dysmorphic disorder symptoms and
cosmetic surgery acceptance. J Soc Clin Psychol. 2010;29:489.
Peng ZW, Xu T, Miao GD, He QH, Zhao Q, Dazzan P, Chan RC.
Neurological soft signs in obsessive-compulsive disorder: The effect of
comorbid
psychosis
and
evidence
for
familiality.
Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2012;39(1):200–205.
Philips KA, Pinto A, Hart AS, Coles ME, Eisen JL, Menard W, Rasmussen
SA. A comparison of insight in body dysmorphic disorder and obsessivecompulsive disorder. J Psych Res. 2012;46:1293.
Piallat B, Polosan M, Fraix V, Goetz L, David O, Fenoy A, Torres N,
Quesada JL, Seigneuret E, Pollak P, Krack P, Bougerol T, Benabid AL,
Chabardès S. Subthalamic neuronal firing in obsessive-compulsive
disorder and Parkinson disease. Ann Neurol. 2011;69:793.
Pittenger C, Bloch MH. Pharmacological treatment of obsessive-compulsive
disorder. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2014;37(3):375–391.
Prazeres AM, Nascimento AL, Fontenelle LF. Cognitive-behavioral therapy
for body dysmorphic disorder: A review of its efficacy. Neuropsychiatr
Dis Treat. 2013;9:307–316.
Riesel A, Endrass T, Kaufmann C, Kathmann N. Overactive error-related
brain activity as a candidate endophenotype for obsessive-compulsive
disorder: Evidence from unaffected first-degree relatives. Am J Psychiatry.
2011;168:317.
Schuck K, Keijsers GP, Rinck M. The effects of brief cognitive-behaviour
therapy for pathological skin picking: A randomized comparison to waitlist control. Behav Res Ther. 2011;49:11.
Smith AK, Mittal V. Delusions of body image in the prodrome. Schizophr
Res. 2013;146(1–3):366–367.
Smith AH, Wetterneck CT, Hart JM, Short MB, Björgvinsson T. Differences
in obsessional beliefs and emotion appraisal in obsessive-compulsive
symptom presentation. J Obsessive Compulsive Relat Disord. 2012;1:54.
Snorrason I, Smari J, Ólafsson RP. Emotion regulation in pathological skin
picking: Findings from a non-treatment seeking sample. J Behav Ther Exp
Psychiatry. 2010;41:238.


<<<PAGE 1369>>>
Snorrason I, Stein D, Woods D. Classification of excoriation (skin picking)
disorder: Current status and future directions. Acta Psychiatr Scand.
2013;128(5):406–407.
Stein DJ, Lochner C. Chapter 15: Obsessive-compulsive and related
disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters
Kluwer; 2017:1785–1798.
Steketee G, Siev J, Fama JM, Keshaviah A, Chosak A, Wilhelm S. Predictors
of treatment outcome in modular cognitive therapy for obsessivecompulsive disorder. Depress Anxiety. 2011;28:333.
Timpano KR, Rasmussen J, Exner C, Rief W, Schmidt NB, Wilhelm S.
Hoarding and the multi-faceted construct of impulsivity: A cross-cultural
investigation. J Psychiatr Res. 2013;47(3):363–370.
Tolin DF, Villavicencio A. Inattention, but not obsessive-compulsive
disorder, predicts the core features of hoarding disorder. Behav Res Ther.
2011;49:120.
Via E, Cardoner N, Pujol J, Alonso P, López-Solà M, Real E, ContrerasRodríguez O, Deus J, Segalàs C, Menchón JM, Soriano-Mas C, Harrison
BJ. Amygdala activation and symptom dimensions in obsessivecompulsive disorder. Brit J Psychiatry. 2014;204(1):61–68.
Wahl K, Huelle JO, Zurowski B, Kordon A. Managing obsessive thoughts
during brief exposure: An experimental study comparing mindfulnessbased strategies and distraction in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Cogn
Ther Res. 2013;37(4):752–761.
Walther MR, Snorrason I, Flessner CA, Franklin ME, Burkel R, Woods DW.
The Trichotillomania Impact Project in Young Children (TIP-YC): Clinical
Characteristics, Comorbidity, Functional Impairment and Treatment
Utilization. Child Psychiatry & Hum Dev. 2014;45(1):24–31.
Whittal ML, Robichaud M. Obsessive-compulsive disorder. In: Hofmann SG,
Reinecke MA, eds. Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy With Adults: A Guide to
Empirically-Informed Assessment and Intervention. New York: Cambridge
University Press; 2010:92.
Wilhelm S, Philips KA, Steketee G. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Body
Dysmorphic Disorder: A Treatment Manual. New York: Guilford; 2013.
Williams M, Powers MB, Foa EB. Obsessive-compulsive disorder. In:
Sturmey P, Hersen M, eds. Handbook of Evidence-Based Practice in


<<<PAGE 1370>>>
Clinical Psychology. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley; 2012:313.
Woods DW. Treating trichotillomania across the lifespan. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2013;52(3):223–224.


<<<PAGE 1371>>>
10
Trauma- and Stressor-Related
Disorders
This chapter includes disorders characterized by exposure to significant stress
or trauma. These disorders include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
acute stress disorder, and adjustment disorders.

THE CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Persons suffering from one of these disorders develop emotional and
behavioral symptoms in response to a significant stressor or traumatic event.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Acute Stress Disorder
Persons who have PTSD or acute stress disorder have increased stress and
anxiety following exposure to a traumatic or stressful event. Traumatic or
stressful events may include experiencing a violent accident or crime,
military combat, assault, being kidnapped, being involved in a natural
disaster, being diagnosed with a life-threatening illness, or experiencing
systematic physical or sexual abuse. A PTSD patient typically relives the
trauma or tries to avoid reminders of it. They experience negative thoughts
and moods about the event and feel hyperaroused or hyperactive. The patient
may relive the trauma in their dreams or experience “flashbacks” or waking
thoughts about the ordeal.
The stressors causing both acute stress disorder and PTSD are sufficiently
overwhelming to affect almost everyone. They can arise from experiences in
war, torture, natural catastrophes, assault, rape, and serious accidents.
Physicians have appreciated the link between acute mental syndromes and


<<<PAGE 1372>>>
traumatic events for more than 200 years. After the American Civil War,
physicians documented trauma-related syndromes, and early psychoanalytic
writers, including Sigmund Freud, noted a relationship between neurosis and
trauma. In World Wars I and II, these disorders were given various names,
including “battle fatigue,” “shell shock,” and “soldier’s heart.” Moreover,
increasing documentation of mental reactions to the Holocaust, to a series of
natural disasters, and assault contributed to the growing recognition of a close
relation between trauma and psychopathology.
Mrs. M sought treatment for symptoms that she developed in the wake of
an assault that had occurred about 6 weeks before her psychiatric
evaluation. While leaving work late one evening, Mrs. M was attacked in
a parking lot next to the hospital in which she worked. She was raped and
badly beaten but was able to escape and call for help. On referral, Mrs. M
reported frequent intrusive thoughts about the assault, including
nightmares about the event and recurrent intrusive visions of her
assailant. She now took the bus to work to avoid the scene of the attack
and changed her work hours to avoid leaving the building after dark.
Also, she reported that she had difficulty interacting with men,
particularly those who resembled her attacker, and that she consequently
avoided such interactions whenever possible. Mrs. M described increased
irritability, difficulty staying asleep at night, poor concentration, and an
increased focus on her environment, particularly after dark. (Courtesy of
Erin B. McClure-Tone, Ph.D., and Daniel S. Pine, M.D.)
Clinical Features. Individuals with PTSD relive distressing instances of
the traumatic event, with vivid emotional proximity and high, imperative
intensity. They organize their lives trying to contain and mitigate the
persistent effects of the traumatic experience. For those traumatized in a war
zone, they often feel as if the war never ended. Victims of rape, assault, or
torture describe difficulties engaging and trusting other humans. Constantly
reliving the trauma in the present, PTSD patients’ lives become a series of
effortful attempts to avoid reminders of the traumatic event. They scan the
environment for threat signals, which they fearfully expect, and remain on
guard, tense, restless, and exhausted. The persistence of symptoms despite


<<<PAGE 1373>>>
the termination of the threat, combined with an inability to regain a sense of
safety, are core features of PTSD. Another core feature is the involuntary,
uncontrollable, and intense nature of symptoms.
Adjustment Disorders
People with adjustment disorders have an emotional response to a stressful
event. It is one of the few diagnostic entities that directly links an external
stressor to the development of symptoms. Typically, the stressor involves
financial issues, a medical illness, or a relationship problem. The symptom
complex that develops may involve anxious or depressive affect or may
present with a disturbance of conduct. The symptoms must begin within 3
months of the stressor. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-5) includes a variety of subtypes of the disorder, including
adjustment disorder with depressed mood, mixed anxiety and depressed
mood, disturbance of conduct, mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct,
and unspecified type.
Clinical Features. Patients with adjustment disorders develop intense
emotional or behavioral symptoms in response to one or more external
stressors. The intensity of the symptoms is subjectively considered beyond
what one would expect in the given situation and impairs the patient’s ability
to function.
Other Specified or Unspecified Trauma- or Stressor-Related
Disorder
As with other psychiatric diagnoses, the DSM-5 includes separate categories
to account for persons whose symptoms do not meet the full criteria for
another trauma- or stressor-related disorder.

DIAGNOSIS
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Acute Stress Disorder
The diagnosis includes several categories of symptoms, including symptoms
of intrusion, avoidance, negative mood or cognitions, and hyperarousal.
These symptoms cause significant functional impairment and are present for


<<<PAGE 1374>>>
more than a month.
We outline the diagnostic approach to posttraumatic stress disorder in
Table 10-1.
As with most disorders, substance use or a medical condition should not
better explain the symptoms.
With acute stress disorder, the primary feature differentiating this disorder
from PTSD is the time course, with the symptoms of acute stress disorder
occurring 3 days to 1 month following a traumatic event. Acute stress
disorder can have any of the symptoms of PTSD; however, they do not have
to have all the domains. A person who experiences a minimum of nine
symptoms from any of these domains within 3 days to 1 month of a traumatic
event meets the criteria for acute stress disorder.
We outline the diagnostic approach to acute stress disorder in Table 10-2.
Three weeks after a train derailment, a 42-year-old budget analyst
presented to the mental health clinic. He noted that he was embarrassed
to seek care, as he was previously a firefighter, but felt he needed “some
reassurance that what I’m experiencing is normal.” He reported that,
since the wreck, he had been feeling nervous and on edge. He
experienced some difficulty focusing his attention at work, and he had
occasional intrusive recollections of “the way the ground just shook; the
tremendous ‘bang’ and then the screaming when the train rolled over.”
He noted that he had spoken with five business colleagues who were also
on the train, and three acknowledged similar symptoms. However, they
said that they were improving. He was more concerned about the
frequency of tearful episodes, sometimes brought on by hearing the name
of a severely injured friend, but, at other times, occurring “for no
particular reason.” Also, he noted that, when he evacuated the train,
rescue workers gave him explicit directions about where to report, and,
although the man complied, he now felt extremely guilty about not
returning to the train to assist in the rescue of others. He reported a
modest decrease in appetite and denied weight loss but noted that he had
stopped jogging during his lunch break. He had difficulty initiating sleep,
so he had begun consuming a “glass or two” of wine before bed to help
with this. He did not feel rested on awakening. He denied suicidal


<<<PAGE 1375>>>
ideation or any psychotic symptoms. His sister had taken an
antidepressant several years ago, but he did not desire medication. He
feared that side effects could further diminish his ability to function at the
workplace and could cause him to gain weight. (Courtesy of D. M.
Benedek, M.D., R. J. Ursano, M.D., and H. C. Holloway, M.D.)
Adjustment Disorders
Clinicians tend to use the diagnostic category of adjustment disorders
liberally. Although this disorder must follow a stressor, the symptoms do not
necessarily begin immediately. Up to 3 months may elapse between a stressor
and the development of symptoms. Symptoms do not always subside as soon
as the stressor ceases; if the stressor continues, the disorder may be chronic.
The disorder can occur at any age, and its symptoms vary considerably, with
depressive, anxious, and mixed features most common in adults. Physical
symptoms, which are most common in children and the elderly, can occur in
any age group. Manifestations may also include impulsivity, violence,
excessive alcohol consumption, and suspiciousness.
The clinical presentations of adjustment disorder can vary widely.
We outline the diagnostic approach to adjustment disorder in Table 10-3.
Adjustment Disorder with Depressed Mood. In adjustment disorder
with depressed mood, symptoms may manifest as depression, hyposomnia,
low self-esteem, or suicidal ideation. We should distinguish this disorder
from a major depressive disorder and uncomplicated bereavement.
Adjustment Disorder with Anxiety. Symptoms such as generalized
anxiety, increased motor activity, and situational anxiety are present in
adjustment disorder with anxiety, which we should differentiate from anxiety
disorders.
Adjustment Disorder with Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood. In
adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, patients exhibit
features of both anxiety and depression that do not meet the criteria for an
already established anxiety disorder or depressive disorder.


<<<PAGE 1376>>>
A 48-year-old married woman, in good health, with no previous
psychiatric difficulties, presented to the emergency room, reporting that
she had overdosed on a handful of antihistamines shortly before she
arrived. She described her problems as having started 2 months earlier,
soon after her husband unexpectedly requested a divorce. She felt
betrayed after having devoted much of her 20-year marriage to being a
wife, mother, and homemaker. She was sad and tearful at times, and she
occasionally had difficulty sleeping. Otherwise, she had no vegetative
symptoms and enjoyed time with family and friends. She felt desperate
and suicidal after she realized that “he no longer loves me.” After crisis
intervention in the emergency setting, she responded well to individual
psychotherapy for over 3 months. She occasionally required
benzodiazepines for anxiety during the period of treatment. By the time
of discharge, she had returned to her baseline function. She came to terms
with the possibility of life after divorce and was exploring her best
options under the circumstances. (Courtesy of Jeffrey W. Katzman, M.D.,
and C. M. A. Geppert, M.D., Ph.D., M.P.H.)
Adjustment Disorder with Disturbance of Conduct. In adjustment
disorder with disturbance of conduct, symptoms include impulsivity, lack of
insight, and violent behavior. We should differentiate this category from
conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
Table 10-1
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Diagnoses in DSM-5 and
ICD-10
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Disorder

DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic name Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

Duration

Symptoms arise in weeks to
months following traumatic

≥1 mo


<<<PAGE 1377>>>
event
Symptoms

1. History of exposure
to (directly
experiencing,
repeated exposure
witnessing in person,
learning of
occurrence in close
acquaintance) actual
threatened death,
severe injury, or
sexual trauma
2. Intrusive symptoms
• Involuntary intrusive
memories
• In children <6 yr,
may see
reenactment of
event through
play
• Recurrent
nightmares/dreams
of the event
• In children <6 yr,
frightening
dreams without
identifiable
content may be
present
• Dissociative
responses or
reliving of prior
experience (i.e.,
flashbacks)

1. Symptoms arise as a delayed
or prolonged response to a
single or recurrent stressful
experience that is lifethreatening or catastrophic in
severity
2. Traumatic event would cause
distress in most individuals
3. Symptoms may include
• Flashbacks
• Dreams/nightmares
• Emotional blunting and
subjective numbness
• Social
withdrawal/detachment
• Anhedonia
• Avoidance
• Hyperarousal/hypervigilance
• Sleep disturbance
4. May or may not be associated
with co-occurring anxiety
and/or depression


<<<PAGE 1378>>>
• In children <6 yr,
may see
reenactment of
event through
play
• Psychological
distress related to
exposure to stimuli
that are reminders
of prior trauma
• Presence of
physiologic
response to stimuli
that are reminders
of prior trauma
3. Pattern of avoidance
of stimuli associated
with prior experience
of trauma
• Avoidance of
memories related
to trauma
• Avoidance of
external reminders
of trauma
4. Negative mood or
cognitions related to
trauma
• Impairment in
memories related
to event
• Negative
perceptions of self
and others
• Cognitive


<<<PAGE 1379>>>
distortions related
to event
• Excessive guilt,
anger or fear
• Diminished interest
and social
withdrawal
• Subjective
detachment from
others
• Difficulty
experiencing
positive feelings in
response to
previously
pleasurable stimuli
5. Altered level of
arousal
• Irritability and/or
anger
• Risk taking
• Hypervigilance
• Increased startle
response
• Difficulties with
concentration
• Sleep disturbances
Required number In addition to history of
of symptoms
exposure to trauma,
must have
• at least one
symptom of
intrusion
• at least one

Any of the above


<<<PAGE 1380>>>
symptom of
avoidance
• at least two
symptoms of
negative
mood/cognition
• at least two
symptoms of
arousal alterations
Psychosocial
Marked distress and
consequences
impairment in
of symptoms
functioning
Exclusions

• Exposure through
media, electronics,
movie, or photo
• Related to substance
use
• Related to another
medical condition

Symptom
specifiers

With dissociative
symptoms:
• Depersonalization:
perception of
feeling outside
one’s own body
• Derealization:
perception of
surrounding
environment being
unreal or distorted

Course specifiers With delayed
expression:
• All diagnostic


<<<PAGE 1381>>>
criteria not met
until 6 mo or
more after initial
traumatic event
Severity
specifiers
Table 10-2
Acute Stress Disorder Diagnoses in DSM-5 and ICD-10
Acute Stress Disorder
Disorder

DSM-5

Diagnostic name Acute Stress Disorder

ICD-10
Acute Stress Reaction

Duration

3 days to <1 mo following Symptoms arise
exposure to trauma
transiently in
response to
emotional or
physical stress and
usually resolve
within hours or
days

Symptoms

1. History of exposure to
(directly experiencing,
repeated exposure
witnessing in person,
learning of occurrence
in close acquaintance)
actual threatened
death, severe injury,
or sexual trauma
2. Presence of
symptoms in the
following categories

1. Cognitive “daze”
2. Narrowed attention
3. Difficulties with
comprehension
4. Disorientation
5. Autonomic
symptoms of panic
6. May be followed by
further withdrawal
from the situation
or possible
agitation/excitability


<<<PAGE 1382>>>
(same as PTSD
categories)
• Intrusion
• Negative
mood/cognition
• Dissociation
• Avoidance
• Arousal

7. May have partial or
complete amnesia
related to the event

Required number Nine symptoms from
of symptoms
among the above five
categories
Psychosocial
Marked distress and
consequences
impairment in
of symptoms
functioning
Exclusions (not
result of):

Substance
Other medical condition
Brief psychotic disorder or
other psychiatric
illness

Table 10-3
Adjustment Disorder Diagnoses in DSM-5 and ICD-10
Adjustment Disorders
Disorder

DSM-5

Diagnostic name Adjustment Disorder
Duration

Occurring within 3 mo
of an acute stressor
and resolving within
6 mo of resolution
of stressor

Symptoms

1. Emotional or

ICD-10
Adjustment Disorders

1. Subjective


<<<PAGE 1383>>>
behavioral changes
2. Marked
distress/impairment
that is felt to be out
of proportion to the
stressor itself

distress/emotional
disturbance
2. Arises during period of
adaptation to a
change or stress
3. Symptoms of
depressed mood or
anxiety may arise, and
conduct disturbance
may be noted in
adolescents

Required number All of the above
of symptoms
Psychosocial
Marked
consequences
distress/functional
of symptoms
impairment
Exclusions (not
result of):

Exacerbation of
existing mental
illness
Normal bereavement
Other psychiatric
illness

Symptom
specifiers

With depressed
mood:
• Predominant low
mood,
hopelessness
With anxiety:
• Predominant
anxiety, worry
With mixed anxiety
and depressed
mood:

Often result in impairment
in social functioning


<<<PAGE 1384>>>
• Both low mood
and anxiety
present
With mixed
disturbance of
emotions and
conduct:
• Mood and
conduct
disturbance
present
Unspecified
Adjustment Disorder with Mixed Disturbance of Emotions and
Conduct. A combination of disturbances of emotions and conduct
sometimes occurs. Examples include excessive alcohol ingestion,
suspiciousness, hostility, defrauding behavior, and homicidal ideation.
Clinicians are encouraged to try to make one or the other diagnosis in the
interest of clarity.
Adjustment Disorder Unspecified. Adjustment disorder unspecified is a
residual category for atypical maladaptive reactions to stress. Examples
include inappropriate responses to the diagnosis of physical illness, such as
massive denial, severe noncompliance with treatment, and social withdrawal,
without significant depressed or anxious mood.
Other Specified or Unspecified Trauma- or Stressor-Related
Disorder
DSM-5 uses the categories of “other specified trauma- or stressor-related
disorder” or “unspecified trauma- or stressor-related disorder” uses for
patients who develop emotional or behavioral symptoms in response to an
identifiable stressor, but do not meet the full criteria for any of the above
disorders. The primary difference between these two categories is that “other
specified trauma- or stressor-related disorder” is used when it is essential to
convey the reason that the patient does not meet the full criteria for one of the


<<<PAGE 1385>>>
other disorders.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS FOR THE TRAUMA- AND
STRESSOR-RELATED DISORDERS
Generally, the time requirements and diagnostic criteria help to differentiate
PTSD, acute stress disorder, and other psychiatric disorders. With adjustment
disorder, one of the challenges is that there are no clear criteria that define the
stressors that are required to make this diagnosis. PTSD and acute stress
disorder have the nature of the stressor better characterized and include a
defined constellation of affective, cognitive, and autonomic symptoms. In
contrast, the stressor in adjustment disorder can be of any severity, with a
wide range of possible symptoms. When the response to an extreme stressor
does not meet the acute stress or posttraumatic disorder threshold, the
adjustment disorder diagnosis would be appropriate.
We list some common disorders that can also cause posttraumatic
symptomatology in Table 10-4.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Acute Stress Disorder
Because patients often exhibit complex reactions to trauma, the clinician
must be careful to exclude other syndromes as well when evaluating patients
presenting in the wake of trauma. It is particularly important to recognize
potentially treatable medical contributors to posttraumatic symptomatology,
especially head injury during the trauma. A careful history and examination
can help detect medical contributors. Epilepsy, alcohol use disorders, and
other substance-related disorders can also either cause or exacerbate the
symptoms. Acute intoxication or withdrawal from some substances may also
present a clinical picture that is difficult to distinguish from the disorder until
the effects of the substance have worn off.
Table 10-4
Differential Diagnosis of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Medical causes

Traumatic brain injury
Epilepsy
Alcohol use disorder


<<<PAGE 1386>>>
Substance-related disorders
Acute substance or alcohol withdrawal
Psychiatric diagnoses

Panic disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder
Major depressive disorder
Dissociative identity disorder
Borderline personality disorder
Factitious disorders
Acute stress disorder

Symptoms of PTSD can be difficult to distinguish from both panic disorder
and generalized anxiety disorder because all three syndromes are associated
with prominent anxiety and autonomic arousal. Keys to correctly diagnosing
PTSD include a careful review of the time course relating the symptoms to a
traumatic event. PTSD is also associated with intrusion symptoms and
avoidance of anything that reminds the person of the trauma, something not
usually present in panic or generalized anxiety disorder. Major depression is
also a frequent concomitant of PTSD. Although the two syndromes are not
generally difficult to distinguish phenomenologically, it is essential to note
the presence of comorbid depression because this can influence the treatment
of PTSD. We also must differentiate PTSD from several related disorders that
can look similar, including borderline personality disorder, dissociative
disorders, and factitious disorders. Borderline personality disorder can be
difficult to distinguish from PTSD. The two disorders can coexist or even be
causally related. Patients with dissociative disorders do not usually have the
same degree of avoidance and arousal that PTSD patients do. The time course
can distinguish PTSD and acute stress disorder.
Adjustment Disorders
Although uncomplicated bereavement often produces temporarily impaired
social and occupational functioning, the person’s dysfunction remains within
the expectable bounds of a reaction to the loss of a loved one and, thus, is not
considered adjustment disorder. We discuss uncomplicated bereavement
among the depressive disorders in Chapter 7.


<<<PAGE 1387>>>
We must differentiate adjustment disorder from many other disorders, and
we list some of these in Table 10-5. Patients with an adjustment disorder are
impaired in social or occupational functioning and show symptoms beyond
the usual and expectable reaction to the stressor. Because no absolute criteria
help to distinguish an adjustment disorder from another condition, clinical
judgment is necessary. Some patients may meet the criteria for both an
adjustment disorder and a personality disorder. If the adjustment disorder
follows a physical illness, the clinician must make sure that the symptoms are
not a continuation or another manifestation of the illness or its treatment.

COMORBIDITY
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Comorbidity rates are high among patients with PTSD, with about two-thirds
having at least two other disorders. Common comorbid conditions include
depressive disorders, substance-related disorders, anxiety disorders, and
bipolar disorders. Comorbid disorders make persons more vulnerable to
develop PTSD.
Table 10-5
Differential Diagnosis of Adjustment Disorders
Major depressive disorder
Brief psychotic disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder
Somatic symptom disorder
Substance-related disorder
Conduct disorder
Antisocial personality disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Adjustment Disorders
Most psychiatric disorders can co-occur with adjustment disorder. However,
it is critical to ensure that another psychiatric disorder does not best explain


<<<PAGE 1388>>>
the person’s response to the stressor.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Immediately following exposure to a traumatic event, many people
experience symptoms such as shock, nightmares, and intrusive thoughts
about the event. However, we cannot make a diagnosis of PTSD unless
enough symptoms persist for at least 1 month. Symptoms can fluctuate over
time and may be most intense during periods of stress. Untreated, about 30
percent of patients recover completely, 40 percent continue to have mild
symptoms, 20 percent continue to have moderate symptoms, and 10 percent
remain unchanged or become worse. After 1 year, about 50 percent of
patients will recover.
We list some predictors of good prognosis in Table 10-6.
In general, the very young and the very old have more difficulty with
traumatic events than do those in midlife. For example, about 80 percent of
young children who sustain a burn injury show symptoms of PTSD 1 or 2
years after the initial injury; only 30 percent of adults who suffer such an
injury have symptoms of PTSD after 1 year. Presumably, young children do
not yet have adequate coping mechanisms to deal with the physical and
emotional insults of the trauma. Likewise, older persons are likely to have
more rigid coping mechanisms than younger adults and to be less able to
muster a flexible approach to dealing with the effects of trauma. Furthermore,
physical disabilities typical of late life can exacerbate the symptoms.
Examples include impairments of the nervous system and the cardiovascular
system, such as reduced cerebral blood flow, failing vision, palpitations, and
arrhythmias. Pre-existing psychiatric disability also increases the effects of
stressors. PTSD that is comorbid with other disorders is often more severe
and perhaps more chronic and may be challenging to treat. The availability of
social supports may also influence the development, severity, and duration of
PTSD. In general, patients who have a good network of social support are
less likely to have the disorder and to experience it in its severe forms and are
more likely to recover faster.


<<<PAGE 1389>>>
Adjustment Disorders
With appropriate treatment, the overall prognosis of an adjustment disorder is
generally favorable. Most patients return to their previous level of
functioning within 3 months. Some persons (particularly adolescents) who
receive a diagnosis of an adjustment disorder later have mood disorders or
substance-related disorders. Adolescents usually require a longer time to
recover than adults.
Table 10-6
Positive Prognostic Factors for PTSD
Rapid onset of the symptoms
Short duration of the symptoms (less than 6 mo)
Good premorbid functioning
Strong social supports
Absence of other psychiatric, medical, or substance-related disorders
or other risk factors
Research has disclosed a risk for suicide not previously fully appreciated.
Some studies suggest that a high proportion of patients with adjustment
disorders have had past suicide attempts and recent suicidality. This data is
difficult to interpret, given the extensive and sometimes inconsistent use of
this diagnosis; however, it is critical to evaluate for suicidality in patients
with this disorder.
A 16-year-old high school senior’s first relationship ended when his
girlfriend rejected him. In the weeks after the end of the relationship, he
began to exhibit dysphoric mood accompanied by anxiety and
psychomotor agitation. He had received counseling in junior high school
when his parents divorced, and he began using alcohol and marijuana.
His school suspended him during his freshman year for fighting. A month
after the breakup, he began to tell his parents that life was no longer
worth living without his former girlfriend. Two months later, his parents
came home from work and found him hanging in the garage with a note


<<<PAGE 1390>>>
stating he could not go on alone. (Courtesy of J. W. Katzman, M.D., and
C. M. A. Geppert, M.D., Ph.D., M.P.H.)

TREATMENT APPROACH
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
We list some of the most common treatments for PTSD and related disorders
in Table 10-7.
Pharmacotherapy. Currently, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), particularly sertraline and paroxetine, have the most robust evidence
for efficacy. There are promising initial findings for the noradrenergic and
serotonergic reuptake inhibitor venlafaxine, the atypical antipsychotic
risperidone, and the anticonvulsant topiramate. We lack evidence for the
effectiveness of benzodiazepines, despite their continued use in practice; one
meta-analysis went so far as to consider benzodiazepines relatively
contraindicated in this population. Finally, the alpha 1-adrenergic antagonist
prazosin and the atypical antipsychotics show some efficacy in treatmentresistant PTSD, and prazosin shows effectiveness for treating nightmares.
Insomnia is prevalent and disabling in chronic PTSD, with low-dose
trazodone preferable to benzodiazepines. The orexin antagonist suvorexant is
promising for managing trauma-related insomnia.
Table 10-7
Treatments for PTSD
Pharmacologic
interventions

Strong evidence
SSRIs (sertraline, paroxetine)
Promising initial evidence
SNRI (venlafaxine)
Atypical antipsychotic (risperidone)
Anticonvulsant (topiramate)
Limited evidence
Alpha 1-adrenergic antagonist (prazosin)


<<<PAGE 1391>>>
Lack of evidence
Benzodiazepines
Symptom-specific
Prazosin (nightmares)
Orexin (insomnia)
Trazodone (insomnia)
Psychotherapeutic
interventions

Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy
(TFCBT),
Prolonged exposure (PE) therapy
Cognitive processing therapy (CPT)
Eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing therapy (EMDR)
Present centered therapy (PCT)
Cognitive processing therapy (CPT)
Psychodynamic psychotherapy
Group and family therapy

Psychotherapy. Several therapies are effective for PTSD and related
disorders; we list these in Table 10-7. Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral
therapy (TFCBT) includes prolonged exposure (PE) therapy, which focuses
on reexperiencing the traumatic event through repeatedly engaging with the
memories (imaginal exposure) and everyday reminders (in vivo exposure)
rather than avoiding triggers. Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing
therapy (EMDR) involves repeatedly recalling distressing images while
receiving sensory inputs. Present centered therapy (PCT) focuses on the
current relationship and work challenges rather than the trauma, and
cognitive processing therapy (CPT) emphasizes correcting faulty attributions
including posttraumatic overgeneralizations of the world as dangerous,
uncontrollable, and unpredictable. Psychodynamic psychotherapy may also
be useful in the treatment of many patients with PTSD. In some cases,
reconstruction of the traumatic events with associated abreaction and
catharsis may be therapeutic. Still, psychotherapy must be tailored to the
individual, because reexperiencing the trauma overwhelms some patients.
In addition to individual therapy techniques, group therapy and family


<<<PAGE 1392>>>
therapy are effective for PTSD. The advantages of group therapy include the
sharing of traumatic experiences and support from other group members.
Group therapy has been particularly successful with Vietnam veterans and
survivors of catastrophic disasters such as earthquakes. Family therapy often
helps sustain a marriage through periods of exacerbated symptoms.
Hospitalization may be necessary when symptoms are particularly severe or
when the risk of suicide or other violence exists.
Adjustment Disorders
Psychotherapy. Psychotherapy remains the treatment of choice for
adjustment disorders. Group therapy can be particularly useful for patients
who have had similar stresses—for example, a group of retired persons or
patients having renal dialysis. Individual psychotherapy interventions include
supportive psychological approaches, cognitive-behavioral, problem-solving
techniques, and psychodynamic interventions. After successful therapy,
patients sometimes emerge from an adjustment disorder stronger than in the
premorbid period, although no pathology was evident during that period.
Because there is an explicit stressor, some clinicians mistakenly deemphasize
psychotherapy and believe that the disorder will remit spontaneously. This
viewpoint, however, ignores the fact that many persons exposed to the same
stressor experience different symptoms, and in adjustment disorders, the
response is pathologic. Psychotherapy can help persons adapt to stressors that
are not reversible or time-limited and can serve as a preventive intervention if
the stressor does remit.
Crisis Intervention. Crisis intervention and case management are shortterm treatments aimed at helping persons with adjustment disorders resolve
their situations quickly by supportive techniques, suggestion, reassurance,
environmental modification, and even hospitalization, if necessary. The
frequency and length of visits for crisis support vary according to patients’
needs; daily sessions may be required, sometimes two or three times each
day. Flexibility is essential in this approach.
Pharmacotherapy. There is limited evidence for the efficacy of
pharmacologic interventions in persons with adjustment disorder. Still, it may


<<<PAGE 1393>>>
be reasonable to use medication to treat specific symptoms for a brief time.
The judicious use of medications can help patients with adjustment disorders,
but we should only use them for short periods. Depending on the type of
adjustment disorder, a patient may respond to an antianxiety agent or an
antidepressant. It is often helpful and important to treat insomnia and severe
anxiety with pharmacologic interventions in the short run. It is not as clear
whether it helps to treat the depressive symptoms using medication.
Clinicians have found some SSRIs to be useful for treating some
subthreshold depressive symptoms and may benefit certain subtypes of
adjustment disorders. Pharmacologic intervention in this population should
mainly augment psychosocial strategies and not serve as the primary
modality.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
About 6.8 percent of the general population has a lifetime prevalence of
PTSD, with a current past year prevalence estimated at 3.5 percent. The
lifetime prevalence rate is 9.7 percent in women and 3.6 percent in men.
According to the National Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study (NVVRS),
30.9 percent of men developed full-blown PTSD after having served in the
war, and 26.9 percent of women developed the disorder. A 25-year follow-up
of the NVVRS, the National Vietnam Veteran Longitudinal Study (NVVLS),
was conducted to assess the course of PTSD 40 years after the war. This
study found that the current prevalence of war zone PTSD was 4.5 percent,
and the lifetime prevalence of war zone PTSD was 17 percent.
Although PTSD can appear at any age, it is most prevalent in young adults
because they tend to be more exposed to precipitating situations. Children
can also have the disorder. The disorder is most likely to occur in those who
are single, divorced, widowed, socially withdrawn, or of low socioeconomic
level, but anyone can be affected, and no one is immune. The most important
risk factors, however, for this disorder are the severity, duration, and
proximity of a person’s exposure to the actual trauma. A familial pattern
seems to exist for this disorder, and first-degree biologic relatives of persons
with a history of depression have an increased risk for developing PTSD


<<<PAGE 1394>>>
following a traumatic event.
Adjustment Disorders
Few studies have examined the prevalence of adjustment disorder in
community samples. One study that did assess for the presence of adjustment
disorder was the European Outcome of Depression International Network
(ODIN) study, which found that less than 1 percent of subjects had
adjustment disorder. Another study examined the prevalence of adjustment
disorder in a primary care setting and found that 2.94 percent of the sample
met the criteria for adjustment disorder. There is a higher prevalence of
adjustment disorder in the medical setting—especially patients with cancer
and those receiving palliative care. For example, one study found that 11
percent of individuals with mixed cancer diagnoses had an adjustment
disorder.

ETIOLOGY
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Risk Factors for PTSD. Even when faced with overwhelming trauma,
most persons do not experience PTSD symptoms. The National Comorbidity
Study found that 60 percent of males and 50 percent of females had
experienced some significant trauma. In contrast, the reported lifetime
prevalence of PTSD, as mentioned earlier, was much lower. Similarly, events
that may appear mundane or less than catastrophic to most persons can
produce PTSD in some. Evidence indicates a dose–response relationship
between the degree of trauma and the likelihood of symptoms.
A meta-analysis of risk factors for PTSD in the community found that
female gender, age at trauma, race, lower education, childhood abuse, higher
severity of trauma exposure, lack of social support, and additional life stress
increased risk for PTSD. A second meta-analysis identified seven predictors:
prior trauma, prior psychological adjustment, family history of
psychopathology, more significant perceived life threat during the trauma,
lower posttrauma social support, more considerable emotional distress during
exposure, and higher dissociation during exposure. For combat-related PTSD,


<<<PAGE 1395>>>
identified risk factors include lower education, nonofficer ranks, army
service, combat specialization, higher numbers of deployments, longer
cumulative length of deployments, more adverse life events, prior trauma
exposure, and previous psychological problems. Various aspects of the
trauma period also constituted risk factors, including higher levels of combat
exposure, discharging a weapon, witnessing someone being wounded or
killed, severe trauma, and deployment-related stressors. Another study
reported that killing enemy combatants, prisoners of war, and civilians in the
war zone increased the risk of PTSD.
Table 10-8 summarizes vulnerability factors that appear to play etiologic
roles in the disorder.
Genetics and Risk for PTSD. Genes account for about 30 percent of the
variance in the risk for PTSD. A study of Vietnam veteran twin pairs reported
that monozygotic twins of veterans with combat-related PTSD had more
significant mood disorder symptoms than monozygotic co-twins of combat
controls or dizygotic co-twins of veterans with PTSD. The findings suggest a
shared genetic vulnerability to PTSD and mood disorders. Other studies have
indicated that PTSD symptoms are moderately heritable, with the remaining
vulnerability accounted for by unique environmental experiences. Several
common genetic variants are associated with PTSD, including
polymorphisms in FKBP5, PACAP1, COMT, DRD2, GABA alpha-2
receptor, G-protein signaling 2 (RSG2), an SNP in an intergenic region of the
fourth chromosome, and an estrogen response element on ADCYAP R1.
Also, the s/s genotype of the serotonin transporter gene may interact with
childhood adversity to increase PTSD risk.
Table 10-8
Predisposing Vulnerability Factors in Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder
Presence of childhood trauma
Borderline, paranoid, dependent, or antisocial personality disorder
traits
Inadequate family or peer support system
Being female


<<<PAGE 1396>>>
Genetic vulnerability to psychiatric illness
Recent stressful life changes
Perception of an external locus of control (natural cause) rather than
an internal one (human cause)
Recent excessive alcohol intake
Adjustment Disorders
By definition, a stressor precipitates an adjustment disorder. The severity of
the stressor or stressors does not always predict the severity of the disorder;
the stressor severity is a complex function of degree, quantity, duration,
reversibility, environment, and personal context. For example, the loss of a
parent is different for a child 10 years of age than for a person 40 years of
age. Personality organization and cultural or group norms and values also
contribute to the disproportionate responses to stressors.
Stressors may be single, such as the death of a loved one, divorce, losing a
job, or medical illness. Alternatively, they can be a combination of any of
these. Stressors may be recurrent, such as seasonal business difficulties, or
continuous, such as chronic illness or poverty. A discordant intrafamilial
relationship can produce an adjustment disorder that affects the entire family
system, or the disorder may be limited to a patient who was perhaps the
victim of a crime or who has a physical illness. Sometimes, adjustment
disorders occur in a group or community setting, and the stressors affect
several persons, as in a natural disaster or racial, social, or religious
persecution. Specific developmental stages, such as beginning school, leaving
home, getting married, becoming a parent, failing to achieve occupational
goals, having the last child leave home, and retiring, are often associated with
adjustment disorders.
Psychodynamic Factors. Pivotal to understanding adjustment disorders
is an understanding of three factors: the nature of the stressor, the conscious
and unconscious meanings of the stressor, and the patient’s pre-existing
vulnerability. A concurrent personality disorder or organic impairment may
make a person vulnerable to adjustment disorders. Vulnerability is also
associated with the loss of a parent during infancy or growing up in a
dysfunctional family. Actual or perceived support from crucial relationships


<<<PAGE 1397>>>
can affect behavioral and emotional responses to stressors.
Clinicians must undertake a detailed exploration of a patient’s experience
of the stressor. Some patients commonly place all the blame on a particular
event when a less apparent event may have had more significant
psychological meaning for the patient. Current events may reawaken past
traumas or disappointments from childhood, so patients should be
encouraged to think about how the current situation relates to similar past
events.
Throughout early development, each child develops a unique set of defense
mechanisms to deal with stressful events. Because of higher amounts of
trauma or greater constitutional vulnerability, some children have less mature
defensive constellations than other children. This disadvantage may cause
them as adults to react with substantially impaired functioning when facing a
loss, divorce, or a financial setback; those who have developed mature
defense mechanisms are less vulnerable and bounce back more quickly from
the stressor. Resilience is also crucially determined by the nature of
children’s early relationships with their parents. Studies of trauma repeatedly
indicate that supportive, nurturing relationships prevent traumatic incidents
from causing permanent psychological damage.
Psychodynamic clinicians must consider the relationship between a
stressor and the human developmental life cycle. When adolescents leave
home for college, for example, they are at high developmental risk for
reacting with a temporary symptomatic picture. Similarly, if the young
person who leaves home is the last child in the family, the parents may be
particularly vulnerable to a reaction of adjustment disorder. Moreover,
middle-aged persons who are confronting their mortality may be especially
sensitive to the effects of loss or death.

References
Alexander S, Kuntz S. PTSD-related sleep disturbances: Is there evidencebased treatment? JAAPA. 2012;25:44.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association; 2013.
Barnes JB, Dickstein BD, Maguen S, Neria Y, Litz BT. The distinctiveness


<<<PAGE 1398>>>
of prolonged grief and posttraumatic stress disorder in adults bereaved by
the attacks of September 11th. J Affect Disord. 2012;136:366.
Benedek DM, Ursano RJ, Holloway HC. Disaster psychiatry: Disaster,
terrorism, and war. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia,
PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2564–2576.
Biggs QM, Fullerton CS, Reeves JJ, Grieger TA, Reissman D, Ursano RJ.
Acute stress disorder, depression, and tobacco use in disaster workers
following 9/11. Am J Orthopsychiatry. 2010;80:586.
Bryant RA. Acute stress disorder as a predictor of posttraumatic stress
disorder: A systematic review. J Clin Psychiatry. 2011;72:233.
Busch AB, Yoon F, Barry CL, Azzone V, Normand SL, Goldman HH,
Huskamp HA. The effects of mental health parity on spending and
utilization for bipolar, major depression, and adjustment disorders. Am J
Psychiatry. 2013;170(2):180–187.
Casey P, Maracy M, Kelly BD, Lehtinen V, Ayuso-Mateos JL, Dalgard OS,
Dowrick C. Can adjustment disorder and depressive episode be
distinguished? Results from ODIN. J Affective Disord. 2006;92:291–297.
Chen PF, Chen CS, Chen CC, Lung FW. Alexithymia as a screening index
for male conscripts with adjustment disorder. Psychiatr Q. 2011;82:139.
Cloitre M, Garvert DW, Brewin CR, Bryant RA, Maercker A. Evidence for
proposed ICD-11 PTSD and complex PTSD: A latent profile analysis. Eur
J Psychotraumatol. 2013;4.
Daniels J. The perils of “adjustment disorder” as a diagnostic category. J
Humanistic Counsel. 2009;48:77.
Elklit A, Christiansen DM. Acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress
disorder in rape victims. J Interper Viol. 2010;25(8):1470–1488.
Fareed A, Eilender P, Haber M, Bremner J, Whitfield N, Drexler K.
Comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder and opiate addiction: A literature
review. J Addict Dis. 2013;32(2):168–179.
Fernández A, Mendive JM, Salvador-Carulla L, Rubio-Valera M, Luciano
JV, Pinto-Meza A, Haro JM, Palao DJ, Bellón JA, Serrano-Blanco A;
DASMAP investigators. Adjustment disorders in primary care: Prevalence,
recognition and use of services. Br J Psychiatry. 2012;201:137–142.
Forneris CA, Gartlehner G, Brownley KA, Gaynes BN, Sonis J, CokerSchwimmer E, Jonas DE, Greenblatt A, Wilkins TM, Woodell CL, Lohr


<<<PAGE 1399>>>
KN. Interventions to prevent posttraumatic stress disorder: A systematic
review. Am J Prev Med. 2013;44(6):635–650.
Fuina J, Rossetter SR, DeRhodes BJ, Nahhas RW, Welton RS.
Benzodiazepines for PTSD: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Psychiatr Pract. 2015;21:281–303.
Giltaij HP, Sterkenburg PS, Schuengel C. Psychiatric diagnostic screening of
social maladaptive behaviour in children with mild intellectual disability:
Differentiating disordered attachment and pervasive developmental
disorder behaviour. J Intellect Disabil Res. 2015;59(2):138–149.
Jamieson JP, Mendes WB, Nock MK. Improving acute stress responses: The
power of reappraisal. Curr Dir Psychol Sci. 2013;22(1):51–56.
Jovanovic T, Sakoman AJ, KozaricУ-KovacˇicУ D, MeštrovicУ AH,
Duncan EJ, Davis M, Norrholm SD. Acute stress disorder versus chronic
posttraumatic stress disorder: Inhibition of fear as a function of time since
trauma. Depress Anxiety. 2013;30(3):217–224.
Katzman JW, Geppert CMA. Adjustment disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017.
Kim-Cohen J, Turkewitz R. Resilience and measured gene-environment
interactions. Dev Psychopathol. 2012;24(4):1297–1306.
Krystal JH, Pietrzak RH, Rosenheck RA, Cramer JA, Vessicchio J, Jones
KM, Huang GD, Vertrees JE, Collins J, Krystal AD; Veterans Affairs
Cooperative Study #504 Group. Sleep disturbance in chronic militaryrelated PTSD: clinical impact and response to adjunctive risperidone in the
Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study #504. J Clin Psychiatry. 2016;77:483–
491.
Kryzhanovskaya L, Canterbury R. Suicidal behavior in patients with
adjustment disorders. Crisis. 2001;22:152–131.
Le QA, Doctor JN, Zoellner LA, Feeny NC. Cost-effectiveness of prolonged
exposure therapy versus pharmacotherapy and treatment choice in
posttraumatic stress disorder (the optimizing PTSD treatment trial): A
doubly randomized preference trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2014;75(3):222–
230.
Lederberg MS, Loscalzo MJ, McCorkle RS, eds. Psycho-Oncology. 2nd ed.
New York: Oxford University Press; 2010:303.
Li M, Hales S, Rodin GM. Adjustment disorders. In: Holland JC, Breitbart


<<<PAGE 1400>>>
WS, Jacobsen PB, Lederberg MS, Loscalzo MJ, McCorkle RS, eds.
Psycho-Oncology. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2010.
Marmar CR, Schlenger W, Henn-Haase C, Qian M, Purchia E, Li M, Corry
N, Williams CS, Ho C, Horesh D, Karstoft K, Shalev A, Kulka RA.
Course of posttraumatic stress disorder 40 years after the Vietnam War:
Findings from the National Vietnam Veterans Longitudinal Study. JAMA
Psychiatry. 2015;72:875–881.
Mehnert A, Brahler E, Faller H, Härter M, Keller M, Schulz H, Wegscheider
K, Weis J, Boehncke A, Hund B, Reuter K, Richard M, Sehner S,
Sommerfeldt S, Szalai C, Wittchen HU, Koch U. Four-week prevalence of
mental disorders in patients with cancer across major tumor entities. J Clin
Oncol. 2014;32:3540–3546.
Panagioti M, Gooding PA, Tarrier N. Hopelessness, defeat, and entrapment
in posttraumatic stress disorder: Their association with suicidal behavior
and severity of depression. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2012;200:676.
Ponniah K, Hollon SD. Empirically supported psychological treatments for
adult acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder: A review.
Depress Anxiety. 2009;26:1086.
Regier DA, Kuhl EA, Kupfer DJ. The DSM-5: Classification and criteria
changes. World Psychiatry. 2013;12(2):92–98.
Schuengel C, Schipper JC, Sterkenburg PS, Kef S. Attachment, intellectual
disabilities and mental health: Research, assessment and intervention. J
Appl Res Intellect Dis. 2013;26(1):34–46.
Schulze T, Maercker A, Horn AB. Mental health and multimorbidity:
Psychosocial adjustment as an important process for quality of life.
Gerontology. 2014;60(3):249–254.
Shalev AY, Marmar C. Posttraumatic stress disorder. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1812–1826.
Shalev AY, Marmar CR. Posttraumatic stress disorder. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017.
Simon NM. Treating complicated grief. JAMA. 2013;310(4):416–423.
Sones HM, Thorp SR, Raskind M. Prevention of posttraumatic stress
disorder. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2011;34:79.
Strain JJ, Diefenbache A. The adjustment disorders: The conundrums of the


<<<PAGE 1401>>>
diagnoses. Compr Psychiatry. 2008;49:121.
Strain JJ, Friedman MJ. Considering adjustment disorders as stress response
syndromes for DSM-5. Depress Anxiety. 2011;28:818.
Varma A, Moore MB, Miller CWT, Himelhoch S. Topiramate as
monotherapy or adjunctive treatment for posttraumatic stressor disorder: A
meta-analysis. J Trauma Stress. 2018;31:125–133.
Watts BV, Schnurr PP, Mayo L, Young-Xu Y, Weeks WB, Friedman MJ.
Meta-analysis of the efficacy of treatments for posttraumatic stress
disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 2013;74:e541–e550.
Zantvoord JB, Diehle J, Lindauer RJ. Using neurobiological measures to
predict and assess treatment outcome of psychotherapy in posttraumatic
stress
disorder:
Systematic
review.
Psychother
Psychosom.
2013;82(3):142–151.
Zimmerman M, Martinez JH, Dalrymple K, Chelminski I, Young D.
“Subthreshold” depression: Is the distinction between depressive disorder
not otherwise specified and adjustment disorder valid? J Clin Psychiatry.
2013;74(5):470–476.


<<<PAGE 1402>>>
11
Dissociative Disorders
In psychiatry, dissociation is an unconscious defense mechanism involving
the segregation of any group of mental or behavioral processes from the rest
of the person’s psychic activity. Dissociative disorders involve this
mechanism so that there is a disruption in one or more mental functions, such
as memory, identity, perception, consciousness, or motor behavior. The
disturbance may be sudden or gradual, transient or chronic, and
psychological trauma is often the cause.

DIAGNOSTIC AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Dissociative Amnesia
The main feature of dissociative amnesia is the inability to recall important
personal information, usually related to a significant trauma or stressor, that
is too extensive to be explained by ordinary forgetfulness. The disorder
cannot result from the direct physiologic effects of a substance or a
neurologic or other general medical condition.
Table 11-1 lists the different types of dissociative amnesia.
A 45-year-old, divorced, left-handed, male bus dispatcher was seen in
psychiatric consultation on a medical unit. He had been admitted with an
episode of chest discomfort, light-headedness, and left-arm weakness. He
had a history of hypertension and had a medical admission in the past
year for ischemic chest pain, although he had not suffered a myocardial
infarction. Psychiatric consultation was called, because the patient
complained of memory loss for the previous 12 years, behaving and


<<<PAGE 1403>>>
responding to the environment as if it were 12 years previously (e.g., he
did not recognize his 8-year-old son, insisted that he was unmarried, and
denied recollection of current events, such as the name of the current
president). Physical and laboratory findings were unchanged from the
patient’s usual baseline. Brain computed tomography (CT) scan was
normal.
On mental status examination, the patient displayed intact intellectual
function but insisted that the date was 12 years earlier, denying recall of
his entire subsequent personal history and of current events for the past
12 years. He was perplexed by the contradiction between his memory and
current circumstances. The patient described a family history of brutal
beatings and physical discipline. He was a decorated combat veteran,
although he described amnestic episodes for some of his combat
experiences. In the military, he had been a champion golden glove boxer
noted for his powerful left hand.
He was educated about his disorder and given the suggestion that his
memory could return as he could tolerate it, perhaps overnight during
sleep or perhaps over a longer time. If this strategy was unsuccessful,
hypnosis or an amobarbital interview was proposed. (Adapted from a
case of Richard J. Loewenstein, M.D., and Frank W. Putnam, M.D.)
Classic Presentation. The classic disorder is an overt, florid, dramatic
clinical disturbance that quickly presents for medical attention. A history of
extreme acute trauma is typical. It also commonly develops, however, in the
context of profound intrapsychic conflict or emotional stress. Patients may
present with physical symptoms, alterations in consciousness,
depersonalization, derealization, trance states, spontaneous age regression,
and even ongoing anterograde dissociative amnesia. There is a significant
risk of depression and suicidal ideation. No single personality profile or
antecedent history is consistently reported in these patients, although a prior
personal or family history of somatoform or dissociative symptoms can
predispose individuals to develop acute amnesia during traumatic
circumstances. Many of these patients have histories of prior adult or
childhood abuse or trauma. In wartime cases, as in other forms of combatrelated posttraumatic disorders, the most crucial variable in the development


<<<PAGE 1404>>>
of dissociative symptoms, however, appears to be the intensity of combat.
Table 11-2 presents the mental status evaluation of dissociative amnesia.
Nonclassic Presentation. These patients frequently come to treatment for
a variety of symptoms, such as depression or mood swings, substance abuse,
sleep disturbances, somatoform symptoms, anxiety and panic, suicidal or
self-mutilating impulses and acts, violent outbursts, eating problems, and
interpersonal problems. Self-mutilation and violent behavior in these patients
may also occur. Amnesia may also occur for flashbacks or behavioral
reexperiencing episodes related to trauma.
Dissociative Fugue. DSM-5 treats dissociative fugue as a subtype of
dissociative amnesia, whereas it is a separate diagnosis in ICD-10. It can
occur in patients with both dissociative amnesia and dissociative identity
disorder.
Dissociative fugue is as sudden, unexpected travel away from home or
one’s customary place of daily activities. Also, the person cannot recall some
or all of one’s past. Along with the amnesia, the person is confused about
their identity or may even assume a new identity. The disturbance is not due
to the direct physiologic effects of a substance or a general medical condition.
Dissociative fugues have been described to last from minutes to months.
Some patients report multiple fugues. In some extreme cases of posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), a person may awaken from a nightmare in a fugue
state. Children or adolescents may be more limited than adults in their ability
to travel. Thus, fugues in this population may be brief and involve only short
distances.
A teenage girl was continually sexually abused by her alcoholic father
and another family friend. She was threatened with perpetration of sexual
abuse on her younger siblings if she told anyone about the abuse. The girl
became suicidal but felt that she had to stay alive to protect her siblings.
She ran away from home after being raped by her father and several of
his friends. She traveled to a part of the city where she had lived
previously with the idea of finding her grandmother with whom she had
lived before the abuse began. She traveled by public transportation and


<<<PAGE 1405>>>
walked the streets, apparently without attracting attention. After
approximately 8 hours, she was stopped by the police in a curfew check.
When questioned, she could not recall recent events or give her current
address, insisting that she lived with her grandmother. On initial
psychiatric examination, she was aware of her identity, but she believed
that it was 2 years earlier, giving her age as 2 years younger and insisting
that none of the events of recent years had occurred. (Courtesy of Richard
J. Loewenstein, M.D., and Frank W. Putnam, M.D.)
Table 11-1
Types of Dissociative Amnesia
Localized amnesia: Inability to recall events related to a
circumscribed period of time
Selective amnesia: Ability to remember some, but not all, of the
events occurring during a circumscribed period of time
Generalized amnesia: Failure to recall one’s entire life
Continuous amnesia: Failure to recall successive events as they
occur
Systematized amnesia: Failure to remember a category of
information, such as all memories relating to one’s family or to a
particular person
Table 11-2
Mental Status Examination Questions for Dissociative
Amnesia
If answers are positive, ask the patient to describe the event. Make
sure to specify that the symptom does not occur during an
episode of intoxication.
1. Do you ever have blackouts? Blank spells? Memory lapses?
2. Do you lose time? Have gaps in your experience of time?
3. Have you ever traveled a considerable distance without
recollection of how you did this or where you went exactly?


<<<PAGE 1406>>>
4. Do people tell you of things you have said and done that you do
not recall?
5. Do you find objects in your possession (such as clothes, personal
items, groceries in your grocery cart, books, tools, equipment,
jewelry, vehicles, weapons, and so on) that you do not remember
acquiring? Out-of-character items? Items that a child might have?
Toys? Stuffed animals?
6. Have you ever been told or found evidence that you have talents
and abilities that you did not know that you had? For example,
musical, artistic, mechanical, literary, athletic, or other talents?
Do your tastes seem to fluctuate a lot? For example, food
preference, personal habits, taste in music or clothes, and so
forth.
7. Do you have gaps in your memory of your life? Are you missing
parts of your memory for your life history? Are you missing
memories of some important events in your life? For example,
weddings, birthdays, graduations, pregnancies, birth of children,
and so on.
8. Do you lose track of or tune out conversations or therapy sessions
as they are occurring? Do you find that, while you are listening to
someone talk, you did not hear all or part of what was just said?
9. What is the longest period of time that you have lost? Minutes?
Hours? Days? Weeks? Months? Years? Describe.
Adapted from Loewenstein RJ. An office mental status examination for chronic complex
dissociative symptoms and multiple personality disorder. Psychiatr Clin North Am.
1991;14(3):567–604.

After the termination of a fugue, the patient may experience perplexity,
confusion, trance-like behaviors, depersonalization, derealization, and
conversion symptoms, in addition to amnesia. Some patients may terminate a
fugue with an episode of generalized dissociative amnesia.
As the patient with dissociative fugue begins to become less dissociated,
he or she may display mood disorder symptoms, intense suicidal ideation,
and PTSD or anxiety disorder symptoms. In classic cases, the person has an
alter identity under whose auspices the patient lives for a period. Many of
these latter cases are better classified as dissociative identity disorder or, if


<<<PAGE 1407>>>
using DSM-5, as other specified dissociative disorder with features of
dissociative identity disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Table 11-3 lists the differential diagnosis of dissociative amnesia.
Ordinary Forgetfulness and Nonpathologic Amnesia. Ordinary
forgetfulness is benign and unrelated to stressful events. In dissociative
amnesia, memory loss is more extensive than in nonpathologic amnesia.
There are other types of nonpathologic amnesia as well, including infantile
and childhood amnesia, amnesia for sleep and dreaming, and hypnotic
amnesia.
Dementia, Delirium, and Amnestic Disorders due to Medical
Conditions. In patients with dementia, delirium, and amnestic disorders due
to medical conditions, memory loss is part of a more extensive set of
cognitive, language, attentional, behavioral, and memory problems. Loss of
memory for personal identity is usually not found without evidence of a
marked disturbance in many domains of cognitive function. Causes of
organic amnestic disorders include Korsakoff psychosis, cerebral vascular
accident (CVA), postoperative amnesia, postinfectious amnesia, anoxic
amnesia, and transient global amnesia (see below). Electroconvulsive therapy
(ECT) may also cause marked temporary amnesia, as well as persistent
memory problems in some cases. Here, however, memory loss for
autobiographical experience is unrelated to traumatic or overwhelming
experiences and seems to involve many different types of personal
experiences, most commonly those occurring just before or during the ECT
treatments.
Posttraumatic Amnesia. In posttraumatic amnesia caused by brain injury,
we usually find a history of a clear-cut physical trauma, a period of
unconsciousness or amnesia, or both. Also, there is objective clinical
evidence of brain injury.
Seizure Disorders. In most seizure cases, the clinical presentation differs
significantly from that of dissociative amnesia, with clear-cut ictal events and


<<<PAGE 1408>>>
sequelae. In complex–partial seizures, patients may wander or show
semipurposeful behavior, or both, during seizures or in postictal states, for
which subsequent amnesia occurs. Rarely, patients with recurrent, complex–
partial seizures present with ongoing bizarre behavior, memory problems,
irritability, or violence, leading to a differential diagnostic puzzle. Seizure
patients in an epileptic fugue often exhibit abnormal behavior, however,
including confusion, perseveration, and abnormal or repetitive movements.
Patients with pseudoepileptic seizures may also have dissociative symptoms,
such as amnesia and an antecedent history of psychological trauma. In some
of these cases, the diagnosis can be clarified only by telemetry or ambulatory
electroencephalographic (EEG) monitoring.
Table 11-3
Differential Diagnosis of Dissociative Amnesia
Ordinary forgetfulness
Age-related cognitive
decline
Nonpathologic forms of
amnesia
Infantile and
childhood amnesia
Amnesia for sleep
and dreaming
Hypnotic amnesia
Dementia
Delirium
Amnestic disorders
Neurologic disorders
with discrete
memory loss
episodes
Posttraumatic
amnesia
Transient global

Acute stress disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Somatization disorder
Psychotic episode
Lack of memory for psychotic episode
when returns to nonpsychotic state
Mood disorder episode
Lack of memory for aspects of episode of
mania when depressed and vice versa
or when euthymic
Factitious disorder
Malingering
Psychophysiologic symptoms or disorders
Asthma and breathing problems
Perimenstrual disorders
Irritable bowel syndrome
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Somatic memory
Affective symptoms
Depressed mood, dysphoria, or


<<<PAGE 1409>>>
amnesia
anhedonia
Amnesia related to
Brief mood swings or mood lability
seizure disorders
Suicidal thoughts and attempts or selfmutilation
Substance-related
Guilt and survivor guilt
amnesia
Helpless and hopeless feelings
Alcohol
Sedative–hypnotics
Obsessive-compulsive symptoms
Anticholinergic agents
Ruminations about trauma
Steroids
Obsessive counting, singing
Marijuana
Arranging
Narcotic analgesics
Washing
Psychedelics
Checking
Phencyclidine
Methyldopa (Aldomet)
Pentazocine (Talwin)
Hypoglycemic agents
β-Blockers
Lithium carbonate
Many others
Other dissociative
disorders
Dissociative fugue
Dissociative identity
disorder
Dissociative disorder
not otherwise
specified
Substance-Related Amnesia. A variety of substances and intoxicants
can cause amnesia. Table 11-3 lists some common offending agents.
Transient Global Amnesia. Transient global amnesia can be mistaken for
dissociative amnesia, especially because stressful life events may precede
either disorder. In transient global amnesia, however, there is the sudden
onset of complete anterograde amnesia and learning abilities; pronounced


<<<PAGE 1410>>>
retrograde amnesia; preservation of memory for personal identity; anxious
awareness of memory loss with repeated, often perseverative, questioning;
overall normal behavior; lack of gross neurologic abnormalities in most
cases; and rapid return of baseline cognitive function, with a persistent short
retrograde amnesia. The patient usually is older than 50 years of age and
shows risk factors for cerebrovascular disease, although epilepsy and
migraine are also possible causes.
Dissociative Identity Disorder. Patients with dissociative identity
disorder can present with acute forms of amnesia and fugue episodes. These
patients, however, have symptoms beyond that found in dissociative amnesia.
Concerning amnesia, most patients with dissociative identity disorder, and
those with an unspecified dissociative disorder with dissociative identity
disorder features, report multiple forms of complex amnesia, including
recurrent blackouts, fugues, unexplained possessions, and fluctuations in
skills, habits, and knowledge.
Acute Stress Disorder and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Many
trauma spectrum disorders, including acute stress disorder and PTSD, are
associated with dissociative amnesia. When diagnoses of acute stress disorder
or PTSD are appropriate, we should add the co-occurring diagnosis of
dissociative amnesia if the amnesia persists beyond the immediate trauma.
Malingering and Factitious Amnesia. No absolute way exists to
differentiate dissociative amnesia from factitious or malingered amnesia.
Malingerers may continue their deception even during hypnotically or
barbiturate-facilitated interviews. A patient who presents to psychiatric
attention seeking to recover repressed memories as a chief complaint most
likely has a factitious disorder or has been subject to suggestive influences.
Most of these individuals do not describe bona fide amnesia when carefully
questioned but are often insistent that they must have been abused in
childhood to explain their unhappiness or dysfunction. Malingering of
dissociative fugue can occur in individuals who are attempting to flee a
situation involving legal, financial, or personal difficulties, as well as in
soldiers who are attempting to avoid combat or unpleasant military duties. No
test, battery of tests, or set of procedures exist that invariably distinguish


<<<PAGE 1411>>>
actual dissociative symptoms from malingering. Many malingerers confess
spontaneously or when confronted. In the forensic context, when a patient
claims to have a fugue, the examiner should always carefully consider the
diagnosis of malingering.

DEPERSONALIZATION/DEREALIZATION DISORDER
Depersonalization is the persistent or recurrent feeling of detachment or
estrangement from one’s self. The individual may report feeling like an
automaton or watching himself or herself in a movie. Derealization is
somewhat related and refers to feelings of unreality or of being detached from
one’s environment. The patient may describe his or her perception of the
outside world as lacking lucidity and emotional coloring, as though dreaming
or dead.
Table 11-4
Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Depersonalization/Derealization Depersonalization/Derealiz
Disorder
Syndrome

Symptoms

Depersonalization:
Perceived change in mental
activity, such that thought
• Feeling detached from
body, or surroundings fee
oneself
Unreal
• Feeling as if observing oneself
Remote
• Sense of unreality
Automatized
• Sense of distorted time
Loss of emotions
• Sense of distorted perceptions
Feeling estranged or detac
Derealization
• Sense of unreality
• Feeling detached from one’s
surroundings

# Symptoms
needed

Either depersonalization or
derealization as above

Any of above
Intact reality testing


<<<PAGE 1412>>>
Intact reality testing
Exclusions (not Substance use
result of):
Another medical condition
Another mental disorder
Psychosocial
impact

Schizophrenic
Depressive disorders
Phobic disorders
Obsessive-compulsive disor

Marked distress and/or
impairment

Table
11-4
compares
the
diagnostic
approaches
to
depersonalization/derealization disorder.
Several distinct components comprise the experience of depersonalization,
including a sense of (1) bodily changes, (2) duality of self as observer and
actor, (3) feeling cut off from others, and (4) feeling cut off from one’s own
emotions. Patients experiencing depersonalization often have great difficulty
expressing what they are feeling. Trying to express their subjective suffering
with banal phrases, such as “I feel dead,” “Nothing seems real,” or “I’m
standing outside of myself,” depersonalized patients may not adequately
convey to the examiner the distress they experience. While complaining
bitterly about how this is ruining their life, they may nonetheless appear
remarkably without distress.
Ms. R was a 27-year-old, unmarried, graduate student with a master’s
degree in biology. She complained about intermittent episodes of
“standing back,” usually associated with anxiety-provoking social
situations. When asked about a recent episode, she described presenting
in a seminar course. “All of a sudden, I was talking, but it didn’t feel like
it was me talking. It was very disconcerting. I had this feeling, ‘Who’s
doing the talking?’ I felt like I was just watching someone else talk.
Listening to words come out of my mouth, but I wasn’t saying them. It
wasn’t me. It went on for a while. I was calm, even sort of peaceful. It
was as if I was very far away. In the back of the room somewhere—just
watching myself. But the person talking didn’t even seem like me really.
It was like I was watching someone else.” The feeling lasted the rest of
that day and persisted into the next, during which time it gradually


<<<PAGE 1413>>>
dissipated. She thought that she remembered having similar experiences
during high school but was confident that they occurred at least once a
year during college and graduate school.
As a child, Ms. R reported frequent intense anxiety from overhearing or
witnessing the frequent violent arguments and periodic physical fights
between her parents. In addition, the family was subject to many
unpredictable dislocations and moves owing to the patient’s father’s
intermittent difficulties with finances and employment. The patient’s
anxieties did not abate when the parents divorced when she was a late
adolescent. Her father moved away and had little further contact with her.
Her relationship with her mother became increasingly angry, critical, and
contentious. She was unsure if she experienced depersonalization during
childhood while listening to her parents’ fights. (Adapted from a case of
Richard J. Loewenstein, M.D., and Frank W. Putnam, M.D.)
Differential Diagnosis
The variety of conditions associated with depersonalization complicates the
differential diagnosis of depersonalization disorder. Depersonalization can
result from a medical condition or neurologic condition, intoxication or
withdrawal from illicit drugs, as a side effect of medications, or can be
associated with panic attacks, phobias, PTSD, or acute stress disorder, major
depression, schizophrenia, illness anxiety disorder, or another dissociative
disorder. A thorough medical and neurologic evaluation is essential,
including standard laboratory studies, an EEG, and any indicated drug
screens. Drug-related depersonalization is typically transient. However,
persistent depersonalization can follow an episode of intoxication with a
variety of substances, including marijuana, cocaine, and other
psychostimulants. A range of neurologic conditions, including seizure
disorders, brain tumors, postconcussion syndrome, metabolic abnormalities,
migraine, vertigo, and Ménière disease, have been reported as causes.
Depersonalization caused by organic conditions tends to be primarily sensory
without the elaborated descriptions and personalized meanings common to
psychiatric etiologies.


<<<PAGE 1414>>>
DISSOCIATIVE IDENTITY DISORDER
Dissociative identity disorder, previously called multiple personality disorder,
has been the most extensively researched of all the dissociative disorders. It is
the presence of two or more distinct identities or personality states. The
identities or personality states, sometimes called alters, self-states, alter
identities, or parts, among other terms, differ from one another in that each
presents as having its pattern of perceiving, relating to, and thinking about the
environment and self, in short, its personality. It is the paradigmatic
dissociative psychopathology in that the symptoms of all the other
dissociative disorders occur in patients with dissociative identity disorder:
amnesia, often with fugue, depersonalization, derealization, and similar
symptoms.
Diagnostic Features
The critical feature in diagnosing this disorder is the presence of two or more
distinct personality states. Also, individuals with this disorder often report
losing time beyond what one would expect from ordinary forgetfulness.
There are many other diverse signs and symptoms, making diagnosis
difficult. Table 11-5 describes the many other associated symptoms
commonly found in patients with dissociative identity disorder, and Table 116 compares the different diagnostic approaches to dissociative identity
disorder.
Mental Status
A careful and detailed mental status examination is essential in making the
diagnosis. It is easy to mistake patients with this disorder as suffering from
schizophrenia, borderline personality disorder, or outright malingering. Table
11-7 lists the questions clinicians should ask to make the proper diagnosis.
Memory and Amnesia Symptoms
Dissociative disturbances of memory are manifest in several fundamental
ways and are frequently observable in clinical settings. As part of the general
mental status examination, clinicians should routinely inquire about
experiences of losing time, blackout spells, and significant gaps in the


<<<PAGE 1415>>>
continuity of recall for personal information. Dissociative time loss
experiences are too extensive to be explained by normal forgetting and
typically have sharply demarcated onsets and offsets.
Patients with dissociative identity disorder often report significant gaps in
autobiographical memory, especially for childhood events. Dissociative gaps
in the autobiographical recall are usually sharply demarcated and do not fit
the usual decline in autobiographical recall for younger ages.
Table 11-5
Associated Symptoms Commonly Found in Dissociative
Identity Disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms
Intrusive symptoms
Hyperarousal
Avoidance and numbing symptoms
Somatic symptoms
Conversion and pseudoneurologic symptoms
Seizure-like episodes
Pain symptoms
Headache, abdominal, musculoskeletal, pelvic pain
Psychophysiologic symptoms or disorders
Asthma and breathing problems
Perimenstrual disorders
Irritable bowel syndrome
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Somatic memory
Affective symptoms
Depressed mood, dysphoria, or anhedonia
Brief mood swings or mood lability
Suicidal thoughts and attempts of self-mutilation
Helpless and hopeless feelings
Obsessive-compulsive symptoms
Ruminations about trauma
Obsessive counting, singing


<<<PAGE 1416>>>
Arranging
Washing
Checking
Ms. A, a 33-year-old married woman employed as a librarian in a school
for disturbed children, presented to psychiatric attention after discovering
her 5-year-old daughter “playing doctor” with several neighborhood
children. Although this event was of little consequence, the patient began
to become fearful that her daughter would be molested. The patient was
seen by her internist and was treated with antianxiety agents and
antidepressants, but with little improvement. She sought psychiatric
consultation from several clinicians but repeated, appropriate trials of
antidepressants, antianxiety agents, and supportive psychotherapy
resulted in limited improvement. After the death of her father from
complications of an alcohol use disorder, the patient became more
symptomatic. He was estranged from the family since the patient was
approximately 12 years of age, owing to his drinking and associated
antisocial behavior.
Psychiatric hospitalization was precipitated by the patient’s arrest for
disorderly conduct in a nearby city. She was found in a hotel, in revealing
clothing, engaged in an altercation with a man. She denied knowledge of
how she had come to the hotel, although the man insisted that she had
come there under a different name for a voluntary sexual encounter.
On psychiatric examination, the patient described dense amnesia for
the first 12 years of her life, with the feeling that her “life started at 12
years old.” She reported that, for as long as she could remember, she had
an imaginary companion, an elderly black woman, who advised her and
kept her company. She reported hearing other voices in her head: several
women and children, as well as her father’s voice repeatedly speaking to
her in a derogatory way. She reported that since age 12, she had episodes
of amnesia: for work, for her marriage, for the birth of her children, and
her sex life with her husband. She reported perplexing changes in skills;
for example, people told her that she played the piano well but had no
conscious awareness that she could do so. Her husband reported that she
had always been “forgetful” of conversations and family activities. He


<<<PAGE 1417>>>
also noted that, at times, she would speak like a child; at times, she would
adopt a southern accent; and, at other times, she would be angry and
provocative. She frequently had little recall of these episodes.
When questioned about her early life, the patient appeared to enter a
trance and stated, “I just don’t want to be locked in the closet” in a
childlike voice. Inquiry about this produced rapid shifts in a state between
alter identities who differed in manifested age, facial expression, voice
tone, and knowledge of the patient’s history. One spoke in an angry,
expletive-filled manner and appeared irritable and preoccupied with
sexuality. She discussed the episode with the man in the hotel and stated
that it was she who had arranged it. Gradually, the alters described a
history of family chaos, brutality, and neglect during the first 12 years of
the patient’s life, until her mother, who also struggled with alcohol use
disorder, achieved sobriety and fled her husband, taking her children with
her. The patient, in the alter identities, described episodes of physical
abuse, sexual abuse, and emotional torment by the father, her siblings,
and her mother.
After an assessment of family members, the patient’s mother also met
diagnostic criteria for dissociative identity disorder, as did her older
sister, who also had been molested. A brother met diagnostic criteria for
PTSD, major depression, and alcohol use disorder. (Adapted from a case
of Richard J. Loewenstein, M.D., and Frank W. Putnam, M.D.)
Table 11-6
Dissociative Identity Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Dissociative
Identity
Disorder

Other Dissociative (Conversion)
Disorders

Symptoms

Sense of one’s
identity is
distorted
Sense of having


<<<PAGE 1418>>>
at least two
personality
states, each
with unique
Sense of selfcontrol
Affect
Behavior
Memory
Perception
Sensory
motor
function
Memory
lapses
about past
events
# Symptoms
needed

All the above

Exclusions (not Acceptable
result of):
cultural
beliefs
Normal
forgetting
Substance use
Another
medical
condition
Fantasy play in
children
Psychosocial
impact

Marked distress
and/or
impairment


<<<PAGE 1419>>>
Comments

Listed among the other disorders,
along with Ganser syndrome
and psychogenic
confusion/twilight state.
Symptoms are not detailed.

Table 11-7
Mental Status Examination Questions for Dissociative
Identity Disorder Process Symptoms
If answers are positive, ask the patient to describe the event. Make
sure to specify that the symptom does not occur during an
episode of intoxication.
1. Do you act so differently in one situation compared to another
situation that you feel almost like you were two different people?
2. Do you feel that there is more than one of you? More than one
part of you? Side of you? Do they seem to be in conflict or in a
struggle?
3. Does that part (those parts) of you have its (their) own
independent way(s) of thinking, perceiving, and relating to the
world and the self? Have its (their) own memories, thoughts, and
feelings?
4. Does more than one of these entities take control of your
behavior?
5. Do you ever have thoughts or feelings, or both, that come from
inside you (outside you) that you cannot explain? That do not feel
like thoughts or feelings that you would have? That seem like
thoughts or feelings that are not under your control (passive
influence)?
6. Have you ever felt that your body was engaged in behavior that
did not seem to be under your control? For example, saying
things, going places, buying things, writing things, drawing or
creating things, hurting yourself or others, and so forth? That your
body does not seem to belong to you?
7. Do you ever feel that you have to struggle against another part of


<<<PAGE 1420>>>
you that seems to want to do or to say something that you do not
wish to do or to say?
8. Do you ever feel that there is a force (pressure, part) inside you
that tries to stop you from doing or saying something?
9. Do you ever hear voices, sounds, or conversations in your mind?
That seem to be discussing you? Commenting on what you do?
Telling you to do or not do certain things? To hurt yourself or
others? That seem to be warning you or trying to protect you?
That try to comfort, support, or soothe you? That provide
important information about things to you? That argue or say
things that have nothing to do with you? That have names? Men?
Women? Children?
10. I would like to talk with that part (side, aspect, facet) of you (of
the mind) that is called the “angry one” (the Little Girl, Janie, that
went to Atlantic City last weekend and spent lots of money, etc.).
Can that part come forward now, please?
11. Do you frequently have the experience of feeling like you are
outside yourself? Inside yourself? Beside yourself, watching
yourself as if you were another person?
12. Do you ever feel disconnected from yourself or your body as if
you (your body) were not real?
13. Do you frequently experience the world around you as unreal?
As if you are in a fog or daze? As if it were painted? Twodimensional?
14. Do you ever look in the mirror and not recognize who you see?
See someone else there?
Adapted from Loewenstein RJ. An office mental status examination for chronic complex
dissociative symptoms and multiple personality disorder. Psychiatr Clin North Am.
1991;14:567–604, with permission.

Dissociative Alterations in Identity
Clinically, dissociative alterations in identity may first manifest with odd
first-person plural or third-person singular or plural self-references. Also,
patients may refer to themselves using their first names or make
depersonalized self-references, such as “the body,” when describing
themselves and others. Patients often describe a profound sense of


<<<PAGE 1421>>>
concretized internal division or personified internal conflicts between parts of
themselves. In some instances, these parts may have proper names, or the
patient may refer to them by their predominate affect or function, for
example, “the angry one” or “the wife.” Patients may suddenly change how
they refer to others, for example, “the son” instead of “my son.”
Other Associated Symptoms
Most patients with dissociative identity disorder meet the criteria for a mood
disorder, usually one of the depression spectrum disorders. Frequent, rapid
mood swings are common but are usually part of posttraumatic and
dissociative phenomena, not a cyclic mood disorder. Considerable overlap
may exist between PTSD symptoms of anxiety, disturbed sleep, and
dysphoria, and mood disorder symptoms.
Obsessive-compulsive personality traits are common in dissociative
identity disorder, and intercurrent obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
symptoms occur in patients with dissociative identity disorder, with a
subgroup manifesting severe OCD symptoms. OCD symptoms commonly
have a posttraumatic quality: repeatedly checking to be sure that no one can
enter the house or the bedroom, compulsive washing to relieve a feeling of
being dirty because of abuse, and repetitive counting or singing in one’s head
to distract from anxiety over being abused, for example.
Child and Adolescent Presentations
Children and adolescents manifest the same core dissociative symptoms and
secondary clinical phenomena as adults. Age-related differences in autonomy
and lifestyle, however, may significantly influence the clinical expression of
dissociative symptoms in youth. Younger children have a less linear and less
continuous sense of time and often are not able to self-identify dissociative
discontinuities in their behavior. Often additional informants, such as
teachers and relatives, are available to help document dissociative behaviors.
Several normal childhood phenomena, such as imaginary companionship
and elaborated daydreams, must be carefully differentiated from pathologic
dissociation in younger children. The clinical presentation may be that of an
elaborated or autonomous imaginary companionship, with the imaginary
companions taking control of the child’s behavior, often experienced through


<<<PAGE 1422>>>
passive influence experiences or auditory pseudohallucinations, or both, that
command the child to behave in specific ways.
Differential Diagnosis
Table 11-8 lists the most common differentials for dissociative identity
disorder.
Factitious, Imitative, and Malingered Dissociative Identity
Disorder. Indicators of falsified or imitative dissociative identity disorder
include those typical of other factitious or malingering presentations. These
include symptom exaggeration, lies, use of symptoms to excuse antisocial
behavior (e.g., amnesia only for bad behavior), amplification of symptoms
when under observation, refusal to allow collateral contacts, legal problems,
and pseudologia fantastica. Patients with genuine dissociative identity
disorder are usually confused, conflicted, ashamed, and distressed by their
symptoms and trauma history. Those with the nongenuine disorder frequently
show little dysphoria about their disorder.
Table 11-8
Differential Diagnosis of Dissociative Identity Disorder
Comorbidity versus differential diagnosis
Affective disorders
Psychotic disorders
Anxiety disorders
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Personality disorders
Neurocognitive disorders
Neurologic and seizure disorders
Somatic symptom disorders
Factitious disorders
Malingering
Other dissociative disorders
Deep-trance phenomena


<<<PAGE 1423>>>
OTHER SPECIFIED OR UNSPECIFIED DISSOCIATIVE
DISORDER
The categories of specified or unspecified dissociative disorders cover all the
conditions characterized by a primary dissociative response that does not
meet diagnostic criteria for one of the other DSM-5 dissociative disorders.
Specified dissociative disorders include chronic and recurrent syndromes of
mixed dissociative symptoms; identity disturbance due to prolonged and
intense coercive persuasion (e.g., brainwashing); acute dissociative reactions
to stressful events; and dissociative trance.
Dissociative Trance
Dissociative trance is manifest by a temporary, marked alteration in the state
of consciousness or by loss of the customary sense of personal identity
without the replacement by an alternate sense of identity. A variant of this,
possession trance, involves single or episodic alternations in the state of
consciousness, characterized by the exchange of the person’s customary
identity with a new identity usually attributed to a spirit, divine power, deity,
or another person. In this possessed state, the individual exhibits stereotypical
and culturally determined behaviors or experiences an entity controlling
them. There must be partial or full amnesia for the event. The trance or
possession state must not be a commonly accepted part of cultural or
religious practice and must cause significant distress or functional
impairment in one or more of the usual domains. Finally, the dissociative
trance state must not occur exclusively during a psychotic disorder and is not
the result of any substance use or general medical condition.
Brainwashing
DSM-5 describes this dissociative disorder as “identity disturbance due to
prolonged and intense coercive persuasion.” Brainwashing occurs mostly in
the setting of political reform, as has been described at length with the
Cultural Revolution in communist China, war imprisonment, torture of
political dissidents, terrorist hostages, and, more familiarly, in Western
culture, totalitarian cult indoctrination. It implies that under conditions of
adequate stress and duress, those in power can make individuals comply with


<<<PAGE 1424>>>
their demands, thereby undergoing significant changes in their personality,
beliefs, and behaviors. Persons subjected to such conditions can undergo
considerable harm, including loss of health and life, and they typically
manifest a variety of posttraumatic and dissociative symptoms.
Some have likened the first stage in coercive processes to the artificial
creation of an identity crisis, with the emergence of a new pseudoidentity that
manifests characteristics of a dissociative state. Under circumstances of
extreme and malignant dependency, overwhelming vulnerability, and danger
to one’s existence, individuals develop a state characterized by an extreme
idealization of their captors, with ensuing identification with the aggressor
and externalization of their superego, regressive adaptation known as
traumatic infantilism, paralysis of will, and a state of frozen fright. The
coercive techniques include isolation of the subject, degradation, control of
overall communications and essential daily functions, induction of fear and
confusion, peer pressure, assignment of repetitive and monotonous routines,
the unpredictability of environmental supplies, renunciation of past
relationships and values, and various deprivations. Even though physical or
sexual abuse, torture, and extreme sensory deprivation and physical neglect
can be part of this process, they are not required to define a coercive process.
As a result, victims manifest extensive posttraumatic and dissociative
symptomatology, including drastic alteration of their identity, values, and
beliefs; reduction of cognitive flexibility with regression to simplistic
perceptions of good versus evil and dominance versus submission; numbing
of experience and blunting of affect; trance-like states and diminished
environmental responsiveness; and, in some cases, more severe dissociative
symptoms such as amnesia, depersonalization, and shifts in identity.
Ganser Syndrome
Ganser syndrome is a poorly understood condition characterized by the
giving of approximate answers (paralogia), together with a clouding of
consciousness, and, often, hallucinations and other dissociative, somatoform,
or conversion symptoms.
The symptom of passing over (vorbeigehen) the correct answer for a
related but incorrect one is the hallmark of Ganser syndrome. The
approximate answers often just miss the mark but bear an obvious relation to


<<<PAGE 1425>>>
the question, indicating that the person must have understood. When asked
how old she was, a 25-year-old woman answered, “I’m not five.” If asked to
do simple calculations (e.g., 2 + 2 = 5); for general information (the capital of
the United States is New York); to identify simple objects (a pencil is a key);
or to name colors (green is gray), the patient with Ganser syndrome gives
erroneous but comprehensible answers. They may even answer incorrectly to
rhetorical questions (“how many legs are on a three-legged stool?” “Four?”)
A clouding of consciousness also occurs, usually manifest by
disorientation, amnesias, loss of personal information, and some impairment
of reality testing. Visual and auditory hallucinations occur in roughly onehalf of the cases. Neurologic examination may reveal what Ganser called
hysterical stigmata, for example, nonneurologic analgesia or shifting
hyperalgesia. It must include other dissociative symptoms, such as amnesias,
conversion symptoms, or trance-like behaviors.
Differential Diagnosis. The examiner should conduct a thorough
neurologic and medical evaluation, given the reported frequent history of
organic brain syndromes, seizures, head trauma, and psychosis in Ganser
syndrome. Differential diagnoses include organic dementia, depressive
pseudodementia, the confabulation of Korsakoff syndrome, organic
dysphasia, and reactive psychoses. Patients with dissociative identity disorder
occasionally may also exhibit Ganser-like symptoms.

COMORBIDITY
Common comorbidities found in dissociative disorders include depressive
disorders, adjustment disorder, anxiety disorders, trauma and stress-related
disorders, eating disorders, OCD, somatic symptom disorders, and
conversion disorder. Individuals with dissociative disorders may also meet
the criteria for personality disorders, with reports of co-occurring avoidant,
borderline, dependent, and obsessive-compulsive personality disorders
predominating.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Dissociative Amnesia


<<<PAGE 1426>>>
We know little about the clinical course of dissociative amnesia. After
removing the person to safety from traumatic or overwhelming
circumstances, the acute dissociative amnesia frequently spontaneously
resolves. At the other extreme, some patients do develop chronic forms of
generalized, continuous, or severe localized amnesia and are profoundly
disabled and require high levels of social support, such as nursing home
placement or intensive family caretaking. Clinicians should try to restore
patients’ lost memories to consciousness as soon as possible; otherwise, the
repressed memory may form a nucleus in the unconscious mind around
which future amnestic episodes may develop.
In those who develop a dissociative fugue, most fugue states are relatively
brief, lasting from hours to days. Most individuals appear to recover,
although refractory dissociative amnesia may persist in rare cases. Some
studies have described recurrent fugues in most individuals presenting with
an episode of dissociative fugue.
Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder
Depersonalization after traumatic experiences or intoxication commonly
remits spontaneously after removal from the traumatic circumstances or
ending of the episode of intoxication. Depersonalization accompanying
mood, psychotic, or other anxiety disorders commonly remit with the
definitive treatment of these conditions.
Depersonalization disorder may have an episodic, relapsing and remitting,
or chronic course. Many patients with chronic depersonalization may have a
severe and chronic functional impairment. The mean age of onset is usually
late adolescence or early adulthood.
Dissociative Identity Disorder
We know little about the natural history of untreated dissociative identity
disorder. Some individuals with untreated dissociative identity disorder may
continue in abusive relationships or violent subcultures, or both, that may
result in the traumatization of their children, with the potential for additional
family transmission of the disorder. Many authorities believe that some
percentage of patients with undiagnosed or untreated dissociative identity
disorder die by suicide or because of their risk-taking behaviors.


<<<PAGE 1427>>>
Prognosis is poorer in patients with comorbid medical disorders, psychotic
disorders (not dissociative identity disorder pseudopsychosis), and severe
medical illnesses. Refractory substance use and eating disorders also suggest
a poorer prognosis. Other factors that usually indicate a poorer outcome
include significant antisocial personality features, current criminal activity,
ongoing perpetration of abuse, and current victimization, with the refusal to
leave abusive relationships. Repeated adult traumas with recurrent episodes
of acute stress disorder may severely complicate the clinical course.

TREATMENT
Dissociative Amnesia
Psychotherapy
PHASE-ORIENTED TREATMENT. Phase-oriented treatment is the current standard

of care for the treatment of dissociative amnesia, although there are no
systematic studies with large cohorts of dissociative amnesia patients. This
phasic treatment follows the three-stage phasic treatment model developed
for the treatment of complex PTSD and dissociative identity disorder, which
is discussed extensively in the section on treatment of dissociative identity
disorder, below. When applied to dissociative amnesia treatment, memory
recall is a central issue, because the loss of memory for personal identity and
gaps in current autobiographical memory are acutely disabling symptoms that
require relatively rapid intervention.
Cognitive therapy may have specific benefits for
individuals with trauma disorders. Identifying the specific cognitive
distortions about the trauma may provide an entrée into autobiographical
memory for which the patient experiences amnesia. As the patient becomes
able to correct cognitive distortions, particularly about the meaning of prior
trauma, a more detailed recall of traumatic events may occur.
COGNITIVE THERAPY.

HYPNOSIS. Hypnotic interventions can help to contain, modulate, and titrate

the intensity of symptoms; to facilitate controlled recall of dissociated
memories; to provide support and ego strengthening for the patient; and,
finally, to promote working through and integration of dissociated material.


<<<PAGE 1428>>>
Also, the patient can learn self-hypnosis to apply containment and calming
techniques in his or her everyday life. Successful use of containment
techniques, whether hypnotically facilitated or not, also increases the
patient’s sense that he or she can more effectively be in control of
alternations between intrusive symptoms and amnesia.
Time-limited
and
longer-term
group
psychotherapies can help combat veterans with PTSD and survivors of
childhood abuse. During group sessions, patients may recover memories for
which they have had amnesia. Supportive interventions by the group
members or the group therapist, or both, may facilitate integration and
mastery of the dissociated material.
GROUP

PSYCHOTHERAPY.

Somatic Therapies. No known pharmacotherapy exists for dissociative
amnesia other than pharmacologically facilitated interviews. The interviews
have used a variety of sedatives, including sodium amobarbital, thiopental,
oral benzodiazepines, and amphetamines.
Pharmacologically facilitated interviews using intravenous amobarbital or
diazepam are used primarily in working with acute amnesias and conversion
reactions, among other indications, in general hospital medical and
psychiatric services. This procedure is also occasionally useful in refractory
cases of chronic dissociative amnesia when patients are unresponsive to other
interventions. The material uncovered in a pharmacologically facilitated
interview needs to be processed by the patient in his or her usual conscious
state. The Joint Commission now considers pharmacologically facilitated
interviews to be conscious sedation, requiring the presence of an
anesthesiologist.
Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder
Clinicians working with patients with depersonalization/derealization
disorder often find them to be a singularly clinically refractory group.
However, benzodiazepines, serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and stimulants
appear to be partially efficacious for some patients. There is absolutely no
empirical evidence for the efficacy of typical or atypical antipsychotic
medications in depersonalization/derealization disorder, and indeed these
medications may increase a feeling of emotional deadness and lack of


<<<PAGE 1429>>>
emotional response to oneself or the world. Also, opioid antagonists such as
naltrexone and cognitive enhancers have had some benefit in the clinical
treatment of specific depersonalization/derealization disorder patients. Early
data suggest the possible efficacy of repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation (rTMS) treatment.
Many different types of psychotherapy may help depersonalization
disorder: psychodynamic, cognitive, cognitive-behavioral, hypnotherapeutic,
and supportive. However, the response is not robust for many patients. Stress
management strategies, distraction techniques, reduction of sensory
stimulation, relaxation training, and physical exercise may be somewhat
helpful in some patients.
Dissociative Identity Disorder
Psychotherapy. The current model of treatment of the dissociative identity
disorder patient follows a phasic model that is the current standard of care for
complex posttraumatic disorders. The phases include: (1) development of
safety and symptom stabilization; (2) (optionally) focused, in-depth attention
to traumatic material; and (3) integration or reintegration, in which the
individual moves away from a life adaptation based on chronic traumatization
and victimization. These phases are relatively heuristic, and aspects of each
may be part of the others.
STAGE 1 PHASIC TRAUMA TREATMENT: STABILIZATION AND SAFETY. Stabilization

of the individual with dissociative identity disorder is vital to the successful
negotiation of all aspects of treatment. Stabilization focuses on the safety and
management of core dissociative identity disorder and comorbid symptoms.
The majority of patients with dissociative identity disorder come to treatment
because of overwhelming PTSD and dissociative symptoms and because of
some form of self-destructive behavior or violence against others.
Before establishing safety, the patient in reality or symbolically lives in a
world of ongoing trauma, whether perpetrated on the patient by others or by
the patient on him/herself due to chronic forms of repeated self-destruction
and high-risk behavior. The clinician must logically prioritize basic life and
health over other interventions. The clinician may need to resort to many
different levels and types of interventions to protect the patient, including


<<<PAGE 1430>>>
hospitalization, specialized substance use or eating disorders programs,
police assistance and shelter for victims of intimate partner violence, social
service interventions to protect minor children, and assistance with housing,
and access to medical care.
STAGE 2 PHASIC TRAUMA TREATMENT: WORK ON TRAUMATIC MEMORIES. For

patients who stabilize and form a reasonable working alliance in treatment,
longer-term treatment goals involve the detailed, affectively intense,
psychotherapeutic processing of life experiences, and the transformation of
the meaning of these experiences for the individual. Authorities emphasize
that, in most cases, intensive, detailed psychotherapeutic work with traumatic
memories should only start after the patient has demonstrated the ability to
use symptom management skills independently, after the self-state system
can work together in a reasonably cooperative way, and after a stable
therapeutic relationship has been established.
The patient should be able to give informed consent and have a realistic
understanding of the potential risks and benefits of intensive focus on
traumatic material. Potential risks may include temporary, acute worsening of
PTSD, affective, somatoform, and self-destructive symptoms, and short-term
interference with daily activities. Long-term benefits may include significant
amelioration of dissociative and PTSD symptoms, decreases in subjective
self-division, the fusion of identities, and freeing of psychological energy for
daily life. The patient must be able to understand that the goal is the
integration of dissociated thoughts, feelings, recollections, and perceptions,
not the exhumation or expulsion of memories per se.
The patient should not be in the midst of an acute life crisis or significant
life change. Also, we should first stabilize comorbid medical and psychiatric
disorders. The patient should have the ego strength and psychosocial
resources to withstand the rigors of the process, and there must be adequate
resources, such as support by significant others, and, potentially, support for
additional sessions.
Experienced clinicians attempt to carefully structure affectively intense
sessions focused on traumatic material, with attention to affect modulation,
restabilization of the patient before concluding the session, and reasonable
availability to assist the patient supportively between sessions. It may require
many sessions to fully explicate the cognitive and emotional meaning of


<<<PAGE 1431>>>
traumatic events, so that they may become part of the patient’s repertoire of
nondissociated, ordinary memories for life experience.
STAGE 3 PHASIC TRAUMA TREATMENT: FUSION, INTEGRATION, RESOLUTION, AND
RECOVERY. Throughout treatment, we may observe significant unification of

dissociated mental processes. Self-states lose distinctness and decrease
compartmentalization of thoughts, memories, and affects. The patient
develops a more unified sense of self. Transference is modified, consistent
with these changes. Amnesia and switching become less apparent than
before. The fusion of states results in the psychological merging of two or
more entities at a point in time, with a subjective experience of loss of all
separateness. The term integration is sometimes used synonymously with
fusion but is a more general term, describing the process of undoing all forms
of dissociative division during treatment. Some patients seem to proceed to a
complete fusion of all states. They may shift in self-representation, and
develop a consistent and continuous sense of self. Many patients never attain
a complete fusion of their personalities but achieve a therapeutic resolution:
improved communication, collaboration, and cooperation among self-states
leading to relative stability and adequate function.
HYPNOSIS. Hypnotherapeutic interventions can often alleviate self-destructive

impulses or reduce symptoms, such as flashbacks, dissociative hallucinations,
and passive-influence experiences. Teaching the patient self-hypnosis may
help with crises outside of sessions. Hypnosis can be useful for accessing
specific alter personality states, and their sequestered affects and memories.
Hypnosis can create relaxed mental states in which the subject can examine
adverse life events without overwhelming anxiety. Clinicians using hypnosis
should obtain specialized training in trauma populations. Clinicians should be
aware of current controversies over the impact of hypnosis on accurate
reporting of recollections and should use appropriate informed consent for its
use.
GROUP THERAPY. In therapy groups, including general psychiatric patients,

the emergence of alter personalities can be disruptive to the group process by
eliciting excess fascination or by frightening other patients. Therapy groups
composed only of patients with dissociative identity disorder seem to be more


<<<PAGE 1432>>>
successful, although the groups must be carefully structured, must provide
firm limits, and should generally focus only on here-and-now issues of
coping and adaptation.
FAMILY THERAPY. Family or couples therapy is often crucial for long-term

stabilization and to address pathologic family and marital processes that are
common in patients with dissociative identity disorder and their family
members. Education of family and concerned others about dissociative
identity disorder and its treatment may help family members cope more
effectively with dissociative identity disorder and PTSD symptoms in their
loved ones. Group interventions for education and support of family members
have also been found helpful. Sex therapy may be a critical part of couples’
treatment, because patients with dissociative identity disorder may become
intensely phobic of intimate contact for periods, and spouses may have little
idea how to deal with this helpfully.
SELF-HELP GROUPS. Patients with dissociative identity disorder usually have a

negative outcome to self-help groups or 12-step groups for incest survivors.
A variety of problematic issues occur in these settings, including the
intensification of PTSD symptoms because of discussion of trauma material
without clinical safeguards, exploitation of the patient with dissociative
identity disorder by predatory group members, contamination of the patient’s
recall by group discussions of trauma, and a feeling of alienation even from
these other reputed sufferers of trauma and dissociation.
Expressive and occupational
therapies, such as art and movement therapy, have proved particularly helpful
in the treatment of patients with dissociative identity disorder. Art therapy
may help with the containment and structuring of severe dissociative identity
disorder and PTSD symptoms, as well as to permit these patients safer
expression of thoughts, feelings, mental images, and conflicts that they have
difficulty verbalizing. Movement therapy may facilitate the normalization of
body sense and body image for these severely traumatized patients.
Occupational therapy may help the patient with focused, structured activities
that can be completed successfully and may help with grounding and
symptom management.
EXPRESSIVE AND OCCUPATIONAL THERAPIES.


<<<PAGE 1433>>>
Eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) is a treatment for PTSD. No
systematic studies have been done in dissociative identity disorder patients
using EMDR. Case reports suggest that some dissociative identity disorder
patients may be destabilized by EMDR procedures, especially those with
acutely increased PTSD and dissociative symptoms. Some authorities believe
that EMDR can be a helpful adjunct for later phases of treatment in wellstabilized dissociative identity disorder outpatients. The International Society
for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation dissociative identity disorder
treatment guidelines suggest that EMDR only be used in this patient
population by clinicians who have taken advanced EMDR training, are
knowledgeable and skilled in phasic trauma treatment for dissociative
disorders and have received supervision in the use of EMDR in dissociative
identity disorder.
EYE

MOVEMENT

DESENSITIZATION

AND

REPROCESSING.

DIALECTICAL BEHAVIOR THERAPY. Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is a

treatment developed by the psychologist Marsha Linehan for borderline
personality disorder. Its concepts and techniques may be helpful to structure
aspects of stabilization throughout dissociative identity disorder treatment
since many patients with borderline personality disorder report significant
trauma histories and fit the complex trauma construct. Helpfully for the
patient with dissociative identity disorder, DBT focuses on the primacy of
safety, therapy-interfering behaviors, affect regulation strategies, distress
tolerance, and radical acceptance.
However, DBT may also have notable limitations for the patient with a
dissociative identity disorder. It does not focus on stabilization and
management
of
dissociative
symptoms
such
as
depersonalization/derealization and dissociative amnesia, flashbacks, and
unconscious reenactments, traumatic transference, and related trauma-based
symptoms.
Psychopharmacologic Interventions. Guidelines for the use of
medications with dissociative patients emphasize the need to identify specific
treatment-responsive symptoms rather than attempting to treat the
dissociation per se. Medications may help attenuate symptoms to assist the
patient in stabilizing during treatment. We should advise patients that the


<<<PAGE 1434>>>
medication response is likely to be partial, devising the best “shock-absorber”
system for the patient at a given time. In general, success is more likely if the
target symptoms are present across most or all personality states, rather than
confined to one or a few. Because rapid symptom oscillations are
characteristic in this population, it is not advisable to chase each symptom
shift with a medication change.
The most robust medication treatment effect in this patient population is
the response of nightmares to the α1-adrenergic antagonist prazosin. If the
patient tolerates the blood pressure effects, dosages of prazosin as high as 25
mg daily, in single or twice-daily doses, can be useful. Daytime dosing may
also be effective for control of flashbacks and intrusive symptoms.
Doxazosin, a longer-acting α1-adrenergic antagonist, may also help with
nightmares and intrusive symptoms in PTSD.
Antidepressant medications can reduce depression and stabilize mood. A
variety of PTSD symptoms, especially intrusive and hyperarousal symptoms,
are partially medication responsive. Clinicians report some success with
SSRI, tricyclic, and monoamine oxidase (MAO) antidepressants, β-blockers,
clonidine, anticonvulsants, and benzodiazepines in reducing intrusive
symptoms, hyperarousal, and anxiety in patients with a dissociative identity
disorder. Patients with obsessive-compulsive symptoms may respond to
serotonergic antidepressants. Emerging data suggest that naltrexone may help
ameliorate recurrent self-injurious behaviors in a subset of traumatized
patients.
The atypical neuroleptics, such as risperidone, quetiapine, ziprasidone,
aripiprazole, and olanzapine, may be more effective and better tolerated than
typical neuroleptics for overwhelming anxiety and intrusive PTSD symptoms
in patients with dissociative identity disorder. However, weight gain and
metabolic syndrome may be a particularly problematic side effect for these
nonpsychotic patients. Occasionally, an extremely disorganized,
overwhelmed, chronically ill patient with dissociative identity disorder, who
has not responded to trials of other neuroleptics, responds favorably to a trial
of clozapine.
Electroconvulsive Therapy. For some patients, ECT helps to ameliorate
refractory mood disorders and does not worsen dissociative memory


<<<PAGE 1435>>>
problems. Clinical experience in tertiary care settings for severely ill patients
with dissociative identity disorder suggests that a clinical picture of major
depression with persistent, refractory melancholic features across all alter
states may predict a positive response to ECT. This response is usually only
partial, however, as is typical for most successful somatic treatments in the
dissociative identity disorder population.
Table 11-9 lists target symptoms and somatic treatments for dissociative
identity disorder.
Dissociative Trance
There are no systematic studies of dissociative trance disorder in the absence
of pathologic possession. In general, treatment should focus on the patient
understanding the nature of trance states and their relationship to more
ordinary phenomena such as daydreaming. Assessment of hypnotizability
may also allow the clinician to produce the same symptoms the patient is
experiencing with a hypnotic induction. This may lead to an increased sense
of control and may be enough to assist the patient in recognizing
autohypnotic states and having strategies to manage these. In more chronic
cases, supportive–expressive psychotherapy, like that for conversion
disorder, may be most successful.
Table 11-9
Medications for Associated Symptoms in Dissociative
Identity Disorder
Medications and somatic treatments for posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), affective disorders, anxiety disorders, and obsessivecompulsive disorder (OCD)
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (no preferred agent, except
for OCD symptoms)
Fluvoxamine (for OCD presentations)
Clomipramine (for OCD presentations)
Tricyclic antidepressants
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (if patient can reliably maintain diet
safely)


<<<PAGE 1436>>>
Electroconvulsive therapy (for refractory depression with persistent
melancholic features across all dissociative identity disorder
alters)
Mood stabilizers (more useful for PTSD and anxiety than mood
swings)
Divalproex
Lamotrigine
Oral or intramuscular benzodiazepines
Medications for sleep problems
Low-dose trazodone
Low-dose mirtazapine
Low-dose tricyclic antidepressants
Low-dose neuroleptics
Benzodiazepines (often less helpful for sleep problems in this
population)
Zolpidem
Anticholinergic agents (diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine)
Medications for self-injury, addictions
Naltrexone
Brainwashing
There are no empirical treatment studies of individuals subjected to extreme
coercion applied in the service of indoctrination into a belief system or an
attempt at identity alteration. The basic principles of phased trauma treatment
would seem to provide an organizing framework for their care, as for victims
of other forms of torture. Family and social interventions may be necessary
because of the duress and disruption accompanying the precipitating events
and the social effects of the profound changes in the patient’s attitudes,
behaviors, and beliefs, as well as sequestration from everyday events during
the period of captivity.
Ganser Syndrome
No systematic treatment studies have been conducted, given the rarity of this
condition. In most case reports, the patient has been hospitalized and
provided with a protective and supportive environment. In some instances,


<<<PAGE 1437>>>
low doses of antipsychotic medications may be beneficial. Confrontation or
interpretations of the patient’s approximate answers are not productive, but
the exploration of possible stressors may be helpful. Hypnosis and
amobarbital narcosynthesis can also help patients reveal the underlying
stressors that preceded the development of the syndrome, with the
concomitant cessation of the Ganser symptoms.
Usually, a relatively rapid return to normal function occurs within days,
although some cases may take a month or more to resolve. The individual is
typically amnesic for the period of the syndrome.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Dissociative Amnesia
Dissociative amnesia is in a range of approximately 2 to 6 percent of the
general population. There is no known difference in incidence between men
and women. Cases generally begin to be reported in late adolescence and
adulthood. Dissociative amnesia can be especially challenging to assess in
preadolescent children because of their more limited ability to describe the
subjective experience.
Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder
Transient experiences of depersonalization and derealization are prevalent in
normal and clinical populations. They are the third most commonly reported
psychiatric symptoms, after depression and anxiety. Transient symptoms are
common in the general population, with a lifetime prevalence of 26 to 74
percent, and 31 to 66 percent at the time of a traumatic event. Symptoms can
occur with the use of illicit drugs, especially marijuana, hallucinogens,
ketamine, and 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA or Ecstasy).
They have been described after certain types of meditation, deep hypnosis,
extended mirror or crystal gazing, and sensory deprivation experiences. They
are also common after mild to moderate head injury, wherein little or no loss
of consciousness occurs, but they are significantly less likely if
unconsciousness
lasts
for
more
than
30
minutes.
Depersonalization/derealization symptoms also occur in patients with
epilepsy, both as a manifestation of the aura as well as the seizure itself,


<<<PAGE 1438>>>
particularly in complex–partial seizure patients. The prevalence of
depersonalization/derealization disorder is approximately 2.5 percent, with no
age or gender differences.
Dissociative Identity Disorder
Few systematic epidemiologic data exist for dissociative identity disorder.
Based on community samples, the prevalence in the general population is
approximately 1 to 1.5 percent. Developmental studies indicate that the ratio
of female to male dissociative identity disorder cases steadily increases from
1 to 1 in early childhood to approximately 8 to 1 by late adolescence in North
American samples.
Ganser Syndrome
The overall frequency of Ganser syndrome has declined with time. Men
outnumber women by approximately 2 to 1, and cases have been reported in
a variety of cultures. Three of Ganser’s first four cases were convicts, leading
some authors to consider it to be a disorder of penal populations and, thus, an
indicator of potential malingering.

ETIOLOGY
Dissociative Amnesia
In many cases of acute dissociative amnesia, the psychosocial environment
out of which the amnesia develops is massively conflictual, with the patient
experiencing intolerable emotions of shame, guilt, despair, rage, and
desperation. These usually result from conflicts over unacceptable urges or
impulses, such as intense sexual, suicidal, or violent compulsions. Traumatic
experiences such as physical or sexual abuse can induce the disorder. In some
cases, the trauma is caused by a betrayal by a trusted, needed other (betrayal
trauma). This betrayal may influence how the event is processed and
remembered.
Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder
Psychodynamic.

Traditional

psychodynamic

formulations

have


<<<PAGE 1439>>>
emphasized the disintegration of the ego or have viewed depersonalization as
an affective response in defense of the ego. These explanations stress the role
of overwhelming, painful experiences or conflictual impulses as triggering
events.
Traumatic Stress. A substantial proportion—typically one-third to onehalf—of patients in clinical depersonalization case series have histories of
significant trauma. Several studies of accident victims find as many as 60
percent of those with a life-threatening experience report at least transient
depersonalization during the event or immediately after that. Military training
studies find that stress and fatigue can evoke symptoms of depersonalization
and derealization and affect performance.
Neurobiologic Theories. There are several neurobiologic theories related
to depersonalization and derealization symptoms. These include animal
models of submissive immobility when an organism determines it is unable to
defend itself from a predator, like the concept of “playing dead”; disturbances
in inferior bilateral frontal, medial prefrontal, cingulate, insula, and
temporoparietal cortex; and neurochemical dysregulation, with various
studies implicating the NMDA glutamate receptor, neuropeptide Y,
norepinephrine, serotonin, and the opioid system.
Dissociative Identity Disorder
Severe experiences of early childhood trauma are the likely cause of
dissociative identity disorder. From 85 to 97 percent of dissociative identify
disorder cases reported severe childhood trauma or maltreatment. Physical
and sexual abuse are common sources of childhood trauma.
Ganser Syndrome
Some case reports identify precipitating stressors, such as personal conflicts
and financial reverses, whereas others note organic brain syndromes, head
injuries, seizures, and medical or psychiatric illness. Psychodynamic
explanations are common in the older literature; in some cases, there are clear
medical or neurologic causes. The physiologic insults from such a disorder
may act as acute stressors, precipitating the syndrome in vulnerable


<<<PAGE 1440>>>
individuals. Some patients have reported significant histories of childhood
maltreatment and adversity.

References
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association; 2013.
Anderson MC, Ochsner KN, Kuhl B, Cooper J, Robertson E, Gabrieli SW,
Glover GH, Gabrieli JDE. Neural systems underlying the suppression of
unwanted memories. Science. 2004;303:232–235.
Biswas J, Chu JA, Perez DL, Gutheil TG. From the neuropsychiatric to the
analytic: Three perspectives on dissociative identity disorder. Harvard Rev
Psychiatry. 2013;21(1):41–51.
Brown RJ, Schrag A, Trimble MR. Dissociation, childhood interpersonal
trauma, and family functioning in patients with somatization disorder. Am
J Psychiatry. 2005;162:899–905.
Farina B, Liotti G. Does a dissociative psychopathological dimension exist?
A review on dissociative processes and symptoms in developmental
trauma spectrum disorders. Clin Neuropsychiatry. 2013;10(1):11–18.
Foote B, Smolin Y, Kaplan M, Legatt ME, Lipschitz D. Prevalence of
dissociative disorders in psychiatric outpatients. Am J Psychiatry.
2006;163(4):623–629.
Hunter ECM, Baker D, Phillips ML, Sierra M, David AS. Cognitivebehaviour therapy for depersonalization disorder: An open study. Behav
Res Ther. 2005;43:1121–1130.
Isaac M, Chand PK. Dissociative and conversion disorder: Defining
boundaries. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2006;19:61–66.
Karris BC, Capobianco M, Wei X, Ross L. Treatment of depersonalization
disorder with repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation. J Psychiatr
Pract. 2017;23:141–144.
Lanius RA, Williamson PC, Densmore M, Boksman K, Neufeld RWJ, Gati
JS, Menon R. The nature of traumatic memories: A 4-T fMRI functional
connectivity analysis. Am J Psychiatry. 2004;161:36–44.
Loewenstein RJ, Frewen P, Lewis-Fernandez R. Chapter 20: Dissociative
disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s


<<<PAGE 1441>>>
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters
Kluwer; 2017:1866–1952.
Maaranen P, Tanskanen A, Honkalampi K, Haatainen K, Hintikka J,
Viinamaki H. Factors associated with pathological dissociation in the
general population. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2005;39:387–394.
Markowitsch HJ. Psychogenic amnesia. Neuroimage. 2003;20:S132–S138.
Martinez-Taboas A, Dorahy M, Sar V, Middleton W, Kruger C. Growing not
dwindling: International research on the worldwide phenomenon of
dissociative disorders. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2013;201(4):353–354.
Middleton W. Owning the past, claiming the present: Perspectives on the
treatment of dissociative patients. Australas Psychiatry. 2005;13:40–49.
Rachid F. Treatment of a patient with depersonalization disorder with low
frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of the right temporoparietal junction in a private practice setting. J Psychiatr Pract.
2017;23:145–147.
Reinders AA, Nijenhuis ERS, Paans AMJ, Korf J, Willemsen ATM, den
Boer JA. One brain, two selves. Neuroimage. 2003;20:2119–2125.
Simeon D, Knutelska M, Nelson D, Guralnik O. Feeling unreal: A
depersonalization disorder update of 117 cases. J Clin Psychiatry.
2003;64:990–997.
Vermetten E, Spiegel D. Trauma and dissociation: Implications for borderline
personality disorder. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2014;16(2):1–10.


<<<PAGE 1442>>>
12
Somatic Symptom and Related
Disorders
Everyone experiences somatic symptoms, and most can cope with them
effectively. However, some people’s lives are overwhelmed by their somatic
concerns. Sometimes the somatic concerns stem from well-established major
medical illnesses; sometimes, the origins of the concerns are never quite
clear. What is common in both situations are the pervasive and overwhelming
thoughts and behaviors centered on these sensations. DSM-5 incorporated
this perspective because the older perspective (only counting or cataloging
symptoms labeled as medically unexplained) embodied in the previous
versions of the disorder was unreliable and such perspective often put the
doctor and the patient at odds over the question of the legitimacy and
“reality” of the patient’s symptoms and personal suffering. ICD-10 continues
the older approach. However, the planned revision will be more in line with
DSM-5.

THE CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Persons suffering from one of these disorders have one or more somatic
symptoms that become all-consuming or lead to notable impairment in their
day-to-day lives. These symptoms are no longer required to be medically
unexplained, as such a distinction in itself is unreliable, and because
psychiatrists commonly treat patients with medically established diagnoses
who are disproportionately troubled by or preoccupied with their physical
symptoms.
Somatic Symptom Disorder


<<<PAGE 1443>>>
Patients with somatic symptom disorder believe that they have some severe
yet undetected disease, and evidence to the contrary does not persuade them
otherwise. They may maintain a belief that they have a particular disease or,
over time, may transfer their belief to another disease. They are fixated on
one or more somatic symptoms that they are convinced are evidence of
illness. For some individuals, their convictions persist despite negative
laboratory results, the benign course of the alleged disease over time, and
appropriate reassurances from physicians. Others may have a genuine
medical condition about which they develop excessive and unreasonable
anxiety, and this is also a manifestation of somatic symptom disorder.
Patients with somatic symptom disorder often experience symptoms of
depression and anxiety, in addition to their somatic symptoms.
Illness Anxiety Disorder
Patients with illness anxiety disorder, like those with somatic symptom
disorder, believe they have a serious but undiagnosed disease despite
evidence to the contrary. They may maintain a belief that they have a
particular disease or, as time progresses, they may transfer their belief to
another disease. Their convictions persist despite negative laboratory results,
the benign course of the alleged disease over time, and appropriate
reassurances from physicians. Their preoccupation with illness interferes with
their interaction with family, friends, and coworkers. They are often addicted
to internet searches about their feared illness, inferring the worst from
information (or misinformation) they find there. Unlike somatic symptom
disorder, however, these individuals do not have significant physical
symptoms. Sometimes people with this disorder develop a fear of going to
medical appointments, while other times, they seek excessive reassurance
about their health from medical providers.
Conversion Disorder (Functional Neurologic Symptom Disorder)
Persons with conversion disorder (also called functional neurologic symptom
disorder) present with what appears to be a neurologic condition. The
symptoms may be motor or sensory but are incompatible with known
neurologic conditions. Often the illness is preceded by conflicts or other
stressors and may seem to be associated with apparent psychological factors.


<<<PAGE 1444>>>
Individuals with conversion disorder do not intentionally produce these
symptoms or deficits. Conversion motor symptoms mimic syndromes such as
paralysis, ataxia, dysphagia, or seizure disorder (nonepileptic seizures
[NESs]), and the sensory symptoms mimic neurologic deficits such as
blindness, deafness, or anesthesia. There can also be disturbances of
consciousness (e.g., amnesia, fainting spells).
Psychological Factors Affecting Other Medical Conditions
Patients with this disorder have physical disorders caused by or adversely
affected by emotional or psychological factors. A medical condition must
always be present to make the diagnosis. Common clinical examples include
denial and refusal of treatment for an acute condition (such as myocardial
infarct or abdominal emergencies) by individuals with certain personality
styles (e.g., domineering or controlling), the exacerbation of asthma or
irritable bowel attacks by anxiety, and the manipulation of insulin by an
individual with diabetes, or diuretics in the case of hypertensive patients, in
efforts to lose weight.
Factitious Disorder
Patients with factitious disorder feign, misrepresent, simulate, cause, induce,
or aggravate illness to receive medical attention, regardless of whether or not
they are ill. Thus, they may inflict painful, deforming, or even lifethreatening injuries on themselves, their children, or other dependents. The
primary motivation is not the avoidance of duties, financial gain, or anything
concrete. The motivation is simply to receive medical care and to partake in
the medical system.
Factitious disorders can lead to significant morbidity or even mortality.
Therefore, even the patients falsify their presenting complaints, health
professionals must take the medical and psychiatric needs of these patients
seriously, as their self-induced symptoms can result in significant harm or
even death. Historically this disorder was called “Munchausen syndrome,” a
reference to the Baron Munchausen, legendary for his outrageously
exaggerated stories of his military career.
Other Specified and Unspecified Somatic Symptom and Related


<<<PAGE 1445>>>
Disorders
Patients with other specified somatic symptom and related disorders present
with somatic symptoms that do not meet the threshold for another disorder.
For example, they may present with symptoms consistent with illness anxiety
disorder, except that the symptoms do not meet the duration criterion; in this
case, the diagnosis would be brief illness anxiety disorder.
When there is not enough information to make a specific diagnosis, then
clinicians should use the unspecified somatic symptom and related disorder
diagnosis.

DIAGNOSIS
Somatic Symptom Disorder
According to the DSM-5, individuals with somatic symptom disorder present
with one or more somatic complaints that result in significant angst or
functional impairment. Also, they must be anxious about their symptoms or
be preoccupied with them. The analogous diagnosis in ICD-10, as well in the
previous version of the DSM is somatization disorder. The biggest difference
between the two concepts is whether there needs to be evidence that there is
no underlying medical cause for the disorder—ICD-10 does, and DSM-IV
did require this whereas DSM-5 does not. Table 12-1 compares the
approaches to this diagnosis.
Mr. K, a white man in his mid-50s, consulted a general medicine clinic
complaining of gastrointestinal problems. He had a long list of physical
symptoms and concerns, mostly related to the gastrointestinal system.
These included abdominal pain, left lower quadrant cramps, bloating,
persistent sense of fullness in stomach hours after eating, intolerance to
foods, constipation, decrease in physical stamina, heart palpitations, and
feelings that “skin is getting yellow” and “not getting enough oxygen.” A
review of systems disclosed disturbances from virtually every organ
system, including tired eyes with blurred vision, sore throat and “lump”
in the throat, heart palpitations, irregular heartbeat, dizziness, trouble
breathing, and general weakness.


<<<PAGE 1446>>>
The patient reported that symptoms started more than 20 years ago.
Over this time, psychiatrists, general practitioners, and other medical
specialists evaluated him, including surgeons. He used the internet
regularly and traveled extensively in search of expert evaluations, seeking
new procedures and diagnostic assessments. He had undergone repeated
colonoscopies, sigmoidoscopies, and computed tomographic (CT) scans,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies, and ultrasound examinations
of the abdomen that had revealed Barrett esophagus but no other
pathology. He was on disability and had been unable to work for more
than 2 years due to his condition.
About 3 years before his visit to the medical clinic, his abdominal
complaints and his fixed belief that he had an intestinal obstruction led to
an exploratory surgical intervention for the first time, apparently with
negative findings. However, according to the patient, the surgery “got
things even worse,” and since then, he had undergone at least five more
operations. During these surgeries, he has undergone subtotal colectomies
and ileostomies due to possible “adhesions” to rule out “mechanical”
obstruction. However, available records from some of the surgeries do
not disclose any specific pathology other than “intractable constipation.”
Pathologic specimens were also inconclusive.
A complete physical and neurologic examination showed a welldeveloped, well-nourished male who was afebrile. A complete physical
and neurologic examination was normal except for examination of the
abdomen, which revealed multiple abdominal scars. Right ileostomy was
present, with soft stool in the bag and active bowel sounds. There was no
point tenderness and no abdominal distension. During the examination,
the patient kept pointing to an area of “hardness” in the left lower
quadrant that he thought was a “tight muscle strangling his bowels.”
However, the examination did not disclose any palpable mass. Skin and
extremities were all within normal limits, and all joints had a full range of
motion and no swelling. Musculature was well developed. Neurologic
examination was within normal limits. His primary care physician
scheduled brief monthly visits by, during which the doctor performed
brief physicals, reassured the patient, and allowed the patient to talk
about “stressors.” The physician avoided invasive tests or diagnostic
procedures, did not prescribe any medications and avoided telling the


<<<PAGE 1447>>>
patient that the symptoms were mental or “all in his head.” The primary
care physician then referred the patient back to psychiatry.
The psychiatrist confirmed a long list of physical symptoms that
started in his 20s, most of which remained medically unexplained. The
psychiatric examination revealed some anxiety symptoms, including
apprehension, tension, uneasiness, and somatic components such as
blushing and palpitations that seemed particularly prominent in social
situations. Possible symptoms of depression included mild dysphoria, low
energy, and sleep disturbance, all of which the patient blamed on his
“medical” problems. The mental status examination showed that Mr. K’s
mood was rather somber and pessimistic, although he denied feeling sad
or depressed. Affect was irritable. He was somatically focused and had
little if any, psychological insight. The examination revealed the presence
of a few life stressors (unemployment, financial problems, and family
issues) that the patient quickly discounted as unimportant. The
psychiatrist diagnosed somatic symptom disorder, severe.
Although the patient continued to deny having any psychiatric
problems or any need for psychiatric intervention or treatment, he agreed
to a few regular visits to continue to assess his situation. He refused to
have anyone from his family involved in this process. Efforts to engage
the patient with formal therapy such as cognitive-behavioral therapy
(CBT) or a medication trial were all futile, so he was seen only for
“supportive psychotherapy,” with the hope of developing rapport and
preventing additional iatrogenic complications.
During the follow-up period, the patient was operated on at least one
more time and continued to complain of abdominal bloating and
constipation and to rely on laxatives. The patient continued to believe he
had an obstruction of his intestines; this bordered on the delusional.
However, he continued to refuse pharmacologic treatment. The only
medication he accepted was a low-dose benzodiazepine for anxiety. He
continued to monitor his intestinal function 24 hr/day and to seek
evaluation by prominent specialists, traveling to high-profile specialty
centers far from home in search of solutions. (Courtesy of J. I. Escobar,
M.D.)


<<<PAGE 1448>>>
Table 12-1
Somatic Symptom Disorder (DSM-5) and Somatization
Disorder (ICD-10)
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Somatic Symptom
Disorder

Somatization Disorder

Duration

≥6 mo

≥2 yr

Symptoms

• Preoccupied with
symptoms and their
potential
seriousness.
• Anxious about
symptoms and
health
• Time and energy
devoted to the
symptoms

• Recurring symptoms
• Symptoms frequently
change
• Prolonged involvement
with the medical system
• High use of healthcare
services

# Symptoms
needed

≥1

Exclusion (not
the result of):

Malingering
Medical cause for
symptoms on workup

Psychosocial
impact

Distress or
impairment

Symptom
specifiers

With predominant
pain

Severity
specifiers

Mild: 1 symptom
Moderate: ≥2
symptoms
Severe: ≥2
symptoms, with

Social, interpersonal, and
familial disruption

Undifferentiated
somatoform disorder: <2
yr, less severe
symptoms
Somatoform autonomic


<<<PAGE 1449>>>
multiple
symptomatic
complaints or 1
that is severe

Course
specifiers

dysfunction: autonomic
arousal symptoms or
other less specific
complaints
Persistent somatoform pain
disorder (pain is the
predominant symptom)

Persistent: >6 mo of
severe symptoms
and impairment

Although DSM-5 specifies that the symptoms must be present for at least 6
months, transient manifestations can occur after significant stresses, most
commonly the death or severe illness of someone important to the patient. It
can also occur after a severe illness that resolved but left the patient shaken
by the experience. Such states that last fewer than 6 months are diagnosed as
“Other Specified Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders” in DSM-5.
Transient somatic symptom disorder responses to external stress generally
remit with a resolution of the stress, but they can become chronic if friends or
healthcare professionals reinforce the concerns.
Illness Anxiety Disorder
The primary DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for illness anxiety disorder are that
patients be preoccupied with the false belief that they have or will develop a
severe disease in the presence of few if any physical signs or symptoms. With
illness anxiety disorder, patients have relatively minor somatic symptoms and
instead focus on concerns that they will get sick or have an undiagnosed
illness; on the other hand, with somatic symptom disorder, there are
significant health concerns along with substantial somatic symptoms. The
analogous disorder in ICD-10 and the earlier DSM-IV is hypochondriasis.
Table 12-2 compares the two disorders.
Conversion Disorder (Functional Neurologic Symptom Disorder)
A conversion reaction is a rather acute and temporary loss or alteration in


<<<PAGE 1450>>>
motor or sensory function that requires substantial discordance between the
symptoms displayed and any neurologic condition, such that it would be
impossible for the patient’s presentation to be consistent with a neurologic
disease. Because the onset frequently coincides with psychological issues
(conflict), early theorists speculated that such issues were “converted” to
neurologic symptoms. The problem is that stress is omnipresent in life, and
many patients present with conversion without an obvious stressor. The
classic syndromes represent neurologic syndromes such as paralysis,
seizures, or blindness. In DSM-5, we can indicate the type of symptom the
patient is experiencing. Table 12-3 compares the approaches to diagnosing
this disorder in DSM-5 and ICD-10. Table 12-4 lists common symptoms of
conversion disorder. Table 12-5 lists examples of significant physical
examination findings often found in disorder.
Table 12-2
Illness Anxiety Disorder (DSM-5) and Hypochondriasis
(ICD-10)
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Illness Anxiety Disorder

Hypochondriacal
Disorder

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

• Preoccupied with having or
getting a serious illness without
good reason
• Anxious about the belief
• Excess health-related behaviors
related to the belief (“careseeking”), maladaptive
behaviors, or avoidance
behaviors (“care-avoiding”)

Preoccupied with
having a
serious
medical illness
Anxiety
Somatic
complaints
Concerns about
appearance
Distress or
depression
associated


<<<PAGE 1451>>>
with the above
# Symptoms
needed

All the above

Exclusion
(not the
result of):

Another mental disorder

Symptom
specifiers

Care-seeking type
Care-avoidant type

Comments

Body dysmorphic
disorder is
included with
this diagnosis
as a subtype

Table 12-3
Conversion Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Conversion Disorder
(Functional Neurologic
Symptom Disorder)

Dissociative
(Conversion)
Disorders

Symptoms

• ≥ Voluntary motor or sensory
symptoms
• No correlation between any
medical or neurologic illness
and the symptoms on
examination

Exclusion (not Another mental illness
the result of): Another medical condition
Psychosocial
impact

Marked distress and/or
functional impairment


<<<PAGE 1452>>>
Symptom
specifiers

With weakness or paralysis
With abnormal movement
With swallowing symptoms
With speech symptom
With attacks or seizures
With anesthesia or sensory
loss
With special sensory
symptoms (i.e., vision,
olfaction, hearing)
With mixed symptoms
Can also specify with or
without psychological
stressor

Course
specifiers

Acute episode (<6 mo)
Persistent (≥6 mo)

Dissociative
stupor
Dissociative
motor
disorder
(limb, speech,
or gait)
Dissociative
convulsions
Dissociative
anesthesia
and sensory
loss
Mixed
dissociative
(conversion)
disorders

Mr. J is a 28-year-old single man who works in a factory. He was brought
to an emergency department by his father, complaining that he had lost
his vision while sitting in the back seat on the way home from a family
gathering. He had been playing volleyball at the gathering but had
sustained no significant injury except for the volleyball hitting him in the
head a few times. He was initially reluctant to play volleyball because of
his mediocre athleticism and was a last-minute addition to the team. He
recalls having some problems with seeing during the game, but his vision
did not become ablated until he was in the car on the way home. By the
time he got to the emergency department, his vision was improving,
although he still complained of blurriness and mild diplopia. The
physician could attenuate the double vision by having the patient focus
on different items at different distances.
On examination, Mr. J was fully cooperative, somewhat uncertain


<<<PAGE 1453>>>
about why this would have occurred, and rather nonchalant. Pupillary,
oculomotor, and general sensorimotor examinations were routine. After
being cleared medically, the physician referred the patient to a mental
health center for further evaluation.
At the mental health center, the patient recounts the same story as he
did in the emergency department. His father continued to accompany
him. He said his vision improved when his father stopped the car, and
they talked about the day’s events. He spoke with his father about how he
had felt embarrassed and somewhat conflicted about playing volleyball
but felt pressure to play. Further history from the patient and his father
revealed that this young man had been shy as an adolescent, particularly
around athletic participation. He had never had another episode of visual
loss. He did recount feeling anxious and sometimes not feeling well in his
body during athletic activities.
Discussion with the patient at the mental health center focused on the
potential role of psychological and social factors in acute vision loss. The
patient was somewhat perplexed by this but was also amenable to
discussion. He stated that he recognized that he began seeing and feeling
better when his father pulled off to the side of the road and discussed
things with him. Doctors stated that they did not know the cause of the
vision loss and that it would likely not return. The patient and his father
were satisfied with the medical and psychiatric evaluation and agreed to
return for care if there were any further symptoms. The patient was
appointed a follow-up time at the outpatient psychiatric clinic. (Courtesy
of Michael A. Hollifield, M.D.)
Table 12-4
Common Symptoms of Conversion Disorder
Motor Symptoms

Sensory Deficits

Involuntary movements

Anesthesia, especially of extremities

Tics

Midline anesthesia

Blepharospasm

Blindness


<<<PAGE 1454>>>
Torticollis

Tunnel vision

Opisthotonos

Deafness

Seizures

Visceral Symptoms

Abnormal gait

Psychogenic vomiting

Falling

Pseudocyesis

Astasia–abasia

Globus hystericus

Paralysis

Swooning or syncope

Weakness

Urinary retention

Aphonia

Diarrhea

(Courtesy of Frederick G. Guggenheim, M.D.)

Table 12-5
Distinctive Physical Examination Findings in Conversion
Disorder
Condition

Test

Conversion Findings

Anesthesia

Map
Sensory loss does not conform to
dermatomes
recognized pattern of
distribution

Hemianesthesia Check midline

Strict half-body split

Astasia–abasia Walking,
dancing

With suggestion, those who
cannot walk may still be able to
dance; alteration of sensory
and motor findings with
suggestion

Paralysis,
paresis

Drop paralyzed Hand falls next to face, not on it
hand onto
face
Hoover test

Pressure noted in examiner’s


<<<PAGE 1455>>>
hand under paralyzed leg
when attempting straight leg
raising

Coma

Check motor
strength

Give-away weakness

Examiner
attempts to
open eyes

Resists opening; gaze preference
is away from doctor

Ocular cephalic Eyes stare straight ahead, do not
maneuver
move from side to side
Aphonia

Request a
cough

Essentially normal coughing
sound indicates cords are
closing

Intractable
sneezing

Observe

Short nasal grunts with little or no
sneezing on inspiratory phase;
little or no aerosolization of
secretions: minimal facial
expression; eyes open; stops
when asleep; abates when
alone

Syncope

Head-up tilt test Magnitude of changes in vital
signs and venous pooling do
not explain continuing
symptoms

Tunnel vision

Visual fields

Profound
monocular
blindness

Swinging
Absence of relative afferent
flashlight
pupillary defect
sign (Marcus
Gunn)

Changing pattern on multiple
examinations

Binocular visual Sufficient vision in “bad eye”


<<<PAGE 1456>>>
fields

precludes plotting normal
physiologic blind spot in good
eye

Severe bilateral “Wiggle your
Patient may begin to mimic new
blindness
fingers, I’m
movements before realizing
just testing
the slip
coordination”
Sudden flash of Patient flinches
bright light
“Look at your
hand”

Patient does not look there

“Touch your
index
fingers”

Even blind patients can do this by
proprioception

(Courtesy of Frederick G. Guggenheim, M.D.)

Sensory Symptoms. In conversion disorder, anesthesia and paresthesia
are common, especially of the extremities. All sensory modalities can be
involved, and the distribution of the disturbance is usually inconsistent with
either central or peripheral neurologic disease. Thus, clinicians may see the
characteristic stocking-and-glove anesthesia of the hands or feet or the
hemianesthesia of the body beginning precisely along the midline.
Conversion disorder symptoms may involve the organs of special sense
and can produce deafness, blindness, and tunnel vision. These symptoms can
be unilateral or bilateral, but neurologic evaluation reveals intact sensory
pathways. In conversion disorder blindness, for example, patients walk
around without collisions or self-injury, their pupils react to light, and their
cortical-evoked potentials are normal.
Motor Symptoms. The motor symptoms of conversion disorder include
abnormal movements, gait disturbance, weakness, and paralysis. Gross
rhythmical tremors, choreiform movements, tics, and jerks may be present.
The movements generally worsen when calling attention to them. One gait
disturbance seen in conversion disorder is astasia–abasia, which is a wildly


<<<PAGE 1457>>>
ataxic, staggering gait accompanied by gross, irregular, jerky truncal
movements and thrashing and waving arm movements. Patients with the
symptoms rarely fall; if they do, they are generally not injured.
Other common motor disturbances are paralysis and paresis involving one,
two, or all four limbs, although the distribution of the involved muscles does
not conform to the neural pathways. Reflexes remain normal; the patients
have no fasciculations or muscle atrophy (except after long-standing
conversion paralysis); electromyography findings are normal.
Seizure Symptoms. NESs are another symptom of conversion disorder.
Clinicians may find it challenging to differentiate NESs from an actual
seizure by clinical observation alone. Some patients with NESs also have a
coexisting epileptic disorder, which may complicate the clinical picture.
Tongue-biting, urinary incontinence, and injuries after falling can occur in
NESs, although these symptoms are generally not present. Patients with
NESs retain pupillary and gag reflexes after their seizure-like activity, and
patients have no postseizure increase in prolactin concentrations.
Other Associated Features. Several psychological symptoms are also
associated with conversion disorder.
PRIMARY GAIN. Patients achieve primary gain by keeping internal conflicts

outside their awareness. Symptoms have symbolic value; they represent an
unconscious psychological conflict.
SECONDARY GAIN. Patients accrue tangible advantages and benefits as a result

of being sick; for example, being excused from obligations and difficult life
situations, receiving support and assistance that might not otherwise be
forthcoming, and controlling others’ behavior.
LA BELLE INDIFFÉRENCE. La belle indifférence (“beautiful indifference”) is a

patient’s inappropriately cavalier attitude toward severe symptoms; that is,
the patient seems to be unconcerned about what appears to be a significant
impairment. That bland indifference may also occur in some seriously ill
medical patients who develop a stoic attitude. The presence or absence of la
belle indifférence is not pathognomonic of conversion disorder, but it is often


<<<PAGE 1458>>>
associated with the condition.
IDENTIFICATION. Patients with conversion disorder may unconsciously model

their symptoms on those of someone important to them. For example, a
parent or a person who has recently died may serve as a model for conversion
disorder. During pathologic grief reaction, bereaved persons commonly have
symptoms of the deceased.
Psychological Factors Affecting Other Medical Conditions
According to DSM-5, individuals with this condition have a medical illness
that is significantly impacted by psychological influences or patterns of
behavior. We should only make the diagnosis when the effect of the
psychological issue on the medical condition is unambiguous and leads to
documentable effects on the course and outcome of the medical condition.
Psychological or behavioral factors include psychological distress, patterns of
interpersonal interaction, coping styles, and maladaptive health behaviors
such as denial of symptoms or poor adherence to medical recommendations.
The reverse situation, the psychiatric or psychological consequences of
having a medical condition, is more appropriately classified as an adjustment
disorder. Other ambiguous situations where psychological and physical
symptoms coexist (the so-called “comorbidities”) present particular
challenges. For example, many somatic, anxiety, and mood disorders are
associated with chronic medical conditions (diabetes, hypertension,
hypercholesterolemia) or “functional” syndromes (irritable bowel, migraine
headaches, and several others).
Mr. A, a 55-year-old man, was hospitalized in the intensive care unit
following a cardiac arrest. He had been experiencing severe substernal
chest pain but “ignored it.” He became diaphoretic and reported
reluctantly to a nearby emergency room where he had a cardiac arrest
while awaiting evaluation. He was successfully resuscitated and
transferred to the ICU. He emphatically rejected having had a heart
attack, took his EKG leads off, and was preparing to leave the unit
against medical advice. The psychiatric consultant obtained a history that
the patient’s father and his brother had died of coronary disease. At the


<<<PAGE 1459>>>
time of the initial assessment, the patient was irritable and somewhat
anxious. He agreed to stay in the ICU overnight after his wife insisted
that he stay, and the psychiatrist explained the tests further. The
psychiatrist prescribed a low dose of a benzodiazepine, and, on the next
day, he was agreeable to remain in the hospital for further treatment.
Factitious Disorder
Factitious disorder is the faking of physical or psychological signs and
symptoms. Symptoms can be imposed on self or imposed on another. Table
12-6 compares criteria for the disorder and Table 12-7 list some clues that
should trigger suspicion of this disorder.
Factitious Disorder Imposed on Self. We diagnose this condition when
an individual feigns having a medical or psychiatric illness in order to
achieve the sick role. Patients may simply misrepresent their symptoms, may
cause injury to themselves, or may use other dishonest methods in order to
appear as if they are sick.
Some patients show psychiatric symptoms judged to be fake. This
determination can be difficult and is often made only after a prolonged
investigation. The feigned symptoms frequently include depression,
hallucinations, dissociative and conversion symptoms, and bizarre behavior.
Because the patient’s condition does not improve after routine therapeutic
measures, he or she may receive large doses of psychoactive drugs and may
undergo electroconvulsive therapy. Patients may appear depressed and may
explain their depression by offering a false history of the recent death of a
significant friend or relative. Elements of the history that may suggest
factitious bereavement include a violent or bloody death, a death under
dramatic circumstances, and the dead person being a child or a young adult.
Other patients may describe either recent and remote memory loss or both
auditory and visual hallucinations. Some patients may use psychoactive
substances to produce symptoms, such as stimulants to produce restlessness
or insomnia, or hallucinogens to produce distortions of reality. Combinations
of psychoactive substances can produce very unusual presentations. Other
psychological symptoms include pseudologia fantastica and impostorship.


<<<PAGE 1460>>>
Table 12-6
Factitious Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Factitious Disorder

Intentional Production or
Feigning of Symptoms or
Disabilities, Either Physical
or Psychological (Factitious
Disorder)

Symptoms

Factitious disorder
Feigns symptoms
imposed on self:
No apparent external reward
• Fabricates their
or motivation
symptoms and
Aim is to take on the sick role
clinical findings
• Claims to be ill
• Purposely misleads
health
professionals
• No apparent
external reward or
motivation (outside
of the illness role)
Factitious disorder
imposed on
another:
• As above except the
object of the
feigned illness or
injury is another
person.

Exclusion
Another mental
(not the
disorder
result of):
Course

Single episode

Factitious dermatitis
Malingering


<<<PAGE 1461>>>
specifiers Recurrent episodes (2
or more discrete
events)
Comments

Note: In factitious
disorder imposed on
another, the
perpetrator receives
the diagnosis, not
the victim.

Table 12-7
Clues That Should Trigger Suspicion of Factitious
Disorder
1. The patient has sought treatment at various different hospitals or
clinics
2. The patient is an inconsistent, selective, or misleading informant;
he or she resists allowing the treatment team access to outside
sources of information
3. The course of the illness is atypical and does not follow the
natural history of the presumed disease
4. A remarkable number of tests, consultations, and medical and
surgical treatments have been done to little or no avail
5. The magnitude of symptoms consistently exceeds objective
pathology or symptoms have proved to be exaggerated by the
patient
6. Some findings are discovered to have been self-induced or at
least worsened through self-manipulation
7. The patient might eagerly agree to or request invasive medical
procedures or surgery
8. Physical evidence of a factitious cause might be discovered
during the course of treatment
9. The patient predicts deteriorations or there are exacerbations
shortly before their scheduled discharge


<<<PAGE 1462>>>
10. A diagnosis of factitious disorder has been explicitly considered
by at least one healthcare professional
11. The patient is noncompliant with diagnostic or treatment
recommendations or is disruptive on the unit
12. Evidence from laboratory or other tests disputes information
provided by the patient
13. The patient has a history of work in the healthcare field
14. The patient engages in gratuitous, self-aggrandizing lying
15. The patient has been prescribed (or obtained) opiate drugs when
not indicated
16. While seeking medical or surgical intervention, the patient
opposes psychiatric assessment
In pseudologia fantastica, the patient mixes limited factual material with
extensive and colorful fantasies. The listener’s interest pleases the patient
and, thus, reinforces the symptom. In addition to distortions of the history,
patients often give false and conflicting accounts about other areas of their
lives (e.g., they may claim the death of a parent, to play on the sympathy of
others). Imposture is commonly related to lying in these cases. Many patients
assume the identity of a prestigious person. They may, for example, report
being war heroes and attribute their surgical scars to wounds received during
battle or in other dramatic and dangerous exploits. Similarly, they may say
that they have ties to accomplished or renowned figures.
Other patients may feign physical symptoms suggesting a disorder
involving any organ system. They are familiar with the diagnoses of most
disorders that usually require hospital admission or medication and can give
excellent histories capable of deceiving even experienced clinicians. Clinical
presentations are myriad and include hematoma, hemoptysis, abdominal pain,
fever, hypoglycemia, lupus-like syndromes, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and
seizures. For example, the patient may contaminate urine with blood or feces
or take anticoagulants to simulate bleeding disorders, or insulin to produce
hypoglycemia. Such patients often insist on surgery and claim adhesions
from previous surgical procedures. They may acquire a “gridiron” or
washboard-like abdomen from multiple procedures. Complaints of pain,
especially that simulating renal colic, are common, with the patients wanting


<<<PAGE 1463>>>
narcotics. In about half the reported cases, these patients demand treatment
with specific medications, usually analgesics. Once in the hospital, they
continue to be demanding and challenging. After each test result is negative,
they may accuse doctors of incompetence, threaten litigation, and become
generally abusive. Some may sign out abruptly shortly before they believe
the healthcare team is going to confront them with their factitious behavior.
They then go to another hospital in the same or another city and begin the
cycle again. Specific predisposing factors are actual physical disorders during
childhood, leading to extensive medical treatment. Other factors may include
a grudge against the medical profession, employment in the healthcare
industry, or a significant relationship with a physician in the past.
Table 12-8 provides a comprehensive overview of a variety of signs and
symptoms that may be faked and mistaken for genuine illness. The table also
includes the means of simulation and possible methods of detection.
Factitious Disorder Imposed on Another (formerly Factitious
Disorder by Proxy). In this diagnosis, a person intentionally produces
physical signs or symptoms in another person who is under the first person’s
care. One apparent purpose of the behavior is for the caretaker to assume the
sick role indirectly; another is to be relieved of the caretaking role by having
the child hospitalized. The most common cause of factitious disorder
imposed on another involves a mother who deceives medical personnel into
believing that her child is ill. The deception may involve a false medical
history, contamination of laboratory samples, alteration of records, or
induction of injury and illness in the child. Table 12-9 lists some clues that
should trigger suspicion of this disorder.
BC, a 1-month-old girl, was admitted for the evaluation of fever. The
medical team requested a psychiatric consult because of inconsistencies
in the mother’s reporting of medical information despite her presentation
as a knowledgeable and caring mother who worked as an emergency
medical technician. BC’s mother reported her own diagnosis of ovarian
cancer when she was 3 months pregnant with BC. She reported
undergoing a hysterectomy during her cesarean section, and that she had
been getting radiation therapy at a local hospital since BC’s birth. The


<<<PAGE 1464>>>
pediatrician called the local hospital with the mother’s permission and
learned that she had a corpus luteum cyst removed at 3 months’ gestation
and mild hydronephrosis but no cancer or hysterectomy. BC’s mother,
when confronted with this, replied that she might need a kidney
transplant for the hydronephrosis.
On further exploration, the medical team discovered that the mother
had brought her children to multiple emergency rooms, giving inaccurate
histories that prompted excessive testing. At one visit, she told clinicians
that her 2-year-old son had lupus and hypergammaglobulinemia, and at
another visit, that he had asthma and seizures. She also pursued a minor
cosmetic surgical procedure for him against his pediatrician’s
recommendation.
Clinicians suspected that BC’s mother intentionally fabricated
symptoms, such as by warming BC’s thermometer, and that she did not
actively induce symptoms in her children. She was faithful in keeping
medical appointments, and her children appeared healthy and well cared
for, despite her factitious behavior. The mother denied a psychiatric
history but agreed to let the clinicians contact the local psychiatric
hospital. That hospital revealed her history of depression, anorexia, panic
disorder, and a suicide attempt resulting in psychiatric hospitalization.
After the hospitalization, she received psychotherapy and medication,
which she stopped a few months before this presentation. During BC’s
admission for fever, her mother agreed to resume psychiatric treatment.
The team made a referral to social services, and the pediatrician
scheduled regular follow-up visits for the children.
Table 12-8
Methods of Factitious Symptom Production, Suggestive
Signs, and Confirmatory Tests by Systems
Symptom

Method of Factitious
Symptom Manufacture

Signs Suggestive of
Factitiousness

Infectious Disease
Fever

Injecting infectious material Higher than 41°C


<<<PAGE 1465>>>
into vein/intravenous
line
Ingesting thyroid hormone

Not accompanied by
other vital sign
abnormalities

Drinking hot fluids

Does not follow diurnal
pattern

Manipulating
No diaphoresis with rapid
thermometers with
defervescence
lightbulb or heating pad
Substituting another
thermometer

Bacteremia

Warm wax/wet cotton in
ears

Measuring fresh urine
specimen temperature

Injection of contaminated
substance

Polymicrobial bacteremia
Absence of
urologic/biliary/GI
obstruction
Stool flora/pet flora noted

HIV/AIDS

False history/reports

Normal CD4
count/undetectable
viral load/Ab negative

Gastrointestinal
Diarrhea

Laxative abuse
Metabolic alkalosis
(magnesium, castor oil,
phenolphthalein)


<<<PAGE 1466>>>
Acute hyperchloremic
metabolic acidosis
with normal anion gap
Decreased serum
bicarbonate with
metabolic acidosis
High daily stool volume
Melanosis coli on
sigmoidoscopy
Cathartic colon on barium
enema
Low urine potassium
concentration
High fecal fluid potassium
concentration
Fecal fluid osmolality
<290 mOsm/kg

Vomiting

Adding water to stool
sample

High stool osmolar gap
>125 mOsmol/kg

Ipecac/cathartic abuse

Hypokalemia
High urine potassium
concentration
Low urine chloride
concentration
Metabolic alkalosis with
increased serum
bicarbonate


<<<PAGE 1467>>>
Pancreatitis

Spitting into urine sample
(salivary amylase)

Hyperamylasuria with
normal serum
amylase

GI bleeding

Injection of blood from
transfusions

Nasogastric tube shows
blood despite normal
endoscopy

Ingestion of
NSAIDs/salicylates

Single-stripe sign on
colonoscopy

Obstruction

Ingestion of loperamide

Renal
Diuresis

Diuretic abuse

High urine potassium
concentration

Bartter syndrome

Loop diuretic abuse

Hypokalemia, urine
chloride low or
variable

Self-induced vomiting
Metabolic
Hypervitaminosis A

Vitamin A abuse

Increased gammaglutamyltransferase
Increased bilirubin

Hypokalemia

Laxative abuse

See above

Hyperkalemia

Injection of urine into blood Potassium level
sample
incompatible with life

Hypernatremia

Salt load

Fractional excretion of
sodium high
Gastric aspirate salt
concentration >200
mmol/L


<<<PAGE 1468>>>
Urologic
Hematuria

Adding blood from another Lack of red blood
wound/meat
cell/hemoglobin casts
Traumatizing urethra

Lack of distorted red
blood cells

Inserting foreign bodies
into the bladder
Ingestion of anticoagulants
Addition of coloring to
urine
Proteinuria

Injection of egg protein in
bladder

Large day-to-day
variations in urine
protein concentration
Serum albumin
concentration remains
in normal range
Lack of other signs of
nephrotic syndrome

Bacteriuria

Injecting bacteria into
bladder or urine
specimens

Urinary calculi

Adding pepper grains to
urine
Inserting stones into
bladder
Submitting quartz, feldspar
as samples


<<<PAGE 1469>>>
Hematologic
Anemia

Self-bloodletting

Decreased serum iron,
ferritin, iron-binding
capacity
Decreased bone marrow
iron concentration
No evidence of bleeding

Sickle cell crisis

Pancytopenia

Serum protein
electrophoresis
normal

Ingestion of chemotherapy

Hemorrhage/purpura Ingestion of anticoagulant Prolonged prothrombin
(rodenticide/Coumadin)
time (PT)
Heparin injection

Prolonged partial
thromboplastin time
(PTT) with normal PT

Ingestion of quinidine

Purpura with
thrombocytopenia

Injection of insulin

Serum insulin

Endocrine
Hypoglycemia


<<<PAGE 1470>>>
Ingestion of oral
hypoglycemic
(sulfonylurea)

concentration >100
mU/L

Ingestion of tolbutamide
Manipulation of testing
strips

Hyperglycemia

Insufficient administration
of insulin

Hyperthyroidism

Ingestion of thyroid
hormone

Goiter/eye findings
absent
Increased thyroxine or
liothyronine levels
Low TSH in thyroid storm

Cushing syndrome

Injecting/ingesting
glucocorticoid

Plasma/urinary cortisol
increased

Adding glucocorticoid to
urine

Plasma ACTH
low/undetectable
Normal
corticosterone/high
cortisol


<<<PAGE 1471>>>
Pheochromocytoma Injection of epinephrine,
isoproterenol

Normal chromogranin A
level

Ingestion of stimulant

Lack of metabolites of
epinephrine
(metanephrines)

Injection of epinephrine
into urine sample

Lack of norepinephrine
increase after
glucagon
Normal response to
clonidine suppression
test

Hyperaldosteronism Ingestion of black
Treatment-resistant
licorice/glycyrrhizic acid
hypokalemia
Metabolic alkalosis
Hypernatremia
Cardiovascular
Arrhythmia

Rearranging of EKG leads Unusual pattern on EKG
Ingestion of digitalis, beta
blockers, calcium
channel blockers

Hypertension

Valsalva maneuver

Office BPs normal, home
BPs high

Ingestion of stimulants
Infarction

Beating self with towel to
raise creatine kinase

EKGs don’t change
Enzymes do not rise
appropriately


<<<PAGE 1472>>>
Dermatologic
Cheilitis
granulomatosa

Self-inoculation with
polyvinylpyrrolidone
(PVP)

Dermatitis artefacta

Self-mutilation

Distribution of lesions in
reachable areas

Erythematous lesion Applying alcohol to lesion
Nonhealing wounds

Injection of
Heal when casted
air/contaminants/foreign Resistant to treatment
bodies
Subcutaneous
emphysema

Obstetrical
Ectopic pregnancy

Injection of hCG

Negative urine b-hCG
Widely varying b-hCG
levels

Vaginal discharge

Intravaginal insertion

Inconsistent pH
Vaginal wall shows
abrasion/denies
intercourse

Neurologic
Movement disorders Ingestion of neuroleptics to MRI/EEG/EMG
induce parkinsonism
inconsistent
Hoover sign/tremor
entrainable/distractible
Prolactin elevated with
antipsychotics
Multiple sclerosis

Examination inconsistent

Pseudoseizures

History inconsistent


<<<PAGE 1473>>>
Semiology inconsistent
Never observed seizing
by others
Pulmonary
Asthma

Tape interfering with pulse Intractable hypoxia
oximeters
Inhalation of irritant (talc)

Intractable status
asthmaticus

Ingestion of allergens
Cystic fibrosis

Manipulation of sweat test

Normal x-rays
Normal examination/lack
of clubbing

Hemoptysis

Ingestion of anticoagulants Normal
bronchoscopy/lack of
blood
Cough abrasion of lung
Self-induced trauma to
respiratory tract

Respiratory failure

Incongruous arterial
blood gas
Marked hypocapnia

Rheumatologic
Arthritis

Insertion of metal
fragments in joints

Lupus

Feigned history/borderline
positive ANA

Repeat serum
autoimmune tests


<<<PAGE 1474>>>
negative
Normal complement in
active flare
Vasculitis

Injection of contaminants
to create purpura

Ophthalmologic
Conjunctivitis

Instillation of foreign
substance

Purulent discharge
purposely left on skin
and eyelashes
Severity of discharge
greater than severity
of redness
Severity of swelling less
than severity of
redness
Mainly inferior
conjunctival
involvement
Cornea uninvolved

Anisocoria

Instillation of atropine eye
drops

Table 12-9
Clues Triggering Suspicion for Factitious Disorder Imposed
on Another Person
1. Diagnosis does not match the objective findings
2. Signs or symptoms are bizarre
3. Caregiver or suspected offender does not express relief or
pleasure when told that dependent is improving or that dependent
does not have a particular illness


<<<PAGE 1475>>>
4. Inconsistent histories of symptoms from different observers
5. Caregiver insists on invasive or painful procedures or
hospitalizations
6. Caregiver’s behavior does not match expressed distress or report
of symptoms (e.g., unusually calm)
7. Signs and symptoms begin only in the presence of one caregiver
8. Sibling or another dependent has or had an unusual or
unexplained illness or death
9. Sensitivity to multiple environmental substances or medicines
10. Failure of the dependent’s illness to respond to its normal
treatments or unusual intolerance to those treatments
11. Caregiver publicly solicits sympathy or donations or benefits
because of the dependent’s rare illness
12. Extensive unusual illness history in the caregiver or caregiver’s
family; caregiver’s history of somatization disorders
13. Caregiver seeks other medical opinions when told the dependent
does not have illness
14. Caregiver perseverates about borderline abnormal results of no
clinical relevance despite repeated reassurance, or refutes the
validity of normal results
Other Specified or Unspecified Somatic Symptom and Related
Disorders
This DSM-5 category describes conditions characterized by one or more
unexplained physical symptoms, which are below the threshold for a
diagnosis of somatic symptom or a related disorder. The symptoms are not
better explained solely by another medical, psychiatric, or substance use
disorder, and they cause clinically significant distress or impairment.
Disorders in this category generally have too few symptoms are too brief to
meet the criteria for a full disorder.

EVALUATION OF SOMATIC SYMPTOM AND RELATED
DISORDERS
Patients with severe and protracted somatic syndromes approach medical


<<<PAGE 1476>>>
encounters with a mixture of unrealistic expectations, pessimism, and distrust
of the medical profession. The patients base these attitudes on their previous
experiences with physicians, in which the physicians showed a lack of
interest or disbelief in the patient’s complaints and suffering. Building a
trusting alliance must begin with respect for the patient’s symptoms and an
acknowledgment of their validity. Active, receptive listening, tolerance for
repetition, and a “neutral” approach (avoiding being dismissive,
confrontational, or overly reassuring) are essential skills.
Many of these patients often bring “thick” charts that include descriptions
of many clinical encounters and multiple tests and procedures that are
redundant and ordered without a clear rationale. The prospect of reviewing
these medical records is challenging and often leads to a negative attitude
from the physician. The physician should keep an open mind, despite
forewarnings in the medical records, and perform an independent assessment
of the patient. Avoid an emphasis on psychological questioning and
interpretations at this stage. The patient may perceive premature reassurance
as disinterest or dismissiveness.
Many patients with somatic symptom and related disorders do not readily
acknowledge or recognize “emotional” issues and will feel more comfortable
dealing with questions related to their physical symptoms than questions
related to psychological issues. Taking a history of multiple somatic
complaints can be carried over into subsequent appointments. A thorough
physical examination, including neurologic examination, should follow
history-taking at the initial visit, and the clinician should perform briefer
physical assessments at subsequent visits. An inclusive drug history,
including prescription and nonprescription remedies, should also be
completed. As history-taking moves along, attitudes, beliefs, and attributions
should become more evident and patterns of interaction and illness behavior
discernible.
In the case of conversion disorder, there should be careful attention to any
history of trauma, sexual abuse, physical abuse, and family history of
conversion symptoms. Additionally, a neurologic workup of suspected
conversion disorder should include routine laboratory studies,
electroencephalograms, and other special studies (such as MRI) to rule out
organic causes.
In the case of factitious disorder, the psychiatric examination should


<<<PAGE 1477>>>
emphasize securing information from any available friends, relatives, or other
informants, because interviews with reliable outside sources often reveal the
false nature of the patient’s illness. Although time-consuming and tedious,
corroborating all the facts presented by the patient about previous
hospitalizations and medical care is essential. Psychiatric evaluation is
requested on a consultation basis in about 50 percent of cases, usually after a
simulated illness is suspected. Under these circumstances, it is necessary to
avoid pointed or accusatory questioning that may provoke truculence,
evasion, or flight from the hospital. A danger may exist in provoking frank
psychosis when using vigorous confrontation. In some instances, the feigned
illness serves an adaptive function and is a desperate attempt to ward off
further disintegration.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Somatic Symptom Disorder
We should differentiate somatic symptom disorder from nonpsychiatric
medical conditions, especially disorders that show symptoms that are not
necessarily easily diagnosed. Such diseases include acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), endocrinopathies, myasthenia gravis,
multiple sclerosis, degenerative diseases of the nervous system, systemic
lupus erythematosus, and occult neoplastic disorders.
Somatic symptom disorder is differentiated from illness anxiety disorder
by the emphasis on illness anxiety disorder on fear of having a disease rather
than a concern about many symptoms. Patients with illness anxiety disorder
usually complain about fewer symptoms than patients with somatic symptom
disorder; they are primarily concerned about being sick.
Conversion disorder is acute and generally transient and usually involves a
symptom rather than a particular disease. The presence or absence of la belle
indifférence is an unreliable feature with which to differentiate the two
conditions.
Patients with body dysmorphic disorder wish to appear normal, but believe
that others notice that they are not, whereas those with somatic symptom
disorder seek out attention for their presumed diseases.
Somatic symptom disorder can also occur in patients with depressive


<<<PAGE 1478>>>
disorders and anxiety disorders. Patients with panic disorder may initially
complain that they are affected by a disease (e.g., heart trouble), but careful
questioning during the medical history usually uncovers the classic symptoms
of a panic attack. Delusional beliefs occur in schizophrenia and other
psychotic disorders but can be differentiated from somatic symptom disorder
by their delusional intensity and by the presence of other psychotic
symptoms. Also, schizophrenic patients’ somatic delusions tend to be bizarre,
idiosyncratic, and out of keeping with their cultural milieus, as illustrated in
the case below.
A 52-year-old man complained, “my guts are rotting away.” Even after
an extensive medical workup, the physician could not reassure the man
that he was not ill.
Somatic symptom disorder is distinguished from factitious disorder and
from malingering in that patients with somatic symptom disorder experience
and do not simulate the symptoms they report.
Illness Anxiety Disorder
Again, we must differentiate illness anxiety disorder from other medical
conditions. Too often, doctors dismiss these patients as “chronic
complainers” and do not perform a careful medical examination. Patients
with an illness anxiety disorder are differentiated from those with somatic
symptom disorder by the emphasis on illness anxiety disorder on fear of
having a disease versus the emphasis on somatic symptom disorder on
concern about many symptoms. However, both may exist to varying degrees
in each disorder. Patients with illness anxiety disorder usually complain about
fewer symptoms than patients with somatic symptom disorder. Conversion
disorder is differentiated from illness anxiety disorder by the fact that it is
acute, generally transient, and usually involves a symptom rather than a
particular disease. The fear of illness can also occur in patients with
depressive and anxiety disorders. If a patient meets the full diagnostic criteria
for both illness anxiety disorder and another major mental disorder, such as
major depressive disorder or generalized anxiety disorder, the patient should


<<<PAGE 1479>>>
receive both diagnoses. Illness anxiety disorder can be differentiated from
obsessive-compulsive disorder by the singularity of their beliefs and by the
absence of compulsive behavioral traits, but there is often an obsessive
quality to the patient’s fear. Delusional beliefs can be differentiated from
illness anxiety disorder by their delusional intensity and the presence of other
psychotic symptoms.
Conversion Disorder (Functional Neurologic Symptom Disorder)
One of the significant problems in diagnosing conversion disorder is the
difficulty in definitively ruling out a medical disorder. Concomitant
nonpsychiatric medical disorders are common in hospitalized patients with
conversion disorder, and evidence of a current or previous neurologic
disorder or a systemic disease affecting the brain occurs in 18 to 64 percent
of such patients. An estimated 25 to 50 percent of patients classified as
having conversion disorder eventually receive diagnoses of neurologic or
nonpsychiatric medical disorders that could have caused their earlier
symptoms. Thus, a thorough medical and neurologic workup is essential in
all cases. If the suggestion resolves the symptom, such as with hypnosis, or
parenteral amobarbital or lorazepam, the symptoms are probably the result of
conversion disorder.
Neurologic disorders (e.g., dementia and other degenerative diseases),
brain tumors, and basal ganglia disease are part of the differential diagnosis.
For example, weakness may be confused with myasthenia gravis,
polymyositis, acquired myopathies, or multiple sclerosis. Optic neuritis can
resemble conversion disorder blindness. Other diseases that can cause
confusing symptoms are Guillain–Barré syndrome, Creutzfeldt–Jakob
disease, periodic paralysis, and early neurologic manifestations of AIDS.
Conversion disorder symptoms occur in schizophrenia, depressive disorders,
and anxiety disorders, but these other disorders are associated with their
distinct symptoms that eventually make differential diagnosis possible.
The demarcation between conversion disorder and somatic symptom
disorder is not that clear, and conversion symptoms may form part of the
constellation of symptoms seen in somatic symptom disorder. One
differentiating feature is that conversion disorder requires that the presenting
symptoms be inconsistent with neurologic conditions, whereas somatic


<<<PAGE 1480>>>
symptom disorder does not require this inconsistency.
In both malingering and factitious disorder, the symptoms are under
conscious, voluntary control. A malingerer’s history is usually more
inconsistent and contradictory than that of a patient with conversion disorder,
and a malingerer’s fraudulent behavior is goal-directed.
Psychological Factors Affecting Other Medical Conditions
Differential diagnosis can be complicated and should include other somatic
symptom disorders (somatic symptom disorder, conversion disorder,
factitious disorder) as well as personality disorders (e.g., borderline
personality disorder).
Factitious Disorder
Any disorder in which physical signs and symptoms are prominent are part of
the differential diagnosis, and the physician must explore the possibility of
authentic or concomitant physical illness. Additionally, a history of many
surgeries in patients with factitious disorder may predispose such patients to
complications or actual diseases, necessitating even further surgery.
Factitious disorder is on a continuum between somatic symptom and related
disorders and malingering, the goal being to assume the sick role.
A factitious disorder is differentiated from conversion disorder by the
voluntary production of factitious symptoms, the extreme course of multiple
hospitalizations, and the seeming willingness of patients with a factitious
disorder to undergo an extraordinary number of mutilating procedures.
Patients with conversion disorder are not usually conversant with medical
terminology and hospital routines, and their symptoms have a direct temporal
relation or symbolic reference to specific emotional conflicts.
Illness anxiety disorder differs from factitious disorder in the lack of
voluntary production of symptoms.
Because of their pathologic lying, lack of close relationships with others,
hostile and manipulative manner, and associated substance use and criminal
history, clinicians may think that patients with factitious disorder have an
antisocial personality disorder. Antisocial persons, however, do not usually
volunteer for invasive procedures or resort to a way of life marked by
repeated or long-term hospitalization. Because of attention-seeking and an


<<<PAGE 1481>>>
occasional flair for the dramatic, they may also be diagnosed with a histrionic
personality disorder. However, not all such patients have a dramatic flair, and
many are withdrawn and bland. Consideration of the patient’s chaotic
lifestyle, history of disturbed interpersonal relationships, identity crisis,
substance abuse, self-damaging acts, and manipulative tactics may lead to the
diagnosis of borderline personality disorder.
We should distinguish factitious disorders from malingering. Malingerers
have a manifest, recognizable environmental goal in producing signs and
symptoms. They may seek hospitalization to secure financial compensation,
evade the police, avoid work, or merely obtain free bed and board for the
night, but they always have some apparent end for their behavior. Moreover,
these patients can usually stop producing their signs and symptoms when the
symptoms are no longer useful to them or when the risk becomes too high.

COMORBIDITY
Somatic Symptom Disorder
Individuals with somatic symptom disorders often have co-occurring anxiety
disorders and depressive disorders, as well as comorbid medical illnesses. It
is possible to have a diagnosed medical condition and receive a co-occurring
diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder when the individual experiences more
considerable distress and anxiety about the illness than would be expected.
Illness Anxiety Disorder
Given that illness anxiety disorder is new to DSM-5, there is limited data on
comorbidity. However, a 2017 study demonstrated comorbidity of illness
anxiety disorder and both depressive and anxiety disorders, especially
generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder.
Conversion Disorder (Functional Neurologic Symptom Disorder)
Medical and, especially, neurologic disorders, frequently occur among
patients with conversion disorders. What one typically sees in these comorbid
neurologic or medical conditions is an elaboration of symptoms stemming
from the original lesion.
Depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, and somatic symptom disorder


<<<PAGE 1482>>>
often occur alongside conversion disorder. It is rarer with schizophrenia,
however, it does occur. Personality disorders also frequently accompany
conversion disorder, especially histrionic, dependent, and antisocial
personality disorders, or individuals with passive–aggressive personality
styling. Conversion disorders can occur, however, in persons with no
predisposing medical, neurologic, or psychiatric disorder.
Psychological Factors Affecting Other Medical Conditions
All individuals with this diagnosis have at least one other medical condition
that is comorbid, as per the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria.
Factitious Disorder
Many persons diagnosed with factitious disorder have comorbid psychiatric
diagnoses (e.g., mood disorders, personality disorders, or substance-related
disorders).

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Somatic Symptom Disorder
The course of the disorder is usually episodic; the episodes last from months
to years with equally long quiescent periods. There may be an apparent
association between exacerbations of somatic symptoms and psychosocial
stressors. Although no well-conducted extensive outcome studies exist, an
estimated one-third to one-half of all patients with somatic symptom disorder
eventually improve significantly. A good prognosis is associated with high
socioeconomic status, treatment-responsive anxiety or depression, sudden
onset of symptoms, the absence of a personality disorder, the absence of
childhood adversity, and the absence of a related nonpsychiatric medical
condition. Most children with the disorder will recover by late adolescence or
early adulthood.
Illness Anxiety Disorder
Because the disorder is a new diagnosis, there are no reliable data about the
prognosis. One may extrapolate from the course of somatic symptom


<<<PAGE 1483>>>
disorder, which is usually episodic; the episodes last from months to years
and have equally long quiescent periods in between. A good prognosis is
associated with high socioeconomic status, treatment-responsive anxiety or
depression, sudden onset of symptoms, the absence of a personality disorder,
and the absence of a related nonpsychiatric medical condition.
Conversion Disorder (Functional Neurologic Symptom Disorder)
The onset of conversion disorder is usually acute, but a crescendo of
symptomatology may also occur. Symptoms or deficits are usually of short
duration, and approximately 95 percent of acute cases remit spontaneously,
usually within 2 weeks in hospitalized patients. If symptoms have been
present for 6 months or longer, the prognosis for symptom resolution is less
than 50 percent and diminishes further, the longer that conversion is present.
Recurrence occurs in one-fifth to one-fourth of people within 1 year of the
first episode. Thus, one episode is a predictor for future episodes. Acute
onset, presence of clearly identifiable stressors at the time of onset, a short
interval between onset and the institution of treatment, and above-average
intelligence are all good prognostic indicators. Paralysis, aphonia, and
blindness are associated with a good prognosis, whereas tremor and seizures
are poor prognostic factors.
Psychological Factors Affecting Other Medical Conditions
This condition can occur at any age. Little has been reported about course
and prognosis.
Factitious Disorder
Factitious disorders typically begin in early adulthood, although they can
appear during childhood or adolescence. The onset of the disorder or of
discrete episodes of seeking treatment may follow a real illness, loss,
rejection, or abandonment. Usually, the patient or a close relative had a
hospitalization in childhood or early adolescence for genuine physical illness.
After that, a long pattern of successive hospitalizations begins insidiously and
evolves. As the disorder progresses, the patient becomes knowledgeable
about medicine and hospitals.
Factitious disorders are incapacitating to the patient and often produce


<<<PAGE 1484>>>
severe trauma or untoward reactions related to treatment. A course of
repeated or long-term hospitalization is incompatible with meaningful
vocational work and sustaining interpersonal relationships. The prognosis, in
most cases, is poor.

TREATMENT OF SOMATIC SYMPTOM AND RELATED
DISORDERS
Treatment Approach
Reviews of controlled studies have shown a good efficacy of psychotherapy,
particularly of the cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) type, and some
evidence for the efficacy of pharmacotherapy in the treatment of several
somatic syndromes. Kroenke and colleagues found 34 randomized controlled
trials on somatoform disorders, which included more than 1,000 patients. Of
these, 13 were CBT trials, 5 were antidepressant trials, and 16 involved other
modalities. Overall, CBT showed the highest efficacy, with virtually all
reported studies showing a significant effect of CBT on symptoms compared
to no treatment. Antidepressants seem to work in painful syndromes, and the
data favored older antidepressants (tricyclics) over newer ones (serotonin
reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs]). Other interventions, including the use of a
psychiatric consultation letter, brief psychodynamic psychotherapy, exercise,
and more recently, biofeedback, have also shown beneficial effects on some
of these symptoms. A more recent article reviewed 15 randomized controlled
trials of the efficacy of CBT in somatoform disorders and found that CBT
improved somatic, anxiety, and depressive symptoms and improved social
functioning.
However, patients with somatic symptom and related disorders sometimes
are not open to psychological explanations of their symptoms or
psychological or psychiatric treatment. More specific treatment guidelines are
listed for each diagnosis, below.
Somatic Symptom Disorder
Therapeutic goals should be modest at first and limited to small, attainable
gains such as a decrease in medical visits, a commitment to a single primary
care physician, and the avoidance of unnecessary tests and procedures. The


<<<PAGE 1485>>>
physician should prepare for a long-term commitment to the patient.
Physicians should limit specialist consultations unless there is evidence of
comorbid physical conditions. Some of the elements of CBT, such as diary
keeping, should be incorporated into the primary care physician’s treatment
strategy. Recommendations for exercise, yoga, relaxation, meditation, and
massage may be useful and are generally better accepted by patients than
psychological treatments.
The use of a brief “consultation letter” intended for primary care
physicians has demonstrated effectiveness in improving patients’ functional
capacity and decreasing their utilization of health services. This consultation
letter provides physicians with “do’s and don’ts” regarding their encounters
with patients with multiple medically unexplained physical symptoms and
briefly instructs them on using of a few fundamental management techniques.
The letter should urge the physicians to see these patients during regularly
scheduled appointments, perform brief physical examinations focusing on the
area of discomfort at each visit, avoid unnecessary diagnostic procedures,
invasive treatments, and hospitalizations, avoid using statements such as
“symptoms are all in your head,” and briefly allow/encourage patients to talk
about “stressors.”
A body of research has demonstrated the efficacy of CBT for the treatment
of somatic symptom disorder and related syndromes. CBT-type interventions
appear to help patients by modifying thoughts and behaviors associated with
somatization. In the typical CBT program, the therapist systematically
introduces patients to several behavioral techniques, which include relaxation
training and graded increases in activities. From a cognitive perspective, CBT
helps patients to identify thoughts that contribute to increased stress,
inactivity, and health concern. Often, patients with this condition tend to
think catastrophically about their physical symptoms. Such thoughts lead
them to conclude that they are sick and must limit physical activity, creating a
cycle that perpetuates the somatic process. Reports indicate that brief
psychodynamic therapy of unexplained somatic symptoms may be useful,
although most of the recent evidence in terms of randomized controlled trials
involves CBT.
In general, we should avoid medications when treating patients with
somatic symptom disorder except in the presence of clearly delineated
anxious, depressive, or psychotic symptoms. Despite the development of new


<<<PAGE 1486>>>
pharmacologic agents such as dual (norepinephrine and serotonin) reuptake
inhibitors and limited data on gabapentin, there is no evidence that a purely
pharmacologic approach targeting the treatment of somatic symptom disorder
will be sufficient.
Illness Anxiety Disorder
Various group and individual therapies, including CBT and psychodynamic
therapy, have been proposed over the years to manage patients with health
anxiety. Several controlled trials have demonstrated efficacy for CBT
interventions, making CBT the prototype, first-line treatment for illness
anxiety disorder. Other types of therapy, including mindfulness training,
exposure therapy, and acceptance and commitment therapy, have also
demonstrated some efficacy.
Limited data exist to guide pharmacologic treatment of illness anxiety
disorder. There have been a few randomized, placebo-controlled trials that
demonstrated benefit with SSRIs. Most reports have been anecdotal, singleblind studies. A recent randomized controlled trial of 195 patients with
hypochondriasis demonstrated the efficacy and safety of fluoxetine in this
patient population. Interestingly, the addition of CBT to fluoxetine conferred
a slight added benefit.
Conversion Disorder (Functional Neurologic Symptom Disorder)
Many conversion syndromes have an acute, benign course and may remit
spontaneously with understanding and support. Early intervention can
forestall potential chronicity and the progression into a well-entrenched
somatization disorder. Once chronicity has developed, intensive treatment
may use all treatment modalities, including hospitalization, individual or
group therapy, insight-oriented therapies, behavioral techniques, hypnosis,
sodium amytal interview, physical therapy, biofeedback, relaxation training,
and medication (primarily for comorbid anxiety, depression, or other
somatoform disorders). Psychological interpretations or explanations do not
work well early in the process, but reassuring patients that critical tests are
normal and that symptoms will eventually improve may be helpful. Any
implication to the patient that he or she is malingering is very
counterproductive. Behavioral interventions should focus on improving self-


<<<PAGE 1487>>>
esteem, the capacity for emotional expression and assertiveness, and the
ability to communicate comfortably with others. With chronic conversion,
muscle contractures can occur, and physical therapy is necessary. Even in the
absence of such contractures, however, many conversion patients find that
physical therapy can be helpful for muscular symptoms or balance problems.
The process of slowly progressive exercises and activity can help restore
functioning.
Psychological Factors Affecting Other Medical Conditions
Treatment frequently involves communication with the patient’s primary
medical team as well as family. The psychoeducational intervention clarifies
the role that emotional and behavioral factors play in aggravating the
underlying medical condition. Medication to treat another underlying
psychiatric disorder may be necessary.
Factitious Disorder
No specific psychiatric therapy has been effective in treating factitious
disorders. It is a clinical paradox that patients with the disorders simulate
severe illness and seek and submit to unnecessary treatment while they deny
to themselves and others their actual illness and thus avoid possible treatment
for it. Ultimately, the patients elude meaningful therapy by abruptly leaving
the hospital or failing to keep follow-up appointments.
Treatment, thus, is best focused on management rather than on cure. Table
12-10 lists the guidelines for treating and managing factitious disorder. The
three primary goals in the treatment and management of factitious disorders
are (1) to reduce the risk of morbidity and mortality, (2) to address the
underlying emotional needs or psychiatric diagnosis underlying factitious
illness behavior, and (3) to be mindful of legal and ethical issues. Perhaps the
single most crucial factor in successful management is a physician’s early
recognition of the disorder. In this way, physicians can forestall a multitude
of painful and potentially dangerous diagnostic procedures for these patients.
There must be a good liaison between psychiatrists and the medical or
surgical staff. Although a few cases of individual psychotherapy exist in the
literature, no consensus exists about the best approach. In general, working in
concert with the patient’s primary care physician is more effective than


<<<PAGE 1488>>>
working with the patient in isolation.
Table 12-10
Guidelines for Management and Treatment of Factitious
Disorder
Keep in mind that active pursuit of a prompt diagnosis can minimize
the risk of morbidity and mortality.
Minimize harm. Avoid unnecessary tests and procedures, especially
if they are invasive. Treat according to clinical judgment, keeping
in mind that subjective complaints may be deceptive.
Arrange regular interdisciplinary meetings to reduce conflict and
splitting among staff. Manage staff countertransference.
Steer the patient toward psychiatric treatment in an empathic,
nonconfrontational, face-saving manner. Avoid aggressive direct
confrontation.
Treat underlying psychiatric disturbances. In psychotherapy, address
coping strategies and emotional conflicts.
Appoint a primary care provider as a gatekeeper for all medical and
psychiatric treatment.
Consider involving risk management and bioethicists from an early
point.
Consider appointing a guardian for medical and psychiatric
decisions.
As a behavioral disincentive, consider prosecution for fraud.
Table 12-11
Pediatric Factitious Disorder Imposed on Another—Basic
Principles of Management
Make sure the child is safe.


<<<PAGE 1489>>>
Make sure the child’s future safety is also assured.
Allow treatment to occur in the least restrictive setting possible.
A pediatrician should serve as “gatekeeper” for medical care
utilization.
All other physicians should coordinate care with the gatekeeper.
Child-protective services should be informed whenever a child is
harmed.
Family psychotherapy and/or individual psychotherapy should be
instituted for the perpetrating parent and the child.
Health insurance companies, school officials, and other nonmedical
sources should be asked to report possible medical abuse to the
physician gatekeeper. Permission of a parent or of child-protective
services must first be obtained.
The possibility should be considered of admitting the child to an
inpatient or partial hospital setting to facilitate diagnostic
monitoring of symptoms and to institute a treatment plan.
The child may require placement in another family. The perpetrating
parent may need to be removed from the child through criminal
prosecution and incarceration.
The personal reactions of physicians and staff members are of great
significance in treating and establishing a working alliance with these
patients, who invariably evoke feelings of futility, bewilderment, betrayal,
hostility, and even contempt. In essence, staff members must abandon a
fundamental element of their relationship with patients—accepting the
truthfulness of the patients’ statements. One appropriate psychiatric
intervention is to suggest to the staff ways of remaining aware that even
though the patient’s illness is factitious, the patient is ill. Physicians should
try not to feel resentment when patients humiliate their diagnostic prowess,
and they should avoid any unmasking ceremony that sets up the patients as
adversaries and precipitates their flight from the hospital. The staff should not


<<<PAGE 1490>>>
perform unnecessary procedures or discharge patients abruptly, both of which
are manifestations of anger.
In cases of factitious disorder imposed on another, physicians have
obtained a legal intervention in several instances, particularly with children.
The senselessness of the disorder and the denial of false action by parents are
obstacles to successful court action and often make conclusive proof
unobtainable. In such cases, the treatment team should notify the child
welfare and make arrangements for ongoing monitoring of the children’s
health (see Table 12-11 for interventions for pediatric factitious disorder
imposed on another).

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Somatic Symptom Disorder
The prevalence of somatic symptom disorder is not yet known. Data do exist,
however, for somatization disorder as defined by DSM-IV. Studies in the
United States, Puerto Rico, Germany, and Italy found lifetime prevalence
rates of “full” somatization disorder ranging from 0.1 percent in the United
States to 0.8 percent in Germany. In contrast, lifetime rates of “abridged”
somatization disorder ranged from 5.6 percent in Germany to 19 percent in
Puerto Rico. Much higher prevalence rates have been reported for more
broadly defined somatic symptom clusters.
Illness Anxiety Disorder
The prevalence of this disorder is unknown, aside from using data that relate
to hypochondriasis, which gives a prevalence of 4 to 6 percent in a general
medical clinic population. In other surveys, up to 10 percent of persons in the
general population worry about becoming sick and incapacitated as a result.
Conversion Disorder (Functional Neurologic Symptom Disorder)
The epidemiologic information on conversion disorder is limited. Estimates
vary broadly: Less than 1 percent in the general population, 5 to 14 percent
among general hospital medical/surgical referrals to psychiatry consultation
services, and 5 to 25 percent in treated psychiatric outpatients. The disorder
appears to be more frequent in females and can occur in children as young as


<<<PAGE 1491>>>
7 or 8 years old. It is rare after the age of 35 years.
Psychological Factors Affecting Other Medical Conditions
The prevalence of this condition is unknown. In mental health systems, it is
most frequently diagnosed in consultation–liaison psychiatry settings.
Factitious Disorder
No comprehensive epidemiologic data on factitious disorder exist. However,
it is estimated to comprise approximately 1 percent of the healthcare-seeking
population. Factitious disorder imposed on another account for less than 0.04
percent of reported child abuse in the United States each year.

ETIOLOGY
Somatic Symptom Disorder
Early family studies suggested an association between hysteria/Briquet
syndrome in females and antisocial personality in their male first-degree
relatives. Also, studies of adopted-away children highlighted the presence of
alcoholism and violence in biologic fathers of women with somatization
disorder. However, since developing the new diagnostic criteria, there have
been no major epidemiologic studies.
Some have postulated that persons with this disorder augment and amplify
their somatic sensations; they have low thresholds for and low tolerance of
physical discomfort. For example, what persons usually perceive as
abdominal pressure, persons with somatic symptom disorder experience as
abdominal pain. They may focus on bodily sensations, misinterpret them, and
become alarmed by them because of a faulty cognitive scheme.
Others have proposed a social learning model. They see the symptoms of
this disorder as a request for admission to the sick role made by a person
facing seemingly insurmountable and unsolvable problems. The sick role
offers an escape that allows a patient to avoid noxious obligations, to
postpone unwelcome challenges, and to evade usual duties and obligations.
Illness Anxiety Disorder


<<<PAGE 1492>>>
The etiology is unknown. The social learning model described for somatic
symptom disorder may apply to this disorder as well, with a similar dynamic
to what we described above.
Conversion Disorder (Functional Neurologic Symptom Disorder)
Biologic Factors. The neuropsychologic conceptualization speaks of an
inherent deficit in certain brain functions, especially those in the dominant
hemisphere that may interfere with verbal associations. Also, functional MRI
studies have shown differences in brain activation between patients with
conversion disorder and controls.
Psychological Factors The behavioral theory attributes
conversion disorder to faulty childhood learning, with the
nonadaptive behavioral responses used for secondary gain and
control of interpersonal relationships. The psychoanalytic theory, on
the other hand, describes symptoms as compromise formations with primary
gain of conflict resolution through a partial expression of the conflict without
conscious awareness of its significance. Some have suggested a strong
relationship between childhood traumatization by sexual or physical abuse
and a later propensity for conversion disorder. Other studies, however, do not
confirm such an association.
Factitious Disorder
Etiology is generally not clear, except that a common denominator is that
these patients tend to be avid medical service seekers. The underlying
motivations for the behaviors are likely unconscious. Two factors may
underlie most cases of factitious disorder: (1) an affinity for the medical
system, and (2) poor, maladaptive coping skills. In the case of factitious
disorder imposed on another, psychodynamic theories predominately view
the disorder as an objectification of the child to serve the parent’s
psychological needs.

References
Aduan RP, Fauci AS, Dale DD. Factitious fever and self-induced infection: A


<<<PAGE 1493>>>
report of 32 cases and review of the literature. Ann Intern Med.
1979;90:230.
Alexander F. Psychosomatic medicine: Its principles and application. New
York: Norton; 1950.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association; 2013.
Ani C, Reading R, Lynn R, Forlee S, Garralda E. Incidence and 12-month
outcome of non-transient childhood conversion disorder in the UK and
Ireland. Br J Psychiatry. 2013;202(6):413–418.
Bass C, Taylor M. Recovery from chronic factitious disorder (Munchausen’s
syndrome): A personal account. Personal Ment Health. 2013;7(1):80–83.
Brody S. Hypochondriasis: Attentional, sensory, and cognitive factors.
Psychosomatics. 2013;54(1):98.
Bryant RA, Das P. The neural circuitry of conversion disorder and its
recovery. J Abnorm Psychology. 2012;121(1):289.
Cannon WB. The Wisdom of the Body. New York: Norton; 1932.
Carson AJ, Brown R, David AS, Duncan R, Edwards MJ, Goldstein LH,
Grunewald R, Howlett S, Kanaan R, Mellers J, Nicholson TR, Reuber M,
Schrag AE, Stone J, Voon V; UK-FNS. Functional (conversion)
neurological symptoms: Research since the millennium. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012;83(8):842–850.
Chaturvedi SK, Desai G. Measurement and assessment of somatic symptoms.
Int Rev Psychiatry. 2013;25(1):31–40.
Daum C, Aybek S. Validity of the “drift without pronation” sign in
conversion disorder. BMC Neurol. 2013;13:31.
Dimsdale JE, Creed F, Escobar J, Sharpe M, Wulsin L, Barsky A, Lee S,
Irwin MR, Levenson J. Somatic symptom disorder: An important change
in DSM. J Psychosom Res. 2013;75(3):223–228.
Eisendrath SJ. Factitious physical disorders: Treatment without
confrontation. Psychosomatics. 1989;30:383.
El-Gabalawy R, Mackenzie CS, Thibodeau MA, Asmundson GJG, Sareen J.
Health anxiety disorders in older adults: Conceptualizing complex
conditions in late life. Clin Psychol Rev. 2013;33(8):1096–1105.
Escobar JI, Dimsdale JEE. Somatic symptom and related disorders. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive


<<<PAGE 1494>>>
Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer;
2017:1827–1845.
Fallon BA, Ahern DK, Pavlicova M, Slavov I, Skritskya N, Barsky AJ. A
randomized controlled trial of medication and cognitive-behavioral therapy
for hypochondriasis. Am J Psychiatry. 2017;174(8):756–764.
Frances A. The new somatic symptom disorder in DSM-5 risks mislabeling
many people as mentally ill. BMJ. 2013;346:f1580.
Frye EM, Feldman MD. Factitious disorder by proxy in educational settings:
A review. Educ Psychol Rev. 2012;24(1):47–61.
Gropalis M, Bleichhardt G, Hiller W, Witthoft M. Specificity and
modifiability of cognitive biases in hypochondriasis. J Consult Clin
Psychol. 2013;81(3):558–565.
Guidi J, Rafanelli C, Roncuzzi R, Sirri L, Fava GA. Assessing psychological
factors affecting medical conditions: Comparison between different
proposals. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2013;35(2):141–146.
Guz H, Doganay Z, Ozkan A, Colak E, Tomac A, Sarisoy G. Conversion and
somatization disorders: Dissociative symptoms and other characteristics. J
Psychosom Res. 2004;56:287–291.
Hamilton JC, Eger M, Razzak S, Feldman MD, Hallmark N, Cheek S.
Somatoform, factitious, and related diagnoses in the National Hospital
Discharge Survey: Addressing the proposed DSM-5 revision.
Psychosomatics. 2013;54(2):142–148.
Höfling V, Weck F. Assessing bodily preoccupations is sufficient: Clinically
effective screening for hypochondriasis. J Psychosom Res.
2013;75(6):526–531.
Kinns H, Housley D, Freedman DB. Munchausen syndrome and factitious
disorder: The role of the laboratory in its detection and diagnosis. Ann Clin
Biochem. 2013;50(3):194–203.
Krasnik C, Grant C. Conversion disorder: Not a malingering matter. Paediatr
Child Health. 2012;17(5):246.
Kroenke K. Efficacy of treatment for somatoform disorders: A review of
randomized controlled trials. Psychosom Med. 2007;69:881–888.
Kroenke K, Sharpe M, Sykes R. Revising the classification of somatoform
disorders: Key questions and preliminary recommendations.
Psychosomatics. 2007;48:277–285.
Lee S, Lam IM, Kwok KP, Leung C. A community-based epidemiological


<<<PAGE 1495>>>
study of health anxiety and generalized anxiety disorder. J Anxiety Disord.
2014;28(2):187–194.
Liu J, Gill NS, Teodorczuk A, Li Z-J, Jing S. The efficacy of cognitive
behavioural therapy in somatoform disorders and medically unexplained
physical symptoms: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J
Affect Disord. 2019;245:98–112.
McCormack R, Moriarty J, Mellers JD, Shotbolt P, Pastena R, Landes N,
Goldstein L, Fleminger S, David AS. Specialist inpatient treatment for
severe motor conversion disorder: A retrospective comparative study. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2014;85(8):895–900.
Newby JM, Hobbs MJ, Mahoney AEJ, Wong S, Andrews G. DSM-5 illness
anxiety disorder and somatic symptom disorder: Comorbidity, correlates,
and overlap with DSM-IV hypochondriasis. J Psychosom Res.
2017;101:31–37.
Nicholson TR, Aybek S, Kempton MJ, Daly EM, Murphy DG, David AS,
Kanaan RA. A structural MRI study of motor conversion disorder:
Evidence of reduction in thalamic volume. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry.
2014;85(2):227–229.
Phillips MR, Ward NG, Ries RK. Factitious mourning: Painless patienthood.
Am J Psychiatry. 1983;147:1057.
Prior KN, Bond MJ. Somatic symptom disorders and illness behaviour:
Current perspectives. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2013;25(1):5–18.
Quinn DK, Wang D, Powsner S, Eisendrath SJ. Factitious disorder. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer;
2017:1846–1865.
Rogers R, Bagby RM, Rector N. Diagnostic legitimacy of factitious disorder
with psychological symptoms. Am J Psychiatry. 1989;146:1312.
Scarella TM, Boland RJ, Barsky AJ. Illness anxiety disorder:
psychopathology, epidemiology, clinical characteristics, and treatment.
Psychosom Med. 2019;81(5):398–407.
Scarella TM, Laferton JAC, Ahern DK, Fallon BA, Barsky A. The
relationship of hypochondriasis to anxiety, depressive, and somatoform
disorders. Psychosomatics. 2016;57(2):200–207.
Schrag AE, Mehta AR, Bhatia KP, Brown RJ, Frackowiak RS, Trimble MR,
Ward NS, Rowe JB. The functional neuroimaging correlates of


<<<PAGE 1496>>>
psychogenic versus organic dystonia. Brain. 2013;136(3):770–781.
Shorter E. From paralysis to fatigue: A history of psychosomatic illness in the
modern era. New York: Free Press; 1992.
Sirri L, Fava GA. Diagnostic criteria for psychosomatic research and somatic
symptom disorders. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2013;25(1):19–30.
Somashekar B, Jainer A, Wuntakal B. Psychopharmacotherapy of somatic
symptoms disorders. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2013;25(1):107–115.
Starcevic V. Hypochondriasis and health anxiety: Conceptual challenges. Br
J Psychiatry. 2013;202(1):7–8.
Stone J, Smyth R, Carson A, Lewis S, Prescott R, Warlow C, Sharpe M.
Systematic review of misdiagnosis of conversion symptoms and
“hysteria.” BMJ. 2005; 331(7523):989.
Tomenson B, Essau C, Jacobi F, Ladwig KH, Leiknes KA, Lieb R,
Meinlschmidt G, McBeth J, Rosmalen J, Rief W, Sumathipala A, Creed F;
EURASMUS Population Based Study Group. Total somatic symptom
score as a predictor of health outcome in somatic symptom disorders. Br J
Psychiatry. 2013;203(5):373–380.
Voigt K, Wollburg E, Weinmann N, Herzog A, Meyer B, Langs G, Löwe B.
Predictive validity and clinical utility of DSM-5 somatic symptom
disorder: Prospective 1-year follow-up study. J Psychosom Res.
2013;75(4):358–361.


<<<PAGE 1497>>>
13
Feeding and Eating Disorders
This chapter deals with several feeding and eating disorders, including
anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, binge-eating disorder, and other specified
feeding and eating disorders. There are different feeding and eating disorders
that are typically associated with childhood and adolescence (e.g., pica,
rumination disorder, and avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder);
Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Other Childhood Disorders (Chapter 2)
covers those disorders.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Anorexia Nervosa
The term anorexia nervosa comes from the Greek term for “loss of appetite”
and a Latin word implying nervous origin. Anorexia nervosa is a syndrome
characterized by three essential criteria, one behavioral, one
psychopathological, and the last, physiologic. The first is self-induced
starvation, to a significant degree (behavioral). The second is a relentless
drive for thinness or a morbid fear of fatness (psychopathological). The third
criterion is the presence of medical signs and symptoms resulting from
starvation (physiologic). Anorexia nervosa is often, but not always,
associated with disturbances of body image, the perception that one is
distressingly large despite evident medical starvation. The distortion of body
image is disturbing when present; it is, however, not pathognomonic,
invariable, or required for diagnosis. Two subtypes of anorexia nervosa exist:
restricting and binge/purge. The theme in all anorexia nervosa subtypes is the
highly disproportionate emphasis placed on thinness as a vital source of selfesteem, with weight, and to a lesser degree, shape, becoming the overriding


<<<PAGE 1498>>>
and consuming daylong preoccupation of thoughts, mood, and behaviors.
Approximately half of anorexic persons will lose weight by drastically
reducing their total food intake. The other half of these patients will not only
diet but will also regularly engage in binge eating, followed by purging
behaviors. Some patients routinely purge after eating small amounts of food.
Anorexia nervosa is much more prevalent in females than in males and
usually has its onset in adolescence. Hypotheses of an underlying
psychological disturbance in young women with the disorder include
conflicts surrounding the transition from girlhood to womanhood. Some have
also suggested that psychological issues related to feelings of helplessness
and difficulty establishing autonomy also contribute to the development of
the disorder. Bulimic symptoms can occur as a separate disorder or as part of
anorexia nervosa. Persons with either disorder are excessively preoccupied
with weight, food, and body shape. The outcome of anorexia nervosa varies
from spontaneous recovery to a waxing and waning course to death.
Bulimia Nervosa
People with bulimia nervosa have episodes of binge eating combined with
inappropriate ways of stopping weight gain. Physical discomfort—for
example, abdominal pain or nausea—terminates the binge eating, which is
often followed by feelings of guilt, depression, or self-disgust. Unlike
patients with anorexia nervosa, those with bulimia nervosa typically maintain
average body weight.
The term bulimia nervosa derives from the terms for “ox-hunger” in Greek
and “nervous involvement” in Latin. For some patients, bulimia nervosa may
represent a failed attempt at anorexia nervosa, sharing the goal of becoming
very thin, but occurring in an individual less able to sustain prolonged
semistarvation or severe hunger as consistently as classic restricting anorexia
nervosa patients. For others, eating binges represent “breakthrough eating”
episodes of giving in to hunger pangs generated by efforts to limit eating to
maintain a socially desirable level of thinness. Still, others use binge eating as
a means to self-medicate during times of emotional distress. Regardless of
the reason, eating binges provoke panic as individuals feel that their eating
has been out of control. The unwanted binges lead to subsequent attempts to
avoid the feared weight gain by a variety of compensatory behaviors, such as


<<<PAGE 1499>>>
purging or excessive exercise.
Binge-Eating Disorder
Individuals with binge-eating disorder engage in recurrent binge eating
during which they eat an abnormally large amount of food over a short time.
Unlike bulimia nervosa, patients with binge-eating disorder do not
compensate in any way after a binge episode (e.g., vomiting, laxative use).
Binge episodes often occur in private, generally include foods of dense
caloric content, and, during the binge, the person feels he or she cannot
control his or her eating.
Other Specified Feeding or Eating Disorders
This diagnostic category also includes eating conditions that may cause
significant distress but do not meet the full criteria for a classified eating
disorder. Conditions included in this category include night-eating syndrome,
purging disorder, and subthreshold forms of anorexia nervosa, bulimia
nervosa, and binge-eating disorder.
Night-Eating Syndrome. Night-eating syndrome is characterized by the
consumption of large amounts of food after the evening meal. Individuals
generally have little appetite during the day and suffer from insomnia.
Purging Disorder. Purging disorder is characterized by recurrent purging
behavior after consuming a small amount of food in persons of average
weight who have a distorted view of their weight or body image. Purging
behavior includes self-induced vomiting, laxative abuse, enemas, and
diuretics. This behavior should not be associated with anorexia nervosa.
Purging disorder is differentiated from bulimia nervosa because purging
behavior occurs after eating small quantities of food or drink and does not
occur as a result of a binge episode.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Anorexia Nervosa
The onset of anorexia nervosa usually occurs between the ages of 10 and 30


<<<PAGE 1500>>>
years. We summarize the diagnostic criteria in DSM-5 and ICD-10 for the
disorder in Table 13-1.
Intense fear of gaining weight and becoming obese is present in all patients
with the disorder and undoubtedly contributes to their lack of interest in and
even resistance to therapy. Most aberrant behavior directed toward losing
weight occurs in secret. Patients with anorexia nervosa usually refuse to eat
with their families or in public places. They lose weight by drastically
reducing their total food intake, with a disproportionate decrease in highcarbohydrate and fatty foods.
The term anorexia is a misnomer because the loss of appetite is usually
rare until late in the disorder. Evidence that patients are frequently thinking
about food is their passion for collecting recipes and for preparing elaborate
meals for others. Some patients cannot continuously control their voluntary
restriction of food intake, and so have eating binges. These binges usually
occur secretly, often at night, and are frequently followed by self-induced
vomiting. Patients abuse laxatives and even diuretics to lose weight, and
ritualistic exercising, extensive cycling, walking, jogging, and running are
everyday activities.
Patients with the disorder show peculiar behavior surrounding food. They
hide food all over the house and frequently carry large quantities of candies
in their pockets and purses. While eating meals, they try to dispose of food in
their napkins or hide it in their pockets. They cut their meat into tiny pieces
and spend a great deal of time rearranging these pieces on their plates. If
someone confronts the patient about the behavior, they often deny that it is
unusual or flatly refuse to discuss it.
Obsessive-compulsive behavior, depression, and anxiety are other
psychiatric symptoms of anorexia nervosa most frequently noted clinically.
Patients tend to be rigid and perfectionist, and somatic complaints, especially
epigastric discomfort, are usual. Compulsive stealing, usually of candies and
laxatives but occasionally of clothes and other items, may occur.
Patients with the disorder frequently have poor sexual adjustment. Many
adolescent patients with anorexia nervosa have delayed psychosocial sexual
development; in adults, a markedly decreased interest in sex often
accompanies the onset of the disorder. A minority of anorexic patients have a
premorbid history of promiscuity, substance abuse, or both, but during the
disorder show a decreased interest in sex.


<<<PAGE 1501>>>
Patients usually come to medical attention when their weight loss becomes
apparent. As the weight loss grows profound, physical signs such as
hypothermia (as low as 35°C), dependent edema, bradycardia, hypotension,
and lanugo (the appearance of neonatal-like hair) appear, and patients show a
variety of metabolic changes. These and other medical complications are
listed in Table 13-2.
Table 13-1
Anorexia Nervosa Diagnoses
Anorexia Nervosa
Disorder

DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic
name

Anorexia nervosa

Anorexia nervosa

Symptom

• Food restriction leading to
abnormally low weight
• Fear of gaining weight and
behaviors to prevent weight
gain
• Distorted body image
• Misperceiving weight or
shape
• Self-evaluation based on
thinness, lack of recognition
of the seriousness of one’s
weight

• Deliberate weight
loss induced by
the patient
• Fear of being fat
or flabby
• Associated
physiologic
disturbances due
to low weight
• Specific
behaviors:
• Restricted diet
• Excess exercise
• Binging behavior
• Use of appetite
suppressants
and diuretics

Required
All
number of


<<<PAGE 1502>>>
symptom
Exclusions

Loss of appetite
(physical or
psychological)

Symptom
Restricting type: Primary
specifiers
behaviors are dieting, fasting,
and exercise for last 3 mo
Binge eating type: Binging and
purging behavior for last 3
mo. Can include use of
laxatives or other substances
to aid purging
Course
Partial remission: Symptoms
specifiers
present but no longer an
abnormally low weight
Full remission: No symptoms for
a sustained period
Severity
Severity is measured by BMI
specifiers
level
See DSM-5 for ranges
Comments

If lacking core
symptoms, the
diagnosis of
“atypical
anorexia
nervosa” is
made

Table 13-2
Medical Complications of the Eating Disorders
Disorder and
System

Consequence


<<<PAGE 1503>>>
Affected
Anorexia Nervosa
Vital signs

Bradycardia, hypotension with marked orthostatic
changes, hypothermia, poikilothermia

General

Muscle atrophy, loss of body fat

Central nervous Generalized brain atrophy with enlarged ventricles,
system
decreased cortical mass, seizures, abnormal
electroencephalogram
Cardiovascular Peripheral (starvation) edema, decreased cardiac
diameter, narrowed left ventricular wall,
decreased response to exercise demand,
superior mesenteric artery syndrome
Renal

Prerenal azotemia

Hematologic

Anemia of starvation, leukopenia, hypocellular bone
marrow

Gastrointestinal Delayed gastric emptying, gastric dilatation,
decreased intestinal lipase and lactase
Metabolic

Hypercholesterolemia, nonsymptomatic
hypoglycemia, elevated liver enzymes,
decreased bone mineral density

Endocrine

Low luteinizing hormone, low follicle-stimulating
hormone, low estrogen or testosterone,
low/normal thyroxine, low triiodothyronine,
increased reverse triiodothyronine, elevated
cortisol, elevated growth hormone, partial
diabetes insipidus, increased prolactin

Bulimia Nervosa and Binge Eating and Purging Type Anorexia
Nervosa
Metabolic

Hypokalemic alkalosis or acidosis, hypochloremia,
dehydration


<<<PAGE 1504>>>
Renal

Prerenal azotemia, acute and chronic renal failure

Cardiovascular Arrhythmias, myocardial toxicity from emetine
(ipecac)
Dental

Lingual surface enamel loss, multiple caries

Gastrointestinal Swollen parotid glands, elevated serum amylase
levels, gastric distention, irritable bowel
syndrome, melanosis coli from laxative abuse
Musculoskeletal Cramps, tetany
Subtypes. Anorexia nervosa has two clinical subtypes: food restricting and
purging. In the food-restricting category, present in approximately 50 percent
of cases, food intake is highly restricted (usually with attempts to consume
fewer than 300 to 500 calories per day and no fat grams) and the patient may
be relentlessly and compulsively overactive, with overuse athletic injuries. In
the purging subtype, patients alternate attempts at rigorous dieting with
intermittent binge or purge episodes. Purging represents a secondary
compensation for the unwanted calories, most often accomplished by selfinduced vomiting, frequently by laxative abuse, less frequently by diuretics,
and occasionally with emetics. Sometimes, repetitive purging occurs without
prior binge eating, after ingesting only relatively few calories. Both types
may be socially isolated and have depressive disorder symptoms and
diminished sexual interest. Overexercising and perfectionistic traits are also
common in both types.
Those who practice binge eating and purging share many features with
persons who have bulimia nervosa without anorexia nervosa. Those who
binge eat and purge tend to have families in which some members are obese,
and they have histories of heavier body weights before the disorder than do
persons with the restricting type. Binge eating–purging persons are likely to
be associated with substance abuse, impulse control disorders, and
personality disorders. Persons with restricting anorexia nervosa often have
obsessive-compulsive traits concerning food and other matters. Some persons
with anorexia nervosa may purge but not binge.
Patients with anorexia nervosa are often secretive, deny their symptoms,


<<<PAGE 1505>>>
and resist treatment. In almost all cases, relatives or intimate acquaintances
must confirm a patient’s history. The mental status examination usually
shows a patient who is alert and knowledgeable on the subject of nutrition
and who is preoccupied with food and weight.
A young woman who weighed 10 percent above the average weight but
was otherwise healthy, functioning well, and working hard as a university
student joined a track team. She started training for hours a day, more
than her teammates, began to perceive herself as fat, and thought that her
performance would be enhanced if she lost weight. She started to diet and
reduced her weight to 87 percent of the “ideal weight” for her age
according to standard tables. At her point of maximum weight loss, her
performance declined, and she pushed herself even harder in her training
regimen. She started to feel apathetic and morbidly afraid of becoming
fat. Her food intake became restricted, and she stopped eating anything
containing fat. Her menstrual periods became skimpy and infrequent but
did not cease. (Courtesy of Arnold E. Andersen, M.D. and Joel Yager,
M.D.)
Bulimia Nervosa
People with bulimia nervosa have binge episodes with compensatory
behaviors. Like persons with anorexia nervosa, they fear becoming fat;
however, they are not severely thin. We summarize the diagnostic criteria in
DSM-5 and ICD-10 for the disorder in Table 13-3.
Table 13-3
Bulimia Nervosa Diagnoses
Bulimia Nervosa
Disorder

DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic
name

Bulimia nervosa

Bulimia nervosa

Duration

Occurs at least once a week for


<<<PAGE 1506>>>
3 mo
Symptom

1. Repeated binge-eating
episodes
• Occurring within 2 hr
period
• Loss of control during the
episode
2. Compensatory behaviors to
prevent weight gain, such
as
• Vomiting
• Laxatives
• Diuretics, other
substances
• Excessive exercise
• Fasting
3. Self-evaluation based on
weight and shape

Required
All 3
number
of
symptom
Exclusions

Does not occur only during
episodes of anorexia
nervosa

Course
Partial remission: Full
specifiers
symptoms no longer met for
a sustained time
Full remission: No symptoms
for a sustained period
Severity
Severity is measured by the
specifiers
average number of
compensatory behaviors in

• Binging
• Preoccupation with
weight control
• Preoccupation with
body shape and
weight
• Associated
physiologic
disturbances due to
repeated vomiting
• Specific
compensatory
behaviors:
• Vomiting
• Use of purgatives

Not specified


<<<PAGE 1507>>>
a weeks’ time
See DSM-5 for ranges
When making a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa, clinicians should explore the
possibility that the patient has experienced a brief or prolonged prior bout of
anorexia nervosa, which is present in approximately half of those with
bulimia nervosa. The binging behavior commonly precedes vomiting by
about 1 year.
Vomiting is frequent and is often induced by sticking a finger down the
throat. Some patients can vomit at will. Vomiting decreases the abdominal
pain and the feeling of being bloated and allows patients to continue eating
without fear of gaining weight. The acid content of vomitus can damage tooth
enamel, a not uncommon finding in patients with the disorder. Depression,
sometimes called postbinge anguish, often follows the episode. During
binges, patients eat food that is sweet, high in calories, and generally soft or
smooth textured, such as cakes and pastry. Some patients prefer bulky foods
without regard to taste. The food is eaten secretly and rapidly and is
sometimes not even chewed.
Jean was a 25-year-old woman admitted to an inpatient unit after a
superficial suicide attempt. During her initial evaluation, she revealed
that she had struggled with bulimia nervosa since her early teens. She
said that she has always tended “to be on the heavy side” and would
respond by skipping meals during the day, only to binge on “junk food”
in the evening. Her binge eating occurred almost daily, and at least two or
three times a week, Jean would force herself to vomit afterward. She also
used daily laxatives and ran for at least an hour a day. Despite these
behaviors, she could not lose weight, which distressed her to the point
that she cut her wrists, although Jean admitted she had really “only
scratched myself.” She drank socially and did not use illicit drugs. On
examination, she appeared somewhat overweight with a BMI of 29. Her
dentition showed signs of enamel erosion, and she had calluses on her
fingers from her induced vomiting. There were superficial scratches on
her wrist from when she cut herself. She had normal electrolytes on


<<<PAGE 1508>>>
laboratory evaluation.
Jean had a high school education and had been married for 2 years, and
she described her marriage as “rocky” as her husband frequently traveled
on business. She said she rarely saw her parents, who were “always
criticizing me.” She did not work and said she was bored most of the
time. On several occasions, while her husband was away, she would meet
up with former boyfriends and sometimes slept with them. She felt that
her guilt over these affairs contributed to her depression and suicidal
ideation.
During her hospital stay, she had nutritional counseling and ate
regularly scheduled meals, for which she had to be observed. After meals,
she could use the bathroom but was instructed not to flush the toilet. This
continued for 2 days until a staff member found a plastic bag of partially
digested food in a trash can, after which the staff would observe her for
an hour after meals. Initially, she would use a hospital courtyard for
jogging, and when that was restricted, the evening staff observed her
doing calisthenics in her room. Several staff members also saw her
flirting with the male patients, and her therapist reminded her of the unit
rules regarding patient relationships. Her treatment consisted of a
behavioral schedule and frequent observation while her therapy focused
on her difficulties with self-esteem and interpersonal interactions. Her
psychiatrist initiated fluoxetine, 20 mg. Her purging behaviors decreased
over the next 2 weeks to the point where she was considered appropriate
for outpatient treatment.
Most patients with bulimia nervosa are within their normal weight range,
but some may be underweight or overweight. These patients are concerned
about their body image and their appearance, worried about how others see
them, and concerned about their sexual attractiveness. Most are sexually
active, compared with anorexia nervosa patients, who are not interested in
sex. They may have a history of pica and struggles during meals.
Table 13-4
Binge-Eating Disorder


<<<PAGE 1509>>>
Binge-Eating Disorder
Disorder

DSM-5

Diagnostic name Binge-eating disorder

ICD-10
Bulimia nervosa,
nonpurging type

Duration

Occurs at least once a
week for 3 mo

Symptom

• Repeated binge-eating Similar to ICD-10
episodes
bulimia nervosa
minus the specific
• Occurring within 2 hr
compensatory
period
behaviors
• Loss of control during
the episode
• Binge-associated
behaviors or reactions
• Eating quicker than
normal
• Eating until
uncomfortably full
• Eating despite not
being hungry
• Eating alone to avoid
embarrassment
• Feeling guilty or
disgusted after eating

Required number Binge behaviors plus at
of symptom
least three of the
associated behaviors
or reactions
Psychosocial
Marked distress
consequences
of symptoms


<<<PAGE 1510>>>
Exclusions

No compensatory
behavior as in bulimia
nervosa

Course specifiers Partial remission:
Occurrences are less
frequent (<1
episode/wk)
Full remission: No
symptoms for a
sustained period
Severity
specifiers

Severity is measured by
the average number of
compensatory
behaviors in a weeks’
time
See DSM-5 for ranges

Binge-Eating Disorder
Individuals with binge-eating disorder engage in frequent binges, often
independent of feeling hungry. We summarize the diagnostic criteria in
DSM-5 and ICD-10 for the disorder in Table 13-4.
Other Specified Feeding and Eating Disorder
Night-Eating Syndrome. As implied by the name, night-eating syndrome
includes recurrent episodes of hyperphagia or night eating. It may be
associated with insomnia and a lack of desire for food in the morning.
Patients with night-eating syndrome usually consume a large portion of
their daily calorie intake after the evening meal. They may also wake up
during the night and eat upon awakening. Some patients believe that they can
only sleep if they eat. Depressed mood is common among these patients,
especially during the evening and night hours.

PATHOLOGY AND LABORATORY EXAMINATION


<<<PAGE 1511>>>
Anorexia Nervosa
A patient with anorexia nervosa must have a thorough general physical and
neurologic examination. If the patient is vomiting, a hypokalemic alkalosis
may be present. Because most patients are dehydrated, serum electrolyte
levels must be determined initially and periodically. Hospitalization may be
necessary to deal with medical complications.
A complete blood count often reveals leukopenia with a relative
lymphocytosis in emaciated patients with anorexia nervosa. If binge eating
and purging are present, serum electrolyte determination reveals hypokalemic
alkalosis. Fasting serum glucose concentrations are often low during the
emaciated phase, and serum salivary amylase concentrations may increase if
the patient is vomiting.
Electrocardiographic (ECG) changes, such as T-wave flattening or
inversion, ST segment depression, and lengthening of the QT interval, have
been noted in the emaciated stage of anorexia nervosa. The ST segment and
T-wave changes are usually secondary to electrolyte disturbances; emaciated
patients have hypotension and bradycardia. ECG changes may also result
from potassium loss, which can lead to death. Young girls may have a high
serum cholesterol level. All these values revert to normal with nutritional
rehabilitation and cessation of purging behaviors. Endocrine changes related
to being underweight may occur. These can include amenorrhea, mild
hypothyroidism, and hypersecretion of corticotrophin-releasing hormone,
which revert to normal with weight gain (see Table 13-2).
Bulimia Nervosa
Bulimia nervosa can result in electrolyte abnormalities and various degrees of
starvation, although it may not be as apparent as in low-weight patients with
anorexia nervosa. Thus, even normal-weight patients with bulimia nervosa
should have laboratory studies of electrolytes and metabolism. In general,
thyroid function remains intact in bulimia nervosa, but patients may show
nonsuppression on a dexamethasone-suppression test. Dehydration and
electrolyte disturbances are likely to occur in patients with bulimia nervosa
who purge regularly. These patients commonly exhibit hypomagnesemia and
hyperamylasemia. Although not a core diagnostic feature, many patients with
bulimia nervosa have menstrual disturbances. Hypotension and bradycardia


<<<PAGE 1512>>>
occur in some patients.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Anorexia Nervosa
The differential diagnosis of anorexia nervosa is complicated, as patients
often deny symptoms, are secretive about their eating habits, and resist
seeking treatment. Thus, it may be difficult to identify the mechanism of
weight loss and the patient’s associated ruminative thoughts about distortions
of body image.
We should differentiate the eating disorders from one another. Attention to
specific criteria, including whether the patient is of average weight, is
essential. However, the two conditions can coexist.
We must ascertain that a patient does not have a medical illness that can
account for the weight loss (e.g., a brain tumor or cancer). Weight loss,
peculiar eating behaviors, and vomiting can occur in several mental
disorders. Depressive disorders and anorexia nervosa have several features in
common, such as depressed feelings, crying spells, sleep disturbance,
obsessive ruminations, and occasional suicidal thoughts. The two disorders,
however, have several distinguishing features. In general, a patient with a
depressive disorder has decreased appetite, whereas a patient with anorexia
nervosa claims to have a normal appetite and to feel hungry; only in the
severe stages of anorexia nervosa do patients have decreased appetite.
In contrast to depressive agitation, the hyperactivity seen in anorexia
nervosa is planned and ritualistic. The preoccupation with recipes, the caloric
content of foods, and the preparation of gourmet feasts is typical of patients
with anorexia nervosa but is absent in patients with a depressive disorder. In
depressive disorders, patients have no intense fear of obesity or disturbance
of body image.
Weight fluctuations, vomiting, and peculiar food handling may occur in
somatization disorder. On rare occasions, a patient may have both a
somatization disorder and anorexia nervosa, in which case we should
diagnose both. In general, patients with somatization disorder have less
weight loss than patients with anorexia nervosa and do not fear weight gain.
Amenorrhea for 3 months or longer is unusual in somatization disorder.


<<<PAGE 1513>>>
Patients with schizophrenia that include delusions about food rarely are
concerned with caloric content. More likely, they believe someone poisoned
the food. Patients with schizophrenia are rarely preoccupied with a fear of
becoming obese and do not have the hyperactivity seen with anorexia
nervosa. Patients with schizophrenia have bizarre eating habits but not the
entire syndrome of anorexia nervosa.
There are rare conditions of unknown etiology in which a hyperactive
vagus nerve causes changes in eating patterns that are associated with weight
loss, sometimes severe. In such cases, we may see bradycardia, hypotension,
and other parasympathomimetic signs and symptoms. Because the vagus
nerve relates to the enteric nervous system, eating may be associated with
gastric distress such as nausea or bloating. Patients do not generally lose their
appetite. Treatment is symptomatic. Anticholinergic drugs can reverse
hypotension and bradycardia, which may be life-threatening.
Bulimia Nervosa
We cannot make the diagnosis of bulimia nervosa if the binge-eating and
purging behaviors occur exclusively during episodes of anorexia nervosa. In
such cases, the diagnosis is anorexia nervosa, binge eating–purging type.
Additionally, we should distinguish bulimia nervosa from binge-eating
disorder, which typically includes binge-eating behaviors but no
compensatory or purging behaviors.
We must ascertain that patients have no neurologic disease, such as
epileptic-equivalent seizures, central nervous system tumors, Klüver–Bucy
syndrome, or Kleine–Levin syndrome. Klüver–Bucy syndrome includes
visual agnosia, compulsive licking and biting, an examination of objects by
the mouth, inability to ignore any stimulus, placidity, altered sexual behavior
(hypersexuality), and altered dietary habits, especially hyperphagia. The
syndrome is exceedingly rare and is unlikely to cause a problem in the
differential diagnosis. Kleine–Levin syndrome consists of periodic
hypersomnia lasting for 2 to 3 weeks and hyperphagia. As in bulimia
nervosa, the onset is usually during adolescence, but the syndrome is more
common in men than in women.
Some patients with bulimia nervosa have multiple comorbid impulsive
behaviors, including substance abuse, and lack of ability to control


<<<PAGE 1514>>>
themselves in such diverse areas as money management (resulting in impulse
buying and compulsive shopping) and sexual relationships (often resulting in
a short, passionate attachment and promiscuity). They exhibit self-mutilation,
chaotic emotions, and chaotic sleeping patterns. They usually meet the
criteria for borderline personality disorder and other mixed personality
disorders and, not infrequently, bipolar II disorder. When bulimia nervosa cooccurs with one of these disorders, we should note both diagnoses.
Binge-Eating Disorder
Binge-eating disorder and bulimia nervosa share the same core feature of
recurrent binge eating. Binge-eating disorder is distinct from bulimia nervosa,
however, in that binge-eating disorder patients do not report repetitive
compensatory behaviors such as vomiting, laxative abuse, or excessive
dieting. Binge-eating disorder is distinct from anorexia nervosa in that
patients do not exhibit an extreme drive for thinness and are of average
weight or are obese.
Other Specified Feeding and Eating Disorder
Night-Eating Syndrome. Night-eating syndrome is common among
patients with other eating disorders, particularly bulimia nervosa and bingeeating disorder. Although we can find night eating in patients with bulimia
nervosa and binge-eating disorder, it is the characteristic sign of night-eating
disorder. Also, the amount of food consumed during eating episodes is
usually lower in night-eating disorder than in bulimia nervosa and bingeeating disorder. Unlike other eating disorders, patients with night eating
syndrome are not overly concerned about body image and weight. Patients
with night-eating syndrome are also at higher risk for obesity and metabolic
syndrome.
Recurrent episodes of involuntary eating characterize a sleep-related eating
disorder during the night. These episodes can lead to severe consequences
such as the ingesting of nonedible foods or substances, dangerous behaviors
while searching for or preparing food, and sleep-related injury. The eating
episodes usually occur after the patient has gone to sleep and may occur
while the patient is unconscious or asleep. The sleep-related eating disorder


<<<PAGE 1515>>>
also has high comorbidity with sleepwalking, restless legs syndrome, and
obstructive sleep apnea, conditions that are rarely found among night-eating
syndrome patients. Episodes of sleep-related eating disorder have been
reported after the use of certain medications, including zolpidem, triazolam,
olanzapine, and risperidone.

COMORBIDITY
Anorexia Nervosa
Table 13-5 lists comorbid psychiatric conditions associated with anorexia
nervosa. Overall, anorexia nervosa is associated with depression in 50
percent of cases, social phobia in 22 percent of cases, and obsessivecompulsive disorder (OCD) in 35 percent of cases.
The suicide rate is higher in persons with the binge eating–purging type of
anorexia nervosa than in those with the restricting type.
Binge eating–purging persons are likely to be associated with substance
abuse, impulse control disorders, and personality disorders. Persons with
restricting anorexia nervosa often have obsessive-compulsive traits
concerning food and other matters. Some persons with anorexia nervosa may
purge but not binge.
Bulimia Nervosa
Bulimia nervosa occurs in individuals with high rates of mood disorders and
impulse control disorders. Bulimia nervosa also co-occurs with substance use
disorders, particularly alcohol. Patients with bulimia nervosa also have
increased rates of anxiety disorders, bipolar I disorder, dissociative disorders,
and histories of sexual abuse. Patients with bulimia nervosa who have
concurrent seasonal affective disorder and patterns of atypical depression
(with overeating and oversleeping in low-light months) may manifest
seasonal worsening of both bulimia nervosa and depressive features.
Individuals with bulimia nervosa who purge may be at risk for certain
medical complications such as hypokalemia from vomiting or laxative abuse
and hypochloremic alkalosis. Those who vomit repeatedly are at risk for
gastric and esophageal tears, although these complications are rare.


<<<PAGE 1516>>>
Binge-Eating Disorder
Binge-eating disorder is associated with mood, anxiety, and substance use
disorders. Also, nearly half of individuals with binge-eating disorder are
obese and are at risk for medical complications associated with obesity.
Patients with binge-eating disorder are also more likely to have an unstable
weight history with frequent episodes of weight cycling (the gaining or losing
of more than 10 kg). The disorder may be associated with insomnia, early
menarche, neck or shoulder and lower back pain, chronic muscle pain, and
metabolic disorders.
Table 13-5
Lifetime Comorbidities of Various Psychiatric Disorders
with Eating Disorders

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS


<<<PAGE 1517>>>
Anorexia Nervosa
The precise course of the illness varies substantially, although specific
patterns have emerged in the literature. Follow-up studies of patients with
anorexia nervosa reveal that, at the time of assessment, approximately 30 to
50 percent have achieved full recovery, and 10 to 20 percent remain
chronically ill. The remainder improve but continue to struggle with certain
disordered behaviors. The chronically ill group often requires multiple
hospitalizations. Of note, anorexia nervosa has a mortality rate as high as that
associated with any psychiatric illness. Compared to the general population,
individuals with the illness are up to six times more likely to die. The
majority of deaths are attributable to medical complications of low weight
and malnourishment, but a smaller, yet significant, proportion of deaths
(approximately 1 in 5) are due to suicide.
Although additional research is needed to identify predictors of outcome in
anorexia nervosa, studies have found that adolescents with a shorter duration
of illness tend to have a better prognosis, emphasizing the importance of
early detection and intervention. Studies examining inpatients with anorexia
nervosa just before and after discharge have also identified specific predictors
of posttreatment outcomes. Individuals who achieve full weight-restoration
on an inpatient unit and maintain their weight in the first month after
discharge are, perhaps unsurprisingly, more likely to remain at a healthy
weight up to a year after treatment. Lower BMI at discharge and weight loss
in the first month after treatment, on the other hand, predict more
unsatisfactory long-term outcomes. Additionally, individuals who
demonstrate an ability to consume a diet that is high in variety and energy
density (i.e., a greater concentration of kcal/g) before discharge seem to do
better after treatment.
Bulimia Nervosa
Bulimia nervosa is characterized by higher rates of partial and full recovery
compared with anorexia nervosa. Those receiving treatment fare much better
than those who are untreated. Untreated patients tend to remain chronic or
may show small, but generally unimpressive, degrees of improvement with
time. Research has yet to identify any clear predictors of outcome in bulimia
nervosa. Studies have examined a variety of potential prognostic factors,


<<<PAGE 1518>>>
including duration of illness, age of onset, illness severity, comorbid
diagnoses, and personality characteristics, with mixed results. In individuals
who receive treatment for bulimia nervosa, studies have found that rapid
symptom reduction predicts better treatment outcomes.
Binge-Eating Disorder
We know little about the course of binge-eating disorder. Severe obesity is a
long-term effect in over 3 percent of patients with the disorder. One
prospective study of women in the community with binge-eating disorder
suggested that by 5 years of follow-up, fewer than one-fifth of the sample
still had clinically significant eating disorder symptoms.
Other Specified Feeding and Eating Disorder
Night-Eating Syndrome. The age of onset for night-eating syndrome
ranges from the late teens to the late 20s and has a long-lasting course with
periods of remission with treatment. Patients who experience poor sleep
quality are more likely to develop diabetes, obesity, hypertension, and
cardiovascular disease.

TREATMENT APPROACH
Treatment of Anorexia Nervosa
Given the complicated psychological and medical implications of anorexia
nervosa, a comprehensive treatment plan, including hospitalization when
necessary and both individual and family therapy, is recommended. It is
important to consider behavioral, interpersonal, and cognitive approaches. In
many cases, medication may also help.
Hospitalization. The first consideration in the treatment of anorexia
nervosa is to restore patients’ nutritional state; dehydration, starvation, and
electrolyte imbalances can seriously compromise health and, in some cases,
lead to death. When deciding whether to hospitalize a patient, we should
consider the patient’s medical condition and the amount of structure needed
to ensure cooperation. In general, patients with anorexia nervosa who are 20


<<<PAGE 1519>>>
percent below the normal weight for their height require inpatient programs,
and patients who are 30 percent below their expected weight require
psychiatric hospitalization for 2 to 6 months.
Inpatient psychiatric programs for patients with anorexia nervosa generally
use a combination of a behavioral management approach, individual
psychotherapy, family education and therapy, and, in some cases,
psychotropic medications. Staff members should maintain a firm yet
supportive approach to patients, often through a combination of positive
reinforcers (praise) and negative reinforcers (restriction of exercise). The
program must have some flexibility for individualizing treatment to meet
patients’ needs and cognitive abilities. Patients must become willing
participants for treatment to succeed in the long run.
Most patients are uninterested in psychiatric treatment and even resist it;
they are brought to a doctor’s office unwillingly by agonizing relatives or
friends. The patients rarely accept the recommendation of hospitalization
without arguing and criticizing the proposed program. Emphasizing the
benefits, such as relief of insomnia and depressive signs and symptoms, may
help persuade the patients to admit themselves willingly to the hospital.
Relatives’ support and confidence in the physicians and treatment team are
essential for reinforcing the firm recommendations made on the unit. We
should warn patients’ families that the patients will resist admission and, for
the first several weeks of treatment, will make many dramatic pleas for their
families’ support to obtain release from the hospital program. We should
consider compulsory admission or commitment only when the risk of death
from the complications of malnutrition is likely. On rare occasions, patients
prove that the doctor’s statements about the probable failure of outpatient
treatment are wrong. They may gain a specified amount of weight by the time
of each outpatient visit, but such behavior is uncommon, and a period of
inpatient care is usually necessary.
HOSPITAL MANAGEMENT. The following considerations apply to the general

management of patients with anorexia nervosa during a hospitalized
treatment program. Patients should be weighed daily, early in the morning
after emptying the bladder. The staff should record daily fluid intake and
urine output. If vomiting is occurring, hospital staff members must monitor
serum electrolyte levels regularly and watch for the development of


<<<PAGE 1520>>>
hypokalemia. Because patients often regurgitate food after meals, the staff
may be able to control vomiting by making the bathroom inaccessible for at
least 2 hours after meals or by having an attendant in the bathroom to prevent
the opportunity for vomiting. Constipation in these patients is relieved when
they begin to eat normally. We may occasionally use stool softeners, but
never laxatives. If diarrhea occurs, it usually means that patients are
surreptitiously taking laxatives. Because of the risk of refeeding syndrome
when patients immediately start eating an enormous number of calories, the
hospital staff should start patients on a low-caloric intake initially (e.g., 1,000
to 1,400 kcals/day), and increase slowly by approximately 400 kcals every
few days. It is wise to give these calories in six equal feedings throughout the
day so that patients need not eat a large amount of food at one sitting. Giving
patients a liquid food supplement may be advisable, because they may be less
apprehensive about gaining weight slowly with formula than by eating food.
After discharging patients from the hospital, clinicians usually find it
necessary to continue outpatient supervision of the problems identified in the
patients and their families.
Psychotherapy

Family-based therapy (FBT) is an effective
treatment for anorexia nervosa, particularly in patients under the age of 18.
FBT, also known as the Maudsley method, generally consists of three phases
of treatment. In phase one, treatment focuses on the restoration of the
patient’s physical health, with decisions about what or when the patient will
eat made by the parents. Once the patient has begun to gain weight and
shown improvement in symptoms of anorexia nervosa, FBT moves on to
phase two. In this phase, the patient gradually begins to take responsibility
for decisions about eating. In phase three, the focus shifts to the patient’s
growth and development.
FAMILY-BASED

THERAPY.

COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL THERAPY. Cognitive and behavioral therapy principles

can be applied in both inpatient and outpatient settings and have been found
effective for inducing weight gain. Monitoring is an essential component of
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). Therapists teach patients to monitor
their food intake, their feelings and emotions, their binging and purging
behaviors, and their problems in interpersonal relationships. They also teach


<<<PAGE 1521>>>
the patients cognitive restructuring to identify automatic thoughts and to
challenge their core beliefs. Problem-solving is a specific method whereby
patients learn how to think through and devise strategies to cope with their
food-related and interpersonal problems. These techniques can help address a
patient’s vulnerability to rely on anorectic behavior as a means of coping.
DYNAMIC PSYCHOTHERAPY. We sometimes use dynamic expressive-supportive

psychotherapy in the treatment of patients with anorexia nervosa, but their
resistance may make the process difficult and painstaking. Because patients
view their symptoms as constituting the core of their specialness, therapists
must avoid excessive investment in trying to change their eating behavior.
We should gear the opening phase of the psychotherapy process toward
building a therapeutic alliance. Patients may experience early interpretations
as though someone else was telling them what they feel and thereby
minimizing and invalidating their own experiences. Therapists who
empathize with patients’ points of view and take an active interest in what
their patients think and feel, however, convey to patients that their autonomy
is respected. Above all, psychotherapists must be flexible, persistent, and
durable in the face of patients’ tendencies to defeat any efforts to help them.
Pharmacotherapy. Pharmacologic studies have not yet identified any
medication that yields a definitive improvement of the core symptoms of
anorexia nervosa. Some reports support the use of atypical antipsychotics,
particularly olanzapine, for weight gain, although larger studies or metaanalyses have not supported this. When using atypical antipsychotics, the
metabolic and cardiac risks associated with these medications, particularly in
a population already at risk for cardiac complications, require close
monitoring. Antidepressants, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), have been tried by patients
with anorexia nervosa with variable results, though typically antidepressants
are not helpful while patients are in an undernourished state. In patients with
anorexia nervosa and coexisting depressive disorders, we should treat the
depressive condition. Concern exists about the use of tricyclic drugs in lowweight, depressed patients with anorexia nervosa, who may be vulnerable to
hypotension, cardiac arrhythmia, and dehydration. In some patients, the
depression improves with weight gain and normalized nutritional status.


<<<PAGE 1522>>>
Treatment of Bulimia Nervosa
Most patients with uncomplicated bulimia nervosa do not require
hospitalization. In general, patients with bulimia nervosa are not as secretive
about their symptoms as patients with anorexia nervosa. Therefore, outpatient
treatment is usually not difficult, but psychotherapy is frequently stormy and
prolonged. In some cases—when eating binges are out of control, outpatient
treatment does not work, or a patient exhibits such additional psychiatric
symptoms as suicidality and substance abuse—hospitalization may become
necessary. Also, electrolyte and metabolic disturbances resulting from severe
purging may necessitate hospitalization.
Psychotherapy
COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL THERAPY. CBT should be considered the benchmark,

first-line treatment for bulimia nervosa. The data supporting the efficacy of
CBT are based on strict adherence to rigorously implemented, highly
detailed, manual-guided treatments that include about 18 to 20 sessions over
5 to 6 months. CBT implements several cognitive and behavioral procedures
to (1) interrupt the self-maintaining behavioral cycle of binging and dieting
and (2) alter the individual’s dysfunctional cognitions; beliefs about food,
weight, body image; and overall self-concept.
OTHER MODALITIES. Given its effectiveness in anorexia nervosa, clinicians

have also used FBT for bulimia nervosa. Additionally, controlled trials have
shown that a variety of novel ways of administering and facilitating CBT are
effective for bulimia nervosa. These include “stepped-care” programs and
internet-based platforms, computer-facilitated programs, email-enhanced
programs, and administration of CBT via telemedicine to remote areas.
Finally, emerging evidence suggests that dialectical behavior therapy may be
effective.
Pharmacotherapy. Antidepressant medications help treat bulimia nervosa,
particularly the SSRI fluoxetine. Fluoxetine can reduce binge eating and
purging, independent of the presence of a mood disorder. Dosages of
fluoxetine that are effective in decreasing binge eating, however, may be
higher (60 to 80 mg a day) than those used for depressive disorders. Other


<<<PAGE 1523>>>
antidepressants that may be helpful include other SSRIs (although concerns
about prolonged QT intervals with higher doses limit the utility of citalopram
in this population), TCAs (particularly amitriptyline and desipramine),
trazodone, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Bupropion is
contraindicated due to an increased risk of seizure in this population. In
general, most of the antidepressants other than fluoxetine have been effective
at dosages usually given in the treatment of depressive disorders. Medication
is helpful in patients with comorbid depressive disorders and bulimia
nervosa. Topiramate may have some efficacy in reducing binge episodes in
bulimia nervosa, as may lisdexamfetamine. Evidence indicates that CBT and
medications (particularly fluoxetine) are the most effective combination.
Treatment of Binge-Eating Disorder
Psychotherapy. CBT is the most effective psychological treatment for
binge-eating disorder and should be considered a first-line treatment. CBT
can lead to decreases in binge eating and associated problems (e.g.,
depression); however, studies have not shown marked weight loss as a result
of CBT. CBT combined with psychopharmacological treatments such as
SSRIs shows better results than CBT alone. Exercise has also shown a
reduction in binge eating when combined with CBT. Interpersonal
psychotherapy (IPT) is also effective in the treatment of binge-eating
disorder; however, therapy focuses more on the interpersonal problems that
contribute to the disorder rather than disturbances in eating behavior. There is
also some evidence for the use of dialectical behavior therapy for bingeeating disorder.
Psychopharmacotherapy. Symptoms of binge eating may benefit from
medication treatment, with strong evidence supporting the use of
lisdexamfetamine for both weight loss and reduction of binge episodes.
Antidepressant medications have demonstrated improvement in binge eating,
but typically do not result in sustained weight loss; these include fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, citalopram, escitalopram, sertraline, duloxetine, and bupropion.
The anticonvulsants topiramate and zonisamide may improve binge-eating
disorder, particularly with moderate weight loss. Topiramate may also reduce
binge episodes.


<<<PAGE 1524>>>
Most, but not all, studies show that medication added to CBT is more
effective than medication alone. For example, studies indicate that CBT did
better than fluvoxamine or desipramine as a monotherapy for binge-eating
disorder; however, when CBT was combined with these agents, more
improvement was seen in terms of weight loss compared with CBT alone.
Treating of Other Specified Feeding and Eating Disorder
Night-Eating Syndrome. Various studies have shown positive results in
patients treated with SSRIs who showed improvement in nighttime
awakenings, nocturnal eating, and post-evening caloric intake. Weight loss
and a reduction in nocturnal eating are associated with an addition of
topiramate to medication regimens.
In patients with comorbid major depression and night-eating syndrome,
bright light therapy has shown to decrease depressed mood. CBT has also
been helpful.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Anorexia Nervosa
Although a substantial proportion of those diagnosed with subthreshold
anorexia nervosa in DSM-IV now have a formal diagnosis in DSM-5,
combined rates of subthreshold and threshold anorexia nervosa have
remained relatively stable since the 1970s. Various studies have, however,
documented a significant increase in incidence rates (the number of new
cases in the population over a set time) in the high-risk group of 15- to 19year-old females in recent years. It remains unclear if this increase signifies
an earlier age of illness onset or more rapid recognition and intervention.
Across all age groups and genders, a review of recent epidemiologic studies
found that lifetime prevalence of DSM-5 anorexia nervosa is between 2.4 and
4.3 percent, approximately double the rate of cases diagnosed using DSM-IV
criteria. Among girls and women, point prevalence estimates of DSM-5
anorexia nervosa is between 0.6 and 0.7 percent.
Although epidemiologic studies indicate that it may occur as many as ten
times more frequently in females, anorexia nervosa does affect males. Recent


<<<PAGE 1525>>>
research suggests that the illness, which continues to be perceived by many as
a female disorder, may be even more common in men and boys than
previously believed. It may go unrecognized in men for a variety of reasons.
In particular, men may be reluctant to seek treatment out of shame, and
clinicians may be less likely to recognize the syndrome in male versus female
patients. Historically, many consider anorexia nervosa to be a disease of
white, wealthy women; however, it impacts individuals of all racial and
socioeconomic backgrounds.
Bulimia Nervosa
As with anorexia nervosa, rates of bulimia nervosa have increased with
changes to diagnostic criteria. However, before the recent modifications
appearing in DSM-5, studies suggested that the incidence of the illness had
decreased in recent years. Using DSM-5 criteria, the lifetime prevalence of
bulimia nervosa in women is approximately 2 percent, and point prevalence
is close to 0.6 percent. The average age of onset also seems to have
decreased, although this finding may be an artifact of earlier detection. Like
anorexia nervosa, the disorder is more common in women than in men.
Binge-Eating Disorder
Binge-eating disorder is the most common eating disorder and the least
gender-divided of the three. In the United States, the lifetime prevalence of
binge-eating disorder is about 3.6 percent for women and 2.1 percent for
men. Rates of binge-eating disorder are particularly high in obese and
overweight individuals.
Other Specified Feeding and Eating Disorder
Night-Eating Syndrome. Night-eating syndrome occurs in approximately
2 percent of the general population; however, it has a higher prevalence
among patients with insomnia, obesity (10 to 15 percent), eating disorders,
and other psychiatric disorders. The disorder usually begins in early
adulthood.

ETIOLOGY


<<<PAGE 1526>>>
Biologic, social, and psychological factors are important to the cause of
feeding and eating disorders. However, the precise mechanisms of causation
remain elusive. Current theories posit that individuals with eating disorders,
in particular, possess a set of predisposing traits (e.g., biologic, genetic, or
personality vulnerability) which, when triggered by a precipitating event
(e.g., the stress of puberty, the decision to go on a diet), result in illness. Once
the illness sets in, several factors work to maintain it (e.g., the social rewards
of weight loss, the effects of the starvation state in anorexia nervosa). A
discussion of the current understanding of the etiology of feeding and eating
disorders is detailed below.
Anorexia Nervosa
Genetic and Biologic Factors. Although we have not identified a
specific gene in anorexia nervosa, several lines of evidence suggest that
genetic vulnerability plays an important role in the development of the
illness. Family studies, in particular, have provided useful information about
genetic susceptibility, demonstrating that individuals with a family history of
anorexia nervosa are much more likely than those with no family history to
receive a diagnosis during their lifetime. The risk of developing the illness is
up to 11 times greater in individuals with a first-degree relative who has
experienced the illness. A relative with a history of a different eating disorder
also increases this risk. Twin studies have demonstrated that concordance
rates of anorexia nervosa are substantially higher in monozygotic twins as
compared to dizygotic twins, suggesting that something more than the family
environment is at play in increasing the odds of illness development. Studies
of the serotonin transporter offer preliminary evidence that this gene may
interact with environmental stressors to play a role in the development of
anorexia, further emphasizing that a convergence of elements is necessary for
illness development. Finally, once the illness sets in, the biologic and
psychological changes to the body that occur in the starvation state, including
depression and obsessionality, may help to maintain the illness.
Developmental Factors. Anorexia nervosa tends to develop during
adolescence, suggesting that factors particular to this period may put
individuals at risk for the syndrome. Adolescence represents a time of


<<<PAGE 1527>>>
increased biologic, psychological, and social change. The experience of
going through puberty and experiencing changes to body shape or weight
may serve as a major stressor for some, triggering or worsening body
dissatisfaction and low self-esteem. Additionally, several major social and
psychological transitions occur throughout adolescence, including identity
and role formation, increasing independence from parents, and the initiation
of romantic relationships. These stressors and others may work to catalyze
the eating disorder.
Psychological Factors. Several psychological factors appear to confer
added risk for developing anorexia nervosa. Certain personality traits,
including high levels of perfectionism, self-discipline, harm avoidance, and
self-criticism, are common in individuals with the illness. Individuals with
the restricting subtype, in particular, exhibit low impulsivity and are much
more likely to delay rewards than individuals without the illness. Cognitive
inflexibility is usually prominent, as well. In a subset of individuals, mood
and anxiety disorders or symptoms precede the development of the anorexia
nervosa. OCD and obsessive-compulsive personality traits also appear to
serve as vulnerability factors.
Environmental and Social Factors. Environmental and social factors,
small and large, from experiences in the family or school setting to cultural
ideals, may play a role in the development of anorexia nervosa. The influence
of family functioning style as a potential predisposing factor remains
controversial. No specific family functioning style appears to be either a
necessary or sufficient requirement for developing an eating disorder. As in
most psychiatric disorders, various family dysfunctional styles appear to act
as nonspecific vulnerability factors and also hamper recovery.
Activities that emphasize weight may increase the probability of
developing anorexia nervosa or another eating disorder. Ballet, gymnastics,
modeling, and weight-restricted sports like wrestling or light-weight rowing
may lead to preoccupation with body form and unhealthy attempts to control
weight. As many of these activities likely select for individuals who are
higher in perfectionism, another risk factor for anorexia nervosa, they may be
even more likely to contribute to illness onset.
Although it is a common misperception that Western media causes eating


<<<PAGE 1528>>>
disorders, the cultural ideal of thinness, which is certainly perpetuated by the
media, may fuel the overvaluation of shape and weight that marks both
anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Indeed, studies in Fiji, where Western
media was not available until the 1990s, showed a significant increase in
cases of eating disorders following the introduction of Western television
shows to the country. Nonetheless, classic anorexia nervosa remains rare, and
research has firmly established that the media alone does not cause eating
disorders.
Bulimia Nervosa
Genetic and Biologic Factors. As in anorexia nervosa, genetics likely
play a role in the development of bulimia nervosa, as evidenced by twin and
family studies. Individuals with a family history of bulimia nervosa, mood
disorder, substance use disorder, or obesity are at higher risk for developing
the syndrome.
Neurobiologic disturbances are also present in individuals with bulimia
nervosa and may increase the probability of binge eating. In particular,
individuals with the disorder tend to display delayed gastric emptying,
increased stomach capacity, and reduced secretion of cholecystokinin (CCK),
a peptide hormone released by the small intestine that helps to signal satiety
during food consumption. Together, disruptions to these neurobiologic
processes may put individuals at elevated risk for overeating.
Developmental Factors. The same psychological and social stressors of
puberty and adolescence that put individuals at risk for anorexia nervosa also
confer risk for bulimia nervosa.
Psychological Factors. Unlike individuals with anorexia nervosa, those
with bulimia nervosa tend to exhibit high levels of novelty seeking and
impulsivity. They also tend to display elevated levels of harm avoidance,
negative emotionality, and stress reactivity. Afflicted individuals are more
likely than others to experience a comorbid substance use disorder and
engage in self-harm, leading to speculation that a subset of individuals with
bulimia nervosa may have a propensity toward impulsivity across a range of
problematic behaviors. Mood and anxiety disturbances appear to serve as risk


<<<PAGE 1529>>>
factors for bulimia nervosa, as well.
Just as the starvation state works to maintain anorexia nervosa, the cycle of
binge eating and purging often becomes self-sustaining in bulimia nervosa.
Individuals with bulimia nervosa tend to restrict their food intake outside of
binge episodes, which puts them at increased risk for episodes of overeating.
In turn, after experiencing a binge episode and the resulting compensatory
behaviors, individuals often renew their commitment to restrictive eating in
an attempt to avoid future overeating episodes. Thus, this cycle tends to
become self-perpetuating and works to maintain the disorder.
Environmental and Social Factors. Individuals with bulimia nervosa
are likely affected by similar environmental and social stressors as those with
anorexia nervosa.
Binge-Eating Disorder
We know even less about the etiology of binge-eating disorder than of
anorexia or bulimia nervosa. Research thus far has suggested that a history of
childhood obesity, mood disorder, and negative family dynamics may put
individuals at higher risk for developing the illness. In some individuals,
dietary restriction appears to play a role in precipitating episodes of binge
eating, as in bulimia nervosa. Many individuals with binge-eating disorder,
however, seem to experience binge eating outside of the context of dietary
restriction. For these individuals, intense emotions may provoke binge
episodes.
Other Specified Feeding and Eating Disorder
Night-Eating Syndrome. We also know little about the cause of nighteating disorder. However, researchers have studied the hormones melatonin,
leptin, ghrelin, and cortisol as they relate to this disorder. Night-eating
syndrome also appears to run in families.

References
Allison KC, Lundgren JD, O’Reardon JP, Geliebter A, Gluck ME, Vinai P,
Mitchell JE, Schenck CH, Howell MJ, Crow SJ, Engel S, Latzer Y,


<<<PAGE 1530>>>
Tzischinsky O, Mahowald MW, Stunkard AJ. Proposed diagnostic criteria
for night eating syndrome. Int J Eat Disord. 2010;43:241–247.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association; 2013.
Birmingham CL, Treasure J. Medical Management of Eating Disorders. 2nd
ed. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2010.
Brown LM, Clegg DJ. Estrogen and leptin regulation of endocrinological
features of anorexia nervosa. Neuropsychopharmacol Rev. 2013;38:237.
Brown TA, Keel PK, Striegel RH. Feeding and eating conditions not
elsewhere classified (NEC) in DSM-5. Psych Annals. 2012;42:421.
Call CC, Attia E, Walsh BT. Chapter 22: Feeding and eating disorders. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer;
2017:2065–2082.
Castillo M, Weiselberg E. Bulimia nervosa/purging disorder. Curr Probl
Pediatr Adolesc Health Care. 2017;47:85–94.
Crow SJ. Pharmacologic treatment of eating disorders. Psychiatr Clin N Am.
2019;42:253–262.
De Young KP, Lavender JM, Wilson GT, Wonderlich SA. Binge eating
disorder in DSM-5. Psych Annals. 2012;42:410.
Engel SG, Wonderlich SA, Crosby RD, Mitchell JE, Crow S, Peterson CB,
Le Grange D, Simonich HK, Cao L, Lavender JM, Gordon KH. The role
of affect in the maintenance of anorexia nervosa: Evidence from a
naturalistic assessment of momentary behaviors and emotion. J Abnorm
Psychol. 2013;122(3):709–719.
Fallon P, Wisniewski L. A system of evidenced-based techniques and
collaborative clinical interventions with a chronically ill patient. Int J Eat
Disord. 2013;46(5):501–506.
Fazeli PK, Misra M, Goldstein M, Miller KK, Klibanski A. Fibroblast growth
factor-21 may mediate growth hormone resistance in anorexia nervosa. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95:369–374.
Fladung AK, Grön G, Grammer K, Herrnberger B, Schilly E, Grasteit S,
Wolf RC, Walter H, von Wietersheim J. A neural signature of anorexia
nervosa in the ventral striatal reward system. Am J Psych. 2009;167:206–
212.


<<<PAGE 1531>>>
Frank GKW, Reynolds JR, Shott ME, Jappe L, Yang TT, Tregellas JR,
O’Reilly RC. Anorexia nervosa and obesity are associated with opposite
brain reward response. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2012;37:2031–2046.
Friborg O, Martinussen M, Kaiser S, Overgård KT, Martinsen EW,
Schmierer P, Rosenvinge JH. Personality disorders in eating disorder not
otherwise specified and binge eating disorder: A meta-analysis of
comorbidity studies. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2014;202(2):119–125.
Friederich HC, Herzog W. Cognitive-behavioral flexibility in anorexia
nervosa. In: Adan RAH, Kaye WH, eds. Behavioral Neurobiology of
Eating Disorders. New York: Springer; 2011:111.
Germain N, Galusca B, Grouselle D, Frere D, Billard S, Epelbaum J, Estour
B. Ghrelin and obestatin circadian levels differentiate bingeing-purging
from restrictive anorexia nervosa. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2010;95:3057–3062.
Gianini LM, White MA, Masheb RM. Eating pathology, emotion regulation,
and emotional overeating in obese adults with binge eating disorder. Eat
Behav. 2013;14(3):309–313.
Goldschmidt AB, Grange DL, Powers P, Crow SJ, Hill LL, Peterson CB,
Crosby RD, Mitchell JE. Eating disorder symptomatology in normalweight vs. obese individuals with binge eating disorder. Obesity.
2011;19:1515–1518.
Guerdjikova AI, Mori N, Casuto LS, McElroy SL. Update on binge eating
disorder. Med Clin N Am. 2019;103(4):669–680.
Hay P. A systematic review of evidence for psychological treatments in
eating disorders: 2005–2012. Int J Eat Disord. 2013;46(5):462–469.
Hudson JI, Hiripi E, Pope HG Jr, Kessler RC. The prevalence and correlates
of eating disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey replication. Biol
Psychiatry. 2007;61:348–358.
Kaye WH, Bulik CM, Thornton L, Barbarich N, Masters K. Comorbidity of
anxiety disorders in anorexia and bulimia nervosa. Am J Psych.
2004;161(12):2215–2221.
Kishi T, Kafantaris V, Sunday S, Sheridan EM, Correll CU. Are
antipsychotics effective for the treatment of anorexia nervosa? Results
from a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Psychiatry.
2012;73:e757–e766.
Kumar KK, Tung S, Iqbal J. Bone loss in anorexia nervosa: Leptin, serotonin,


<<<PAGE 1532>>>
and the sympathetic nervous system. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010;1211:51–65.
Locke J, Grange DL. Treatment Manual for Anorexia Nervosa. 2nd ed. New
York: Guilford; 2013.
Lopez C, Davies H, Tchanturia K. Neuropsychological inefficiences in
anorexia nervosa targeted in clinical practice: The development of a
module of cognitive remediation therapy. In: Fox J, Goss K, eds. Eating
and its Disorders. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley; 2012:185.
Lowe MR, Witt AA, Grossman SL. Dieting in bulimia nervosa is associated
with increased food restriction and psychopathology but decreased binge
eating. Eat Behav. 2013;14(3):342–347.
Milano W, De Rosa M, Milano L, Capasso A. Night eating syndrome: An
overview. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2012;64:2–10.
Moskowitz L, Weiselberg E. Anorexia nervosa/atypical anorexia nervosa.
Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care. 2017;47:70–84.
Oberndorfer TA, Frank GKW, Simmons AN, Wagner A, McCurdy D, Fudge
JL, Yang TT, Paulus MP, Kaye WH. Altered insula response to sweet taste
processing after recovery from anorexia and bulimia nervosa. Am J
Psychiatry. 2013;170(10):1143–1151.
Perez M, Warren CS. The relationship between quality of life, binge-eating
disorder, and obesity status in an ethnically diverse sample. Obesity.
2012;20:879–885.
Pollert GA, Engel SG, Schreiber-Gregory DN, Crosby RD, Cao L,
Wonderlich SA, Tanofsky-Kraff M, Mitchell JE. The role of eating and
emotion in binge eating disorder and loss of control eating. Int J Eat
Disord. 2013;46(3):233–238.
Poulsen S, Lunn S, Daniel SI, Folke S, Mathiesen BB, Katznelson H,
Fairburn CG. A randomized controlled trial of psychoanalytic
psychotherapy or cognitive-behavioral therapy for bulimia nervosa. Am J
Psychiatry. 2014;171(1):109–116.
Reinecke RD. Family-based treatment of eating disorders in adolescents:
Current insights. Adolesc Health Med Ther. 2017;8:69–79.
Sandberg K, Erford BT. Choosing assessment instruments for bulimia
practice and outcome research. J Counsel Dev. 2013;91(3):359–366.
Schwitzer AM. Diagnosing, conceptualizing, and treating eating disorders not
otherwise specified: A comprehensive practice model. J Counsel Dev.
2012;90:281–289.


<<<PAGE 1533>>>
Tanofsky-Kraff M, Bulik CM, Marcus MD, Striegel RH, Wilfley DE,
Wonderlich SA, Hudson JI. Binge eating disorder: The next generation of
research. Int J Eat Disord. 2013;46(3):193–207.
Udo T, Grilo CM. Psychiatric and medical correlates of DSM-5 eating
disorders in a nationally representative sample of adults in the United
States. Int J Eat Disord. 2019;52:42–50.
Vander Wal JS. Night eating syndrome: A critical review of the literature.
Clin Psychol Rev. 2012;32:49–59.
Wolfe BE, Hannon-Engel SL, Mitchell JE. Bulimia nervosa in DSM-5. Psych
Annals. 2012;42:406–409.
Zimmerli EJ, Devlin MJ, Kissileff HR, Walsh BT. The development of
satiation in bulimia nervosa. Physiol Behav. 2010;100:346–349.
Zipfel S, Wild B, Groß G, Friederich HC, Teufel M, Schellberg D, Giel KE,
de Zwaan M, Dinkel A, Herpertz S, Burgmer M, Löwe B, Tagay S, von
Wietersheim J, Zeeck A, Schade-Brittinger C, Schauenburg H, Herzog W;
ANTOP study group. Focal psychodynamic therapy, cognitive behaviour
therapy, and optimised treatment as usual in outpatients with anorexia
nervosa (ANTOP study): Randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2014;383(9912):127–137.
Zunker C, Peterson CB, Crosby RD, Cao L, Engel SG, Mitchell JE,
Wonderlich SA. Ecological momentary assessment of bulimia nervosa:
Does dietary restriction predict binge eating? Behav Res Ther.
2011;49(10):714–717.


<<<PAGE 1534>>>
14
Elimination Disorders
The developmental milestones of mastering control over bowel and bladder
function are complex processes that involve motor and sensory functions,
coordinated through frontal lobe activities, and regulated by neurons in the
pons and midbrain area. Mastery of bowel and bladder function occurs over
several months for the typical toddler. Infants generally void small volumes
of urine approximately every hour, commonly stimulated by feeding, and
may have incomplete emptying of the bladder. As the infant matures to be a
toddler, bladder capacity increases, and between 1 and 3 years of age, cortical
inhibitory pathways develop that allow the child to have voluntary control
over reflexes that control the bladder muscles. The ability to have muscular
control over the bowel occurs even before bladder control for most toddlers,
and the assessment of fecal soiling includes determining whether the clinical
presentation occurs with or without chronic constipation and overflow
soiling. The typical sequence of developing control over bowel and bladder
functions is the development of nocturnal fecal continence, diurnal fecal
continence, diurnal bladder control, and nocturnal bladder control. Bowel and
bladder control develops gradually over time. Toilet training is affected by
many factors, such as a child’s intellectual capacity and social maturity,
cultural determinants, and the psychological interactions between child and
parents. The ability to control bowel and bladder functions depends on the
maturation of neurobiologic systems, so that children with developmental
delays may also display delayed continence of bowel and bladder. When
children exhibit incontinence of urine or feces regularly, it is troubling to the
children and families, and often misunderstood as voluntary misbehavior.
Encopresis (repeated passage of feces into inappropriate places) and
enuresis (repeated urination into bed or clothes) are the two elimination


<<<PAGE 1535>>>
disorders described in DSM-5. ICD-10 contains the diagnoses of nonorganic
encopresis and enuresis, which they list in the category of other behavioral
and emotional disorders with onset usually occurring in childhood and
adolescence. We should not make these diagnoses until after age 4 years, for
encopresis, and after age 5 years for enuresis, the ages at which a typically
developing child masters these skills. Healthy development encompasses a
range of time in which a given child can devote the attention, motivation, and
physiologic skills to exhibit competency in elimination processes.
We discuss each disorder separately in this chapter.

ENCOPRESIS
Clinical and Diagnostic Features
According to both DSM-5 and ICD-10, encopresis occurs when a child
passes feces into inappropriate places regularly. Table 14-1 compares the
diagnostic approaches for encopresis. Encopresis may be present in children
who have bowel control and intentionally deposit feces in their clothes or
other places for a variety of emotional reasons. Anecdotal reports have
suggested that occasionally encopresis is attributable to an expression of
anger or rage in a child whose parents have been punitive or of hostility at a
parent. In a case such as this, once a child develops this inappropriate
repetitive behavior eliciting negative attention, it is difficult to break the cycle
of continuous negative attention. In other children, sporadic episodes of
encopresis can occur during times of stress—for example, proximal to the
birth of a new sibling—but in such cases, the behavior is usually transient
and does not fulfill the diagnostic criteria for the disorder.
Encopresis can also be present on an involuntary basis in the absence of
physiologic abnormalities. In these cases, a child may not exhibit adequate
control over the sphincter muscles, either because the child is absorbed in
another activity or because he or she is unaware of the process. The feces
may be of normal, near-normal, or liquid consistency. Some involuntary
soiling occurs from chronic retaining of stool, which may result in a liquid
overflow. In rare cases, the involuntary overflow of stool results from
psychological causes of diarrhea or anxiety disorder symptoms. DSM-5
includes specifiers to indicate whether or not the disorder includes


<<<PAGE 1536>>>
constipation and overflow incontinence.
Studies have indicated that children with encopresis who do not have
gastrointestinal illnesses have high rates of abnormal anal sphincter
contractions. This finding is particularly prevalent among children with
encopresis with constipation and overflow incontinence who have difficulty
relaxing their anal sphincter muscles when trying to defecate. Children with
constipation, who have difficulties with sphincter relaxation, are not likely to
respond well to laxatives in the treatment of their encopresis. Children with
encopresis without abnormal sphincter tone are likely to improve over a short
period.
Jack was a 7-year-old boy with daily encopresis, enuresis, and history of
hoarding behaviors, along with hiding the feces around the house. He
lived with his adoptive parents, having been removed from his biologic
parents at the age of 3 years because of neglect and physical abuse. He
was reported to be cocaine-addicted at birth but was otherwise healthy.
Jack’s biologic mother was a known methamphetamine and alcohol user,
and his father had spent time in jail for drug dealing. Jack had always
been enuretic at night, and until this year, he had a history of daytime
enuresis as well. Jack had a short attention span, was highly impulsive,
and had great difficulty staying in his seat at school and remaining on
task. He had reading difficulties and was in a contained special education
classroom because of his disruptive behavior as well as his academic
difficulties. Despite experiencing physical abuse, he has not experienced
flashbacks or other symptoms that would indicate the presence of
posttraumatic stress disorder. Jack was treated for attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) with a good response to
methylphenidate.
Table 14-1
Encopresis

Name

DSM-5

ICD-10

Encopresis

Nonorganic


<<<PAGE 1537>>>
Encopresis
Duration

≥1/mo for ≥3 mo

Symptoms

Eliminating feces in clothes or floor Eliminating feces
in inappropriate
Can be voluntary or unintentional
places
Can be voluntary
or unintentional

Exclusion

Age <4 y
Substance use
Another medical condition (not
including ones that are causing
constipation)

Another medical
condition

Severity
With constipation and overflow
specifiers
incontinence
Without constipation and overflow
incontinence
Jack’s adoptive family sought help at a university hospital’s outpatient
program that had expertise in the behavioral treatments of many
psychiatric disorders, including encopresis. The treatment program
combined the use of regular laxatives and a bowel training method with
cognitive-behavioral therapy for Jack and his family. Jack was started on
a regimen of daily polyethylene glycol (PEG) solution and was seen by a
pediatrician who was able to perform a manual disimpaction under
sedation. Following that, Jack was continued on daily PEG solution
combined with therapy. He learned to empty his bowel while sitting on
the toilet for 10 minutes after each meal, whether or not he felt like he
had to go. He soon was eager to stay on this regular bathroom schedule
and felt proud when he was able to have a bowel movement in the toilet.
Over 3 months, Jack improved, and at 6 months, he was almost entirely
better. (Courtesy of Edwin J. Mikkelsen, M.D. and Caroly Pataki, M.D.)


<<<PAGE 1538>>>
Pathology and Laboratory Examination
Although no specific test indicates a diagnosis of encopresis, clinicians must
rule out medical illnesses, such as Hirschsprung disease, before making a
diagnosis. The physician should perform an abdominal examination to help
determine whether fecal retention is responsible for encopresis with
constipation and overflow incontinence, and an abdominal x-ray can help
determine the degree of constipation present. Tests to determine whether
sphincter tone is abnormal are generally not conducted in uncomplicated
cases of encopresis.
Differential Diagnosis
In encopresis with constipation and overflow incontinence, constipation can
begin as early as the child’s first year and can peak between the second and
fourth years. Soiling usually begins by age 4. There are frequent liquid stools
and hard fecal masses in the colon and the rectum on abdominal palpation
and rectal examination. Complications include impaction, megacolon, and
anal fissures.
The chief differential medical problem is aganglionic megacolon or
Hirschsprung disease, in which a patient may have an empty rectum and no
desire to defecate, but may still have an overflow of feces. The disorder
occurs in 1 in 5,000 children; signs appear shortly after birth. Faulty nutrition
is rarely the cause of encopresis with constipation and overflow incontinence.
Other conditions are rare as well, including structural disease of the anus,
rectum, and colon, adverse drug effects, or nongastrointestinal medical
(endocrine or neurologic) disorders.
Course and Prognosis
The outcome of encopresis depends on the etiology, the chronicity of the
symptoms, and coexisting behavioral problems. In some cases, encopresis is
self-limiting, and it rarely continues beyond middle adolescence. Encopresis
in children who have associated physiologic factors, such as poor gastric
motility and an inability to relax the anal sphincter muscles, is more
challenging to treat than that in those with constipation but normal sphincter
tone.
Encopresis is a particularly objectionable disorder to family members, who


<<<PAGE 1539>>>
may assume that the behavior is due to “laziness,” and family tensions are
often high. Peers are intolerant of the developmentally inappropriate behavior
and typically taunt and reject a child with encopresis. Many affected children
have abysmally low self-esteem and feel constant social rejection.
Psychologically, a child may appear blunted toward the symptoms or less
frequently may be entrenched in a pattern of encopresis as a mode of
expressing anger. The outcome of encopresis is influenced by a family’s
willingness and ability to participate in treatment without being overly
punitive and by the child’s ability and motivation to engage in treatment.
Treatment
A typical treatment plan for a child with encopresis includes daily oral
administration of laxatives such as PEG at 1 g/kg per day, and often a
surgical disimpaction under general anesthesia before administering
maintenance laxatives. Also help is a cognitive-behavioral intervention to
help the child begin regular attempts to have bowel movements in the toilet,
and to diminish anxiety related to bowel movement. By the time a child
presents for treatment, considerable family discord and distress are common.
We must reduce family tensions about the symptom and establish a
nonpunitive atmosphere. Similarly, we should help to reduce the child’s
embarrassment at school. A treatment plan may include arranging for many
changes of underwear with a minimum of embarrassment. Education of the
family and correction of misperceptions that a family may have about soiling
must occur before treatment. Laxatives are not necessary for children who are
not constipated and do have reasonable bowel control, but regular timed
intervals on the toilet may be useful with these children as well.
A report confirms the success of an interactive parent–child family
guidance intervention for young children with encopresis based on
psychological and behavioral interventions for children younger than age 9
years.
Supportive psychotherapy and relaxation techniques may be useful in
treating the anxieties and other sequelae of children with encopresis, such as
low self-esteem and social isolation. Family interventions can be helpful for
children who have bowel control but who continue to deposit their feces in
inappropriate locations. An optimal outcome occurs when a child achieves a


<<<PAGE 1540>>>
feeling of control over his or her bowel function.
Epidemiology
Encopresis affects about 3 percent of 4-year-olds and 1.6 percent of 10-yearold children. Incidence rates for encopretic behavior decrease drastically with
increasing age. Between the ages of 10 and 12 years, it affects about 0.75
percent of typically developing children. Globally, the community prevalence
of encopresis ranges from 0.8 to 7.8 percent. In Western cultures, bowel
control is established in more than 95 percent of children by their fourth
birthday and 99 percent by the fifth birthday. Encopresis is virtually absent in
youth with normal intellectual function by the age of 16 years. Males are
from three to six times more likely to have encopresis than females. A
significant relationship exists between encopresis and enuresis.
Etiology
Ninety percent of chronic childhood encopresis is likely functional. Children
with this disorder typically withhold feces by contracting their gluteal
muscles, holding their legs together, and tightening their external anal
sphincter. In some cases, this is an entrenched behavioral response to
previously painful bowel movements due to hard stool, which leads to fear of
defecation and withholding behaviors. Encopresis involves an oftencomplicated interplay between physiologic and psychological factors leading
to an avoidance of defecation. However, when children chronically hold in
bowel movements, the result is often fecal impaction and eventual overflow
soiling. This pattern occurs in more than 75 percent of children with
encopretic behavior. This standard set of circumstances in most children with
encopresis supports a behavioral intervention with a focus on ameliorating
constipation while increasing appropriate toileting behavior. Inadequate
training or the lack of appropriate toilet training may delay a child’s
attainment of continence.
Evidence indicates that some encopretic children have lifelong inefficient
and ineffective sphincter control. Other children may soil involuntarily, either
because of an inability to control the sphincter adequately or because of
excessive fluid caused by a retentive overflow.
In about 5 to 10 percent of cases, medical conditions cause fecal


<<<PAGE 1541>>>
incontinence, including abnormal innervation of the anorectal region,
ultrashort-segment Hirschsprung disease, neuronal intestinal dysplasia, or
spinal cord damage.
One study found encopresis to occur with significantly higher frequency
among children with known sexual abuse and other psychiatric disorders,
compared to samples of healthy children. Encopresis, however, is not a
specific indicator of sexual abuse.
It is evident that once a child has developed a pattern of withholding bowel
movements and attempts to defecate have become painful, the child’s fear
and resistance to changing the pattern are high. Battles with parents who
insist that their untreated child attempts to defecate may aggravate the
condition and cause secondary behavioral difficulties. Untreated children
with encopresis, however, frequently end up being socially ostracized and
rejected. The social consequences of soiling can lead to the development of
emotional problems. On the other hand, children with encopresis who clearly
can control their bowel function adequately but chronically deposit feces of
relatively normal consistency in abnormal places are likely to have preexisting neurodevelopmental problems. Occasionally, a child has a specific
fear of using the toilet, leading to a phobia.
Encopresis, in some cases, can be considered secondary, that is, emerging
after a period of healthy bowel habits in conjunction with a disruptive life
event, such as the birth of a sibling or a move to a new home. When
encopresis manifests after a long period of fecal continence, it may reflect a
regressive developmental behavior based on a severe stressor, such as
parental separation, loss of a best friend, or unexpected academic failure.
Megacolon. Most children with encopresis retain feces and become
constipated, either voluntarily or secondary to painful defecation. In some
cases, a subclinical pre-existing anorectal dysfunction exists that contributes
to constipation. In either case, the resulting chronic rectal distention from
large, hard fecal masses can cause loss of tone in the rectal wall and
desensitization to pressure. Thus, children in this situation become even less
aware of the need to defecate, and overflow encopresis occurs, usually with
relatively small amounts of liquid or soft stool leaking out.

ENURESIS


<<<PAGE 1542>>>
Clinical and Diagnostic Features
Enuresis is the repeated voiding of urine into a child’s clothes or bed; the
voiding may be involuntary or intentional. The child must exhibit a
developmental or chronologic age of at least 5 years. Children with enuresis
are at higher risk for ADHD compared with the general population. They are
also more likely to have comorbid encopresis. DSM-5 and the ICD-10 break
down the disorder into three types: nocturnal only, diurnal only, and
nocturnal and diurnal (Table 14-2).
Pathology and Laboratory Examination
No single laboratory finding is pathognomonic of enuresis, but clinicians
must rule out organic factors, such as the presence of urinary tract infections,
which may predispose a child to enuresis. Structural obstructive
abnormalities may be present in up to 3 percent of children with apparent
enuresis. Usually, clinicians defer sophisticated radiographic studies in
uncomplicated cases of enuresis with no signs of repeated infections or other
medical problems.
Table 14-2
Enuresis
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Enuresis

Nonorganic Enuresis

Duration

≥2/wk for ≥3 mo

Symptoms

Urinating into
Involuntary voiding of urine
bed or
Can be nighttime or daytime
clothes
Can be
voluntary or
unintentional

Exclusions
Age <5 y
Another medical condition (i.e.,
(not result Substance use
structural abnormality, epilepsy,
of):
neurologic disorder)
Another


<<<PAGE 1543>>>
medical
condition
Symptom
specifiers

Nocturnal only
Diurnal only
Nocturnal and
Diurnal

Differential Diagnosis
Medical causes of bladder dysfunction must be investigated and ruled out.
Urinary tract infections, obstructions, or anatomical conditions are found
most often in children who experience both nocturnal and diurnal enuresis
combined with urinary frequency and urgency. We should consider various
causes of genitourinary pathology. Depending on the signs and symptoms,
these can include obstructive uropathy, spina bifida occulta, and cystitis—
there are many other causes of polyuria and enuresis, such as diabetes
mellitus and diabetes insipidus. Also, we should consider disturbances of
consciousness and sleep, such as seizures, intoxication, and sleepwalking
disorder, during which a child urinates; and adverse effects from medications.
Course and Prognosis
Enuresis is often self-limited, and a child with enuresis may have a
spontaneous remission. Most children who master the task of control over
their bladder gain self-esteem and improved social confidence when they
become continent. About 80 percent of affected children have never achieved
a year-long period of dryness. Enuresis after at least 1 dry year usually begins
between the ages of 5 and 8 years; if it occurs much later, especially during
adulthood, we should investigate for other causes. Some evidence indicates
that the late onset of enuresis in children is more frequently associated with a
concomitant psychiatric difficulty than is enuresis without at least 1 dry year.
Relapses occur in children with enuresis who are becoming dry
spontaneously and in those in treatment. The significant emotional and social
difficulties of these children usually include poor self-image, decreased selfesteem, social embarrassment and restriction, and intrafamilial conflict. The
course of children with enuresis may be influenced by whether they receive


<<<PAGE 1544>>>
appropriate evaluation and treatment for common comorbid disorders such as
ADHD.
Treatment
A relatively high rate of spontaneous remission of enuresis occurs over time
in childhood; however, in many cases, interventions are necessary because
enuresis is causing functional impairment. The first step in any treatment plan
is to review appropriate toilet training. If the parents have not attempted toilet
training with the child, we should guide the parents and the patient in this
undertaking. It is helpful to keep records, to determine a baseline, and follow
the child’s progress; it may also be therapeutic in itself. A star chart may be
particularly helpful. Other useful techniques include restricting fluids before
bed and night lifting to toilet train the child. Intervention with alarm therapy,
which is triggered by wet underwear, has been a mainstay of treatment for
enuresis. Alarm therapy works by alerting a child to respond when voiding
begins during sleep. The alarm is a battery-operated device that can be
attached to a child’s underwear or a mat. The alarm is triggered as soon as
voiding begins by emitting a loud noise that awakens the child. The success
of this method depends on the child’s ability to awaken promptly and respond
to the alarm by getting up and voiding in the toilet. A child who can respond
optimally is at least 6 or 7 years old.
Another simple intervention for children with enuresis and bowel
dysfunction is to assess whether chronic constipation is contributing to
urinary dysfunction and to consider increasing dietary fiber to diminish
constipation.
Behavioral Therapy. Classical conditioning with the bell (or buzzer) and
pad (alarm) apparatus is generally the most effective treatment for enuresis,
with dryness resulting in more than 50 percent of cases. Bladder training—
encouragement or reward for delaying micturition for increasing times during
waking hours—has also been used. Although sometimes useful, this method
is decidedly inferior to the bell and pad.
Pharmacotherapy. We can consider medication when enuresis is causing
social, family or functional impairment, and when dietary and behavioral
interventions are not sufficient. When the problem interferes significantly


<<<PAGE 1545>>>
with a child’s functioning, we can consider several medications, although the
problem often recurs when we discontinue the medications.
Desmopressin, an antidiuretic compound that is available as an intranasal
spray, has shown success in reducing enuresis. The reduction of enuresis has
varied from 10 to 90 percent with the use of desmopressin. In most studies,
enuresis recurred shortly after discontinuation of this medication. Adverse
effects that can occur with desmopressin include headache, nasal congestion,
epistaxis, and stomachache. The most severe adverse effect reported with the
use of desmopressin to treat enuresis was a hyponatremic seizure experienced
by a child.
Antidepressants, particularly imipramine, were the first medications used
for enuresis, and are still used at times. In this case, we are taking advantage
of the anticholinergic side effects of the medication. However, it does have a
considerable side effect profile. Reboxetine (not available in the United
States), a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor that has a noncardiotoxic side
effect profile, may be a safer alternative to the classically used imipramine in
the treatment of childhood enuresis.
Psychotherapy. Psychotherapy may be useful in dealing with coexisting
psychiatric problems and the emotional and family difficulties that arise
secondary to chronic enuresis. However, the behavioral therapy approaches
described above are the treatments of choice.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of enuresis ranges from 5 to 10 percent in 5-year-olds. It is
about 1.5 to 5 percent in 9- to 10-year-olds, and about 1 percent in
adolescents 15 years and older. The prevalence of enuresis decreases with
increasing age. Enuretic behavior is considered developmentally appropriate
among young toddlers, precluding diagnoses of enuresis; however, enuretic
behavior occurs in 82 percent of 2-year-olds, 49 percent of 3-year-olds, and
26 percent of 4-year-olds regularly.
Although most children with enuresis do not have a comorbid psychiatric
disorder, children with enuresis are at higher risk for the development of
another psychiatric disorder.
Nocturnal enuresis is about 50 percent more common in boys and accounts


<<<PAGE 1546>>>
for about 80 percent of children with enuresis. Diurnal enuresis is also seen
more often in boys who often delay voiding until it is too late. A spontaneous
resolution of nocturnal enuresis is about 15 percent per year. Nocturnal
enuresis consists of an average volume of voided urine, whereas when a child
voids small volumes of urine at night, other medical causes may be present.
Etiology
Enuresis involves complex neurobiologic systems that include contributions
from cerebral and spinal cord centers, motor and sensory functions, and
autonomic and voluntary nervous systems. Neurons regulate urination in the
pons and midbrain regions. Bladder detrusor muscle contraction occurs
whenever bladder capacity is reached, which can lead to enuresis in a
sleeping child. Therefore, excessive volumes of urine produced at night may
lead to enuresis at night in children without any physiologic abnormalities.
Nighttime enuresis often occurs in the absence of a specific neurogenic cause.
Daytime enuresis may develop based on behavioral habits developed over
time.
Daytime enuresis may occur in the absence of neurologic abnormalities
resulting from habitual, voluntary tightening of the external sphincter during
urges to urinate. The pattern may become set in a young child who may start
with a normal or overactive detrusor muscle in the bladder, but with repeated
attempts to prevent leaking or urination when there is an urge to void. Over
time, the sensation of the urge to urinate diminishes, and the bladder does not
empty regularly, leading to enuresis at night when the bladder is relaxed and
can empty without resistance. This immature pattern of urinating can account
for some cases of enuresis, especially when the pattern has been in place
since early childhood. Most children are not enuretic by intention or even
with awareness until after they are wet. Physiologic factors often play a role
in the development of enuresis, and behavioral patterns are likely to maintain
the maladaptive urination. Healthy bladder control, which is acquired
gradually, is influenced by neuromuscular and cognitive development,
socioemotional factors, toilet training, and genetic factors. Difficulties in one
or more of these areas can delay urinary continence.
Genetic factors play a role in the expression of enuresis, given that the
emergence of enuresis is significantly higher in first-degree relatives. A


<<<PAGE 1547>>>
longitudinal study of child development found that children with enuresis
were about twice as likely to have concomitant developmental delays as those
who did not have enuresis. About 75 percent of children with enuresis have a
first-degree relative who has or has had enuresis. A child’s risk for enuresis is
more than seven times higher if the father was enuretic. The concordance rate
is higher in monozygotic twins than in dizygotic twins. There is a strong
genetic component, and much can be accounted for by tolerance for enuresis
in some families and by other psychosocial factors.
Studies indicate that children with enuresis with a normal anatomical
bladder capacity report urge to void with less urine in the bladder than
children without enuresis. Other studies report that nocturnal enuresis occurs
when the bladder is full because of lower than expected levels of nighttime
antidiuretic hormone. This low level of the hormone could lead to higherthan-usual urine output. Enuresis does not appear to be related to a specific
stage of sleep or time of night; instead, bedwetting appears randomly. In most
cases, the quality of sleep is average. Little evidence indicates that children
with enuresis sleep more soundly than other children.
Psychosocial stressors appear to precipitate enuresis in a subgroup of
children with the disorder. In young children, the disorder may relate to the
birth of a sibling, hospitalization, the start of school, separation of a family
due to divorce, or a move to a new environment.

References
Baeyens D, Roeyers H, D’Haese L, Pieters F, Hoebeke P, Vande Walle J.
The prevalence of ADHD in children with enuresis: Comparison between a
tertiary and non-tertiary care sample. Acta Paediatr. 2006;95:347–352.
Benninga MA, Voskuijl WP, Akkerhius GW, Taminiau JA, Buller HA.
Colonic transit times and behaviour profiles in children with defecation
disorders. Arch Dis Child. 2004;89:13–16.
Brazzeli M, Griffiths P. Behavioural and cognitive interventions with or
without other treatments for the management of faecal incontinence in
children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006;19:CD002240.
Brown ML, Pope AW, Brown EJ. Treatment of primary nocturnal enuresis in
children: A review. Child Care Health Dev. 2010;37:153–160.
Butler RJ, Heron J. The prevalence of infrequent bedwetting and nocturnal


<<<PAGE 1548>>>
enuresis in childhood: A large British cohort. Scand J Urol Nephrol.
2008;42:257–264.
Di Lorenzo C, Benninga MA. Pathophysiology of pediatric fecal
incontinence. Gastroenterology. 2004;126(Suppl 1):S33–S40.
Feldman AS, Bauer SB. Diagnosis and management of dysfunctional
voiding. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2006;18:139–147.
Fitzgerald MP, Thom DH, Wassel-Fyr C, Subak L, Brubaker L, Van Den
Deden SK, Brown JS; Reproductive Risks for Incontinence Study at Kaiser
Research Group. Childhood urinary symptoms predict adult overactive
bladder symptoms. J Urol. 2006;175:989–993.
Friedman FM, Weiss JP. Desmopressin in the treatment of nocturia: Clinical
evidence and experience. Ther Adv Urol. 2013;5:310–317.
Har AF, Croffie JM. Encopresis. Pediatr Rev. 2010;31:368–374.
Kajiwara M, Inoue K, Kato M, Usui A, Kurihara M, Usui T. Nocturnal
enuresis and overactive bladder in children: An epidemiological study. Int
J Urol. 2006;13:36–41.
Klages T, Geller B, Tillman R, Bolhofner K, Zimerman B. Controlled study
of encopresis and enuresis in children with a prepubertal and early
adolescent bipolar-I disorder phenotype. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2005;44:1050–1057.
Landgraf JM, Abidari J, Cilento BG Jr., Cooper CS, Schulman SL, Ortenberg
J. Coping, commitment, and attitude: Quantifying the everyday burden of
enuresis on children and their families. Pediatrics. 2004;113:334–344.
Mellon MW, Whiteside SP, Friedrich WN. The relevance of fecal soiling as
an indicator of child sexual abuse: A preliminary analysis. J Dev Behav
Pediatr. 2006;27:25–32.
Mikkelsen EJ. Elimination disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. II.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3624.
Mugie SM, Di Lorenzo C, Benninga MA. Constipation in childhood. Nat Rev
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;8:502–511.
Nevéus T. Reboxetine in therapy-resistant enuresis: Results and pathogenetic
implications. Scand J Urol Nephrol. 2006;40:31–34.
Pennesi M, Pitter M, Borduga A, Minisini S, Peratoner L. Behavioral therapy
for primary nocturnal enuresis. J Urol. 2004;171:408–410.
Perrin N, Sayer L, White A. The efficacy of alarm therapy versus


<<<PAGE 1549>>>
desmopressin therapy in the treatment of primary mono-symptomatic
nocturnal enuresis: A systematic review. Prim Health Care Res Dev.
2015;16:21–31.
Rajindrajith S, Devanarayana NM, Benninga MA. Review article: Faecal
incontinence in children: Epidemiology, pathophysiology, clinical
evaluation and management. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2013;37:37–48.
Reid H, Bahar RJ. Treatment of encopresis and chronic constipation in young
children: Clinical results from interactive parent-child guidance. Clin
Pediatr. 2006;45:157–164.
Reiner WG. Pharmacotherapy in the management of voiding and storage
disorders, including enuresis and encopresis. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2008;47:5:491–498.
Rowan-Legg A; Canadian Paediatric Society, Community Paediatrics
Committee. Managing functional constipation in children. Paediatr Child
Health. 2011;16:661–670.
Rutter M, Tizard J, Yule W, Graham P, Whitmore K. Research report: Isle of
Wight Studies, 1964–1974. Psychol Med. 1976;6:313–332.
Von Gontard A, Hollmann E. Comorbidity of functional urinary incontinence
and encopresis: Somatic and behavioral associations. J Urol.
2004;171:2644–2647.
Yilmaz S, Bilgic A, Hergüner S. Effect of OROS methylphenidate on
encopresis in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Child
Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2014;24:158–160.


<<<PAGE 1550>>>
15
Sleep–Wake Disorders
To understand sleep and its disorders, it helps to begin with sleep’s three
essential characteristics: (1) Sleep is a process required for proper brain
function. Failure to sleep impairs thought processes, mood regulation, and a
host of normal physiologic functions. (2) Sleep is not a single process; there
are several distinct types of sleep. These different types of sleep differ both
qualitatively and quantitatively. Each type of sleep has unique characteristics,
functional importance, and regulatory mechanisms. Selectively depriving one
particular type of sleep produces compensatory rebound when an individual
is allowed to sleep ad lib. (3) Sleep is not a passive process; during sleep,
there is a high degree of brain activation and metabolism.
The science of sleep is a fascinating ever-growing topic, that is, perhaps
unfortunately, beyond the repertoire of the average psychiatrist, and we refer
the interested reader to the Comprehensive Textbook’s discussion of the
basic science of sleep, discussed about the neural sciences.
Several basic mechanisms regulate sleep, and when these systems go awry,
sleep disorders occur. Sleep disorders are both dangerous and expensive.
Hypersomnolence is a serious, potentially life-threatening condition affecting
not only the sleepy individual but also their family, coworkers, and society in
general. Sleep-related motor vehicle accidents represent a significant public
safety concern, with some states enacting criminal statutes to deter sleepy
driving. Investigations link many major industrial catastrophes to sleepiness.
Research shows that sleep-disordered breathing contributes to hypertension,
heart failure, and stroke. Sleep disorders’ direct cost per annum in the United
States is about $16 billion, with indirect costs ranging upward to more than
$100 billion.


<<<PAGE 1551>>>
THE CLINICAL PRESENTATION
This chapter’s disorders all describe disturbances in healthy sleep. Among
them, however, there is considerable variation.
It is helpful to understand the stages of sleep and electrophysiologic
criteria. Table 15-1 and Figure 15-1 illustrate some of the features of normal
sleep.
Insomnia Disorder
Persons with insomnia primarily have difficulty falling asleep, difficulty
staying asleep, or trouble waking early with an inability to fall back to sleep,
sufficient to impair their functioning. In children, this may manifest as
resistance to caregiver designation of bedtime or difficulty sleeping without
some sort of intervention from the caregiver.
Hypersomnolence Disorder
Hypersomnolence broadly refers to excessive sleepiness and time sleeping.
During the day, people are drowsy and have reduced attention. Excessive
sleepiness can be a serious, debilitating, potentially life-threatening condition.
It affects not only the patient but their family, colleagues, and the public. Not
due to disrupted sleep or circadian problems, hypersomnolence disorder
likely results from some fundamental neurologic sleep regulation
dysfunction.
Narcolepsy
People with narcolepsy have an overwhelming desire to sleep and may
suddenly fall asleep, even if it is not appropriate to do so. Also, they may
experience cataplexy, or the sudden loss of muscle tone, usually with
continuing full or partial consciousness. Laughter, or other strong emotions,
commonly precipitate the cataplexy. Cataplexy can range from transient
weakness in the knees to total paralysis while the patient is fully conscious.
Episodes may last from several seconds to minutes. Usually, the patient is
unable to speak and may fall to the floor. Sleep paralysis and hypnagogic (or
hypnopompic) hallucinations may occur.


<<<PAGE 1552>>>
Sleep-Related Breathing Disorders
People who present with sleep-related breathing disorders experience an
interruption of normal respiration that impacts their sleep, often resulting in
CNS arousal and, consequently, daytime sleepiness. Sleep-related breathing
disorders include conditions involving large airway obstruction during sleep,
breathing cessation resulting from central respiratory mechanisms, and
hypoventilation without breathing cessation. Those affected may experience
sleep-related breathing cessation (sleep apnea), in which the patient stops
breathing for 10 seconds or more during sleep. They may instead have
reduced breathing or hypopnea. Airway obstruction is the usual case of these
impairments, however central (brainstem) pathology can also be the cause.
When asleep, breathing cessations or reductions typically provoke CNS
arousal, significant oxyhemoglobin desaturation, or both. Sleep apnea can
obstructive, central, or mixed, depending on the cause.
The clinical presentation of the sleep-related breathing disorders varies
depending on the mechanism of the disorder. Table 15-2 lists some of these
symptoms.
Circadian Rhythm Sleep–Wake Disorders
Circadian rhythm sleep disorders include a wide range of conditions
involving a misalignment between desired and actual sleep periods. This
collection of sleep disorders shares the same primary underlying etiology—a
desynchrony between an individual’s internal circadian biologic clock and
the desired or conventional sleep–wake cycle. The circadian pacemaker is in
the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). SCN firing oscillates with an almost
sinusoidal pattern, the period of which is 24 hours, and the output correlates
with the daily fluctuations in core body temperature. Mismatched circadian
clock and desired schedules can arise from improper phase relationships
between the two, travel across time zones, or dysfunctions in the basic
biologic rhythm. Under normal circumstances, the internal circadian
pacemaker is reset each day by bright light, social cues, stimulants, and
activity. In cases in which these factors fail to reentrain the circadian rhythm,
the circadian sleep disorders occur.
Table 15-1


<<<PAGE 1553>>>
Stages of Sleep—Electrophysiologic Criteria
Electroencephalogram Electrooculogram Electromyogram
Wakefulness Low-voltage, mixed
frequency activity; α
(8–13 cps) activity
with eyes closed

Eye movements
and eye blinks

High tonic activity
and voluntary
movements

Slow eye
movements

Tonic activity
slightly
decreased
from
wakefulness

Non–rapid
eye
movement
sleep
Stage 1

Low-voltage, mixed
frequency activity; θ
(3–7 cps) activity,
vertex sharp waves

Stage 2

Low-voltage, mixed
None
frequency
background with
sleep spindles (12–
14 cps bursts) and K
complexes (negative
sharp wave followed
by positive slow
wave)

Low tonic activity

Stage 3

High-amplitude (≥75
µV) slow waves (≤2
cps) occupying 20–
50% of epoch

None

Low tonic activity

Stage 4

High-amplitude slow
None
waves occupy >50%
of epoch

Low tonic activity


<<<PAGE 1554>>>
REM sleep

Low-voltage, mixed
frequency activity;
saw-tooth waves, θ
activity, and slow α
activity

REMs

Tonic atonia with
phasic
twitches

cps, cycles per second; REM, rapid eye movement.
Criteria from Rechtschaffen A, Kales A. A Manual of Standardized Terminology, Techniques,
and Scoring System for Sleep Stages of Human Subjects. Los Angeles, CA: Brain Information
Service/UCLA Brain Research Institute; 1968, with permission.

FIGURE 15-1
Sleep histograms showing normal sleep and insomnia. Sleep stage histograms
comparing normal sleep (Panel A) with that found in a patient with major
depressive disorder (Panel B). Difficulty maintaining sleep and early morning
awakenings are common complaints in patients with depression. Panel B
illustrates the electrophysiologic correlates of these complaints beginning, in this
case, after approximately 2 hours of sleep. Sleep continuity becomes disrupted as
morning approaches. Also present is a markedly reduced latency to REM sleep.
This sleep feature is characteristic of this patient population and is thought by
some to reflect cholinergic–aminergic imbalance.

Table 15-2


<<<PAGE 1555>>>
Sleep Apnea Symptoms Based on Cause
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Excessive sleepiness
Snoring
Obesity
Restless sleep
Nocturnal awakenings with choking or gasping for breath
Morning dry mouth
Morning headaches
Heavy nocturnal sweating
Central Sleep Apnea
Breathing cessations unrelated to airway flow limitations
Insomnia
Daytime sleepiness
Morning headaches
Parasomnias and Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
Parasomnias are disorders of partial arousal. In general, the parasomnias are a
diverse collection of sleep disorders characterized by physiologic or
behavioral phenomena that occur during or are potentiated by sleep. One
conceptual framework views many parasomnias as overlaps or intrusions of
one sleep–wake state into another. Usually, we divide sleep into three basic
states: wakefulness, non–rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, and REM.
Each has a unique neurologic organization. During wakefulness, both the
body and brain are active. In NREM sleep, both the body and brain are much
less active. REM sleep, however, pairs an atonic body with an active brain
(capable of creating elaborate dream fantasies). Regional cerebral blood flow,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and other imaging studies confirm
increased brain activation during REM sleep. It certainly appears that in some
parasomnias, there are state boundary violations. For example, arousal
disorders (sleepwalking and sleep terrors) involve momentary or partial
wakeful behaviors suddenly occurring in NREM sleep. Similarly, isolated
sleep paralysis is the persistence of REM sleep atonia into the wakefulness


<<<PAGE 1556>>>
transition, whereas REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is the failure of the
mechanism creating paralytic atonia such that individuals act out their
dreams.
There are many sleep-related movement disorders. These disorders
typically involve relatively simple bodily movements that impact sleep. Table
15-3 lists examples of these disorders.

DIAGNOSIS
Three different nosologies provide classification systems for sleep disorders:
(1) the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition
(DSM-5), (2) the International Classification of Sleep Disorders, third edition
(ICSD-3), and (3) the International Classification of Diseases, 10th edition
(ICD-10). Most general psychiatrists use the DSM-5 approach. However,
Sleep Medicine specialists often prefer the ICSD-3. We have included a
listing of ICSD sleep–wake disorders for reference (Table 15-4).
Table 15-3
Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
Restless legs syndrome
Periodic limb movement disorder
Sleep-related leg cramps
Sleep-related bruxism
Sleep-related rhythmic movement disorder
Benign sleep myoclonus of infancy
Propriospinal myoclonus at sleep onset
Sleep-related movement disorders due to:
Medical conditions
Medications
Substances
Insomnia Disorder
The primary diagnostic criteria descriptively relate to how insomnia affects
sleep. To be diagnosed with insomnia, the person must have difficulty falling


<<<PAGE 1557>>>
asleep, staying asleep, or waking early with difficulty getting back to sleep.
While there are no formal criteria for diagnostic subtypes of insomnia, the
ICSD-3 does describe each subtype briefly. We describe the insomnia
subtypes here to highlight possible insomnia nuances and complications. We
present a comparison of the different approaches to diagnosing insomnia in
Table 15-5.
Psychophysiologic Insomnia. Psychophysiologic insomnia (PPI)
involves conditioned arousal with the thought of sleeping. Objects related to
sleep (e.g., the bed, the bedroom) likewise have become conditioned stimuli
that evoke insomnia. Daytime adaptation is usually good; however, there can
be extreme tiredness, and the affected person can become desperate. PPI
often occurs in combination with stress and anxiety disorders, delayed sleep
phase syndrome, and hypnotic use and withdrawal. Table 15-6 lists some
typical characteristics of PPI.
DESCRIPTION
Ms. W is a 41-year-old, divorced white female presenting with a two- and
one-half year complaint of sleeplessness. She has some difficulty falling
asleep (30- to 45-minute sleep-onset latency) and awakens every hour or
two after sleep onset. These awakenings may last 15 minutes to several
hours, and she estimates approximately 4.5 hours of sleep on an average
night. She rarely takes daytime naps notwithstanding feeling tired and
edgy. The patient describes her sleep problem with the following words,
“It seems like I never get into a deep sleep. I have never been a heavy
sleeper, but now the slightest noise wakes me up. Sometimes I have a
hard time getting my mind to shut down.” She views the bedroom as an
unpleasant place of sleeplessness and states, “I tried staying at a friend’s
house where it is quiet, but then I couldn’t sleep because of the silence.”
At times, Ms. W is unsure whether she is asleep or awake. She has a
history of clock watching (to time her wakefulness) but stopped doing
this when she realized it was contributing to the problem. Reportedly the
insomnia is unrelated to seasonal changes, menstrual cycle, or time-zone
translocation. Her basic sleep hygiene is good. Appetite and libido are
unchanged. She denies mood disturbance, except that she is quite


<<<PAGE 1558>>>
frustrated and concerned about sleeplessness and its effect on her work.
Her work involves sitting at a microscope for 6 hours out of a 9-hour
working day and meticulously documenting her findings. Her final output
has not suffered, but she must now “double check” for accuracy.
She describes herself as a worrier and a Type-A personality. The
patient does not know how to relax. For example, on vacation she
continually worries about things that can go wrong. She will not even
begin to unwind until she has arrived at the destination, checked in, and
unpacked. Even then, she is unable to relax.
Medical history is unremarkable except for tonsillectomy (age 16
years),
migraine
headaches
(current),
and
diet-controlled
hypercholesterolemia. She takes naproxen as needed for headache. She
does not currently drink caffeinated beverages, smoke tobacco, or drink
alcoholic beverages. She does not use recreational drugs.
The problem with insomnia began after relocation to a new city and
place of employment. She attributes her insomnia to the noisy
neighborhood in which she now lives. She first sought treatment 18
months ago. Her family practice physician diagnosed depression, and she
was started on fluoxetine that made her “climb the walls.” Antihistamines
were tried next with similar results. She was then switched to low-dose
trazodone (for sleep) and developed nausea. After these medical
interventions, she sought medical care elsewhere. Zolpidem 5 mg was
prescribed, but it made her feel drugged and upon discontinuation she had
withdrawal effects. Another family practice physician diagnosed
“nonspecific anxiety disorder” and began buspirone; an experience she
describes as “having an alien try to climb out of my skin.” Buspirone was
discontinued. Paroxetine was tried for 8 weeks with no effect. Finally, a
psychiatrist was consulted, who diagnosed adult attention-deficit disorder
(without hyperactivity) and suggested treatment with methylphenidate. At
this point, the patient was convinced that a stimulant would not help her
insomnia and demanded referral to a sleep disorders center.
DISCUSSION
Ms. W’s symptoms fall into the broad category of an insomnia, and the
symptoms began after having moved from one city to another.
Environmental sleep disorder (noise) and adjustment sleep disorder (new


<<<PAGE 1559>>>
job, city, and apartment) are likely initial diagnoses. However, a more
chronic, endogenous problem has become operative. What is it? Ms. W is
a “worrier” and meticulous, but she doesn’t reach diagnostic criteria for
personality or anxiety disorders. Dyssomnia associated with mood
disorder should be considered in any patient with sleep maintenance
problems and early morning awakening insomnia. However, this patient
does not have other significant signs of depression. Unfortunately, many
patients are misdiagnosed with depression or “masked depression” on the
sole basis of an insomnia complaint and unsuccessfully treated with
antidepressant medication. Ms. W’s job demands long hours with focused
concentration. Her job performance has been superior for many years
notwithstanding insomnia. Thus, a diagnosis of attention-deficit disorder
is unlikely. Idiopathic insomnia implies a childhood complaint, which
Ms. W denies.
The likely working diagnosis is PPI. There may be some sleep state
misperception (sometimes unclear of whether she is awake or asleep), but
this cannot adequately account for the constellation of symptoms. An
initial treatment plan should include further documentation of the sleep
pattern using a sleep log. Behavioral treatments will likely benefit this
patient. Medications with sedative effects are sometimes useful during
initial treatment of PPI. However, thus far in this patient they have done
more harm than good. She is likely to be a challenging patient to treat.
Table 15-4
Outline of the International
Disorders, Third Edition

Classification

I. Insomnia
A. Chronic Insomnia Disorder
B. Short-Term Insomnia Disorder
C. Other Insomnia Disorder
D. Isolated Symptoms and Normal Variants
1. Excessive Time in Bed
2. Short Sleeper
II. Sleep-Related Breathing Disorders

of

Sleep


<<<PAGE 1560>>>
A. Obstructive Sleep Apnea Disorders
1. Obstructive Sleep Apnea, Adult
2. Obstructive Sleep Apnea Disorder, Pediatric
B. Central Sleep Apnea Syndromes
1. Central Sleep Apnea with Cheyne–Stokes Breathing
2. Central Apnea due to a Medical Disorder without Cheyne–
Stokes Breathing
3. Central Sleep Apnea due to High-Altitude Periodic Breathing
4. Central Sleep Apnea due to a Medication or Substance
5. Primary Central Sleep Apnea
6. Primary Central Sleep Apnea of Infancy
7. Primary Central Sleep Apnea of Prematurity
8. Treatment-Emergent Central Sleep Apnea
C. Sleep-Related Hypoventilation Disorders
1. Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome
2. Congenital Central Alveolar Hypoventilation Syndrome
3. Late-Onset Central Hypoventilation and Hypothalamic
Dysfunction
4. Idiopathic Central Alveolar Hypoventilation
5. Sleep-Related Hypoventilation due to a Medication or
Substance
6. Sleep-Related Hypoventilation due to a Medical Disorder
D. Sleep-Related Hypoxemia Disorder
1. Sleep-Related Hypoxemia
E. Isolated Symptoms and Normal Variants
1. Snoring
2. Catathrenia
III. Central Disorders of Hypersomnolence
A. Narcolepsy type 1
B. Narcolepsy type 2
C. Idiopathic Hypersomnia
D. Kleine–Levin Syndrome
E. Hypersomnia due to a Medical Disorder
F. Hypersomnia due to a Medication or Substance
G. Hypersomnia Associated with a Psychiatric Disorder
H. Insufficient Sleep Syndrome


<<<PAGE 1561>>>
I. Isolated Symptoms and Normal Variants
1. Long Sleeper
IV. Circadian Rhythm Sleep–Wake Disorders
A. Delayed Sleep–Wake Phase Disorder
B. Advanced Sleep–Wake Phase Disorder
C. Irregular Sleep–Wake Rhythm Disorder
D. Non–24-h Sleep–Wake Rhythm Disorder
E. Shift Work Disorder
F. Jet Lag Disorder
G. Circadian Sleep–Wake Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
V. Parasomnias
A. NREM-Related Parasomnias
1. Confusional Arousals
2. Sleepwalking
3. Sleep Terrors
4. Sleep-Related Eating Disorder
B. REM-Related Parasomnias
1. REM Sleep Behavior Disorder
2. Recurrent Isolated Sleep Paralysis
3. Nightmare Disorder
C. Other Parasomnias
1. Exploding Head Syndrome
2. Sleep-Related Hallucinations
3. Sleep Enuresis
4. Parasomnia due to Medical Disorder
5. Parasomnia due to a Medication or Substance
6. Parasomnia, Unspecified
7. Isolated Symptoms and Normal Variants
a. Sleep Talking
VI. Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
A. Restless Legs Syndrome
B. Periodic Limb Movement Disorder
C. Sleep-Related Leg Cramps
D. Sleep-Related Bruxism
E. Sleep-Related Rhythmic Movement Disorder
F. Benign Sleep Myoclonus of Infancy


<<<PAGE 1562>>>
G. Propriospinal Myoclonus at Sleep Onset
H. Sleep-Related Movement Disorder due to Medical Disorder
I. Sleep-Related Movement Disorder due to a Medication or
Substance
J. Sleep-Related Movement Disorder, Unspecified
K. Isolated Symptoms and Normal Variants
1. Excessive Fragmentary Myoclonus
2. Hypnagogic Foot Tremor and Alternating Leg Muscle
Activation
3. Sleep Starts (Hypnic Jerks)
VII. Other Sleep Disorders
Table 15-5
Insomnia Disorder
DSM-5

ICSD-3

Name

Insomnia disorder Insomnia disorder

Duration

Symptoms occur
at least 3
nights/wk,
lasting at least
3 mo

Occurs at least 3×/wk

Symptoms

Dissatisfaction
with quality of
sleep due to
either:
• Difficulty
falling
asleep
• Difficulty

1. Problem with sleep
initiation or maintenance
2. Symptoms occurring
despite adequate
opportunities for sleep
3. Symptoms resulting in
daytime consequences
due to poor sleep

ICD-10
Disorders of

Disorders


<<<PAGE 1563>>>
maintaining
sleep
• Early morning
awakenings
# Symptoms
needed

Any of the above

All the above three
symptoms

Exclusion (not Medical disorder
the result of): A medication or
substance
Another sleep–
wake disorder
Insufficient
opportunity for
sleep
Psychosocial
impact

Symptom
specifiers

Causes significant Required presence of
distress and/or
significant daytime
impairment in
impairment/consequences
functioning
due to impaired sleep
• With nonsleep
disorder
mental
comorbidity
(including
substance
use
disorder)
• With other
medical
comorbidity
• With other
sleep
disorder

Nightmares
Nonorganic

Sleep terrors
Sleepwalking


<<<PAGE 1564>>>
Severity
specifiers
Course
specifiers

Comments

Episodic (lasting Short-term insomnia
1–3 mo)
disorder: <3 mo
Persistent (lasting Chronic insomnia disorder:
≥3 mo)
≥3 mo
Recurrent (two or
more episodes
occurring within
1 y)
This is often occurring in the
setting of an acute
stressor

Idiopathic Insomnia. Idiopathic insomnia characterizes patients with a
lifelong inability to obtain adequate sleep. The insomnia predates any
psychiatric condition, and other etiologies must be ruled out or treated,
including PPI, environmental sleep disturbances, and poor sleep hygiene.
Paradoxical Insomnia. Paradoxical insomnia, at its core, involves a
dissociation between sleep and its usual attendant unconsciousness. In
paradoxical insomnia, a person thinks he or she is awake and having
insomnia even though the brain electrophysiologic activity pattern is
consistent with the correlates of healthy sleep. We should consider this
disorder when a patient complains of difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep
without any objective evidence of sleep disruption. Paradoxical insomnia can
occur in individuals who are free from psychopathology; however, it may
represent a somatic delusion or hypochondriasis. Some patients with
paradoxical insomnia have obsessional features regarding bodily functions.
Table 15-6
Some Characteristics of Psychophysiologic Insomnia
1. Excessive worry about not being able to sleep


<<<PAGE 1565>>>
2. Trying too hard to sleep
3. Rumination—inability to clear one’s mind while trying to sleep
4. Increased muscle tension when getting into bed
5. Other somatic manifestations of anxiety
6. Ability to fall asleep when not trying (e.g., while watching
television)
7. Sleeping better away from the person’s own bedroom
Inadequate Sleep Hygiene. Inadequate sleep hygiene refers to insomnia
produced by behaviors that are not conducive to good sleep. Many behaviors
can interfere with sleep. Some of these behaviors increase arousal, for
example, consuming caffeine or nicotine at night or engaging in excessive
emotional or physical stimulation within a few hours of bedtime. Other
behaviors interfere with sleep architecture, including daytime naps and a
significant variation of the daily sleep–wake schedule.
Behavioral Insomnia of Childhood. Children with this subtype of
insomnia depend on specific stimulation, objects, or setting for initiating or
returning to sleep. Without the presence of, for example, a stuffed animal or a
parent, the child has trouble falling asleep. Alternatively, without adequate
limit-setting by the caregiver, bedtime stalling (“Dad, I’m thirsty—can I get
some water?”) or bedtime refusal (“I’m not tired! I don’t want to go to
sleep!”) can ensue.
Insomnia Comorbid with Mental Disorder. This type of insomnia is the
most common. Sleep disorder centers report that 35 percent of patients seen
with insomnia have a mental disorder. Of these, major depressive disorder
(MDD) is the most common disorder. Other common disorders include
bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and generalized anxiety disorder.
Insomnia Comorbid with Medical Condition. Insomnia accompanies
many medical and neurologic conditions. Given pain’s potential for
disturbing sleep, all medical conditions producing pain can (and usually do)
disturb sleep. Unfortunately, a synergy exists between pain and sleep, such
that poor sleep lowers the pain threshold. This vicious cycle can present a
difficult treatment challenge. However, reducing pain can also improve sleep,


<<<PAGE 1566>>>
and improving sleep can reduce pain. In other medical conditions, sleep
disturbance appears to be secondary. For example, patients with sleep-related
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) often have insomnia. Treating the
reflux results in sleep improvement but insomnia treatments seldom, if ever,
relieve nocturnal GERD. Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) commonly suffer from both sleep-onset and sleep-maintenance
insomnia. Neurodegenerative disorders are also frequently associated with
sleep disorders.
Insomnia due to Drug or Substance. Many prescription drugs, even
when taken properly, can disturb sleep. We list some common examples in
Table 15-7.
Alcohol and hypnotic use initially promote sleep onset because of their
sedating properties. A problem occurs when sleep quality is adversely
affected, tolerance develops after chronic use, or withdrawal begins. Alcohol
may relax a tense person and thereby decrease latency to sleep; however,
sleep later in the night will usually be fragmented by arousals. As tolerance
develops to the alcohol, higher amounts or more frequent dosing are needed
to sustain the effects. Furthermore, during withdrawal or after tolerance
develops, insomnia may rebound to a level more severe than the initial
disturbance.
Table 15-7
Medications and Drugs Causing Insomnia
Antiparkinsonian drugs
Decongestants (e.g., pseudoephedrine)
Anorectics
Stimulants
Antiepileptic medications
SSRI antidepressants
Caffeine
Alcohol (rebound insomnia)
Sedatives (rebound insomnia)


<<<PAGE 1567>>>
Caffeine (the active ingredient in coffee) and theobromine (the active
ingredient in chocolate) are methylxanthines and act as psychostimulants in
the central nervous system (CNS). Psychostimulants increase sleep latency,
reduce sleep efficiency, and decrease total sleep time. Caffeine’s half-life is 3
to 7 hours and may interfere with sleep when consumed in large quantities
throughout the day or even in smaller portions closer to bedtime. Some
individuals are hypersensitive to methylxanthines, and any coffee or
chocolate can trigger difficulty falling asleep or awakening after a couple of
hours of sleep with difficulty getting back to sleep.
Finally, abuse of illicit substances, particularly stimulants (such as cocaine
and amphetamines), interfere with sleep onset and sleep maintenance. Unlike
with alcohol, discontinuation of these substances will cause
hypersomnolence.
Hypersomnolence Disorder
DSM-5 includes hypersomnolence disorder as a discreet diagnosis, whereas
ICSD and ICD consider it more broadly. ICSD refers to it as “idiopathic
hypersomnia” and questions whether it is a single disorder or rather a group
of disorders with different underlying causes. Table 15-8 compares the
different approaches to diagnosing hypersomnolence.
In general, we should consider this disorder when a patient complains of
frequently feeling sleepy despite getting adequate sleep. They may nap
during the day. Despite getting adequate sleep, they do not feel refreshed
when waking.
Kleine–Levin Syndrome. Kleine–Levin syndrome is a relatively rare
condition consisting of recurrent periods of prolonged sleep (from which they
are arousable) with intervening periods of healthy sleep and alert waking.
During the episodes of hypersomnia, wakeful periods are usually marked by
withdrawal from social contacts and return to bed at the first opportunity.
Kleine–Levin syndrome is the best-recognized recurrent hypersomnia though
it is uncommon. It predominantly afflicts males in early adolescence;
however, it can also affect females and older people. With few exceptions,
the first attack occurs between the ages of 10 and 21 years. However, there
are some reports of onset in the fourth and fifth decades of life. In its classic


<<<PAGE 1568>>>
form, the recurrent episodes include extreme sleepiness (18- to 20-hour sleep
periods), voracious eating, hypersexuality, and disinhibition (e.g.,
aggression). Episodes typically last for a few days up to several weeks and
appear once to 10 times per year. A monosymptomatic hypersomnolent form
can occur. The disorder is usually sporadic but familial cases are reported.
Narcolepsy
Table 15-9 lists the criteria for narcolepsy. People with narcolepsy have
irresistible sleep episodes, lapses into sleep, or nap frequently.
The discovery that narcolepsy is strongly associated with a hypocretin
(orexin) deficit radically changed diagnostic practice. Cataplexy had been
considered a core feature of the disorder, but we now know that there are
variants that occur without cataplexy.
Sleep-Related Breathing Disorders
DSM-5 includes three disorders under the category of sleep-related breathing
disorders: obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea, central sleep apnea, and sleeprelated hypoventilation. Table 15-10 compares the diagnostic approaches to
sleep-related breathing disorders.
Table 15-8
Hypersomnolence Disorder
DSM-5

ICS-3

ICD-10

Name

Hypersomnolence
disorder

Idiopathic
hypersomnia

Nonorganic
hypersomnia

Duration

≥3×/wk for at least 3
mo

Symptoms

Multiple episodes of
sleeping within
the same day
Main sleep lasts >9
h, but is
nonrestorative

Subjective
Excess daytime
sleepiness
sleepiness
MSLT shows mean Sleep attacks
sleep latency ≤8 Difficult to
min
become fully
<2 sleep-onset rapid
aroused


<<<PAGE 1569>>>
Difficult to become
fully aroused
when woken

# Symptoms
needed

At least one of the
above

Exclusion (not Another sleep
the result of):
disorder
Substance use
Another mental or
medical disorder
Psychosocial
impact

Causes significant
distress and/or
impairment in
functioning

Symptom
specifiers

With mental disorder
With medical
condition
With another sleep
disorder

Severity
specifiers

Mild: occurs 1–2
days a week
Moderate: occurs 3–
4 days a week
Severe: occurs 5–7
days a week

Course
specifiers

Acute: <1 mo
Subacute: 1–3 mo
Persistent: >3 mo

eye movement
periods on the
MSLT and
overnight
polysomnogram

when woken

All the above
Cataplexy
Medical cause
Hypocretin-1
Narcolepsy
deficiency
Sleep deprivation
Other causes of
hypersomnolence


<<<PAGE 1570>>>
Comments

It is unclear whether This is usually
this is a single
associated
disorder or
with some
multiple with
other mental
different
disorder
underlying
mechanisms

Obstructive
Sleep
Apnea-Hypopnea.
Obstructive
sleep
apnea/hypopnea, often called obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), occurs when the
airway partially or fully collapses during sleep. Decreased oxygen saturation
and increased respiratory effort leads to arousals and sleep fragmentation.
Predisposing factors for OSA include being male, reaching middle age, being
obese, and having micrognathia (undersized lower jaw), retrognathia
(posteriorly positioned lower jaw), nasopharyngeal abnormalities,
hypothyroidism, and acromegaly. Patients with OSA may also have
hypertension, erectile failure in men, depression, heart failure, nocturia,
polycythemia, and memory impairment as a result of obstructive sleep apneahypopnea. Obstructive apnea and hypopnea episodes can occur in any stage
of sleep but are more typical during REM sleep, NREM stage 1, and NREM
stage 2 sleep.
Mr. J is a 28-year-old single African American male with an
approximately 10-year history of fatigue and sleepiness in the daytime.
He began to recognize the daytime sleepiness as a problem in his
freshman year of college when he would fall asleep in class or in the
dormitory. He admits that his sleep–wake schedule was disrupted during
college due to taking long naps and then having to stay up until 1:00 or
2:00 am to complete his studies. His grades and social life suffered, and
he describes himself as depressed, isolated, and hopeless about his
planned future as a certified public accountant.
As a child, Mr. J says he slept “normally.” In high school he felt best
with 10 hours of sleep per night and was able to function well in the
daytime. Mr. J denies abuse of alcohol or drugs. He does not use tobacco
and drinks about 8 to 10 cups of coffee per day. Family history is


<<<PAGE 1571>>>
negative for known sleep or psychiatric disorders. Physical examination
findings are noncontributory except for body mass index of 29. Routine
labs were normal, including TSH.
Mr. J’s excessive sleepiness has continued to the present day,
notwithstanding some improved sleep hygiene. Improvements include
more consistency in bedtime, trying not to nap, and a torturous monthlong trial without caffeine. He remains dysphoric and discouraged about
his future, blaming his chronic sleepiness as the continuing impediment
to his life plans. “I’m just tired of being tired,” he says.
Currently, his bedtime is between 10:00 and 10:30 pm; his wake-up
alarm is set for 6:30 am. He oversleeps at least once a week on workdays
and sleeps from 10:30 pm until 10:00 am on weekends to “catch up.” He
has difficulty awakening and feels unrefreshed or mildly refreshed. By
drinking six to eight cups of coffee in the morning, he is usually able to
avoid dozing during the morning. Luckily, he works independently and
can schedule client appointments during this relatively alert time. After
lunch he routinely falls asleep at the computer while working. He sleeps
for 20 to 60 minutes and is usually awakened by his secretary. He then
drinks another two cups of coffee and continues with his work.
Unexpected napping can also occur later in the afternoon or evening, and
he has “nodded off” while driving. He sleeps alone; however, he has been
told that he snores loudly. He does not awaken gasping or choking. He
denies hypnagogic hallucinations and sleep paralysis but thinks he may
feel weak after the rare occasions when he participates in a heated
argument.
DISCUSSION
Mr. J has one of the hypersomnias. Most consistent with his history are
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, idiopathic hypersomnia, sleep
deprivation in a long sleeper, dyssomnia associated with mood disorder,
and narcolepsy. The ancillary symptoms of narcolepsy are absent, with
the possible exception of cataplexy. When cataplexy occurs clearly, the
diagnosis of narcolepsy is strongly indicated. However, Mr. J’s possible
infrequent weakness during heated arguments is equivocal for cataplexy.
His persistent desire for a 10-hour sleep period would be unusual for a
patient with narcolepsy.


<<<PAGE 1572>>>
A long sleeper or an individual with idiopathic hypersomnia requires
prolonged sleep periods and may awaken groggy as does Mr. J. The main
differentiating feature is that whenever consistently given a chance to
have a full nightly sleep period (usually 10 to 12 hours), the long sleeper
does not experience excessive daytime sleepiness. Furthermore, there
may be associated autonomic nervous system dysfunction or
polysomnographic evidence of elevated slow-wave sleep percentage in
patients with idiopathic hypersomnia.
Sleepiness associated with a low-grade chronic depression may be
difficult to differentiate from other causes of hypersomnolence.
Polysomnography, psychiatric interview, and psychometric testing can be
helpful. Mr. J relates his dysphoria to sleepiness and not vice versa;
nonetheless, a dyssomnia associated with mood disorder should be
considered.
Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome is a strong possibly. Mr. J is
overweight (BMI = 29) and snores loudly. Many patients are unaware of
gasping or choking for breath. Often, family members witness cessation
of breathing during sleep and urge patients to seek treatment. However,
Mr. J lives and sleeps alone.
Polysomnography is recommended in patients suspected of obstructive
sleep apnea syndrome, narcolepsy, or idiopathic hypersomnia. These
disorders usually require lifelong treatment and have significant
morbidity and mortality if untreated.
Table 15-9
Narcolepsy
DSM-5

ICSD-3

ICD-10

Name

Narcolepsy

Narcolepsy

Narcolepsy and
cataplexy

Duration

≥3×/wk for at least 3 mo

Symptoms

Excessive daytime
sleepiness with
• Cataplexy

1. Excessive Episodes of
sleepiness
daytime
sleepiness
2. Cataplexy


<<<PAGE 1573>>>
• CSF hypocretin
and/or
deficiency
hypocretin
1
• REM sleep latency
deficiency
• ≤15 min on
polysomnography 3. Mean sleep
• OR mean sleep
latency of
latency ≤8 min on
≤8 min and
multiple sleep
two sleeplatency testing
onset rapid
with ≥ sleepeye
onset REM sleep
movement
periods
periods
(SOREMP)
within 15
min of
sleep
onset

occurring
despite
adequate
sleep, and
often
associated
with cataplexy,
and
uncontrollable
lapses in
consciousness

# Symptoms
needed

Excessive daytime
sleepiness is
required, plus at
least one other
symptom as above.

Type 1: All of
the above
criteria met
Type 2:
Cataplexy
and/or
hypocretin
deficiency
not present

Exclusion (not
the result
of):

Substance use disorder Sleep
Nightmares
deprivation Nonorganic sleep
Another sleep–wake
disorder
Another
disorders
sleepSleep terrors
related
Sleepwalking
disorder

Symptom
specifiers

Narcolepsy without
cataplexy but with

Types 1 and
2 (see


<<<PAGE 1574>>>
hypocretin
deficiency
Narcolepsy with
cataplexy but
without hypocretin
deficiency
Autosomal dominant
cerebellar ataxia,
deafness, and
narcolepsy (due to
genetic mutation and
characterized by late
onset in 30s and
40s)
Autosomal dominant
narcolepsy,
obesity, and type 2
diabetes
(associated with
mutation in myelin
oligodendrocyte
glycoprotein gene)
Narcolepsy secondary
to another medical
condition
Severity
specifiers

Mild: <1/wk, 1–2 naps
daily mildly, or
intermittently
disturbed sleep.
Moderate: cataplexy
1/day or close to
that. Disturbed
sleep, need for
multiple naps.
Severe: near constant.

above)


<<<PAGE 1575>>>
Multiple attacks/day.
Disturbed sleep.
Resistant to
medications.
Central Sleep Apnea. Central sleep apnea is a diminished effort to
breathe. There are many possible causes, DSM defines three of them:
idiopathic CSA, Cheyne–Stokes breathing, and CSA comorbid with opioid
use. Other causes include heart failure, high altitude, brainstem lesions,
metabolic conditions, specific drugs or substances (CNS depressants),
congenital abnormalities, and positive airway pressure (PAP) treatment. The
critical characteristic linking the various CSA syndromes is the diminished
breathing is not caused by airway obstruction. ICSD-3 includes several
subtypes of CSA in addition to those included in DSM-5, which we discuss
below, along with the DSM-5 subtypes.
Table 15-10
Sleep-Related Breathing Disorders

Name

DSM-5

ICSD-3

Breathing-related sleep
disorders:
• Obstructive sleep
apnea-hypopnea
• Central sleep apnea
• Sleep-related
hypoventilation

Sleep-related breathing
disorders:
• Central sleep
apnea syndromes
• Central sleep
apnea with
Cheyne–Stokes
breathing
• Central sleep
apnea due to a
medical disorder
without Cheyne–
Stokes breathing
• Central sleep
apnea due to


<<<PAGE 1576>>>
high-altitude
periodic breathing
• Primary central
sleep apnea
• Obstructive sleep
apnea disorders
• Sleep-related
hypoventilation
disorders
• Obesity
hypoventilation
syndrome
• Congenital central
alveolar
hypoventilation
syndrome
• Late-onset central
hypoventilation
with hypothalamic
dysfunction
• Idiopathic central
alveolar
hypoventilation
Symptoms

Obstructive Sleep ApneaHypopnea:
Evidence on
polysomnography of ≤5
obstructive apneas or
hypopneas/hour of sleep
with either:
• Nocturnal breathing
disturbance (i.e.,
snoring, breathing
pauses)
• Daytime sleepiness,

Obstructive Sleep
Apnea-Hypopnea:
15+ events/hour of sleep
on polysomnogram
OR 5 obstructive
events/hour on
polysomnography w/
daytime symptoms of
fatigue or sleepiness
Central Sleep Apnea:
Above symptoms but
they persist despite


<<<PAGE 1577>>>
fatigue
positive airway
pressure relieving
Evidence on
an obstruction
polysomnography of 15+
obstructive apneas
Sleep-Related
and/or hypopneas/hour
Hypoventilation:
of sleep
↑ alveolar CO2 (direct
Central Sleep Apnea:
measurement or by
5+ central apneas/hour of
end-tidal CO2
sleep on
measurement)
polysomnography
For obesity
Sleep-Related
hypoventilation
Hypoventilation:
syndrome:
Decreased respiration
Daytime ↑ PaCO2
causing increased CO2
(>45 mm Hg) in a
levels, as correlated by
patient with BMI of
polysomnography
>30 kg/m2
# Symptoms
needed

Obstructive Sleep Apnea- Obstructive Sleep
Hypopnea: One of the
Apnea-Hypopnea:
above criteria must be
One of the above
met
criteria must be met
Central Sleep Apnea: All
Central Sleep Apnea:
criteria met
All criteria met
Sleep-related
Sleep-related
hypoventilation: All
hypoventilation: All
criteria met
criteria met

Exclusion
(not the
result of):

Another sleep disorder
Use of a substance or
medication

Symptom
specifiers

Obstructive Sleep ApneaHypopnea:
n/a
Central Sleep Apnea:

Another sleep disorder
Use of a
substance/medication


<<<PAGE 1578>>>
• Idiopathic central
sleep apnea
• Cheyne–Stokes
breathing
• Central sleep apnea
comorbid with opioid
use
Sleep-Related
Hypoventilation:
• Idiopathic
hypoventilation
• Congenital central
alveolar
hypoventilation
• Comorbid sleep-related
hypoventilation
Severity
specifiers

Obstructive Sleep ApneaHypopnea:
Mild: apnea hypopnea
index is <15
Moderate: apnea
hypopnea index 15–30
Severe: apnea hypopnea
index >30
Central Sleep Apnea:
Severity based on
frequency of breathing
disturbance as well as
severity of oxygen
desaturation/sleep
fragmentation
Sleep-Related
Hypoventilation:
Severity based on degree


<<<PAGE 1579>>>
of
hypoxemia/hypercarbia,
in addition to presence
of end-organ
impairment. Blood gas
abnormality during
wakefulness is an
indicator of more
severe illness.
IDIOPATHIC CSA. Patients with idiopathic CSA typically have low normal

arterial carbon dioxide tension (PaCO2) while awake and have a high
ventilatory response to CO2. They present with daytime sleepiness, insomnia,
or awakening with shortness of breath. Respiratory cessations during sleep
are independent of ventilatory effort. Polysomnography reveals five or more
central apneas per hour of sleep.
CHEYNE–STOKES BREATHING. Cheyne–Stokes breathing is a unique breathing

pattern consisting of prolonged hyperpnea during which tidal volume
gradually waxes and wanes in a crescendo–decrescendo fashion. The
hyperpnea alternates with apnea and hypopnea episodes that are associated
with reduced ventilatory effort. This pattern is most common in older men
with congestive heart failure or stroke. As with idiopathic CSA, the patient
presents with daytime sleepiness, insomnia, and awakening short of breath.
CSA COMORBID WITH OPIOID USE. This syndrome is the third subtype of CSA

in DSM-5, specified if opioid use disorder is present. There is an association
with chronic use of long-acting opioid medications and impairment of
neuromuscular respiratory control leading to CSA.
CSA DUE TO HIGH-ALTITUDE PERIODIC BREATHING. Central apnea at sleep onset

is universal at elevations above 7,600 m but can occur at 1,500 m in some
individuals (especially with a rapid ascent). This subtype is no longer
included in DSM-5 but may still have clinical significance. Periods of central
apnea alternate with periods of hyperpnea in a 12- to 34-second cycle. This


<<<PAGE 1580>>>
response is an extension of normal respiratory control at sleep onset where
medullary pH receptors raise their set-point and require lower pH to respond.
At high altitudes, hyperventilation causes a hypocapnic alkalosis that reduces
ventilation during sleep. Sleep architecture may suffer, with increased
duration in stages 1 and 2 and less slow-wave sleep. REM sleep may not be
affected.
CSA DUE TO MEDICAL DISORDER WITHOUT CHEYNE–STOKES BREATHING. This

form of CSA is usually caused by a brainstem lesion associated with a wide
range of variable etiologies. Cardiac and renal disorders can also cause
central apnea. Diagnostic criteria require a polysomnographically verified
rate of 5 or more central apneas and hypopneas per hour of sleep.
A variety of drugs or drug
combinations can provoke central apnea episodes, most notably long-acting
opiates. However, other substances or medications can also alter
neuromuscular control leading to CSA. Diagnostic criteria are a central apnea
index (number of episodes per hour) of 5 or more per hour.
CSA DUE TO DRUG OR SUBSTANCE USE.

PRIMARY SLEEP APNEA OF INFANCY. This form of CSA involves prolonged

apneas or hypopneas with concomitant hypoxemia, bradycardia, or both. This
condition afflicts preterm neonates, presumably because their brainstems are
not fully developed. The condition may be exacerbated by other medical
problems that further compromise the infant’s physiologic and developmental
status.
Sleep-Related Hypoventilation. DSM-5 includes three types of sleeprelated hypoventilation disorders: (1) idiopathic hypoventilation, (2)
congenital central alveolar hypoventilation, and (3) comorbid sleep-related
hypoventilation (which results from a medical disorder, such as a cervical
spinal cord injury, COPD, or a neuromuscular disorder, for example).
Polysomnography must demonstrate either episodes with elevated CO2 levels
and decreased respirations or, if not monitoring the CO2, episodes of
persistently low oxyhemoglobin levels that are not provoked by apnea or
hypopnea.


<<<PAGE 1581>>>
Circadian Rhythm Sleep–Wake Disorders
DSM-5 lists six types of circadian rhythm sleep–wake disorders: delayed
sleep phase type, advanced sleep phase type, irregular sleep–wake type, non–
24-hour sleep–wake type, shift work type, and unspecified type. DSM-5 does
not include jet lag type, but ICSD does. Table 15-11 compares the diagnostic
approaches to the circadian rhythm sleep–wake disorders.
Table 15-11
Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorders
DSM-5
Name

ICSD-3

Circadian rhythm Circadian rhythm
sleep-wake
sleep–wake
disorders
disorders:
• Shift work
disorder
• Jet lag
disorder
• Delayed
sleep–wake
phase
disorder
• Advanced
sleep–wake
phase
disorder
• Irregular
sleep–wake
rhythm
disorder
• Non–24-h
sleep–wake
rhythm
disorder

ICD-10
Disorders of
sleep–wake
schedule
Delayed sleep
phase
syndrome
Irregular sleep–
wake pattern


<<<PAGE 1582>>>
Duration

Episodic (lasting Symptoms ≥3 mo
1–3 mo)
(exception of
jet lag disorder)
Persistent
(lasting ≥3
mo)
Recurrent (two
or more
episodes
occurring
within 1 y)

Symptoms

• Disturbed
sleep due to
altered
circadian
rhythm
• Excessive
daytime
sleepiness
and/or
insomnia

Chronic pattern of Persistent sleep
sleep–wake
disturbance
rhythm
(i.e., insomnia
disruption due
or excessive
to abnormality
daytime
in circadian
sleepiness)
timing/schedule
due to altered
circadian
Presence of
rhythm and
insomnia
environmental
and/or
demands
excessive
sleepiness
Disruption of
normal 24-h
circadian
cycle

# Symptoms
needed

All the above

All the above

Exclusion (not Substance use
the result of): Another medical
condition

One of the above
Nightmares
Nonorganic
sleep
disorders
Sleep terrors
Sleepwalking


<<<PAGE 1583>>>
Psychosocial
impact

Marked distress Distress or
and/or
impairment in
impairment in
functioning
functioning

Symptom
specifiers

Delayed sleep
phase type
(sleep onset
and
awakening
times are
later)
Specify if
familial
Specify if
overlapping
with non–
24-h sleep–
wake type
Advanced sleep
phase type
(sleep onset
and
awakening
times are
earlier)
Specify if
familial
Irregular sleep–
wake type
(disorganized
cycle)
Non–24-h
sleep–wake
type does not
follow 24-h


<<<PAGE 1584>>>
pattern, with
daily drift of
progressively
later sleep
onset/wake
time)
Shift work type
Unspecified
type
Course
specifiers

Comments

Episodic (lasting
1–3 mo)
Persistent
(lasting ≥3
mo)
Recurrent (two
or more
episodes
occurring
within 1 y)
Circadian rhythm
disorders can
be the result of
underlying
medical,
psychiatric, or
neurologic
disorders

Delayed Sleep Phase Type. The delayed sleep phase circadian disorder
occurs when the biologic clock runs slower than 24 hours or is shifted later
than the desired schedule. This produces a phase delay in the sleepiness–
alertness cycle. Individuals with delayed sleep phase are more alert in the
evening and early nighttime, stay up later and are more tired in the morning.
These individuals are sometimes called night owls.


<<<PAGE 1585>>>
Advanced Sleep Phase Type. Advanced sleep phase occurs when the
circadian rhythm cycle shifts forward. Therefore, the sleepiness cycle moves
earlier. Individuals with advanced sleep phase are drowsy in the evening,
want to retire to bed earlier, awaken earlier, and are more alert in the early
morning. Individuals with this pattern of advanced sleep phase are sometimes
called early birds or larks.
Irregular Sleep–Wake Type. The irregular sleep–wake pattern occurs
when the circadian sleep–wake rhythm is absent or pathologically
diminished. The sleep–wake pattern is temporally disorganized, and the
timing of sleep and wakefulness is unpredictable. Individuals with this
condition have a healthy amount of sleep during 24 hours; however, it is
fragmented into three or more episodes that occur irregularly. There are
symptoms of insomnia at night and excessive sleepiness during the day. Long
daytime naps and inappropriate nocturnal wakefulness occur. This usually
impairs activities of daily life.
Non–24-Hour Sleep–Wake Type. When the circadian sleep–wake
pacemaker has a cycle length greater or less than 24 hours and is not reset
each morning, a person may develop this type of circadian rhythm disorder.
Under normal circumstances, resynchronization of the circadian rhythm
occurs daily in response to the light–dark cycle. Problems occur
incrementally when internal and environmental clocks become more and
more out of phase. If the circadian clock’s period is longer than 24 hours and
does not reset each day, the patient experiences progressively worsening
sleep-onset insomnia and daytime sleepiness. Sleep problems peak when
circadian and environmental clocks are 12 hours out of phase and then begin
to lessen, as the sleep phase continues to advance. Eventually, the clocks
align, and the sleep–wake cycle is normal for a few days. Then,
unfortunately, the problem begins again.
For this reason, non–24-hour sleep–wake disorder has been called periodic
insomnia and periodic excessive sleepiness. Traumatic brain injury (TBI) can
cause this, as can blindness.
Shift Work Type. Many service industries require 24-hour operation (e.g.,
transportation, health care). Similarly, as cultures became more capital


<<<PAGE 1586>>>
intensive, mining and manufacturing became around-the-clock enterprises.
The number of individuals doing shift work has been increasing steadily for
decades. Shift workers commonly have insomnia, excessive sleepiness, or
both. Some individuals require only a short time to adjust to a shift change,
whereas others have great difficulty. Frequent shift rotation adds to the
problem.
Furthermore, to meet social demands, shift workers often adopt an
unshifted sleep–wake schedule on weekends and holidays. Even those
individuals who try to stay shifted usually retain an unshifted circadian
rhythm. The result can be severe insomnia when attempting to sleep and
excessive sleepiness when attempting to remain awake. The result is
profound sleep deprivation as circadian rhythm continues to conflict with the
sleep–wake schedule. The natural low point in the normal sleep–wake rhythm
occurs at approximately 3:00 to 5:00 AM—the time frame during which
transportation and industrial accidents commonly occur as a direct
consequence of sleepiness.
Jet Lag Type. Removed from DSM-5, the other classifications still
recognize jet lag. With the advent of high-speed air travel, induced
desynchrony between circadian and environmental clocks became possible.
Thus, the term jet lag came into use. When an individual rapidly travels
across many time zones, they either induce a circadian phase advance or a
phase delay, depending on the direction of travel. Typically, traveling across
one or two time zones will not cause a significant problem. However, it can
be challenging to adjust to overseas travel. Individuals who frequently travel
for business can find themselves quite impaired at the time they need to make
crucial decisions.
Furthermore, “night owls” will experience greater difficulty adjusting to
eastward travel because resynchronization requires phase advance. Similarly,
“larks” theoretically will have more difficulty with westward travel. The
number of time zones crossed is a critical factor. Usually, healthy individuals
can quickly adapt to one or two time zone changes per day; therefore, natural
adjustment to an 8-hour translocation may take 4 or more days.
Unspecified Type. During illnesses that keep patients bedridden during
hospitalizations, and in some forms of dementia, individuals often sleep


<<<PAGE 1587>>>
erratically. The resulting chaotic sleep–wake pattern adversely affects the
circadian rhythm. Medications can also exacerbate the sleep–wake cycle
breakdown. Sleep in patients in the intensive care unit is disturbed by noise,
light, and therapeutic and monitoring procedures. The resulting disorganized
sleep–wake pattern can produce a significant sleep disorder. Also, abuse of
recreational street drugs (e.g., methamphetamine, ecstasy) is associated with
individuals remaining awake overnight or continuously for several days at a
time. These episodes of prolonged wakefulness ultimately produce periods of
profound hypersomnia.
Parasomnias and Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
DSM 5 includes only three of the 10 specific parasomnias referenced in the
ICSD-3. Also, DSM-5 includes restless legs syndrome (RLS), which ICSD-3
classifies as one of the seven specific sleep-related movement disorders. We
will discuss all of these disorders together.
NREM-Related Parasomnias. Table 15-12 compares the diagnostic
approaches to the NREM-related parasomnias.
SLEEPWALKING. Sleepwalking, in its classic form, as the name implies, is a

condition in which an individual arises from bed and ambulates without fully
awakening. It is sometimes called somnambulism, and individuals can
engage in a variety of complex behaviors while unconscious. Usually,
sleepwalking occurs during slow-wave sleep, and characteristically begins
toward the end of the first or second slow-wave sleep episodes. Sleep
deprivation and interruption of slow-wave sleep appear to exacerbate, or even
provoke, sleepwalking in susceptible individuals. Sleepwalking episodes may
range from sitting up and attempting to walk to conducting an involved
sequence of semipurposeful actions. The sleepwalker can often successfully
interact with the environment (e.g., avoiding tripping over objects). However,
the sleepwalker may interact with the environment inappropriately, which
sometimes results in injury (e.g., stepping out of an upstairs window or
walking into the roadway). There are cases in which sleepwalkers have
committed acts of violence. An individual who is sleepwalking is difficult to
awaken. Once awake, the sleepwalker will usually appear confused. It is best
to gently attempt to lead sleepwalkers back to bed rather than to attempt to


<<<PAGE 1588>>>
awaken them by grabbing, shaking, or shouting. In their confused state,
sleepwalkers may think they are being attacked and may react violently to
defend themselves. Sleepwalking in adults is rare, has a familial pattern, and
may occur as a primary parasomnia or secondary to another sleep disorder
(e.g., sleep apnea). By contrast, sleepwalking is very common in children and
has a peak prevalence between the ages of 4 and 8 years. After adolescence, it
usually disappears spontaneously. Nightly to weekly sleepwalking episodes
associated with physical injury to the patient and others are considered
severe. There are “specialized” forms of sleepwalking, most notably sleeprelated eating behavior.
Table 15-12
NREM Sleep Disorders
DSM-5

ICSD-3

ICD-10

Name

NREM sleep
arousal
disorders

NREM-related
parasomnias

Nonorganic
disorders of the
sleep–wake
schedule
Sleepwalking
(somnambulism)
Sleep terrors
(night terrors)
Nightmares

Symptoms

Recurrent
Recurrent
Sleepwalking
episodes of
episodes of
altered state of
incomplete
incomplete
consciousness in
awakening from
awakening
which sleep and
sleep,
associated with
wakefulness are
accompanied
abnormal
combined;
by either
behaviors or
episodes
experiences
associated with
• Sleepwalking
(confused
low levels of
• Sleep terrors
arousal,
awareness, with
Little dream recall,
sleepwalking,
no recall of event
if any


<<<PAGE 1589>>>
Amnesia for
episodes

# Symptoms
needed

All the above
criteria met

Exclusion (not Effects of
the result of):
substance or
medication
Other mental or
medical
disorders
Psychosocial

Marked

sleep terrors,
on awakening
sleep-related
Sleep terrors
eating
nighttime
disorders)
episodes of terror
Absent or
and panic
inappropriate
associated with
responsiveness
motor movement
during
and vocalization,
episodes
in addition to high
levels of
Limited or no
autonomic tone;
cognition of
associated with
dream report
little to no recall
Partial or complete
of the event
amnesia for the
Nightmares:
event
associated with
fear and negative
emotion, with
presence of intact
recall of dream
content on
awakening. Not
associated with
vocalization and
body movement


<<<PAGE 1590>>>
impact

impairment
and/or distress

Symptom
specifiers

Sleep terror type
Sleepwalking type
• With sleeprelated
eating
• With sleeprelated sexual
behavior

DSM includes
nightmare
disorder as a
separate category

DESCRIPTION
Ms. R is a 20-year-old white woman who was referred with symptoms of
talking, mumbling, and crying out during sleep. At least twice per week
she screams in her sleep. She is bothered with excessive sleepiness and
falling asleep inappropriately, such as during a conversation. When
inactive, she is tired and sleepy, even after a full 8-hour night of sleep.
However, she has energy when motivated and leads a vigorous life. Once,
she awakened outside of her apartment and her roommate had to let her
back in because she had locked herself out. She does not recall the
sleepwalking episode or other nocturnal wanderings but sometimes
remembers yelling. From the history, crying seems to occur in light sleep
but she rarely recalls any sleep-related thoughts or dreams. However,
there is a history of occasional nightmares and bruxism. The patient uses
an oral appliance to protect her teeth. Leg-kicking and mild snoring
without gasping or choking are noted. The patient also complains of legkicking during sleep. Her sleep–wake schedule is irregular, and she
averages between 5 and 7 hours of sleep per night. She occasionally
awakens with a headache in the morning.
Previous health history includes a hospitalization for febrile
convulsions during infancy, ophthalmologic surgery for strabismus
during childhood, and tonsillectomy as a teenager. Health is otherwise
excellent. The patient does not smoke tobacco or drink alcohol.


<<<PAGE 1591>>>
DISCUSSION
By history Ms. R has one or more of the parasomnias. Sleep talking alone
does not require a sleep study, but this patient has nocturnal wanderings.
Polysomnography with clinical EEG is indicated to rule out unrecognized
nocturnal seizure disorder or other organic factors inducing sleepwalking.
Sleepwalking is common and not necessarily considered abnormal in
young children; however, in the adult it is rare and merits careful
evaluation. Ms. R’s excessive daytime sleepiness is likely due to
insufficient sleep (5 to 7 hours per night) and possibly parasomnia-related
disruption. Interestingly, many parasomnias are exacerbated by sleep
deprivation, as is nocturnal seizure disorder.
Sleep studies were performed using comprehensive, attended,
laboratory polysomnography. Prior to the overnight study, a clinical EEG
was performed. The clinical EEG study did not reveal any significant
abnormal EEG activity during baseline, photic stimulation, or
hyperventilation. An extended EEG montage was used during the sleep
study. Overall sleep quality was within the normal range. Sleep efficiency
was 96 percent and latency to sleep was 1 minute. REM sleep percentage
was elevated (31 percent) and latency to REM sleep was less than normal
(57 minutes). Slow-wave sleep was normal in percentage, but EEG delta
activity was very high amplitude. The overall macroarchitectural sleep
pattern suggested rebound from sleep deprivation.
By contrast, sleep microarchitecture contained many abnormal
features. The clinicians observed high amplitude paroxysmal EEG bursts.
Excessively prolonged sleep spindles were noted, and rhythmic K
complexes were observed. There was one arousal out of slow-wave sleep
with rhythmic EEG discharges alternating with sharp waves. Sharps and
spikes occurred several times; however, the focus was difficult to localize
(possibly right temporal lobe). There were frequent body movements and
full body jerks, most of which occurred during NREM sleep. There were
episodes of moaning during slow-wave sleep and laughing during stage 2
sleep that was followed by high amplitude theta bursts and REM sleep.
The clinicians observed frequent movements and arousals from REM
sleep, but no REM-related spikes or sharp waves. Seizure-like EEG
activity was noted during the night and occurred predominantly during
slow-wave sleep. However, the patient did not attempt to sleepwalk.


<<<PAGE 1592>>>
Sharp wave and spike activity increased during the final 45 minutes of
the sleep study.
The patient did not have any sleep-related breathing impairment and
SaO2 nadir was 90 percent. She had no periodic limb movements during
sleep, and polygraphic features associated with RLS were absent.
Sleep terrors involve sudden arousal with intense
fearfulness. They usually begin with a piercing scream or cry and are
accompanied by behavioral manifestations of intense anxiety bordering on
panic. Autonomic and behavioral correlates of fear are typically present.
Typically, an individual experiencing a sleep terror sits up in bed, is
unresponsive to stimuli, and, if awakened, is confused or disoriented.
Vocalizations may occur, but they usually are incoherent.
Notwithstanding the intensity of these events, amnesia for the episodes
usually occurs. Like sleepwalking, these episodes usually arise from slowwave sleep. Fever and CNS depressant withdrawal potentiate sleep terror
episodes. Unlike nightmares, in which an elaborate dream sequence unfolds,
sleep terrors may be devoid of images or contain only fragments of very brief
but frighteningly vivid and sometimes static images. It is sometimes called
pavor nocturnus, incubus, or night terror. As with other slow-wave sleep
parasomnias, sleep deprivation can provoke or exacerbate sleep terrors.
Psychopathology is seldom associated with sleep terrors in children;
however, a history of a traumatic experience or frank psychiatric problems is
often comorbid in adults with this disorder. Severity ranges from less than
once per month to almost nightly occurrence (with injury to the patient or
others).
SLEEP

TERRORS.

CONFUSIONAL AROUSALS. ICSD-3 defines confusional arousals as a milder

form of NREM sleep parasomnias. It is common in young children. The child
will typically partially awaken from sleep and sit up. The child is confused,
but lies back down and resumes sleep. Confusional arousals, sleepwalking,
and sleep terrors likely lie on a continuum.
This diagnosis is subsumed under the
DSM-5 classification NREM sleep arousal disorders and specified as
SLEEP-RELATED EATING DISORDER.


<<<PAGE 1593>>>
“sleepwalking with sleep-related eating.” In this disorder, eating may become
obsessional, and the patient may eat several small meals during a night. The
individual may be unaware of the activity, and weight gain can become a
problem. During the recurrent sleep-related eating episodes, the individual
may consume unusual foods or food combinations or may injure themselves
or create a hazard while preparing food (e.g., starting a fire on the stove).
They may also experience health consequences from these episodes.
REM-Related Parasomnias. Table 15-13 compares the diagnostic
approaches to the REM-related parasomnias.
Nightmares are frightening or terrifying dreams.
Sometimes called dream anxiety attacks, they produce sympathetic activation
and ultimately awaken the dreamer. Nightmares occur in REM sleep and
usually evolve from a long, complicated dream that becomes increasingly
frightening. Having aroused to wakefulness, the person typically remembers
the dream (in contrast to sleep terrors). Some nightmares are recurrent, and
reportedly when they occur in association with posttraumatic stress disorder,
they may be recollections of actual events. Common in children ages 3 to 6
years, nightmares are rare in adults. Frequent and distressing nightmares are
sometimes responsible for insomnia because the individual is afraid to sleep.
Most people with nightmares are free from psychiatric conditions. Traumatic
events are known to induce nightmares, sometimes immediately, but at other
times delayed. The nightmares can persist for many years. Several
medications can provoke nightmares, including L-DOPA and β-adrenergic
blockers. Withdrawal from REM suppressant medications may induce
nightmares, as well. Finally, drug or alcohol abuse is associated with
nightmares.
NIGHTMARE DISORDER.

Table 15-13
REM Sleep Disorders

Name

DSM-5

ICSD-3

ICD-10

REM sleep behavior
disorder

REM-related
parasomnias

REM sleep
behavior


<<<PAGE 1594>>>
disorder
Symptoms

Repeated arousal
Sleep-related
Recurrent
during sleep
vocalizations or
episodes
complex motor
of sudden,
Vocalization or
behaviors
often
complex motor
violent
behavior
Occurs during REM
behaviors
sleep as
Occurs during REM
during
documented by
sleep
REM sleep
polysomnography
Not confused when
(or presumed
May cause
awakened
based on history)
harm to
Either:
self or
REM sleep without REM sleep without
others.
atonia on
atonia on
polysomnography Difficulty
polysomnography
awakening
OR history
Associated
consistent with
with dream
REM sleep
enactment
behaviors with
established
diagnosis of a
synucleinopathy
(i.e., Parkinson
disease)

# Symptoms
needed

All the above

Exclusion (not Medication
the result of): Substance use
disorder
Another medical
condition
A mental disorder

All the above
Another sleep
disorder
Medical or
neurologic
disorder
Mental disorder
Medication
Substance use


<<<PAGE 1595>>>
disorder
Absence of
epileptiform
activity during
REM sleep
Psychosocial
impact

Marked distress
and/or impairment
in functioning

Table 15-14
Nightmare Disorder
DSM-5

ICSD-3

ICD-10

Name

Nightmare
disorder

Nightmare
Nonorganic
disorder
disorders of
(classified
the sleep–
under REMwake schedule
related
Sleep terrors
parasomnia; Nightmares
see Table
15-13)

Symptoms

Pattern of
Recurrent,
Sleep terrors:
long,
highly
Nighttime
dysphoric,
dysphoric or
episodes of
threatening,
anxietyterror and
vivid
laden
panic
dreams
nightmares
associated
with motor
Dreams are
Dreams are
movement
recalled
remembered
and
upon
On awakening,
vocalization
awakening
quickly
High levels of
becomes
autonomic
awake and
tone
alert


<<<PAGE 1596>>>
Little to no
recall of the
event
Nightmares:
Dreams
associated
with fear and
negative
emotion
Intact recall of
dream
content
# Symptoms
needed

All of the
above

Exclusion (not Effects of a
the result of):
substance
or
medication
Coexisting
mental or
medical
disorder
Psychosocial
impact

Marked
Marked distress
distress
and/or
and/or
impairment
impairment
in areas of
in areas of
functioning
functioning

Symptom
specifiers

• During
sleep onset
• With
associated
nonsleep

Not associated
with
vocalization
and body
movement


<<<PAGE 1597>>>
disorder
(including
substance
use
disorder)
• With
associated
other
medical
condition
• With
associated
other sleep
disorder
Severity
specifiers

Mild (less than
one
episode per
week)
Moderate
(one or
more
episodes
per week,
but less
than
nightly)
Severe
(nightly
episodes)

Course
specifiers

Acute
(duration
≤1 mo)
Subacute (1–
6 mo)


<<<PAGE 1598>>>
Persistent (≥6
mo)
Frequently occurring nightmares often produce a “fear of sleeping” type of
insomnia. In turn, insomnia may provoke sleep deprivation, which is known
to exacerbate nightmares; hence, a vicious cycle.
ICSD includes it among the REM-related sleep disorders whereas DSM-5
classifies this as a separate disorder. ICD considers this a “nonorganic
disorder” of the sleep–wake schedule, along with sleep terrors. Table 15-14
compares the diagnostic approaches.
REM SLEEP BEHAVIOR DISORDER. RBD involves a failure of the patient to have

atonia (sleep paralysis) during the REM stage sleep. The result is that the
patient enacts his or her dreams. Under normal circumstances, the REMrelated hypopolarization of α and γ motor neurons immobilizes the dreamer.
Without this paralysis or with intermittent atonia, a dreamer could punch,
kick, leap, while dreaming. The activity correlates with dream imagery.
Unlike sleepwalking, the individual seems unaware of the actual
environment but instead is acting on the dream sensorium. Thus, a
sleepwalker may calmly go to a bedroom window, open it, and step out. By
contrast, a person with RBD would more likely dive through the window,
thinking it is a dream-visualized lake. Patients and bed partners frequently
sustain an injury, which is sometimes severe (e.g., lacerations, fractures). A
wide variety of drugs and comorbid conditions can precipitate or worsen
RBD.
Sleep paralysis is, as the name
implies, an inability to make voluntary movements during sleep. It becomes a
parasomnia when it occurs at sleep onset or on awakening, a time when the
individual is partially conscious and aware of the surroundings. This inability
to move can be extremely distressing, especially when coupled with the
feeling that there is an intruder in the house or when hypnagogic
hallucinations are occurring. Sleep paralysis is part of the tetrad of symptoms
associated with narcolepsy; however, it can occur (with or without
hypnagogia) in individuals that have neither cataplexy nor excessive daytime
RECURRENT ISOLATED SLEEP PARALYSIS.


<<<PAGE 1599>>>
sleepiness. Although it is sometimes frightening, sleep paralysis is a feature
of normal REM sleep, briefly intruding into wakefulness. The paralysis may
last from one to several minutes.
Interestingly, the occurrence of sleep paralysis with hypnagogia may
account for a variety of experiences in which the sleeper is confronted or
attacked by some sort of “creature.” The standard description is that the
paralyzed sleeper feels a “presence” nearby, and the creature talks, attacks, or
sits on the sleeper’s chest and then vanishes. Whether it is called an incubus,
“Old Hag,” a vampire, ghost oppression (kanashibari in Japanese), witch
riding, or an alien encounter, all these experiences have elements that are
similar to descriptions of sleep paralysis. Irregular sleep, sleep deprivation,
psychological stress, and shift work increase the likelihood of sleep paralysis.
Other Parasomnias
EXPLODING HEAD SYNDROME. Individuals with the parasomnia “hear” a loud

imagined noise or a sense of an explosion. They experience it as inside their
head as they are falling asleep or awakening. The experience can occur just
once or recurrently. There is no pain associated with the noise, but the
individual may be concerned that they are having a stroke or that something
is very wrong. Even a single episode can trigger severe insomnia. There are
no known neurologic consequences to this syndrome.
SLEEP-RELATED HALLUCINATIONS. This parasomnia typically involves visual

images occurring at sleep onset (hypnagogic) or on awakening
(hypnopompic) from sleep. Sometimes challenging to differentiate from
dreams, they are common in patients with narcolepsy. Complex
hallucinations are rare and usually happen with abrupt awakening and
without remembering dreaming. Images tend to be vivid and immobile and
persist for several minutes. They usually appear when turning on a light. The
images can be frightening.
SLEEP ENURESIS. Sleep enuresis is a disorder in which the individual urinates

during sleep while in bed. It is commonly called bed-wetting and has primary
and secondary forms. In children, primary sleep enuresis is the continuance
of bed-wetting since infancy. Secondary enuresis refers to relapse after toilet
training was complete, and there was a period during which the child


<<<PAGE 1600>>>
remained dry. Usually, after toilet training, bed-wetting spontaneously
resolves before age 6 years.
Parental primary enuresis increases the likelihood that the children will
also have enuresis. A single recessive gene is suspected. Secondary enuresis
in children may occur with the birth of a sibling and represent a “cry for
attention.” Secondary enuresis can also be associated with nocturnal seizures,
sleep deprivation, and urologic anomalies. In adults with sleep-disordered
breathing, sleep enuresis may occur. In most cases, embarrassment, shame,
and guilt are the most substantial consequences. Nonetheless, if we do not
address sleep enuresis, it may leave psychosocial scars.
PARASOMNIA DUE TO DRUG OR SUBSTANCE USE AND PARASOMNIA DUE TO
MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Many drugs and substances can trigger parasomnias,

particularly those agents that lighten sleep; however, alcohol is notorious for
producing sleepwalking (even in individuals who have taken sleeping pills).
Table 15-15 lists some medications and drugs that can worsen parasomnias.
Seizure disorder should always be on the top of a differential diagnosis list
for most parasomnias. The American Academy of Sleep Medicine practice
guidelines concerning the indications for polysomnography includes using
sleep testing to rule out seizures when diagnosing sleep terror, sleepwalking,
RBD, nightmares, and other parasomnias. Sleep-related breathing disorders
are also known to trigger sleepwalking, enuresis, sleep terror, confusional
arousal, and nightmares. RBD is associated with a variety of neurologic
conditions, including Parkinson disease, dementia, progressive supranuclear
palsy, Shy–Drager syndrome (a movement disorder with autonomic arousal
symptoms), narcolepsy, and others.
Restless Legs Syndrome. RLS is an uncomfortable, subjective sensation
of the limbs, usually the legs, sometimes described as a “creepy-crawly”
feeling, and the irresistible urge to move the legs when at rest or while trying
to fall asleep. Patients often report the sensation of ants walking on the skin
and crawling feelings in their legs. It tends to be worse at night, and moving
the legs or walking helps to alleviate the discomfort. Thus, as the individual
is lying in bed and relaxing, he or she is disturbed by these sensations. Then
he or she moves the legs and again tries to fall asleep. This cycle sometimes
continues for hours and results in profound insomnia. Table 15-16 compares


<<<PAGE 1601>>>
the diagnostic approaches to RLS.
Table 15-15
Medications and Drugs Causing or Worsening Certain
Parasomnias
REM Sleep Behavior Disorder
Biperiden
Caffeine
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
Selegiline
Serotonin agonists
Tricyclic antidepressants
Venlafaxine
Withdrawal syndromes
Alcohol
Meprobamate
Pentazocine
Nitrazepam
Nightmares
Alcohol abuse or withdrawal
Drug-induced REM sleep rebound (e.g., withdrawal from REMsuppressing drugs such as methamphetamine)
l-DOPA
β-Blockers
A variety of medical conditions can cause secondary RLS, and we list
these in Table 15-17. A detailed history and physical examination are
essential parts of the RLS workup. Also, we should check a ferritin level in
every patient with symptoms consistent with RLS.
Periodic Limb Movement Disorder. Periodic limb movement disorder
(PLMD), previously called nocturnal myoclonus, involves brief, stereotypic,
repetitive, nonepileptiform movements of the limbs, usually the legs. It


<<<PAGE 1602>>>
occurs primarily in NREM sleep and involves an extension of the big toe. A
partial flexion of the ankle, knee, and hip may also occur. These movements
range from 0.5 to 5 seconds in duration and occur every 20 to 40 seconds.
The leg movements are frequently associated with brief arousals from sleep
and, as a result, can (but do not always) disturb sleep architecture. The
prevalence of PLMD increases with aging and can occur in association with
folate deficiency, renal disease, anemia, and the use of antidepressants.
Sleep-Related Leg Cramps. Nocturnal leg cramps are much like leg
cramps that occur during wakefulness. They usually affect the calf and are
painful muscle contractions. The pain awakens the sleeper and thereby
disrupts sleep. Metabolic disorders, mineral deficiencies, electrolytic
imbalances, diabetes, and pregnancy are known precipitators. The reason that
some individuals have repeated leg cramps during sleep and not during the
day is not known.
Sleep-Related Bruxism. Sleep-related bruxism occurs when an individual
grinds or clenches the teeth during sleep. Formerly classified as a
parasomnia, sleep bruxism can produce abnormal wear and damage to teeth,
provoke tooth and jaw pain, or make loud, unpleasant sounds that disturb the
bed partner. Sometimes atypical facial pain and headache also result. More
than 85 percent of the population may brux at one time or another; however,
it is clinically significant in only about 5 percent. Teeth grinding occurs in
any sleep stage but is most common at the transition to sleep, in stage 2 sleep,
and during REM sleep. Some evidence indicates that teeth grinding during
REM sleep is more commonly associated with dental wear or damage. Sleep
bruxism does not appear to be exacerbated by dental malocclusion. It
worsens during periods of stress. Researchers studying sleep bruxism have
found that many patients seem to have less frequent teeth grinding when
sleeping in the laboratory; therefore, we may need repeat studies to document
the disorder. By contrast, bruxism frequently appears on polysomnographic
recordings made for other purposes. Sleep bruxism may occur secondary to
sleep-related breathing disorders, the use of psychostimulants (e.g.,
amphetamine, cocaine), alcohol ingestion, and treatment with some SSRIs.
Sleep bruxism can infrequently occur (monthly), regularly (weekly), or
frequently (nightly). We judge the severity by considering the degree of sleep


<<<PAGE 1603>>>
disruption, consequent pain, and dental damage.
Table 15-16
Restless Legs Syndrome
DSM-5

ICSD-3

ICD-10

Name

Restless legs
syndrome

Restless legs
syndrome

Other specified
extrapyramidal
and
movement
disorders
Restless legs
syndrome

Duration

≥3×/wk for ≥3
mo

Symptoms

Urge to move Urge to move
legs
legs
Worse at night Uncomfortable
sensations
Urge relieved
occurring
by
during
movement
rest/inactivity
At least partially
relieved by
movement
Tend to have
circadian
pattern
(occurring
primarily at
night)

# Symptoms
needed

All the above

All the above

Experiencing a
strong urge to
move legs to
relieve
discomfort
often occurs
while lying
down or sitting
and tends to
be worse at
night


<<<PAGE 1604>>>
Exclusion (not Akathisia
the result of): Effects of a
substance
or
medication
Another mental
disorder or
medical
condition
Behavioral
condition
(i.e.,
habitual
movements)
Psychosocial
impact

Marked
distress
and/or
impairment
in areas of
functioning
present

Marked distress
and/or
impairment in
areas of
functioning
present

Sleep-Related Rhythmic Movement Disorder. This sleep disorder
consists of repetitive, rhythmic movements, usually involving the head and
neck. Most often occurring at the transition from wakefulness to sleep, this
movement disorder may also continue during light sleep. Formerly classified
as a parasomnia, sleep-related rhythmic movement disorder has many names,
including jactatio capitis nocturna, headbanging, head rolling, body rocking,
and rhythmie du sommeil. Most infants body rock. Some clinicians believe
that body rocking develops from the soothing effect of vestibular stimulation.
If the rhythmic movement persists into childhood, the risk of injury increases.
This is particularly true if the movement includes headbanging. The male to
female ratio is 4:1. Severity ranges from less than one episode weekly to
nightly episodes producing injury.


<<<PAGE 1605>>>
Table 15-17
Medical Disorders That Can Cause Secondary Restless
Legs Syndrome
COPD
Diabetes
Fibromyalgia
Iron and folic acid deficiency anemias
Neuropathies
Rheumatoid arthritis
Thyroid diseases
Uremia
Benign Sleep Myoclonus of Infancy. Previously called benign neonatal
sleep myoclonus, this disorder is characterized by asynchronous jerking of
limbs and trunk during quiet sleep in neonates. This benign, apparently rare,
parasomnia usually begins within the first week of life and may last a few
days or several months. It does not require any treatment and should resolve
with time.
Propriospinal Myoclonus at Sleep Onset. Propriospinal myoclonus at
sleep onset is a spinal cord–mediated movement disorder, sometimes
associated with spinal cord lesions. Movements appear during times of
wakeful relaxation and may interfere with sleep onset. They start in the
abdominal and truncal muscles and then progress to the neck and proximal
muscles of the limbs.
Sleep-Related Movement Disorder due to Medication or
Substance Use and Sleep-Related Movement Disorder due to
Medical Condition. A variety of medications, substances, and comorbid
conditions can produce or exacerbate sleep-related movement disorders.
Table 15-18 lists some example medications. Neurologic diseases that are
associated with daytime movement disorders can also be associated with
sleep-related movement disorders. Stress, anxiety, and sleep deprivation may
contribute to bruxism.


<<<PAGE 1606>>>
Table 15-18
Medications Causing Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
Antidepressants (including most tricyclics and SSRIs)
Antiemetics
Antihistamines
Antipsychotics (restless legs symptoms, periodic limb movement
disorder)
Calcium channel blockers
Lithium
Stimulants (rhythmic movement disorders, bruxism)
Isolated Symptoms and Normal Variants
Sleep Talking. As the name implies, sleep talking in classic form involves
unconscious speech during sleep. Unless it annoys the bed partner, it is
seldom recognized. Fever, stress, or talking with the sleeper can all induce
the behavior. Somniloquy may accompany sleep terror, sleepwalking,
confusional arousals, OSAs, and RBD.
Sleep Starts (Hypnic Jerks). Sleep starts are sudden, brief muscle
contractions that occur at the transition between wakefulness and sleep in 60
to 70 percent of adults. The contractions commonly involve the legs;
however, sometimes there is movement in the arms and head. Sometimes
called a “hypnic jerk,” it is usually benign. The sleep start, however, can
interfere with the ability to fall asleep and may be accompanied by sensations
of falling, a hallucinated flash of light, or a loud crackling sound. In severe
cases, the sleep start produces profound sleep-onset insomnia.

CLINICAL TOOLS IN SLEEP MEDICINE
Clinical Interview
A careful and thorough clinical interview is one of the most informative parts
of a workup for sleep disorders. The habitual bedtime and arising times for
both weekdays and weekends, the frequency, duration, and restorative nature


<<<PAGE 1607>>>
of naps, and overall level of sleepiness are good places to begin. Specific
sleep problems relating to difficulty initiating and maintaining sleep are
informative, including whether there is rumination at bedtime, fear of not
being able to sleep, or excessive worry when attempting to sleep. We should
assess for movements, including leg movement, leg sensations, leg cramps,
teeth grinding, and dream enactments (with or without injury). We should
also review for morning headaches, morning dry mouth, nocturnal reflux,
hyperhidrosis (excess sweating), nocturia, enuresis, nocturnal tongue biting,
nightmares, sleep terrors, and other sleep-related problems. In some cases, it
can be crucial to ask about the presence of family pets and whether they sleep
in the bedroom (or bed). A sleep history questionnaire is often helpful in
diagnosing a patient’s sleep disorder (Table 15-19).
Clinical Tests
Polysomnography. Polysomnography is the continuous, attended,
comprehensive recording of the physiologic changes that occur during sleep.
A polysomnogram is typically recorded at night and lasts between 6 and 8
hours. Brain wave activity, eye movements, submentalis electromyography
activity, nasal–oral airflow, nasal pressure, respiratory effort, oxyhemoglobin
saturation, heart rhythm, and leg movements during sleep are measured.
Usually, the laboratory records body position and snoring sounds. Brain wave
activity, eye movements, and submentalis electromyogram are essential for
identifying sleep stages and CNS arousals. Muscle tension and movements
subside with deeper sleep and can also be useful in the diagnosis of PLMD
and RLS. Nasal airflow, respiratory effort, and oxyhemoglobin saturation are
instrumental in diagnosing sleep apnea and other sleep-related breathing
disorders.
Table 15-20 lists the most common reasons for ordering polysomnography.
A sleep study is not needed to diagnose RLS.
Table 15-21 lists standard polysomnographic measures.
Home Sleep Testing. Home sleep testing involves recording a limited
number of cardiopulmonary parameters to assess patients for sleep-related
breathing disorders. Home sleep testing is much less expensive than
polysomnography. The test can record airflow, respiratory effort, heart


<<<PAGE 1608>>>
rhythm, snoring sounds, and oximetry. Several devices are commercially
available that are capable of detecting sleep apnea in patients with moderate
to severe pathophysiology. Negative studies are problematic because home
sleep testing is less sensitive than full laboratory polysomnography. Patients
with negative tests, notwithstanding obvious symptoms or comorbidity,
should be scheduled for laboratory polysomnography. Also, home sleep
testing does not check for the full spectrum of sleep disorders; therefore, the
presence of residual symptoms after a breathing disorder is diagnosed in this
manner and treated indicates a need for careful follow-up.
Multiple Sleep Latency Test. The multiple sleep latency test (MSLT) is
essential for the workup of narcolepsy. Every 2 hours, beginning 2 hours
after morning awakening, the patient is provided with 20-minute nap
opportunities and instructed not to resist falling asleep. During sleep, the
laboratory records electroencephalographic, electrooculographic, and
submentalis electromyography activity to determine the sleep stage. The
latency to sleep helps assess hypersomnolence, and the appearance of REM
sleep on two or more nap opportunities confirms narcolepsy (or on one nap if
the previous night’s polysomnography revealed REM sleep within 15
minutes of sleep onset). If the patient falls asleep on a given nap opportunity,
the laboratory will wake the patient 15 minutes after initial sleep onset. If the
patient does not fall asleep after 20 minutes, the laboratory will terminate the
session. The laboratory gives the patient five nap opportunities during 2-hour
intervals across the day.
Maintenance of Wakefulness Test. Similar to the MSLT, the
maintenance of wakefulness test (MWT) provides 40-minute test sessions at
2-hour intervals across the day. However, in this test, the laboratory instructs
the patient to try to remain awake. This technique is used to assess treatment
outcomes and is sometimes part of “fit for duty” testing. Patients are recorded
in a darkened room while sitting in a comfortable chair or a bed with a bolster
pillow. The first epoch of stage 2, 3, or 4 sleep or REM or three consecutive
epochs of stage 1 mark unequivocal sleep onset. Falling asleep on MWT
indicates some level of sleepiness. Any sleep latency of fewer than 8 minutes
is abnormal. Sleep latency ranging from 8 to 40 minutes is of unknown
significance.


<<<PAGE 1609>>>
Actigraphy. An actigraph is a device that measures and records movement.
It is usually worn on the wrist (like a watch) and is a rough measure of the
sleep–wake cycle. Depending on the model and the settings, it can make
continuous recordings for days or weeks. It can be especially useful for
assessing insomnia, circadian rhythm disorders, movement disorders, and an
assortment of rare events.
Common Test Findings in Sleep–Wake Disorders
Hypersomnolence Disorder. The EEG sleep pattern is essentially the
same as that found in healthy individuals who are sleep deprived (Fig. 15-2).
Unlike a sleep-deprived individual, the sleep pattern continues in this profile
even after several nights of extended sleep. Also, we may see elevated slowwave sleep.
Narcolepsy. When the diagnosis is not clinically apparent, a nighttime
polysomnographic recording reveals a characteristic sleep-onset REM period
(Fig. 15-3). A test of daytime MSLT shows rapid sleep onset and usually one
or more sleep-onset REM periods.
Table 15-19
Example Sleep History Questionnaire
Patient name
___________________________________________________
Date
__________________________________________________________
Please check the appropriate box or give short answers for the following:
Yes
1. Do you feel sleepy or have sleep attacks during the day?

□

2. Do you nap during the day?

□

3. Do you have trouble concentrating during the day?

□

4. Do you have trouble falling asleep when you first go to bed?

□


<<<PAGE 1610>>>
5. Do you awaken during the night?

□

6. Do you awaken more than once?

□

7. Do you awaken too early in the morning?

□

8. How long have you had trouble sleeping?

□

What do you think precipitated the problem?

9. How would you describe your usual night’s sleep (hours of
sleep, quality of sleep, etc.)?

10. Does your schedule for sleep and rising on the weekend differ □
from what it is during the week?
11. Do others live at home who interrupt your sleep?

□

12. Are you regularly awakened at night by pain or the need to use □
the bathroom?
13. Does your job require shift changes or travel?

□

14. Do you drink caffeinated beverages (coffee, tea, or soft
drinks)?

□

15. Apart from difficulty in sleeping, what, if any, other medical
problems do you have?

16. What sleep medications, prescription or nonprescription, do
you take? (Please include the dosage, how often you take it,
and for how many months or years you have taken it.)


<<<PAGE 1611>>>
17. What other prescription and over-the-counter medications do
you regularly use? (Again, please include the dosage, the
frequency, and the duration.)

18. Have you ever suffered from depression, anxiety, or similar
problems?

□

19. Do you snore?

□

Questions for the Sleep Partner
1. Does your sleep partner snore?

□

2. Does your sleep partner seem to stop breathing repeatedly
during the night?

□

3. Does your sleep partner jerk his or her legs or kick you while he □
or she is sleeping?
4. Have you ever experienced trouble sleeping? Please explain.

□

Table 15-20
Indications for Polysomnography
Common Reasons
Diagnosis of sleep-related breathing disorders
Positive airway pressure (PAP) titration and assessment of treatment
efficacy
Evaluation of sleep-related behaviors that are violent or may
potentially harm the patient or bed partner
Differentiating narcolepsy from other hypersomnolence disorders
Differentiating parasomnias from nocturnal seizures
Other Possible Uses


<<<PAGE 1612>>>
Diagnose atypical parasomnias
Sleep-related problems secondary to neuromuscular disorders
Periodic limb movement disorder
Arousals secondary to seizure disorder
Excessive daytime sleepiness
Waking up gasping or choking
Narcolepsy (to assess sleep quality and quantity prior to a multiple
sleep latency test)
Obstructive Sleep Apnea. On the polysomnogram, episodes of OSA
appear as multiple periods of at least 10 seconds’ duration in which nasal and
oral airflow ceases either wholly or partially. Meanwhile, the abdominal and
chest expansion leads indicate the continuing efforts of the diaphragm and
accessory muscles of respiration to move air through the obstruction (Fig. 154). The arterial oxygen saturation drops, and often we see bradycardia, along
with possible arrhythmias, such as premature ventricular contractions. In the
end, an arousal reflex takes place, seen as a waking signal, and possibly as a
motor artifact on the EEG channels. At this moment, sometimes called the
breakthrough, the patient can make brief restless movements in bed.
Table 15-21
Common Polysomnographic Measures
Sleep latency: Period of time from turning out the lights until the
appearance of stage 2 sleep
Early morning awakening: Time of being continuously awake from
the last stage of the sleep until the end of the sleep record
(usually at 7 am)
Sleep efficiency: Total sleep time or total time of the sleep record ×
100
Apnea index: Number of apneas longer than 10 s/h of sleep
Nocturnal myoclonus index: Number of periodic leg movements per
hour


<<<PAGE 1613>>>
Rapid eye movement (REM) latency: Period of time from the onset of
sleep until the first REM period of the night
Sleep-onset REM period: REM sleep within the first 10 min of sleep

FIGURE 15-2
Sleep stage histograms comparing a normal sleep profile with that of a patient
with hypersomnolence. Panel A illustrates the sleep pattern recorded in a healthy
young adult. His sleep was interrupted several times by awakenings associated
with other concurrent laboratory procedures; however, all parameters were within
normal limits. Panel B depicts the sleep pattern of a patient with severe daytime
sleepiness. The patient did not have narcolepsy or apnea. In the laboratory, sleep
onset was rapid, sleep continued virtually without interruption, and he was
extremely difficult to arouse. This recording was terminated after 7.5 hours to
begin daytime testing; however, the patient’s sleep revealed little indication of
progressing toward a lighter state. In contrast to the normal sleep pattern, slowwave sleep duration was elevated and it continued to emerge in alternation with
REM sleep throughout the night. The patient awoke feeling unrefreshed and not
satisfied with his sleep.


<<<PAGE 1614>>>
FIGURE 15-3
Polysomnographic tracing comparing normal sleep onset with that of a patient
with narcolepsy. Each panel illustrates approximately 30 seconds of
polysomnographic recording beginning with relaxed wakefulness. Panel A
(normal sleep progression) shows a reduction of EEG α activity and development
of slow rolling eye movements. Panel B shows the normally expected abatement
of EEG α activity associated with increased θ activity and the appearance of a few
slow eye movements. However, within 25 seconds (far right of figure) a swift loss
of muscle tone occurs accompanied by rapid eye movements. This appearance of
sleep-onset REM sleep (SOREM) characterizes narcolepsy and is part of the
diagnostic criteria.

Central Sleep Apnea. The polysomnographic features of CSA are similar
to those of OSA. However, during the periods of apnea, cessation of
respiratory effort is seen in the abdominal and chest expansion leads. In
Cheyne–Stokes breathing, polysomnography reveals five or more central
apnea and hypopnea episodes per hour of sleep. In CSA, due to a medical
disorder without Cheyne–Stokes breathing, diagnostic criteria require a
polysomnographically verified rate of 5 or more central apneas and
hypopneas per hour of sleep. Also, CSA due to medication or substance
requires five or more central apneas per hour.
Sleep-Related Hypoventilation. Polysomnography demonstrates either
episodes with elevated CO2 levels and decreased respirations or, if not


<<<PAGE 1615>>>
monitoring CO2, episodes of persistently low oxyhemoglobin levels that are
not provoked by apnea or hypopnea.
Parasomnias. Sleep studies help to develop a differential diagnosis and
rule out that the unusual behavior is secondary to a seizure, sleep-related
breathing disorder, or another sleep disorder. Figures 15-5 to 15-7 give
examples of polysomnograms for sleep terrors, RLS, and sleep-related
bruxism.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
In general, the differential diagnosis of sleep–wake disorders should include
other individual sleep–wake disorders, psychiatric disorders, medical
conditions, medications and substance use, and normal variants.
Insomnia Disorder
Many psychiatric disorders can cause a person to experience insomnia. For
example, MDD, bipolar disorder, and PTSD can all present with sleep
disruption. Many medications and substances also affect sleep, some of
which we listed in Table 15-7. Other sleep–wake disorders should also be
considered, including circadian rhythm sleep–wake disorder, RLS, sleeprelated breathing disorders, narcolepsy, and parasomnias. Finally, one should
consider whether the sleep pattern is a normal variant in the population (e.g.,
a “short sleeper”) or is occurring in the context of an acute stressor.
Hypersomnolence Disorder
Psychiatric disorders associated with increased sleep or fatigue, such as MDD
or bipolar depression, should be considered part of the differential diagnosis.
Certain medications or substances can also cause sedation, such as sedative–
hypnotics and opioids. Other sleep–wake disorders should be considered,
including circadian rhythm sleep–wake disorder, sleep-related breathing
disorders, and parasomnias. Also, poor sleep quality can lead to excessive
daytime sleepiness, and there are some persons for whom it is a normal
variant to require more sleep (e.g., “long sleepers”).


<<<PAGE 1616>>>
FIGURE 15-4
Polysomnographic tracings illustrating sleep apnea episodes. Panel A illustrates
an obstructive sleep apnea, Panel B shows a central sleep apnea, and Panel C
depicts a mixed sleep apnea. Note the presence of respiratory effort (rib cage and
abdominal movement), notwithstanding cessation of airflow, throughout the
obstructive apnea and during the latter portion of the mixed apnea. By contrast,
respiratory effort is absent during the flow cessation throughout the central apnea
and during the early portion of the mixed apnea. Notation: F3 (left frontal scalp
derivation); M2 (right mastoid electrode location); C3 (left central scalp derivation);
O3 (left occipital scalp derivation); E1 (left outer canthus eye electrode location);
E2 (right outer canthus eye electrode location); EMGSM (surface electrode
electromyogram from submentalis muscle); Flow (airflow measured with nasal–
nasal–oral thermistors); RC Mvmt (rib cage movement measured with inductive
plethysmography); AB Mvmt (abdominal movement measured with inductive
plethysmography). (From Hirshkowitz M, Sharafkhaneh A. Diagnostic assessment
methods in adults. In: Kryger MH, Avidan AY, Berry RB, eds. Atlas of Clinical
Sleep Medicine. 2nd ed. Elsevier Saunders: Philadelphia, PA; 2014:378.)


<<<PAGE 1617>>>
FIGURE 15-5
Polysomnographic tracing illustrating a sleep terror. Panel A shows approximately
14 seconds of tracing occurring immediately before the sleep terror. Prominent
EEG slow-wave activity and other characteristics of stage 4 sleep are seen. Panel
B shows the awakening, accompanied by tachycardia and movement. EEG
activity is ambiguous and the patient eventually disconnected his electrodes as he
thrashed about in bed (visible at far right of figure). Although the patient was
screaming and greatly agitated, there was no report of dreaming. In the morning,
there was little recollection of anything having occurred during the night.


<<<PAGE 1618>>>
FIGURE 15-6
Restless legs syndrome. This patient presented with complaints of uncomfortable,
crawling sensations in the legs when trying to fall asleep. Patients commonly
report an urge to move the leg in order to dispel the sensation. This figure shows
a bilateral pattern of leg EMG activity; however, the discharge is more
pronounced in the left anterior tibialis (EMG-AT-L) than the right (EMG-AT-R).
This pattern continued for more than an hour as the patient attempted to fall
asleep; note that the sharp activity in central and occipital EEG (C3-A2 and O1A2, respectively) and EOG is EKG artifact and not an EEG abnormality.


<<<PAGE 1619>>>
FIGURE 15-7
Polysomnographic tracing showing sleep-related bruxism. This figure showing
approximately 25 seconds of tracing was obtained from a patient during an
episode of bruxism. Bruxism can occur during any stage of sleep or wakefulness.
The interference pattern of EEG-EOG-EMG channels is typical and reflects the
rhythmic jaw movement and grinding of the teeth. This patient had many such
episodes, some that caused awakening. Readily observable tooth damage and
jaw pain were noted.

Table 15-22
Medical Disorders Causing Cataplexy
Disorders affecting the hypothalamus
Tumors
Sarcoidosis
Multiple sclerosis plaques
Paraneoplastic syndrome
Neimann–Pick type C disease
Coffin–Lowry syndrome
Narcolepsy


<<<PAGE 1620>>>
The differential diagnosis of narcolepsy includes many of the same disorders
as the differential diagnosis of hypersomnolence disorder. Also, cataplexy
can be confused for seizures or neurologic movement disorders (e.g., chorea).
Many disorders can precipitate cataplexy, and we list some of the more
common in Table 15-22. All of these disorders would preclude a diagnosis of
narcolepsy. Cataplexy is usually absent in narcolepsy associated with
multiple sclerosis, myotonic dystrophy, Prader–Willi syndrome, Parkinson
disease, and multisystem atrophy.
Sleep-Related Breathing Disorders
The differential diagnosis of sleep-related breathing disorders includes many
of the same disorders as the differential diagnosis of insomnia and
hypersomnolence disorders, given the clinical presentation of fatigue and
daytime sleepiness. Other possible conditions include panic attacks and
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (as repeated apneic episodes may lead
to problems with focus, attention, and school- or job-related performance).
Circadian Rhythm Sleep–Wake Disorders
The differential diagnosis of circadian rhythm sleep–wake disorders includes
insomnia disorder, other sleep–wake disorders, and mood disorders. One
should also consider the possibility that the sleep pattern represents a normal
variant.
Parasomnias and Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
The differential diagnosis of parasomnias can be complicated and should
include other individual parasomnias, sleep-related breathing disorders,
nocturnal seizures, panic attacks, other sleep–wake disorders, amnestic and
dissociative syndromes, and numerous medical conditions. The differential
diagnosis of RLS includes multiple medical conditions, such as arthritis,
neuropathy, positional ischemia, and peripheral artery disease, to name a few,
while the differential diagnosis of sleep-related bruxism should include
nocturnal seizures.

COMORBIDITY


<<<PAGE 1621>>>
Insomnia Disorder
Several psychiatric disorders are often comorbid with insomnia. We list some
common ones in Table 15-23. Nearly 90 percent of patients with MDD have
insomnia. Of the most significant concern, insomnia is an independent risk
factor for suicide in patients with MDD. Insomnia also predicts who will
develop posttraumatic stress disorder following a trauma. For bipolar
patients, lack of sleep may precipitate a manic episode. Patients with
schizophrenia may deny having slept despite objective measures showing
normal sleep.
Hypersomnolence Disorder
Many disorders also occur with hypersomnolence disorder, and we list some
of these in Table 15-23. Medication use disorders are also common,
particularly the stimulants, as the individual attempts to stay awake.
Narcolepsy
Narcolepsy is associated with psychiatric disorders in general, as well as
many medical disorders. We list some of these in Table 15-23.
Sleep-Related Breathing Disorders
Table 15-23 lists several disorders associated with sleep-related breathing
disorders. The section on diagnosis discusses conditions associated with
central sleep apnea and sleep-related hypoventilation.
Circadian Rhythm Sleep–Wake Disorders
The circadian rhythm sleep–wake disorders can be associated with
psychiatric and medical comorbidities; we list some of these in Table 15-23.
The shift work type is especially associated with many psychiatric and
medical disorders.
Parasomnias and Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
Each parasomnia has its own set of common comorbid diagnoses, and we list
some examples in Table 15-23. Many individuals who present with RBD will
go on to develop a neurodegenerative disorder.


<<<PAGE 1622>>>
TREATMENT APPROACH
Insomnia
Pharmacologic Treatment. For many years, benzodiazepines were the
most commonly prescribed sedative–hypnotic medications for treating
insomnia. Other benzodiazepine-receptor agonists (e.g., zolpidem and similar
drugs) then emerged as an option to treat insomnia. The subsequent
development of a low-dose antihistamine (doxepin), a melatonin receptor
agonist (ramelteon), and an orexin antagonist (suvorexant) have more
recently augmented the armamentarium of medications approved for treating
insomnia. However, unapproved off-label (and not recommended) use of
sedating antidepressants is commonplace. Additionally, a variety of over-thecounter (OTC) sleep aids is available. Nonprescription formulas include
sedating antihistamines, protein precursors, and other substances. Ltryptophan was trendy and readily available at health food stores until an
outbreak of eosinophilia led to pulling it off the shelves. However, the cause
was a single manufacturer, and L-tryptophan subsequently became available
OTC again. Melatonin is the leader among self-administered food additives
believed by some to alleviate sleeplessness. Low-dose melatonin can improve
sleep when used to align or reentrain the circadian rhythm with the desired
sleep–wake schedule.
Table 15-23
Disorders That Are Commonly Comorbid with Various
Sleep Disorders
Insomnia Disorder
Bipolar disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder
Major depressive disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Schizophrenia
Hypersomnolence Disorder
Bipolar disorder


<<<PAGE 1623>>>
Depressive disorders (particularly seasonal depression)
Neurodegenerative disorders
Substance use disorders (stimulants)
Narcolepsy
Anxiety
Depressive disorders
Obstructive sleep apnea
Headache
Hyperlipidemia
Hypertension
Obesity
Peripheral neuropathy
Thyroid disease, other endocrinopathies
Sleep-Related Breathing Disorders
Anxiety disorders
Dementia
Mood disorders
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Psychotic disorders
Cardiovascular disease
Diabetes mellitus
Heart failure
Hypertension
Obesity
Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders
Depression
Neurodegenerative disorders
Neurodevelopmental disorders
Personality disorder
Somatic symptom disorders
Blindness
Cardiovascular disease


<<<PAGE 1624>>>
Diabetes mellitus
Gastrointestinal disease
Substance use disorders
Parasomnias and Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
Sleepwalking
Obsessive compulsive disorder
Major depression
Nightmare disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Acute stress disorder
Schizophrenia
Anxiety disorders
Personality disorders
Bereavement
Pain
Neurodegenerative disorders
Cardiovascular disease
REM sleep behavior disorder
Narcolepsy
Neurodegenerative disorders
Restless legs syndrome
Depression
Anxiety
Attentional disorders
Iron deficiency
Drug manufacturers must rigorously test prescription medications in
clinical trials; therefore, they hold an advantage over the virtually untested
OTCs. Medication must be proven safe and effective to become FDA
approved.
Most hypnotic medications are approved for short-, not long-term use.
Exceptions include zolpidem-modified release, eszopiclone, and ramelteon,
which the FDA approved for long-term therapy. When properly used,
hypnotics can provide immediate and adequate relief from sleeplessness.


<<<PAGE 1625>>>
Insomnia, however, usually returns upon discontinuation of dosing.
The clinical practice guideline from the American Academy of Sleep
Medicine recommends the use of suvorexant, eszopiclone, zaleplon,
zolpidem, triazolam, temazepam, ramelteon, and doxepin for the treatment of
insomnia (with specific agents having different indications for sleep-onset or
sleep-maintenance insomnia). They recommend against the use of trazodone,
tiagabine, diphenhydramine, melatonin, tryptophan, and valerian for
insomnia treatment.
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia. Cognitive-behavioral
therapy for insomnia (CBTi), as a treatment modality, uses a combination of
behavioral and cognitive techniques to overcome dysfunctional sleep
behaviors, misperceptions, and distorted, disruptive thoughts about sleep.
Behavioral techniques include universal sleep hygiene, stimulus control
therapy, sleep restriction therapy, relaxation therapies, and biofeedback.
Studies repeatedly show significant, sustained improvement in sleep
symptoms, including number and duration of awakenings and sleep latency,
from CBTi. Short-term benefits are similar to that of medication, but CBTi
tends to have lasting benefits, even 36 months after treatment. With the
cessation of the medication, insomnia frequently returns and is sometimes
accompanied by rebound insomnia. CBTi has no apparent adverse effects.
There are no established “best practice” guidelines for length or quantity of
sessions. CBTi, however, is not without limitations. Most data do not
compare the efficacy of the individual components of CBTi. However, sleep
hygiene education alone produces an insignificant effect on sleep. Intuitively,
the multicomponent approach addresses many of the variables contributing to
insomnia. Other limitations of CBTi include lack of or unavailability of
trained specialists, cost of sessions, and noncoverage by insurance carriers.
The effects of CBTi take longer to emerge than the effects of medications.
Usually, when patients finally come for treatment of their insomnia, they are
desperate. It is challenging to convince them to try a therapy that may take
several weeks before it will provide relief. Furthermore, patients do not
assume a passive role in this type of therapy; they must be active participants.
Many individuals not only want a “quick fix,” but they also want to undergo
a procedure or have something administered rather than be involved in the
therapeutic process. For optimal CBTi, patients must commit to come to


<<<PAGE 1626>>>
multiple sessions and also be open to the idea that modifying thoughts and
behaviors about sleep can improve the symptoms of insomnia.
Although firmly focused on cognitive and behavioral issues, it helps to
extend CBT just slightly into the psychodynamic sphere. For some patients
with long-standing difficulty sleeping, being an insomniac becomes an
essential part of their identity. There may be primary or secondary gain to
such identification. It is the negative emotional response (i.e., anger at the
inability to control one’s sleep, feeling like a failure because one cannot
sleep) to insomnia that contributes to its chronicity. In general, these
individuals tend to internalize rather than express emotion, feel a heightened
need for control, experience interpersonal difficulties and have significant
discontent with past events. For this subset of people, neglecting the
emotional response can limit the response to treatment and cause a relapse.
The clinician will be better able to intercept barriers to treatment when they
attune themselves to a patient’s tendency to view something as a failure
rather than a challenge.
Universal Sleep Hygiene. A patient’s lifestyle can lead to a sleep
disturbance. We usually call this inadequate sleep hygiene, referring to a
problem in following generally accepted practices to aid sleep. These include,
for instance, keeping regular hours of bedtime and arousal, avoiding
excessive caffeine, not eating heavy meals before bedtime, and getting
adequate exercise. Many behaviors can interfere with sleep and may do so by
increasing nervous system arousal near bedtime or by altering circadian
rhythms.
The focus of universal sleep hygiene is on modifiable environmental and
lifestyle components that may interfere with sleep, as well as behaviors that
may improve sleep. Because some of these behaviors are difficult to change,
we should concentrate on only one or two items, chosen in collaboration with
the patient, to address. The patient then has the best chance at a successful
intervention. We list some sleep-enhancing directives in Table 15-24. Often a
few simple alterations in a patient’s habits or sleep environment are useful.
The clinician, however, needs to spend time reviewing both the patient’s
routine and its irregularity. In some respects, the essence of insomnia is its
variability. The day-to-day changes in behavior and the changing severity of
sleeplessness can obscure the factors responsible for the problem. A carefully


<<<PAGE 1627>>>
explained program of sleep hygiene, with follow-up, represents a reasonably
inexpensive intervention. Furthermore, improving sleep habits can enhance
sleep, even when the primary cause of insomnia is physical. However, sleep
hygiene education does not appear to be as effective as CBTi.
Stimulus Control Therapy. Stimulus control therapy is a deconditioning
paradigm that aims to break the cycle of problems commonly associated with
difficulty initiating sleep. By attempting to undo conditioning that
undermines sleep, stimulus control therapy helps reduce both primary and
reactive factors involved in insomnia. The rules attempt to enhance stimulus
cues for sleeping and diminish associations with sleeplessness. The
instructions are simple; however, the patient must consistently follow them.
We list an example of these instructions in Table 15-25. Stimulus control
therapy does work; however, we might not see results for weeks or even a
month. If continually practiced, the bouts of insomnia lessen in both
frequency and severity.
Sleep Restriction Therapy. Sleep restriction therapy is a strategy
designed to increase sleep efficiency by decreasing the amount of time spent
awake while lying in bed. This therapy targets explicitly those patients who
lie awake in bed, unable to sleep. Restricting time in bed can help to
consolidate sleep. If the patient reports sleeping only 5 hours of an 8-hour
scheduled time in bed, reduce the time in bed. It is advised, however, not to
reduce bedtime to less than 4 hours per night and to warn the patient about
the hazards of daytime sleepiness. Sleep at other times during the day must
be avoided, except in the elderly, who may take a 30-minute nap. The
clinician then monitors sleep efficiency (time asleep as a percentage of the
time in bed). When sleep efficiency reaches 85 percent (averaged over five
nights), we should increase the time in bed by 15 minutes. Sleep restriction
therapy produces a gradual and steady decline in nocturnal wakefulness.
Table 15-24
Do’s and Don’ts for Good Sleep Hygiene
DO DON’T
Maintain regular hours of bedtime and arising

✓


<<<PAGE 1628>>>
If you are hungry, have a light snack before bedtime

✓

Maintain a regular exercise schedule

✓

Give yourself approximately an hour to wind down
before going to bed

✓

If you are preoccupied or worried about something at
✓
bedtime, write it down and deal with it in the morning
Keep the bedroom cool

✓

Keep the bedroom dark

✓

Keep the bedroom quiet

✓

Take naps

✓

Watch the clock so you know how bad your insomnia
actually is

✓

Exercise right before going to bed in order wear yourself
out

✓

Watch television in bed when you cannot sleep

✓

Eat a heavy meal before bedtime to help you sleep

✓

Drink coffee in the afternoon and evening

✓

If you cannot sleep, smoke a cigarette

✓

Use alcohol to help in going to sleep

✓

Read in bed when you cannot sleep

✓

Eat in bed

✓

Exercise in bed

✓

Talk on the phone in bed

✓

Relaxation Therapy and Biofeedback. The most critical aspect of
relaxation therapy is to perform it properly. Self-hypnosis, progressive


<<<PAGE 1629>>>
relaxation, guided imagery, and deep breathing exercises are all useful if they
produce relaxation. The goal is to find the optimal technique for each patient,
but not all patients need help in relaxing. Progressive muscle relaxation is
especially useful for patients who experience muscle tension. The patients
should purposefully tense (5 to 6 seconds) and then relax (20 to 30 seconds)
muscle groups, beginning at the head and ending at the feet. The patient
should appreciate the difference between tension and relaxation. Guided
imagery has the patient visualize a pleasant, restful scene, engaging all of his
or her senses.
Table 15-25
Stimulus Control Instructions
1. Go to bed only when sleepy to maximize success.
2. Use the bed only for sleeping. Do not watch television in bed, do
not read, do not eat, and do not talk on the telephone while in
bed.
3. Do not lie in bed and become frustrated if unable to sleep. After a
few minutes (do not watch the clock), get up, go to another room,
and do something nonarousing until sleepiness returns. Repeat
as often as needed.
4. Awaken at the same time every morning (regardless of bedtime,
total sleep time, or day of week) and totally avoid napping.
Table 15-26
Abdominal Breathing
1. In the supine position, the patient should breathe normally
through his or her mouth or nose, whichever is more comfortable,
and attend to his or her breathing pattern.
2. While maintaining that rhythm, the patient should begin to
breathe more with his or her abdomen and less with his or her
chest.
3. The patient should pause for a half second after each breath
cycle (in and out) and evaluate the breath. How did it feel? Was it


<<<PAGE 1630>>>
smooth? Eventually each breath will become uniform and smooth.
4. The patient should find a place where he or she can best feel the
air move in and out. Concentrate on that spot and on the air
moving in and out.
5. The patient should visualize intrusive thoughts as floating away; if
there are too many thoughts, stop practicing and try again later.
Breathing exercises should be practiced for at least 20 min/day for 2
weeks. Once mastered, the technique should be used once at bedtime for 30
minutes. If it does not work, the patient should try a different night again. It is
essential that the technique not become associated with failure to fall asleep.
Table 15-26 gives example instructions for abdominal breathing, an
important technique. The patient should become comfortable with each step
before moving on to the next.
Biofeedback provides stimulus cues for physiologic markers of relaxation
and can increase self-awareness. Muscle tension in the forehead or finger
temperature is measured. Finger temperature rises when a person becomes
more relaxed. Patients require thorough and adequate training; merely giving
them an instruction tape is not especially helpful. Techniques are ideally
mastered during the day for several weeks before application to the sleep
problem; the patient preferably does this outside of the bed. By the time the
patient uses the techniques in bed, the skill should be automatic. Relaxation
techniques readily lend themselves to being combined with sleep hygiene and
stimulus control therapies. Sometimes they make for good distractions from
thinking about the inability to sleep. The ruminations fuel insomnia, and if
the ruminator can be distracted, then the person may sleep better.
Cognitive Therapy. This practical, validated treatment for a variety of
psychiatric conditions, including major depression and generalized anxiety,
has been adapted for use with insomnia. The cognitive aspect of insomnia
treatment targets the negative emotional response to an appraisal of a sleeprelated situation. The negative emotional response produces emotional
arousal, which in turn contributes to or perpetuates insomnia. People who
have maladaptive cognitions tend to exaggerate the negative consequences of
insomnia: “There must be something wrong with me if I cannot fall asleep in


<<<PAGE 1631>>>
40 minutes.” They also tend to have unrealistic expectations about their sleep
requirements: “If I do not sleep 8 hours a night, then my whole day will be
ruined.” The first step is to identify these cognitions, then challenge their
validity, and finally, substitute them with more adaptive cognitions.
DH was a 42-year-old man with a 5-year history of insomnia. He
identified losing his job and the birth of a colicky baby as precipitating
factors in his inability to sleep. However, even after he found a new
position with better hours and pay and with the child sleeping through the
night, DH continued to experience difficulty falling and staying asleep.
Perpetuating factors included low back pain and a spouse with periodic
limb movement disorder. He reported spending 8 to 9 hours in bed each
night and sleeping only 4 to 5 hours intermittently. He watched 1 hour of
television in bed before turning out the light for bedtime. He spent hours
watching the minutes tick away. He did not wake feeling rested, and
when his alarm went off, he was frequently already awake and had
thoughts such as, “I hardly slept at all last night. I should be able to get
more sleep. There must be something wrong. Great, I’ll be too tired to
concentrate on anything today.”
Examples of maladaptive thoughts: “I should be able to get more
sleep.” This is a faulty appraisal of sleeping ability and may relate to a
need for control over sleep. This need for control interferes with having a
more laissez-faire attitude about a few missed hours of rest. Such
thoughts can also lead to feelings of frustration and anger. “Great, I’ll be
too tired to concentrate on anything today.” This is a misattribution of
daytime impairment due to poor sleep. DH was also magnifying the
negative and discounting the positive with his black-and-white or all-ornothing thinking. Could DH be too tired to concentrate on some things,
but not all things? Might his inability to concentrate be due to a myriad of
other factors? “There must be something wrong with me (if I can’t get
enough sleep).” This is catastrophizing and emotional reasoning: just
because a person had a feeling does not mean that the thought or feeling
is valid. A firmly held belief that sleeplessness negatively affects physical
and mental health can set off catastrophizing. (Courtesy of Max
Hirshkowitz, Ph.D., Rhoda G. Seplowitz-Hafkin, M.D., and Amir


<<<PAGE 1632>>>
Sharafkhaneh, M.D., Ph.D.)
Paradoxical Intention. This is a cognitive technique with conflicting
evidence regarding its efficacy. In clinical practice, compliance is often a
barrier, but it does work for a limited number of patients. The theory is that
performance anxiety interferes with sleep onset. Thus, when the patient tries
to stay awake for as long as possible rather than trying to fall asleep,
performance anxiety will be reduced, and sleep latency will improve.
Hypersomnolence Disorder
We usually treat hypersomnolence disorder with medication. Although there
are no medications approved for its treatment, physicians commonly use
stimulants, with varying degrees of success. The wake-promoting substance
modafinil or traditional psychostimulants (amphetamines and their
derivatives) sometimes help manage the sleepiness. In addition to drug
therapies, the overall therapeutic approach usually includes lifestyle
adjustment, psychological counseling, drug holidays to reduce tolerance (if
using stimulants), and careful monitoring of refills, general health, and
cardiac status.
Narcolepsy
Currently, we cannot cure narcolepsy; however, the symptoms can be
managed with either the wake-promoting substances modafinil or
armodafinil, or traditional psychostimulants like amphetamines and their
derivatives. The FDA has approved two medications for the treatment of
narcolepsy as wake-promoting agents: pitolisant, which is a selective H3
receptor antagonist/inverse agonist, and solriamfetol, a selective
norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitor. For managing cataplexy,
clinicians often administer REM sleep–suppressing drugs (e.g., many
antidepressants). This approach capitalizes on the REM sleep-suppressant
properties of these drugs. Because cataplexy is presumably an intrusion of
REM sleep phenomena into the awake state, the rationale is clear. Many
reports indicate that imipramine and protriptyline are quite effective in
reducing or eliminating cataplexy. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors


<<<PAGE 1633>>>
have gained popularity because they are associated with fewer side effects
than the tricyclic antidepressants. Sodium oxybate has proven extremely
useful for reducing cataplexy, even in cases where clinicians thought that the
cataplexy was intractable. Studies also suggest that sodium oxybate helps
improve sleep and relieves some of the sleepiness associated with narcolepsy.
Although drug therapy is the treatment of choice, the overall therapeutic
approach should include scheduled naps, lifestyle adjustment, psychological
counseling, drug holidays to reduce tolerance, and careful monitoring of drug
refills, general health, and cardiac status.

FIGURE 15-8
Sleep histogram showing CPAP-related sleep improvement. Sleep stage
histogram illustrating the immediate, dramatic improvement in sleep architecture
produced by treating obstructive sleep apnea with continuous positive airway
pressure (CPAP) therapy. Panel A illustrates the abnormal sleep pattern on a
night when the patient had more than 200 episodes of obstructive sleep apnea.
Sleep is disturbed by frequent awakenings while REM and slow-wave (stages 3
and 4) sleep are nearly absent. Panel B shows data from the same patient being
treated with CPAP on the next night. Normalization of sleep continuity with a
massive rebound in REM and slow-wave sleep is evident.

Breathing-Related Sleep Disorders


<<<PAGE 1634>>>
Obstructive Sleep Apnea-Hypopnea. A number of treatments are
available for OSA, including PAP, oral appliances, positional therapy,
surgical intervention, and weight loss. Medications have not been useful for
treating OSA. Wakefulness promoting agents, such as modafinil,
solriamfetol, and pitolisant, may help with the residual sleepiness that may
persist despite the use of other OSA treatments such as PAP. However, these
medications do not address the pathophysiology of airway occlusion.
POSITIVE AIRWAY PRESSURE. PAP is the preferred treatment for OSA (Fig. 15-

8). The PAP apparatus consists of a fan-driven blower, a nasal mask or
oronasal interface, and tubing connecting the two. The airflow through the
interface (usually a mask or nasal pillows) provides a positive pressure that
offsets oropharyngeal collapse produced by inspiratory negative thoracic
pressure. In this manner, it acts as a pneumatic splint, thereby maintaining the
airway. When appropriately titrating the pressure, even the most severe sleep
apnea can be alleviated. Results are often dramatic. PAP devices come in
several varieties. The most common are systems that provide a preset
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). For individuals who find it
difficult to exhale against a continuous pressure, bilevel positive airway
pressure (BPAP) may provide a solution. BPAP devices have different
inspiratory and expiratory pressure settings. More recently, systems that
sense the patient’s changes in airway resistance and automatically adjust the
positive airway pressure have been gaining popularity. Such automatic
positive airway pressure (APAP) systems should theoretically be able to
adapt to changes in pressure requirements produced by sleep deprivation,
medications, weight change, sleep stage, illness, and aging. Finally, there are
timed bilevel and servo-ventilation systems, but these fall into the category of
noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) systems, which are more
appropriate for treating other pulmonary diseases and breathing problems in
neuromuscular diseases. The tremendous efficacy and remarkable safety of
PAP therapies have made them the standard of care for patients who can
tolerate sleeping with the machine. The principal therapeutic challenge is
utilization. Patient education and systematic follow-up are crucial. When
problems with the interface, the pressure, nasal stuffiness, and other barriers
to routine, nightly use arise, we should remedy these quickly to ensure
therapeutic adherence. When used properly, the success of PAP therapy has


<<<PAGE 1635>>>
rendered surgical intervention a secondary option, resorted to mainly after
PAP failure, rejection, or nonadherence.
ORAL APPLIANCE. Oral appliances represent another therapeutic option that is

gaining popularity. A variety of oral appliances have also been developed to
treat snoring and can provide benefit for mild to moderate OSA cases. The
general approach is to manipulate the position of the mandible, lift the palate,
or retain the tongue. Randomized trials indicate that some oral appliances
improve airway patency sufficiently. However, in patients with severe OSA,
improvement does not always reach satisfactory levels; therefore, follow-up
evaluations are critically important.
POSITIONAL THERAPY. In some patients, sleep-disordered breathing occurs

only in the supine position. In such situations, preventing patients from
sleeping on their backs may produce beneficial results. Tennis balls sewn
onto or placed into pockets on the back of the nightshirt or foam wedges may
accomplish this goal. Although such interventions seem to be useful in
clinical practice, large-scale systematic clinical trials are needed.
SURGICAL INTERVENTION. Aggressive surgical treatments evolved soon after

OSA’s pathophysiologic and potentially life-threatening consequences were
recognized. The earliest surgical intervention aimed to create a patent airway;
thus, in the late 1970s, tracheostomies were performed on individuals with
severe apnea. Although no longer the preferred treatment, it remains a
standard against which we judge newer, more refined therapies. Secondgeneration surgical approaches attempt to correct airway obstructions and
malformations. Early studies of uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP)
suggested that modification of the soft palate effectively relieved most sleep
apnea. Later follow-up results were less impressive. Approximately 30 to 50
percent of patients with sleep apnea benefit from UPPP. These patients are
likely those with oropharyngeal obstruction; thus, careful attention to
selection criteria presumably improves outcomes. However, if obstruction
occurs in the posterior airway space (PAS), maxillomandibular surgery may
be appropriate. In retrognathic patients or patients with cephalometrics
revealing compromised PAS, moving the jaw forward can achieve impressive
normalization of breathing during sleep.


<<<PAGE 1636>>>
WEIGHT LOSS. Weight loss is known to help many patients. However, because

losing weight and keeping it off is difficult and unreliably achieved, the
prudent clinician should recommend weight loss but also rely on other
therapies.
CSA due to High-Altitude Periodic Breathing. We can treat CSA due
to high-altitude periodic breathing with acetazolamide, which lowers serum
pH and increases the respiratory drive. Acetazolamide side effects include
metabolic acidosis, electrolyte imbalance, anaphylaxis, Stevens–Johnson
syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and agranulocytosis. Common
reactions include but are not limited to fatigue, anorexia, taste changes,
polyuria, diarrhea, melena, tinnitus, and photosensitivity.
Circadian Rhythm Sleep–Wake Disorders
Light Therapy. Research indicates that exposing an individual to bright
lights can reset the circadian pacemaker. This seems especially the case when
the light is bright (higher than 10,000 lux) or in the blue spectrum. With the
precise timing of bright light exposure, we can reset the biologic clock.
Exposure to light modifies the set-point of the biologic clock. Using core
body temperature as a physiologic marker, one can use bright lights to
produce a phase delay when presented before the temperature nadir. By
contrast, light exposure after the temperature nadir evokes phase advance.
The closer one presents light to the point of inflection (temperature nadir), the
more robust is the response in altering the cycle. Thus, we can use earlymorning bright-light therapy to phase advance individuals with delayed sleep
phase syndrome.
Similarly, exposure to bright light in the evening can help patients with
advanced sleep phase syndrome. The blue part of the light spectrum is the
crucial ingredient in phase setting and shifting. Therefore, blue light exposure
(or limitation with blue-blocking eyewear) at specific times can provide
therapeutic benefit. Clinicians are using light therapy to reset the circadian
rhythm of shift workers, astronauts, and individuals experiencing jet lag.
Medication. Researchers posit that melatonin secretion acts as the biologic
substrate for the internal circadian oscillator. Under normal circumstances,


<<<PAGE 1637>>>
melatonin levels begin to rise at dusk and remain elevated until dawn. Bright
light suppresses the release of melatonin. Melatonin, in a sense, is the signal
of darkness in the brain. As such, we can use it clinically to manage sighted
patients with disturbed sleep–wake cycles. Melatonin is available over the
counter in the United States. A prescription synthetic melatonin agonist
(ramelteon) is also available. Ramelteon is FDA approved for treating
patients with sleep-onset insomnia but is used off label for the entire
spectrum of circadian rhythm sleep disorders. Outside the United States, a
sustained-release prescription form of melatonin is available. Of interest, the
only medication approved for shift work sleep disorder is the wakepromoting compound modafinil. Modafinil treats sleepiness occurring during
night shift work.
Chronotherapy. Chronotherapy is one technique used to reset the biologic
clock. It involves progressively phase delaying a person until synchronizing
the circadian oscillator with the desired sleep–wake schedule. Most young
and middle-aged adults have a propensity to phase delay the circadian sleep–
wake rhythm progressively anyhow. Thus, phase delaying each night by 2 to
3 hours is simpler than phase advancing because it capitalizes on a natural
tendency. Halting the phase delay at the appropriate moment and maintaining
the desired synchrony can be a challenge. The patient also has to cope with
an odd sleep–wake schedule for the better part of a week during therapy
(which can interfere with school or work). For these reasons, the
development of light therapy and pharmacologic interventions has
overshadowed chronotherapy.
Parasomnias and Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
Nightmare Disorder. Treatment using behavioral techniques can be
helpful. Desensitization and exposure therapy, image rehearsal therapy, lucid
dream therapy, and cognitive therapy can help address nightmare disorder.
Additionally, evidence for the use of prazosin, a CNS α-1 receptor antagonist,
in the treatment of PTSD-related nightmares is growing. Nitrazepam and
triazolam may also be helpful.
Recurrent Isolated Sleep Paralysis. Improved sleep hygiene and


<<<PAGE 1638>>>
assuring sufficient sleep are first-line therapies. Sometimes, if the individual
voluntarily makes very–rapid eye movements or is touched by another
person, the episode will usually terminate.
Sleep Enuresis. Treating sleep enuresis involves medication, behavioral
interventions, or both. Among medications, desmopressin acetate is the
preferred choice. Other medications used to treat sleep enuresis include
imipramine and oxybutynin chloride. Behavioral treatments, including
bladder training, using conditioning devices (bell and pad), diet modification,
and fluid restriction, have reported success when properly administered.
Other treatments include psychotherapy, motivational strategies, and
hypnotherapy.
Restless Legs Syndrome. Pharmacologically, the dopaminergic agonists
pramipexole, rotigotine, and ropinirole are FDA approved and represent the
treatment of choice. Other agents used to treat RLS include dopamine
precursors (e.g., levodopa), benzodiazepines, opiates (including prolongedrelease oxycodone–naloxone), and antiepileptic drugs (e.g., gabapentin,
pregabalin). When iron deficiency is present, or when ferritin levels are low,
iron supplementation can also be helpful. Nonpharmacologic treatment
includes avoiding alcohol or nicotine use close to bedtime, massaging the
affected parts of the legs, taking hot baths, applying hot or cold to the
affected areas, magnetic or electric stimulation therapy, and moderate
exercise.
Periodic Limb Movement Disorder Treatment. Pharmacotherapy for
PLMD associated with RLS is the same as for RLS. Clinical trials of
pharmacotherapy for other forms of PLMD are lacking. However,
benzodiazepines, especially clonazepam, reportedly improve sleep in patients
with PLMD.
Sleep-Related Bruxism. The usual treatment involves having the patient
wear an oral appliance to protect the teeth during sleep. There are two basic
types of appliances: the soft one (mouth guard) is typically used in the short
term, whereas the hard acrylic one (bite splint) is used long term and requires
regular follow-up. Relaxation, biofeedback, hypnosis, physical therapy, and


<<<PAGE 1639>>>
stress management can also treat sleep bruxism. A variety of drug therapies
have been tried (benzodiazepines, muscle relaxants, dopaminergic agonists,
and propranolol); however, reliable outcome data are not available.
Botulinum toxin can also improve the frequency of bruxism episodes.
Benign Sleep Myoclonus of Infancy. This benign condition typically
lasts a few days to several months and does not need to be treated.
Propriospinal Myoclonus at Sleep Onset. Treatment with clonazepam
or anticonvulsants may be useful.

References
American Academy of Sleep Medicine. International Classification of Sleep
Disorders. 3rd ed. Darien, IL: American Academy of Sleep Medicine;
2014.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association; 2013.
Barateau L, Dauvillers Y. Recent advances in treatment for narcolepsy. Ther
Adv Neurol Disord. 2019;12:1756286419875622.
Barclay NL, Gregory AM. Quantitative genetic research on sleep: a review of
normal sleep, sleep disturbances and associated emotional, behavioural,
and health-related difficulties. Sleep Med Rev. 2013;17(1):29–40.
Beddis H, Pemberton M, Davies S. Sleep bruxism: an overview for
clinicians. Br Dent J. 2018;225(6):497–501.
Bianchi MT, Thomas RJ. Technical advances in the characterization of the
complexity of sleep and sleep disorders. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry. 2013;45:277–286.
Chung KF, Lee CT, Yeung WF, Chan MS, Chung EW, Lin WL. Sleep
hygiene education as a treatment of insomnia: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Fam Pract. 2018;35(4):365–375.
Claassen DO, Josephs KA, Ahlskog JE, Silber MH, Tippmann-Peikert M,
Boeve BF. REM sleep behavior disorder preceding other aspects of
synucleinopathies by up to half a century. Neurology. 2010;75(6):494–499.
Costa G. Shift work and occupational medicine: an overview. Occup Med


<<<PAGE 1640>>>
(Lond). 2003;53(2):83–88.
Dauvilliers Y, Verbraecken J, Partinen M, Hedner J, Saaresranta T, Georgiev
O, Tiholov R, Lecomte I, Tamisier R, Levy P, Scart-Gres C, Lecomte JM,
Schwarts JC, Pepin JL; HAROSA II Study Group collaborators. Pitolisant
for daytime sleepiness in patients with obstructive sleep apnea who refuse
continuous positive airway pressure treatment. A randomized trial. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med. 2020;201(9):1135–1145.
Genderson MR, Rana BK, Panizzon MS, Grant MD, Toomey R, Jacobson
KC, Xian H, Cronin-Golomb A, Franz CE, Kremen WS, Lyons MJ.
Genetic and environmental influences on sleep quality in middleaged men:
a twin study. J Sleep Res. 2013;22(5):519–526.
Gieselmann A, Aoudia MA, Carr M, Germain A, Gorzka R, Holzinger B,
Kleim B, Krakow B, Kunze AE, Lancee J, Nadorff MR, Nielsen T,
Riemann D, Sandahl H, Schlarb AA, Schmid C, Schredl M, Spoormaker
VI, Steil R, van Schagen AM, Wittmann L, Zschoche M, Pietrowsky R.
Aetiology and treatment of nightmare disorder: state of the art and future
perspectives. J Sleep Res. 2019;28(4):e12820.
Hirshkowitz M, Sharafkhaneh A. Chapter 23: Sleep disorders. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2083–2109.
Iber C, Ancoli-Israel S, Chesson A; Quan SF for the American Academy of
Sleep Medicine. The AASM Manual for the Scoring of Sleep and
Associated Events: Rules, Terminology and Technical Specifications.
Westchester, IL: American Academy of Sleep Medicine; 2007.
Jenni OG. How much sleep is “normal” in children and adolescents? JAMA
Pediatr. 2013;167(1):91–92.
Manfredini D, Winocur E, Guarda-Nardini L, Paesani D, Lobbezoo F.
Epidemiology of bruxism in adults: a systematic review of the literature. J
Orofac Pain. 2013;27(2):99–110.
Ohayon MM, Dauvilliers Y, Reynolds CF III. Operational definitions and
algorithms for excessive sleepiness in the general population: implications
for DSM-5 nosology. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2012;69(1):71–79.
Ohayon MM, Mahowald MW, Dauvilliers Y, Krystal AD, Léger D.
Prevalence and comorbidity of nocturnal wandering in the U.S. adult
general population. Neurology. 2012;78(20):1583–1589.
Ohayon MM, Reynolds CF III, Dauvilliers Y. Excessive sleep duration and


<<<PAGE 1641>>>
quality of life. Ann Neurol. 2013;73(6):785–794.
Potts KJ, Butterfield DT, Sims P, Henderson M, Shames CB. Cost savings
associated with an education campaign on the diagnosis and management
of sleep-disordered breathing: a retrospective, claims-based U.S. study.
Popul Health Manag. 2013;16(1):7–13.
Qaseem A, Holty JE, Owens DK, Dallas P, Starkey M, Shekelle P; Clinical
Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians.
Management of obstructive sleep apnea in adults: a clinical practice
guideline from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med.
2013;159(7):471–483.
Richard DM, Dawes MA, Mathias CW, Acheson A, Hill-Kapturczak N,
Dougherty DM. L-tryptophan: basic metabolic functions, behavioral
research, and therapeutic indications. Int J Tryptophan Res. 2009;2:45–60.
Richardson GS. The human circadian system in normal and disordered sleep.
J Clin Psychiatry. 2005;66(Suppl 9):3–9; quiz 42–43.
Rosipal R, Lewandowski A, Dorffner G. In search of objective components
for sleep quality indexing in normal sleep. Biol Psychol. 2013;94(1):210–
220.
Saper CB, Scammell TE. Emerging therapeutics in sleep. Ann Neurol.
2013;74(3):435–440.
Sateia MJ. International classification of sleep disorders-third edition:
highlights and modifications. Chest. 2014;146(5):1387–1394.
Sateia MJ, Buysse DJ, Krystal AD, Neubauer DN, Heald JL. Clinical practice
guideline for the pharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia in adults:
an American Academy of Sleep Medicine clinical practice guideline. J
Clin Sleep Med. 2017;13(2):307–349.
Scott AJ. Shift work and health. Prim Care. 2000;27(4):1057–1079.
Thomas SJ, Lichstein KL, Taylor DJ, Riedel BW, Bush AJ. Epidemiology of
bedtime, arising time, and time in bed: analysis of age, gender, and
ethnicity. Behav Sleep Med. 2014;12(3):169–182.
Trenkwalder C, Allen R, Högl B, Clemens S, Patton S, Schormair B,
Winkelmann J. Comorbidities, treatment, and pathophysiology in restless
legs syndrome. Lancet Neurol. 2018;17(11):994–1005.
Wright KP, Lowry CA, Lebourgeois MK. Circadian and wakefulness-sleep
modulation of cognition in humans. Front Mol Neurosci. 2012;5:50.
Younes, MK, Ostrowski M, Hanly P, Raneri J. Agreement between manual


<<<PAGE 1642>>>
and automatic scoring of polysomnograms in a broad spectrum of sleep
disorders. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014;189:A3593.
Zee PC, Vitiello MV. Circadian rhythm sleep disorder: irregular sleep wake
rhythm type. Sleep Med Clin. 2009;4(2):213–218.


<<<PAGE 1643>>>
16
Human Sexuality and Sexual
Dysfunctions
Sexuality is a broad topic, and no brief synopsis can do it justice. For the
psychiatrist, it loosely divides into the subjects of normal sexuality, sexual
dysfunction, paraphilias, and gender dysphoria. As with other chapters, we
are focusing on the disorders that might bring a patient to a psychiatrist.
There are two broad categories of disorders that we loosely group under
sexual disorders: sexual dysfunction and paraphilias. By sexual dysfunctions,
we are referring to disorders of normal sexual functioning. The paraphilias
are unusual expressions of sexuality that are considered aberrant or even
illegal. As these represent fundamentally different problems that require very
different approaches, we separate these into two sections. We then discuss
normal sexuality as part of our consideration of the pathology and etiology of
these disorders. We will discuss gender dysphoria in the next section.
For a fuller discussion, we would refer the reader to Virginia Sadock’s
excellent review of the subject in the Comprehensive Textbook.

SEXUAL DYSFUNCTIONS
The essential features of sexual dysfunctions are an inability to respond to
sexual stimulation, or the experience of pain during the sexual act.
Dysfunction can be defined by a disturbance in the subjective sense of
pleasure or desire usually associated with sex, or by the objective
performance. According to ICD-10, sexual dysfunction refers to a person’s
inability “to participate in a sexual relationship as he or she would wish.”
In DSM-5, the sexual dysfunctions include male hypoactive sexual desire
disorder, female sexual interest/arousal disorder, erectile disorder, female


<<<PAGE 1644>>>
orgasmic disorder, delayed ejaculation, premature (early) ejaculation, genitopelvic pain/penetration disorder, substance/medication-induced sexual
dysfunction, other specified sexual dysfunction, and unspecified sexual
dysfunction. We diagnose sexual dysfunctions only when they are a
significant part of the clinical picture. If more than one dysfunction exists, we
should diagnose them all. Sexual dysfunctions can be lifelong or acquired,
generalized or situational, and result from psychological factors, physiologic
factors, combined factors, and numerous stressors, including prohibitive
cultural mores, health and partner issues, and relationship conflicts. If the
dysfunction is attributable entirely to a general medical condition, substance
use, or adverse effects of medication, then sexual dysfunction due to a
general medical condition or substance-induced sexual dysfunction is
diagnosed. DSM-5 indicates the severity of the dysfunction by whether the
patient’s distress is mild, moderate, or severe.
Sexual dysfunctions are frequently associated with other mental disorders,
such as depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, personality disorders, and
schizophrenia. In many instances, sexual dysfunction is comorbid with
another psychiatric disorder. If the dysfunction is mostly attributable to an
underlying psychiatric disorder, we should only diagnose the underlying
disorder. Sexual dysfunctions are usually self-perpetuating, with the patients
increasingly subjected to ongoing performance anxiety and a concomitant
inability to experience pleasure. In relationships, the sexually functional
partner often reacts with distress or anger due to feelings of deprivation or a
sense that he or she is an insufficiently attractive or adequate sexual partner.
In such cases, the clinician must consider whether the sexual problem
preceded or arose from relationship difficulties and weigh whether a
diagnosis of sexual dysfunction relevant to relationship issues is appropriate.
A sex history provides essential information about patients, regardless of
the presence of a sexual disorder or whether that is the patient’s chief
complaint. The information can be obtained gradually through open-ended
questions. The outline in Table 16-1 provides a guide to the topics to be
covered.
Desire, Interest, and Arousal Disorders
Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder. Male hypoactive sexual


<<<PAGE 1645>>>
desire disorder is a deficiency or absence of sexual fantasies and desire for
sexual activity for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months (Table 162). Men for whom this is a lifelong condition have never experienced many
spontaneous erotic/sexual thoughts. Minimal spontaneous sexual thinking or
minimal desire for sex ahead of sexual experiences is not a diagnosable
disorder in women, primarily if the sexual encounter then triggers the desire.
The reported prevalence of low desire is highest at the younger and older
ends of the age spectrum, with only 2 percent of men ages 16 to 44 affected
by this disorder. A reported 6 percent of men ages 18 to 24, and 40 percent of
men ages 66 to 74, have problems with sexual desire. Some men may confuse
decreased desire with decreased activity. Their erotic thoughts and fantasies
are undiminished, but they no longer act on them due to health issues,
unavailability of a partner, or another sexual dysfunction such as erectile
disorder.
A variety of causative factors are associated with low sexual desire.
Patients with desire problems often use inhibition of desire defensively, to
protect against unconscious fears about sex.
Abstinence from sex for a prolonged period sometimes results in
suppression of sexual impulses. Loss of desire may also be an expression of
hostility to a partner or the sign of a deteriorating relationship. The presence
of desire depends on several factors: biologic drive, adequate self-esteem, the
ability to accept oneself as a sexual person, the availability of an appropriate
partner, and a good relationship in nonsexual areas with a partner. Damage
to, or absence of, any of these factors can diminish desire.
In making the diagnosis, clinicians must evaluate a patient’s age, general
health, any medication regimen, and life stresses. The clinician must attempt
to establish a baseline of sexual interest before the disorder began. The need
for sexual contact and satisfaction varies among persons. We should not
make a diagnosis unless the lack of desire is a source of distress to a patient.
Table 16-1
Taking a Sex History
I. Identifying data
A. Age
B. Sex


<<<PAGE 1646>>>
C. Occupation
D. Relationship status—single, married, number of times
previously married, separated, divorced, cohabiting, serious
involvement, casual dating (difficulty forming or keeping
relationships should be assessed throughout the interview)
E. Sexual orientation—heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual
(this may also be ascertained later in the interview)
II. Current functioning
A. Unsatisfactory to highly satisfactory
B. If unsatisfactory, why?
C. Feeling about partner satisfaction
D. Dysfunctions?—e.g., lack of desire, erectile disorder, inhibited
female interest/arousal, anorgasmia, premature ejaculation,
retarded ejaculation, pain associated with intercourse
(dysfunction discussed below)
1. Onset—lifelong or acquired
a. If acquired, when?
b. Did onset coincide with drug use (medications or illegal
recreational drugs), life stresses (e.g., loss of job, birth of
child), interpersonal difficulties
2. Generalized—occurs in most situations or with most
partners
3. Situational
a. Only with current partner
b. In any committed relationship
c. Only with masturbation
d. In socially proscribed circumstance (e.g., affair)
e. In definable circumstance (e.g., very late at night, in
parental home, when partner initiated sex play)
E. Frequency—partnered sex (coital and noncoital sex play)
F. Desire/libido—how often are sexual feelings, thoughts,
fantasies, dreams, experienced? (per day, week, etc.)
G. Description of typical sexual interaction
1. Manner of initiation or invitation (e.g., verbal or physical?
Does same person always initiate?)


<<<PAGE 1647>>>
2. Presence, type, and extent of foreplay (e.g., kissing,
caressing, manual or oral genital stimulation)
3. Coitus? positions used?
4. Verbalization during sex? if so, what kind?
5. Afterplay? (whether sex act is completed or disrupted by
dysfunction); typical activities (e.g., holding, talking, return
to daily activities, sleeping)
6. Feeling after sex: relaxed, tense, angry, loving
H. Sexual compulsivity?—intrusion of sexual thoughts or
participation in sexual activities to a degree that interferes with
relationships or work, requires deception and may endanger
the patient
III. Past sexual history
A. Childhood sexuality
1. Parental attitudes about sex—degree of openness or
reserve (assess unusual prudery or seductiveness)
2. Parents’ attitudes about nudity and modesty
3. Learning about sex
a. From parents? (initiated by child’s questions or parent
volunteering information? which parent? what was child’s
age?) subjects covered (e.g., pregnancy, birth,
intercourse, menstruation, nocturnal emission,
masturbation)
b. From books, magazines, or friends at school or through
religious group?
c. Significant misinformation
d. Feeling about information
4. Viewing or hearing primal scene—reaction?
5. Viewing sex play or intercourse of person other than parent
6. Viewing sex between pets or other animals
B. Childhood sex activities
1. Genital self-stimulation before adolescence; age? reaction if
apprehended?
2. Awareness of self as boy or girl; bathroom sensual
activities? (regarding urine, feces, odor, enemas)


<<<PAGE 1648>>>
3. Sexual play or exploration with another child (playing doctor)
—type of activity (e.g., looking, manual touching, genital
touching); reactions or consequences if apprehended (by
whom?)
IV. Adolescence
A. Age of onset of puberty—development of secondary sex
characteristics, age of menarche for girl, wet dreams or first
ejaculation for boy (preparation for and reaction to)
B. Sense of self as feminine or masculine—body image,
acceptance by peers (opposite sex and same sex), sense of
sexual desirability, onset of coital fantasies
C. Sex activities
1. Masturbation—age begun; ever punished or prohibited?
method used, accompanying fantasies, frequency
(questions about masturbation and fantasies are among the
most sensitive for patients to answer)
2. Homosexual activities—ongoing or rare and experimental
episodes, approached by others? If homosexual, has there
been any heterosexual experimentation?
3. Dating—casual or steady, description of first crush,
infatuation, or first love
4. Experiences of kissing, necking, petting (“making out” or
“fooling around”), age begun, frequency, number of
partners, circumstances, type(s) of activity
5. Orgasm—when first experienced? (may not be experienced
during adolescence), with masturbation, during sleep, or
with partner? with intercourse or other sex play?
frequency?
6. First coitus—age, circumstances, partner, reactions (may
not be experienced during adolescence); contraception
and/or safe sex precautions used
V. Adult sexual activities (may be experienced by some adolescents)
A. Premarital sex
1. Types of sex play experiences—frequency of sexual
interactions, types and number of partners


<<<PAGE 1649>>>
2. Contraception and/or safe sex precautions used
3. First coitus (if not experienced in adolescence) age,
circumstances, partner
4. Cohabitation—age begun, duration, description of partner,
sexual fidelity, types of sexual activity, frequency,
satisfaction, number of cohabiting relationships, reasons for
breakup(s)
5. Engagement—age, activity during engagement period with
fiancé(e), with others; length of engagement
B. Marriage (if multiple marriages have occurred, explore sexual
activity, reasons for marriage, and reasons for divorce in each
marriage)
1. Types and frequency of sexual interaction—describe typical
sexual interaction (see above), satisfaction with sex life?
view of partner’s feeling
2. First sexual experience with spouse—when? what were the
circumstances? was it satisfying? disappointing?
3. Honeymoon—setting, duration, pleasant or unpleasant,
sexually active, frequency? problems? compatibility?
4. Effect of pregnancies and children on marital sex
5. Extramarital sex—number of incidents, partner; emotional
attachment to extramarital partners? feelings about
extramarital sex
6. Postmarital masturbation—frequency? effect on marital sex?
7. Extramarital sex by partner—effect on interviewee
8. Ménage à trois or multiple sex (swinging)
9. Areas of conflict in marriage (e.g., parenting, finances,
division of responsibilities, priorities)
VI. Sex after widowhood, separation, divorce—celibacy, orgasms in
sleep, masturbation, noncoital sex play, intercourse (number of
and relationship to partners), other
VII. Special issues
A. History of rape, incest, sexual or physical abuse
B. Spousal abuse (current)


<<<PAGE 1650>>>
C. Chronic illness (physical or psychiatric)
D. History or presence of sexually transmitted diseases
E. Fertility problems
F. Abortions, miscarriages, or unwanted or illegitimate
pregnancies
G. Gender identity conflict—(e.g., transsexualism, wearing clothes
of opposite sex)
H. Paraphilias—(e.g., fetishes, voyeurism, sadomasochism)
Table 16-2
Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Male
Hypoactive
Sexual
Desire
Disorder

Lack or loss of sexual desire
Sexual aversion and lack of
sexual enjoyment

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Decreased
thoughts or
interest in
sex

# Symptoms
Needed

Symptoms
should be
recurrent

Exclusions (not Sociocultural

Lack or loss of sexual desire not
attributable to physiologic
difficulties related to
intercourse
Sexual aversion due to anxiety
and subsequent avoidance of
sexual activity, or lack of
enjoyment given that orgasm is
not accompanied by
appropriate pleasure


<<<PAGE 1651>>>
result of):

influences
Age
Relationship
problem
Substance use
(including
prescribed
meds)
Another
medical
condition
Another
psychiatric
condition

Psychosocial
Impact

Marked distress

Symptom
Specifiers

Generalized vs.
Situational

Severity
Specifiers

Mild: causes
mild distress
Moderate:
causes
moderate
distress
Severe: causes
severe
distress

Course
Specifiers

Lifelong vs.
Acquired

Note: ICD-10 classifies this
diagnosis as including male
hypoactive sexual desire
disorder as well as female
sexual arousal disorder (Table
16-3)


<<<PAGE 1652>>>
Table 16-3
Female Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Female Sexual
Interest/Arousal
Disorder

Lack or loss of sexual
desire
Sexual aversion and
lack of sexual
enjoyment

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Decreased arousal or
Lack or loss of sexual
interest in sex:
desire not
Reduced interest in sex
attributable to
Reduced sexual
physiologic
thoughts/fantasies
difficulties related to
Reduced
intercourse
initiation/receptiveness Sexual aversion due to
to sexual activity
anxiety and
Absent or reduced
subsequent
sexual pleasure
avoidance of sexual
Absent or reduced
activity, or lack of
pleasure from sexual
enjoyment given
cues
that orgasm is not
Absent or reduced
accompanied by
sensation during sex
appropriate
pleasure

# Symptoms
Needed

≥3 during most sexual
experiences

Exclusions (not Relationship problem
result of):
Substance use (including
prescribed meds)
Another medical condition
Another psychiatric


<<<PAGE 1653>>>
condition
Psychosocial
Impact

Marked distress

Symptom
Specifiers

Generalized vs. Situational

Severity
Specifiers

Mild: causes mild distress
Moderate: causes
moderate distress
Severe: causes severe
distress

Course
Specifiers

Lifelong vs. Acquired

Female Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorder. The combination of interest
(or desire) and arousal into one dysfunction category reflects the recognition
that women do not necessarily move stepwise from desire to arousal, but
often experience desire synchronously with, or even following, beginning
feelings of arousal. This is particularly true for women in long-term
relationships. As a corollary, women experiencing sexual dysfunction may
experience either inability to feel interest or arousal, and they may also have
difficulty achieving orgasm or experience pain. Some may experience
dysfunction across the entire range of sexual response. Complaints in this
dysfunction category present variously as a decrease or paucity of erotic
feelings, thoughts, or fantasies; a decreased impulse to initiate sex; a
decreased or absent receptivity to partner overtures; or an inability to respond
to partner stimulation (Table 16-3).
A complicating factor in this diagnosis is that a subjective sense of arousal
is often poorly correlated with genital lubrication in both normal and
dysfunctional women. Therefore, complaints of lack of pleasure are sufficient
for this diagnosis even when vaginal lubrication and congestion are present.
A woman complaining of lack of arousal may lubricate vaginally, but may
not experience a subjective sense of excitement. Alterations in testosterone,
estrogen, prolactin, and thyroxin levels occur in female sexual arousal


<<<PAGE 1654>>>
disorder. Also, medications with antihistaminic or anticholinergic properties
cause a decrease in vaginal lubrication.
We should evaluate factors such as life stresses, aging, menopause,
adequate sexual stimulation, and general health before making this diagnosis.
Relationship problems are particularly relevant to acquired interest/arousal
disorder. In one study of couples with markedly decreased sexual interaction,
the most prevalent etiology was marital discord.
Male Erectile Disorder. Male erectile disorder was historically called
impotence. The term was dropped for a more medical designation, but also
because it was considered derogatory and had negative connotations for the
man with the problem. However, it describes with accuracy the feelings of
powerlessness, helplessness, and resultant low self-esteem men with this
dysfunction frequently suffer (Table 16-4). A man with a lifelong male
erectile disorder has never been able to obtain an erection sufficient for
insertion. In acquired male erectile disorder, a man has successfully achieved
penetration at some time in his sexual life but is later unable to do so. In
situational male erectile disorder, a man can have coitus in certain
circumstances but not in others; for example, he may function effectively
with a sex worker but be unable to have an erection when with his partner.
Acquired male erectile disorder occurs in 10 to 20 percent of all men.
Erectile disorder is the chief complaint of more than 50 percent of all men
treated for sexual disorders. Lifelong male erectile disorder is rare; it occurs
in about 1 percent of men younger than age 35. The incidence of erectile
disorder increases with age. It has been reported variously as 2 to 8 percent of
the young adult population, and much more common in older men. Male
erectile disorder, however, is not universal in aging men; having an available
sex partner is related to continuing potency, as is a history of consistent
sexual activity and the absence of vascular, neurologic, or endocrine disease.
Twenty percent of men fear erectile dysfunction before their first coitus; the
reported incidence of actual erectile dysfunction during the first coitus is 8
percent.
Male erectile disorder can be organic or psychological or a combination of
both, but in young and middle-aged men, the cause is usually psychological.
A good history is of primary importance in determining the cause of the
dysfunction. If a man reports having spontaneous erections at times when he


<<<PAGE 1655>>>
does not plan to have intercourse, having morning erections, or having good
erections with masturbation or with partners other than his usual one, the
physiologic causes of his erectile disorder can be considered negligible, and
he can avoid costly diagnostic procedures. Male erectile disorder caused by a
general medical condition or a pharmacologic substance is discussed later in
this section.
Table 16-4
Erectile Disorder or Failure of Genital Response
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Erectile
Disorder

Failure of genital response

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Difficulties with Male
erections:
Difficulty with erections:
Achieving
developing
Maintaining
maintaining
Rigidity
Female
Difficulty with:
Vaginal dryness
Lack of adequate lubrication

# Symptoms
Needed

≥1 during most
sexual
encounters

Exclusions (not Relationship
result of):
problem
Substance use
(including
prescribed
meds)
Another
medical


<<<PAGE 1656>>>
condition
Another
psychiatric
condition
Psychosocial
Impact

Marked
distress

Symptom
Specifiers

Generalized
vs.
Situational

Severity
Specifiers

Mild: causes
mild
distress
Moderate:
causes
moderate
distress
Severe:
causes
severe
distress

Course
Specifiers

Lifelong vs.
Acquired

Comments

Note: ICD-10 classifies this
diagnosis as including male
erectile disorder as well as
female sexual arousal disorder

A man may be unable to express a sexual impulse because of fear, anxiety,
anger, or moral prohibition. In an ongoing relationship, the disorder may
reflect difficulties between the partners, mainly when a man cannot
communicate his needs or his anger directly and constructively. Also,
episodes of erectile disorder are reinforcing, with the man becoming
increasingly anxious before each sexual encounter.


<<<PAGE 1657>>>
Mr. Y came for therapy after his wife complained about their lack of
sexual interaction. The patient avoided sex because of his frequent
erectile dysfunction and the painful feelings of inadequacy he suffered
after his “failures.” He presented as an articulate, gentle, and self-blaming
man.
He was faithful to his wife but masturbated frequently. His fantasies
involved explicit sadistic components, including hanging and biting
women. The contrast between his angry, aggressive fantasies and his
loving, considerate behavior toward his wife symbolized his conflicts
about his sexuality, his masculinity, and his mixed feelings about women.
The physician diagnosed him with erectile disorder, situational type.
Orgasm Disorders
Female Orgasmic Disorder. Female orgasmic disorder, sometimes called
inhibited female orgasm or anorgasmia, is defined as the recurrent or
persistent inhibition of female orgasm, as manifested by the recurrent delay
in, or absence of, orgasm after a normal sexual excitement phase that a
clinician judges to be adequate in focus, intensity, and duration—in short, a
woman’s inability to achieve orgasm by masturbation or coitus (Table 16-5).
Women who can achieve orgasm by one of these methods are not necessarily
categorized as anorgasmic, although there may be some sexual inhibition.
Some anorgasmic women are not distressed by the lack of climax and derive
pleasure from sexual activity. However, the woman may still present for
treatment as her partner is distressed by her apparent disinterest.
Research on the physiology of the female sexual response has shown that
orgasms caused by clitoral stimulation and those caused by vaginal
stimulation are physiologically identical. Many women achieve orgasm
during coitus by a combination of manual clitoral stimulation and penile
vaginal stimulation.
A woman with a lifelong female orgasmic disorder has never experienced
orgasm by any kind of stimulation. A woman with an acquired orgasmic
disorder has previously experienced at least one orgasm, regardless of the
circumstances or means of stimulation, whether by masturbation or while


<<<PAGE 1658>>>
dreaming during sleep. Studies have shown that women achieve orgasm more
consistently with masturbation than with partnered sex. Lifelong female
orgasmic disorder is more common among unmarried women than married
women. Increased orgasmic potential in women older than 35 years of age
may relate to less psychologic inhibition, greater sexual experience, or both.
Acquired female orgasmic disorder is a common complaint in clinical
populations. One clinical treatment facility reported having about four times
as many nonorgasmic women in its practice as female patients with all other
sexual disorders. In another study, 46 percent of women complained of
difficulty reaching orgasm. Inhibition of arousal and orgasmic problems often
occur together. The overall prevalence of female orgasmic disorder from all
causes is estimated to be 30 percent. Orgasmic dysfunction in some females
may have a genetic basis and cannot be attributed solely to psychologic
differences. That study demonstrated an estimated heritability for difficulty
reaching orgasm with intercourse of 34 percent and an estimated heritability
in women who could not climax with masturbation of 45 percent.
Table 16-5
Female Orgasmic Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Female Orgasmic
Disorder

Orgasmic dysfunction

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Difficulties with
orgasms
Delayed/reduced
frequency
Reduced intensity

# Symptoms
Needed

≥1 during most
sexual encounters

Marked delay or absence of
orgasm

Exclusions (not Relationship problem Another medical condition
result of):
Substance use


<<<PAGE 1659>>>
(including
prescribed meds)
Another medical
condition
Another psychiatric
condition
Psychosocial
Impact

Marked distress

Symptom
Specifiers

Generalized vs.
Situational

Severity
Specifiers

Mild: causes mild
distress
Moderate: causes
moderate distress
Severe: causes
severe distress

Course
Specifiers

Lifelong vs. Acquired
Never experienced
an orgasm under
any conditions

Comments

Note: ICD 10 classifies
orgasmic dysfunction as
occurring in men and
women, including
delayed ejaculation in this
category as per Table 166

Numerous psychological factors are associated with female orgasmic
disorder. They include fears of impregnation, rejection by a sex partner, and
damage to the vagina; hostility toward men; poor body image; and feelings of
guilt about sexual impulses. Some women equate orgasm with loss of control
or with aggressive, destructive, or violent impulses; they may express their


<<<PAGE 1660>>>
fear of these impulses through inhibition of arousal or orgasm. Cultural
expectations and social restrictions on women are also relevant. Despite the
sexual revolution of the 1960s, many women in the United States still grow
to believe that sexual pleasure is not a natural entitlement for so-called decent
women. Nonorgasmic women may be otherwise symptom-free or may
experience frustration in a variety of ways; they may have such pelvic
complaints as lower abdominal pain, itching, and vaginal discharge, as well
as increased tension, irritability, and fatigue.
Delayed Ejaculation. In male delayed ejaculation, sometimes called
retarded ejaculation, a man achieves ejaculation during coitus with great
difficulty, if at all (Table 16-6). The problem is rarely present with
masturbation but appears as a problem during partnered sex. A man with
lifelong delayed ejaculation has never been able to ejaculate during partnered
sexual activity. The problem is usually most pronounced during coital
activity. We would consider the disorder to be acquired if it develops after
previously normal functioning. Some researchers think that orgasm and
ejaculation should be differentiated, especially in the case of men who
ejaculate but complain of a decreased or absent subjective sense of pleasure
during the orgasmic experience (orgasmic anhedonia).
The incidence of male orgasmic disorder is much lower than the incidence
of premature ejaculation or erectile disorder. The prevalence is about 5
percent. However, there may be an increase in this disorder presenting to sex
therapy programs. An increase in antidepressant use may be one explanation
for this. Another is the high use of Internet pornography. These sites offer a
level of stimulation involving such a variety of people and acts that they may
inure the man to the stimulation of more typical partnered activity. Some
studies of adolescent males who use these sites frequently, before live sexual
interaction, have reported that these teens do not develop neuronal synapses
that will enable them to respond to usual partnered interactions with
sufficient pleasure to allow them to achieve climax.
Lifelong delayed ejaculation indicates severe psychopathology. A man
may come from a rigid, puritanical background; he may perceive sex as sinful
and the genitals as dirty, and he may have conscious or unconscious incest
wishes and guilt. He usually has difficulty with closeness in areas beyond
those of sexual relations. In a few cases, an attention-deficit/hyperactivity


<<<PAGE 1661>>>
disorder may aggravate the condition. A man’s distractibility prevents
sufficient arousal for climax to occur.
In an ongoing relationship, acquired male delayed ejaculation disorder
frequently reflects interpersonal difficulties. The disorder may be a man’s
way of coping with real or fantasized changes in a relationship, such as plans
for pregnancy about which the man is ambivalent, the loss of sexual
attraction to the partner, or demands by the partner for greater commitment as
expressed by sexual performance. In some men, the inability to ejaculate
reflects unexpressed hostility toward a woman. The problem is more common
among men with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) than among others.
Table 16-6
Delayed Ejaculation
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Delayed
Ejaculation

Orgasmic dysfunction

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Difficulty with
Marked delay or absence of
ejaculations:
orgasm
Delayed
Absent or
reduced
frequency

# Symptoms
Needed

≥1

Exclusions (not Relationship
Another medical condition
result of):
problem
Substance use
(including
prescribed
meds)
Another


<<<PAGE 1662>>>
medical
condition
Another
psychiatric
condition
Psychosocial
Impact

Marked
distress

Symptom
Specifiers

Generalized vs.
Situational

Severity
Specifiers

Mild: causes
mild distress
Moderate:
causes
moderate
distress
Severe:
causes
severe
distress

Course
Specifiers

Lifelong vs.
Acquired

Comments

Note: ICD 10 classifies orgasmic
dysfunction as occurring in men
and women, including delayed
ejaculation in this category as
per Table 16-5

A couple presented with the man as the identified patient; he was unable
to ejaculate with intercourse. He had always had difficulty reaching
climax, except in rare circumstances. He ejaculated once when he was
with two women at the same time and once when he was experimenting
with cocaine. He currently was not using any substances except for


<<<PAGE 1663>>>
moderate use of alcohol. This patient was committed to his marriage,
although he had extramarital sexual experiences. He did not ejaculate
with coitus in those situations either, although he could climax with oral
sex. He stated he was more interested in “the conquest” than in the sex
itself. He could climax with masturbation, although he rarely masturbated
himself, but went to massage parlors. He had issues with anger at women
and considered his wife to be excessively critical.
He had difficulty doing any of the exercises that required him to
pleasure his wife. His difficulty giving also made it hard for him to enjoy
mutual pleasuring. It was easier for him to be the recipient of stimulation.
Because of this patient’s problems with impulsiveness, narcissism, and
dependency, it was necessary to combine introspective psychotherapy
with a regimen of behavioral exercises.
The psychiatrist diagnosed the patient with delayed ejaculation,
lifelong type.
Premature (Early) Ejaculation. In premature ejaculation, men
persistently or recurrently achieve orgasm and ejaculation before they wish
to. The diagnosis occurs when a man regularly ejaculates before or within
approximately 1 minute after penetration. DSM-5 refers only to “vaginal
penetration” in its diagnostic criteria, even though the disorder can occur in
gay men or those who do not engage in vaginal penetration for other reasons.
DSM-5 defines the disorder as mild if ejaculation occurs within
approximately 30 seconds to 1 minute of vaginal penetration, moderate if
ejaculation occurs within approximately 15 to 30 seconds of vaginal
penetration, and severe when ejaculation occurs at the start of sexual activity
or within approximately 15 seconds of vaginal penetration. A difficulty with
these specifiers involves time distortions, which patients make in both
overestimating and underestimating time from penetration to climax.
Clinicians need to consider factors that affect the duration of the excitement
phase of the sexual response, such as age, the novelty of the sex partner, and
the frequency of coitus (Table 16-7). As with the other sexual dysfunctions,
we would not diagnose premature ejaculation when it is caused exclusively
by organic factors or when it is symptomatic of another clinical psychiatric
syndrome.


<<<PAGE 1664>>>
Premature ejaculation appears to be more common among collegeeducated men than among men with less education. The complaint is likely
related to their concern for partner satisfaction, although data is limited, and
we do not know for sure. Premature ejaculation is the chief complaint of
about 35 to 40 percent of men treated for sexual disorders. In DSM-5, the
writers state that the disorder, with its newly defined time parameter, would
now be an accurate diagnosis for only 1 to 3 percent of men. Some
researchers divide men who experience premature ejaculation into two
groups: those who are physiologically predisposed to climax quickly because
of shorter nerve latency time and those with a psychogenic or behaviorally
conditioned cause. Difficulty in ejaculatory control can be associated with
anxiety regarding the sex act, with unconscious fears about the vagina, or
with negative cultural conditioning. Men whose early sexual contacts
occurred mainly with sex workers who demanded that the sex act proceed
quickly or whose sexual contacts took place in situations in which discovery
would be embarrassing (e.g., in a shared dormitory room or the parental
home) may be conditioned to orgasm rapidly. With young, inexperienced
men, who have the problem, it may resolve in time. In ongoing relationships,
the partner has a significant influence on a premature ejaculator, and a
stressful marriage exacerbates the disorder. The developmental background
and the psychodynamics found in premature ejaculation and erectile disorder
are similar.
Table 16-7
Premature (Early) Ejaculation
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Premature (Early)
Ejaculation

Premature ejaculation

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Ejaculation occurs
Within 1 min of
penetration
Before it was

Difficulty controlling
ejaculation


<<<PAGE 1665>>>
intended
# Symptoms
Needed

Above occurs in most
sexual encounters

Exclusions (not Relationship problem
result of):
Substance use
(including
prescribed meds)
Another medical
condition
Another psychiatric
condition
Psychosocial
Impact

Marked distress

Symptom
Specifiers

Generalized vs.
Situational

Severity
Specifiers

Defined by time from
penetration until
ejaculation:
Mild: 30 s–1 min
Moderate: 15–30 s
Severe: <15 s

Course
Specifiers

Lifelong vs. Acquired

Both partners do not
sufficiently enjoy the
sexual encounter

The focus of this diagnosis is on males, and data on premature female
orgasm are lacking. There are some case reports of, for example, multiple
spontaneous orgasms without sexual stimulation. In some cases, an
epileptogenic focus may be the cause. There are also some rare case reports
of spontaneous orgasms in women taking serotonergic antidepressants.
Orgasmic Anhedonia. Orgasmic anhedonia is a condition in which a


<<<PAGE 1666>>>
person has no physical sensation of orgasm, even though the physiologic
component (e.g., ejaculation) remains intact. Organic causes, such as sacral
and cephalic lesions that interfere with afferent pathways from the genitalia
to the cortex, must be ruled out. Psychiatric causes usually relate to extreme
guilt about experiencing sexual pleasure. These feelings produce a
dissociative response that isolates the affective component of the orgasmic
experience from consciousness. In DSM-5 this would be diagnosed as an
“other specified sexual dysfunction.”
Sexual Pain Disorders
Genito-Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder. In DSM-5, this disorder
refers to one or more of the following complaints, of which any two or more
may occur together: difficulty having intercourse, genito-pelvic pain, fear of
pain or penetration, and tension of the pelvic floor muscles (Table 16-8).
Previously, we diagnosed these pain disorders as dyspareunia or vaginismus.
These former diagnoses could coexist, or one could lead to the other and
could understandably lead to fear of pain with sex. Thus, it is reasonable to
gather these diagnoses into one diagnostic category. For this clinical
discussion, however, the distinct categories of dyspareunia and vaginismus
remain clinically useful.
DYSPAREUNIA. Dyspareunia is recurrent or persistent genital pain occurring

before, during, or after intercourse. Dyspareunia is related to and often
coincides with vaginismus. Repeated episodes of vaginismus can lead to
dyspareunia and vice versa; in either case, we should rule out somatic causes,
or lack of lubrication. Perhaps 5 percent of women in North America report
recurrent pain during intercourse.
In most cases, dynamic factors are considered causative. Chronic pelvic
pain is a common complaint in women with a history of rape or childhood
sexual abuse. Painful coitus can result from tension and anxiety about the sex
act that causes women to contract their pelvic floor muscles involuntarily.
The pain is real and makes intercourse unpleasant or unbearable. The
anticipation of further pain may cause women to avoid coitus altogether. If a
partner proceeds with intercourse regardless of a woman’s state of readiness,
this aggravates the condition. There is an increase in reported dyspareunia


<<<PAGE 1667>>>
postmenopausally due to hormonally induced physiologic changes in the
vagina; however, specific complaints of difficulty having intercourse occur
more often in premenopausal women. There is some increase in dyspareunia
in the immediate postpartum population, but it is usually temporary.
Dyspareunia may present as any of the four complaints listed under genitopelvic pain/penetration disorder, and we would diagnose this as a genitopelvic pain/penetration disorder.
VAGINISMUS. Vaginismus is a constriction of the outer third of the vagina due

to involuntary pelvic floor muscle tightening or spasm. It then interferes with
penile insertion and intercourse. This response may occur during a
gynecologic examination when involuntary vaginal constriction prevents the
introduction of the speculum into the vagina. We would not make the
diagnosis when the dysfunction is caused exclusively by organic factors or
when it is symptomatic of another mental disorder.
Vaginismus may be complete; that is, no penetration of the vagina is
possible, whether by the penis, fingers, a speculum during a gynecologic
examination, or even if the woman tries to use the smallest size tampon.
Many women who discover this when they become sexually active have
avoided the use of tampons previously. In a less severe form of vaginismus,
pelvic floor muscle tightening due to pain or fear of pain makes penetration
difficult, but not impossible. Penetration may be achieved with the smallest
size speculum or little fingers. In mild cases, the muscles relax after the initial
difficulty with penetration, and the woman can continue with sexual play,
sometimes even with coitus.
Miss B was a 27-year-old single woman who presented for therapy
because of an inability to have intercourse. She described episodes with a
recent boyfriend in which he had tried vaginal penetration but had been
unable to enter. The boyfriend did not have erectile dysfunction. Miss B
experienced desire and was able to achieve orgasm through manual or
oral stimulation. For almost a year, she and her boyfriend had sex play
without intercourse. However, he complained increasingly about his
frustration at the lack of coitus, which he had enjoyed in previous
relationships. Miss B had a conscious fear of penetration and dreaded


<<<PAGE 1668>>>
going to the gynecologist, although she was able to use tampons when
she menstruated. Her therapist diagnosed her with genito-pelvic
pain/penetration disorder, lifelong type.
Table 16-8
Genito-Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Genito-Pelvic
Nonorganic vaginismus
Pain/Penetration Nonorganic dyspareunia
Disorder

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

During vaginal
Vaginismus: spasm of pelvic
penetration, the
floor muscles around the
woman
vagina, causing pain and
experiences
difficulties with penetration
Difficulties with
Dyspareunia: pain or
penetration
discomfort related to
Pain
penile penetration or
Associated
intercourse
symptoms during
or in anticipation
of penetration:
Fear or anxiety
Tension or
tightening of
pelvic muscles

# Symptoms
Needed

One or more of the
above

Exclusions (not Relationship
result of):
problem
Substance use

Another medical condition


<<<PAGE 1669>>>
(including
prescribed meds)
Another medical
condition
Another psychiatric
condition
Psychosocial
Impact

Marked distress

Symptom
Specifiers
Severity
Specifiers

Mild: causes mild
distress
Moderate: causes
moderate
distress
Severe: causes
severe distress

Course
Specifiers

Lifelong vs. Acquired

Vaginismus is less prevalent than female orgasmic disorder. It most often
afflicts highly educated women and those in high socioeconomic groups.
Women with vaginismus may consciously wish to have coitus, but
unconsciously wish to keep a penis from entering their bodies. Sexual
trauma, such as rape, may cause vaginismus. The anticipation of pain at the
first coital experience may cause vaginismus. Clinicians have noted that a
strict religious upbringing in which the patient associates sex with sin is
frequent in these patients. Other women have problems in dyadic
relationships; if women feel emotionally abused by their partners, they may
protest in this nonverbal fashion. Some women who have experienced
significant pain in childhood due to surgical or dental interventions become
guarded about any breach of body integrity and develop vaginismus.
Vaginismus may present as any of the four complaints under genito-pelvic


<<<PAGE 1670>>>
pain/penetration disorder, and we should diagnose this as genito-pelvic
pain/penetration disorder.
Postcoital Headache. Postcoital headache, characterized by headache
immediately after coitus, may last for several hours. It is usually described as
throbbing and localized to the occipital or frontal area. The cause is
unknown. There may be vascular, muscle contraction (tension), or
psychogenic causes. Coitus may precipitate migraine or cluster headaches in
predisposed persons. In DSM-5 this disorder would not be included among
the above pain disorders as the pain is not directly associated with the sexual
act. When it is a source of distress or dysfunction, we list it as an “other
specified sexual dysfunction.”
Sexual Dysfunction due to a General Medical Condition
Male Erectile Disorder due to a General Medical Condition. The
incidence of psychological male erectile disorder has been the focus of many
studies. Statistics indicate that 20 to 50 percent of men with erectile disorder
have an organic basis for the disorder. A physiologic etiology is more likely
in men older than 50 and the most likely cause in men older than age 60.
Table 16-9 lists the medical causes of male erectile disorder. Side effects of
medication can impair male sexual functioning in a variety of ways (Table
16-10). Castration (removal of the testes) does not always lead to sexual
dysfunction because erection may still occur. A reflex arc, fired when
stimulating the inner thigh, passes through the sacral cord erectile center to
account for the phenomenon.
Several procedures, benign and invasive, are used to help differentiate the
causes of erectile disorder. The procedures include monitoring nocturnal
penile tumescence (erections that occur during sleep), generally associated
with rapid eye movement; monitoring tumescence with a strain gauge;
measuring blood pressure in the penis with a penile plethysmograph or an
ultrasound (Doppler) flowmeter, both of which assess blood flow in the
internal pudendal artery; and measuring pudendal nerve latency time. Other
diagnostic tests that delineate physiologic bases for impotence include
glucose tolerance tests, plasma hormone assays, liver and thyroid function
tests, prolactin and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) determinations, and


<<<PAGE 1671>>>
cystometric examinations. Invasive diagnostic studies include penile
arteriography, infusion cavernosonography, and radioactive xenon
penography. Invasive procedures require expert interpretation and are used
only for patients who are candidates for vascular reconstructive procedures.
Dyspareunia due to a General Medical Condition. An estimated 30
percent of all surgical procedures on the female genital area result in
temporary dyspareunia. Also, 30 to 40 percent of women with the complaint
seen in sex therapy clinics have pelvic pathology. Organic abnormalities
leading to dyspareunia and vaginismus include irritated or infected hymenal
remnants, episiotomy scars, Bartholin gland infection, various forms of
vaginitis and cervicitis, endometriosis, and adenomyosis. Women with
myomata, endometriosis, and adenomyosis may report postcoital pain owing
to the uterine contractions during orgasm. Postmenopausal women may have
dyspareunia resulting from thinning of the vaginal mucosa and reduced
lubrication.
Table 16-9
Diseases and Other Medical Conditions Implicated in Male
Erectile Disorder
Infectious and
Neurologic disorders
parasitic
Multiple sclerosis
diseases
Transverse myelitis
Elephantiasis
Parkinson disease
Mumps
Temporal lobe epilepsy
Traumatic and neoplastic spinal cord
Cardiovascular
diseasesa
diseasea
Central nervous system tumor
Atherosclerotic
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
disease
Peripheral neuropathy
Aortic aneurysm
General paresis
Leriche syndrome
Tabes dorsalis
Cardiac failure
Renal and urologic Pharmacologic factors
Alcohol and other dependence-inducing
disorders
substances (heroin, methadone, morphine,
Peyronie disease


<<<PAGE 1672>>>
Chronic renal
cocaine, amphetamines, and barbiturates)
failure
Prescribed drugs (psychotropic drugs,
Hydrocele and
antihypertensive drugs, estrogens, and
varicocele
antiandrogens)
Hepatic disorders
Poisoning
Cirrhosis (usually
Lead (plumbism)
associated with
Herbicides
alcohol
Surgical proceduresa
dependence)
Perineal prostatectomy
Pulmonary
Abdominal–perineal colon resection
disorders
Sympathectomy (frequently interferes with
Respiratory failure
ejaculation)
Aortoiliac surgery
Genetics
Radical cystectomy
Klinefelter
Retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy
syndrome
Congenital penile Miscellaneous
vascular and
Radiation therapy
structural
Pelvic fracture
abnormalities
Any severe systemic disease or debilitating
condition
Nutritional disorders
Malnutrition
Vitamin
deficiencies
Obesity
Endocrine
disordersa
Diabetes mellitus
Dysfunction of the
pituitary–
adrenal–testis
axis
Acromegaly
Addison disease
Chromophobe
adenoma


<<<PAGE 1673>>>
Adrenal neoplasia
Myxedema
Hyperthyroidism
aIn the United States an estimated 2 million men are impotent because they have diabetes

mellitus; an additional 300,000 are impotent because of other endocrine diseases; 1.5 million
are impotent as a result of vascular disease; 180,000 because of multiple sclerosis; 400,000
because of traumas and fractures leading to pelvic fractures or spinal cord injuries; and
another 650,000 are impotent as a result of radical surgery, including prostatectomies,
colostomies, and cystectomies.

Two conditions not readily apparent on physical examination that produce
dyspareunia are vulvar vestibulitis and interstitial cystitis. The former may
present with chronic vulvar pain, and the latter produces pain most intensely
following orgasm. Dyspareunia can also occur in men, but it is uncommon
and is usually associated with an organic condition, such as Peyronie disease,
which consists of sclerotic plaques on the penis that cause penile curvature.
Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder and Female
Interest/Arousal Disorder due to a General Medical Condition.
Sexual desire commonly decreases after major illness or surgery, particularly
when the body image is affected after such procedures as mastectomy,
ileostomy, hysterectomy, and prostatectomy. Illnesses that deplete a person’s
energy, chronic conditions that require physical and psychological
adaptation, and serious illnesses that can cause a person to become depressed
can all markedly lessen sexual desire.
In some cases, biochemical correlates are associated with hypoactive
sexual desire disorder (Table 16-11). A recent study found markedly lower
levels of serum testosterone in men complaining of low desire than in normal
controls in a sleep-laboratory situation. Drugs that depress the central nervous
system (CNS) or decrease testosterone production can decrease desire.
Other Male Sexual Dysfunction due to a General Medical
Condition. Delayed ejaculation can have physiologic causes and can occur
after surgery on the genitourinary tract, such as prostatectomy. It may also be
associated with Parkinson disease and other neurologic disorders involving
the lumbar or sacral sections of the spinal cord. The antihypertensive drug
guanethidine monosulfate, methyldopa, the phenothiazines, the tricyclic


<<<PAGE 1674>>>
drugs, and the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), among others,
have been implicated in retarded ejaculation. Also, we should differentiate
delayed ejaculation from retrograde ejaculation, in which ejaculation occurs
but the seminal fluid passes back into the bladder. Retrograde ejaculation
always has an organic cause. It can develop after genitourinary surgery, and it
is also associated with medications that have anticholinergic adverse effects,
such as the phenothiazines.
Other Female Sexual Dysfunction due to a General Medical
Condition. Some medical conditions—specifically, endocrine diseases such
as hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and primary hyperprolactinemia—can
affect a woman’s ability to have orgasms. Several drugs also affect some
women’s capacity to have orgasms (Table 16-12). Antihypertensive
medications, CNS stimulants, tricyclic drugs, SSRIs, and, frequently,
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) have interfered with female
orgasmic capacity. One study of women taking MAOIs, however, found that
after 16 to 18 weeks of pharmacotherapy, the adverse effect of the medication
disappeared, and the women were able to reexperience orgasms, although
they continued taking an undiminished dose of the drug.
Table 16-10
Some Pharmacologic Agents Implicated in Male Sexual
Dysfunctions
Drug

Impairs
Erection

Impairs
Ejaculation

Imipramine (Tofranil)

+

+

Protriptyline (Vivactil)

+

+

Desipramine (Pertofrane)

+

+

Clomipramine (Anafranil)

+

+

Amitriptyline (Elavil)

+

+

Psychiatric drugs
Cyclic drugsa


<<<PAGE 1675>>>
Trazodone (Desyrel)b

–

–

Tranylcypromine (Parnate)

+

+

Phenelzine (Nardil)

+

+

Pargyline (Eutonyl)

–

+

Isocarboxazid (Marplan)

–

+

Lithium (Eskalith)

+

+

Amphetamines

+

+

Fluoxetine (Prozac)c

–

+

Fluphenazine (Prolixin)

+

+

Thioridazine (Mellaril)

+

+

Chlorprothixene
(Taractan)

–

+

Mesoridazine (Serentil)

–

+

Perphenazine (Trilafon)

–

+

Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)

–

+

Reserpine (Serpasil)

+

+

Haloperidol (Haldol)

–

+

–

+

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors

Other mood-active drugs

Antipsychoticsd

Antianxiety agente
Chlordiazepoxide
(Librium)
Antihypertensive drugs


<<<PAGE 1676>>>
Clonidine (Catapres)

+

+

Methyldopa (Aldomet)

+

+

Spironolactone
(Aldactone)

+

–

Hydrochlorothiazide

+

–

Guanethidine (Ismelin)

+

+

Alcohol

+

+

Barbiturates

+

+

Cannabis

+

–

Cocaine

+

+

Heroin

+

+

Methadone

+

–

Morphine

+

+

Antiparkinsonian agents

+

+

Clofibrate (Atromid-S)

+

–

Digoxin (Lanoxin)

+

–

Glutethimide (Doriden)

+

+

Indomethacin (Indocin)

+

–

Phentolamine (Regitine)

–

+

Propranolol (Inderal)

+

–

Commonly abused substances

Miscellaneous drugs

aThe incidence of male erectile disorder associated with the use of tricyclic drugs is low.
bTrazodone has been causative in some cases of priapism.
cAll SSRIs can produce sexual dysfunction, more commonly, in men.
dImpairment of sexual function is not a common complication of the use of antipsychotics.


<<<PAGE 1677>>>
Priapism has occasionally occurred in association with the use of antipsychotics.
eBenzodiazepines have been reported to decrease libido, but in some patients the diminution
of anxiety caused by those drugs enhances sexual function.

Substance/Medication-Induced Sexual Dysfunction. We diagnose
substance-induced sexual dysfunction when evidence of substance
intoxication or withdrawal is apparent from the history, physical examination,
or laboratory findings. The disturbance in sexual function must be
predominant in the clinical picture. Distressing sexual dysfunction occurs
soon after significant substance intoxication or withdrawal, or after exposure
to a medication or a change in medication use. Specified substances include
alcohol, amphetamines or related substances, cocaine, opioids, sedatives,
hypnotics, or anxiolytics, and other or unknown substances.
Abused recreational substances affect sexual function in various ways. In
small doses, many substances enhance sexual performance by decreasing
inhibition or anxiety or by causing a temporary elevation of mood. With
continued use, however, erectile engorgement and orgasmic and ejaculatory
capacities become impaired. The abuse of sedatives, anxiolytics, hypnotics,
and particularly opiates and opioids nearly always depresses desire. Alcohol
may foster the initiation of sexual activity by removing inhibition, but it also
impairs performance. Cocaine and amphetamines produce the similar effects.
Although no direct evidence indicates that sexual drive is enhanced, users
initially have feelings of increased energy and may become sexually active;
ultimately, dysfunction occurs. Men usually go through two stages: an
experience of prolonged erection without ejaculation, and then a gradual loss
of erectile capability.
Patients recovering from substance dependency may need therapy to regain
sexual function, partly because of psychological readjustment to a
nondependent state. Many substance abusers have always had difficulty with
intimate interactions. Others who spent their crucial developmental years
under the influence of a substance have missed the experiences that would
have enabled them to learn social and sexual skills.
Almost every pharmacologic agent, particularly those used in psychiatry,
has been associated with an effect on sexuality. In men, these effects include
decreased sex drive, erectile failure, decreased volume of ejaculate, and
delayed or retrograde ejaculation. In women, decreased sex drive, decreased


<<<PAGE 1678>>>
vaginal lubrication, inhibited or delayed orgasm, and decreased or absent
vaginal contractions may occur. Drugs may also enhance sexual responses
and increase the sex drive, but this is less common than adverse effects.
Most antipsychotic drugs are dopamine receptor
antagonists that also block adrenergic and cholinergic receptors, thus
accounting for the adverse sexual effects (Table 16-13). Chlorpromazine and
trifluoperazine are potent anticholinergics, and they impair erection and
ejaculation. With some drugs, the seminal fluid backs up into the bladder
rather than being propelled through the penile urethra. Patients still have a
pleasurable sensation, but the orgasm is dry. When urinating after orgasm,
the urine may be milky white because it contains the ejaculate. The condition
is startling but harmless. Paradoxically, antipsychotics may rarely cause
priapism.
ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS.

Table 16-11
Neurophysiology of Sexual Dysfunction

ANTIDEPRESSANT DRUGS. The tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressants have

anticholinergic effects that interfere with erection and delay ejaculation.
Because the anticholinergic effects vary among the cyclic antidepressants,
those with the fewest effects (e.g., desipramine) produce the fewest sexual
adverse effects.
Some men report increased sensitivity of the glans that is pleasurable, and
that does not interfere with erection, although it delays ejaculation. In some
cases, however, the tricyclic causes painful ejaculation, perhaps as the result
of interference with seminal propulsion caused by interference with, in turn,
urethral, prostatic, vas, and epididymal smooth muscle contractions.
Clomipramine may increase sex drive in some persons. Selegiline, a selective
MAO type B (MAOB) inhibitor, and bupropion may also increase sex drive,


<<<PAGE 1679>>>
possibly by dopaminergic activity and increased production of
norepinephrine.
Venlafaxine and the SSRIs most often have adverse effects because of the
rise in serotonin levels. A lowering of the sex drive and difficulty reaching
orgasm occur in both sexes. Cyproheptadine, an antihistamine with
antiserotonergic effects, and methylphenidate, with adrenergic effects, may
reverse those adverse effects. Trazodone is associated with the rare
occurrence of priapism, the symptom of prolonged erection in the absence of
sexual stimuli. That symptom appears to result from the α1-adrenergic
antagonism of trazodone.
Table 16-12
Some Pharmacologic Agents Implicated in Inhibited Female
Orgasma
Tricyclic antidepressants
Imipramine (Tofranil)
Clomipramine (Anafranil)
Nortriptyline (Aventyl)
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Tranylcypromine (Parnate)
Phenelzine (Nardil)
Isocarboxazid (Marplan)
Dopamine receptor antagonists
Thioridazine (Mellaril)
Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Fluoxetine (Prozac)
Paroxetine (Paxil)
Sertraline (Zoloft)
Fluvoxamine (Luvox)
Citalopram (Celexa)
aThe interrelation between female sexual dysfunction and pharmacologic agents has been

less extensively evaluated than male reactions. Oral contraceptives are reported to decrease


<<<PAGE 1680>>>
libido in some women, and some drugs with anticholinergic side effects may impair arousal as
well as orgasm. Prolonged use of oral contraceptives may also cause physiologic
menopausal-like changes resulting in genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.
Benzodiazepines have been reported to decrease libido, but in some patients the diminution
of anxiety caused by those drugs enhances sexual function. Both increase and decrease in
libido have been reported with psychoactive agents. It is difficult to separate those effects
from the underlying condition or from improvement of the condition. Sexual dysfunction
associated with the use of a drug disappears when use of the drug is discontinued.

The MAOIs affect biogenic amines broadly. Accordingly, they produce
impaired erection, delayed or retrograde ejaculation, vaginal dryness, and
inhibited orgasm. Tranylcypromine has a paradoxical sexually stimulating
effect in some persons, possibly as a result of its amphetamine-like
properties.
Mr. W presented with the complaint of inability to achieve orgasm. His
problem dated from the time, 18 months previously, when he started
fluoxetine. Before that time, he had been able to achieve orgasm through
masturbation and coitus with his wife.
Mr. W tried several other SSRIs, as well as venlafaxine, but the side
effect of delayed ejaculation persisted. None of the usual antidotes to
SSRI-induced anorgasmia proved effective, and the patient then tried
antidepressants of other categories. Mr. W was able to respond to
bupropion and clonazepam. This combination treated his depression and
anxiety, and his delayed ejaculation resolved.
His psychiatrist diagnosed pharmacologically induced delayed
ejaculation.
Table 16-13
Diagnostic Issues with Sex and Some Antipsychotic Drugs
Differential diagnosis of druginduced sexual dysfunction

Problem after drug therapy
started or drug overdose
Problem not situation or partner
specific
Not a lifelong or recurrent


<<<PAGE 1681>>>
problem
No obvious nonpharmacologic
precipitant
Dissipates with drug
discontinuation
Antipsychotic drugs and
ejaculatory problems

Perphenazine
Chlorpromazine
Trifluoperazine
Haloperidol
Mesoridazine
Chlorprothixene

Antipsychotic drugs and priapism

Perphenazine
Mesoridazine
Chlorpromazine
Thioridazine
Fluphenazine
Molindone
Risperidone
Clozapine

Table by R. T. Seagraves, M.D.

Because depression is associated with decreased libido, varying levels of
sexual dysfunction and anhedonia are part of the disease process. Some
patients report improved sexual functioning as their depression improves
because of antidepressant medication. The phenomenon makes evaluating
sexual side effects difficult; also, the side effects may disappear with time,
perhaps because a biogenic amine homeostatic mechanism comes into play.


<<<PAGE 1682>>>
Lithium regulates mood and, in the manic state, may reduce
hypersexuality, possibly by a dopamine antagonist activity. Some patients
may have impaired erections.
LITHIUM.

Psychostimulants,
including
amphetamines,
methylphenidate, and pemoline, raise the plasma levels of norepinephrine and
dopamine. They can increase libido. However, with prolonged use, men may
experience a loss of desire and erections.
SYMPATHOMIMETICS.

α-ADRENERGIC AND β-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS. α-Adrenergic and

β-adrenergic receptor antagonists, used in the treatment of hypertension,
angina, and certain cardiac arrhythmias, diminish tonic sympathetic nerve
outflow from vasomotor centers in the brain. As a result, they can cause
impotence, decrease the volume of ejaculate, and produce retrograde
ejaculation. They can affect libido in both sexes.
The anticholinergics block cholinergic receptors and
include such drugs as amantadine and benztropine. They produce dryness of
the mucous membranes (including those of the vagina) and erectile disorder.
However, amantadine may reverse SSRI-induced orgasmic dysfunction
through its dopaminergic effect.
ANTICHOLINERGICS.

Drugs such as diphenhydramine have anticholinergic
activity and are mildly hypnotic. They may inhibit sexual function as a result.
Cyproheptadine, although an antihistamine, also has potent activity as a
serotonin antagonist. It can block the serotonergic sexual adverse effects
produced by SSRIs, such as delayed orgasm.
ANTIHISTAMINES.

The dominant class of anxiolytics is the
benzodiazepines. They act on the γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors,
which are involved in cognition, memory, and motor control. Because
benzodiazepines decrease plasma epinephrine concentrations, they diminish
anxiety, and as a result, they improve sexual function in persons inhibited by
anxiety.
ANTIANXIETY

ALCOHOL.

AGENTS.

Alcohol suppresses CNS activity generally and can produce


<<<PAGE 1683>>>
erectile disorders in men as a result. Alcohol has a direct gonadal effect that
decreases testosterone levels in men; paradoxically, it can produce a slight
rise in testosterone levels in women. The latter finding may account for
women who report increased libido after drinking small amounts of alcohol.
The long-term use of alcohol reduces the ability of the liver to metabolize
estrogenic compounds in men, which produces signs of feminization (such as
gynecomastia as a result of testicular atrophy).
OPIOIDS. Opioids, such as heroin, have adverse sexual effects, such as erectile

failure and decreased libido. The alteration of consciousness may enhance the
sexual experience of occasional users.
The hallucinogens include lysergic acid diethylamide
(LSD), phencyclidine (PCP), psilocybin (from some mushrooms), and
mescaline (from peyote cactus). In addition to inducing hallucinations, the
drugs cause loss of contact with reality and an expanding and heightening of
consciousness. Some users report that the sexual experience is similarly
enhanced, but others experience anxiety, delirium, or psychosis, which
interfere with sexual function.
HALLUCINOGENS.

CANNABIS. The altered state of consciousness produced by cannabis may

enhance sexual pleasure for some persons. Its prolonged use depresses
testosterone levels.
Barbiturates and similarly
acting sedative-hypnotic drugs may enhance sexual responsiveness in persons
who are sexually unresponsive as a result of anxiety. They have no direct
effect on the sex organs; however, they do produce an alteration in
consciousness that some persons find pleasurable. These drugs are subject to
abuse, and use can be fatal when combined with alcohol or other CNS
depressants.
Methaqualone acquired a reputation as a sexual enhancer, a reputation
without basis. It is no longer legally sold in the United States.
BARBITURATES AND SIMILARLY ACTING DRUGS.

Treatment
Before 1970, the most common treatment for sexual dysfunctions was


<<<PAGE 1684>>>
individual psychotherapy. Classic psychodynamic theory holds that sexual
inadequacy has its roots in early developmental conflicts, and the therapist
treated the sexual disorder as part of a pervasive emotional disturbance. The
symptoms of sexual dysfunctions, however, frequently become secondarily
autonomous and continue to persist, even when other problems evolving from
the patients’ pathology have been resolved. The addition of behavioral
techniques is often necessary to cure a sexual problem. Depending on the
disorder, medications can be a first-line treatment or an adjunct to therapy.
Somatic Treatments. Biologic treatments, including pharmacotherapy,
surgery, and mechanical devices, can treat specific cases of sexual disorder.
Most of the recent advances involve male sexual dysfunction.
PHARMACOTHERAPY. Medications for erectile disorder include sildenafil and

its congeners (Table 16-14), oral phentolamine, alprostadil, and injectable
medications. Other options include papaverine, prostaglandin E1,
phentolamine, or some combination of these; and transurethral alprostadil
(MUSE).
Sildenafil is a nitric oxide enhancer that facilitates the inflow of blood to
the penis necessary for an erection. The drug takes effect about 1 hour after
ingestion, and its effect can last up to 4 hours. Sildenafil is not effective in the
absence of sexual stimulation. The most common adverse events associated
with its use are headaches, flushing, and dyspepsia. Persons taking organic
nitrates should not take sildenafil, as the combined action of the two drugs
can cause sudden, and sometimes fatal, drops in systemic blood pressure.
Sildenafil is not effective in all cases of erectile dysfunction. It fails to
produce an erection that is sufficiently rigid for penetration in about 50
percent of men who have had radical prostate surgery or in those with longstanding insulin-dependent diabetes. It is also ineffective in some instances of
nerve damage.
A small number of patients developed nonarteritic ischemic optic
neuropathy (NAION) soon after using sildenafil. This side effect may be
more common in patients with cardiovascular risk factors. Although rare,
sildenafil may provoke NAION in individuals with an arteriosclerotic risk
profile. Exceedingly rare cases of hearing loss may also occur.
Sildenafil use in women results in vaginal lubrication, but not in increased


<<<PAGE 1685>>>
desire. Anecdotal reports, however, describe individual women who have
experienced intensified excitement with sildenafil.
Oral phentolamine and apomorphine are not FDA approved at present but
have proved useful as potency enhancers in men with minimal erectile
dysfunction. Phentolamine reduces sympathetic tone and relaxes corporeal
smooth muscle. Adverse events include hypotension, tachycardia, and
dizziness. Apomorphine effects are mediated by the autonomic nervous
system and result in vasodilation that facilitates the inflow of blood to the
penis. Adverse events include nausea and sweating.
Table 16-14
Pharmacokinetics of the PDE-5 Inhibitors

In contrast to the oral medications, injectable and transurethral forms of
alprostadil act locally on the penis and can produce erections in the absence
of sexual stimulation. Alprostadil contains a naturally occurring form of
prostaglandin E, a vasodilating agent. Alprostadil may be administered by
direct injection into the corpora cavernosa or by intraurethral insertion of a
pellet through a cannula. The firm erection produced within 2 to 3 minutes
after administration of the drug may last as long as 1 hour. Infrequent and
reversible adverse effects of injections include penile bruising and changes in
liver function test results. Possible hazardous sequelae exist, including
priapism and sclerosis of the small veins of the penis. Users of transurethral
alprostadil sometimes complain of burning sensations in the penis.
Two small trials found different topical agents effective in alleviating
erectile dysfunction. One cream consists of three vasoactive substances


<<<PAGE 1686>>>
absorbed through the skin: aminophylline, isosorbide dinitrate, and codergocrine mesylate, which is a mixture of ergot alkaloids. The other is a gel
containing alprostadil and an additional ingredient, which temporarily makes
the outer layer of the skin more permeable.
Also, a cream incorporating alprostadil exists for female sexual arousal
disorder. Vaginally applied phentolamine mesylate, an α-receptor antagonist,
can increase vasocongestion and a subjective sense of arousal. Flibanserin is
also FDA-approved to increase desire in women.
The pharmacologic treatments described in the preceding text are useful in
the treatment of arousal dysfunction of various causes: neurogenic, arterial
insufficiency, venous leakage, psychogenic, and mixed. When coupled with
insight-oriented or behavioral sex therapy, the use of medications can reverse
psychogenic arousal disorder that is resistant to psychotherapy alone, the
ultimate goal being pharmacologically unassisted sexual functioning.
Other Pharmacologic Agents. Numerous other pharmacologic agents have
been used to treat various sexual disorders. Intravenous methohexital sodium
assists with desensitization therapy. Antianxiety agents may have some
application for tense patients. The side effects of antidepressants, in
particular the SSRIs and tricyclic drugs, have been used to prolong the
sexual response in patients with premature ejaculation. This approach is
particularly useful in patients who are refractory to behavioral techniques.
Topical anesthetic creams may help decrease the intravaginal ejaculation
latency time (IELT) in cases of premature ejaculation. Antidepressants can
help patients who are phobic of sex and in those with posttraumatic stress
disorder following rape. Trazodone is an antidepressant that improves
nocturnal erections. We should always weigh the risks of taking such
medications against their possible benefits. Bromocriptine treats
hyperprolactinemia, which is frequently associated with hypogonadism and
any associated sexual dysfunction. In such patients, it is necessary to rule out
pituitary tumors.
Several substances have popular standing as aphrodisiacs; for example,
ginseng root and yohimbine. Studies, however, have not confirmed any
aphrodisiac properties. Yohimbine, an α-receptor antagonist, may cause
dilation of the penile artery; however, the American Urologic Association
does not recommend its use to treat organic erectile dysfunction. Many


<<<PAGE 1687>>>
recreational drugs, including cocaine, amphetamines, alcohol, and cannabis,
are considered enhancers of sexual performance. Although they may provide
the user with an initial benefit because of their tranquilizing, disinhibiting, or
mood-elevating effects, consistent or prolonged use of any of these
substances impairs sexual functioning.
Dopaminergic agents may increase libido and improve sex function. Those
drugs include L-dopa, a dopamine precursor, and bromocriptine, a dopamine
agonist. The antidepressant bupropion has dopaminergic effects and has
increased sex drive in some patients. Selegiline, an MAOI, is selective for
MAOB and is dopaminergic. It improves sexual functioning in older persons.
HORMONE THERAPY. Androgens increase the sex drive in women and
men with low testosterone concentrations. Women may experience virilizing
effects, some of which are irreversible (e.g., deepening of the voice). In men,
prolonged use of androgens produces hypertension and prostatic enlargement.
Testosterone is most effective when given parenterally; however, effective
oral and transdermal preparations are available.
Women who use estrogens for replacement therapy or contraception may
report decreased libido; in such cases, a combined preparation of estrogen
and testosterone may help. Estrogen itself prevents thinning of the vaginal
mucous membrane and facilitates lubrication. Several forms of locally
delivered estrogen—vaginal rings, vaginal creams, and vaginal tablets—
provide alternate administration routes to treat women with arousal problems
or genital atrophy. Because tablets, creams, and rings do not significantly
increase circulating estrogen levels, we should consider these devices for
patients with breast cancer with arousal problems.
ANTIANDROGENS
AND
ANTIESTROGENS.
Estrogens
and
progesterone are antiandrogens that have been used to treat compulsive
sexual behavior in men, usually in sex offenders. Clomiphene and tamoxifen
are both antiestrogens, and both stimulate gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) secretion and increase testosterone concentrations, thereby
increasing libido. Women treated for breast cancer with tamoxifen report an
increased libido. However, tamoxifen may cause uterine cancer.
MECHANICAL TREATMENT APPROACHES. Male patients with


<<<PAGE 1688>>>
arteriosclerosis (especially of the distal aorta, known as Leriche syndrome),
may lose their erection during active pelvic thrusting. The need for increased
blood in the gluteal muscles and others served by the ilial or hypogastric
arteries takes blood away (steals) from the pudendal artery and, thus,
interferes with penile blood flow. They can obtain relief by decreasing pelvic
thrusting, which is also aided by the woman’s superior coital position.
VACUUM PUMP. Vacuum pumps are mechanical devices that patients
without a vascular disease can use to obtain erections. The vacuum draws
blood to the penis and kept there by a ring at the base of the penis. This
device has no adverse effects, but it is cumbersome, and partners must be
willing to accept its use. Some women complain that the penis is redder and
cooler than a natural erection or find the process objectionable.
A similar device, called EROS, has been developed to create clitoral
erections in women. EROS is a small suction cup that fits over the clitoral
region and draws blood into the clitoris. Studies have reported its success in
treating female sexual arousal disorder. Vibrators used to stimulate the
clitoral area have been successful in treating anorgasmic women.
OTHER SOMATIC TREATMENTS

Male Prostheses. Surgical treatment is rarely indicated, but penile
prosthetic devices are available for men with inadequate erectile responses
who are resistant to other treatment methods or who have medically caused
deficiencies. The two main types of prostheses are (1) a semi-rigid rod
prosthesis that produces a permanent erection that can be positioned close to
the body for concealment and (2) an inflatable type that is implanted with its
reservoir and pump for inflation and deflation. The latter type can mimic
normal physiologic functioning.
Vascular Surgery. When vascular insufficiency is present due to
atherosclerosis or other blockages, bypass surgery of penile arteries may
help in selected cases.
Psychosocial Treatments
DUAL-SEX THERAPY. The theoretical basis of dual-sex therapy is the concept of

the marital unit or dyad as the object of therapy; the approach represented the


<<<PAGE 1689>>>
significant advance in the diagnosis and treatment of sexual disorders in the
20th century. The methodology was originated and developed by Masters and
Johnson. In dual-sex therapy, when a dysfunctional person is in a
relationship, the couple must be treated. Because both are involved in a
sexually distressing situation, both must participate in the therapy program.
The sexual problem often reflects other areas of disharmony or
misunderstanding in the relationship so that the entire relationship is treated,
with emphasis on the sexual functioning of the partners.
The keystone of the program is the roundtable session in which a male and
female therapy team clarifies, discusses, and works through problems with
the couple. The four-way sessions require active participation by the patients.
Therapists and patients discuss the psychological and physiologic aspects of
sexual functioning, and therapists have an educative attitude. Therapists
suggest specific sexual activities for the couple to follow in the privacy of
their home. The therapy aims to establish or reestablish communication
within the partner unit. Sex is emphasized as a natural function that flourishes
in the appropriate domestic climate, and improved communication is
encouraged toward that end. In a variation of this therapy that has proved
useful, one therapist may treat the couple. Treatment is short term and is
behaviorally oriented. The therapists attempt to reflect the situation as they
see it, rather than interpret underlying dynamics. An undistorted picture of
the relationship presented by the therapists often corrects the myopic, narrow
view held by each partner. This new perspective can interrupt the couple’s
destructive pattern of relating and can encourage improved, more effective
communication. Specific exercises are prescribed for the couple to treat their
particular problems. Sexual inadequacy often involves a lack of information,
misinformation, and performance fear. Therefore, the therapist prohibits any
sexual play other than what was prescribed. Beginning exercises usually
focus on heightening sensory awareness to touch, sight, sound, and smell.
Initially, the therapist also prohibits intercourse, and the couple learns to give
and receive bodily pleasure without the pressure of performance or
penetration. At the same time, they learn how to communicate nonverbally in
a mutually satisfactory way, and they learn that sexual foreplay is an
enjoyable alternative to intercourse and orgasm.
During the sensate focus exercises, the couple receives much
reinforcement to reduce anxiety. They can use fantasies to distract them from


<<<PAGE 1690>>>
obsessive concerns about performance (spectatoring). They should consider
the needs of both the dysfunctional partner and the nondysfunctional partner.
If either partner becomes sexually excited by the exercises, the other is
encouraged to bring them to orgasm by manual or oral means. Open
communication and the expression of mutual needs are encouraged.
Resistances, such as claims of fatigue or not enough time to complete the
exercises, are common and must be dealt with by the therapists. Issues of
body image, fear of being touched, and difficulty touching oneself arise
frequently. Eventually, the therapy allows genital stimulation in addition to
general body stimulation. The couple should sequentially to try various
positions for intercourse, without necessarily completing the act, and to use
varieties of stimulating techniques before they proceed with intercourse.
Psychotherapy sessions follow each new exercise period, and problems
and satisfactions, both sexual and in other areas of the couple’s lives, are
discussed. The therapist reviews specific instructions and introduces new
exercises geared to the individual couple’s progress. Gradually, the couple
gains confidence and learns to communicate, verbally and sexually. Dual-sex
therapy is most effective when sexual dysfunction exists apart from other
psychopathology. The more difficult treatment cases involve couples with
severe marital discord. Desire disorders are particularly challenging to treat.
They require more extended and intensive therapy than some other disorders,
and their outcomes vary greatly.
SPECIFIC TECHNIQUES AND EXERCISES. Various techniques can treat various

sexual dysfunctions. In cases of vaginismus, a woman is advised to dilate her
vaginal opening with her fingers or with size-graduated dilators. Dilators can
also treat cases of dyspareunia. Sometimes, specially trained physiotherapists
can assist the treatment by helping the patients to relax their perineal muscles.
In cases of premature ejaculation, an exercise known as the squeeze
technique can raise the threshold of penile excitability. In this exercise, the
man or the woman stimulates the erect penis until feeling the earliest
sensations of impending ejaculation. At this point, the partner forcefully
squeezes the coronal ridge of the glans, diminishing the erection and
inhibiting ejaculation. The exercise program eventually raises the threshold of
the sensation of ejaculatory inevitability and allows the man to focus on the
sensations of arousal without anxiety and develop confidence in his sexual


<<<PAGE 1691>>>
performance. A variant of the exercise is the stop-start technique developed
by James H. Semans, in which the woman stops all stimulation of the penis
when the man first senses an impending ejaculation without squeezing.
Research has shown that the presence or absence of circumcision has no
bearing on a man’s ejaculatory control; the glans is equally sensitive in the
two states. Sex therapy has been most successful in the treatment of
premature ejaculation.
A man with a sexual desire disorder or male erectile disorder can
masturbate to prove that full erection and ejaculation are possible. Delayed
ejaculation is managed initially by extravaginal ejaculation and then by
gradual vaginal entry after stimulation to a point near ejaculation. Most
importantly, the early exercises forbid ejaculation to remove the pressure to
climax and allow the man to immerse himself in sexual pleasuring.
In cases of lifelong female orgasmic disorder, the woman is directed to
masturbate, sometimes using a vibrator. The shaft of the clitoris is the
masturbatory site most preferred by women, and orgasm depends on adequate
clitoral stimulation. An area on the anterior wall of the vagina exists in some
women as a site of sexual excitation, known as the G-spot, but reports of an
ejaculatory phenomenon at orgasm in women following the stimulation of the
G-spot is only anecdotal.
BEHAVIOR THERAPY. Behavioral approaches were initially designed for the

treatment of phobias but are now used to treat other problems as well.
Behavior therapists assume that the patient learns sexual dysfunction as
maladaptive behavior, which causes them to fear sexual interaction. Using
traditional techniques, therapists set up a hierarchy of anxiety-provoking
situations, ranging from least threatening (e.g., the thought of kissing) to most
threatening (e.g., the thought of penile penetration). The behavior therapist
enables the patient to master the anxiety through a standard program of
systematic desensitization, which inhibits the learned anxious response by
encouraging behaviors antithetical to anxiety. The patient first deals with the
least anxiety-producing situation in fantasy and progresses by steps to the
most anxiety-producing situation. Medication, hypnosis, and specialized
training in deep muscle relaxation can help with the initial mastery of
anxiety.
Assertiveness training can help teach patients to express sexual needs


<<<PAGE 1692>>>
openly and without fear. The patient receives exercises in assertiveness, given
in conjunction with sex therapy, and they are encouraged to make sexual
requests and to refuse to comply with requests perceived as unreasonable.
Sexual exercises may be prescribed for patients to perform at home, and the
therapist helps the patient to establish a hierarchy, starting with those
activities that have proved most pleasurable and successful in the past.
One treatment variation involves the participation of the patient’s sexual
partner in the desensitization program. The partner, rather than the therapist,
presents items of increasing stimulation value to the patient. A cooperative
partner is necessary to help the patient carry gains made during treatment
sessions to sexual activity at home.
Couples who regularly practice assigned exercises appear to have a much
higher likelihood of success than do more resistant couples or those whose
interaction involves sadomasochistic or depressive features or mechanisms of
blame and projection. Attitude flexibility is also a favorable prognostic factor.
Overall, younger couples tend to complete sex therapy more often than older
couples. Couples whose interactional difficulties center on their sex
problems, such as inhibition, frustration, or fear of performance failure, are
also likely to respond well to therapy.
MINDFULNESS. Mindfulness is a cognitive technique that has been helpful in

the treatment of sexual dysfunction. The patient focuses on the moment and
maintains an awareness of sensations—visual, tactile, auditory, and olfactory
—that he or she experiences in the moment. The aim is to distract the patient
from “spectatoring” (watching him or herself) and center the person on the
sensations that lead to arousal or orgasm. Hopefully, this shift in focus allows
patients to become immersed in the pleasure of the experience and remove
themselves from self-judgment and performance anxiety.
Group therapy helps to examine both intrapsychic and
interpersonal problems in patients with sexual disorders. A therapy group
provides a strong support system for a patient who feels ashamed, anxious, or
guilty about a particular sexual problem. It is a useful forum in which to
counteract sexual myths, correct misconceptions, and provide accurate
information about sexual anatomy, physiology, and varieties of behavior.
One can organize the groups in several ways. Members may all share the
GROUP THERAPY.


<<<PAGE 1693>>>
same problem, such as premature ejaculation; members may all be of the
same sex with different sexual problems, or groups may be composed of both
men and women who are experiencing a variety of sexual problems. Group
therapy can be an adjunct to other forms of therapy or the prime mode of
treatment. Groups organized to treat a particular dysfunction are usually
behavioral in approach.
Groups composed of married couples with sexual dysfunctions are also
useful. A group provides the opportunity to gather accurate information,
offers consensual validation of individual preferences, and enhances selfesteem and self-acceptance. Techniques, such as role-playing and
psychodrama, may be used in treatment. Such groups are not indicated for
couples when one partner is uncooperative, when a patient has a severe
depressive disorder or psychosis, when a patient finds explicit sexual
audiovisual material repugnant, or when a patient fears or dislikes groups.
HYPNOTHERAPY. Hypnotherapists focus specifically on the anxiety-producing

situation—that is, the sexual interaction that results in dysfunction. The
successful use of hypnosis enables patients to gain control over the symptom
that has been lowering self-esteem and disrupting psychological homeostasis.
The patient’s cooperation is first obtained and encouraged during a series of
nonhypnotic sessions with the therapist. Those discussions permit the
development of a secure doctor–patient relationship, a sense of physical and
psychological comfort on the part of the patient, and the establishment of
mutually desired treatment goals. During this time, the therapist assesses the
patient’s capacity for the trance experience. The nonhypnotic sessions also
permit the clinician to take a psychiatric history and perform a mental status
examination before beginning hypnotherapy. The focus of treatment is on
symptom removal and attitude alteration. The patient develops alternative
means of dealing with the anxiety-provoking situation, the sexual encounter.
Also, the therapist teaches relaxation techniques for use before sexual
relations. With these methods to alleviate anxiety, the physiologic responses
to sexual stimulation can more readily result in pleasurable excitation and
discharge. The therapy helps to remove psychological impediments to
vaginal lubrication, erection, and orgasms so that normal sexual functioning
ensues. Hypnosis may be added to a basic individual psychotherapy program
to accelerate the effects of psychotherapeutic intervention.


<<<PAGE 1694>>>
ANALYTICALLY ORIENTED SEX THERAPY. Some therapists combine sex therapy

with psychodynamic psychotherapy. The therapy occurs over a more
extended period than usual, which allows learning or relearning of sexual
satisfaction under the realities of patients’ day-to-day lives. The addition of
psychodynamic conceptualizations to behavioral techniques used to treat
sexual dysfunctions allows the treatment of patients with sexual disorders
associated with other psychopathology.
The material and dynamics that emerge in patients in analytically oriented
sex therapy are the same as those in psychoanalytic therapy, such as dreams,
fear of punishment, aggressive feelings, difficulty trusting a partner, fear of
intimacy, oedipal feelings, and fear of genital mutilation. The combined
approach of analytically oriented sex therapy is used by the general
psychiatrist, who carefully judges the optimal timing of sex therapy and the
ability of patients to tolerate the directive approach that focuses on their
sexual difficulties.

PARAPHILIC DISORDERS
Paraphilias or perversions are sexual stimuli or acts that are deviations from
normal sexual behaviors but are necessary for some persons to experience
arousal and orgasm. DSM-5 only considers this a disorder when a person has
acted on the fantasy or impulse, or if the fantasies or impulses lead to
significant distress. Individuals with paraphilic interests can experience
sexual pleasure, but they do not respond to stimuli that are typically
considered erotic. The paraphiliac person’s sexuality is mainly restricted to
specific deviant stimuli or acts. Persons who occasionally experiment with
paraphilic behavior (e.g., infrequent episode of bondage or dressing in
costumes), but can respond to more typical erotic stimuli, do not have
paraphilic disorders.
Paraphilic disorders can range from nearly normal behavior to behavior
that is destructive or hurtful only to a person’s self or to a person’s self and
partner, and finally to behavior that is deemed destructive or threatening to
the community at large. DSM-5 lists pedophilia, frotteurism, voyeurism,
exhibitionism, sexual sadism, sexual masochism, fetishism, and transvestism
with explicit diagnostic criteria because of their threat to others or because
they are relatively common paraphilias. Many other paraphilias exist.


<<<PAGE 1695>>>
A particular fantasy with its unconscious and conscious components is the
pathognomonic element of the paraphilia, with sexual arousal and orgasm
being associated phenomena that reinforce the fantasy or impulse. The
influence of these fantasies and their behavioral manifestations often extend
beyond the sexual sphere to pervade people’s lives.
The primary functions of human sexual behavior are to assist in bonding,
to create mutual pleasure in cooperation with a partner, to express and
enhance love between two persons, and to procreate. Paraphilic disorders
entail divergent behaviors in that those acts involve aggression, victimization,
and extreme one-sidedness. The behaviors exclude or harm others and disrupt
the potential for bonding between persons. Moreover, paraphilic sexual
scripts often serve other vital psychic functions. They may assuage anxiety,
bind aggression, or stabilize identity.
The Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis
In DSM-5, the criteria for paraphilic disorder require the patient to experience
intense and recurrent arousal from their deviant fantasy for at least 6 months
and to either act on the paraphilic impulse or experience significant distress
as a result of the impulse. The fantasy distressing the patient contains unusual
sexual material that is relatively fixed and shows only minor variations.
Arousal and orgasm depend on the mental elaboration, if not the behavioral
playing out of the fantasy. Sexual activity is ritualized or stereotyped and
makes use of degraded, reduced, or dehumanized objects.
Exhibitionism
Exhibitionism is the recurrent urge to expose the genitals to a stranger or an
unsuspecting person. Sexual excitement occurs in anticipation of the
exposure, and orgasm is brought about by masturbation during or after the
event. In almost 100 percent of cases, those with exhibitionism are men
exposing themselves to women. The dynamic of men with exhibitionism is to
assert their masculinity by showing their penises and by watching the
victims’ reactions—fright, surprise, and disgust. In other related paraphilias,
the central themes involve derivatives of looking or showing.
A substance-abusing professional was finally able to attain sobriety at age


<<<PAGE 1696>>>
33 years. With this accomplishment, he met a woman and got married,
began to work steadily for the first time in his life, and was able to
impregnate his new wife. His preferred sexual activity had been
masturbation in semi-public places. The patient had a strong sense that
his mother had always thought him to be inadequate, did not like to spend
time with him, and constantly made negative comparisons between him
and his “all-boy” younger brother. He recalled several times when his
father had tried to explain his mother’s antipathy: “It is just one of those
things, son: your mother does not seem to like you.” Without substance
abuse, he gave up his exhibitionism, but he quickly developed sexual
incapacity with his wife and became “addicted” to phone sex. (Courtesy
of Stephen B. Levine, M.D.)
Specifiers added to exhibitionistic disorder by DSM-5 differentiate
between arousal from exposing genitals to prepubertal children, to physically
mature individuals, or both (Table 16-15).
Fetishism
In fetishism, the sexual focus is on objects (e.g., shoes, gloves, pantyhose,
and stockings) that are intimately associated with the human body, or on
nongenital body parts. The latter focus is sometimes called partialism. DSM5 applies the diagnosis of fetishistic disorder to partialism and attaches the
following specifiers to fetishistic disorder: body part(s); nonliving parts; other
(Table 16-16). The particular fetish used is linked to someone closely
involved with a patient during childhood and has a quality associated with
this loved, needed, or even traumatizing person. Usually, the disorder begins
by adolescence, although the fetish may begin in childhood. Once
established, the disorder tends to be chronic.
Table 16-15
Exhibitionism

Name

DSM-5

ICD-10

Exhibitionistic Disorder

Exhibitionism


<<<PAGE 1697>>>
Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Sexual
Exposing genitals to stran
arousal/fantasies/urges/behaviors
public,
that result from exposing one’s
often of the opposite se
genitals to unsuspecting
sexual
individuals
excitement/arousal/m
associated

Psychosocial
Impact

Marked distress and/or psychosocial
impairment

Symptom
Specifiers

Sexually aroused by:
exposing genitals to prepubertal
children
exposing genitals to physically
mature individuals
both

Severity
Specifiers

In a controlled environment lives
in institution/other controlled
environment

Course
Specifiers

In full remission: no symptoms or
distress for ≥5 yr

Table 16-16
Fetishism
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Fetishistic Disorder

F65.0 Fetishism

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Sexual
Sexual
arousal/fantasies/urges/behaviors
arousal/gratification
that result from
from nonliving
objects/nongenital body parts
objects


<<<PAGE 1698>>>
Psychosocial
Impact

Marked distress and/or psychosocial
impairment

Exclusions (not Transvestic disorder
result of):
Using genital stimulation devices
Symptom
Specifiers

Body Part(s)
Nonliving object(s)
Other

Severity
Specifiers

In a controlled environment (lives
in institution/other controlled
environment)

Course
Specifiers

In full remission: no symptoms or
distress for ≥5 yr

The patient may direct sexual activity at the fetish itself (e.g., masturbation
with or into a shoe), or may incorporate the fetish into sexual intercourse
(e.g., the demand that high-heeled shoes be worn). The disorder is almost
exclusively found in men. Learning theorists believe that the object was
associated with sexual stimulation at an early age.
A 50-year-old man entered treatment with a chief complaint of erectile
disorder experienced primarily with his wife. He was suffering from a
moderate depression that related to both his marital issues and business
problems. He had no erectile problems with women he picked up in bars
or knew and arranged to meet in bars, partly because where he lived,
smoking was allowed in bars. The woman’s act of smoking a cigarette
was necessary to his sexual arousal. His family history included an
alcoholic mother and an emotionally abusive father who was a chain
smoker. On family car trips, the father would smoke, with all the car
windows up. If the patient complained of feeling nauseous, the father
would tell him to “shut up.” He recalled being very attracted to a Sunday
school teacher who smoked when he was six years old. He first smoked
when he was 13, sneaking and hiding behind his house. His first cigarette
was one he stole from a pack on his mother’s night table.


<<<PAGE 1699>>>
Frotteurism
Frotteurism is usually characterized by a man’s rubbing his penis against the
buttocks or other body parts of a fully clothed woman to achieve orgasm
(Table 16-17). At other times, he may use his hands to rub an unsuspecting
victim. The acts usually occur in crowded places, particularly in subways and
buses. Those with frotteurism are passive and isolated, and frottage is often
their only source of sexual gratification. The expression of aggression in this
paraphilia is readily apparent.
Pedophilia
Pedophilia involves recurrent intense sexual urges toward, or arousal by,
children. Per DSM-5, the child must be under 14 years old, and the patient
must be at least 16 years old and at least five years older than the victims.
Most child molestations involve genital fondling or oral sex. Vaginal or
anal penetration of children infrequently occurs, except in cases of incest.
Although most child victims coming to public attention are girls, this finding
may be a product of the referral process. Offenders report that when they
touch a child, most (60 percent) of the victims are boys. This figure is in
sharp contrast to the figure for nontouching victimization of children, such as
window peeping and exhibitionism; 99 percent of all such cases occur against
girls. DSM-5 includes criteria to specify the genders of the patient’s target,
and Table 16-18 compares the criteria for this disorder.
Of persons with pedophilia, 95 percent are heterosexual, and 50 percent
have consumed alcohol to excess at the time of the incident. Many
perpetrators concomitantly or have previously committed exhibitionism,
voyeurism, or rape.
Incest is related to pedophilia by the frequent selection of an immature
child as a sex object, the subtle or overt element of coercion, and occasionally
the preferential nature of the adult–child liaison.
Table 16-17
Frotteurism
DSM-5

ICD-10


<<<PAGE 1700>>>
Name

Frotteuristic Disorder

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Sexual
Sexual arousal
arousal/fantasies/urges/behaviors
from rubbing
that result from touching/rubbing
against
against a nonconsenting
people in
individual
public
spaces

Psychosocial
Impact

Marked distress and/or psychosocial
impairment

Severity
Specifiers

In a controlled environment (lives
in institution/other controlled
environment)

Course
Specifiers

In full remission: no symptoms or
distress for ≥5 yr

Comments

Other disorders
of sexual
preference
Frotteurism

This category
also
includes
Necrophilia,
in addition to
behaviors
such as
making
obscene
phone calls,
engaging in
sexual
activity with
animals, and


<<<PAGE 1701>>>
use of
strangulation
for sexual
excitement
A 62-year-old married janitor had worked as a fourth-grade school
teacher for 26 years before he transferred school districts, and several
years later mysteriously lost his second job. He was referred for help after
his family discovered that he had repeatedly fondled the genitals of his 4and 6-year-old granddaughters. A father of five who had not had sex with
his wife for 30 years after strenuously objecting to her cigarette smoking,
he was generous, helpful, and cooperative with his children and
grandchildren. Intellectually slow, he preferred comic books and had a
charming manner of playing with young children “like he was one
himself.” By his estimate, he had touched the buttocks and genitals of at
least 300 girl students, thinking only of how they did not know what he
was doing because he was affectionate, and they were too young to
realize what was happening. He loved the anticipation and excitement of
this behavior. His teaching career ended when parents complained to a
principal. The principal discovered that the man had lost his last job for
the same reason. (Courtesy of Stephen B. Levine, M.D.)
Sexual Masochism
Masochism takes its name from the 19th-century novelist Sacher-Masoch,
whose characters derived sexual pleasure from being abused and dominated
by women. According to the DSM-5, persons with sexual masochism have a
recurrent preoccupation with sexual urges and fantasies involving the act of
being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer (Table 16-19).
The diagnosis includes asphyxiophilia or autoerotic asphyxiation as a
subtype. It is the practice of achieving or heightening sexual arousal with
restriction of breathing. Sexual masochistic practices are more common
among men than among women. Persons with sexual masochism may have
had childhood experiences that convinced them that pain is a prerequisite for
sexual pleasure. About 30 percent of those with sexual masochism also have


<<<PAGE 1702>>>
sadistic fantasies. Moral masochism involves a need to suffer but does not
include sexual fantasies.
Table 16-18
Pedophilia
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Pedophilic Disorder

Pedophilia

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Sexual
Sexually
arousal/fantasies/urges/behaviors
preferring
that result from sexual activity
young
with prepubescent children
boys and
Individual must be 16 yr or older at
girls
time of diagnosis, and must also Often
be a minimum of 5 yr older than
preferring
the child of sexual interest
prepubertal
or early
pubertal
age

# Symptoms
Needed

Both of the above

Exclusion

≤16 yr old
Adolescent in relationship with child
aged 12 or 13

Psychosocial
Impact

Marked distress and/or psychosocial
impairment

Symptom
Specifiers

Exclusive type (attracted only to
children)
Nonexclusive type
Sexually attracted to males
Sexually attracted to females


<<<PAGE 1703>>>
Sexually attracted to both males
and females
Limited to incest
Table 16-19
Sexual Masochism
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Sexual Masochism Disorder

Sadomasochism

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Sexual
Preference for
arousal/fantasies/urges/behaviors
sexual
that result from being
activity to
humiliated/hit/bound/made to
include:
suffer
Bondage
Infliction of
pain or
humiliation
(as the
recipient)

Psychosocial
Impact

Marked distress and/or psychosocial
impairment

Symptom
Specifiers

With asphyxiophilia: arousal from
restriction of breathing

Severity
Specifiers

In a controlled environment: lives
in institution/other controlled
environment

Course
Specifiers

In full remission: no symptoms or
distress for ≥5 yr

Comments

ICD combined
masochism


<<<PAGE 1704>>>
and sadism
into one
diagnosis
A 27-year-old woman presented for a job interview. She was
accompanied by a man whom she introduced, saying, “This is my lover.”
When asked about this, the woman said that her companion had ordered
her to bring him and introduce him in that way. She further explained that
she was part of a group that utilized sadomasochistic techniques in their
sexual play.
Sexual Sadism
Sexual sadism is recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the physical and
psychological suffering of another person. The name is from the Marquis de
Sade, an 18th-century French author who wrote novels detailing violent
sexual acts against women, and was himself imprisoned for such acts. A
person must have experienced these feelings for at least 6 months and must
have either acted on sadistic fantasies or experienced significant distress as a
result of these fantasies to receive a diagnosis of sexual sadism disorder
(Table 16-20).
The onset of the disorder is usually before the age of 18 years, and most
persons with sexual sadism are male. Sexual sadism likely derives from early
abusive life experiences. However, there is little data about how the disorder
develops. Sexual sadism is related to rape, although rape is more aptly
considered an expression of power. Some sadistic rapists, however, kill their
victims after having sex (so-called lust murders). In many cases, these
persons have underlying schizophrenia, and they may also suffer from a
dissociative disorder or have a history of head trauma.
Voyeurism
Voyeurism, also known as scopophilia, is the recurrent preoccupation with
fantasies and acts that involve observing unsuspecting persons who are naked
or engaged in grooming or sexual activity (Table 16-21). Masturbation to
orgasm usually accompanies or follows the event. The first voyeuristic act


<<<PAGE 1705>>>
usually occurs during childhood, and the paraphilia is most common in men.
When persons with voyeurism are apprehended, the charge is usually
loitering.
Transvestism
Transvestism, formerly called transvestic fetishism, is described as fantasies
and sexual urges to dress in opposite gender clothing as a means of arousal
and as an adjunct to masturbation or coitus. DSM also has various specifiers
depending on the exact nature of the fantasy, and Table 16-22 compares the
criteria for this disorder.
Table 16-20
Sexual Sadism
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Sexual Sadism Disorder

Sadomasochism

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Sexual
Preference for
arousal/fantasies/urges/behaviors
sexual
that result from inflicting physical
activity to
or psychological
include:
suffering/humiliation on others
Bondage
Infliction of
pain or
humiliation
(as the
provider)

Psychosocial
Impact

Marked distress and/or psychosocial
impairment
or engaging with nonconsenting
person

Severity
Specifiers

In a controlled environment: lives
in institution/other controlled


<<<PAGE 1706>>>
environment
Course
Specifiers

In full remission: no symptoms or
distress for ≥5 yr

Comments

ICD combined
masochism
and sadism
into one
diagnosis

Table 16-21
Voyeurism
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Voyeuristic Disorder

Voyeurism

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Sexual
Experiencing
arousal/fantasies/urges/behaviors
sexual
that result from observing an
pleasure
unaware person as they
from
undress/have sex
watching
unaware
people
engage in:
sex
other intimate
activities
(undressing)

# Symptoms
Needed
Exclusion

≤18 yr old

Psychosocial

Marked distress and or impairment


<<<PAGE 1707>>>
Impact
Symptom
Specifiers
Severity
Specifiers

In a controlled environment: lives
in institution/other controlled
environment

Course
Specifiers

In full remission: no symptoms or
distress for ≥5 yr

Transvestism typically begins in childhood or early adolescence. With
time, some men want to dress and live permanently as women. Very rarely,
women want to dress and live as men. DSM-5 considers this to be a
combination of transvestic disorder and gender dysphoria. Usually, a person
wears more than one article of opposite sex clothing; frequently, this involves
an entire wardrobe. When a man with transvestism cross-dresses, the
appearance of femininity may be striking, although not usually to the degree
found in transsexualism. When not dressed in women’s clothes, men with
transvestism may be hypermasculine in appearance and occupation. Crossdressing can range from solitary, guilt-ridden behaviors to ego-syntonic,
social membership in a subculture.
The overt clinical syndrome of transvestism may begin in latency but is
more often seen around pubescence or in adolescence. Frank dressing in
opposite-sex clothing usually does not begin until the person is relatively
independent of their parents.
Other Specified Paraphilic Disorder
DSM-5 includes a generalized category for paraphilias that cause distress but
do not fit into one of the previous categories. We describe some examples of
these next.
In some cases, we may not wish to specify the exact paraphilia, such as
when we do not yet have enough information; in these cases, we would
diagnose an unspecified paraphilic disorder.
Telephone and Computer Scatologia. Telephone scatologia involves


<<<PAGE 1708>>>
obscene phone calling to an unsuspecting recipient. Tension and arousal
begin in anticipation of phoning; the recipient of the call listens while the
telephoner (usually male) verbally exposes his preoccupations or induces her
to talk about her sexual activity. The conversation is accompanied by
masturbation.
Persons also use interactive computer networks, sometimes compulsively,
to send obscene messages by electronic mail and to transmit sexually explicit
messages and video images. Because of the anonymity of the users in chat
rooms who use aliases, on-line or computer sex (cybersex) allows some
persons to play the role of the opposite sex (“genderbending”), which
represents an alternative method of expressing transvestic or other fantasies.
A danger of on-line cybersex is that pedophiles often make contact with
children or adolescents who lure children into meeting and then molest them.
Many on-line contacts develop into off-line liaisons. Although some persons
report that the off-line encounters develop into meaningful relationships,
most such meetings are filled with disappointment and disillusionment, as the
fantasized person fails to meet the unconscious expectations of the ideal
partner. In other situations, when adults meet, rape or even homicide may
occur.
Table 16-22
Transvestism
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Transvestic Disorder

Fetishistic
transvestism

Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Sexual
Sexual
arousal/fantasies/urges/behaviors
excitement
that result from cross-dressing
from
wearing
opposite sex
clothes
Desire to


<<<PAGE 1709>>>
remove after
arousal
declines
Psychosocial
Impact

Marked distress and/or impairment

Symptom
Specifiers

With fetishism (sexually aroused by
specific fabrics or garments)
With autogynephilia (sexually
aroused by imagining self as
female)

Severity
Specifiers

In a controlled environment: lives
in institution/other controlled
environment

Course
Specifiers

In full remission: no symptoms or
distress for ≥5 yr

Necrophilia. Necrophilia is an obsession with obtaining sexual gratification
from cadavers. Most persons with this disorder find corpses in morgues, but
some may rob graves or even murder to satisfy their sexual urges. In the few
cases studied, those with necrophilia believed that they were inflicting the
greatest conceivable humiliation on their lifeless victims. Some experts
consider this a type of psychosis.
Partialism. Persons with the disorder of partialism concentrate their sexual
activity on one part of the body to the exclusion of all others. Mouth–genital
contacts—such as cunnilingus (oral contact with a woman’s external
genitals), fellatio (oral contact with the penis), and anilingus (oral contact
with the anus)—is typically associated with foreplay. However, when a
person uses these activities as the sole source of sexual gratification and
cannot have or refuses to have coitus, a paraphilia exists. It is also known as
oralism. As described earlier, transvestism is a type of partialism but differs
in that the focus is not on a sexual organ.
Zoophilia. In zoophilia, persons incorporate animals into arousal fantasies


<<<PAGE 1710>>>
or sexual activities, including intercourse, masturbation, and oral–genital
contact. Zoophilia, as an organized paraphilia, is rare. For many persons,
animals are the primary source of relatedness, so it is not surprising that some
may use a broad variety of domestic animals sensually or sexually.
Sexual relations with animals may occasionally be an outgrowth of
availability or convenience, especially in parts of the world where rigid
convention precludes premarital sexuality and in situations of enforced
isolation. Because masturbation is also available in such situations, however,
a predilection for animal contact is probably present in opportunistic
zoophilia.
Coprophilia, Urophilia, and Klismaphilia. Coprophilia is sexual
pleasure associated with the desire to defecate on a partner, to be defecated
on, or to eat feces (coprophagia). A variant is the compulsive utterance of
obscene words (coprolalia). Urophilia, a form of urethral eroticism, is an
interest in sexual pleasure associated with the desire to urinate on a partner or
to be urinated on. The disorder may be associated with masturbatory
techniques involving the insertion of foreign objects into the urethra for
sexual stimulation. Similarly, klismaphilia is the use of enemas for sexual
stimulation.
Hypoxyphilia. Hypoxyphilia is the desire to achieve an altered state of
consciousness secondary to hypoxia while experiencing orgasm. Persons may
use a drug (e.g., a volatile nitrite or nitrous oxide) to produce hypoxia.
Autoerotic asphyxiation is related and is a form of sexual masochism.
Differential Diagnosis
Clinicians must differentiate a paraphilia from an experimental act that is not
recurrent or compulsive and done for its novelty. Paraphilic activity most
likely begins during adolescence. Some paraphilias (especially the bizarre
types) are associated with other mental disorders, such as schizophrenia.
Brain diseases can also release perverse impulses.
Course and Prognosis
The difficulty in controlling or curing paraphilic disorders rests in the fact


<<<PAGE 1711>>>
that it is hard for people to give up sexual pleasure with no assurance that
alternative approaches will be as sexually gratifying. The prognosis is poor
when it begins at an early age, and when it occurs frequently. Also, a lack of
guilt is a bad predictor of outcome, as is a substance use disorder. The course
and the prognosis are better when patients also engage in regular sexual
activity. It may also be better when patients self-refer than are forced to
present for legal reasons.
Treatment
There are five types of psychiatric interventions used to treat persons with
paraphilic disorder: external control, reduction of sexual drives, treatment of
comorbid conditions (e.g., depression or anxiety), cognitive-behavioral
therapy, and dynamic psychotherapy.
Prison is an external control mechanism for sexual crimes that usually does
not contain a treatment element. When victimization occurs in a family or
work setting, the external control comes from informing supervisors, peers,
or other adult family members of the problem and advising them about
eliminating opportunities for the perpetrator to act on urges.
Drug therapy, including antipsychotic or antidepressant medication, is
indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia or depressive disorders if the
paraphilia is associated with these disorders. Antiandrogens, such as
cyproterone acetate in Europe and medroxyprogesterone acetate (DepoProvera) in the United States, may reduce the drive to behave sexually by
decreasing serum testosterone levels to subnormal concentrations.
Serotonergic agents, such as fluoxetine, have been used with limited success
in some patients with paraphilia.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy can disrupt learned paraphilic patterns and
modify behavior to make it socially acceptable. The interventions include
social skills training, sex education, cognitive restructuring (confronting and
destroying the rationalizations used to support the victimization of others),
and development of victim empathy. The therapist can also teach the patient
imaginal desensitization and relaxation technique. The patient can also learn
what triggers the paraphilic impulse so that they can avoid these stimuli. In
modified aversive behavior rehearsal, the therapist videotapes the
perpetrators acting out their paraphilia with a mannequin. Then the therapist


<<<PAGE 1712>>>
or a peer group may confront the patient with questions about feelings,
thoughts, motives associated with the act and repeatedly try to correct
cognitive distortions and point out the lack of victim empathy to the patient.
Insight-oriented psychotherapy is a long-standing treatment approach.
Patients have the opportunity to understand their dynamics and the events
that caused the paraphilia to develop. In particular, they become aware of the
daily events that cause them to act on their impulses (e.g., a real or fantasized
rejection). Treatment helps them deal more effectively with life stresses and
enhances their capacity to relate to a life partner. Also, psychotherapy allows
patients to regain self-esteem, which in turn allows them to approach a
partner in a more normal sexual manner. Sex therapy is an appropriate
adjunct to the treatment of patients with specific sexual dysfunctions when
they attempt nondeviant sexual activities.
Good treatment predictors include the presence of a single paraphilia,
normal intelligence, the absence of substance abuse, the absence of nonsexual
antisocial personality traits, and the presence of a successful adult attachment.
Paraphilic disorders, however, remain significant treatment challenges even
under these circumstances.
Epidemiology
Paraphilias are rare, but the insistent, repetitive nature of the disorders results
in a high frequency of such acts. Thus, many people are victims of persons
with paraphilic disorders. It may be that the prevalence of paraphilias is much
higher than that found in clinical care, given the large commercial market in
paraphilic pornography and paraphernalia. We do not know how many
consumers of these materials act on their fantasies or cannot respond to
typical erotic stimuli.
Among legally identified cases of paraphilic disorders, pedophilia is most
common. Of all children, 10 to 20 percent have been molested by age 18.
Because the act involves a child, it has gotten more attention than some other
paraphilic disorders. Persons with exhibitionism who publicly display
themselves to young children are also commonly apprehended. Those with
voyeurism may be apprehended, but their risk is not considerable. Of adult
females, 20 percent have been the targets of persons with exhibitionism and
voyeurism. Sexual masochism and sexual sadism are underrepresented in any


<<<PAGE 1713>>>
prevalence estimates. Sexual sadism usually comes to attention only in
sensational cases of rape, brutality, and lust murder. The excretory paraphilic
disorders rarely come to clinical attention, as it usually takes place between
consenting adults or between a sex worker and client. Persons with fetishism
rarely become entangled in the legal system. Those with transvestism may be
arrested occasionally for disturbing the peace or on other misdemeanor
charges if they are men dressed in women’s clothes, but an arrest is more
common among those with gender identity disorders. Zoophilia, as an actual
paraphilic disorder, is rare (Table 16-23).
As usually defined, the paraphilias seem to be mostly male conditions.
Fetishism almost always occurs in men. More than 50 percent of all
paraphilias have their onset before age 18. Patients with paraphilia frequently
have three to five paraphilias, either concurrently or at different times in their
lives. This pattern of occurrence is especially the case with exhibitionism,
fetishism, sexual masochism, sexual sadism, transvestic fetishism,
voyeurism, and zoophilia (see Table 16-23). The occurrence of paraphilic
behavior peaks between ages 15 and 25 and gradually declines. DSM-5
suggests the paraphilia designation be reserved for those ages 18 and older to
avoid pathologizing healthy sexual curiosity and occasional experimentation
in adolescence. In men older than 50, criminal paraphilic acts are rare. Those
that occur are practiced in isolation or with a cooperative partner.
Table 16-23
Frequency of Paraphilic Acts Committed by Patients with
Paraphilia Seeking Outpatient Treatment
Diagnostic
Category

Patients with Paraphilia
Seeking Outpatient
Treatment (%)

Paraphilic Acts per
Patient with
Paraphilia

Pedophilia

45

5

Exhibitionism

25

50

Voyeurism

12

17

Frotteurism

6

30


<<<PAGE 1714>>>
Sexual
masochism

3

36

Transvestic
fetishism

3

25

Sexual sadism

3

3

Fetishism

2

3

Zoophilia

1

2

aMedian number.

Courtesy of Gene G. Abel, M.D.

Etiology
Psychosocial Factors. Many paraphilias can be traced back to childhood
experiences that condition or socialize children into committing a paraphilic
act. The first shared sexual experience can be significant in that regard.
Molestation as a child can predispose a person to accept continued abuse as
an adult or, conversely, to become an abuser of others. Also, early
experiences of abuse that are not explicitly sexual, such as spanking, enemas,
or verbal humiliation, can be sexualized by a child and can form the basis for
a paraphilia. Such experiences can result in the development of an eroticized
child.
A 34-year-old man presented for the treatment of an erectile disorder. He
was frequently unable to obtain an erection sufficient for coitus with his
wife. The problem disappeared whenever she was willing to act out his
bondage fantasy and tie him up with ropes, a scenario he intensely
desired. He explained that he felt free to be sexual when tied up because
it reassured him that he could move vigorously and not hurt the woman.
Also, he gave a history of being tied up “in fun” when he was a child by a
babysitter who would then tickle him until he begged her to stop.
The onset of paraphilic acts can result from persons’ modeling their
behavior on the behavior of others who have carried out paraphilic acts,


<<<PAGE 1715>>>
mimicking sexual behavior depicted in the media, or recalling emotionally
laden events from the past, such as their molestation. Learning theory
indicates that because the fantasizing of paraphilic interests begins at an early
age and because children are likely to hide their fantasies from others (who
might discourage them), the use and misuse of paraphilic fantasies and urges
continue uninhibited until late in life. Only then do persons begin to realize
that such paraphilic interests and urges are inconsistent with societal norms.
By that time, however, the repetitive use of such fantasies has become
ingrained, and sexual thoughts and behaviors have become associated with or
conditioned to paraphilic fantasies.
In the classic psychoanalytic model, persons with a paraphilia have failed
to complete the normal developmental process toward sexual adjustment, but
new psychoanalytic approaches have modified the model. What distinguishes
one paraphilia from another is the method chosen by a person (usually male)
to cope with the anxiety caused by the threat of castration by the father and
separation from the mother. However bizarre its manifestation, the resulting
behavior provides an outlet for the sexual and aggressive drives that would
otherwise channel into normal sexual behavior.
Biologic Factors. Several studies have identified abnormal biologic
findings in persons with paraphilias. None has used random samples of such
persons; instead, they have extensively investigated patients with paraphilia
at large medical centers. Among these patients, those with positive physical
findings included 74 percent with abnormal hormone levels, 27 percent with
hard or soft neurologic signs, 24 percent with chromosomal abnormalities, 9
percent with seizures, 9 percent with dyslexia, 4 percent with abnormal
electroencephalography (EEG) studies, 4 percent with major mental
disorders, and 4 percent with an intellectual disorder. It is not clear whether
these abnormalities are causally related or incidental to the paraphilia.
Psychophysiological tests can measure the penile volumetric size in
response to paraphilic and nonparaphilic stimuli. The procedures may be of
use in diagnosis and treatment but are of questionable diagnostic validity
because some men can suppress their erectile responses.

SEX ADDICTION AND COMPULSIVITY


<<<PAGE 1716>>>
The concept of sex addiction developed over the last two decades to refer to
persons who compulsively seek out sexual experiences and whose behavior
becomes impaired if they are unable to gratify their sexual impulses. This
concept derives from the model of substance addiction or such addictive
behaviors as gambling. Addiction implies psychological dependence,
physical dependence, and the presence of a withdrawal syndrome if the
substance or behavior is not available.
DSM-5 does not contain the diagnosis of sex addiction or compulsive
sexuality, and the concept remains controversial. Nevertheless, the
phenomenon of a person whose life revolves around sex-seeking behavior
and activities, who spends an excessive amount of time in such behavior, and
who often tries to stop such behavior but is unable to do so is well known to
clinicians. Such persons show repeated and increasingly frequent attempts to
have a sexual experience, deprivation of which gives rise to symptoms of
distress. When encountering such a story, this should alert the clinician to
find an underlying cause for the behavior.
Sex addicts cannot control their sexual impulses, which can involve the
entire spectrum of sexual fantasy or behavior. Eventually, the need for sexual
activity increases, and the person’s behavior is mainly motivated by the
persistent desire to experience the sex act. The history usually reveals a longstanding pattern of such behavior, which the person repeatedly has tried to
stop, but without success. Although a patient may have feelings of guilt and
remorse after the act, these feelings do not suffice to prevent its recurrence.
The patient may report that their need to act out is most severe during
stressful periods or when angry, depressed, anxious, or otherwise dysphoric.
Most acts culminate in sexual orgasm. Eventually, the sexual activity
interferes with the person’s social, vocational, or marital life, which begins to
deteriorate. Table 16-24 lists the signs of sexual addiction.
Table 16-24
Signs of Sexual Addiction
1. Out-of-control behavior
2. Severe adverse consequences (medical, legal, interpersonal) due
to sexual behavior


<<<PAGE 1717>>>
3. Persistent pursuit of self-destructive or high-risk sexual behavior
4. Repeated attempts to limit or stop sexual behavior
5. Sexual obsession and fantasy as a primary coping mechanism
6. The need for increasing amounts of sexual activity
7. Severe mood changes related to sexual activity (e.g., depression,
euphoria)
8. Inordinate amount of time spent in obtaining sex, being sexual, or
recovering from sexual experience
9. Interference of sexual behavior in social, occupational, or
recreational activities
Some men who appear to be hypersexual, as manifested by their need to
have many sexual encounters or conquests, use their sexual activities to mask
deep feelings of inferiority, this is sometimes called Don Juanism. Some are
unconsciously attracted to other men, which they deny by compulsive sexual
contact with women. After having sex, most Don Juans are no longer
interested in the woman. The condition is also called satyriasis.
In a woman, a similar condition is called nymphomania. Of the few
scientific studies of the condition, those patients who were studied usually
have had one or more sexual disorders, often including female orgasmic
disorder. The woman often has an intense fear of losing love and, through her
actions, attempts to satisfy her dependence needs rather than gratify her
sexual impulses.
Comorbidity
Many sex addicts have an associated psychiatric disorder. The comorbid
diagnosis may be challenging to recognize, given that the addictive disorder
produces considerable stress and anxiety on its own. Most common are
substance use disorders (up to 80 percent in some studies), which not only
complicates the task of diagnosis, but also complicates treatment.
Treatment


<<<PAGE 1718>>>
Self-help groups based on the 12-step concept used in Alcoholics
Anonymous (AA) have been used successfully with many sex addicts. They
include such groups as Sexaholics Anonymous (SA), Sex and Love Addicts
Anonymous (SLAA), and Sex Addicts Anonymous (SAA). The groups differ
in that some are for men or women, or married persons or couples. All
advocate some abstinence from either the addictive behavior or sex in
general. Should a substance use disorder also be present, the patient often
requires referral to AA or Narcotics Anonymous (NA) as well. Patients may
enter an inpatient treatment unit when they lack sufficient motivation to
control their behavior on an outpatient basis or pose a danger to themselves
or others. Also, severe medical or psychiatric symptoms may require careful
supervision and treatment best carried out in a hospital.
A 42-year-old married businessman with two children was considered a
model of virtue in his community. He was active in his church and on the
boards of several charitable organizations. He was living a secret life,
however, and would lie to his wife, telling her that he was at a board
meeting when he was visiting massage parlors for paid sex. He eventually
was engaging in the behavior four to five times a day, and although he
tried to quit many times, he was unable to do so. He knew that he was
harming himself by putting his reputation and marriage at risk.
The patient presented himself to the psychiatric emergency room,
stating that he would prefer to be dead rather than continue the behavior
described. He was admitted with a diagnosis of major depressive disorder
and started on a daily dose of 20 mg of fluoxetine. He also received 100
mg of medroxyprogesterone intramuscularly once a day. His need to
masturbate diminished markedly and ceased entirely on the third hospital
day, as did his mental preoccupation with sex. His clinicians discontinued
the medroxyprogesterone on the sixth day and discharged him. He
continued to take fluoxetine, enrolled in a local SA group, and entered
individual and couples psychotherapy. His addictive behavior eventually
stopped, he was having satisfactory sexual relations with his wife, and he
was no longer suicidal or depressed.
Pharmacotherapy. Certain medications may be of use in treating sex


<<<PAGE 1719>>>
addiction, however, because of their specific effects on reducing the sex
drive. SSRIs reduce libido in some persons. Compulsive masturbation is an
example of a behavioral pattern that may benefit from such medication.
Medroxyprogesterone acetate diminishes libido in men and, thus, makes it
easier to control sexually addictive behavior.
There is little information on the use of antiandrogens in women to control
hypersexuality; however, they might be of benefit. Antiandrogenic agents
(e.g., cyproterone acetate) are not available in the United States, but in
Europe, they have had varying success. Antiandrogenic medications remain
controversial, and some clinicians see it as chemical castration.
Psychotherapy. Insight-oriented psychotherapy may help patients
understand the dynamics of their behavioral patterns. Supportive
psychotherapy can help repair the interpersonal, social, or occupational
damage that occurs. Cognitive behavioral therapy helps the patient recognize
dysphoric states that precipitate sexual acting out. Marital therapy or couples
therapy can help the patient regain self-esteem. It is also helpful to the
partners who need assistance in understanding the disease and dealing with
their complex reactions to the situation. Finally, psychotherapy may help in
the treatment of any associated psychiatric disorder.

NORMAL SEXUALITY
Sexuality is determined by anatomy, physiology, the culture in which a
person lives, relationships with others, and developmental experiences
throughout the life cycle. It includes the perception of being male or female
and private thoughts and fantasies as well as behavior. To the average person,
sexual attraction to another person and the passion and love that follow are
deeply associated with feelings of intimate happiness.
Healthy sexual behavior brings pleasure to oneself and one’s partner and
involves stimulation of the primary sex organs, including coitus; it is devoid
of inappropriate feelings of guilt or anxiety and is not compulsive. Societal
understanding of what defines normal sexual behavior is inconstant and
varies from era to era, reflecting the cultural mores of the time.
Terms


<<<PAGE 1720>>>
Sexuality and personality cannot be separated as they are related; hence the
term psychosexual, to describe personality development and functioning as
affected by sexuality. The term psychosexual applies to more than sexual
feelings and behavior, and it is not synonymous with libido in the Freudian
sense.
Childhood Sexuality
Before Freud described the effects of childhood experiences on the
personalities of adults, the universality of sexual activity and sexual learning
in children was unrecognized. Most sexual learning experiences in childhood
occur without the parents’ knowledge, but awareness of a child’s sex does
influence parental behavior. Male infants, for instance, tend to be handled
more vigorously, and female infants cuddled more. Fathers spend more time
with their infant sons than with their daughters, and they also tend to be more
aware of their sons’ adolescent concerns than of their daughters’ anxieties.
Boys are more likely than girls to be physically disciplined. A child’s sex
affects parental tolerance for aggression and reinforcement or extinction of
activity and intellectual, aesthetic, and athletic interests.
Observation of children reveals that genital play in infants is part of
healthy development. According to Harry Harlow, interaction with mothers
and peers is necessary for the development of active adult sexual behavior in
monkeys, a finding that has relevance to the socialization of children. During
a critical period in development, infants are especially susceptible to certain
stimuli; later, they may be immune to these stimuli. We do not entirely
understand the detailed relation of critical periods to psychosexual
development; Freud’s stages of psychosexual development—oral, anal,
phallic, latent, and genital—presumably provide a broad framework.
Psychosexual Factors
Sexuality depends on four interrelated psychosexual factors: sexual identity,
gender identity, sexual orientation, and sexual behavior. These factors affect
personality, growth, development, and functioning. Sexuality is something
more than physical sex, coital or noncoital, and something less than all
behaviors directed toward attaining pleasure.


<<<PAGE 1721>>>
Sexual Identity, Gender Identity, and Sexual Orientation
Sexual identity is the pattern of a person’s biologic sexual characteristics:
chromosomes, external genitalia, internal genitalia, hormonal composition,
gonads, and secondary sex characteristics. In healthy development, these
characteristics form a cohesive pattern that leaves a person in no doubt about
his or her sex. Gender identity is a person’s sense of maleness or femaleness.
Sexual identity and gender identity are interactive. Genetic influences and
hormones affect behavior, and the environment affects hormonal production
and gene expression (Table 16-25).
Sexual Identity. Modern embryologic studies have shown that all
mammalian embryos, whether genetically male (XY genotype) or genetically
female (XX genotype), are anatomically female during the early stages of
fetal life. Differentiation of the male from the female results from the action
of fetal androgens; the action begins about the sixth week of embryonic life
and finishes by the end of the third month. Recent research has focused on
the possible roles of critical genes in fetal sexual development. A testis
develops because of SRY and SOX9 action, and an ovary develops in the
absence of such action. DAX1 plays a part in the fetal development of both
sexes, and WNT4 action is needed for the development of the müllerian ducts
in the female fetus. Other studies have explained the effects of fetal hormones
on the masculinization or feminization of the brain. In animals, prenatal
hormonal stimulation of the brain is necessary for male and female
reproductive and copulatory behavior. The fetus is also vulnerable to
exogenously administered androgens during that period. For instance, if a
pregnant woman receives sufficient exogenous androgens, her female fetus
that possesses ovaries can develop external genitalia resembling those of a
male fetus.
In the past, newborns with ambiguous genitalia were assigned their sexual
identity at birth. The theory underlying this action was that parents and child
would feel less confusion and that the child would accept the assigned sex
and more easily develop a stable sense of being male or female. Although
this worked for some children, others developed a gender identity at odds
with their assigned sex. For example, an infant designated female at birth
could instead feel male throughout childhood, and more emphatically at


<<<PAGE 1722>>>
puberty. In some cases, this conflict led to depression and even suicide.
Current practice usually allows the child to develop with the ambiguity,
which permits a sense of gender identity to evolve as the child grows. The
gender identity is then more congruent with the child’s emotional sense of
maleness or femaleness. Ideally, the family receives support from a medical
team composed of a pediatrician, an endocrinologist, and a psychiatrist
throughout this developmental process.
Table 16-25
Classification of Intersexual Disordersa
Syndrome

Description

Virilizing adrenal
hyperplasia
(adrenogenital
syndrome)

Results from excess androgens in fetus
with XX genotype; most common female
intersex disorder; associated with
enlarged clitoris, fused labia, hirsutism
in adolescence

Turner syndrome

Results from absence of second female
sex chromosome (XO); associated with
web neck, dwarfism, cubitus valgus; no
sex hormones produced; infertile

Klinefelter syndrome

Genotype is XXY; male habitus present
with small penis and rudimentary testes
because of low androgen production;
weak libido; usually assigned as male

Androgen insensitivity
Congenital X-linked recessive disorder that
syndrome (testicularresults in inability of tissues to respond
feminizing
to androgens; external genitals look
syndrome)
female and cryptorchid testes present;
in extreme form patient has breasts,
normal external genitals, short blind
vagina, and absence of pubic and
axillary hair


<<<PAGE 1723>>>
Enzymatic defects in XY Congenital interruption in production of
genotype (e.g., 5-αtestosterone that produces ambiguous
reductase deficiency,
genitals and female habitus
17-hydroxy-steroid
deficiency)
Hermaphroditism

True hermaphrodite is rare and
characterized by both testes and ovaries
in same person (may be 46 XX or 46
XY)

Pseudohermaphroditism Usually the result of endocrine or
enzymatic defect (e.g., adrenal
hyperplasia) in persons with normal
chromosomes; female
pseudohermaphrodites have masculinelooking genitals but are XX; male
pseudohermaphrodites have
rudimentary testes and external genitals
and are XY
aIntersexual disorders include a variety of syndromes that produce persons with gross

anatomical or physiologic aspects of the opposite sex.

Gender Identity. In infants with an unambiguous sexual identity, almost
everyone has a firm conviction that “I am male” or “I am female” by 2 to 3
years of age. However, even if maleness and femaleness develop typically,
persons must still develop a sense of masculinity or femininity.
Gender identity, according to Robert Stoller, “connotes psychological
aspects of behavior related to masculinity and femininity.” Stoller considers
gender social and sex biologic: “Most often, the two are relatively congruent,
that is, males tend to be manly and females womanly.” Nevertheless, sex and
gender can develop in conflicting or even opposite ways. Gender identity
results from an almost infinite series of cues derived from experiences with
family members, teachers, friends, and coworkers, and from cultural
phenomena. Physical characteristics derived from a person’s biologic sex—
such as physique, body shape, and physical dimensions—interrelate with an
intricate system of stimuli, including rewards and punishment and parental


<<<PAGE 1724>>>
gender labels, to establish gender identity.
Thus, the formation of gender identity arises from parental and cultural
attitudes, the infant’s external genitalia, and genetic influence, which is
physiologically active by the sixth week of fetal life. Although family,
cultural, and biological influences may complicate the establishment of a
sense of masculinity or femininity, persons usually develop a relatively
secure sense of identification with their biologic sex—a stable gender
identity.
GENDER ROLE. Related to, and in part derived from, gender identity is gender

role behavior. John Money and Anke Ehrhardt described gender role
behavior as all those things that a person says or does to disclose himself or
herself as having the status of boy or man, girl or woman, respectively. A
gender role is not established at birth, but builds gradually through (1)
experiences encountered and transacted through casual and unplanned
learning, (2) explicit instruction and inculcation, and (3) spontaneously
putting two and two together to sometimes make four and sometimes five.
The usual outcome is a congruence of gender identity and gender roles.
Although biologic attributes are significant, the primary factor in achieving
the role appropriate to a person’s sex is learning.
Research on sex differences in children’s behavior reveals more
psychological similarities than differences. Girls, however, are found to be
less susceptible to tantrums after the age of 18 months than are boys, and
boys generally are more physically and verbally aggressive than are girls
from age two onward. Little girls and little boys are similarly active, but boys
are more easily stimulated to sudden bursts of activity when they are in
groups. Some researchers speculate that, although aggression is a learned
behavior, male hormones may have sensitized boys’ neural organizations to
absorb these lessons more readily than do girls.
Persons’ gender roles can seem to be opposed to their gender identities.
They may identify with their sex and yet adopt the dress, hairstyle, or other
characteristics of the opposite sex. Alternatively, they may identify with the
opposite sex and yet for expediency adopt many behavioral characteristics of
their sex. A further discussion of gender issues appears in Chapter 17.
Sexual Orientation. Sexual orientation describes the object of a person’s


<<<PAGE 1725>>>
sexual impulses: opposite sex, same-sex, or both sexes. A group of people
have defined themselves as “asexual” and assert this as a positive identity.
Some researchers believe this lack of attraction to any object is a
manifestation of a desire disorder. Other people wish not to define their
sexual orientation at all and avoid labels. Still, others describe themselves as
polysexual or pansexual.
The Biology of Sexual Behavior
The Brain
CORTEX. The cortex is involved both in controlling sexual impulses and in

processing sexual stimuli that may lead to sexual activity. In studies of young
men, some areas of the brain are more active during sexual stimulation than
others. These include the orbitofrontal cortex, which is involved in emotions;
the left anterior cingulate cortex, which is involved in hormone control and
sexual arousal; and the right caudate nucleus, whose activity is a factor in
whether sexual activity follows arousal.
LIMBIC SYSTEM. In all mammals, the limbic system is directly involved with

elements of sexual functioning. Chemical or electrical stimulation of the
lower part of the septum and the contiguous preoptic area, the fimbria of the
hippocampus, the mammillary bodies, and the anterior thalamic nuclei have
all elicited penile erections.
Studies of the brain in women have revealed that those areas activated by
emotions of fear or anxiety are notably quiescent when the woman
experiences an orgasm.
BRAINSTEM. Brainstem sites exert inhibitory and excitatory control over spinal

sexual reflexes. The nucleus paragigantocellularis projects directly to pelvic
efferent neurons in the lumbosacral spinal cord, apparently causing them to
secrete serotonin, which is known to inhibit orgasms. The lumbosacral cord
also receives projections from other serotonergic nuclei in the brainstem.
BRAIN NEUROTRANSMITTERS. Many neurotransmitters, including dopamine,

epinephrine, norepinephrine, and serotonin, are produced in the brain and
affect sexual function. For example, an increase in dopamine likely increases


<<<PAGE 1726>>>
libido. Serotonin, produced in the upper pons and midbrain, exerts an
inhibitory effect on sexual function. Oxytocin is released with orgasm and
may reinforce pleasurable activities.
Spinal Cord. Ultimately, sexual arousal and climax are organized at the
spinal level. Afferents from the pudendal, pelvic, and hypogastric nerves
convey the sensory stimuli related to sexual function. Several separate
experiments suggest that spinal neurons mediate sexual reflexes in the central
gray region of the lumbosacral segments.
Physiologic Responses. Sexual response is a psychophysiological
experience. Both psychological and physical stimuli trigger arousal and an
aroused person experiences both physiologic and emotional tension. With
orgasm, usually, subjective perception of a peak of physical reaction and
release occurs along with a feeling of well-being. Psychosexual development,
psychological attitudes toward sexuality, and attitudes toward one’s sexual
partner are directly involved with, and affect, the physiology of human sexual
response.
Usually, men and women experience a sequence of physiologic responses
to sexual stimulation. In the first detailed description of these responses,
Masters and Johnson observed that the physiologic process involves
increasing levels of vasocongestion and myotonia (tumescence) and the
subsequent release of the vascular activity and muscle tone as a result of
orgasm (detumescence). Tables 16-26 and 16-27 describe the physiologic
male and female sexual response cycles. It is important to remember that the
sequence of responses can overlap and fluctuate. A sexual fantasy or the
desire to have sex frequently precedes the physiologic responses of
excitement, orgasm, and resolution, particularly in the male. Also, a person’s
subjective experiences are as relevant to sexual satisfaction as the objective
physiologic response. Figures 16-1 and 16-2 illustrate several possible
patterns in the phases of the male sexual response and female sexual
response, respectively.
Hormones and Sexual Behavior. In general, substances that increase
dopamine levels in the brain increase desire, whereas substances that
augment serotonin decrease desire. Testosterone increases libido in both men


<<<PAGE 1727>>>
and women, although estrogen is a crucial factor in the lubrication involved
in female arousal and may increase sensitivity in the woman to stimulation.
Recent studies indicate that estrogen is also a factor in the male sexual
response and that a decrease in estrogen in the middle-aged male results in
higher fat accumulation just as it does in women. Progesterone mildly
depresses desire in men and women as do excessive prolactin and cortisol.
Oxytocin is involved in pleasurable sensations during sex and increases in
men and women after orgasm.
Gender Differences in Desire and Erotic Stimuli
Sexual impulses and desire exist in men and women. In measuring desire by
the frequency of spontaneous sexual thoughts, interest in participating in
sexual activity, and alertness to sexual cues, males generally possess a higher
baseline level of desire than do women, which may be biologically
determined. Motivations for having sex, other than desire, exist in both men
and women but seem to be more varied and prevalent in women. In women,
they may include a wish to reinforce the pair bond, the need for a feeling of
closeness, a way of preventing the man from straying, or a desire to please
the partner.
Although explicit sexual fantasies are common to both sexes, the external
stimuli for the fantasies frequently differ for men and women. Many men
respond sexually to visual stimuli of nude or barely dressed women. Women
report responding sexually to romantic stories such as a demonstrative hero
whose passion for the heroine impels him toward a lifetime commitment to
her. A complicating factor is that a woman’s subjective sense of arousal is
not always congruent with her physiologic state of arousal. Her sense of
excitement may reflect a readiness to be aroused rather than physiologic
lubrication. Conversely, she may experience signs of arousal, including
vaginal lubrication, without being aware of them. This situation rarely occurs
in men.
Masturbation
Masturbation is usually a standard precursor of object-related sexual
behavior. To paraphrase MS Patton, no other form of sexual activity is more
discussed, more condemned, and more universally practiced. Research by


<<<PAGE 1728>>>
Kinsey into the prevalence of masturbation indicated that nearly all men and
three-fourths of all women masturbate sometime during their lives.
Longitudinal studies of development show that sexual self-stimulation is
common in infancy and childhood. Just as infants learn to explore the
functions of their fingers and mouths, they learn to do the same with their
genitalia. At about 15 to 19 months of age, both sexes begin genital selfstimulation. Pleasurable sensations result from any gentle touch to the genital
region. Those sensations, coupled with the ordinary desire for exploration of
the body, produce a healthy interest in masturbatory pleasure at that time.
Children also develop an increased interest in the genitalia of others—
parents, children, and even animals. As youngsters acquire playmates, the
curiosity about their own and others’ genitalia motivates episodes of
exhibitionism or genital exploration. Such experiences, unless blocked by
guilty fear, contribute to continued pleasure from sexual stimulation.
With the approach of puberty, the upsurge of sex hormones, and the
development of secondary sex characteristics, sexual curiosity intensifies,
and masturbation increases. Adolescents are physically capable of coitus and
orgasm but are usually inhibited by social restraints. The dual and often
conflicting pressures of establishing their sexual identities and controlling
their sexual impulses produce a strong physiologic sexual tension in
teenagers that demands release, and masturbation is a healthy way to reduce
sexual tensions. In general, males learn to masturbate to orgasm earlier than
females and masturbate more frequently. An important emotional difference
between the adolescent and the youngster of earlier years is the presence of
coital fantasies during masturbation in the adolescent. These fantasies are an
essential adjunct to the development of sexual identity; in the comparative
safety of the imagination, the adolescent learns to perform the adult sex role.
This autoerotic activity continues into the young adult years when coitus
becomes more common.
Table 16-26
Male Sexual Response Cyclea
Organ

Excitement
Phase

Orgasmic
Phase

Resolution Phase


<<<PAGE 1729>>>
Lasts several
3–5 s
minutes to
several hours;
heightened
excitement
before orgasm,
30 s to 3 min

10–15 min; if no
orgasm, ½–1
day

Skin

Just before
Well-developed Flush disappears
orgasm: sexual
flush
in reverse order
flush
of appearance;
inconsistently
inconsistently
appears;
appearing film
maculopapular
of perspiration
rash originates
on soles of feet
on abdomen
and palms of
and spreads to
hands
anterior chest
wall, face, and
neck and can
include
shoulders and
forearms

Penis

Erection in 10–30 Ejaculation;
Erection: partial
s caused by
emission
involution in 5–
vasocongestion
phase
10 s with
of erectile
marked by
variable
bodies of
three to four
refractory
corpus
0.8-s
period; full
cavernosa of
contractions
detumescence
shaft; loss of
of vas,
in 5–30 min
erection may
seminal
occur with
vesicles,
introduction of
prostate;
asexual
ejaculation
stimulus, loud
proper


<<<PAGE 1730>>>
noise; with
heightened
excitement,
size of glands
and diameter of
penile shaft
increase further

marked by
0.8-s
contractions
of urethra
and
ejaculatory
spurt of 12–
20 in at age
18,
decreasing
with age to
seepage at
70

Scrotum
and
testes

Tightening and
No change
lifting of scrotal
sac and
elevation of
testes; with
heightened
excitement,
50% increase
in size of testes
over
unstimulated
state and
flattening
against
perineum,
signaling
impending
ejaculation

Decrease to
baseline size
because of loss
of
vasocongestion;
testicular and
scrotal descent
within 5–30 min
after orgasm;
involution may
take several
hours if no
orgasmic
release takes
place

Cowper
glands

2–3 drops of
mucoid fluid
that contain

No change

No change


<<<PAGE 1731>>>
viable sperm
are secreted
during
heightened
excitement
Other

Breasts:
Loss of
Return to baseline
inconsistent
voluntary
state in 5–10
nipple erection
muscular
min
with heightened
control
A refractory period
excitement
Rectum:
follows orgasm,
before orgasm
rhythmical
during which
Myotonia:
contractions
time the male
semispastic
of sphincter
cannot be
contractions of Heart rate: up
rearoused to
facial,
erection and is
to 180 beats
abdominal, and
unresponsive to
a minute
intercostal
stimulation. The
Blood pressure:
muscles
length of the
up to 40–
refractory
Tachycardia: up to
100 mm
period is age
175 beats a
systolic; 20–
and situation
minute
50 mm
dependent
Blood pressure:
diastolic
rise in systolic Respiration: up
20–80 mm; in
to 40
diastolic 10–40
respirations
mm
a minute
Respiration:
increased

aA desire phase consisting of sex fantasies and desire to have sex precedes excitement

phase.
Table by Virginia Sadock, M.D.

Couples in a sexual relationship do not abandon masturbation entirely.
When coitus is unsatisfactory or is unavailable because of illness or the


<<<PAGE 1732>>>
absence of the partner, self-stimulation often serves an adaptive purpose,
combining sensual pleasure and tension release.
Kinsey reported that when women masturbate, most prefer clitoral
stimulation. Masters and Johnson stated that women prefer the shaft of the
clitoris to the glans because the glans is hypersensitive to intense stimulation.
Most men masturbate by vigorously stroking the penile shaft and glans.
Several studies found that in men, orgasm from masturbation raised the
serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) significantly. Male patients scheduled
for PSA tests should be advised not to masturbate (or have coitus) for at least
seven days before the examination.
Moral taboos against masturbation have generated myths that masturbation
causes mental illness or decreased sexual potency. No scientific evidence
supports such claims. Masturbation is a psychopathological symptom only
when it becomes a compulsion beyond a person’s willful control. Then, it is a
symptom of emotional disturbance, not because it is sexual, but because it is
compulsive. Masturbation is probably a universal aspect of psychosexual
development, and, in most cases, it is adaptive.
Coitus
The first coitus is a rite of passage for both men and women. In the United
States, most people have experienced coitus by young adulthood. In a study
of people ages 18 to 59, over 95 percent had included coitus in their last
sexual interaction.
Table 16-27
Female Sexual Response Cyclea
Organ

Excitement
Phase

Orgasmic Phase

Lasts several
3–15 seconds
minutes to
several hours;
heightened
excitement
before orgasm,

Resolution
Phase
10–15 minutes; if
no orgasm,
½–1 day


<<<PAGE 1733>>>
30 s to 3 min
Skin

Just before
Well-developed
orgasm: sexual
flush
flush
inconsistently
appears;
maculopapular
rash originates
on abdomen
and spreads to
anterior chest
wall, face, and
neck; can
include
shoulders and
forearms

Flush disappears
in reverse
order of
appearance;
inconsistently
appearing film
of perspiration
on soles of
feet and
palms of
hands

Breasts

Nipple erection in Breasts may
two-thirds of
become
women,
tremulous
venous
congestion and
areolar
enlargement;
size increases
to one-fourth
over normal

Return to normal
in about 30
min

Clitoris

Enlargement in
No change
diameter of
glans and
shaft; just
before orgasm,
shaft retracts
into prepuce

Shaft returns to
normal
position in 5–
10 s;
detumescence
in 5–30 min; if
no orgasm,
detumescence


<<<PAGE 1734>>>
takes several
hours
Labia
Nullipara: elevate No change
majora
and flatten
against
perineum

Nullipara:
decrease to
normal size in
1–2 min

Multipara:
congestion and
edema

Multipara:
decrease to
normal size in
10–15 min

Labia
Size increased
Contractions of
minora
two to three
proximal labia
times over
minora
normal;
change to pink,
red, deep red
before orgasm

Return to normal
within 5 min

Vagina

Color change to
3–15 contractions Ejaculate forms
dark purple;
of lower third of
seminal pool
vaginal
vagina at
in upper twotransudate
intervals of 0.8
thirds of
appears 10–30
s
vagina;
s after arousal;
congestion
elongation and
disappears in
ballooning of
seconds or, if
vagina; lower
no orgasm, in
third of vagina
20–30 min
constricts
before orgasm

Uterus

Ascends into false Contractions
pelvis; laborthroughout
like
orgasm
contractions

Contractions
cease, and
uterus
descends to


<<<PAGE 1735>>>
begin in
heightened
excitement just
before orgasm
Other

normal
position

Myotonia
Loss of voluntary
Return to
muscular
baseline
A few drops of
control
status in
mucoid
seconds to
secretion from Rectum: rhythmical
minutes
Bartholin
contractions of
glands during
sphincter
Cervix color and
heightened
size return to
Hyperventilation
excitement
normal, and
and tachycardia
cervix
Cervix swells
descends into
slightly and is
seminal pool
passively
elevated with
uterus

aA desire phase consisting of sex fantasies and desire to have sex may precede or overlap

with the excitement phase.
Table by Virginia Sadock, M.D.

The young man experiencing intercourse for the first time is vulnerable in
his pride and self-esteem. Cultural myths still perpetuate the idea that he
should be able to have an erection with no, or little, stimulation, and that he
should have an effortless mastery over the situation, even though it is an act
that he has never before experienced. Cultural pressure on the woman with
her first coitus reflects remaining cultural ambivalence about her loss of
virginity, despite the current era of sexual liberality. This reality is illustrated
by a survey that found only 50 percent of young women use contraception
during their first coitus, and of that 50 percent, an even smaller number use it
consistently after that. Young women with a history of masturbation are more
likely to approach intercourse with positive anticipation and confidence.


<<<PAGE 1736>>>
FIGURE 16-1
Male sexual response. An individual man may experience any of these three
patterns (A, B, or C) during a particular sexual experience. (From Walker JI, ed.
Essentials of Clinical Psychiatry. Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott; 1985:276, with
permission.)

FIGURE 16-2
Female sexual response. An individual woman may experience any of these three
patterns (A, B, or C) during a particular sexual experience. (From Walker JI, ed.
Essentials of Clinical Psychiatry, Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott; 1985:276. with
permission.)

In the last decade, coitus has also been part of the sexual repertoire of
elderly adults, due to the development of sildenafil type drugs, which


<<<PAGE 1737>>>
facilitate erections in men, and hormonally enhanced creams or hormonal
pills, which counteract vaginal atrophy in postmenopausal women. Before the
development of these drugs, many elderly adults enjoyed gratifying sex play,
exclusive of coitus.

References
Arnold P, Agate RJ, Carruth LL. Hormonal and nonhormonal mechanisms of
sexual differentiation of the brain. In: Legato M, ed. Principles of Gender
Specific Medicine. San Diego: Elsevier Science; 2004:84.
Bancroft J. Alfred C. Kinsey and the politics of sex research. Ann Rev Sex
Res. 2004;15:1–39.
Basson R. Clinical practice. Sexual desire and arousal disorders in women. N
Engl J Med. 2006;354(15):1497–1506.
Brotto LA. “Efficacy of psychological interventions for sexual dysfunction:
A systematic review and meta-analysis”: Comment. J Sex Med.
2013;10:1904–1906.
Carnes PJ, Murray R, Charpantier L. Addiction interaction disorder. In:
Combs RH, ed. Handbook of Addictive Disorders: A Practical Guide to
Diagnosis and Treatment. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons; 2004:31.
Ceccarelli P. Perversion on the other side of the couch. Int Forum
Psychoanalysis. 2005;14:176–182.
Charnigo R, Noar SM, Garnett C, Crosby R, Palmgreen P, Zimmerman RS.
Sensation seeking and impulsivity: Combined associations with risky
sexual behavior in a large sample of young adults. J Sex Res.
2013;50(5):480–488.
Chirban JT. Integrative strategies for treating internet sexuality: A case study
of paraphilias. Clin Case Stud. 2006;5:126–141.
Dimen M. Perversion is us? Eight notes. In: Sexuality, Intimacy, Power.
Hillsdale, NJ: The Analytic Press; 2003:257–291.
Drescher J, Stein TS, Byne WM. Homosexuality, gay and lesbian identities
and homosexual behavior. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 1.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:2060.
Egan V, Parmar R. Dirty habits? Online pornography use, personality,
obsessionality, and compulsivity. J Sex Marital Ther. 2013;39(5):394–409.


<<<PAGE 1738>>>
Federman DD. Current concepts: The biology of human sex differences. N
Engl J Med. 2006;354(14):1507.
Fisher WA, Rosen RC, Mollen M, Brock G, Karlin G, Pommerville P,
Goldstein I, Bangerter K, Bandel TJ, Derogatis LR, Sand M. Improving
the sexual quality of life of couples affected by erectile dysfunction: A
double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of vardenafil. J Sex
Med. 2005;2(5):699–708.
Freud S. General theory of the neuroses. In: Strachey J, Freud A, eds.
Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud.
Vol. 16. London: Hogarth Press; 1966:241.
Freud S. Letter to an American mother. Am J Psychiatry. 1951;102:786.
Frohman EM. Sexual dysfunction in neurological disease. Clin
Neuropharmacol. 2002;25(3):126–132.
Fugl-Meyer KS, Oberg K, Lundberg PO, Lewin B, Fugl-Meyer A. On
orgasm, sexual techniques, and erotic perceptions in 18- to 74-year-old
Swedish women. J Sex Med. 2006;3(1):56–68.
Gopalakrishnan R, Jacob KS, Kuruvilla A, Vasantharaj B, John JK. Sildenafil
in the treatment of antipsychotic-induced erectile dysfunction: A
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, flexible-dose, two-way
crossover trial. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(3):494–499.
Gross G, Blundo R. Viagra: Medical technology constructing aging
masculinity. J Sociol Soc Welf. 2005;32(1):85–97.
Hines M. Brain Gender. New York: Oxford University Press; 2004.
Humphreys TP. Cognitive frameworks of virginity and first intercourse. J Sex
Res. 2013;50(7):664–675.
Jacobson L. On the use of “sexual addiction”: The case for “perversion.”
Contemp Psychoanal. 2003;39:107–113.
Kafka MP, Hennen J. Hypersexual desire in males: Are males with
paraphilias different from males with paraphilia-related disorders? Sex
Abuse. 2003;15(4):307–321.
Kafka MP. The monoamine hypothesis for the pathophysiology of paraphilic
disorders: An update. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003;989:86–94.
Kristen PN, Kristen NJ. The mediating role of sexual and nonsexual
communication between relationship and sexual satisfaction in a sample of
college-age heterosexual couples. J Sex Marital Ther. 2013;39(5):410–427
Gutmann P. About confusions of the mind due to abnormal conditions of the


<<<PAGE 1739>>>
sexual organs. In: Löwenstein HJ, ed. History of Psychiatry. SAGE
Publications; 2006;17(1):107–133. ff10.1177/0957154X06061724ff.ffhal00570853f.
Lowenstein L, Mustafa S, Burke Y. Pregnancy and normal sexual function.
Are they compatible? J Sex Med. 2013;10(3):621–622.
Melby T. Asexuality: Is it a sexual orientation? Contemporary Sexuality.
2005;39(11):1.
Nestler EJ, Malenka RC. The addicted brain. Sci Am. 2004;290(3):78–85.
Oliviera C, Nobre PJ. The role of trait-affect, depression, and anxiety in
women with sexual dysfunction: A pilot study. J Sex Marital Ther.
2013;39(5):436–452.
Patrick K, Heywood W, Simpson JM, Pitts MK, Richters J, Shelley JM,
Smith AM. Demographic predictors of consistency and change in
heterosexuals’ attitudes toward homosexual behavior over a two-year
period. J Sex Res. 2013;50(6):611–619.
Patton MS. Twentieth-century attitudes toward masturbation. J Relig Health.
1986;25:291–302.
Pauls RN, Kleeman SD, Karram MM. Female sexual dysfunction: Principles
of diagnosis and therapy. Obstet Gynecol Surv. 2005;60(3):196–205.
Person ES. As the wheel turns: A centennial reflection on Freud’s three
essays on the theory of sexuality. J Am Psychoanal Assoc.
2005;53(4):1257–1282.
Person ES. Paraphilias. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:1965.
Puppo V. Comment on ‘New findings and concepts about the G-spot in
normal and absent vagina: Precautions possibly needed for preservation of
the G-spot and sexuality during surgery’. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2014;
40(2):639–640.
Raymond NC, Coleman E, Miner MH. Psychiatric comorbidity and
compulsive/impulsive traits in compulsive sexual behavior. Compr
Psychiatry. 2003;44(5):370–380.
Reichenpfader U, Gartlehner G, Morgan LC, Greenblatt A, Nussbaumer B,
Hansen RA, Van Noord N, Lux L, Gaynes BN. Sexual dysfunction
associated with second-generation antidepressants in patients with major
depressive disorder: Results from a systematic review with network meta-


<<<PAGE 1740>>>
analysis. Drug Saf. 2014;37(1):19–31.
Rhoden EL, Morgentaler A. Risks of testosterone-replacement therapy and
recommendations deficiency. N Engl J Med. 2004;350(5):482–492.
Richards AK. A fresh look at perversion. J Am Psychoanal Assoc.
2003;51(4):1199–1218.
Rosen R, Shabsigh R, Berber M, Assalian P, Menza M, Rodriguez-Vela L,
Porto R, Bangerter K, Seger M, Montorsi F; Vardenafil Study Site
Investigators. The Vardenafil Study Site Investigators. Efficacy and
tolerability of vardenafil in men with mild depression and erectile
dysfunction: The depression-related improvement with vardenafil for
erectile response study. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(1):79–87.
Sadock VA. Group psychotherapy of psychosexual dysfunctions. In: Kaplan
HI, Sadock BJ, eds. Comprehensive Group Psychotherapy. Baltimore,
MD: Williams & Wilkins; 1983:286.
Sadock VA. Normal human sexuality and sexual dysfunction. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2017.
Sadock VA. Sexual addiction. In: Ruiz P, Strain E, eds. Lowinson and Ruiz’s
Substance Abuse: A Comprehensive Textbook. 5th ed. Lippincott William
& Wilkins; 2011.
Serretti A, Chiesa A. Sexual dysfunction and antidepressants: Identification,
epidemiology, and treatment. Directions in Psychiatry. 2013;33:1–11.
Simkovic M, Stulhofer A, Bozic J. Revisiting the association between
pornography use and risky sexual behaviors: The role of early exposure to
pornography and sexual sensation seeking. J Sex Res. 2013;50(7):633–641.
van Lankveld J. Does “normal” sexual functioning exist? J Sex Res.
2013;50(3–4):205–206.
Woodward TL, Nowak NT, Balon R, Tancer M, Diamond MP. Brain
activation patterns in women with acquired hypoactive desire disorder and
women with normal function: A cross-sectional pilot study. Fertil Steril.
2013;100(4):1068–1076.
Yakeley J, Wood H. Paraphilias and paraphilic disorders: Diagnosis,
assessment and management. Adv Psychiatr Treat. 2014;20:202–213.


<<<PAGE 1741>>>
17
Gender Dysphoria, Gender Identity,
and Related Conditions
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, we discuss gender identity and associated disorders. We start
with gender identity and related conditions.
Gender identity refers to the sense one has of being male or female, which
corresponds most often to the person’s anatomical sex. Persons with gender
dysphoria express their discontent with their assigned sex as a desire to have
the body of the other sex or to be regarded socially as a person of the other
sex.
The term gender dysphoria appears as a diagnosis for the first time in
DSM-5 to refer to those persons with a marked incongruence between their
experienced or expressed gender and the one assigned at birth. It was known
as gender identity disorder in the previous edition of DSM.
In ICD-10, gender identity issues appear under Disorders of Adult
Behavior and Personality in the category Gender Identity Disorders and
include five diagnoses: transsexualism, dual-role transvestic, gender identity
disorder of childhood, other gender identity disorders, and gender identity
disorder, unspecified.
The ICD Working Group on the Classification of Sexual Disorders and
Sexual Health is recommending that for ICD-11, gender identity concerns be
moved from the psychological sections and is considering options that would
list these concerns in a separate chapter, as medical diagnoses, or as part of a
new chapter on sexual health and sexual disorders.
The term transgender is a general term used to refer to those who identify


<<<PAGE 1742>>>
with a gender different from the one they were born with (sometimes referred
to as their assigned gender). Transgender people are a diverse group: those
who want to have the body of another sex known as transsexuals; those who
feel they are between genders, of both genders, or neither gender known as
genderqueer; and those who wear clothing traditionally associated with
another gender, but who maintain a gender identity that is the same as their
birth-assigned gender known as cross-dressers. Contrary to popular belief,
most transgender people do not have genital surgery. Some do not desire it,
and others who do may be unable to afford it. Transgender people may be of
any sexual orientation. For example, a transgender man, assigned female at
birth, may identify as gay (attracted to other men), straight (attracted to
women), or bisexual (attracted to both men and women).

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Children
The DSM-5 defines gender dysphoria in children as incongruence between
expressed and assigned gender, with the most critical criterion being a desire
to be another gender or insistence that one is another gender. By emphasizing
the importance of the child’s self-perception, the creators of the diagnosis
attempt to limit its use to those children who clearly state their wishes to be
another gender, rather than encompassing a broader group of children who
might be considered by adults to be gender nonconforming. However, a
child’s behavior may also lead to this diagnosis. Table 17-1 compares the
approaches to diagnosing gender dysphoria or gender identity disorder.
Many children with gender dysphoria prefer clothing typical of another
gender, preferentially choose playmates of another gender, enjoy games and
toys associated with another gender, and take on the roles of another gender
during play. In gender dysphoria, these social characteristics accompany
other traits that are less likely to be socially influenced, such as a strong
desire to be the other gender, dislike of one’s sexual anatomy, or desire for
primary or secondary sexual characteristics of the desired gender. Children
may express a desire to have different genitals, state that their genitals are
going to change, or urinate in the position (standing or sitting) typical of
another gender. Also, although the caregivers may be distressed, it is the


<<<PAGE 1743>>>
child who must feel clinically significant distress or impairment because of
the condition for there to be a diagnosis.
Adolescents and Adults
Adolescents and adults diagnosed with gender dysphoria must also show an
incongruence between expressed and assigned gender. Also, they must meet
at least two of six criteria, half of which are related to their current (or in the
cases of early adolescents, future) secondary sex characteristics or desired
secondary sex characteristics. Other criteria include a strong desire to be
another gender, be treated as another gender, or the belief that one has the
typical feelings and reactions of another gender (see Table 17-1).
In practice, most adults who present to mental health practitioners with
reports of gender-related concerns are aware of the concept of transgender
identity. They may be interested in therapy to explore gender issues. They
may also make contact to request a letter recommending hormone treatment
or surgery. The cultural trope of being “trapped in the wrong body” does not
apply to all, or even most, people who identify as transgender, so clinicians
should be aware of using open and affirming approaches, taking language
cues from their patients.
The DSM-5 criteria are noticeably open to the idea that some people do not
fit into the traditional gender binary and might desire to be alternative
genders, such as genderqueer. As with children, adolescents and adults
should be personally distressed or impaired by their feelings. The adolescent
and adult criteria also contain a posttransition specifier, which is for people
living in their affirmed genders. For this specifier, they have to have had at
least one medical or surgical procedure or be preparing for one.
Table 17-1
Gender Dysphoria
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

Gender Dysphoria

Gender Identity Disorder
(Several Disorders)

Duration

≥6 mo


<<<PAGE 1744>>>
Symptoms

Conflict between
Transsexualism: desire to
experienced and
live as member of the
assigned gender:
opposite sex
Children
Dual-role transvestism:
temporarily wearing
• Desire or
clothes of opposite sex
insistence of being
to experience the other
another gender
gender, but not desiring
• Dressing like the
sex change.
other gender
Gender identity disorder
• Preference for
of childhood:
other gender roles
• Distress about
during play
assigned sex
• Preference for
• Desire to be other sex
other gender toys,
games, or
• Dressing like other sex
stereotypes
• Disliking one’s
• Rejection of same
assigned sex
gender toys,
games, or
stereotypes
• Preferences for
other gender
playmates
• Dislike of one’s
anatomy
• Desire for physical
characteristics of
other gender
Adults
• Conflict between
experienced
gender and
primary/secondary
sex characteristics
• Desire to remove


<<<PAGE 1745>>>
one’s
primary/secondary
sex characteristics
• Desire for other
another gender’s
primary/secondary
sex characteristics
• Desire to be
another gender
• Feeling one has
the psychological
characteristics of
another gender
# Symptoms
needed

Children: ≥6
Adults: ≥2

Exclusions (not
result of):

Not motivated by sexual
excitement
In children:
Normal variants
(“tomboyishness” or
effeminate behavior)
Ego-dystonic sexual
orientation
Sexual maturation
disorder

Psychosocial
impact

Distress or functional
impairment

Symptom
specifiers

With a disorder of sex
development

Course
specifiers

Post transition: ≥1
procedure/treatment
for gender change

Distress


<<<PAGE 1746>>>
and is living as the
other gender
Other Specified
The category other specified gender dysphoria is for cases where the
presentation causes clinically significant distress or impairment but does not
meet the full criteria for gender dysphoria. When using this diagnosis, the
clinician should specify why the full criteria were not met.
Unspecified
The category unspecified gender dysphoria can be applied when full criteria
are not met, and the clinician chooses not to specify the reason.
A 27-year-old assigned female at birth was referred to a gender identity
clinic reporting having felt different as a child from other girls, although
unable then to identify the source. As a young girl, she enjoyed playing
sports with girls and boys but generally preferred the companionship of
boys. She preferred wearing unisex or boyish clothes and resisted
wearing a skirt or dress. Everyone referred to her as a tomboy. She tried
to hide her breast development by wearing loose-fitting tops and stooping
forward. Menses were embarrassing and poignantly reminded her of her
femaleness, which was becoming increasingly alienating. As sexual
attractions evolved, they were directed exclusively to female partners. In
her late teens, she had one sexual experience with a man, and it was
aversive. She began socializing in lesbian circles, but did not feel
comfortable there and did not consider herself lesbian, but more a man.
For sexual partners, she wanted heterosexual women and wanted to be
considered by the partner as a man. As gender dysphoric feelings became
increasingly pronounced, she consulted transsexual sites on the Internet
and contacted a female-to-male transsexual community support group.
She then set into motion the process of clinical referral. She transitioned
to living as a man, had a name change, and received androgen injections.
The patient’s voice deepened, facial and body hair grew, menses stopped,
and sex drive increased, along with clitoral hypertrophy. After 2 years,


<<<PAGE 1747>>>
the patient underwent a bilateral mastectomy and was on the waitlist for
phalloplasty and hysterectomy–oophorectomy. Employment as a man
continues, as does a 3-year relationship with a female partner. The
partner has a child from a previous marriage. (Adapted from a case of
Richard Green, M.D.)

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Differential Diagnosis of Children
Children diagnosed with gender dysphoria predicted to be more likely than
others to identify as transgender as adults are differentiated from other
gender-nonconforming children by statements about desired anatomical
changes, as well as the persistence of the diagnosis over time. Children
whose gender dysphoria persists over time may make repeated statements
about a desire to be or believe that they are another gender. Other gendernonconforming children may make these statements for short periods but not
repeatedly, or may not make these types of statements, and may instead
prefer clothing and behaviors associated with another gender but show
contentment with their birth-assigned gender.
The diagnosis of gender dysphoria no longer excludes intersex people and
instead is coded with a specifier in the cases where intersex people are gender
dysphoric about their birth-assigned gender. Medical history is important to
distinguish between children with or without intersex conditions. The
standards of care for intersex children have changed dramatically over the
last few decades due to activism by intersex adults and supportive medical
and mental health professionals. Historically, intersex babies were often
subjected to early surgical procedures to create a more standard male or
female appearance. These procedures had the potential to cause sexual
dysfunction, such as inability to orgasm, and permanent sterility. Recently,
these practices have changed considerably so that more intersex people can
make decisions about their bodies later in life.
Differential Diagnosis of Adolescents and Adults
Those who meet the criteria for a diagnosis of gender dysphoria must


<<<PAGE 1748>>>
experience clinical distress or impairment related to their gender identity.
This requirement excludes the diagnosis of transgender or gendernonconforming people who are not clinically distressed by their gender
identities. There are certain mental illnesses in which transgender identity
may be a component of delusional thinking, such as in schizophrenia.
However, this is extremely rare and is different from transgender identity or
gender dysphoria as the gender identity issues diminish with the treatment of
the psychosis. Body dysmorphic disorder may be a differential diagnosis for
some patients who present with a desire to change gendered body parts.
However, with body dysmorphic disorder, the focus is on the body part
looking abnormal, not on gender. Transvestic disorder, discussed in the
previous chapter, is a recurrent and intense sexual arousal from crossdressing that causes clinically significant distress or impairment. This
diagnosis is differentiated from gender dysphoria by the patient’s gender
identity being consistent with their gender assigned at birth, and by sexual
excitement linked to cross-dressing coming to interfere with the person’s life.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Children
Children typically begin to develop a sense of their gender identity around
age 3. At this point, they may develop gendered behaviors and interests, and
some may begin to express a desire to be another gender. It is often around
school age that children are first brought for clinical consultations, as this is
when they begin to interact with classmates closely and to be scrutinized by
adults other than their caregivers. Some adults who identify as transgender
recall that as children, they did not show behaviors consistent with another
gender then. Some say later that they worked hard to appear stereotypical to
their assigned gender, whereas others deny being able to recall gender
identity concerns. Approaching puberty, many children diagnosed with
gender dysphoria begin to show increased levels of anxiety related to
anticipated changes to their bodies.
Children diagnosed with gender dysphoria do not necessarily grow up to
identify as transgender adults. Several studies have demonstrated that more
than half of those diagnosed with gender identity disorder, based on the


<<<PAGE 1749>>>
DSM-IV, later identify with their birth-assigned gender once they reach
adulthood. Those children who do identify as transgender as adults tend to
have more extreme gender dysphoria as children. Many studies show
increased rates of gay and bisexual identity among those who were gender
nonconforming as children.

COMORBIDITY
Comorbidity in Children
Children diagnosed with gender dysphoria show higher rates than other
children of depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, and impulse control
disorders. This high rate is likely related to the stigma faced by these children
related to their gendered behaviors and identities. There are also reports that
those diagnosed with gender dysphoria are more likely than others to fall on
the autism spectrum. Some researchers posit that this may be related to
intrauterine hormone exposure.
Comorbidity in Adults
Adults diagnosed with gender dysphoria show higher rates than other adults
of depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, suicidality, self-harming
behaviors, and substance abuse. The lifetime rate of suicidal thoughts in
transgender people is about 40 percent. The minority stress model predicts
increases in mental illness in groups that are stigmatized, discriminated
against, harassed, and abused at higher rates than others. DSM-5 reports that
persons with late-onset gender dysphoria may have more significant
fluctuations in the extent of their distress and more ambivalence about and
less satisfaction after sex reassignment surgery.

TREATMENT
Children
Treatment of gender identity issues in children typically consists of
individual, family, and group therapy that guides children in exploring their
gendered interests and identities. Some providers practice reparative, or
conversion therapy, which attempts to change a person’s gender identity or


<<<PAGE 1750>>>
sexual orientation. This type of therapy is contrary to position statements by
the American Psychiatric Association and practice guidelines of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, and we consider this
to treatment to be unethical.
Adolescents
As gender-nonconforming children approach puberty, some show intense fear
and preoccupation related to the physical changes they anticipate or are
beginning to experience. In addition to providing psychotherapy, many
clinicians use these adolescents’ reactions to the first signs of puberty as a
compass to determine if puberty-blocking medications should be a
consideration. Puberty-blocking medications are gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH) agonists that can temporarily block the release of hormones
that lead to secondary sex characteristics, giving adolescents and their
families time to reflect on the best options moving forward. GnRH agonists
are used in other populations (e.g., children with precocious puberty) and
thought safe. However, we should consider such steps carefully.
Adults
Treatment of adults who identify as transgender may include psychotherapy
to explore gender issues, hormonal treatment, and surgical treatment.
Hormonal and surgical interventions may decrease depression and improve
the quality of life for such persons.
Mental Health Treatment
The history of poor treatment and medicalization of transgender people by
mental health providers has led to a decreased interest on the part of transidentified people in engaging in mental health care. Many surgeons, and
some physicians who prescribe transition-related hormones, require a letter
from a mental health provider, so for many transgender people, the mental
health worker is a gatekeeper. Many community clinics are now using
informed consent models for hormone treatment, thereby decreasing the need
for mental health providers to play the role of gatekeepers. The World
Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH) Standards of
Care (SOC) for the health of transsexual, transgender, and gender-


<<<PAGE 1751>>>
nonconforming people have recently become more flexible and open to
informed consent models. Some mental health providers are specializing in
working with transgender populations, and this is increasing the rate at which
transgender people engage in psychotherapy.
Hormones
Hormone treatment of transgender men most often involves testosterone,
usually taken by injection every week or every other week. Initial changes
with testosterone therapy include increased acne, muscle mass, and libido, as
well as a cessation of menses, usually within the first few months.
Subsequent and more permanent changes include deepening of the voice,
increased body hair, and enlargement of the clitoris. Monitoring includes
hemoglobin/hematocrit levels, as testosterone can rarely cause an increase in
red blood cell counts that can lead to stroke. Like all steroid hormones, the
liver metabolizes testosterone, so we should obtain routine liver function
tests. Clinicians also want to monitor cholesterol and screen for diabetes, as
testosterone treatment may increase the likelihood of lipid abnormalities and
diabetes. Those beginning hormone treatments are routinely counseled on
fertility, as future fertility may be affected by testosterone.
Transgender women may take estrogen, testosterone-blockers, or
progesterone, often in combination. These hormones can cause softening of
the skin and redistribution of fat, as well as breast growth. Breast
development varies between people but does not generally exceed bra cup
size B. Experts recommend for patients to be on hormones for 18 to 24
months before having breast augmentation, allowing the breasts to develop to
their final size. Sex drive can decrease, as well as erections and ejaculation.
Body hair can decrease somewhat, but often not as much as desired,
prompting many women to obtain electrolysis. There is no change in voice,
as testosterone has permanently altered the vocal cords, and many women
seek out voice coaching. Those on estrogen should avoid cigarette smoking,
as the combination can lead to an increased risk of blood clots. We should
monitor blood pressure, as well as liver function and cholesterol. Also,
providers routinely test prolactin as this hormone can increase with estrogen
therapy, and in rare cases, transgender women may develop prolactinomas.
Reproductive counseling is essential before beginning estrogen treatment


<<<PAGE 1752>>>
because permanent sterility is almost always the outcome.
Surgery
Many fewer people undergo gender-related surgeries than take hormones.
Some people do not desire gender-related surgeries. Others cannot afford
them or are not convinced that they will be satisfied with the currently
available results.
The most common type of surgery for both trans men and trans women is
“top surgery,” or chest surgery. Transgender men may have surgery to
construct a male-contoured chest. Trans-women may have breast
augmentation.
“Bottom surgery” is less common. Transgender men may have a
metoidioplasty, in which the surgeon frees the clitoris from the ligament,
attaching it to the body, and adds tissue increasing its length and girth.
Scrotoplasty, the placement of testicular implants, is another way to create
male-appearing genitalia. Phalloplasty, the creation of a penis, is less
commonly performed because it is expensive, involves multiple procedures,
requires donor skin from another part of the body, and has limited
functionality. Bottom surgery for women is typically vaginoplasty, also
commonly known as Sex Reassignment Surgery (SRS). Here, the surgeon
removes the testicles, reconstructs the penis to form a clitoris, and creates a
vagina. Techniques for vaginoplasty are becoming very good, but the
procedure remains expensive. Because of this, some women, especially those
with less money, may have orchiectomies, where the surgeon removes the
testicles. These can be in-office procedures with a local anesthetic. The
procedure is useful for substantially decreasing the body’s production of
androgens like testosterone. Less widely discussed, but essential to many
women, are facial feminization surgeries that alter the cheeks, forehead, nose,
and lips to create a more feminine facial appearance. The face is often used
by persons to recognize gender in another person, and having facial features
that match the affirmed gender can facilitate social interaction and provide
safety from harassment and violence. Transgender men rarely undergo facial
surgeries, as testosterone typically causes the face to appear more masculine.
Because surgery is inaccessible to many, there are rare cases of selfsurgery, and some people have surgeries performed under unsafe conditions.


<<<PAGE 1753>>>
Women may inject industrial-grade silicone to produce body curves. Silicone
injection done without the supervision of a medical professional can result in
body mutilation, infection, and even silicone blood clots that can lead to
embolism and death.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Children
Most children with gender dysphoria come to clinical attention in early grade
school years. Parents, however, typically report that the cross-gender
behaviors were apparent before 3 years of age. Among a sample of boys
younger than age 12 referred for a range of clinical problems, the reported
desire to be the other sex was 10 percent. For clinically referred girls younger
than age 12, the reported desire to be the other sex was 5 percent. The sex
ratio of children referred for gender dysphoria is 4 to 5 boys for each girl,
which is likely due in part to societal stigma directed toward feminine boys.
The sex ratio is equal in adolescents referred for gender dysphoria.
Researchers have observed that many children considered to have shown
gender-nonconforming behavior do not grow up to be transgender adults;
conversely, many people who later come out as transgender adults report that
they were not identified as gender nonconforming during childhood.
Adults
The estimates of gender dysphoria in adults emanate from European
hormonal/surgical clinics with a prevalence of 1 in 11,000 male- and 1 in
30,000 female-assigned people. DSM-5 reports a prevalence rate ranging
from 0.005 to 0.014 percent for male- and 0.002 to 0.003 percent for femaleassigned people. Most clinical centers report a sex ratio of three to five male
patients for each female patient. Most adults with gender dysphoria report
having felt different from other children of their same sex, although, in
retrospect, many could not identify the source of that difference. Many report
feeling extensively cross-gender identified from the earliest years, with the
cross-gender identification becoming more profound in adolescence and
young adulthood. Overall the prevalence of male to female dysphoria is
higher than female to male dysphoria. An important factor in diagnosis is that


<<<PAGE 1754>>>
there is greater social acceptance of birth-assigned females dressing and
behaving as boys (so-called tomboys) than there is of birth-assigned males
acting as females (so-called sissies). Some researchers speculate that 1 in 500
adults may fall somewhere on a transgender spectrum, based on population
data rather than clinical data.

ETIOLOGY
Biologic Factors
For mammals, the resting state of tissue is initially female. Males only
develop if the body introduces androgen, which is set off by the Y
chromosome. The result is testicular development. Without testes and
androgen, female external genitalia develop. Thus, maleness and masculinity
depend on fetal and perinatal androgens. Sex steroids govern sexual behavior
in lower animals, but this effect diminishes as the evolutionary tree is scaled.
Sex steroids influence the expression of sexual behavior in mature men or
women; that is, testosterone can increase libido and aggressiveness in
women, and estrogen can decrease libido and aggressiveness in men.
However, masculinity, femininity, and gender identity are more a product of
postnatal life events than the prenatal hormonal organization.
Brain organization theory refers to the masculinization or feminization of
the brain in utero. Testosterone affects brain neurons that contribute to the
masculinization of the brain in such areas as the hypothalamus. Whether
testosterone contributes to so-called masculine or feminine behavioral
patterns remains a controversial issue.
Genetic causes of gender dysphoria are under study, but we have not
identified candidate genes, and chromosomal variations are uncommon in
transgender populations. Case reports of identical twins have shown some
pairs that are concordant for transgender issues and others that are not.
A variety of other approaches to understanding gender dysphoria are
underway. These include imaging studies that have shown changes in white
matter tracts, cerebral blood flow, and cerebral activation patterns in patients
with gender dysphoria, but this is preliminary work. An incidental finding is
that transgender persons are likely to be left-handed, the significance of
which is unknown.


<<<PAGE 1755>>>
Psychosocial Factors
Children usually develop a gender identity consonant with their assigned sex.
Many factors influence the formation of gender identity, including children’s
temperament and the interaction of that with parents’ qualities and attitudes.
Culturally acceptable gender roles exist: Society does not expect boys to be
effeminate, or girls to be masculine. There are boys’ games (e.g., cops and
robbers) and girls’ toys (e.g., dolls and dollhouses). Children learn these
roles, although some investigators believe that some boys are
temperamentally delicate and sensitive and that some girls are aggressive and
energized—traits that are stereotypically known in today’s culture as
feminine and masculine, respectively. However, in Western society, we have
a higher tolerance for “nontraditional” gender role behaviors than we once
did.
Sigmund Freud believed that gender identity problems resulted from
conflicts experienced by children within the oedipal triangle. In his view,
both real family events and children’s fantasies fuel these conflicts. Whatever
interferes with a child loving the opposite-sex parent and identifying with the
same-sex parent interferes with healthy gender identity development.
Since Freud, psychoanalysts have postulated that the quality of the
mother–child relationship in the first years of life is paramount in establishing
gender identity. During this period, mothers usually facilitate their children’s
awareness of, and pride in, their gender: they value their children as little
boys and girls. Analysts argue that devaluing, hostile mothering can result in
gender problems. At the same time, the separation–individuation process is
unfolding. When gender problems become associated with separation–
individuation problems, the result can be the use of sexuality to remain in
relationships characterized by shifts between a desperate infantile closeness
and a hostile, devaluing distance.
Some children receive the message that they would be more valued if they
adopted the gender identity of the opposite sex. Rejected or abused children
may act on such a belief. A mother’s death, extended absence, or depression
can influence the process, and a young boy may react by totally identifying
with her—that is, by becoming a mother to replace her.
The father’s role is also vital in the early years, and his presence can help
the separation–individuation process. Without a father, the mother and child


<<<PAGE 1756>>>
may remain overly close. For a girl, the father usually is the prototype of
future love objects; for a boy, the father is a model for male identification.
Learning theory postulates that children may be rewarded or punished by
parents and teachers based on gendered behavior, thus influencing the way
children express their gender identities. Children also learn how to label
people according to gender. Eventually, they also learn that we should not
dictate gender based on surface appearances such as clothing or hairstyle.

References
Adelson SL; American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
(AACAP) Committee on Quality Issues (CQI). Practice parameter on gay,
lesbian, or bisexual sexual orientation, gender nonconformity, and gender
discordance in children and adolescents. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2011;51(9):957–974.
Carmel T, Hopwood R, Dickey L. Mental health concerns. In: EricksonSchroth L, ed. Trans Bodies, Trans Selves. New York: Oxford University
Press; 2014.
Devor AH. Witnessing and mirroring: a fourteen stage model of transsexual
identity formation. JGLP. 2004;8(1/2):41–67.
Drescher J. Queer diagnoses: parallels and contrasts in the history of
homosexuality, gender variance, and the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual.
Arch Sex Behav. 2009;39:427–460.
Drescher J, Cohen-Kettenis P, Winter S. Minding the body: situating gender
identity diagnoses in the ICD-11. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2012;24(6):568–577.
Erickson-Schroth L. Update on the biology of transgender identity. J Gay
Lesbian Ment Health. 2013;17(2):150–174.
Erickson-Schroth L, Gilbert MA, Smith TE. Sex and gender development. In:
Erickson-Schroth L, ed. Trans Bodies, Trans Selves. New York: Oxford
University Press; 2014.
Grant JM, Mottet LA, Tanis J, Harrison J, Herman JL, Keisling M. Injustice
at every turn: a report of the national transgender discrimination survey.
Washington, DC: National Center for Transgender Equality and National
Gay
and
Lesbian
Task
Force;
2011.
Retrieved
from
http://www.thetaskforce.org/reports_and_research/ntds
Green R. Gender identity disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.


<<<PAGE 1757>>>
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009.
Lev AI. Transgender emergence: therapeutic guidelines for working with
gender variant people and their families. Binghamton, New York: The
Haworth Press; 2004.
Meier SC, Labuski CM. The demographics of the transgender population. In:
Baumle AK, ed. International Handbook on the Demography of Sexuality.
New York: Springer; 2013.
Spack NP, Edwards-Leeper L, Feldman HA, Leibowitz S, Mandel F,
Diamond DA, Vance SR. Children and adolescents with gender identity
disorder referred to a pediatric medical center. Pediatrics.
2012;129(3):418–425.
Wallien MSC, Cohen-Kettenis P. Psychosexual outcome of gender dysphoric
children. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2008;47(12):1413–1423.
Wylie K, Barrett J, Besser M, Bouman WP, Bridgman M, Clayton A, Green
R, et al. Good practice guidelines for the assessment and treatment of
adults with gender dysphoria. Sex Relatsh Ther. 2014;29(2):154–214.


<<<PAGE 1758>>>
18
Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and
Conduct Disorders
Six conditions comprise the category of disruptive, impulse-control, and
conduct disorders. They include two that are associated with childhood: (1)
oppositional defiant disorder and (2) conduct disorder; we discuss both in
Chapter 2. DSM-5 includes antisocial personality disorder in both this section
and in the personality disorders section; we will consider that with the
personality disorders (Chapter 19). The remaining three disorders are
intermittent explosive disorder, kleptomania, and pyromania, which are
discussed here as well as other specified and unspecified disorders that relate
to this category.

THE CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Persons suffering from one of these disorders have either an inability to resist
an intense impulse or drive or are tempted to perform a particular act that is
clearly harmful to themselves or others, or both. Before the event, the
individual usually experiences mounting tension and arousal, sometimes—
but not consistently—mingled with conscious anticipatory pleasure.
Completing the action brings immediate gratification and relief. Within a
variable time afterward, the individual experiences a conflation of remorse,
guilt, self-reproach, and dread. Shameful secretiveness about the repeated
impulsive activity frequently expands to permeate the individual’s entire life,
often delaying treatment.
Intermittent Explosive Disorder


<<<PAGE 1759>>>
Patients with intermittent explosive disorder have discrete episodes of losing
control of their aggressive impulses; these episodes can result in severe
assault or the destruction of property. The aggressiveness expressed is grossly
out of proportion to any stressors that may have helped elicit the events. The
episodes appear within minutes or hours and, regardless of duration, remit
spontaneously and quickly. After each episode, patients usually show genuine
regret or guilt, and signs of generalized impulsivity or aggressiveness are
absent between events. Clinicians should not diagnose intermittent explosive
disorder if they can better explain the symptoms with another disorder: one
can imagine a long list of possible disorders, and we discuss some
differentials in that section.
A 36-year-old real estate agent sought assistance for difficulty with his
anger. He was quite competent at his job, although he frequently lost
clients when he became enraged over their indecisiveness. On several
occasions, he became verbally abusive, leading clients to find ways out of
escrow closings. The impulsive aggression also led to the termination of
multiple relationships because sudden angry outbursts contained
demeaning accusations toward his girlfriends. These outbursts frequently
occurred in the absence of any apparent conflict. On numerous occasions,
the patient became so uncontrollably enraged that he threw things across
the room, including books, his desk, and the contents of the refrigerator.
Between episodes, he was a kind and likable individual with many
friends. He enjoyed drinking on the weekends and had a history of two
arrests for driving while intoxicated. On one of these occasions, he
became involved in a verbal altercation with a police officer. He had a
history of drug experimentation in college that included cocaine and
marijuana.
A mental status examination revealed a generally cooperative patient.
However, he became quite defensive when questioned about his anger
and quickly felt accused and blamed by the interviewer for his past
behaviors. He had no significant medical history and no signs of
neurologic problems. He had never been in psychiatric treatment before
this evaluation. He was on no medications. He denied any symptoms of a
mood disorder or any other antisocial activity.


<<<PAGE 1760>>>
Treatment included the use of carbamazepine and a combination of
supportive and cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy. The patient’s angry
outbursts improved as he became aware of the early signs that he was
about to lose control. He learned techniques to avoid confrontation when
such warning signs occurred. (Courtesy of Vivien K. Burt, M.D., Ph.D.
and Jeffrey William Katzman, M.D.)
Kleptomania
Patients with kleptomania (from the Greek kleptēs, “thief”) describe a
recurrent failure to resist the impulse to steal objects, even though they have
no need for the objects—often it has no value to the person, monetary or
otherwise, and the patient could have easily afforded it. For patients with this
disorder, the goal is not to obtain a specific item, it is the act of stealing itself.
After taking the objects, the patient often gives them away, returns them
secretly, or hides them.
As with other impulse-control disorders, patients with kleptomania
experience mounting tension before the act, followed by gratification and
lessening of tension after the action. They may or may not feel guilt or
remorse and might feel depressed about their behavior. The theft is not
planned and does not involve others. Although patients are unlikely to take
something when immediate arrest is probable (e.g., in front of a security
guard at a store), they may not rationally consider the risks involved even
though repeated arrests lead to pain and humiliation. Patients may feel guilt
and anxiety after the theft, but they do not feel anger or vengeance.
Jane was a 42-year-old, highly successful, single executive from a
wealthy background. She called herself a “shop-’til-you-drop type” and
had always been able to afford the expensive designer clothing that she
loved. Since college, her “legit” shopping had been paralleled by
“boosting” cheap panties and brassieres from discount stores. She did not
wear the stolen items; indeed, she considered them “sleazy.” She could
never bring herself to get rid of them either and kept boxes filled with
stolen lingerie in a storage facility.
Jane talked or bought her way out of trouble until her 30s when she


<<<PAGE 1761>>>
was arrested while stealing pantyhose from the same K-Mart for the third
time in as many months. As a condition of probation, she was ordered to
see a psychiatrist. Her attendance was sporadic, and several more thefts
occurred over the next 2 years. She also experienced substantial
depression, which she tried to alleviate by heavy drinking.
Jane finally began taking her problem seriously after yet another arrest
precipitated a suicidal gesture. She started keeping appointments
regularly and consented to take citalopram and naltrexone. She believes
that her participation in an Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) group for highpressured executives has been at least as effective—if not more so—in
controlling her stealing. (Courtesy of Harvey Roy Greenberg, M.D.)
Table 18-1
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Disorder

DSM-5

Diagnostic name Intermittent explosive
disorder

ICD-10
Other habit and
impulse disorders
(intermittent
explosive disorder)

Duration

If symptom 1, average of
2×/wk for 3 mo
If symptom 2, occurs for
at least 1 y

Symptoms

Nonpremeditated,
Persistently repeated
unmotivated verbal or
maladaptive
physical aggression,
behavior
out of proportion to the Failure to resist the
provocation
impulse
1. Not causing damage Preceded by a period
2. Causing damage
of tension
Followed by a period


<<<PAGE 1762>>>
of release
Required number Either 1 or 2 above
of symptoms If symptom 2, has to
occur at least 3 times
within the year

All of above

Psychosocial
Distress or impaired
consequences
functioning (social,
of symptoms
occupational, or other
significant areas)
Or, financial or legal
consequences
Exclusions (not
result of):

Medical illness
Not secondary to
another psychiatric
Substance
syndrome
Other psychiatric disorder
Age <6

Comments

This is diagnosed as a
habit and impulse
disorder, “other,”
and not specifically
defined

Table 18-2
Kleptomania Diagnoses
Kleptomania
Disorder

DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic
name

Kleptomania

Kleptomania

Symptoms

Recurrent stealing
• Failure to resist the
impulse to steal
• Items stolen are not

Persistently repeated
maladaptive behavior
• Failure to resist the
impulse


<<<PAGE 1763>>>
needed
• Preceded by a period
of tension
• Followed by a period
of gratification or
release
Required
number of
symptoms

All of above

Exclusions (not Anger
result of):
Vengeance
Psychosis

• Preceded by a period
of tension
• Followed by a period
of release

All of above

Not secondary to
another psychiatric
syndrome

Conduct disorder
Mania
Antisocial personality
disorder
Comments

Included among the
habit and impulse
disorders

Pyromania
Patients with pyromania repeatedly and deliberately set fires. They feel an
urge to do this and relief or pleasure after they do. They typically are
fascinated with all aspects of fires and may set off false alarms. They often
are attracted to firefighting, may spend time at their local fire department,
volunteer, or even become professional firefighters. Their curiosity is evident,
but they show no remorse and may be indifferent to the consequences for life
or property. Firesetters may gain satisfaction from the resulting destruction;
frequently, they leave apparent clues.

DIAGNOSIS


<<<PAGE 1764>>>
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Table 18-1 lists the diagnostic approaches to intermittent explosive disorder
in DSM-5 and ICD-10. The key feature of this disorder is an aggressive
outburst that has a rapid onset, typically without warning, lasting for less than
30 minutes. There is usually some provocation, although the response is
disproportionate to that provocation. A less severe episode may occur in
between the more severe ones.
As with most psychiatric disorders, the disorders cause significant distress
or impairment in psychosocial functioning and are not better accounted for by
another psychiatric, substance use, or other medical disorder. Relatively
unique to this disorder is an age requirement, in which the individual has to
be above the age of 6 years (or of comparable developmental level).
The diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder should be the result of
history-taking that reveals several episodes of loss of control associated with
aggressive outbursts. One discrete episode does not justify the diagnosis. The
histories typically describe a childhood in an atmosphere of an alcohol use
disorder, violence, and emotional instability. Patients’ work histories are
poor; they report job losses, marital difficulties, and trouble with the law.
Most patients have sought psychiatric help in the past but to no avail.
Anxiety, guilt, and depression usually follow an outburst, but this is not a
constant finding.
Kleptomania
Table 18-2 lists the diagnostic approaches to kleptomania in DSM-5 and
ICD-10. The essential feature of kleptomania is recurrent, intrusive, and
irresistible urges or impulses to steal unneeded objects. The act is
accompanied by tension before the action and pleasure, gratification, or relief
after it. It is not associated with anger or vengeance and is not better
explained by some other disorder, as discussed in the Differential section.
Pyromania
Table 18-3 lists the diagnostic approaches to kleptomania in DSM-5 and
ICD-10. To be diagnosed with pyromania, patients must set fires, not just
desire or imagine them. This action is repetitive, deliberate, and purposeful.
They feel tension or arousal before setting the fires as well as a fascination


<<<PAGE 1765>>>
and attraction to fires. They may make considerable preparations before
starting the fire. After setting the fire, they feel pleasure, gratification or relief
when witnessing or participating in the aftermath of the fire. Perhaps related
to that gratification, they also feel a similar attraction and interest with
firefighting, including the activities and equipment associated with that
profession. Like the discussion of kleptomania, they do not personally
benefit, financially or otherwise, from the fire, hence the distinction between
pyromania and arson, and the disorder is not better explained by another
cause (see the Differential section).
Other Specified or Unspecified Disorders
DSM includes “other specified or unspecified disorders” for most of the
diagnostic categories. This is usually a residual category for disorders that do
not meet the criteria for the major disorders in the class. In this case, this
group includes some unique disorders, some of which stand at the border
between impulsive and compulsive disorders (see the section on Differential
Diagnosis for a discussion of the difference). Many of these, such as Internet
gaming disorder and related, are better considered as addictive disorders and
included in our substance use disorders chapter. This is because even though
not due to substances, the phenomenology, pathology, course, and treatment
approach of disorders such as Internet gaming disorder appears to be very
similar.

OBJECTIVE TESTS FOR THE DISORDERS
Physical Findings and Laboratory Examination
Blood chemistry (liver and thyroid function tests, fasting blood glucose,
electrolytes), urinalysis (including drug toxicology), and syphilis serology
may help rule out other causes of aggression or impulsive behavior. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) may reveal changes in the prefrontal cortex, which
is associated with loss of impulse control.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS FOR THE DISRUPTIVE AND
IMPULSE-CONTROL DISORDERS


<<<PAGE 1766>>>
It can be challenging to distinguish between impulse disorders and
compulsive disorders, and the terms in practice are sometimes vague and
overlapping. Technically, an impulse is a tension state that can exist without
an action; a compulsion is a tension state that always has an action
component. In the case of compulsive disorders (such as obsessivecompulsive disorder [OCD] or trichotillomania), the patients feel
“compelled” to act out their pathologic behavior; they cannot resist the
impulse to do so. Impulses and compulsions also differ by their expected
result: people acting on an impulse expect to receive some pleasure, whereas
compulsions are often ego-dystonic, meaning that a person does not desire or
enjoy the act despite feeling compelled to do it. Even this is complicated, as
in some cases impulse-control disorders also elicit guilt, which disturbs the
sense of pleasure. Similarly, not all compulsions are ego-dystonic; for
example, compulsive video game playing may have a pleasurable component.
Both impulsive and compulsive behaviors are repetitive; however, the
repeated acting out of impulses leads to psychosocial impairment, whereas
compulsive behavior does not always carry that risk.
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
One should only diagnose an intermittent explosive disorder after other
disorders associated with the occasional loss of control of aggressive
impulses have been ruled out as the primary cause. These other disorders
include psychotic disorders, personality change because of a general medical
condition, antisocial or borderline personality disorder, substance intoxication
(e.g., alcohol, barbiturates, hallucinogens, amphetamines), epilepsy, brain
tumors, degenerative diseases, and endocrine disorders.
Table 18-3
Pyromania
Pyromania
Disorder

DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic
name

Pyromania

Pyromania


<<<PAGE 1767>>>
Symptoms

Fire setting
Fire setting
• 1+ incidents
• Multiple acts or
• Deliberate and
attempts
purposeful
• No apparent motive
• Preoccupied by fire,
• Preoccupied by fire,
burning, and related
burning, and related
phenomena
phenomena
• Followed by a period
• Preceded by a
of gratification or
period of tension
release
• Followed by a period
of excitement

Required
All of above
number of
symptoms

All of above

Exclusions
• Conduct disorder
(not result • Mania
of):
• Antisocial personality
disorder
• Psychosis
• Impaired cognition or
judgment
Motivated by:
• Desire for a
perceived financial
or social benefit
• Sociopolitical
ideology
• Need to conceal
criminal activity
• Anger
• Vengeance

• Dissocial personality
disorder
• Alcohol or substance
disorder
• Feigned illness
• Conduct disorder
• Organic mental disorder
• Schizophrenia

Comments

Included among the habit
and impulse disorders


<<<PAGE 1768>>>
The episodic and discrete nature of intermittent explosive disorder
differentiates it from conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder,
which are more pervasive patterns of behavior in which aggression is a
consistent feature, and not just associated with discrete outbursts.
In schizophrenia, patients may display violent behavior in response to
delusions and hallucinations, and they show gross impairments in reality
testing. Hostile patients with mania may be impulsively aggressive, but the
underlying diagnosis is generally apparent from their mental status
examinations and clinical presentations.
Amok is a culture-bound syndrome usually associated with southeastern
Asia (but also seen elsewhere), which consists of episodes of acute violent
behavior for which the person claims amnesia. It is distinguished from
intermittent explosive disorder by a single episode and prominent dissociative
features.
Among medical disorders, certain neurologic disorders can resemble
impulse-control disorders. The best-documented examples are with Parkinson
disease, which can resemble both impulse-control disorders and addictive
disorder.
Kleptomania
Shoplifting has become a national epidemic. Few shoplifters have true
kleptomania; most are teenagers and young adults who steal in pairs or small
groups for “kicks” as well as goods and do not have a psychiatric disorder.
Individuals with an antisocial personality disorder steal for personal gain,
with some degree of premeditation and planning. Often they convince others
to rob for them. Antisocial stealing regularly involves the threat of harm or
actual violence, mainly to elude capture. Guilt and remorse are distinctively
lacking, or patients are patently insincere.
Episodes of theft occasionally occur during psychotic illness, for example,
acute mania, major depression with psychotic features, or schizophrenia.
Psychotic stealing is a product of pathologic elevation or depression of mood
or command hallucinations or delusions.
Acute intoxication with drugs or alcohol may precipitate theft in an
individual with another psychiatric disorder or without significant
psychopathology. Patients with Alzheimer disease or other dementing


<<<PAGE 1769>>>
organic illness may leave a store without paying, owing to forgetfulness
rather than larcenous intent.
Some individuals with an antisocial personality disorder or no disorder
may steal and then claim to suffer from kleptomania. This would be an
example of malingering, not kleptomania, although with sufficiently
intelligent perpetrators it may be challenging to tell the difference.
Pyromania
Clinicians should have little trouble distinguishing between pyromania and
the fascination of many young children with matches, lighters, and fire as
part of the normal investigation of their environments. One should also
separate pyromania from incendiary acts of sabotage carried out by dissident
political extremists or by arsonists.
When a fire setting occurs in conduct disorder and antisocial personality
disorder, it is a deliberate act, not a failure to resist an impulse. Such
individuals may set fires for profit, sabotage, or retaliation. Patients with
schizophrenia or mania may set fires in response to delusions or
hallucinations. Patients with brain dysfunction (e.g., dementia), mental
retardation, or substance intoxication may set fires because of a failure to
appreciate the consequences of the act.

COMORBIDITY
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
More than 80 percent of individuals with intermittent explosive disorder meet
the criteria for another psychiatric disorder. These include other disorders of
impulse-control and substance use, and mood, anxiety, personality (antisocial
and borderline), posttraumatic stress, and eating disorders. Also, individuals
with intermittent explosive disorder have been reported to be at increased risk
of self-harm.
Kleptomania
Patients with kleptomania are said to have high lifetime comorbidity of major
mood disorders (usually, but not exclusively, depressive) and various anxiety
disorders. Associated conditions also include other disorders such as


<<<PAGE 1770>>>
pathologic gambling and compulsive shopping, eating disorders (especially
bulimia nervosa), personality disorders, OCD, and substance use disorders,
especially alcohol use disorder. Individuals with kleptomania are also
reported to have higher rates of suicide.
Pyromania
Pyromania is significantly associated with substance use disorders (especially
alcohol and marijuana use disorders), affective disorders, depressive or
bipolar, and other impulse-control disorders. They are also reported to have
increased suicidal thoughts.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Intermittent explosive disorder may begin at any stage of life but usually
appears between late adolescence and early adulthood. The onset can be
sudden or insidious, and the course can be episodic or chronic. In most cases,
the disorder decreases in severity with the start of middle age, but heightened
organic impairment can lead to frequent and severe episodes. Intermittent
explosive disorder is more common in men than women.
Kleptomania
Kleptomania may begin in childhood, although most children and adolescents
who steal do not become kleptomaniac adults. The onset of the disorder
generally is adolescence. In quiescent cases, loss or disappointment may
precipitate new bouts of the disorder.
The course of the disorder waxes and wanes but tends to be chronic—the
frequency of stealing ranges from less than one to multiple episodes per
month. Most patients with kleptomania steal from retail stores, but they may
also take from family members in their households. People with the disorder
sometimes have bouts of being unable to resist the impulse to steal, followed
by free periods that last for weeks or months. The spontaneous recovery rate
of kleptomania is unknown.
Severe impairment and complications are usually secondary to being
caught, particularly to being arrested. Many persons seem never to have


<<<PAGE 1771>>>
consciously considered the possibility of facing the consequences of their
acts. Often, the disorder in no way impairs a person’s social or work
functioning.
The prognosis with treatment can be good, but few patients come for help
of their own accord.
Pyromania
It should not be too surprising that we know very little about the development
and course of pyromania. Most individuals with pyromania start setting fires
in adolescence or young adulthood. The frequency and intensity of fire
setting may increase over time or may wax and wane. The course of
pyromania is unknown, but smaller studies suggest it may be chronic.
Pyromania occurs more frequently in males with weaker social skills and
learning difficulties.

TREATMENT APPROACH
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
A combined pharmacologic and psychotherapeutic approach has the best
chance of success. Psychotherapy with patients who have an intermittent
explosive disorder is difficult, however, because of their angry outbursts.
Therapists may have problems with countertransference and limit-setting.
Group psychotherapy may be helpful, and family therapy is useful, especially
when the explosive patient is an adolescent or a young adult. A goal of
treatment is to have the patient recognize and verbalize the thoughts or
feelings that precede the explosive outbursts instead of acting them out.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy and contingency management may be helpful.
Anticonvulsants have long been used, with mixed results, in treating
explosive patients. Lithium has been reported useful in generally lessening
aggressive behavior, and carbamazepine, valproate, and phenytoin have been
reported helpful. Some clinicians have also used other anticonvulsants (e.g.,
topiramate). Clinicians occasionally use benzodiazepines but the meds can
cause disinhibition, thus worsening the behaviors.
Antipsychotics and tricyclic drugs have been effective in some cases, but
clinicians must then question whether schizophrenia or a mood disorder is the


<<<PAGE 1772>>>
correct diagnosis. With a likelihood of subcortical seizure-like activity,
medications that lower the seizure threshold can aggravate the situation.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), trazodone, and buspirone are
useful in reducing impulsivity and aggression. Propranolol and other βadrenergic receptor antagonists and calcium channel inhibitors have also been
effective in some cases.
Some neurosurgeons have performed operative treatments for intractable
violence and aggression. No evidence indicates that such treatment is
effective.
Kleptomania
Because true kleptomania is rare, reports of treatment tend to be individual
case descriptions or a short series of cases. Insight-oriented psychotherapy
and psychoanalysis have been successful but depend on patients’
motivations. Those who feel guilt and shame may be helped by insightoriented psychotherapy because of their increased motivation to change their
behavior.
Case reports and case series suggest that cognitive-behavioral therapy may
be helpful. Specific behavior therapies, including systematic desensitization,
aversive conditioning, and a combination of aversive conditioning and altered
social contingencies, have been reported successful, even when motivation
was lacking. SSRIs, such as fluoxetine and fluvoxamine, appear to be
effective in some patients with kleptomania; however, there are also reports
of fluoxetine having no benefit in kleptomania. Case reports indicated
successful treatment with tricyclic drugs, trazodone, lithium, valproate,
topiramate, naltrexone, methylphenidate, and electroconvulsive therapy. In a
controlled trial of antidepressants, escitalopram was found to have no benefit
in treating kleptomania. Though limited by small sample size and open-label
design, high-dose naltrexone was reported to be effective in reducing the urge
to steal in patients with kleptomania.
Pyromania
Little has been written about the treatment of pyromania, and treating
firesetters has been difficult because of their lack of motivation. No single
treatment has been proved effective; as a result, most therapists try various


<<<PAGE 1773>>>
modalities, including behavioral approaches. Among the treatments
attempted, CBT appears to be the most promising.
Because of the recurrent nature of pyromania, any treatment program
should include the supervision of patients to prevent a repeated episode of
fire setting. Incarceration may be the only method of avoiding a recurrence
while their therapy can commence.
We should treat firesetting by children with the utmost seriousness. When
possible we should consider intensive interventions, but as therapeutic and
preventive measures, not as punishment. In the case of children and
adolescents, treatment of pyromania or fire setting should include family
therapy.
Several case reports have been published using SSRIs, lithium, naltrexone,
stimulants, topiramate, valproate, carbamazepine, antiandrogen agents,
clonazepam, and olanzapine. Unfortunately, many have reported no benefit
from pharmacotherapy.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
For all these disorders, we do not know much about their epidemiology, as
they are all underreported. This is understandable given the potential
ramifications of self-reporting what is usually illegal behavior.
The lifetime prevalence rate for intermittent explosive disorder is estimated
to be around 5 to 8 percent, and it appears to be more common in men than in
women. The men are likely to be found in correctional institutions and the
women in psychiatric facilities. In one study, about 2 percent of all persons
admitted to a university hospital psychiatric service had an intermittent
explosive disorder; 80 percent were men.
The prevalence of kleptomania is not known, but it is estimated to be about
0.6 percent. The range varies from 4 to 24 percent of those arrested for
shoplifting. The male-to-female ratio is 1:3 in clinical samples.
No information is available on the prevalence of pyromania, but only a
small percentage of adults who set fires have pyromania. The disorder is
found far more often in men than in women. In the United States, 60 percent
of individuals who set fires are adolescents; most, however, would not meet
the criteria for pyromania.


<<<PAGE 1774>>>
ETIOLOGY
For all of these disorders, the cause is not known. Psychodynamic,
psychosocial, and biologic factors all undoubtedly play an essential role.
Some disruptive and impulse-control disorders may have common underlying
neurobiologic mechanisms. Fatigue, constant stimulation, and psychic trauma
can lower a person’s resistance to control impulses.
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Other factors associated with impulsive aggression include childhood
exposure to violence, maltreatment, and neglect. One study found that there
was significant association between intermittent explosive disorder and
aversive childhood parenting environment comparable to other
psychopathologies. Another study found that physical abuse in childhood was
independently associated with intermittent explosive disorder, with
impulsivity and aggression as the mediators of the relationship between
physical abuse and intermittent explosive disorder. Others have shown that
intermittent explosive disorder is associated with childhood exposure to
interpersonal traumatic events.
Prefrontal cortical dysfunction has been associated with impulsive
aggression. Some investigators suggest that disordered brain physiology,
particularly in the limbic system, is involved in most cases of episodic
violence. Compelling evidence indicates that serotonergic neurons mediate
behavioral inhibition. Decreased serotonergic transmission, which can be
induced by inhibiting serotonin synthesis or by antagonizing its effects,
reduces the impact of punishment as a deterrent to behavior. The restoration
of serotonin activity (e.g., by administering L-tryptophan, a serotonin
precursor) restores the behavioral effect of punishment and may aid the
control of violent tendencies. Low levels of CSF 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid
(5-HIAA) correlate with violent suicide attempts and impulsive aggression in
some studies. High CSF testosterone concentrations are associated with
aggressiveness and interpersonal violence in men. Antiandrogenic agents
have been shown to decrease aggression.
Evidence indicates that intermittent explosive disorder is more common in
first-degree biologic relatives of persons with the disorder than in the general
population. This association does not imply a genetic etiology, as many other


<<<PAGE 1775>>>
familial and social factors are surely influential. A gene–environment
interaction may exist where individuals who have specific serotonin gene
polymorphisms may be more prone to impulsive aggression behavior after
exposure to childhood maltreatment.
Kleptomania
We know little about the etiology of kleptomania. There have been case
reports of kleptomania associated with head trauma, frontal lobe lesions,
cortical atrophy, dementia, and hypoglycemia secondary to insulinoma. There
are implications for subtle white matter pathology based on diffusion tensor
imaging results. Another study found that although, as a group, patients with
kleptomania did not show deficits on neuropsychological testing, the severity
of illness was associated with impairment in executive functioning.
Data are lacking and limited regarding the genetics of kleptomania. A
study found that individuals with kleptomania had more first-degree relatives
with alcohol use disorders compared to controls. Serotonin and dopamine, as
well as the opioid and glutamatergic neurotransmitter systems, may play a
role in kleptomania. Additionally, there are higher rates of OCD in relatives
of individuals with kleptomania compared to the general population.
Pyromania
The etiology of pyromania is also poorly understood. The literature on the
origins of pyromania has suggested factors ranging from temperament to
environmental factors and parental psychopathology. Other authors have
suggested pyromania, and the other impulse-control disorders, may share a
neurobiologic link with substance use disorders. Limited studies suggest that
pyromania may be associated with lower concentration of norepinephrine and
serotonin metabolites 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG) and 5hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA).

References
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association; 2013.


<<<PAGE 1776>>>
Dannon PN. Topiramate for the treatment of kleptomania: a case series and
review of the literature. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2003;26:1.
Grant JE, Kim SW. An open-label study of naltrexone in the treatment of
kleptomania. J Clin Psychiatry. 2002;63:349–356.
Grant JE, Potenza MN. Impulse control disorders: clinical characteristics and
pharmacological management. Ann Clin Psychiatry. 2004;16:27–34.
Greenberg HR. Impulse-control disorders not elsewhere classified. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 8th ed. Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2005:2035.
Hassamal S, Ramesh D, Moeller FG. Chapter 24: Impulse control disorders:
pyromania. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters
Kluwer; 2017:2113–2114.
Hassamal S, Ramesh D, Moeller FG. Chapter 24: Impulse control disorders:
kleptomania. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters
Kluwer; 2017:2114–2115.
Hollander E, Baker BR, Kahn J, Stein DJ. Conceptualizing and assessing
impulse-control disorders. In: Hollander E, Stein DJ, eds. Clinical Manual
of Impulse-Control Disorders. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Publishing; 2006:1–18.
Koran LM, Aboujaoude EN, Gamel NN. Escitalopram treatment of
kleptomania: an open-label trial followed by double-blind discontinuation.
J Clin Psychiatry. 2007;68:422–427.
Kuzma JM, Black DW. Disorders characterized by poor impulse control. Ann
Clin Psychiatry. 2005;17:219–226.
Lyke J. A psychiatric perspective on the variety of impulsive behaviors.
PsycCRITIQUES. 2006;51(12).
Mandy W, Skuse D, Steer C, St Pourcain B, Oliver BR. Oppositionality and
socioemotional competence: interacting risk factors in the development of
childhood conduct disorder symptoms. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2013;52(7):718–727.
Olson SL, Sameroff AJ, Lansford JE, Sexton H, Davis-Kean P, Bates JE,
Pettit GS, Dodge KA. Deconstructing the externalizing spectrum: growth
patterns of overt aggression, covert aggression, oppositional behavior,


<<<PAGE 1777>>>
impulsivity/inattention, and emotion dysregulation between school entry
and early adolescence. Dev Psychopathol. 2013;25(3):817–842.
Ramesh D, Hassamal S, Moeller FG. Chapter 24: Impulse control disorders:
intermittent explosive disorder. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2110–2113.
Reimherr FW, Marchant BK, Olsen JL, Wender PH, Robison RJ.
Oppositional defiant disorder in adults with ADHD. J Attent Dis.
2013;17(2):102–113.
Reist C, Nakamura K, Sagart E, Sokolski KN, Fujimoto KA. Impulsive
aggressive behavior: open-label treatment with citalopram. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2003;64:81.
Stein DJ, Harvey B, Seedat S, Hollander E. Treatment of impulse-control
disorders. In: Hollander E, Stein DJ, eds. Clinical Manual of ImpulseControl Disorders. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing;
2006:309–325.
Voon V, Rizos A, Chakravartty R, Mulholland N, Robinson S, Howell NA,
Harrison N, Vivian G, Chaudhuri KR. Impulse control disorders in
Parkinson’s disease: decreased striatal dopamine transporter levels. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2014;85(2):148–152.
Zhang Z, Huang F, Liu D. Kleptomania: recent advances in symptoms,
etiology and treatment. Curr Med Sci. 2018;38:937–940.


<<<PAGE 1778>>>
19
Personality Disorders
The person-centered approach to understanding personality and its disorders
distinguish psychiatry fundamentally from all other branches of medicine. A
person is a self-aware human being, as C. Robert Cloninger said, not “a
machine-like object that lacks self-awareness.” Personality refers to all of the
characteristics that distinguish a continually developing, self-organizing
human being from a predictable machine-like object. In other words,
personality refers to all the ways someone shapes and adapts in a unique way
to an ever-changing internal and external environment.
Persons with personality disorders are far more likely to refuse psychiatric
help and to deny their problems than persons with anxiety disorders,
depressive disorders, or obsessive-compulsive disorder. In general,
personality disorder symptoms are ego-syntonic (i.e., acceptable to the ego,
as opposed to ego-dystonic) and alloplastic (i.e., adapt by trying to alter the
external environment rather than themselves). Persons with personality
disorders do not feel anxiety about their maladaptive behavior. Because they
do not routinely acknowledge pain from what others perceive as their
symptoms, they often seem disinterested in treatment and impervious to
recovery.

THE CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Persons suffering from one of these disorders have long-standing,
maladaptive behavior traits that are pervasive and apparent in a wide range of
personal and social contexts.
Paranoid Personality Disorder


<<<PAGE 1779>>>
Persons with paranoid personality disorder have long-standing suspiciousness
and mistrust of persons in general. They refuse responsibility for their
feelings and assign responsibility to others. They are often hostile, irritable,
and angry.
Schizoid Personality Disorder
Schizoid personality disorder is characterized by a lifelong pattern of social
withdrawal. Others often see persons with schizoid personality disorder as
eccentric, isolated, or lonely. Their discomfort with human interaction, their
introversion, and their bland, constricted affect are noteworthy.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Persons with schizotypal personality disorder are strikingly odd or strange,
even to laypersons. Magical thinking, peculiar notions, ideas of reference,
illusions, and derealization are commonplace.
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Antisocial personality disorder is an inability to conform to the social norms
that ordinarily govern many aspects of a person’s adolescent and adult
behavior. Although often characterized by continual antisocial or criminal
acts, the disorder is not synonymous with criminality.
Borderline Personality Disorder
Patients with borderline personality disorder stand on the border between
neurosis and psychosis, and they have extraordinarily unstable affect, mood,
behavior, object relations, and self-image.
Histrionic Personality Disorder
Persons with histrionic personality disorder are excitable and emotional and
behave in a colorful, dramatic, extroverted fashion. Accompanying their
flamboyant aspects, however, is often an inability to maintain sincere, longlasting attachments.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder


<<<PAGE 1780>>>
Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder have a heightened sense of
self-importance, lack of empathy, and grandiose feelings of uniqueness.
Underneath, however, their self-esteem is fragile and vulnerable to even
minor criticism.
Avoidant Personality Disorder
Persons with avoidant personality disorder show extreme sensitivity to
rejection and may lead socially withdrawn lives. Although shy, they are not
asocial and show a great desire for companionship, but they need unusually
strong guarantees of uncritical acceptance. We often describe this group as
having an inferiority complex.
Dependent Personality Disorder
Patients with dependent personality disorder subordinate their own needs to
those of others, get others to assume responsibility for significant areas of
their lives, lack self-confidence, and may experience intense discomfort when
alone for more than a brief period.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
Persons with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder typically are
emotionally constricted, orderly, perseverative, stubborn, and indecisive. The
essential feature of the disorder is a pervasive pattern of perfectionism and
inflexibility.
Personality Change due to a General Medical Condition
Personality change due to a general medical condition is a significant
occurrence. ICD-10 includes the category personality and behavioral
disorders due to brain disease, damage, and dysfunction, which includes
organic
personality
disorder,
postencephalitic
syndrome,
and
postconcussional syndrome. Persons with this disorder have a marked change
in personality style and traits from their previous level of functioning.
Patients must show evidence of a causative medical factor antedating the
onset of personality change.


<<<PAGE 1781>>>
DIAGNOSIS
DSM-5’s categorical approach to personality disorders is problematic. It
seems counterintuitive to think that we can boil down disturbed personality
into a few symptoms. Experts in the field have argued for a more dimensional
approach that is grounded in research on temperament and personality, some
of which we later describe. The DSM-5 Personality Disorders Workgroup did
work on such a change, in which the clinician would focus on the
impairments in a person’s personality functioning, using an approach based
on a widely accepted model of personality. Although the authors of DSM-5
did consider such a change, they felt it too radical a leap for clinical use.
Instead, they included the approach that the workgroup recommended in a
later section of the book, “Emerging Measures and Models.” For now, the
categorical approach remains. However, this remains a controversial area of
psychiatry, and many rightly question the validity of this approach.
ICD-10, with its more descriptive approach, is a little less controversial.
However, despite some wording differences, its approach is similar to DSM5’s, although it lists more disorders than does DSM-5.
Table 19-1 compares the general approaches to diagnosing personality
disorders.
DSM-5 divides the disorders into three categories, or clusters: A, B, and C.
Cluster A includes three personality disorders with odd, aloof features
(paranoid, schizoid, and schizotypal). Cluster B includes four personality
disorders with dramatic, impulsive, exploitative, and erratic features
(borderline, antisocial, narcissistic, and histrionic). Cluster C includes three
personality disorders sharing anxious and fearful features (avoidant,
dependent, and obsessive-compulsive). Individuals frequently exhibit traits
that are not limited to a single personality disorder. When a patient meets the
criteria for more than one personality disorder, clinicians should diagnose
each.
Many of the features of various personality disorders can occur during an
episode of another mental disorder. We should only use a diagnosis of
personality disorder when the features are typical of long-term functioning
and are not limited to a discrete episode of another mental disorder. Likewise,
when maladaptive behavior features are due to the direct psychological
effects of another mental disorder, including substance use, a diagnosis of


<<<PAGE 1782>>>
personality disorder is not warranted. However, it is possible to diagnose
personality change due to another medical condition such as temporal lobe
epilepsy; in this case, we must specify the medical condition along with the
associated diagnosis of personality change.
Table 19-1
Personality Disorders
DSM-5

ICD-10

Name

General
Personality
Disorder

Disorders of Adult Personality
and Behavior

Duration

Persistent, long Persistent
duration,
usually since
teens or early
adulthood

Symptoms

The symptoms
Consistent, fixed, and inflexible
comprise a
pattern of behaviors, involving
fixed pattern
• Dysfunctional relationships
of behavior.
• Distorted view of oneself
The domains
include:
• Cognitive and
perceptual
• Mood and
affect
• Interpersonal
• Behavioral

# Symptoms
Needed

2/4 of the
domains
above

Exclusions (not Another mental


<<<PAGE 1783>>>
result of):

disorder
Substance use
Another medical
illness

Psychosocial
Impact

Distress,
functional
impairment

Usually causes distress
Difficulties with social
performance

Specific
Disorders

• Cluster A:
paranoid
personality
disorder,
schizoid
personality
disorder,
schizotypal
personality
disorder
• Cluster B:
antisocial
personality
disorder,
borderline
personality
disorder,
histrionic
personality
disorder,
narcissistic
personality
disorder
• Cluster C:
avoidant
personality
disorder,

• Specific personality
disorder: Paranoid personality
disorder, schizoid personality
disorder, dissocial personality
disorder, emotionally unstable
personality disorder, histrionic
personality disorder,
anankastic personality
disorder, anxious [avoidant]
personality disorder,
dependent personality
disorder, other specific
personality disorder (eccentric,
haltlose, immature,
narcissistic, passiveaggressive, psychoneurotic),
personality disorder
unspecified
• Mixed and other personality
disorders
• Enduring personality
changes: due to brain
damage and disease, after
catastrophic experience, after
psychiatric illness, chronic pain
personality syndrome,
enduring personality change


<<<PAGE 1784>>>
dependent
personality
disorder,
obsessivecompulsive
personality
disorder

unspecified

This compares the general criteria for all the disorders. Please see additional tables for
specific personality disorders.

Table 19-2
Paranoid Personality Disorder: Specific Symptoms
DSM-5
Paranoid Personality Disorder

ICD-10
Paranoid Personality Disorder

Suspiciousness, evident Exclusions (not
• Excessive
Exclusions (no
from the following (≥4):
result of):
sensitivity to
result of):
setbacks or
• Suspicion/persecutory
•
• Psychosis
insults
thoughts
Schizophrenia
• Schizophre
• Suspiciousness
• Doubting others’
• Depression
• Paranoid st
loyalty
with
• Interpreting
psychotic
experiences as
• Distrust, inability to
features
threatening or
confide in others
hostile
• Other
• Interpreting
psychoses
• Distrusting
experiences as
partner’s
threatening or hostile
• Substance
faithfulness
use
• Holds grudges
• May also be
• A medical
• Feeling attacked by
self-important
condition
others
or overall self• Distrusting partner’s
referential
faithfulness
Cluster A: Odd and Eccentric


<<<PAGE 1785>>>
Paranoid Personality Disorder. The hallmarks of paranoid personality
disorder are excessive suspiciousness and distrust of others expressed as a
pervasive tendency to interpret the actions of others as deliberately
demeaning, malevolent, threatening, exploiting, or deceiving. This tendency
begins in early adulthood and appears in a variety of contexts. Almost
invariably, those with the disorder expect to be exploited or harmed by others
in some way. They frequently dispute, without any justification, friends’ or
associates’ loyalty or trustworthiness. Such persons are often pathologically
jealous and, for no reason, question the fidelity of their spouses or sexual
partners. Persons with this disorder externalize their own emotions and use
the defense of projection; they attribute to others the impulses and thoughts
that they cannot accept in themselves. Ideas of reference and logically
defended illusions are common. Table 19-2 compares the different
approaches to diagnosing paranoid personality disorder.
On psychiatric examination, patients with paranoid personality disorder
may be formal in their style and act baffled about having to seek psychiatric
help. Muscular tension, an inability to relax, and a need to scan the
environment for clues may be evident, and the patient’s manner is often
severe and humorless. Although some premises of their arguments may be
false, their speech is goal-directed and logical. Their thought content shows
evidence of projection, prejudice, and occasional ideas of reference.
Schizoid Personality Disorder. Persons with schizoid personality
disorder seem to be cold and aloof; they display a remote reserve and show
no involvement with everyday events and the concerns of others. They
appear quiet, distant, seclusive, and unsociable. They may pursue their own
lives with remarkably little need or longing for emotional ties, and they are
the last to be aware of changes in popular fashion. Table 19-3 compares the
different approaches to diagnosing schizoid personality disorder.
The life histories of such persons reflect solitary interests and success at
noncompetitive, lonely jobs that others find difficult to tolerate. Their sexual
lives may exist exclusively in fantasy, and they may postpone mature
sexuality indefinitely. Persons with schizoid personality disorder usually
reveal a lifelong inability to express anger directly. They often lack close
friends or confidants and are indifferent to praise and criticism. Although
persons with schizoid personality disorder appear self-absorbed and lost in


<<<PAGE 1786>>>
daydreams, they have an average capacity to recognize reality.
On an initial psychiatric examination, patients with schizoid personality
disorder may appear ill at ease. They rarely tolerate eye contact, and
interviewers may surmise that such patients are eager for the interview to
end. Their affect may be constricted, aloof, or inappropriately severe, but
underneath the aloofness, sensitive clinicians can recognize fear. These
patients find it challenging to be lighthearted: their efforts at humor may
seem adolescent and off the mark. Their speech is goal-directed, but they are
likely to give short answers to questions and to avoid spontaneous
conversation. They may occasionally use unusual figures of speech, such as
an odd metaphor, and may be fascinated with inanimate objects or
metaphysical constructs. Their sensorium is intact, their memory functions
well, and their proverb interpretations are abstract.
Table 19-3
Schizoid Personality Disorder: Specific Symptoms
DSM-5
Schizoid Personality Disorder
Detachment from
interpersonal
relationships
(≥4):
• Doesn’t enjoy
relationships
• Prefers doing
things alone
• Not interested
in sexual
relations
• Doesn’t enjoy
activities
• Few if any
friends or

ICD-10
Schizoid Personality Disorder

Exclusions (not
• Retreats from Exclusions (not
result of):
close
result of):
contact or
•
• Asperger
emotional
Schizophrenia
syndrome
encounters
• Depression
• Delusional
• Prefers
with
disorder
fantasy,
psychotic
•
isolation,
features
Schizophrenia
and
• Bipolar
• Schizotypal
introspection
disorder with
disorder
• Difficulty
psychotic
expressing
features
emotions
• Autism
• Difficulty
spectrum
experiencing
disorder
pleasure


<<<PAGE 1787>>>
acquaintances
• Doesn’t care
what others
think of them
• Emotionally
constricted

• Another
psychotic
disorder
• Another
medical
condition

Table 19-4
Schizotypal Personality Disorder: Specific Symptoms
DSM-5
Schizotypal Personality Disorder

Social difficulties
Exclusions (not
and perceptual
result of):
disturbances
• Schizophrenia
(≥5):
• Depression
• Ideas of
with psychotic
reference
features
• Magical/strange
• Bipolar
thinking
disorder with
• Odd perceptions
psychotic
features
• Odd
speech/thoughts • Autism
spectrum
• Odd affect
disorder
• Odd behavior
• Another
• Suspicious or
psychotic
persecutory
disorder
thoughts
• Few if any
friends or
acquaintances
• Socially anxious

ICD-10
Schizotypal Disorder (classified
under the psychotic disorders in
ICD-10, not personality disorders)
• Eccentric
Exclusions (not
behavior
result of):
• Abnormal
• Schizophrenia,
thinking
other
psychiatric
• Cold affect
disorders
• Odd behavior
• Asperger
• Social
syndrome
isolation
• Schizoid
• Perceptual
personality
disturbances:
disorder
Quasipsychotic
episodes
Illusions
Delusionallike ideas
Hallucinations
• Starts
suddenly,
course is


<<<PAGE 1788>>>
(because of
thoughts)

more like that
for
personality
disorders

Schizotypal Personality Disorder. Schizotypal personality disorder is
characterized by pervasive discomfort with and inability to maintain close
relationships, as well as eccentric behavior. These individuals demonstrate
peculiarities of thinking, behavior, and appearance. Taking a history may be
difficult because of the patients’ unusual way of communicating.
Patients with schizotypal personality disorder exhibit disturbed thinking
and communicating. Although frank thought disorder is absent, their speech
may be distinctive or peculiar, may have meaning only to them, and often
needs interpretation. These patients may be superstitious or claim powers of
clairvoyance and may believe that they have other special powers of thought
and insight. Their inner world may contain vivid imaginary relationships and
child-like fears and fantasies, and they may experience perceptual illusions,
as well. Table 19-4 compares the different approaches to diagnosing
schizotypal personality disorder.
Because persons with schizotypal personality disorder have poor
interpersonal relationships and may act inappropriately, they are isolated and
have few, if any, friends. Under stress, patients with schizotypal personality
disorder may decompensate and have psychotic symptoms, but these are
usually brief. Patients with severe cases of the disorder may exhibit
anhedonia and severe depression.
Cluster B: Dramatic
Antisocial Personality Disorder. The hallmarks of antisocial personality
disorder are pervasive disrespect for and infringement on the rights of others.
A person has to be 18 years of age or older, has to have demonstrated this
pattern of behavior since age 15, and must have demonstrated evidence of
conduct disorder before the age of 15 years (conduct disorder involves a
repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in which they violate the
fundamental rights of others or major age-appropriate social rules). Table 19-


<<<PAGE 1789>>>
5 compares the different approaches to diagnosing antisocial personality
disorder.
Patients with antisocial personality disorder can often seem to be normal
and even charming and ingratiating. Their histories, however, reveal many
areas of disordered life functioning. Lying, truancy, running away from
home, thefts, fights, substance abuse, and illegal activities are typical
experiences that patients report as beginning in childhood. These patients
often impress clinicians with the colorful, seductive aspects of their
personalities, but the clinician may also regard them as manipulative and
demanding. They frequently have a heightened sense of reality testing and
often impress observers as having excellent verbal intelligence.
Table 19-5
Antisocial Personality Disorder: Specific Symptoms
DSM-5

ICD-10

Antisocial Personality Disorder

Dissocial Personality Disorder

≥age 18
Exclusions (not
• Disregards social
Exclusions (not
result of):
norms
result of):
Began by age
15
•
• Unconcerned by
• Conduct
Schizophrenia
others’ feelings
disorders
Conduct
disorder
• Bipolar
• Easily
• Emotionally
before age
disorder
frustrated/distressed
unstable
15
personality
• Easily becomes
(diagnosed or
disorder
aggressive
evidence for)
• Blames others
(≥3):
• Disregards
legal and
social
rules/norms
• Lies
• Impulsive
• Irritable or


<<<PAGE 1790>>>
aggressive
• Neglects
safety
(self/others)
• Irresponsible
• No remorse
Persons with antisocial personality disorder are highly representative of the
so-called con men. They are incredibly manipulative and can frequently talk
others into participating in schemes for easy ways to make money or to
achieve fame or notoriety. These schemes may eventually lead the unwary to
financial ruin, social embarrassment, or both. Those with this disorder do not
tell the truth and cannot be trusted to carry out any task or adhere to any
conventional standard of morality. Promiscuity, spousal abuse, child abuse,
and drunk driving are frequent events in their lives. A notable finding is a
lack of remorse for these actions; that is, they appear to lack a conscience.
Patients with antisocial personality disorder can fool even the most
experienced clinicians. In an interview, patients can appear composed and
credible, but beneath the veneer lurks tension, hostility, irritability, and rage.
A stress interview, in which the clinician vigorously confronts the patient
with inconsistencies in their histories, may be necessary to reveal the
pathology. A diagnostic workup should include a thorough neurologic
examination. Because patients often show abnormal EEG results and soft
neurologic signs suggesting minimal brain damage in childhood, these
findings may support the clinical impression.
Borderline Personality Disorder. Persons with borderline personality
disorder almost always appear to be in a state of crisis. Mood swings are
frequent. Patients can be argumentative at one moment, depressed the next,
and later complain of having no feelings. Patients can have short-lived
psychotic episodes rather than full-blown psychotic breaks, and the
symptoms are circumscribed, fleeting, or questionable. The behavior of
patients with borderline personality disorder is highly unpredictable, and their
achievements are rarely at the level of their abilities. The painful nature of
their lives reflects in their repetitive self-destructive acts. Such patients may


<<<PAGE 1791>>>
slash their wrists and perform other self-mutilation to elicit help from others,
to express anger, or to numb themselves to overwhelming affect. Table 19-6
compares the different approaches to diagnosing borderline personality
disorder.
Because they feel both dependent and hostile, persons with this disorder
have tumultuous interpersonal relationships. They can be dependent on those
with whom they are close and, when frustrated, can express enormous anger
toward their intimate friends. Patients with borderline personality disorder
cannot tolerate being alone, and they prefer a frantic search for
companionship, no matter how unsatisfactory, to their own company. To
assuage loneliness, if only for brief periods, they accept a stranger as a friend
or behave promiscuously. They often complain about chronic feelings of
emptiness and boredom and the lack of a consistent sense of identity (identity
diffusion); when pressed, they may complain about how depressed they
usually feel, despite the flurry of other affects.
Functionally, patients with borderline personality disorder distort their
relationships by considering each person to be either all good or all bad. They
see persons as either nurturing attachment figures or as hateful, sadistic
figures who deprive them of security needs and threaten them with
abandonment whenever they feel dependent. As a result of this splitting, the
good person is idealized, and the bad person devalued. Shifts of allegiance
from one person or group to another are frequent. Some clinicians use the
concepts of panphobia, pananxiety, panambivalence, and chaotic sexuality to
delineate these patients’ characteristics.
Projective identification is a defense mechanism that often occurs in
patients with borderline personality disorder. In this primitive defense
mechanism, the patient projects intolerable aspects of themselves onto
another person, inducing them to play the projected role, and the two persons
act in unison. Therapists must be aware of this process so they can act
neutrally toward such patients.
Histrionic Personality Disorder. Persons with histrionic personality
disorder show a high degree of attention-seeking behavior. They tend to
exaggerate their thoughts and feelings and make everything sound more vital
than it is. They display temper tantrums, tears, and accusations when they are
not the center of attention or are not receiving praise or approval. Table 19-7


<<<PAGE 1792>>>
compares the different approaches to diagnosing histrionic personality
disorder.
Seductive behavior is typical in both sexes. Sexual fantasies about persons
with whom patients are involved are common, but patients are inconsistent
about verbalizing these fantasies and may be coy or flirtatious rather than
sexually aggressive. Despite these behaviors, they may have a psychosexual
dysfunction, such as anorgasmia. They may act on their sexual impulses to
reassure themselves that they are attractive to the other sex. Their
relationships tend to be superficial, however, and they can be vain, selfabsorbed, and fickle. Their deep dependence needs make them overly trusting
and gullible.
Table 19-6
Borderline Personality Disorder: Specific Symptoms
DSM-5

ICD-10

Borderline Personality
Disorder

Emotionally Unstable Personality
Disorder

Conflict/impulsivity (≥5):
• Avoids abandonment
• Intense, unstable
relations marked by
splitting
• Unstable self-image
• Self-harm, other
impulsive behaviors
• Suicidal ideation or
behavior
• Labile affect
• Feeling empty inside
• Poor anger
management
• Paranoia/dissociation,
usually due to stress

• Impulsiveness
Exclusions
(not result
• Labile mood
of):
• Outbursts
• Dissocial
• Interpersonal conflict
personality
Two subtypes:
disorder
(1) Impulsive type
(emotional lability and
lack of impulse
control)
(2) Borderline type (poor
self-image, self-worth,
relationships, with
associated self-harm)


<<<PAGE 1793>>>
Table 19-7
Histrionic Personality Disorder: Specific Symptoms
DSM-5

ICD-10

Histrionic Personality Disorder

Histrionic Personality
Disorder

Needing attention, very emotional
(≥5):
• Uncomfortable when not the
center of attention
• Flirtatious, provocatively sexual
• Emotionally labile
• Physically provocative or
flamboyant
• Speech is vague
• Speech is exaggerated/dramatic
• Suggestible
• Overestimates the intimacy of
relationships

• Affect is shallow/labile
• Self-dramatization
• Speech and emotions are
exaggerated
• Suggestible
• Egocentric
• Not concerned with others
• Attention seeking
• Easily offended or hurt

The major defenses of patients with histrionic personality disorder are
repression and dissociation. Accordingly, such patients are unaware of their
true feelings and cannot explain their motivations. Under stress, reality
testing quickly becomes impaired.
In interviews, patients with histrionic personality disorder are generally
cooperative and eager to give a detailed history. Gestures and dramatic
punctuation in their conversations are commonplace; they may make frequent
slips of the tongue, and their language is colorful. Affective display is typical,
but when pressed to acknowledge certain feelings (e.g., anger, sadness, and
sexual wishes), they may respond with surprise, indignation, or denial. The
results of the cognitive examination are usually normal, although they may
show a lack of perseverance on arithmetic or concentration tasks, and the
patients’ forgetfulness of affect-laden material may be astonishing.


<<<PAGE 1794>>>
Narcissistic Personality Disorder. Persons with narcissistic personality
disorder have a grandiose sense of self-importance; they consider themselves
special and expect special treatment. Their sense of entitlement is striking.
They handle criticism poorly and may become enraged when someone dares
to criticize them, or they may appear utterly indifferent to criticism. Persons
with this disorder want their way and are frequently ambitious to achieve
fame and fortune. Their relationships are tenuous, and they can make others
furious by their refusal to obey conventional rules of behavior. Interpersonal
exploitativeness is commonplace. They cannot show empathy, and they feign
sympathy only to achieve their selfish ends. Because of their fragile selfesteem, they are susceptible to depression. Interpersonal difficulties,
occupational problems, rejection, and loss are among the stresses that
narcissists commonly produce by their behavior—stresses they are least able
to handle. Table 19-8 compares the different approaches to diagnosing
narcissistic personality disorder.
Table 19-8
Narcissistic Personality Disorder: Specific Symptoms
DSM-5

ICD-10

Narcissistic Personality
Disorder

Narcissistic Personality

Self-important, lacking empathy for Not described. Listed as an
others (≥5):
“other specific personality
disorder”
• Grandiose
• Preoccupied with fantasies
about success
• Feeling special/unique
• Needing others to admire them
for validation
• Expecting special treatment
• Exploiting others
• Lacking empathy
• Jealous of others’ success,


<<<PAGE 1795>>>
assuming others are jealous of
them
• Arrogance
Cluster C: Anxious
Avoidant Personality Disorder. Hypersensitivity to rejection by others is
the central feature of avoidant personality disorder, and timidity is the
primary personality trait that is displayed. These persons desire the warmth
and security of human companionship but justify their avoidance of
relationships by their fear of rejection. When talking with someone, they
express uncertainty, show a lack of self-confidence, and may speak in a selfeffacing manner. Because they are hypervigilant about rejection, they are
afraid to speak up in public or to make requests of others. They are apt to
misinterpret others’ comments as derogatory or ridiculing. The refusal of any
request leads them to withdraw from others and to feel hurt. Table 19-9
compares the different approaches to diagnosing avoidant personality
disorder.
In the vocational sphere, patients with avoidant personality disorder often
take jobs on the sidelines. They rarely attain much personal advancement or
exercise much authority but seem shy and eager to please. These persons are
generally unwilling to enter relationships unless they have an unusually
strong guarantee of uncritical acceptance. Consequently, they often have no
close friends or confidants.
In clinical interviews, patients’ most striking aspect is anxiety about
talking with an interviewer. Their nervous and tense manner may wax and
wane depending on whether they think the interviewer likes them. They may
also seem vulnerable to the interviewer’s comments and suggestions and may
regard a clarification or interpretation as criticism.
Dependent Personality Disorder. Dependent personality disorder is a
pervasive pattern of dependent and submissive behavior. Persons with the
disorder cannot make decisions without significant and unwarranted advice
and encouragement from others. They avoid positions of responsibility and
become anxious if asked to assume a leadership role. They prefer to be


<<<PAGE 1796>>>
submissive. When on their own, they find it difficult to persevere at tasks but
may find it easy to perform these tasks for someone else. Table 19-10
compares the different approaches to diagnosing dependent personality
disorder.
Table 19-9
Avoidant Personality Disorder: Specific Symptoms
DSM-5

ICD-10

Avoidant Personality Disorder Anxious [Avoidant] Personality
Disorder
Hypersensitive, lacking
confidence (≥4):
• Avoids others
• Fears being disliked
• Avoids relationships for fear
of shame
• Fears rejection/criticism
• Inhibited in relationships
• Avoids novelty for fear of
embarrassment

• Fearful, insecure, feels inferior to
others
• Craves acceptance
• Fears or is sensitive to rejection
• Relationships are superficial
• Avoids activities/situations
perceived as risky

Table 19-10
Dependent Personality Disorder: Specific Symptoms
DSM-5

ICD-10

Dependent Personality Disorder

Dependent Personality
Disorder

Fears separation, needs others to
care for them (≥5):
• Cannot make decisions alone
• Avoids taking on responsibility for
important things

• Relies on others and needs
them for validation
• Cannot make decisions
without another’s approval
• Fears abandonment


<<<PAGE 1797>>>
• Cannot disagree with others for
fear they will disapprove of them
• Lacks confidence, cannot initiate
new things
• Seeks acceptance of others
• Fears being alone/independence
• When relationship ends, quickly
seeks new one
• Fears having to take care of self

• Fears
helplessness/incompetence
• Passive, lets another make
decisions
• Avoids responsibility

Because persons with the disorder do not like to be alone, they seek out
others on whom they can depend; their relationships, thus, are distorted by
their need to be attached to another person. In a shared psychotic disorder
(folie à deux), one member of the pair usually has dependent personality
disorder; the submissive partner takes on the delusional system of the more
aggressive, assertive partner on whom he or she depends.
Pessimism, self-doubt, passivity, and fears of expressing sexual and
aggressive feelings all typify the behavior of persons with a dependent
personality disorder. An abusive, unfaithful, or alcoholic spouse may be
tolerated for long periods to avoid disturbing the sense of attachment.
In interviews, patients appear compliant. They try to cooperate, welcome
specific questions and look for guidance.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder. Persons with obsessivecompulsive personality disorder are preoccupied with rules, regulations,
orderliness, neatness, details, and the achievement of perfection. These traits
account for the general constriction of the entire personality. They insist that
rules be followed rigidly and cannot tolerate what they consider infractions.
Accordingly, they lack flexibility and are intolerant. They are capable of
prolonged work, provided it is routinized and does not require changes to
which they cannot adapt. Table 19-11 compares the different approaches to
diagnosing obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
Persons with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder have limited
interpersonal skills. They are formal and severe and often lack a sense of
humor. They alienate those around them, are unable to compromise, and


<<<PAGE 1798>>>
insist that others submit to their needs. They are eager to please those whom
they see as more powerful, however, and they carry out these persons’ wishes
in an authoritarian manner. Because they fear to make mistakes, they are
indecisive and ruminate about making decisions. Although a stable marriage
and occupational adequacy are common, persons with obsessive-compulsive
personality disorder have few friends. Anything that threatens to upset their
perceived stability or the routine of their lives can precipitate much anxiety
otherwise bound up in the rituals that they impose on their lives and try to
impose on others.
In interviews, patients with an obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
may have a stiff, formal, and rigid demeanor. Their affect is not blunted or
flat but often constricted. They lack spontaneity, and their mood is usually
serious. Such patients may be anxious about not being in control of the
interview. Their answers to questions are unusually detailed. The defense
mechanisms they use are rationalization, isolation, intellectualization,
reaction formation, and undoing.
Other Personality Disorders
Personality Change due to Another Medical Condition. This
diagnosis involves a change in personality from previous patterns of behavior
or an exacerbation of previous personality characteristics. Impaired control of
the expression of emotions and impulses is a cardinal feature. Emotions are
characteristically labile and shallow, although euphoria or apathy may be
prominent. The euphoria may mimic hypomania, but genuine elation is
absent, and patients may admit to not feeling happy. There is a hollow and
silly ring to their excitement and facile jocularity, particularly when the
frontal lobes are involved. Also associated with damage to the frontal lobes,
the so-called frontal lobe syndrome, consists of prominent indifference and
apathy, characterized by a lack of concern for events in the immediate
environment. Temper outbursts, which can occur with little or no
provocation, especially after alcohol ingestion, can result in violent behavior.
The expression of impulses may include inappropriate jokes, a coarse
manner, improper sexual advances, and antisocial conduct resulting in
conflicts with the law, such as assaults on others, sexual misdemeanors, and
shoplifting. They typically have diminished foresight, and cannot anticipate


<<<PAGE 1799>>>
the social or legal consequences of actions. Persons with temporal lobe
epilepsy
characteristically
show
humorlessness,
hypergraphia,
hyperreligiosity, and marked aggressiveness during seizures.
Table 19-11
Obsessive-Compulsive
Symptoms

Personality

Disorder:

Specific

Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Anankastic Personality Disorder
Disorder
Orderliness,
• Cannot
• Plagued by
Exclusions (not
perfectionism,
delegate
doubt
result of):
self-control (≥4):
• Stingy
• Perfectionism,
• Obsessive• Attention to
checking,
compulsive
• Stubborn/rigid
rules/details/order
attention to
disorde
detail
• Cannot complete
things because of
• Stubborn/rigid
needing it to be
• Overly cautious
perfect
• Unwanted
• Relationships
thoughts or
neglected
impulses, but
because of
not to the point
devotion to work
of obsessions
• Inflexible thinking
or compulsions
• Cannot part with
things
Persons with personality change due to a general medical condition have a
clear sensorium. Mild disorders of cognitive function often coexist but do not
amount to intellectual deterioration. Patients may be inattentive, which may
account for disorders of recent memory. With some prodding, however,
patients are likely to recall what they claim to have forgotten. We should
suspect the diagnosis in patients who show marked changes in behavior or
personality involving emotional lability and impaired impulse control, who
have no history of mental disorder, and whose personality changes occur


<<<PAGE 1800>>>
abruptly or over a relatively brief time.
Other Specified Personality Disorder. DSM-5 reserves the category of
other specified personality disorder for situations that meet the general
criteria for a personality disorder, but the presentation does not fit into any of
the personality disorder categories described above. Passive-aggressive
personality and depressive personality are examples. A narrow spectrum of
behavior or a particular trait—such as oppositionalism, sadism, or masochism
—can also be classified in this category. A patient with features of more than
one personality disorder but without the complete criteria of any one disorder
can be assigned this classification.
Unspecified Personality Disorder. This diagnosis is like the above
Other Specified Personality Disorder but is used in situations when we may
choose not to indicate why the patient does not meet the criteria for a specific
personality disorder. A typical example is a case in which there is not enough
information to make a specific personality disorder diagnosis.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Many of the features of various personality disorders may occur during an
episode of another mental disorder. Some of the personality disorders,
particularly within a given cluster, may also share common features.
Paranoid Personality Disorder
Paranoid personality disorder can usually be differentiated from delusional
disorder by the absence of fixed delusions. Unlike persons with
schizophrenia, those with personality disorders typically lack hallucinations
or formal thought disorder. However, when a brief reactive psychosis with
delusions complicates the clinical picture of paranoid personality disorder,
this distinction is far more complicated. Paranoid personality disorder can be
distinguished from a borderline personality disorder because patients who are
paranoid are rarely capable of overly involved, tumultuous relationships with
others. Patients with paranoia lack the long history of antisocial behavior of
persons with antisocial character. Persons with schizoid personality disorder
are withdrawn and aloof and do not have paranoid ideation.


<<<PAGE 1801>>>
Schizoid Personality Disorder
Schizoid personality disorder differs from schizophrenia, delusional disorder,
and affective disorder with psychotic features based on periods with positive
psychotic symptoms, such as delusions and hallucinations, in the latter.
Although patients with paranoid personality disorder share many traits with
those with schizoid personality disorder, the former exhibit more social
engagement, a history of aggressive verbal behavior, and a greater tendency
to project their feelings onto others. If just as emotionally constricted,
patients with obsessive-compulsive and avoidant personality disorders
experience loneliness as dysphoric, possess a more abundant history of past
object relations, and do not engage as much in autistic reverie. The chief
distinction between a patient with schizotypal personality disorder and one
with schizoid personality disorder is that the patient who is schizotypal is
more similar to a patient with schizophrenia in oddities of perception,
thought, behavior, and communication. Patients with avoidant personality
disorder are isolated but do wish to participate in activities, a characteristic
absent in those with schizoid personality disorder. Schizoid personality
disorder is distinguished from autism spectrum disorder by more severely
impaired social interactions and stereotypical behaviors and interests with
autism.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Persons with schizotypal personality disorder can be distinguished from those
with schizoid and avoidant personality disorders by the presence of oddities
in their behavior, thinking, perception, and communication. Schizotypal
personality disorder is difficult to distinguish from the heterogeneous group
of solitary, odd children whose behavior is characterized by social isolation,
eccentricity, and peculiarities in language seen in autism spectrum disorder
and communication disorders. We distinguish the latter by the primacy and
severity of the language disorder and accompanying compensatory efforts by
the patient. Also, individuals with autism often have more severely impaired
social interactions and restricted behaviors and interests than those with
schizotypal disorder. Patients with schizotypal personality disorder can be
distinguished from those with schizophrenia by the absence of psychosis. If
psychotic symptoms do appear, they are brief and fragmentary. Patients with


<<<PAGE 1802>>>
paranoid personality disorder are suspicious but lack the odd behavior of
patients with schizotypal personality disorder.
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Antisocial personality disorder differs from mere illegal behavior in that
antisocial personality disorder involves many areas of a person’s life. When
illegal behavior is only for gain and does not include rigid, maladaptive, and
persistent personality traits, we classify it as criminal behavior not associated
with a personality disorder in DSM-5.
Many of these persons have a neurologic or mental disorder that has been
either overlooked or undiagnosed. More difficult is the differentiation of
antisocial personality disorder from substance use disorders. When both
substance use disorders and antisocial behavior begin in childhood and
continue into adult life, we should diagnose both disorders. When, however,
the antisocial behavior is secondary to premorbid alcohol use disorder or
another substance use disorder, the diagnosis of antisocial personality
disorder is not warranted.
In diagnosing antisocial personality disorder, clinicians must adjust for the
distorting effects of socioeconomic status, cultural background, and sex.
Furthermore, the diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder is not warranted
when intellectual disability, schizophrenia, or mania can explain the
symptoms. Other personality disorders, such as narcissistic, histrionic, and
paranoid, can be differentiated from antisocial personality disorder as the
former personality disorders rarely include serious criminality and
aggressiveness. Borderline personality disorder can sometimes be associated
with criminality. However, individuals with borderline personality who
commit crimes tend to display high novelty seeking and high harm avoidance
behaviors, whereas those with antisocial personality tend to display high
novelty seeking and low harm avoidance behaviors.
Borderline Personality Disorder
Borderline personality disorder differs from major depressive disorder,
bipolar disorder, dysthymic disorder, and cyclothymia based on the presence
of core borderline personality symptoms that are not typically present in
mood disorders (e.g., fear of abandonment, highly unpredictable behavior,


<<<PAGE 1803>>>
tumultuous interpersonal relationships, seeing others as either all good or all
bad, complaints of being numb or empty, and the lack of a consistent sense of
identity). It differs from identity problems, which are typically limited to a
developmental stage.
Borderline personality disorder differs from schizophrenia on the basis that
the patient with borderline personality lacks prolonged psychotic episodes,
thought disorder, and other classic schizophrenic signs. Patients with
schizotypal personality disorder show marked peculiarities of thinking,
strange ideation, and recurrent ideas of reference. Those with paranoid
personality disorder have extreme suspiciousness. In contrast, patients with
borderline personality disorder generally have short-lived psychotic episodes,
when present.
Histrionic Personality Disorder
Distinguishing between histrionic personality disorder and borderline
personality disorder is challenging, but in borderline personality disorder,
suicide attempts, identity diffusion, and brief psychotic episodes are more
likely. Although both conditions can exist in the same patient, clinicians
should separate the two. Somatic symptom disorder may occur in conjunction
with histrionic personality disorder, and we should diagnose both as well.
Patients with brief psychotic disorder and dissociative disorders may warrant
a coexisting diagnosis of histrionic personality disorder.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Borderline, histrionic, and antisocial personality disorders often accompany
narcissistic personality disorder, so differential diagnosis is difficult. Patients
with narcissistic personality disorder have less anxiety than those with
borderline personality disorder; their lives tend to be less chaotic, and they
are less likely to attempt suicide. Patients with antisocial personality disorder
have a history of impulsive behavior, often associated with alcohol or other
substance use, which frequently gets them into trouble with the law. Patients
with histrionic personality disorder show features of exhibitionism and
interpersonal manipulativeness that resemble those of patients with
narcissistic personality disorder. Narcissistic personality disorder can be
distinguished from the grandiosity of mania by the episodic course,


<<<PAGE 1804>>>
associated euphoria, and functional impairment in a manic or hypomanic
episode.
Avoidant Personality Disorder
Avoidant personality disorder is complicated to distinguish from social
anxiety disorder. In social anxiety disorder, specific situations, rather than
interpersonal contact in general, are avoided. They may co-occur. Panic
disorder with agoraphobia also manifests avoidance, but usually after the
onset of panic attacks.
Patients with schizoid and schizotypal personality disorders may be
indistinguishable from those with avoidant personality disorder. However,
patients with avoidant personality disorder desire social interaction, unlike
patients with schizoid personality disorder, who want to be alone. Patients
with avoidant personality disorder are not as demanding, irritable, or
unpredictable as those with borderline and histrionic personality disorders.
Avoidant personality disorder and dependent personality disorder are similar.
Patients with dependent personality disorder are presumed to have a greater
fear of being abandoned or unloved than those with avoidant personality
disorder, but the clinical picture may be indistinguishable.
Dependent Personality Disorder
The traits of dependence occur in many psychiatric disorders, so the
differential diagnosis is difficult. Dependence is a prominent factor in
patients with histrionic and borderline personality disorders. However, those
with dependent personality disorder usually have a long-term relationship
with one person rather than a series of persons on whom they are dependent,
and they do not tend to be overly manipulative. Dependent behavior can also
occur in patients with agoraphobia, panic disorder, and depressive disorders,
but these patients tend to have a high level of overt anxiety, panic, or
depression, respectively.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
When recurrent obsessions or compulsions are present, we should diagnose
an obsessive-compulsive disorder. Perhaps the most challenging distinction is
between outpatients with some obsessive-compulsive traits and those with an


<<<PAGE 1805>>>
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. We should reserve the personality
disorder diagnosis for those with significant impairments in their
occupational or social effectiveness. In some cases, delusional disorder
coexists with personality disorders, and we should diagnose both.
Personality Change due to Another Medical Condition
Dementia involves global deterioration in intellectual and behavioral
capacities, of which personality change is just one category. A personality
change may herald a cognitive disorder that eventually will deteriorate into
dementia. In these cases, as deterioration begins to encompass significant
memory and cognitive deficits, the diagnosis of the disorder changes from
personality change caused by a general medical condition to dementia. In
differentiating the specific syndrome from other disorders in which
personality change may occur—such as schizophrenia, delusional disorder,
mood disorders, and impulse control disorders—physicians must consider the
most critical factor, the presence of a personality change due to a specific
organic causative factor.

COMORBIDITY
Personality disorders occur in 10 to 20 percent of the general population and
about half of psychiatric inpatients or outpatients. Personality disorders are
frequently comorbid with other clinical syndromes and are predisposing
factors for other psychiatric disorders and symptoms (e.g., substance use,
suicide, affective disorders, impulse-control disorders, eating disorders, and
anxiety disorders).
Paranoid Personality Disorder
These individuals are at increased risk for major depression, obsessivecompulsive disorder, agoraphobia, and substance use disorders. The most
common co-occurring personality disorders are schizotypal, schizoid,
narcissistic, avoidant, and borderline. Paranoid personality disorder may be a
premorbid antecedent of delusional disorder, persecutory type.
Schizoid Personality Disorder


<<<PAGE 1806>>>
This personality disorder sometimes appears as the premorbid antecedent of
delusional disorder, schizophrenia, or rarely major depression. Paranoid,
schizotypal, and avoidant are the most common co-occurring personality
disorders.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
More than half of these patients have had at least one episode of major
depression, and 30 to 50 percent have major depression concurrent with this
personality disorder. The most common co-occurring personality disorders
are schizoid, paranoid, avoidant, and borderline.
Antisocial Personality Disorder
These patients are at increased risk for impulse control disorders, major
depression, substance use disorders, pathologic gambling, anxiety disorders,
and somatic symptom disorder. Narcissistic, borderline, and histrionic are the
most common co-occurring personality disorders.
Borderline Personality Disorder
These individuals are at increased risk for major depression, substance use
disorders, eating disorders (notably bulimia), posttraumatic stress disorder,
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, and somatic symptom disorder.
Borderline personality disorder can co-occur with most other personality
disorders.
Histrionic Personality Disorder
Patients with histrionic personality disorder are at increased risk for major
depression, somatic symptom disorder, and conversion disorder. Narcissistic,
borderline, antisocial, and dependent are the most common co-occurring
personality disorders.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
These patients are at increased risk for major depression and substance use
disorders (especially cocaine use). The most common co-occurring
personality disorders are borderline, antisocial, histrionic, and paranoid.


<<<PAGE 1807>>>
Avoidant Personality Disorder
Patients with avoidant personality disorder are at increased risk for mood and
anxiety disorders (especially social anxiety disorder). The most common cooccurring personality disorders are schizotypal, schizoid, paranoid,
dependent, and borderline. Somatic symptom disorder may be comorbid.
Dependent Personality Disorder
These patients are at increased risk for major depression, anxiety disorders,
and adjustment disorder. Somatic symptom disorder may be comorbid. The
personality disorders that co-occur most commonly are histrionic, avoidant,
and borderline.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
These individuals are at increased risk for major depression and anxiety
disorder. Equivocal evidence exists for an increased risk of obsessivecompulsive disorder.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Personality disorders are chronic, and they last over decades. They often
interfere with the treatment outcomes of comorbid psychiatric disorders and
lead to personal incapacitation, morbidity, and mortality in these patients.
People with personality disorders have chronic impairments in their ability to
work and love, tend to be less educated, drug dependent, single, unemployed,
and to have marital difficulties. They consume a large portion of community
services, social welfare benefits, public health, and prison resources.
Paranoid Personality Disorder
There are no adequate, systematic long-term studies of paranoid personality
disorder. In some, paranoid personality disorder is lifelong; in others, it is a
harbinger of schizophrenia. In still others, paranoid traits give way to reaction
formation, appropriate concern with morality, and altruistic concerns as they
mature or as stress diminishes. In general, however, those with paranoid
personality disorder have lifelong problems working and living with others.
Occupational and marital problems are common. Complications may


<<<PAGE 1808>>>
include brief reactive psychosis, particularly in response to stress.
Schizoid Personality Disorder
The onset of schizoid personality disorder usually occurs in early childhood
or adolescence. As with all personality disorders, schizoid personality
disorder is long-lasting but not necessarily lifelong. The proportion of
patients who incur schizophrenia is unknown. These individuals frequently
have severe problems in social relations, and occupational problems develop
when interpersonal involvement is required. Solitary work sometimes
favorably affects overall performance. Complications may include very brief
reactive psychosis, particularly in response to stress.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
This disorder can be the premorbid personality of the patient with
schizophrenia. Some, however, maintain a stable schizotypal personality
throughout their lives and marry and work, despite their oddities.
Complications may include transient psychotic episodes, particularly in
response to stress. Symptoms sometimes become so significant that
individuals meet the criteria for schizophreniform disorder, delusional
disorder, and brief psychotic disorder. One long-term study reported that 10
percent of those with schizotypal personality disorder eventually committed
suicide.
Antisocial Personality Disorder
When an antisocial personality disorder develops, it runs an unremitting
course, with the height of antisocial behavior usually occurring in late
adolescence. The prognosis varies. Some reports indicate that symptoms
decrease as a person ages. Even after the severe antisocial behavior “burns
out,” people diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder usually continue
to be irritable, impulsive, and detached. Complications may include
dysphoria, tension, low tolerance for boredom, depressed mood, and
premature, violent death.
Borderline Personality Disorder
The course of borderline personality disorder is variable and most commonly


<<<PAGE 1809>>>
follows a pattern of chronic instability in early adulthood, with episodes of
severe affective and impulsive dyscontrol. The impairment and the risk of
suicide are highest in the young adult years and gradually wane with
advancing age. In the fourth and fifth decades, these individuals tend to attain
greater stability in their relationships and functioning. Impairment typically
involves frequent job losses, interrupted education, and broken marriages.
Complications may include psychotic-like symptoms (hallucinations, body
image distortions, hypnagogic phenomena, ideas of reference) in response to
stress, as well as premature death or physical handicaps from suicide and
suicidal gestures, failed suicide, and self-injurious behavior.
Histrionic Personality Disorder
With age, persons with histrionic personality disorder show fewer symptoms,
but because they lack the energy of earlier years, the difference in the number
of symptoms may be more apparent than real. Persons with this disorder are
sensation seekers, and they may get into trouble with the law, abuse
substances, and act promiscuously. Complications may include frequent
suicidal gestures and threats to coerce better caregiving; interpersonal
relations that are unstable, shallow, and generally ungratifying; and frequent
marital problems secondary to the tendency to neglect long-term relationships
for the excitement of new relationships.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Narcissistic personality disorder is chronic and difficult to treat. Patients with
the disorder must continuously deal with blows to their narcissism resulting
from their behavior or life experience. Patients handle aging poorly; they
value beauty, strength, and youthful attributes, to which they cling
inappropriately. They may be more vulnerable, therefore, to midlife crises
than are other groups. However, narcissistic symptoms tend to diminish after
the age of 40 years, when pessimism usually develops. Impairment is
frequently severe and includes marital problems and interpersonal
relationships in general. Complications may include social withdrawal,
depressed mood, and dysthymic or major depressive disorder in reaction to
criticism or failure.


<<<PAGE 1810>>>
Avoidant Personality Disorder
Avoidant personality disorder frequently begins in childhood with shyness
and fear of strangers and new situations. Impairment can be severe and
typically includes occupational and social difficulties. However, many
persons with avoidant personality disorder can function in a protected
environment. Some marry, have children, and live their lives surrounded only
by family members. If their support system fails, however, they are subject to
depression, anxiety, and anger. Phobic avoidance is common, and patients
with the disorder may give histories of social anxiety disorder or incur social
anxiety disorder in the course of their illness.
Dependent Personality Disorder
We know little about the course of dependent personality disorder.
Occupational functioning tends to be impaired because persons with the
disorder cannot act independently and without close supervision. Social
relationships are limited to those on whom they can depend, and many suffer
physical or mental abuse because they cannot assert themselves. They risk
major depressive disorder if they lose the person on whom they depend, but
with treatment, the prognosis is favorable. Complications may include low
socioeconomic status and inadequate family and marital functioning, as well
as mood disorders, anxiety disorders, adjustment disorder, and social anxiety
disorder.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
The course of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is variable and
unpredictable. Occupational and social difficulties are typical. From time to
time, persons may develop obsessions or compulsions in the course of their
disorder. Some adolescents with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
evolve into warm, open, and loving adults; in others, the disorder can be
either the harbinger of schizophrenia or—decades later and exacerbated by
the aging process—major depressive disorder.
Persons with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder may flourish in
positions demanding methodical, deductive, or detailed work, but they are
vulnerable to unexpected changes, and their personal lives may remain
barren. Depressive disorders, especially those of late-onset, are common.


<<<PAGE 1811>>>
Complications may include distress and difficulties when confronted with
new situations that require flexibility and compromise, as well as myocardial
infarction secondary to features typical of type A personalities, such as time
urgency, hostility, and competitiveness.
Personality Change due to Another Medical Condition
Both the course and the prognosis of personality change due to a general
medical condition depend on its cause. If the disorder results from structural
damage to the brain, the disorder tends to persist. In cases of head trauma or
vascular accident, the disorder may follow a period of coma and delirium,
and it may be permanent. The personality change can evolve into dementia in
cases of brain tumors, multiple sclerosis, and Huntington disease. Personality
changes produced by chronic intoxication, medical illness, or drug therapy
(such as levodopa for parkinsonism) may reverse with appropriate treatment
of the cause. Some patients require custodial care or at least close supervision
to meet their basic needs, avoid repeated conflicts with the law, and protect
themselves and their families from the hostility of others and destitution
resulting from impulsive and ill-considered actions.

TREATMENT APPROACH
Individuals with personality disorders do not recognize that they are ill and
seldom seek help unless others (such as a spouse or parents) are insistent.
This usually happens when maladaptive behaviors create marital, family, and
career problems, or when other disorders (e.g., anxiety, depression, substance
use) or somatic symptoms (e.g., obesity, heart disease, COPD) complicate
their clinical picture. In general, patients with personality disorders require a
multifaceted treatment plan that often combines psychotherapy and
pharmacotherapy.
Combining Psychotherapy and Pharmacotherapy
Most patients with a personality disorder will require a combination of
psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy. Psychotherapy is the primary treatment,
as it promotes the maturation of character and, ultimately, the encouragement
of the patient’s capacity to develop better adaptive solutions. However,


<<<PAGE 1812>>>
psychotherapy is very hard to implement in the setting of unstable affect and
risky or self-destructive behaviors, all very common in the initial stages of
treatment. During these early stages, pharmacotherapy achieves a relatively
prompt control of affect and behavior. Most importantly, this nonspecific
improvement sets a more suitable platform for the work in psychotherapy.
Pharmacotherapy. In the treatment of patients with personality disorders,
medications can target specific symptoms of their disorders with the goals of
relieving subjective distress, risky or self-destructive behaviors, or conflict
with others, thereby preparing them for or allowing them to participate in
psychotherapeutic approaches. We should identify target symptoms, in order
to choose agents that effect those symptoms. Table 19-12 summarizes drug
choices for various target symptoms of personality disorders.
Paranoid Personality Disorder
Psychotherapy. Psychotherapy is the treatment of choice for those with
paranoid personality disorder. Therapists should be straightforward in all
their dealings with these patients. If the patient accuses the therapist of an
inconsistency or a fault, such as lateness for an appointment, honesty and an
apology are preferable to a defensive explanation. Therapists must remember
that trust and tolerance of intimacy are troubled areas for patients with this
disorder. Individual psychotherapy thus requires a professional and not
overly warm style from therapists. Clinicians’ overzealous use of
interpretation—especially interpretation about deep feelings of dependence,
sexual concerns, and wishes for intimacy—increases patients’ mistrust
significantly. Generally, patients who are paranoid do not do well in group
psychotherapy, although it can be useful for improving social skills and
diminishing suspiciousness through role-playing. Many cannot tolerate the
intrusiveness of behavior therapy, also used for social skills training.
At times, patients with paranoid personality disorder behave so
threateningly that therapists must control or set limits on their actions.
Delusional accusations should be realistically handled, but gently and without
humiliating patients. Patients who are paranoid are profoundly frightened
when they feel that those trying to help them are weak and helpless;
therefore, therapists should never offer to take control unless they are willing


<<<PAGE 1813>>>
and able to do so.
Pharmacotherapy. There is little evidence to guide the use of
pharmacotherapy in paranoid personality disorder. Treatment selection
should be tailored to the individual patient and guided by target symptoms,
such as the use of low-dose novel antipsychotics for psychotic symptoms or
the use of anticonvulsants for irritability.
Schizoid Personality Disorder
Psychotherapy. The treatment of patients with schizoid personality
disorder is similar to that of those with paranoid personality disorder. Patients
who are schizoid tend toward introspection; however, these tendencies are
consistent with psychotherapists’ expectations, and such patients may
become devoted if distant patients. As trust develops, patients who are
schizoid may, with great trepidation, reveal a plethora of fantasies, imaginary
friends, and fears of unbearable dependence—even of merging with the
therapist.
In group therapy settings, patients with schizoid personality disorder may
be silent for long periods; nonetheless, they do become involved. The patients
should be protected against aggressive attack by group members for their
proclivity to be silent. With time, the group members become important to
patients who are schizoid and may provide the only social contact in their
otherwise isolated existence.
Pharmacotherapy.
Limited
evidence
exists
to
guide
the
psychopharmacologic treatment of patients with schizoid personality
disorder. The use of psychotropics to target specific symptoms, such as social
and emotional detachment, may be appropriate.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Psychotherapy. The principles of treatment of schizotypal personality
disorder do not differ from those of schizoid personality disorder, but
clinicians must deal sensitively with the former, mainly using care to avoid
ridiculing or judging patients’ odd beliefs. Schizotypal patients have peculiar


<<<PAGE 1814>>>
patterns of thinking, and some are involved in cults, strange religious
practices, or the occult.
Pharmacotherapy. Antipsychotic medication may be useful for dealing
with ideas of reference, illusions, and other symptoms of the disorder and can
be an adjunct to psychotherapy. Antidepressants are useful when a depressive
component of the personality is present.
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Psychotherapy. There is limited evidence to guide the use of
psychotherapeutic approaches in antisocial personality disorder. Overall, the
limited evidence suggests that these individuals seem to respond better to
contingency management and other reward-based interventions than they do
to cognitive behavioral therapy.
Pharmacotherapy. Pharmacotherapy can deal with incapacitating
symptoms such as anxiety, rage, and depression, but because patients often
misuse substances, we should use medications judiciously. One might use
anticonvulsants to treat aggressive behaviors, especially if there are abnormal
waveforms on an EEG. β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists, lithium, and
antipsychotics may also reduce aggression.
Borderline Personality Disorder
Psychotherapy. Psychotherapy for patients with borderline personality
disorder is an area of intensive investigation and has been the treatment of
choice. It seems to be most successful in combination with pharmacotherapy.
Psychotherapy is difficult for the patient and therapist alike. Patients
regress quickly, act out their impulses, and show labile or fixed negative or
positive transferences, which are difficult to analyze. Projective identification
may also cause countertransference problems when therapists are unaware
that patients are unconsciously trying to coerce them to act out a particular
behavior. The splitting defense mechanism causes patients to love and hate
therapists and others in the environment alternately. A reality-oriented
approach is more effective than in-depth interpretations of the unconscious.


<<<PAGE 1815>>>
Table 19-12
Pharmacotherapy of
Personality Disorders

Target

Symptom

Domains

of

Choice of Drugs According to Target Symptoms of Personality
Disorders
Target Symptom

Drug/Treatment of
Choice

Not
Recommended

I. Mood Dysregulation and Anxiety
Anxiety
Chronic cognitive

Psychotherapy,
Benzodiazepines
SSRIs, SNRIs,
MAOIs, Low-Dose
Novel
Psychotropics
(aripiprazole,
quetiapine)
Valproate and other
GABA analogs
(clonazepam and
buspirone)

Chronic somatic

MAOIs, SNRIs
(duloxetine,
milnacipran)
Pregabalin and other
GABA analogs,
TCAs, betablockers

Obsessions

SSRIs, Antipsychotics
(quetiapine), TCAs
(clomipramine),
Mild NMDA
antagonists

If used—
benzodiazepines
with long half-life
and short trials
preferred


<<<PAGE 1816>>>
(riluzole,
memantine)
Acute and severe

Mirtazapine, Novel
Psychotropics
(quetiapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine), TCAs,
clonazepam,
valproates, lithium

Depression
Atypical
MAOIs, SSRIs,
depression/dysphoria
SNRIs,
Classical depression
Aripiprazole,
Lurasidone,
ziprasidone,
quetiapine,
Atypical
antipsychotics (as
monotherapy or
augmentation)

TCAs

Emotional lability/rapid Lithium, Lamotrigine,
cycling
Valproate, Lowerdose
antipsychotics
(olanzapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine,
ziprasidone)

TCAs
(“catecholamine
stress”),
Standard
antidepressants
(risk of switching
to mania)

II. Behavior Dyscontrol
Aggression/impulsivity
Affective aggression
Lithium, SSRIs,
“Hot temper” with normal
Anticonvulsants,

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition)


<<<PAGE 1817>>>
EEG

Low-dose
antipsychotics

Predatory aggression
(cold blooded
revenge/cruelty)

No Effective
Pharmacologic Tx

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition)

Organic-like aggression
(traumatic brain
injury)

Beta-Blockers,
Valproates,
Quetiapine,
Carbamazepine
(CBMZ), TCAs,
cholinesterase
inhibitors
(donepezil)

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition,
delirium)

Ictal aggression
(abnormal EEG)

CBMZ,
TCAs, Low-potency
Diphenylhydantoin,
typical
Valproate
antipsychotics
Benzodiazepines
(both increase
(clonazepam)
risk of seizures)

III. Social and Emotional Detachment
Chronic asociality and disinterest
Blunted affect

Low-Dose
Antipsychotics
(aripiprazole,
olanzapine, lowdose clozapine,
sulpiride)

IV. Cognitive-Perceptual Distortions/Psychotic Symptoms
Acute and brief
psychotic episodes

Novel Antipsychotics
(Risperdal,
olanzapine)
Typical neuroleptics
(for the duration of


<<<PAGE 1818>>>
psychosis)
Chronic and low-level
psychotic-like
symptoms

Novel Antipsychotics

Adapted with permission of the Center for Well-Being at Washington University.

Therapists have used behavior therapy to help patients manage their
impulses and angry outbursts and to reduce their sensitivity to criticism and
rejection. Social skills training, especially with videotape playback, helps
patients to see how their actions affect others and thereby improve their
interpersonal behavior.
Patients with borderline personality disorder often do well in a hospital
setting in which they receive intensive psychotherapy on both an individual
and a group basis. In a hospital, they can also interact with trained staff
members from a variety of disciplines and receive occupational, recreational,
and vocational therapy. Such programs are especially helpful when the home
environment is detrimental to a patient’s rehabilitation because of
intrafamilial conflicts or other stresses, such as abuse. Within the protected
environment of the hospital, we can give limits to patients who are
excessively impulsive, self-destructive, or self-mutilating, and observe their
actions. Under ideal circumstances, patients remain in the hospital until they
show marked improvement, up to 1 year in some cases. We can then
discharge patients to specialized support systems, such as day hospitals, night
hospitals, and halfway houses.
DIALECTICAL BEHAVIOR THERAPY. Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is the

psychosocial treatment that has received the most empirical support for
patients with borderline personality disorder. The method is eclectic, drawing
on concepts derived from supportive, cognitive, and behavioral therapies.
There are four primary modes of treatment in DBT: group skill training,
individual therapy, phone consultation, and consultation team. Patients are
seen weekly, with the goal of improving interpersonal skills and decreasing
self-destructive behavior. Patients with borderline personality disorder
receive help in dealing with the ambivalent feelings that are characteristic of
the disorder. As with other behavioral approaches, DBT assumes all behavior


<<<PAGE 1819>>>
(including thoughts and feelings) is learned and that patients with borderline
personality disorder behave in ways that reinforce or even reward their
behavior, regardless of how maladaptive it is. See Chapter 23 for a more
detailed discussion of DBT.
Another type of psychotherapy for
borderline personality disorder is called mentalization-based therapy (MBT).
Mentalization is a social construct that allows a person to be attentive to the
mental states of oneself and of others; it comes from a person’s awareness of
mental processes and subjective states that arise in interpersonal interactions.
MBT is based on a theory that borderline personality symptoms, such as
difficulty regulating emotions and managing impulsivity, are a result of
patients’ reduced capacities to mentalize. Thus, recovery of mentalization
should help patients build relationship skills as they learn to regulate their
thoughts and feelings better. MBT was effective for borderline personality
disorder in several randomized, controlled research trials.
MENTALIZATION-BASED TREATMENT.

Transference-focused
psychotherapy (TFP) is a modified form of psychodynamic psychotherapy
used for the treatment of borderline personality disorder grounded in object
relations theory. The therapist relies on two major processes in working with
the patient: the first is clarification, in which the transference is analyzed
more directly than in traditional psychotherapy so that the patient becomes
quickly aware of his or her distortions about the therapist, and the second is
confrontation, whereby the therapist points out how these transferential
distortions interfere with interpersonal relations toward others (objects). The
mechanism of splitting used by borderline patients is characterized by their
having a good object and a bad object, and they use this as a defense against
anxiety. If therapy is successful, then the need for splitting diminishes, object
relations are improved, and the patient achieves a more normal level of
functioning. Studies comparing TFP, DBT, psychodynamic psychotherapy,
and supportive psychotherapy show that all are useful and all show varying
degrees of success.
TRANSFERENCE-FOCUSED

PSYCHOTHERAPY.

Pharmacotherapy. Pharmacotherapy is useful to deal with specific
personality features that interfere with patients’ overall functioning.


<<<PAGE 1820>>>
Antipsychotics may help control anger, hostility, and brief psychotic
episodes. Antidepressants improve the depressed mood common in patients
with borderline personality disorder. Benzodiazepines should be avoided not
only due to the risk of abuse, but also because patients may become
disinhibited with this class of drugs. Anticonvulsants, such as carbamazepine,
may improve functioning for some patients. Serotonergic agents, such as
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), have been helpful in some
cases.
Histrionic Personality Disorder
Psychotherapy. Patients with histrionic personality disorder are often
unaware of their real feelings; clarification of their inner feelings is a
necessary therapeutic process. Psychoanalytically oriented psychotherapy is
probably the treatment of choice for histrionic personality disorder.
Pharmacotherapy. Pharmacotherapy can be adjunctive to target symptoms
(e.g., the use of antidepressants for depression and somatic complaints,
antianxiety agents for anxiety, and antipsychotics for derealization and
illusions).
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Psychotherapy. Because patients must renounce their narcissism to make
progress, the treatment of narcissistic personality disorder is challenging.
Some experts have advocated using psychoanalytic approaches to effect
change, but much research is required to validate the diagnosis and to
determine the best treatment. Some clinicians advocate group therapy for
their patients so they can learn how to share with others and, under ideal
circumstances, can develop an empathic response to others.
Pharmacotherapy. Lithium can help patients whose clinical picture
includes mood swings. Because patients with narcissistic personality disorder
tolerate rejection poorly and are susceptible to depression, antidepressants,
especially serotonergic drugs, may also be of use.


<<<PAGE 1821>>>
Avoidant Personality Disorder
Psychotherapy. Psychotherapeutic treatment depends on solidifying an
alliance with patients. As trust develops, a therapist must convey an accepting
attitude toward the patient’s fears, especially the fear of rejection. The
therapist eventually encourages a patient to move out into the world to take
what they perceive as significant risks of humiliation, rejection, and failure.
However, therapists should be cautious when giving assignments to exercise
new social skills outside therapy; failure can reinforce the patient’s already
weak self-esteem. Group therapy may help patients understand how their
sensitivity to rejection affects them and others. Assertiveness training is a
form of behavior therapy that may teach patients to express their needs
openly and to enlarge their self-esteem.
Pharmacotherapy. Pharmacotherapy can help manage anxiety and
depression when they are associated with the disorder. Some patients are
helped by β-adrenergic receptor antagonists, such as atenolol, to manage
autonomic nervous system hyperactivity, which tends to be high in patients
with avoidant personality disorder, especially when they approach feared
situations. Serotonergic agents may help with rejection sensitivity.
Theoretically, dopaminergic drugs might engender novelty-seeking behavior
in these patients; however, the patient must be psychologically prepared for
any new experience that might result.
Dependent Personality Disorder
Psychotherapy. The treatment of dependent personality disorder is often
successful. Insight-oriented therapies enable patients to understand the
antecedents of their behavior, and with the support of a therapist, patients can
become more independent, assertive, and self-reliant. Behavioral therapy,
assertiveness training, family therapy, and group therapy have all been used,
with successful outcomes in many cases.
A pitfall may arise in treatment when a therapist encourages a patient to
change the dynamics of a pathologic relationship (e.g., supports a physically
abused wife in seeking help from the police). At this point, patients may
become anxious and unable to cooperate in therapy; they may feel torn


<<<PAGE 1822>>>
between complying with the therapist and losing an external pathologic
relationship. Therapists must show great respect for these patients’ feelings of
attachment, no matter how pathologic these feelings may seem.
Pharmacotherapy. Pharmacotherapy can help deal with specific
symptoms, such as anxiety and depression, which are commonly associated
features of dependent personality disorder. Patients who experience panic
attacks or who have high levels of separation anxiety may benefit from
symptom-targeted pharmacotherapy, such as antidepressant agents.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
Psychotherapy. Unlike patients with other personality disorders, some
individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder are often aware
of their suffering and seek treatment on their own. Though limited evidence
exists to guide treatment, there have been several studies that support
cognitive therapy or cognitive behavioral therapy as an effective treatment for
individuals with this disorder, delivered either individually or in a group.
Additionally, interpersonal psychotherapy may improve depressive
symptoms in individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
Pharmacotherapy. There is limited evidence for the pharmacologic
treatment of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. Some studies have
suggested benefits from fluvoxamine and carbamazepine, and in those
patients with comorbid depression, citalopram may be helpful. In one study
comparing citalopram and sertraline, both medications reduced the number of
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder traits, though citalopram
performed better than sertraline.
Personality Change due to Another Medical Condition
Management of personality change disorder involves the treatment of the
underlying medical condition when possible. Psychopharmacological
treatment of specific symptoms may help in some cases, such as
antidepressants for depression or anticonvulsants for irritability, aggression,
or impulsivity.
Patients with severe cognitive impairment or weakened behavioral controls


<<<PAGE 1823>>>
may need counseling to help avoid difficulties at work or to prevent social
embarrassment. As a rule, patients’ families need emotional support and
concrete advice on how to help minimize patients’ undesirable conduct.
Patients should avoid alcohol, and we should curtail social engagements
when patients tend to act in a grossly offensive manner.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Personality disorders are common. They occur in 10 to 20 percent of the
general population, and approximately 50 percent of all psychiatric patients.
Paranoid Personality Disorder
Data suggest that the prevalence of paranoid personality disorder is 0.5 to 4.4
percent of the general population. Those with the disorder rarely seek
treatment themselves; when referred to treatment by a spouse or an employer,
they can often pull themselves together and appear undistressed. Relatives of
patients with schizophrenia show a higher incidence of paranoid personality
disorder than control participants. Some evidence suggests a more specific
familial relationship with delusional disorder, persecutory type. The
diagnosis is more common in men.
Schizoid Personality Disorder
The prevalence of schizoid personality disorder is estimated to be 3.1 to 4.9
percent of the general population, according to DSM-5. This diagnosis is
more common in men. Persons with the disorder tend to gravitate toward
solitary jobs that involve little or no contact with others. Many prefer night
work to day work so that they need not deal with many persons. There
appears to be an increased prevalence among the relatives of individuals with
schizophrenia or schizotypal personality disorder.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Schizotypal personality disorder occurs in 3.9 to 4.6 percent of the
population, according to DSM-5. The sex ratio is unknown; however, it is
frequent in females with fragile X syndrome. A higher association of cases
exists among the biologic relatives of patients with schizophrenia than among


<<<PAGE 1824>>>
control participants and a higher incidence among monozygotic twins than
among dizygotic twins (33 percent vs. 4 percent in one study).
Antisocial Personality Disorder
According to DSM-5, prevalence rates for antisocial personality disorder are
3 percent for males and 1 percent for females in the general population. It is
frequent among the first-degree biologic relatives of individuals with this
disorder. Biologic relatives of females with antisocial personality disorder are
at increased risk for the same disorder compared to biologic relatives of
males with antisocial personality disorder. Genetic studies have suggested
familial transmission of antisocial personality disorder, substance use, and
somatic symptom disorder (most studies used the previous criteria for the
related somatization disorder), the former two being characteristic of males,
and the latter of females in the same family. Adoption studies have shown
that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the risk of this
disorder. Both adopted and biologic children of parents with antisocial
personality disorder are at increased risk for this disorder. Conduct disorder
(before the age of 10 years) and accompanying attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder increases the likelihood of developing antisocial personality in adult
life. Conduct disorder is more likely to develop into antisocial personality
disorder with erratic parenting, neglect, or inconsistent parental discipline.
Borderline Personality Disorder
Borderline personality disorder is thought to be present in about 2 percent of
the general population and is more common in women than in men. The
disorder is more common in younger than in older samples, suggesting a
natural tendency toward maturation and remission. Physical and sexual
abuse, neglect, hostile conduct, and early parental loss or separation are
common in the childhood histories of patients with this disorder. Borderline
personality disorder is five times more common among relatives of
individuals with the same disorder than the general population. An increased
prevalence of mood disorders, antisocial personality disorder, and substance
use disorder is common in first-degree relatives of persons with borderline
personality disorder.


<<<PAGE 1825>>>
Histrionic Personality Disorder
Limited data from general population studies suggest a prevalence of
histrionic personality disorder of about 2 percent. Although traditionally
thought to occur more frequently in women, there is some evidence to
suggest that this disorder might be equally frequent among men and women.
Histrionic personality disorder tends to run in families. Some experts suggest
that there is a genetic link between histrionic and antisocial personality
disorder and alcohol use disorder.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
According to DSM-5, estimates of the prevalence of narcissistic personality
disorder range from less than 1 percent in the general population to 2 to 16
percent in the clinical population; this disorder is more common in men.
Avoidant Personality Disorder
The prevalence of the disorder is about 0.5 to 2 percent of the general
population, according to DSM-5. It occurs in men and women equally.
Dependent Personality Disorder
Dependent personality disorder is equally common in women and men.
DSM-5 reports an estimated prevalence of 0.5 to 0.6 percent. Persons with
chronic physical illness in childhood or separation anxiety disorder may be
most susceptible to dependent personality disorder.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
DSM-5 reports an estimated prevalence ranging from 2 to 8 percent of the
general population. It is more common in men than in women. Some studies
have demonstrated a familial aggregation of this disorder.

ETIOLOGY
Genetic Factors
The best evidence that genetic factors contribute to personality disorders
comes from investigations of more than 15,000 pairs of twins in the United


<<<PAGE 1826>>>
States. The concordance for personality disorders among monozygotic twins
was several times that among dizygotic twins. Moreover, according to one
study, monozygotic twins reared apart are about as similar as monozygotic
twins reared together. Similarities include multiple measures of personality
and temperament, occupational and leisure-time interests, and social
attitudes.
Cluster A personality disorders are more common in the biologic relatives
of patients with schizophrenia than in control groups. Adoption, family, and
twin studies demonstrate an increased prevalence of schizotypal features in
the families of schizophrenic patients, mainly when schizotypal features were
not associated with comorbid affective symptoms. Less correlation exists
between paranoid or schizoid personality disorder and schizophrenia.
Cluster B personality disorders have a genetic basis. Antisocial personality
disorder is associated with alcohol use disorders. Depression is common in
the family backgrounds of patients with borderline personality disorder.
These patients have more relatives with mood disorders than do control
groups, and persons with borderline personality disorder often have a mood
disorder as well. There is a strong association between histrionic personality
disorder and somatic symptom disorder; patients with each disorder show an
overlap of symptoms.
Cluster C personality disorders may also have a genetic base. Patients with
avoidant personality disorder often have high anxiety levels. Obsessivecompulsive traits are more common in monozygotic twins than in dizygotic
twins, and patients with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder show
some signs associated with depression—for example, shortened rapid eye
movement (REM) latency period and abnormal dexamethasone-suppression
test (DST) results.
Biologic Factors
Hormones. Persons who exhibit impulsive traits also often show high levels
of testosterone, 17-estradiol, and estrone. In nonhuman primates, androgens
increase the likelihood of aggression and sexual behavior, but the role of
testosterone in human aggression is unclear. DST results are abnormal in
some patients with borderline personality disorder who also have depressive
symptoms.


<<<PAGE 1827>>>
Platelet Monoamine Oxidase. Low platelet monoamine oxidase (MAO)
levels are associated with activity and sociability in monkeys. College
students with low platelet MAO levels report spending more time in social
activities than students with high platelet MAO levels. Low platelet MAO
levels occur in some patients with schizotypal disorders.
Smooth Pursuit Eye Movements. Smooth pursuit eye movements are
saccadic (i.e., jumpy) in persons who are introverted, who have low selfesteem and tend to withdraw, and who have schizotypal personality disorder.
These findings have no clinical application, but they do indicate the role of
inheritance.
Neurotransmitters. Studies of personality traits and the dopaminergic and
serotonergic systems indicate an arousal-activating function for these
neurotransmitters. Levels of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), a
metabolite of serotonin, are low in persons who attempt suicide and in
patients who are impulsive and aggressive. Raising serotonin levels with
serotonergic agents such as fluoxetine can produce dramatic changes in some
character traits of personality. In many persons, serotonin reduces depression,
impulsiveness, and rumination and can produce a sense of general wellbeing. Increased dopamine concentrations in the central nervous system
produced by certain psychostimulants (e.g., amphetamines) can induce
euphoria. The effects of neurotransmitters on personality traits have
generated much interest and controversy about whether personality traits are
inborn or acquired.
Table 19-13
Medical Conditions Associated with Personality Change
Head trauma
Cerebrovascular diseases
Cerebral tumors
Epilepsy (particularly, complex partial epilepsy)
Huntington disease
Multiple sclerosis
Endocrine disorders


<<<PAGE 1828>>>
Heavy metal poisoning (manganese, mercury)
Neurosyphilis
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)
Electrophysiology. Changes in electrical conductance on the
electroencephalogram (EEG) occur in some patients with personality
disorders, most commonly antisocial and borderline types; these changes
appear as slow-wave activity on EEGs.
Other Biologic Factors. In the case of personality change due to another
medical condition, structural damage to the brain is usually the cause, and
head trauma is probably the most common cause. Cerebral neoplasms and
vascular accidents, particularly of the temporal and frontal lobes, are also
common causes. The conditions most often associated with personality
change are listed in Table 19-13.
Psychoanalytic Factors
Sigmund Freud suggested that personality traits are related to a fixation at
one psychosexual stage of development. For example, those with an oral
character are passive and dependent because they are fixated at the oral stage
when the dependence on others for food is prominent. Those with an anal
character are stubborn, parsimonious, and highly conscientious because of
struggles over toilet training during the anal period.
Wilhelm Reich subsequently coined the term character armor to describe
individuals’ characteristic defensive styles for protecting themselves from
internal impulses and interpersonal anxiety in significant relationships.
Reich’s theory has had a broad influence on contemporary concepts of
personality and personality disorders. For example, each human being’s
unique stamp of personality depends on their characteristic defense
mechanisms. Each personality disorder has a cluster of defenses that help
psychodynamic clinicians recognize the type of character pathology present.
Persons with paranoid personality disorder, for instance, use projection,
whereas schizoid personality disorder is associated with withdrawal.
When defenses work effectively, persons with personality disorders master
feelings of anxiety, depression, anger, shame, guilt, and other affects. Their


<<<PAGE 1829>>>
behavior is ego-syntonic; that is, it creates no distress for them even though it
may adversely affect others. They may also be reluctant to engage in a
treatment process; because their defenses are essential to controlling
unpleasant affects, they are not interested in surrendering them.
In addition to characteristic defenses in personality disorders, another
central feature is internal object relations. During development, a person
develops particular patterns of the self in relation to others. Through
introjection, children internalize a parent or another significant person as an
internal presence that continues to feel like an object rather than a self.
Through identification, children internalize parents and others in such a way
that they incorporate the traits of the external object into the self, and the
child “owns” the traits. These internal self-representations and object
representations are crucial in developing the personality and, through
externalization and projective identification, are played out in interpersonal
scenarios in which they coerce others into playing a role in the person’s
internal life. Hence, persons with personality disorders are also identified by
particular patterns of interpersonal relatedness that stem from these internal
object relations patterns.
Defense Mechanisms. To help those with personality disorders,
psychiatrists must appreciate patients’ underlying defenses, the unconscious
mental processes that the ego uses to resolve conflicts among the four
lodestars of the inner life: instinct (wish or need), reality, important persons,
and conscience. When defenses are most effective, especially in those with
personality disorders, they can abolish anxiety and depression at the
conscious level. Thus, abandoning a defense increases conscious awareness
of anxiety and depression—a primary reason that those with personality
disorders are reluctant to alter their behavior.
Although we tend to characterize patients with personality disorders by
their most dominant or rigid mechanism, each patient uses several defenses.
Therefore, the management of defense mechanisms used by patients with
personality disorders is discussed here as a general topic and not as an aspect
of the specific disorders. While many formulations are presented here in the
language of psychoanalytic psychiatry, it is possible to translate them into
principles consistent with cognitive and behavioral approaches.


<<<PAGE 1830>>>
FANTASY. Many people who are labeled schizoid—those who are eccentric,

lonely, or frightened—seek solace and satisfaction within themselves by
creating imaginary lives, especially imaginary friends. In their extensive
dependence on fantasy, these persons often seem to be strikingly aloof.
Therapists must understand that the unsociableness of these patients rests on
a fear of intimacy. Rather than criticizing them or feeling rebuffed by their
rejection, therapists should maintain a quiet, reassuring, and considerate
interest without insisting on reciprocal responses. Recognition of patients’
fear of closeness and respect for their eccentric ways are both therapeutic and
useful.
Dissociation is an unconscious defense mechanism that
involves separating a mental or behavioral process (e.g., thought, feeling)
from the rest of the person’s psychic activity. Patients with borderline
personality disorder may demonstrate dissociation during times of increased
stress, including derealization or depersonalization.
DISSOCIATION.

ISOLATION. Isolation involves the separation of an idea or memory from its

attached emotion. It is characteristic of controlled, orderly persons who are
often labeled obsessive-compulsive personalities. These individuals
remember the truth in fine detail but without affect. In a crisis, patients may
show intensified self-restraint, overly formal social behavior, and obstinacy.
Patients’ quests for control may annoy clinicians or make them anxious.
Often, such patients respond well to precise, systematic, and rational
explanations and value efficiency, cleanliness, and punctuality as much as
they do clinicians’ effective responsiveness. Whenever possible, therapists
should allow such patients to control their own care and should not engage in
a battle of wills.
PROJECTION. In projection, patients attribute their unacknowledged feelings to

others. Patients’ excessive faultfinding and sensitivity to criticism may appear
to therapists as prejudiced, hypervigilant, and injustice-collecting, but the
therapist should not respond with defensiveness and argument. Instead,
clinicians should frankly acknowledge even minor mistakes on their part and
should discuss the possibility of future difficulties. Strict honesty, concern for
patients’ rights, and maintaining the same formal, concerning distance as


<<<PAGE 1831>>>
used with patients who use fantasy defenses are all helpful. Confrontation
guarantees a lasting enemy and early termination of the interview. Therapists
need not agree with patients’ injustice-collecting, but they should ask whether
both can agree to disagree.
The technique of counterprojection is especially helpful. Clinicians
acknowledge and give paranoid patients full credit for their feelings and
perceptions; they neither dispute patients’ complaints nor reinforce them but
agree that the world described by patients is conceivable. Interviewers can
then talk about real motives and feelings, misattributed to someone else, and
begin to cement an alliance with patients.
SPLITTING. In splitting, the patient divides persons toward whom they are, or

have been, ambivalent into good and bad. For example, in an inpatient
setting, a patient may idealize some staff members and uniformly disparage
others. This defense behavior can be highly disruptive in a hospital ward and
can ultimately provoke the staff to turn against the patient. When staff
members anticipate the process, discuss it at staff meetings, and gently
confront the patient with the fact that no one is all good or all bad, the
phenomenon of splitting can be dealt with effectively.
ACTING OUT. In acting out, patients directly express unconscious wishes or

conflicts through action to avoid being conscious of either the accompanying
idea or the affect. Tantrums, apparently motiveless assaults and pleasureless
promiscuity are typical examples. Because the behavior occurs outside
reflective awareness, acting out appears to observers to be unaccompanied by
guilt, but when acting out is impossible, the conflict behind the defense may
be accessible. The clinician faced with acting out, either aggressive or sexual,
in an interview situation, must recognize that the patient has lost control, that
the patient will mishear anything the interviewer says, and that getting the
patient’s attention is of paramount importance. Depending on the
circumstances, a clinician’s response may be, “How can I help you if you
keep screaming?” Alternatively, if the patient’s loss of control seems to be
escalating, say, “If you continue screaming, I will leave.” An interviewer who
feels genuinely frightened of the patient can simply leave and, if necessary,
ask for help from ward attendants or the police.


<<<PAGE 1832>>>
The defense mechanism of projective
identification appears mainly in borderline personality disorder and consists
of three steps. First, the patient projects an aspect of the self onto someone
else. The projector then tries to coerce the other person into identifying what
they projected. Finally, the recipient of the projection and the projector feel a
sense of oneness or union.
PROJECTIVE

IDENTIFICATION.

Temperament
Temperament refers to the body’s biases in the modulation of conditioned
behavioral responses to prescriptive physical stimuli. Behavioral conditioning
(i.e., procedural learning) involves presemantic sensations that elicit basic
emotions, such as fear or anger, independent of conscious recognition,
descriptive observation, reflection, or reasoning. Pioneering work by A.
Thomas and S. Chess conceptualized temperament as the stylistic component
(“how”) of behavior, as differentiated from the motivation (“why”) and the
content (“what”) of behavior. Modern concepts of temperament emphasize its
emotional, motivational, and adaptive aspects. Specifically, four major
temperament traits have been identified and subjected to extensive
neurobiologic, psychosocial, and clinical investigation: harm avoidance,
novelty seeking, reward dependence, and persistence. These four
temperaments are now understood to be genetically independent dimensions
that occur in all possible combinations within the same individual rather than
as mutually exclusive categories.
Psychobiology of Temperament. Temperament traits of harm
avoidance, novelty seeking, reward dependence, and persistence are heritable
differences underlying one’s automatic response to danger, novelty, social
approval, and intermittent reward, respectively. These four temperaments are
closely associated with the four basic emotions of fear (harm avoidance),
anger (novelty seeking), attachment (reward dependence), and ambition
(persistence).
Individual differences in temperament and basic emotions modify the
processing of sensory information and shape early learning characteristics,
especially associative conditioning of unconscious behavior responses and
preattentive components of perception. Temperament occurs in terms of


<<<PAGE 1833>>>
heritable biases in emotionality and learning that underlie the acquisition of
emotion-based, automatic behavioral traits and habits observable early in life
and relatively stable over one’s lifespan.
Each of the four major dimensions is a normally distributed quantitative
trait, moderately heritable, observable early in childhood, relatively stable in
time, and moderately predictive of adolescent and adult behavior. The four
dimensions are genetically homogeneous and independently inherited from
one another, as per several extensive international twin studies.
Temperamental differences, which are not very stable initially, tend to
stabilize during the second and third years of life. Accordingly, ratings of
these four temperament traits at ages 10 to 11 years were moderately
predictive of personality traits at ages 15, 18, and 27 years in a large sample
of Swedish children.
The four dimensions are universal across different cultures, ethnic groups,
and political systems on every inhabited continent. We call these aspects of
personality temperaments because they are heritable, manifest early in life,
are developmentally stable, and are consistent in different cultures.
Temperament traits are similar to crystallized intelligence in that they do not
show the rapid changes with increasing age or across birth cohorts found for
fluid intelligence and character traits. Table 19-14 summarizes contrasting
sets of behaviors that distinguish extreme scorers on the four dimensions of
temperament. Note that each extreme of these dimensions has specific
adaptive advantages and disadvantages so that neither high nor low scores
inherently mean better adaptation.
Each of the four temperament dimensions has unique genetic determinants
according to family and twin studies, as well as studies of genetic
associations with specific DNA markers.
HARM AVOIDANCE. Harm avoidance involves a heritable bias in the inhibition

of behavior in response to signals of punishment and frustrative non-reward.
High harm avoidance is a fear of uncertainty, social inhibition, shyness,
passive avoidance of problems/danger, rapid fatigability, and pessimistic
worry in anticipation of problems even in situations that do not worry others.
Those low in harm avoidance are carefree, courageous, energetic, outgoing,
and optimistic, even in situations that worry most people.
The psychobiology of harm avoidance is complex. Benzodiazepines


<<<PAGE 1834>>>
disinhibit avoidance by γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic inhibition of
serotonergic neurons originating in the dorsal raphe nuclei. The anterior
serotonergic cells in the dorsal raphe nucleus intermingle with the
dopaminergic cells of the ventral tegmental area, and both groups innervate
the same structures (e.g., basal ganglia, accumbens, amygdala), providing
opposing dopaminergic-serotonergic influences in the modulation of
approach and avoidance behavior. Persons given serotonin drugs show
decreased harm avoidance behavior.
Table 19-14
Descriptors of Individuals Who Score High or Low on the
Four Temperament Dimensions
Descriptors of Extreme Variants
Temperament Dimension

High

Low

Harm avoidance

Pessimistic

Optimistic

Fearful

Daring

Shy

Outgoing

Fatigable

Energetic

Exploratory

Reserved

Impulsive

Deliberate

Extravagant

Thrifty

Disorderly

Orderly

Sentimental

Detached

Open

Aloof

Warm

Cold

Affectionate

Independent

Industrious

Lazy

Novelty seeking

Reward dependence

Persistence


<<<PAGE 1835>>>
Determined

Spoiled

Ambitious

Underachiever

Perfectionist

Pragmatist

NOVELTY SEEKING. Novelty seeking reflects a heritable bias in the initiation or

activation of appetitive approach in response to novelty, approach to signals
of reward, active avoidance of conditioned signals of punishment, and escape
from unconditioned punishment. Novelty seeking is an exploratory activity in
response to novelty, impulsiveness, extravagance in approach to cues of
reward, and active avoidance of frustration. Individuals high in novelty
seeking are quick-tempered, curious, easily bored, impulsive, extravagant,
and disorderly. Those low in novelty seeking are slow tempered, uninquiring,
stoical, reflective, frugal, reserved, tolerant of monotony, and orderly.
Dopaminergic projections have a crucial role in novelty seeking. Novelty
seeking seems to involve increased reuptake of dopamine at presynaptic
terminals, thereby requiring frequent stimulation to maintain optimal levels of
postsynaptic dopaminergic stimulation. Studies of candidate genes involved
in dopamine neurotransmission, have provided evidence of association with
novelty seeking and no other dimension of temperament.
Reward dependence reflects the maintenance of
behavior in response to cues of social reward. Individuals high in reward
dependence are tender-hearted, sensitive, dedicated, dependent, and warmly
sociable. Those low in reward dependence are practical, tough-minded, cold,
socially insensitive, irresolute, and indifferent if alone.
Noradrenergic projections from the locus coeruleus and serotonergic
projections from the median raphe likely influence such reward conditioning.
The “love hormone” oxytocin’s plasma level is positively correlated (r = 0.5)
with individual differences in reward dependence but not other dimensions of
personality.
REWARD DEPENDENCE.

Persistence reflects the maintenance of behavior despite
frustration, fatigue, and intermittent reinforcement. It manifests as
industriousness, determination, ambitiousness, and perfectionism. Highly
persistent individuals are hard-working, perseverant, and ambitious
PERSISTENCE.


<<<PAGE 1836>>>
overachievers who tend to intensify their effort in response to anticipated
rewards and view frustration and fatigue as personal challenges. Those low in
persistence are indolent, inactive, unstable, and erratic; they tend to give up
easily when faced with frustration, rarely strive for higher accomplishments,
and manifest little perseverance even in response to intermittent reward.

FIGURE 19-1
Correlations between individual personality disorder subtypes and temperament
traits of harm avoidance (HA), novelty seeking (NS), and reward dependence
(RD). A, antisocial; Ac, antisocial children; B, borderline; D, dependent; F, selfdefeating; G, passive aggressive; H, histrionic; N, narcissistic; O, obsessive; P,
paranoid; S, sadistic; GT, schizotypal; V, avoidant; Z, schizoid.

Individual differences in persistence have been strongly correlated (r = 0.8)
with responses measured by fMRI in a circuit involving the ventral striatum,
orbitofrontal cortex/rostral insula, and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex.
Figure 19-1 illustrates the interrelationships between the personality
disorders and the temperament traits of harm avoidance, novelty seeking, and
reward dependence.


<<<PAGE 1837>>>
References
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association; 2013.
Apt C, Hurlbert DF. The sexual attitudes, behavior, and relationships of
women with histrionic personality disorder. J Sex Marital Ther.
1994;20(2):125–133.
Bateman A, Fonagy P. 8-year follow-up of patients treated for borderline
personality disorder: mentalization-based treatment versus treatment as
usual. Focus. 2013;11(2):261–268.
Bornstein RF, Gold SH. Comorbidity of personality disorders and
somatization disorder: a meta-analytic review. J Psychopathol Behav
Assess. 2008;30:154–161.
Boudreaux MJ. “Personality-related problems and the five-factor model of
personality.” Personality Disord. 2016;7(4):372–383.
Brazil IA, van Dongen JDM, Maes JHR, Mars RB, Baskin-Sommers AR.
Classification and treatment of antisocial individuals: from behavior to
biocognition. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2018;91:259–277.
Cloninger CR. Feeling Good: The Science of Well Being. New York: Oxford
University Press; 2004.
Cloninger CR, Svrakic DM. Chapter 26: Personality disorders. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2126–
2176.
Crawford TN, Cohen P, Johnson JG, Sneed Joel R, Brook JS. The course and
psychosocial correlates of personality disorder symptoms in adolescence:
Erikson’s developmental theory revisited. J Youth Adolesc. 2004;33:373–
387.
Diedrich A, Voderholzer U. Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder: a
current review. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2015;17:2–10.
Forster C, Berthollier N, Rawlinson D. A systematic review of potential
mechanisms of change in psychotherapeutic interventions for personality
disorder. J Psychol Psychother. 2014;4(133):2161–0487.
Helgeland MI, Kjelsberg E, Torgersen S. Continuities between emotional and
disruptive behavior disorders in adolescence and personality disorders in


<<<PAGE 1838>>>
adulthood. Am J Psychiatry. 2005;162:1941–1947.
Johnson JG, First MB, Cohen P, Skodol AE, Kasen S, Brook JS. Adverse
outcomes associated with personality disorder not otherwise specified in a
community sample. Am J Psychiatry. 2005;162:1926–1932.
Koch J, Modesitt T, Palmer M, Ward S, Martin B, Wyatt R, Thomas C.
Review of pharmacologic treatment in cluster a personality disorders. Ment
Health Clin. 2016;6(2):75–81.
Linehan MM, Comtois KA, Murray AM, Brown MZ, Gallop RJ, Heard HL,
Korslund KE, Tutek DA, Reynolds SK, Lindenboim N. Two-year
randomized controlled trial and follow-up of dialectical behavior therapy
vs therapy by experts for suicidal behaviors and borderline personality
disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2006;63(7):757–766.
Nickel MK, Muehlbacher M, Nickel C, Kettler C, Pedrosa Gil F, Bachler E,
Buschmann W, Rother N, Fartacek R, Egger C, Anvar J, Rother WK,
Loew TH, Kaplan P. Aripiprazole in the treatment of patients with
borderline personality disorder: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(5):833–838.
Ozkan M, Altindag A. Comorbid personality disorders in subjects with panic
disorder: do personality disorders increase clinical severity? Compr
Psychiatry. 2005;46:20–26.
Pagan JL, Oltmanns TF, Whitmore MJ, Turkheimer E. Personality disorder
not otherwise specified: searching for an empirically based diagnostic
threshold. J Pers Disord. 2005;19:674–689.
Papaioannou D, Brazier J, Parry G. How to measure quality of life for cost
effectiveness analyses of personality disorders: a systematic review. J Pers
Disord. 2013;27(3):383–401.
Rosenthal MZ, Rodriguez MA. Chapter 33.9: Dialectical behavior therapy.
In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters
Kluwer; 2017:2784–2795.
Schwarze C, Mobascher A, Pallasch B, Hoppe G, Kurz M, Hellhammer DH,
Lieb K. Prenatal adversity: a risk factor in borderline personality disorder?
Psychol Med. 2013;43(6):1279–1291.
Silk KR. “Caught in an unconscious split: commentary on ‘the ironic fate of
the personality disorders in DSM-5.’” Personality Disord. 2013;4(4): 350–
351.


<<<PAGE 1839>>>
Skodol AE, Morey LC, Bender DS, Oldham JM. “The ironic fate of the
personality disorders in DSM-5.” Personality Disord. 2013;4(4): 342–349.
Sussman N. Borderline personality and bipolar disorders: Is there a
connection? Primary Psychiatry. 2004;11:13.
Witkiewitz K, King K, McMahon RJ, Wu J, Luk J, Bierman KL, Coie JD,
Dodge KA, Greenberg MT, Lochman JE, Pinderhughes EE, Conduct
Problems Prevention Research Group. Evidence for a multi-dimensional
latent structural model of externalizing disorders. J Abnorm Child Psychol.
2013;41(2):223–237.
Zimmerman M, Rothschild L, Chelminski I. The prevalence of DSM-IV
personality disorders in psychiatric outpatients. Am J Psychiatry.
2005;162:1911–1918.


<<<PAGE 1840>>>
20
Other Conditions that May be a Focus
of Clinical Attention
INTRODUCTION
DSM-5 includes a section called Other Conditions that May be a Focus of
Clinical Attention. ICD-10 has a similar section called Factors Influencing
Health Status and Contact with Health Services. These sections are for
conditions that are not mental disorders but that have led to contact with the
mental health care system. In some instances, one of these conditions will be
noted during a psychiatric evaluation (e.g., divorce), although there is no
mental disorder. In other instances, the diagnostic evaluation reveals no
mental disorder, but there is a need to note the primary reason for contact
with the mental health care system (e.g., homelessness).
In some cases, we may eventually find a mental disorder, but the focus of
attention or treatment is on a condition that is not caused by a mental
disorder. For example, a patient with an anxiety disorder may receive
treatment for a marital problem that is unrelated to the anxiety disorder itself.
Table 20-1 includes the many conditions DSM-5 lists that may be a focus
of clinical attention, or that may influence the diagnosis, treatment, or course
of a mental disorder contained in DSM-5. The list of conditions that make up
this category covers the entire life cycle from infancy through childhood,
adolescence, adulthood, and old age. The list of conditions covers almost
every conceivable life circumstance, from divorce to problems related to
being in military service. Each of these conditions or circumstances is
capable of having a profound input on a particular mental illness or the
human experience in general.


<<<PAGE 1841>>>
MALINGERING
Malingering is the deliberate falsification of physical or psychological
symptoms in an attempt to achieve a secondary gain such as avoiding
military duty, avoiding work, obtaining financial compensation, evading
criminal prosecution, or obtaining drugs. Under some circumstances,
malingering may represent adaptive behavior—for example, as mentioned
below, feigning illness while a captive of the enemy during wartime.
The clinician should consider possible malingering when encountering any
combination of the following: (1) medicolegal context of presentation (e.g.,
the person is referred by an attorney to the clinician for examination), (2)
evident discrepancy between the individual’s claimed stress or disability and
the objective findings, (3) lack of cooperation during the diagnostic
evaluation and in complying with the prescribed treatment regimen, and (4)
the presence of antisocial personality disorder.
Diagnosis and Clinical Features
Avoidance of Criminal Responsibility, Trial, and Punishment.
Criminals may pretend to be incompetent to avoid standing trial; they may
feign insanity at the time of the perpetration of the crime, malinger symptoms
to receive a less harsh penalty, or attempt to act too incapacitated
(incompetent) for punishment.
Avoidance of Military Service or Particularly Hazardous Duties.
Persons may malinger to avoid conscription into the armed forces, and, after
being conscripted, they may feign illness to escape from particularly onerous
or hazardous duties.
Financial Gain. Malingerers may seek financial gain in the form of
undeserved disability insurance, veterans’ benefits, workers’ compensation,
or tort damages for purported psychological injury.
Avoidance of Work, Social Responsibility, and Social
Consequences. Individuals may malinger to escape from unpleasant
vocational or social circumstances or to avoid the social and litigation-related


<<<PAGE 1842>>>
consequences of vocational or social improprieties.
An owner of a previously successful photographic equipment supplier
declared bankruptcy in a way that the government maintained was illegal.
Subsequently, the government indicted the defendant on various counts
of fraud. The defendant’s counsel maintained that the defendant was too
depressed to cooperate with him and that, because of that depression, he
experienced memory loss that made it impossible to understand what had
occurred and, therefore, impossible to provide a meaningful defense. The
government’s forensic psychiatrist evaluated the defendant to ascertain
the nature of his depression and to determine whether it was causing
cognitive problems.
When asked early in his evaluation when his birthday was, he
responded, “Oh, what does it matter? It was in the 40s or 50s.” Similarly,
when queried about where he was born, he said, “Somewhere in
Hungary.” Even when pressed for more specifics, he refused to elaborate.
Nevertheless, at many points later in his evaluation, he responded with
complete, often detailed information about transactions not related to
those for which he was under indictment. It was the impression of the
evaluator that the defendant was malingering grossly and inconsistently,
incompatible with the kinds of decreases in cognitive skills that
occasionally attend major depression. (Adapted from a case of Mark J.
Mills, J.D., M.D. and Mark S. Lipian, M.D., Ph.D.)
Table 20-1
Conditions that May be a Focus of Clinical Attention
Relational Problems
• Problems Related to Family Upbringing
• Parent–Child Problem
• Sibling Problem
• Upbringing Away from Parents
• Parental Relationship Distress
• Other Problems Related to Primary Support System


<<<PAGE 1843>>>
• Relationship Distress with Spouse or Partner
• Separation or Divorce
• Emotional Distress within Family
• Uncomplicated Bereavement
Abuse and Neglect
• Problems of Child Maltreatment and Neglect
• Child Physical Abuse
• Child Sexual Abuse
• Child Neglect
• Child Psychological Abuse
• Problems of Adult Maltreatment and Neglect
• Physical Violence of Spouse or Partner
• Sexual Violence of Spouse or Partner
• Spouse or Partner Neglect
• Psychological Spouse or Partner Abuse
• Adult Abuse by Nonspouse or Nonpartner (e.g., Physical,
Sexual, Psychological)
Educational and Occupational Problems
• Educational Problems
• Occupational Problems
• Related to Current Military Deployment Status
• Other (e.g., Job change, Loss of job, Stress)
Housing and Economic Problems
• Housing Problems
• Homelessness
• Inadequate Housing (e.g., Lack of Heat or Electricity, Insect or
Rodent Infestation)
• Neighbor, Lodger, or Landlord Discord
• Residential Institution (Does Not Include Psychological
Reaction to Change in Living Situation; see Adjustment
Disorders, Chapter 10)
• Economic Problems
• Lack of Adequate Food or Safe Drinking Water


<<<PAGE 1844>>>
• Extreme Poverty
• Low Income
Other Problems Related to the Social Environment
• Phase of Life Problem
• Acculturation Difficulty
• Social Exclusion or Rejection
• Discrimination or Persecution
Problems Related to Crime or Interaction with the Legal System
(e.g., Victim of Crime, Imprisonment, Release from Prison)
Other Health Service Encounters for Counseling and Medical Advice
(e.g., Sexual Counseling)
Problems Related to Other Psychological, Personal, and
Environmental Circumstances
• Religious or Spiritual Problem
• Victim of Terrorism or Torture
• Exposure to Disaster or War
Other Circumstances of Personal History
• Adult Antisocial Behavior
• Child or Adolescent Antisocial Behavior
• Problems Related to Access to Medical and Other Health Care
• Nonadherence to Medical Treatment (e.g., Overweight or Obesity,
Malingering, Wandering Associated with a Mental Disorder)
• Borderline Intellectual Functioning
Adapted from Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed., American
Psychiatric Association; 2013.

Facilitation of Transfer from Prison to Hospital. Prisoners may
malinger (fake bad) to obtain a transfer to a psychiatric hospital from which
they may hope to escape or in which they expect to do “easier time.” The
prison context may also give rise to dissimulation (faking good). However,
the prospect of an indeterminate number of days on a mental health ward may
prompt an inmate with actual psychiatric symptoms to make every effort to


<<<PAGE 1845>>>
conceal them.
Admission to a Hospital. In this era of deinstitutionalization and
homelessness, individuals may malinger to gain admission to a psychiatric
hospital. The individual may see such institutions as providing free room and
board, a haven from the police, or refuge from rival gang members or
disgruntled drug cronies who have made street life even more unbearable and
hazardous than it usually is.
A robust, neatly attired man presented to the psychiatric emergency
department in the early-morning hours. He stated that “the voices” were
worse than before and that he wished readmission to the hospital. When
the psychiatrist challenged him, observing that his discharge was just that
afternoon, that he routinely left the hospital in the morning and demanded
rehospitalization at night, and that, despite multiple hospitalizations,
clinicians increasingly doubted his reported history of hallucinations, the
man became belligerent. When the psychiatrist still refused to admit him,
the patient grabbed the psychiatrist’s clothes, threatening him but
inflicting no harm. The psychiatrist asked the hospital police to escort
him off the grounds. The treatment team told the patient that he could
seek readmission to his regular ward during the day. Subsequent contact
with the patient’s ward revealed that their diagnoses were substance
abuse and homelessness; his apparent schizophrenia appeared never to
have been an actual issue in his treatment. (Courtesy of Mark J. Mills,
J.D., M.D. and Mark S. Lipian, M.D., Ph.D.)
Drug Seeking. Malingerers may feign illness to obtain favored
medications, either for personal use or, in a prison setting, as currency to
barter for cigarettes, protection, or other inmate-provided favors.
The plaintiff, a woman in her late 20s, was injured while dancing at a
club. Although her claim initially appeared bona fide, subsequent
investigation cast doubt on the mechanism of injury that she claimed—
namely, that a misplaced electrical cord under a carpet caused her to slip.


<<<PAGE 1846>>>
This was true, she claimed, even though she had been dancing in a
particularly jerky manner that could have easily caused problems without
tripping.
Subsequently, she sought medical and surgical treatment for torn
cartilage in her injured knee. Even though the initial surgery went well,
she kept reinjuring the knee with various “slips.” As a result, she
requested narcotic analgesics. A careful medical record review revealed
that she was obtaining such medications from multiple practitioners and
that she had forged at least one prescription.
In reviewing the case before binding arbitration, it was the opinion of
the orthopedic and psychiatric consultants that, although the initial injury
and reported pain were real, the plaintiff consciously elaborated her
injuries to obtain the desired narcotic analgesics. (Courtesy of Mark J.
Mills, J.D., M.D. and Mark S. Lipian, M.D., Ph.D.)
Child Custody. Minimizing difficulties or faking good for the sake of
obtaining child custody can occur when one party accurately accuses the
other of being an unfit parent because of psychological conditions. The
accused party may feel compelled to minimize symptoms or to portray himor herself in a positive light to reduce the chances of being deemed unfit and
losing custody.
Differential Diagnosis
The challenge is to differentiate malingering from an actual physical or
psychiatric illness. Furthermore, the possibility of partial malingering, which
is an exaggeration of existing symptoms, must be entertained. Also, the
possibility exists of unintentional, dynamically driven misattribution of
genuine symptoms (e.g., of depression) to an incorrect environmental cause
(e.g., to sexual harassment rather than to narcissistic injury).
We should also remember that a real psychiatric disorder and malingering
are not mutually exclusive.
Factitious disorder is distinguished from malingering by motivation (sick
role vs. tangible pain), whereas the somatoform disorders involve no
conscious volition. In conversion disorder, as in malingering, objective signs
cannot account for subjective experience, and differentiation between the two


<<<PAGE 1847>>>
disorders can be difficult. Table 20-2 lists some variables that may aid in
distinguishing between these two conditions.
Epidemiology
There is perhaps a 1 percent prevalence of malingering among mental health
patients in civilian clinical practice, with the estimate rising to 5 percent in
the military. In a litigious context, during interviews of criminal defendants,
the estimated prevalence of malingering is much higher—between 10 and 20
percent. Approximately 50 percent of children presenting with conduct
disorders have reported lying-related issues.
Although there is no apparent familial or genetic patterns, and no clear-cut
sex or age bias at onset, malingering does appear to be highly prevalent in
some military, prison, and litigious populations and, in Western society, in
men from youth through middle age. Associated disorders include conduct
and anxiety disorders in children and antisocial, borderline, and narcissistic
personality disorders in adults.
Etiology
Although there do not seem to be any biologic factors causally related to
malingering, its frequent association with antisocial personality disorder
raises the possibility that hypoarousability may be an underlying metabolic
factor. Still, no predisposing genetic, neurophysiologic, neurochemical, or
neuroendocrinologic forces are presently known.
Table 20-2
Factors Aiding in the Differentiation between Malingering
and Conversion Disorder
1. Malingerers are more likely to be suspicious, uncooperative, aloof,
and unfriendly; patients with conversion disorder are likely to be
friendly, cooperative, appealing, dependent, and clinging.
2. Malingerers may try to avoid diagnostic evaluations and refuse
recommended treatment; patients with conversion disorder likely
welcome evaluation and treatment, “searching for an answer.”
3. Malingerers likely refuse employment opportunities designed to


<<<PAGE 1848>>>
circumvent their disability; patients with conversion disorder likely
accept such opportunities.
4. Malingerers are more likely to provide extremely detailed and
exacting descriptions of events precipitating their “illness”;
patients with conversion disorder are more likely to report
historical gaps, inaccuracies, and vagaries.
Course and Prognosis
Malingering persists as long as the malingerer believes it will likely produce
the desired rewards. In the absence of concurrent diagnoses, after the
individual has attained the goal, the feigned symptoms disappear. In some
structured settings, such as the military or prison units, ignoring the
malingered behavior may result in its disappearance, mainly if an expectation
of continued productive performance, despite complaints, is made clear. In
children, malingering is most likely associated with a predisposing anxiety or
conduct disorder; proper attention to this developing problem may alleviate
the child’s propensity to malinger.
Treatment
The appropriate stance for the psychiatrist is clinical neutrality. If
malingering is suspected, a careful differential investigation should ensue. If,
after the diagnostic evaluation, malingering seems most likely, the clinician
should tactfully but firmly confront the patient with the apparent outcome.
The clinician should also try to understand the underlying reasons for the
ruse, and explore alternative, more acceptable pathways to the desired
outcome. Coexisting psychiatric disorders should be thoroughly assessed.
Only if the patient is utterly unwilling to interact with the physician under
any terms other than manipulation should the physician abandon the
interaction.

BEREAVEMENT
Normal bereavement begins immediately after or within a few months of the
loss of a loved one. Typical signs and symptoms include feelings of sadness,
preoccupation with thoughts about the deceased, tearfulness, irritability,


<<<PAGE 1849>>>
insomnia, and difficulties concentrating and carrying out daily activities.
Based on the cultural group, bereavement is limited to a varying time, usually
6 months, but it can be longer. Normal bereavement, however, can lead to a
full depressive disorder that requires treatment. Some grieving individuals
present with symptoms characteristic of a major depressive episode such as
depressed mood, insomnia, anorexia, and weight loss. The duration of grief
and bereavement varies considerably among different cultural groups and
within the same cultural group. The diagnosis of depressive disorder is
generally not given unless the symptoms are still present 2 months after the
loss. However, the presence of specific symptoms that are not characteristic
of a “normal” grief reaction may help differentiate bereavement from
depression. These include (1) guilt about things other than actions taken or
not taken by the survivor at the time of the death, (2) thoughts of death other
than the survivor feeling that he or she would be better off dead or should
have died with the deceased person, (3) morbid preoccupation with
worthlessness, (4) marked psychomotor retardation, (5) prolonged and
marked functional impairment, and (6) hallucinatory experiences other than
thinking that he or she hears the voice of or transiently sees the image of the
deceased person.

OCCUPATIONAL PROBLEMS
Occupational problems often arise during stressful changes in work, namely,
at initial entry into the workforce or when making job changes within the
same organization to a higher position because of excellent quality
performance or to a parallel position because of corporate need. Distress
often occurs when not choosing these changes or if the person feels
unprepared for the change. It is also true during layoffs and at retirement,
especially if retirement is mandatory, and the person is unprepared for this
event. Work distress can result if one’s work situation changes to work
overload, or conversely, a lack of challenge. Also, an individual may feel
unable to fulfill work expectations, perhaps because they lack sufficient
authority to enact any change or meet with conflicting expectations. Working
with harsh or unreasonable superiors can be another common source of work
distress.


<<<PAGE 1850>>>
Work Choices and Changes
Young adults without role models or guidance from families, mentors, or
others in their communities too often underestimate their potential lifetime
abilities to learn a trade or earn a college or postgraduate degree. Also,
women and members of minority groups often feel less prepared to accept
work challenges, fear rejection, and do not apply for jobs for which they are
qualified. On the other hand, men, in fields in which they are
underrepresented, often and confidently move up the career ladder faster
(glass elevator). As part of initial interviews for evaluation of occupational
problems, patients should be encouraged to consider their heretofore
unrecognized, unadmitted talents; long-held, yet unexpressed, dreams and
goals regarding work; actual successes in work and school; and motivation to
risk learning what they would find satisfying.
Minorities and those in low-paying and low-skilled jobs too often have less
job security. Business and institutional reorganization and consequent
downsizing, factory closings, and moves affect many, often leaving these
workers feeling hopeless and helpless about future employment, on welfare,
angry, and depressed.
With ongoing and often sudden downsizing of corporations and
businesses, men and women continue to struggle with unexpected job loss
and premature retirement even when finances are not an issue. Also, men, in
particular, define themselves by their work roles and thus experience more
occupational distress from these changes. Women may adjust faster to
retirement, but they often have less financial security than men. Even today,
white women earn approximately 80 cents on the dollar, and African
American and Hispanic women earn even less for comparable work. In
addition to lower pay, women may have lower status, find themselves
widowed more often than men, and are more likely to be caring for children,
grandchildren, and elderly relatives. Women represent more of the single
working parent group and the working poor.
Stress and the Workplace
More than 30 percent of workers report that they are under stress at work. At
least 15 percent of occupational disability claims involve workplace distress.
Expected distress follows recognized and uncontrollable work changes—


<<<PAGE 1851>>>
downsizing, mergers and acquisitions; work overload; and chronic physical
strains, including work noise, temperature, bodily injuries, and strain from
performing computer work.
Work frustration can also arise from an individual worker’s unrecognized
(and therefore unresolved) psychodynamic issues, such as working
appropriately with superiors and not relating to one’s supervisor as a parent
figure. Other developmental issues include unresolved problems with
competition, assertiveness, envy, fear of success, and the inability to
communicate verbally in a constructive manner.
After the September 11, 2001, World Trade Center tragedy, a 32-year-old
married male firefighter, who had been away on vacation that day with
his wife and children, began to exhibit changed behaviors at home and
work. At home, he appeared not to listen to his two children and, instead,
focused his attention on television sporting events. At work, he also
appeared to be more focused on cooking the same dinners for his peers
and watching television than on interacting verbally with his remaining
peers and the new chief. In several months, a chaplain visited the station
several times and talked to the firefighters about survivor guilt and the
9/11 tragedy, and the firefighter began to return somewhat to his former
healthier behaviors. (Courtesy of Leah J. Dickstein, M.D.)
Often, work conflicts reflect similar conflicts in the worker’s personal life,
and referral for treatment, unless there is insight, is in order. Some studies
have found that massage therapy, meditation, and yoga at intervals during the
workday relieve stress when used regularly. Approaches using cognitive
therapy have also helped people reduce work pressure.
Suicide Risk
Some occupations—health professionals, financial service workers, and
police, the first and latter groups because of more access to lethal drugs and
weapons—both attract persons with high suicide risk and involve increased
chronic distress that may lead to higher suicide rates.


<<<PAGE 1852>>>
Career and Job Problems of Women
Most women work outside the home out of necessity to support themselves
or their dependents (whether children or adults) or as part of a working
couple. With the divorce rate remaining at the 50 percent level, many women
find themselves economically more impoverished after a divorce than when
married, although divorced men usually find their economic status improved.
Despite more than four decades of increasing knowledge about and concern
for women’s status in the workplace, unique gender issues, bias, and lack of
accommodation to their unique needs at certain life stages (i.e., pregnancy
and postpartum, the primary responsibility for young healthy and ill children)
continue. However, women were the largest group establishing new small
businesses in the 1990s. Many have left large corporations where they felt
undervalued because of their gender. Women experience problems when they
are the sole woman in a man’s field. Despite increasing recognition of the
need for men in relationships with women to assume home and family
responsibilities, fewer than 25 percent of men do so equitably.
Women of childbearing and child-rearing ages continue to find themselves
in conflict with job expectations, opportunities, and personal responsibilities.
High-quality, on-site, dependent-care facilities with extended hours are rare
and often out of range financially. Major unresolved work issues that are
unique to women at certain life stages include flextime and paid and unpaid
dependent leave options. Beyond dependent care issues, women in the
workforce continue to experience distress after chronic and repeated sexual
harassment, despite its illegality and media attention. Increasingly, more
women have travel responsibilities, work long hours, work shifts beyond
daylight hours, and experience personal workplace violence.
Among dual-career families and partners, the woman is more likely to
move when the man chooses to move for a work opportunity than vice versa.
Consequently, a woman’s career is interrupted more often. There is now less
hesitation to have the two members of a relationship work for the same
organization than previously, albeit usually in different departments. Work
distress may also stem from continuous miscommunication, especially that
based on gender.
Working Teenagers


<<<PAGE 1853>>>
With unemployment increasing, many teenagers work part time while
attending high school. Consequently, stress can arise because of less parent–
teenager interaction and constructive parental control issues about teens’ use
of earnings, time spent away from home, and consequent behaviors both in
and outside the home. When both parents or a single parent, as well as the
teenager, work outside the home, often on different schedules, parent–teen
verbal communication must be proactive, transparent, and ongoing.
Working within the Home
Although most women with children of all ages must work outside the home,
at times, they may be home full time or part time or may work at home.
When their husbands or partners work full time outside the home, problems
may develop from each one’s perceived expectations of the other. Women
who care for children and their home exclusively may be seen by their
partners as not only economically dependent and inferior but also not as
competent and not understanding of the man’s stressors and needs. Ongoing
respectful listening and verbal communication must be encouraged.
People in organizations are increasingly taking work home as their work
expectations increase. This work-at-home experience can and does interfere
with personal lives and satisfaction, which can then have further
repercussions at work.
Chronic Illness
As general and other medical and psychiatric treatments for chronic diseases
improve, employers have been increasingly concerned about accommodating
patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), diabetes
mellitus, and other disorders. The issue of mandatory testing for AIDS and
substance abuse (alcohol and other illegal substances) continues to be of
concern. Employee assistance programs offering education about general and
mental health topics have proved timely and cost-effective.
Domestic Violence
Although occurring in the home, signs and symptoms that interfere with work
may help identify victims of domestic violence. Trained professionals must
question all employees experiencing work distress about domestic violence


<<<PAGE 1854>>>
and, when indicated, refer individuals for assistance, which includes safety in
the workplace.
Job Loss
Regardless of the reason for job loss, most people experience distress, at least
temporarily, including symptoms of normal grief, loss of self-esteem, anger,
and reactive depressive and anxiety symptoms, as well as somatic symptoms
and possibly the onset of or increase in substance abuse or domestic violence.
Timely education, support programs, and vocational guidance can be helpful,
as is access to treatment.
Vocational Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation is often necessary for those traumatized by stresses in the
workplace, those who had to take a leave for medical or psychiatric reasons,
and those who lose their jobs. Individual or group counseling enables persons
to improve personal relationships, raise self-esteem, or learn new work skills.
Patients with schizophrenia may benefit from sheltered workshops in which
they perform work geared to their level of function. Some patients with
schizophrenia or autism do well in tasks that are repetitive or require
obsessive concern with details.

ADULT ANTISOCIAL BEHAVIOR
Characterized by activities that are illegal, immoral, or both, antisocial
behavior usually begins in childhood and often persists throughout life. The
term antisocial behavior somewhat confusingly applies both to persons’
actions that are not due to a mental disorder and to actions by those who
never received a neuropsychiatric workup to determine the presence or
absence of a mental disorder. As Dorothy Lewis noted, the term can apply to
behavior by otherwise normal persons who “struggle to make a dishonest
living.”
Diagnosis and Clinical Features
The diagnosis of adult antisocial behavior is one of exclusion. Substance
dependence in such behavior often makes it difficult to separate the antisocial


<<<PAGE 1855>>>
behavior related primarily to substance dependence from disordered
behaviors that occurred either before substance use or during episodes
unrelated to substance dependence.
It is also essential that we differentiate this from an antisocial personality
disorder, and when a patient meets the criteria for the personality disorder,
that diagnosis would supersede this one.
During the manic phases of bipolar I disorder, certain aspects of behavior,
such as wanderlust, sexual promiscuity, and financial difficulties can be
similar to adult antisocial behavior. Patients with schizophrenia may have
episodes of adult antisocial behavior, but the symptom picture is usually
clear, especially regarding thought disorder, delusions, and hallucinations on
the mental status examination.
Neurologic conditions can be associated with adult antisocial behavior,
and, when indicated, a full workup, including neuroimaging, can help
identify a cause of the behavior. We should consider complex partial seizures
in the differential diagnosis. When making a clear-cut diagnosis of epilepsy
or encephalitis, we should then consider whether the disorder is contributing
to antisocial behavior. Abnormal EEG findings are prevalent among violent
offenders: an estimated 50 percent of aggressive criminals have abnormal
EEG findings.
Persons with adult antisocial behavior have difficulties in work, marriage,
and money matters and conflicts with various authorities. Table 20-3
summarizes the symptoms of adult antisocial behavior.
Epidemiology
Depending on the specifics of the case finding, adult antisocial behavior may
range from 5 to 15 percent of the population. Within prison populations,
investigators report prevalence figures between 20 and 80 percent. Men
account for more adult antisocial behavior than do women.
Table 20-3
Symptoms of Adult Antisocial Behavior
Life Area

Antisocial Patients with Significant
Problems in Area (%)


<<<PAGE 1856>>>
Work problems

85

Marital problems

81

Financial dependence

79

Arrests

75

Alcohol abuse

72

School problems

71

Impulsiveness

67

Sexual behavior

64

Wild adolescence

62

Vagrancy

60

Belligerence

58

Social isolation

56

Military record (of
those serving)

53

Lack of guilt

40

Somatic complaints

31

Use of aliases

29

Pathologic lying

16

Drug abuse

15

Suicide attempts

11

Data from Robins L. Deviant Children Grown Up: A Sociological and Psychiatric Study of
Sociopathic Personality. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins; 1966.

Etiology
Antisocial behaviors in adulthood are characteristic of a variety of persons,
ranging from those with no demonstrable psychopathology to those who are


<<<PAGE 1857>>>
severely impaired and have psychotic disorders, cognitive disorders, and
retardation, among other conditions. A comprehensive neuropsychiatric
assessment of antisocial adults is indicated and may reveal potentially
treatable psychiatric and neurologic impairments. Only in the absence of
mental disorders can patients be categorized as displaying adult antisocial
behavior. Genetic and social factors may influence adult antisocial behavior.
Genetic Factors. Some studies found a 60 percent concordance rate in
monozygotic twins and about a 30 percent concordance rate in dizygotic
twins. Adoption studies show a high rate of antisocial behavior in the
biologic relatives of adoptees identified with antisocial behavior and a high
incidence of antisocial behavior in the adopted-away offspring of those with
antisocial behavior. The prenatal and perinatal periods of those who
subsequently display antisocial behavior often are associated with low birth
weight, mental retardation, and prenatal exposure to alcohol and other drugs
of abuse.
Social Factors. Studies have shown that in neighborhoods in which
families with low socioeconomic status (SES) predominate, the sons of
unskilled workers are more likely to commit more offenses and more serious
criminal offenses than do the sons of middle-class and skilled workers, at
least during adolescence and early adulthood. These data are not as precise
for women, but the findings are generally similar in studies from many
countries. Areas of family training differ by SES group. Middle-SES parents
use love-oriented techniques in discipline. They withdraw affection rather
than impose physical punishment, as is done in low-SES groups. Negative
parental attitudes toward aggressive behavior attempt to curb that behavior,
and the ability to communicate parental values are more characteristic of
middle- and high-SES groups than of low ones. Adult antisocial behavior is
associated with the use and abuse of alcohol and other substances and with
the easy availability of handguns.
Treatment
In general, therapists are pessimistic about treating adult antisocial behavior.
They have little hope of changing a pattern that has been present almost
continuously throughout a person’s life. Psychotherapy has not been


<<<PAGE 1858>>>
effective, and no breakthroughs with biologic treatments, including
medications, have occurred.
Therapists show more enthusiasm for the use of therapeutic communities
and other forms of group treatment, although the data provide little basis for
optimism. Many adult criminals, incarcerated in institutional settings, have
shown some response to group therapy approaches. The history of violence,
criminality, and antisocial behavior has shown that such behaviors seem to
decrease after age 40 years. Recidivism in criminals, which can reach 90
percent in some studies, also decreases in middle age.
Prevention. Because antisocial behavior often begins during childhood, the
primary focus must be on delinquency prevention. Any measures that
improve the physical and mental health of socioeconomically disadvantaged
children and their families are likely to reduce delinquency and violent crime.
Often, recurrently violent persons have sustained many insults to the central
nervous system (CNS) prenatally and throughout childhood and adolescence.
Consequently, we need to develop programs to educate parents about the
dangers to their children of CNS injury from maltreatment, including the
effects of psychoactive substances on the brains of growing fetuses. Public
education about the releasing effect of alcohol on violent behaviors (as well
as its contribution to vehicular homicide) may also reduce crime.
In a Surgeon General’s Workshop on Violence and Public Health (1985),
the work group on preventing assault and homicide emphasized the
importance of discouraging corporal punishment in the home, forbidding it in
the schools, and even abolishing capital punishment by the state, saying that
all are models and sanctions for violence. No evidence indicates that capital
punishment reduces crime in the states that have it. Opponents of capital
punishment see it as “vengeance,” not punishment.
Although persons disagree about the contribution of violence in the media
to violent crime, the propaganda potential of the media is universally
recognized. We have not fully realized the extent to which the media, such as
television, can be used to transmit positive social values. The guidelines
issued by the television industry to indicate the amount of sex and violence in
programs is an attempt to deal with the issue; however, program content that
espouses traditional societal values would be beneficial.
The most successful preventive measures within the field of medicine have


<<<PAGE 1859>>>
come from community-wide public health programs (e.g., campaigns against
smoking) and from programs that detect individual vulnerabilities (e.g.,
individual monitoring of blood pressure). Studies of adult antisocial behavior
reveal the contribution of broad cultural factors and constellations of
individual biopsychosocial vulnerabilities. Prevention programs must
recognize and address both kinds of factors.

RELIGIOUS OR SPIRITUAL PROBLEM
A religious or spiritual problem can bring the person to the psychiatrist under
one of several circumstances. For example, a person may begin to question
his or her faith and choose not to discuss the problem with a spiritual advisor.
Alternatively, a person may wish to convert to a new faith, to marry or
improve a marriage when the partner is of a different faith.
Psychiatrists must enable and assist patients in distinguishing religious
thought or experience from psychopathology and, if this is a problem,
encourage patients to work through the issues independently or with
assistance. Religious imagery may be recognized in mental illness when
persons state they believe that they have been commanded by God to take a
dangerous or grandiose action.
Religious experiences may factor into a person’s life in unexpected ways,
as in the following case. A midcareer male surgeon who was very
successful but long overcommitted to his private practice and his
academic responsibilities revealed to his often-neglected wife that, at age
9 years, he was approached by his religious leader to get close physically
and ultimately engaged in sexual acts over several years. Believing it was
his fault, he never told anyone and decided never to have children. After
telling his wife about the experience, they engaged in family therapy to
work through the stresses the confession produced in their marriage.
Cults
Recently, cults have appeared to be less popular and less attractive to naïve
late adolescents and young adults seeking assistance in discovering who they
are as they struggle to develop more mature relationships with their parents.


<<<PAGE 1860>>>
Cults are led by charismatic leaders, often out of control themselves, with
inappropriate and often unethical values but purporting to offer acceptance
and guidance to troubled followers. Cult members are actively controlled and
forced to dissolve allegiance to family and others to serve the cult leader’s
directives and personal needs. These young members often come from
educated families who then seek professional help in persuading their
children to leave the cult and enter deprogramming therapy to restore
psychological stability to the former cult members. Deprogramming and
adjustment back into the family, society, and an independent life are timeintensive and long term with resultant posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
which must be recognized and treated.

ACCULTURATION PROBLEM
Acculturation is the process whereby a person from one culture changes in
their manner, custom, and dress to adapt to a different culture. It leads to
assimilation in which the person has identified with the new culture, usually
without conflict or ambivalence. In some cases, however, significant cultural
change can evoke severe distress, termed culture shock. This condition arises
when individuals suddenly find themselves in a new culture in which they
feel entirely alien. They may also feel conflict over which lifestyles to
maintain, change, or adopt. Children and young adult immigrants often adapt
more quickly than do middle-aged and elderly immigrants. Younger
immigrants often learn the new language more efficiently and continue to
mature in the new culture, but those who are more senior, having had more
stability and unchanging routines in their former culture, struggle more to
adapt. Culture shock from immigration differs from the restless and
continuous moving of psychiatric patients secondary to their illness.
Culture shock can occur within a person’s own country with geographic,
school, and work changes, such as joining the military, experiencing school
busing, moving across the country, or moving to a vastly different
neighborhood or from a rural area to a metropolis. Reactive symptoms, which
are understandable, include anxiety, depression, isolation, fear, and a sense of
loss of identity as the person adjusts. If the person is part of a family or group
making this transition and the move is positive and planned, stress can be
lower. Furthermore, if one can maintain selected cultural mores safely as they


<<<PAGE 1861>>>
integrate into the new culture, it may be less stressful.
Constant geographic moves because of chosen work opportunities or
necessity involve a large proportion of workers in the United States. Joining
activities in the new community and actively trying to meet neighbors and
coworkers can lessen the culture shock.
An 18-year-old, first-year female college student offered an academic
scholarship by a small Southern college with a major in her field of
interest, realized on her return home to the Midwest for winter break that
she felt like a misfit among her dorm peers. They were friendly yet
generally kept their distance from her after class. At home, she discussed
her experiences with high school friends, who replied that they had heard
about such cultural dissonance from peers at their Midwestern colleges.
The student returned to college feeling that it was not her fault or
imagination and slowly began to reach out more assertively to her peers
so they could get to know her beyond stereotypical beliefs and so she
could do the same.
Brainwashing
First practiced by the Chinese Communists on American prisoners during the
Korean War, brainwashing is the deliberate creation of culture shock.
Individuals are isolated, intimidated, and made to feel different and out of
place to break their spirits and destroy their coping skills. When a person
appears mentally weak and helpless, the aggressors impose new ideas on
them that they would never have accepted in their normal state. As with those
involved in cults, on release and return to their homes, brainwashed
individuals with PTSD require deprogramming treatment, including reeducation and ongoing supportive psychotherapy, both on an individual and
group basis. Treatment is usually long-term to rebuild healthy self-esteem
and coping skills.
Prisoners of War and Torture Victims
Prisoners who survive war or torture experiences do so because of personal
inner strengths developed in their earlier lives, beginning within their


<<<PAGE 1862>>>
emotionally healthy and caring families; if they come from troubled families,
they are more likely to commit suicide during imprisonment and torture.
Prisoners must continuously cope with ongoing anxiety, fear, isolation from
known lives, and complete loss of all control over their lives. Those who
appear to cope best believe they must survive for a reason (e.g., to tell others
what they experienced or to find and return to loved ones). Prisoners who
cope best describe living simultaneously on two levels—coping in the here
and now to survive the situation while maintaining constant mental
connections to their past values and experiences and those important to them.
Beyond the surviving prisoner’s personal difficulties, including PTSD, if
and when his or her survival behavior continues, his or her family may be
affected by the surviving prisoner’s inordinate fear of police and strangers,
overprotection and overburdening of children to replace those significant
others lost, lack of sharing of the past, continued isolation from current
communities, or inappropriately expressed anger. Thus, another generation
(i.e., children of survivors) can be affected in their personal development and
psychological functioning and may require psychiatric evaluation and
treatment. (See also Chapter 10, Trauma and Stressor-Related Disorders, for
further discussion of these topics.)
A 75-year-old Catholic female survivor of the Pawiak prison in Warsaw,
Poland, and then of a concentration camp after her capture as a member
of the underground in World War II stated that she had wanted to become
a painter. In camp, she carved the Madonna and Child on her toothbrush
and sent it home to her mother. She made other clandestine carvings for
several women in her barracks to send home to their families, which
pleased everyone. After the war, she became a well-known sculptress
with exhibits throughout Europe. Many of her art pieces taught people
about suffering and respect for others who are of different religions and
cultures.

PHASE OF LIFE PROBLEM
Phase of life problems may occur at any point along the life cycle: the first
day of school as a child, the divorce of a parent during adolescence, starting


<<<PAGE 1863>>>
college as a young adult, marriage, having children, illness, caring for aged
parents, and many others. Although, on some level, adults recognize that life
events will intrude on expected plans in the course of a lifetime, unexpected,
multiple, significant negative occurrences, especially if they are chronic,
overwhelm a person’s ability to recover and function constructively. The
typical phase of life problems include relationship changes, such as a
changed significant personal relationship or loss, job crises, and parenthood.
Because of sex-role socialization and consequent cultural expectations,
where men appear externally better able to handle these phases of life
problems, women, people with lower SES, and minority group members
appear more vulnerable to negative experiences, perhaps because they feel
less empowered psychologically. Significant life changes precipitate distress
in the form of anxiety and depressive symptoms, an inability to express
reactive emotions directly, and often difficulties in coping with ongoing or
changed life responsibilities.
Individuals with positive attitudes, healthy family and personal
relationships, and mature defense mechanisms and coping styles, including
essential trust in self and others, good verbal communication skills, a capacity
for creative and positive thinking, and the ability to be flexible, reliable, and
energetic, appear to be best able to cope with phase of life problems.
Furthermore, a capacity for sublimation; adequate financial and work status;
solid values; and healthy, feasible goals can enable people to face, accept,
and deal realistically with expected and unexpected life problems and
changes.

NONCOMPLIANCE WITH TREATMENT
Compliance is the degree to which a patient carries out the recommendations
of the treating physician. A positive doctor–patient relationship can help
foster compliance, but even in those circumstances, the patient may be
reluctant to comply with a physician’s advice. In psychiatry, a significant
concern is medication noncompliance, which may result from discomforting
side effects, expense, personal value judgments, and denial of illness, among
many others. We should only use this category when the problem is
sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.


<<<PAGE 1864>>>
RELATIONAL PROBLEMS
An adult’s psychological health and sense of well-being depend, to a
significant degree, on the quality of his or her critical relationships—that is,
on patterns of interaction with a partner and children, parents and siblings,
and friends and colleagues. Problems in the interaction between any of these
significant others can lead to clinical symptoms and impaired functioning
among one or more members of the relational unit. Relational problems may
be a focus of clinical attention (1) when a relational unit is distressed and
dysfunctional or threatened with dissolution and (2) when the relational
problems precede, accompany, or follow other psychiatric or medical
disorders. Indeed, the relational context of the patient influences other
medical or psychiatric symptoms. Conversely, the functioning of a relational
unit is affected by a member’s general and other medical or psychiatric
illness. Relational disorders require a different clinical approach than other
disorders. Instead of focusing primarily on the link between symptoms, signs,
and the workings of the individual mind, the clinician must also focus on
interactions between the individuals involved. Also, the clinician should
consider how these interactions are related to the general and other medical or
psychiatric symptoms in a meaningful way.
Definition
Relational problems are patterns of interaction between members of a
relational unit that are associated with significantly impaired functioning in
one or more individual members. Thus one may have parent–child problems,
sibling-related problems, or other dyad or triad impairments. At times the
entire unit, such as the family itself, may be dysfunctional.
Epidemiology
No reliable figures are available on the prevalence of relational problems.
They can be assumed to be ubiquitous; however, most relational problems
resolve without professional intervention. We should consider the nature,
frequency, and effects of the problem on those involved before using this
diagnosis. For example, divorce, which occurs in just under 50 percent of
marriages, is a problem that partners resolve through the remedy of divorce.


<<<PAGE 1865>>>
We do not need to use this diagnosis for most divorces. If the persons cannot
resolve their disputation and continue to live together in a sadomasochistic or
pathologically depressed relationship with unhappiness and abuse, then they
should be so labeled. Relationship problems between involved persons that
cannot be resolved by friends, family, or clergy require professional
intervention by psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, social workers, and other
mental health professionals.
Relational Problem Related to a Mental Disorder or General
Medical Condition
When a family member is ill either from a psychiatric or medical illness,
there are reverberations throughout the family unit. Studies indicate that
whereas satisfying relationships may have a health-protective influence,
relationship distress tends to be associated with an increased incidence of
illness. Psychophysiologic mechanisms help to explain how relational
systems affect physical or mental health—for example, the intense emotions
generated in human attachment systems can affect vascular reactivity and
immune processes. Thus, stress-related psychological or physical symptoms
can be an expression of family dysfunction.
Adults must often assume responsibility for caring for aging parents while
they are still caring for their children, and this dual obligation can create
stress. When adults take care of their parents, both parties must adapt to a
reversal of their former roles, and the caretakers not only face the potential
loss of their parents but also must cope with evidence of their mortality.
Some caretakers abuse their aging parents, a problem that is now receiving
attention. Abuse is most likely to occur when the caretaking offspring have
substance abuse problems, are under economic stress, and have no relief from
their caretaking duties or when the parent is bedridden or has a chronic illness
requiring constant nursing attention. Women suffer abuse more often than
men, and most abuse occurs in persons older than age 75 years.
The development of chronic illness in a family member stresses the family
system and requires adaptation by both the sick person and the other family
members. The person who has become sick must frequently face a loss of
autonomy, an increased sense of vulnerability, and sometimes a taxing
medical regimen. The other family members must experience the loss of the


<<<PAGE 1866>>>
person as he or she was before the illness, and they usually have substantial
caretaking responsibility—for example, in debilitating neurologic diseases,
including dementia of the Alzheimer’s type, and diseases such as AIDS and
cancer. In these cases, the whole family must deal with the stress of
prospective death as well as the current illness. Some families use the anger
engendered by such situations to create support organizations, increase public
awareness of the disease, and rally around the sick member. However,
chronic illness frequently produces depression in family members and can
cause them to withdraw from or attack one another. The burden of caring for
ill family members falls disproportionately on the women in a family—
mothers, daughters, and daughters-in-law.
Chronic emotional illness also requires major adaptations by families. For
instance, family members may react with chaos or fear of the psychotic
productions of a family member with schizophrenia. The regression,
exaggerated emotions, frequent hospitalizations, and economic and social
dependence of a person with schizophrenia can stress the family system.
Family members may react with hostile feelings (referred to as expressed
emotion) that are associated with a poor prognosis for the person who is sick.
Similarly, a family member with bipolar I disorder can disrupt a family,
particularly during manic episodes.
Family devastation can occur when illness (1) suddenly strikes a
previously healthy person, (2) occurs earlier than expected in the life cycle
(some impairment of physical capacities is expected in old age, although
many older persons are healthy), (3) affects the economic stability of the
family, and (4) when there are few options for improving the condition of the
sick family member.
Parent–Child Relational Problem
Parents differ widely in sensing the needs of their infants. Some quickly note
their child’s moods and needs; others are slow to respond. Parental
responsiveness interacts with the children’s temperament to affect the quality
of the attachment between child and parent. The diagnosis of the parent–child
relational problem applies when the focus of clinical attention is a pattern of
interaction between parent and child that is associated with clinically
significant impairment in individual or family functioning or with clinically


<<<PAGE 1867>>>
significant symptoms. Examples include impaired communication,
overprotection, and inadequate discipline.
Research on parenting skills has isolated two primary dimensions: (1) a
permissive–restrictive dimension and (2) a warm and accepting versus a cold
and hostile dimension. A typology that separates parents on these dimensions
distinguishes among authoritarian (restrictive and cold), permissive
(minimally restrictive and accepting), and authoritative (restrictive as needed
but also warm and accepting) parenting styles. Children of authoritarian
parents tend to be withdrawn or conflicted; those of permissive parents are
likely to be more aggressive, impulsive, and low achievers; and children of
authoritative parents seem to function at the highest level, socially and
cognitively. However, switching from an authoritarian to a permissive mode
may create a negative reinforcement pattern.
Difficulties in many situations stress the usual parent–child interaction.
Substantial evidence indicates that marital discord leads to problems in
children, from depression and withdrawal to conduct disorder and poor
performance at school. Parents may resort to triangulation, where they recruit
a child as an ally in the struggle with the partner. Divorces and remarriages
stress the parent–child relationship and may create painful loyalty conflicts.
Stepparents often find it challenging to assume a parental role and may resent
the special relationship that exists between their new marital partner and the
children from that partner’s previous marriages. The resentment of a
stepparent by a stepchild and the favoring of a natural child are usual
reactions in a new family’s initial phases of adjustment. When a second child
is born, both familial stress and happiness may result, although happiness is
the dominant emotion in most families. The birth of a child can also be
troublesome when parents had adopted a child in the belief that they were
infertile. Single-parent families usually consist of a mother and children, and
their relationship is often affected by financial and emotional problems.
Other situations that can produce a parent–child problem are the
development of fatal, disabling, or chronic illness, such as leukemia,
epilepsy, sickle-cell anemia, or spinal cord injury, in either the parent or
child. The birth of a child with congenital disabilities, such as cerebral palsy,
blindness, or deafness, may also produce parent–child problems. These
situations, which are not rare, challenge the emotional resources of those
involved. Parents and the child must face present and potential loss and must


<<<PAGE 1868>>>
adjust their day-to-day lives physically, economically, and emotionally.
These situations can strain the healthiest families and produce parent–child
problems not only with the sick person but also with the unaffected family
members. In a family with a severely sick child, parents may resent, prefer, or
neglect the other children because the ill child requires much time and
attention.
Parents with children who have emotional disorders face particular
problems, depending on the child’s illness. In families with a child with
schizophrenia, family treatment is beneficial and improves the social
adjustment of the patient. Similarly, family therapy is useful when a child has
a mood disorder. In families with a substance-abusing child or adolescent,
family involvement is crucial to help control the drug-seeking behavior and
to allow family members to verbalize the feelings of frustration and anger
that are invariably present.
Normal developmental crises can also be related to parent–child problems.
For instance, adolescence is a time of frequent conflict as the adolescent
resists rules and demands, increasing autonomy and, at the same time, elicits
protective control by displaying immature and dangerous behavior.
The parents of sons ages 18, 15, and 11 years presented with distress
about the behavior of their middle child. The family had been cohesive
with satisfactory relationships among all members until 6 months before
this consultation. At that time, the 15-year-old son began seeing a girl
from a comparatively unsupervised household. Frequent arguments had
developed between parents and son regarding going out on school nights,
curfews, and neglect of schoolwork. The son’s combativeness and
lowered academic achievement upset his parents to a great deal. They had
not experienced similar conflicts with their oldest child. The adolescent,
however, maintained a good relationship with his siblings and friends, did
not have behavior problems at school, continued to participate in the
school basketball team, and was not a substance user.
Daycare Centers. Quality of care during the first 3 years of life is crucial
to neuropsychologic development. The National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development does not consider daycare harmful to children,


<<<PAGE 1869>>>
especially when the caregivers and daycare teachers provide consistent,
empathetic, nurturing care. Not all daycare centers can meet that level of
care, however, especially those located in impoverished urban areas. Children
receiving less than optimal caring exhibit decreased intellectual and verbal
skills that indicate delayed neurocognitive development. They may also
become irritable, anxious, or depressed, which interferes with the parent–
child bonding experience, and they are less assertive and less effectively
toilet trained by the age of 5 years.
Currently, more than 55 percent of women are in the workforce, many of
whom have no choice but to place their children in daycare centers. Close to
50 percent of entering medical students are women; few medical centers,
however, make adequate provisions for on-site daycare centers for their
students or staff. Similarly, corporations need to provide on-site, high-quality
care for the children of their employees. Not only will that approach benefit
the children, but also corporate economic benefits will accrue as a result of
reduced absenteeism, increased productivity, and happier working mothers.
Such programs have the added benefit of decreasing stresses on marriages.
Partner Relational Problem
Partner relational problems may include negative communication (e.g.,
criticisms), distorted communication (e.g., unrealistic expectations), or
noncommunication (e.g., withdrawal) associated with clinically significant
impairment in individual or family functioning or symptoms in one or both
partners.
When persons have partner relational problems, psychiatrists must assess
whether a patient’s distress arises from the relationship or a mental disorder.
Mental disorders are more common in single persons—those who never
married or who are widowed, separated, or divorced—than among married
persons. Clinicians should evaluate developmental, sexual, and occupational
and relationship histories, for purposes of diagnosis.
Marriage demands a sustained level of adaptation from both partners. In a
troubled marriage, a therapist can encourage the partners to explore areas
such as the extent of communication between the partners, their ways of
solving disputes, their attitudes toward childbearing and child-rearing, their
relationships with their in-laws, their attitudes toward social life, their


<<<PAGE 1870>>>
handling of finances, and their sexual interaction. The birth of a child,
abortion or miscarriage, economic stresses, moves to new areas, episodes of
illness, significant career changes, and any situations that involve a
significant change in marital roles can precipitate stressful periods in a
relationship. Illness in a child exerts the most significant strain on a marriage,
and marriages in which a child has died through illness or accident more
often than not end in divorce. Complaints of lifelong anorgasmia or
impotence by marital partners usually indicate intrapsychic problems,
although sexual dissatisfaction is involved in many cases of marital
maladjustment.
Adjustment to marital roles can be a problem when partners are from
different backgrounds and have grown up with different value systems. For
example, members of low SES groups perceive a wife as making most of the
decisions in the family, and they accept physical punishment as a way to
discipline children. Middle-class persons perceive family decision-making
processes as shared, with the husband often being the final arbiter, and they
prefer to discipline children verbally. Therapists and partners can handle the
problems involving conflicts in values, adjustment to new roles, and poor
communication by examining the couple’s relationship, as in marital therapy.
Epidemiologic surveys show that unhappy marriages are a risk factor for
major depressive disorders. Marital discord also affects physical health. For
example, in a study of women age 30 to 65 years with coronary artery
disease, marital stress worsened the prognosis 2.9 times for recurrent
coronary events. Marital conflict was also associated with a 46 percent higher
relative death risk among female patients having hemodialysis and with
elevations in serum epinephrine, norepinephrine, and corticotrophin levels in
both men and women. In one study, patients with high levels of hostile
marital behavior had slower healing wounds, lower production of
proinflammatory cytokines, and higher cytokine production in peripheral
blood. Overall, women show better psychological and physiologic
responsiveness to conflict than men.
Physician Marriages. Physicians have a higher risk of divorce than other
occupational groups. The incidence of divorce among physicians is about 25
to 30 percent. Specialty choice influenced divorce. The highest rate of
divorce occurred in psychiatrists (50 percent) followed by surgeons (33


<<<PAGE 1871>>>
percent) and internists, pediatricians, and pathologists (31 percent). The
average age at first marriage was 26 years among all groups.
It is not clear why physicians are at high risk for divorce. Factors
implicated include the stresses of dealing with dying patients, making lifeand-death decisions, working long hours, and the constant risk of malpractice
litigation. Such stressors may predispose physicians to a variety of emotional
ills, with the most common being depression and substance abuse, including
alcoholism. Such persons generally cannot deal with the complex interactions
required to maintain successful long-term relationships of any kind, and
marriage requires the most interpersonal skills of all.
Sibling Relational Problem
Sibling relationships tend to be characterized by competition, comparison,
and cooperation. Intense sibling rivalry can occur with the birth of a child and
can persist as the children grow up, compete for parental approval, and
measure their accomplishments against one another. Alliances between
siblings are equally common. Siblings may learn to protect one another
against parental control or aggression. In households with three children, one
pair tends to become tightly involved with one another, leaving the extra
child in the position of an outsider.
Relational problems can arise when a family treats siblings unequally; for
instance, idealizing one child while casting another in the role of the family
scapegoat. Differences in gender roles and expectations expressed by the
parents can underlie sibling rivalry. Parent–child relationships also are
dependent on personality interactions. A child’s resentment directed at a
parental figure or a child’s own disavowed dark emotions can be projected
onto a sibling and can fuel an intense hate relationship.
An ill child creates stress for the child’s siblings. Parental concern and
attention to the sick child can elicit envy in the siblings. Also, chronic
disability can leave the sick child feeling devalued and rejected by siblings,
and the latter may develop a sense of superiority and may feel embarrassed
about having a disabled sister or brother. Twin relationships have become an
area of increasing study. Preliminary data show that twins are more likely to
be cooperative than competitive. Whether or not identical twins should be
dressed differently during their toddler years to ensure a separate identity is


<<<PAGE 1872>>>
open to question as is the issue of whether or not they should be in separate
classrooms when they begin school.
Other Relational Problems
People, across the life cycle, may become involved in relational problems
with leaders and others in their communities at large. In such relationships,
conflicts are frequent and can bring about stress-related symptoms. Many
relational problems of children occur in the school setting and involve peers.
Impaired peer relationships can be the chief complaint in attention-deficit or
conduct disorders, as well as in depressive and other psychiatric disorders of
childhood, adolescence, and adulthood.
Racial, ethnic, and religious prejudices and ignorance cause problems in
interpersonal relationships. In the workplace and communities at large, sexual
harassment is often a combination of inappropriate sexual interactions,
inappropriate displays of abuse of power and dominance, and expressions of
negative gender stereotypes. This harassment most often victimizes women
and gay men. However, it can also affect children and adolescents of both
sexes.

References
Barzilai-Pesach V, Sheiner EK, Sheiner E, Potashnik G, Shoham-Vardi I.
The effect of women’s occupational psychologic stress on outcome of
fertility treatments. J Occup Environ Med. 2006;48(1):56–62.
Bhugra D. Migration and depression. Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl.
2003;418:67–72.
Bogduk N. Diagnostic blocks: A truth serum for malingering. Clin J Pain.
2004;20(6):409–414.
Bosco SM, Harvey D. Effects of terror attacks on employment plans and
anxiety levels of college students. College Student J. 2003;37:438–446.
Campagna AF. Sexual abuse of males: The SAM model of theory and
practice. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2005;44(10):1064–1065.
Costigan CL, Cox MJ, Cauce AM. Work-parenting linkage among dualearner couples at the transition to parenthood. J Fam Psychol.
2003;17:397–408.


<<<PAGE 1873>>>
Dagan E, Gil S. BRCA1/2 mutation carriers: Psychological distress and ways
of coping. J Psychol Oncol. 2004;22(3):93–106.
Guriel J, Fremouw W. Assessing malingered posttraumatic disorder: A
critical review. Clin Psychol Rev. 2003;23(7):881–904.
Johnston D. What makes a difference to patients? Int Rev Psychiatry.
2013;25(3):319–328.
Langan J, Mercer SW, Smith DJ. Multimorbidity and mental health: Can
psychiatry rise to the challenge? Br J Psychiatry. 2013;202(6):391–393.
Larrabee GJ. Detection of malingering using atypical performance patterns
on standard neuropsychological tests. Clin Neuropsychol. 2003;17(3):410–
425.
Mason AM, Cardell R, Armstrong M. Malingering psychosis: Guidelines for
assessment and management. Perspect Psychiatr Care. 2014;50(1):51–57.
Mills MJ, Lipian MS. Malingering. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan
& Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 8th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2005:2247.
Ninivaggi FJ. Malingering. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan
& Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia,
PA. Wolters Kluwer; 2017.
O’Bryant SE, Hilsabeck RC, Fisher JM, McCaffrey RJ. Utility of the trail
making test in the assessment of malingering in a sample of mild traumatic
brain injury litigants. Clin Neuropsychol. 2003;17(1):69–74.
Stansfeld SA, Pike C, McManus S, Harris J, Bebbington P, Brugha T,
Hassiotis A, Jenkins R, Meltzer H, Moran P, Clark C. Occupations, work
characteristics and common mental disorder. Psychol Med.
2013;43(5):961–973.
Zierold KM, Anderson H. The relationship between work permits, injury, and
safety training among working teenagers. Am J Ind Med. 2006;49(5):360–
366.


<<<PAGE 1874>>>
B Treatment Across the Lifespan


<<<PAGE 1875>>>
21
Psychopharmacology
Psychopharmacologic advances continue to expand the parameters of
psychiatric treatments dramatically. Our increasing understanding of the
brain has led to more effective, less toxic, better-tolerated, and more specific
therapeutic agents. With the ever-increasing sophistication and array of
treatment options, clinicians, however, must remain aware of potential
adverse effects, drug–drug (and drug–food or drug–supplement) interactions,
and how to manage the emergence of unwanted or unintended consequences.
Newer drugs often cause side effects that are not recognized initially.
Keeping up with the latest research findings is important as these findings
proliferate. A thorough understanding of the management of medicationinduced side effects (either through treating the effect with another agent or
substituting another primary agent) is necessary.
Medications used to treat psychiatric disorders are sometimes referred to as
psychotropic drugs. These drugs are commonly described by their primary
clinical application, for example, antidepressants, antipsychotics, mood
stabilizers, anxiolytics, hypnotics, cognitive enhancers, and stimulants. A
problem with this approach is that, in many instances, drugs have multiple
indications. For example, drugs such as the selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) are both antidepressants and anxiolytics, and the serotonindopamine antagonists (SDAs) are both antipsychotics and mood stabilizers.
The term is largely synonymous with simply “psychiatric drugs” and we use
both terms synonymously in this book.
Psychotropic drugs have also been organized according to structure (e.g.,
tricyclic), mechanism (e.g., monoamine oxidase inhibitor [MAOI]), history
(e.g., first-generation, traditional), uniqueness (e.g., atypical), or indication
(e.g., antidepressant). A further source of confusion is that many drugs used


<<<PAGE 1876>>>
to treat medical and neurologic conditions are routinely used to treat
psychiatric disorders.
Also, psychotropic drug terminology can be confusing. The first
pharmaceutical agents used to treat schizophrenia were termed tranquilizers.
When newer drugs emerged as therapies for anxiety, a distinction was drawn
between major and minor tranquilizers. At first, antidepressants were
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) or MAOIs. In the 1970s and 1980s, as newer
antidepressant drugs emerged, they were labeled as second- or thirdgeneration antidepressants. More recently, older agents used as treatments
for psychosis became known as typical, conventional, or first-generation
traditional neuroleptics. Newer ones became atypical neuroleptics or secondgeneration antipsychotics.
In this chapter, we still start with a general review of psychopharmacology,
as it applies to psychotropic medications. We will then review the major
classes of drugs. For the purposes here, we will use the first system of
organization described above; that is, we will classify them by their primary
application. Also, we will divert from our usual practice of mainly using
generic names of the drugs to, in many cases, include brand names as well.
However, in practice, most psychotropic medications are now available
through generic preparations, and few patients receive the brand version of a
medication. Also, the brand names here reflect US brands. Drug companies
in other countries may produce medications under a different brand name.

DRUG SELECTION
Although all U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved
psychotropics are similar in overall effectiveness for their indicated disorder,
they differ considerably in their pharmacology and their efficacy and adverse
effects on individual patients. The ability of a drug to prove effective, thus, is
only partially predictable and is dependent on poorly understood patient
variables. Nevertheless, some drugs may have a niche in which they can be
uniquely helpful for a subgroup of patients, without demonstrating any
overall superiority in efficacy. No drug is universally effective, and no
evidence indicates the unambiguous superiority of any single agent as a
treatment for any major psychiatric disorders. The only exception, clozapine
(Clozaril), has been approved by the FDA as a treatment for cases of


<<<PAGE 1877>>>
treatment-refractory schizophrenia.
Decisions about drug selection and use are made on a case-by-case basis,
relying on individual judgment by the physician. Other factors in drug
selection are the characteristics of the drug and the nature of the patient’s
illness. Each of these components affects the probability of a successful
outcome.

DRUG FACTORS
Pharmacodynamics
Both genetic and environmental factors influence individual response to and
tolerability of psychotropic agents. Thus, a drug that may not prove effective
in many patients with a disorder can dramatically improve symptoms in
others. In these cases, identification of characteristics that might predict
potential candidates for that drug becomes important but often remains
elusive.
Drugs, even within the same class, are distinguished from one another by
often subtle differences in molecular structure, types of interactions with
neurotransmitter systems, differences in pharmacokinetics, the presence or
absence of active metabolites, and protein binding. These differences, along
with patient biochemical variations, account for the profile of efficacy,
tolerability, and safety and the risk-to-benefit ratio for the individual. These
multiple variables, some poorly understood, make it difficult to predict a
drug’s effect with certainty. Nevertheless, knowledge of the nature of each
property increases the likelihood of successful treatment. The clinical effects
of drugs are best understood in terms of pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics. Pharmacokinetics describes what the body does to a
drug, whereas pharmacodynamics is what the drug does to the body.
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics need to be seen in the context of
the underlying variability among patients for how drug effects are expressed
clinically. Patients differ in their therapeutic response to a drug, and the
experience of side effects. It is increasingly clear that these differences have a
strong genetic basis. Pharmacogenetics research is attempting to identify the
role of genetics in drug response.
Primary pharmacodynamic considerations include receptor mechanisms,


<<<PAGE 1878>>>
the dose–response curve, the therapeutic index, and the development of
tolerance, dependence, and withdrawal phenomena. The drug’s mechanism of
action is subsumed under pharmacodynamics. The clinical response to a
drug, including adverse reactions, results from an interaction between that
drug and a patient’s susceptibility to those actions. Pharmacogenetic studies
are beginning to identify genetic polymorphisms linked to individual
differences in treatment response and sensitivity to side effects.
Mechanisms
The mechanisms through which most psychotropic drugs produce their
therapeutic effects remain poorly understood. Standard explanations focus on
ways that drugs alter synaptic concentrations of dopamine, serotonin,
norepinephrine, histamine, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), or acetylcholine.
These changes are said to result from receptor antagonists or agonists,
interference with neurotransmitter reuptake, enhancement of neurotransmitter
release, or inhibition of enzymes. Specific drugs are associated with
permutations or combinations of these actions. For example, a drug can be an
agonist for a receptor, thus stimulating the specific biologic activity of the
receptor, or an antagonist, thus inhibiting the biologic activity. Some drugs
are partial agonists because they are not capable of fully activating a specific
receptor. Some psychotropic drugs also produce clinical effects through
mechanisms other than receptor interactions. For example, lithium (Eskalith)
can act by directly inhibiting the enzyme inositol-1-phosphatase. Some
effects are closely linked to a specific synaptic effect. For example, most
medications that treat psychosis share the ability to block the dopamine type
2 (D2) receptor. Similarly, benzodiazepine agonists bind a receptor complex
that contains benzodiazepine and GABA receptors.
Additionally, illustrating the fact that the mechanisms of action of
psychotropic drugs remain only partially understood are observations that
medications that do not directly target monoamine neurotransmitters can be
remarkably effective in treating some psychiatric disorders. For example,
ketamine (Ketalar), an anesthetic agent that targets glutamate, can rapidly and
dramatically alleviate symptoms of depression when given as a slow infusion.
Another example involves the antibiotic minocycline (Solodyn), which has
been shown to have antidepressant effects. Along with other findings, this


<<<PAGE 1879>>>
suggests that the immune system and inflammatory responses may underlie
some mood disorders.
Accounts of the so-called mechanisms of action should nevertheless be
kept in perspective. Explanations of how psychotropic drugs work that focus
on synaptic elements represent an oversimplification of a complex series of
events. If merely raising or lowering levels of neurotransmitter activity is
associated with the clinical effects of a drug, then all drugs that cause these
changes should produce equivalent benefits. This predictability is not the
case. Multiple obscure actions, several steps removed from events at neuronal
receptor sites, are probably responsible for the therapeutic effects of
psychotropic drugs. These downstream elements are postulated to represent
the actual reasons that these drugs produce clinical improvement. A glossary
of terms related to receptor drug interactions is given in Table 21-1.

SIDE EFFECTS
Side effects are an unavoidable risk of medication treatment. Although it is
impossible to have an encyclopedic knowledge of all possible adverse drug
effects, prescribing clinicians should be familiar with the more common
adverse effects, as well as those with serious medical consequences. No
single text or document, including the product information, contains a
complete list of possible treatment-emergent events.
Side effect considerations include the probability of its occurrence, its
impact on a patient’s quality of life, its time course, and its cause. Just as no
one drug is sure to produce clinical improvement in all patients, no side
effect, no matter how common, occurs in every patient. When concurrent
medical disorders or a history of a similar adverse reaction puts a patient at
increased risk for a side effect, it is logical to consider prescribing a
compound not typically associated with that adverse reaction.
Side effects can result from the same pharmacologic action that is
responsible for a drug’s therapeutic activity or from an unrelated property. In
examples of the latter, some of the most common adverse effects of the TCAs
are caused by blockade of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors or histamine
receptors. If a patient is sensitive to these effects, alternative agents without
these properties should be prescribed. When side effects are manifestations of
the drug’s presumed mechanism of action, side effects may be unavoidable.


<<<PAGE 1880>>>
Thus, blockade of serotonin reuptake by SSRIs can cause nausea and sexual
dysfunction. The D2 blockade of drugs used to treat psychosis can cause
extrapyramidal side effects. Agonist action of benzodiazepine receptors can
cause ataxia and daytime sleepiness. In these cases, additional medications
are frequently used to make the primary agent better tolerated.
Time Course
Adverse effects differ in terms of their onset and duration. Some side effects
appear at the outset of treatment and then rapidly diminish. Nausea occurring
with SSRIs or venlafaxine (Effexor) and sedation occurring with mirtazapine
(Remeron) are good examples of early, time-limited side effects. Early-onset,
but persistent, side effects include a dry mouth that is associated with
noradrenergic reuptake inhibition or antimuscarinic activity. Some side
effects appear later in treatment (late-appearing side effects) and, sometimes
may be just the opposite of adverse events early in treatment. For example,
patients may typically lose weight during early treatment with SSRIs, only to
find, over time, a reversal occurs, so that they gain weight.
Similarly, early activation or agitation may be followed by constant fatigue
or apathy. Because most data about new drugs come from short-term studies,
generally 8 weeks in duration, early-onset side effects are overrepresented in
product information and descriptions of newly marketed information.
Clinicians must follow the letters to the editor sections of journals and other
sources of information to update their understanding of the real side effect
profile of a drug.
Adverse effects differ in their impact on compliance and the potential to
cause harm. Depending on a patient’s threshold of tolerance for a side effect
and the impact on the quality of life, side effects can lead to drug
discontinuation. Examples of serious side effects include agranulocytosis
(clozapine), Stevens–Johnson syndrome (lamotrigine [Lamictal]), hepatic
failure (nefazodone [Serzone]), stroke (phenelzine [Nardil]), and heart block
(thioridazine [Mellaril]). Overall, the risk of life-threatening side effects with
psychotropics is low. Drugs that carry such a risk should be monitored more
closely, and the prescribing physician should take into account whether the
potential clinical benefits justify the additional risk. Any drug with a serious
risk, as reflected in a black box warning, is generally used less extensively


<<<PAGE 1881>>>
than would otherwise be the case.
Table 21-1
Glossary of Receptor Drug Interactions
Receptor Definition
Interaction

Examples and Comments

Agonist
A drug or medication that Full agonists include opioids
(full
binds to a specific
such as morphine,
agonist)
receptor producing an
methadone, oxycodone,
effect identical to that
hydrocodone, heroin,
usually produced by the
codeine, meperidine,
neurotransmitter
propoxyphene, and
affecting that receptor.
fentanyl. Benzodiazepines
Drugs are often
act as agonists at the
designed as receptor
GABA receptor complex.
agonists to treat a
variety of diseases and
disorders in which the
original neurotransmitter
is missing or diminished.
Antagonist A compound that binds to Flumazenil is a competitive
a receptor that blocks or
benzodiazepine receptor
reduces the action of
antagonist. It competitively
another substance
inhibits the activity at the
(agonist) at the receptor
benzodiazepine
site involved.
recognition site on the
GABA/benzodiazepine
Antagonists that compete
receptor complex. It is the
with an agonist for a
purest antagonist
receptor are competitive
synthesized.
antagonists Those that
antagonize by other
Drugs used in the treatment
means are
of schizophrenia block
noncompetitive
dopamine 2 receptors.
antagonists
Examples of opioid


<<<PAGE 1882>>>
antagonists include
naltrexone and naloxone.
Partial
A compound that (even
Buprenorphine is a partial
agonist
when fully occupying a
agonist that produces
(mixed
receptor) possesses
typical opioid agonist
agonist)
affinity for a receptor, but
effects and side effects,
elicits a partial
such as euphoria and
pharmacologic response
respiratory depression, but
at the receptor involved.
its maximal effects are
Partial agonists are often
less than those of full
structural analogs of
agonists like heroin and
agonist molecules. If
methadone.
neurotransmitter
When used at low doses
concentrations are low,
buprenorphine produces
partial agonists may
sufficient agonist effect to
behave as an agonist.
enable opioid-addicted
This is why these
individuals to discontinue
medications are
the drugs with fewer
sometimes called mixed
withdrawal symptoms.
agonists.
Inverse
agonist

An inverse agonist is an
Several inverse agonists are
agent that binds to the
currently in clinical
same receptor as an
development. One
agonist for that receptor
particular example is
but produces the
R015-4513, which is the
opposite pharmacologic
inverse agonist of the
effect.
benzodiazepine class of
drugs. R015-4513 and the
benzodiazepines both
utilize the same GABA
binding site on neurons,
yet R015-4513 has the
opposite effect, producing
severe anxiety rather than
the sedative and anxiolytic


<<<PAGE 1883>>>
effects associated with
benzodiazepines.
Cannabinoid inverse
agonists have been found
to reduce appetite, the
opposite of the craving
effect associated with
cannabis.
GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid.
Table by Norman Sussman, M.D.

In the case of haloperidol (Haldol) and other dopamine receptor
antagonists (DRAs), long-term complications, such as tardive dyskinesia,
have been well documented. Emerging evidence also suggests that the use of
dopamine antagonists is associated with a small increase in the risk of breast
cancer and that this is related to larger cumulative doses. In cases in which
serious risk is associated with a drug, closer medical monitoring of
medication treatment is warranted. Because the most widely used
psychotropics, such as the SSRIs and SDAs, have only been in use since the
1980s or 1990s, there is less certainty about long-term effects, but no
evidence indicates that side effects are not merely extensions of those already
evident during initial therapy. It should also be kept in mind that most drugs
used in the treatment of chronic medical disorders have not been in use
sufficiently long to provide assurances about unintended long-term adverse
effects.
Suicidal Ideation and Antidepressant Treatment
The issue of antidepressant-associated suicide has become front-page news,
the result of an analysis suggesting a link between medication use and
suicidal ideation among children, adolescents, and adults up to age 24 in
short-term (4 to 16 weeks), placebo-controlled trials of nine newer
antidepressant drugs. The data from trials involving more than 4,400 patients
suggested that the average risk of suicidal thinking or behavior (suicidality)
during the first few months of treatment in those receiving antidepressants
was 4 percent, twice the placebo risk of 2 percent. No suicides occurred in


<<<PAGE 1884>>>
these trials. The analysis also showed no increase in suicide risk among the
25- to 65-age group. Antidepressants reduced suicidality among those over
age 65.
Following public hearings on the subject, in October 2004, the FDA
requested the addition of black box warnings—the most severe warning
placed on the labeling of prescription medication—to all antidepressant
drugs, old and new. This action raised the alarm among parents and
physicians and prompted an explosion of advertisements by malpractice
attorneys. Most important, antidepressant prescriptions written for
adolescents declined, whereas those for adults flattened, after years of
growth.
A large study of real-world patients published in the January 2006 issue of
the American Journal of Psychiatry raised severe doubt about antidepressants
and actual suicidality and about the wisdom of the FDA’s decision to change
the labeling. The study examined suicides and hospitalizations for suicide
attempts in the medical records of 65,103 members of a nonprofit insurer in
the Pacific Northwest that covers about 500,000 people who received
antidepressants from 1992 to 2003. It found that (1) newer antidepressants
were associated with a more rapid and more significant reduction in risk than
older types of antidepressants, and (2) patients were significantly more likely
to attempt or commit suicide in the month before they began drug therapy
than in the 6 months after starting it.
This controversy is not the first time credible evidence has contradicted a
significant link between antidepressant use and increased risk of suicide. At
the hearings that led to the black box warning, John Mann of Columbia
University presented population data showing that since 1987, the year before
fluoxetine (Prozac) became the first marketed SSRI, suicide rates in the
United States began dropping and that areas in the United States with the
highest SSRI prescription rates had the most significant decline in suicides.
For every 10 percent increase in prescription rates, the US suicide rate
declined 3 percent.
Another study, a review of 588 case files of patients aged 10 to 19, found
that a 1 percent increase in antidepressant use was associated with a decrease
of 0.23 suicides per 100,000 adolescents per year.
A more critical question, given how slight the risk may be, if indeed it
exists, is whether as a result of the FDA’s ill-considered actions, some


<<<PAGE 1885>>>
depressed patients are not getting potentially life-saving treatment.
Epidemiologic findings from several countries, including the United States,
have shown that decreased prescribing of antidepressants for depressed
children and adolescents resulted in an increase in suicide rates in those
populations.
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
Medication-induced movement disorders are commonly associated with the
use of psychotropic drugs. Although most frequently associated with drugs
that block dopamine type 2 (D2) receptors, abnormal motor activity may
occur with other types of medications as well. Sometimes it can be
challenging to determine if abnormal motor movements are an adverse event
or a symptom of an underlying disorder. For example, anxiety can resemble
akathisia, and alcohol or benzodiazepine withdrawal can cause tremors. The
American Psychiatric Association has decided to retain the term neuroleptic
when discussing side effects associated with drugs used to treat psychosis—
the DRAs and second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs). The rationale for
continued use of the term is that it was initially used to describe the tendency
of these drugs to cause abnormal movements. Note that SGA and SDA are
often used interchangeably when referring to the second-generation
antipsychotics.
The most common neuroleptic-related movement disorders are
parkinsonism, acute dystonia, and acute akathisia. The neuroleptic malignant
syndrome is a life-threatening and often misdiagnosed condition.
Neuroleptic-induced tardive dyskinesia is a late-appearing adverse effect of
neuroleptic drugs and can be irreversible; recent data, however, indicate that
the syndrome, although still severe and potentially disabling, is less
pernicious than was previously thought in patients taking DRAs. The newer
antipsychotics, the SDAs, block binding to dopamine receptors to a much
lesser degree and thereby are presumed to be less likely to produce such
movement disorders. Nevertheless, this risk remains, and vigilance is still
required when these drugs are prescribed.
Table 21-2 lists the selected medications associated with movement
disorders and their impact on relevant neuroreceptors.


<<<PAGE 1886>>>
Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism and Other Medication-Induced
Parkinsonism
DIAGNOSIS, SIGNS, AND SYMPTOMS. Symptoms of neuroleptic-induced
parkinsonism and other medication-induced parkinsonism include muscle
stiffness (lead pipe rigidity), cogwheel rigidity, shuffling gait, stooped
posture, and drooling. The pillrolling tremor of idiopathic parkinsonism is rare, but a regular, coarse tremor
similar to essential tremor may be present. The so-called rabbit syndrome, a
tremor affecting the lips and perioral muscles, is another parkinsonian effect
seen with antipsychotics, although perioral tremor is more likely than other
tremors to occur late in the course of treatment.
EPIDEMIOLOGY. Parkinsonian adverse effects typically occur within 5 to 90

days of the initiation of treatment. Patients who are elderly and female are at
the highest risk for neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism, although the disorder
can occur at all ages.
The blockade of D2 receptors causes neuroleptic-induced
parkinsonism in the caudate at the termination of the nigrostriatal dopamine
neurons. All antipsychotics can cause the symptoms, especially high-potency
drugs with low levels of anticholinergic activity, most notably haloperidol
(Haldol).
ETIOLOGY.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. Included in the differential diagnosis are idiopathic

parkinsonism, other organic causes of parkinsonism, and depression, which
can also be associated with parkinsonian symptoms. Decreased psychomotor
activity and blunted facial expression are symptoms of depression and
idiopathic parkinsonism.
Parkinsonism can be treated with anticholinergic agents,
benztropine (Cogentin), amantadine (Symmetrel), or diphenhydramine
(Benadryl) (Table 21-3). Anticholinergics should be withdrawn after 4 to 6
weeks to assess whether tolerance to the parkinsonian effects has developed;
about half of patients with neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism require
continued treatment. Even after the antipsychotics are withdrawn,
parkinsonian symptoms can last up to 2 weeks. In elderly patients, this may
TREATMENT.


<<<PAGE 1887>>>
last as long as 3 months. With such patients, the clinician may continue the
anticholinergic drug after the antipsychotic has been stopped until the
parkinsonian symptoms resolve completely.
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
DIAGNOSIS, SIGNS, AND SYMPTOMS. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome is a life-

threatening complication that can occur anytime during antipsychotic
treatment. The motor and behavioral symptoms include muscular rigidity and
dystonia, akinesia, mutism, obtundation, and agitation. The autonomic
symptoms include hyperthermia, diaphoresis, and increased pulse and blood
pressure (BP). Laboratory findings include an increased white blood cell
(WBC) count and increased levels of creatinine phosphokinase, liver
enzymes, plasma myoglobin, and myoglobinuria, occasionally associated
with renal failure.
Table 21-2
Selected Medications Associated with Movement Disorders:
Impact on Relevant Neuroreceptors


<<<PAGE 1888>>>
About 0.01 to 0.02 percent of patients treated with
antipsychotics develop neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Men are affected
more frequently than women, and young patients are affected more
commonly than elderly patients. The mortality rate can reach 10 to 20 percent
or even higher when depot antipsychotic medications are involved.
EPIDEMIOLOGY.

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS. The symptoms usually evolve over 24 to 72 hours,

and the untreated syndrome lasts 10 to 14 days. The diagnosis is often missed
in the early stages, and the withdrawal or agitation may mistakenly be
considered to reflect an exacerbation of the psychosis.
TREATMENT. In addition to supportive medical treatment, the most commonly

used medications for the condition are dantrolene (Dantrium) and
bromocriptine (Parlodel), although amantadine (Symmetrel) is sometimes
used (Table 21-4). Bromocriptine and amantadine pose direct DRA effects
and may overcome the antipsychotic-induced dopamine receptor blockade.


<<<PAGE 1889>>>
We should reduce the antipsychotic dose to the lowest effective dose
possible. High-potency drugs, such as haloperidol, pose the greatest risk.
Antipsychotic drugs with anticholinergic effects seem less likely to cause
neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) has been
used.
Medication-Induced Acute Dystonia
DIAGNOSIS, SIGNS, AND SYMPTOMS. Dystonias are brief or prolonged
contractions of muscles that result in obviously abnormal movements or
postures, including oculogyric crises, tongue protrusion, trismus, torticollis,
laryngeal–pharyngeal dystonias, and dystonic postures of the limbs and trunk.
Other dystonias include blepharospasm and glossopharyngeal dystonia; the
latter results in dysarthria, dysphagia, and even difficulty in breathing, which
can cause cyanosis. Children are particularly likely to evidence opisthotonos,
scoliosis, lordosis, and writhing movements. Dystonia can be painful and
frightening and often results in noncompliance with future drug treatment
regimens.
Their early-onset characterizes the development of acute
dystonic symptoms during treatment with neuroleptics. There is a higher
incidence of acute dystonia in men, in patients younger than age 30 years,
and patients who were given high dosages of high-potency medications.
EPIDEMIOLOGY.

ETIOLOGY. Although it is most frequent with intramuscular doses of high-

potency antipsychotics, dystonia can occur with any antipsychotic. The
mechanism of action is thought to be dopaminergic hyperactivity in the basal
ganglia that occurs when the central nervous system (CNS) levels of the
antipsychotic drug begin to fall between doses.
Table 21-3
Drug Treatment of Extrapyramidal Disorders
Generic Name
Anticholinergics

Trade
Name

Usual Daily
Dosage

Indications


<<<PAGE 1890>>>
Benztropine

Cogentin

PO 0.5–2 mg Acute dystonia,
tid; IM or
parkinsonism,
IV 1–2 mg
akinesia, akathisia

Biperiden

Akineton

PO 2–6 mg
tid; IM or
IV 2 mg

Procyclidine

Kemadrin

PO 2.5–5 mg
bid-qid

Trihexyphenidyl

Artane,
Tremin

PO 2–5 mg
tid

Orphenadrine

Norflex,
Disipal

PO 50–100 Rabbit syndrome
mg bid-qid;
IV 60 mg

Antihistamine
Diphenhydramine Benadryl

Amantadine

PO 25 mg
qid; IM or
IV 25 mg

Acute dystonia,
parkinsonism,
akinesia, rabbit
syndrome

Symmetrel PO 100–200 Parkinsonism,
mg bid
akinesia, rabbit
syndrome

β-Adrenergic
Antagonist
Propranolol

Inderal

PO 20–40
mg tid

Akathisia, tremor

Catapres

PO 0.1 mg
tid

Akathisia

α-Adrenergic
Antagonist
Clonidine


<<<PAGE 1891>>>
Benzodiazepines
Clonazepam

Klonopin

PO 1 mg bid Akathisia, acute
dystonia

Lorazepam

Ativan

PO 1 mg tid

Buspirone

BuSpar

PO 20–40
mg qid

Tardive dyskinesia

Vitamin E

—

PO 1,200–
1,600
IU/day

Tardive dyskinesia

PO, orally; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; bid, twice a day; tid, three times a day; qid;
four times a day.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. The differential diagnosis

includes seizures and

tardive dyskinesia.
COURSE AND PROGNOSIS. Dystonia can fluctuate spontaneously and respond

to reassurance, so the clinician gets the false impression that the movement is
hysterical or entirely under conscious control.
Table 21-4
Treatment of Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Intervention

Dosing

Effectiveness

Amantadine

200–400 mg PO/day in
divided doses

Beneficial as
monotherapy or
in combination;
decrease in
death rate

Bromocriptine

2.5 mg PO bid or tid, may
increase to a total of 45
mg/day

Mortality reduced
as a single or
combined agent

Levodopa/carbidopa Levodopa 50–100 mg/day

Case reports of


<<<PAGE 1892>>>
IV as continuous
infusion

dramatic
improvement

Electroconvulsive
therapy

Reports of good outcome
with both unilateral and
bilateral treatments;
response may occur in
as few as three
treatments

Effective when
medications
have failed; also
may treat
underlying
psychiatric
disorder

Dantrolene

1 mg/kg/day for 8 days,
then continue as PO for
7 additional days

Benefits may occur
in minutes or
hours as a
single agent or
in combination

Benzodiazepines

1–2 mg IM as test dose; if
effective, switch to PO;
consider use if
underlying disorder has
catatonic symptoms

Has been reported
effective when
other agents
have failed

Supportive
measures

IV hydration, cooling
Often effective as
blankets, ice packs, iceinitial approach
water enema,
early in the
oxygenation, antipyretics
episode

PO, orally; bid, twice a day; tid, three times a day; IV, intravenously; IM, intramuscularly.
Adapted from Davis JM, Caroif SN, Mann SC. Treatment of neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Psychiatr Ann. 2000;30:325–331, with permission.
TREATMENT. Prophylaxis with anticholinergics or related drugs (outlined in

Table 21-3) usually prevents dystonia, although the risks of prophylactic
treatment weigh against that benefit. Treatment with intramuscular
anticholinergics or intravenous or intramuscular diphenhydramine (Benadryl)
(50 mg) almost always relieves the symptoms. Diazepam (Valium) (10 mg
intravenously), amobarbital (Amytal), caffeine sodium benzoate, and
hypnosis have also been reported to be effective. Although tolerance for the


<<<PAGE 1893>>>
adverse effects usually develops, it is prudent to change the antipsychotic if
the patient is particularly concerned that the reaction may recur.
Medication-Induced Acute Akathisia
DIAGNOSIS, SIGNS, AND SYMPTOMS. Akathisia is subjective feelings of
restlessness, objective signs of restlessness, or both. Examples include a
sense of anxiety, inability to relax, jitteriness, pacing, rocking motions while
sitting, and rapid alternation of sitting and standing. Akathisia has been
associated with the use of a wide range of psychiatric drugs, including
antipsychotics, antidepressants, and sympathomimetics. Once akathisia is
recognized and diagnosed, the antipsychotic dose should be reduced to a
minimally adequate level. Akathisia may be associated with a poor treatment
outcome.
EPIDEMIOLOGY. Middle-aged women are at increased risk of akathisia, and the

time course is similar to that for neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism.
TREATMENT. Three necessary steps in the treatment of akathisia are reducing

medication dosage, attempting treatment with appropriate drugs, and
considering changing the neuroleptic. The most efficacious drugs are βadrenergic receptor antagonists, although anticholinergic drugs,
benzodiazepines, and cyproheptadine (Periactin) may benefit some patients.
In some cases of akathisia, no treatment seems to be effective.
Tardive Dyskinesia
DIAGNOSIS, SIGNS, AND SYMPTOMS. Tardive dyskinesia is a delayed effect of

antipsychotics; it rarely occurs until after 6 months of treatment. The disorder
consists of abnormal, involuntary, irregular choreoathetoid movements of the
muscles of the head, limbs, and trunk. The severity of the movements ranges
from minimal—often missed by patients and their families—to grossly
incapacitating. Perioral movements are the most common and include
darting, twisting, and protruding movements of the tongue; chewing and
lateral jaw movements; lip-puckering; and facial grimacing. Finger
movements and hand clenching are also typical. Torticollis, retrocollis, trunk
twisting, and pelvic thrusting occur in severe cases. In the most severe cases,


<<<PAGE 1894>>>
patients may have breathing and swallowing irregularities that result in
aerophagia, belching, and grunting. Respiratory dyskinesia has also been
reported. Dyskinesia is exacerbated by stress and disappears during sleep.
Table 21-5
Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS) Examination
Procedure
Patient Identification
Rated by
Either before or after completing the examination procedure,
observe the patient unobtrusively at rest (e.g., in waiting
room).
The chair to be used in this examination should be a hard, firm
one without arms.
After observing the patient, rate him or her on a scale of 0
(none), 1 (minimal), 2 (mild), 3 (moderate), and 4 (severe),
according to the severity of the symptoms.
Ask patient whether there is anything in his or her mouth (e.g.,
gum, candy) and, if so, to remove it.
Ask patient about the current condition of his or her teeth. Ask
patient if he or she wears dentures. Do teeth or dentures
bother patient now?
Ask patient whether he or she notices movement in mouth,
face, hands, or feet. If yes, ask patient to describe and
indicate to what extent movements currently bother patient or
interfere with his or her activities.
0 1 2 3 4 Have patient sit in chair with hands on knees, legs
slightly apart, and feet flat on floor. (Look at entire body for
movement while in this position.)
0 1 2 3 4 Ask patient to sit with hands hanging unsupported—If
male, between legs; if female and wearing a dress, hanging
over knees. (Observe hands and other body areas.)
0 1 2 3 4 Ask patient to open mouth. (Observe tongue at rest
within mouth.) Do this twice.

Date


<<<PAGE 1895>>>
0 1 2 3 4 Ask patient to protrude tongue. (Observe
abnormalities of tongue movement.) Do this twice.
0 1 2 3 4 Ask patient to tap thumb, with each finger, as rapidly
as possible for 10–15 seconds; separately with right hand,
then with left hand. (Observe facial and leg movements.)
0 1 2 3 4 Flex and extend patient’s left and right arms. (One at
a time.)
0 1 2 3 4 Ask patient to stand up. (Observe in profile. Observe
all body areas again, hips included.)
0 1 2 3 4 aAsk patient to extend both arms outstretched in front
with palms down. (Observe trunk, legs, and mouth.)
0 1 2 3 4 aHave patient walk a few paces, turn, and walk back
to chair. (Observe hands and gait.)
Do this twice.
aActivated movements.

EPIDEMIOLOGY. Tardive dyskinesia develops in about 10 to 20 percent of

patients who are treated for more than a year. About 20 to 40 percent of
patients who require long-term hospitalization have tardive dyskinesia.
Women are more likely to be affected than men. Children, patients who are
more than 50 years of age, and patients with brain damage or mood disorders
are also at high risk.
COURSE AND PROGNOSIS. Between 5 and 40 percent of all cases of tardive

dyskinesia eventually remit, and between 50 and 90 percent of all mild cases
remit. Tardive dyskinesia is less likely to remit in elderly patients than in
young patients, however.
TREATMENT. The three basic approaches to tardive dyskinesia are prevention,

diagnosis, and management. Prevention is best achieved by using
antipsychotic medications only when indicated and in the lowest effective
doses. The atypical antipsychotics are associated with less tardive dyskinesia
than the older antipsychotics. Clozapine (Clozaril) is the only antipsychotic to
have minimal risk of tardive dyskinesia and can even help improve
preexisting symptoms of tardive dyskinesia. This quality of the drug may be


<<<PAGE 1896>>>
due to its low affinity for D2 receptors and high affinity for 5hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) receptor antagonism. Patients who are receiving
antipsychotics should be examined regularly for the appearance of abnormal
movements, preferably with the use of a standardized rating scale (Table 215). Patients frequently experience an exacerbation of their symptoms when
the DRA is withheld, whereas substitution of an SDA may limit the abnormal
movements without worsening the progression of the dyskinesia.
Once tardive dyskinesia is recognized, the clinician should consider
reducing the dose of the antipsychotic or even stopping the medication
altogether. Alternatively, the clinician may switch the patient to clozapine or
one of the new SDAs. In patients who cannot continue taking any
antipsychotic medication, lithium (Eskalith), carbamazepine (Tegretol), or
benzodiazepines may effectively reduce the symptoms of both the movement
disorder and the psychosis. In 2017, the FDA-approved valbenazine
(Ingrezza) for the treatment of adults with tardive dyskinesia, making this the
first approved medication for tardive dyskinesia.
Tardive Dystonia and Tardive Akathisia. On occasion, dystonia and
akathisia emerge late in the course of treatment. These symptoms may persist
for months or years despite drug discontinuation or dose reduction.
Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
DIAGNOSIS, SIGNS, AND SYMPTOMS. Tremor is a rhythmic alteration in a
movement that is usually faster than one beat per second. Fine tremor (8 to 12
Hz) is most common.
EPIDEMIOLOGY. Typically, tremors decrease during periods of relaxation and

sleep and increase with stress or anxiety.
Whereas all the above diagnoses specifically include an
association with a neuroleptic, a range of psychiatric medications can
produce tremors—most notably, lithium, stimulants, antidepressants,
caffeine, and valproate (Depakene).
ETIOLOGY.

TREATMENT. The treatment involves four principles:


<<<PAGE 1897>>>
1. The lowest possible dose of the psychiatric drug should be taken.
2. Patients should minimize caffeine consumption.
3. The psychiatric drug should be taken at bedtime to minimize the amount
of daytime tremor.
4. β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists (e.g., propranolol [Inderal]) can be
given to treat drug-induced tremors.
Other Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
NOCTURNAL MYOCLONUS. Nocturnal myoclonus consists of highly
stereotyped, abrupt contractions of specific leg muscles during sleep. Patients
lack any subjective awareness of the leg jerks. The condition may be present
in about 40 percent of persons over 65 years of age. The cause is unknown,
but it is a rare side effect of SSRIs.
The repetitive leg movements occur every 20 to 60 seconds, with
extensions of the large toe and flexion of the ankle, the knee, and the hips.
Frequent awakenings, unrefreshing sleep, and daytime sleepiness are
significant symptoms. No treatment for nocturnal myoclonus is universally
effective. Benzodiazepines, levodopa (Larodopa), quinine, and, in rare cases,
opioids may be useful.
In restless leg syndrome, persons feel deep
sensations of creeping inside the calves whenever sitting or lying down. The
dysesthesias are rarely painful but are agonizingly relentless and cause an
almost irresistible urge to move the legs; thus, this syndrome interferes with
sleep and with falling asleep. It peaks in middle age and occurs in 5 percent
of the population. The cause is unknown, but it is a rare side effect of SSRIs.
Symptoms are relieved by movement and by leg massage. The dopamine
receptor agonists ropinirole (Requip) and pramipexole (Mirapex) are
effective in treating this syndrome. Other treatments include the
benzodiazepines, levodopa, quinine, opioids, propranolol, valproate, and
carbamazepine.
RESTLESS LEG SYNDROME.

Hyperthermic Syndromes. All the medication-induced movement
disorders may be associated with hyperthermia. Table 21-6 lists the various
conditions associated with hyperthermia.


<<<PAGE 1898>>>
Side Effects Associated with Newer Medications
All medications are associated with side effects. The clinician should be
aware of these, be able to recognize them, and take appropriate measures to
treat them.
Somnolence. Sedation is often an intended effect of many psychotropic
drugs, mainly when used to treat insomnia, anxiety, or agitation. Daytime
sleepiness, or somnolence, is also an unwanted adverse event, however. It is
essential for the clinician to alert patients to the possibility of sedation and to
document that the person was advised to exercise caution when operating any
type of vehicle or mechanical equipment. Some somnolence results from a
carryover of nighttime use of drugs as hypnotics. Even with drugs such as the
SSRIs, which are activating for many patients, somnolence can be
problematic. In some instances, it results from impairment of sleep quality.
Chronic use of SSRIs can cause some patients to experience a subjective
sense of fatigue, exhaustion, or yawning, even with adequate amounts of
sleep. Management of unwanted somnolence includes adjustment of dose or
timing of administration, switching to alternative medications, the addition of
small doses of stimulants, or the addition of modafinil (Provigil).
Gastrointestinal Disturbances. The significant gastrointestinal (GI) side
effects of the older antidepressant and antipsychotic drugs consisted primarily
of constipation and dry mouth, a consequence of their antimuscarinic activity.
Most of the newer drugs have little antimuscarinic activity but do have effects
on the serotonin system. Most of the body’s serotonin is in the GI tract, and
serotonergic drugs often cause varying degrees of stomach pain, nausea,
flatulence, and diarrhea. In most cases, these side effects are transient, but
some persons never accommodate and must switch to another class of drugs.
The initial use of lower doses or the use of delayed-release preparations are
the most effective strategies for minimizing GI side effects.
Movement Disorders. The introduction of SDAs has dramatically reduced
the incidence of medication-induced movement disorders, but varying
degrees of dose-related parkinsonism, akathisia, and dystonia still occur.
Risperidone (Risperdal) most closely resembles the older agents in terms of
these side effects. Olanzapine (Zyprexa) also causes more extrapyramidal


<<<PAGE 1899>>>
effects than clinical trials suggested. Aripiprazole (Abilify) causes severe
akathisia. There have been rare reports of SSRI-induced movement disorders,
ranging from akathisia to tardive dyskinesia.
Sexual Dysfunction. The use of psychiatric drugs can be associated with
sexual dysfunction—decreased libido, impaired ejaculation and erection, and
inhibition of female orgasm. In clinical trials with the SSRIs, the extent of
sexual side effects was grossly underestimated because data were based on
spontaneous reports by patients. The rate of sexual dysfunction in the original
fluoxetine product information, for example, was less than 5 percent. In
subsequent studies in which specific questions elicited information about
sexual side effects, the rate of SSRI-associated sexual dysfunction was found
to be between 35 and 75 percent. In clinical practice, patients are not likely to
report sexual dysfunction spontaneously to the physician, so it is essential to
ask about this side effect. Also, some sexual dysfunctions may be related to
the primary psychiatric disorder.
Table 21-6
Drug-Induced Central Hyperthermic Syndromesa


<<<PAGE 1900>>>
Nevertheless, if sexual dysfunction emerges after pharmacotherapy has
begun and the primary response to treatment has been positive, it may be
worthwhile to attempt to treat the symptoms. Long lists of possible antidotes
to these side effects have evolved, but few interventions are consistently
effective, and few have more than anecdotal evidence to support their use.
The clinician and patient should consider the possibility of sexual side effects
when selecting a drug and switching treatment to another drug that is less or
not at all associated with sexual dysfunction if this adverse effect is not
acceptable to the patient.
Weight Gain. Weight gain accompanies the use of many psychotropic drugs
as a result of retained fluid, increased caloric intake, decreased exercise, or
altered metabolism. Weight gain can also occur as a symptom of a disorder,
as in bulimia or atypical depression. In these cases, it may be a sign of


<<<PAGE 1901>>>
recovery. Treatment-emergent increase in body weight is a common reason
for noncompliance with a drug regimen. No specific mechanisms have been
identified as causing weight gain, and it appears that the histamine and
serotonin systems mediate changes in weight associated with many drugs
used to treat depression and psychosis. Metformin (Glucophage) has been
reported to facilitate weight loss among patients whose weight gain is
attributed to the use of serotonin-dopamine reuptake inhibitors and valproic
acid (Depakene). Valproate (Depacon), as well as olanzapine, has been linked
to the development of insulin resistance, which could induce appetite
increase, with the subsequent weight increase. Weight gain is a noteworthy
side effect of clozapine (Clozaril) and olanzapine. Genetic factors that
regulate body weight, as well as the related problem of diabetes mellitus,
seem to involve the 5-HT2C receptor. There is a genetic polymorphism of the
promoter region of this receptor, and patients with a variant allele have less
weight gain. Drugs with a strong 5-HT2C affinity would be expected to have a
more significant impact on body weight of patients with a polymorphism of
the 5-HT2C receptor promoter region.
Weight Loss. Initial weight loss is associated with SSRI treatment but is
usually transient, with most weight being regained within the first few
months. Bupropion (Wellbutrin) has been shown to cause modest weight loss
that is sustained. When combined with diet and lifestyle changes, bupropion
can facilitate more significant weight loss. Topiramate (Topamax) and
zonisamide (Zonegran), marketed as treatments for epilepsy, sometimes
produce substantial, sustained loss of weight.
Glucose Changes. Increased risk of glucose abnormalities, including
diabetes mellitus, is associated with weight increase during psychotropic drug
therapy. Clozapine and olanzapine are associated with a greater risk than
other SDAs of abnormalities in fasting glucose levels, as well as
hyperosmolar diabetes and ketoacidosis. This dysregulation of glucose
homeostasis appears to be drug-induced and increases glucagon.
Hyponatremia. Hyponatremia is associated with oxcarbazepine (Trileptal)
and SSRI treatment, especially in elderly patients. Confusion, agitation, and
lethargy are common symptoms.


<<<PAGE 1902>>>
Cognitive Impairment. Cognitive impairment means a disturbance in the
capacity to think. Some agents, such as the benzodiazepine agonists, are
recognized as causes of cognitive impairment. Other widely used
psychotropics, such as the SSRIs, lamotrigine (Lamictal), topiramate
(Topamax), gabapentin (Neurontin), lithium, TCAs, and bupropion, however,
are also associated with varying degrees of memory impairment and wordfinding difficulties. In contrast to the benzodiazepine-induced anterograde
amnesia, these agents cause a more subtle type of absent-mindedness. Drugs
with anticholinergic properties are likely to worsen memory performance.
Sweating. Severe perspiration unrelated to ambient temperature is
associated with TCAs, SSRIs, and venlafaxine. This side effect is often
socially disabling. Attempts can be made to treat this side effect with alpha
agents, such as terazosin (Hytrin) and oxybutynin (Ditropan).
Cardiovascular Disturbances. Newer agents are less likely to have
direct cardiac effects. Many older agents, such as TCAs and phenothiazines,
affected BP and cardiac conduction. Thioridazine (Mellaril), which has been
in use for decades, has been shown to prolong the QTc interval in a doserelated manner and may increase the risk of sudden death by delaying
ventricular repolarization and causing torsades de pointes. Newer drugs are
now routinely scrutinized for evidence of cardiac effects. A promising
treatment for psychosis, sertindole (Serlect), was not marketed because the
FDA would have required a black box warning. Slight QTc effects noted with
ziprasidone (Geodon) delayed the marketing of that drug. Clozapine can
cause myocarditis in rare cases.
Rash. Any medication is a potential source of a drug rash. Some
psychotropics, such as carbamazepine (Equetro, Tegretol) and lamotrigine,
have been linked to an increased risk of severe exfoliative dermatitis.
Commonly referred to as Stevens–Johnson syndrome, this condition is a
systemic, immune-mediated reaction that can prove fatal or result in
permanent scarring or blindness. All patients should be informed about the
potential seriousness of widespread lesions that occur above the neck, that
involve the mucous membranes, and that may be associated with fever and


<<<PAGE 1903>>>
lymphadenopathy. If such symptoms manifest, a patient should be instructed
at the time that the medication is prescribed to go immediately to an
emergency department.
Idiosyncratic and Paradoxical Drug Responses
Idiosyncratic reactions occur in a tiny percentage of patients taking a drug.
The reactions are not related to the known pharmacologic properties, and
most likely represent a genetically based abnormal sensitivity to a drug. A
paradoxical response represents the manifestation of a clinical effect the
opposite of what is expected. In March 2007, the FDA reported dissociativelike states associated with certain sedative-hypnotics. These included
behaviors such as sleepwalking, binge eating, aggressive outbursts, and night
driving, of which the patient was unaware. Table 21-7 lists the drugs required
to have warning labels for that effect.
Therapeutic Index
The therapeutic index is a relative measure of the toxicity or safety of a drug
and is defined as the ratio of the median toxic dose to the median effective
dose. The median toxic dose is the dose at which 50 percent of patients
experience a specific toxic effect, and the median effective dose is the dose at
which 50 percent of patients have a specified therapeutic effect. When the
therapeutic index is high, as it is for haloperidol, it is reflected by the wide
range of dosages in which that drug is prescribed. Conversely, the therapeutic
index for lithium is relatively low, thus requiring careful monitoring of serum
lithium levels in patients for whom the drug is prescribed.
Overdose
Safety in overdose is always a consideration in drug selection. Almost all of
the newer agents, however, have a wide margin of safety when taken in
overdose. By contrast, a 1-month supply of TCAs could be fatal. The
depressed patients they were used to treat are the group most at risk of
attempting suicide. Because even the safest drugs can sometimes produce
severe medical complications, especially when combined with other agents,
clinicians must recognize that the prescribed medication can be used in an
attempt to commit suicide. Although it is prudent to write nonrefillable


<<<PAGE 1904>>>
prescriptions for small quantities, this practice passes along increased copay
costs to the patient. Many pharmacy benefit management programs
encourage the prescribing of a 3-month supply of medication.
Table 21-7
Sedative-Hypnotics Cited by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration
Drug

Manufacturer

Zolpidem (Ambien/Ambien CR)

Sanofi Aventis

Butabarbital (Butisol Sodium)

MedPointe Pharmaceuticals

Pentobarbital and carbromal (Carbrital) Parke-Davis
Flurazepam (Dalmane)

Valeant Pharmaceuticals

Quazepam (Doral)

Questcor Pharmaceuticals

Triazolam (Halcion)

Pfizer

Eszopiclone (Lunesta)

Sepracor

Ethchlorvynol (Placidyl)

Abbott

Estazolam (Prosom)

Abbott

Temazepam (Restoril)

Tyco Healthcare

Ramelteon (Rozerem)

Takeda

Secobarbital (Seconal)

Lilly

Zaleplon (Sonata)

King Pharmaceuticals

In cases in which suicide is a significant concern, an attempt should be
made to verify that the medication is not being hoarded for a later overdose
attempt. Random pill counts or asking a family member to dispense daily
doses may be helpful. Some patients attempt suicide just as they are
beginning to recover. Large quantities of medications with a low therapeutic
index should be prescribed judiciously. Another reason to limit the number of


<<<PAGE 1905>>>
pills prescribed is the possibility of accidental ingestion of medications by
children in the household. Psychotherapeutic medications should be kept in a
safe place.
Physicians who work in emergency departments should know which drugs
can be hemodialyzed. The issues involved are complex and are not based on
any single chemical property of the drug. For example, it is generally
presumed that drugs with low protein binding are good candidates for
dialysis. Venlafaxine, however, is only 27 percent protein-bound and is too
large as a molecule dialyzed. Hemodialysis is useful for treating overdose of
lithium and valproic acid.
Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacokinetic drug interactions are the effects of drugs on the plasma
concentrations of each other, and pharmacodynamic drug interactions are the
effects of drugs on the biologic activities of each other. Pharmacokinetic
concepts are used to describe and predict the time course of drug
concentrations in different parts of the body, such as plasma, adipose tissue,
and the CNS. From a clinical perspective, pharmacokinetic methods help
explain or predict the onset and duration of drug activity and interactions
between drugs that alter their metabolism or excretion.
Pharmacogenetic research focuses on finding variant alleles that alter drug
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Researchers are attempting to
identify genetic differences in how enzymes metabolize psychotropics, as
well as CNS proteins directly involved in drug action. Likely, identification
of patient genotypes will facilitate the prediction of clinical response to
different types of drugs.
Most clinicians need to consult charts or computer programs to determine
when potential interactions may occur and, if so, how clinically relevant they
may be. Whenever possible, it is preferable to use a medication that produces
the minimal risk of drug interactions. Also, it is recommended that
prescribers know the interaction profiles of the drugs they most commonly
prescribe.
Examples of pharmacokinetic interactions include one drug increasing or
decreasing the concentrations of a coadministered compound. These types of
interactions can also lead to altered concentrations of metabolites. In some


<<<PAGE 1906>>>
cases, there may also be interference with the conversion of a drug to its
active metabolite. Enormous variability exists among patients concerning
pharmacokinetic parameters, such as drug absorption and metabolism.
Another type of interaction is represented by interactions involving the
kidney. Commonly used medications, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors (ACEIs), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and
thiazides, decrease the renal clearance of lithium, increasing the likelihood of
severe elevations of lithium. Drug interactions can occur pharmacokinetically
or pharmacodynamically.
Pharmacogenetics is being used to study why patients differ in the way
they metabolize drugs. In patients who are ultrarapid or extensive
metabolizers, the concentrations of a drug may be lower than expected.

PATIENT-RELATED FACTORS
Response to medication and sensitivity to side effects are influenced by
factors related to the patient. This response is why there is no one-size-fits-all
approach to pharmacologic treatment. Patient-related variables include
diagnosis, genetic factors, lifestyle, overall medical status, concurrent
disorders, and history of drug response. A patient’s attitude toward
medication in general, aversion to certain types of side effects, and preference
for a specific agent also need to be considered.
Diagnosis
Failure to correctly diagnose a disorder diminishes the likelihood of optimal
drug selection. Misdiagnosis not only can result in a missed opportunity, but
it also can, at times, produce worsening of symptoms. Inadvertently
diagnosing a patient in the depressed phase of bipolar disorder as having
unipolar depression can induce mania or rapid cycling. Treatment failure or
exacerbation of symptoms should prompt a reassessment of the working
diagnosis.
Past Treatment Response
A specific drug should be selected according to the patient’s history of drug
response (compliance, therapeutic response, adverse effects), the patient’s


<<<PAGE 1907>>>
family history of drug response, the profile of adverse effects for that drug
concerning the particular patient, and the prescribing clinician’s usual
practice. If a drug has previously been effective in treating a patient or a
family member, the same drug should be used again. For reasons that are not
understood, however, some patients fail to respond to a previously effective
agent when it is resumed. A history of severe adverse effects from a specific
drug is a strong indicator that the patient would not be compliant with that
particular drug.
It is helpful if patients can recall the details of past psychotropic drug
treatment: the drugs prescribed, in what dosages, for how long, and in what
combinations. Because of their psychiatric disorders, many patients,
however, are poor historians. If possible, patients’ medical records should be
obtained to confirm their reports. Family members are a good source of
collateral information.
Response in Family Members
It is widely held that drug responses cluster in families. Response to a drug in
a relative may predict a patient’s response. Although no conclusive evidence
supports this as a consideration in drug selection, existing studies do confirm
that a history of positive response to treatment with a drug should be
considered in making treatment decisions. Of course, certain drugs may not
have been available to a family member depending on the era in which they
were treated.
Concurrent Medical or Psychiatric Disorders
The initial assessment should elicit information about coexisting medical
disorders. In some cases, a medical disorder may be responsible for the
symptoms. Patients with thyroid disease who are not adequately treated may
appear depressed. Sleep apnea produces depression and cognitive
impairment. Rare conditions, such as Kleine–Levin syndrome, can mimic
bipolar disorder. A drug should be selected that minimally exacerbates any
preexisting medical problems that a particular patient may have.
Recreational drug use, excessive consumption of alcohol, and frequent
ingestion of caffeine-containing beverages can complicate and even
undermine psychotropic drug treatment. These compounds possess


<<<PAGE 1908>>>
significant psychoactive properties and, in some cases, may represent the
source of the patient’s symptoms. It is reasonable to ask patients to abstain
from the use of these substances, at least until the benefits of psychotropic
drug treatment have been unequivocally established. Gradual reintroduction
of moderate amounts of alcohol, tea, and coffee can then take place. Patients
can then observe for themselves whether there are any untoward effects on
their clinical status.

INFORMED CONSENT AND PATIENT EDUCATION
Establishing trust and motivating the patient to comply with the medication
regimen are essential components of successful treatment. Patients should be
informed about treatment options and the probable side effects and unique
benefits of each treatment. Patient preference should be respected unless a
compelling advantage exists involving efficacy, tolerability, or safety with an
alternative agent. If a particular medication is being recommended, the
reasons for this recommendation should be explained. Patients are more
likely to continue taking their medication if they fully understand the reasons
why it is being prescribed.
A strong therapeutic alliance between a clinician and a patient is always
helpful. Given the unpredictability of medication response, the frequent
occurrence of side effects, and underlying ambivalence about, or fear of
taking, medication, a constructive, trusting relationship serves to improve
patient compliance. Repeated failed trials may be needed before a response is
seen. A patient’s confidence in the physician’s knowledge and judgment
enables medication trials and more complex regimens, such as the use of
multiple medications.
Discussions about drug selection should be documented in notes, but a
signed informed consent is not needed. Surprisingly, patients who are
informed of potential adverse effects report a higher incidence of side effects
but do not have higher rates of premature discontinuation.
How the patient and family are engaged in the treatment plan can
determine the success of treatment. The psychodynamic meaning of
pharmacotherapy to the patient and family and environmental influences,
psychosocial stressors, and support should be explored. Some patients may
view drug treatment as a panacea, and others may view it as the enemy. With


<<<PAGE 1909>>>
the patient’s consent, relatives and other clinicians should be instructed about
the reasons for the drug treatment, as well as the expected benefits and
potential risks.

DOSING, DURATION, AND MONITORING
Dosing
The clinically effective dose for treatment depends on the characteristics of
the drug and patient factors, such as inherited sensitivity and ability to
metabolize a drug, concurrent medical disorders, use of concurrent
medications, and history of exposure to previous medications.
Plasma concentrations of many psychotropics can vary up to 10-fold.
Thus, to some extent, the optimal dose for an individual is ultimately
determined by trial and error, guided by the empirical evidence of the usual
dose range for that drug. In some cases, it may prove helpful to test patients
for genetic polymorphisms involving hepatic enzymes. Patients who are
ultrarapid metabolizers of certain drugs may require higher than standard
dosing. Slow metabolizers might demonstrate side effects and even toxicity at
very low doses.
Some drugs demonstrate a clear relationship between increases in the dose
and clinical response. This dose–response curve plots the drug concentration
against the effects of the drug.
The potency of a drug refers to the relative dose required to achieve
specific effects, not to its efficacy. Haloperidol, for example, is more potent
than chlorpromazine (Thorazine) because approximately 5 mg of haloperidol
is required to achieve the same therapeutic effect as 100 mg of
chlorpromazine. These drugs, however, are equal in their clinical efficacy—
that is, the maximal clinical response achievable by the administration of a
drug.
Drugs must be used in effective dosages for sufficient periods. Although
drug tolerability and safety are always considerations, subtherapeutic doses
and incomplete therapeutic trials should be avoided. The use of inadequate
doses merely exposes the patient to the risk of side effects without providing
the probability of therapeutic benefit. Because of the wide margin of safety
associated with most currently prescribed medications, more risk exists in


<<<PAGE 1910>>>
underdosing than in overshooting the recommended dose range.
The time of dosing is usually based on the plasma half-life of a drug and its
side effect profile. Sedating drugs are given all at night or with
disproportionate daily doses at night. The opposite is true with activating
drugs. The frequency of dosing is not as straightforward as with sedating
drugs. Most dosing regimens of psychotropic drugs, such as once-a-day
versus divided doses, are based on measurements of plasma concentrations
rather than receptor occupancy in the brain. Evidence suggests a significant
dissociation exists between the brain and plasma kinetics. Reliance on plasma
kinetics as the basis for dosing regimens leads to a misunderstanding of
necessary schedules.
As a rule, psychotropic drugs should be used continuously. There are some
possible exceptions, such as when treating insomnia, agitation, or situational
anxiety. A common mistake is the use of high-potency benzodiazepines, such
as alprazolam (Xanax) and clonazepam (Klonopin), only after an attack has
begun. These drugs should be used as part of a regular schedule to prevent
attacks.
Some patients who experience sexual dysfunction while being treated with
SSRIs take a drug holiday; that is, they skip a daily dose from time to time to
facilitate sexual performance.
Intermittent dosing regimens of SSRIs are effective as a treatment for
premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). The drugs are taken daily during
the 2-week luteal phase of the menstrual cycle.
Duration of Treatment
A common question from a patient is, “How long do I need to take the
medication?” The answer depends on multiple variables. These include the
specific disorder, the symptom duration, and family history. We should also
consider the patient’s tolerance of and benefit from the medication. Patients
can be given a reasonable explanation of the probabilities but should be told
that it is first best to see if the medication works for them and whether any
side effects are acceptable. Any more definitive discussion of treatment
duration can be held once we can assess the degree of success. Even patients
with a philosophical aversion to the use of psychotropic drugs may elect to
stay on the medication indefinitely if the magnitude of improvement is


<<<PAGE 1911>>>
excellent. Most psychiatric disorders have high rates of chronicity and
relapse. Because of this, long-term treatment is often needed to prevent a
recurrence. Nevertheless, the fact remains that psychotropic drugs are not
said to cure the disorders they treat but rather to help control the symptoms.
Treatment is conceptually broken down into three phases: the initial
therapeutic trial, the continuation, and the maintenance phase. The initial
period of treatment should last at least several weeks because of the delay in
therapeutic effects that characterize most classes of psychotropic drugs. The
required duration of a therapeutic trial of a drug should be discussed at the
outset of treatment so that the patient does not have unrealistic expectations
of an immediate improvement in symptoms. Patients are more likely to
experience side effects early in the course of pharmacotherapy than any relief
from their disorder. In some cases, medication may even exacerbate some
symptoms. Patients should be counseled that a meager initial reaction to
medication is not an indicator of the outcome of treatment. For instance,
many patients with panic disorder develop jitteriness or an increase in panic
attacks after starting on tricyclic or SSRI treatment. Benzodiazepine agonists
are an exception to the rule that clinical onset is delayed. In most cases, their
hypnotic and antianxiety effects are evident immediately.
Ongoing use of medication, however, does not provide absolute protection
against relapse. Continuation therapy provides clinically and statistically
significant protective effects against relapse. The optimal duration of
continuation or maintenance therapy is variable and dependent on the clinical
history of the patient. Early-onset chronic major depression, for example, has
a more severe course and more significant comorbidity than late-onset
chronic major depression. In addition to early-onset, a history of multiple past
episodes and the severity and length of a current episode would suggest that
longer, even indefinite, treatment is appropriate.
Frequency of Visits
Until an unequivocal response to treatment occurs, patients should be seen as
frequently as circumstances warrant. The frequency of follow-up or
monitoring visits is determined by clinical judgment. In severely ill patients,
this might mean several times a week. Patients on maintenance therapy, even
when stable, need monitoring, but no consensus exists on the frequency of


<<<PAGE 1912>>>
follow-up therapy. Three months is a reasonable interval between visits, but 6
months may be adequate after long-standing treatment.

LABORATORY TESTS AND THERAPEUTIC BLOOD
MONITORING
Laboratory testing and therapeutic blood monitoring should be based on
clinical circumstances and the drugs being used. For most commonly used
psychotropic drugs, routine testing is not required.
Pretreatment tests are routine as part of a workup to establish baseline
values and to rule out underlying medical problems that may be causing the
psychiatric symptoms or that might complicate treatment with drugs. Results
of recently performed tests should be obtained. With agents known to cause
cardiac conduction changes, a pretreatment electrocardiogram (ECG) should
be obtained before initiating treatment. With lithium and clozapine, the
possibility of severe changes in thyroid, renal, hepatic, or hematologic
functions requires pretreatment and ongoing monitoring with appropriate
laboratory tests.
As a result of both anecdotal and research findings of sometimes severe
glucose dysregulation during treatment primarily with SDAs, the FDA has
suggested that patients being treated with any atypical antipsychotic be
monitored for the emergence of diabetes.
Certain circumstances present in which it is necessary or useful to use
plasma concentrations to monitor a patient’s condition. The most common is
the monitoring of drugs with narrow therapeutic indexes, such as lithium.
Also, we may monitor drugs with a therapeutic window, which is the optimal
dose range for a therapeutic response; drug combinations that can lead to
interactions that raise drug concentrations of medications or their metabolites,
which can cause toxicity; unexplained toxicity at average therapeutic doses;
and failure to respond in a patient who may be noncompliant. A clinician
should have no reservations about requesting random urine toxicologic tests
in a patient who abuses substances.

TREATMENT OUTCOMES
The goal of psychotropic treatment is to eliminate all manifestations of a


<<<PAGE 1913>>>
disorder, thus enabling the patient to regain the ability to function as well and
to enjoy life as fully as before they became ill. This degree of improvement to
below the syndromal threshold is defined as remission.
Response and Remission
Remission is the preferred outcome of treatment, not only because of the
immediate impact on functioning and state of mind but also because
emerging evidence suggests that patients in remission are less likely to
experience relapse and recurrence of their disorder.
Patients who improve but do not experience a full resolution are
considered to be responders. They may exhibit significant improvement but
continue to experience symptoms. In depression studies, the response is
usually defined as a 50 percent or more significant decrease from baseline on
a standard rating scale, such as the Hamilton Depression (HAM-D) Scale or
the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS). The scales
define remission as an absolute score of 7 or less on the HAM-D or 10 or less
on the MADRS.
Our expectations around improvement derive from what we know about
the disorder and its response to treatment. Obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD) and schizophrenia, for example, are more likely to be associated with
residual manifestations of illness than major depression or panic disorder.
The probability of full remission from OCD with SSRI treatment alone over
2 years is less than 12 percent, and the probability of partial remission is
approximately 47 percent.
Treatment Failure
The initial treatment plan should anticipate that the medication may be
ineffective. A next-step strategy should be in place at the initiation of
treatment. Repeated drug failures should prompt a reassessment of the
patient. First, was the original diagnosis correct? In answering this question,
the clinician should include the possibility of an undiagnosed medical
condition or recreational drug use as the cause of the psychiatric symptoms.
Second, are the observed symptoms related to the original disorder, or are
they adverse effects of the drug treatment? Some antipsychotic drugs, for
example, can produce akinesia, which resembles psychotic withdrawal, or


<<<PAGE 1914>>>
akathisia and neuroleptic malignant syndrome, which resemble increased
psychotic agitation. Long-term use of SSRIs can produce emotional blunting,
which can mimic depression. Intolerance of side effects may be the most
common reason for treatment failure.
Third, was the drug administered at an appropriate dosage for a sufficient
length of time? Because absorption and metabolism of drugs can vary
significantly in patients, the clinician may need to measure plasma levels of a
drug to ensure a sufficient dose of the drug.
Fourth, did a pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction with
another drug that the patient was taking reduce the efficacy of the newly
prescribed drug?
Fifth, did the patient take the drug as directed? Drug noncompliance is a
common clinical problem that arises as a result of complicated drug regimens
(more than one drug in more than one daily dosage), adverse effects (mainly
if unnoticed by the clinician), and poor patient education about the drug
treatment plan. Patients may discontinue medication when they recover,
thinking that they are cured and no longer benefiting from the medication.
Treatment Resistance
Some patients fail to respond to repeated trials of medication. No single
factor can explain the ineffectiveness of the various interventions in these
cases. Strategies in these cases include the use of drug combinations, highdose therapy, and the use of unconventional drugs. Limited evidence is
available on the comparative success rates associated with any given strategy.
Tolerance
The development of tolerance is marked by a need, over time, to use
increased doses of a drug for it to maintain a clinical effect. This decreased
responsiveness to a drug occurs after repeated doses. Tolerance also describes
decreased sensitivity to adverse effects of the drug, such as nausea. This
phenomenon is used as the basis for starting some drugs at subtherapeutic
doses, with the plan to adjust the schedule once the patient can tolerate higher
doses. Clinical tolerance appears to represent changes in the CNS, such as
altered receptor configuration or density. Drugs with similar pharmacologic
actions often exhibit cross-tolerance.


<<<PAGE 1915>>>
Sensitization
Clinically manifested as the reverse of tolerance, sensitization is said to occur
when sensitivity to a drug effect increases over time. In these cases, the same
dose typically produces more pronounced effects as treatment progresses.
Withdrawal
The development of physiologic adaptation to a drug, with a subsequent risk
of withdrawal symptoms, has been reported for many classes of psychotropic
drugs. Technically, withdrawal should be considered a side effect. The
probability and severity of these reactions are remote with most drugs and
more frequent with others. As a general rule, the more abruptly a drug is
stopped and the shorter its elimination half-life, the more likely it is that
clinically significant withdrawal symptoms will occur. When using some
short-acting drugs, withdrawal reactions can result from missed doses and
during daily intervals between doses. Gradual tapering of medications after
prolonged use is recommended whenever possible. Although this reduces the
risk of withdrawal reactions, it does not ensure they will not occur. The socalled sedative-hypnotics and opiates are the agents most often associated
with mentally and physically distressing discontinuation reactions. In some
cases, such as barbiturate use, withdrawal can be fatal.
Marked differences are found among agents, even within a given class,
concerning the probability and severity of discontinuation effects. For
example, the benzodiazepines alprazolam and triazolam (Halcion) commonly
produce more immediate and intense withdrawal symptoms than other
compounds. Among the SSRIs, there is a well-described withdrawal
syndrome that appears to be more frequent and severe with paroxetine
(Paxil). It can, however, occur with any SSRI. Even fluoxetine can be
associated with discontinuation symptoms, but the symptoms may be delayed
and attenuated because of the long elimination half-life of its active
metabolite. These manifestations are subtle and are delayed for weeks after
the last dose. Venlafaxine also produces severe SSRI-like withdrawal
syndrome.
In addition to half-life, many variables can influence the likelihood and
degree of discontinuation symptoms. Changes in the rate of drug metabolism,
as an example, can play a role. Paroxetine is primarily metabolized by the


<<<PAGE 1916>>>
cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6 isoenzyme. However, it is also a potent
inhibitor of CYP 2D6. This results in autoinhibition, dose-dependent
inhibition of its metabolism, with a subsequent increase in plasma
concentrations of paroxetine. If the dose of paroxetine is decreased or the
drug is stopped, the decline in its plasma concentrations can be steep, causing
withdrawal to occur. Withdrawal can occur in rare cases in which the dose of
a drug is not decreased, but a second agent, which had been inhibiting its
metabolism, was stopped. For example, alprazolam is metabolized via the
CYP 3A3/4 enzyme system. Nefazodone inhibits that enzyme. If a patient
taking both agents for several weeks discontinues the nefazodone, it could
result in a rapid increase in the rate of alprazolam metabolism and a
consequent drop in plasma concentrations.
The development of sustained-release versions of drugs, such as
alprazolam, paroxetine, and venlafaxine, has not reduced the severity of their
withdrawal reactions. The prolonged half-life of those agents results from
delayed absorption rather than prolongation of the elimination phase. The
frequency of drug dosing is reduced but not the rate of the falloff in plasma
concentrations.
Low bioavailability with a generic agent may account for the unexpected
loss of clinical effect in the emergence of withdrawal symptoms. The
occurrence of these events soon after refilling a prescription should prompt
examination of the new medication. It should be confirmed whether the
dispensed medication and dose are both correct. It is difficult to ascertain
whether generic medications are genuinely equivalent, so the possibility
exists that differences in potency may underlie adverse changes in clinical
status.
Withdrawal symptoms invariably occur hours or days after dose reduction
or discontinuation. Symptoms resolve within a few weeks, so the persistence
of symptoms argues against withdrawal. Although depletion studies have
been shown to provoke the rapid return of symptoms, in clinical practice,
psychotic and mood symptoms do not usually reappear abruptly after longterm treatment.

COMBINATION OF DRUGS
According to the American Psychiatric Association Practice Guidelines for


<<<PAGE 1917>>>
the Treatment of Psychiatric Disorders, “the use of multiple agents should be
avoided if possible” in the treatment of psychiatric disorders. Although
monotherapy represents the ideal, polypharmacy, the simultaneous use of
psychotropic medications, has been commonplace since chlorpromazine was
combined with reserpine (Diupres) in the early 1950s. The practice of
combining drugs and the merits of various augmentation or combination
strategies are routinely discussed in the literature and at scientific meetings.
The mean number of simultaneously prescribed medications has increased in
recent decades. Among psychiatric inpatients, the mean number of
psychotropics prescribed is approximately three. Fixed combinations—drugs
that contain more than one active ingredient—have been successfully
marketed in the past, and research on new combinations is ongoing. A
fluoxetine-olanzapine fixed combination has been approved as a treatment for
bipolar disorder. The use of such drugs may increase the patients’ compliance
by simplifying the drug regimen. A problem with combination drugs,
however, is that the clinician has less flexibility in adjusting the dosage of
one of the components; that is, the use of combination drugs can cause two
drugs to be administered when only one drug continues to be necessary for
therapeutic efficacy (Table 21-8).
Table 21-8
Selected Combination Drugs Used in Psychiatry

Sometimes distinctions are made between augmentation and combination


<<<PAGE 1918>>>
therapy. When two psychotropics with the same approved indications are
used concurrently, this is termed combination therapy. Adding a drug with
another indication is termed augmentation. Augmentation often entails the
use of a drug that is not primarily considered a psychotropic. For example, in
treating depression, it is not common to add thyroid hormone to an approved
antidepressant.
Almost all patients with bipolar disorder are taking more than one
psychotropic agent. Combination treatment with drugs that treat depression
and DRA or SDA has long been held as preferable in patients with psychotic
depression. Similarly, SSRIs typically produce partial improvement in
patients with OCD, so the addition of an SDA may be helpful.
Medications also can be combined to counteract side effects, to treat
specific symptoms, and as a temporary measure to transition from one drug to
another. It is common practice to add a new medication without the
discontinuation of a prior drug, mainly when the first drug has provided
partial benefit. This addition can be part of a plan to transition from an agent
that is not producing a satisfactory response or an attempt to maintain the
patient on combined therapy.
The advantages of combining drugs include building on the existing
response, which may be less demoralizing, and the possibility that
combinations produce new mechanisms that no single agent can provide. One
limitation is that noncompliance and adverse effects increase, and the
clinician may not be able to determine whether it was the second drug alone
or the combination of drugs that resulted in a therapeutic success or a
particular adverse effect. Combining drugs can create a broad spectrum effect
and also changes the ratio of metabolites.

COMBINED PSYCHOTHERAPY AND
PHARMACOTHERAPY
Many psychiatrists believe that patients are best treated with a combination of
medication and psychotherapy. Studies have demonstrated that the results of
combined therapy are superior to those of either type of therapy alone. When
pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy are used together, the approach should
be coordinated, integrated, and synergistic. If two separate clinicians direct
psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy, the clinicians must communicate with


<<<PAGE 1919>>>
each other clearly and often.

SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Although every patient brings a unique combination of demographic and
clinical variables to the clinical setting, specific patient populations require
special consideration. When treating the young, the elderly, those with
medical disorders, and women who want to conceive or are pregnant or
nursing, awareness of risks associated with medication assumes increased
importance. Data derived from clinical trials are of limited value in guiding
many decisions because populations in these studies consisted of healthy
young adults and, until recently, excluded many women of child-bearing age.
Studies of children and adolescents have become more common, so
understanding of treatment effects in this population has grown.
Children
Understanding of the safety and efficacy of most psychotropic drugs, when
used to treat children, is based more on clinical experience than on evidence
from extensive clinical trial data. Often, so results from adult studies are
extrapolated to children. This extrapolation is not necessarily appropriate
because of developmental differences in pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics. Dosing is another special consideration in drug use with
children. Although the small volume of distribution suggests the use of lower
doses than those used in adults, a child’s higher rate of metabolism suggests
that a higher ratio of milligrams of a drug to kilograms of body weight should
be used. In practice, beginning with a small dose is best, then increasing it
until clinical effects are observed. The clinician should not hesitate, however,
to use adult dosages in children if these dosages are effective and the adverse
effects are acceptable.
The paucity of research data is a legacy of many years in which
manufacturers avoided conducting trials in children because of liability
concerns, small market share, and, hence, limited profit potential represented
by this population. To correct this problem, the FDA Modernization Act
(FDAMA) of 1997 provided for special encouragement and incentives to
study drugs for pediatric use.


<<<PAGE 1920>>>
Pregnant and Nursing Women
No definitive assurances exist that any drug is entirely without risk during
pregnancy and lactation. No psychotropic medication is absolutely
contraindicated during pregnancy, although drugs with known risks of
congenital disabilities, premature birth, or neonatal complications should be
avoided if acceptable alternatives are available.
Women who are pregnant or lactating are excluded from clinical trials, and
it is only recently that women of child-bearing age have been able to
participate in these studies. As a result, there are large gaps in knowledge of
the effects of psychotropic agents on the developing fetus and the neonate.
Most of what is known are the result of anecdotal reports or data from
registries. The basic rule is to avoid administering any drug to a woman who
is pregnant (particularly during the first trimester) or who is breastfeeding a
child unless the mother’s psychiatric disorder is severe, and the therapeutic
value of the drug outweighs the theoretical adverse effects on the fetus or
newborn. A woman may elect to continue on medication because she does
not want to chance a possible recurrence of painful or disabling symptoms.
Among the newer antidepressants, paroxetine is the only one to carry a
warning from the FDA, the result of an increased risk of cardiac
malformation. The agents with the most well-documented risk of specific
congenital disabilities are lithium, carbamazepine, and valproate. Lithium
administration during pregnancy is associated with Ebstein anomaly, a severe
abnormality of cardiac development, although recent evidence suggests that
the risk is not as significant as previously believed. Carbamazepine and
valproic acid are associated with neural tube defects, which can be prevented
by the use of folate during pregnancy. Lamotrigine may cause oral clefts
when used during the first trimester. Some experts advise that all women of
child-bearing age who are treated with psychotropics take supplemental
folate.
The administration of psychotherapeutic drugs at or near delivery can
cause the baby to be overly sedated at delivery and require a respirator. They
may also be physically dependent on the drug, requiring detoxification and
the treatment of a withdrawal syndrome. Reports exist of a neonatal
withdrawal syndrome associated with third-trimester use of SSRIs in
pregnant women. They have also been implicated in producing pulmonary


<<<PAGE 1921>>>
hypertension in newborns.
Virtually all psychiatric drugs are secreted in the milk of a nursing mother;
therefore, mothers on those agents should be advised not to breastfeed their
infants.
Elderly Patients
The two major concerns when treating geriatric patients with
psychotherapeutic drugs are that elderly persons may be more susceptible to
adverse effects (particularly cardiac effects) and may metabolize and excrete
drugs more slowly, thus requiring lower dosages of medication. In practice,
clinicians should begin treating geriatric patients with a small dose, usually
approximately half of the usual starting dose. The dose should be raised in
small increments, more slowly than for middle-aged adults, until a clinical
benefit is achieved or unacceptable adverse effects appear. Although many
geriatric patients require a small dose of medication, many others require a
full therapeutic dose.
Elderly patients account for approximately one-third of all prescription
drug use and a substantial percentage of over-the-counter preparations as
well. Even more significant is the incidence of polypharmacy. Recent surveys
have found that elderly patients in the community are taking between three
and five medications, and that hospitalized elderly patients are treated with an
average of ten drugs. Nearly half of all patients in long-term care facilities are
prescribed one or more psychotropic agents. Because of these statistics,
clinicians need to consider potential types and likelihood of drug interactions
when selecting medications.
Psychotropic drugs are causally related to falls in the elderly.
Discontinuation of psychotropic drugs results in an estimated 40 percent risk
reduction for falls. This association between psychotropics and falls and hip
fractures may weaken as newer agents become widely used. As a rule, newgeneration compounds produce less unwanted sedation, dizziness,
parkinsonism, and postural hypotension.
Age-related changes in renal clearance and hepatic metabolism make it
more important to be conservative with the starting doses of medication as
well as the rate of dose titration. Within any class of psychotropic agents,
those with potentially serious consequences, such as hypotension, cardiac


<<<PAGE 1922>>>
conduction abnormalities, anticholinergic activity, and respiratory depression,
are not suitable choices. Drugs that cause cognitive impairment, such as
benzodiazepines and anticholinergics, can mimic or exacerbate symptoms of
dementia. Similarly, DRAs can worsen or induce Parkinson disease, another
age-related disorder. Some side effects, such as SSRIassociated syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone
(SIADH) and oxcarbazepine-associated hyponatremia, occur more commonly
in older patients.
A common ethical dilemma with the medically ill elderly or those with
dementia is the question of their capacity to give informed consent before
treatment with psychotropic drugs or ECT.
Medically Ill Patients
There are special considerations, diagnostic and therapeutic, when
administering psychiatric drugs to medically ill patients. The medical
disorder should be ruled out as a cause of psychiatric symptoms. For
example, patients with neurologic or endocrine disorders or those infected
with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) may experience disturbances of
mood and cognition. Common medications, such as corticosteroids and Ldopa, are associated with the induction of mania.
A patient with diabetes mellitus is better treated with an agent without the
risk of weight gain or glucose dysregulation. Depending on the diagnosis,
drugs that might treat the primary psychiatric disorder and also cause weight
loss, drugs such as bupropion, topiramate, and zonisamide, should be
prescribed for these patients. Patients with obstructive pulmonary disease
should not be given sedating drugs, which raise the arousal threshold and
suppress respiration. Patients with medical disorders are also taking other
medications, which can result in pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic
interactions. Combined treatment with an inducer of multiple CYP enzymes
and a drug that is a substrate for those enzymes could result in subtherapeutic
levels, leading to inadequate symptom control. The use of the tuberculosis
treatment rifampicin (Rifadin) with carbamazepine is an example of this. The
use of drugs that inhibit CYP 2D6, agents such as paroxetine and fluoxetine,
can prevent the conversion of hydrocodone (Robidone) and other opiates into
an active analgesic form. NSAIDs are also a rare cause of perceptual


<<<PAGE 1923>>>
disturbances and psychotic symptoms.
Other issues include a potentially increased sensitivity to adverse effects,
including increased or decreased metabolism and excretion of the drug, and
interactions with other medications. Drug interactions are an obvious concern
when drugs with a narrow therapeutic range are being used. Any change in
the rate of metabolism or interference with the formation and elimination of
metabolites can profoundly influence the activity of that drug. Similarly,
interactions that interfere with drug metabolism can produce an increase in
side effects and toxicity.
As with children and geriatric patients, the most reasonable clinical
practice is to begin with a small dosage, to increase it slowly, and to watch
for clinical benefit and adverse effects. Determining the plasma drug
concentrations may be helpful for such patients, but therapeutic blood
concentrations for most psychotropic drugs are neither necessary nor
routinely available.
Substance Abuse
Many patients who seek or need treatment for a psychiatric disorder
chronically use illicit substances or drink excessive amounts of alcohol.
Discontinuation of chronic drug or alcohol use can result not only in craving
but also in clinically significant psychiatric and physiologic withdrawal
symptoms. For many patients, successful treatment of their underlying
psychiatric disorder may not be possible in the presence of ongoing
marijuana, cocaine, and alcohol use. If several trials of medications fail,
hospitalization for detoxification may be necessary. Little research and no
consensus exist about how to use psychotropic agents in patients who are
regular users of cocaine, marijuana, or other recreational drugs.

REGULATORY ISSUES
The FDA has the authority to approve a drug for clinical use and to ensure
that product labeling is truthful and contains all information pertinent to the
safe and effective use of that drug.
Product information that is FDA approved for marketed drugs appears as a
package insert that lists potential side effects, drug interactions, the need for
special monitoring, and restrictions for use. In some cases, these adverse


<<<PAGE 1924>>>
reactions and potential safety hazards warrant a warning label called a black
box label. The FDA typically negotiates final labeling language with the
company; however, in cases where a company refuses to satisfy the FDA, the
agency may initiate proceedings to remove the drug from clinical use. In
recent years, warning labels have been applied to entire classes of
psychotropic drugs, including the SDAs and antidepressants such as the
SSRIs.
The product information may also contain a “Contraindications” heading.
This section describes instances in which the drug should not be used because
the risk of using it outweighs the benefit. If no contraindications are known,
this section of the labeling will state “None known.”
A Precautions section may contain precautions for most individuals taking
the drug, as well as for specific groups, such as pregnant women, nursing
mothers, or children. In this section, one will find recommendations for
patients to ensure the safe and effective use of the drug. For example, there
may be precautions about driving when taking the medication or using
substances such as other drugs, food, or alcohol that may have harmful
effects if taken while using the medication. The precautions section also
provides information about laboratory tests needed to track responses or to
identify adverse reactions to the drug or about known interactions with other
drugs, foods, or ingredients.
Every product label has an Adverse Reaction section that lists the
frequency of undesirable effects that may be associated with the use of a
drug. Causes of adverse reactions can include medication errors, such as
overdosage, or interactions between different drugs or between drugs and
certain foods.

NONAPPROVED DOSAGES AND USES
It is now common practice to treat psychiatric disorders with drugs that are
approved for nonpsychiatric conditions. Some examples include propranolol
(Inderal) for social anxiety and treatment of lithium-induced tremor;
verapamil (Calan, Isoptin) for mania and treatment of MAOI-induced
hypertensive crisis; levothyroxine (Levoxyl) for antidepressant augmentation;
clonidine (Catapres) and guanfacine (Tenex) for posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD); dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine) for antidepressant augmentation;


<<<PAGE 1925>>>
and riluzole (Rilutek) for self-injurious behavior. Off-label use of a drug is
not a violation of law or a departure from good medical practice. The FDA
does not limit how a physician may use an approved drug. Medications can
be prescribed for any reason shown to be medically indicated for the welfare
of the patient. Once a drug is approved for commercial use, a physician can,
as part of the practice of medicine, lawfully prescribe a different dosage for a
patient or may otherwise vary the conditions of use from what is approved in
the package labeling without notifying the FDA or obtaining its approval.
Failure to follow the information on the drug label does not in itself impose
liability and should not preclude a physician from using sound clinical
judgment in the service of the patient. Physicians are permitted to use a drug
for indications not included on the drug’s official labeling without violating
the FDA rules. This fact, however, does not absolve the physician of
responsibility for an untoward result from treatment. Patients can still sue for
possible medical malpractice with the reasoning that the failure to follow the
FDA-approved label can be interpreted as deviating from the prevailing
standard of care.
When using a drug off-label or in doses outside the usual range, we should
explain to the patient the reasons for this approach. We should also document
it in the chart. When doubting the plan to use a drug off label, a consultation
with a colleague should be obtained.
In some cases, a drug has obtained limited approval for an indication.
Divalproex (Depakote) and risperidone, for example, are approved by the
FDA for the acute, but not long-term, treatment of mania. Nevertheless, these
drugs are routinely used for long-term prevention of recurrences of mania and
bipolar disorder. In the case of lamotrigine, it was accepted as a first-choice
agent for the treatment of bipolar disorder long before the FDA approved that
indication.

PLACEBOS
Pharmacologically inactive substances have long been known sometimes to
produce significant clinical benefits. A patient who believes that a compound
is helpful may often derive considerable benefit from taking that substance,
whether it is known to be pharmacologically active or not. For many
psychiatric disorders, including mild to moderate depression and some


<<<PAGE 1926>>>
anxiety disorders, well over 30 percent of patients can exhibit significant
improvement or remission of symptoms on a placebo. For other conditions,
such as schizophrenia, manic episodes, and psychotic depression, the placebo
response rate is meager. Whereas suggestion is undoubtedly crucial in the
efficacy of placebos (and active drugs), placebos can produce biologic
effects. For example, placebo-induced analgesia may sometimes be blocked
by naloxone (Narcan), which suggests that endorphins may mediate the
analgesia derived from taking a placebo. It is conceivable that placebos may
also stimulate endogenous anxiolytic and antidepressant factors, resulting in
clinical improvement in patients with depression and anxiety disorders.
Just as placebos can produce benefits, they can also have adverse effects.
In many studies, some adverse effects are likely to be more frequent with
placebos than with the active drug. Some patients will not tolerate placebos,
although they are supposedly inert, and they exhibit adverse effects (called
the nocebo phenomenon). It is easy to discount such patients as overly
suggestible; however, if placebos can stimulate beneficial endogenous
factors, perhaps toxic endogenous factors can also be produced.
Prudence is needed in contemplating the use of a placebo in clinical
practice. Treating a patient with a placebo without consent can seriously
undermine a patient’s confidence in the physician if, and when, it is
discovered.

21.1 Antipsychotics
SEROTONIN–DOPAMINE ANTAGONISTS AND
SIMILARLY ACTING DRUGS (SECOND-GENERATION OR
ATYPICAL ANTIPSYCHOTICS)
The SGAs, also known as second-generation or atypical antipsychotic drugs,
are a group of pharmacologically diverse drugs that have largely supplanted
the older DRAs. The term atypical is used because these drugs differ in their
side effect profiles, most notably lower risk of extrapyramidal side effects
(EPS), and have spectra of action that are broader than those of the DRAs.
However, this term is becoming something of a misnomer, as the drugs are


<<<PAGE 1927>>>
now more commonly used than the “typical” antipsychotics. In contrast to the
earlier antipsychotic drugs, the SGAs have significant effects on both the
dopamine and serotonin systems. Their pharmacology is complex, with
individual drugs in this group having multiple neurotransmitter effects. All
SGAs are indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia. Most of these SGA
drugs have also received approval as monotherapy or adjunctive therapy in
the treatment of bipolar disorder. Some have also been approved as adjuncts
for the treatment of major depression.
As of 2020, 13 SGA drugs were approved by the FDA. These include the
following:
Aripiprazole (marketed as Abilify)
Asenapine Maleate (marketed as Saphris)
Brexpiprazole (marketed as Rexulti)
Cariprazine (marketed as Vraylar)
Clozapine (marketed as Clozaril)
Iloperidone (marketed as Fanapt)
Lumateperone (marketed as Caplyta)
Lurasidone (marketed as Latuda)
Olanzapine (marketed as Zyprexa, and as Symbyax in combination with
fluoxetine)
Paliperidone (marketed as Invega)
Quetiapine (marketed as Seroquel)
Risperidone (marketed as Risperdal)
Ziprasidone (marketed as Geodon)
It is arguable whether the SGAs represent an improvement in overall
tolerability than the DRAs. Although there is an improvement concerning a
lowered, not absent, risk of EPS, most of the drugs in this group often
produce substantial weight gain, which in turn increases the potential for the
development of diabetes mellitus. Olanzapine and clozapine appear to
account for most cases of weight gain and drug-induced diabetes mellitus.
The other agents pose a smaller risk of these side effects; nevertheless, the
FDA has requested that all SGAs carry a warning label that patients taking
the drugs need to be monitored closely, and has recommended the following
factors be considered for all patients prescribed SGAs:


<<<PAGE 1928>>>
1. Personal and family history of obesity, diabetes, dyslipidemia,
hypertension, and cardiovascular disease
2. Weight and height (so that body mass index can be calculated)
3. Waist circumference (at the level of the umbilicus)
4. BP
5. Fasting plasma glucose level
6. Fasting lipid profile
Patients with preexisting diabetes should have regular monitoring,
including hemoglobin A1C (HbA1C) and, in some cases, insulin levels.
Among these drugs, clozapine sits apart. It is not considered a first-line agent
because of side effects (hematologic) and the need for weekly blood tests.
Although highly effective in treating both mania and depression, clozapine
does not have an FDA indication for these conditions.
Mechanisms of Action
The presumed antipsychotic effects of the SDAs are blockade of D2
dopamine receptors. Where the SDAs differ from older antipsychotic drugs is
their higher ratio interactions with serotonin receptor subtypes, most notably
the 5-HT2A subtype, as well as with other neurotransmitter systems. It is
hypothesized that these properties account for the distinct tolerability profiles
associated with each of the SDAs. All SDAs have different chemical
structures, receptor affinities, and side effect profiles. No SDA is identical in
its combination of receptor affinities, and the relative contribution of each
receptor interaction to the clinical effects is unknown.
Therapeutic Indications
Although initially approved for the treatment of schizophrenia and acute
mania, some of these drugs have also been approved as adjunctive therapy in
treatment-resistant depression and as adjunctive therapy in major depressive
disorder (MDD). They are also useful in PTSD and anxiety disorders.
Although clinicians tend to use them in behavioral disturbances associated
with dementia, all SDAs carry an FDA boxed warning regarding adverse
effects when used in elderly persons with dementia-related psychoses,
because elderly patients with dementia-related psychoses are at an increased


<<<PAGE 1929>>>
risk (1.6 to 1.7 times) of death compared with placebo. All of these agents are
considered first-line drugs for schizophrenia except clozapine, which may
cause adverse hematologic effects that require weekly blood sampling.
Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective Disorder. The SDAs are useful for
treating acute and chronic psychoses such as schizophrenia and
schizoaffective disorder, in both adults and adolescents. SDAs are as good as
or better than typical antipsychotics (DRAs) for the treatment of positive
symptoms in schizophrenia and superior to DRAs for the treatment of
negative symptoms. Compared with persons treated with DRAs, persons
treated with SDAs have fewer relapses and require less frequent
hospitalization, fewer emergency department visits, less phone contact with
mental health professionals, and less treatment in day programs.
Because clozapine has potentially life-threatening adverse effects, it is
appropriate only for patients with schizophrenia who are resistant to all other
antipsychotics. Other indications for clozapine include treatment of persons
with severe tardive dyskinesia—which can be reversed with high dosages in
some cases—and those with a low threshold for EPS. Persons who tolerate
clozapine have done well on long-term therapy. The effectiveness of
clozapine may be increased by augmentation with risperidone, which raises
clozapine concentrations and sometimes results in dramatic clinical
improvement.
Mood Disorders. Most of the SDAs (clozapine being a notable exception)
are FDA approved for the treatment of acute mania. Some of these agents,
including aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine, and quetiapine XR, are also
approved for the maintenance treatment in bipolar disorder as monotherapy
or adjunctive therapy. The SDAs improve depressive symptoms in
schizophrenia, and both clinical experience and clinical trials show that all of
the SDAs augment antidepressants in the acute management of major
depression. At this time, olanzapine, in combination with fluoxetine, has been
approved for treatment-resistant depression, and aripiprazole and quetiapine
XR are indicated for adjunctive therapy to antidepressants in MDDs.
Quetiapine and quetiapine XR are also approved in bipolar depression. A
fixed combination of olanzapine and fluoxetine (Symbyax) is approved as a
treatment for acute bipolar depression.


<<<PAGE 1930>>>
Other Indications. About 10 percent of patients with schizophrenia exhibit
outwardly aggressive or violent behavior, and the SDAs are effective for the
treatment of such aggression. Other off-label indications include acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) dementia, autism spectrum disorders,
Tourette disorder, Huntington disease, and Lesch–Nyhan syndrome.
Risperidone and olanzapine have been used to control aggression and selfinjury in children. These drugs are sometimes coadministered with stimulants
to children with ADHD who are comorbid for either oppositional–
defiant disorder or conduct disorder. SDAs—especially olanzapine,
quetiapine, and clozapine—are useful in persons who have severe tardive
dyskinesia. The SDAs are also effective for treating psychotic depression and
for psychosis secondary to head trauma, dementia, or treatment drugs.
Treatment with SDAs decreases the risk of suicide and water intoxication
in patients with schizophrenia. Patients with treatment-resistant OCD have
responded to the SDAs; however, a few persons treated with the SDAs have
been noted to develop treatment-emergent symptoms of OCD. Some patients
with borderline personality disorder may improve with the SDAs.
Some data suggest that treatment with conventional DRAs has protective
effects against the progression of schizophrenia when used during the first
episode of psychosis. Ongoing studies are looking at whether the use of
SDAs in at-risk patients with early evidence of disease prevents deterioration,
thus improving long-term outcomes.
Adverse Effects
The SDAs share a similar spectrum of adverse reactions but differ
considerably in terms of frequency or severity of their occurrence. Specific
side effects that are more common with an individual SDA are emphasized in
the discussion of each drug in subsequent text.
Risperidone (Risperdal)
Indications. Risperidone is indicated for the acute and maintenance
treatment of schizophrenia in adults and the treatment of schizophrenia in
adolescents ages 13 to 17 years. Risperidone is also indicated for the shortterm treatment of acute manic or mixed episodes associated with bipolar I
disorder in adults and children and adolescents ages 10 to 17 years. The


<<<PAGE 1931>>>
combination of risperidone with lithium or valproate is indicated for the
short-term treatment of acute manic or mixed episodes associated with
bipolar I disorder.
Risperidone is also indicated for the treatment of irritability associated with
an autistic spectrum disorder in children and adolescents ages 5 to 16 years,
including symptoms of aggression toward others, deliberate selfinjuriousness, temper tantrums, and quickly changing moods.
Pharmacology. Risperidone is a benzisoxazole. It undergoes extensive
first-pass hepatic metabolism to 9-hydroxy risperidone, a metabolite with
equivalent antipsychotic activity. Peak plasma levels of the parent compound
occur within 1 hour for the parent compound and 3 hours for the metabolite.
Risperidone has bioactivity of 70 percent. The combined half-life of
risperidone and 9-hydroxy risperidone averages 20 hours, so it is useful in
once-daily dosing. Risperidone is an antagonist of the serotonin 5-HT2A,
dopamine D2, α1-adrenergic and α2-adrenergic, and histamine H1 receptors. It
has a low affinity for α-adrenergic and muscarinic cholinergic receptors.
Risperidone is a potent antagonist of D2 receptors, as potent as haloperidol,
however unlike haloperidol it causes less EPS.
Dosages. The recommended dose range and frequency of risperidone
dosing have changed since the drug first came into clinical use. Risperidone
is available in 0.25-, 0.5-, 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-mg tablets and a 1-mg/mL oral
solution. The initial dosage is usually 1 to 2 mg at night, which can then be
increased to 4 mg/day. Positron emission tomography (PET) studies have
shown that dosages of 1 to 4 mg/day provide the required D2 blockade for a
therapeutic effect. At first, it was believed that because of its short
elimination half-life, risperidone should be given twice a day, but studies
have shown equal efficacy with once-a-day dosing. Dosages above 6 mg a
day are associated with a higher incidence of adverse effects, particularly
EPS. There is no correlation between plasma concentrations and therapeutic
effects. Dosing guidelines for adolescents and children are different from
those for adults, requiring lower starting dosages; higher dosages are
associated with more adverse effects.


<<<PAGE 1932>>>
Side Effects. The EPS of risperidone is largely dosage dependent, and there
has been a trend to using lower doses than initially recommended. Weight
gain, anxiety, nausea and vomiting, rhinitis, erectile dysfunction, orgasmic
dysfunction, and increased pigmentation are associated with risperidone use.
The most common drug-related reasons for discontinuation of risperidone use
are EPS, dizziness, hyperkinesias, somnolence, and nausea. Marked elevation
of prolactin may occur. Weight gain occurs more commonly with risperidone
use in children than in adults.
Risperidone is also available as an orally disintegrating tablet (Risperdal
M-Tab), which is available in 0.5, 1, and 2 mg strengths, and in a depot
formulation (Risperdal Consta), which is given as an intramuscular (IM)
injection formulation every 2 weeks. The dose may be 25, 50, or 75 mg. Oral
risperidone should be coadministered with Risperdal Consta for the first 3
weeks before being discontinued.
Drug Interactions. Inhibition of CYP2D6 by drugs such as paroxetine and
fluoxetine can block the formation of risperidone’s active metabolite.
Risperidone is a weak inhibitor of CYP2D6 and has little effect on other
drugs. Combined use of risperidone and SSRIs may result in significant
elevation of prolactin, with associated galactorrhea and breast enlargement.
Paliperidone (Invega)
Indications. Paliperidone is indicated for the acute and maintenance
treatment of schizophrenia. Paliperidone is also indicated for the acute
treatment of schizoaffective disorder as monotherapy or as an adjunct to
mood stabilizers or antidepressants.
Pharmacology. Paliperidone is a benzisoxazole derivative and is the
primary active metabolite of risperidone. Peak plasma concentrations (Cmax)
are achieved approximately 24 hours after dosing, and steady-state
concentrations of paliperidone are attained within 4 or 5 days. The hepatic
isoenzymes CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 play a limited role in the metabolism and
elimination of paliperidone, so no dose adjustment is required in patients with
mild or moderate hepatic impairment.


<<<PAGE 1933>>>
Dosage. Paliperidone is available in 3-, 6-, and 9-mg tablets. The
recommended dosage is 6 mg once daily administered in the morning. It can
be taken with or without food. It is also available as extended-release tablets,
which are also available in 3-, 6-, and 9-mg tablets administered once daily. It
is recommended that no more than 12 mg should be administered per day. A
long-acting formulation of paliperidone (Invega Sustenna) is given by
injection once a month. Invega Sustenna is available as a white to off-white
sterile aqueous extended-release suspension for intramuscular injection in
dose strengths of 39-, 78-, 117-, 156-, and 234-mg paliperidone palmitate.
The drug product hydrolyzes to the active moiety, paliperidone, resulting in
dose strengths of 25, 50, 75, 100, and 150 mg of paliperidone, respectively.
Invega Sustenna is provided in a prefilled syringe with a plunger stopper
and tip cap. The kit also contains two safety needles (a 1½-in 22-gauge safety
needle and a 1-in 23-gauge safety needle). It has a half-life of 25 to 49 days.
Monthly injections of 117 mg are recommended, although higher or lower
dosages can be used depending on the clinical situation. The first two
injections should be in the deltoid muscle because plasma concentrations are
28 percent higher with deltoid versus gluteal administration. Subsequent
injections can alternate between gluteal and deltoid sites.
Side Effects. The dose of paliperidone should be reduced in patients with
renal impairment. It may cause more sensitivity to temperature extremes,
such as very hot or cold conditions. Paliperidone may cause an increase in
QT (QTc) interval and should be avoided in combination with other drugs
that cause prolongation of QT interval. It may cause orthostatic hypotension,
tachycardia, somnolence, akathisia, dystonia, EPS, and parkinsonism.
Olanzapine (Zyprexa)
Indications. Olanzapine is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia.
Oral olanzapine is indicated for use as monotherapy for the acute treatment of
manic or mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder and maintenance
treatment of bipolar I disorder. Oral olanzapine is also indicated for the
treatment of manic or mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder as an
adjunct to lithium or valproate, and olanzapine can also be used in
combination with fluoxetine (Symbyax) for the treatment of depressive


<<<PAGE 1934>>>
episodes associated with bipolar I disorder.
Oral olanzapine and fluoxetine in combination (Symbyax) is indicated for
the treatment of treatment-resistant depression. Olanzapine monotherapy is
not indicated for the treatment of treatment-resistant depression.
Pharmacology. Approximately 85 percent of olanzapine is absorbed from
the GI tract, and about 40 percent of the dosage is inactivated by first-pass
hepatic metabolism. Peak concentrations are reached in 5 hours, and the halflife averages 31 hours (range 21 to 54 hours). It is given in once-daily dosing.
In addition to 5-HT2A and D2 antagonism, olanzapine is an antagonist of the
D1, D4, α1, 5-HT1A, muscarinic M1 to M5, and H1 receptors.
Dosages. Olanzapine is available in 2.5-, 5-, 7.5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-mg oral
and Zydis form (orally disintegrating) tablets. The initial dosage for the
treatment of psychosis is usually 5 or 10 mg. For acute mania, it is usually 10
or 15 mg given once daily. It is also available as 5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-mg
orally disintegrating tablets that might be useful for patients who have
difficulty swallowing pills or who “cheek” their medication.
A starting daily dose of 5 to 10 mg is recommended. After 1 week, the
dosage can be raised to 10 mg a day. Given the long half-life, 1 week must be
allowed to achieve each new steady-state blood level. Dosages in clinical use
ranges vary, with 5 to 20 mg a day is most commonly used, but 30 to 40 mg a
day is needed in treatment-resistant patients. A word of caution, however, is
that the higher dosages are associated with increased EPS and other adverse
effects, and dosages above 20 mg a day were not studied in the pivotal trials
that led to the approval of olanzapine. The parenteral form of olanzapine is
indicated for the treatment of acute agitation associated with schizophrenia
and bipolar disorder, and the IM dosage is 10 mg. Coadministration with
benzodiazepines is not approved.
Other Formulations. Olanzapine is available as an extended-release
injectable suspension (Relprevv), which is a long-acting atypical IM injection
indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia. It is injected deep in the gluteal
region and should not be administered intravenously or subcutaneously, nor
is it approved for deltoid administration. Before administering the injection,
the administrator should aspirate the syringe for several seconds to ensure


<<<PAGE 1935>>>
that no blood is visible. It carries a boxed warning for postinjection delirium
sedation syndrome (PDSS). Patients are at risk for severe sedation (including
coma) and must be observed for 3 hours after each injection in a registered
facility. In controlled studies, all patients with PDSS recovered, and there
were no deaths reported. It is postulated that PDSS is secondary to increased
levels of olanzapine secondary to accidental rupture of a blood vessel,
causing extreme sedation or delirium. Patients should be managed as
clinically appropriate and, if necessary, monitored in a facility capable of
resuscitation. The injection can be given every 2 or 4 weeks, depending on
the dosing guidelines.
Drug Interactions. Fluvoxamine (Luvox) and cimetidine (Tagamet)
increase, and carbamazepine and phenytoin decrease, serum concentrations of
olanzapine. Ethanol increases olanzapine absorption by more than 25 percent,
leading to increased sedation. Olanzapine has little effect on the metabolism
of other drugs.
Side Effects. Other than clozapine, olanzapine consistently causes a more
significant amount and more frequent weight gain than other atypicals. This
effect is not dose-related and continues over time. Clinical trial data suggest it
peaks after 9 months, after which it may continue to increase more slowly.
Somnolence, dry mouth, dizziness, constipation, dyspepsia, increased
appetite, akathisia, and tremor are associated with olanzapine use. A small
number of patients (2 percent) may need to discontinue the use of the drug
because of transaminase elevation. There is a dose-related risk of EPS. The
manufacturer recommends a “periodic” assessment of blood sugar and
transaminases during treatment with olanzapine. There is an FDA-mandated
warning about an increased risk of stroke among patients with dementia
treated with SDAs, but this risk is small and is outweighed by improved
behavioral control that treatment may produce.
Quetiapine (Seroquel)
Indications. Quetiapine is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia. It is
also indicated for the acute treatment of manic episodes associated with
bipolar I disorder, both as monotherapy and as an adjunct to lithium or


<<<PAGE 1936>>>
sodium valproate. It is also indicated as monotherapy for the acute treatment
of depressive episodes associated with bipolar disorder and maintenance
treatment of bipolar I disorder as an adjunct to lithium or divalproex. It also is
indicated as adjunctive therapy to antidepressants for the treatment of MDD.
Pharmacology. Quetiapine is a dibenzothiazepine structurally related to
clozapine, but it differs markedly from that agent in biochemical effects. It is
rapidly absorbed from the GI tract, with peak plasma concentrations reached
in 1 to 2 hours. The steady-state half-life is about 7 hours, and optimal dosing
is two or three times per day. Quetiapine, in addition to being an antagonist
of D2 and 5-HT2, also blocks 5-HT6, D1 and H1, and α1 and α2 receptors. It
does not block muscarinic or benzodiazepine receptors. The receptor
antagonism for quetiapine is generally lower than that for other antipsychotic
drugs, and it is not associated with EPS.
Dosages. Quetiapine is available in 25-, 50-, 100-, 200-, 300-, and 400-mg
tablets. Quetiapine dosing should begin at 25 mg twice daily, with doses then
increased by 25 to 50 mg/dose every 2 to 3 days, up to a target of 300 to 400
mg a day. Studies have shown efficacy in the range of 300 to 800 mg a day.
In reality, more aggressive dosing is both tolerated and more effective. It has
become evident that the target dose can be achieved more rapidly and that
some patients benefit from dosages of as much as 1,200 to 1,600 mg a day.
When used at higher doses, serial ECG studies are required. Despite its short
elimination half-life, quetiapine can be given to many patients once a day.
This dosing is consistent with the observation that quetiapine receptor
occupancy remains even when concentrations in the blood have markedly
declined. Quetiapine in doses of 25 to 300 mg at night has been used for
insomnia.
Other Formulations. Quetiapine XR has comparable bioavailability to an
equivalent dose of quetiapine administered two or three times daily.
Quetiapine XR is given once daily, preferably in the evening, 3 to 4 hours
before bedtime without food or a light meal to prevent an increase in Cmax.
The usual starting dose is 300 mg, and it may be increased to 400 to 800 mg.
Drug Interactions. The potential interactions between quetiapine and other


<<<PAGE 1937>>>
drugs have been well studied. Phenytoin increases quetiapine clearance
fivefold; no significant pharmacokinetic interactions have been noted. Avoid
the use of quetiapine with drugs that increase the QT interval and in patients
with risk factors for prolonged QT interval. The FDA has added a new
warning about quetiapine, cautioning prescribers about potential prolongation
of the QT interval when above-recommended amounts of quetiapine are
combined with specific drugs. Quetiapine should not be combined with other
drugs that are known to prolong QTc. This includes class 1A antiarrhythmics
(e.g., quinidine, procainamide) or class III antiarrhythmics (e.g., amiodarone,
sotalol), antipsychotic medications (e.g., ziprasidone, chlorpromazine,
thioridazine), antibiotics (e.g., gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin), or any other class
of medications known to prolong the QTc interval (e.g., pentamidine,
levomethadyl acetate, methadone). Quetiapine should also be avoided in
circumstances that may increase the risk of occurrence of torsade de pointes
or sudden death, including (1) a history of cardiac arrhythmias such as
bradycardia; (2) hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia; (3) concomitant use of
other drugs that prolong the QTc interval; and (4) presence of congenital
prolongation of the QT interval. Postmarketing cases also show increases in
QT interval in patients who overdose on quetiapine.
Side Effects. Somnolence, postural hypotension, and dizziness are the most
common adverse effects of quetiapine. These are usually transient and are
best managed with initial gradual upward titration of the dosage. Quetiapine
is the SDA least likely to cause EPS, regardless of dose. This makes it
particularly useful in treating patients with Parkinson disease who develop
dopamine agonist-induced psychosis. Prolactin elevation is rare and both
transient and mild when it occurs. Quetiapine is associated with modest
transient weight gain in some persons, but some patients occasionally gain a
considerable amount of weight. The relationship between quetiapine and the
development of diabetes is not as clearly established as are the cases
involving the use of olanzapine. Small increases in heart rate, constipation,
and a transient increase in liver transaminases may also occur. Initial
concerns about cataract formation, based on animal studies, have not been
borne out since the drug has been in clinical use. Nevertheless, it might be
prudent to test for lens abnormalities early in treatment and periodically after
that.


<<<PAGE 1938>>>
Ziprasidone (Geodon)
Indications. Ziprasidone is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia.
Ziprasidone is also indicated as monotherapy for the acute treatment of manic
or mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder and as an adjunct to
lithium or valproate for the maintenance treatment of bipolar I disorder.
Pharmacology. Ziprasidone is a benzisothiazole piperazine. Peak plasma
concentrations of ziprasidone are reached in 2 to 6 hours. Steady-state levels
ranging from 5 to 10 hours are reached between the first and the third days of
treatment. The mean terminal half-life at steady state ranges from 5 to 10
hours, which accounts for the recommendation that twice-daily dosing is
necessary. Bioavailability doubles when ziprasidone is taken with food, and
therefore it should be taken with food.
Peak serum concentrations of IM ziprasidone occur after approximately 1
hour, with a half-life of 2 to 5 hours.
Ziprasidone, similar to the other SDAs, blocks 5-HT2A and D2 receptors. It
is also an antagonist of 5-HT1D, 5-HT2C, D3, D4, α1, and H1 receptors. It has
a very low affinity for D1, M1, and α2 receptors. Also, ziprasidone has agonist
activity at the serotonin 5-HT1A receptors and is an SSRI and a
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. This action is consistent with clinical
reports that ziprasidone has antidepressant-like effects in nonschizophrenic
patients.
Dosages. Ziprasidone is available in 20-, 40-, 60-, and 80-mg capsules.
Ziprasidone for IM use comes as a single-use 20 mg/mL vial. Oral
ziprasidone dosing should be initiated at 40 mg a day, divided into two daily
doses. Studies have shown efficacy in the range of 80 to 160 mg a day,
divided twice daily. In clinical practice, doses as high as 240 mg a day are
being used. The recommended IM dosage is 10 to 20 mg every 2 hours for
the 10-mg dose and every 4 hours for the 20-mg dose. The maximum total
daily dose of IM ziprasidone is 40 mg.
Other than interactions with other drugs that prolong the QTc complex,
ziprasidone appears to have a low potential for clinically significant drug
interactions.


<<<PAGE 1939>>>
Side Effects. Somnolence, headache, dizziness, nausea, and
lightheadedness are the most common adverse effects in patients taking
ziprasidone. The drug has almost no significant effects outside the CNS, is
associated with almost no weight gain, and does not cause sustained prolactin
elevation. Concerns about prolongation of the QTc complex have deterred
some clinicians from using ziprasidone as a first choice. The QTc interval has
been shown to increase in patients treated with 40 and 120 mg/day.
Ziprasidone is contraindicated in combination with other drugs known to
prolong the QTc interval. These include, but are not limited to, dofetilide,
sotalol, quinidine, other class IA and III antiarrhythmics, mesoridazine,
thioridazine,
chlorpromazine,
droperidol,
pimozide,
sparfloxacin,
gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin, halofantrine, mefloquine, pentamidine, arsenic
trioxide, levomethadyl acetate, dolasetron mesylate, probucol, and
tacrolimus. Ziprasidone should be avoided in patients with congenital long
QT syndrome and patients with a history of cardiac arrhythmias.
Aripiprazole (Abilify)
Aripiprazole is a potent 5-HT2A antagonist and is indicated for the treatment
of both schizophrenia and acute mania. It is also approved for the
augmentation of antidepressant agents in MDD. Aripiprazole is a D2
antagonist, but can also act as a partial D2 agonist. Partial D2 agonists
compete at D2 receptors for endogenous dopamine, thereby producing a
functional reduction of dopamine activity.
Indications. Aripiprazole is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia.
Short-term, 4- to 6-week studies comparing aripiprazole with haloperidol and
risperidone in patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder have
shown comparable efficacy. Dosages of 15, 20, and 30 mg a day were found
to be effective. Long-term studies suggest that aripiprazole is effective as a
maintenance treatment at a daily dose of 15 to 30 mg.
Aripiprazole is also indicated for the acute and maintenance treatment of
manic and mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder. It is also used
as adjunctive therapy to either lithium or valproate for the acute treatment of
manic and mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder.
Aripiprazole is indicated for use as adjunctive therapy to antidepressants


<<<PAGE 1940>>>
for the treatment of MDD. Aripiprazole is also indicated for the treatment of
irritability associated with autistic disorder.
Pharmacology. Aripiprazole is well absorbed, reaching peak plasma
concentrations after 3 to 5 hours. Absorption is not affected by food. The
mean elimination half-life of aripiprazole is about 75 hours. It has a weakly
active metabolite with a half-life of 96 hours. These relatively long half-lives
make aripiprazole suitable for once-daily dosing. Clearance is reduced in
elderly persons. Aripiprazole exhibits linear pharmacokinetics and is
primarily metabolized by CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 enzymes. It is 99 percent
protein-bound. Aripiprazole is excreted in breast milk in lactating rats.
Mechanistically, aripiprazole acts as a modulator, rather than a blocker,
and acts on both postsynaptic D2 receptors and presynaptic autoreceptors. In
theory, this mechanism addresses excessive limbic dopamine
(hyperdopaminergic) activity and decreased dopamine (hypodopaminergic)
activity in frontal and prefrontal areas—abnormalities that are thought to be
present in schizophrenia. The absence of a complete D2 blockade in the
striatal areas would be expected to minimize EPS. Aripiprazole is an α1adrenergic receptor antagonist, which may cause some patients to experience
orthostatic hypotension. Similar to the so-called atypical antipsychotic
agents, aripiprazole is a 5-HT2A antagonist.
Other Uses. A study of aggressive children and adolescents with
oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder found that there was a
positive response in about 60 percent of the subjects. In this study, vomiting
and somnolence led to a reduction in initial aripiprazole dosage.
Drug Interactions. Whereas carbamazepine and valproate reduce serum
concentrations, ketoconazole, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and quinidine increase
aripiprazole serum concentrations. Lithium and valproic acid, two drugs
likely to be combined with aripiprazole when treating bipolar disorder, do not
affect the steady-state concentrations of aripiprazole. Combined use with
antihypertensives may cause hypotension. Drugs that inhibit CYP2D6
activity reduce aripiprazole elimination.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Aripiprazole is available as 5-, 10-, 15-


<<<PAGE 1941>>>
, 20-, and 30-mg tablets. The effective dosage range is 10 to 30 mg/day.
Although the starting dosage is 10 to 15 mg/day, problems with nausea,
insomnia, and akathisia have led to the use of lower than recommended
starting dosages of aripiprazole. Many clinicians find that an initial dose of 5
mg increases tolerability.
Side Effects. The most commonly reported side effects of aripiprazole are
headache, somnolence, agitation, dyspepsia, anxiety, and nausea. Although it
is not a frequent cause of EPS, aripiprazole does cause akathisia-like
activation. Described as restlessness or agitation, it can be highly distressing
and often leads to discontinuation of the medication. Insomnia is another
common complaint. Data so far do not indicate that weight gain or diabetes
mellitus have an increased incidence with aripiprazole. Prolactin elevation
does not typically occur. Aripiprazole does not cause significant QTc interval
changes. There have been reports of seizures.
Asenapine (Saphris)
Indications. Asenapine is approved for the acute treatment of adults with
schizophrenia and acute treatment of manic or mixed episodes associated
with bipolar I disorder with or without psychotic features in adults.
Pharmacology. Asenapine has an affinity for several receptors, including
serotonin (5-HT2A and 5-HT2C), noradrenergic (α2, and α1), dopaminergic
(D3 and D4 receptors is higher than its affinity for D2 receptors), and
histamine (H1). It has a negligible affinity for muscarinic-1 cholinergic
receptors and hence less incidence of dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation,
and urinary retention. The bioavailability is 35 percent via the sublingual
(preferred) route, and it achieves peak plasma concentration in 1 hour.
Asenapine is metabolized through glucuronidation and oxidative metabolism
by CYP1A2, so coadministration with fluvoxamine and other CYP1A2
inhibitors should be done cautiously.
Dosage. Asenapine is available as 5- and 10-mg sublingual tablets and
should be placed under the tongue. This method is because the bioavailability
of asenapine is less than 2 percent when swallowed, but is 35 percent when


<<<PAGE 1942>>>
absorbed sublingually. The agent dissolves in saliva within seconds and is
absorbed through the oral mucosa. Sublingual administration avoids first-pass
hepatic metabolism. Patients should be advised to avoid drinking or eating
for 10 minutes after taking asenapine because this may lower the blood
levels. The recommended starting and target dose for schizophrenia is 5 mg
twice a day. In bipolar disorder, the patient may be started on 10 mg twice a
day, and if necessary, the dosage may be lowered to 5 mg twice a day,
depending on the tolerability issues. In acute schizophrenia treatment, there is
no evidence of added benefit with a 10 mg twice-daily dose, but there is an
apparent increase in specific adverse reactions. In both bipolar I disorder and
schizophrenia, the maximum dose should not exceed 10 mg two times a day.
The safety of doses above 10 mg twice a day has not been evaluated in
clinical studies.
Side Effects. The most common side effects observed in schizophrenic and
bipolar disorders are somnolence, dizziness, EPS other than akathisia, and
increased weight. In clinical trials, the mean weight gain after 52 weeks is 0.9
kg, and there were no clinically relevant differences in lipid profile and blood
glucose after 52 weeks. In clinical trials, asenapine was found to increase the
QTc interval in a range of 2 to 5 milliseconds compared to placebo. No
patients treated with asenapine experienced QTc increases 60 milliseconds or
greater from baseline measurements, nor did any experience a QTc of 500
milliseconds or more. Nevertheless, asenapine should be avoided in
combination with other drugs known to prolong QTc interval in patients with
congenital prolongation of QT interval or a history of cardiac arrhythmias,
and in circumstances that may increase the occurrence of torsades de pointes.
Asenapine can elevate prolactin levels, and the elevation can persist during
chronic administration. Galactorrhea, amenorrhea, gynecomastia, and
impotence may occur.
Clozapine (Clozaril)
Indications. In addition to being the most effective drug treatment for
patients who have failed to respond to standard therapies, clozapine has been
shown to benefit patients with severe tardive dyskinesia. Clozapine
suppresses these dyskinesias, but the abnormal movements return when


<<<PAGE 1943>>>
clozapine is discontinued. This suppression is true even though clozapine, on
rare occasions, may cause tardive dyskinesia. Other clinical situations in
which clozapine may be used include the treatment of psychotic patients
intolerant of EPS caused by other agents, treatment-resistant mania, severe
psychotic depression, idiopathic Parkinson disease, Huntington disease, and
suicidal patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. Other
treatment-resistant disorders that have demonstrated response to clozapine
include pervasive developmental disorder, autism of childhood, and OCD
(either alone or in combination with an SSRI). Used by itself, clozapine may
very rarely induce obsessive-compulsive symptoms.
Pharmacology. Clozapine is a dibenzothiazepine. It is rapidly absorbed,
with peak plasma levels reached in about 2 hours. Steady state is achieved in
less than 1 week if twice-daily dosing is used. The elimination half-life is
about 12 hours. Clozapine has two significant metabolites, one of which, Ndimethyl clozapine, may have some pharmacologic activities. Clozapine is an
antagonist of 5-HT2A, D1, D3, D4, and α (especially α1) receptors. It has
relatively low potency as a D2 receptor antagonist. Data from PET scanning
show that whereas 10 mg of haloperidol produces 80 percent occupancy of
striatal D2 receptors, clinically significant dosages of clozapine occupy only
40 to 50 percent of striatal D2 receptors. This difference in D2 receptor
occupancy is probably why clozapine does not cause EPS. It has also been
postulated that clozapine and other SDAs bind more loosely to the D2
receptor, and because of this “fast dissociation,” more normal dopamine
neurotransmission is possible.
Dosages. Clozapine is available in 25- and 100-mg tablets. The initial
dosage is usually 25 mg one or two times daily, although a conservative
initial dosage is 12.5 mg twice daily. The dosage can then be increased
gradually (25 mg a day every 2 or 3 days) to 300 mg a day in divided doses,
usually two or three times a day. Dosages up to 900 mg a day can be used.
Testing for blood concentrations of clozapine may be helpful in patients who
fail to respond. Studies have found that plasma concentrations greater than
350 µg/mL are associated with a better likelihood of response.


<<<PAGE 1944>>>
Drug Interactions. Clozapine should not be used with any other drug that
is associated with the development of agranulocytosis or bone marrow
suppression. Such drugs include carbamazepine, phenytoin, propylthiouracil,
sulfonamides, and captopril (Capoten). Lithium combined with clozapine
may increase the risk of seizures, confusion, and movement disorders.
Lithium should not be used in combination with clozapine by persons who
have experienced an episode of neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Clomipramine (Anafranil) can increase the risk of seizure by lowering the
seizure threshold and by increasing clozapine plasma concentrations.
Risperidone, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and fluvoxamine increase serum
concentrations of clozapine. The addition of paroxetine may precipitate
clozapine-associated neutropenia.
Side Effects. The most common drug-related adverse effects are sedation,
dizziness, syncope, tachycardia, hypotension, electrocardiography (ECG)
changes, nausea, and vomiting. Other common adverse effects include
fatigue, weight gain, various GI symptoms (most commonly constipation),
anticholinergic effects, and subjective muscle weakness. Sialorrhea, or
hypersalivation, is a side effect that begins early in treatment and is most
evident at night. Patients report that their pillows are drenched with saliva.
This side effect is most likely the result of impairment of swallowing.
Although there are reports that clonidine or amitriptyline may help reduce
hypersalivation, the most practical solution is to put a towel over the pillow.
The risk of seizures is about 4 percent in patients taking dosages greater
than 600 mg a day. Leukopenia, granulocytopenia, agranulocytosis, and fever
occur in about 1 percent of patients. During the first year of treatment, there
is a 0.73 percent risk of clozapineinduced agranulocytosis. The risk during the second year is 0.07 percent. For
neutropenia, the risk is 2.32 percent and 0.69 percent, respectively, during the
first and second years of treatment. The only contraindications to the use of
clozapine are a WBC count below 3,500 cells/mm3; a previous bone marrow
disorder; a history of agranulocytosis during clozapine treatment; or the use
of another drug that is known to suppress the bone marrow, such as
carbamazepine (Tegretol).
During the first 6 months of treatment, weekly WBC counts are indicated
to monitor the patient for the development of agranulocytosis. If the WBC


<<<PAGE 1945>>>
count remains normal, the frequency of testing can be decreased to every 2
weeks. Although monitoring is expensive, an early indication of
agranulocytosis can prevent a fatal outcome. Clozapine should be
discontinued if the WBC count is below 3,000 cells/mm3 or the granulocyte
count is below 1,500/mm3. Also, a hematologic consultation should be
obtained, and obtaining a bone marrow sample should be considered. Persons
with agranulocytosis should not be reexposed to the drug. Clozapine cannot
be dispensed without proof of monitoring.
Patients exhibiting symptoms of chest pain, shortness of breath, fever, or
tachypnea should be immediately evaluated for myocarditis or
cardiomyopathy, an infrequent but serious adverse effect ending in death.
Serial CPK-MB (creatine phosphokinase with myocardial band fractions),
troponin levels, and ECG studies are recommended, with immediate
discontinuation of clozapine.
Iloperidone (Fanapt)
Indications. Iloperidone (Fanapt) is indicated for the acute treatment of
schizophrenia in adults. The safety and efficacy of iloperidone in children and
adolescents has not been established.
Pharmacology. Iloperidone is not a derivative of another antipsychotic
agent. It has complex multiple antagonist effects on several neurotransmitter
systems. Iloperidone has a strong affinity for dopamine D3 receptors,
followed by decreasing affinities of α2c-noradrenergic, 5-HT1a, D2a, and 5HT6 receptors. Iloperidone has a low affinity for histaminergic receptors. As
with other antipsychotics, the clinical significance of this receptor binding
affinity is unknown.
Iloperidone has a peak concentration of 2 to 4 hours and a half-life that is
dependent on hepatic isoenzyme metabolism. It is metabolized primarily
through CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, and the dosage should be reduced by half
when administered concomitantly with potent inhibitors of these two
isoenzymes. The half-life is 18 to 26 hours in CYP2D6 extensive
metabolizers and is 31 to 37 hours in CYP2D6 poor metabolizers. Of note,
approximately 7 to 10 percent of whites and 3 to 8 percent of African
Americans cannot metabolize CYP2D6 substrates; hence, dosing should be


<<<PAGE 1946>>>
determined with this caveat in mind. Iloperidone should be used with caution
in persons with severe hepatic impairment.
Side Effects. Iloperidone prolongs the QT interval and may be associated
with arrhythmia and sudden death. Iloperidone prolongs the QTc interval by
9 milliseconds at dosages of 12 mg twice daily. Concurrent use with other
agents that prolong the QTc interval may result in additive effects on the QTc
interval. The concurrent use of iloperidone with agents that prolong the QTc
interval may result in potentially life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias,
including torsades de pointes. Concurrent administration of other drugs that
are known to prolong the QTc interval should be avoided. Cardiovascular
disease,
hypokalemia,
hypomagnesemia,
bradycardia,
congenital
prolongation of the QT interval, and concurrent use of inhibitors of CYP3A4
or CYP2D6, which metabolize iloperidone, may increase the risk of QT
prolongation.
The most common adverse effects reported are dizziness, dry mouth,
fatigue, sedation, tachycardia, and orthostatic hypotension (depending on
dosing and titration). Despite being a robust D2 antagonist, the rates of EPS
and akathisia are similar to those of placebo. The mean weight gain in shortand long-term trials is 2.1 kg. Due to its relatively limited use, there is no
accurate understanding of iloperidone’s effects on weight and lipids. Some
patients exhibit elevated prolactin levels. Three cases of priapism have been
reported in the premarketing phase.
Dosing. Iloperidone must be titrated slowly to avoid orthostatic
hypotension. It is available in a titration pack, and the effective dose (12 mg)
should be reached in approximately 4 days based on a twice-a-day dosing
schedule. It is usually started on day 1 at 1 mg twice a day and increased
daily on a twice-a-day schedule to reach 12 mg by day 4. The maximum
recommended dose is 12 mg twice a day (24 mg a day), and it can be
administered without regard to food.
Lurasidone HCL (Latuda)
Indications. Lurasidone hydrochloride is an oral, once-daily atypical
antipsychotic indicated for the treatment of patients with schizophrenia. To


<<<PAGE 1947>>>
date, there has not been extensive clinical experience with lurasidone.
Side Effects. The most commonly observed adverse reactions associated
with the use of lurasidone are similar to those seen with other new-generation
antipsychotics. These include, but are not limited to, somnolence, akathisia,
nausea, parkinsonism, and agitation. Based on clinical trial data, lurasidone
appears to cause less weight gain and metabolic changes than the two other
most recently approved SDAs, asenapine and iloperidone. More extensive
clinical experience with the drug is required to determine whether this is, in
fact, the case.
Drug Interactions. When coadministration of lurasidone with a moderate
CYP3A4 inhibitor such as diltiazem is considered, the dose should not
exceed 40 mg/day. Lurasidone should not be used in combination with a
potent CYP3A4 inhibitor (e.g., ketoconazole). Lurasidone also should not be
used in combination with a potent CYP3A4 inducer (e.g., rifampin).
Dosages. Lurasidone is available as 20-, 40-, 80-, and 120-mg tablets.
Initial dose titration is not required. The recommended starting dose is 40 mg
once daily, and the medication should be taken with food. It is effective in a
dose range of 40 to 120 mg/day. Although there is no proven added benefit
with the 120 mg/day dose, there may be a dose-related increase in adverse
reactions. Still, some patients may benefit from the maximum recommended
dose of 160 mg/day. Dose adjustment is recommended in patients with renal
impairment. The dose in moderate to severe renal impairment should not
exceed 80 mg/day. The dose in severe hepatic impairment patients should not
exceed 40 mg/day.
Lumateperone (Caplyta)
Lumateperone was approved by the FDA for the treatment of schizophrenia
in adults in December 2019 and became available in February 2020. It
antagonizes several receptors, including 5-HT2A receptor, D1, D2, and D4.
Although effective for schizophrenia, several studies of its effectiveness in
bipolar depression had disappointing results. It is available in several doses,
although the highest FDA-approved dose is 42 mg. As this is a new drug,
experience with it in post study clinical samples is very limited.


<<<PAGE 1948>>>
Clinical Guidelines for SDAs
All SDAs are appropriate for the management of an initial psychotic episode,
but clozapine is reserved for persons who are refractory to all other
antipsychotic drugs. If a person does not respond to the first SDA, other
SDAs should be tried. The choice of drug should be based on the patient’s
clinical status and history of response to medication. Recent studies have
challenged the notion that SDAs require 4 to 6 weeks to reach full
effectiveness, and it may take up to 8 weeks for the full clinical effects of an
SDA to become apparent. The newer meta-analyses suggest that the apparent
benefits may be seen as early as 2 to 3 weeks, and early response or failure is
an indicator of subsequent response or failure.
Nevertheless, it is acceptable practice to augment an SDA with a highpotency DRA or benzodiazepine in the first few weeks of use. Lorazepam
(Ativan) 1 to 2 mg orally or IM can be used as needed for acute agitation.
Once effective, dosages can be lowered as tolerated. Clinical improvement
may take 6 months of treatment with SDAs in some, particularly treatmentrefractory persons.
The use of all SDAs must be initiated at low dosages and gradually tapered
upward to therapeutic dosages. The potential development of adverse effects
necessitates the gradual increase in dosage. If a person stops taking an SDA
for more than 36 hours, drug use should be resumed at the initial titration
schedule. After the decision to terminate olanzapine or clozapine use, dosages
should be tapered whenever possible to avoid cholinergic rebound symptoms
such as diaphoresis, flushing, diarrhea, and hyperactivity.
After assuring themselves of the appropriateness of SDA treatment, the
clinician should explain the risks and benefits of SDA treatment to the person
and the family. In the case of clozapine, an informed consent procedure
should be documented in the person’s chart. The patient’s history should
include information about blood disorders, epilepsy, cardiovascular disease,
hepatic and renal diseases, and drug abuse. The presence of a hepatic or renal
disease necessitates using low starting dosages of the drug. The physical
examination should include supine and standing BP measurements to screen
for orthostatic hypotension. The laboratory examination should include an
ECG and several complete blood counts (CBCs) with WBC counts, which
can then be averaged; and liver and renal function tests. Periodic monitoring


<<<PAGE 1949>>>
of blood glucose, lipids, and body weight is recommended.
Although the transition from a DRA to an SDA may be made abruptly, it is
wiser to taper off the DRA slowly while titrating up the SDA. Clozapine and
olanzapine both have anticholinergic effects, and the transition from one to
the other can usually be accomplished with little risk of cholinergic rebound.
The transition from risperidone to olanzapine is best accomplished by
tapering the risperidone off over 3 weeks while simultaneously beginning
olanzapine at 10 mg a day. Risperidone, quetiapine, and ziprasidone lack
anticholinergic effects, and the abrupt transition from a DRA, olanzapine, or
clozapine to one of these agents may cause cholinergic rebound, which
consists of excessive salivation, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. The risk of
cholinergic rebound can be mitigated by initially augmenting risperidone,
quetiapine, or ziprasidone with an anticholinergic drug, which is then tapered
off slowly. Any initiation and termination of SDA use should be
accomplished gradually.
It is wise to overlap the administration of the new drug with the old drug.
Of interest, some people have a more robust clinical response while taking
the two agents during the transition and then regressing on monotherapy with
the newer drug. We know little about the safety of combination antipsychotic
treatment.
Persons receiving regular injections of depot formulations of a DRA who
are to switch to SDA use are given the first dose of the SDA on the day the
next injection is due.
Persons who developed agranulocytosis while taking clozapine can safely
switch to olanzapine use, although initiation of olanzapine use amid
clozapine-induced agranulocytosis can prolong the time of recovery from the
usual 3 to 4 days up to 11 to 12 days. It is prudent to wait for the resolution of
agranulocytosis before initiating olanzapine use. Emergence or recurrence of
agranulocytosis has not been reported with olanzapine, even in persons who
developed it while taking clozapine.
SDA use by pregnant women has not been studied, but consideration
should be given to the potential of risperidone to raise prolactin
concentrations, sometimes up to three to four times the upper limit of the
normal range. Because the drugs can be excreted in breast milk, they should
not be taken by nursing mothers. The dosages for selected SDAs are given in
Table 21-9.


<<<PAGE 1950>>>
DOPAMINE RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS (FIRSTGENERATION ANTIPSYCHOTICS)
The DRAs represent the first group of effective agents for schizophrenia and
other psychotic illnesses. The first of these drugs, the phenothiazine
chlorpromazine (Thorazine), was introduced in the early 1950s. Other DRAs
include all of the antipsychotics in the following groups: phenothiazines,
butyrophenones, thioxanthenes, dibenzoxazepines, dihydroindoles, and
diphenylbutylpiperidines. Because these agents are associated with
extrapyramidal side effects (EPS) at clinically effective dosages, newer
antipsychotic drugs—the SDAs—have gradually replaced the older agents in
the United States. The SDAs are differentiated from earlier drugs by their
lower liability to cause extrapyramidal side effects. These newer drugs have
other liabilities, most notably a propensity to cause weight gain, lipid
elevations, and diabetes. Therefore, a reason to still consider the use of the
DRAs is their lower risk of causing significant metabolic abnormalities.
Intermediate-potency DRAs, such as perphenazine (Trilafon), are as effective
and well tolerated as the SDAs. Manufacturing of molindone (Moban), the
DRA with the lowest risk of weight gain and metabolic side effects, was
discontinued in the United States.
Table 21-9
Comparison of Usual Dosinga for Some Available SecondGeneration Antipsychotics in Schizophrenia


<<<PAGE 1951>>>
Pharmacologic Actions
All of the DRAs are well absorbed after oral administration, with liquid
preparations being absorbed more efficiently than tablets or capsules. Peak
plasma concentrations are usually reached 1 to 4 hours after oral
administration and 30 to 60 minutes after parenteral administration. Smoking,
coffee, antacids, and food interfere with the absorption of these drugs.
Steady-state levels are reached in approximately 3 to 5 days. The half-lives of
these drugs are approximately 24 hours. All can be given in one daily oral


<<<PAGE 1952>>>
dose if tolerated after the patient is in a stable condition. Most DRAs are
highly protein-bound. Parenteral formulation of the DRAs results in a more
rapid and more reliable onset of action. Bioavailability is also up to 10-fold
higher with parenteral administration. Most DRAs are metabolized by
cytochrome P450 (CYP) CYP2D6 and 3A isozymes. However, there are
differences among the specific agents.
Table 21-10
Factors
Influencing
Antipsychotics
Age

the

Pharmacokinetics

of

Elderly patients may demonstrate reduced clearance
rates.

Medical
Decreased hepatic blood flow can reduce clearance.
condition
Hepatic disease can decrease clearance.
Enzyme
inducers

Carbamazepine, phenytoin, ethambutol, barbiturates.

Clearance
Include SSRIs, TCAs, cimetidine, β-blockers, isoniazid,
inhibitors
methylphenidate, erythromycin,
triazolobenzodiazepines, ciprofloxacin, and
ketoconazole.
Changes in Hypoalbuminemia can occur with malnutrition or
binding
hepatic failure.
protein
SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TCA, tricyclic antidepressant.
Adapted from Ereshefsky L. Pharmacokinetics and drug interactions: update for new
antipsychotics. J Clin Psychiatry. 1996;57(Suppl 11):12–25.

Long-acting depot parenteral formulations of haloperidol (Haldol
Decanoate) and fluphenazine are available in the United States. These agents
are usually administered once every 1 to 4 weeks, depending on the dose and
the patient. It can take up to 6 months of treatment with depot formulations to
reach steady-state plasma levels, indicating that oral therapy should be


<<<PAGE 1953>>>
continued during the first month or so of depot antipsychotic treatment.
Antipsychotic activity derives from the inhibition of dopaminergic
neurotransmission. The DRAs are effective when approximately 72 percent
of dopamine D2 receptors in the brain are occupied. The DRAs also block
noradrenergic, cholinergic, and histaminergic receptors, with different drugs
having different effects on these receptor systems.
Some generalizations can be made about the DRAs based on their potency.
Potency refers to the amount of drug that is required to achieve therapeutic
effects. Low-potency drugs such as chlorpromazine and thioridazine
(Mellaril), given in doses of several 100 mg/day, typically produce more
weight gain and sedation than high-potency agents such as haloperidol and
fluphenazine, usually given in doses of less than 10 mg/day. High-potency
agents are also more likely to cause EPS. Some factors influencing the
pharmacologic actions of DRAs are listed in Table 21-10.
Therapeutic Indications
Many types of psychiatric and neurologic disorders may benefit from
treatment with DRAs. Some of these indications are shown in Table 21-11.
Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective Disorder. The DRAs are useful in
both the short- and long-term management of schizophrenia and
schizoaffective disorder. They both reduce acute symptoms and prevent
future exacerbations. These agents produce their most dramatic effects on the
positive symptoms of schizophrenia (e.g., hallucinations, delusions, and
agitation). Negative symptoms (e.g., emotional withdrawal and ambivalence)
are less likely to improve significantly, and they may appear to worsen
because these drugs produce constriction of facial expression and akinesia,
side effects that mimic negative symptoms.
Table 21-11
Indications for Dopamine Receptor Antagonists
Acute psychotic episodes in schizophrenia and schizoaffective
disorder
Maintenance treatment in schizophrenia and schizoaffective


<<<PAGE 1954>>>
disorders
Mania
Depression with psychotic symptoms
Delusional disorder
Borderline personality disorder
Substance-induced psychotic disorder
Delirium and dementia
Mental disorders caused by a medical condition
Childhood schizophrenia
Autism spectrum disorder
Tourette disorder
Huntington disease
Schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder are characterized by remission
and relapse. DRAs decrease the risk of reemergence of psychosis in patients
who have recovered while on medication. After the first episode of psychosis,
patients should be maintained on medication for 1 to 2 years; after multiple
episodes, for 2 to 5 years.
Mania. DRAs are useful for treating psychotic symptoms of acute mania.
Because antimanic agents (e.g., lithium) generally have a slower onset of
action than do antipsychotics in the treatment of acute symptoms, it is
standard practice to initially combine either a DRA or an SDA with lithium
(Eskalith), sodium valproate (Depakote), lamotrigine (Lamictal), or
carbamazepine (Tegretol) and then to withdraw the antipsychotic gradually.
Depression with Psychotic Symptoms. Combination treatment with an
antipsychotic and an antidepressant is one of the treatments of choice for
MDD with psychotic features; the other is ECT.
Delusional Disorder. Patients with delusional disorder often respond
favorably to treatment with these drugs. Some persons with borderline
personality disorder who develop paranoid thinking may respond to
antipsychotic drugs.


<<<PAGE 1955>>>
Severe Agitation and Violent Behavior. Severely agitated and violent
patients, regardless of diagnosis, may be treated with DRAs. Symptoms such
as extreme irritability, lack of impulse control, severe hostility, gross
hyperactivity, and agitation respond to short-term treatment with these drugs.
Children with mental disabilities, especially those with profound intellectual
disabilities and autistic disorder, often have associated episodes of violence,
aggression, and agitation that respond to treatment with antipsychotic drugs;
however, the repeated administration of antipsychotics to control disruptive
behavior in children is controversial.
Tourette Disorder. DRAs are used to treat Tourette’s disorder, a
neurobehavioral disorder marked by motor and vocal tics. Haloperidol and
pimozide (Orap) are the drugs most frequently used, but other DRAs are also
useful. Some clinicians prefer to use clonidine (Catapres) for this disorder
because of its lower risk of neurologic side effects.
Borderline Personality Disorder. Patients with borderline personality
disorder who experience transient psychotic symptoms, such as perceptual
disturbances, suspiciousness, ideas of reference, and aggression, may need to
be treated with a DRA. This disorder is also associated with mood instability,
so patients should be evaluated for possible treatment with mood-stabilizing
agents.
Dementia and Delirium. About two-thirds of agitated, elderly patients
with various forms of dementia improve when given a DRA. Low doses of
high-potency drugs (e.g., 0.5 to 1 mg a day of haloperidol) are recommended.
DRAs are also used to treat psychotic symptoms and agitation associated
with delirium. The cause of the delirium needs to be determined because
toxic deliriums caused by anticholinergic agents can be exacerbated by lowpotency DRAs, which often have significant antimuscarinic activity.
Orthostasis, parkinsonism, and worsened cognition are the most problematic
side effects in this elderly population.
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder. Intoxication with cocaine,
amphetamines, alcohol, phencyclidine, or other drugs can cause psychotic
symptoms. Because these symptoms tend to be time-limited, it is preferable


<<<PAGE 1956>>>
to avoid the use of a DRA unless the patient is severely agitated and
aggressive. Usually, benzodiazepines can be used to calm the patient.
Benzodiazepines should be used instead of DRAs in cases of phencyclidine
intoxication. When a patient is experiencing hallucinations or delusions as a
result of alcohol withdrawal, DRAs may increase the risk of seizure.
Childhood Schizophrenia. Children with schizophrenia benefit from
treatment with antipsychotic medication, although considerably less research
has been devoted to this population. Studies are underway to determine if
intervention with medication at the very earliest signs of disturbance in
children genetically at risk for schizophrenia can prevent the emergence of
more florid symptoms. Careful consideration needs to be given to side
effects, especially those involving cognition and alertness.
Table 21-12
Dopamine Receptor Antagonists: Potency and Adverse
Effects

Other Psychiatric and Nonpsychiatric Indications. The DRAs reduce
the chorea in the early stages of Huntington disease. Patients with this disease


<<<PAGE 1957>>>
may develop hallucinations, delusions, mania, or hypomania. These and other
psychiatric symptoms respond to DRAs. High-potency DRAs should be used.
However, clinicians should be aware that patients with a rigid form of this
disorder may experience acute EPS. The use of DRAs to treat impulse control
disorders should be reserved for patients in whom other interventions have
failed. Patients with autism spectrum disorder may exhibit hyperactivity,
screaming, and agitation with combativeness. Some of these symptoms
respond to high-potency DRAs, but there is little research evidence
supporting benefits in these patients.
The rare neurologic disorders ballismus and hemiballismus (which affect
only one side of the body), characterized by propulsive movements of the
limbs away from the body, also respond to treatment with antipsychotic
agents. Other miscellaneous indications for the use of DRAs include the
treatment of nausea, emesis, intractable hiccups, and pruritus. Endocrine
disorders and temporal lobe epilepsy may be associated with psychosis that
responds to antipsychotic treatment.
The most common side effects of DRAs are neurologic. As a rule, lowpotency drugs cause the most nonneurologic adverse effects, and highpotency drugs cause the most neurologic adverse effects.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Table 21-12 summarizes the most common adverse events associated with
the use of DRAs.
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome. A potentially fatal side effect of
DRA treatment, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, can occur at any time
during DRA treatment. Symptoms include extreme hyperthermia, severe
muscular rigidity and dystonia, akinesia, mutism, confusion, agitation, and
increased pulse rate and BP. Laboratory findings include increased WBC
count and levels of creatinine phosphokinase, liver enzymes, plasma
myoglobin, and myoglobinuria, occasionally associated with renal failure.
The symptoms usually evolve over 24 to 72 hours, and the untreated
syndrome lasts 10 to 14 days. The diagnosis is often missed in the early
stages, and the withdrawal or agitation may mistakenly be considered to
reflect increased psychosis. Men are affected more frequently than are


<<<PAGE 1958>>>
women, and young persons are affected more commonly than are elderly
persons. The mortality rate can reach 20 to 30 percent, or even higher, when
depot medications are involved. Rates are also increased when high doses of
high-potency agents are used.
If the neuroleptic malignant syndrome is suspected, the DRA should be
stopped immediately, and the following done: medical support to cool the
person; monitoring of vital signs, electrolytes, fluid balance, and renal output;
and symptomatic treatment of fever. Antiparkinsonian medications may
reduce some of the muscle rigidity. Dantrolene (Dantrium), a skeletal muscle
relaxant (0.8 to 2.5 mg/kg every 6 hours, up to a total dosage of 10 mg a day),
may be useful in the treatment of this disorder. When the person can take oral
medications, dantrolene can be given in doses of 100 to 200 mg a day.
Bromocriptine (20 to 30 mg a day in four divided doses) or amantadine can
be added to the regimen. Treatment should usually be continued for 5 to 10
days. When drug treatment is restarted, the clinician should consider
switching to a low-potency drug or an SDA, although these agents—
including clozapine—may also cause the neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Seizure Threshold. DRAs may lower the seizure threshold.
Chlorpromazine, thioridazine, and other low-potency drugs are thought to be
more epileptogenic than are high-potency drugs. The risk of inducing a
seizure by drug administration warrants consideration when the person
already has a seizure disorder or brain lesion.
Sedation. The blockade of histamine H1 receptors is the usual cause of
sedation associated with DRAs. Chlorpromazine is the most sedating typical
antipsychotic. The relative sedative properties of the drugs are summarized in
Table 21-12. Giving the entire daily dose at bedtime usually eliminates any
problems from sedation, and tolerance for this adverse effect often develops.
Central Anticholinergic Effects. The symptoms of central
anticholinergic activity include severe agitation; disorientation to time,
person, and place; hallucinations; seizures; high fever; and dilated pupils.
Stupor and coma may ensue. The treatment of anticholinergic toxicity
consists of discontinuing the causal agent or agents, close medical
supervision, and physostigmine (Antilirium, Eserine), 2 mg by slow


<<<PAGE 1959>>>
intravenous (IV) infusion, repeated within 1 hour as necessary. Too much
physostigmine is dangerous, and symptoms of physostigmine toxicity include
hypersalivation and sweating. Atropine sulfate (0.5 mg) can reverse the
effects of physostigmine toxicity.
Cardiac Effects. The DRAs decrease cardiac contractility, disrupt enzyme
contractility in cardiac cells, increase circulating levels of catecholamines,
and prolong atrial and ventricular conduction time and refractory periods.
Low-potency DRAs, particularly the phenothiazines, are usually more
cardiotoxic than are high-potency drugs. One exception is haloperidol, which
has been linked to abnormal heart rhythm, ventricular arrhythmias, torsades
de pointes, and sudden death when injected IV. Pimozide, sulpiride, and
droperidol (a butyrophenone) also prolong the QTc interval and have been
associated with torsades de pointes and sudden death. In one study,
thioridazine was responsible for 28 (61 percent) of the 46 sudden
antipsychotic deaths. In 15 of these cases, it was the only drug ingested.
Chlorpromazine also causes prolongation of the QT and PR intervals,
blunting of the T waves, and depression of the ST segment. These drugs are
thus indicated only when other agents have been ineffective.
Sudden Death. Occasional reports of sudden cardiac death during
treatment with DRAs may be the result of cardiac arrhythmias. Other causes
may include seizure, asphyxiation, malignant hyperthermia, heatstroke, and
neuroleptic malignant syndrome. However, there does seem to be an overall
increased incidence of sudden death with antipsychotics.
Orthostatic (Postural) Hypotension. Orthostatic (postural) hypotension
is most frequent with low-potency drugs, particularly chlorpromazine,
thioridazine, and chlorprothixene. When using intramuscular (IM) lowpotency DRAs, the clinician should measure the patient’s BP (lying and
standing) before and after the first dose and during the first few days of
treatment.
Orthostatic hypotension is mediated by adrenergic blockade and occurs
most frequently during the first few days of treatment. Tolerance often
develops for this side effect, which is why the initial dosing of these drugs is
lower than the usual therapeutic dose. Fainting or falls, although uncommon,


<<<PAGE 1960>>>
may lead to injury. Patients should be warned of this side effect and
instructed to rise slowly after sitting and reclining. Patients should avoid all
caffeine and alcohol; should drink at least 2 L of fluid a day; and if not under
treatment for hypertension, should add liberal amounts of salt to their diet.
Support hose may help some persons.
Hypotension can usually be managed by having patients lie down with
their feet higher than their heads and pump their legs as if bicycling. Volume
expansion or vasopressor agents, such as norepinephrine (Levophed), may be
indicated in severe cases. Because hypotension is produced by α-adrenergic
blockade, the drugs also block the α-adrenergic stimulating properties of
epinephrine, leaving the β-adrenergic stimulating effects untouched.
Therefore, the administration of epinephrine results in a paradoxical
worsening of hypotension and is contraindicated in cases of antipsychoticinduced hypotension. Pure α-adrenergic pressor agents, such as metaraminol
(Aramine) and norepinephrine, are the drugs of choice in the treatment of the
disorder.
Hematologic Effects. Temporary leukopenia with a WBC count of about
3,500 is a common but not a serious problem. Agranulocytosis, a lifethreatening hematologic problem, occurs in about 1 in 10,000 persons treated
with DRAs. Thrombocytopenic or nonthrombocytopenic purpura, hemolytic
anemias, and pancytopenia may rarely occur in persons treated with DRAs.
Although routine CBCs are not indicated, if a person reports a sore throat and
fever, a CBC should be done immediately to check for the possibility of a
severe blood dyscrasia. If blood index values are low, the administration of
DRAs should be stopped, and the patient should be transferred to a medical
facility. The mortality rate for the complication may be as high as 30 percent.
Peripheral Anticholinergic Effects. Peripheral anticholinergic effects,
such as dry mouth and nose, blurred vision, constipation, urinary retention,
and mydriasis, are common. This is especially true with low-potency DRAs,
for example, chlorpromazine, thioridazine, mesoridazine (Serentil). Some
persons may also have nausea and vomiting.
Constipation should be treated with the usual laxative preparations, but
severe constipation can progress to paralytic ileus. A decrease in the DRA
dosage is warranted in such cases. Pilocarpine (Salagen) may be used to treat


<<<PAGE 1961>>>
paralytic ileus, although the relief is only transitory. Bethanechol
(Urecholine) (20 to 40 mg a day) may be useful in some persons with urinary
retention.
Weight gain is associated with increased mortality and morbidity and with
medication noncompliance. Low-potency DRAs may cause significant
weight gain but not as much as is seen with the SDAs olanzapine (Zyprexa)
and clozapine (Clozaril). Molindone and perhaps loxapine (Loxitane) appear
to be least likely to cause weight gain.
Endocrine Effects. Blockade of the dopamine receptors in the
tuberoinfundibular tract results in the increased secretion of prolactin, which
can result in breast enlargement, galactorrhea, amenorrhea, and inhibited
orgasm in women and impotence in men. The SDAs, except risperidone
(Risperdal), are not significantly associated with an increase in prolactin
levels and may be the drugs of choice for persons experiencing disturbing
side effects from increased prolactin release.
Sexual Adverse Effects. Both men and women taking DRAs can
experience anorgasmia and decreased libido. Up to 50 percent of men who
take antipsychotics report ejaculatory and erectile disturbances. Sildenafil
(Viagra), vardenafil (Levitra), and tadalafil (Cialis) are often used to treat
psychotropic-induced orgasmic dysfunction, but they have not been studied
in combination with the DRAs. Thioridazine is mainly associated with
decreased libido and retrograde ejaculation in men. Priapism and reports of
painful orgasms have also been described, both possibly resulting from α1adrenergic antagonist activity.
Skin and Eye Effects. Allergic dermatitis and photosensitivity may occur,
especially with low-potency agents. Urticarial, maculopapular, petechial, and
edematous eruptions may occur early in treatment, generally in the first few
weeks, and remit spontaneously. A photosensitivity reaction that resembles a
severe sunburn also occurs in some persons taking chlorpromazine. Persons
should be warned of this adverse effect, should spend no more than 30 to 60
minutes in the sun, and should use sunscreens. Long-term chlorpromazine
use is associated with blue-gray discoloration of skin areas exposed to
sunlight. The skin changes often begin with a tan or golden brown color and


<<<PAGE 1962>>>
progress to such colors as slate gray, metallic blue, and purple. These
discolorations resolve when the patient is switched to another medication.
Irreversible retinal pigmentation is associated with the use of thioridazine
at dosages above 1,000 mg a day. An early symptom of the side effect can
sometimes be nocturnal confusion related to difficulty with night vision. The
pigmentation can progress even after thioridazine administration is stopped,
finally resulting in blindness. It is for this reason that the maximum
recommended dosage of thioridazine is 800 mg/day.
Patients taking chlorpromazine may develop a relatively benign
pigmentation of the eyes, characterized by whitish brown granular deposits
concentrated in the anterior lens and posterior cornea and visible only by slitlens examination. The deposits can progress to opaque white and yellowbrown granules, often stellate. Occasionally, the conjunctiva is discolored by
a brown pigment. No retinal damage is seen, and vision is rarely impaired.
This condition gradually resolves when chlorpromazine is discontinued.
Jaundice. Elevations of liver enzymes during treatment with a DRA tend to
be transient and not clinically significant. When chlorpromazine first came
into use, cases of obstructive or cholestatic jaundice were reported, usually in
the first month of treatment and heralded by symptoms of upper abdominal
pain, nausea, and vomiting. This adverse effect was followed by fever, rash,
eosinophilia, bilirubin in the urine, and increases in levels of serum bilirubin,
alkaline phosphatase, and hepatic transaminases. Reported cases are now
sporadic, but if jaundice occurs, the medication should be discontinued.
Overdoses. Overdoses typically consist of exaggerated DRA side effects.
Symptoms and signs include CNS depression, EPS, mydriasis, rigidity,
restlessness, decreased deep tendon reflexes, tachycardia, and hypotension.
The severe symptoms of overdose include delirium, coma, respiratory
depression, and seizures. Haloperidol may be among the safest typical
antipsychotics in overdose. After an overdose, electroencephalography (EEG)
shows diffuse slowing and low voltage. An extreme overdose may lead to
delirium and coma, with respiratory depression and hypotension. Lifethreatening overdose usually involves the ingestion of other CNS
depressants, such as alcohol or benzodiazepines.
Activated charcoal, if possible, and gastric lavage should be administered


<<<PAGE 1963>>>
if the overdose is recent. Emetics are not indicated because the antiemetic
actions of the DRAs inhibit their efficacy. Seizures can be treated with IV
diazepam or phenytoin. Hypotension can be treated with either
norepinephrine or dopamine but not epinephrine.
Pregnancy and Lactation. There is a low correlation between the use of
antipsychotics during pregnancy and congenital malformations. Nevertheless,
antipsychotics should be avoided during pregnancy, particularly in the first
trimester, unless the benefit outweighs the risk. High-potency drugs are
preferable to low-potency drugs because low-potency drugs are associated
with hypotension.
DRAs are secreted in the breast milk, although concentrations are low.
Women taking these agents should be advised against breastfeeding.
Drug Interactions
Many pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drug interactions are
associated with these drugs (Table 21-13). CYP2D6 is the most common
hepatic isozyme involved in DRA pharmacokinetic interactions. Other
common drug interactions affect the absorption of the DRAs.
Antacids, activated charcoal, cholestyramine (Questran), kaolin, pectin,
and cimetidine (Tagamet) taken within 2 hours of antipsychotic
administration can reduce the absorption of these drugs. Anticholinergics
may decrease the absorption of the DRAs. The additive anticholinergic
activity of the DRAs, anticholinergics, and tricyclic drugs may result in
anticholinergic toxicity. Digoxin (Lanoxin) and steroids, both of which
decrease gastric motility, can increase DRA absorption.
Table 21-13
Antipsychotic Drug Interactions
Interacting
Medication

Mechanism

Clinical Effect

Drug Interactions Assessed to Have Major Severity
β-Adrenergic
receptor

Synergistic pharmacologic
effect; antipsychotic

Severe hypotension


<<<PAGE 1964>>>
antagonists

inhibits metabolism of
propranolol;
antipsychotic increases
plasma concentrations

Anticholinergics

Pharmacodynamic effects

Decreased
antipsychotic
effect

Additive anticholinergic
effect

Anticholinergic
toxicity

Barbiturates

Phenobarbital induces
Decreased
antipsychotic metabolism
antipsychotic
concentrations

Carbamazepine

Induces antipsychotic
metabolism

Charcoal

Reduces GI absorption of May reduce
antipsychotic and
antipsychotic
adsorbs drug during
effect or cause
enterohepatic circulation
toxicity when used
to treat overdose
or for GI
disturbances

Cigarette
smoking

Induction of microsomal
enzymes

Up to 50% reduction
in antipsychotic
concentrations

Reduced plasma
concentrations of
antipsychotic
agents

Epinephrine,
Antipsychotic antagonizes
norepinephrine
pressor effect

Hypotension

Ethanol

Impaired
psychomotor
status

Additive CNS depression


<<<PAGE 1965>>>
Fluvoxamine

Fluvoxamine inhibits
metabolism of
haloperidol and
clozapine

Increased
concentrations of
haloperidol and
clozapine

Guanethidine

Antipsychotic antagonizes
guanethidine reuptake

Impaired
antihypertensive
effect

Lithium

Unknown

Rare reports of
neurotoxicity

Meperidine

Additive CNS depression

Hypotension and
sedation

Drug Interactions Assessed to Have Minor or Moderate Severity
Amphetamines,
anorexiants

Decreased pharmacologic
effect of amphetamine

Diminished weight
loss effect;
amphetamines
may exacerbate
psychosis

ACEIs

Additive hypotensive crisis

Hypotension,
postural
intolerance

Antacids
containing
aluminum

Insoluble complex formed
in GI tract

Possible reduced
antipsychotic
effect

AD nonspecific

Decreased metabolism of
AD through competitive
inhibition

Increased AD
concentration

Benzodiazepines Increased pharmacologic
effect of the
benzodiazepine

Respiratory
depression,
stupor,
hypotension


<<<PAGE 1966>>>
Bromocriptine

Antipsychotic antagonizes
dopamine receptor
stimulation

Increased prolactin

Caffeinated
beverages

Form precipitate with
antipsychotic solutions

Possible diminished
antipsychotic
effect

Cimetidine

Reduced antipsychotic
Decreased
absorption and clearance
antipsychotic
effect

Clonidine

Antipsychotic potentiates α- Hypotension or
adrenergic hypotensive
hypertension
effect

Disulfiram

Impairs antipsychotic
metabolism

Increased
antipsychotic
concentrations

Methyldopa

Unknown

BP elevations

Phenytoin

Induction of antipsychotic
metabolism; decreased
phenytoin metabolism

Decreased
antipsychotic
concentrations:
increased
phenytoin levels

SSRIs

Impair antipsychotic
metabolism;
pharmacodynamic
interaction

Sudden onset of
extrapyramidal
symptoms

Valproic acid

Antipsychotic inhibits
Increased valproic
valproic acid metabolism
acid half-life and
levels

ACEI, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; AD, antidepressant; BP, blood pressure; CNS,
central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
From Ereshosky L, Overman GP, Karp JK. Current psychotropic dosing and monitoring
guidelines. Prim Psychiatry. 1996;3:21, with permission.


<<<PAGE 1967>>>
Phenothiazines, especially thioridazine, may decrease the metabolism of
and cause toxic concentrations of phenytoin. Barbiturates may increase the
metabolism of DRAs.
Tricyclic drugs and SSRIs that inhibit CYP2D6—paroxetine (Paxil),
fluoxetine (Prozac), and fluvoxamine (Luvox)—interact with DRAs,
resulting in increased plasma concentrations of both drugs. The
anticholinergic, sedative, and hypotensive effects of the drugs may also be
cumulative.
Typical antipsychotics may inhibit the hypotensive effects of αmethyldopa (Aldomet). Conversely, typical antipsychotics may have an
additive effect on some hypotensive drugs. Antipsychotic drugs have a
variable effect on the hypotensive effects of clonidine. Propranolol (Inderal)
coadministration increases the blood concentrations of both drugs.
The DRAs potentiate the CNS-depressant effects of the sedatives,
antihistamines, opiates, opioids, and alcohol, particularly in persons with
impaired respiratory status. When these agents are taken with alcohol, the
risk for heatstroke may be increased.
Cigarette smoking may decrease the plasma levels of the typical
antipsychotic drugs. Epinephrine has a paradoxical hypotensive effect in
persons taking typical antipsychotics. These drugs may decrease the blood
concentration of warfarin (Coumadin), resulting in decreased bleeding time.
The phenothiazines, thioridazine, and pimozide should not be coadministered
with other agents that prolong the QT interval. Thioridazine is
contraindicated in patients taking drugs that inhibit the CYP2D6 isoenzyme
or in patients with reduced levels of CYP2D6.
Laboratory Interferences
Chlorpromazine and perphenazine (Trilafon) may cause both false-positive
and false-negative results in immunologic pregnancy tests and falsely
elevated bilirubin (with reagent test strips) and urobilinogen (with Ehrlich
reagent test) values. These drugs are associated with an abnormal shift in the
results of the glucose tolerance test. However, that shift may reflect the
effects of the drugs on the glucose-regulating system. Phenothiazines have
been reported to interfere with the measurement of 17-ketosteroids and 17hydroxycorticosteroids and produce false-positive results in tests for


<<<PAGE 1968>>>
phenylketonuria.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Contraindications to the use of DRAs include the following: (1) a history of a
severe allergic response; (2) the possible ingestion of a substance that will
interact with the antipsychotic to induce CNS depression (e.g., alcohol,
opioids, barbiturates, and benzodiazepines) or anticholinergic delirium (e.g.,
scopolamine and possibly phencyclidine [PCP]); (3) the presence of a severe
cardiac abnormality; (4) a high risk for seizures; (5) the presence of narrowangle glaucoma or prostatic hypertrophy if a drug with high anticholinergic
activity is to be used; and (6) the presence or a history of tardive dyskinesia.
Antipsychotics should be administered with caution in persons with hepatic
disease because impaired hepatic metabolism may result in high plasma
concentrations. The usual assessment should include a CBC with WBC
indexes, liver function tests, and electrocardiography (ECG), especially in
women older than 40 years of age and men older than 30 years of age.
Elderly persons and children are more sensitive to side effects than are young
adults, so the dosage of the drug should be adjusted accordingly.
Various patients may respond to widely different dosages of
antipsychotics; therefore, there is no set dosage for any given antipsychotic
drug. Because of side effects, it is a reasonable clinical practice to begin at a
low dosage and increase as necessary. It is important to remember that the
maximal effects of a particular dosage may not be evident for 4 to 6 weeks.
Available preparations and dosages of the DRAs are given in Table 21-14.
Short-Term Treatment. The equivalent of 5 to 20 mg of haloperidol is a
reasonable dose for an adult in an acute state. An older adult may benefit
from as little as 1 mg of haloperidol. The administration of more than 25 mg
of chlorpromazine in one injection may result in profound hypotension. IM
administration results in peak plasma levels in about 30 minutes versus 90
minutes using the oral route. Doses of drugs for IM administration are about
half those given by the oral route. In a short-term treatment setting, the
person should be observed for 1 hour after the first dose of medication. After
that time, most clinicians administer a second dose or a sedative agent (e.g., a
benzodiazepine) to achieve effective behavioral control. Possible sedatives


<<<PAGE 1969>>>
include lorazepam (Ativan) (2 mg IM) and amobarbital (50 to 250 mg IM).
Rapid Neuroleptization. Rapid neuroleptization (also called
psychotolysis) is the practice of administering hourly IM doses of
antipsychotic medications until marked sedation is achieved. However,
several research studies have shown that merely waiting several more hours
after one dose yields the same clinical improvement as is seen with repeated
doses. Nevertheless, clinicians must be careful to keep patients from
becoming violent while they are psychotic. Clinicians can help prevent
violent episodes by using adjuvant sedatives or by temporarily using physical
restraints until the persons can control their behavior.
Early Treatment. A full 6 weeks may be necessary to evaluate the extent of
the improvement in psychotic symptoms. However, agitation and excitement
usually improve quickly with antipsychotic treatment. About 75 percent of
persons with a short history of illness show significant improvement in their
psychosis. Psychotic symptoms, both positive and negative, usually continue
to improve 3 to 12 months after the initiation of treatment.
About 5 mg of haloperidol or 300 mg of chlorpromazine is a usual
effective daily dose. In the past, much higher doses were used, but evidence
suggests that it resulted in more side effects without additional benefits. A
single daily dose is usually given at bedtime to help induce sleep and to
reduce the incidence of adverse effects. However, bedtime dosing for elderly
persons may increase their risk of falling if they get out of bed during the
night. The sedative effects of typical antipsychotics last only a few hours, in
contrast to the antipsychotic effects, which last for 1 to 3 days.
Intermittent Medications. It is a common clinical practice to order
medications to be given intermittently as needed (PRN). Although this
practice may be reasonable during the first few days that a person is
hospitalized, the amount of time the person takes antipsychotic drugs, rather
than an increase in dosage, is what produces therapeutic improvement.
Clinicians on inpatient services may feel pressured by staff members to write
PRN antipsychotic orders; such orders should include specific symptoms,
how often the drugs should be given, and how many doses can be given each
day. Clinicians may choose to use small doses for the PRN doses (e.g., 2 mg


<<<PAGE 1970>>>
of haloperidol) or use a benzodiazepine instead (e.g., 2 mg of lorazepam IM).
If PRN doses of an antipsychotic are necessary after the first week of
treatment, the clinician may want to consider increasing the standing daily
dose of the drug.
Maintenance Treatment. The first 3 to 6 months after a psychotic episode
are usually considered a period of stabilization. After that time, the dosage
can be decreased by about 20 percent every 6 months until the minimum
effective dosage is found. A person is usually maintained on antipsychotic
medications for 1 to 2 years after the first psychotic episode. Antipsychotic
treatment is often continued for 5 years after a second psychotic episode, and
lifetime maintenance is considered after the third psychotic episode, although
attempts to reduce the daily dosage can be made every 6 to 12 months.
Table 21-14
Dopamine Receptor Antagonists

Antipsychotic drugs are effective in controlling psychotic symptoms, but
persons may report that they prefer being off the drugs because they feel
better without them. The clinician must discuss maintenance medication with


<<<PAGE 1971>>>
patients and take into account their wishes, the severity of their illnesses, and
the quality of their support systems. The clinician needs to know enough
about the patient’s life to try to predict upcoming stressors that might require
increasing the dosage or closely monitoring compliance.
Long-Acting Depot Medications. Long-acting depot preparations may
be needed to overcome problems with compliance. IM preparations are
typically given once every 1 to 4 weeks.
Two depot preparations, a decanoate and an enanthate of fluphenazine, and
a decanoate preparation of haloperidol, are available in the United States. The
preparations are injected IM into an area of extensive muscle tissue, from
which they are absorbed slowly into the blood. Decanoate preparations can
be given less frequently than enanthate preparations because they are
absorbed more slowly. Although stabilizing a person on the oral preparation
of the specific drugs is not necessary before initiating the depot form, it is
good practice to give at least one oral dose of the drug to assess the
possibility of an adverse effect, such as severe EPS or an allergic reaction.
It is reasonable to begin with either 12.5 mg (0.5 mL) of fluphenazine
preparation or 25 mg (0.5 mL) of haloperidol decanoate. If symptoms emerge
in the next 2 to 4 weeks, the person can be treated temporarily with additional
oral medications or with additional small depot injections. After 3 to 4 weeks,
the depot injection can be increased to a single dose equal to the total of the
doses given during the initial period.
A good reason to initiate depot treatment with low doses is that the
absorption of the preparations may be faster than usual at the onset of
treatment, resulting in frightening episodes of dystonia that eventually
discourage compliance with the medication. Some clinicians keep patients
drug free for 3 to 7 days before initiating depot treatment and give small
doses of the depot preparations (3.125 mg of fluphenazine or 6.25 mg of
haloperidol) every few days to avoid those initial problems.
Plasma Concentrations
Genetic differences among persons and pharmacokinetic interactions with
other drugs influence the metabolism of the antipsychotics. If a person has
not improved after 4 to 6 weeks of treatment, the plasma concentration of the


<<<PAGE 1972>>>
drug should be determined if feasible. After a patient has been on a particular
dosage for at least five times the half-life of the drug and thus approaches
steady-state concentrations, blood levels may be helpful. It is standard
practice to obtain plasma samples at trough levels—just before the daily dose
is given, usually at least 12 hours after the previous dose, and most
commonly 20 to 24 hours after the previous dose. Most antipsychotics have
no well-defined dose–response curve. The best-studied drug is haloperidol,
which may have a therapeutic window ranging from 2 to 15 ng/mL. Other
therapeutic ranges that have been reasonably well documented are 30 to 100
ng/mL for chlorpromazine and 0.8 to 2.4 ng/mL for perphenazine.
Treatment-Resistant Persons. Unfortunately, 10 to 35 percent of
persons with schizophrenia do not obtain significant benefit from the
antipsychotic drugs. Treatment resistance is a failure on at least two adequate
trials of antipsychotics from two pharmacologic classes. It is useful to
determine plasma concentrations for such persons because it is possible that
they are slow or rapid metabolizers or are not taking their medication.
Clozapine has been conclusively shown to be effective when given to patients
who have failed multiple trials of DRAs.
Adjunctive Medications. It is common practice to use DRAs in
conjunction with other psychotropic agents, either to treat side effects or to
improve symptoms further. Most commonly, this involves the use of lithium
or other mood-stabilizing agents, SSRIs, or benzodiazepines. It was once held
that antidepressant drugs exacerbated psychosis in patients with
schizophrenia. In all likelihood, this observation involved patients with
bipolar disorder who were misdiagnosed as having schizophrenia. Abundant
evidence suggests that antidepressants improve symptoms of depression in
patients with schizophrenia. In some cases, amphetamines can be added to
DRAs if patients remain withdrawn and apathetic.
Choice of Drug
Given their proven efficacy in managing acute psychotic symptoms and the
fact that prophylactic administration of antiparkinsonian medication prevents
or minimizes acute motor abnormalities, DRAs are still valuable, especially
for short-term therapy. There is a considerable cost advantage to a DRA


<<<PAGE 1973>>>
antiparkinsonian regimen compared with monotherapy with a newer
antipsychotic agent. Concern about the development of DRA-induced tardive
dyskinesia is the primary deterrent to long-term use of these drugs, yet it is
not clear that SDAs are entirely free of this complication. Thus, DRAs still
occupy an important role in psychiatric treatment. DRAs are not predictably
interchangeable. For reasons that cannot be explained, some patients do
better on one drug than another. The choice of a particular DRA should be
based on the known adverse effect profile of the drugs. Other than a
significant advantage in terms of medication cost, the choice currently would
be an SDA. If a DRA is thought to be preferable, a high-potency
antipsychotic is favored, even though it may be associated with more
neurologic adverse effects, mainly because there is a higher incidence of
other adverse effects (e.g., cardiac, hypotensive, epileptogenic, sexual, and
allergic) with the low-potency drugs. If sedation is the desired goal, either a
low-potency antipsychotic can be given in divided doses, or a benzodiazepine
can be coadministered.
An unpleasant or dysphoric reaction (a subjective sense of restlessness,
oversedation, and acute dystonia) to the first dose of an antipsychotic predicts
future inadequate response and noncompliance. Prophylactic use of
antiparkinsonian medications may prevent this reaction. In general, clinicians
should be vigilant about serious side effects and adverse events (described
above) regardless of which drug is used.


<<<PAGE 1974>>>
21.2 Antidepressants
SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE INHIBITORS
Fluoxetine (Prozac), the first SSRI marketed in the United States, rapidly
captured the favor of both clinicians and the general public as reports
emerged of dramatic patient responses to treatment of depression. Patients no
longer experienced such side effects as dry mouth, constipation, sedation,
orthostatic hypotension, and tachycardia, typical side effects associated with
the earlier antidepressant drugs—the TCAs and MAOIs. It was also
significantly safer when taken in overdose than any previously available
antidepressant. A significant effect of fluoxetine’s popularity was that it
helped ameliorate the long-standing stigma of depression and its treatment.
Table 21-15
Currently Approved Indications of the Selective Serotonin
Reuptake Inhibitors in the United States for Adult and
Pediatric Populations

Other SSRIs followed fluoxetine. These include sertraline (Zoloft),
paroxetine (Paxil), fluvoxamine (Luvox), citalopram (Celexa), escitalopram
(Lexapro), and vilazodone (Viibryd). These drugs are all equally effective in


<<<PAGE 1975>>>
treating depression. However, some are approved by the U.S. FDA for
multiple indications, such as major depression, OCD, PTSD, PMDD, panic
disorder, and social phobia (social anxiety disorder) (Table 21-15). Note that
fluvoxamine is not FDA approved as an antidepressant, a fact that is due to a
marketing decision. It is considered an antidepressant in other countries.
Although all SSRIs are equally effective, there are meaningful differences
in pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, and side effects, differences that
might affect clinical responses among individual patients. This would explain
why some patients have better clinical responses to a particular SSRI than
another. The SSRIs have proven more problematic in terms of some side
effects than the original clinical trials suggested. Quality-of-life–associated
adverse effects such as nausea, sexual dysfunction, and weight gain
sometimes mitigate the therapeutic benefits of the SSRIs. There can also be
distressing withdrawal symptoms when SSRIs are stopped abruptly. This
withdrawal is especially true with paroxetine but also occurs when other
SSRIs with short half-lives are stopped.
Pharmacologic Actions
Pharmacokinetics. A significant difference among the SSRIs is their
broad range of serum half-lives. Fluoxetine has the most prolonged half-life:
4 to 6 days; its active metabolite has a half-life of 7 to 9 days. The half-life of
sertraline is 26 hours, and its less active metabolite has a half-life of 3 to 5
days. The half-lives of the other three, which do not have metabolites with
significant pharmacologic activity, are 35 hours for citalopram, 27 to 32
hours for escitalopram, 21 hours for paroxetine, and 15 hours for
fluvoxamine. As a rule, the SSRIs are well absorbed after oral administration
and have their peak effects in the range of 3 to 8 hours. Absorption of
sertraline may be slightly enhanced by food.
There are also differences in plasma protein–binding percentages among
the SSRIs, with sertraline, fluoxetine, and paroxetine being the most highly
bound and escitalopram being the least bound.
All SSRIs are metabolized in the liver by the CYP450 enzymes. Because
the SSRIs have such a broad therapeutic index, other drugs rarely produce
problematic increases in SSRI concentrations. The most critical drug–drug
interactions involving the SSRIs occur as a result of the SSRIs inhibiting the


<<<PAGE 1976>>>
metabolism of the coadministered medication. Each of the SSRIs possesses a
potential for slowing or blocking the metabolism of many drugs (Table 2116). Fluvoxamine is the most problematic of the drugs in this respect. It has a
marked effect on several of the CYP enzymes. Examples of clinically
significant interactions include fluvoxamine and theophylline (Slo-Bid, TheoDur) through CYP1A2 interaction, fluvoxamine and clozapine (Clozaril)
through CYP1A2 inhibition; and fluvoxamine with alprazolam (Xanax) or
clonazepam (Klonopin) through CYP3A4 inhibition. Fluoxetine and
paroxetine also possess significant effects on the CYP2D6 isozyme, which
may interfere with the efficacy of opiate analogs, such as codeine and
hydrocodone, by blocking the conversion of these agents to their active form.
Thus, coadministration of fluoxetine and paroxetine with an opiate interferes
with its analgesic effects. Sertraline, citalopram, and escitalopram are least
likely to complicate treatment because of interactions.
The pharmacokinetics of vilazodone (5 to 80 mg) is dose-proportional.
Steady-state plasma levels are achieved in about 3 days. The elimination of
vilazodone is primarily by hepatic metabolism with a terminal half-life of
approximately 25 hours.
Pharmacodynamics. The SSRIs are believed to exert their therapeutic
effects through serotonin reuptake inhibition. They derive their name because
they have little effect on the reuptake of norepinephrine or dopamine. Often,
adequate clinical activity and saturation of the 5-HT transporters are achieved
at starting dosages. As a rule, higher dosages do not increase antidepressant
efficacy but may increase the risk of adverse effects.
Table 21-16
CYP450 Inhibitory Potential of Commonly Prescribed
Antidepressants


<<<PAGE 1977>>>
Citalopram and escitalopram are the most selective inhibitors of serotonin
reuptake, with very little inhibition of norepinephrine or dopamine reuptake
and very low affinities for histamine H1, GABA, or benzodiazepine
receptors. The other SSRIs have a similar profile except that fluoxetine
weakly inhibits norepinephrine reuptake and binds to 5-HT2C receptors,
sertraline weakly inhibits norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake, and
paroxetine has significant anticholinergic activity at higher dosages and binds
to nitric oxide synthase. The SSRI vilazodone has 5-HT1A receptor agonist
properties. The clinical implications of the 5-HT1A receptor agonist effects
are not yet evident.
A pharmacodynamic interaction appears to underlie the antidepressant
effects of combined fluoxetine–olanzapine. When taken together, these drugs
increase brain concentrations of norepinephrine. Concomitant use of SSRIs
and drugs in the triptan class (sumatriptan [Imitrex], naratriptan [Amerge],
rizatriptan [Maxalt], and zolmitriptan [Zomig]) may result in a severe
pharmacodynamic interaction—the development of serotonin syndrome (see
“Precautions and Adverse Reactions”). However, many people use triptans
while taking low doses of an SSRI for headache prophylaxis without adverse
reaction. A similar reaction may occur when SSRIs are combined with
tramadol (Ultram).
Therapeutic Indications
Depression. In the United States, all SSRIs other than fluvoxamine have
been approved by the FDA for the treatment of depression. Several studies


<<<PAGE 1978>>>
have found that antidepressants with serotonin-norepinephrine activity—
drugs such as the MAOIs, TCAs, venlafaxine (Effexor), and mirtazapine
(Remeron)—may produce higher rates of remission than SSRIs in head-tohead studies. The continued role of SSRIs as first-line treatment thus reflects
their simplicity of use, safety, and a broad spectrum of action.
Direct comparisons of individual SSRIs have not revealed any to be
consistently superior to another. There nevertheless can be considerable
diversity in response to the various SSRIs among individuals. For example,
more than 50 percent of people who respond poorly to one SSRI will respond
favorably to another. Thus, before shifting to non-SSRI antidepressants, it is
most reasonable to try other agents in the SSRI class for persons who did not
respond to the first SSRI.
Some clinicians have attempted to select a particular SSRI for a specific
person based on the drug’s unique adverse effect profile. For example,
thinking that fluoxetine is an activating and stimulating SSRI, they may
assume it is a better choice for an abulic person than paroxetine, which is
presumed to be a sedating SSRI. These differences, however, usually vary
from person to person. Analyses of clinical trial data show that SSRIs are
more effective in patients with more severe symptoms of major depression
than those with milder symptoms.
SUICIDE. The FDA has issued a black box warning for antidepressants and

suicidal thoughts and behavior in children and young adults. This warning is
based on a decade-old analysis of clinical trial data. More recent,
comprehensive reanalysis of data has shown that suicidal thoughts and
behavior decreased over time for adult and geriatric patients treated with
antidepressants as compared with placebo. No differences were found for
youths. In adults, reduction in suicide ideation and attempts occurred through
a reduction in depressive symptoms. In all age groups, the severity of
depression improved with medication and was significantly related to suicide
ideation or behavior. It appears that SSRIs, as well as serotoninnorepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), have a protective effect against
suicide that is mediated by decreases in depressive symptoms with treatment.
For youths, no significant effects of treatment on suicidal thoughts and
behavior were found, although depression responded to treatment. No
evidence of increased suicide risk was observed in youths receiving active


<<<PAGE 1979>>>
medication. It is crucial to keep in mind that SSRIs, like all antidepressants,
prevent potential suicides as a result of their primary action, the shortening
and prevention of depressive episodes. In clinical practice, a few patients
become anxious and agitated when started on an SSRI. The appearance of
these symptoms could conceivably provoke or aggravate suicidal ideation.
Thus, all depressed patients should be closely monitored during the period of
maximum risk, the first few days and weeks they are taking SSRIs.
DEPRESSION DURING PREGNANCY AND POSTPARTUM. Rates of relapse of major

depression during pregnancy among women who discontinue, attempt to
discontinue, or modify their antidepressant regimens are very high. Rates
range from 68 to 100 percent of patients. Thus, many women need to
continue taking their medication during pregnancy and postpartum. The
impact of maternal depression on infant development is unknown. There is
no significantly increased risk for major congenital malformations after
exposure to SSRIs during pregnancy (with the exception of paroxetine,
discussed below). Thus, the risk of relapse into depression when a newly
pregnant mother is taken off SSRIs is severalfold higher than the risk to the
fetus of exposure to SSRIs.
There is some evidence suggesting increased rates of special care nursery
admissions after delivery for children of mothers taking SSRIs. There is also
a potential for a discontinuation syndrome with paroxetine. However, there is
an absence of clinically significant neonatal complications associated with
SSRI use.
Studies that have followed children into their early school years have failed
to find any perinatal complications, congenital fetal anomalies, decreases in
global intelligence quotient (IQ), language delays, or specific behavioral
problems attributable to the use of fluoxetine during pregnancy.
Postpartum depression (with or without psychotic features) affects a small
percentage of mothers. Some clinicians start administering SSRIs if the
postpartum blues extend beyond a few weeks or if a woman becomes
depressed during pregnancy. The head start afforded by starting SSRI
administration during pregnancy if a woman is at risk for postpartum
depression also protects the newborn, toward whom the woman may have
harmful thoughts after parturition.
Babies whose mothers are taking an SSRI in the latter part of pregnancy


<<<PAGE 1980>>>
may be at a slight risk of developing pulmonary hypertension. Data about the
risk of this side effect are inconclusive, but it is estimated to involve 1 to 2
babies for 1,000 births. Paroxetine should be avoided during pregnancy.
The FDA classified paroxetine as a pregnancy Category D medication in
the former FDA classification system. In 2005, the FDA issued an alert that
paroxetine increases the risk of congenital disabilities, particularly heart
defects, when women take it during the first 3 months of pregnancy.
Paroxetine should usually not be taken during pregnancy, but for some
women who have already been taking paroxetine, the benefits of continuing
paroxetine may be greater than the potential risk to the baby. Women taking
paroxetine who are pregnant, think they may be pregnant, or plan to become
pregnant should talk to their physicians about the potential risks of taking
paroxetine during pregnancy.
The FDA alert was based on the findings of studies that showed that
women who took paroxetine during the first 3 months of pregnancy were
about one-and-a-half to two times as likely to have a baby with a heart defect
as women who received other antidepressants or women in the general
population. Most of the heart defects in these studies were not lifethreatening and happened mainly in the inside walls of the heart muscle,
where repairs can be made if needed (atrial and ventricular septal defects).
Sometimes these septal defects resolve without treatment. In one of the
studies, the risk of heart defects in babies whose mothers had taken
paroxetine early in pregnancy was 2 percent, compared with a 1 percent risk
in the whole population. In the other study, the risk of heart defects in babies
whose mothers had taken paroxetine in the first 3 months of pregnancy was
1.5 percent, compared with 1 percent in babies whose mothers had taken
other antidepressants in the first 3 months of pregnancy. This study also
showed that women who took paroxetine in the first 3 months of pregnancy
were about twice as likely to have a baby with any congenital disability as
women who took other antidepressants.
Minimal amounts of SSRIs are found in breast milk, and no harmful
effects have been found in breastfed babies. Concentrations of sertraline and
escitalopram are exceptionally low in breast milk. However, in some cases,
reported concentrations might be higher than average. No decision regarding
the use of an SSRI is risk-free. It is thus essential to document that
communication of potential risks to the patient has taken place.


<<<PAGE 1981>>>
DEPRESSION IN ELDERLY AND MEDICALLY ILL PERSONS. The SSRIs are safe and

well tolerated when used to treat elderly and medically ill persons. As a class,
they have little or no cardiotoxic, anticholinergic, antihistaminergic, or αadrenergic adverse effects. Paroxetine does have some anticholinergic
activity, which may lead to constipation and worsening of cognition. The
SSRIs can produce subtle cognitive deficits, prolonged bleeding time, and
hyponatremia, all of which may impact the health of this population. The
SSRIs are effective in poststroke depression and dramatically reduce the
symptom of crying.
DEPRESSION IN CHILDREN. The use of SSRI antidepressants in children and

adolescents has been controversial. Few studies have shown clear-cut
benefits from the use of these drugs, and studies show that there may be an
increase in suicidal or aggressive impulses. However, some children and
adolescents do exhibit dramatic responses to these drugs in terms of
depression and anxiety. Fluoxetine has most consistently demonstrated
effectiveness in reducing symptoms of depressive disorder in both children
and adolescents. This fact may be a function of the quality of the clinical
trials involved. Sertraline is effective in treating social anxiety disorder in this
population, especially when combined with cognitive-behavioral therapy.
Given the potential adverse effect of untreated depression and anxiety in a
young population and the uncertainty about many aspects of how children
and adolescents might react to medication, any use of SSRIs should be
undertaken only within the context of comprehensive management of the
patient.
Anxiety Disorders
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER. Fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, and

fluoxetine are indicated for the treatment of OCD in persons older than the
age of 18 years. Fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, and sertraline have also been
approved for the treatment of children with OCD (ages 6 to 17 years). About
50 percent of persons with OCD begin to show symptoms in childhood or
adolescence, and more than half of these respond favorably to medication.
Beneficial responses can be dramatic. Long-term data support the model of


<<<PAGE 1982>>>
OCD as a genetically determined, lifelong condition that is best treated
continuously with drugs and cognitive-behavioral therapy from the onset of
symptoms in childhood throughout the lifespan.
SSRI dosages for OCD may need to be higher than those required to treat
depression. Although some responses can be seen in the first few weeks of
treatment, it may take several months for the maximum effects to become
evident. Patients who fail to obtain adequate relief of their OCD symptoms
with an SSRI will usually benefit from the addition of a small dose of
risperidone (Risperdal). Apart from the extrapyramidal side effects of
risperidone, patients should be monitored for increases in prolactin levels
when this combination is used. Clinically, hyperprolactinemia may manifest
as gynecomastia and galactorrhea (in both men and women) and loss of
menses.
Several disorders are now considered to be within the OCD spectrum. This
spectrum includes several conditions and symptoms characterized by
nonsuicidal self-mutilation, such as trichotillomania, eyebrow picking, nose
picking, nail-biting, compulsive picking of skin blemishes, and cutting.
Patients with these behaviors benefit from treatment with SSRIs. Other
spectrum disorders include compulsive gambling, compulsive shopping,
hypochondriasis, and body dysmorphic disorder.
PANIC DISORDER. Paroxetine, fluoxetine, and sertraline are indicated for the

treatment of panic disorder, with or without agoraphobia. These agents work
less rapidly than do benzodiazepines but are far superior to them for the
treatment of panic disorder with comorbid depression. Citalopram and
fluvoxamine also may reduce spontaneous or induced panic attacks. Because
fluoxetine can initially heighten anxiety symptoms, persons with panic
disorder must begin taking small dosages (5 mg a day) and increase the
dosage slowly. Low doses of benzodiazepines may be given to manage this
side effect.
SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. SSRIs are effective agents in the treatment of

social phobia. They reduce both symptoms and disability. The response rate
is comparable to that seen with the MAOI phenelzine (Nardil), the previous
standard treatment. The SSRIs are safer to use than MAOIs or
benzodiazepines.


<<<PAGE 1983>>>
POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER. Pharmacotherapy for PTSD must target

specific symptoms in four clusters: reexperiencing, avoidance, negative
changes in mood and thinking, and arousal. For long-term treatment, SSRIs
appear to have a broader spectrum of therapeutic effects on specific PTSD
symptom clusters than do TCAs and MAOIs. Benzodiazepine augmentation
is useful in the acute symptomatic state. The SSRIs are associated with
marked improvement of both intrusive and avoidant symptoms.
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER. The SSRIs may be useful for the treatment

of specific phobias, generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), and separation
anxiety disorder. A thorough, individualized evaluation is the first approach,
with particular attention to identifying conditions amenable to drug therapy.
Also, cognitive-behavioral or other psychotherapies can be added for greater
efficacy.
Bulimia Nervosa and Other Eating Disorders. Fluoxetine is indicated
for the treatment of bulimia, which is best done in the context of
psychotherapy. Dosages of 60 mg a day are significantly more effective than
20 mg a day. In several well-controlled studies, fluoxetine in dosages of 60
mg a day was superior to placebo in reducing binge eating and induced
vomiting. Some experts recommend an initial course of cognitive-behavioral
therapy alone. If there is no response in 3 to 6 weeks, then fluoxetine
administration is added. The appropriate duration of treatment with fluoxetine
and psychotherapy has not been determined.
Fluvoxamine was not effective at a statistically significant level in one
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial for inpatients with bulimia.
Fluoxetine has been used in inpatient treatment of
anorexia nervosa to attempt to control comorbid mood disturbances and
obsessive-compulsive symptoms. However, at least two careful studies, one
of 7 months’ and one of 24 months’ duration, failed to find that fluoxetine
affected the overall outcome and the maintenance of weight. Effective
treatments for anorexia include cognitive-behavioral, interpersonal,
psychodynamic, and family therapies in addition to a trial with SSRIs.
ANOREXIA NERVOSA.

OBESITY.

Fluoxetine, in combination with a behavioral program, is only


<<<PAGE 1984>>>
modestly beneficial for weight loss. A significant percentage of all persons
who take SSRIs, including fluoxetine, lose weight initially but later may gain
weight. However, all SSRIs may cause initial weight gain.
PREMENSTRUAL DYSPHORIC DISORDER. PMDD is characterized by debilitating

mood and behavioral changes in the week preceding menstruation that
interferes with normal functioning. Sertraline, paroxetine, fluoxetine, and
fluvoxamine have been reported to reduce the symptoms of PMDD.
Controlled trials of fluoxetine and sertraline administered either throughout
the cycle or only during the luteal phase (the 2 weeks between ovulation and
menstruation) showed both schedules to be equally effective.
An additional observation of unclear significance was that fluoxetine was
associated with changing the duration of the menstrual period by more than 4
days, either lengthening or shortening it. The effects of SSRIs on menstrual
cycle length are mostly unknown and may warrant careful monitoring in
women of reproductive age.
Off-Label Uses
The anorgasmic effects of SSRIs make them
useful as a treatment for men with premature ejaculation. The SSRIs permit
intercourse for a significantly more extended period and are reported to
improve sexual satisfaction in couples in which the man has premature
ejaculation. Fluoxetine and sertraline are useful for this purpose.
PREMATURE EJACULATION.

The SSRIs may reduce obsessive-compulsive behavior in
people with paraphilias. The SSRIs diminish the average time per day spent
in unconventional sexual fantasies, urges, and activities. Evidence suggests a
more significant response to sexual obsessions than for paraphilic behavior.
PARAPHILIAS.

Obsessive-compulsive behavior, poor social relatedness, and
aggression are prominent autistic features that may respond to serotonergic
agents such as SSRIs and clomipramine (Anafranil). Sertraline and
fluvoxamine have been shown in controlled and open-label trials to mitigate
aggressiveness, self-injurious behavior, repetitive behaviors, some degree of
language delay, and (rarely) lack of social relatedness in adults with autistic
AUTISM.


<<<PAGE 1985>>>
spectrum disorders. Fluoxetine has been reported to be useful for features of
autism in children, adolescents, and adults.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. SSRI side effects need to be
considered in terms of their onset, duration, and severity. For example,
nausea and jitteriness are early, generally mild, and time-limited side effects.
Although SSRIs share similar side effect profiles, individual drugs in this
class may cause a higher rate or carry a more severe risk of specific side
effects depending on the patient.
Sexual Dysfunction. All SSRIs cause sexual dysfunction, and it is the
most common adverse effect of SSRIs associated with long-term treatment. It
has an estimated incidence of between 50 and 80 percent. The most common
complaints are anorgasmia, inhibited orgasm, and decreased libido. Some
studies suggest that sexual dysfunction is dose-related, but this has not been
established. Unlike most of the other adverse effects of SSRIs, sexual
inhibition rarely resolves in the first few weeks of use but usually continues
as long as the drug is taken. In some cases, there may be an improvement
over time.
Strategies to counteract SSRI-induced sexual dysfunction are numerous,
and none has been proven to be very useful. Some reports suggest decreasing
the dosage or adding bupropion (Wellbutrin) or amphetamine. Reports have
described successful treatment of SSRI-induced sexual dysfunction with
agents such as sildenafil (Viagra), which are used to treat erectile
dysfunction. Ultimately, patients may need to be switched to antidepressants
that do not interfere with sexual functioning, drugs such as mirtazapine or
bupropion.
Gastrointestinal Adverse Effects. GI side effects are widespread and
are mediated mainly through effects on the serotonin 5-HT3 receptor. The
most frequent GI complaints are nausea, diarrhea, anorexia, vomiting,
flatulence, and dyspepsia. Sertraline and fluvoxamine produce the most
intense GI symptoms. Delayed-release paroxetine, compared with the
immediate-release preparation of paroxetine, has less intense GI side effects
during the first week of treatment. However, paroxetine, because of its
anticholinergic activity, frequently causes constipation. Nausea and loose


<<<PAGE 1986>>>
stools are usually dose-related and transient, usually resolving within a few
weeks. Sometimes flatulence and diarrhea persist, especially during sertraline
treatment. Initial anorexia may also occur and is most frequent with
fluoxetine. SSRI-induced appetite and weight loss begin as soon as the drug
is taken and peak at 20 weeks, after which weight often returns to baseline.
Up to one-third of persons taking SSRIs will gain weight, sometimes more
than 20 lb. This effect is mediated through a metabolic mechanism, an
increase in appetite, or both. It happens gradually and is usually resistant to
diet and exercise regimens. Paroxetine is associated with more frequent,
rapid, and pronounced weight gain than the other SSRIs, especially among
young women.
Cardiovascular Effects. All SSRIs can lengthen the QT interval in
otherwise healthy people and cause drug-induced long QT syndrome,
especially when taken in overdose. The risk of QTc prolongation increases
when an antidepressant and an antipsychotic are used in combination, an
increasingly common practice. Citalopram stands out as the SSRI with the
most pronounced effect on QT intervals. A QT study to assess the effects of
20- and 60-mg doses of citalopram on the QT interval in adults, compared
with placebo, found a maximum mean prolongation in the individually
corrected QT intervals were 8.5 milliseconds for 20-mg citalopram and 18.5
milliseconds for 60 mg. For 40 mg, prolongation of the corrected QT interval
was estimated to be 12.6 milliseconds. Based on these findings, the FDA has
issued the following recommendation regarding citalopram use:
20 mg a day is the maximum recommended dose for patients with hepatic
impairment, who are older than 60 years of age, who are CYP2C19 poor
metabolizers, or who are taking concomitant cimetidine (Tagamet).
No longer prescribe at doses greater than 40 mg a day.
Do not use in patients with congenital long QT syndrome.
Correct hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia before administering
citalopram.
Monitor electrolytes as clinically indicated.
Consider more frequent electrocardiograms in patients with congestive
heart failure, bradyarrhythmias, or patients on concomitant medications that


<<<PAGE 1987>>>
prolong the QT interval.
The fact that citalopram carries a greater risk of causing fatal rhythm
abnormalities was confirmed in a review of 469 SSRI poisoning admissions.
Accordingly, patients should be advised to contact their prescriber
immediately if they experience signs and symptoms of an abnormal heart rate
or rhythm while taking citalopram.
The effect of vilazodone (20, 40, 60, and 80 mg) on the QTc interval was
evaluated, and a small effect was observed. The upper bound of the 90
percent confidence interval for the largest placebo-adjusted, baselinecorrected QTc interval was below 10 milliseconds, based on the individual
correction method (QTcI). This interval is below the threshold for clinical
concern. However, it is unknown whether 80 mg is adequate to represent a
high clinical exposure condition.
Physicians should consider whether the benefits of androgen deprivation
therapy outweigh the potential risks in SSRI treated patients with prostate
cancer, as reductions in androgen levels can cause QTc interval prolongation.
Dextromethorphan/Quinidine (Nuedexta) is available as a treatment for
pseudobulbar affect, which is defined by involuntary, sudden, and frequent
episodes of laughing or crying that are generally out of proportion or
inappropriate to the situation. Quinidine can prolong the QT interval and is a
potent inhibitor of CYP2D6. It should not be used with other medications that
prolong the QT interval and are metabolized by CYP2D6. This drug should
be used with caution with any medications that can prolong the QT interval
and inhibit CYP3A4, particularly in patients with cardiac disease.
Antepartum use of SSRIs is sometimes associated with QTc interval
prolongation in exposed neonates. In a review of 52 newborns exposed to
SSRIs in the immediate antepartum period and 52 matched control subjects,
the mean QTc was significantly longer in the group of newborns exposed to
antidepressants as compared with control subjects. Five (10 percent)
newborns exposed to SSRIs had a markedly prolonged QTc interval (greater
than 460 milliseconds) compared with none of the unexposed newborns. The
most extended QTc interval observed among exposed newborns was 543
milliseconds. All of the drug-associated repolarization abnormalities
normalized in subsequent electrocardiographic tracings.
Headaches. The incidence of headache in SSRI trials was 18 to 20 percent,


<<<PAGE 1988>>>
only one percentage point higher than the placebo rate. Fluoxetine is the most
likely to cause headaches. On the other hand, all SSRIs are effective
prophylaxis against both migraine and tension-type headaches in many
persons.
Central Nervous System Adverse Effects
ANXIETY. Fluoxetine may cause anxiety, particularly in the first few weeks of
treatment. However, these initial effects usually give way to an overall
reduction in anxiety after a few weeks. Increased anxiety is caused
considerably less frequently by paroxetine and escitalopram, which may be
better choices if sedation is desired, as in mixed anxiety and depressive
disorders.
The primary effect SSRIs exert in the area of
insomnia and sedation is improved sleep resulting from the treatment of
depression and anxiety. However, as many as 25 percent of persons taking
SSRIs note trouble sleeping, excessive somnolence, or overwhelming fatigue.
Fluoxetine is the most likely to cause insomnia, for which reason it is often
taken in the morning. Sertraline and fluvoxamine are about equally likely to
cause insomnia as somnolence, and citalopram and especially paroxetine
often cause somnolence. Escitalopram is more likely to interfere with sleep
than its isomer, citalopram. Some persons benefit from taking their SSRI
dose before going to bed, but others prefer to take it the morning. SSRIinduced insomnia can be treated with benzodiazepines, trazodone (Desyrel)
(clinicians must explain the risk of priapism), or other sedating medicines.
Significant SSRI-induced somnolence often requires switching to the use of
another SSRI or bupropion.
INSOMNIA AND SEDATION.

OTHER SLEEP EFFECTS. Many persons taking SSRIs report recalling extremely

vivid dreams or nightmares. They describe sleep as “busy.” Other sleep
effects of the SSRIs include bruxism, restless legs, nocturnal myoclonus, and
sweating.
Emotional blunting is a largely overlooked but
frequent side effect associated with chronic SSRI use. Patients report an
EMOTIONAL BLUNTING.


<<<PAGE 1989>>>
inability to cry in response to emotional situations, a feeling of apathy or
indifference, or a restriction in the intensity of emotional experiences. This
side effect often leads to treatment discontinuation, even when the drugs
provide relief from depression or anxiety.
Close clinical observation of patients taking SSRIs reveals an
increase in yawning. This side effect is not a reflection of fatigue or poor
nocturnal sleep but is the result of SSRI effects on the hypothalamus.
YAWNING.

SEIZURES. Seizures have been reported in 0.1 to 0.2 percent of all patients

treated with SSRIs, an incidence comparable to that reported with other
antidepressants and not significantly different from that with placebo.
Seizures are more frequent at the highest doses of SSRIs (e.g., fluoxetine 100
mg a day or higher) than at standard doses.
The SSRIs may rarely cause akathisia,
dystonia, tremor, cogwheel rigidity, torticollis, opisthotonos, gait disorders,
and bradykinesia. Rare cases of tardive dyskinesia have been reported. Some
people with well-controlled Parkinson disease may experience acute
worsening of their motor symptoms when they take SSRIs.
EXTRAPYRAMIDAL

SYMPTOMS.

Anticholinergic Effects. Paroxetine has a mild anticholinergic activity
that causes dry mouth, constipation, and sedation in a dose-dependent
fashion. Nevertheless, most persons taking paroxetine do not experience
cholinergic adverse effects. Other SSRIs are associated with dry mouth, but
this effect is not mediated by muscarinic activity.
Hematologic Adverse Effects. The SSRIs can cause functional
impairment of platelet aggregation but not a reduction in platelet number.
This pharmacologic effect can manifest through easy bruising and excessive
or prolonged bleeding. When patients exhibit these signs, a test for bleeding
time should be performed. Special monitoring is suggested when patients use
SSRIs in conjunction with anticoagulants or aspirin. Concurrent use of SSRIs
and NSAIDs is associated with a significantly increased risk of gastric
bleeding. In cases where this combination is necessary, we should consider
using proton pump inhibitors.


<<<PAGE 1990>>>
Electrolyte and Glucose Disturbances. The SSRIs may acutely
decrease glucose concentrations; therefore, diabetic patients should be
carefully monitored. Long-term use may be associated with increased glucose
levels, although it remains to be proven whether this is the result of a
pharmacologic effect. Antidepressant users may have other characteristics
that raise their odds of developing diabetes, or may be more likely to be
diagnosed with diabetes or other medical conditions as a result of being in
treatment for depression.
Cases of SSRI-associated hyponatremia and the syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone have been seen in some patients, especially those who
are older or treated with diuretics.
Endocrine and Allergic Reactions. The SSRIs can increase prolactin
levels and cause mammoplasia and galactorrhea in both men and women.
Breast changes are reversible upon discontinuation of the drug, but this may
take several months to occur.
Various types of rashes appear in about 4 percent of all patients; in a small
subset of these patients, the allergic reaction may generalize and involve the
pulmonary system, rarely resulting in fibrotic damage and dyspnea. SSRI
treatment may have to be discontinued in patients with drug-related rashes.
Serotonin Syndrome. Concurrent administration of an SSRI with an
MAOI, L-tryptophan, or lithium (Eskalith) can raise plasma serotonin
concentrations to toxic levels, producing a constellation of symptoms called
serotonin syndrome. This severe and possibly fatal syndrome of serotonin
overstimulation comprises, in order of appearance as the condition worsens,
(1) diarrhea; (2) restlessness; (3) extreme agitation, hyperreflexia, and
autonomic instability with possible rapid fluctuations in vital signs; (4)
myoclonus, seizures, hyperthermia, uncontrollable shivering, and rigidity;
and (5) delirium, coma, status epilepticus, cardiovascular collapse, and death.
Treatment of serotonin syndrome consists of removing the offending
agents and promptly instituting comprehensive supportive care. Supportive
care and treatment may include nitroglycerine, cyproheptadine (Periactin),
methysergide (Sansert), cooling blankets, chlorpromazine (Thorazine),
dantrolene (Dantrium), benzodiazepines, anticonvulsants, mechanical
ventilation, and paralyzing agents.


<<<PAGE 1991>>>
Sweating. Some patients experience sweating while being treated with
SSRIs. This sweating is independent of the temperature in the environment.
Nocturnal sweating may drench bed sheets and require a change of
nightclothes. Terazosin (Hytrin), 1 or 2 mg/day, is often dramatically
effective in counteracting sweating.
Overdose. The adverse reactions associated with overdose of vilazodone at
doses of 200 to 280 mg, as observed in clinical trials, included serotonin
syndrome, lethargy, restlessness, hallucinations, and disorientation.
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor Withdrawal. The abrupt
discontinuance of SSRI use, especially one with a shorter half-life such as
paroxetine or fluvoxamine, has been associated with a withdrawal syndrome
that may include dizziness, weakness, nausea, headache, rebound depression,
anxiety, insomnia, poor concentration, upper respiratory symptoms,
paresthesias, and migraine-like symptoms. It usually does not appear until
after at least 6 weeks of treatment and usually resolves spontaneously in 3
weeks. Persons who experienced transient adverse effects in the first weeks
of taking an SSRI are more likely to experience discontinuation symptoms.
Fluoxetine is the SSRI least likely to be associated with this syndrome
because the half-life of its metabolite is more than 1 week, and it effectively
tapers itself. Fluoxetine has therefore been used in some cases to treat the
discontinuation syndrome caused by the termination of other SSRIs.
Nevertheless, a delayed and attenuated withdrawal syndrome occurs with
fluoxetine as well.
Drug Interactions
The SSRIs do not interfere with most other drugs. A serotonin syndrome
(Table 21-17) can develop with concurrent administration of MAOIs, Ltryptophan, lithium, or other antidepressants that inhibit the reuptake of
serotonin. Fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine can raise plasma
concentrations of TCAs, which can cause clinical toxicity. Several potential
pharmacokinetic interactions have been described based on in vitro analyses
of the CYP enzymes, but clinically relevant interactions are rare. SSRIs that
inhibit CYP2D6 may interfere with the analgesic effects of hydrocodone and
oxycodone. These drugs can also reduce the effectiveness of tamoxifen


<<<PAGE 1992>>>
(Nolvadex, Soltamox). The combined use of SSRIs and NSAIDs increases
the risk of gastric bleeding.
Table 21-17
Serotonin Syndrome Symptoms
Diarrhea

Myoclonus

Diaphoresis

Hyperactive reflexes

Tremor

Disorientation

Ataxia

Lability of mood

The SSRIs, particularly fluvoxamine, should not be used with clozapine
because it raises clozapine concentrations, increasing the risk of seizure. The
SSRIs may increase the duration and severity of zolpidem (Ambien)-induced
side effects, including hallucinations.
Fluoxetine. Fluoxetine can be administered with tricyclic drugs, but the
clinician should use low dosages of the tricyclic drug. Because the hepatic
enzyme CYP2D6 metabolizes it, fluoxetine may interfere with the
metabolism of other drugs in the 7 percent of the population who have an
inefficient isoform of this enzyme, the so-called poor metabolizers.
Fluoxetine may slow down the metabolism of carbamazepine (Tegretol),
antineoplastic agents, diazepam (Valium), and phenytoin (Dilantin). Drug
interactions have been described for fluoxetine that may affect the plasma
levels of benzodiazepines, antipsychotics, and lithium. Fluoxetine and other
SSRIs may interact with warfarin (Coumadin), increasing the risk of bleeding
and bruising.
Sertraline. Sertraline may displace warfarin from plasma proteins and may
increase the prothrombin time. The drug interaction data on sertraline support
a generally similar profile to that of fluoxetine, although sertraline does not
interact as strongly with the CYP2D6 enzyme.
Paroxetine. Paroxetine has a higher risk for drug interactions than does
either fluoxetine or sertraline because it is a more potent inhibitor of the


<<<PAGE 1993>>>
CYP2D6 enzyme. Cimetidine can increase the concentration of sertraline and
paroxetine, and phenobarbital (Luminal) and phenytoin can decrease the
concentration of paroxetine. Because of the potential for interference with the
CYP2D6 enzyme, the coadministration of paroxetine with other
antidepressants, phenothiazines, and antiarrhythmic drugs should be
undertaken with caution. Paroxetine may increase the anticoagulant effect of
warfarin. Coadministration of paroxetine and tramadol may precipitate
serotonin syndrome in elderly persons.
Fluvoxamine. Among the SSRIs, fluvoxamine appears to present the most
risk for drug–drug interactions. Fluvoxamine is metabolized by the enzyme
CYP3A4, which may be inhibited by ketoconazole (Nizoral). Fluvoxamine
may increase the half-life of alprazolam, triazolam (Halcion), and diazepam,
and it should not be coadministered with these agents. Fluvoxamine may
increase theophylline levels threefold and warfarin levels twofold, with
significant clinical consequences; thus, the serum levels of the latter drugs
should be closely monitored, and the doses adjusted accordingly.
Fluvoxamine raises concentrations and may increase the activity of clozapine,
carbamazepine, methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), propranolol (Inderal),
and diltiazem (Cardizem). Fluvoxamine has no significant interactions with
lorazepam (Ativan) or digoxin (Lanoxin).
Citalopram. Citalopram is not a potent inhibitor of any CYP enzymes.
Concurrent administration of cimetidine increases concentrations of
citalopram by about 40 percent. Citalopram does not significantly affect the
metabolism of, nor is its metabolism significantly affected by, digoxin,
lithium, warfarin, carbamazepine, or imipramine (Tofranil). Citalopram
increases the plasma concentrations of metoprolol (Lopressor) twofold, but
this usually does not affect BP or heart rate. Data on coadministration of
citalopram and potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 are not available.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and has
been shown to raise desipramine (Norpramin) and metoprolol concentrations
significantly.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone dose should be reduced to 20 mg when


<<<PAGE 1994>>>
coadministered with CYP3A4 potent inhibitors. Concomitant use with
inducers of CYP3A4 can result in inadequate drug concentrations and may
diminish effectiveness. The effect of CYP3A4 inducers on the systemic
exposure of vilazodone has not been evaluated.
Laboratory Interferences
In general, the SSRIs do not interfere with any laboratory tests. There have
been some reports of false-positive urine toxicology for benzodiazepines in
patients taking sertraline; if this is suspected, additional confirmation can be
sought via gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Fluoxetine. Fluoxetine is available in 10- and 20-mg capsules, in a scored
10-mg tablet, as a 90-mg enteric-coated capsule for once-weekly
administration, and as an oral concentrate (20 mg/5 mL). Fluoxetine is also
marketed as Sarafem for PMDD. For depression, the initial dosage is usually
10 or 20 mg orally each day, usually given in the morning, because insomnia
is a potential adverse effect of the drug. Fluoxetine should be taken with food
to minimize possible nausea. The long half-lives of the drug and its
metabolite contribute to 4 weeks to reach steady-state concentrations. Twenty
milligrams is often as effective as higher doses for treating depression. The
maximum dosage recommended by the manufacturer is 80 mg a day. To
minimize the early side effects of anxiety and restlessness, some clinicians
initiate fluoxetine use at 5 to 10 mg a day, either with the scored 10-mg tablet
or by using the liquid preparation. Alternatively, because of the long half-life
of fluoxetine, its use can be initiated with an every-other-day administration
schedule. The dosage of fluoxetine (and other SSRIs) that is effective in other
indications may differ from the dosage generally used for depression.
Sertraline. Sertraline is available in scored 25-, 50-, and 100-mg tablets. For
the initial treatment of depression, sertraline use should be initiated with a
dosage of 50 mg once daily. To limit the GI effects, some clinicians begin at
25 mg a day and increase to 50 mg a day after 3 weeks. Patients who do not
respond after 1 to 3 weeks may benefit from dosage increases of 50 mg every
week up to a maximum of 200 mg given once daily. Sertraline can be


<<<PAGE 1995>>>
administered in the morning or in the evening. Administration after eating
may reduce the GI adverse effects. Sertraline oral concentrate (1 mL = 20
mg) has 12 percent alcohol content and must be diluted before use. When
used to treat panic disorder, sertraline should be initiated at 25 mg to reduce
the risk of provoking a panic attack.
Paroxetine. Immediate-release paroxetine is available in scored 20-mg
tablets; in unscored 10-, 30-, and 40-mg tablets; and as an orange-flavored
10-mg/5-mL oral suspension. Paroxetine use for the treatment of depression
is usually initiated at a dosage of 10 or 20 mg a day. An increase in the
dosage should be considered when an adequate response is not seen in 1 to 3
weeks. At that point, the clinician can initiate upward dose titration in 10-mg
increments at weekly intervals to a maximum of 50 mg a day. Persons who
experience GI upset may benefit from taking the drug with food. Paroxetine
can be taken initially as a single daily dose in the evening; higher dosages
may be divided into two doses per day.
A delayed-release formulation of paroxetine, paroxetine CR, is available in
12.5-, 25-, and 37.5-mg tablets. The starting dosages of paroxetine CR are 25
mg/day for depression and 12.5 mg/day for panic disorder.
Paroxetine is the SSRI most likely to produce a discontinuation syndrome,
because plasma concentrations decrease rapidly in the absence of continuous
dosing. Paroxetine use should be tapered gradually to limit the symptoms of
abrupt discontinuation, with dosage reductions every 2 to 3 weeks.
Fluvoxamine. Fluvoxamine is the only SSRI not approved by the FDA as
an antidepressant. It is indicated for OCD. It is available in unscored 25-mg
tablets and scored 50- and 100-mg tablets. The effective daily dosage range is
50 to 300 mg a day. A usual starting dosage is 50 mg once a day at bedtime
for the first week, after which the dosage can be adjusted according to the
adverse effects and clinical response. Dosages above 100 mg a day may be
divided into twice-daily dosing. A temporary dosage reduction or slower
upward titration may be necessary if nausea develops over the first 2 weeks
of therapy. Although fluvoxamine can also be administered as a single
evening dose to minimize its adverse effects, its short half-life may lead to
interdose withdrawal. An extended-release formulation is available in 100and 150-mg dose strengths. All fluvoxamine formulations should be


<<<PAGE 1996>>>
swallowed with food without chewing the tablet. Abrupt discontinuation of
fluvoxamine may cause a discontinuation syndrome owing to its short halflife.
Citalopram. Citalopram is available in 20- and 40-mg scored tablets and as
a liquid (10 mg/5 mL). The usual starting dosage is 20 mg a day for the first
week, after which it usually is increased to 40 mg a day. For elderly persons
or persons with hepatic impairment, 20 mg a day is recommended. Tablets
should be taken once daily in either the morning or the evening with or
without food.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is available as 10- and 20-mg scored tablets, as
well as an oral solution at a concentration of 5 mg/5 mL. The recommended
dosage of escitalopram is 10 mg/day. In clinical trials, no additional benefit
was noted when 20 mg/day was used.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone is available as 10-, 20-, and 40-mg tablets. The
recommended therapeutic dose of vilazodone is 40 mg once daily. Treatment
should be titrated, starting with an initial dose of 10 mg once daily for 7 days,
followed by 20 mg once daily for an additional 7 days, and then an increase
to 40 mg once daily. Vilazodone should be taken with food. If vilazodone is
taken without food, inadequate drug concentrations may result, and the
drug’s effectiveness may be diminished. Vilazodone is not approved for use
in children. The safety and efficacy of vilazodone in pediatric patients have
not been studied. The patient’s age should not influence the dose, nor does
mild or moderate hepatic impairment. Vilazodone has not been studied in
patients with severe hepatic impairment. No dose adjustment is
recommended in patients with mild, moderate, or severe renal impairment.
Pregnancy and Breastfeeding. Except for paroxetine, the SSRIs are safe
to take during pregnancy when deemed necessary for the treatment of the
mother. There are no controlled human data regarding vilazodone use during
pregnancy, nor are there human data regarding drug concentrations in breast
milk. Transient QTc prolongation has been noted in newborns whose mother
was being treated with an SSRI during pregnancy.


<<<PAGE 1997>>>
Loss of Efficacy. Some patients report a diminished response or total loss
of response to SSRIs with recurrence of depressive symptoms while
remaining on a full dose of medication. The exact mechanism of this socalled “poop-out” is unknown, but the phenomenon is genuine. Potential
remedies for the attenuation of the response to SSRIs include increasing or
decreasing the dosage, tapering drug use, and then rechallenging with the
same medication, switching to another SSRI or non-SSRI antidepressant, and
augmenting with bupropion or another augmentation agent.
Vortioxetine (Trintellix). Vortioxetine works mainly as an inhibitor of
serotonin (5-HT) reuptake, but it has a more complex pharmacologic profile
than other SSRIs. It also acts as an agonist at 5-HT1A receptors, a partial
agonist at 5-HT1B receptors, and an antagonist at 5-HT3, 5-HT1D, and 5-HT7
receptors. The contribution of each of these activities to the drug’s
antidepressant effect has not been established, but it is the only compound
with this combination of pharmacodynamic actions.
Side effects seen during the trials include, but are not limited to, nausea,
constipation, and vomiting.
The recommended starting dose is 10 mg administered orally once daily
without regard to meals. The dose should then be increased to 20 mg/day, as
tolerated. A dose of 5 mg/day should be considered for patients who do not
tolerate higher doses.
The maximum recommended dose of vortioxetine is 10 mg/day in known
CYP2D6 poor metabolizers. Reduction of the dose of vortioxetine by onehalf is suggested when patients are receiving a CYP2D6 potent inhibitor
(e.g., bupropion, fluoxetine, paroxetine, or quinidine) concomitantly. The
dose should be increased to the original dose of vortioxetine in patients who
stop taking CYP inducers (e.g., rifampin, carbamazepine, or phenytoin). This
adjustment is especially essential when a potent CYP inducer is
coadministered for greater than 14 days. The maximum recommended dose
should not exceed three times the original dose. The dose of vortioxetine
should be reduced to the original level within 14 days when the inducer is
discontinued.
Although vortioxetine can be abruptly discontinued, in placebo-controlled
trials, patients experienced transient adverse reactions such as headache and


<<<PAGE 1998>>>
muscle tension following abrupt discontinuation of vortioxetine 15 or 20
mg/day. It is recommended that the dose be decreased to 10 mg/day for 1
week before full discontinuation of vortioxetine 15 or 20 mg/day.
Vortioxetine is available in 5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-mg tablets.

SELECTIVE SEROTONIN–NOREPINEPHRINE REUPTAKE
INHIBITORS
There are currently four SNRIs approved for use in the United States:
venlafaxine (Effexor and Effexor XR), desvenlafaxine succinate (DVS;
Pristiq), duloxetine (Cymbalta), and levomilnacipran (Fetzima). A fifth
SNRI, milnacipran (Savella), available in other countries as an
antidepressant, has U.S. FDA approval in the United States as a treatment for
fibromyalgia. The term SNRI reflects the belief that the therapeutic effects of
these medications are mediated by concomitant blockade of neuronal
serotonin (5-HT) and norepinephrine uptake transporters. The SNRIs are also
sometimes referred to as dual reuptake inhibitors, a broader functional class
of antidepressant medications that include TCAs such as clomipramine
(Anafranil) and, to a lesser extent, imipramine (Tofranil) and amitriptyline
(Elavil). What distinguishes the SNRIs from TCAs is their relative lack of
affinity for other receptors, especially muscarinic, histaminergic, and the
families of α- and β-adrenergic receptors. This distinction is an important one
because the SNRIs have a more favorable tolerability profile than the older
dual reuptake inhibitors.
Venlafaxine and Desvenlafaxine
Therapeutic Indications. Venlafaxine is approved for the treatment of
four disorders: MDD, GAD, social anxiety disorder, and panic disorder.
MDD is currently the only FDA-approved indication for DVS.
DEPRESSION. The FDA does not recognize any class of antidepressants as

being more effective than any other. This does not mean that differences do
not exist, but no study to date has sufficiently demonstrated such superiority.
It has been argued that direct modulation of serotonin and norepinephrine
may convey more significant antidepressant effects than are exerted by


<<<PAGE 1999>>>
medications that selectively enhance only noradrenergic or serotoninergic
neurotransmission. This more significant therapeutic benefit could result
from an acceleration of postsynaptic adaptation to increased neuronal
signaling, simultaneous activation of two pathways for intracellular signal
transduction, additive effects on the activity of relevant genes such as brainderived neurotrophic factor, or, quite simply, broader coverage of depressive
symptoms. Clinical evidence supporting this hypothesis first emerged in a
pair of studies conducted by the Danish University Antidepressant Group,
which found an advantage for the dual reuptake inhibitor clomipramine
compared with SSRIs citalopram (Celexa) and paroxetine (Paxil). Another
report, which compared the results of a group of patients prospectively
treated with the combination of desipramine (Norpramin) and fluoxetine
(Prozac) with a historical comparison group treated with desipramine alone,
provided additional support. A meta-analysis of 25 inpatient studies
comparing the efficacy of TCAs and SSRIs yielded the most substantial
evidence. Specifically, although the TCAs were found to have a modest
overall advantage, superiority versus SSRIs was almost entirely explained by
the studies that used the TCAs that are considered to be dual reuptake
inhibitors—clomipramine, amitriptyline, and imipramine. Meta-analyses of
head-to-head studies suggest that venlafaxine has the potential to induce
higher rates of remission in depressed patients than do the SSRIs. This
difference in the venlafaxine advantage is about 6 percent. DVS has not been
extensively compared with other classes of antidepressants concerning
efficacy.
The extended-release formulation of
venlafaxine is approved for the treatment of GAD. In clinical trials lasting 6
months, dosages of 75 to 225 mg a day were effective in treating insomnia,
poor concentration, restlessness, irritability, and excessive muscle tension
related to GAD.
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER.

SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. The extended-release formulation of venlafaxine

is approved for the treatment of social anxiety disorder. Its efficacy was
established in 12-week studies.
OTHER INDICATIONS. Case reports and uncontrolled studies have indicated that


<<<PAGE 2000>>>
venlafaxine may be beneficial in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive
disorder, panic disorder, agoraphobia, social phobia, ADHD, and patients
with a dual diagnosis of depression and cocaine dependence. It has also been
used in chronic pain syndromes with good effect.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Venlafaxine has a safety and
tolerability profile similar to that of the more widely prescribed SSRI class.
Nausea is the most frequently reported treatment-emergent adverse effect
associated with venlafaxine and DVS therapy. Initiating therapy at lower
dosages may also attenuate nausea. When extremely problematic, treatmentinduced nausea can be controlled by prescribing a selective 5-HT3 antagonist
or mirtazapine (Remeron).
Venlafaxine and DVS therapy is associated with sexual side effects,
predominantly decreased libido and a delay to orgasm or ejaculation. The
incidence of these side effects may exceed 30 to 40 percent when there is a
direct, detailed assessment of sexual function.
Other common side effects include headache, insomnia, somnolence, dry
mouth, dizziness, constipation, asthenia, sweating, and nervousness.
Although several side effects are suggestive of anticholinergic effects, these
drugs have no affinity for muscarinic or nicotinic receptors. Thus,
noradrenergic agonism is likely to be the culprit.
Higher-dose venlafaxine therapy is associated with an increased risk of
sustained elevations of BP. Experience with the instant-release (IR)
formulation in studies of depressed patients indicated that sustained
hypertension was dose-related, increasing from 3 to 7 percent at doses of 100
to 300 mg/day and 13 percent at doses greater than 300 mg/day. In this
dataset, venlafaxine therapy did not adversely affect BP control of patients
taking antihypertensives and lowered the mean values of patients with
elevated BP readings before therapy. In controlled studies of the extendedrelease formulation, venlafaxine therapy resulted in only approximately 1
percent greater risk of high BP when compared with the placebo. Arbitrarily
capping the upper dose of venlafaxine used in these studies, thus,
significantly attenuated concerns about elevated BP. When higher doses of
the extended-release formulation are used, however, monitoring of BP is
recommended.
Venlafaxine and DVS are commonly associated with discontinuation


<<<PAGE 2001>>>
syndrome. This syndrome is characterized by the appearance of a
constellation of adverse effects during a rapid taper or abrupt cessation,
including dizziness, dry mouth, insomnia, nausea, nervousness, sweating,
anorexia, diarrhea, somnolence, and sensory disturbances. It is recommended
that, whenever possible, a slow taper schedule should be used when longerterm treatment must be stopped. On occasion, substituting a few doses of the
sustained-release formulation of fluoxetine may help to bridge this transition.
There were no overdose fatalities in premarketing trials of venlafaxine,
although electrocardiographic changes (e.g., prolongation of QT interval,
bundle branch block, QRS interval prolongation), tachycardia, bradycardia,
hypotension, hypertension, coma, serotonin syndrome, and seizures were
reported. Fatal overdoses have been documented subsequently, typically
involving venlafaxine ingestion in combination with other drugs, alcohol, or
both.
Information concerning the use of venlafaxine and DVS by pregnant and
nursing women is not available at this time. Venlafaxine and DVS are
excreted in breast milk. Clinicians should carefully weigh the risks and
benefits of venlafaxine use by pregnant and nursing women.
Drug Interactions. Venlafaxine is metabolized in the liver primarily by the
CYP2D6 isoenzyme. Because the parent drug and principal metabolite are
essentially equipotent, medications that inhibit this isoenzyme usually do not
adversely affect therapy. Venlafaxine is itself a relatively weak inhibitor of
CYP2D6, although it can increase levels of substrates, such as desipramine or
risperidone (Risperdal). In vitro and in vivo studies have shown venlafaxine
to cause little or no inhibition of CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and
CYP3A4.
Venlafaxine is contraindicated in patients taking MAOIs because of the
risk of a pharmacodynamic interaction (i.e., serotonin syndrome). An MAOI
should not be started for at least 7 days after stopping venlafaxine. Few data
are available regarding the combination of venlafaxine with atypical
neuroleptics, benzodiazepines, lithium (Eskalith), and anticonvulsants;
therefore, clinical judgment should be exercised when combining
medications.
Laboratory Interferences. Data are not currently available on laboratory


<<<PAGE 2002>>>
interferences with venlafaxine. There have been some reports of patients
taking venlafaxine who have false-positive results on liquid chromatography
testing for tramadol.
Dosage and Administration. Venlafaxine is available in 25-, 37.5-, 50-,
75-, and 100-mg tablets and 37.5-, 75-, and 150-mg extended-release
capsules. The tablets and the extended-release capsules are equally potent,
and persons stabilized with one can switch to an equivalent dosage of the
other. Because the immediate-release tablets are rarely used due to their
tendency to cause nausea and the need for multiple-daily doses, the dosage
recommendations that follow refer to the use of the extended-release
capsules.
In depressed persons, venlafaxine demonstrates a dose–response curve.
The initial therapeutic dosage is 75 mg a day, given once a day. However,
most persons are started at a dosage of 37.5 mg for 4 to 7 days to minimize
adverse effects, particularly nausea. A convenient starter kit for the drug
contains a 1-week supply of both the 37.5- and 75-mg strengths. If a rapid
titration is preferred, the dosage can be raised to 150 mg/day after day 4. As a
rule, the dosage can be raised in increments of 75 mg a day every 4 or more
days. Although the recommended upper dosage of the extended-release
preparation (venlafaxine XR) is 225 mg/day, it is approved by the FDA for
use at dosages up to 375 mg a day. The dosage of venlafaxine should be
halved in persons with significantly diminished hepatic or renal function. If
discontinued, venlafaxine use should be gradually tapered over 2 to 4 weeks
to avoid withdrawal symptoms.
There are minor differences in the doses used for major depression, GAD,
and social anxiety disorder. In the treatment of these disorders, for example, a
dose–response effect has not been found. Also, lower mean dosages are
typically used, with most patients taking 75 to 150 mg/day.
DVS is available as 50- and 100-mg extended-release tablets. The
therapeutic dose for most patients is 50 mg a day. Although some patients
may need higher doses, in clinical trials, no more significant therapeutic
benefit was noted when the dose was increased. At higher doses, adverse
events and discontinuation rates were increased.
Duloxetine


<<<PAGE 2003>>>
Pharmacologic Actions. Duloxetine is formulated as a delayed-release
capsule to reduce the risk of severe nausea associated with the drug. It is well
absorbed, but there is a 2-hour delay before absorption begins. Peak plasma
concentrations occur 6 hours after ingestion. Food delays the time to achieve
maximum concentrations from 6 to 10 hours and reduces the extent of
absorption by about 10 percent. Duloxetine has an elimination half-life of
about 12 hours (range, 8 to 17 hours). Steady-state plasma concentrations
occur after 3 days. Duloxetine’s elimination is mainly through the isozymes
CYP2D6 and CYP1A2. Duloxetine undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism
to numerous metabolites. About 70 percent of the drug appears in the urine as
metabolites, and about 20 percent is excreted in the feces. Duloxetine is 90
percent protein-bound.
Therapeutic Indications
DEPRESSION. In contrast to venlafaxine, a small number of studies have
compared duloxetine with the SSRIs. Although these studies are suggestive
of some advantage in efficacy, their findings are limited by the use of fixed,
low starting doses of paroxetine and fluoxetine, but dosages of duloxetine in
some studies were as high as 120 mg/day. Any inferences on whether
duloxetine is superior to the SSRIs in any aspect of treatment for depression
thus await more evidence from adequately designed trials.
NEUROPATHIC PAIN

ASSOCIATED

WITH

DIABETES

AND

STRESS

URINARY

INCONTINENCE. Duloxetine is the first drug to be approved by the FDA as a

treatment for neuropathic pain associated with diabetes. Its pain effects have
not been compared with other agents, such as venlafaxine and the TCAs.
Duloxetine is currently awaiting approval as a treatment for stress urinary
incontinence, the inability to voluntarily control bladder voiding, which is the
most frequent type of incontinence in women. The action of duloxetine in the
treatment of stress urinary incontinence is associated with its effects in the
sacral spinal cord, which in turn increases the activity of the striated urethral
sphincter. Duloxetine is marketed under the name Yentreve for this indication
which has not been approved for this indication in the United States but is
available in the European Union and other countries.


<<<PAGE 2004>>>
PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS. The most common adverse reactions

are nausea, dry mouth, dizziness, constipation, fatigue, decreased appetite,
anorexia, somnolence, and increased sweating. Nausea was the most common
side effect that led to treatment discontinuation in clinical trials. The true
incidence of sexual dysfunction is unknown; the long-term effects on body
weight are also unknown. In clinical trials, treatment with duloxetine was
associated with mean increases in BP averaging 2 mm Hg systolic and 0.5
mm Hg diastolic versus placebo. No studies have compared the BP effects of
venlafaxine and duloxetine at equivalent therapeutic doses.
Close monitoring is suggested when using duloxetine in patients who have
or are at risk for diabetes. Duloxetine has been shown to increase blood sugar
and hemoglobin A1C levels during long-term treatment.
Patients with substantial alcohol use should not be treated with duloxetine
because of possible hepatic effects. It also should not be prescribed for
patients with hepatic insufficiency and end-stage renal disease or patients
with uncontrolled narrow-angle glaucoma.
Abrupt discontinuation of duloxetine should be avoided because it may
produce a discontinuation syndrome similar to that of venlafaxine. A gradual
dose reduction is recommended.
Clinicians should avoid the use of duloxetine by pregnant and nursing
women unless the potential benefits justify the potential risks.
Drug Interactions. Duloxetine is a moderate inhibitor of CYP450
enzymes.
Laboratory Interferences. Data are not currently available on laboratory
interferences with duloxetine.
Dosage and Administration. Duloxetine is available in 20-, 30-, and 60mg tablets. The recommended therapeutic and maximum dosage is 60
mg/day. The 20- and 30-mg doses are useful for either initial therapy or for
twice-daily use as strategies to reduce side effects. In clinical trials, dosages
of up to 120 mg/day were studied, but no consistent advantage in efficacy
was noted at doses higher than 60 mg/day. Duloxetine thus does not appear to
demonstrate a dosage–response curve. However, there were difficulties in
tolerability with single doses above 60 mg. Accordingly, when dosages of 80


<<<PAGE 2005>>>
and 120 mg/day were used, they were administered as 40 or 60 mg twice
daily. It remains to be seen to what extent dosages above 60 mg/day will be
necessary and whether this will require divided doses to make the drug
tolerable.
Milnacipran and Levomilnacipran
Milnacipran is only FDA approved for the treatment of fibromyalgia.
Although some countries have approved milnacipran for general use as an
antidepressant, efficacy is not as well established. Compared with
venlafaxine, milnacipran is approximately five times more potent for
inhibition of norepinephrine uptake than for 5-HT reuptake inhibition.
Milnacipran has a half-life of approximately 8 hours and shows linear
pharmacokinetics between doses of 50 and 250 mg/day. Milnacipran has no
active metabolites, and it is directly metabolized in the liver. The kidneys
primarily excrete milnacipran.
Milnacipran is available as 12.5-, 25-, 50-, and 100-mg tablets. The
standard recommended milnacipran dose is as follows: day 1, 12.5 mg once
daily; days 2 and 3, 12.5 mg twice daily; days 4 to 7, 25 mg twice daily; and
day 7 and beyond, 50 mg twice daily.
Levomilnacipran was approved in 2013 by the FDA as a treatment for
MDD in adults. Levomilnacipran is an active enantiomer of the racemic drug
milnacipran. In vitro studies have shown that it has greater potency for
norepinephrine reuptake inhibition than for serotonin reuptake inhibition and
does not directly affect the uptake of dopamine or other neurotransmitters. It
is taken once daily as a sustained-release formulation. In clinical trials, doses
of 40, 80, or 120 mg improved symptoms compared with placebo.
The most common adverse reactions in the placebo-controlled trials were
nausea, constipation, hyperhidrosis, increased heart rate, erectile dysfunction,
tachycardia, vomiting, and palpitations. Rates of adverse events were
generally consistent across the 40- to 120-mg dose range. The only doserelated adverse events were urinary hesitation and erectile dysfunction.

BUPROPION
Bupropion (Wellbutrin, Wellbutrin SR, Wellbutrin XL) is an antidepressant
drug that inhibits the reuptake of norepinephrine and, possibly, dopamine.


<<<PAGE 2006>>>
Most significantly, it does not act on the serotonin system like SSRI
antidepressants. This novel action results in a side effect profile characterized
by a low risk of sexual dysfunction and sedation and with modest weight loss
during acute and long-term treatment. No withdrawal syndrome has been
linked to discontinuation of bupropion. Although increasingly used as firstline monotherapy, a significant percentage of bupropion use occurs as add-on
therapy to other antidepressants, usually SSRIs. Bupropion was marketed
under the name Zyban for use in smoking cessation regimens. However, the
manufacturer has discontinued that brand in the United States.
Pharmacologic Actions
Three formulations of bupropion are available: immediate-release (taken
three times daily), sustained-release (taken twice daily), and extended-release
(taken once daily). The different versions of the drug contain the same active
ingredient but differ in their pharmacokinetics and dosing. There have been
reports of inconsistencies in bioequivalence between various branded and
generic versions of bupropion. If a patient experiences changes in adverse
effects or efficacy, the clinician should inquire whether there has been a
change of formulation.
Immediate-release bupropion is well absorbed from the GI tract. Peak
plasma concentrations of bupropion are usually reached within 2 hours of
oral administration, and peak levels of the sustained-release version are seen
after 3 hours. The mean half-life of the compound is 12 hours, ranging from 8
to 40 hours. Peak levels of extended-release bupropion occur 5 hours after
ingestion. This pharmacokinetic profile provides a longer time to maximum
plasma concentration (tmax) but comparable peak and trough plasma
concentrations. The 24-hour exposure occurring after administration of the
extended-release version of 300 mg once daily is equivalent to that provided
by sustained release of 150 mg twice daily. Clinically, this permits the drug
to be taken once a day in the morning. Plasma levels are also reduced in the
evening, making it less likely for some patients to experience treatmentrelated insomnia.
The mechanism of action for the antidepressant effects of bupropion is
presumed to involve the inhibition of dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake.
Bupropion binds to the dopamine transporter in the brain. The effects of


<<<PAGE 2007>>>
bupropion on smoking cessation may be related to its effects on dopamine
reward pathways or inhibition of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.
Therapeutic Indications
Depression. Although overshadowed by the SSRIs as first-line treatment
for major depression, the therapeutic efficacy of bupropion in depression is
well established in both outpatient and inpatient settings. Observed rates of
response and remission are comparable to those seen with the SSRIs.
Bupropion has been found to prevent seasonal major depressive episodes in
patients with a history of seasonal patterns or affective disorder.
Smoking Cessation. Bupropion is indicated for use in combination with
behavioral modification programs for smoking cessation. It is intended to be
used in patients who are highly motivated and who receive some form of
structured behavioral support. Bupropion is most effective when combined
with nicotine substitutes (Nico-Derm, Nicotrol).
Bipolar Disorders. Bupropion is less likely than TCAs to precipitate mania
in persons with bipolar I disorder and less likely than other antidepressants to
exacerbate or induce rapid-cycling bipolar II disorder; however, the evidence
about the use of bupropion in the treatment of patients with bipolar disorder
is limited.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Bupropion is used as a
second-line agent, after the sympathomimetics, for treatment of ADHD. It
has not been compared with proven ADHD medications such as
methylphenidate (Ritalin) or atomoxetine (Strattera) for childhood and adult
ADHD. Bupropion is an appropriate choice for persons with comorbid
ADHD and depression or persons with comorbid ADHD, conduct disorder,
or substance use disorder. It may also be considered for use in patients who
develop tics when treated with psychostimulants.
Cocaine Detoxification. Bupropion may be associated with a euphoric
feeling; thus, it may be contraindicated in persons with histories of substance
abuse. However, because of its dopaminergic effects, bupropion has been
explored as a treatment for cocaine cravings. Results have been inconclusive,


<<<PAGE 2008>>>
with some patients showing a reduction in drug craving and others finding
their cravings increased.
Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder. Bupropion is often added to drugs
such as SSRIs to counteract sexual side effects and may be helpful as a
treatment for nondepressed individuals with a disorder of sexual desire.
Bupropion may improve sexual arousal, orgasm completion, and sexual
satisfaction.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Headache, insomnia, dry mouth, tremor, and nausea are the most common
side effects. Restlessness, agitation, and irritability may also occur. Patients
with severe anxiety or panic disorder should not be prescribed bupropion.
Most likely, because of its potentiating effects on dopaminergic
neurotransmission, bupropion can cause psychotic symptoms, including
hallucinations, delusions, and catatonia, as well as delirium. Most notable
about bupropion is the absence of significant drug-induced orthostatic
hypotension, weight gain, daytime drowsiness, and anticholinergic effects.
Some persons, however, may experience dry mouth or constipation and
weight loss. Hypertension may occur in some patients, but bupropion causes
no other significant cardiovascular or clinical laboratory changes. Bupropion
exerts indirect sympathomimetic activity, producing positive inotropic effects
in the human myocardium, an effect that may reflect catecholamine release.
Some patients experience cognitive impairment, most notably word-finding
difficulties.
Concern about seizure has deterred some physicians from prescribing
bupropion. The risk of seizure is dose-dependent. Studies show that at
dosages of 300 mg a day or less of sustainedrelease bupropion, the incidence of seizures is 0.05 percent, which is no
worse than the incidence of seizures with other antidepressants. The risk of
seizures increases to about 0.1 percent with dosages of 400 mg a day.
Changes in electroencephalographic (EEG) waveforms have been reported
to be associated with bupropion use. About 20 percent of individuals treated
with bupropion exhibit spike waves, sharp waves, and focal slowing. The
likelihood of women having sharp waves is higher than for men. The


<<<PAGE 2009>>>
presence of these waveforms in individuals taking a medication known to
lower the seizure threshold may be a risk factor for developing seizures.
Other risk factors for seizures include a history of seizures, use of alcohol,
recent benzodiazepine withdrawal, organic brain disease, head trauma, or
pretreatment epileptiform discharges on EEG.
The use of bupropion by pregnant women is not associated with a specific
risk of an increased rate of congenital disabilities. Bupropion is secreted in
breast milk, so the use of bupropion in nursing women should be based on the
clinical circumstances of the patient and the judgment of the clinician.
Few deaths have been reported after overdoses of bupropion. Poor
outcomes are associated with cases of massive doses and mixed-drug
overdoses. Seizures occur in about one-third of all overdoses and are dosedependent, with those having seizures ingesting a significantly higher median
dose. Fatalities can involve uncontrollable seizures, sinus bradycardia, and
cardiac arrest. Symptoms of poisoning most often involve seizures, sinus
tachycardia, hypertension, GI symptoms, hallucinations, and agitation. All
seizures are typically brief and self-limited. In general, however, bupropion is
safer in overdose cases than are other antidepressants except for perhaps
SSRIs.
Drug Interactions
Given the fact that bupropion is frequently combined with SSRIs or
venlafaxine, potential interactions are significant. Bupropion has been found
to affect the pharmacokinetics of venlafaxine. One study noted a significant
increase in venlafaxine levels and a consequent decrease in its main
metabolite O-desmethylvenlafaxine during combined treatment with
sustained-release bupropion. Bupropion hydroxylation is weakly inhibited by
venlafaxine. No significant changes in plasma levels of the SSRIs paroxetine
and fluoxetine have been reported. However, few case reports indicate that
the combination of bupropion and fluoxetine (Prozac) may be associated with
panic, delirium, or seizures. Bupropion, in combination with lithium
(Eskalith), may rarely cause CNS toxicity, including seizures.
Because of the possibility of inducing a hypertensive crisis, bupropion
should not be used concurrently with MAOIs. At least 14 days should pass
after the discontinuation of an MAOI before initiating treatment with


<<<PAGE 2010>>>
bupropion. In some cases, the addition of bupropion may permit persons
taking antiparkinsonian medications to lower the doses of their dopaminergic
drugs. However, delirium, psychotic symptoms, and dyskinetic movements
may occur with the coadministration of bupropion and dopaminergic agents,
such as antiparkinsonian meds. Sinus bradycardia may occur when bupropion
is combined with metoprolol.
Carbamazepine (Tegretol) may decrease plasma concentrations of
bupropion, and bupropion may increase plasma concentrations of valproic
acid (Depakene).
In vitro biotransformation studies of bupropion have found that the
formation of a major active metabolite, hydroxybupropion, is mediated by
CYP2B6. Bupropion has a significant inhibitory effect on CYP2D6.
Laboratory Interferences
A report has appeared indicating that bupropion may give a false-positive
result on urinary amphetamine screens. No other reports have appeared of
laboratory interferences associated with bupropion treatment. Clinically
nonsignificant changes in the electrocardiogram (premature beats and
nonspecific ST-T changes) and decreases in the WBC count (by about 10
percent) have been reported in a small number of persons.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Immediate-release bupropion is available in 75-, 100-, and 150-mg tablets.
Sustained-release bupropion is available in 100-, 150-, 200-, and 300-mg
tablets. Extended-release bupropion comes in 150- and 300-mg strengths.
There have been problems associated with one of the extended-release
generic versions called Budeprion XL 300-mg tablets, which was found not
to be therapeutically equivalent to Wellbutrin XL 300 mg and was removed
from the market.
The initiation of immediate-release bupropion in the average adult person
should be 75 mg orally twice a day. On the fourth day of treatment, the
dosage can be increased to 100 mg three times a day. Because 300 mg is the
recommended dose, the person should be maintained on this dose for several
weeks before increasing it further. The maximum dosage, 450 mg a day,
should be given as 150 mg three times a day. Because of the risk of seizures,


<<<PAGE 2011>>>
increases in dose should never exceed 100 mg in 3 days; a single dose of
immediate-release bupropion should never exceed 150 mg, and the total daily
dosage should not exceed 450 mg. The maximum of 400 mg of the sustainedrelease version should be used as a twice-a-day regimen of either 200 mg
twice daily or 300 mg in the morning and 100 mg in the afternoon. A starting
dosage of the sustained-release version, 100 mg once a day, can be increased
to 100 mg twice a day after 4 days. Then 150 mg twice a day may be used. A
single dose of sustained-release bupropion should never exceed 300 mg. The
maximum dosage is 200 mg twice a day of the immediate-release or
extended-release formulations. An advantage of the extended-release
preparation is that the patient can take a single daily dose of 450 mg after
proper titration.
For smoking cessation, the patient should start taking 150 mg a day of
sustained-release bupropion 10 to 14 days before quitting smoking. On the
fourth day, the dosage should be increased to 150 mg twice daily. Treatment
generally lasts 7 to 12 weeks.

MIRTAZAPINE
Mirtazapine (Remeron) is unique among drugs used to treat major depression
in that it increases both norepinephrine and serotonin through a mechanism
other than reuptake blockade (as in the case of tricyclic agents or SSRIs) or
monoamine oxidase inhibition (as in the case of phenelzine or
tranylcypromine). Mirtazapine is also more likely to reduce rather than cause
nausea and diarrhea, the result of its effects on serotonin 5-HT3 receptors.
Characteristic side effects include increased appetite and sedation.
Pharmacologic Actions
Mirtazapine is administered orally and is rapidly and completely absorbed. It
has a half-life of about 30 hours. Peak concentration is achieved within 2
hours of ingestion, and steady state is reached after 6 days. Plasma clearance
may be slowed up to 30 percent in persons with impaired hepatic function, up
to 50 percent in those with impaired renal function, up to 40 percent slower in
older men, and up to 10 percent slower in older women.
The mechanism of action of mirtazapine is the antagonism of central


<<<PAGE 2012>>>
presynaptic α2-adrenergic receptors and blockade of postsynaptic serotonin 5HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors. The α2-adrenergic receptor antagonism causes the
increased firing of norepinephrine and serotonin neurons. The potent
antagonist of serotonin 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors serves to decrease
anxiety, relieve insomnia, and stimulate the appetite. Mirtazapine is a potent
antagonist of histamine H1 receptors and is a moderately potent antagonist at
α1-adrenergic and muscarinic-cholinergic receptors.
Therapeutic Indications
Mirtazapine is effective for the treatment of depression. It is highly sedating,
making it a reasonable choice for use in depressed patients with severe or
long-standing insomnia. Some patients find the residual daytime sedation
associated with the initiation of treatment to be quite pronounced. However,
the more extreme sedating properties of the drug generally lessen over the
first week of treatment. Combined with the tendency to sometimes cause a
ravenous appetite, mirtazapine is well suited for depressed patients with
melancholic features such as insomnia, weight loss, and agitation. Elderly
depressed patients, in particular, are good candidates for mirtazapine; young
adults are more likely to object to this side effect profile.
Mirtazapine’s blockade of 5-HT3 receptors, a mechanism associated with
medications used to combat the severe GI side effects of cancer
chemotherapy agents, has led to the use of the drug in a similar role. In this
population, sedation and stimulation of appetite clearly could be seen as
being beneficial instead of unwelcome side effects.
Mirtazapine is often combined with SSRIs or venlafaxine to augment
antidepressant response or counteract serotonergic side effects of those drugs,
particularly nausea, agitation, and insomnia. Mirtazapine has no significant
pharmacokinetic interactions with other antidepressants.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Somnolence, the most common adverse effect of mirtazapine, occurs in more
than 50 percent of persons (Table 21-18). Persons starting mirtazapine should
thus exercise caution when driving or operating dangerous machinery and
even when getting out of bed at night. This adverse effect is why mirtazapine


<<<PAGE 2013>>>
is almost always given before sleep. Mirtazapine potentiates the sedative
effects of other CNS depressants, so potentially sedating prescription or overthe-counter drugs and alcohol should be avoided during the use of
mirtazapine. Mirtazapine also causes dizziness in 7 percent of persons. It
does not appear to increase the risk of seizures. Mania or hypomania occurred
in clinical trials at a rate similar to that of other antidepressant drugs.
Mirtazapine increases appetite in about one-third of patients. Mirtazapine
may also increase serum cholesterol concentration to 20 percent or more
above the upper limit of normal in 15 percent of persons and increase
triglycerides to 500 mg/dL or more in 6 percent of persons. Elevations of
alanine transaminase levels to more than three times the upper limit of normal
were seen in 2 percent of mirtazapine-treated persons as opposed to 0.3
percent of placebo control subjects.
In limited premarketing experience, the absolute neutrophil count dropped
to 500/mm3 or less within 2 months of the onset of use in 0.3 percent of
persons, some of whom developed symptomatic infections. This hematologic
condition was reversible in all cases and was more likely to occur when other
risk factors for neutropenia were present. Increases in the frequency of
neutropenia have not, however, been reported during the extensive
postmarketing period. Persons who develop fever, chills, sore throat, mucous
membrane ulceration, or other signs of infection should nevertheless be
evaluated medically. If a low WBC count is found, mirtazapine should be
immediately discontinued, and the infectious disease status should be
followed closely.
Table 21-18
Adverse Reactions Reported with Mirtazapine
Event

Patients (%)

Somnolence

54

Dry mouth

25

Increased appetite

17

Constipation

13


<<<PAGE 2014>>>
Weight gain

12

Dizziness

7

Myalgias

5

Disturbing dreams

4

A small number of persons experience orthostatic hypotension while
taking mirtazapine. Although no data exist regarding the effects on fetal
development, mirtazapine should be used with caution during pregnancy.
Mirtazapine use by pregnant women has not been studied, but because the
drug may be excreted in breast milk, it should not be taken by nursing
mothers. Because of the risk of agranulocytosis associated with mirtazapine
use, persons should be attuned to signs of infection. Because of the sedating
effects of mirtazapine, persons should determine the degree to which they are
affected before engaging in driving or other potentially dangerous activities.
Drug Interactions
Mirtazapine can potentiate the sedation of alcohol and benzodiazepines.
Mirtazapine should not be used within 14 days of use of an MAOI.
Laboratory Interferences
No laboratory interferences have yet been described for mirtazapine.
Dosage and Administration
Mirtazapine is available in 15-, 30-, and 45-mg scored tablets. Mirtazapine is
also available in 15-, 30-, and 45-mg orally disintegrating tablets for persons
who have difficulty swallowing pills. If persons fail to respond to the initial
dose of 15 mg of mirtazapine before sleep, the dose may be increased in 15mg increments every 5 days to a maximum of 45 mg before sleep. Lower
dosages may be necessary for elderly persons or persons with renal or hepatic
insufficiency.

NEFAZODONE AND TRAZODONE
Nefazodone (Serzone) and Trazodone (Desyrel) are mechanistically and


<<<PAGE 2015>>>
structurally related drugs approved as treatments for depression. Nefazodone
(Serzone) is an analog of trazodone. When nefazodone was introduced in
1995, there were expectations that it would become widely used because it
did not cause the sexual side effects and sleep disruption associated with the
selective SSRIs. Although it was devoid of these side effects, it was
nevertheless found to produce problematic sedation, nausea, dizziness, and
visual disturbances. Consequently, nefazodone was never extensively
adopted in clinical practice. This fact, as well as reports of rare cases of
sometimes fatal hepatotoxicity, led the original manufacturer to discontinue
the production of branded nefazodone in 2004. Generic nefazodone remains
available in the United States.
Trazodone received FDA approval in 1981 as a treatment for MDD. Its
novel triazolopyridine chemical structure distinguished it from the TCAs, and
clinical trials suggested improved safety and tolerability compared with
TCAs. There were high expectations that it would replace the older drugs as a
mainstay of treatment for depression. However, the extreme sedation
associated with trazodone, even at subtherapeutic doses, limited the clinical
effectiveness of the drug. However, its soporific properties made trazodone a
favorite alternative to standard hypnotics as a sleep-inducing agent. Unlike
conventional sleeping pills, trazodone is not a controlled substance.
Nefazodone
Pharmacologic Actions. Nefazodone is rapidly and completely absorbed
but is then extensively metabolized so that the bioavailability of active
compounds is about 20 percent of the oral dose. Its half-life is 2 to 4 hours.
Steady-state concentrations of nefazodone and its principal active metabolite,
hydroxynefazodone, are achieved within 4 to 5 days. Metabolism of
nefazodone in elderly persons, especially women, is about half of that seen in
younger persons, so lowered doses are recommended for elderly persons. An
important metabolite of nefazodone is meta-chlorophenylpiperazine (mCPP),
which has some serotonergic effects and may cause migraine, anxiety, and
weight loss.
Although nefazodone is an inhibitor of serotonin uptake and, more weakly,
of norepinephrine reuptake, its antagonism of serotonin 5-HTA receptors is
thought to produce its antianxiety and antidepressant effects. Nefazodone is


<<<PAGE 2016>>>
also a mild antagonist of the α1-adrenergic receptors, which predisposes some
persons to orthostatic hypotension but is not sufficiently potent to produce
priapism.
Therapeutic Indications. Nefazodone is effective for the treatment of
major depression. The usual effective dosage is 300 to 600 mg a day. In
direct comparison with SSRIs, nefazodone is less likely to cause inhibition of
orgasm or decreased sexual desire. Nefazodone is also effective for the
treatment of panic disorder and panic with comorbid depression or depressive
symptoms, GAD, and PMDD and management of chronic pain. It is not
useful for the treatment of OCD. Nefazodone increases rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep and increases sleep continuity. Nefazodone is also of use in
patients with PTSD and chronic fatigue syndrome. It may also be effective in
patients who have been treatment-resistant to other antidepressant drugs.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common reasons for
discontinuing nefazodone use are sedation, nausea, dizziness, insomnia,
weakness, and agitation (Table 21-19). Many patients report no specific side
effects but describe a vague sense of feeling medicated. Nefazodone also
causes visual trails, in which patients see an afterimage when looking at
moving objects or when moving their heads quickly.
A significant safety concern with the use of nefazodone is a severe
elevation of hepatic enzymes, and, in some instances, liver failure.
Accordingly, serial hepatic function tests need to be done when patients are
treated with nefazodone. Hepatic effects can be seen early in treatment and
are more likely to develop when nefazodone is combined with other drugs
metabolized in the liver.
Some patients taking nefazodone may experience a decrease in BP that can
cause episodes of postural hypotension. Nefazodone should therefore be used
with caution by persons with underlying cardiac conditions or history of
stroke or heart attack, dehydration, or hypovolemia or by persons being
treated with antihypertensive medications. Patients switched from SSRIs to
nefazodone may experience an increase in side effects, possibly because
nefazodone does not protect against SSRI withdrawal symptoms. One of its
metabolites, mCPP, may intensify these discontinuation symptoms. Patients
have survived nefazodone overdoses above 10 g, but deaths have been


<<<PAGE 2017>>>
reported when it has been combined with alcohol. Nausea, vomiting, and
somnolence are the most common signs of toxicity.
Table 21-19
Adverse Reactions Reported with Nefazodone (300–600 mg
a day)
Reaction

Patients (%)

Headache

36

Dry mouth

25

Somnolence

25

Nausea

22

Dizziness

17

Constipation

14

Insomnia

11

Weakness

11

Lightheadedness

10

Blurred vision

9

Dyspepsia

9

Infection

8

Confusion

7

Scotomata

7

There are few studies or clinical reports of nefazodone during pregnancy.
Nefazodone should, therefore, be used during pregnancy only if the potential
benefit to the mother outweighs the potential risks to the fetus. It is not
known whether nefazodone is excreted in human breast milk. Therefore, it
should be used with caution by lactating mothers. The nefazodone dosage
should be lowered in persons with severe hepatic disease, but no adjustment


<<<PAGE 2018>>>
is necessary for persons with renal disease.
Drug Interactions and Laboratory Interferences. Nefazodone should
not be given concomitantly with MAOIs. Also, nefazodone has particular
drug–drug interactions with the triazolobenzodiazepines triazolam (Halcion)
and alprazolam (Xanax) because of the inhibition of CYP3A4 by nefazodone.
Potentially elevated levels of each of these drugs can develop after
administration of nefazodone, but the levels of nefazodone are generally not
affected. The dose of triazolam should be lowered by 75 percent, and the
dose of alprazolam should be lowered by 50 percent, when given
concomitantly with nefazodone.
Nefazodone may slow the metabolism of digoxin; therefore, digoxin levels
should be monitored carefully in persons taking both medications.
Nefazodone also slows the metabolism of haloperidol (Haldol) so that the
dosage of haloperidol should be reduced in persons taking both medications.
The addition of nefazodone may also exacerbate the adverse effects of
lithium carbonate (Eskalith).
There are no known laboratory interferences associated with nefazodone.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Nefazodone is available in 50-, 200-,
and 250-mg unscored tablets and 100- and 150-mg scored tablets. The
recommended starting dosage of nefazodone is 100 mg twice a day, but 50
mg twice a day may be better tolerated, especially by elderly persons. The
dosage should be slowly raised in increments of 100 to 200 mg a day at
intervals of no less than 1 week per increase to limit the development of
adverse effects. The optimal dosage is 300 to 600 mg daily in two divided
doses. However, some studies report that nefazodone is effective when taken
once a day, especially at bedtime. Geriatric persons should receive dosages
about two-thirds of the usual nongeriatric dosages, with a maximum of 400
mg a day. Similar to other antidepressants, the clinical benefit of nefazodone
usually appears after 2 to 4 weeks of treatment. Patients with the
premenstrual syndrome are treated with a flexible dosage that averages about
250 mg a day.
Trazodone


<<<PAGE 2019>>>
Pharmacologic Actions. Trazodone is readily absorbed from the GI tract
and reaches peak plasma levels in about 1 hour. It has a half-life of 5 to 9
hours. Trazodone is metabolized in the liver, and 75 percent of its metabolites
are excreted in the urine.
Trazodone is a weak inhibitor of serotonin reuptake and a potent antagonist
of serotonin 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptors. The active metabolite of
trazodone is mCPP, which is an agonist at 5-HT2C receptors and has a halflife of 14 hours. mCPP has been associated with migraine, anxiety, and
weight loss. The adverse effects of trazodone are partially mediated by α1adrenergic receptor antagonism.
Therapeutic Indications
DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS. The main indication for the use of trazodone is
MDD. There is a dose–response relationship, with dosages of 250 to 600 mg
a day being necessary for trazodone to have therapeutic benefit. Trazodone
increases total sleep time, decreases the number and the duration of nighttime
awakenings, and decreases the amount of REM sleep. Unlike tricyclic drugs,
trazodone does not decrease stage 4 sleep. Trazodone is thus useful for
depressed persons with anxiety and insomnia.
Trazodone is a first-line agent for the treatment of insomnia
because of its marked sedative qualities and favorable effects on sleep
architecture (see above) combined with its lack of anticholinergic effects.
Trazodone is effective for insomnia caused by depression or the use of drugs.
When used as a hypnotic, the usual initial dosage is 25 to 100 mg at bedtime.
INSOMNIA.

Trazodone is associated with an increased risk of
priapism. Trazodone can potentiate erections resulting from sexual
stimulation. It has thus been used to prolong erectile time and turgidity in
some men with erectile disorder. The dosage for this indication is 150 to 200
mg a day. Trazodone-triggered priapism (an erection lasting more than 3
hours with pain) is a medical emergency. The use of trazodone for the
treatment of male erectile dysfunction has diminished considerably since the
introduction of phosphodiesterase (PDE)-5 agents (see Chapter 16).
ERECTILE DISORDER.


<<<PAGE 2020>>>
OTHER INDICATIONS. Trazodone may be useful in low dosages (50 mg a day)

for controlling severe agitation in children with developmental disabilities
and elderly persons with dementia. At dosages above 250 mg a day,
trazodone reduces the tension and apprehension associated with GAD. It has
been used to treat depression in patients with schizophrenia. Trazodone may
have a beneficial effect on insomnia and nightmares in persons with PTSD.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common adverse
effects associated with trazodone are sedation, orthostatic hypotension,
dizziness, headache, and nausea. Some persons experience dry mouth or
gastric irritation. The drug is not associated with anticholinergic adverse
effects, such as urinary retention, weight gain, and constipation. A few case
reports have noted an association between trazodone and arrhythmias in
persons with preexisting premature ventricular contractions or mitral valve
prolapse. Neutropenia, usually not of clinical significance, may develop,
which should be considered if persons have a fever or sore throat.
Trazodone may cause significant orthostatic hypotension 4 to 6 hours after
a dose is taken, especially if taken concurrently with antihypertensive agents
or if a large dose is taken without food. Administration of trazodone with
food slows absorption and reduces the peak plasma concentration, thus
reducing the risk of orthostatic hypotension.
Because suicide attempts often involve the ingestion of sleeping pills, it is
essential to be familiar with the symptoms and treatment of trazodone
overdose. Patients have survived trazodone overdoses of more than 9 g.
Symptoms of overdose include lethargy, vomiting, drowsiness, headache,
orthostasis, dizziness, dyspnea, tinnitus, myalgias, tachycardia, incontinence,
shivering, and coma. Treatment consists of emesis or lavage and supportive
care. Forced diuresis may enhance elimination. Treat hypotension and
sedation as appropriate.
Trazodone causes priapism, prolonged erection in the absence of sexual
stimuli, in one of every 10,000 men. Trazodone-induced priapism usually
appears in the first 4 weeks of treatment but may occur as late as 18 months
into treatment. It can appear at any dose. In such cases, trazodone use should
be discontinued, and another antidepressant should be used. Painful erections
or erections lasting more than 1 hour are warning signs that warrant
immediate discontinuation of the drug and medical evaluation. The first step


<<<PAGE 2021>>>
in the emergency management of priapism is an intracavernosal injection of
an α1-adrenergic agonist pressor agent, such as metaraminol (Aramine) or
epinephrine. In about one-third of reported cases, surgical intervention was
required. In some cases, permanent impairment of erectile function or
impotence resulted.
The use of trazodone is contraindicated in pregnant and nursing women.
Trazodone should be used with caution in persons with hepatic and renal
diseases.
Drug Interactions. Trazodone potentiates the CNS depressant effects of
other centrally acting drugs and alcohol. Concurrent use of trazodone and
antihypertensives may cause hypotension. No cases of hypertensive crisis
have been reported when trazodone has been used to treat MAOI-associated
insomnia. Trazodone can increase levels of digoxin and phenytoin.
Trazodone should be used with caution in combination with warfarin. Drugs
that inhibit CYP3A4 can increase levels of trazodone’s primary metabolite,
mCPP, leading to an increase in side effects.
Laboratory Interferences. No known laboratory interferences are
associated with the administration of trazodone.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Trazodone is available in 50-, 100-,
150-, and 300-mg tablets. Once-a-day dosing is as effective as divided dosing
and reduces daytime sedation. The usual starting dose is 50 mg before sleep.
The dosage can be increased in increments of 50 mg every 3 days if sedation
or orthostatic hypotension does not become a problem. The therapeutic range
for trazodone is 200 to 600 mg a day in divided doses. Some reports indicate
that dosages of 400 to 600 mg a day are required for maximal therapeutic
effects; other reports indicate that 250 to 400 mg a day is sufficient. The
dosage may be titrated up to 300 mg a day; then, the person can be evaluated
for the need for further dosage increases based on the presence or the absence
of signs of clinical improvement.

TRICYCLICS AND TETRACYCLICS
The observation in 1957 that imipramine (Tofranil) had antidepressant effects


<<<PAGE 2022>>>
led to the development of a new class of antidepressant compounds, the
tricyclics (TCAs). In turn, the finding that imipramine blocked reuptake of
norepinephrine led to research into the role of catecholamines in depression.
After the introduction of imipramine, several other antidepressant compounds
were developed that shared a basic tricyclic structure and had relatively
similar effects. Later, other heterocyclic compounds were also marketed that
were somewhat similar in structure and that had relatively comparable
secondary properties. At one time, amitriptyline (Elavil, Endep) and
imipramine were the two most commonly prescribed antidepressants in the
United States. However, because of their anticholinergic and antihistaminic
side effects, they are rarely used for depression. Nortriptyline (Aventyl,
Pamelor) and desipramine (Norpramin, Pertofrane) became preferred.
Nortriptyline has the least effect on orthostatic hypotension, and desipramine
is the least anticholinergic. Although introduced as antidepressants, the
therapeutic indications for these agents have grown to include panic disorder,
GAD, PTSD, OCD, and pain syndromes. The introduction of newer
antidepressant agents with more selective actions on neurotransmitters or
with unique mechanisms of action has sharply reduced the prescribing of
TCAs and tetracyclics. The improved safety profiles of the newer drugs,
especially when taken in overdose, also contributed to the decline in the use
of older drugs. Nevertheless, the TCAs and tetracyclics remain unsurpassed
in terms of their antidepressant efficacy. Table 21-20 lists TCA and
tetracyclic drugs and their available preparations.
Pharmacologic Actions
The absorption of most TCAs is complete after oral administration, and there
is significant metabolism from the first-pass effect. Peak plasma
concentrations occur within 2 to 8 hours, and the half-lives of the TCAs vary
from 10 to 70 hours; nortriptyline, maprotiline (Ludiomil), and particularly
protriptyline (Vivactil) can have longer half-lives. The long half-lives allow
all the compounds to be given once daily; 5 to 7 days is needed to reach
steady-state plasma concentrations. Imipramine pamoate (Tofranil) is a depot
form of the drug for intramuscular (IM) administration; indications for the
use of this preparation are limited.
The TCAs undergo hepatic metabolism by the CYP450 enzyme system.


<<<PAGE 2023>>>
Clinically relevant drug interactions may result from competition for enzyme
CYP2D6 among TCAs and quinidine, cimetidine (Tagamet), fluoxetine
(Prozac), sertraline (Zoloft), paroxetine (Paxil), phenothiazines,
carbamazepine (Tegretol), and the type IC antiarrhythmics propafenone
(Rythmol) and flecainide (Tambocor). Concomitant administration of TCAs
and these inhibitors may slow down the metabolism and raise the plasma
concentrations of TCAs. Additionally, genetic variations in the activity of
CYP2D6 may account for up to a 40-fold difference in plasma TCA
concentrations in different persons. The dosage of the TCA may need to be
adjusted to correct changes in the rate of hepatic TCA metabolism.
Table 21-20
Tricyclic and Tetracyclic Drug Preparations

The TCAs block the transporter site for norepinephrine and serotonin, thus
increasing synaptic concentrations of these neurotransmitters. Each drug
differs in its affinity for each of these transporters, with clomipramine
(Anafranil) being the most serotonin selective and desipramine the most
norepinephrine selective of the TCAs. Secondary effects of the TCAs include
antagonism at the muscarinic acetylcholine, histamine H1, and α1- and α2adrenergic receptors. The potency of these effects on other receptors largely
determines the side effect profile of each drug. Amoxapine, nortriptyline,
desipramine, and maprotiline have the least anticholinergic activity; doxepin
has the most antihistaminergic activity. Although they are more likely to
cause constipation, sedation, dry mouth, or lightheadedness than the SSRIs,
the TCAs are less prone to cause sexual dysfunction, significant long-term


<<<PAGE 2024>>>
weight gain, and sleep disturbances than the SSRIs. The half-lives and
plasma clearance for most TCAs are very similar.
Therapeutic Indications
The indications are similar to those for the SSRIs, which have widely
replaced the TCAs. However, the TCAs represent a reasonable alternative for
persons who cannot tolerate the adverse effects of the SSRIs.
Major Depressive Disorder. The treatment of a major depressive episode
and the prophylactic treatment of MDD are the principal indications for using
TCAs. Although the TCAs are effective in the treatment of depression in
persons with bipolar I disorder, they are more likely to induce mania,
hypomania, or cycling than the newer antidepressants, most notably the
SSRIs and bupropion. It is thus not advised that TCAs be routinely used to
treat depression associated with bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
Melancholic features, prior major depressive episodes, and a family history
of depressive disorders increase the likelihood of therapeutic response. All of
the available TCAs are equally effective in the treatment of depressive
disorders. In the case of a person, however, one tricyclic or tetracyclic may be
useful, and another one may be ineffective. The treatment of a major
depressive episode with psychotic features almost always requires the
coadministration of an antipsychotic drug and an antidepressant.
Although it is used worldwide as an antidepressant, clomipramine is only
approved in the United States for the treatment of OCD.
Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia. Imipramine is the TCA most studied
for panic disorder with agoraphobia, but other TCAs are also useful when
taken at the usual antidepressant dosages. Because of the potential initial
anxiogenic effects of the TCAs, starting dosages should be small, and the
dosage should be titrated upward slowly. Small doses of benzodiazepines
may be used initially to deal with this side effect.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder. The FDA approves the use of doxepin for
the treatment of anxiety disorders. Some research data show that imipramine
may also be useful. Although rarely used anymore, a chlordiazepoxide–
amitriptyline combination (Limbitrol) is available for mixed anxiety and


<<<PAGE 2025>>>
depressive disorders.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Patients with OCD appear to respond
specifically to clomipramine, as well as the SSRIs. Some improvement is
usually seen in 2 to 4 weeks, but a further reduction in symptoms may
continue for the first 4 to 5 months of treatment. None of the other TCAs
appears to be nearly as effective as clomipramine for the treatment of this
disorder. Clomipramine may also be a drug of choice for depressed persons
with marked obsessive features.
Pain. The TCAs are widely used to treat chronic neuropathic pain and in the
prophylaxis of migraine headache. Amitriptyline is the TCA most often used
in this role. During the treatment of pain, doses are generally lower than those
used in depression; for example, 75 mg of amitriptyline may be sufficient.
These effects also appear more rapidly.
Other Disorders. Childhood enuresis is often treated with imipramine.
Peptic ulcer disease can be treated with doxepin, which has marked
antihistaminergic effects. Other indications for the TCAs are narcolepsy,
nightmare disorder, and PTSD. The drugs are sometimes used for the
treatment of children and adolescents with ADHD, sleepwalking disorder,
separation anxiety disorder, and sleep terror disorder. Clomipramine has also
been used to treat premature ejaculation, movement disorders, and
compulsive behavior in children with autistic disorders; however, because the
TCAs have caused sudden death in several children and adolescents, they
should not be used in children.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
The TCAs are associated with a wide range of problematic side effects and
can be lethal when taken in overdose.
Psychiatric Effects. The TCAs can induce a switch to mania or
hypomania in susceptible individuals. The TCAs may also exacerbate
psychotic disorders in susceptible persons. At high plasma concentrations
(levels above 300 ng/mL), the anticholinergic effects of the TCAs can cause
confusion or delirium. Patients with dementia are particularly vulnerable to


<<<PAGE 2026>>>
this development.
Anticholinergic Effects. Anticholinergic effects often limit the tolerable
dosage to relatively low ranges. Some persons may develop a tolerance for
the anticholinergic effects with continued treatment. Anticholinergic effects
include dry mouth, constipation, blurred vision, delirium, and urinary
retention. Sugarless gum, candy, or fluoride lozenges can alleviate dry
mouth. Bethanechol (Urecholine), 25 to 50 mg three or four times a day, may
reduce urinary hesitancy and may be helpful in erectile dysfunction when the
drug is taken 30 minutes before sexual intercourse. Anticholinergic drugs can
also aggravate narrow-angle glaucoma, and the precipitation of glaucoma
requires emergency treatment with a miotic agent. The TCAs should be
avoided in persons with narrow-angle glaucoma, and an SSRI should be
substituted. Severe anticholinergic effects can lead to CNS anticholinergic
syndrome. This syndrome includes symptoms of confusion and delirium,
especially if the TCAs are administered with DRAs or anticholinergic drugs.
IM or IV physostigmine (Antilirium, Eserine) is used to diagnose and treat
anticholinergic delirium.
Cardiac Effects. When administered in their usual therapeutic dosages, the
TCAs may cause tachycardia, flattened T waves, prolonged QT intervals, and
depressed ST segments in the electrocardiographic (ECG) recording.
Imipramine has a quinidine-like effect at therapeutic plasma concentrations
and may reduce the number of premature ventricular contractions. Because
the drugs prolong conduction time, their use in persons with preexisting
conduction defects is contraindicated. In persons with a history of any type of
heart disease, the TCAs should be used only after SSRIs or other newer
antidepressants have been found ineffective, and if used, they should be
introduced at low dosages, with gradual increases in dosage and monitoring
of cardiac functions. All of the TCAs can cause tachycardia, which may
persist for months and is one of the most common reasons for drug
discontinuation, especially in younger persons. At high plasma
concentrations, as seen in overdoses, the drugs become arrhythmogenic.
Other Autonomic Effects. Orthostatic hypotension is the most common
cardiovascular autonomic adverse effect, and the most common reason TCAs


<<<PAGE 2027>>>
are discontinued. It can result in falls and injuries in affected persons.
Nortriptyline may be the drug least likely to cause this problem. Orthostatic
hypotension is treated with avoidance of caffeine, intake of at least 2 L of
fluid per day, and addition of salt to the diet unless the person is being treated
for hypertension. In persons taking antihypertensive agents, reduction of the
dosage may reduce the risk of orthostatic hypotension. Other possible
autonomic effects are profuse sweating, palpitations, and increased BP.
Although some persons respond to fludrocortisone (Florinef), 0.02 to 0.05 mg
twice a day, the drug has potential toxicities. It is preferable to substitute an
SSRI than to use a mineralocorticoid such as fludrocortisone. The TCAs’ use
should be discontinued several days before elective surgery because of the
occurrence of hypertensive episodes during surgery in persons receiving
TCAs.
Sedation. Sedation is a common effect of the TCAs and may be welcomed
if sleeplessness has been a problem. The sedative effect of the TCAs is a
result of anticholinergic and antihistaminergic activities. Amitriptyline,
trimipramine, and doxepin are the most sedating agents; imipramine,
amoxapine, nortriptyline, and maprotiline are less sedating; and desipramine
and protriptyline are the least sedating agents.
Neurologic Effects. A fine, rapid tremor may occur. Myoclonic twitches
and tremors of the tongue and the upper extremities are common. Rare effects
include speech blockage, paresthesia, peroneal palsies, and ataxia.
Amoxapine is unique in causing parkinsonian symptoms, akathisia, and
even dyskinesia because of the dopaminergic blocking activity of one of its
metabolites. Amoxapine may also cause neuroleptic malignant syndrome in
rare cases. Maprotiline may cause seizures when the dosage is increased too
quickly or is kept at high levels for too long. Clomipramine and amoxapine
may lower the seizure threshold more than other drugs in the class. As a
class, however, the TCAs have a relatively low risk for inducing seizures
except in persons who are at risk for seizures (e.g., persons with epilepsy and
those with brain lesions). Although such persons can still use the TCAs, the
initial dosages should be lower than usual, and subsequent dosage increases
should be gradual.


<<<PAGE 2028>>>
Allergic and Hematologic Effects. Exanthematous rashes are seen in 4
to 5 percent of all persons treated with maprotiline. Jaundice is rare.
Agranulocytosis, leukocytosis, leukopenia, and eosinophilia are rare
complications of TCA treatment. However, a person who has a sore throat or
a fever during the first few months of TCA treatment should have a CBC
done immediately.
Hepatic Effects. Mild and self-limited increases in serum transaminase
concentrations may occur and should be monitored. The TCAs can also
produce a fulminant acute hepatitis in 0.1 to 1 percent of persons. This side
effect can be life-threatening, and the antidepressant should be discontinued.
Other Adverse Effects. Modest weight gain is typical. Amoxapine exerts
a DRA effect and may cause hyperprolactinemia, impotence, galactorrhea,
anorgasmia, and ejaculatory disturbances. Other TCAs have also been
associated with gynecomastia and amenorrhea. The syndrome of
inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone has also been reported with
TCAs. Other effects include nausea, vomiting, and hepatitis.
TERATOGENICITY AND PREGNANCY-RELATED RISKS. A definitive link between

the tricyclic compounds and tetracyclic compounds and teratogenic effects
has not been established, but isolated reports of morphogenesis have been
reported. TCAs cross the placenta, and neonatal drug withdrawal can occur.
This syndrome includes tachypnea, cyanosis, irritability, and poor sucking
reflex. If possible, tricyclic and tetracyclic medications should be
discontinued 1 week before delivery. Recently, norepinephrine and serotonin
transporters have been identified in the placenta. They appear to play an
essential role in the clearance of these amines in the fetus. The understanding
of the effects of reuptake inhibitors on these transporters during pregnancy is
limited. However, one study compared intelligence and language
development in 80 children exposed to TCAs during pregnancy with 84
children exposed to other nonteratogenic agents and found no deleterious
effects of the TCAs. The TCAs are excreted in breast milk at concentrations
similar to plasma. The actual quantity delivered, however, is small, so drug
levels in the infant are usually undetectable or very low. Because the risk of
relapse is a serious concern in patients with recurrent depression, and these


<<<PAGE 2029>>>
risks may be increased during pregnancy or the postpartum period, the risks
and benefits of continuing or withdrawing treatment need to be discussed
with the patient and weighed carefully.
Precautions. The TCAs may cause a withdrawal syndrome in newborns
consisting of tachypnea, cyanosis, irritability, and poor sucking reflex. The
drugs do pass into breast milk but at concentrations that are usually
undetectable in the infant’s plasma. We should use these drugs cautiously in
patients with hepatic or renal diseases. The TCAs should not be administered
during a course of ECT, primarily because of the risk of serious adverse
cardiac effects.
Drug Interactions
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors. The TCAs should not be taken within
14 days of administration of an MAOI.
Antihypertensives. The TCAs block the therapeutic effects of
antihypertensive medication. The TCAs may block the antihypertensive
effects of the β-adrenergic receptor antagonists (e.g., propranolol [Inderal]
and clonidine [Catapres]). The coadministration of a TCA and α-methyldopa
(Aldomet) may cause behavioral agitation.
Antiarrhythmic Drugs. The antiarrhythmic properties of TCAs can be
additive to those of quinidine, an effect that is further exacerbated by the
inhibition of TCA metabolism by quinidine.
Dopamine Receptor Antagonists. Concurrent administration of TCAs
and DRAs increases the plasma concentrations of both drugs. Desipramine
plasma concentrations may increase twofold during concurrent administration
with perphenazine (Trilafon). The DRAs also add to the anticholinergic and
sedative effects of the TCAs. Concomitant use of SDAs also increases those
effects.
Central Nervous System Depressants. Opioids, alcohol, anxiolytics,
hypnotics, and over-the-counter cold medications have additive effects by
causing CNS depression when coadministered with TCAs. Persons should be


<<<PAGE 2030>>>
advised to avoid driving or using dangerous equipment if sedated by TCAs.
Sympathomimetics. Tricyclic drug use with sympathomimetic drugs may
cause serious cardiovascular effects.
Oral Contraceptives. Birth control pills may decrease TCA plasma
concentrations through the induction of hepatic enzymes.
Other Drug Interactions. Nicotine may reduce TCA concentrations.
Plasma concentrations may also be lowered by ascorbic acid, ammonium
chloride, barbiturates, cigarette smoking, carbamazepine, chloral hydrate,
lithium (Eskalith), and primidone (Mysoline). TCA plasma concentrations
may be increased by concurrent use of acetazolamide (Diamox), sodium
bicarbonate, acetylsalicylic acid, cimetidine, thiazide diuretics, fluoxetine,
paroxetine, and fluvoxamine (Luvox). Plasma concentrations of the TCAs
may rise three- to fourfold when administered concurrently with fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, and paroxetine.
Laboratory Interferences
The tricyclic compounds are present at low concentrations and are not likely
to interfere with other laboratory assays. They may interfere with the
determination of conventional neuroleptic blood concentrations because of
their structural similarity and the low concentrations of some neuroleptics.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Persons who intend to take TCAs should undergo routine physical and
laboratory examinations, including a CBC, a WBC count with differential,
and serum electrolytes with liver function tests. An ECG should be obtained
for all persons, especially women older than 40 years of age and men older
than 30 years of age. The TCAs are contraindicated in persons with a QTc
greater than 450 milliseconds. The initial dose should be small and should be
raised gradually. Because of the availability of highly effective alternatives to
TCAs, a newer agent should be used if there is any medical condition that
may interact adversely with the TCAs.
Elderly persons and children are more sensitive to TCA adverse effects


<<<PAGE 2031>>>
than are young adults. In children, the ECG should be regularly monitored
during the use of a TCA.
The available preparations of TCAs are presented in Table 21-20. The
dosages and therapeutic blood levels for the TCAs vary among the drugs
(Table 21-21). Except for protriptyline, all of the TCAs should be started at
25 mg a day and increased as tolerated. Divided doses at first reduce the
severity of the adverse effects, although most of the dosage should be given
at night to help induce sleep if a sedating drug such as amitriptyline is used.
Eventually, the entire daily dose can be given at bedtime. A common clinical
mistake is to stop increasing the dosage when the person is tolerating the drug
but taking less than the maximum therapeutic dose and does not show clinical
improvement. The clinician should routinely assess the person’s pulse and
orthostatic changes in BP while the dosage is being increased.
Nortriptyline use should be started at 25 mg a day. Most patients need only
75 mg a day to achieve a blood level of 100 mg/nL. However, the dosage
may be raised to 150 mg a day if needed. Amoxapine use should be started at
150 mg a day and raised to 400 mg a day. Protriptyline use should be started
at 15 mg a day and raised to 60 mg a day. Maprotiline has been associated
with an increased incidence of seizures. This risk is most significant if the
dosage is raised too quickly or is maintained at too high a level. Maprotiline
use should be started at 25 mg a day and increased over 4 weeks to 225 mg a
day. It should be kept at that level for only 6 weeks and then be reduced to
175 to 200 mg a day.
Persons with chronic pain may be particularly sensitive to adverse effects
when TCA use is started. Therefore, treatment should begin with low dosages
that are raised in small increments. However, persons with chronic pain may
experience relief on long-term low-dosage therapy, such as amitriptyline or
nortriptyline at 10 to 75 mg a day.
Table 21-21
General Information for the Tricyclic and Tetracyclic
Antidepressants
Generic
Name

Trade Name Usual Adult
Dosage Range
(mg/day)

Therapeutic Plasma
Concentrations
(µg/mL)


<<<PAGE 2032>>>
Imipramine

Tofranil

150–300

150–300a

Desipramine

Norpramin,
150–300
Pertofrane

150–300a

Trimipramine Surmontil

150–300

150–300

Amitriptyline

Elavil, Endep 150–300

100–250b

Nortriptyline

Pamelor,
Aventyl

50–150

50–150a (maximum)

Protriptyline

Vivactil

15–60

75–250

Amoxapine

Asendin

150–400

200–500c

Doxepin

Adapin,
Sinequan

150–300

100–250a

Maprotiline

Ludiomil

150–230

150–300a

Clomipramine Anafranil

130–250

50 to 250c

aExact range may vary among laboratories.
bIncludes parent compound and desmethyl metabolite.
cEstimated from limited studies.

The TCAs should be avoided in children except as a last resort. Dosing
guidelines in children for imipramine include initiation at 1.5 mg/kg a day.
The dosage can be titrated to no more than 5 mg/kg a day. In enuresis, the
dosage is usually 50 to 100 mg a day, taken at bedtime. Clomipramine use
can be initiated at 50 mg a day and increased to no more than 3 mg/kg per
day or 200 mg a day.
When TCA treatment is discontinued, the dosage should first be decreased
to three-fourths the maximal dosage for a month. At that time, if no
symptoms are present, drug use can be tapered by 25 mg (5 mg for
protriptyline) every 4 to 7 days. Slow tapering avoids a cholinergic rebound
syndrome consisting of nausea, upset stomach, sweating, headache, neck
pain, and vomiting. This syndrome can be treated by reinstituting a small
dosage of the drug and tapering more slowly than before. Several case reports
note the appearance of rebound mania or hypomania after the abrupt


<<<PAGE 2033>>>
discontinuation of TCA use.
Plasma Concentrations and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring.
Clinical determinations of plasma concentrations should be conducted after 5
to 7 days on the same dosage of medication and 8 to 12 hours after the last
dose. Because of variations in absorption and metabolism, there may be a 30to 50-fold difference in the plasma concentrations in persons given the same
dosage of a TCA. Nortriptyline is unique in its association with a therapeutic
window—that is, plasma concentrations below 50 ng/mL or above 150
ng/mL may reduce its efficacy.
Plasma concentrations may be useful in confirming compliance, assessing
reasons for drug failures, and documenting effective plasma concentrations
for future treatment. Clinicians should always treat the person and not the
plasma concentration. Some persons have adequate clinical responses with
seemingly subtherapeutic plasma concentrations, and other persons only
respond at supratherapeutic plasma concentrations without experiencing
adverse effects. The latter situation, however, should alert the clinician to
monitor the person’s condition with, for example, serial ECG recordings.
Overdose Attempts. Overdose attempts with TCAs are severe and can
often be fatal. Prescriptions for these drugs should be nonrefillable and for no
longer than 1 week at a time for patients at risk for suicide. Amoxapine may
be more likely than the other TCAs to result in death when taken in overdose.
The newer antidepressants are safer in overdose.
Symptoms of overdose include agitation, delirium, convulsions,
hyperactive deep tendon reflexes, bowel and bladder paralysis, dysregulation
of BP and temperature, and mydriasis. The patient then progresses to coma
and perhaps respiratory depression. Cardiac arrhythmias may not respond to
treatment. Because of the long half-lives of TCAs, the patients are at risk of
cardiac arrhythmias for 3 to 4 days after the overdose, so they should be
monitored in intensive care medical settings.

MONOAMINE OXIDASE INHIBITORS
Introduced in the late 1950s, MAOIs were the first class of approved
antidepressant drugs. The first of these drugs, isoniazid, was intended to be


<<<PAGE 2034>>>
used as a treatment for tuberculosis, but its antidepressant properties were
discovered by chance when some treated patients experienced elevation of
mood during treatment. Despite their effectiveness, prescription of MAOIs as
first-line agents has always been limited by concern about the development of
potentially lethal hypertension and the consequent need for a restrictive diet.
The use of MAOIs declined further after the introduction of the SSRIs and
other new agents. They are now mainly relegated to use in treatment-resistant
cases. Thus, the second-line status of MAOIs has less to do with
considerations of efficacy than with safety concerns. The currently available
MAOIs
include
phenelzine
(Nardil),
isocarboxazid
(Marplan),
tranylcypromine (Parnate), rasagiline (Azilect), moclobemide (Manerix), and
selegiline (Eldepryl).
Two subsequent advances in the field of antidepressant MAOIs involve the
introduction of a selective reversible inhibitor of MAOA (RIMA),
moclobemide (Manerix), in the early 1990s into most countries except the
United States, and in 2005, the introduction of a transdermal delivery form of
selegiline (Emsam) in the United States that is used for the treatment of
parkinsonism. Other RIMA agents, including brofaromine (Consonar) and
befloxatone, have not been submitted for registration despite favorable
outcomes in clinical trials.
Pharmacologic Actions
Phenelzine, tranylcypromine, and isocarboxazid are readily absorbed after
oral administration and reach peak plasma concentrations within 2 hours.
Whereas their plasma half-lives are in the range of 2 to 3 hours, their tissue
half-lives are considerably longer. Because they irreversibly inactivate
MAOs, the therapeutic effect of a single dose of irreversible MAOIs may
persist for as long as 2 weeks. The RIMA moclobemide is rapidly absorbed
and has a half-life of 0.5 to 3.5 hours. Because it is a reversible inhibitor,
moclobemide has a much briefer clinical effect after a single dose than do
irreversible MAOIs.
The MAO enzymes are found on the outer membranes of mitochondria,
where they degrade cytoplasmic and extraneuronal monoamine
neurotransmitters such as norepinephrine, serotonin, dopamine, epinephrine,
and tyramine. MAOIs act in the CNS, the sympathetic nervous system, the


<<<PAGE 2035>>>
liver, and the GI tract. There are two types of MAOs, MAOA and MAOB.
MAOA primarily metabolizes norepinephrine, serotonin, and epinephrine;
both MAOA and MAOB metabolize dopamine and tyramine.
The structures of phenelzine and tranylcypromine are similar to those of
amphetamine and have similar pharmacologic effects in that they increase the
release of dopamine and norepinephrine with attendant stimulant effects on
the brain.
Therapeutic Indications
MAOIs are used for the treatment of depression. Some research indicates that
phenelzine is more effective than TCAs in depressed patients with mood
reactivity, extreme sensitivity to interpersonal loss or rejection, prominent
anergia, hyperphagia, and hypersomnia—a constellation of symptoms
conceptualized as atypical depression. Evidence also suggests that MAOIs
are more effective than TCAs as a treatment for bipolar depression.
Patients with panic disorder and social phobia respond well to MAOIs.
MAOIs have also been used to treat bulimia nervosa, PTSD, anginal pain,
atypical facial pain, migraine, ADHD, idiopathic orthostatic hypotension, and
depression associated with traumatic brain injury.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
The most frequent adverse effects of MAOIs are orthostatic hypotension,
insomnia, weight gain, edema, and sexual dysfunction. Orthostatic
hypotension can lead to dizziness and falls. Thus, cautious upward tapering
of the dosage should be used to determine the maximum tolerable dosage.
Treatment for orthostatic hypotension includes avoidance of caffeine; intake
of 2 L of fluid per day; addition of dietary salt or adjustment of
antihypertensive drugs (if applicable); support stockings; and in severe cases,
treatment with fludrocortisone (Florinef), a mineralocorticoid, 0.1 to 0.2 mg a
day. Orthostatic hypotension associated with tranylcypromine use can usually
be relieved by dividing the daily dosage.
Insomnia can be treated by dividing the dose, not giving the medication
after dinner, and using a benzodiazepine hypnotic if necessary. Weight gain,
edema, and sexual dysfunction often do not respond to any treatment and
may warrant switching to another agent. When switching from one MAOI to


<<<PAGE 2036>>>
another, the clinician should taper and stop the use of the first drug for 10 to
14 days before beginning the use of the second drug.
Paresthesias, myoclonus, and muscle pains are occasionally seen in
persons treated with MAOIs. Paresthesias may be secondary to MAOIinduced pyridoxine deficiency, which may respond to supplementation with
pyridoxine, 50 to 150 mg orally each day. Occasionally, persons complain of
feeling drunk or confused, perhaps indicating that the dosage should be
reduced and then increased gradually. Reports that the hydrazine MAOIs are
associated with hepatotoxic effects are relatively uncommon. MAOIs are less
cardiotoxic and less epileptogenic than are the tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs.
The most common adverse effects of the RIMA moclobemide are
dizziness, nausea, and insomnia or sleep disturbance. RIMAs cause fewer GI
adverse effects than do SSRIs. Moclobemide does not have adverse
anticholinergic or cardiovascular effects, and it has not been reported to
interfere with sexual function.
MAOIs should be used with caution by persons with renal disease,
cardiovascular disease, or hyperthyroidism. MAOIs may alter the dosage of a
hypoglycemic agent required by persons with diabetes. MAOIs have been
significantly associated with the induction of mania in persons in the
depressed phase of bipolar I disorder and triggering a psychotic
decompensation in persons with schizophrenia. MAOIs are contraindicated
during pregnancy, although data on their teratogenic risk are minimal.
Nursing women should not take MAOIs because the drugs can pass into
breast milk.
Tyramine-Induced Hypertensive Crisis. The most worrisome side
effect of MAOIs is the tyramine-induced hypertensive crisis. The amino acid
tyramine is usually transformed via GI metabolism. However, MAOIs
inactivate GI metabolism of dietary tyramine, thus allowing intact tyramine
to enter the circulation. A hypertensive crisis may subsequently occur as a
result of a powerful pressor effect of the amino acid. Tyramine-containing
foods should be avoided for 2 weeks after the last dose of an irreversible
MAOI to allow the resynthesis of adequate concentrations of MAO enzymes.
Accordingly, foods rich in tyramine (Table 21-22) or other
sympathomimetic amines, such as ephedrine, pseudoephedrine (Sudafed), or
dextromethorphan (Trocal), should be avoided by persons who are taking


<<<PAGE 2037>>>
irreversible MAOIs. Patients should be advised to continue the dietary
restrictions for 2 weeks after they stop MAOI treatment to allow the body to
resynthesize the enzyme. Bee stings may cause a hypertensive crisis. In
addition to severe hypertension, other symptoms may include headache, stiff
neck, diaphoresis, nausea, and vomiting. A patient with these symptoms
should seek immediate medical treatment.
Table 21-22
Tyramine-Rich Foods to Be Avoided in Planning Monoamine
Oxidase Inhibitor Diets
High Tyramine Contenta (≥2 mg of tyramine a serving)
Cheese: English Stilton, blue cheese, white (3 yr old), extra old,
old cheddar, Danish blue, mozzarella, cheese snack spreads
Fish, cured meats, sausage; pâtés and organs, salami,
mortadella, air-dried sausage
Alcoholic beveragesb: Liqueurs and concentrated after-dinner
drinks
Marmite (concentrated yeast extract)
Sauerkraut (Krakus)
Moderate Tyramine Contenta (0.5–1.99 mg of tyramine a serving)
Cheese: Swiss Gruyere, muenster, feta, parmesan, gorgonzola,
blue cheese dressing, Black Diamond
Fish, cured meats, sausage, pâtés and organs: Chicken liver (5
days old); bologna; aged sausage, smoked meat; salmon
mousse
Alcoholic beverages: Beer and ale (12 oz per bottle)—Amstel,
Export Draft, Blue Light, Guinness Extra Stout, Old Vienna,
Canadian, Miller Light, Export, Heineken, Blue Wines (per 4oz glass)—Rioja (red wine)
Low Tyramine Contenta (0.01 to >0.49 mg of tyramine a serving)
Cheese: Brie, Camembert, Cambozola with or without rind
Fish, cured meat, sausage, organs, and pâtés; pickled herring;
smoked fish; kielbasa sausage; chicken liver; liverwurst (<2
days old)
Alcoholic beverages: Red wines, sherry, scotchc


<<<PAGE 2038>>>
Others: Banana or avocado (ripe or not), banana peel
aAny food left out to age or spoil can spontaneously develop tyramine through fermentation.
bAlcohol can produce profound orthostasis interacting with monoamine oxidase inhibitors

(MAOIs) but cannot produce direct hypotensive reactions.
cWhite wines, gin, and vodka have no tyramine content.
Table by Jonathan M. Himmelhoch, M.D.

An MAOI-induced hypertensive crisis should be treated with α-adrenergic
antagonists—for example, phentolamine (Regitine) or chlorpromazine
(Thorazine). These drugs lower BP within 5 minutes. IV furosemide (Lasix)
can be used to reduce fluid load, and a β-adrenergic receptor antagonist can
control tachycardia. A sublingual 10-mg dose of nifedipine (Procardia) can
be given and repeated after 20 minutes. Persons with thyrotoxicosis or
pheochromocytoma should not use MAOIs.
The risk of tyramine-induced hypertensive crises is relatively low for
persons who are taking RIMAs, such as moclobemide and befloxatone. These
drugs have relatively little inhibitory activity for MAOB, and because they are
reversible, regular activity of existing MAOA returns within 16 to 48 hours of
the last dose of a RIMA. Therefore, the dietary restrictions are less stringent
for RIMAs, applying only to foods containing high concentrations of
tyramine, which need to be avoided for 3 days after the last dose of a RIMA.
A reasonable dietary recommendation for persons taking RIMAs is to avoid
eating tyramine-containing foods 1 hour before and 2 hours after taking a
RIMA.
Spontaneous, nontyramine-induced hypertensive crisis is a rare occurrence,
usually shortly after the first exposure of an MAOI. Persons experiencing
such a crisis should avoid MAOIs altogether.
Withdrawal. Abrupt cessation of regular doses of MAOIs may cause a selflimited discontinuation syndrome consisting of arousal, mood disturbances,
and somatic symptoms. Dosages should be gradually tapered over several
weeks to avoid these symptoms.
Overdose. It often takes 1 to 6 hours after an overdose for the toxic
symptoms to occur. MAOI overdose is characterized by agitation that can
progress to coma with hyperthermia, hypertension, tachypnea, tachycardia,


<<<PAGE 2039>>>
dilated pupils, and hyperactive deep tendon reflexes. Involuntary movements
may be present, particularly in the face and the jaw. Acidification of the urine
markedly hastens the excretion of MAOIs, and dialysis can be of some use.
Phentolamine or chlorpromazine may be useful if hypertension is a problem.
Moclobemide alone in overdosage causes relatively mild and reversible
symptoms.
Drug Interactions
The significant drug–drug interactions involving MAOIs are listed in Table
21-23. Most antidepressants, as well as precursor agents, should be avoided.
Persons should be instructed to tell any other physicians or dentists who are
treating them that they are taking an MAOI. MAOIs may potentiate the
action of CNS depressants, including alcohol and barbiturates. MAOIs should
not be coadministered with serotonergic drugs, such as SSRIs and
clomipramine (Anafranil), because this combination can trigger serotonin
syndrome. The use of lithium or tryptophan with an irreversible MAOI may
also induce serotonin syndrome. Initial symptoms of serotonin syndrome can
include tremor, hypertonicity, myoclonus, and autonomic signs, which can
then progress to hallucinosis, hyperthermia, and even death. Fatal reactions
had occurred when MAOIs were combined with meperidine (Demerol) or
fentanyl (Sublimaze).
Table 21-23
Drugs to Be Avoided during Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitor
Treatment (Partial Listing)
Never Use
Antiasthmatics
Antihypertensives (methyldopa, guanethidine, reserpine)
Buspirone
Levodopa
Opioids (especially meperidine, dextromethorphan,
propoxyphene, tramadol; morphine or codeine may be less
dangerous)
Cold, allergy, or sinus medications containing dextromethorphan


<<<PAGE 2040>>>
or sympathomimetics
SSRIs, clomipramine, venlafaxine, sibutramine
Sympathomimetics (amphetamines, cocaine, methylphenidate,
dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, isoproterenol,
ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine)
L-Tryptophan
Use Carefully
Anticholinergics
Antihistamines
Disulfiram
Bromocriptine
Hydralazine
Sedative-hypnotics
Terpin hydrate with codeine
Tricyclics and tetracyclics (avoid clomipramine)
SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.

When switching from an irreversible MAOI to any other type of
antidepressant drug, persons should wait at least 14 days after the last dose of
the MAOI before beginning the use of the next drug to allow replenishment
of the body’s MAOs. When switching from an antidepressant to an
irreversible MAOI, persons should wait 10 to 14 days (or 5 weeks for
fluoxetine [Prozac]) before starting the use of the MAOI to avoid drug–drug
interactions. In contrast, MAO activity recovers completely 24 to 48 hours
after the last dose of a RIMA.
The effects of the MAOIs on hepatic enzymes are poorly studied.
Tranylcypromine inhibits CYP2C19. Moclobemide inhibits CYP2D6,
CYP2C19, and CYP1A2 and is a substrate for 2C19.
Cimetidine (Tagamet) and fluoxetine significantly reduce the elimination
of moclobemide. Modest doses of fluoxetine and moclobemide administered
concurrently may be well tolerated, with no significant pharmacodynamic or
pharmacokinetic interactions.
Laboratory Interferences
MAOIs may lower blood glucose concentrations. MAOIs artificially raise


<<<PAGE 2041>>>
urinary metanephrine concentrations and may cause a false-positive test
result for pheochromocytoma or neuroblastoma. MAOIs have been reported
to be associated with a minimal false elevation in thyroid function test results.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
There is no definitive rationale for choosing one irreversible MAOI over
another. Table 21-24 lists MAOI preparations and typical dosages.
Phenelzine use should begin with a test dose of 15 mg on the first day. The
dosage can be increased to 15 mg three times daily during the first week and
increased by 15 mg a day each week after that until the dosage of 90 mg a
day, in divided doses, is reached by the end of the fourth week.
Tranylcypromine and isocarboxazid use should begin with a test dosage of 10
mg and may be increased to 10 mg three times daily by the end of the first
week. Many clinicians and researchers have recommended upper limits of 50
mg a day for isocarboxazid and 40 mg a day for tranylcypromine.
Administration of tranylcypromine in multiple small daily doses may reduce
its hypotensive effects.
Table 21-24
Typical Dosage Forms and Recommended Dosages for
Currently Available Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
Drug

Usual Dose
(mg/day)

Maximum Dose Dosage (Oral)
(mg/day)
Formulation

Isocarboxazid
(Marplan)

20–40

60

10-mg tablets

Phenelzine
(Nardil)

30–60

90

15-mg tablets

Tranylcypromine
(Parnate)

20–60

60

10-mg tablets

Rasagiline

0.5–1.0

1.0

0.5- or 1.0-mg
tablets

Selegiline

10

30

5-mg tablets


<<<PAGE 2042>>>
(Eldepryl)
Moclobemide
(Manerix)

300–600

600

100- or 150-mg
tablets

Even though coadministration of MAOIs with TCAs, SSRIs, or lithium is
generally contraindicated, these combinations have been used successfully
and safely to treat patients with refractory depression. However, they should
be used with extreme caution.
Hepatic transaminase serum concentrations should be monitored
periodically because of the potential for hepatotoxicity, especially with
phenelzine and isocarboxazid. Elderly persons may be more sensitive to
MAOI adverse effects than are younger adults. MAO activity increases with
age, so MAOI dosages for elderly persons are the same as those required for
younger adults. We know little about using MAOIs in children.
Studies have suggested that transdermal selegiline has antidepressant
properties. Although selegiline is a type B inhibitor at low doses, it becomes
less selective as the dose is increased.

THYROID HORMONES
Thyroid hormones—levothyroxine (Synthroid, Levothroid, Levoxine) and
liothyronine (Cytomel)—are used in psychiatry either alone or as an
augmentation to treat persons with depression or rapid-cycling bipolar I
disorder. They can convert an antidepressant-nonresponsive person into an
antidepressant-responsive person. Thyroid hormones are also used as
replacement therapy for persons treated with lithium (Eskalith) who have
developed a hypothyroid state. Successful use of thyroid hormone as an
intervention for treatment-resistant patients was first reported in the early
1970s. Study results since then have been mixed; however, most show that
patients taking triiodothyronine (T3) are twice as likely to respond to
antidepressant treatment versus placebo. These studies have found that
augmentation with T3 is significant with TCAs and SSRIs. Nevertheless,
many endocrinologists object to the use of thyroid hormones as
antidepressant augmentation agents, citing such risks as osteoporosis and
cardiac arrhythmias.


<<<PAGE 2043>>>
Pharmacologic Actions
Thyroid hormones are administered orally, and their absorption from the GI
tract is variable. Absorption is increased if the drug is administered on an
empty stomach. Thyroxine (T4) crosses the blood–brain barrier and diffuses
into neurons, where it is converted into T3, which is the physiologically
active form. The half-life of T4 is 6 to 7 days, and that of T3 is 1 to 2 days.
The mechanism of action for thyroid hormone effects on antidepressant
efficacy is unknown. Thyroid hormone binds to intracellular receptors that
regulate the transcription of a wide range of genes, including several
receptors for neurotransmitters.
Therapeutic Indications
The primary indication for thyroid hormones in psychiatry is as an adjuvant
to antidepressants. There is no clear correlation between the laboratory
measures of thyroid function and the response to thyroid hormone
supplementation of antidepressants. If a patient has not responded to a 6week course of antidepressants at appropriate dosages, adjuvant therapy with
either lithium or a thyroid hormone is an alternative. Most clinicians use
adjuvant lithium before trying a thyroid hormone. Several controlled trials
have indicated that liothyronine use converts about 50 percent of
antidepressant nonresponders to responders.
The dosage of liothyronine is 25 or 50 µg a day added to the patient’s
antidepressant regimen. Liothyronine has been used primarily as an adjuvant
for tricyclic drugs; however, evidence suggests that liothyronine augments
the effects of all of the antidepressant drugs.
Thyroid hormones have not been shown to cause particular problems in
pediatric or geriatric patients; however, the hormones should be used with
caution in elderly persons who may have occult heart disease.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
At the dosages usually used for augmentation—25 to 50 µg a day—adverse
effects occur infrequently. The most common adverse effects associated with
thyroid hormones are transient headache, weight loss, palpitations,
nervousness, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, sweating, tachycardia, increased


<<<PAGE 2044>>>
BP, tremors, and insomnia. Osteoporosis may also occur with long-term
treatment, but this has not been found in studies involving liothyronine
augmentation. Overdoses of thyroid hormones can lead to cardiac failure and
death.
Patients with cardiac disease, angina, or hypertension should not take
thyroid hormones. The hormones are contraindicated in thyrotoxicosis and
uncorrected adrenal insufficiency and persons with acute myocardial
infarctions. Thyroid hormones can be administered safely to pregnant
women, provided that laboratory thyroid indexes are monitored. Thyroid
hormones are minimally excreted in breast milk and have not been shown to
cause problems in nursing babies.
Drug Interactions
Thyroid hormones can potentiate the effects of warfarin (Coumadin) and
other anticoagulants by increasing the catabolism of clotting factors. They
may increase the insulin requirement for diabetic persons and the digitalis
requirement for persons with cardiac disease. We should not coadminister
with sympathomimetics, ketamine (Ketalar), or maprotiline (Ludiomil)
because of the risk of cardiac decompensation. Administration of SSRIs,
tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs, lithium, or carbamazepine (Tegretol) can
mildly lower serum T4 and raise serum thyrotropin concentrations in
euthyroid persons or persons taking thyroid replacements. This interaction
warrants close serum monitoring and may require an increase in the dosage
or initiation of thyroid hormone supplementation.
Laboratory Interferences
Levothyroxine has not been reported to interfere with any laboratory test
other than thyroid function indexes. Liothyronine, however, suppresses the
release of endogenous T4, thereby lowering the result of any thyroid function
test that depends on the measure of T4.
Thyroid Function Tests
Several thyroid function tests are available, including tests for T4 by
competitive protein binding (T4 [D]) and by radioimmunoassay (T4 RIA)


<<<PAGE 2045>>>
involving a specific antigen–antibody reaction. More than 90 percent of T4 is
bound to serum protein and is responsible for thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH) secretion and cellular metabolism. Other thyroid measures include the
free T4 index (FT4I), T3 uptake, and total serum T3 measured by
radioimmunoassay (T3 RIA). Those tests are used to rule out hypothyroidism,
which can be associated with symptoms of depression. In some studies, up to
10 percent of patients complaining of depression and associated fatigue had
an incipient hypothyroid disease. Lithium can cause hypothyroidism and,
more rarely, hyperthyroidism. Neonatal hypothyroidism results in intellectual
disability and is preventable if the diagnosis is made at birth.
Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone Stimulation Test. The thyrotropinreleasing hormone (TRH) stimulation test is indicated for patients who have
marginally abnormal thyroid test results with suspected subclinical
hypothyroidism, which may account for clinical depression. It is also used in
patients with possible lithium-induced hypothyroidism. The procedure entails
an intravenous injection of 500 mg of protirelin (TRH), which produces a
sharp increase in serum TSH levels are measured at 15, 30, 60, and 90
minutes. An increase in serum TSH of 5 to 25 mIU/mL above the baseline is
normal. An increase of less than 7 mIU/mL is considered a blunted response,
which may correlate with a diagnosis of depression. Eight percent of all
patients with depression have some thyroid illness.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Liothyronine is available in 5-, 25-, and 50-µg tablets. Levothyroxine is
available in 12.5-, 25-, 50-, 75-, 88-, 100-, 112-, 125-, 150-, 175-, 200-, and
300-µg tablets; it is also available in a 200 and 500 µg parenteral form. The
dosage of liothyronine is 25 or 50 µg a day added to the person’s
antidepressant regimen. Liothyronine has been used as an adjuvant for all of
the available antidepressant drugs. An adequate trial of liothyronine
supplementation should last 2 to 3 weeks. If liothyronine supplementation is
successful, it should be continued for 2 months and then tapered off at a rate
of 12.5 µg a day every 3 to 7 days.

NOVEL AGENTS


<<<PAGE 2046>>>
Several agents with novel mechanisms are currently approved for use. They
are usually given in specialized centers, and clinicians should only administer
after special training to manage their significant safety profile.
NMDA Receptor Antagonists
Ketamine, an anesthetic agent, is used in specialized centers for depression. It
has a unique action, as after a single low dose, much lower than the usual
anesthetic dose, it can produce rapid relief from depression. This effect often
occurs within 4 hours of IV administration. The effects persist for several
weeks, but then without additional intervention, the depression often relapses.
The drug has several significant side effects, including its general anesthetic
effect as well as its psychotomimetic effect. Most experts consider it safe at
lower doses; however, the clinical team should be ready to provide medical
treatment should the drug have a profound effect on a patient’s breathing or
cause significant bradycardia.
Ketamine’s enantiomer, esketamine (Ketanest), was approved by the FDA
for the treatment of depression in adults in 2019. It has the advantage over
ketamine, in that in addition to an injectable form, it is available as a nasal
spray. Esketamine’s mechanism of action is similar to ketamine’s, although
not identical; for example, both are noncompetitive NMDA receptor
antagonist and inhibit dopamine transporters. However, esketamine does not
act on the sigma receptors, which may account for part of ketamine’s
antidepressant effect. This lack of effect on sigma receptors is thought to
reduce the psychotomimetic properties of the drug. It must be provided in a
clinical setting that has the staff and facilities to observe the patient for at
least 2 hours following administration. The main side effects are sedation,
difficulties with vision and speaking, and cognitive effects, including
confusion, dissociation, and potentially delirium. It may also cause anxiety
and increased BP in some patients.
GABAA Allosteric Modulators
Brexanolone, also called allopregnanolone, was approved in the United States
in 2019 under the priority review process as a breakthrough therapy for the
treatment of postpartum depression. It is a neurosteroid which positively
modulates the GABAA receptor. It is also a negative allosteric modulator of


<<<PAGE 2047>>>
the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and may have action on serotonin HT3 as
well. The mechanism of its antidepressant effect is not clear, as other positive
allosteric modulators of GABAA, such as benzodiazepines, do not have a
significant antidepressant effect. However, like ketamine, it provides a rapid
response in patients who respond to the drug, usually within 2 to 3 days. We
know little about the long term efficacy of the drug.
The drug is marketed under the brand name Zulresso and is a Schedule IV
controlled substance. It is only available through a national registry and has
several other drawbacks limiting its widespread acceptance. One is its long
administration time, as the drug must be given by continuous IV infusion
over 60 hours, during which the dose is slowly increased. This extended
hospitalization is to prevent excess sedation or syncope.
Perhaps the most significant drawback of the medication is its cost.
Currently, the drug costs about $34,000 for a single dose, as well as the price
of remaining in a medical facility for 60 hours, and is not currently covered
by most insurance companies.

21.3 Mood Stabilizers
LITHIUM
The effectiveness of lithium for mania and the prophylactic treatment of
manic–depressive disorder was established in the early 1950s as a result of
research done by John F.J. Cade, an Australian psychiatrist. Concerns about
toxicity limited initial acceptance of lithium use in the United States, but its
use increased gradually in the late 1960s. It was not until 1970 that the FDA
approved its labeling for the treatment of mania. The only other approved
FDA indication came in 1974 when it was accepted as maintenance therapy
in patients with a history of mania. For several decades, lithium was the only
drug approved for both acute and maintenance treatment. It is also used as an
adjunctive medication in the treatment of MDD.
Lithium (Li), a monovalent ion, is a member of the group IA alkali metals
on the periodic table, a group that also includes sodium, potassium, rubidium,
cesium, and francium. Lithium exists in nature as both 6Li (7.42 percent) and


<<<PAGE 2048>>>
7Li (92.58 percent). The latter isotope allows the imaging of lithium by

magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Some 300 mg of lithium is contained in
1,597 mg of lithium carbonate (Li2CO3). Most lithium used in the United
States is obtained from dry lake mining in Chile and Argentina.
Pharmacologic Actions
Lithium is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral administration, with
peak serum concentrations occurring in 1 to 1.5 hours with standard
preparations and in 4 to 4.5 hours with slow-release and controlled-release
preparations. Lithium does not bind to plasma proteins, is not metabolized,
and is excreted through the kidneys. The plasma half-life is initially 1.3 days
and is 2.4 days after administration for more than 1 year. The blood–brain
barrier permits only the slow passage of lithium, which is why a single
overdose does not necessarily cause toxicity and why long-term lithium
intoxication is slow to resolve. The elimination half-life of lithium is 18 to 24
hours in young adults but is shorter in children and more prolonged in elderly
persons. Renal clearance of lithium is decreased with renal insufficiency.
Equilibrium is reached after 5 to 7 days of regular intake. Obesity is
associated with higher rates of lithium clearance. The excretion of lithium is
complex during pregnancy; excretion increases during pregnancy but
decreases after delivery. Lithium is excreted in breast milk and insignificant
amounts in the feces and sweat. Thyroid and renal concentrations of lithium
are higher than serum levels.
An explanation for the mood-stabilizing effects of lithium remains elusive.
Theories include alterations of ion transport and effects on neurotransmitters
and neuropeptides, signal transduction pathways, and second messenger
systems.
Therapeutic Indications
Bipolar I Disorder
MANIC EPISODES. Lithium controls acute mania and prevents relapse in about
80 percent of persons with bipolar I disorder and in a somewhat smaller
percentage of persons with mixed (mania and depression) episodes, rapidcycling bipolar disorder, or mood changes in encephalopathy. Lithium has a


<<<PAGE 2049>>>
relatively slow onset of action when used and exerts its antimanic effects over
1 to 3 weeks. Thus, a benzodiazepine, DRA, SDA, or valproic acid is usually
administered for the first few weeks. Patients with mixed or dysphoric mania,
rapid cycling, comorbid substance abuse, or organicity respond less well to
lithium than those with classic mania.
BIPOLAR DEPRESSION. Lithium is effective in the treatment of depression

associated with bipolar I disorder, as well as in the role of add-on therapy for
patients with severe MDD. Augmentation of lithium therapy with valproic
acid (Depakene) or carbamazepine (Tegretol) is usually well tolerated, with
little risk of precipitation of mania.
When a depressive episode occurs in a person taking maintenance lithium,
the differential diagnosis should include lithium-induced hypothyroidism,
substance abuse, and lack of compliance with lithium therapy. One approach
is to increase the lithium concentration (up to 1 to 1.2 mEq/L). Alternately we
may augment with valproate or carbamazepine. It may also help to add
supplemental thyroid hormone (e.g., 25 µg a day of liothyronine [Cytomel]),
even in the presence of normal findings on thyroid function tests.
Antidepressants or ECT are sometimes added judiciously. After the acute
depressive episode resolves, other therapies should be tapered in favor of
lithium monotherapy, if clinically tolerated.
MAINTENANCE. Maintenance treatment with lithium markedly decreases the

frequency, severity, and duration of manic and depressive episodes in persons
with bipolar I disorder. Lithium provides relatively more effective
prophylaxis for mania than for depression, and supplemental antidepressant
strategies may be necessary either intermittently or continuously. Lithium
maintenance is almost always indicated after the first episode of bipolar I
disorder, depression or mania, and should be considered after the first episode
for adolescents or for persons who have a family history of bipolar I disorder.
Others who benefit from lithium maintenance are those who have poor
support systems, had no precipitating factors for the first episode, have a high
suicide risk, had a sudden onset of the first episode, or had a first episode of
mania. Clinical studies have shown that lithium reduces the incidence of
suicide in bipolar I disorder patients six- or sevenfold. Lithium is also an
effective treatment for persons with severe cyclothymic disorder.


<<<PAGE 2050>>>
It is wise to initiate maintenance therapy after the first manic episode,
based on several observations. First, each episode of mania increases the risk
of subsequent episodes. Second, among people responsive to lithium,
relapses are 28 times more likely after lithium use is discontinued. Third, case
reports describe persons who initially responded to lithium, discontinued
taking it, and then had a relapse but no longer responded to lithium in
subsequent episodes. Continued maintenance treatment with lithium is often
associated with increased efficacy and reduced mortality. Therefore, an
episode of depression or mania that occurs after a relatively short time on
lithium maintenance does not necessarily represent treatment failure.
However, lithium treatment alone may begin to lose its effectiveness after
several years of successful use. If this occurs, then supplemental treatment
with carbamazepine or valproate may be useful.
Maintenance lithium dosages can often be adjusted to achieve plasma
concentration somewhat lower than that needed for the treatment of acute
mania. If lithium use is to be discontinued, then the dosage should be slowly
tapered. Abrupt discontinuation of lithium therapy is associated with an
increased risk of recurrence of manic and depressive episodes.
Major Depressive Disorder. Lithium is effective in the long-term
treatment of major depression, but it is not more effective than antidepressant
drugs. The most common role for lithium in MDD is as an adjuvant to
antidepressant use in persons who have failed to respond to the
antidepressants alone. About 50 to 60 percent of antidepressant
nonresponders do respond when lithium, 300 mg three times daily, is added
to the antidepressant regimen. In some cases, a response may be seen within
days, but most often, several weeks are required to see the efficacy of the
regimen. Lithium alone may effectively treat depressed persons who have
bipolar I disorder but have not yet had their first manic episode. Lithium has
been reported to be effective in persons with MDD whose disorder has
marked cyclicity.
Schizoaffective Disorder and Schizophrenia. Persons with prominent
mood symptoms—either bipolar type or depressive type—with
schizoaffective disorder are more likely to respond to lithium than those with
predominant psychotic symptoms. Although SDAs and DRAs are the


<<<PAGE 2051>>>
treatments of choice for persons with schizoaffective disorder, lithium is a
useful augmentation agent. This approach is particularly true for persons
whose symptoms are resistant to treatment with SDAs and DRAs. Lithium
augmentation of an SDA or DRA medication may be an effective treatment
for persons with schizoaffective disorder even in the absence of a prominent
mood disorder component. Some persons with schizophrenia who cannot
take antipsychotic drugs may benefit from lithium treatment alone.
Other Indications. Over the years, reports have appeared about the use of
lithium to treat a wide range of other psychiatric and nonpsychiatric
conditions (Tables 21-25 and 21-26). The effectiveness and safety of lithium
for most of these disorders have not been confirmed. Lithium has an antiaggressive activity that is separate from its effects on mood. Aggressive
outbursts in persons with schizophrenia, violent prison inmates, and children
with conduct disorder and aggression, or self-mutilation in persons with
intellectual disability, can sometimes be controlled with lithium.
Table 21-25
Psychiatric Uses of Lithium
Well established (FDA approved)
Bipolar disorder
Manic episode
Maintenance therapy
Reasonably well established
Bipolar I disorder, depressive episode
Bipolar II disorder
Rapid-cycling bipolar I disorder
Cyclothymic disorder
Major depressive disorder
Acute depression (as an augmenting agent)
Maintenance therapy
Schizoaffective disorder
Evidence of benefit in particular groups
Schizophrenia


<<<PAGE 2052>>>
Aggression (episodic), explosive behavior, and self-mutilation
Conduct disorder in children and adolescents
Intellectual disability
Cognitive disorders
Aggressive prisoners
Anecdotal, controversial, unresolved, or doubtful
Alcohol and other substance-related disorders
Cocaine abuse
Substance-induced mood disorder with manic features
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Phobias
Posttraumatic stress disorder
ADHD
Eating disorders
Anorexia nervosa
Bulimia nervosa
Impulse-control disorders
Kleine–Levin syndrome
Mental disorders caused by a general medical condition (e.g.,
mood disorder caused by a general medical condition with
manic features)
Periodic catatonia
Periodic hypersomnia
Personality disorders (e.g., antisocial, borderline, emotionally
unstable, schizotypal)
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
Sexual disorders
Transvestism
Exhibitionism
Pathologic hypersexuality
FDA, Food and Drug Administration; ADHD, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

Table 21-26
Nonpsychiatric Uses of Lithiuma


<<<PAGE 2053>>>
Neurologic
Epilepsy
Headache (chronic cluster, hypnic, migraine, particularly cyclic)
Ménière disease (not supported by controlled studies)
Movement disorders
Huntington disease
L-Dopa–induced hyperkinesias
On–off phenomenon in Parkinson disease (controlled study
found decreased akinesia but development of dyskinesia in a
few cases)
Spasmodic torticollis
Tardive dyskinesia (not supported by controlled studies, and
pseudoparkinsonism has been reported)
Tourette disorder
Pain (facial pain syndrome, painful shoulder syndrome,
fibromyalgia)
Periodic paralysis (hypokalemic and hypermagnesic but not
hyperkalemic)
Hematologic
Aplastic anemia
Cancer—chemotherapy-induced, radiotherapy-induced
Neutropenia (one study found increased risk of sudden death in
patients with preexisting cardiovascular disorder)
Drug-induced neutropenia (e.g., from carbamazepine,
antipsychotics, immunosuppressives, and zidovudine)
Felty syndrome
Leukemia
Endocrine
Thyroid cancer as an adjunct to radioactive iodine
Thyrotoxicosis
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
Cardiovascular
Antiarrhythmic agent (animal data only)
Dermatologic
Genital herpes (controlled studies support topical and oral use)


<<<PAGE 2054>>>
Eczematoid dermatitis
Seborrheic dermatitis (controlled study supports)
Gastrointestinal
Cyclic vomiting
Gastric ulcers
Pancreatic cholera
Ulcerative colitis
Respiratory
Asthma (controlled study did not support)
Cystic fibrosis
Other
Bovine spastic paresis
aAll the uses listed here do not have Food and Drug Administration(FDA)–approved labeling.

There are conflicting reports about many of these uses—some have negative findings in
controlled studies, and a few involve reports of possible adverse effects.
L-Dopa, levodopa.

Precautions and Adverse Effects
More than 80 percent of patients taking lithium experience side effects. It is
crucial to minimize the risk of adverse events through monitoring of lithium
blood levels and to use appropriate pharmacologic interventions to counteract
unwanted effects when they occur. The most common adverse effects are
summarized in Table 21-27. Patient education can play an essential role in
reducing the incidence and severity of side effects. Patients taking lithium
should be advised that changes in the body’s water and salt content can affect
the amount of lithium excreted, resulting in either increases or decreases in
lithium concentrations. Excessive sodium intake (e.g., a dramatic dietary
change) lowers lithium concentrations.
Table 21-27
Adverse Effects of Lithium
Neurologic
Benign, nontoxic: dysphoria, lack of spontaneity, slowed reaction
time, memory difficulties
Tremor: postural, occasional extrapyramidal


<<<PAGE 2055>>>
Toxic: coarse tremor, dysarthria, ataxia, neuromuscular
irritability, seizures, coma, death
Miscellaneous: peripheral neuropathy, benign intracranial
hypertension, myasthenia gravis–like syndrome, altered
creativity, lowered seizure threshold
Endocrine
Thyroid: goiter, hypothyroidism, exophthalmos, hyperthyroidism
(rare)
Parathyroid: hyperparathyroidism, adenoma
Cardiovascular
Benign T-wave changes, sinus node dysfunction
Renal
Concentrating defect, morphologic changes, polyuria
(nephrogenic diabetes insipidus), reduced GFR, nephrotic
syndrome, renal tubular acidosis
Dermatologic
Acne, hair loss, psoriasis, rash
Gastrointestinal
Appetite loss, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
Miscellaneous
Altered carbohydrate metabolism, weight gain, fluid retention
GFR, glomerular filtration rate.

Conversely, too little sodium (e.g., fad diets) can lead to potentially toxic
concentrations of lithium. Decreases in body fluid (e.g., excessive
perspiration) can lead to dehydration and lithium intoxication. Patients should
report whenever another clinician prescribes medications, because many
commonly used agents can affect lithium concentrations.
Cardiac Effects. Lithium can cause diffuse slowing, widening of the
frequency spectrum, and potentiation and disorganization of background
rhythm on electrocardiography (ECG). Bradycardia and cardiac arrhythmias
may occur, especially in people with cardiovascular disease. Lithium
infrequently reveals Brugada syndrome, an inherited, life-threatening heart
problem that some people may have without knowing it. It can cause a severe


<<<PAGE 2056>>>
abnormal heartbeat and other symptoms (such as severe dizziness, fainting,
shortness of breath) that need medical attention right away. Before starting
lithium treatment, clinicians should ask about known heart conditions,
unexplained fainting, and family history of problems or sudden unexplained
death before age 45.
Gastrointestinal Effects. GI symptoms—which include nausea,
decreased appetite, vomiting, and diarrhea—can be diminished by dividing
the dosage, administering the lithium with food, or switching to another
lithium preparation. The lithium preparation least likely to cause diarrhea is
lithium citrate. Some lithium preparations contain lactose, which can cause
diarrhea in lactose-intolerant persons. Persons taking slow-release
formulations of lithium who experience diarrhea caused by unabsorbed
medication in the lower part of the GI tract may experience less diarrhea than
with standard-release preparations. Diarrhea may also respond to
antidiarrheal preparations such as loperamide (Imodium, Kaopectate),
bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol), or diphenoxylate with atropine
(Lomotil).
Weight Gain. Weight gain results from a poorly understood effect of
lithium on carbohydrate metabolism. Weight gain can also result from
lithium-induced hypothyroidism, lithium-induced edema, or excessive
consumption of soft drinks and juices to quench lithium-induced thirst.
Neurologic Effects
TREMOR. A lithium-induced postural tremor may occur that is usually 8 to 12
Hz and is most notable in outstretched hands, especially in the fingers, and
during tasks involving fine manipulations. The tremor can be reduced by
dividing the daily dosage, using a sustained-release formulation, reducing
caffeine intake, reassessing the concomitant use of other medicines, and
treating comorbid anxiety. β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists, such as
propranolol, 30 to 120 mg a day in divided doses, and primidone (Mysoline),
50 to 250 mg a day, are usually effective in reducing the tremor. In persons
with hypokalemia, potassium supplementation may improve the tremor.
When a person taking lithium has a severe tremor, the possibility of lithium
toxicity should be suspected and evaluated.


<<<PAGE 2057>>>
COGNITIVE EFFECTS. Lithium use has been associated with dysphoria, lack of

spontaneity, slowed reaction times, and impaired memory. We should note
these symptoms carefully because they are a frequent cause of
noncompliance. The differential diagnosis for such symptoms should include
depressive disorders, hypothyroidism, hypercalcemia, other illnesses, and
other drugs. Some, but not all, persons have reported that fatigue and mild
cognitive impairment decrease with time.
OTHER NEUROLOGIC EFFECTS. Uncommon neurologic adverse effects include

symptoms of mild parkinsonism, ataxia, and dysarthria, although the last two
symptoms may also be attributable to lithium intoxication. Lithium is rarely
associated with the development of peripheral neuropathy, benign intracranial
hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri), findings resembling myasthenia gravis,
and increased risk of seizures.
Renal Effect. The most common adverse renal effect of lithium is polyuria
with secondary polydipsia. The symptom is particularly a problem in 25 to 35
percent of persons taking lithium who may have a urine output of more than
3 L a day (reference range: 1 to 2 L a day). The polyuria primarily results
from lithium antagonism to the effects of antidiuretic hormone, which thus
causes diuresis. When polyuria is a significant problem, the person’s renal
function should be evaluated and followed up with 24-hour urine collections
for creatinine clearance determinations. Treatment consists of fluid
replacement, the use of the lowest effective dosage of lithium, and single
daily dosing of lithium. Treatment can also involve the use of a thiazide or
potassium-sparing diuretic. For example, amiloride (Midamor),
spironolactone (Aldactone), triamterene (Dyrenium), or amiloride–
hydrochlorothiazide (Moduretic) may help. If treatment with a diuretic is
initiated, the lithium dosage should be halved, and the diuretic should not be
started for 5 days, because the diuretic is likely to increase lithium retention.
The most severe renal adverse effects, which are rare and associated with
continuous lithium administration for 10 years or more, involve the
appearance of nonspecific interstitial fibrosis, associated with gradual
decreases in glomerular filtration rate and increases in serum creatinine
concentrations, and rarely with renal failure. Lithium is occasionally


<<<PAGE 2058>>>
associated with nephrotic syndrome and features of distal renal tubular
acidosis. Another pathologic finding in patients with lithium nephropathy is
the presence of microcysts. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be used
to demonstrate renal microcysts secondary to chronic lithium nephropathy
and therefore avoid renal biopsy. It is prudent for persons taking lithium to
check their serum creatinine concentration, urine chemistries, and 24-hour
urine volume at 6-month intervals. If creatinine levels do rise, then more
frequent monitoring and MRI might be considered.
Thyroid Effects. Lithium causes a generally benign and often transient
diminution in the concentrations of circulating thyroid hormones. Reports
have attributed goiter (5 percent of persons), benign reversible exophthalmos,
hyperthyroidism, and hypothyroidism (7 to 10 percent of persons) to lithium
treatment. Lithium-induced hypothyroidism is more common in women (14
percent) than in men (4.5 percent). Women are at the highest risk during the
first 2 years of treatment. Persons taking lithium to treat bipolar disorder are
twice as likely to develop hypothyroidism if they develop rapid cycling.
About 50 percent of persons receiving long-term lithium treatment have
laboratory abnormalities, such as an abnormal TRH response, and about 30
percent have elevated concentrations of TSH. If symptoms of hypothyroidism
are present, replacement with levothyroxine (Synthroid) is indicated. Even in
the absence of hypothyroid symptoms, some clinicians treat persons with
significantly elevated TSH concentrations with levothyroxine. In lithiumtreated persons, TSH concentrations should be measured every 6 to 12
months. Lithium-induced hypothyroidism should be considered when
evaluating depressive episodes that emerge during lithium therapy.
Cardiac Effects. The cardiac effects of lithium resemble those of
hypokalemia on ECG. The displacement of intracellular potassium by the
lithium ion causes this. The most common changes on the ECG are T-wave
flattening or inversion. The changes are benign and disappear after lithium is
excreted from the body.
Lithium depresses the pacemaking activity of the sinus node, sometimes
resulting in sinus dysrhythmias, heart block, and episodes of syncope.
Lithium treatment, therefore, is contraindicated in persons with sick sinus
syndrome. In rare cases, ventricular arrhythmias and congestive heart failure


<<<PAGE 2059>>>
have been associated with lithium therapy. Lithium cardiotoxicity is prevalent
in persons on a low-salt diet, those taking certain diuretics or ACEIs, and
those with fluid–electrolyte imbalances or any renal insufficiency.
Dermatologic Effects. Dermatologic effects may be dose-dependent. They
include acneiform, follicular, and maculopapular eruptions; pretibial
ulcerations; and worsening of psoriasis. Occasionally, aggravated psoriasis or
acneiform eruptions may force the discontinuation of lithium treatment.
Alopecia has also been reported. Persons with many of those conditions
respond favorably to changing to another lithium preparation and the usual
dermatologic measures. Lithium concentrations should be monitored if
tetracycline is used for the treatment of acne because it can increase the
retention of lithium.
Lithium Toxicity and Overdoses. The early signs and symptoms of
lithium toxicity include neurologic symptoms, such as coarse tremor,
dysarthria, and ataxia; GI symptoms; cardiovascular changes; and renal
dysfunction. The later signs and symptoms include impaired consciousness,
muscular fasciculations, myoclonus, seizures, and coma. Signs and symptoms
of lithium toxicity are outlined in Table 21-28. Risk factors include
exceeding the recommended dosage, renal impairment, low-sodium diet, drug
interaction, and dehydration. Elderly persons are more vulnerable to the
effects of increased serum lithium concentrations. The greater the degree and
duration of elevated lithium concentrations, the worse are the symptoms of
lithium toxicity.
Table 21-28
Signs and Symptoms of Lithium Toxicity
1. Mild to moderate intoxication (lithium level, 1.5–2.0 mEq/L)
GI

Vomiting
Abdominal pain
Dryness of mouth

Neurologic Ataxia
Dizziness


<<<PAGE 2060>>>
Slurred speech
Nystagmus
Lethargy or excitement
Muscle weakness
2. Moderate to severe intoxication (lithium level: 2.0–2.5 mEq/L)
GI

Anorexia
Persistent nausea and vomiting

Neurologic Blurred vision
Muscle fasciculations
Clonic limb movements
Hyperactive deep tendon reflexes
Choreoathetoid movements
Convulsions
Delirium
Syncope
Electroencephalographic changes
Stupor
Coma
Circulatory failure (lowered BP, cardiac arrhythmias, and
conduction abnormalities)
3. Severe lithium intoxication (lithium level >2.5 mEq/L)
Generalized convulsions
Oliguria and renal failure
Death
Lithium toxicity is a medical emergency, potentially causing permanent
neuronal damage and death. In cases of toxicity (Table 21-29), lithium should
be stopped and dehydration treated. Unabsorbed lithium can be removed
from the GI tract by ingestion of sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate)
or polyethylene glycol solution (GoLYTELY), but not activated charcoal.
Ingestion of a single large dose may create clumps of medication in the
stomach, which can be removed by gastric lavage with a wide-bore tube. The


<<<PAGE 2061>>>
value of forced diuresis is still debated. In severe cases, hemodialysis rapidly
removes excessive amounts of serum lithium. Postdialysis serum lithium
concentrations may increase as lithium is redistributed from tissues to the
blood, so repeat dialysis may be needed. Neurologic improvement may lag
behind the clearance of serum lithium by several days because lithium
crosses the blood–brain barrier slowly.
Table 21-29
Management of Lithium Toxicity
1. Contact personal physician or go to a hospital emergency
department
2. Lithium should be discontinued
3. Vital signs and a neurologic examination with complete formal
mental status examination
4. Lithium level, serum electrolytes, renal function tests, and ECG
5. Emesis, gastric lavage, and absorption with Kayexalate or
GoLYTELY
6. For any patient with a serum lithium level greater than 4.0 mEq/L,
hemodialysis
ECG, electrocardiography.

Adolescents. The serum lithium concentrations for adolescents are similar
to those for adults. Weight gain and acne associated with lithium use can be
particularly troublesome to adolescents.
Elderly Persons. Lithium is a safe and effective drug for elderly persons.
However, the treatment of elderly persons taking lithium may be complicated
by the presence of other medical illnesses, decreased renal function, special
diets that affect lithium clearance, and generally increased sensitivity to
lithium. Elderly persons should initially be given low dosages, their dosages
should be switched less frequently than those of younger persons, and a
longer time must be allowed for renal excretion to equilibrate with absorption
before lithium can be assumed to have reached its steady-state
concentrations.


<<<PAGE 2062>>>
Pregnant Women. Lithium should not be administered to pregnant women
in the first trimester because of the risk of congenital disabilities. The most
common malformations involve the cardiovascular system, most commonly
Ebstein anomaly of the tricuspid valves. The risk of Ebstein malformation in
lithium-exposed fetuses is 1 in 1,000, which is 20 times the risk in the general
population. The possibility of fetal cardiac anomalies can be evaluated with
fetal echocardiography. The teratogenic risk of lithium (4 to 12 percent) is
higher than that for the general population (2 to 3 percent) but appears to be
lower than that associated with the use of valproate or carbamazepine. A
woman who continues to take lithium during pregnancy should use the lowest
effective dosage. The maternal lithium concentration must be monitored
closely during pregnancy, and especially after pregnancy, because of the
significant decrease in renal lithium excretion as the renal function returns to
normal in the first few days after delivery. Adequate hydration can reduce the
risk of lithium toxicity during labor. Lithium prophylaxis is recommended for
all women with bipolar disorder as they enter the postpartum period. Lithium
is excreted into breast milk and should be taken by a nursing mother only
after careful evaluation of potential risks and benefits. Signs of lithium
toxicity in infants include lethargy, cyanosis, abnormal reflexes, and
sometimes hepatomegaly.
Miscellaneous Effects. Lithium should be used with caution in diabetic
persons, who should monitor their blood glucose concentrations carefully to
avoid diabetic ketoacidosis. Benign, reversible leukocytosis is commonly
associated with lithium treatment. Dehydrated, debilitated, and medically ill
persons are most susceptible to adverse effects and toxicity.
Drug Interactions
Lithium drug interactions are summarized in Table 21-30.
Lithium is commonly used in conjunction with DRAs. This combination is
typically sufficient and safe. However, coadministration of higher dosages of
a DRA and lithium may result in a synergistic increase in the symptoms of
lithium-induced neurologic side effects and neuroleptic extrapyramidal
symptoms. In rare instances, encephalopathy has been reported with this
combination.


<<<PAGE 2063>>>
The coadministration of lithium and carbamazepine, lamotrigine,
valproate, and clonazepam may increase lithium concentrations and
aggravate lithium-induced neurologic adverse effects. Treatment with the
combination should be initiated at slightly lower dosages than usual, and the
dosages should be increased gradually. Changes from one to another
treatment for mania should be made carefully, with as little temporal overlap
between the drugs as possible.
Most diuretics (e.g., thiazide and potassium-sparing) can increase lithium
concentrations; when treatment with such a diuretic is stopped, the clinician
may need to increase the person’s daily lithium dosage. Osmotic and loop
diuretics, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, and xanthines (including caffeine)
may reduce lithium concentrations to below therapeutic concentrations.
Whereas ACEIs may cause an increase in lithium concentrations, the AT1
angiotensin II receptor inhibitors losartan (Cozaar) and irbesartan (Avapro)
do not alter lithium concentrations. A wide range of NSAIDs can decrease
lithium clearance, thereby increasing lithium concentrations. These drugs
include indomethacin (Indocin), phenylbutazone (Azolid), diclofenac
(Voltaren), ketoprofen (Orudis), oxyphenbutazone (Oxalid), ibuprofen
(Motrin, Advil), piroxicam (Feldene), and naproxen (Naprosyn). Aspirin and
sulindac (Clinoril) do not affect lithium concentrations.
The coadministration of lithium and quetiapine (Seroquel) may cause
somnolence but is otherwise well tolerated. The coadministration of lithium
and ziprasidone (Geodon) may modestly increase the incidence of tremors.
The coadministration of lithium and calcium channel inhibitors should be
avoided because of potentially fatal neurotoxicity.
A person taking lithium who is about to undergo ECT should discontinue
taking lithium 2 days before beginning ECT to reduce the risk of delirium.
Laboratory Interferences
Lithium does not interfere with any laboratory tests, but lithium-induced
alterations include an increased WBC count, decreased serum thyroxine, and
increased serum calcium. Blood collected in a lithium–heparin anticoagulant
tube will produce falsely elevated lithium concentrations.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines


<<<PAGE 2064>>>
Initial Medical Workup. All patients should have a routine laboratory
workup and physical examination before being started on lithium. The
laboratory tests should include serum creatinine concentration (or a 24-hour
urine creatinine if the clinician has any reason to be concerned about renal
function), electrolytes, thyroid function (TSH, T3 [triiodothyronine], and T4
[thyroxine]), a CBC, ECG, and a pregnancy test in women of childbearing
age.
Dosage Recommendations. Lithium formulations include immediaterelease 150-, 300-, and 600-mg lithium carbonate capsules (Eskalith and
generic), 300 mg lithium carbonate tablets (Lithotabs), 450-mg controlledrelease lithium carbonate capsules (Eskalith CR and Lithonate), and 8 mEq/5
mL of lithium citrate syrup.
The starting dosage for most adults is 300 mg of the regular-release
formulation three times daily. The starting dosage for elderly persons or
persons with renal impairment should be 300 mg once or twice daily. After
stabilization, dosages between 900 and 1,200 mg a day usually produce a
therapeutic plasma concentration of 0.6 to 1 mEq/L, and a daily dose of 1,200
to 1,800 mg usually produces a therapeutic concentration of 0.8 to 1.2
mEq/L. Maintenance dosing can be given either in two or three divided doses
of the regular-release formulation or in a single dosage of the sustainedrelease formulation equivalent to the combined daily dosage of the regularrelease formulation. The use of divided doses reduces gastric upset and
avoids single high-peak lithium concentrations. Discontinuation of lithium
should be gradual to minimize the risk of early recurrence of mania and to
permit recognition of early signs of recurrence.
Table 21-30
Drug Interactions with Lithium
Drug Class

Reaction

Antipsychotics

Case reports of encephalopathy, worsening of
extrapyramidal adverse effects, and neuroleptic
malignant syndrome; inconsistent reports of
altered red blood cell and plasma


<<<PAGE 2065>>>
concentrations of lithium, antipsychotic drug, or
both
Antidepressants

Occasional reports of a serotonin-like syndrome
with potent serotonin reuptake inhibitors

Anticonvulsants

No significant pharmacokinetic interactions with
carbamazepine or valproate; reports of
neurotoxicity with carbamazepine;
combinations helpful for treatment resistance

NSAIDs

May reduce renal lithium clearance and increase
serum concentration; toxicity reported
(exception is aspirin)

Diuretics
Thiazides

Well-documented reduced renal lithium clearance
and increased serum concentration; toxicity
reported

Potassium
sparing

Limited data; may increase lithium concentration

Loop

Lithium clearance unchanged (some case reports
of increased lithium concentration)

Osmotic
Increase renal lithium clearance and decrease
(mannitol, urea)
lithium concentration
Xanthine
Increase renal lithium clearance and decrease
(aminophylline,
lithium concentration
caffeine,
theophylline)
Carbonic
Increase renal lithium clearance
anhydrase
inhibitors
(acetazolamide)
ACEIs

Reports of reduced lithium clearance, increased


<<<PAGE 2066>>>
concentrations, and toxicity
Calcium channel
inhibitors

Case reports of neurotoxicity; no consistent
pharmacokinetic interactions

Miscellaneous
Succinylcholine,
pancuronium

Reports of prolonged neuromuscular blockade

Metronidazole

Increased lithium concentration

Methyldopa

Few reports of neurotoxicity

Sodium
bicarbonate

Increased renal lithium clearance

Iodides

Additive antithyroid effects

Propranolol

Used for lithium tremor; possible slight increase
in lithium concentration

NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; ACEI, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor.

Laboratory Monitoring. The periodic measurement of serum lithium
concentration is an essential aspect of patient care, but it should always be
combined with sound clinical judgment. A laboratory report listing the
therapeutic range as 0.5 to 1.2 mEq/L may lull a clinician into disregarding
early signs of lithium intoxication in patients whose levels are around 1.2
mEq/L. Clinical toxicity, especially in elderly persons, has been well
documented at or slightly above the upper limit of the therapeutic range.
Regular monitoring of serum lithium concentrations is essential. Lithium
levels should be obtained every 2 to 6 months except when there are signs of
toxicity, during dosage adjustments, and in persons suspected to be
noncompliant with the prescribed dosages. Under these circumstances, levels
may be done weekly. Baseline ECG studies are essential and should be
repeated annually.
When obtaining blood for lithium levels, patients should be at steady-state
lithium dosing (usually after 5 days of constant dosing), preferably using a
twice-daily or thrice-daily dosing regimen, and the blood sample must be
drawn 12 hours (±30 minutes) after a given dose. Lithium concentrations 12


<<<PAGE 2067>>>
hours postdose in persons treated with sustained-release preparations are
generally about 30 percent higher than the corresponding concentrations
obtained from those taking the regular-release preparations. Because
available data are based on a sample population following a multiple-dosage
regimen, regular-release formulations given at least twice daily should be
used for the initial determination of the appropriate dosages. Factors that may
cause fluctuations in lithium measurements include dietary sodium intake,
mood state, activity level, body position, and use of an improper blood
sample tube.
Laboratory values that do not seem to correspond to clinical status may
result from the collection of blood in a tube with a lithium–heparin
anticoagulant (which can give results falsely elevated by as much as 1
mEq/L) or aging of the lithium ion-selective electrode (which can cause
inaccuracies of up to 0.5 mEq/L). After the daily dose has been set, it is
reasonable to change to the sustained-release formulation given once daily.
Effective serum concentrations for mania are 1.0 to 1.2 mEq/L, a level
associated with 1,800 mg a day. The recommended range for maintenance
treatment is 0.4 to 0.8 mEq/L, which is usually achieved with a daily dose of
900 to 1,200 mg. A small number of persons will not achieve therapeutic
benefit with a lithium concentration of 1.2 mEq/L, yet will have no signs of
toxicity. For such persons, titration of the lithium dosage to achieve a
concentration above 1.2 mEq/L may be warranted. Some patients can be
maintained at concentrations below 0.4 mEq/L. There may be considerable
variation from patient to patient, so it is best to follow the maxim, “treat the
patient, not the laboratory results.” The only way to establish an optimal dose
for a patient may be through trial and error.
Package inserts (US) for lithium products list effective serum
concentrations for mania between 1.0 and 1.2 mEq/L (usually achieved with
1,800 mg of lithium carbonate daily) and for long-term maintenance between
0.6 and 1.2 mEq/L (usually achieved with 900 to 1,200 mg of lithium
carbonate daily). The dose–blood level relationship may vary considerably
from patient to patient. The likelihood of achieving a response at levels above
1.2 mEq/L is usually significantly outweighed by the increased risk of
toxicity, although rarely a patient may both require and tolerate a higher-thanusual blood concentration.
What constitutes the lower end of the therapeutic range remains a matter of


<<<PAGE 2068>>>
debate. A prospective 3-year study found patients who maintained a
concentration between 0.4 and 0.6 mEq/L (mean 0.54) were 2.6 times more
likely to relapse than those who maintained between 0.8 and 1.0 mEq/L
(mean 0.83). However, higher blood concentrations produced more adverse
effects and were less well tolerated.
If there is no response after 2 weeks at a concentration that is beginning to
cause adverse effects, then the person should taper off lithium over 1 to 2
weeks, and other mood-stabilizing drugs should be tried.
Patient Education. Lithium has a narrow therapeutic index, and many
factors can upset the balance between lithium concentrations that are well
tolerated and therapeutic, and those that produce side effects or toxicity. It is
thus imperative that persons taking lithium be educated about signs and
symptoms of toxicity, factors that affect lithium levels, how and when to
obtain laboratory testing, and the importance of regular communication with
the prescribing physician. Lithium concentrations can be disrupted by
common factors such as excessive sweating from ambient heat or exercise or
the use of widely prescribed agents such as ACEIs or NSAIDs. Patients may
stop taking their lithium because they are feeling well or because they are
experiencing side effects. They should be advised against discontinuing or
modifying their lithium regimen. Table 21-31 lists some essential instructions
for patients.

VALPROATE
Valproate (Depakene, Depakote), or valproic acid, is approved for the
treatment of manic episodes associated with bipolar I disorder and is one of
the most widely prescribed mood stabilizers in psychiatry. It has a rapid onset
of action and is well-tolerated, and numerous studies suggest that it reduces
the frequency and intensity of recurrent manic episodes over extended
periods.
Chemistry
Valproate is a simple-chain branch carboxylic acid. It is called valproic acid
because it is rapidly converted to the acid form in the stomach. Multiple
formulations of valproic acid are marketed. These include valproic acid


<<<PAGE 2069>>>
(Depakene), divalproex sodium (Depakote), an enteric-coated delayed-release
1:1 mixture of valproic acid and sodium valproate available in tablet and
sprinkle formulation (can be opened and spread on food); and sodium
valproate injection (Depacon). Extended-release preparation is also available.
Each of these is therapeutically equivalent because, at physiologic pH,
valproic acid dissociates into valproate ion.
Table 21-31
Instructions to Patients Taking Lithium
Lithium can be remarkably effective in treating your disorder. If not
used appropriately and not monitored closely, it can be ineffective
and potentially harmful. It is important to keep the following
instructions in mind.
Dosing
Take lithium exactly as directed by your doctor—never take more or
less than the prescribed dose.
Do not stop taking without speaking to your doctor.
If you miss a dose, take it as soon as possible. If it is within 4 hr of
the next dose, skip the missed dose (about 6 hr in the case of
extended-release or slow-release preparations). Never double up
doses.
Blood Tests
Comply with the schedule of recommended regular blood tests.
Despite their inconvenience and discomfort, your lithium blood levels,
thyroid function, and kidney status need to be monitored as long as
you take lithium.
When going to have lithium levels checked, you should have taken
your last lithium dose 12 hr earlier.
Use of Other Medications
Do not start any prescription or over-the-counter medications without
telling your doctor.
Even drugs such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve)
can significantly increase lithium levels.


<<<PAGE 2070>>>
Diet and Fluid Intake
Avoid sudden changes in your diet or fluid intake. If you do go on a
diet, your doctor may need to increase the frequency of blood
tests.
Caffeine and alcohol act as diuretics and can lower your lithium
concentrations.
During treatment with lithium, it is recommended that you drink about
2 or 3 quarts of fluid daily and use normal amounts of salt.
Inform your doctor if you start or stop a low-salt diet.
Recognizing Potential Problems
If you engage in vigorous exercise or have an illness that causes
sweating, vomiting, or diarrhea, consult your doctor because these
might affect lithium levels.
Nausea, constipation, shakiness, increased thirst, frequency of
urination, weight gain, or swelling of the extremities should be
reported to your doctor.
Blurred vision, confusion, loss of appetite, diarrhea, vomiting, muscle
weakness, lethargy, shakiness, slurred speech, dizziness, loss of
balance, inability to urinate, or seizures could indicate severe
toxicity and should prompt immediate medical attention.
Pharmacologic Actions
Regardless of how it is formulated, valproate is rapidly and completely
absorbed 1 to 2 hours after oral administration, with peak concentrations
occurring 4 to 5 hours after oral administration. The plasma half-life of
valproate is 10 to 16 hours. Valproate is highly protein-bound. Protein
binding becomes saturated at higher dosages, and concentrations of
therapeutically effective free valproate increase at serum concentrations
above 50 to 100 µg/mL. The unbound portion of valproate is considered to be
pharmacologically active and can cross the blood–brain barrier. The
extended-release preparation produces lower peak concentrations and higher
minimum concentrations and can be given once a day. Valproate is
metabolized primarily by hepatic glucuronidation and mitochondrial β


<<<PAGE 2071>>>
oxidation.
The biochemical basis of valproate’s therapeutic effects remains poorly
understood. Postulated mechanisms include enhancement of GABA activity,
modulation of voltage-sensitive sodium channels, and action on
extrahypothalamic neuropeptides.
Therapeutic Indications
Valproate is currently approved as monotherapy or adjunctive therapy of
complex partial seizures, monotherapy and adjunctive therapy of simple and
complex absence seizures, and adjunctive therapy for patients with multiple
seizures that include absence seizures. Divalproex has additional indications
for prophylaxis of migraine.
Bipolar I Disorder
ACUTE MANIA. About two-thirds of persons with acute mania respond to
valproate. The majority of patients with mania usually respond within 1 to 4
days after achieving valproate serum concentrations above 50 µg/mL. The
antimanic response is generally associated with levels greater than 50 µg/mL,
in a range of 50 to 125 µg/mL. This serum concentration may be gradually
achieved within 1 week of initiation of dosing, but rapid oral loading
strategies achieve therapeutic serum concentrations in 1 day and can control
manic symptoms within 5 days. The short-term antimanic effects of valproate
can be augmented with the addition of lithium, carbamazepine (Tegretol),
SDAs, or DRAs. Numerous studies have suggested that the irritable manic
subtype responds significantly better to sodium valproate than lithium or
placebo. Because of its more favorable profile of cognitive, dermatologic,
thyroid, and renal adverse effects, valproate is preferred to lithium for the
treatment of acute mania in children and elderly persons.
ACUTE BIPOLAR DEPRESSION. Valproate possesses some activity as a short-

term treatment of depressive episodes in bipolar I disorder, but this effect is
far less pronounced than for the treatment of manic episodes. Among
depressive symptoms, valproate is more useful for the treatment of agitation
than dysphoria. In clinical practice, valproate is most often used as add-on
therapy to an antidepressant to prevent the development of mania or rapid


<<<PAGE 2072>>>
cycling.
PROPHYLAXIS. Studies suggest that valproate is useful in the prophylactic

treatment of bipolar I disorder, resulting in fewer, less severe, and shorter
manic episodes. In direct comparison, valproate is at least as effective as
lithium and is better tolerated than lithium. It may be particularly useful in
persons with rapid-cycling and ultrarapid-cycling bipolar disorders,
dysphoric or mixed mania, and mania caused by a general medical condition
as well as in persons who have comorbid substance use disorders or panic
attacks and in persons who have not had complete favorable responses to
lithium treatment.
Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective Disorder. Valproate may
accelerate response to antipsychotic therapy in patients with schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder. Valproate alone is generally less effective in
schizoaffective disorder than in bipolar I disorder. Valproate alone is
ineffective for the treatment of psychotic symptoms and is typically used in
combination with other drugs in patients with these symptoms.
Other Mental Disorders. Valproate has been studied for possible efficacy
in a broad range of psychiatric disorders. These include alcohol withdrawal
and relapse prevention, panic disorder, PTSD, impulse control disorder,
borderline personality disorder, and behavioral agitation and dementia.
Evidence supporting use in these cases is weak, and any observed therapeutic
effects may be related to the treatment of a comorbid bipolar disorder.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Although valproate treatment is generally well tolerated and safe, it carries
quite a few black box warnings and other warnings (Table 21-32). The two
most serious adverse effects of valproate treatment affect the pancreas and
liver. Risk factors for potentially fatal hepatotoxicity include young age
(younger than 3 years); concurrent use of phenobarbital; and the presence of
neurologic disorders, especially inborn errors of metabolism. The rate of fatal
hepatotoxicity in persons who have been treated with valproate alone is 0.85
per 100,000 persons; no persons older than the age of 10 years have been
reported to have died from hepatotoxicity. Therefore, the risk of this adverse


<<<PAGE 2073>>>
reaction in adult psychiatric patients is low.
Table 21-32
Black Box Warnings and Other Warnings for Valproate
More Serious Side Management Considerations
Effect
Hepatotoxicity

Rare, idiosyncratic event
Estimated risk, 1:118,000 (adults)
Greatest risk profile (polypharmacy, younger than
2 yr of age, intellectual disability): 1:800

Pancreatitis

Rare, similar pattern to hepatotoxicity
Incidence in clinical trial data is 2 in 2,416
(0.0008%)
Postmarketing surveillance shows no increased
incidence
Relapse with rechallenge
Asymptomatic amylase not predictive

Hyperammonemia Rare; more common in combination with
carbamazepine (Tegretol)
Associated with coarse tremor and may respond
to L-carnitine administration
Associated with
urea cycle
disorders

Discontinue valproate and protein intake
Assess underlying urea cycle disorder
Divalproex is contraindicated in patients with
urea cycle disorders

Teratogenicity

Neural tube defect: 1–4% with valproate
Preconceptual education and folate–vitamin B
complex supplementation for all young women
of childbearing potential

Somnolence in
elderly persons

Slower titration than conventional doses
Regular monitoring of fluid and nutritional intake


<<<PAGE 2074>>>
Thrombocytopenia Decrease dose if clinically symptomatic (i.e.,
bruising, bleeding gums)
Thrombocytopenia more likely with valproate
levels ≥110 µg/mL (women) and ≥135 µg/mL
(men)
Nevertheless, if symptoms of lethargy, malaise, anorexia, nausea and
vomiting, edema, and abdominal pain occur in a person treated with
valproate, the clinician must consider the possibility of severe hepatotoxicity.
A modest increase in liver function test results does not correlate with the
development of severe hepatotoxicity. Rare cases of pancreatitis have been
reported; they occur most often in the first 6 months of treatment, and the
condition occasionally results in death. The pancreatic function can be
assessed and followed by serum amylase concentrations. Other potentially
severe consequences of treatment include hyperammonemia-induced
encephalopathy and thrombocytopenia. Thrombocytopenia and platelet
dysfunction occur most commonly at high dosages and result in the
prolongation of bleeding times.
There are multiple concerns regarding the use of valproate during
pregnancy. Women who require valproate therapy should, therefore, inform
their physicians if they intend to become pregnant. First-trimester use of
valproate has been associated with a 3 to 5 percent risk of neural tube defects,
as well as an increased risk of other malformations affecting the heart and
other organ systems. Multiple reports have also indicated that in utero
exposure to valproate may negatively affect cognitive development in
children of mothers who take valproate during pregnancy. They have lower
IQ scores at age 6 years compared with those exposed to other antiepileptic
drugs. Fetal valproate exposure has dose-dependent associations with reduced
cognitive abilities across a range of domains at 6 years of age. Valproate
exposure may also increase the risk of autistic spectrum disorder.
Valproate is also associated with teratogenicity, most notably neural tube
defects (e.g., spina bifida). The risk is about 1 to 4 percent of all women who
take valproate during the first trimester of pregnancy. The risk of valproateinduced neural tube defects can be reduced with daily folic acid supplements
(1 to 4 mg a day). All women with childbearing potential who take the drug


<<<PAGE 2075>>>
should be given folic acid supplements. Infants breastfed by mothers taking
valproate develop serum valproate concentrations 1 to 10 percent of maternal
serum concentrations, but no data suggest that this poses a risk to the infant.
Valproate is not contraindicated in nursing mothers. We should avoid this
drug in patients with hepatic diseases. Valproate may be especially
problematic for adolescents and young women. Cases of polycystic ovarian
disease have been reported in women using valproate. Even when the full
syndromal criteria for this syndrome are not met, many of these women
develop menstrual irregularities, hair loss, and hirsutism. These effects are
thought to result from a metabolic syndrome that is driven by insulin
resistance and hyperinsulinemia.
The common adverse effects associated with valproate (Table 21-33) are
those affecting the GI system, such as nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia, and
diarrhea. The GI effects are generally most common in the first month of
treatment, significantly if the dosage is increased rapidly. Unbuffered
valproic acid (Depakene) is more likely to cause GI symptoms than the
enteric-coated “sprinkle” or the delayed-release divalproex sodium
formulations. Other common adverse effects involve the nervous system,
such as sedation, ataxia, dysarthria, and tremor. Valproate-induced tremor
may respond well to treatment with β-adrenergic receptor antagonists or
gabapentin. Treatment of the other neurologic adverse effects usually requires
lowering the valproate dosage.
Weight gain is a common adverse effect, especially in long-term treatment,
and can best be treated by strict limitation of caloric intake. Hair loss may
occur in 5 to 10 percent of all persons treated, and rare cases of complete loss
of body hair have been reported. Some clinicians have recommended
treatment of valproate-associated hair loss with vitamin supplements that
contain zinc and selenium. About 5 to 40 percent of persons experience a
persistent but clinically insignificant elevation in liver transaminases up to
three times the upper limit of normal, which is usually asymptomatic and
resolves after discontinuation of the drug. High dosages of valproate (above
1,000 mg a day) may rarely produce mild to moderate hyponatremia, most
likely because of some degree of the syndrome of secretion of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone, which is reversible upon lowering of the dosage.
Overdoses of valproate can lead to coma and death.


<<<PAGE 2076>>>
Table 21-33
Adverse Effects of Valproate
Common
GI irritation
Nausea
Sedation
Tremor
Weight gain
Hair loss
Uncommon
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Ataxia
Dysarthria
Persistent elevation of hepatic transaminases
Rare
Fatal hepatotoxicity (primarily in pediatric patients)
Reversible thrombocytopenia
Platelet dysfunction
Coagulation disturbances
Edema
Hemorrhagic pancreatitis
Agranulocytosis
Encephalopathy and coma
Respiratory muscle weakness and respiratory failure
GI, gastrointestinal.

Drug Interactions
Valproate is commonly prescribed as part of a regimen involving other
psychotropic agents. The only consistent drug interaction with lithium, if
both drugs are maintained in their respective therapeutic ranges, is the
exacerbation of drug-induced tremors, which can usually be treated with βreceptor antagonists. The combination of valproate and DRAs may result in
increased sedation, as can be seen when valproate is added to any CNS


<<<PAGE 2077>>>
depressant (e.g., alcohol), and increased severity of extrapyramidal
symptoms, which usually responds to treatment with antiparkinsonian drugs.
Valproate can usually be safely combined with carbamazepine or SDAs.
Perhaps the most worrisome interaction of valproate and a psychotropic drug
involves lamotrigine. Since the approval of lamotrigine for the treatment of
bipolar disorder, it is more likely that patients will be treated with both
agents. Valproate more than doubles lamotrigine concentrations, increasing
the risk of a severe rash (Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis).
The plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, diazepam (Valium),
amitriptyline (Elavil), nortriptyline (Pamelor), and phenobarbital (Luminal)
may also be increased when these drugs are coadministered with valproate.
Also, the plasma concentrations of phenytoin (Dilantin) and desipramine
(Norpramin) may be decreased when they are combined with valproate. The
plasma concentrations of valproate may be decreased when the drug is
coadministered with carbamazepine and may be increased when
coadministered with guanfacine (Tenex), amitriptyline, or fluoxetine
(Prozac). Valproate can be displaced from plasma proteins by carbamazepine,
diazepam, and aspirin. Persons who are treated with anticoagulants (e.g.,
aspirin and warfarin [Coumadin]) should also be monitored when valproate
use is initiated to assess the development of any undesired augmentation of
the anticoagulation effects. Interactions of valproate with other drugs are
listed in Table 21-34.
Table 21-34
Interactions of Valproate with Other Drugs
Drug

Interactions Reported with Valproate

Lithium

Increased tremor

Antipsychotics

Increased sedation; increased extrapyramidal
effects; delirium and stupor (single report)

Clozapine

Increased sedation; confusional syndrome (single
report)

Carbamazepine Acute psychosis (single report); ataxia, nausea,


<<<PAGE 2078>>>
lethargy (single report); may decrease valproate
serum concentrations
Antidepressants Amitriptyline and fluoxetine may increase valproate
serum concentrations
Diazepam

Serum concentration increased by valproate

Clonazepam

Absence status (rare; reported only in patients with
preexisting epilepsy)

Phenytoin

Serum concentration decreased by valproate

Phenobarbital

Serum concentration increased by valproate;
increased sedation

Other CNS
depressants

Increased sedation

Anticoagulants

Possible potentiation of effect

CNS, central nervous system.

Laboratory Interferences
Valproate may cause a laboratory increase of serum-free fatty acids.
Valproate metabolites may produce a false-positive test result for urinary
ketones as well as falsely abnormal thyroid function test results.
Table 21-35
Recommended Laboratory Tests during Valproate Therapy
Before Treatment
Standard chemistry screen with special attention to liver function
tests
CBC, including WBC and platelet count
During Treatment
Liver function tests at 1 mo; then every 6–24 mo if no
abnormalities are found.
Complete blood count with platelet count at 1 mo; then every 6–
24 mo if findings are normal.


<<<PAGE 2079>>>
If Liver Function Test Results Become Abnormal
Mild transaminase elevation (less than three times normal):
monitoring every 1–2 wk; if stable and patient is responding
to valproate, results are monitored monthly to every 3 mo.
Pronounced transaminase elevation (more than three times
normal): dosage reduction or discontinuation of valproate;
increase dose or rechallenge if transaminases normalize and
if the patient is a valproate responder.
CBC, complete blood count; WBC, white blood cell.

Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
When starting valproate therapy, a baseline hepatic panel, CBC and platelet
counts, and pregnancy testing should be ordered. Additional testing should
include amylase and coagulation studies if baseline pancreatic disease or
coagulopathy is suspected. In addition to baseline laboratory tests, hepatic
transaminase concentrations should be obtained 1 month after initiation of
therapy and every 6 to 24 months after that. However, because even frequent
monitoring may not predict severe organ toxicity, it is more prudent to
reinforce the need for prompt evaluation of any illnesses when reviewing the
instructions with patients. Asymptomatic elevation of transaminase
concentrations up to three times the upper limit of normal are typical and do
not require any change in dosage. Table 21-35 lists the recommended
laboratory tests for valproate treatment.
Valproate is available in several formulations (Table 21-36). For the
treatment of acute mania, an oral loading strategy of initiation with 20 to 30
mg/kg a day can be used to accelerate the control of symptoms. This strategy
is usually well tolerated but can cause excessive sedation and tremor in
elderly persons. Agitated behavior can be rapidly stabilized with IV infusion
of valproate. If acute mania is absent, it is best to initiate drug treatment
gradually to minimize the common adverse effects of nausea, vomiting, and
sedation. The dose on the first day should be 250 mg administered with a
meal. The dosage can be raised to 250 mg orally three times daily for over 3
to 6 days. The plasma concentrations can be assessed in the morning before
the first daily dose is administered. Therapeutic plasma concentrations for the
control of seizures range between 50 and 100 µg/mL. It is reasonable to use


<<<PAGE 2080>>>
the same range for the treatment of mental disorders; most of the controlled
studies have used 50 to 125 µg/mL. Most persons attain therapeutic plasma
concentrations on a dosage between 1,200 and 1,500 mg a day in divided
doses. After a person’s symptoms are well controlled, the full daily dose can
be taken all at once before sleep.
Table 21-36
Valproate Preparations Available in the United States
Generic
Name

Trade Name, Time to Peak
Form (Doses)

Valproate
sodium
injection

Depacon
injection
(100-mg
valproic
acid/mL)

Valproic acid Depakene,
syrup (250
mg/5 mL)
Depakene,
capsules
(250 mg)

1 hr

1–2 hr

1–2 hr

Divalproex
sodium

Depakote,
3–8 hr
delayedreleased
tablets (125,
250, 500
mg)

Divalproex
sodiumcoated
particles
in

Depakote,
sprinkle
capsules
(125 mg)

Compared with divalproex tablets,
divalproex sprinkle has earlier onset
and slower absorption, with slightly
lower peak plasma concentration


<<<PAGE 2081>>>
capsules
Divalproex
Depakote ER
sodium
(250, 500
extendedmg)
release

4–17 hr

LAMOTRIGINE
Lamotrigine (Lamictal) was developed as a result of screening folate
antagonists as anticonvulsants. Lamotrigine proved effective in several
animal models of epilepsy, was developed as an antiepileptic drug, and was
marketed for the adjunctive treatment of partial seizures in the United States
in 1995. Initial, postmarketing, open, clinical experience suggested efficacy
in a variety of neurologic and psychiatric conditions, coupled with good
tolerability (aside from the risk of rash). Later, double-blind, placebocontrolled studies revealed that lamotrigine was useful for some, but not all,
of the neurologic and psychiatric conditions reported in open studies.
Therefore, lamotrigine appeared effective as a maintenance treatment for
bipolar disorder and was approved for the maintenance treatment of bipolar I
disorder in 2003. Lamotrigine also appeared to have potential utility in acute
bipolar depression. However, the magnitude of the effect was too modest to
yield consistently superior performance compared with placebo, and hence
lamotrigine did not receive approval for the treatment of acute bipolar
depression.
Similarly, limited data suggested that lamotrigine had potential utility in
rapid-cycling bipolar disorder. Lamotrigine did not appear to be as effective
as the primary intervention in acute mania. Thus, lamotrigine has emerged as
an agent that appears to “stabilize mood from below” in the sense that it may
maximally impact the depressive component of bipolar disorders.
Pharmacologic Actions
Lamotrigine is wholly absorbed, has a bioavailability of 98 percent, and has a
steady-state plasma half-life of 25 hours. However, the rate of metabolism of
lamotrigine varies over a sixfold range, depending on which other drugs are
administered concomitantly. Dosing is escalated slowly to twice-a-day


<<<PAGE 2082>>>
maintenance dosing. Food does not affect its absorption, and it is 55 percent
protein-bound in the plasma; 94 percent of lamotrigine and its inactive
metabolites are excreted in the urine. Among the better-delineated
biochemical actions of lamotrigine is the blockade of voltage-sensitive
sodium channels, which in turn modulates the release of glutamate and
aspartate and has a slight effect on calcium channels. Lamotrigine modestly
increases plasma serotonin concentrations, possibly through inhibition of
serotonin reuptake, and is a weak inhibitor of serotonin 5-HT3 receptors.
Therapeutic Indications
Bipolar Disorder. Lamotrigine is indicated in the treatment of bipolar
disorder and may prolong the time between episodes of depression and
mania. It is more effective in lengthening the intervals between depressive
episodes than manic episodes. It is also useful as a treatment for rapid-cycling
bipolar disorder.
Other Indications. There have been reports of therapeutic benefit in the
treatment of borderline personality disorder and the treatment for various pain
syndromes.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Lamotrigine is remarkably well tolerated. The absence of sedation, weight
gain, and other metabolic effects are noteworthy. The most common adverse
effects—dizziness, ataxia, somnolence, headache, diplopia, blurred vision,
and nausea—are typically mild. Anecdotal reports of cognitive impairment
and joint or back pain are standard.
The appearance of a rash, which is common and occasionally very severe,
is a source of concern. About 8 percent of patients started on lamotrigine
develop a benign maculopapular rash during the first 4 months of treatment,
and the drug should be discontinued if a rash develops. Even though these
rashes are benign, there is concern that, in some cases, they may represent
early manifestations of Stevens–Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal
necrolysis. Nevertheless, even if lamotrigine is discontinued immediately
upon the development of a rash or other signs of hypersensitivity reaction,
such as fever and lymphadenopathy, this may not prevent subsequent


<<<PAGE 2083>>>
development of a life-threatening rash or permanent disfiguration.
Estimates of the rate of severe rash vary, depending on the source of the
data. In some studies, the incidence of severe rashes was 0.08 percent in adult
patients receiving lamotrigine as initial monotherapy and 0.13 percent in
adult patients receiving lamotrigine as adjunctive therapy. German registry
data, based on clinical practice, suggest that the risk of rash may be as low as
1 in 5,000 patients. The appearance of any rash necessitates immediate
discontinuation of drug administration.
It is known that the likelihood of a rash increases if the recommended
starting dose and speed of dose increase exceed what is recommended.
Concomitant administration of valproic acid also increases risk and should be
avoided if possible. If valproate is used, a more conservative dosing regimen
is followed. Children and adolescents younger than age 16 years appear to be
more susceptible to rash with lamotrigine. If patients miss more than 4
consecutive days of lamotrigine treatment, they need to restart therapy at the
initial starting dose and titrate upward as if they had not already been on the
medication.
Laboratory Testing
There is no proven correlation between lamotrigine blood concentrations and
either antiseizure effects or efficacy in bipolar disorders. Laboratory tests are
not useful in predicting the occurrence of adverse events.
Drug Interactions
Lamotrigine has significant, well-characterized drug interactions involving
other anticonvulsants. The most potentially serious lamotrigine drug
interaction involves concurrent use of valproic acid, which doubles serum
lamotrigine concentrations. Lamotrigine decreases the plasma concentration
of valproic acid by 25 percent. Sertraline (Zoloft) also increases plasma
lamotrigine concentrations, but to a lesser extent than does valproic acid.
Lamotrigine concentrations are decreased by 40 to 50 percent with
concomitant administration of carbamazepine, phenytoin, or phenobarbital.
Combinations of lamotrigine and other anticonvulsants have complex effects
on the time of peak plasma concentration and the plasma half-life of
lamotrigine.


<<<PAGE 2084>>>
Laboratory Interferences
Lamotrigine does not interfere with any laboratory tests.
Dosage and Administration
In the clinical trials leading to the approval of lamotrigine as a treatment for
bipolar disorder, no consistent increase in efficacy was associated with doses
above 200 mg/day. Most patients should take between 100 and 200 mg a day.
In epilepsy, the drug is administered twice daily, but in bipolar disorder, the
total dose can be taken once a day, either in the morning or night, depending
on whether the patient finds the drug activating or sedating.
Lamotrigine is available as unscored 25-, 100-, 150-, and 200-mg tablets.
The primary determinant of lamotrigine dosing is the minimization of the risk
of rash. Lamotrigine should not be taken by anyone younger than 16 years of
age. Because valproic acid markedly slows the elimination of lamotrigine,
concomitant administration of these two drugs necessitates a much slower
titration (Table 21-37). People with renal insufficiency should aim for a lower
maintenance dosage. The appearance of any rash necessitates immediate
discontinuation of lamotrigine administration. Lamotrigine should usually be
discontinued gradually over 2 weeks unless a rash emerges, in which case it
should be discontinued over 1 to 2 days.
Lamotrigine orally disintegrating tablets (Lamictal ODT) are available for
patients who have difficulty swallowing. It is the only antiepileptic treatment
that is available in an orally disintegrating formulation. It is available in 25,
50, 100, and 200 mg strengths and matches the dose of lamotrigine tablets.
Chewable dispersible tablets of 2, 5, and 25 mg are also available.

CARBAMAZEPINE AND OXCARBAZEPINE
Carbamazepine (Tegretol) possesses some structural similarity to the TCA
imipramine (Tofranil). It was approved for use in the United States for the
treatment of trigeminal neuralgia in 1968 and temporal lobe epilepsy
(complex partial seizures) in 1974. Interestingly, carbamazepine was first
synthesized as a potential antidepressant, but because of its atypical profile in
several animal models, it was initially developed for use in pain and seizure
disorders. It is now recognized in most guidelines as a second-line mood


<<<PAGE 2085>>>
stabilizer useful in the treatment and prevention of both phases of bipolar
affective disorder. A long-acting sustained release formulation (Equetro) was
approved by the U.S. FDA for the treatment of acute mania in 2002.
Table 21-37
Lamotrigine Dosing (mg/day)
Treatment

Weeks 1–2

Weeks
3–4

Weeks 4–5

Lamotrigine
monotherapy

25

50

100–200 (200
maximum)

Lamotrigine +
carbamazepine

50

100

200–400 (400
maximum)

Lamotrigine +
valproate

25 every other 25
day

50–100 (100
maximum)

An analog of carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine (Trileptal), was marketed as
an antiseizure medication in the United States in 2000. Previously it was used
as a treatment for pediatric epilepsy in Europe since 1990. Because of its
similarity to carbamazepine, many clinicians began to use it as a treatment for
patients with bipolar disorder. Despite some reports that oxcarbazepine has
mood-stabilizing properties, this has not been confirmed in large, placebocontrolled trials.
Carbamazepine
Pharmacologic Actions. The absorption of carbamazepine is slow and
unpredictable. Food enhances absorption. Peak plasma concentrations are
reached 2 to 8 hours after a single dose, and steady-state levels are reached
after 2 to 4 days on a steady dosage. It is 70 to 80 percent protein-bound. The
half-life of carbamazepine ranges from 18 to 54 hours, with an average of 26
hours. However, with chronic administration, the half-life of carbamazepine
decreases to an average of 12 hours. This results from the induction of
hepatic CYP450 enzymes by carbamazepine, specifically the autoinduction
of carbamazepine metabolism. The induction of hepatic enzymes reaches its


<<<PAGE 2086>>>
maximum level after about 3 to 5 weeks of therapy.
The pharmacokinetics of carbamazepine are different for two long-acting
preparations of carbamazepine, each of which uses slightly different
technology. One formulation, Tegretol XR, requires food to ensure standard
GI transit time. The other preparation, Carbatrol, relies on a combination of
intermediate, extended-release, and very slow release beads, making it
suitable for bedtime administration.
Carbamazepine is metabolized in the liver, and the 10,11-epoxide
metabolite is active as an anticonvulsant. Its activity in the treatment of
bipolar disorders is unknown. Long-term use of carbamazepine is associated
with an increased ratio of the epoxide to the parent molecule.
The anticonvulsant effects of carbamazepine are thought to be mediated
mainly by binding to voltage-dependent sodium channels in the inactive state
and prolonging their inactivation. This action secondarily reduces voltagedependent calcium channel activation and, thus, synaptic transmission.
Additional effects include reduction of currents through N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) glutamate-receptor channels, competitive antagonism of adenosine
a1-receptors, and potentiation of CNS catecholamine neurotransmission.
Whether any or all of these mechanisms also result in mood stabilization is
not known.
Therapeutic Indications
Bipolar Disorder
ACUTE MANIA. The acute antimanic effects of carbamazepine are typically
evident within the first several days of treatment. About 50 to 70 percent of
all persons respond within 2 to 3 weeks of initiation. Studies suggest that
carbamazepine may be especially useful in persons who are not responsive to
lithium (Eskalith), such as persons with dysphoric mania, rapid cycling, or an
adverse family history of mood disorders. The antimanic effects of
carbamazepine can be, and often are, augmented by concomitant
administration of lithium, valproic acid (Depakene), thyroid hormones,
DRAs, or SDAs. Some persons may respond to carbamazepine but not
lithium or valproic acid and vice versa.


<<<PAGE 2087>>>
PROPHYLAXIS. Carbamazepine is effective in preventing relapses, particularly

among patients with bipolar II disorder and schizoaffective disorder, and
dysphoric mania.
ACUTE DEPRESSION. A subgroup of treatment-refractory patients with acute

depression responds well to carbamazepine. Patients with more severe
episodic and less chronic depression seem to be better responders to
carbamazepine. Nevertheless, carbamazepine remains an alternative drug for
depressed persons who have not responded to conventional treatments,
including ECT.
OTHER DISORDERS. Carbamazepine helps to control symptoms associated with

acute alcohol withdrawal, although benzodiazepines are more effective in this
population. Carbamazepine has been suggested as a treatment for the
recurrent paroxysmal component of PTSD. Uncontrolled studies suggest that
carbamazepine is effective in controlling impulsive, aggressive behavior in
nonpsychotic persons of all ages, including children and elderly persons.
Carbamazepine is also effective in controlling nonacute agitation and
aggressive behavior in patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective
disorder. Persons with prominent positive symptoms (e.g., hallucinations)
may be likely to respond, as are persons who display impulsive aggressive
outbursts.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Carbamazepine is relatively well
tolerated. Mild GI (nausea, vomiting, gastric distress, constipation, diarrhea,
and anorexia) and CNS (ataxia, drowsiness) side effects are the most
common. The severity of these adverse effects is reduced if the dosage of
carbamazepine is increased slowly and kept at the minimal effective plasma
concentration. In contrast to lithium and valproate (other drugs used to
manage bipolar disorder), carbamazepine does not appear to cause weight
gain. Because of the phenomena of autoinduction, with consequent
reductions in carbamazepine concentrations, side effect tolerability may
improve over time. Most of the adverse effects of carbamazepine are
correlated with plasma concentrations above 9 µg/mL. The rarest but most
serious adverse effects of carbamazepine are blood dyscrasias, hepatitis, and
severe skin reactions (Table 21-38).


<<<PAGE 2088>>>
BLOOD DYSCRASIAS. The drug’s hematologic effects are not dose-related.

Severe blood dyscrasias (aplastic anemia, agranulocytosis) occur in about 1
in 125,000 persons treated with carbamazepine. There does not appear to be a
correlation between the degree of benign WBC suppression (leukopenia),
which is seen in 1 to 2 percent of persons, and the emergence of lifethreatening blood dyscrasias. Persons should be warned that the emergence of
such symptoms as fever, sore throat, rash, petechiae, bruising, and easy
bleeding can potentially herald a serious dyscrasia, and they should seek
medical evaluation immediately. Routine hematologic monitoring in
carbamazepine-treated persons is recommended at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months. If
there is no significant evidence of bone marrow suppression by that time,
many experts will reduce the interval of monitoring. However, even
assiduous monitoring may fail to detect severe blood dyscrasias before they
cause symptoms.
Table 21-38
Adverse Events Associated with Carbamazepine
Dosage-Related Adverse Effects

Idiosyncratic Adverse Effects

Double or blurred vision

Agranulocytosis

Vertigo

Stevens–Johnson syndrome

Gastrointestinal disturbances

Aplastic anemia

Task performance impairment

Hepatic failure

Hematologic effects

Rash
Pancreatitis

HEPATITIS. Within the first few weeks of therapy, carbamazepine can cause

both hepatitis associated with increases in liver enzymes, particularly
transaminases, and cholestasis associated with elevated bilirubin and alkaline
phosphatase. Mild transaminase elevations warrant observation only, but
persistent elevations more than three times the upper limit of normal indicate
the need to discontinue the drug. Hepatitis can recur if the drug is
reintroduced to the person and can result in death.


<<<PAGE 2089>>>
About 10 to 15 percent of those treated with
carbamazepine develop a benign maculopapular rash within the first 3 weeks
of treatment. Stopping the medication usually leads to resolution of the rash.
Some patients may experience life-threatening dermatologic syndromes,
including exfoliative dermatitis, erythema multiforme, Stevens–Johnson
syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis. The possible emergence of these
serious dermatologic problems causes most clinicians to discontinue
carbamazepine use in people who develop any rash. The risk of drug rash is
about equal between valproic acid and carbamazepine in the first 2 months of
use but is subsequently much higher for carbamazepine. If carbamazepine
seems to be the only effective drug for a person who has a benign rash with
carbamazepine treatment, a retrial of the drug can be undertaken. Many
patients can be rechallenged without reemergence of the rash. Pretreatment
with prednisone (Deltasone; 40 mg a day) may suppress the rash, although
other symptoms of an allergic reaction (e.g., fever and pneumonitis) may
develop even with steroid pretreatment.
DERMATOLOGIC EFFECTS.

Carbamazepine is occasionally used to treat diabetes
insipidus not associated with lithium use. This activity results from direct or
indirect effects at the vasopressin receptor. It may also lead to the
development of hyponatremia and water intoxication in some patients,
mainly elderly persons, or when used in high doses.
RENAL EFFECTS.

Carbamazepine decreases cardiac conduction
(although less than the tricyclic drugs do) and can thus exacerbate preexisting
cardiac disease. Carbamazepine should be used with caution in persons with
glaucoma, prostatic hypertrophy, diabetes, or a history of alcohol abuse.
Carbamazepine occasionally activates vasopressin receptor function, which
results in a condition resembling the syndrome of secretion of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone, characterized by hyponatremia and, rarely, water
intoxication. This effect is the opposite of the renal effects of lithium (i.e.,
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus). Augmentation of lithium with
carbamazepine does not reverse the lithium effect, however. The emergence
of confusion, severe weakness, or headache in a person taking carbamazepine
should prompt the measurement of serum electrolytes.
Carbamazepine use rarely elicits an immune hypersensitivity response
OTHER ADVERSE EFFECTS.


<<<PAGE 2090>>>
consisting of fever, rash, eosinophilia, and possibly fatal myocarditis.
Cleft palate, fingernail hypoplasia, microcephaly, and spina bifida in
infants may be associated with the maternal use of carbamazepine during
pregnancy. Pregnant women should not use carbamazepine unless necessary.
All women with childbearing potential should take 1 to 4 mg of folic acid
daily, even if they are not trying to conceive. Carbamazepine is secreted in
breast milk.
Drug Interactions. Carbamazepine decreases serum concentrations of
numerous drugs as a result of the prominent induction of hepatic CYP3A4
(Table 21-39). Monitoring for a decrease in clinical effects is frequently
indicated. Carbamazepine can decrease the blood concentrations of oral
contraceptives, resulting in breakthrough bleeding and uncertain prophylaxis
against pregnancy. Carbamazepine should not be administered with MAOIs,
which should be discontinued at least 2 weeks before initiating treatment with
carbamazepine. Grapefruit juice inhibits the hepatic metabolism of
carbamazepine. When carbamazepine and valproate are used in combination,
the dosage of carbamazepine should be decreased because valproate displaces
carbamazepine binding on proteins, and the dosage of valproate may need to
be increased.
Table 21-39
Carbamazepine: Drug Interactions
Effect of Carbamazepine on Plasma Agents that May Affect
Concentrations of Concomitant
Carbamazepine Plasma
Agents
Concentrations
Carbamazepine may decrease drug Agents that may increase
plasma concentration of:
carbamazepine plasma
Acetaminophen
concentration:
Alprazolam
Allopurinol
Amitriptyline
Cimetidine
Bupropion
Clarithromycin
Clomipramine
Danazol
Clonazepam
Diltiazem
Clozapine
Erythromycin


<<<PAGE 2091>>>
Cyclosporine
Desipramine
Dicumarol
Doxepin
Doxycycline
Ethosuximide
Felbamate
Fentanyl
Fluphenazine
Haloperidol
Hormonal contraceptives
Imipramine
Lamotrigine
Methadone
Methsuximide
Methylprednisolone
Nimodipine
Pancuronium
Phensuximide
Phenytoin
Primidone
Theophylline
Valproate
Warfarin
Carbamazepine may increase drug
plasma concentrations of
Clomipramine
Phenytoin
Primidone

Fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Gemfibrozil
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Isoniazida
Itraconazole
Lamotrigine
Loratadine
Macrolides
Nefazodone
Nicotinamide
Propoxyphene
Terfenadine
Troleandomycin
Valproatea
Verapamil
Viloxazine
Drugs that may decrease
carbamazepine plasma
concentrations
Carbamazepine
(autoinduction)
Cisplatin
Doxorubicin HCl
Felbamate
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Primidone
Rifampinb
Theophylline
Valproate

aIncreased concentrations of the active 10,11-epoxide.
bDecreased concentrations of carbamazepine and increased concentrations of the 10,11-

epoxide.
Table by Carlos A. Zarate, Jr., M.D. and Mauricio Tohen, M.D.


<<<PAGE 2092>>>
Laboratory Interferences. Circulating levels of thyroxine and
triiodothyronine are associated with a decrease in TSH and may be associated
with treatment. Carbamazepine is also associated with an increase in total
serum cholesterol, primarily by increasing high-density lipoproteins. The
thyroid and cholesterol effects are not clinically significant. Carbamazepine
may interfere with the dexamethasone (Decadron) suppression test and may
also cause false-positive pregnancy test results.
Dosing and Administration. The target dose for antimanic activity is
1,200 mg a day, although this varies considerably. Immediate-release
carbamazepine needs to be taken three or four times a day, which leads to
lapses in compliance. Extended-release formulations are thus preferred
because they can be taken once or twice a day. One form of extended-release
carbamazepine, Carbatrol, comes as 100-, 200-, and 300-mg capsules.
Another form, Equetro, is identical to Carbatrol and is marketed as a
treatment for bipolar disorder. These capsules contain tiny beads with three
different types of coatings, so they dissolve at different times. Capsules
should not be crushed or chewed. However, the contents can be sprinkled
over food without affecting the extended-release qualities. This formulation
can be taken either with or without meals. The entire daily dose can be given
at bedtime. The rate of absorption is faster when it is given with a high-fat
meal. Another extended-release form of carbamazepine, Tegretol XR, uses a
different drug-delivery system than Carbatrol. It is available in 100-, 200-,
and 300-mg tablets.
Preexisting hematologic, hepatic, and cardiac diseases can be relative
contraindications for carbamazepine treatment. Persons with hepatic disease
require only one-third to one-half the usual dosage; the clinician should be
cautious about raising the dosage in such persons and should do so only
slowly and gradually. The laboratory examination should include a CBC with
platelet count, liver function tests, serum electrolytes, and an
electrocardiogram in persons older than 40 years of age or with preexisting
cardiac disease. An electroencephalogram is not necessary before the
initiation of treatment, but it may be helpful in some cases for the
documentation of objective changes correlated with clinical improvement.
Table 21-40 presents a brief user’s guide to carbamazepine in bipolar
disorder.


<<<PAGE 2093>>>
Routine Laboratory Monitoring. Serum levels for antimanic efficacy
have not been established. The anticonvulsant blood concentration range for
carbamazepine is 4 to 12 µg/mL, and this range should be reached before
determining that carbamazepine is not effective in the treatment of a mood
disorder. A clinically insignificant suppression of the WBC count commonly
occurs during carbamazepine treatment. This benign decrease can be reversed
by adding lithium, which enhances colony-stimulating factor. Potential
serious hematologic effects of carbamazepine, such as pancytopenia,
agranulocytosis, and aplastic anemia, occur in about 1 in 125,000 patients.
Complete laboratory blood assessments may be performed every 2 weeks for
the first 2 months of treatment and quarterly after that, but the FDA has
revised the package insert for carbamazepine to suggest that blood
monitoring be performed at the discretion of the physician. Patients should be
informed that fever, sore throat, rash, petechiae, bruising, or unusual bleeding
may indicate a hematologic problem and should prompt immediate
notification of a physician. This approach is probably more useful than is
frequent blood monitoring during long-term treatment. It has also been
suggested that liver and renal function tests be conducted quarterly, although
the benefit of conducting tests this frequently has been questioned. It seems
reasonable, however, to assess hematologic status, along with liver and renal
functions, whenever a routine examination of the person is being conducted.
A monitoring protocol is listed in Table 21-41.
Table 21-40
Carbamazepine in Bipolar Illness: A Brief User’s Guide
1. Start with low (200 mg) bedtime dose in depression or euthymia;
higher doses (600–800 mg/day in divided doses) in manic
inpatients.
2. All bedtime dosing is reasonable with carbamazepine extendedrelease preparation.
3. Titrate slowly to the individual’s response or side effects
threshold.
4. Hepatic enzyme CYP450 (3A4) induction and autoinduction
occur in 2–3 wk; slightly higher doses may be needed or
tolerated at that time.


<<<PAGE 2094>>>
5. Warn regarding benign rash, which occurs in 5–10% of those
taking the drug; progression to rare, severe rash is unpredictable,
so the drug should be discontinued if any rash develops.
6. Benign white blood cell count decreases occur regularly (usually
inconsequential).
7. Rarely, agranulocytosis and aplastic anemia may develop
(several per million new exposures); warn regarding appearance
of fever, sore throat, petechiae, and bleeding gums and to check
with physician to obtain an immediate complete blood cell count.
8. Use adequate birth control methods, including higher dosage
forms of estrogen (as carbamazepine lowers estrogen levels).
9. Avoid carbamazepine in pregnancy (spina bifida occurs in 0.5%;
other severe adverse outcomes occur in about 8%).
10. Some people will respond well to carbamazepine and not other
mood stabilizers (lithium) or anticonvulsants (valproic acid).
11. Combination treatment often required to maintain remission and
prevent loss of effect via tolerance.
12. Major drug interactions associated with increases in
carbamazepine and potential toxicity from 3A4 enzyme inhibition
include calcium channel blockers (isradipine and verapamil);
erythromycin and related macrolide antibiotics; and valproate.
Carbamazepine treatment should be discontinued, and a consult with a
hematologist should be obtained, if the following laboratory values are found:
total WBC count below 3,000/mm3, erythrocytes below 4.0 × 106/mm3,
neutrophils below 1,500/mm3, hematocrit less than 32 percent, hemoglobin
less than 11 g/100 mL, platelet count below 100,000/mm3, reticulocyte count
below 0.3 percent, and a serum iron concentration below 150 mg/100 mL.
Table 21-41
Laboratory Monitoring
Psychiatric Disorders

of

Carbamazepine

for

Adult


<<<PAGE 2095>>>
Oxcarbazepine
Although structurally related to carbamazepine, the usefulness of
oxcarbazepine as a treatment for mania has not been established in controlled
trials.
Pharmacokinetics. Absorption is rapid and unaffected by food. Peak
concentrations occur after about 45 minutes. The elimination half-life of the
parent compound is 2 hours, which remains stable over long-term treatment.
The monohydroxide has a half-life of 9 hours. Most of the drug’s
anticonvulsant activity is presumed to result from this monohydroxy
derivative.
Side Effects. The most common side effects are sedation and nausea. Less
frequent side effects are cognitive impairment, ataxia, diplopia, nystagmus,
dizziness, and tremor. In contrast to carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine does not
have an increased risk of severe blood dyscrasias, so hematologic monitoring
is not necessary. The frequency of benign rash is lower than observed with
carbamazepine, and severe rashes are extremely rare. However, about 25 to
30 percent of patients who develop an allergic rash while taking
carbamazepine also develop a rash with oxcarbazepine. Oxcarbazepine is


<<<PAGE 2096>>>
more likely to cause hyponatremia than carbamazepine. Approximately 3 to 5
percent of patients taking oxcarbazepine develop this side effect. It is
advisable to obtain serum sodium concentrations early in the course of
treatment because hyponatremia may be clinically silent. In severe cases,
confusion and seizure may occur.
Dosing and Administration. Oxcarbazepine dosing for bipolar disorder
has not been established. It is available in 150-, 300-, and 600-mg tablets.
The dose range may vary from 150 to 2,400 mg/day, given in divided doses
twice a day. In clinical trials for mania, the doses typically used were from
900 to 1,200 mg/day with a starting dose of 150 or 300 mg at night.
Drug Interactions. Drugs such as phenobarbital and alcohol, which induce
CYP34A, increase clearance and reduce oxcarbazepine concentrations.
Oxcarbazepine induces CYP3A4/5 and inhibits CYP2C19, which may affect
the metabolism of drugs that use that pathway. Women taking oral
contraceptives should be told to consult with their gynecologists, because
oxcarbazepine may reduce concentrations of their contraceptive and thus
decrease its efficacy.


<<<PAGE 2097>>>
OTHER ANTICONVULSANTS
The anticonvulsants described in this section were developed for the
treatment of epilepsy but were also found to have beneficial effects in
psychiatric disorders. Also, these agents are used as skeletal muscle relaxants
and in neurogenic pain. These drugs have a variety of mechanisms, including
increasing GABAergic function or decreasing glutamatergic function. This
section includes seven anticonvulsants: gabapentin (Neurontin), levetiracetam
(Keppra), pregabalin (Lyrica), tiagabine (Gabitril), topiramate (Topamax),
and zonisamide (Zonegran), as well as one of the first used anticonvulsants,
phenytoin (Dilantin). Carbamazepine (Tegretol), valproate (Depakene,
Depakote), lamotrigine (Lamictal), and oxcarbazepine (Trileptal) are
discussed in separate sections.
In 2008, the FDA issued a warning that these drugs may increase the risk
of suicidal ideation or act in some persons compared with placebo; however,
the relative risk for suicidality was higher in patients with epilepsy compared
with those with psychiatric disorders. However, some published data
contradict this warning. These studies suggest that anticonvulsants may have
a protective effect on suicidal thoughts in bipolar disorder. Considering the
inherently increased risk of suicide in persons with bipolar disorder,
clinicians should be aware of these warnings.
Gabapentin
Gabapentin was first introduced as an antiepileptic drug and was found to
have sedative effects that were useful in some psychiatric disorders,
especially insomnia. It was also found to be beneficial in reducing
neuropathic pain, including postherpetic neuralgia. It is used in anxiety
disorders (social phobia and panic disorder), but not as the primary
intervention in mania or treatment-resistant mood disorders.
Pharmacologic Actions. Gabapentin circulates in the blood primarily
unbound and is not appreciably metabolized in humans. It is eliminated
unchanged by renal excretion and can be removed by hemodialysis. Food
only moderately affects the rate and extent of absorption. Clearance is
decreased in elderly persons, requiring dosage adjustments. Gabapentin


<<<PAGE 2098>>>
appears to increase cerebral GABA and may inhibit glutamate synthesis as
well. It increases human whole blood serotonin concentrations and modulates
calcium channels to reduce monoamine release. It has antiseizure as well as
antispastic activity and antinociceptive effects in pain.
Therapeutic Indications. In neurology, gabapentin is used for the
treatment of both general and partial seizures. It is useful in reducing the pain
of postherpetic neuralgia and other pain syndromes associated with diabetic
neuropathy, neuropathic cancer pain, fibromyalgia, meralgia paresthetica,
amputation, and headache. It is useful in some cases of chronic pruritus.
In psychiatry, gabapentin is used as a hypnotic agent because of its
sedating effects. It has anxiolytic properties and benefits patients with social
anxiety and panic disorder. It may decrease the craving for alcohol in some
patients and improve mood as well; hence, it may have some use in depressed
patients. Some bipolar patients have benefited when gabapentin is used
adjunctively with mood stabilizers.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Adverse effects are mild, with the
most common being daytime somnolence, ataxia, and fatigue, which are
usually dose-related. Overdose (over 45 g) has been associated with diplopia,
slurred screech, lethargy, and diarrhea, but all patients recovered. The drug
was classified as pregnancy category C in the former FDA classification
system and is excreted in breast milk, so it is best to avoid it in pregnant
women and nursing mothers.
Drug Interactions. Gabapentin bioavailability may decrease as much as 20
percent when administered with antacids. In general, there are no drug
interactions. Chronic use does not interfere with lithium administration.
Laboratory Interferences. Gabapentin does not interfere with any
laboratory tests, although spontaneous reports of false-positive drug
toxicology screenings for amphetamines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and
marijuana have been reported.
Dosages and Clinical Guidelines. Gabapentin is well tolerated, and the
dosage can be increased to the maintenance range within a few days. A


<<<PAGE 2099>>>
general approach is to start with 300 mg on day 1, increase to 600 mg on day
2, 900 mg on day 3, and subsequently increase up to 1,800 mg/day in divided
doses as needed to relieve symptoms. Final total daily doses tend to be
between 1,200 and 2,400 mg/day, but occasionally results may be achieved
with dosages as low as 200 to 300 mg/day, especially in elderly persons.
Sedation is usually the limiting factor in determining the dosage. Some
patients have taken dosages as high as 4,800 mg/day.
Gabapentin is available as 100-, 300-, and 400-mg capsules and as 600and 800-mg tablets. A 250-mg/5-mL oral solution is also available. Although
abrupt discontinuation of gabapentin does not cause withdrawal effects, the
use of all anticonvulsant drugs should be gradually tapered.
Topiramate
Topiramate (Topamax) was developed as an anticonvulsant and was found
useful in a variety of psychiatric and neurologic conditions, including
migraine prevention, treatment of obesity, bulimia, binge eating, and alcohol
dependence.
Pharmacologic Actions. Topiramate has GABAergic effects and
increases cerebral GABA in humans. It has 80 percent oral bioavailability
and is not significantly altered by food. It is 15 percent protein-bound, and
about 70 percent of the drug is eliminated by renal excretion. With renal
insufficiency, topiramate clearance decreases by about 50 percent, so the
dosage needs to be decreased. It has a half-life of around 24 hours.
Therapeutic Indications. Topiramate is used mainly as an antiepileptic
medication and has been found superior to placebo as monotherapy in
patients with seizure disorders. It is also used in the prevention of migraine,
smoking cessation, pain syndromes (e.g., low back pain), PTSD, and
essential tremor. The drug has been associated with weight loss, and that fact
has been used to counteract the weight gain caused by many psychotropic
drugs. It has also been used in general obesity and the treatment of bulimia
and binge-eating disorder. Self-mutilating behavior may be decreased in
borderline personality disorder. It is of little or no benefit in the treatment of
psychotic disorders. In one study, the combination of topiramate with
bupropion (Wellbutrin) showed some efficacy in bipolar depression, but


<<<PAGE 2100>>>
double-blind, placebo-controlled trials failed to demonstrate topiramate
monotherapy efficacy in acute mania in adults.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common adverse
effects of topiramate include paresthesias, weight loss, somnolence, anorexia,
dizziness, and memory problems. Sometimes disturbances in the sense of
taste occur. In many cases, the adverse effects are mild to moderate and can
be attenuated by decreasing the dose. No deaths have been reported during an
overdose. The drug affects acid–base balance (low serum bicarbonate), which
can be associated with cardiac arrhythmias and the formation of renal calculi
in about 1.5 percent of cases. Patients taking the drug should be encouraged
to drink plenty of fluids. It is not known if the drug passes through the
placenta or is present in breast milk, and pregnant women or nursing mothers
should avoid it.
Drug Interactions. Topiramate has few drug interactions with other
anticonvulsant drugs. Topiramate may increase phenytoin concentrations up
to 25 percent and valproic acid 11 percent; it does not affect the concentration
of carbamazepine, phenobarbital (Luminal), or primidone. Topiramate
concentrations are decreased by 40 to 48 percent with concomitant
administration of carbamazepine or phenytoin. We should not combine
topiramate with other carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, as it increases the risk of
nephrolithiasis or heat-related problems (oligohidrosis and hyperthermia).
These include acetazolamide (Diamox) or dichlorphenamide (Daranide).
Laboratory Interferences. Topiramate does not interfere with any
laboratory tests.
Dosages and Clinical Guidelines. Topiramate is available as unscored
25-, 100-, and 200-mg tablets. Topiramate dosage is titrated gradually over 8
weeks to a maximum of 200 mg twice a day to reduce the risk of adverse
cognitive and sedative effects. Off-label topiramate is typically used
adjunctively, starting with 25 mg at bedtime and increasing weekly by 25 mg
as necessary and tolerated. Final doses in efforts to promote weight loss are
often between 75 and 150 mg/day at bedtime. Doses higher than 400 mg are
not associated with increased efficacy. All of the doses can be given at


<<<PAGE 2101>>>
bedtime to take advantage of the sedative effects. Persons with renal
insufficiency should reduce doses by half.
Tiagabine
Tiagabine was introduced as a treatment for epilepsy in 1997 and was found
to have efficacy in some psychiatric conditions, including acute mania.
However, safety concerns (see later), along with a lack of controlled data,
have limited the use of tiagabine in disorders other than epilepsy.
Pharmacologic Actions. Tiagabine is well absorbed with a bioavailability
of about 90 percent and is extensively (96 percent) bound to plasma proteins.
Tiagabine is a cytochrome P450 CYP3A substrate and is extensively
transformed into inactive 5-oxo-tiagabine and glucuronide metabolites, with
only 2 percent being excreted unchanged in the urine. The remainder is
excreted as metabolites in the feces (65 percent) and the urine (25 percent).
Tiagabine blocks the uptake of the inhibitory amino acid neurotransmitter
GABA into neurons and glia, enhancing the inhibitory action of GABA at
both GABAA and GABAB receptors, putatively yielding anticonvulsant and
antinociceptive effects, respectively. It has mild blocking effects on histamine
1 (H1), serotonin type 1B (5-HT1B), benzodiazepine, and chloride channel
receptors.
Therapeutic Indications. Tiagabine is rarely used for psychiatric
disorders, and then it is used only for GAD and insomnia. Its main indication
is in generalized epilepsy.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Tiagabine may cause withdrawal
seizures, cognitive or neuropsychiatric problems (impaired concentration,
speech or language problems, somnolence, and fatigue), status epilepticus,
and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). Acute oral overdoses of
tiagabine have been associated with seizures, status epilepticus, coma, ataxia,
confusion, somnolence, drowsiness, impaired speech, agitation, lethargy,
myoclonus, stupor, tremors, disorientation, vomiting, hostility, temporary
paralysis, and respiratory depression. Deaths have been reported in polydrug
overdoses involving tiagabine. Cases of severe rash may occur, including


<<<PAGE 2102>>>
Stevens–Johnson syndrome.
Tiagabine was classified as pregnancy category C in the former FDA
classification system because fetal loss and teratogenicity have been
demonstrated in animals. It is not known if the drug is excreted in breast
milk. Pregnant women and nursing mothers should not be given the drug.
Laboratory Tests. Tiagabine does not interfere with any laboratory tests.
Dosage and Administration. Tiagabine should not be rapidly loaded or
rapidly initiated because of the risk of severe adverse effects. In adults and
adolescents 12 years of age or older with epilepsy who are also taking
enzyme inducers, tiagabine should be initiated at 4 mg/day and increased
weekly by 4 mg/day during the first month. The dose should then be
increased weekly by 4 to 8 mg/day for weeks 5 and 6, yielding 24 to 32
mg/day administered in two to four divided doses by week 6. In adults (but
not adolescents), tiagabine doses may be further increased weekly by 4 to 8
mg/day to as high as 56 mg/day. Plasma concentrations in patients with
epilepsy commonly range between 20 and 100 ng/mL but do not appear to be
systematically related to antiseizure effects and thus are not routinely
monitored.
Levetiracetam
Initially developed as a nootropic (memory enhancing) drug, levetiracetam
proved to be a potent anticonvulsant and marketed as a treatment for partial
seizures. It has been used to treat acute mania and anxiety and to augment
antidepressant drug therapy.
Pharmacologic Actions. The CNS effects are not well understood, but it
appears to enhance GABA inhibition indirectly. It is wholly and rapidly
absorbed, and peak concentrations are reached in 1 hour. Food delays the rate
of absorption and decreases the amount of absorption. Levetiracetam is not
significantly plasma protein-bound and is not metabolized through the
hepatic CYP system. Its metabolism involves the hydrolysis of the acetamide
group. Serum concentrations are not correlated with therapeutic effects.
Therapeutic Indications. The primary indication is for the treatment of


<<<PAGE 2103>>>
convulsive disorders, including partial-onset seizures, myoclonic seizures,
and idiopathic generalized epilepsy. In psychiatry, levetiracetam has been
used off label to treat acute mania, as an add-on treatment for major
depression, and as an anxiolytic agent.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common side effects of
levetiracetam include drowsiness, dizziness, ataxia, diplopia, memory
impairment, apathy, and paresthesias. Some patients develop behavioral
disturbances during treatment, and hallucinations may occur. Suicidal
patients may become agitated. It should not be used in pregnant or lactating
women.
Drug Interactions. There are few if any interactions with other drugs,
including other anticonvulsants. There is no interaction with lithium.
Laboratory Interferences. No laboratory interferences have been
reported.
Dosages and Clinical Guidelines. The drug is available as 250-, 500-,
750-, and 1,000-mg tablets; 500-mg extended-release tablets; a 100-mg/mL
oral solution; and a 100-mg/mL intravenous solution. In epilepsy, the typical
adult daily dose is 1,000 mg.
Because of its renal clearance, dosages should be reduced in patients with
impaired renal function.
Zonisamide
Zonisamide, another anticonvulsant, was also found to be useful in bipolar
disorder, obesity, and binge-eating disorder.
Pharmacologic Actions. Zonisamide blocks sodium channels and may
weakly potentiate dopamine and serotonin activity. It also inhibits carbonic
anhydrase. Some evidence suggests that it may block calcium channels. The
hepatic CYP3A system metabolizes zonisamide, so enzyme-inducing agents
such as carbamazepine, alcohol, and phenobarbital increase the clearance and
reduce the availability of the drug. Zonisamide does not affect the
metabolism of other drugs. It has a long half-life of 60 hours, so it is


<<<PAGE 2104>>>
efficiently dosed once daily, preferably at nighttime.
Therapeutic Indications. Its primary use is in the treatment of generalized
seizure disorders and refractory partial seizures. In psychiatry, controlled
studies found it to be of use in obesity and binge-eating disorder.
Uncontrolled trials have found it useful in bipolar disorder, particularly
mania; however, further studies are warranted for this indication.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Zonisamide is a sulfonamide and
thus may cause a fatal rash and blood dyscrasias, although these events are
rare. About 4 percent of patients develop kidney stones. The most common
side effects are drowsiness, cognitive impairment, insomnia, ataxia,
nystagmus, paresthesia, speech abnormalities, constipation, diarrhea, nausea,
and dry mouth. Weight loss is also a common side effect, which has been
exploited as a therapy for patients who have gained weight during treatment
with psychotropics or, as mentioned above, have ongoing difficulty
controlling their eating. Zonisamide should not be used in pregnant women or
breastfeeding mothers.
Drug Interactions. Zonisamide does not inhibit CYP isoenzymes and does
not instigate drug interactions. It is important not to combine carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors with zonisamide because of an increased risk of
nephrolithiasis related to increased blood levels of urea.
Laboratory Interferences. Zonisamide can elevate hepatic alkaline
phosphatase and increase blood urea nitrogen and creatinine.
Dosages and Clinical Guidelines. Zonisamide is available in 100- and
200-mg capsules. In epilepsy, the dosage range is 100 to 400 mg/day, with
side effects becoming more pronounced at doses above 300 mg. Because of
its long half-life, zonisamide can be given once a day.
Pregabalin
Pregabalin is pharmacologically similar to gabapentin. It is believed to work
by inhibiting the release of excess excitatory neurotransmitters. It increases
neuronal GABA levels, its binding affinity is six times greater than that of


<<<PAGE 2105>>>
gabapentin, and it has a longer half-life.
Pharmacologic Actions. Pregabalin exhibits linear pharmacokinetics. It is
rapidly absorbed in proportion to its dose. The time to maximal plasma
concentration is about 1 hour, and to steady state is within 24 to 48 hours.
Pregabalin demonstrates high bioavailability, and it has a mean elimination
half-life of about 6.5 hours. Food does not affect absorption. Pregabalin does
not bind to plasma proteins and is excreted virtually unchanged (<2 percent
metabolism) by the kidneys. It is not subject to hepatic metabolism and does
not induce or inhibit liver enzymes. Dose reduction may be necessary for
patients with creatinine clearance (CLcr) less than 60 mL/min. Daily doses
should be further reduced by approximately 50 percent for each additional 50
percent decrease in CLcr. Pregabalin is highly cleared by hemodialysis so
that additional doses may be needed for patients on chronic hemodialysis
treatment after each hemodialysis treatment.
Therapeutic Indications. Pregabalin is approved for the management of
diabetic peripheral neuropathy and postherpetic neuralgia and adjunctive
treatment of partial-onset seizures. It is of benefit to some patients with GAD.
In studies, no consistent dose–response relationship was found, although 300
mg of pregabalin per day was more effective than 150 or 450 mg. Some
patients with panic disorder or social anxiety disorder may benefit from
pregabalin, but little evidence supports its routine use in treating persons with
these disorders. It was most recently approved for the treatment of
fibromyalgia.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common adverse events
associated with pregabalin use are dizziness, somnolence, blurred vision,
peripheral edema, amnesia or loss of memory, and tremors. Pregabalin
potentiates the sedating effects of alcohol, antihistamines, benzodiazepines,
and other CNS depressants. It remains to be seen if pregabalin is associated
with benzodiazepine-type withdrawal symptoms. There are scant data about
its use in pregnant women or nursing mothers, and it is best avoided in these
patients.
Drug Interactions. Given the absence of hepatic metabolism, pregabalin


<<<PAGE 2106>>>
lacks metabolic drug interactions.
Laboratory Interferences. There are no effects on laboratory tests.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. The recommended dose for
postherpetic neuralgia is 50 or 100 mg orally three times a day. The
recommended dose for diabetic peripheral neuropathy is 100 to 200 mg orally
three times a day. Patients with fibromyalgia may require up to 450 to 600
mg/day given in divided doses. Pregabalin is available as 25-, 50-, 75-, 100-,
150-, 200-, 225-, and 300-mg capsules.
Phenytoin
Phenytoin sodium (Dilantin) is an antiepileptic drug and is related to the
barbiturates in chemical structure. It is indicated for the control of generalized
tonic–clonic (grand mal) and complex partial (psychomotor, temporal lobe)
seizures and prevention and treatment of seizures occurring during or after
neurosurgery. Studies have shown comparable efficacy of phenytoin to other
anticonvulsants in bipolar disorder, but clinicians should take into account the
danger of gingival hyperplasia, leukopenia, or anemia and the danger of
toxicity caused by nonlinear pharmacokinetics.
Pharmacologic Action. Similar to other anticonvulsants, phenytoin causes
blockade of voltage-activated sodium channels and hence is efficacious as an
antimanic agent. The plasma half-life after oral administration averages 22
hours, with a range of 7 to 42 hours. Steady-state therapeutic levels are
achieved at least 7 to 10 days (5 to 7 half-lives) after initiation of therapy,
with recommended doses of 300 mg/day. Serum level should be obtained at
least 5 to 7 half-lives after treatment initiation. Phenytoin is excreted in the
bile, which is then reabsorbed from the intestinal tract and excreted in the
urine. Urinary excretion of phenytoin occurs partly with glomerular filtration
and by tubular secretion. Small incremental doses of phenytoin may increase
the half-life and produce very substantial increases in serum levels. Patients
should adhere strictly to the prescribed dosage, and serial monitoring of
phenytoin levels is recommended.
Therapeutic Indications. Apart from its indication in generalized tonic–


<<<PAGE 2107>>>
clonic (grand mal) and complex partial (psychomotor, temporal lobe)
seizures, phenytoin is also used for the treatment of acute mania in bipolar
disorder.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common adverse
reactions reported with phenytoin therapy are usually dose-related and
include nystagmus, ataxia, slurred speech, decreased coordination, and
mental confusion. Other side effects include dizziness, insomnia, transient
nervousness, motor twitching, and headaches. There have been rare reports of
phenytoin induced dyskinesias, similar to those induced by phenothiazine and
other neuroleptic drugs. More severe side effects include thrombocytopenia,
leukopenia, agranulocytosis, and pancytopenia, with or without bone marrow
suppression.
Several reports have suggested the development of lymphadenopathy
(local or generalized), including benign lymph node hyperplasia,
pseudolymphoma, lymphoma, and Hodgkin’s disease. Prenatal exposure to
phenytoin may increase the risks for congenital malformations, and a
potentially life-threatening bleeding disorder related to decreased levels of
vitamin K–dependent clotting factors may occur in newborns exposed to
phenytoin in utero. Hyperglycemia has been reported with phenytoin use;
also, the agent may increase the serum glucose level in patients with diabetes.
Drug Interactions. Acute alcohol intake, amiodarone, chlordiazepoxide,
cimetidine, diazepam, disulfiram, estrogens, fluoxetine, H2-antagonists,
isoniazid, methylphenidate, phenothiazines, salicylates, and trazodone may
increase phenytoin serum levels. Drugs that may lower phenytoin levels
include carbamazepine, chronic alcohol abuse, and reserpine.
Laboratory Interferences. Phenytoin may decrease serum concentrations
of thyroxine. It may cause increased serum levels of glucose, alkaline
phosphatase, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Patients may be started on one 100-mg
extended oral capsule three times daily, and the dosage then adjusted to suit
individual requirements. Patients may then be switched to once-a-day dosing,
which is more convenient. In this case, extended-release capsules may be


<<<PAGE 2108>>>
used. Serial monitoring of phenytoin levels is recommended, and the normal
range is usually 10 to 20 µg/mL.

CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
The intracellular calcium ion regulates the activity of multiple
neurotransmitters such as serotonin and dopamine, and that action may
account for its role as a treatment in mood disorders. Calcium channel
inhibitors are used in psychiatry as antimanic agents for persons who are
refractory to or cannot tolerate treatment with first-line mood-stabilizing
agents such as lithium (Eskalith), carbamazepine (Tegretol), and sodium
valproate (Depakote). Calcium channel inhibitors include nifedipine
(Procardia, Adalat), nimodipine (Nimotop), isradipine (DynaCirc),
amlodipine (Norvasc, Lotrel), nicardipine (Cardene), nisoldipine (Sular),
nitrendipine, and verapamil (Calan). They are used for control of mania and
ultradian bipolar disorder (mood cycling in less than 24 hours).
The results of a large genetic study have rekindled interest in the potential
clinical uses of calcium channel blockers (CCBs). Two genome-wide
findings implicated genes encoding L-type voltage-gated calcium channel
subunits as susceptibility genes for bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, MDD,
ADHD, and autism.
Pharmacologic Actions
The calcium channel inhibitors are nearly completely absorbed after oral use,
with significant first-pass hepatic metabolism. Considerable intraindividual
and interindividual variations are seen in the plasma concentrations of the
drugs after a single dose. Peak plasma levels of most of these agents are
achieved within 30 minutes. Amlodipine does not reach peak plasma levels
for about 6 hours. The half-life of verapamil after the first dose is 2 to 8
hours; the half-life increases to 5 to 12 hours after the first few days of
therapy. The half-lives of the other CCBs range from 1 to 2 hours for
nimodipine and isradipine to 30 to 50 hours for amlodipine (Table 21-42).
Table 21-42
Half-Lives, Dosages, and Effectiveness of Selected Calcium
Channel Inhibitors in Psychiatric Disorders


<<<PAGE 2109>>>
The primary mechanism of action of CCBs in bipolar illness is not known.
The calcium channel inhibitors discussed in this section inhibit the influx of
calcium into neurons through L-type (long-acting) voltage-dependent calcium
channels.
Therapeutic Indications
Bipolar Disorder. Nimodipine and verapamil have been demonstrated to
be effective as maintenance therapy in persons with bipolar illness. Patients
who respond to lithium appear to also respond to treatment with verapamil.
Nimodipine may be useful for ultradian cycling and recurrent brief
depression. The clinician should begin treatment with a short-acting drug
such as nimodipine or isradipine, beginning with a low dosage and increasing
the dosage every 4 to 5 days until clinical response is seen or adverse effects
appear. When symptoms are controlled, a longer-acting drug, such as
amlodipine, can be substituted as maintenance therapy. Failure to respond to
verapamil does not exclude a favorable response to one of the other drugs.
Verapamil has been shown to prevent antidepressant-induced mania. The
CCBs can be combined with other agents, such as carbamazepine, in patients
who are partial responders to monotherapy.
Depression. None of the CCBs is effective as a treatment for depression
and may prevent response to antidepressants.
Other Psychiatric Indications. Nifedipine is used to treat hypertensive
crises associated with the use of MAOIs. Isradipine may reduce the
subjective response to methamphetamine. Calcium channel inhibitors may be
beneficial in Tourette disorder, Huntington disease, panic disorder,


<<<PAGE 2110>>>
intermittent explosive disorder, and tardive dyskinesia.
Other Medical Uses. These drugs have been used to treat medical
conditions such as angina, hypertension, migraine headaches, Raynaud
phenomenon, esophageal spasm, premature labor, and headache. Verapamil
has antiarrhythmic activity and has been used to treat superventricular
arrhythmias.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
The most common adverse effects associated with calcium channel inhibitors
are those attributable to vasodilation: dizziness, headache, tachycardia,
nausea, dysesthesias, and peripheral edema. Verapamil and diltiazem
(Cardizem), in particular, can cause hypotension, bradycardia, and
atrioventricular (AV) heart block, which necessitate close monitoring and
sometimes discontinuation of the drugs. In all patients with cardiovascular
disease, the drugs should be used with caution. Other common adverse
effects include constipation, fatigue, rash, coughing, and wheezing. Adverse
effects noted with diltiazem include hyperactivity, akathisia, and
parkinsonism; with verapamil, delirium, hyperprolactinemia, and
galactorrhea; with nimodipine, subjective sense of chest tightness and skin
flushing; and with nifedipine, depression. The drugs have not been evaluated
for safety in pregnant women and are best avoided. Because the drugs are
secreted in breast milk, nursing mothers should also avoid the drugs.
Drug Interactions
All CCBs have the potential for drug–drug interactions. The types and risks
of these interactions vary by the compound. Verapamil raises serum levels of
carbamazepine, digoxin, and other CYP3A4 substrates. Verapamil and
diltiazem but not nifedipine have been reported to precipitate carbamazepineinduced neurotoxicity. Calcium channel inhibitors should not be used by
persons taking β-adrenergic receptor antagonists, hypotensives (e.g.,
diuretics, vasodilators, and ACEIs), or antiarrhythmic drugs (e.g., quinidine
and digoxin) without consultation with an internist or cardiologist.
Cimetidine (Tagamet) has been reported to increase plasma concentrations of
nifedipine and diltiazem. Some patients who are treated with lithium and


<<<PAGE 2111>>>
calcium channel inhibitors concurrently may be at increased risk for the signs
and symptoms of neurotoxicity, and deaths have occurred.
Laboratory Interferences
No known laboratory interferences are associated with the use of calcium
channel inhibitors.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Verapamil is available in 40-, 80-, and 120-mg tablets; 120-, 180-, and 240mg sustained-release tablets; and 100-, 120-, 180-, 200-, 240-, 300-, and 360mg sustained-release capsules. The starting dosage is 40 mg orally three
times a day and can be increased in increments every 4 to 5 days up to 80 to
120 mg three times a day. The patient’s BP, pulse, and electrocardiogram (in
patients older than 40 years old or with a history of cardiac illness) should be
routinely monitored.
Nifedipine is available in 10- and 20-mg capsules and 30-, 60-, and 90-mg
extended-release tablets. The administration should be started at 10 mg orally
three or four times a day and can be increased up to a maximum dosage of
120 mg a day.
Nimodipine is available in 30-mg capsules. It has been used at 60 mg
every 4 hours for ultra–rapid-cycling bipolar disorder and sometimes briefly
at up to 360 mg/day.
Isradipine is available in 2.5- and 5-mg capsules, with a maximum of 20
mg/day. An extended-release formulation of isradipine has been
discontinued.
Amlodipine is available in 2.5-, 5-, and 10-mg tablets. The administration
should start at 5 mg once at night and can be increased to a maximum dosage
of 10 to 15 mg a day.
Diltiazem is available in 30-, 60-, 90-, and 120-mg tablets; 60-, 90-, 120-,
180-, 240-, 300-, and 360-mg extended-release capsules; and 60-, 90-, 120-,
180-, 240-, 300-, and 360-mg extended-release tablets. The administration
should start with 30 mg orally four times a day and can be increased up to a
maximum of 360 mg a day.
Elderly persons are more sensitive to calcium channel inhibitors than are
younger adults. No specific information is available regarding the use of the


<<<PAGE 2112>>>
agents for children.

21.4 Anxiolytics
BENZODIAZEPINES AND DRUGS ACTING ON GABA
RECEPTORS
The first benzodiazepine to be introduced was chlordiazepoxide (Librium), in
1959. In 1963, diazepam (Valium) became available. Over the next three
decades, superior safety and tolerability helped the benzodiazepines replace
the older antianxiety and hypnotic medications, such as the barbiturates and
meprobamate (Miltown). Dozens of benzodiazepines and drugs acting on
benzodiazepine receptors have been synthesized and marketed worldwide.
Many of these agents are not available in the United States. Also, some
benzodiazepines have been discontinued because of a lack of use. Table 2143 lists agents currently available in the United States.
The benzodiazepines derive their name from their molecular structure.
They share a common effect on receptors that have been termed
benzodiazepine receptors, which in turn modulate GABA activity.
Nonbenzodiazepine agonists, such as zolpidem (Ambien), zaleplon (Sonata),
and eszopiclone (Lunesta), are similar to these drugs as they bind at a
location close to the benzodiazepine receptor. However, we discuss these
with the medications for insomnia. Flumazenil (Romazicon), a
benzodiazepine receptor antagonist used to reverse benzodiazepine-induced
sedation and in emergency care of benzodiazepine overdosage, is also
covered here.
Because benzodiazepines have a rapid anxiolytic sedative effect, they are
most commonly used for acute treatment of insomnia, anxiety, agitation, or
anxiety associated with any psychiatric disorder. Also, the benzodiazepines
are used as anesthetics, anticonvulsants, and muscle relaxants and as the
preferred treatment for catatonia. Because of the risk of psychological and
physical dependence associated with long-term use of benzodiazepines,
ongoing assessment should be made as to the continued clinical need for
these drugs in treating patients. In most patients, given the nature of their


<<<PAGE 2113>>>
disorders, it is often best if benzodiazepine agents are used in conjunction
with psychotherapy and when alternative agents have been tried and proven
ineffective or poorly tolerated. In many forms of chronic anxiety disorders,
antidepressant drugs such as SSRIs and SNRIs are now used as primary
treatments, with benzodiazepines used as adjuncts. Benzodiazepine abuse is
rare, usually found in patients who abuse multiple prescription and
recreational drugs.
Table 21-43
Preparations and Doses of Medications Acting on the
Benzodiazepine Receptor Available in the United States

Pharmacologic Actions
All benzodiazepines except clorazepate (Tranxene) are completely absorbed
after oral administration and reach peak serum levels within 30 minutes to 2
hours. Metabolism of clorazepate in the stomach converts it to
desmethyldiazepam, which is then completely absorbed.


<<<PAGE 2114>>>
The absorption, the attainment of peak concentrations, and the onset of
action are quickest for diazepam (Valium), lorazepam (Ativan), alprazolam
(Xanax), triazolam (Halcion), and estazolam (ProSom). The rapid onset of
effects is vital to persons who take a single dose of a benzodiazepine to calm
an episodic burst of anxiety or to fall asleep rapidly. Several benzodiazepines
are effective after intravenous (IV) injection, but only lorazepam and
midazolam (Versed) have rapid and reliable absorption after intramuscular
(IM) administration.
Diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clonazepam (Klonopin), clorazepate,
flurazepam (Dalmane), and quazepam (Doral) have plasma half-lives of 30
hours to more than 100 hours and are technically described as long-acting
benzodiazepines. The plasma half-lives of these compounds can be as high as
200 hours in persons whose metabolism is genetically slow. Because the
attainment of steady-state plasma concentrations of the drugs can take up to 2
weeks, persons may experience symptoms and signs of toxicity after only 7
to 10 days of treatment with a dosage that seemed initially to be in the
therapeutic range.
Clinically, half-life alone does not necessarily determine the duration of
therapeutic action for most benzodiazepines. The fact that all
benzodiazepines are lipid-soluble to varying degrees means that
benzodiazepines and their active metabolites bind to plasma proteins. The
extent of this binding is proportional to their lipid solubility. The amount of
protein binding varies from 70 to 99 percent. Distribution, onset, and
termination of action after a single dose are thus determined mainly by
benzodiazepine lipid solubility, not elimination half-life. Preparations with
high lipid solubility, such as diazepam and alprazolam, are absorbed rapidly
from the GI tract and distribute rapidly to the brain by passive diffusion along
a concentration gradient, resulting in a rapid onset of action. However, as the
concentration of the medication increases in the brain and decreases in the
bloodstream, the concentration gradient reverses itself, and these medications
leave the brain rapidly, resulting in fast cessation of drug effect. Drugs with
longer elimination half-lives, such as diazepam, may remain in the
bloodstream for a substantially more extended time than their actual
pharmacologic action at benzodiazepine receptors because the concentration
in the brain decreases rapidly below the level necessary for a noticeable
effect.


<<<PAGE 2115>>>
In contrast, lorazepam, which has a shorter elimination half-life than
diazepam but is less lipid-soluble, has a slower onset of action after a single
dose because the drug is absorbed and enters the brain more slowly.
However, the duration of action after a single dose is longer because it takes
longer for lorazepam to leave the brain and for brain levels to decrease below
the concentration that produces an effect. In chronic dosing, some of these
differences are not as apparent because brain levels are in equilibrium with
higher and more consistent steady-state blood levels, but additional doses still
produce a more rapid but briefer action with diazepam than with lorazepam.
Benzodiazepines are distributed widely in adipose tissue. As a result,
medications may persist in the body after discontinuation longer than would
be predicted from their elimination half-lives. Also, the dynamic half-life
(i.e., duration of action on the receptor) may be longer than the elimination
half-life.
The advantages of long–half-life drugs over short–half-life drugs include
less frequent dosing, less variation in plasma concentration, and less severe
withdrawal phenomena. The disadvantages include drug accumulation,
increased risk of daytime psychomotor impairment, and increased daytime
sedation.
The half-lives of lorazepam, oxazepam (Serax), temazepam (Restoril), and
estazolam are between 8 and 30 hours. Alprazolam has a half-life of 10 to 15
hours, and triazolam has the shortest half-life (2 to 3 hours) of all the orally
administered benzodiazepines. Rebound insomnia and anterograde amnesia
are thought to be more of a problem with the short–half-life drugs than with
the long–half-life drugs.
Because the administration of medications more frequently than the
elimination half-life leads to drug accumulation, medications such as
diazepam and flurazepam accumulate with daily dosing, eventually resulting
in increased daytime sedation.
Some benzodiazepines (e.g., oxazepam) are conjugated directly by
glucuronidation and are excreted. Most benzodiazepines are oxidized first by
CYP3A4 and CYP2C19, often to active metabolites. These metabolites may
then be hydroxylated to another active metabolite. For example, diazepam is
oxidized to desmethyldiazepam, which, in turn, is hydroxylated to produce
oxazepam. These products undergo glucuronidation to inactive metabolites.
Several benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam, chlordiazepoxide) have the same


<<<PAGE 2116>>>
active metabolite (desmethyldiazepam), which has an elimination half-life of
more than 120 hours. Flurazepam (Dalmane), a lipid-soluble benzodiazepine
used as a hypnotic that has a short elimination half-life, has an active
metabolite (desalkylflurazepam) with a half-life greater than 100 hours. This
is another reason that the duration of action of a benzodiazepine may not
correspond to the half-life of the parent drug.
Therapeutic Indications
Insomnia. Because insomnia may be a symptom of a physical or psychiatric
disorder, hypnotics should not be used for more than 7 to 10 consecutive days
without a thorough investigation of the cause of insomnia. However, many
patients have long-standing sleep difficulties and benefit significantly from
the long-term use of hypnotic agents. Temazepam, flurazepam, and triazolam
are benzodiazepines with a sole indication for insomnia.
Flurazepam, temazepam, quazepam, estazolam, and triazolam are the
benzodiazepines approved for use as hypnotics. The benzodiazepine
hypnotics differ principally in their half-lives; flurazepam has the most
prolonged half-life, and triazolam has the shortest. Flurazepam may be
associated with minor cognitive impairment on the day after its
administration, and triazolam may be associated with mild rebound anxiety
and anterograde amnesia. Quazepam may be associated with daytime
impairment when used for a long time. Temazepam or estazolam may be a
reasonable compromise for most adults. Estazolam produces rapid onset of
sleep and a hypnotic effect for 6 to 8 hours.
Anxiety Disorders
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER. Benzodiazepines are highly effective for the

relief of anxiety associated with GAD. Most persons should be treated for a
predetermined, specific, and relatively brief period. However, because GAD
is a chronic disorder with a high rate of recurrence, some persons with GAD
may warrant long-term maintenance treatment with benzodiazepines.
Alprazolam and clonazepam, both high-potency
benzodiazepines, are commonly used medications for panic disorder with or
without agoraphobia. Although the SSRIs are also indicated for the treatment
PANIC

DISORDER.


<<<PAGE 2117>>>
of panic disorder, benzodiazepines have the advantage of working quickly
and not causing significant sexual dysfunction and weight gain. However, the
SSRIs are still often preferred because they target common comorbid
conditions, such as depression or OCD. Benzodiazepines and SSRIs can be
initiated together to treat acute panic symptoms; use of the benzodiazepine
can be tapered after 3 to 4 weeks once the therapeutic benefits of the SSRI
have emerged.
SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. Clonazepam is an effective treatment for social

anxiety disorder. Also, several other benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam) have
been used as adjunctive medications for the treatment of social anxiety
disorder.
Benzodiazepines are used adjunctively for
treatment of adjustment disorder with anxiety, pathologic anxiety associated
with life events (e.g., after an accident), OCD, and PTSD.
OTHER ANXIETY DISORDERS.

ANXIETY ASSOCIATED WITH DEPRESSION. Depressed patients often experience

significant anxiety, and antidepressant drugs may cause initial exacerbation
of these symptoms. Accordingly, benzodiazepines are indicated for the
treatment of anxiety associated with depression.
Bipolar I and II Disorders
Clonazepam, lorazepam, and alprazolam are useful in the management of
acute manic episodes and as an adjuvant to maintenance therapy instead of
antipsychotics. As an adjuvant to lithium (Eskalith) or lamotrigine
(Lamictal), clonazepam may result in an increased time between cycles and
fewer depressive episodes. Benzodiazepines may help patients with bipolar
disorder sleep better.
Catatonia. Lorazepam, sometimes in low doses (less than 5 mg/day) and
sometimes in very high doses (12 mg/day or more), is regularly used to treat
acute catatonia, which is more frequently associated with bipolar disorder
than with schizophrenia. Other benzodiazepines have also been said to be
helpful. However, there are no valid controlled trials of benzodiazepines in
catatonia. Chronic catatonia does not respond as well to benzodiazepines.


<<<PAGE 2118>>>
The definitive treatment for catatonia is ECT.
Akathisia. The first-line drug for akathisia is most commonly a β-adrenergic
receptor antagonist. However, benzodiazepines are also useful in treating
some patients with akathisia.
Other Psychiatric Indications. Chlordiazepoxide (Librium) and
clorazepate (Tranxene) are used to manage the symptoms of alcohol
withdrawal. The benzodiazepines (especially IM lorazepam) are used to
manage substance-induced and psychotic agitation in the emergency
department. Benzodiazepines have been used instead of amobarbital
(Amytal) for drug-assisted interviewing.
Flumazenil for Benzodiazepine Overdosage. Flumazenil is used to
reverse the adverse psychomotor, amnestic, and sedative effects of
benzodiazepine receptor agonists. Flumazenil is administered IV and has a
half-life of 7 to 15 minutes. The most common adverse effects of flumazenil
are nausea, vomiting, dizziness, agitation, emotional lability, cutaneous
vasodilation, injection-site pain, fatigue, impaired vision, and headache. The
most common serious adverse effect associated with the use of flumazenil is
the precipitation of seizures, which is most likely to occur in persons with
seizure disorders, those who are physically dependent on benzodiazepines,
and those who have ingested large quantities of benzodiazepines. Flumazenil
alone may impair memory retrieval.
In mixed-drug overdosage, the toxic effects (e.g., seizures and cardiac
arrhythmias) of other drugs (e.g., TCAs) may emerge with the reversal of the
benzodiazepine effects of flumazenil. For example, seizures caused by an
overdosage of TCAs may have been partially treated in a person who had
also taken an overdosage of benzodiazepines. With flumazenil treatment, the
tricyclic-induced seizures or cardiac arrhythmias may appear and result in a
fatal outcome. Flumazenil does not reverse the effects of ethanol,
barbiturates, or opioids.
For the initial management of a known or suspected benzodiazepine
overdosage, the recommended initial dosage of flumazenil is 0.2 mg (2 mL)
administered IV over 30 seconds. If the desired consciousness is not obtained
after 30 seconds, a further dose of 0.3 mg (3 mL) can be administered over 30


<<<PAGE 2119>>>
seconds. Further doses of 0.5 mg (5 mL) can be administered over 30 seconds
at 1-minute intervals up to a cumulative dose of 3.0 mg. The clinician should
not rush the administration of flumazenil. A secure airway and IV access
should be established before the administration of the drug. Persons should
be awakened gradually.
Most persons with a benzodiazepine overdosage respond to a cumulative
dose of 1 to 3 mg of flumazenil; doses above 3 mg of flumazenil do not
reliably produce additional effects. If a person has not responded 5 minutes
after receiving a cumulative dose of 5 mg of flumazenil, the primary cause of
sedation is probably not benzodiazepine receptor agonists, and additional
flumazenil is unlikely to help.
Sedation can return in 1 to 3 percent of persons treated with flumazenil. It
can be prevented or treated by giving repeated dosages of flumazenil at 20minute intervals. For repeat treatment, no more than 1 mg (given as 0.5 mg a
minute) should be given at any one time, and no more than 3 mg should be
given in any 1 hour.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
The most common adverse effect of benzodiazepines is drowsiness, which
occurs in about 10 percent of all persons. Because of this adverse effect,
persons should be advised to be careful while driving or using dangerous
machinery when taking drugs. Drowsiness can be present during the day after
the use of a benzodiazepine for insomnia the previous night, the so-called
residual daytime sedation. Some persons also experience ataxia (fewer than 2
percent) and dizziness (less than 1 percent). These symptoms can result in
falls and hip fractures, especially in elderly persons. The most severe adverse
effects of the benzodiazepines occur when other sedative substances, such as
alcohol, are taken concurrently. These combinations can result in marked
drowsiness, disinhibition, or even respiratory depression. Infrequently,
benzodiazepine receptor agonists cause mild cognitive deficits that may
impair job performance. Persons taking benzodiazepine receptor agonists
should be advised to exercise additional caution when driving or operating
dangerous machinery.
High-potency benzodiazepines, especially triazolam, can cause anterograde
amnesia. A paradoxical increase in aggression has been reported in persons


<<<PAGE 2120>>>
with preexisting brain damage. Allergic reactions to the drugs are rare, but a
few studies report maculopapular rashes and generalized itching. The
symptoms of benzodiazepine intoxication include confusion, slurred speech,
ataxia, drowsiness, dyspnea, and hyporeflexia.
Triazolam has received significant attention in the media because of an
alleged association with aggression. Therefore, the manufacturer
recommends that the drug be used for no more than 10 days for the treatment
of insomnia and that physicians carefully evaluate the emergence of any
abnormal thinking or behavioral changes in persons treated with triazolam,
giving appropriate consideration to all potential causes. Triazolam was
banned in Great Britain in 1991.
Persons with hepatic disease and elderly persons are particularly likely to
have adverse effects and toxicity from the benzodiazepines, including hepatic
coma, especially when the drugs are administered repeatedly or in high
dosages. Benzodiazepines can produce clinically significant impairment of
respiration in persons with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and sleep
apnea. Alprazolam may exert a direct appetite stimulant effect and may cause
weight gain. The benzodiazepines should be used with caution by persons
with a history of substance abuse, cognitive disorders, renal disease, hepatic
disease, porphyria, CNS depression, or myasthenia gravis.
Some data indicate that benzodiazepines are teratogenic; therefore, their
use during pregnancy is not advised. Moreover, the use of benzodiazepines in
the third trimester can precipitate a withdrawal syndrome in newborns. The
drugs are secreted in the breast milk in sufficient concentrations to affect
newborns. Benzodiazepines may cause dyspnea, bradycardia, and drowsiness
in nursing babies.
Tolerance, Dependence, and Withdrawal. When benzodiazepines are
used for short periods (1 to 2 weeks) in moderate dosages, they usually cause
no significant tolerance, dependence, or withdrawal effects. The short-acting
benzodiazepines (e.g., triazolam) may be an exception to this rule because
some persons have reported increased anxiety the day after taking a single
dose of the drug and then stopping its use. Some persons also report a
tolerance for the anxiolytic effects of benzodiazepines and require increased
doses to maintain the clinical remission of symptoms.
The appearance of a withdrawal syndrome, also called discontinuation


<<<PAGE 2121>>>
syndrome, depends on how long a person takes the drug, what dose, how
quickly they taper it, and the half-life of the compound. Benzodiazepine
withdrawal syndrome consists of anxiety, nervousness, diaphoresis,
restlessness, irritability, fatigue, lightheadedness, tremor, insomnia, and
weakness (Table 21-44). Abrupt discontinuation of benzodiazepines,
particularly those with short half-lives, is associated with severe withdrawal
symptoms, which may include depression, paranoia, delirium, and seizures.
These severe symptoms are more likely to occur if flumazenil is used for the
rapid reversal of the benzodiazepine receptor agonist effects. Some features
of the syndrome may occur in as many as 90 percent of persons treated with
the drugs. The development of severe withdrawal syndrome is seen only in
persons who have taken high dosages for long periods. The syndrome may be
delayed for 1 or 2 weeks in persons who had been taking benzodiazepines
with long half-lives. Alprazolam seems to be significantly associated with an
immediate and severe withdrawal syndrome and should be tapered gradually.
When the medication is to be discontinued, the drug must be tapered
slowly (25 percent a week); otherwise, recurrence or rebound of symptoms is
likely. Monitoring of any withdrawal symptoms (possibly with a standardized
rating scale) and psychological support of the person are helpful in the
successful accomplishment of benzodiazepine discontinuation. Concurrent
use of carbamazepine (Tegretol) during benzodiazepine discontinuation has
been reported to permit a more rapid and better-tolerated withdrawal than
does a gradual taper alone. The dosage range of carbamazepine used to
facilitate withdrawal is 400 to 500 mg a day. Some clinicians report particular
difficulty in tapering and discontinuing alprazolam, especially in persons who
have been receiving high dosages for long periods. There have been reports
of successful discontinuation of alprazolam by switching to clonazepam,
which is then gradually withdrawn.
Table 21-44
Signs and Symptoms of Benzodiazepine Withdrawal
Anxiety

Tremor

Irritability

Depersonalization

Insomnia

Hyperesthesia


<<<PAGE 2122>>>
Hyperacusis

Myoclonus

Nausea

Delirium

Difficulty concentrating

Seizures

Drug Interactions
The most common and potentially severe benzodiazepine receptor agonist
interaction is excessive sedation and respiratory depression occurring when
benzodiazepines are administered concomitantly with other CNS depressants,
such as alcohol, barbiturates, tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs, DRAs, opioids,
and antihistamines. Ataxia and dysarthria may be likely to occur when
lithium, antipsychotics, and clonazepam are combined. The combination of
benzodiazepines and clozapine (Clozaril) has been reported to cause delirium
and should be avoided. Cimetidine (Tagamet), disulfiram (Antabuse),
isoniazid, estrogen, and oral contraceptives increase the plasma concentration
of diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clorazepate, and flurazepam. However,
antacids may reduce the GI absorption of benzodiazepines. The plasma
concentrations of triazolam and alprazolam are increased to potentially toxic
concentrations by nefazodone (Serzone) and fluvoxamine (Luvox).
The manufacturer of nefazodone recommends that the dosage of triazolam
be lowered by 75 percent, and the dosage of alprazolam be lowered by 50
percent, when given concomitantly with nefazodone. Over-the-counter
preparations of the kava plant, advertised as a “natural tranquilizer,” can
potentiate the action of benzodiazepine receptor agonists through synergistic
overactivation of GABA receptors. Carbamazepine can lower the plasma
concentration of alprazolam. Antacids and food may decrease the plasma
concentrations of benzodiazepines, and smoking may increase the
metabolism of benzodiazepines. The benzodiazepines may increase the
plasma concentrations of phenytoin and digoxin (Lanoxin). The SSRIs may
prolong and exacerbate the severity of zolpidem-induced hallucinations.
Deaths have been reported when parental lorazepam is given with parental
olanzapine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines


<<<PAGE 2123>>>
The clinical decision to treat an anxious person with a benzodiazepine should
be carefully considered. Medical causes of anxiety (e.g., thyroid dysfunction,
caffeinism, and prescription medications) should be ruled out.
Benzodiazepine use should be started at a low dosage, and the person should
be instructed regarding the drug’s sedative properties and abuse potential. An
estimated length of therapy should be decided at the beginning of therapy,
and the need for continued therapy should be reevaluated at least monthly
because of the problems associated with long-term use. However, certain
persons with anxiety disorders are unresponsive to treatments other than
benzodiazepines in long-term use.
Benzodiazepines are available in a wide range of formulations.
Clonazepam is available in a wafer formulation that facilitates its use in
patients who have trouble swallowing pills. Alprazolam is available in an
extended-release form, which reduces the frequency of dosing. Some
benzodiazepines are more potent than others in that one compound requires a
relatively smaller dosage than another compound to achieve the same effect.
For example, clonazepam requires 0.25 mg to achieve the same effect as 5
mg of diazepam; thus, clonazepam is considered a high-potency
benzodiazepine. Conversely, oxazepam has an approximate dosage
equivalence of 15 mg and is a low-potency drug.
Table 21-43 lists preparations and doses of medications discussed in this
chapter.

BUSPIRONE
Buspirone hydrochloride (BuSpar) is classified as an azapirone and is
chemically distinct from other psychotropic agents. It acts on two types of
receptors, serotonin (5-HT) and dopamine (D). It has a high affinity for the 5HT1A serotonin receptor, acting as an agonist or partial agonist, and moderate
affinity for the D2 dopamine receptor, acting as both an agonist and an
antagonist. The approved indication for this psychotropic drug is for the
treatment of GAD. It was initially believed to be a better alternative to the
benzodiazepine drug group because buspirone does not possess
anticonvulsant and muscle relaxant effects. Reports continue to appear that
some patients benefit from the addition of buspirone to their antidepressant
regimen. Its use in this role is more common than its use as an anxiolytic.


<<<PAGE 2124>>>
Interestingly, the antidepressant drug vilazodone (Viibryd) inhibits 5-HT
reuptake and acts as a 5-HT1A receptor partial agonist.
Pharmacologic Actions
Buspirone is well absorbed from the GI tract, but absorption is delayed by
food ingestion. Peak plasma levels are achieved 40 to 90 minutes after oral
administration. At doses of 10 to 40 mg, single-dose linear pharmacokinetics
are observed. Nonlinear pharmacokinetics are observed after multiple doses.
Because of its short half-life (2 to 11 hours), buspirone is dosed three times
daily. An active metabolite of buspirone, 1-pyrimidinylpiperazine (1-PP), is
about 20 percent less potent than buspirone but is up to 30 percent more
concentrated in the brain than the parent compound. The elimination half-life
of 1-PP is 6 hours.
Buspirone does not affect the GABA-associated chloride ion channel or
the serotonin reuptake transporter, targets of other drugs that are effective in
GAD. Buspirone also has activity at 5-HT2 and dopamine type 2 (D2)
receptors, although the significance of the effects at these receptors is
unknown. At D2 receptors, it has properties of both an agonist and an
antagonist.
Therapeutic Indications
Generalized Anxiety Disorder. Buspirone is a narrow-spectrum
antianxiety agent with demonstrated efficacy only in the treatment of GAD.
In contrast to the SSRIs or venlafaxine, buspirone is not effective in the
treatment of panic disorder, OCD, or social phobia. Buspirone, however, has
an advantage over these agents in that it does not typically cause sexual
dysfunction or weight gain.
Some evidence suggests that, compared with benzodiazepines, buspirone is
generally more useful for symptoms of anger and hostility, equally effective
for psychic symptoms of anxiety, and less effective for somatic symptoms of
anxiety. The full benefit of buspirone is evident only at dosages above 30 mg
a day. Compared with the benzodiazepines, buspirone has a delayed onset of
action and lacks any euphoric effect. Unlike benzodiazepines, buspirone has
no immediate effects, and patients should be told that a full clinical response


<<<PAGE 2125>>>
may take 2 to 4 weeks. If an immediate response is needed, patients can be
started on a benzodiazepine and then withdrawn from the drug after
buspirone’s effects begin. Sometimes the sedative effects of benzodiazepines,
which are not found with buspirone, are desirable; however, these sedative
effects may cause impaired motor performance and cognitive deficits.
Other Disorders. Many other clinical uses of buspirone have been
reported, but most have not been confirmed in controlled trials. Evidence of
the efficacy of high-dosage buspirone (30 to 90 mg a day) for depressive
disorders is mixed. Buspirone appears to have weak antidepressant activity,
which has led to its use as an augmenting agent in patients who have failed
standard antidepressant therapy. In a large study, buspirone augmentation of
SSRIs worked as well as other commonly used strategies. Buspirone is
sometimes used to augment SSRIs in the treatment of OCD. There are reports
that buspirone may be beneficial against the increased arousal and flashbacks
associated with PTSD.
Because buspirone does not act on the GABA–chloride ion channel
complex, the drug is not recommended for the treatment of withdrawal from
benzodiazepines, alcohol, or sedative-hypnotic drugs, except as treatment of
comorbid anxiety symptoms.
Scattered trials suggest that buspirone reduces aggression and anxiety in
persons with organic brain disease or traumatic brain injury. It is also used
for SSRI-induced bruxism and sexual dysfunction, nicotine craving, and
ADHD.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Buspirone does not cause weight gain, sexual dysfunction, discontinuation
symptoms, or significant sleep disturbance. It does not produce sedation or
cognitive and psychomotor impairment. The most common adverse effects of
buspirone are headache, nausea, dizziness, and (rarely) insomnia. No sedation
is associated with buspirone. Some persons may report a minor feeling of
restlessness, although that symptom may reflect an incompletely treated
anxiety disorder. No deaths have been reported from overdoses of buspirone,
and the median lethal dose is estimated to be 160 to 550 times the
recommended daily dose. Buspirone should be used with caution by persons


<<<PAGE 2126>>>
with hepatic and renal impairment, pregnant women, and nursing mothers.
Buspirone can be used safely by the elderly.
Drug Interactions
The coadministration of buspirone and haloperidol (Haldol) results in
increased blood concentrations of haloperidol. Buspirone should not be used
with MAOIs to avoid hypertensive episodes, and a 2-week washout period
should pass between the discontinuation of MAOI use and the initiation of
treatment with buspirone. Drugs or foods that inhibit CYP3A4, for example,
erythromycin, itraconazole (Sporanox), nefazodone (Serzone), and grapefruit
juice, increase buspirone plasma concentrations.
Laboratory Interferences
Single doses of buspirone can cause transient elevations in growth hormone,
prolactin, and cortisol concentrations, although the effects are not clinically
significant.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Buspirone is available in single-scored 5- and 10-mg tablets and triple-scored
15- and 30-mg tablets; treatment is usually initiated with either 5 mg orally
three times daily or 7.5 mg orally twice daily. The dosage can be raised 5 mg
every 2 to 4 days to the usual dosage range of 15 to 60 mg a day.
Buspirone should not be used in patients with past hypersensitivity to
buspirone, in cases of diabetes-associated metabolic acidosis, or patients with
severely compromised liver or renal function.
Switching from a Benzodiazepine to Buspirone. Buspirone is not
cross-tolerant with benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or alcohol. A common
clinical problem, therefore, is how to initiate buspirone therapy in a person
who is currently taking benzodiazepines. There are two alternatives. First, the
clinician can start buspirone treatment gradually while the benzodiazepine is
being withdrawn. Second, the clinician can start buspirone treatment and
bring the person up to a therapeutic dosage for 2 to 3 weeks while the person
is still receiving the regular dosage of the benzodiazepine and then slowly
taper the benzodiazepine dosage. Patients who have received


<<<PAGE 2127>>>
benzodiazepines in the past, especially in recent months, may find that
buspirone is not as effective as the benzodiazepines in the treatment of their
anxiety. This difference might be explained by the absence of the immediate
mildly euphoric and sedative effects of benzodiazepines. The
coadministration of buspirone and benzodiazepines may be useful in the
treatment of persons with anxiety disorders who have not responded to
treatment with either drug alone.

β-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
Because of the innervations of many, if not most, peripheral organs and
vasculature by the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system,
their functions are ultimately controlled, in part, by one of the two major
classes of adrenergic receptors: α-receptors (see Table 33-2) and β-receptors.
These receptors are further subdivided based on their action and location, and
they are located both peripherally and in the CNS. Shortly after being
introduced for cardiac indications, propranolol (Inderal) was reported to be
useful for agitation, and its use in psychiatry spread rapidly. The five most
commonly used β-receptor antagonists in psychiatry are propranolol, nadolol
(Corgard), metoprolol (Lopressor, Toprol), pindolol (Visken), and atenolol
(Tenormin) (Table 21-45).
Pharmacologic Actions
The β-receptor antagonists differ concerning lipophilicities, metabolic routes,
β-receptor selectivity, and half-lives. The absorption of the β-receptor
antagonists from the GI tract is variable. The agents that are most soluble in
lipids (i.e., are lipophilic) are likely to cross the blood–brain barrier and enter
the brain; those agents that are least lipophilic are less likely to enter the
brain. When CNS effects are desired, a lipophilic drug may be preferred;
when only peripheral effects are desired, a less lipophilic drug may be
indicated.
Table 21-45
β-Adrenergic Drugs Used in Psychiatry


<<<PAGE 2128>>>
Whereas propranolol, nadolol, pindolol, and labetalol (Normodyne,
Trandate) have nearly equal potency at both the β1- and β2-receptors,
metoprolol and atenolol have a greater affinity for the β1-receptor than for the
β2-receptor. Relative β1-selectivity confers few pulmonary and vascular
effects of these drugs, although they must be used with caution in persons
with asthma because the drugs retain some activity at the β2-receptors.
Pindolol has sympathomimetic effects in addition to its β-antagonist
effects, which has allowed its use for augmentation of antidepressant drugs.
Pindolol, propranolol, and nadolol possess some antagonist activity at the
serotonin 5-HT1A receptors.
Therapeutic Indications
Anxiety Disorders. Propranolol is useful for the treatment of social anxiety
disorder, primarily of the performance type (e.g., disabling anxiety before a
musical performance). Data are also available for its use in the treatment of
panic disorder, PTSD, and GAD. In social anxiety disorder, the standard
treatment approach is to take 10 to 40 mg of propranolol 20 to 30 minutes
before the anxiety-provoking situation. The β-receptor antagonists are less
useful for the treatment of panic disorder than are benzodiazepines or SSRIs.
Lithium-Induced Postural Tremor. The β-receptor antagonists are
beneficial for lithium-induced postural tremor and other medication-induced
postural tremors—for example, those induced by TCAs and valproate


<<<PAGE 2129>>>
(Depakene). The initial approach to this movement disorder includes
lowering the dose of lithium (Eskalith), eliminating aggravating factors, such
as caffeine, and administering lithium at bedtime. If these interventions are
inadequate, however, propranolol in the range of 20 to 160 mg a day taken
two or three times daily is generally sufficient for the treatment of lithiuminduced postural tremor.
Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia. Many studies have shown that βreceptor antagonists can be effective in the treatment of neuroleptic-induced
acute akathisia. They are generally more effective for this indication than are
anticholinergics and benzodiazepines. The β-receptor antagonists are not
effective in the treatment of such neuroleptic-induced movement disorders as
acute dystonia and parkinsonism.
Aggression and Violent Behavior. The β-receptor antagonists may be
useful in reducing the number of aggressive and violent outbursts in persons
with impulse disorders, schizophrenia, and aggression associated with brain
injuries such as trauma, tumors, anoxic injury, encephalitis, alcohol use
disorders, and degenerative disorders (e.g., Huntington disease).
Alcohol Withdrawal. Propranolol is reported to be useful as an adjuvant to
benzodiazepines but not as a sole agent in the treatment of alcohol
withdrawal. The following dose schedule is suggested: no propranolol for a
pulse rate below 50 beats/min; 50-mg propranolol for a pulse rate between 50
and 79 beats/min; and 100-mg propranolol for a pulse rate of 80 beats/min or
above.
Antidepressant Augmentation. Pindolol has been used to augment and
hasten the antidepressant effects of SSRIs, tricyclic drugs, and ECT. Small
studies have shown that pindolol administered at the onset of antidepressant
therapy may shorten the usual 2- to 4-week latency of antidepressant
response by several days. Because the β-receptor antagonists may induce
depression in some persons, augmentation strategies with these drugs need to
be further clarified in controlled trials.
Other Disorders. Several case reports and controlled studies have reported


<<<PAGE 2130>>>
data indicating that β-receptor antagonists may be of modest benefit for
persons with schizophrenia and manic symptoms. They have also been used
in some cases of stuttering (see Table 21-46).
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
The β-receptor antagonists are contraindicated for use in people with asthma,
insulin-dependent diabetes, congestive heart failure, significant vascular
disease, persistent angina, and hyperthyroidism. The contraindication in
diabetic persons is because the drugs antagonize the normal physiologic
response to hypoglycemia. The β-receptor antagonists can worsen AV
conduction defects and lead to complete AV heart block and death. If the
clinician decides that the risk-to-benefit ratio warrants a trial of a β-receptor
antagonist in a person with one of these coexisting medical conditions, a β1selective agent should be the first choice, and the patient should be
monitored. All currently available β-receptor antagonists are excreted in
breast milk and should be administered with caution to nursing women.
Table 21-46
Psychiatric Uses for β-Adrenergic Receptor Antagonists
Definitely effective
Performance anxiety
Lithium-induced tremor
Neuroleptic-induced akathisia
Probably effective
Adjunctive therapy for alcohol withdrawal and other substancerelated disorders
Adjunctive therapy for aggressive or violent behavior
Possibly effective
Antipsychotic augmentation
Antidepressant augmentation
Table 21-47
Adverse Effects and Toxicity of β-Adrenergic Receptor


<<<PAGE 2131>>>
Antagonists
Cardiovascular
Hypotension
Bradycardia
Congestive heart failure (in patients with compromised
myocardial function)
Respiratory
Asthma (less risk with β1-selective drugs)
Metabolic
Worsened hypoglycemia in diabetic patients on insulin or oral
agents
Gastrointestinal
Nausea
Diarrhea
Abdominal pain
Sexual function
Impotence
Neuropsychiatric
Lassitude
Fatigue
Dysphoria
Insomnia
Vivid nightmares
Depression (rare)
Psychosis (rare)
Other (rare)
Raynaud phenomenon
Peyronie disease
Withdrawal syndrome
Rebound worsening of preexisting angina pectoris when βadrenergic receptor antagonists are discontinued


<<<PAGE 2132>>>
The most common adverse effects of β-receptor antagonists are
hypotension and bradycardia. In persons at risk for these adverse effects, a
test dosage of 20 mg a day of propranolol can be given to assess the reaction
to the drug. Depression has been associated with lipophilic β-receptor
antagonists, such as propranolol, but it is probably rare. Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and constipation can also be caused by treatment with these agents.
The β-receptor antagonists may blunt cognition in some people. Other more
severe CNS adverse effects (e.g., agitation, confusion, and hallucinations) are
rare. Table 21-47 lists the possible adverse effects of β-receptor antagonists.
Drug Interactions
Antipsychotics, anticonvulsants, theophylline (Theo-Dur, Slo-bid), and
levothyroxine (Synthroid) have increased plasma concentrations when given
with propranolol. Other β-receptor antagonists may have similar effects. The
β-receptor antagonists that are eliminated by the kidneys may have similar
effects on drugs that are also eliminated by the renal route. Barbiturates,
phenytoin (Dilantin), and cigarette smoking increase the elimination of βreceptor antagonists that are metabolized by the liver. Several reports have
associated hypertensive crises and bradycardia with the coadministration of
β-receptor antagonists and MAOIs. Depressed myocardial contractility and
AV nodal conduction can occur from concomitant administration of a βreceptor antagonist and calcium channel inhibitors.
Laboratory Interferences
The β-receptor antagonists do not interfere with standard laboratory tests.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Propranolol is available in 10-, 20-, 40-, 60-, 80-, and 90-mg tablets; 4-, 8-,
and 80-mg/mL solutions; and 60-, 80-, 120-, and 160-mg sustained-release
capsules. Nadolol is available in 20-, 40-, 80-, 120-, and 160-mg tablets.
Pindolol is available in 5- and 10-mg tablets. Metoprolol is available in 50and 100-mg tablets and 50-, 100-, and 200-mg sustained-release tablets.
Atenolol is available in 25-, 50-, and 100-mg tablets. Acebutolol is available
in 200- and 400-mg capsules.
For the treatment of chronic disorders, propranolol administration is


<<<PAGE 2133>>>
usually initiated at 10 mg by mouth three times a day or 20 mg by mouth
twice daily. The dosage can be raised by 20 to 30 mg a day until a therapeutic
effect emerges. The dosage should be leveled off at the appropriate range for
the disorder under treatment. The treatment of aggressive behavior sometimes
requires dosages up to 80 mg a day, and therapeutic effects may not be seen
until the person has been receiving the maximal dosage for 4 to 8 weeks. For
the treatment of social phobia, primarily the performance type, the patient
should take 10 to 40 mg of propranolol 20 to 30 minutes before the
performance.
Pulse and BP readings should be taken regularly, and the drug should be
withheld if the pulse rate is below 50 beats/min or the systolic BP is below 90
mm Hg. The drug should be temporarily discontinued if it produces severe
dizziness, ataxia, or wheezing. Treatment with β-receptor antagonists should
never be discontinued abruptly. Propranolol should be tapered by 60 mg a
day until a dosage of 60 mg a day is reached. After that, the drug should be
tapered by 10 to 20 mg a day every 3 or 4 days.
The clinical guidelines for the other drugs listed in this chapter are similar
to propranolol, taking into consideration the different doses used. For
example, if propranolol is prescribed initially at the lowest available dose
(e.g., 10 mg), then metoprolol should be prescribed at its lowest available
dose (e.g., 50 mg).
Table 21-48
Barbiturate Dosages (Adult)


<<<PAGE 2134>>>
BARBITURATES AND SIMILARLY ACTING DRUGS
The first barbiturate to be used in medicine was barbital (Veronal), which
was introduced in 1903. It was followed by phenobarbital (Luminal),
amobarbital (Amytal), pentobarbital (Nembutal), secobarbital (Seconal), and
thiopental (Pentothal). Many others have been synthesized, but only a
handful have been used clinically (Table 21-48). Many problems are
associated with these drugs, including high abuse and addiction potential, a
narrow therapeutic range with low therapeutic index, and unfavorable side
effects. The use of barbiturates and similar compounds such as meprobamate
(Miltown) has practically been eliminated by the benzodiazepines and
hypnotics, such as zolpidem (Ambien), eszopiclone (Lunesta), and zaleplon
(Sonata), which have a lower abuse potential and a higher therapeutic index
than the barbiturates. Nevertheless, barbiturates still have a role in the
treatment of certain mental and convulsive disorders.
Pharmacologic Actions
The barbiturates are well absorbed after oral administration. The binding of
barbiturates to plasma proteins is high, but lipid solubility varies. The
individual barbiturates are metabolized by the liver and excreted by the
kidneys. The half-lives of specific barbiturates range from 1 to 120 hours.
The barbiturates may also induce hepatic enzymes (cytochrome P450, CYP),
thereby reducing the levels of both the barbiturate and any other concurrently
administered drugs metabolized by the liver. The mechanism of action of
barbiturates involves the GABA receptor–benzodiazepine receptor–chloride
ion channel complex.
Therapeutic Indications
Electroconvulsive Therapy. Methohexital (Brevital) is commonly used
as an anesthetic agent for ECT. It has lower cardiac risks than other
barbiturate anesthetics. Used intravenously (IV), methohexital produces rapid
unconsciousness, and because of its rapid redistribution, it has a brief
duration of action (5 to 7 minutes). Typical dosing for ECT is 0.7 to 1.2
mg/kg. Methohexital can also be used to abort prolonged seizures in ECT or
to limit postictal agitation.


<<<PAGE 2135>>>
Seizures. Phenobarbital (Solfoton, Luminal), the most commonly used
barbiturate for treatment of seizures, has indications for the treatment of
generalized tonic–clonic and simple partial seizures. Parenteral barbiturates
are used in the emergency management of seizures independent of cause.
Intravenous phenobarbital should be administered slowly at 10 to 20 mg/kg
for status epilepticus.
Narcoanalysis. Amobarbital (Amytal) has been used historically as a
diagnostic aid in several clinical conditions, including conversion reactions,
catatonia, hysterical stupor, and unexplained muteness, and to differentiate
stupor of depression, schizophrenia, and structural brain lesions.
The Amytal interview is performed by placing the patient in a reclining
position and administering amobarbital IV at 50 mg a minute. Infusion is
continued until lateral nystagmus is sustained or drowsiness is noted, usually
at 75 to 150 mg. After this, 25 to 50 mg can be administered every 5 minutes
to maintain narcosis. The patient should be allowed to rest for 15 to 30
minutes after the interview before attempting to walk.
Because of the risk of laryngospasm with IV amobarbital, diazepam has
become the drug of choice for narcoanalysis.
Sleep. The barbiturates reduce sleep latency and the number of awakenings
during sleep, although tolerance to these effects generally develops within 2
weeks. Discontinuation of barbiturates often leads to rebound increases in
electroencephalographic measures of sleep and a worsening of insomnia.
Withdrawal from Sedative-Hypnotics
Barbiturates are sometimes used to determine the extent of tolerance to
barbiturates or other hypnotics to guide detoxification. After intoxication has
been resolved, a test dose of pentobarbital (200 mg) is given orally. One hour
later, the patient is examined. Tolerance and dose requirements are
determined by the degree to which the patient is affected. If the patient is not
sedated, another 100 mg of pentobarbital can be administered every 2 hours,
up to three times (maximum, 500 mg over 6 hours). The amount needed for
mild intoxication corresponds to the approximate daily dose of barbiturate
used. Phenobarbital (30 mg) may then be substituted for each 100 mg of
pentobarbital. This daily dose requirement can be administered in divided


<<<PAGE 2136>>>
doses and gradually tapered by 10 percent a day, with adjustments made
according to withdrawal signs.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Some adverse effects of barbiturates are similar to those of benzodiazepines,
including
paradoxical
dysphoria,
hyperactivity,
and
cognitive
disorganization. Rare adverse effects associated with barbiturate use include
the development of Stevens–Johnson syndrome, megaloblastic anemia, and
neutropenia.
Before the advent of benzodiazepines, the widespread use of barbiturates
as hypnotics and anxiolytics made them the most common cause of acute
porphyria reactions. Severe attacks of porphyria have decreased, mainly
because barbiturates are now seldom used and are contraindicated in patients
with the disease.
A significant difference between the barbiturates and the benzodiazepines
is the low therapeutic index of the barbiturates. An overdose of barbiturates
can easily prove fatal. In addition to narrow therapeutic indexes, the
barbiturates are associated with a significant risk of abuse potential and the
development of tolerance and dependence. Barbiturate intoxication is
manifested by confusion, drowsiness, irritability, hyporeflexia or areflexia,
ataxia, and nystagmus. The symptoms of barbiturate withdrawal are similar
to but more marked than those of benzodiazepine withdrawal.
Ten times the daily dose or 1 g of most barbiturates causes severe toxicity;
2 to 10 g generally proves fatal. Manifestations of barbiturate intoxication
may include delirium, confusion, excitement, headache, and CNS and
respiratory depression, ranging from somnolence to coma. Other adverse
reactions include Cheyne–Stokes respiration, shock, miosis, oliguria,
tachycardia, hypotension, hypothermia, irritability, hyporeflexia or areflexia,
ataxia, and nystagmus. Treatment of overdose includes induction of emesis or
lavage, activated charcoal, and saline cathartics; supportive treatment,
including maintaining airway and respiration and treating shock as needed;
maintaining vital signs and fluid balance; alkalinizing the urine, which
increases excretion; forced diuresis if renal function is typical, or
hemodialysis in severe cases.
Because of some evidence of teratogenicity, barbiturates should not be


<<<PAGE 2137>>>
used by pregnant women or women who are breastfeeding. Barbiturates
should be used with caution by patients with a history of substance abuse,
depression, diabetes, hepatic impairment, renal disease, severe anemia, pain,
hyperthyroidism, or hypoadrenalism. Barbiturates are also contraindicated in
patients with acute intermittent porphyria, impaired respiratory drive, or
limited respiratory reserve.
Drug Interactions
The primary area for concern about drug interactions is the potentially
dangerous effects of respiratory depression. Barbiturates should be used with
great caution with other prescribed CNS drugs (including antipsychotic and
antidepressant drugs) and nonprescribed CNS agents (e.g., alcohol). Also,
caution must be exercised when prescribing barbiturates to patients who are
taking other drugs that are metabolized in the liver, especially cardiac drugs
and anticonvulsants. Because individual patients have a wide range of
sensitivities to barbiturate-induced enzyme induction, it is not possible to
predict the degree to which the metabolism of concurrently administered
medications may be affected. Drugs that have their metabolism enhanced by
barbiturate administration include opioids, antiarrhythmic agents, antibiotics,
anticoagulants, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, β-adrenergic receptor
antagonists, DRAs, contraceptives, and immunosuppressants.
Laboratory Interferences
No known laboratory interferences are associated with the administration of
barbiturates.
Dose and Clinical Guidelines
Barbiturates and other drugs described later begin to act within 1 to 2 hours
of administration. The doses of barbiturates vary, and treatment should begin
with low doses that are increased to achieve a clinical effect. Children and
older people are more sensitive to the effects of barbiturates than are young
adults. The most commonly used barbiturates are available in a variety of
dose forms. Barbiturates with half-lives in the 15- to 40-hour range are
preferable, because long-acting drugs tend to accumulate in the body.
Clinicians should instruct patients clearly about the adverse effects and the


<<<PAGE 2138>>>
potential for dependence associated with barbiturates.
Although determining plasma concentrations of barbiturates is rarely
necessary for psychiatry, monitoring of phenobarbital concentrations is
standard practice when the drug is used as an anticonvulsant. The therapeutic
blood concentrations for phenobarbital in this indication range from 15 to 40
mg/L, although some patients may experience significant adverse effects in
that range.
Barbiturates are contained in combination products with which the
clinician should be familiar.
Other Similarly Acting Drugs
Several agents that act similarly to the barbiturates have been used in the
treatment of anxiety and insomnia. Three such available drugs are
paraldehyde (Paral), meprobamate, and chloral hydrate (Noctec). These drugs
are rarely used because of their abuse potential and potential toxic effects and
some of them are now banned in other countries such as the European Union
and Canada.
Paraldehyde. Paraldehyde is a cyclic ether and was first used in 1882 as a
hypnotic. It has also been used to treat epilepsy, alcohol withdrawal
symptoms, and delirium tremens. Because of its low therapeutic index, it has
been supplanted by the benzodiazepines and other anticonvulsants.
PHARMACOLOGIC ACTIONS. Paraldehyde is rapidly absorbed from the GI tract

and intramuscular (IM) injections. It is primarily metabolized to acetaldehyde
by the liver, and the lungs expire the unmetabolized drug. Reported half-lives
range from 3.4 to 9.8 hours. The onset of action is 15 to 30 minutes.
THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS. Paraldehyde is not indicated as an anxiolytic or a

hypnotic and has little place in current psychopharmacology.
PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS. Paraldehyde frequently causes foul

breath because of the expired unmetabolized drug. It can inflame pulmonary
capillaries and cause coughing. It can also cause local thrombophlebitis with
IV use. Patients may experience nausea and vomiting with oral use. Overdose
leads to metabolic acidosis and decreased renal output. There is a risk of


<<<PAGE 2139>>>
abuse among drug addicts.
Disulfiram (Antabuse) inhibits acetaldehyde
dehydrogenase and reduces the metabolism of paraldehyde, leading to a
possible toxic concentration of paraldehyde. Paraldehyde has additive
sedating effects in combination with other CNS depressants such as alcohol
or benzodiazepines.
DRUG

INTERACTIONS.

LABORATORY INTERFERENCES. Paraldehyde can interfere with the metyra-

pone, phentolamine, and urinary 17-hydroxycorticosteroid tests.
DOSING AND CLINICAL GUIDELINES. Paraldehyde is available in 30-mL vials for

oral, IV, or rectal use. For seizures in adults, up to 12 mL (diluted to a 10
percent solution) can be administered by gastric tube every 4 hours. For
children, the oral dose is 0.3 mg/kg.
Meprobamate. Meprobamate, a carbamate, was introduced shortly before
the benzodiazepines, specifically to treat anxiety. It is also used for muscle
relaxant effects.
PHARMACOLOGIC ACTIONS. Meprobamate is rapidly absorbed from the GI

tract and IM injections. It is metabolized primarily by the liver, and a small
portion is excreted unchanged in the urine. The plasma half-life is
approximately 10 hours.
Meprobamate is indicated for the short-term
treatment of anxiety disorders. It has also been used as a hypnotic and is
prescribed as a muscle relaxant.
THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS.

Meprobamate can cause CNS
depression and death in overdose and carries the risk of abuse by patients
with drug or alcohol use disorders. Abrupt cessation after long-term use can
lead to withdrawal syndrome, including seizures and hallucinations.
Meprobamate can exacerbate acute intermittent porphyria. Other rare side
effects include hypersensitivity reactions, wheezing, hives, paradoxical
excitement, and leukopenia. It should not be used in patients with hepatic
PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS.


<<<PAGE 2140>>>
compromise.
Meprobamate has additive sedating effects in
combination with other CNS depressants, such as alcohol, barbiturates, or
benzodiazepines.
DRUG

INTERACTIONS.

Meprobamate can interfere with
metyrapone, phentolamine, and urinary 17-hydroxycorticosteroid tests.
LABORATORY

INTERFERENCES.

the

DOSING AND CLINICAL GUIDELINES. Meprobamate is available in 200-, 400-,

and 600-mg tablets; 200- and 400-mg extended-release capsules; and various
combinations, for example, aspirin 325 mg and 200 mg of meprobamate
(Equagesic) for oral use. For adults, the usual dose is 400 to 800 mg twice
daily. Elderly patients and children aged 6 to 12 years require half the adult
dose.
Chloral Hydrate. Chloral hydrate is a hypnotic agent rarely used in
psychiatry because numerous safer options, such as benzodiazepines, are
available.
PHARMACOLOGIC ACTIONS. Chloral hydrate is well absorbed from the GI tract.

The parent compound is metabolized within minutes by the liver to the active
metabolite trichloroethanol, which has a half-life of 8 to 11 hours. A dose of
chloral hydrate induces sleep in about 30 to 60 minutes and maintains sleep
for 4 to 8 hours. It probably potentiates GABAergic neurotransmission,
which suppresses neuronal excitability.
THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS. The FDA lists chloral hydrate as an unapproved

drug that is still prescribed by clinicians, however it has no FDA-approved
indication. The primary use in clinical practice for chloral hydrate is to
induce sleep. It should be used for no more than 2 or 3 days because longerterm treatment is associated with an increased incidence and severity of
adverse effects. Tolerance develops to the hypnotic effects of chloral hydrate
after 2 weeks of treatment. The benzodiazepines are superior to chloral
hydrate for all psychiatric uses.


<<<PAGE 2141>>>
PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS. Chloral hydrate has adverse effects

on the CNS, GI system, and skin. High doses (>4 g) may be associated with
stupor, confusion, ataxia, falls, or coma. The GI effects include nonspecific
irritation, nausea, vomiting, flatulence, and an unpleasant taste. With longterm use and overdose, gastritis and gastric ulceration can develop. Along
with tolerance, dependence on chloral hydrate can occur. The symptoms are
similar to those of alcohol dependence. With a lethal dose between 5,000 and
10,000 mg, chloral hydrate is a particularly poor choice for potentially
suicidal persons.
Because of metabolic interference, chloral hydrate
should be strictly avoided with alcohol, a notorious concoction known as a
Mickey Finn. Chloral hydrate may displace warfarin (Coumadin) from
plasma proteins and enhance anticoagulant activity; this combination should
be avoided.
DRUG INTERACTIONS.

Chloral hydrate administration can lead to
false-positive results for urine glucose determinations that use cupric sulfate
(e.g., Clinitest) but not in tests that use glucose oxidase (e.g., Clinistix and
Tes-Tape). Chloral hydrate can also interfere with the determination of
urinary catecholamines and 17-hydroxycorticosteroids.
LABORATORY INTERFERENCES.

DOSING AND CLINICAL GUIDELINES. Chloral hydrate is available in 500-mg

capsules; 500-mg/5-mL solution; and 324-, 500-, and 648-mg rectal
suppositories. The standard dose of chloral hydrate is 500 to 2,000 mg at
bedtime. Because the drug is a GI irritant, it should be administered with
excess water, milk, other liquids, or antacids to decrease gastric irritation.
Propofol. Propofol (Diprivan) is a GABAA agonist that is used as an
anesthetic. It induces the presynaptic release of GABA and dopamine (the
latter possibly through action on GABAB receptors) and is a partial agonist at
dopamine D2 and NMDA receptors. Because it is very lipid-soluble, it
crosses the blood–brain barrier readily and induces anesthesia in less than 1
minute. Rapid redistribution from the CNS results in an offset of action
within 3 to 8 minutes after the infusion is discontinued. It is well tolerated


<<<PAGE 2142>>>
when used for conscious sedation, but it has a potential for acute adverse
effects, including respiratory depression, apnea, and bradyarrhythmias, and
the prolonged infusion can cause acidosis and mitochondrial myopathies. The
carrier used for the infusion is a soybean emulsion that can be a culture
medium for various organisms. Also, the carrier can impair macrophage
function and cause hematologic and lipid abnormalities and anaphylactic
reactions.
Etomidate. Etomidate is a carboxylated imidazole that acts at the β2 and β3
subunits of the GABAA receptor. It has a rapid onset (1 minute) and short
duration (less than 5 minutes) of action. The propylene glycol vehicle has
been linked to hyperosmolar metabolic acidosis. It has both proconvulsant
and anticonvulsant properties, and it inhibits cortisol release, with possible
adverse consequences after long-term use. It has been used in anesthesia as it
is unlikely to affect blood pressure, however it has largely been replaced by
newer medications.

21.5 Drugs Used to Treat Sleep Disorders
NONBENZODIAZEPINE GABA AGONISTS
Several of the benzodiazepines are commonly used for sleep, such as
flurazepam, temazepam, quazepam, estazolam, and triazolam. Temazepam,
flurazepam, and triazolam are benzodiazepines used for insomnia; these are
discussed with the other benzodiazepines under the anxiolytic section.
Nonbenzodiazepine agonists, such as zolpidem (Ambien), zaleplon (Sonata),
and eszopiclone (Lunesta)—the so-called “Z drugs”—are similar to these
drugs as they bind at a location close to the benzodiazepine receptor
Pharmacologic Action
Zaleplon, zolpidem, and eszopiclone are structurally distinct and vary in their
binding to the GABA receptor subunits. Benzodiazepines activate all three
specific GABA–benzodiazepine (GABA–BZ) binding sites of the GABAAreceptor, which opens chloride channels and reduces the rate of neuronal and


<<<PAGE 2143>>>
muscle firing. Zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone have selectivity for
specific subunits of the GABA receptor. This specificity may account for
their selective sedative effects and relative lack of muscle relaxant and
anticonvulsant effects.
Zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone are rapidly and well absorbed after
oral administration, although absorption can be delayed by as long as 1 hour
if they are taken with food. Zolpidem reaches peak plasma concentrations in
1.6 hours and has a half-life of 2.6 hours. Zaleplon reaches peak plasma
concentrations in 1 hour and has a half-life of 1 hour. Eszopiclone reaches
peak plasma concentrations in 1 hour. If taken immediately after a high-fat or
heavy meal, the peak is delayed by approximately 1 hour, reducing the
effects of eszopiclone on sleep onset. The terminal-phase elimination half-life
is approximately 6 hours in healthy adults. Eszopiclone is weakly bound to
plasma protein (52 to 59 percent).
The rapid metabolism and lack of active metabolites of zolpidem, zaleplon,
and eszopiclone avoid the accumulation of plasma concentrations compared
with the long-term use of benzodiazepines such as flurazepam or diazepam.
Flumazenil for Benzodiazepine Overdosage. Similar to the
benzodiazepines, flumazenil can reverse the adverse psychomotor, amnestic,
and sedative effects of zolpidem and zaleplon.
Therapeutic Indications
Insomnia. Zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone are also indicated only for
insomnia. Although these “Z drugs” are not usually associated with rebound
insomnia after the discontinuation of their use for short periods, some
patients experience increased sleep difficulties the first few nights after
discontinuing their use. The use of zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone for
periods more extended than 1 month is not associated with the delayed
emergence of adverse effects. No development of tolerance to any parameter
of sleep measurement was observed over 6 months in clinical trials of
eszopiclone.
γ-Hydroxybutyrate (GHB, Xyrem), which is approved for the treatment of
narcolepsy and improves slow-wave sleep, is also an agonist at the GABAA
receptor, where it binds to specific GHB receptors. GHB has the capacity


<<<PAGE 2144>>>
both to reduce drug craving and to induce dependence, abuse, and absence
seizures as a result of complex actions on tegmental dopaminergic systems.
Parkinson Disease. A small number of persons with idiopathic Parkinson
disease respond to long-term use of zolpidem with reduced bradykinesia and
rigidity. Zolpidem dosages of 10 mg four times daily may be tolerated
without sedation for several years.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Zolpidem and zaleplon are generally well tolerated. At zolpidem dosages of
10 mg/day and zaleplon dosages above 10 mg/day, a small number of persons
will experience dizziness, drowsiness, dyspepsia, or diarrhea. Zolpidem and
zaleplon are secreted in breast milk and are therefore contraindicated for use
by nursing mothers. The dosage of zolpidem and zaleplon should be reduced
in elderly persons and persons with hepatic impairment.
Zolpidem (Ambien) has been associated with automatic behavior and
amnesia. In rare cases, zolpidem may cause hallucinations and behavioral
changes. The coadministration of zolpidem and SSRIs may extend the
duration of hallucinations in susceptible patients. Eszopiclone exhibits a
dose–response relationship in elderly adults for the side effects of pain, dry
mouth, and unpleasant taste.
Zolpidem and zaleplon can produce a mild withdrawal syndrome lasting 1
day after prolonged use at higher therapeutic dosages. Rarely, a person taking
zolpidem has self-titrated up the daily dosage to 30 to 40 mg a day. Abrupt
discontinuation of such a high dosage of zolpidem may cause withdrawal
symptoms for 4 or more days. Tolerance does not develop to the sedative
effects of zolpidem and zaleplon.
Drug Interactions
These agents are most dangerous when used with other CNS depressants,
such as alcohol, barbituates, opioids, and similar drugs. Cimetidine increases
the plasma concentrations of zaleplon.
Rifampin (Rifadin), phenytoin (Dilantin), carbamazepine, and
phenobarbital (Solfoton, Luminal) significantly increase the metabolism of
zaleplon.


<<<PAGE 2145>>>
The CYP3A4 and CYP2E1 enzymes are involved in the metabolism of
eszopiclone. Eszopiclone did not show any inhibitory potential on CYP450
1A2, 2A6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4 in cryopreserved human
hepatocytes.
Laboratory Interferences
No known laboratory interferences are associated with the use of zolpidem
and zaleplon.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Zaleplon is available in 5- and 10-mg capsules. A single 10-mg dose is the
usual adult dose. The dose can be increased to a maximum of 20 mg as
tolerated. A single dose of zaleplon can be expected to provide 4 hours of
sleep with minimal residual impairment. For persons older than age 65 years
or persons with hepatic impairment, an initial dose of 5 mg is advised.
Eszopiclone is available in 1-, 2-, and 3-mg tablets. The starting dose
should not exceed 1 mg in patients with severe hepatic impairment or those
taking potent CYP3A4 inhibitors. The recommended dosing to improve sleep
onset or maintenance is 2 or 3 mg for adult patients (ages 18 to 64 years) and
2 mg for older adult patients (ages 65 years and older). The 1-mg dose is for
sleep onset in older adult patients whose primary complaint is difficulty
falling asleep.
Zolpidem is available in 5- and 10-mg capsules, and 6.25- and 12.5-mg
capsules for the controlled-release capsules. There is also a sublingual tablet
and an oropharyngeal spray. The controlled-release form is usually for
problems with sleep maintenance. The sublingual and oropharyngeal forms
are for difficulties with taking the pill, or in particular circumstances. For
example, the sublingual can be used for middle of the night awakening. With
the oral capsule, the starting dose is 5 mg for females and 5 to 10 mg for
males before bedtime. A single 10-mg dose is the usual adult dose (6.25- or
12.5-mg of the controlled release). The capsule should only be taken at the
beginning of the night, as the drug can impair a person if they attempt activity
within 7 to 8 hours of using the drug. For persons older than age 65 years or
persons who are medically frail, 5 mg is the recommended dose.


<<<PAGE 2146>>>
MELATONIN AGONISTS: RAMELTEON AND MELATONIN
There are two melatonin receptor agonists commercially available in the
United States: (1) melatonin, a dietary supplement available in various
preparations in health food stores, and not under FDA regulations; (2) and
ramelteon (Rozerem), an FDA-approved drug for the treatment of insomnia
characterized by difficulties with sleep onset. Both exogenous melatonin and
ramelteon are thought to exert their effects by interaction with central
melatonin receptors.
Ramelteon
Ramelteon (Rozerem) is a melatonin receptor agonist used to treat sleeponset insomnia. Unlike the benzodiazepines, ramelteon has no appreciable
affinity for the GABA receptor complex.
Pharmacologic Actions. Ramelteon essentially mimics melatonin’s
sleep-promoting properties and has a high affinity for melatonin MT1 and
MT2 receptors in the brain. These receptors are thought to be critical in the
regulation of the body’s sleep–wake cycle.
Ramelteon is rapidly absorbed and eliminated over a dose range of 4 to 64
mg. Maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) is reached approximately 45
minutes after administration, and the elimination half-life is 1 to 2.6 hours.
The total absorption of ramelteon is at least 84 percent, but extensive firstpass metabolism results in a bioavailability of approximately 2 percent.
Ramelteon is metabolized primarily through the CYP1A2 pathway and
eliminated principally in urine. Repeated once-daily dosing does not appear
to result in accumulation, likely because of the compound’s short half-life.
Therapeutic Indications. The FDA-approved ramelteon for the treatment
of insomnia characterized by difficulty with sleep onset. Potential off-label
use is centered on the application in circadian rhythm disorders,
predominantly jet lag, delayed sleep phase syndrome, and shift work sleep
disorder.
Clinical trials and animal studies have failed to demonstrate evidence of
rebound insomnia or withdrawal effects.


<<<PAGE 2147>>>
Precautions and Adverse Events. Headache is the most common side
effect of ramelteon. Other adverse effects may include somnolence, fatigue,
dizziness, worsening insomnia, depression, nausea, and diarrhea. We should
not use the drug in patients with severe hepatic impairment. It is also not
recommended in patients with severe sleep apnea or severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Prolactin levels may be increased in women.
The drug should be used with caution, if at all, in nursing mothers and
pregnant women.
Ramelteon has been found sometimes to decrease blood cortisol and
testosterone and to increase prolactin. Female patients should be monitored
for the cessation of menses and galactorrhea, decreased libido, and fertility
problems. The safety and effectiveness of ramelteon in children has not been
established.
Drug Interactions. CYP1A2 is the major isozyme involved in the hepatic
metabolism of ramelteon. Accordingly, fluvoxamine (Luvox) and other
CYP1A2 inhibitors may increase the side effects of ramelteon.
Ramelteon should be administered with caution in patients taking CYP1A2
inhibitors, potent CYP3A4 inhibitors such as ketoconazole, and strong
CYP2C inhibitors such as fluconazole (Diflucan). No clinically meaningful
interactions were found when ramelteon was coadministered with
omeprazole, theophylline, dextromethorphan, midazolam, digoxin, and
warfarin.
Dosing and Clinical Guidelines. The usual dose of ramelteon is 8 mg
within 30 minutes of going to bed. It should not be taken with or immediately
after high-fat meals.
Melatonin
Melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine) is a hormone produced mainly at
night in the pineal gland. Ingested melatonin can reach and bind to
melatonin-binding sites in the brains of mammals and produce somnolence
when used at high doses. Melatonin is available as a dietary supplement and
is not a medication. Few well-controlled clinical trials have been conducted
to determine its effectiveness in treating such conditions as insomnia, jet lag,
and sleep disturbances related to shift work.


<<<PAGE 2148>>>
Pharmacologic Actions. Melatonin’s secretion is stimulated by the dark
and inhibited by the light. It is naturally synthesized from the amino acid
tryptophan, which is converted to serotonin and finally converted to
melatonin. The suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus have
melatonin receptors, and melatonin may have a direct action on SCN to
influence circadian rhythms, which are relevant for jet lag and sleep
disturbances. In addition to the pineal gland, melatonin is also produced in
the retina and GI tract.
Melatonin has a very short half-life of 0.5 to 6 minutes. Plasma
concentrations are a function of the dose administered and the endogenous
rhythm. Approximately 90 percent of melatonin is cleared through the firstpass metabolism by way of the CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 pathways. Elimination
occurs principally in urine.
Exogenous melatonin interacts with the melatonin receptors that suppress
neuronal firing and promote sleep. There does not appear to be a dose–
response relationship between exogenous melatonin administrations and
sleep effects.
Therapeutic Indications. Melatonin is approved for insomnia in the
European Union and several other countries, however, it is not approved by
the FDA for any medical use. It is sold over the counter in the United States
and Canada but requires a prescription in some other countries such as the
United Kingdom. Individuals have used exogenous melatonin to address
sleep difficulties (insomnia, circadian rhythm disorders), cancer (breast,
prostate, colorectal), seizures, depression, anxiety, and seasonal affective
disorder. Some studies suggest that exogenous melatonin may have some
antioxidant effects and antiaging properties.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Adverse events associated with
melatonin include fatigue, dizziness, headache, irritability, and somnolence.
Disorientation, confusion, sleepwalking, vivid dreams, and nightmares have
also been observed, often with effects resolving after melatonin
administration was suspended.
Melatonin may reduce fertility in both men and women. In men,
exogenous melatonin reduces sperm motility, and long-term administration
has been shown to inhibit testicular aromatase levels. In women, exogenous


<<<PAGE 2149>>>
melatonin may inhibit ovarian function, and for that reason, it has been
evaluated as a contraceptive, but with inconclusive results.
Drug Interactions. As a dietary supplement preparation, exogenous
melatonin is not regulated by the FDA and has not been subjected to the same
type of drug interaction studies that were performed for ramelteon. Caution is
suggested in coadministering melatonin with blood thinners (e.g., warfarin
[Coumadin], aspirin, and heparin), antiseizure medications, and medications
that lower BP.
Laboratory Interference. Melatonin is not known to interfere with any
commonly used clinical laboratory tests.
Dosage and Administration. Over-the-counter melatonin is available in
the following formulations: 1-, 2.5-, 3-, and 5-mg capsules; 1-mg/4-mL
liquid; 0.5- and 3-mg lozenges; 2.5-mg sublingual tablets; and 1-, 2-, and 3mg timed-release tablets.
Standard recommendations are to take the desired melatonin dose at
bedtime, but some evidence from clinical trials suggests that dosing up to 2
hours before habitual bedtime may produce a more significant improvement
in sleep onset.
Agomelatine (Valdoxan). Agomelatine is structurally related to melatonin
and is used in Europe as a treatment for MDD. It acts as an agonist at
melatonin (MT1 and MT2) receptors. It also acts as a serotonin antagonist.
Analysis of agomelatine clinical trial data raised serious questions about the
efficacy and safety of the drug. The drug is not being marketed in the United
States.

PRAZOSIN
Prazosin (Minipress) is a quinazoline derivative and one of a new chemical
class of antihypertensives. It is an α1-adrenergic receptor antagonist as
opposed to the drugs mentioned above, which are α2-blockers.
Pharmacologic Actions


<<<PAGE 2150>>>
The exact mechanism of the hypotensive action of prazosin, and how it
suppresses nightmares, is unknown. Prazosin causes a decrease in total
peripheral resistance that is related to its action as an α1-adrenergic receptor
antagonist. BP is lowered in both the supine and standing positions. This
effect is most pronounced on the diastolic BP. After oral administration,
human plasma concentrations reach a peak at about 3 hours with a plasma
half-life of 2 to 3 hours. The drug is highly bound to plasma protein.
Tolerance has not been observed to develop with long-term therapy.
Therapeutic Action
Prazosin is used in psychiatry to suppress nightmares, particularly those
associated with PTSD.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
During clinical trials and subsequent marketing experience, the most frequent
reactions were dizziness (10.3 percent); headache (7.8 percent); drowsiness
(7.6 percent); lack of energy (6.9 percent); weakness (6.5 percent);
palpitations (5.3 percent); and nausea (4.9 percent). In most instances, side
effects disappeared with continued therapy or have been tolerated with no
decrease in the dose of the drug. Prazosin should not be used in nursing
mothers or during pregnancy.
Drug Interactions
No adverse drug interactions have been reported.
Laboratory Interferences
No laboratory interferences have been reported.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
The drug is supplied in 1-, 2-, and 5-mg capsules and a nasal spray. The
therapeutic dosages most commonly used have ranged from 6 to 15 mg daily
given in divided doses. Doses higher than 20 mg do not increase efficacy.
When adding a diuretic or other antihypertensive agent, the dose should be
reduced to 1 or 2 mg three times a day, and retitration then carried out.


<<<PAGE 2151>>>
Concomitant use with a PDE-5 inhibitor can result in additive BP-lowering
effects and symptomatic hypotension; therefore, PDE-5 inhibitor therapy
should be initiated at the lowest dose in patients taking prazosin.

21.6 Stimulants
STIMULANT DRUGS AND ATOMOXETINE
Stimulant drugs increase motivation, mood, energy, and wakefulness. They
are also called sympathomimetics because they mimic the physiologic effects
of the neurotransmitter epinephrine. Several chemical classes are included in
this group.
Currently, these drugs are most commonly used to treat symptoms of poor
concentration and hyperactivity in children and adults with ADHD.
Paradoxically, many patients with ADHD find that these drugs can have a
calming effect. Sympathomimetics are also approved for use in increasing
alertness in narcolepsy.
Amphetamines were the first stimulants to be synthesized. They were
created in the late 19th century and were used by Bavarian soldiers in the
mid-1880s to maintain wakefulness, alertness, energy, and confidence in
combat. They have been used similarly in most wars since then. They were
not widely used clinically until the 1930s when they were marketed as
Benzedrine inhalers for relief of nasal congestion. When their
psychostimulant effects were noted, these drugs were used to treat sleepiness
associated with narcolepsy. They have been classified as controlled drugs
because of their rapid onset, immediate behavioral effects, and propensity to
develop tolerance, which leads to the risk of abuse and dependence in
vulnerable individuals. State and federal agencies regulate their manufacture,
distribution, and use. In 2005, pemoline was withdrawn from the market
because of significant risks of treatment-emergent hepatotoxicity.
Sympathomimetics have been widely used in persons with ADHD and
narcolepsy because no equally effective agents have been available. They
have also been found useful in treating certain cognitive disorders that result
in secondary depression or profound apathy (e.g., AIDS, multiple sclerosis,


<<<PAGE 2152>>>
poststroke depression, dementia, closed head injury) as well as in the
augmentation of antidepressant medications in specific treatment-resistant
depressions.
Atomoxetine is included in this section because it is used to treat ADHD,
even though it is not a psychostimulant.
Pharmacologic Actions
All of these drugs are well absorbed from the GI tract. Amphetamine
(Adderall) and dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine, Dextrostat) reach peak
plasma concentrations in 2 to 3 hours and have a half-life of about 6 hours,
thereby necessitating once- or twice-daily dosing. Methylphenidate is
available in immediate-release (Ritalin), sustainedrelease (Ritalin SR), and extended-release (Concerta) formulations.
Immediate-release methylphenidate reaches peak plasma concentrations in 1
to 2 hours and has a short half-life of 2 to 3 hours, thereby necessitating
multiple-daily dosing. The sustained-release formulation reaches peak plasma
concentrations in 4 to 5 hours and doubles the effective half-life of
methylphenidate. The extended-release formulation reaches peak plasma
concentrations in 6 to 8 hours and is designed to be effective for 12 hours in
once-daily dosing. Dexmethylphenidate (Focalin) reaches peak plasma
concentration in about 3 hours and is prescribed twice daily.
Lisdexamfetamine dimesylate, also known as L-lysine D-amphetamine
(Vyvanse), is an amphetamine prodrug. In this formulation,
dextroamphetamine is coupled with the amino acid L-lysine.
Lisdexamfetamine becomes active upon cleavage of the lysine portion of the
molecule by enzymes in the red blood cells. This results in the gradual
release of dextroamphetamine into the bloodstream. Apart from having an
extended duration of action, this formulation reduces its abuse potential. It is
the only prodrug of its kind. Lisdexamfetamine is indicated for the treatment
of ADHD in children 6 years and up and in adults as an integral part of a total
treatment program that may include other measures (i.e., psychological,
educational, social). The safety and efficacy of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate
in patients 3 to 5 years old has not been established. In contrast to Adderall,
which contains approximately 75 percent dextroamphetamine and 25 percent
levoamphetamine, lisdexamfetamine is a single, dextro-enantiomer


<<<PAGE 2153>>>
amphetamine molecule. In most cases, this makes the drug better tolerated,
but some patients experience a more significant benefit from the mixed
isomer preparation.
Methylphenidate, dextroamphetamine, and amphetamine are indirectly
acting sympathomimetics, with the primary effect causing the release of
catecholamines from presynaptic neurons. Their clinical effectiveness is
associated with increased release of both dopamine and norepinephrine.
Dextroamphetamine and methylphenidate are also weak inhibitors of
catecholamine reuptake and inhibitors of monoamine oxidase.
In recent years, there has been an explosion of new brand name stimulants.
Most of these are variations of the generic methylphenidate or mixed
amphetamine salts that provide additional options to customize treatment in
terms of dosing and duration of effect.
For modafinil, the specific mechanism of action is unknown. Narcolepsy–
cataplexy results from a deficiency of hypocretin, a hypothalamic
neuropeptide. Hypocretin-producing neurons are activated after modafinil
administration. Modafinil does not appear to work through a dopaminergic
mechanism. It does have α1-adrenergic agonist properties, which may
account for its alerting effects, because the wakefulness induced by modafinil
can be attenuated by prazosin, an α1-adrenergic antagonist. Some evidence
suggests that modafinil has some norepinephrine reuptake blocking effects.
Armodafinil (Nuvigil) is the R-enantiomer of modafinil. Both drugs have
similar clinical effects and side effects.
Therapeutic Indications
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Sympathomimetics
are the first-line drugs for the treatment of ADHD in children and are
effective about 75 percent of the time. Methylphenidate and
dextroamphetamine are equally effective and work within 15 to 30 minutes.
Sympathomimetic drugs decrease hyperactivity, increase attentiveness, and
reduce impulsivity. They may also reduce comorbid oppositional behaviors
associated with ADHD. Many persons take these drugs throughout their
schooling and beyond. In responsive persons, the use of a sympathomimetic
may be a critical determinant of scholastic success.
Sympathomimetics improve the core ADHD symptoms of hyperactivity,


<<<PAGE 2154>>>
impulsivity, and inattentiveness and permit improved social interactions with
teachers, family, other adults, and peers. The success of long-term treatment
of ADHD with sympathomimetics, which are efficacious for most of the
various constellations of ADHD symptoms present from childhood to
adulthood, supports a model in which ADHD results from a genetically
determined neurochemical imbalance that requires lifelong pharmacologic
management.
Methylphenidate is the most commonly used initial agent at a dosage of 5
to 10 mg every 3 to 4 hours. Dosages may be increased to a maximum of 20
mg four times daily or 1 mg/kg a day. Use of the 20-mg sustained-release
formulation to achieve 6 hours of benefit and eliminate the need for dosing at
school is supported by many experts, although other authorities believe it is
less effective than the immediate-release formulation. Dextroamphetamine is
about twice as potent as methylphenidate on a per milligram basis and
provides 6 to 8 hours of benefit. Some 70 percent of nonresponders to one
sympathomimetic may benefit from another. All of the sympathomimetic
drugs should be tried before switching to drugs of a different class. The
previous dictum that sympathomimetics worsen tics and, therefore, should be
avoided by persons with comorbid ADHD and tic disorders has been
questioned. Small dosages of sympathomimetics do not appear to cause an
increase in the frequency and severity of tics. Alternatives to
sympathomimetics for ADHD include bupropion (Wellbutrin), venlafaxine
(Effexor), guanfacine (Tenex), clonidine (Catapres), and tricyclic drugs.
Further studies are needed to determine whether modafinil improves the
symptoms of ADHD.
Short-term use of sympathomimetics induces a euphoric feeling; however,
tolerance develops for both the euphoric feeling and the sympathomimetic
activity.
Narcolepsy and Hypersomnolence. Narcolepsy consists of sudden
sleep attacks (narcolepsy), sudden loss of postural tone (cataplexy), loss of
voluntary motor control going into (hypnagogic) or coming out of
(hypnopompic) sleep (sleep paralysis), and hypnagogic or hypnopompic
hallucinations. Sympathomimetics reduce narcoleptic sleep attacks and
improve wakefulness in other types of hypersomnolent states. Modafinil is
approved as an antisomnolence agent for the treatment of narcolepsy, for


<<<PAGE 2155>>>
people who cannot adjust to night shift work, and for those who do not sleep
well because of obstructive sleep apnea.
Other sympathomimetics are also used to maintain wakefulness and
accuracy of motor performance in persons subject to sleep deprivation, such
as pilots and military personnel. Persons with narcolepsy, unlike persons with
ADHD, may develop a tolerance for the therapeutic effects of
sympathomimetics.
In direct comparison with amphetamine-like drugs, modafinil is equally
useful at maintaining wakefulness, with a lower risk of excessive activation.
Depressive Disorders. Sympathomimetics may be used for treatmentresistant depressive disorders, usually as augmentation of standard
antidepressant drug therapy. Possible indications for the use of
sympathomimetics as monotherapy include depression in elderly persons,
who are at increased risk for adverse effects from standard antidepressant
drugs; depression in medically ill persons, especially persons with AIDS;
obtundation caused by chronic use of opioids; and clinical situations in which
a rapid response is necessary but for which ECT is contraindicated.
Depressed patients with abulia and anergia may also benefit.
Dextroamphetamine may be useful in differentiating pseudodementia of
depression from dementia. A depressed person generally responds to a 5-mg
dose with increased alertness and improved cognition. Sympathomimetics are
thought to provide only short-term benefit (2 to 4 weeks) for depression
because most persons rapidly develop a tolerance for the antidepressant
effects of the drugs. However, some clinicians report that long-term treatment
with sympathomimetics can benefit some persons.
Encephalopathy Caused by Brain Injury. Sympathomimetics increase
alertness, cognition, motivation, and motor performance in persons with
neurologic deficits caused by strokes, trauma, tumors, or chronic infections.
Treatment with sympathomimetics may permit earlier and more robust
participation in rehabilitative programs. Poststroke lethargy and apathy may
respond to long-term use of sympathomimetics.
Obesity. Sympathomimetics are used in the treatment of obesity because of
their anorexia-inducing effects. Because tolerance develops for the anorectic


<<<PAGE 2156>>>
effects and because of the drugs’ high abuse potential, their use for this
indication is limited. Of the sympathomimetic drugs, phentermine (Adipex-P,
Fastin) is the most widely used for appetite suppression. Phentermine was the
second half of “fen-phen,” an off-label combination of fenfluramine and
phentermine, widely used to promote weight loss. Fenfluramine and
dexfenfluramine were withdrawn from the market because of their adverse
effect, including cardiac valvular insufficiency, primary pulmonary
hypertension, and irreversible loss of cerebral serotoninergic nerve fibers.
The toxicity of fenfluramine is attributed to the fact that it stimulates the
release of massive amounts of serotonin from nerve endings, a mechanism of
action not shared by phentermine. The use of phentermine alone has not been
reported to cause the same adverse effects like those caused by fenfluramine
or dexfenfluramine.
Careful limitations of caloric intake and judicious exercise are at the core
of any successful weight loss program. Sympathomimetic drugs facilitate the
loss of, at most, an additional fraction of a pound per week.
Sympathomimetic drugs are effective appetite suppressants only for the first
few weeks of use; then, the anorexigenic effects tend to decrease.
Fatigue. Between 70 and 90 percent of individuals with multiple sclerosis
experience fatigue. Modafinil, armodafinil, amphetamines, methylphenidate,
and the dopamine receptor agonist amantadine (Symmetrel) are sometimes
useful in combating this symptom. Other causes of fatigue, such as chronic
fatigue syndrome, respond to stimulants in many cases.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
The most common adverse effects associated with amphetamine-like drugs
are stomach pain, anxiety, irritability, insomnia, tachycardia, cardiac
arrhythmias, and dysphoria. Sympathomimetics cause a decreased appetite,
although tolerance usually develops for this effect. The treatment of common
adverse effects in children with ADHD is usually straightforward (Table 2149). The drugs can also cause increases in heart rate and BP and may cause
palpitations. Less common adverse effects include the possible induction of
movement disorders, such as tics, Tourette disorder–like symptoms, and
dyskinesias, all of which are often self-limited over 7 to 10 days. If a person


<<<PAGE 2157>>>
taking a sympathomimetic develops one of these movement disorders, a
correlation between the dose of the medication and the severity of the
disorder must be firmly established before adjustments are made in the
medication dosage. In severe cases, augmentation with risperidone
(Risperdal), clonidine (Catapres), or guanfacine (Tenex) is necessary.
Methylphenidate may worsen tics in one-third of persons; these persons fall
into two groups: those whose methylphenidate-induced tics resolve
immediately upon the metabolism of the dosage, and a smaller group in
whom methylphenidate appears to trigger tics that persist for several months
but eventually resolve spontaneously.
Table 21-49
Management of Common Stimulant-Induced Adverse Effects
in Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Adverse Effect

Management

Anorexia,
nausea,
weight loss

• Administer stimulant with meals.
• Use caloric-enhanced supplements. Discourage
forcing meals.

Insomnia,
nightmares

• Administer stimulants earlier in day.
• Change to short-acting preparations.
• Discontinue afternoon or evening dosing.
• Consider adjunctive treatment (e.g.,
antihistamines, clonidine, antidepressants).

Dizziness

• Monitor BP.
• Encourage fluid intake.
• Change to long-acting form.

Rebound
phenomena

• Overlap stimulant dosing.
• Change to long-acting preparation or combine
long- and short-acting preparations.
• Consider adjunctive or alternative treatment
(e.g., clonidine, antidepressants).

Irritability

• Assess timing of phenomena (during peak or


<<<PAGE 2158>>>
withdrawal phase).
• Evaluate comorbid symptoms.
• Reduce dose.
• Consider adjunctive or alternative treatment
(e.g., lithium, antidepressants, anticonvulsants).
Dysphoria,
moodiness,
agitation

• Consider comorbid diagnosis (e.g., mood
disorder).
• Reduce dosage or change to long-acting
preparation.
• Consider adjunctive or alternative treatment
(e.g., lithium, anticonvulsants, antidepressants).

BP, blood pressure.
From Wilens TE, Blederman J. The stimulants. In: Shaffer D, ed. The Psychiatric Clinics of
North America: Pediatric Psychopharmacology. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 1992, with
permission.

Longitudinal studies do not indicate that sympathomimetics cause growth
suppression. Sympathomimetics may exacerbate glaucoma, hypertension,
cardiovascular disorders, hyperthyroidism, anxiety disorders, psychotic
disorders, and seizure disorders.
High dosages of sympathomimetics can cause dry mouth, pupillary
dilation, bruxism, formication, excessive ebullience, restlessness, emotional
lability, and occasionally seizures. Long-term use of high dosages can cause a
delusional disorder that resembles paranoid schizophrenia. Seizures can be
treated with benzodiazepines, cardiac effects with β-adrenergic receptor
antagonists, fever with cooling blankets, and delirium with DRAs.
Overdosages of sympathomimetics result in hypertension, tachycardia,
hyperthermia, toxic psychosis, delirium, hyperpyrexia, convulsions, coma,
chest pain, arrhythmia, heart block, hypertension or hypotension, shock, and
nausea. Toxic effects of amphetamines can be seen at 30 mg, but
idiosyncratic toxicity can occur at doses as low as 2 mg. Conversely, survival
has been reported up to 500 mg.
The most limiting adverse effect of sympathomimetics is their association
with psychological and physical dependence. At the doses used for the
treatment of ADHD, the development of psychological dependence virtually


<<<PAGE 2159>>>
never occurs. The more considerable concern is the presence of adolescent or
adult cohabitants who might confiscate the supply of sympathomimetics for
abuse or sale.
The use of sympathomimetics should be avoided during pregnancy,
especially during the first trimester. Dextroamphetamine and
methylphenidate pass into the breast milk, and it is not known whether
modafinil or armodafinil do.
Drug Interactions
Sympathomimetics decrease the metabolism of several drugs, thus increasing
their plasma levels. These drugs include tricyclic or tetracyclic
antidepressants, warfarin (Coumadin), primidone (Mysoline), phenobarbital
(Luminal), phenytoin (Dilantin), or phenylbutazone (Butazolidin).
Sympathomimetics decrease the therapeutic efficacy of many
antihypertensive drugs, especially guanethidine (Esimil, Ismelin). The
sympathomimetics should be used with extreme caution with MAOIs.
Laboratory Interferences
Dextroamphetamine may elevate plasma corticosteroid levels and interfere
with some assay methods for urinary corticosteroids.
Dosage and Administration
Many psychiatrists believe that governmental authorities have overly
regulated amphetamine use. Amphetamines are listed as schedule II drugs by
the Drug Enforcement Agency. Some states keep a registry of patients who
receive amphetamines. Such mandates worry both patients and physicians
about breaches in confidentiality, and physicians are concerned that official
agencies may misinterpret their prescribing practices. Consequently, some
physicians may withhold prescription of sympathomimetics, even from
persons who may benefit from the medications.
The dosage ranges and the available preparations for sympathomimetics
are presented in Table 21-50. Vyvanse dosing is a particular case because
many patients are switched to this formulation after being treated with other
stimulants. A conversion table is shown in Table 21-51. It is available in 20-,
30-, 40-, 50-, 60-, and 70-mg capsules. Dosage should be individualized


<<<PAGE 2160>>>
according to the therapeutic needs and response of the patient.
Lisdexamfetamine (Vyvanse) should be administered at the lowest effective
dosage. In patients who are either starting treatment for the first time or
switching from another medication, 30 mg once daily in the morning is the
recommended dose. Dosages may go up or down in 10 or 20 mg increments
in intervals of approximately 1 week. Patients should avoid taking the drug in
the afternoon, as this may cause insomnia. The drug may be taken with or
without food.
Dextroamphetamine, methylphenidate, amphetamine, benzphetamine, and
methamphetamine are schedule II drugs and, in some states, require triplicate
prescriptions. Phendimetrazine (Adipost, Bontril) and phenmetrazine
(Prelude) are schedule III drugs, and modafinil, armodafinil, phentermine,
diethylpropion (Tenuate), and mazindol (Mazanor, Sanorex) are schedule IV
drugs.
Pretreatment evaluation should include an evaluation of the patient’s
cardiac function, with particular attention to the presence of hypertension or
tachyarrhythmias. The clinician should also examine the patient for the
presence of movement disorders, such as tics and dyskinesia, because the
administration of sympathomimetics can exacerbate these conditions. If tics
are present, many experts will not prescribe sympathomimetics but will
instead choose clonidine or antidepressants. However, recent data indicate
that sympathomimetics may cause only a mild increase in motor tics and may
suppress vocal tics. Liver function and renal function should be assessed, and
dosages of sympathomimetics should be reduced for persons with impaired
metabolism.
Table 21-50
Selected
Sympathomimetics
Psychiatry

Commonly

Used

in


<<<PAGE 2161>>>
Table 21-51
Lisdexamfetamine
Conversions

(Vyvanse)

Dosage

Vyvanse and Adderall XR
Vyvanse

Adderall XR

20 mg

5 mg

30 mg

10 mg

40 mg

15 mg

50 mg

20 mg

60 mg

25 mg

70 mg

30 mg
Vyvanse, Adderall IR, and Dexedrine

Equivalency


<<<PAGE 2162>>>
Vyvanse

Adderall IR

Dexedrine

70 mg

30 mg

22.5 mg

50 mg

20 mg

15 mg

30 mg

10 mg

7.5 mg

XR, extended release; IR, immediate-release.

Persons with ADHD can take immediate-release methylphenidate at 8 AM,
12 noon, and 4 PM. Dextroamphetamine, Adderall, sustainedrelease methylphenidate, or 18 mg of extended-release methylphenidate may
be taken once at 8 AM. The starting dose of methylphenidate ranges from 2.5
mg of regular to 20 mg of the sustained-release formulation. If this is
inadequate, it may be increased to a maximum dose of 80 mg in children and
90 mg daily in adults. The dosage of dextroamphetamine is 2.5 to 40 mg a
day up to 0.5 mg/kg a day.
The starting dosage of modafinil is 200 mg in the morning in medically
healthy individuals and 100 mg in the morning in persons with hepatic
impairment. Some persons take a second 100- or 200-mg dose in the
afternoon. The maximum recommended daily dosage is 400 mg, although
dosages of 600 to 1,200 mg a day have been used safely. Adverse effects
become prominent at dosages greater than 400 mg a day. Compared with
amphetamine-like drugs, modafinil promotes wakefulness but produces less
attentiveness and less irritability. Some persons with excessive daytime
sleepiness extend the activity of the morning modafinil dose with an
afternoon dose of methylphenidate. Armodafinil is virtually identical to
modafinil but is dosed differently, the dosing range being 50 to 250 mg daily.

ATOMOXETINE (STRATTERA)
Atomoxetine is the first nonstimulant drug to be approved by the FDA as a
treatment of ADHD in children, adolescents, and adults. It is included in this
chapter because it shares this indication with the stimulants described earlier.
Pharmacologic Actions
Atomoxetine is believed to produce a therapeutic effect through selective


<<<PAGE 2163>>>
inhibition of the presynaptic norepinephrine transporter. It is well absorbed
after oral administration and is minimally affected by food. High-fat meals
may decrease the rate but not the extent of absorption. Maximum plasma
concentrations are reached after approximately 1 to 2 hours. At therapeutic
concentrations, 98 percent of atomoxetine in plasma is bound to protein,
mainly albumin. Atomoxetine has a half-life of approximately 5 hours and is
metabolized principally by the CYP2D6 pathway. Poor metabolizers of this
compound reach a fivefold higher area under the curve and fivefold higher
peak plasma concentration than normal or extensive metabolizers. This
variation is critical to consider in patients receiving medications that inhibit
the CYP2D6 enzyme. For example, the antidepressant-like pharmacology of
atomoxetine has led to its use as an add-on to SSRIs or other antidepressants.
Drugs such as fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), and bupropion
(Wellbutrin) are CYP2D6 inhibitors and may raise atomoxetine levels.
Therapeutic Indications
Atomoxetine is used for the treatment of ADHD. It should be considered for
use in patients who find stimulants too activating or who experience other
intolerable side effects. Because atomoxetine has no abuse potential, it is a
reasonable choice in the treatment of patients with both ADHD and substance
abuse, patients who complain of ADHD symptoms but are suspected of
seeking stimulant drugs, and patients who are in recovery.
Atomoxetine may enhance cognition when used to treat patients with
schizophrenia. It may also be used as an alternative or add-on to
antidepressants in patients who fail to respond to standard therapies.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Common side effects of atomoxetine include abdominal discomfort,
decreased appetite with resulting weight loss, sexual dysfunction, dizziness,
vertigo, irritability, and mood swings. Minor increases in BP and heart rate
have also been observed. There have been cases of severe liver injury in a
small number of patients taking atomoxetine. The drug should be
discontinued in patients with jaundice (yellowing of the skin or whites of the
eyes, itching) or laboratory evidence of liver injury. Atomoxetine should not
be taken at the same time as, or within 2 weeks of taking, an MAOI or by


<<<PAGE 2164>>>
patients with narrow-angle glaucoma.
The effects of overdose greater than twice the maximum recommended
daily dose in humans are unknown. No specific information is available on
the treatment of overdose with atomoxetine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Atomoxetine is available as 10-, 18-, 25-, 40-, and 60-mg capsules. In
children and adolescents who weigh up to 70 kg, atomoxetine should be
initiated at a total daily dose of approximately 0.5 mg/kg and increased after a
minimum of 3 days to a target total daily dose of approximately 1.2 mg/kg,
administered either as a single daily dose in the morning or as evenly divided
doses in the morning and late afternoon or early evening. The total daily dose
in smaller children and adolescents should not exceed 1.4 mg/kg or 100 mg,
whichever is less. Dosing of children and adolescents who weigh more than
70 kg and adults should start at a total daily dose of 40 mg and then be
increased after a minimum of 3 days to a target total daily dose of
approximately 80 mg. The doses can be administered either as a single daily
dose in the morning or as evenly divided doses in the morning and late
afternoon or early evening. After 2 to 4 additional weeks, the dose may be
increased to a maximum of 100 mg in patients who have not achieved an
optimal response. The maximum recommended total daily dose in children
and adolescents over 70 kg and adults is 100 mg.

21.7 Drugs Used to Treat Substance Use
Disorders
OPIOID RECEPTOR AGONISTS
Opioid receptor agonists are a structurally diverse group of compounds that
are used for pain management. These drugs are also called narcotics.
Although highly effective as analgesics, they often cause dependence and are
frequently diverted for recreational use. Commonly used opioid agonists for
pain relief include morphine, hydromorphone (Dilaudid), codeine,
meperidine (Demerol), oxycodone (OxyContin), buprenorphine (Buprenex),


<<<PAGE 2165>>>
hydrocodone (Robidone), tramadol (Ultram), and fentanyl (Durogesic).
Heroin is used as a street drug. Methadone is used both for pain management
and for the treatment of opiate addiction. This chapter focuses on the µopioid receptor agonists that are most likely to be used in the treatment of
psychiatric disorders instead of pain management.
It is now recognized that the pharmacology of the opioid system is
complex. There are multiple types of opioid receptors, with µ- and κ-opioid
receptors representing functionally opposing endogenous systems (Table 2152). All of the compounds above, which represent the most extensively used
narcotic analgesics, are agonists at µ-opioid receptors. However, analgesic
effects also result from agonist effects on the κ-opioid receptor.
Buprenorphine has mixed receptor effects, being primarily a µ-opioid
receptor agonist as well as a κ-opioid antagonist.
There is growing interest in the use of some drugs that act on opioid
receptors as alternative treatments for a subpopulation of patients with
refractory depression, as well as treatment for cutting behavior in patients
with borderline personality disorder.
Ongoing, regular use of opioids produces dependence and tolerance and
may lead to maladaptive use, functional impairment, and withdrawal
symptoms. This well-known fact tempers consideration of such off-label use.
The prevalence of opioid use, abuse, and dependence, particularly with
prescription opioids, has risen in recent years.
Table 21-52
μ- and κ-Opiate Receptors
Receptor

Agonist Effects

Antagonist Effects

Mu (µ)

Analgesia
Euphoria
Antidepressant
Anxiety

Anxiety
Hostility

Kappa (κ)

Analgesia
Dysphoria
Depression

Antidepressant


<<<PAGE 2166>>>
Stress-induced anxiety
Before using opioid receptor agonists with patients who have failed on
multiple conventional therapeutic agents, screen carefully for a history of
drug use disorders, document the rationale for off-label use, establish
treatment ground rules, obtain written consent, consult with primary care
physician, and monitor closely. Avoid replacing “lost” prescriptions and
providing early prescription renewals.
Pharmacologic Actions
Methadone and buprenorphine are absorbed rapidly from the GI tract.
Hepatic first-pass metabolism significantly affects the bioavailability of each
of the drugs but in markedly different ways. For methadone, hepatic enzymes
reduce the bioavailability of an oral dosage by about half, an effect that is
easily managed with dosage adjustments.
For buprenorphine, first-pass intestinal and hepatic metabolism eliminates
oral bioavailability almost wholly. When used in opioid detoxification,
buprenorphine is given sublingually in either a liquid or a tablet formulation.
The peak plasma concentrations of oral methadone are reached within 2 to
6 hours, and the plasma half-life initially is 4 to 6 hours in opioid-naive
persons and 24 to 36 hours after steady dosing of any type of opioid.
Methadone is highly protein-bound and equilibrates widely throughout the
body, which ensures little post dosage variation in steady-state plasma
concentrations.
Elimination of a sublingual dosage of buprenorphine occurs in two phases:
an initial phase with a half-life of 3 to 5 hours and a terminal phase with a
half-life of more than 24 hours. Buprenorphine dissociates from its receptor
binding site slowly, which permits an every-other-day dosing schedule.
Methadone acts as a pure agonist at µ-opioid receptors and has negligible
agonist or antagonist activity at κ- or δ-opioid receptors. Buprenorphine is a
partial agonist at µ-receptors, a potent antagonist at κ-receptors, and neither
an agonist nor an antagonist at δ-receptors.
Therapeutic Indications
Methadone. Methadone is used for short-term detoxification (7 to 30 days),


<<<PAGE 2167>>>
long-term detoxification (up to 180 days), and maintenance (treatment
beyond 180 days) of opioid-dependent individuals. For these purposes, it is
only available through designated clinics called methadone maintenance
treatment programs (MMTPs) and in hospitals and prisons. Methadone is a
schedule II drug, which means that specific federal laws and regulations
tightly govern its administration.
Enrollment in a methadone program reduces the risk of death by 70
percent; reduces illicit use of opioids and other substances of abuse; reduces
criminal activity; reduces the risk of infectious diseases of all types, most
importantly HIV and hepatitis B and C infection; and in pregnant women,
reduces the risk of fetal and neonatal morbidity and mortality. The use of
methadone maintenance frequently requires lifelong treatment.
Some opioid-dependence treatment programs use a stepwise detoxification
protocol in which a person addicted to heroin switches first to the potent
agonist methadone; then to the weaker agonist buprenorphine; and finally to
maintenance on an opioid receptor antagonist, such as naltrexone (ReVia).
This approach minimizes the appearance of opioid withdrawal effects, which,
if they occur, are mitigated with clonidine (Catapres). However, compliance
with opioid receptor antagonist treatment is low outside of settings using
intensive cognitive-behavioral techniques. In contrast, noncompliance with
methadone maintenance precipitates opioid withdrawal symptoms, which
serve to reinforce the use of methadone and make cognitive-behavioral
therapy less than essential. Thus, some well-motivated, socially integrated
former heroin addicts can use methadone for years without participation in a
psychosocial support program.
Data pooled from many reports indicate that methadone is more effective
when taken at dosages above 60 mg a day. The analgesic effects of
methadone are sometimes used in the management of chronic pain when less
addictive agents are ineffective.
PREGNANCY. Methadone maintenance, combined with effective psychosocial

services and regular obstetric monitoring, significantly improves obstetric
and neonatal outcomes for women addicted to heroin. Enrollment of a heroinaddicted pregnant woman in such a maintenance program reduces the risk of
malnutrition, infection, preterm labor, spontaneous abortion, preeclampsia,
eclampsia, abruptio placenta, and septic thrombophlebitis.


<<<PAGE 2168>>>
The dosage of methadone during pregnancy should be the lowest effective
dosage, and no withdrawal to abstinence should be attempted during
pregnancy. Methadone is metabolized more rapidly in the third trimester,
which may necessitate higher dosages. The daily dose can be administered in
two divided doses during the third trimester to avoid potentially sedating
postdose peak plasma concentrations. Methadone treatment has no known
teratogenic effects.
NEONATAL METHADONE WITHDRAWAL SYMPTOMS. Withdrawal symptoms in

newborns frequently include tremor, a high-pitched cry, increased muscle
tone and activity, poor sleep and eating, mottling, yawning, perspiration, and
skin excoriation. Convulsions that require aggressive anticonvulsant therapy
may also occur. Withdrawal symptoms may be delayed in onset and
prolonged in neonates because of their immature hepatic metabolism.
Women taking methadone are sometimes counseled to initiate breastfeeding
as a means of gently weaning their infants from methadone dependence, but
they should not breastfeed their babies while still taking methadone.
Buprenorphine. The analgesic effects of buprenorphine are sometimes
used in the management of chronic pain when less addictive agents are
ineffective. Because buprenorphine is a partial agonist rather than a full
agonist at the µ-receptor and is a weak antagonist at the κ-receptor, this agent
produces a milder withdrawal syndrome and has a wider margin of safety
than the full µ-agonist compounds generally used in treatment.
Buprenorphine has a ceiling effect beyond which dose increases prolong the
duration of action of the drug without further increasing the agonist effects.
Because of this, buprenorphine has a high clinical safety profile, with limited
respiratory depression, therefore decreasing the likelihood of lethal overdose.
Buprenorphine does have the capacity to cause typical side effects associated
with opioids, including sedation, nausea and vomiting, constipation,
dizziness, headache, and sweating. A relevant pharmacokinetic consideration
when using buprenorphine is the fact that it requires hepatic conversion to
become analgesic (N-dealkylation catalyzed by CYP3A4). This may explain
why some patients do not benefit from buprenorphine. Genetics, grapefruit
juice, and many medications (including fluoxetine and fluvoxamine) can
reduce a person’s ability to metabolize buprenorphine into its bioactive form.


<<<PAGE 2169>>>
Buprenorphine has been combined with the narcotic antagonist naloxone
for sublingual administration (Suboxone). This combination reduces the
likelihood of abusing buprenorphine via the IV route. Because the sublingual
route poorly absorbs naloxone, when the combination drug is taken
sublingually, there is no effect of the naloxone on the efficacy of
buprenorphine. If an opioid-dependent individual injects the combination
medication, the naloxone precipitates a withdrawal reaction, therefore
reducing the likelihood of illicit injection use of the sublingual preparation.
Inducting and stabilizing a patient on buprenorphine is analogous to
inducting and stabilizing a patient on methadone except that, as a partial
agonist, buprenorphine has the potential to cause precipitated withdrawal in
patients who have recently taken full agonist opioids. Thus, a patient must
avoid short-acting opioids for 12 to 24 hours before starting buprenorphine.
Similarly, they should abstain from longer-acting opioids such as methadone
for 24 to 48 hours or longer. The physician must assess the patient clinically
and determine that the patient is in mild to moderate opioid withdrawal with
objectively observable withdrawal signs before initiating buprenorphine.
In most instances, a relatively low dose of buprenorphine (2 to 4 mg) can
then be administered, with additional doses given in 1 to 2 hours if
withdrawal signs persist. The goal for the first 24 hours is to suppress
withdrawal signs and symptoms, and the total 24-hour dose to do so can
range from 2 to 16 mg on the first day. In subsequent days, the dose can be
adjusted upward or downward to resolve withdrawal fully and, as with
methadone, to achieve an absence of craving, adequate tolerance to prevent
reinforcement from the use of other opioids, and ultimately abstinence from
other opioids while minimizing side effects. Dose-ranging studies have
demonstrated that dosages of 6 to 16 mg/day are associated with improved
treatment outcomes compared with lower doses of buprenorphine (1 to 4
mg). Sometimes patients seem to need dosages higher than 16 mg/day,
although there is no evidence for any benefit of dosages beyond 32 mg/day.
For the treatment of opioid dependence, a dose of approximately 4 mg of
sublingual buprenorphine is the equivalent of a daily dose of 40 mg of oral
methadone. It has also been demonstrated that daily, alternate-day or threetimes-per-week administration has equivalent effects in suppressing the
symptoms of opioid withdrawal for dependent individuals. The combination
tablet is recommended for most clinical purposes, including induction and


<<<PAGE 2170>>>
maintenance. The buprenorphine mono (Subutex) should be used only for
pregnant patients (although recent studies are investigating whether the
combination of buprenorphine/naloxone is safe in pregnancy) or for patients
who have a documented anaphylactic reaction to naloxone.
Newer forms of buprenorphine delivery, including a transdermal skin
patch, a long-acting depot intramuscular injection that provides therapeutic
plasma levels for several weeks (Sublocade), and subcutaneous
buprenorphine implants that may provide therapeutic plasma levels for 6
months (Probuphine), are also FDA approved, although the latter treatment
requires special training to administer.
Tramadol. There are multiple reports of tramadol’s antidepressant effects,
both as monotherapy and augmentation agent in treatment-resistant
depression. Clinical and experimental data suggest that tramadol has an
inherent antidepressant-like activity. Tramadol has complex pharmacology. It
is a weak µ-opioid receptor agonist, a 5-HT releasing agent, a DA-releasing
agent, a 5-HT2C receptor antagonist, a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, an
NMDA receptor antagonist, a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antagonist, a
TRPV1 receptor agonist, and an M1 and M3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor
antagonist. Consistent with the evidence of its antidepressant effects is the
fact that tramadol has a close structural similarity to the antidepressant
venlafaxine.
Both venlafaxine and tramadol inhibit norepinephrine/serotonin reuptake
and inhibit the reserpine-induced syndrome completely. Both compounds
also have an analgesic effect on chronic pain. Venlafaxine may have an
opioid component, and naloxone reverses the antipain effect of venlafaxine.
Nonopioid activity is demonstrated by the fact that the µ-opioid receptor
antagonist naloxone does not fully antagonize its analgesic effect. Indicative
of their structural similarities, venlafaxine may cause false-positive results on
liquid chromatography tests to detect urinary tramadol levels.
Another relevant property of tramadol is its relatively long half-life, which
reduces the potential for misuse. Its habituating effects are found to be much
less than other opiate agonists, but abuse, withdrawal, and dependence are
risks. Tramadol requires metabolism to become analgesic: individuals who
are CYP2D6 “poor metabolizers” or use drugs that are CYP2D6 inhibitors


<<<PAGE 2171>>>
reduce the efficacy of tramadol (the same is true of codeine).
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
The most common adverse effects of opioid receptor agonists are
lightheadedness, dizziness, sedation, nausea, constipation, vomiting,
perspiration, weight gain, decreased libido, inhibition of orgasm, and
insomnia or sleep irregularities. Opioid receptor agonists are capable of
inducing tolerance as well as producing physiologic and psychological
dependence. Other CNS adverse effects include depression, sedation,
euphoria, dysphoria, agitation, and seizures. Delirium has been reported in
rare cases. Occasional non-CNS adverse effects include peripheral edema,
urinary retention, rash, arthralgia, dry mouth, anorexia, biliary tract spasm,
bradycardia, hypotension, hypoventilation, syncope, antidiuretic hormonelike activity, pruritus, urticaria, and visual disturbances. Menstrual
irregularities are frequent in women, especially in the first 6 months of use.
Various abnormal endocrine laboratory indexes of little clinical significance
may also be seen.
Most persons develop tolerance to the pharmacologic adverse effects of
opioid agonists during long-term maintenance, and relatively few adverse
effects are experienced after the induction period.
Overdosage. The acute effects of opioid receptor agonist overdosage
include sedation, hypotension, bradycardia, hypothermia, respiratory
suppression, miosis, and decreased GI motility. Severe effects include coma,
cardiac arrest, shock, and death. The risk of overdosage is most significant in
the induction stage of treatment and in persons with slow drug metabolism
caused by preexisting hepatic insufficiency. Deaths have been caused during
the first week of induction by methadone dosages of only 50 to 60 mg a day.
The risk of overdosage with buprenorphine appears to be lower than with
methadone. However, deaths have been caused by the use of buprenorphine
in combination with benzodiazepines.
Withdrawal Symptoms. Abrupt cessation of methadone use triggers
withdrawal symptoms within 3 to 4 days, which usually reaches peak
intensity on the sixth day. Withdrawal symptoms include weakness, anxiety,
anorexia, insomnia, gastric distress, headache, sweating, and hot and cold


<<<PAGE 2172>>>
flashes. The withdrawal symptoms usually resolve after 2 weeks. However, a
protracted methadone abstinence syndrome is possible that may include
restlessness and insomnia.
The withdrawal symptoms associated with buprenorphine are similar to but
less marked than those caused by methadone. In particular, buprenorphine is
sometimes used to ease the transition from methadone to opioid receptor
antagonists or abstinence because of the relatively mild withdrawal reaction
associated with discontinuation of buprenorphine.
Drug–Drug Interactions
Opioid receptor agonists can potentiate the CNS-depressant effects of
alcohol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, other opioids, low-potency DRAs,
tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs, and MAOIs. Carbamazepine (Tegretol),
phenytoin (Dilantin), barbiturates, rifampin (Rimactane, Rifadin), and heavy
long-term consumption of alcohol may induce hepatic enzymes, which may
lower the plasma concentration of methadone or buprenorphine and thereby
precipitate withdrawal symptoms. In contrast, however, hepatic enzyme
induction may increase the plasma concentration of active levomethadyl
metabolites and cause toxicity.
Acute opioid withdrawal symptoms may be precipitated in persons on
methadone maintenance therapy who take pure opioid receptor antagonists
such as naltrexone, nalmefene (Revex, Selincro), and naloxone (Narcan);
partial agonists such as buprenorphine; or mixed agonist–antagonists such as
pentazocine (Talwin). These symptoms may be mitigated by the use of
clonidine, a benzodiazepine, or both.
Competitive inhibition of methadone or buprenorphine metabolism after
short-term use of alcohol or administration of cimetidine (Tagamet),
erythromycin, ketoconazole (Nizoral), fluoxetine (Prozac), fluvoxamine
(Luvox), loratadine (Claritin), quinidine (Quinidex), and alprazolam (Xanax)
may lead to higher plasma concentrations or a prolonged duration of action of
methadone or buprenorphine. Medications that alkalinize the urine may
reduce methadone excretion.
Methadone maintenance may also increase plasma concentrations of
desipramine (Norpramin, Pertofrane) and fluvoxamine. The use of
methadone may increase zidovudine (Retrovir) concentrations, which


<<<PAGE 2173>>>
increases the possibility of zidovudine toxicity at otherwise standard dosages.
Moreover, in vitro human liver microsome studies demonstrate competitive
inhibition of methadone demethylation by several protease inhibitors,
including ritonavir (Norvir), indinavir (Crixivan), and saquinavir (Invirase).
The clinical relevance of this finding is unknown.
Fatal drug–drug interactions with the MAOIs are associated with the use of
the opioids fentanyl (Sublimaze) and meperidine (Demerol) but not with the
use of methadone, levomethadyl, or buprenorphine.
Tramadol may interact with drugs that inhibit serotonin reuptake. Such
combinations can trigger seizures and serotonin syndrome. These events may
also develop during tramadol monotherapy, either at routine or excessive
doses. The risk of interactions is increased when tramadol is combined with
virtually all classes of antidepressants and with drugs that lower the seizure
threshold, especially the antidepressant bupropion.
Laboratory Interferences
Methadone and buprenorphine can be tested separately in urine toxicology to
distinguish them from other opioids. No known laboratory interferences are
associated with the use of methadone or buprenorphine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Methadone. Methadone is supplied in 5-, 10-, and 40-mg dispersible scored
tablets; 40-mg scored wafers; 5-mg/5-mL, 10-mg/5-mL, and 10-mg/mL
solutions; and a 10-mg/mL parenteral form. In maintenance programs,
methadone is usually dissolved in water or juice, and dose administration is
directly observed to ensure compliance. For induction of opioid
detoxification, an initial methadone dose of 15 to 20 mg will usually suppress
craving and withdrawal symptoms. However, some individuals may require
up to 40 mg a day in single or divided doses. Higher dosages should be
avoided during induction of treatment to reduce the risk of acute toxicity
from overdosage.
Over several weeks, the dosage should be raised to at least 70 mg a day.
The maximum dosage is usually 120 mg a day, and higher dosages require
prior approval from regulatory agencies. Dosages above 60 mg a day are
associated with much more complete abstinence from the use of illicit opioids


<<<PAGE 2174>>>
than are dosages less than 60 mg a day.
The duration of treatment should not be predetermined but should be based
on response to treatment and assessment of psychosocial factors. All studies
of methadone maintenance programs endorse long-term treatment (i.e.,
several years) as more effective than short-term programs (i.e., less than 1
year) for the prevention of relapse into opioid abuse. In actual practice,
however, a minority of programs are permitted by policy or approved by
insurers to provide even 6 months of continuous maintenance treatment.
Moreover, some programs encourage withdrawal from methadone in less
than 6 months after induction. This practice is quite ill-conceived, because
more than 80 percent of persons who terminate methadone maintenance
treatment eventually return to illicit drug use within 2 years. In programs that
offer both maintenance and withdrawal treatments, the overwhelming
majority of participants enroll in the maintenance treatment.
Buprenorphine. Buprenorphine is supplied as a 0.3-mg/mL solution in 1mL ampules. Sublingual tablet formulations of buprenorphine containing
buprenorphine only or buprenorphine combined with naloxone in a 4:1 ratio
are used for opioid maintenance treatment. Physicians must be trained and
certified to carry out this therapy in their private offices. There are several
approved training programs in the United States. As noted above, an
extended release and subcutaneous extended formulation are also available
but require some special skill and training.
Tramadol. No controlled trials exist that establish the appropriate dosing
schedule for tramadol when used for conditions other than pain. Tramadol is
available in many formulations. These range from capsules (regular and
extended-release) to tablets (regular, extended-release, chewable tablets) that
can be taken sublingually, suppositories, and injectable ampules. It also
comes as tablets and capsules containing acetaminophen or aspirin. Doses in
case reports of treatment for depression or OCD range from 50 to 200 mg a
day and involve short-term use. The long-term use of tramadol in the
treatment of psychiatric disorders has not been studied.

OPIOID RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS: NALTREXONE,
NALMEFENE, AND NALOXONE


<<<PAGE 2175>>>
Naltrexone (Revia, Depade) and naloxone (Narcan) are competitive opioid
antagonists. They bind to opioid receptors without causing their activation.
Because these drugs induce opioid withdrawal effects in people using full
opioid agonists, these drugs are classified as opioid antagonists.
Naltrexone is the most widely used of these drugs. It has a relatively long
half-life, is orally effective, is not associated with dysphoria, and is
administered once daily. Naloxone, which predated naltrexone to treat
narcotic overdose, became less widely used for preventing relapse to opiate
use in detoxified opiate addicts. Since its introduction, naltrexone has been
tried for the treatment of a wide range of psychiatric disorders, including,
among others, eating disorders, autism, self-injurious behavior, cocaine
dependence, gambling, and alcoholism. Naltrexone was approved for the
treatment of alcohol dependence in 1994. Several generic formulations are
also available. An extended-release, once-a-month injectable suspension
(Vivitrol) was also approved in 2006. Nalmefene (Revex) is indicated for the
complete or partial reversal of opioid drug effects and in the management of
known or suspected opioid overdose. An oral formulation of nalmefene is
available in some countries but not in the United States. Nalmefene (Revex,
Selincro) is an opioid receptor antagonist that is sometimes used in the
management of alcohol dependence.
Pharmacologic Actions
The GI tract rapidly absorbs oral opioid receptor antagonists. However,
because of first-pass hepatic metabolism, only 60 percent of a dose of
naltrexone and 40 to 50 percent of a dose of nalmefene reach the systemic
circulation unchanged. Peak concentrations of naltrexone and its active
metabolite, 6-β-naltrexol, are achieved within 1 hour of ingestion. The halflife of naltrexone is 1 to 3 hours, and the half-life of 6-β-naltrexol is 13 hours.
Peak concentrations of nalmefene are achieved in about 1 to 2 hours, and the
half-life is 8 to 10 hours. Clinically, a single dose of naltrexone effectively
blocks the rewarding effects of opioids for 72 hours. Traces of 6-β-naltrexol
may linger for up to 125 hours after a single dose.
Naltrexone and nalmefene are competitive antagonists of opioid receptors.
Understanding the pharmacology of opioid receptors can explain the
difference in adverse effects caused by naltrexone and nalmefene. Opioid


<<<PAGE 2176>>>
receptors in the body are typed pharmacologically as µ, κ, or δ. Whereas
activation of the κ- and δ-receptors is thought to reinforce opioid and alcohol
consumption centrally, activation of µ-receptors is more closely associated
with central and peripheral antiemetic effects. Because naltrexone is a
relatively weak antagonist of κ- and δ-receptors and a potent µ-receptor
antagonist, dosages of naltrexone that effectively reduce opioid and alcohol
consumption also strongly block µ-receptors and, therefore, may cause
nausea. Nalmefene, in contrast, is an equally potent antagonist of all three
opioid receptor types, and dosages of nalmefene that effectively reduce
opioid and alcohol consumption have no significantly increased effect on µreceptors. Thus, nalmefene is associated clinically with few GI adverse
effects.
Naloxone has the highest affinity for the µ-receptor but is a competitive
antagonist at the µ-, κ-, and δ-receptors.
Whereas the effects of opioid receptor antagonists on opioid use are easily
understood in terms of competitive inhibition of opioid receptors, the effects
of opioid receptor antagonists on alcohol dependence are less
straightforward. That likely relates to the fact that the desire for and the
effects of alcohol consumption appear to be regulated by several
neurotransmitter systems, both opioid and nonopioid.
Therapeutic Indications
The combination of a cognitive-behavioral program plus the use of opioid
receptor antagonists is more successful than either the cognitive-behavioral
program or the use of opioid receptor antagonists alone. Naloxone is used as
a screening test to ensure that the patient is opioid-free before the induction
of therapy with naltrexone (see “Naloxone Challenge Test” in Table 21-53).
Table 21-53
Naloxone (Narcan) Challenge Test
The naloxone challenge test should not be performed in a patient
showing clinical signs or symptoms of opioid withdrawal or in a
patient whose urine contains opioids. The naloxone challenge test
may be administered by either the intravenous (IV) or the


<<<PAGE 2177>>>
subcutaneous route.
IV challenge: After appropriate screening of the patient, 0.8 mg of
naloxone should be drawn into a sterile syringe. If the IV route of
administration is selected, 0.2 mg of naloxone should be injected,
and while the needle is still in the patient’s vein, the patient should
be observed for 30 s for evidence of withdrawal signs or
symptoms. If there is no evidence of withdrawal, the remaining 0.6
mg of naloxone should be injected and the patient observed for an
additional 20 min for signs and symptoms of withdrawal.
Subcutaneous challenge: If the subcutaneous route is selected, 0.8
mg should be administered subcutaneously and the patient
observed for signs and symptoms of withdrawal for 20 min.
Conditions and technique for observation of patient: During the
appropriate period of observation, the patient’s vital signs should
be monitored, and the patient should be monitored for signs of
withdrawal. It is also important to question the patient carefully.
The signs and symptoms of opioid withdrawal include, but are not
limited to, the following:
Withdrawal signs: Stuffiness or running nose, tearing, yawning,
sweating, tremor, vomiting, or piloerection
Withdrawal symptoms: Feeling of temperature change, joint or
bone and muscle pain, abdominal cramps, and formication
(feeling of bugs crawling under skin)
Interpretation of the challenge: Warning—the elicitation of the
enumerated signs or symptoms indicates a potential risk for the
subject, and naltrexone should not be administered. If no signs or
symptoms of withdrawal are observed, elicited, or reported,
naltrexone may be administered. If there is any doubt in the
observer’s mind that the patient is not in an opioid-free state or is
in continuing withdrawal, naltrexone should be withheld for 24 hr
and the challenge repeated.
Opioid Dependence. Patients in detoxification programs are usually
weaned from potent opioid agonists such as heroin over days to weeks,
during which emergent adrenergic withdrawal effects are treated as needed


<<<PAGE 2178>>>
with clonidine (Catapres). A serial protocol is sometimes used in which
potent agonists are gradually replaced by weaker agonists followed by mixed
agonist–antagonists and then finally by pure antagonists. For example, an
abuser of the potent agonist heroin would switch first to the weaker agonist
methadone (Dolophine), then to the partial agonist buprenorphine (Buprenex)
or levomethadyl acetate (ORLAAM)—commonly called LAAM—and
finally, after a 7- to 10-day washout period, to a pure antagonist, such as
naltrexone or nalmefene. However, even with gradual detoxification, some
persons continue to experience mild adverse effects or opioid withdrawal
symptoms for the first several weeks of treatment with naltrexone.
As the opioid receptor agonist potency diminishes, so do the adverse
consequences of discontinuing the drug. Thus, because there are no
pharmacologic barriers to discontinuation of pure opioid receptor antagonists,
the social environment and frequent cognitive-behavioral intervention
become significant factors supporting continued opioid abstinence. Because
of poorly tolerated adverse symptoms, most persons not simultaneously
enrolled in a cognitive-behavioral program stop taking opioid receptor
antagonists within 3 months. Compliance with the administration of an opioid
receptor antagonist regimen can also be increased with participation in a
well-conceived voucher program.
Issues of medication compliance should be a central focus of treatment. If
a person with a history of opioid addiction stops taking a pure opioid receptor
antagonist, the person’s risk of relapse into opioid abuse is exceedingly high,
because the reintroduction of a potent opioid agonist would yield a very
rewarding subjective “high.” In contrast, compliant persons do not develop
tolerance to the therapeutic benefits of naltrexone even if it is administered
continuously for 1 year or longer. Individuals may undergo several relapses
and remissions before achieving long-term abstinence.
Persons taking opioid receptor antagonists should also be warned that
sufficiently high dosages of opioid agonists can overcome the receptor
antagonism of naltrexone or nalmefene, which may lead to hazardous and
unpredictable levels of receptor activation (see “Precautions and Adverse
Reactions”).
Rapid Detoxification. The recommended period of opioid abstinence
before starting opioid receptor antagonists is 7 to 10 days. However, to avoid


<<<PAGE 2179>>>
this, rapid detoxification protocols have been developed. Continuous
administration of adjunct clonidine—to reduce the adrenergic withdrawal
symptoms—and adjunct benzodiazepines, such as oxazepam (Serax)—to
reduce muscle spasms and insomnia—can permit the use of oral opioid
receptor antagonists on the first day of opioid cessation. Detoxification can
thus be completed within 48 to 72 hours, at which point opioid receptor
antagonist maintenance is initiated. Moderately severe withdrawal symptoms
may be experienced on the first day, but they taper off rapidly after that.
Because of the potential hypotensive effects of clonidine, the BP of
persons undergoing rapid detoxification must be closely monitored for the
first 8 hours. Outpatient rapid detoxification settings must therefore be
adequately prepared to administer emergency care.
The main advantage of rapid detoxification is that the transition from
opioid abuse to maintenance treatment occurs over just 2 or 3 days. The
completion of detoxification in as little time as possible minimizes the risk
that the person will relapse into opioid abuse during the detoxification
protocol.
Alcohol Use Disorder. Opioid receptor antagonists are also used as
adjuncts to cognitive-behavioral programs for the treatment of alcohol use
disorder. Opioid receptor antagonists reduce alcohol craving and alcohol
consumption, and they ameliorate the severity of relapses. Concomitant
opioid receptor antagonist treatment added to an effective cognitivebehavioral program may halve the risk of relapse into heavy alcohol
consumption.
The newer agent, nalmefene, has several potential pharmacologic and
clinical advantages over its predecessor, naltrexone, for the treatment of
alcohol use disorder. Whereas naltrexone may cause reversible transaminase
elevations in persons who take dosages of 300 mg a day (which is six times
the recommended dosage for treatment of alcohol and opioid dependence [50
mg a day]), nalmefene has not been associated with any hepatotoxicity.
Clinically effective dosages of naltrexone are discontinued by 10 to 15
percent of persons because of adverse effects, most commonly nausea. In
contrast, discontinuation of nalmefene because of an adverse event is rare at
the clinically effective dosage of 20 mg a day and in the range of 10 percent
at excessive dosages—that is, 80 mg a day. Because of its pharmacokinetic


<<<PAGE 2180>>>
profile, a given dosage of nalmefene may also produce a more sustained
opioid antagonist effect than does naltrexone.
The efficacy of opioid receptor antagonists in reducing alcohol craving
may be augmented with an SSRI, although data from large trials are needed
to assess this potential synergistic effect more fully.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Because opioid receptor antagonists are used for sustaining a drug-free state
after opioid detoxification, great care must be taken to ensure that an
adequate washout period elapses. This detox requires at least 5 days for a
short-acting opioid such as heroin and at least 10 days for longer-acting
opioids such as methadone—after the last dose of opioids and before the first
dose of an opioid receptor antagonist is taken. Self-report and urine
toxicology screens should determine the opioid-free state. If any question
persists of whether opioids are in the body despite a negative urine screen
result, then a naloxone challenge test should be performed. Naloxone
challenge is used because its opioid antagonism lasts less than 1 hour, but
those of naltrexone and nalmefene may persist for more than 24 hours. Thus,
any withdrawal effects elicited by naloxone will be relatively short-lived (see
“Dosage and Clinical Guidelines”). Symptoms of acute opioid withdrawal
include drug craving, a feeling of temperature change, musculoskeletal pain,
and GI distress. Signs of opioid withdrawal include confusion, drowsiness,
vomiting, and diarrhea. Naltrexone and nalmefene should not be taken if
naloxone infusion causes any signs of opioid withdrawal except as part of a
supervised rapid detoxification protocol.
A set of adverse effects resembling a vestigial withdrawal syndrome tends
to affect up to 10 percent of persons who take opioid receptor antagonists. Up
to 15 percent of persons taking naltrexone may experience abdominal pain,
cramps, nausea, and vomiting, which may be limited by transiently halving
the dosage or altering the time of administration. Adverse CNS effects of
naltrexone, experienced by up to 10 percent of persons, include headache,
low energy, insomnia, anxiety, and nervousness. Joint and muscle pains may
occur in up to 10 percent of persons taking naltrexone, as may rash.
Naltrexone may cause dosage-related hepatic toxicity at dosages well
above 50 mg a day; 20 percent of persons taking 300 mg a day of naltrexone


<<<PAGE 2181>>>
may experience serum aminotransferase concentrations 3 to 19 times the
upper limit of normal. The hepatocellular injury of naltrexone appears to be a
dose-related toxic effect rather than an idiosyncratic reaction. At the lowest
dosages of naltrexone required for significant opioid antagonism,
hepatocellular injury is not typically observed. However, naltrexone dosages
as low as 50 mg a day may be hepatotoxic in persons with underlying liver
disease, such as persons with cirrhosis of the liver caused by chronic alcohol
abuse. Serum aminotransferase concentrations should be monitored monthly
for the first 6 months of naltrexone therapy and after that based on clinical
suspicion. Hepatic enzyme concentrations usually return to normal after
discontinuation of naltrexone therapy.
If analgesia is required while a dose of an opioid receptor antagonist is
pharmacologically active, opioid agonists should be avoided in favor of
benzodiazepines or other nonopioid analgesics. Persons taking opioid
receptor antagonists should be instructed that low dosages of opioids will not
affect them. However, larger dosages could overcome the receptor blockade
and suddenly produce symptoms of profound opioid overdosage, with
sedation possibly progressing to coma or death. Use of opioid receptor
antagonists is contraindicated in persons who are taking opioid agonists,
small amounts of which may be present in over-the-counter antiemetic and
antitussive preparations; in persons with acute hepatitis or hepatic failure; and
in persons who are hypersensitive to the drugs.
Because naltrexone is transported across the placenta, opioid receptor
antagonists should only be taken by pregnant women if a compelling need
outweighs the potential risks to the fetus. It is not known whether opioid
receptor antagonists are distributed into breast milk.
Opioid receptor antagonists are relatively safe drugs, and the ingestion of
high doses of opioid receptor antagonists should be treated with supportive
measures combined with efforts to decrease GI absorption.
Because buprenorphine has a high affinity and slow displacement from the
opioid receptors, nalmefene may not wholly reverse buprenorphine-induced
respiratory depression.
Drug Interactions
Many drug interactions involving opioid receptor antagonists have been


<<<PAGE 2182>>>
discussed earlier, including those with opioid agonists associated with drug
abuse as well as those involving antiemetics and antitussives. Because of its
extensive hepatic metabolism, naltrexone may affect or be affected by other
drugs that influence hepatic enzyme levels. However, the clinical importance
of these potential interactions is not known.
One potentially hepatotoxic drug that has been used in some cases with
opioid receptor antagonists is disulfiram (Antabuse). Although no adverse
effects were observed, frequent laboratory monitoring is indicated when such
combination therapy is contemplated. Opioid receptor antagonists have been
reported to potentiate the sedation associated with the use of thioridazine
(Mellaril), an interaction that probably applies equally to all low-potency
DRAs.
Intravenous nalmefene has been administered after benzodiazepines,
inhalational anesthetics, muscle relaxants, and muscle relaxant antagonists
were administered in conjunction with general anesthetics without any
adverse reactions. Care should be taken when using flumazenil (Romazicon)
and nalmefene together because both of these agents have been shown to
induce seizures in preclinical studies.
Laboratory Interferences
The potential for false-positive urine for opiates using less specific urine
screens such as enzyme-multiplied immunoassay technique (EMIT) may
exist, given that naltrexone and nalmefene are derivatives of oxymorphone.
Naltrexone does not interefere with thin-layer, gas-liquid, and high-pressure
liquid chromatographic methods used for the detection of opiates in the urine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
We should take several steps to ensure that the person is opioid-free. These
steps are meant to avoid the possibility of precipitating an acute opioid
withdrawal syndrome. Within a supervised detoxification setting, at least 5
days should elapse after the last dose of short-acting opioids, such as heroin,
hydromorphone (Dilaudid), meperidine (Demerol), or morphine, and at least
10 days should elapse after the last dose of longer-acting opioids, such as
methadone, before opioid antagonists are initiated. Some rapid detoxification
protocols use shorter abstinence periods, however these require special


<<<PAGE 2183>>>
expertise to do safely. Urine toxicologic screens should demonstrate no
opioid metabolites, and detoxification should be complete. However, an
individual may have a negative urine opioid screen result, yet still be
physically dependent on opioids and thus susceptible to antagonist-induced
withdrawal effects. Therefore, after the urine screen result is negative, a
naloxone challenge test is recommended unless an adequate period of opioid
abstinence can be reliably confirmed by observers (Table 21-53).
The initial dosage of naltrexone for the treatment of opioid or alcohol
dependence is 50 mg a day, which should be achieved through a gradual
introduction, even when the naloxone challenge test result is negative.
Various authorities begin with 5, 10, 12.5, or 25 mg and titrate up to the 50mg dosage over a period ranging from 1 hour to 2 weeks while continually
monitoring for evidence of opioid withdrawal. When a daily dose of 50 mg is
well tolerated, it may be averaged over a week by giving 100 mg on alternate
days or 150 mg every third day. Such schedules may increase compliance.
The corresponding therapeutic dosage of nalmefene is 20 mg a day, divided
into two equal doses. Gradual titration of nalmefene to this daily dose is
probably a wise strategy, although clinical data on dosage strategies for
nalmefene are not yet available.
It is recommended that family members directly observe the ingestion of
each dose. This strategy helps to maximize compliance. Random urine tests
for opioid receptor antagonists and their metabolites, as well as for ethanol or
opioid metabolites, should also be taken. Opioid receptor antagonists should
be continued until the person is no longer considered psychologically at risk
for relapse into opioid or alcohol abuse. This treatment generally requires at
least 6 months but may take longer, mainly if there are external stresses.
Nalmefene is available as a sterile solution for intravenous, intramuscular,
and subcutaneous administration in two concentrations, containing 100 µg or
1.0 mg of nalmefene free base per milliliter. The 100 µg/mL concentration
contains 110.8 µg of nalmefene hydrochloride, and the 1.0 mg/mL
concentration contains 1.108 mg of nalmefene hydrochloride per milliliter.
Both concentrations contain 9.0 mg of sodium chloride per milliliter, and the
pH is adjusted to 3.9 with hydrochloric acid. Pharmacodynamic studies have
shown that nalmefene has a longer duration of action than naloxone at fully
reversing opiate activity.


<<<PAGE 2184>>>
Rapid Detoxification. Rapid detoxification has been standardized using
naltrexone, although nalmefene would be expected to be equally effective
with fewer adverse effects. In rapid detoxification protocols, the addicted
person stops opioid use abruptly and begins the first opioid-free day by
taking clonidine 0.2 mg orally every 2 hours for nine doses, to a maximum
dose of 1.8 mg, during which time the BP is monitored every 30 to 60
minutes for the first 8 hours. Naltrexone 12.5 mg is administered 1 to 3 hours
after the first dose of clonidine. To reduce muscle cramps and later insomnia,
a short-acting benzodiazepine, such as oxazepam 30 to 60 mg, is
administered simultaneously with the first dose of clonidine, and half of the
initial dose is readministered every 4 to 6 hours as needed. The maximum
daily dosage of oxazepam should not exceed 180 mg. The person undergoing
rapid detoxification should be accompanied home by a reliable escort. On the
second day, similar doses of clonidine and the benzodiazepine are
administered but with a single dose of naltrexone 25 mg taken in the
morning. Relatively asymptomatic persons may return home after 3 to 4
hours. Administration of the daily maintenance dose of 50 mg of naltrexone
is begun on the third day, and the dosages of clonidine and the
benzodiazepine are gradually tapered off over 5 to 10 days.

DISULFIRAM AND ACAMPROSATE
Disulfiram (Antabuse) and acamprosate (Campral) are drugs used to treat
alcohol use disorder. Disulfiram has suffered from a reputation as a
dangerous medication only suitable for highly motivated and strictly
supervised drinkers because of the severe physical reactions the drug causes
after drinking. Experience has shown, however, that at recommended doses,
it is an acceptable and safe medication for dependent drinkers seeking to
sustain abstinence. The properties that constitute disulfiram’s main
therapeutic effect (i.e., the ability to produce unpleasant symptoms after
alcohol intake, also known as disulfiram–alcohol reaction) have created that
perception of dangerousness.
In the most severe cases, when disulfiram is combined with alcohol, severe
clinical conditions can occur. These include respiratory depression,
cardiovascular collapse, acute heart failure, convulsions, loss of
consciousness, and death in rare cases. These potential complications, as well


<<<PAGE 2185>>>
as the development of alternative antialcohol medications, have been the
limiting factors for the broader use of disulfiram. Unlike disulfiram,
acamprosate, the other drug discussed in this section, does not produce
aversive side effects. Acamprosate is now prescribed more commonly than
disulfiram in outpatient settings, but disulfiram is prescribed more often in
inpatient settings because it helps facilitate initial abstinence.
Other drugs that are useful in reducing alcohol consumption include
naltrexone (ReVia, Trexan), nalmefene (Revex), topiramate (Topamax), and
gabapentin (Neurontin). These agents are discussed in their respective
sections.
Disulfiram
Pharmacologic Actions. Disulfiram is almost completely absorbed from
the GI tract after oral administration. Its half-life is estimated to be 60 to 120
hours. Therefore, it may take 1 or 2 weeks to eliminate disulfiram from the
body after taking the last dose.
The metabolism of ethanol proceeds through oxidation via alcohol
dehydrogenase to the formation of acetaldehyde, which is further metabolized
to acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) by aldehyde dehydrogenase. Disulfiram
is an aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitor that interferes with the metabolism of
alcohol by producing a marked increase in blood acetaldehyde concentration.
The accumulation of acetaldehyde (to a level up to 10 times higher than
occurs in the normal metabolism of alcohol) produces a wide array of
unpleasant reactions, called the disulfiram–alcohol reaction, characterized by
nausea, throbbing headache, vomiting, hypertension, flushing, sweating,
thirst, dyspnea, tachycardia, chest pain, vertigo, and blurred vision. The
reaction occurs almost immediately after the ingestion of one alcoholic drink
and may last from 30 minutes to 2 hours.
BLOOD CONCENTRATIONS IN RELATION TO ACTION. Plasma concentrations of

disulfiram vary among individuals because of several factors, most notably
age and hepatic function. In general, the severity of disulfiram–alcohol
reaction is proportional to the amount of the ingested disulfiram and alcohol.
Nevertheless, disulfiram plasma levels are rarely obtained in clinical practice.
The positive correlation between plasma concentrations of alcohol and the


<<<PAGE 2186>>>
intensity of the reaction is described as follows: in sensitive individuals, as
little as a 5 to 10 mg/100 mL increase of the plasma alcohol level may
produce mild symptoms; fully developed symptoms occur at alcohol levels of
50 mg/100 mL, and levels as high as 125 to 150 mg/100 mL result in loss of
consciousness and coma.
Therapeutic Indications. The primary indication for disulfiram use is as
an aversive conditioning treatment for alcohol use disorder. Either the fear of
having a disulfiram–alcohol reaction or the memory of having had one is
meant to condition the person not to use alcohol. Usually, describing the
severity and the unpleasantness of the disulfiram–alcohol reaction graphically
enough discourages the person from imbibing alcohol. Disulfiram treatment
should be combined with such treatments as psychotherapy, group therapy,
and support groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). Treatment with
disulfiram requires careful monitoring because a person can decide not to
take the medication.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
WITH ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION. The intensity of the disulfiram–alcohol reaction
varies with each person. In extreme cases, it is marked by respiratory
depression, cardiovascular collapse, myocardial infarction, convulsions, and
death. Therefore, disulfiram is contraindicated for persons with significant
pulmonary or cardiovascular disease. Also, disulfiram should be used with
caution, if at all, by persons with nephritis, brain damage, hypothyroidism,
diabetes, hepatic disease, seizures, polydrug dependence, or an abnormal
electroencephalogram. Most fatal reactions occur in persons who take more
than 500 mg a day of disulfiram and who consume more than 3 oz of alcohol.
The treatment of a severe disulfiram–alcohol reaction is primarily supportive
to prevent shock. The use of oxygen, intravenous vitamin C, ephedrine, and
antihistamines have been reported to aid in recovery.
WITHOUT ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION. The adverse effects of disulfiram in the

absence of alcohol consumption include fatigue, dermatitis, impotence, optic
neuritis, a variety of mental changes, and hepatic damage. A metabolite of
disulfiram inhibits dopamine-


<<<PAGE 2187>>>
β-hydroxylase, the enzyme that metabolizes dopamine into norepinephrine
and epinephrine, and thus may exacerbate psychosis in persons with
psychotic disorders. Catatonic reactions may also occur.
Drug Interactions. Disulfiram increases the blood concentration of
diazepam (Valium), paraldehyde, phenytoin (Dilantin), caffeine,
tetrahydrocannabinol (the active ingredient in marijuana), barbiturates,
anticoagulants, isoniazid (Nydrazid), and tricyclic drugs. Disulfiram should
not be administered concomitantly with paraldehyde because paraldehyde is
metabolized to acetaldehyde in the liver.
Laboratory Interferences. In rare instances, disulfiram has been reported
to interfere with the incorporation of iodine-131 into protein-bound iodine.
Disulfiram may reduce urinary concentrations of homovanillic acid, the
major metabolite of dopamine, because it inhibits dopamine hydroxylase.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Disulfiram is supplied in 250- and 500mg tablets. The usual initial dosage is 500 mg a day, taken by mouth for the
first 1 or 2 weeks, followed by a maintenance dosage of 250 mg a day. The
dosage should not exceed 500 mg a day. The maintenance dosage range is
125 to 500 mg a day.
Persons taking disulfiram must be instructed that the ingestion of even the
smallest amount of alcohol will bring on a disulfiram–alcohol reaction, with
all of its unpleasant effects. Also, persons should be warned against ingesting
any alcohol-containing preparations, such as cough drops, tonics of any kind,
and alcohol-containing foods and sauces. Some reactions have occurred in
patients who used alcohol-based lotions, toilet water, colognes, or perfumes
and inhaled the fumes; therefore, precautions must be explicit and should
include any topically applied preparations containing alcohol, such as
perfume.
Disulfiram should not be administered until the person has abstained from
alcohol for at least 12 hours. Persons should be warned that the disulfiram–
alcohol reaction may occur as long as 1 or 2 weeks after the last dose of
disulfiram. Persons taking disulfiram should carry identification cards
describing the disulfiram–alcohol reaction and listing the name and telephone
number of the physician to be called.


<<<PAGE 2188>>>
Acamprosate
Pharmacologic Actions. Acamprosate’s mechanism of action is not fully
understood, but it is thought to antagonize neuronal overactivity related to the
actions of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate. In part, this may result
from antagonism of NMDA receptors.
Indications. Acamprosate is used for treating alcohol-dependent individuals
seeking to continue to remain alcohol-free after they have stopped drinking.
Its efficacy in promoting abstinence has not been demonstrated in persons
who have not undergone detoxification and who have not achieved alcohol
abstinence before beginning treatment.
Precautions and Adverse Effects. Side effects are mostly seen early in
treatment and are usually mild and transient. The most common side effects
are headache, diarrhea, flatulence, abdominal pain, paresthesias, and various
skin reactions. No adverse events occur after abrupt withdrawal of
acamprosate, even after long-term use. There is no evidence of addiction to
the drug. Patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance of less
than 30 mL/min) should not be given acamprosate.
Drug Interactions. Alcohol and acamprosate do not affect each other’s
pharmacokinetics. The same is true when adding disulfiram or diazepam to
acamprosate. Coadministration of naltrexone with acamprosate produces an
increase in concentrations of acamprosate. No adjustment of dosage is
recommended in such patients. The pharmacokinetics of naltrexone and its
major metabolite 6-β-naltrexol were unaffected after coadministration with
acamprosate. During clinical trials, patients taking acamprosate
concomitantly with antidepressants more commonly reported both weight
gain and weight loss compared with patients taking either medication alone.
Laboratory Interferences. Acamprosate has not been shown to interfere
with commonly performed laboratory tests.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. It is important to remember that
acamprosate should not be used to treat alcohol withdrawal symptoms. It
should only be started after the individual has been successfully weaned off


<<<PAGE 2189>>>
alcohol. Patients should show a commitment to remaining abstinent, and
treatment should be part of a comprehensive management program that
includes counseling or support group attendance.
Each tablet contains acamprosate calcium 333 mg, which is equivalent to
300 mg of acamprosate. The dose of acamprosate is different for different
patients. The recommended dosage is two 333-mg tablets (each dose should
total 666 mg) taken three times daily. Although dosing may be done without
regard to meals, dosing with meals was used during clinical trials and is
suggested as an aid to compliance in patients who regularly eat three meals
daily. A lower dose may be useful in some patients. A missed dose should be
taken as soon as possible. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, the
missed dose should be skipped, and then the regular dosing schedule should
be resumed. Doses should not be doubled up. For patients with moderate
renal impairment (creatinine clearance of 30 to 50 mL/min), a starting dosage
of one 333-mg tablet taken three times daily is recommended. People with
severe renal insufficiency should not take acamprosate.

CLONIDINE AND GUANFACINE
Clonidine and guanfacine are marketed as hypertension treatments.
Guanfacine is more selective and less potent than clonidine, but clonidine is
the most widely used α2-agonist.
Pharmacologic Actions
Clonidine and guanfacine are presynaptic α2-receptor agonists. They inhibit
sympathetic outflow and cause vasodilation of blood vessels. Clonidine and
guanfacine are well absorbed from the GI tract and reach peak plasma levels
1 to 3 hours after oral administration. The half-life of clonidine is 6 to 20
hours, and that of guanfacine is 10 to 30 hours.
The agonist effects of clonidine and guanfacine on presynaptic α2adrenergic receptors in the sympathetic nuclei of the brain result in a decrease
in the amount of norepinephrine released from the presynaptic nerve
terminals. This decrease serves to reset the body’s sympathetic tone at a
lower level and decrease arousal. Table 21-54 provides a summary of α2adrenergic receptor agonists used in psychiatry.


<<<PAGE 2190>>>
Therapeutic Indications
There is considerably more experience in clinical psychiatry with clonidine
than with guanfacine. There is recent interest in the use of guanfacine for the
same indications that respond to clonidine due to guanfacine’s longer halflife and relative lack of sedative effects.
Withdrawal from Opioids, Alcohol, Benzodiazepines, or Nicotine.
Clonidine and guanfacine are effective in reducing the autonomic symptoms
of rapid opioid withdrawal (e.g., hypertension, tachycardia, dilated pupils,
sweating, lacrimation, and rhinorrhea) but not the associated subjective
sensations. Clonidine administration (0.1 to 0.2 mg two to four times a day)
is initiated before detoxification and is then tapered off over 1 to 2 weeks
(Table 21-55).
Clonidine and guanfacine can reduce symptoms of alcohol and
benzodiazepine withdrawal, including anxiety, diarrhea, and tachycardia.
They can reduce craving, anxiety, and irritability symptoms of nicotine
withdrawal. The transdermal patch formulation of clonidine is associated
with better long-term compliance for purposes of detoxification than is the
tablet formulation.
Tourette Disorder. Clonidine and guanfacine are effective drugs for the
treatment of Tourette disorder. Most clinicians begin treatment for Tourette
disorder with the standard DRAs haloperidol (Haldol) and pimozide (Orap)
and the SDAs risperidone (Risperdal) and olanzapine (Zyprexa). However, if
concerned about the adverse effects of these drugs, the clinician may begin
treatment with clonidine or guanfacine. The starting dose of clonidine for
children is 0.05 mg a day; it can be increased to 0.3 mg a day in divided
doses. Clonidine may take long periods (e.g., 4 to 6 months) to positively
effect the symptoms of the disorder. The response rate has been reported to
be up to 70 percent.
Table 21-54
α2-Adrenergic Receptor Agonists Used in Psychiatrya


<<<PAGE 2191>>>
Other Tic Disorders. Clonidine and guanfacine reduce the frequency and
severity of tics in persons with tic disorder with or without comorbid ADHD.
Hyperactivity and Aggression in Children. Clonidine and guanfacine
can be useful alternatives for the treatment of ADHD. They are used in place
of sympathomimetics and antidepressants, which may produce a paradoxical
worsening of hyperactivity in some children with intellectual disability,
aggression, or features on the spectrum of autism. Clonidine and guanfacine
can improve mood, reduce activity level, and improve social adaptation.
Some impaired children may respond favorably to clonidine, but others may
become sedated. The starting dose is 0.05 mg a day; it can be raised to 0.3 mg
a day in divided doses. The efficacy of clonidine and guanfacine for control
of hyperactivity and aggression often diminishes over several months of use.
Table 21-55
Oral Clonidine Protocols for Opioid Detoxification
Clonidine 0.1–0.2 mg PO four times a day; hold for systolic BP <90
mm Hg or bradycardia; stabilize for 2–3 days, then taper over 5–10
days
OR
Clonidine 0.1–0.2 mg PO q4–6h as needed for withdrawal signs or
symptoms; stabilize for 2–3 days, then taper over 5–10 days
OR
Test dose with clonidine 0.1–0.2 mg PO or SL (for patients weighing


<<<PAGE 2192>>>
over 200 lb); check BP after 1 hr. If diastolic BP >70 mm Hg and
no symptoms of hypotension, begin treatment as follows:
Weight (lb)

Number of Clonidine Patches

<110

1 patch

110–160

2 patches

160–200

2 patches

>200

2 patches

OR
Test dose of oral clonidine 0.1 mg; check BP after 1 hr (if systolic BP
<90 mm Hg, do not give patch)
Place two TTS-2 clonidine patches (or three patches if patient weighs
>150 lb) on hairless area of upper body; then
For first 23 hr after patch application, give oral clonidine 0.2 mg q6h;
then
For next 24 hr, give oral clonidine 0.1 mg q6h
Change patches weekly
After 2 wk of two patches, switch to one patch (or two patches if
patient weighs >150 lb)
After 1 wk of one patch, discontinue patches
BP, blood pressure; PO, oral; q, every; SL, sublingual; TTS, through the skin.
From American Society of Addiction Medicine. Detoxification: principle and protocols. In: The
Principles Update Series: Topics in Addiction Medicine, Section 11. American Society of
Addiction; 1997, with permission.

Clonidine and guanfacine can be combined with methylphenidate (Ritalin)
or dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine) to treat hyperactivity and inattentiveness,
respectively. A small number of cases have been reported of the sudden death
of children taking clonidine together with methylphenidate; however, it has
not been conclusively demonstrated that these medications contributed to
these deaths. The clinician should explain to the family that the efficacy and


<<<PAGE 2193>>>
safety of this combination have not been investigated in controlled trials.
Periodic cardiovascular assessments, including vital signs and
electrocardiograms, are warranted if this combination is used.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Acute exacerbations of PTSD may be
associated with hyperadrenergic symptoms such as hyperarousal, exaggerated
startle response, insomnia, vivid nightmares, tachycardia, agitation,
hypertension, and perspiration. Preliminary reports suggested that these
symptoms may respond to the use of clonidine or, especially for an overnight
benefit, to the use of guanfacine. More recent studies have failed to
demonstrate that guanfacine produces an improvement in PTSD symptoms.
Other Disorders. Other potential indications for clonidine include other
anxiety disorders (panic disorder, phobias, obsessive-compulsive disorder,
and GAD) and mania, in which it may be synergistic with lithium (Eskalith)
or carbamazepine (Tegretol). There are anecdotal accounts suggesting the
efficacy of clonidine in schizophrenia and tardive dyskinesia. A clonidine
patch can reduce the hypersalivation and dysphagia caused by clozapine.
Low-dose use has been reported effective in hallucinogen-persisting
perceptive disorders.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
The most common adverse effects associated with clonidine are dry mouth
and eyes, fatigue, sedation, dizziness, nausea, hypotension, and constipation,
which result in discontinuation of therapy by about 10 percent of all persons
taking the drug. Some persons also experience sexual dysfunction. Tolerance
may develop to these adverse effects. A similar but milder adverse profile is
seen with guanfacine, especially in doses of 3 mg or more per day. Adults
should not take clonidine and guanfacine if their BP is below 90/60 mm Hg
or if they have cardiac arrhythmias, especially bradycardia. Development of
bradycardia warrants gradual, tapered discontinuation of the drug. Clonidine,
in particular, is associated with sedation, and tolerance does not usually
develop to this adverse effect. Uncommon CNS adverse effects of clonidine
include insomnia, anxiety, and depression; rare CNS adverse effects include
vivid dreams, nightmares, and hallucinations. Fluid retention associated with
clonidine treatment can be treated with diuretics.


<<<PAGE 2194>>>
The transdermal patch formulation of clonidine may cause local skin
irritation, which can be minimized by rotating the sites of application.
Overdose. Persons who take an overdose of clonidine may present with
coma and constricted pupils, symptoms similar to those of an opioid
overdose. Other symptoms of overdose are decreased BP, pulse, and
respiratory rate. Guanfacine overdose produces a milder version of these
symptoms. Clonidine and guanfacine should be avoided during pregnancy
and by nursing mothers. Elderly persons are more sensitive to the drug than
are younger adults. Children are susceptible to the same adverse effects as are
adults.
Withdrawal. Abrupt discontinuation of clonidine can cause anxiety,
restlessness, perspiration, tremor, abdominal pain, palpitations, headache, and
a dramatic increase in BP. These symptoms may appear about 20 hours after
the last dose of clonidine, and these may also be seen if one or two doses are
skipped. A similar set of symptoms occasionally occurs 2 to 4 days after
discontinuation of guanfacine, but the usual course is a gradual return to
baseline BP over 2 to 4 days. Because of the possibility of discontinuation
symptoms, doses of clonidine and guanfacine should be tapered slowly.
Drug Interactions
Clonidine and guanfacine cause sedation, especially early in therapy, and
when administered with other centrally active depressants, such as
barbiturates, alcohol, and benzodiazepines, the potential for additive sedative
effects should be considered. Dose reduction may be required in patients
receiving agents that interfere with AV node and sinus node conduction such
as β-blockers, CCBs, and digitalis. This combination increases the risk of AV
block and bradycardia. Clonidine should not be given with TCAs, which can
inhibit the hypotensive effects of clonidine.
Laboratory Interferences
No known laboratory interferences are associated with the use of clonidine or
guanfacine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines


<<<PAGE 2195>>>
Clonidine is available in 0.1-, 0.2-, and 0.3-mg tablets. The usual starting
dosage is 0.1 mg orally twice a day; the dosage can be raised by 0.1 mg a day
to an appropriate level (up to 1.2 mg/day). Clonidine must always be tapered
when it is discontinued to avoid rebound hypertension, which may occur
about 20 hours after the last clonidine dose. A weekly transdermal
formulation of clonidine is available at doses of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 mg/day. The
usual starting dosage is the 0.1-mg-a-day patch, which is changed each week
for adults and every 5 days for children; the dose can be increased, as needed,
every 1 to 2 weeks. The transition from the oral to the transdermal
formulations should be accomplished gradually by overlapping them for 3 to
4 days.
Guanfacine is available in 1- and 2-mg tablets. The usual starting dosage is
1 mg before sleep, and this can be increased to 2 mg before sleep after 3 to 4
weeks, if necessary. Regardless of the indication for which clonidine or
guanfacine is being used, the drug should be withheld if a person becomes
hypotensive (BP below 90/60 mm Hg).
An extended-release preparation of guanfacine (Intuniv) is also available.
Extended-release guanfacine should be dosed once daily. Tablets should not
be crushed, chewed, or broken before swallowing because this will increase
the rate of guanfacine release. It should not be administered with high-fat
meals due to increased exposure. The extended-release formulation should
not be substituted for immediate-release guanfacine tablets on a milligramper-milligram basis because of differing pharmacokinetic profiles. If
switching from immediate-release guanfacine, discontinue that treatment, and
titrate with extended-release guanfacine according to the following
recommended schedule:
1. ;Begin at a dose of 1 mg/day, and adjust in increments of no more than 1
mg/wk for both monotherapy and adjunctive therapy to a
psychostimulant.
2. For both monotherapy and adjunctive therapy (with a stimulant),
maintain the dose within the range of 1 to 4 mg once daily, depending
on clinical response and tolerability. In clinical trials, patients were
randomized or dose optimized to doses of 1, 2, 3, or 4 mg and received
extended-release guanfacine once daily in the morning in monotherapy
trials and once daily in the morning or the evening in the adjunctive


<<<PAGE 2196>>>
therapy trial.
3. In monotherapy trials, clinically relevant improvements were observed
beginning at doses in the range 0.05 to 0.08 mg/kg once daily. Efficacy
increased with increasing weight-adjusted dose (mg/kg). If well
tolerated, doses up to 0.12 mg/kg once daily may provide additional
benefit. Doses above 4 mg/day have not been systematically studied in
controlled clinical trials.
4. In the adjunctive trial, the majority of subjects reached optimal doses in
the 0.05 to 0.12 mg/kg/day range.
In clinical trials, there were dose-related and exposure-related risks for
several clinically significant adverse reactions (e.g., hypotension,
bradycardia, sedative events). Thus, consideration should be given to dosing
an extended-release preparation of guanfacine on a milligram-per-kilogram
basis in order to balance the exposure-related potential benefits and risks of
treatment.

21.8 Drugs Used for Cognitive
Enhancement
CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS
Donepezil (Aricept), rivastigmine (Exelon), and galantamine (Reminyl) are
cholinesterase inhibitors used to treat mild to moderate cognitive impairment
in dementia of the Alzheimer type. They reduce the inactivation of the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine and, thus, potentiate cholinergic
neurotransmission, which in turn produces a modest improvement in memory
and goal-directed thought. Memantine (Namenda) is not a cholinesterase
inhibitor, producing its effects through blockade of NMDA receptors. Unlike
the cholinesterase inhibitors, which are indicated for the mild to moderate
stages of Alzheimer disease, memantine is indicated for the moderate to
severe stages of the disease. Tacrine (Cognex), the first cholinesterase
inhibitor to be introduced, is no longer used because of its multiple-daily
dosing regimens, its potential for hepatotoxicity, and the consequent need for


<<<PAGE 2197>>>
frequent laboratory monitoring. Clinicians often combine a cholinesterase
inhibitor with memantine, as this combination may provide a beneficial
response compared with only cholinesterase inhibitor pharmacotherapy.
Pharmacologic Actions
Donepezil is entirely absorbed from the GI tract. Peak plasma concentrations
are reached about 3 to 4 hours after oral dosing. The half-life of donepezil is
70 hours in elderly persons, and it is taken only once daily. Steady-state
levels are achieved within about 2 weeks. The presence of stable alcoholic
cirrhosis reduces the clearance of donepezil by 20 percent. Rivastigmine
(Exelon) is rapidly and completely absorbed from the GI tract and reaches
peak plasma concentrations in 1 hour, but this is delayed by up to 90 minutes
if rivastigmine is taken with food. The half-life of rivastigmine is 1 hour, but
because it remains bound to cholinesterases, a single dose is therapeutically
active for 10 hours, and it is taken twice daily. Galantamine (Reminyl) is an
alkaloid similar to codeine and is extracted from daffodils of the plant
Galanthus nivalis. It is readily absorbed, with maximum concentrations
reached after 30 minutes to 2 hours. Food decreases the maximum
concentration by 25 percent. The elimination half-life of galantamine is
approximately 6 hours.
Tacrine (Cognex) is absorbed rapidly from the GI tract. Peak plasma
concentrations are reached about 90 minutes after oral dosing. The half-life of
tacrine is about 2 to 4 hours, thereby necessitating four-times-daily dosing.
Cholinesterase inhibitors are reversible, nonacylating inhibitors of either
acetylcholinesterase or butyrylcholinesterase, the enzymes that catabolize
choline-based esthers in the CNS. The enzyme inhibition increases synaptic
concentrations of acetylcholine, especially in the hippocampus and cerebral
cortex. Unlike tacrine, which is nonselective for all forms of
acetylcholinesterase, donepezil appears to be selectively active within the
CNS and has little activity in the periphery. Donepezil’s favorable side effect
profile appears to correlate with its lack of inhibition of cholinesterases in the
GI tract. Rivastigmine appears to have somewhat more peripheral activity
than donepezil and is thus more likely to cause GI adverse effects than is
donepezil.


<<<PAGE 2198>>>
Therapeutic Indications
Cholinesterase inhibitors are effective for the treatment of mild to moderate
cognitive impairment in dementia of the Alzheimer type. In long-term use,
they slow the progression of memory loss and diminish apathy, depression,
hallucinations, anxiety, euphoria, and purposeless motor behaviors.
Functional autonomy is less well preserved. Some persons note an immediate
improvement in memory, mood, psychotic symptoms, and interpersonal
skills. Others note little initial benefit but can retain their cognitive and
adaptive faculties at a relatively stable level for many months. A practical
benefit of cholinesterase inhibitor use is a delay or reduction of the need for
nursing home placement.
Donepezil and rivastigmine may be beneficial for patients with Parkinson
disease and Lewy body disease and treatment of cognitive deficits caused by
traumatic brain injury. Donepezil is under study for the treatment of mild
cognitive impairment that is less severe than that caused by Alzheimer
disease. People with vascular dementia may respond to acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors. Occasionally, cholinesterase inhibitors elicit an idiosyncratic
catastrophic reaction, with signs of grief and agitation, which is self-limited
after the drug is discontinued. The use of cholinesterase inhibitors to improve
cognition by nondemented individuals should be discouraged.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Donepezil. Donepezil is generally well tolerated at recommended dosages.
Fewer than 3 percent of those taking donepezil experience nausea, diarrhea,
and vomiting. These mild symptoms are more frequent with a 10-mg dose
than with a 5-mg dose, and when present, they tend to resolve after 3 weeks
of continued use. Donepezil may cause weight loss. Donepezil treatment has
been infrequently associated with bradyarrhythmias, especially in those with
underlying cardiac disease. A small number of persons experience syncope.
Rivastigmine. Rivastigmine is generally well tolerated but recommended
dosages may need to be scaled back in the initial period of treatment to limit
GI and CNS adverse effects. These mild symptoms are more common at
dosages above 6 mg a day, and when present, they tend to resolve after the
dosage is lowered. The most common adverse effects associated with


<<<PAGE 2199>>>
rivastigmine are nausea, vomiting, dizziness, headache, diarrhea, abdominal
pain, anorexia, fatigue, and somnolence. Rivastigmine may cause weight
loss, but it does not appear to cause hepatic, renal, hematologic, or electrolyte
abnormalities.
Galantamine. The most common side effects of galantamine are dizziness,
headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and anorexia. These side effects tend to
be mild and transient.
Tacrine. Tacrine is the least used of the cholinesterase inhibitors but
requires more discussion than the others because it is cumbersome to titrate
and use, and it poses the risk of potentially significant elevations in hepatic
transaminase levels. These increases occur in 25 to 30 percent of persons.
Aside from elevated transaminase levels, the most common specific adverse
effects associated with tacrine treatment are nausea, vomiting, myalgia,
anorexia, and rash, but only nausea, vomiting, and anorexia have been found
to have a clear relation to the dosage. Transaminase elevations
characteristically develop during the first 6 to 12 weeks of treatment, and
cholinergically mediated events are dosage related.
HEPATOTOXICITY. Tacrine is associated with increases in the plasma activities

of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST).
The ALT measurement is the more sensitive indicator of the hepatic effects
of tacrine. About 95 percent of patients who develop elevated ALT serum
levels do so in the first 18 weeks of treatment. The average length of time for
elevated ALT concentrations to return to normal after stopping tacrine
treatment is 4 weeks.
For routine monitoring of hepatic enzymes, AST and ALT activities should
be measured weekly for the first 18 weeks, every month for the second 4
months, and every 3 months after that. Weekly assessments of AST and ALT
should be performed for at least 6 weeks after an increase in dosage. Patients
with mildly elevated ALT activity should be monitored weekly and not be
rechallenged with tacrine until the ALT activity returns to the normal range.
For any patient with elevated ALT activity and jaundice, tacrine treatment
should be stopped, and the patient should not be given the drug again.


<<<PAGE 2200>>>
Table 21-56
Incidence of Major Adverse
Cholinesterase Inhibitors (%)

Side

Effects

with

Table 21-56 summarizes the incidence of significant adverse side effects
associated with each of the cholinesterase inhibitors.
Drug Interactions. All cholinesterase inhibitors should be used cautiously
with drugs that also possess cholinomimetic activity. Such drugs include
succinylcholine (Anectine) and bethanechol (Urecholine). The
coadministration of cholinesterase inhibitors and drugs that have cholinergic
antagonist activity (e.g., tricyclic drugs) is probably counterproductive.
Paroxetine is the most anticholinergic of the SSRIs, and we avoid it in
patients taking cholinesterase inhibitors.
Donepezil undergoes extensive metabolism via both CYP2D6 and 3A4
isozymes. The metabolism of donepezil may be increased by phenytoin
(Dilantin), carbamazepine (Tegretol), dexamethasone (Decadron), rifampin
(Rifadin), and phenobarbital (Solfoton). Commonly used agents such as
paroxetine, ketoconazole (Nizoral), and erythromycin can significantly
increase donepezil concentrations. Donepezil is highly protein-bound, but it
does not displace other protein-bound drugs, such as furosemide (Lasix),
digoxin (Lanoxin), or warfarin (Coumadin). Rivastigmine circulates mostly
unbound to serum proteins and has no significant drug interactions.
Similar to donepezil, galantamine is metabolized by both CYP2D6 and
3A4 isozymes and thus may interact with drugs that inhibit these pathways.
Paroxetine and ketoconazole should be used with great caution.
Laboratory Interferences. No laboratory interferences have been
associated with the use of cholinesterase inhibitors.


<<<PAGE 2201>>>
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Before initiation of cholinesterase
inhibitor therapy, potentially treatable causes of dementia should be ruled
out, and the diagnosis of dementia of the Alzheimer type established.
Donepezil is available in 5- and 10-mg tablets. Treatment should be
initiated at 5 mg each night. If well tolerated and of some discernible benefit
after 4 weeks, the dosage should be increased to a maintenance dosage of 10mg each night. Donepezil absorption is unaffected by meals.
Rivastigmine is available in 1.5-, 3-, 4.5-, and 6-mg capsules. The
recommended initial dosage is 1.5 mg twice daily for a minimum of 2 weeks,
after which increases of 1.5 mg a day can be made at intervals of at least 2
weeks to a target dosage of 6 mg a day, taken in two equal dosages. If
tolerated, the dosage may be further titrated upward to a maximum of 6 mg
twice daily. The administration of rivastigmine with food can reduce the risk
of adverse GI events.
Galantamine is available in 4-, 8-, and 16-mg tablets. The suggested dose
range is 16 to 32 mg/day given twice a day. The higher dose is better
tolerated than lower doses. The initial dosage is 8 mg/day, and after a
minimum of 4 weeks, the dose can be raised. All subsequent dosage increases
should occur at 4-week intervals and should be based on tolerability.
Tacrine is available in 10-, 20-, 30-, and 40-mg capsules. Before the
initiation of tacrine treatment, a complete physical and laboratory
examination should be conducted, with particular attention to liver function
tests and baseline hematologic indexes. Treatment should be initiated at 10
mg four times a day and then raised by increments of 10 mg a dose every 6
weeks up to 160 mg a day; the person’s tolerance of each dosage is indicated
by the absence of unacceptable side effects and lack of elevation of ALT
activity. Tacrine should be given four times daily—ideally 1 hour before
meals because the absorption of tacrine is reduced by about 25 percent when
it is taken during the first 2 hours after meals. If tacrine is used, the specific
guidelines for tacrine-induced ALT listed above should be followed.

MEMANTINE
Pharmacologic Actions
Memantine is well absorbed after oral administration. It reaches peak


<<<PAGE 2202>>>
concentrations in about 3 to 7 hours. Food does not affect the absorption of
memantine. Memantine has linear pharmacokinetics over the therapeutic
dosage range and has a terminal elimination half-life of about 60 to 80 hours.
Plasma protein binding is 45 percent.
Memantine undergoes little metabolism, with the majority (57 to 82
percent) of an administered dose excreted unchanged in the urine; the
remainder is converted primarily to three polar metabolites: the N-gludantan
conjugate, 6-hydroxy memantine, and 1-nitroso-deaminated memantine.
These metabolites possess minimal NMDA receptor antagonist activity.
Memantine is a low- to moderate-affinity NMDA receptor antagonist. It is
thought that the overexcitation of NMDA receptors by the neurotransmitter
glutamate may play a role in Alzheimer disease because glutamate plays an
integral role in the neural pathways associated with learning and memory.
Excess glutamate overstimulates NMDA receptors to allow too much calcium
into nerve cells, leading to the eventual cell death observed in Alzheimer
disease. Memantine may protect cells against excess glutamate by partially
blocking NMDA receptors associated with the abnormal transmission of
glutamate while allowing for physiologic transmission associated with
normal cell functioning.
Therapeutic Indications
Memantine is the only approved therapy in the United States for moderate to
severe Alzheimer disease.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Memantine is safe and well tolerated. The most common adverse effects are
dizziness, headache, constipation, and confusion. The use of memantine in
patients with severe renal impairment is not recommended. In a documented
case of an overdose with up to 400 mg of memantine, the patient experienced
restlessness, psychosis, visual hallucinations, somnolence, stupor, and loss of
consciousness. The patient recovered without permanent sequelae.
Drug Interactions
In vitro studies conducted with marker substrates of CYP450 enzymes
(CYP1A2, 2A6, 2C9, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4) showed minimal inhibition of


<<<PAGE 2203>>>
these enzymes by memantine. No pharmacokinetic interactions with drugs
metabolized by these enzymes are expected.
Because memantine is eliminated in part by tubular secretion,
coadministration of drugs that use the same renal cationic system, including
hydrochlorothiazide triamterene (Dyrenium), cimetidine (Tagamet),
ranitidine (Zantac), quinidine, and nicotine, could potentially result in altered
plasma levels of both agents. Coadministration of memantine with a
combination of hydrochlorothiazide and triamterene did not affect the
bioavailability of either memantine or triamterene, and the bioavailability of
hydrochlorothiazide decreased by 20 percent.
Urine pH is altered by diet, drugs (e.g., carbonic anhydrase inhibitors,
topiramate [Topamax], sodium bicarbonate), and the clinical state of the
patient (e.g., renal tubular acidosis or severe infections of the urinary tract).
The clearance of memantine is reduced by about 80 percent under alkaline
urine conditions at pH 8. Therefore, alterations of urine pH toward the
alkaline condition may lead to an accumulation of the drug with a possible
increase in adverse effects. Hence, memantine should be used with caution
under these conditions.
Laboratory Interferences
No laboratory interferences have been associated with the use of memantine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Memantine is available in 5- and 10-mg tablets, with a recommended starting
dose of 5 mg daily. The recommended target dose is 20 mg/day. The drug is
administered twice daily in separate doses with 5-mg increment increases
weekly depending on tolerability.
Patients with mild to moderate disease receiving memantine in
combination with a cholinesterase inhibitor have not been found to
experience significantly greater benefit in cognition or overall function than
those who receive a cholinesterase inhibitor alone.

21.9 Drugs Used to Treat Sexual


<<<PAGE 2204>>>
Disorders
PHOSPHODIESTERASE-5 INHIBITORS
Phosphodiesterase (PDE)-5 inhibitors, such as sildenafil (Viagra), which was
developed in 1998, revolutionized the treatment of erectile disorder. Two
congeners have since come on the market—vardenafil (Levitra) and tadalafil
(Cialis). All have a similar method of action and have changed people’s
expectations of sexual functioning. Although indicated only for the treatment
of male erectile dysfunction, there is anecdotal evidence of these drugs being
effective in women. They are also being misused as recreational drugs to
enhance sexual performance. These drugs have been used by more than 20
million men around the world.
The development of sildenafil provided important information about the
physiology of erection. Sexual stimulation causes the release of the
neurotransmitter nitric oxide (NO), which increases the synthesis of cyclic
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), causing smooth muscle relaxation in the
corpus cavernosum that allows blood to flow into the penis and results in
turgidity and tumescence. The concentration of cGMP is regulated by the
enzyme PDE-5, which, when inhibited, allows cGMP to increase and
enhance erectile function. Because sexual stimulation is required to cause the
release of NO, PDE-5 inhibitors do not affect in the absence of such
stimulation, an important point to understand when providing information to
patients about their use. The congeners vardenafil and tadalafil work in the
same way, by inhibiting PDE-5, thus allowing an increase in cGMP and
enhancing the vasodilatory effects of NO. For this reason, these drugs are
sometimes referred to as NO enhancers.
Pharmacologic Actions
All three substances are relatively rapidly absorbed from the GI tract, with
maximum plasma concentrations reached in 30 to 120 minutes (median, 60
minutes) in the fasting state. Because it is lipophilic, concomitant ingestion of
a high-fat meal delays the rate of absorption by up to 60 minutes and reduces
the peak concentration by one-quarter. These drugs are principally
metabolized by the CYP3A4 system, which may lead to clinically significant


<<<PAGE 2205>>>
drug–drug interactions, not all of which have been documented. Excretion of
80 percent of the dose is via feces, and another 13 percent is eliminated in the
urine. Elimination is reduced in persons older than age 65 years, which
results in plasma concentrations 40 percent higher than in persons ages 18 to
45 years. Elimination is also reduced in the presence of severe renal or
hepatic insufficiency.
The mean half-lives of sildenafil and vardenafil are 3 to 4 hours, and that
of tadalafil is about 18 hours. Tadalafil can be detected in the bloodstream 5
days after ingestion, and because of its long half-life, it has been marketed as
effective for up to 36 hours—the so-called weekend pill. The onset of
sildenafil occurs about 30 minutes after ingestion on an empty stomach;
tadalafil and vardenafil act somewhat more quickly.
Clinicians need to be aware of the crucial clinical observation that these
drugs do not by themselves create an erection. Instead, the mental state of
sexual arousal brought on by erotic stimulation must first lead to activity in
the penile nerves, which then release NO into the cavernosum, triggering the
erectile cascade, the resulting erection being prolonged by the NO enhancers.
Thus, a full advantage may be taken of a sexually exciting stimulus, but the
drug is not a substitute for foreplay and emotional arousal.
Therapeutic Indications
Erectile dysfunctions have traditionally been classified as organic,
psychogenic, or mixed. Over the past 20 years, the prevailing view of the
cause of erectile dysfunction has shifted away from psychological causes
toward organic causes. The latter include diabetes mellitus, hypertension,
hypercholesterolemia, cigarette smoking, peripheral vascular disease, pelvic
or spinal cord injury, pelvic or abdominal surgery (especially prostate
surgery), multiple sclerosis, peripheral neuropathy, and Parkinson disease.
Erectile dysfunction is often induced by alcohol, nicotine, and other
substances of abuse and prescription drugs.
These drugs are effective regardless of the baseline severity of erectile
dysfunction, race, or age. Among those responding to sildenafil are men with
coronary artery disease, hypertension, other cardiac diseases, peripheral
vascular disease, diabetes mellitus, depression, coronary artery bypass graft
surgery, radical prostatectomy, transurethral resection of the prostate, spina


<<<PAGE 2206>>>
bifida, and spinal cord injury, as well as persons taking antidepressants,
antipsychotics, antihypertensives, and diuretics. However, the response rate is
variable.
Sildenafil has been reported to reverse SSRI-induced anorgasmia in men.
There are anecdotal reports of sildenafil having a therapeutic effect on sexual
inhibition in women as well.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
A significant potential adverse effect associated with the use of these drugs is
myocardial infarction (MI). The U.S. FDA distinguished the risk of MI
caused directly by these drugs from that caused by underlying conditions
such as hypertension, atherosclerotic heart disease, diabetes mellitus, and
other atherogenic conditions. The FDA concluded that when used according
to the approved labeling, the drugs do not by themselves confer an increased
risk of death. However, there is increased oxygen demand and stress placed
on the cardiac muscle by sexual intercourse. Thus, coronary perfusion may be
severely compromised, and cardiac failure may occur as a result. For that
reason, any person with a history of MI, stroke, renal failure, hypertension, or
diabetes mellitus and any person older than the age of 70 years should discuss
plans to use these drugs with an internist or a cardiologist. The cardiac
evaluation should specifically address exercise tolerance and the use of
nitrates.
The use of PDE-5 inhibitors is contraindicated in persons who are taking
organic nitrates in any form. Also, amyl nitrate (poppers), a popular
substance of abuse used by gay men to enhance the intensity of orgasm,
should not be used with any of the erection-enhancing drugs. The
combination of organic nitrates and PDE inhibitors can cause a precipitous
lowering of BP and can reduce coronary perfusion to the point of causing MI
and death.
Adverse effects are dose-dependent, occurring at higher rates with higher
dosages. The most common adverse effects are headache, flushing, and
stomach pain. Other less common adverse effects include nasal congestion,
urinary tract infection, abnormal vision (colored tinge [usually blue],
increased sensitivity to light, or blurred vision), diarrhea, dizziness, and rash.
No cases of priapism were reported in premarketing trials. Supportive


<<<PAGE 2207>>>
management is indicated in cases of overdosage. Tadalafil has been
associated with back and muscle pain in about 10 percent of patients.
Recently, there have been 50 reports and 14 verified cases of a severe
condition in men taking sildenafil called nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic
neuropathy. This condition is an eye ailment that causes restriction of blood
flow to the optic nerve and can result in permanent vision loss. The first
symptoms appear within 24 hours after the use of sildenafil and include
blurred vision and some degree of vision loss. The incidence of this effect is
infrequent—1 in 1 million. In the reported cases, many patients had
preexisting eye problems that may have increased their risk, and many had a
history of heart disease and diabetes, which may indicate vulnerability in
these men to endothelial damage.
In 2010, possible hearing loss was reported based on 29 incidents of the
problem since the introduction of these drugs. Hearing loss usually occurs
within hours or days of using the drug. In some cases, the loss is both
unilateral and temporary.
No data are available on the effects on human fetal growth and
development or testicular morphologic or functional changes. However,
because these drugs are not considered an essential treatment, they should not
be used during pregnancy.
Treatment of Priapism
Phenylephrine (Neo-Synephrine) is the drug of choice and first-line treatment
of priapism, because the drug has almost pure α-agonist effects and minimal
β activity. In short-term priapism (less than 6 hours), especially for druginduced priapism, intracavernosal injection of phenylephrine can be used to
cause detumescence. A mixture of 1 ampule of phenylephrine (1 mL/1,000
µg) should be diluted with an additional 9 mL of normal saline. 0.3 to 0.5 mL
should be injected into the corpora cavernosa, using a 29-gauge needle with
10 to 15 minutes between injections. Vital signs should be monitored, and
compression should be applied to the area of injection to help prevent
hematoma formation.
Phenylephrine can also be used orally, 10 to 20 mg every 4 hours as
needed, but it may not be as effective or act as rapidly as the injectable route.


<<<PAGE 2208>>>
Drug Interactions
The primary route of PDE-5 metabolism is through CYP3A4, and the minor
route is through CYP2C9. Inducers or inhibitors of these enzymes will
therefore affect the plasma concentration and half-life of sildenafil. For
example, 800 mg of cimetidine (Tagamet), a nonspecific CYP inhibitor,
increases plasma sildenafil concentrations by 56 percent, and erythromycin
(E-mycin) increases plasma sildenafil concentrations by 182 percent. Other,
more potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 include ketoconazole (Nizoral),
itraconazole (Sporanox), and mibefradil (Posicor). In contrast, rifampicin, a
CYP3A4 inducer, decreases plasma concentrations of sildenafil.
Laboratory Interferences
No laboratory interferences have been described.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Sildenafil is available as 25-, 50-, and 100-mg tablets. The recommended
dose of sildenafil is 50 mg taken by mouth 1 hour before intercourse.
However, sildenafil may take effect within 30 minutes. The duration of the
effect is usually 4 hours, but in healthy young men, the effect may persist for
8 to 12 hours. Based on effectiveness and adverse effects, the dose should be
titrated between 25 and 100 mg. Sildenafil is recommended for use no more
than once a day. The dosing guidelines for use by women as off-label use are
the same as those for men.
Increased plasma concentrations of sildenafil may occur in persons older
than 65 years of age and those with cirrhosis or severe renal impairment or
using CYP3A4 inhibitors. A starting dose of 25 mg should be used in these
circumstances.
An investigational nasal spray formulation of sildenafil has been developed
that acts within 5 to 15 minutes of administration. This formulation is highly
water-soluble, and it is rapidly absorbed directly into the bloodstream. Such a
formulation would permit more ease of use.
Vardenafil is supplied in 2.5-, 5-, 10-, and 20-mg tablets. The initial dose is
usually 10 mg taken with or without food about 1 hour before sexual activity.
The dose can be increased to a maximum of 20 mg or decreased to 5 mg
based on efficacy and side effects. The maximum dosing frequency is once


<<<PAGE 2209>>>
per day. As with sildenafil, dosages may have to be adjusted in patients with
hepatic impairment or patients using specific CYP3A4 inhibitors. A 10 mg
orally disintegrating form of vardenafil (Staxyn) is available. It is placed on
the tongue approximately 60 minutes before sexual activity and should not be
used more than once a day.
Tadalafil is available in 2.5-, 5-, or 20-mg tablets for oral administration.
The recommended dose of tadalafil is 10 mg before sexual activity, which
may be increased to 20 mg or decreased to 5 mg depending on efficacy and
side effects. Once-a-day use of the 2.5- or 5-mg pill is acceptable for most
patients. Similar cautions apply as mentioned earlier in patients with hepatic
impairment and those taking concomitant potent inhibitors of CYP3A4. As
with other PDE-5 inhibitors, concomitant use of nitrates in any form is
contraindicated.

YOHIMBINE
Yohimbine (Yocon) is an α2-adrenergic receptor antagonist that is used as a
treatment for both idiopathic and medication-induced erectile disorder.
Currently, sildenafil (Viagra) and its congeners and alprostadil (Impulse,
Edex) are considered more efficacious for this indication than yohimbine.
Yohimbine is derived from an alkaloid found in Rubiaceae and related trees
and the Rauwolfia serpentina plant.
Pharmacologic Actions
Yohimbine is erratically absorbed after oral administration, with
bioavailability ranging from 7 to 87 percent. There is extensive hepatic firstpass metabolism. Yohimbine affects the sympathomimetic autonomic
nervous system by increasing plasma concentrations of norepinephrine. The
half-life of yohimbine is 0.5 to 2 hours. Clinically, yohimbine produces
increased parasympathetic (cholinergic) tone.
Therapeutic Indications
Yohimbine has been used to treat erectile dysfunction. Penile erection has
been linked to cholinergic activity and to the α2-adrenergic blockade, which
theoretically results in an increased penile inflow of blood, decreased penile


<<<PAGE 2210>>>
outflow of blood, or both. Yohimbine is reported to help counteract the loss
of sexual desire and the orgasmic inhibition caused by some serotonergic
antidepressants (e.g., SSRIs). It has not been found useful in women for these
indications.
Precautions
The side effects of yohimbine include anxiety, elevated BP and heart rate,
increased psychomotor activity, irritability, tremor, headache, skin flushing,
dizziness, urinary frequency, nausea, vomiting, and sweating. Patients with
panic disorder show heightened sensitivity to yohimbine and experience
increased anxiety, increased BP, and increased plasma 3-methoxy-4hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG).
Yohimbine should be used with caution in female patients and should not
be used in patients with renal disease, cardiac disease, glaucoma, or a history
of gastric or duodenal ulcers.
Drug Interactions
Yohimbine blocks the effects of clonidine, guanfacine, and other α2-receptor
agonists.
Laboratory Interferences
No known laboratory interferences are associated with yohimbine use.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Yohimbine is available in 5.4-mg tablets. The dosage of yohimbine in the
treatment of erectile disorder is approximately 16 mg a day, given in doses
that range from 2.7 to 5.4 mg three times a day. In the event of significant
adverse effects, the dose should first be reduced and then gradually increased
again. Yohimbine should be used judiciously in psychiatric patients because
it may worsen their mental status. Because yohimbine has no consistent
effect on erectile dysfunction, its use remains controversial.
Phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE-5) inhibitors are the preferred medication for this
disorder.


<<<PAGE 2211>>>
21.10 Drugs Used to Treat the Side
Effects of Psychotropic Drugs
ANTICHOLINERGIC AGENTS
Anticholinergic drugs block the actions of atropine. In the clinical practice of
psychiatry, the anticholinergic drugs are primarily used to treat medicationinduced movement disorders, particularly neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism,
neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia, and medication-induced postural tremor.
Anticholinergics
Pharmacologic Actions. All anticholinergic drugs are well absorbed from
the GI tract after oral administration, and all are sufficiently lipophilic to
enter the CNS. Trihexyphenidyl (Artane) and benztropine (Cogentin) reach
peak plasma concentrations in 2 to 3 hours after oral administration, and their
duration of action is 1 to 12 hours. Benztropine is absorbed equally rapidly
by intramuscular (IM) and intravenous (IV) administration; IM
administration is preferred because of its low risk for adverse effects.
All six anticholinergic drugs listed in this section (Table 21-57) block
muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, and benztropine has some
antihistaminergic effects. None of the available anticholinergic drugs has any
effect on the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Of these drugs,
trihexyphenidyl is the most stimulating agent, perhaps acting through
dopaminergic neurons, and benztropine is the least stimulating and thus is
least associated with abuse potential.
Table 21-57
Anticholinergic Drugs


<<<PAGE 2212>>>
Therapeutic Indications. The primary indication for the use of
anticholinergics in psychiatric practice is for the treatment of neurolepticinduced parkinsonism, characterized by tremor, rigidity, cogwheeling,
bradykinesia, sialorrhea, stooped posture, and festination. All of the available
anticholinergics are equally effective in the treatment of parkinsonian
symptoms. Neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism is most common in elderly
persons and is most frequently seen with high-potency DRAs, for example,
haloperidol (Haldol). The onset of symptoms usually occurs after 2 or 3
weeks of treatment. The incidence of neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism is
lower with the newer antipsychotic drugs of the SDA class.
Another indication for the use of anticholinergics is for the treatment of
neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia, which is most common in young men.
The syndrome often occurs early in the course of treatment; it is commonly
associated with high-potency DRAs (e.g., haloperidol); and most commonly
affects the muscles of the neck, tongue, face, and back. Anticholinergic drugs
are useful both in the short-term treatment of dystonias and in prophylaxis
against neuroleptic-induced acute dystonias.
Akathisia is characterized by a subjective and objective sense of
restlessness, anxiety, and agitation. Although a trial of anticholinergics for
the treatment of neuroleptic-induced acute akathisia is reasonable, these drugs
are not generally considered as effective as the β-adrenergic receptor
antagonists, the benzodiazepines, and clonidine (Catapres).
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The adverse effects of the
anticholinergic drugs result from the blockade of muscarinic acetylcholine
receptors. Anticholinergic drugs should be used cautiously, if at all, by
persons with prostatic hypertrophy, urinary retention, and narrow-angle
glaucoma. The anticholinergics are occasionally used as drugs of abuse


<<<PAGE 2213>>>
because of their mild mood-elevating properties, most notably,
trihexyphenidyl.
The most severe adverse effect associated with anticholinergic toxicity is
anticholinergic intoxication. The intoxication includes symptoms of delirium,
coma, seizures, agitation, hallucinations, severe hypotension, supraventricular
tachycardia, and peripheral manifestations (flushing, mydriasis, dry skin,
hyperthermia, and decreased bowel sounds). Treatment should begin with the
immediate discontinuation of all anticholinergic drugs. We can both diagnose
and treat anticholinergic intoxication with physostigmine (Antilirium,
Eserine), an inhibitor of anticholinesterase, 1 to 2 mg IV (1 mg every 2
minutes) or IM every 30 or 60 minutes. Because physostigmine can lead to
severe hypotension and bronchial constriction, it should be used only in
severe cases, and only when emergency cardiac monitoring and life-support
services are available.
Drug Interactions. The most common drug–drug interactions with the
anticholinergics occur when they are coadministered with psychotropics that
also have high anticholinergic activity, such as DRAs, tricyclic and
tetracyclic drugs, and MAOIs. Many other prescription drugs and over-thecounter cold preparations also induce significant anticholinergic activity. The
coadministration of those drugs can result in a life-threatening anticholinergic
intoxication syndrome. Also, anticholinergic drugs can delay gastric
emptying, thereby decreasing the absorption of drugs that are broken down in
the stomach and usually absorbed in the duodenum (e.g., levodopa
[Larodopa] and DRAs).
Laboratory Interferences. No known laboratory interferences have been
associated with anticholinergics.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. The six anticholinergic drugs discussed
in this chapter are available in a range of preparations (see Table 21-57).
For the treatment of neurolepticinduced parkinsonism, the equivalent of 1 to 3 mg of benztropine should be
given one to two times daily. The anticholinergic drug should be
administered for 4 to 8 weeks, and then it should be discontinued to assess
NEUROLEPTIC-INDUCED PARKINSONISM.


<<<PAGE 2214>>>
whether the person still requires the drug. Anticholinergic drugs should be
tapered over 1 to 2 weeks.
Treatment with anticholinergics as prophylaxis against the development of
neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism is usually not indicated because the onset
of its symptoms is usually sufficiently mild and gradual to allow the clinician
to initiate treatment only after it is indicated. In young men, prophylaxis may
be indicated, however, mainly if a high-potency DRA is being used. The
clinician should attempt to discontinue the antiparkinsonian agent in 4 to 6
weeks to assess whether its continued use is necessary.
NEUROLEPTIC-INDUCED ACUTE DYSTONIA. For the short-term treatment and

prophylaxis of neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia, 1 to 2 mg of benztropine
or its equivalent in another drug should be given IM. The dose can be
repeated in 20 to 30 minutes, as needed. If the person still does not improve
in another 20 to 30 minutes, a benzodiazepine (e.g., 1 mg IM or IV
lorazepam [Ativan]) should be given. Laryngeal dystonia is a medical
emergency and should be treated with benztropine, up to 4 mg in 10 minutes,
followed by 1 to 2 mg of lorazepam, administered slowly by the IV route.
Prophylaxis against dystonias is indicated in persons who have had one
episode or in persons at high risk (young men taking high-potency DRAs).
Prophylactic treatment is given for 4 to 8 weeks and then gradually tapered
over 1 to 2 weeks to allow assessment of its continued need. The prophylactic
use of anticholinergics in persons requiring antipsychotic drugs has mostly
become a moot issue because of the availability of SDAs, which are
relatively free of parkinsonian effects.
AKATHISIA. As mentioned, anticholinergics are not the drugs of choice for this

syndrome. The β-adrenergic receptor antagonists and perhaps the
benzodiazepines and clonidine are preferable drugs to try initially.

ANTIHISTAMINES
Antihistamines are frequently used in the treatment of a variety of psychiatric
disorders because of their sedative and anticholinergic activities. Certain
antihistamines (antagonists of histamine H1 receptors) are used to treat
neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism and neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia


<<<PAGE 2215>>>
and as hypnotics and anxiolytics. Diphenhydramine (Benadryl) is used to
treat neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism and neuroleptic-induced acute
dystonia and sometimes as a hypnotic. Hydroxyzine hydrochloride (Atarax)
and hydroxyzine pamoate (Vistaril) are used as anxiolytics. Promethazine
(Phenergan) is used for its sedative and anxiolytic effects. Cyproheptadine
(Periactin) has been used for the treatment of anorexia nervosa and inhibited
male and female orgasms caused by serotonergic agents. The antihistamines
most commonly used in psychiatry are listed in Table 21-58. Secondgeneration, “nonsedating” H1 blockers, such as fexofenadine (Allegra),
loratadine (Claritin), and cetirizine (Zyrtec) are less commonly used in
psychiatric practice. The H2-receptor antagonists, such as cimetidine, work
primarily on gastric mucosa, inhibiting gastric secretion.
Table 21-59 lists antihistaminic drugs not used in psychiatry, but that may
have psychiatric adverse effects or drug–drug interactions.
Pharmacologic Actions
The H1 antagonists used in psychiatry are well absorbed from the GI tract.
The antiparkinsonian effects of intramuscular (IM) diphenhydramine have
their onset in 15 to 30 minutes and the sedative effects of diphenhydramine
peak in 1 to 3 hours. The sedative effects of hydroxyzine and promethazine
begin after 20 to 60 minutes and last for 4 to 6 hours. Because all three drugs
are metabolized in the liver, persons with hepatic disease, such as cirrhosis,
may attain high plasma concentrations with long-term administration.
Cyproheptadine is well absorbed after oral administration, and its metabolites
are excreted in the urine.
Table 21-58
Histamine Antagonists Commonly Used in Psychiatry
Generic Name

Trade Name

Duration of Action (hr)

Diphenhydramine

Benadryl

4–6

Hydroxyzine

Atarax, Vistaril

6–24

Promethazine

Phenergan

4–6


<<<PAGE 2216>>>
Cyproheptadine

Periactin

4–6

Table 21-59
Other Histamine Antagonists often Prescribed
Class

Generic
Name

Trade
Name

Second-generation histamine 1 receptor
antagonists

Cetirizine

Zyrtec

Loratadine

Claritin

Fexofenadine Allegra
Histamine 2 receptor antagonists

Nizatidine

Axid

Famotidine

Pepcid

Ranitidine

Zantac

Cimetidine

Tagamet

Activation of H1 receptors stimulates wakefulness; therefore, receptor
antagonism causes sedation. All four agents also possess some antimuscarinic
cholinergic activity. Cyproheptadine is unique among the drugs because it
has both potent antihistamine and serotonin 5-HT2-receptor antagonist
properties.
Therapeutic Indications
Antihistamines are useful as a treatment for neuroleptic-induced
parkinsonism, neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia, and neuroleptic-induced
akathisia. They are an alternative to anticholinergics and amantadine for these
purposes. The antihistamines are relatively safe hypnotics, but they are not
superior to the benzodiazepines, which have been much better studied in
terms of efficacy and safety. The antihistamines have not been proven
effective for long-term anxiolytic therapy; therefore, the benzodiazepines,
buspirone (BuSpar), or SSRIs are preferable for such treatment.
Cyproheptadine is sometimes used to treat impaired orgasms, especially


<<<PAGE 2217>>>
delayed orgasm resulting from treatment with serotonergic drugs.
Because it promotes weight gain, cyproheptadine may be of some use in
the treatment of eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa. Cyproheptadine
can reduce recurrent nightmares with posttraumatic themes. The
antiserotonergic activity of cyproheptadine may counteract the serotonin
syndrome caused by concomitant use of multiple serotonin-activating drugs,
such as SSRIs and MAOIs.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Antihistamines are commonly associated with sedation, dizziness, and
hypotension, all of which can be severe in elderly persons, who are also
likely to experience the anticholinergic effects of those drugs. Paradoxical
excitement and agitation is an adverse effect seen in a small number of
persons. Poor motor coordination can result in accidents; therefore, persons
should be warned about driving and operating dangerous machinery. Other
common adverse effects include epigastric distress, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and constipation. Because of mild anticholinergic activity, some
people experience dry mouth, urinary retention, blurred vision, and
constipation.
For this reason, also, antihistamines should be used only at very low doses,
if at all, by persons with narrow-angle glaucoma or obstructive GI, prostate,
or bladder conditions. Either cyproheptadine or diphenhydramine may induce
a central anticholinergic syndrome with psychosis. The use of cyproheptadine
in some persons has been associated with weight gain, which may contribute
to its reported efficacy in some persons with anorexia nervosa.
In addition to the above adverse effects, antihistamines have some
potential for abuse. The coadministration of antihistamines and opioids can
increase the euphoria experienced by persons with substance use disorders.
Overdoses of antihistamines can be fatal. Antihistamines are excreted in
breast milk, so nursing mothers should avoid their use. Because of some
potential for teratogenicity, pregnant women should avoid the use of
antihistamines.
Drug Interactions
The sedative property of antihistamines can be additive with other CNS


<<<PAGE 2218>>>
depressants, such as alcohol, other sedative-hypnotic drugs, and many
psychotropic drugs, including tricyclic drugs and DRAs. Anticholinergic
activity can be cumulative when using other anticholinergic drugs and may
sometimes result in severe anticholinergic symptoms or intoxication.
Laboratory Interferences
H1 antagonists may eliminate the wheal and induration that form the basis of
allergy skin tests. Promethazine may interfere with pregnancy tests and may
increase blood glucose concentrations. Diphenhydramine may yield a falsepositive urine test result for phencyclidine (PCP). Hydroxyzine use can
falsely elevate the results of specific tests for urinary 17hydroxycorticosteroids.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
The antihistamines are available in a variety of preparations (Table 21-60).
IM injections should be deep because superficial administration can cause
local irritation.
Table 21-60
Dosage and
Antagonists

Administration

of

Common

Histamine

Medication

Route

Preparation

Common Dosage

Diphenhydramine
(Benadryl)

PO

Capsules and
tablets: 25
mg, 50 mg

Adults: 25–50 mg
three to four times
per day

Liquid: 12.5
mg/5.0 mL

Children: 5 mg/kg
three to four times
per day, not to
exceed 300
mg/day

Deep
Solution: 10 or
IM or
50 mg/mL
IV

Same as oral


<<<PAGE 2219>>>
Hydroxyzine
Hydrochloride
(Atarax)

PO

Tablets: 10, 25, Adults: 50–100 mg
50, and 100
three to four times
mg
daily
Syrup: 10 mg/5
mL

Children younger
than 6 yr of age: 2
mg/kg/day in
divided doses
Children older than 6
yr of age: 12.5–
25.0 mg three to
four times daily

Hydroxyzine
Pamoate
(Vistaril)

IM

Solution: 25 or
50 mg/mL

Same as oral

PO

Suspension: 25 Same as dosages for
mg/mL
hydroxyzine
hydrochloride
Capsules: 25,
50, and 100
mg

Promethazine
(Phenergan)

PO

Tablets: 15.2,
25.0, and
50.0 mg

Adults: 50–100 mg
three to four times
daily for sedation

Syrup: 3.25
mg/5 mL

Children: 12.5–25.0
mg at night for
sedation

Rectal

Suppositories:
12.5, 25.0,
and 50.0 mg

IM

Solution: 25 and
50 mg/mL


<<<PAGE 2220>>>
Cyproheptadine
(Periactin)

PO

Tablets: 4 mg

Adults: 4–20 mg/day

Syrup: 2 mg/5
mL

Children 2–7 yr of
age: 2 mg two to
three times daily
(maximum, 12
mg/day)
Children 7–14 yr of
age: 4 mg two to
three times daily
(maximum of 16
mg/day)

IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, oral.

Intravenous (IV) administration of 25 to 50 mg of diphenhydramine is an
effective treatment for neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia, which may
immediately disappear. Treatment with 25 mg three times a day—up to 50
mg four times a day, if necessary—can be used to treat neuroleptic-induced
parkinsonism, akinesia, and buccal movements. Diphenhydramine can be
used as a hypnotic at a 50-mg dose for mild transient insomnia. Doses of 100
mg are not superior to doses of 50 mg, but they produce more anticholinergic
effects than doses of 50 mg.
Hydroxyzine is most commonly used as a short-term anxiolytic.
Hydroxyzine should not be given IV because it is irritating to the blood
vessels. Dosages of 50 to 100 mg given orally four times a day for long-term
treatment or 50 to 100 mg IM every 4 to 6 hours for short-term treatment are
usually effective.
SSRI-induced anorgasmia may sometimes be reversed with 4 to 16 mg a
day of cyproheptadine taken by mouth 1 or 2 hours before anticipated sexual
activity. Several case reports and small studies have also reported that
cyproheptadine may be of some use in the treatment of eating disorders, such
as anorexia nervosa. Cyproheptadine is available in 4-mg tablets and a 2mg/5-mL solution. Children and elderly patients are more sensitive to the
effects of antihistamines than are young adults.


<<<PAGE 2221>>>
DOPAMINE RECEPTOR AGONISTS AND PRECURSORS
Dopamine agonists activate dopamine receptors in the absence of endogenous
dopamine and have been widely used to treat idiopathic Parkinson disease,
hyperprolactinemia, and certain pituitary tumors (prolactinoma). Because
dopamine stimulates the heart and increases blood flow to the liver, kidneys,
and other organs, low levels of dopamine are associated with low BP and low
cardiac input. Dopamine agonist drugs are also administered to treat shock
and congestive heart failure.
Their use in psychiatry has been limited to treat such adverse effects of
antipsychotic drugs as parkinsonism, extrapyramidal symptoms, akinesia,
focal perioral tremors, hyperprolactinemia, galactorrhea, and neuroleptic
malignant syndrome. The drugs in this class most commonly prescribed are
bromocriptine (Parlodel), levodopa (also called L-Dopa; Larodopa),
carbidopa-levodopa (Sinemet), and amantadine (Symmetrel). Amantadine is
used primarily for the treatment of medication-induced movement disorders,
such as neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism. It is also used as an antiviral agent
for the prophylaxis and treatment of influenza A infection and Cotard
syndrome, a rare neuropsychiatric disorder in which a person holds a
delusional belief that he or she is dead. There are also a few reports of
amantadine’s role in augmenting antidepressant medications in patients with
treatment-resistant depression.
New dopamine receptor agonists include ropinirole (Requip), pramipexole
(Mirapex), apomorphine (Apokyn), and pergolide (Permax). Of these drugs,
pramipexole is the most widely prescribed in psychiatry as an augmenter of
antidepressants. In 2007, pergolide was removed from the market because of
the risk of severe damage to patients’ heart valves. In 2012, the U.S. FDA
notified health care professionals about a possible increased risk of heart
failure with pramipexole. This warning was based on studies that suggested a
potential risk of heart failure; however, further review is required because of
study limitations.
Pharmacologic Actions
L-Dopa is rapidly absorbed after oral administration, and peak plasma levels

are reached after 30 to 120 minutes. The half-life of L-Dopa is 90 minutes.


<<<PAGE 2222>>>
Absorption of L-Dopa can be significantly reduced by changes in gastric pH
and by ingestion with meals. Bromocriptine and ropinirole are rapidly
absorbed but undergo first-pass metabolism such that only about 30 to 55
percent of the dose is bioavailable. Peak concentrations are achieved 1.5 to 3
hours after oral administration. The half-life of ropinirole is 6 hours.
Pramipexole is rapidly absorbed with little first-pass metabolism and reaches
peak concentrations in 2 hours. Its half-life is 8 hours. Oral forms of
apomorphine have been studied, but this form is not available in the United
States. Subcutaneous apomorphine injection results in rapid and controlled
systemic delivery, with linear pharmacokinetics over a dose ranging from 2
to 8 mg.
After L-Dopa enters the dopaminergic neurons of the CNS, it is converted
into the neurotransmitter dopamine. Apomorphine, bromocriptine, ropinirole,
and pramipexole act directly on dopamine receptors. L-Dopa, pramipexole,
and ropinirole bind about 20 times more selectively to dopamine D3 than D2
receptors; the corresponding ratio for bromocriptine is less than 2 to 1.
Apomorphine binds selectively to D1 and D2 receptors, with little affinity for
D3 and D4 receptors. L-Dopa, pramipexole, and ropinirole have no significant
activity at nondopaminergic receptors. However, bromocriptine binds to
serotonin 5-HT1 and 5-HT2 and α1-, α2-, and β-adrenergic receptors.
Therapeutic Indications
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders. In present-day clinical
psychiatry, dopamine receptor agonists are used for the treatment of
medication-induced parkinsonism, extrapyramidal symptoms, akinesia, and
focal perioral tremors. Their use has diminished sharply, however, because
the incidence of medication-induced movement disorders is much lower with
the use of the newer, atypical antipsychotics (SDAs). Dopamine receptor
agonists are effective in treating idiopathic restless legs syndrome and may
also be helpful when this is a medication side effect. Ropinirole can treat
restless legs syndrome.
For the treatment of medication-induced movement disorders, most
clinicians rely on anticholinergics, amantadine, and antihistamines because
they are equally effective and have few adverse effects. Bromocriptine


<<<PAGE 2223>>>
remains in use in the treatment of neuroleptic malignant syndrome; however,
the incidence of this disorder is diminishing with the decreased use of DRAs.
Dopamine receptor agonists are also used to counteract the
hyperprolactinemic effects of DRAs, which result in the side effects of
amenorrhea and galactorrhea.
Mood Disorders. Bromocriptine has long been used to enhance response to
antidepressant drugs in refractory patients. Ropinirole has been reported to be
useful as an augmentation of antidepressant therapy and as a treatment for
medication-resistant bipolar II depression. Ropinirole may also be helpful in
the treatment of antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction. Pramipexole is
often used in the augmentation of antidepressants in treatment-resistant
depression. Some studies have found pramipexole to be superior to sertraline
(Zoloft) in the treatment of depression in Parkinson disease, as well as in
reducing anhedonia in Parkinson patients.
Sexual Dysfunction. Dopamine receptor agonists improve erectile
dysfunction in some patients. However, they are rarely used because they
frequently cause adverse effects at therapeutic dosages. Phosphodiesterase-5
inhibitor agents are better tolerated and more effective (see Chapter 16).
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Adverse effects are common with dopamine receptor agonists, thus limiting
the usefulness of these drugs. Adverse effects are dosage-dependent and
include nausea, vomiting, orthostatic hypotension, headache, dizziness, and
cardiac arrhythmias. To reduce the risk of orthostatic hypotension, the initial
dosage of all dopamine receptor agonists should be relatively low, with
incremental increases at intervals of at least 1 week. These drugs should be
used with caution in persons with hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and
hepatic disease. After long-term use, persons, particularly elderly persons,
may experience choreiform and dystonic movements and psychiatric
disturbances—including hallucinations, delusions, confusion, depression, and
mania—and other behavioral changes.
Long-term use of bromocriptine can produce retroperitoneal and
pulmonary fibrosis, pleural effusions, and pleural thickening.
In general, ropinirole and pramipexole have a similar but milder adverse


<<<PAGE 2224>>>
effect profile than L-Dopa and bromocriptine. Pramipexole and ropinirole
may cause irresistible sleep attacks that occur suddenly without warning and
have caused motor vehicle accidents.
The most common adverse effects of apomorphine are yawning, dizziness,
nausea, vomiting, drowsiness, bradycardia, syncope, and perspiration.
Hallucinations have also been reported. Apomorphine’s sedative effects are
exacerbated with concurrent use of alcohol or other CNS depressants.
Dopamine receptor agonists are contraindicated during pregnancy,
especially for nursing mothers, because they inhibit lactation.
Drug Interactions
DRAs are capable of reversing the effects of dopamine receptor agonists, but
this is not usually clinically significant. The concurrent use of tricyclic drugs
and dopamine receptor agonists has been reported to cause symptoms of
neurotoxicity, such as rigidity, agitation, and tremor. They may also
potentiate the hypotensive effects of diuretics and other antihypertensive
medications. Dopamine receptor agonists should not be used in conjunction
with MAOIs, including selegiline (Eldepryl), and MAOIs should be
discontinued at least 2 weeks before the initiation of dopamine receptor
agonist therapy.
Benzodiazepines, phenytoin (Dilantin), and pyridoxine may interfere with
the therapeutic effects of dopamine receptor agonists. We should not combine
ergot alkaloids and bromocriptine because they may cause hypertension and
myocardial infarction. Progestins, estrogens, and oral contraceptives may
interfere with the effects of bromocriptine and may raise plasma
concentrations of ropinirole. Ciprofloxacin (Cipro) can raise plasma
concentrations of ropinirole, and cimetidine (Tagamet) can raise plasma
concentrations of pramipexole.
Laboratory Interferences
L-Dopa administration has been associated with false reports of elevated

serum and urinary uric acid concentrations, urinary glucose test results,
urinary ketone test results, and urinary catecholamine concentrations. No
laboratory interferences have been associated with the administration of the
other dopamine receptor agonists.


<<<PAGE 2225>>>
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Table 21-61 lists the various dopamine receptor agonists and their
formulations. For the treatment of antipsychotic-induced parkinsonism, the
clinician should start with a 100-mg dose of levodopa three times a day,
which may be increased until the person is functionally improved. The
maximum dosage of L-Dopa is 2,000 mg a day, but most persons respond to
dosages below 1,000 mg/day. The dosage of the carbidopa component of the
L-Dopa-carbidopa formulation should total at least 75 mg a day.
The dosage of bromocriptine for mental disorders is uncertain, although it
seems prudent to begin with low dosages (1.25 mg twice daily) and to
increase the dosage gradually. Bromocriptine is usually taken with meals to
help reduce the likelihood of nausea.
The starting dosage of pramipexole is 0.125 mg three times daily, which is
increased to 0.25 mg three times daily in the second week and is increased by
0.25 mg/dose each week until therapeutic benefit or adverse effects emerge.
Persons with idiopathic Parkinson disease usually experience benefits at total
daily doses of 1.5 mg, and the maximum daily dose is 4.5 mg.
For ropinirole, the starting dosage is 0.25 mg three times daily and is
increased by 0.25 mg/dose each week to a total daily dose of 3 mg, then by
0.5 mg/dose each week to a total daily dose of 9 mg, and then by 1 mg/dose
each week to a maximum dosage of 24 mg a day until therapeutic benefit or
adverse effects emerge. The average daily dose for persons with idiopathic
Parkinson disease is about 16 mg.
The recommended subcutaneous dose of apomorphine in Parkinson
disease is 0.2 to 0.6 mL subcutaneously during acute hypomobility episodes
delivered via metered injector pen. Apomorphine can be administered three
times daily, with a maximum dose of 0.6 mL five times daily.
Table 21-61
Available Preparations of Dopamine Receptor Agonists and
Carbidopa
Generic Name

Trade
Name

Preparations

Amantadine

Symmetrel 100-mg capsule, 50-mg/5-mL


<<<PAGE 2226>>>
Bromocriptine

Parlodel

syrup (teaspoon)
2.5-, 5-mg tablets

Carbidopa

Lodosyn

25 mga

Levodopa (L-Dopa)

Larodopa

100-, 250-, 500-mg tablets

Levodopa-carbidopa
(co-careldopa)

Sinemet,
Atamet

100/10-mg, 100/25-mg, 250/25mg tablets; 100/25-,
200/50-mg extended-release
tablets

Pramipexole

Mirapex

0.125-, 0.375-, 0.75-, 1.5-, 3-, 4mg extended-release tablets

Ropinirole

Requip

0.25-, 0.5-, 1-, 2-, 5-mg tablets

aDrug only available directly through the manufacturer.

Amantadine
Amantadine is an antiviral drug used for the prophylaxis and treatment of
influenza. It was found to have antiparkinsonian properties and is now used
to treat that disorder as well as akinesias and other extrapyramidal signs,
including focal perioral tremors (rabbit syndrome).
Pharmacologic Actions. Amantadine is well absorbed from the GI tract
after oral administration, reaches peak plasma concentrations in
approximately 2 to 3 hours, has a half-life of about 12 to 18 hours, and attains
steady-state concentrations after approximately 4 to 5 days of therapy.
Amantadine is excreted unmetabolized in the urine. Amantadine plasma
concentrations can be twice as high in elderly persons as in younger adults.
Patients with renal failure accumulate amantadine in their bodies.
Amantadine augments dopaminergic neurotransmission in the CNS;
however, the precise mechanism is unknown. The mechanism may involve
dopamine release from presynaptic vesicles, blocking the reuptake of
dopamine into presynaptic nerve terminals, or an agonist effect on
postsynaptic dopamine receptors.
Therapeutic Indications. The primary indication for amantadine use in


<<<PAGE 2227>>>
psychiatry is to treat extrapyramidal signs and symptoms, such as
parkinsonism, akinesia, and rabbit syndrome (focal perioral tremor of the
choreoathetoid type) caused by the administration of DRA or SDA drugs.
Amantadine is as effective as the anticholinergics (e.g., benztropine
[Cogentin]) for these indications and results in an improvement in
approximately half of all persons who take it. Amantadine, however, is not
generally considered as effective as the anticholinergics for the treatment of
acute dystonic reactions and is not effective in treating tardive dyskinesia and
akathisia.
Amantadine is a reasonable compromise for persons with extrapyramidal
symptoms who would be sensitive to additional anticholinergic effects,
particularly those taking a low-potency DRA or the elderly. Elderly persons
are susceptible to anticholinergic adverse effects, both in the CNS, such as
anticholinergic delirium, and in the peripheral nervous system, such as
urinary retention. Amantadine is associated with less memory impairment
than are the anticholinergics.
Amantadine has been reported to be of benefit in treating some SSRIassociated side effects, such as lethargy, fatigue, anorgasmia, and ejaculatory
inhibition.
Amantadine is used in general medical practice for the treatment of
parkinsonism of all causes, including idiopathic parkinsonism.
Precautions and Adverse Effects. The most common CNS effects of
amantadine are mild dizziness, insomnia, and impaired concentration (dosage
related), which occur in 5 to 10 percent of all persons. Irritability, depression,
anxiety, dysarthria, and ataxia occur in 1 to 5 percent of all persons. More
severe CNS adverse effects, including seizures and psychotic symptoms,
have been reported. Nausea is the most common peripheral adverse effect of
amantadine. Headache, loss of appetite, and blotchy spots on the skin have
also been reported.
Livedo reticularis of the legs (a purple discoloration of the skin caused by
dilation of blood vessels) has been reported in up to 5 percent of persons who
take the drug for longer than 1 month. It usually diminishes with the
elevation of the legs and resolves in almost all cases when drug use is
terminated.
Amantadine is relatively contraindicated in persons with renal disease or a


<<<PAGE 2228>>>
seizure disorder. Amantadine should be used with caution in persons with
edema or cardiovascular disease. Some evidence indicates that amantadine is
teratogenic and, therefore, should not be taken by pregnant women. Because
amantadine is excreted in breast milk, breastfeeding women should not take
the drug.
Suicide attempts with amantadine overdosages are life-threatening.
Symptoms can include toxic psychoses (confusion, hallucinations,
aggressiveness) and cardiopulmonary arrest. Emergency treatment beginning
with gastric lavage is indicated.
Drug Interactions. Coadministration of amantadine with phenelzine
(Nardil) or other MAOIs can result in a significant increase in resting BP.
The coadministration of amantadine with CNS stimulants can result in
insomnia, irritability, nervousness, and possibly seizures or irregular
heartbeat. Amantadine should not be coadministered with anticholinergics
because unwanted side effects—such as confusion, hallucinations,
nightmares, dry mouth, and blurred vision—may be exacerbated.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Amantadine is available in 100-mg
capsules and as a 50-mg/5-mL syrup. The usual starting dosage of
amantadine is 100 mg given twice a day orally, although the dosage can be
cautiously increased up to 200 mg given twice a day orally if indicated.
Amantadine should be used in persons with renal impairment only in
consultation with the physician treating the renal condition. If amantadine is
successful in the treatment of the drug-induced extrapyramidal symptoms, it
should be continued for 4 to 6 weeks and then discontinued to see whether
the person has become tolerant to the neurologic adverse effects of the
antipsychotic medication. Amantadine should be tapered over 1 to 2 weeks
after a decision has been made to discontinue the drug. Persons taking
amantadine should not drink alcoholic beverages.

DRUGS TO TREAT PSYCHOTROPIC-INDUCED WEIGHT
GAIN
Weight management is a critical element of psychotropic drug treatment
because obesity is common among persons with mental disorders. Thus,


<<<PAGE 2229>>>
medical conditions such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and
hyperlipidemia need to be taken into account when selecting medications.
With few exceptions, most psychotropic drugs used to manage mood
disorders, anxiety disorders, and psychosis are associated with a significant
risk of weight gain as a side effect. Many patients may refuse or discontinue
treatment if weight gain occurs, even if the drug is effective in treating their
symptoms. For this and other reasons, clinicians need to be well informed
about treatment strategies for mitigating drug-induced weight gain and
obesity in general.
The standard recommendation for weight loss regimens consists of
attempting to manage body weight through consistent dietary modifications
and regular physical activity. This behavioral approach may be difficult for
patients struggling with psychiatric symptoms, because their mental disorder
can compromise their ability to be disciplined in this effort. Also, the
physiologic effects of some psychotropic drugs on the regulation of satiety
and body metabolism are difficult, if not impossible, to overcome through
diet and exercise alone. For these reasons, it may be necessary to use
prescription medications to facilitate weight loss.
In this section, drugs used to manage obesity are categorized in two ways:
(1) drugs approved by the U.S. FDA as diet pills; and (2) drugs with primary
indications other than weight loss but produce weight loss as a side effect.
Drugs with U.S. Food and Drug Administration Approval for
Weight Loss
All of the drugs approved by the FDA as weight loss agents are specifically
indicated as an adjunct to a reduced-calorie diet and increased physical
activity for chronic weight management in adult patients with an initial body
mass index (BMI) of 30 kg/m2 or greater (obese) or 27 kg/m2 or greater
(overweight) in the presence of at least one weight-related comorbidity such
as hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, or dyslipidemia.
Phentermine.
Phentermine
hydrochloride
(Adipex-P)
is
a
sympathomimetic amine with pharmacologic activity similar to the
amphetamines. It is indicated as a short-term adjunct in a regimen of weight
reduction, but in fact, many patients use the drug for extended periods. As


<<<PAGE 2230>>>
with all sympathomimetics, contraindications include advanced
arteriosclerosis, cardiovascular disease, moderate to severe hypertension,
hyperthyroidism, known hypersensitivity or idiosyncrasy to the
sympathomimetic amines, agitated states, and glaucoma.
The drug should be prescribed with caution to patients with a history of
drug abuse. Hypertensive crises may result if phentermine is used during or
within 14 days following the administration of MAOIs. Insulin requirements
in diabetes mellitus may be altered in association with the use of phentermine
hydrochloride and the concomitant dietary regimen. Phentermine
hydrochloride may decrease the hypotensive effect of guanethidine.
Phentermine was pregnancy Category X in the former FDA classification
system and thus contraindicated during pregnancy. Studies have not been
performed with phentermine hydrochloride to determine the potential for
carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, or impairment of fertility.
Phentermine should be taken on an empty stomach once daily, before
breakfast. Tablets may be broken or cut in half but should not be crushed. It
should be dosed early in the day to avoid disrupting normal sleep patterns. If
taking more than one dose a day, the last dose should be taken approximately
4 to 6 hours before going to bed. The recommended dose of phentermine may
be different for different patients. Adults under age 60 taking phentermine
using 15- to 37.5-mg capsules should take them once per day before breakfast
or 1 to 2 hours after breakfast. Those using 15- to 37.5-mg tablets should take
them once per day before breakfast or 1 to 2 hours after breakfast. Instead of
taking it once a day, some patients may take 15 to 37.5 mg in divided doses a
half hour before meals. An oral resin formulation is available in 15- and 30mg capsules, which should be taken once per day before breakfast.
Phentermine/Topiramate Extended Release (Qsymia).
This drug is a combination of phentermine and topiramate (Topamax). The
FDA approved the phentermine/topiramate combination in 2012 as an
extended-release formulation. Both active agents in this formulation are
associated with weight loss through separate mechanisms.
Adverse events associated with the use of this drug may include, but are
not limited to, paresthesia, dizziness, dysgeusia, insomnia, constipation, dry
mouth, kidney stones, metabolic acidosis, and secondary angle-closure
glaucoma. The use of this drug is associated with a fivefold increased risk of


<<<PAGE 2231>>>
infants with cleft palate and was classified as pregnancy Category X in the
former FDA classification system. It can only be prescribed by clinicians
who have been certified in the use of this drug.
It is available as a tablet and should be administered once daily in the
morning with or without food. Avoid dosing with the drug in the evening due
to the possibility of insomnia. The recommended dose is as follows: Start
treatment with 3.75 mg/
23 mg (phentermine/topiramate extended-release) daily for 14 days; after 14
days, increase the dose to 7.5 mg/46 mg once daily. Evaluate for weight loss
after 12 weeks of treatment at the 7.5 mg/
46 mg dose. If at least 3 percent of baseline body weight has not been lost on
7.5 mg/46 mg, discontinue the drug or escalate the dose. To escalate the dose,
increase to 11.25 mg/69 mg daily for 14 days, followed by dosing 15 mg/92
mg daily. Evaluate weight loss following dose escalation to 15 mg/92 mg
after an additional 12 weeks of treatment. If at least 5 percent of baseline
body weight has not been lost on 15 mg/92 mg, discontinue the medication
gradually.
Phendimetrazine (Bontril PDM, Adipost, Phendiet, Statobex).
Phendimetrazine is a sympathomimetic amine that is closely related to the
amphetamines. It is classified by the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) as a
Schedule III controlled substance.
The overall prescribing of this agent is limited. The most commonly used
formulation is the 105-mg extended-release capsule, which approximates the
action of three 35-mg immediate-release doses taken at 4-hour intervals. The
average half-life of elimination, when studied under controlled conditions, is
about 3.7 hours for both the extended-release and immediate-release forms.
The absorption half-life of the drug from the immediate-release 35-mg
phendimetrazine tablets is appreciably more rapid than the absorption rate of
the drug from the extended-release formulation. The primary route of
elimination is via the kidneys, where most of the drug and metabolites are
excreted.
Phendimetrazine contraindications are similar to those of phentermine.
They include a history of cardiovascular disease (e.g., coronary artery
disease, stroke, arrhythmias, congestive heart failure, uncontrolled
hypertension, pulmonary hypertension); use during or within 14 days


<<<PAGE 2232>>>
following the administration of MAOIs; hyperthyroidism; glaucoma; agitated
states; a history of drug abuse; pregnancy; nursing; use in combination with
other anorectic agents or CNS stimulants; and known hypersensitivity or
idiosyncratic reactions to sympathomimetics. Given the lack of systematic
research, phendimetrazine should not be used in combination with over-thecounter preparations and herbal products that claim to promote weight loss.
Phendimetrazine tartrate was considered pregnancy Category X in the
former FDA classification system and is contraindicated during pregnancy
because weight loss offers no potential benefit to a pregnant woman and may
result in fetal harm. Studies with phendimetrazine tartrate sustained release
have not been performed to evaluate carcinogenic potential, mutagenic
potential, or effects on fertility.
Interactions may occur with MAOIs, alcohol, insulin, and oral
hypoglycemic agents. Phendimetrazine may decrease the hypotensive effect
of adrenergic neuron blocking drugs. The effectiveness and safety of
phendimetrazine in pediatric patients have not been established. It is not
recommended in patients less than 17 years of age.
Adverse reactions reported with phendimetrazine include sweating,
flushing, tremor, insomnia, agitation, dizziness, headache, psychosis, and
blurred vision. Elevated BP, palpitations, and tachycardia are frequent. GI
side effects include dry mouth, nausea, stomach pain, diarrhea, and
constipation. Genitourinary side effects include frequency, dysuria, and
changes in libido.
Phendimetrazine tartrate is related chemically and pharmacologically to the
amphetamines. Amphetamines and related stimulant drugs have been
extensively abused, and the possibility of abuse of phendimetrazine should be
kept in mind when evaluating the desirability of including a drug as part of a
weight reduction program.
Acute overdose with phendimetrazine may manifest itself by restlessness,
confusion, belligerence, hallucinations, and panic states. Fatigue and
depression usually follow central stimulation. Cardiovascular effects include
tachycardia, arrhythmias, hypertension or hypotension, and circulatory
collapse. GI symptoms include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal
cramps. Poisoning may result in convulsions, coma, and death. The
management of acute overdose is mainly symptomatic. It includes lavage and
sedation with a barbiturate. If hypertension is marked, the use of a nitrate or


<<<PAGE 2233>>>
rapid-acting α-receptor–blocking agent should be considered.
Diethylpropion (Tenuate). Diethylpropion preceded its analog, the
antidepressant drug bupropion (Wellbutrin). Diethylpropion comes in two
formulations: a 25-mg tablet and a 75-mg extended-release tablet (Tenuate
Dospan). It is usually taken three times a day, 1 hour before meals (regular
tablets), or once a day in midmorning (extended-release tablets). The
extended-release tablets should be swallowed whole, never crushed, chewed,
or cut. The maximum daily dose is 75 mg.
Side effects include dry mouth, unpleasant taste, restlessness, anxiety,
dizziness, depression, tremors, upset stomach, vomiting, and increased
urination. Side effects that warrant medical attention include tachycardia,
palpitations, blurred vision, skin rash, itching, difficulty breathing, chest pain,
fainting, swelling of the ankles or feet, fever, sore throat, chills, and painful
urination. Diethylpropion was classified as pregnancy Category B in the
former FDA classification system and has low abuse potential. It is listed as a
Schedule IV drug by the DEA.
Orlistat (Xenical, Alli). Orlistat interferes with the absorption of dietary
fats, causing reduced caloric intake. It works by inhibiting gastric and
pancreatic lipases, the enzymes that break down triglycerides in the intestine.
When lipase activity is blocked, triglycerides from the diet are not hydrolyzed
into absorbable free fatty acids and are excreted undigested instead. Only
trace amounts of orlistat are absorbed systemically; it is almost entirely
eliminated through the feces.
The effectiveness of orlistat in promoting weight loss is definite, though
modest. When used as part of a weight loss program, between 30 and 50
percent of patients can expect a 5 percent or more significant decrease in
body mass. About 20 percent achieve at least a 10 percent decrease in body
mass. After orlistat is stopped, up to a third of people gain the weight they
lose.
Among the benefits of orlistat treatment is a decrease in BP and a reduced
risk of developing type 2 diabetes.
The most common subjective side effects of orlistat are GI related and
include steatorrhea, flatulence, fecal incontinence, and frequent or urgent
bowel movements. Patients should avoid foods with high-fat content to


<<<PAGE 2234>>>
minimize these effects. Also, they should eat a reduced-calorie diet. Because
of this side effect, orlistat can be used with high-fat content diets to treat
constipation that results from treatment with some psychotropic drugs, such
as the TCAs. Side effects are most severe when beginning therapy and may
decrease in frequency with time. Hepatic and renal injuries are potentially
severe side effects of orlistat use. In 2010, new safety information about rare
cases of severe liver injury was added to the product label of orlistat. The rate
of acute kidney injury is more common among orlistat users than nonusers. It
should be used with caution in patients with impaired liver function and renal
function, as well as those with an obstructed bile duct and pancreatic disease.
Orlistat is contraindicated in malabsorption syndromes, hypersensitivity to
orlistat, reduced gallbladder function, and in pregnancy and breastfeeding.
Orlistat was rated pregnancy Category X in the former FDA classification
system.
The use of orlistat inhibits the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins and other
fat-soluble nutrients. Multivitamin supplements that contain vitamins A, D,
E, K, as well as β-carotene, should be taken once a day, preferably at
bedtime.
Orlistat can reduce plasma levels of the immunosuppressant cyclosporine
(Sandimmune), so the two drugs should, therefore, not be administered
concomitantly. Orlistat can also impair the absorption of the antiarrhythmic
amiodarone (Nexterone).
At the standard prescription dose of 120 mg three times daily before meals,
orlistat prevents approximately 30 percent of dietary fat from being absorbed.
Higher doses have not been shown to produce more pronounced effects.
An over-the-counter formulation of orlistat (Alli) is available as 60-mg
capsules—half the dosage of prescription orlistat.
Drugs without U.S. Food and Drug Administration Approval for
Weight Loss
Topiramate. Topiramate and zonisamide (Zonegran) are discussed more
fully among the mood stabilizers earlier in this chapter, but are mentioned
here because both agents can have a substantial effect on weight loss.
Topiramate is approved as an antiepileptic drug and for prevention of
migraine headaches in adults. The degree of weight loss associated with


<<<PAGE 2235>>>
topiramate may be comparable to the weight loss that other FDA-approved
antiobesity drugs induce. Small studies and extensive anecdotal reports
indicate that topiramate can help to offset weight gain associated with SSRIs
and SGA drugs. Its impact on body weight may be due to its effects on both
appetite suppression and satiety enhancement. These may be the result of a
combination of pharmacologic effects including augmenting GABA activity,
modulation of voltage-gated ion channels, inhibition of excitatory glutamate
receptors, or inhibition of carbonic anhydrase.
The duration and dosage of treatment affect the weight loss benefits of
topiramate. Weight loss is higher when the drug is prescribed at doses of 100
to 200 mg/day for more than a month compared with less than a month. In a
large study, it was shown that compared to those who took a placebo,
topiramate-treated patients were seven times more likely to lose more than 10
percent of their body weight. In clinical practice, many patients experience
weight loss at a starting dose of 25 mg/day.
The most common side effects of topiramate are paresthesias, typically
around the mouth, impaired taste (taste perversion), and psychomotor
disturbances, including slowed cognition and reduced physical movements.
Concentration and memory impairment, often characterized by word finding
and name recall problems, is often reported. Some patients may experience
emotional lability and mood changes. Medical side effects include increased
risk of kidney stones and acute-angle closure glaucoma. Patients should
report any change in visual acuity. Those with a history of kidney stones
should be instructed to drink adequate amounts of fluid.
Topiramate is available as 25-, 50- 100-, and 200-mg tablets and as 15-,
25-, and 50-mg capsules.
Zonisamide. Zonisamide is a sulfonamide-related drug, similar in many
ways to topiramate. Its exact mechanism of action is not known. Like
topiramate, it can cause cognitive problems, but the incidence is lower than
that with topiramate.
Zonisamide was assigned to pregnancy Category C in the former FDA
classification system. Animal studies have revealed evidence of
teratogenicity. Fetal abnormalities or embryo-fetal deaths have been reported
in animal tests at zonisamide dosage and maternal plasma levels similar to, or
lower than, human therapeutic levels. Therefore, the use of this drug in


<<<PAGE 2236>>>
human pregnancy may expose the fetus to significant risk.
The most common side effects include drowsiness, loss of appetite,
dizziness, headache, nausea, and agitation or irritability. Zonisamide has also
been associated with hypohidrosis. There is a 2 to 4 percent risk of kidney
stones. Other drugs known to provoke stones, such as topiramate or
acetazolamide (Diamox), should not be combined with zonisamide. Severe,
but rare, adverse drug reactions include Stevens–Johnson syndrome, toxic
epidermal necrolysis, and metabolic acidosis.
Typical dosing for weight loss has not been established. Generally,
zonisamide is started at 100 mg at night for 2 weeks, and increased by 100
mg daily every 2 weeks to a target dose of 200 to 600 mg/day in one or two
daily doses.
Metformin (Glucophage). Metformin is a medication for type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Its actions include reduction of hepatic glucose production, reduced
intestinal glucose absorption, increased insulin sensitivity, and improved
peripheral glucose uptake and regulation. It does not increase insulin
secretion.
When used as an adjunct to SGAs, it has consistently been shown to
reduce body weight and waist circumference. Metformin probably has the
best evidence of therapeutic benefit for the treatment of antipsychotic druginduced metabolic syndrome. In several studies, metformin has been shown
to attenuate or reverse some of the weight gain induced by antipsychotics.
The degree of effect on body weight compares favorably with the effect of
other treatment options that are approved for weight reduction. The weight
loss effect of adjunctive metformin appears to be stronger in drug-naive
patients treated with SGA medications. This effect is most evident for those
being treated with clozapine (Clozaril) and olanzapine (Zyprexa). Based on
the existing evidence, if weight gain occurs after SGA initiation, despite
lifestyle intervention, metformin should be considered.
Common side effects include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and loss
of appetite. GI side effects can be mitigated by dividing the dose, taking the
drug after meals, or using delayed-release formulations.
One serious treatment risk is that of lactic acidosis. This side effect is more
common in those with reduced renal function than other patients. Although
very rare (approximately 9 in 100,000 persons/yr), it has a 50 percent


<<<PAGE 2237>>>
mortality rate. Alcohol use, along with metformin, can increase the risk of
acidosis. Renal function monitoring and alcohol avoidance are essential.
The weight loss effects of metformin are also evident in chronically ill
patients with schizophrenia. Long-term use of metformin appears to be safe
and effective.
There is no established dose range for metformin when used as an adjunct
for weight loss. In most reports, the usual dose ranged from 500 to 2,000
mg/day. The maximum dose used in treating diabetes is 850 mg three times
daily. Patients usually start with a low dose to see how the drug affects them.
Metformin is available in 500-, 850-, and 1,000-mg tablets, all now
generic. Metformin SR (slow release) or XR (extended-release) is available
in 500- and 750-mg strengths. These formulations are intended to reduce GI
side effects and to increase patient compliance by reducing the pill burden.
Amphetamine. Amphetamine is a psychostimulant approved for the
treatment of ADHD and narcolepsy. It has the effect of reducing appetite and
has been used off label for that purpose for many years. Some of the drugs
discussed above have amphetamine-like properties, which account for their
effectiveness. Amphetamines and other psychostimulants are discussed
earlier in the stimulant section of this chapter.

21.11 Nutritional Supplements and
Related
NUTRITIONAL SUPPLEMENTS AND MEDICAL FOODS
Thousands of herbal and dietary supplements are being marketed today.
Some are purported to have psychoactive properties. A number have even
shown promise in the treatment of specific psychiatric symptoms. Although
certain compounds may be beneficial, in many cases, the quantity and quality
of data have been insufficient to make definitive conclusions. Nevertheless,
some patients prefer to use these substances in place of, or in conjunction
with, standard pharmaceutical treatments. If electing to use herbal drugs or
nutritional supplements, bear in mind that their use may come at the expense


<<<PAGE 2238>>>
of proven interventions and that adverse effects are possible. Though more
research is needed, information published to date is still of clinical interest in
diagnosing and treating patients who may be taking dietary supplements.
Additionally, herbal and nonherbal supplements may augment or
antagonize the actions of prescription and nonprescription drugs. Thus,
clinicians need to remain informed on the latest research involving these
substances. Because of the paucity of clinical trials, the clinician must be
extraordinarily alert to the possibility of adverse effects as a result of drug–
drug interactions, mainly if psychotropic agents are prescribed, because many
phytomedicines have ingredients that produce physiologic changes in the
body.
Nutritional Supplements
In the United States, the term nutritional supplement is used interchangeably
with the term dietary supplement. The Dietary Supplement Health and
Education Act (DHSEA) of 1994 defined nutritional supplements as items
taken by mouth that contain a “dietary ingredient” meant to supplement the
diet. These ingredients may include vitamins, minerals, herbs, botanicals,
amino acids, and substances such as enzymes, tissues, glandulars, and
metabolites. By law, such products must be labeled as supplements and may
not be marketed as conventional food.
The DSHEA places dietary supplements in a select category, and therefore
the regulations governing them are laxer than those for prescription and overthe-counter drugs. Unlike pharmaceutical drugs, nutritional supplements do
not need the approval of the U.S. FDA, and the FDA does not evaluate their
effectiveness. Because the FDA does not regulate dietary supplements, the
contents and quality on store shelves vary dramatically. Contamination,
mislabeling, and misidentification of herbs and supplements are problems.
Table 21-62 provides a list of dietary supplements used in psychiatry.
Medical Foods
In recent years the FDA has introduced a new category of nutritional
supplement called medical foods. According to the FDA, medical food, as
defined in the Orphan Drug Act, is “a food which is formulated to be
consumed or administered enterally under the supervision of a physician and


<<<PAGE 2239>>>
which is intended for the specific dietary management of a disease or
condition for which distinctive nutritional requirements, based on recognized
scientific principles, are established by medical evaluation.”
A clear distinction can be made between the regulatory classifications of
medical foods and dietary supplements. Medical foods must be shown, by
medical evaluation, to meet the distinctive nutritional needs of a specific
population of patients with a specific disease being targeted. Dietary
supplements, on the other hand, are intended for normal, healthy adults and
may not require proof of the efficacy of the finished product. Medical foods
are distinguished from the broader category of foods for special dietary use
and from foods that make health claims by the requirement that medical
foods are to be used under medical supervision.
Medical foods do not have to undergo premarket approval by the FDA.
However, medical food firms must comply with other requirements, such as
acceptable manufacturing practices and registration of food facilities.
Medical foods do have some additional regulations that dietary supplements
do not because medical foods are intended to treat illnesses. For example, a
compliance program requires annual inspections of all medical food
manufacturers.
In summary, to be considered a medical food, a product must, at a
minimum, meet the following criteria: (1) The product must be a food for oral
or tube feeding; (2) the product must be labeled for the dietary management
of a specific medical disorder, disease, or condition for which there are
distinctive nutritional requirements; and (3) the product must be intended to
be used under medical supervision. The most common medical foods with
psychoactive claims are listed in Table 21-63.
Table 21-62
Dietary Supplements Used in Psychiatry


<<<PAGE 2240>>>
Table 21-63


<<<PAGE 2241>>>
Some Common Medical Foods
Medical Food

Indication

Mechanism of Action

Caprylictriglyceride
(Axona)

Alzheimer
disease

Increases plasma concentration of
ketones as an alternative energy
source in the brain; metabolized
in the liver

L-methylfolate

Depression

Regulates synthesis of serotonin,
norepinephrine, and dopamine;
adjunctive to selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs); 15
mg/day

S-adenosyl-Lmethionine
(SAMe)

Depression

Naturally occurring molecule
involved in synthesis of
hormones and neurotransmitters
including serotonin and
norepinephrine

L-Tryptophan

Sleep
disturbance
Depression

Essential amino acid; precursor of
serotonin; reduces sleep
latency; usual dose 4–5 g/day

Omega-3 fatty
acid

Depression
Cognition

Eicosapentaenoic (EPA) and
docosahexaenoic (DHA) acids;
direct effect on lipid metabolism;
used for augmentation of
antidepressant drugs

Theramine
(Sentra)

Sleep
Cholinergic modulator; increases
disturbances
acetylcholine and glutamate
Cognitive
enhancer

(Deplin)

NDepression
Acetylcysteine Obsessive-

Amino acid that attenuates
glutamatergic


<<<PAGE 2242>>>
compulsive
disorder

neurotransmission; used to
augment SSRIs

L-Tyrosine

Depression

Amino acid precursor to biogenic
amines epinephrine and
norepinephrine

Glycine

Depression

Amino acid that activates Nmethyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptors; may facilitate
excitatory transmission in the
brain

Citicoline

Alzheimer
Choline donor involved in
disease
synthesis of brain
phosopholipids and
Ischemic brain
acetylcholine; 300–1,000
injury
mg/day; may improve memory

Acetyl Lcarnitine
(Alcar)

Alzheimer
disease
Memory loss

Antioxidant that may prevent
oxidative damage in the brain

PHYTOMEDICINES
The term phytomedicines (from the Greek phyto, meaning “plant”) refers to
herb and plant preparations that are used or have been used for centuries for
the treatment of a variety of medical conditions. Phytomedicines are
categorized as dietary supplements, not drug products, and are therefore
exempt from the regulations that govern prescription and over-the-counter
medications. Manufacturers of phytomedicines are not required to provide
the FDA with safety information before marketing a product or give the FDA
postmarketing safety reports. Thousands of herbal drugs are being marketed
today; the most common with psychoactive properties are listed in Table 2164. Ingredients, when identified, are listed, as are indications, adverse events,
dosages, and comments, particularly on interactions with commonly
prescribed drugs used in psychiatry. For example, St. John’s wort (wort is an
old English word meaning “root or herb” and a familiar term for home


<<<PAGE 2243>>>
brewers), which is used to treat depression, decreases the effectiveness of
certain psychotropic drugs such as amitriptyline (Elavil), alprazolam (Xanax),
paroxetine (Paxil), and sertraline (Zoloft), among others. Kava kava, which is
used to treat anxiety states, has been associated with liver toxicity.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are possible, and toxic interactions with other drugs may
occur with all phytomedicines, dietary supplements, and medicinal foods.
Adulteration is possible, especially with phytomedicines. There are few or no
consistent standard preparations available for most herbs. The FDA does not
test medical foods; however, strict voluntary compliance is required. Safety
profiles and knowledge of adverse effects of most of these substances have
not been studied rigorously, however. Because of the paucity of clinical
trials, all of these agents should be avoided during pregnancy; some herbs
may act as abortifacients, for example. Because most of these substances or
their metabolites are secreted in breast milk, they are contraindicated during
lactation.
Clinicians should always attempt to obtain a history of herbal use or the
use of medical foods or nutritional supplements during the psychiatric
evaluation.
It is important to be nonjudgmental in dealing with patients who use these
substances. Many do so for various reasons: (1) as part of their cultural
tradition, (2) because they mistrust physicians or are dissatisfied with
conventional medicine, or (3) because they experience relief of symptoms
with the particular substance. Because patients will be more cooperative with
traditional psychiatric treatments if they are allowed to continue using their
preparations, psychiatrists should keep an open mind and not attribute all
effects to suggestion. If psychotropic agents are prescribed, the clinician must
be extraordinarily alert to the possibility of adverse effects as a result of
drug–drug interactions, because many of these compounds have ingredients
that produce physiologic changes in the body.
Table 21-64
Phytomedicinals with Psychoactive Effects


<<<PAGE 2244>>>

<<<PAGE 2245>>>

<<<PAGE 2246>>>

<<<PAGE 2247>>>
References
Introduction
Ananth J, Parameswaran S, Gunatilake S, Burgoyne K, Sidhom T.
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome and atypical antipsychotic drugs. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2004;65(4):464–470.
Bai YM, Yu SC, Chen JY, Lin CY, Chou P. Risperidone for pre-existing
severe tardive dyskinesia: a 48-week prospective follow-up study. Int Clin
Psychopharmacol. 2005;20:79–85.
Balk EM, Bonis PA, Moskowitz H, Schmid CH, Ioannidis JP. Correlation of
quality measures with estimates of treatment effect in meta-analyses of
randomized controlled trials. JAMA. 2002;287:2973.
Bratti IM, Kane JM, Marder SR. Chronic restlessness with antipsychotics.
Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164(11):1648–1654.
Caroff SN, Mann SC, Campbell EC, Sullivan KA. Movement disorders
associated with atypical antipsychotic drugs. J Clin Psychiatry.
2002;63(Suppl 4):12–19.
Chuang DM. The antiapoptotic actions of mood stabilizers: molecular
mechanisms and therapeutic potentials. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005;1053:195–
204.
Damier P, Thobois S, Witjas T, Cuny E, Derost P. Bilateral deep brain
stimulation of the globus pallidus to treat tardive dyskinesia. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2007;64:
170–176.
Dayalu P, Chou KL. Antipsychotic-induced extrapyramidal symptoms and
their management. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2008;9:1451–1462.
DeVeaugh-Geiss J, March J, Shapiro M, Andreason PJ, Emslie G, Ford LM,
Greenhill L, Murphy D, Prentice E, Roberts R, Silva S, Swanson JM, van
Zwieten-Boot B, Vitiello B, Wagner KD, Mangum B. Child and
adolescent psychopharmacology in the new millennium: A workshop for
academia, industry, and government. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2006;45(3):261–270.
Factor SA, Lang AE, Weiner WJ, eds. Drug Induced Movement Disorders.
2nd ed. Malden, MA: Blackwell Futura; 2005.
Fava GA, Tomba E, Tossani E. Innovative trends in the design of therapeutic
trials
in
psychopharmacology
and
psychotherapy.
Prog


<<<PAGE 2248>>>
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2013;40:306–311.
Gunes A, Dahl ML, Spina E, Scordo MG. Further evidence for the
association between 5-HT2C receptor gene polymorphisms and
extrapyramidal side effects in male schizophrenic patients. Eur J Clin
Pharmacol. 2008;64:477–482.
Gunes A, Scordo MG, Jaanson P, Dahl ML. Serotonin and dopamine receptor
gene polymorphisms and the risk of extrapyramidal side effects in
perphenazine-treated schizophrenic patients. Psychopharmacology.
2007;190:479–484.
Guzey C, Scordo MG, Spina E, Landsem VM, Spigset O. Antipsychoticinduced extrapyramidal symptoms in patients with schizophrenia:
associations with dopamine and serotonin receptor and transporter
polymorphisms. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2007;63:233–241.
Janicak PG, Beedle D. Medication-induced movement disorders. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:2996.
Janno S, Holi M, Tuisku K, Wahlbeck K. Prevalence of neuroleptic-induced
movement disorders in chronic schizophrenic inpatients. Am J Psychiatry.
2004;161:160–163.
Koning JP, Tenback DE, van Os J, Aleman A, Kahn RS, van Harten PN.
Dyskinesia and parkinsonism in antipsychotic-naive patients with
schizophrenia, first-degree relatives and healthy controls: a meta-analysis.
Schizophr Bull. 2010:36(4):723–731.
Kosky N. A possible association between high normal and high dose
olanzapine and prolongation of the PR interval. J Psychopharmacol.
2002;16:181–182.
Lam RW, Wan DDC, Cohen NL, Kennedy SH. Combining antidepressants
for treatment-resistant depression: a review. J Clin Psychiatry.
2002;63:685–693.
Lee PE, Sykora K, Gill SS, Mamdani M, Marras C, Anderson G, Shulman
KI, Stukel T, Normand SL, Rochon PA. Antipsychotic medications and
drug-induced movement disorders other than parkinsonism: a populationbased cohort study in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2005;53(8):1374–
1379.
Lencer R, Eismann G, Kasten M, Kabakci K, Geithe V. Family history of


<<<PAGE 2249>>>
movement disorders as a predictor for neuroleptic-induced extrapyramidal
symptoms. Br J Psychiatry. 2004;185:465–471.
Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Rosenheck RA. Clinical
Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) investigators.
N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1209–1223.
Liguori A. Psychopharmacology of attention: the impact of drugs in an age of
increased distractions. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2013;21(5):343–344.
Lyons KE, Pahwa R. Efficacy and tolerability of levetiracetam in Parkinson
disease patients with levodopa-induced dyskinesia. Clin Neuropharmacol.
2006;29(3):
148–153.
Malizia AL. The role of emission tomography in pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic studies in clinical psychopharmacology. J
Psychopharmacol. 2006;20(Suppl 4):100–107.
McGrath PJ, Stewart JW, Quitkin FM, Chen Y, Alpert JE. Predictors of
relapse in a prospective study of fluoxetine treatment of major depression.
Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(9):1542–1548.
Meco G, Fabrizio E, Epifanio A, Morgante F, Valente M. Levetiracetam in
tardive dyskinesia. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2006;29:265.
Meyer JH, Ginovart N, Boovariwala A, Sagrati S, Hussey D. Elevated
monoamine oxidase a levels in the brain: an explanation for the
monoamine imbalance of major depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2006;63:1209–1216.
Miller del D, Caroff SN, Davis SM, Rosenheck RA, McEvoy JP. Clinical
Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) investigators:
extrapyramidal side-effects of antipsychotics in a randomised trial. Br J
Psychiatry. 2008;193:279.
Moncrieff J. Magic bullets for mental disorders: the emergence of the concept
of an “antipsychotic” drug. J Hist Neurosci. 2013;22(1):30–46.
Pappa S, Dazzan P. Spontaneous movement disorders in antipsychotic-naive
patients with first-episode psychoses: a systematic review. Psychol Med.
2009;39:
1065–1076.
Poyurovsky M, Pashinian A, Weizman R, Fuchs C, Weizman A. Low-dose
mirtazapine: a new option in the treatment of antipsychotic-induced
akathisia. A randomized, double-blind, placebo- and propranolol-


<<<PAGE 2250>>>
controlled trial. Biol Psychiatry. 2006;59:
1071–1077.
Preskorn SH. Pharmacogenomics, informatics, and individual drug therapy in
psychiatry: past, present and future. J Psychopharmacol. 2006;20(Suppl
4):85–94.
Soares-Weiser K, Fernandez HH. Tardive dyskinesia. Semin Neurol.
2007;27:159–169.
Strous RD, Stryjer R, Maayan R, Gal G, Viglin D. Analysis of clinical
symptomatology, extrapyramidal symptoms and neurocognitive
dysfunction following dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) administration in
olanzapine treated schizophrenia patients: a randomized, double-blind
placebo controlled trial. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2007;32:96–105.
Sussman N. General principles of psychopharmacology. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:2965.
Wadsworth EJK, Moss SC, Simpson SA, Smith AP. Psychotropic medication
use and accidents, injuries, and cognitive failures. Hum Psychopharmacol.
2005;20(6):
391–400.
Zajecka J, Goldstein C. Combining and augmenting: choosing the right
therapies
for
treatment-resistant
depression.
Psychiatr
Ann.
2005;35(12):994–1000.
Zarrouf FA, Bhanot V. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome: don’t let your guard
down yet. Curr Psychiatry. 2007;6(8):89.
Antipsychotics
Cameron K, Kolanos R, Vekariya R, De Felice L, Glennon RA.
“Mephedrone and methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV), major
constituents of “bath salts,” produce opposite effects at the human
dopamine transporter”: erratum. Psychopharmacology. 2013;227(3):501.
Davidson M, Emsley R, Kramer M, Ford L, Pan G, Lim P, Eerdekens M.
Efficacy, safety and early response of paliperidone extended-release tablets
(paliperidone ER): Results of a 6-week, randomized, placebo-controlled
study. Schizophr Res. 2007;93(1–3):117–130.
Dean AC, Groman SM, Morales AM, London ED. An evaluation of the


<<<PAGE 2251>>>
evidence that methamphetamine abuse causes cognitive decline in humans.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013;38(2):259–274.
Frieling H, Hillemacher T, Ziegenbein M, Neundorfer B, Bleich S. Treating
dopamimetic psychosis in Parkinson’s disease: structured review and
meta-analysis. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2007;17(3):165–171.
Isom AM, Gudelsky GA, Benoit SC, Richtand NM. Antipsychotic
medications, glutamate, and cell death: a hidden, but common medication
side effect? Med Hypotheses. 2013;80(3):252–258.
Jones PB, Barnes TR, Davies L, Dunn G; Lloyd H. Randomized controlled
trial of the effect on quality of life of second- vs first-generation
antipsychotic drugs in schizophrenia: Cost Utility of the Latest
Antipsychotic Drugs in Schizophrenia Study (CUtLASS 1). Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2006;63:1079–1087.
Kahn RS, Fleischhacker WW, Boter H, Davidson M, Vergouwe Y, Keet IP,
Gheorghe MD, Rybakowski JK, Galderisi S, Libiger J, Hummer M,
Dollfus S, Lopez-Ibor JJ, Hranov LG, Gaebel W, Peuskens J, Lindefors N,
Riecher-Rossler A, Grobbee DE. Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in
first-episode schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder: an open
randomised clinical trial. Lancet. 2008;371(9618):
1085–1097.
Kane J, Canas F, Kramer M, Ford L, Gassmann-Mayer C, Lim P, Eerdekens
M. Treatment of schizophrenia with paliperidone extended-release tablets:
a 6-week placebo-controlled trial. Schizophr Res. 2007;90(1–3):147–161.
Kane JM, Meltzer HY, Carson WH Jr, McQuade RD, Marcus RN.
Aripiprazole for treatment-resistant schizophrenia: results of a multicenter,
randomized, double-blind, comparison study versus perphenazine. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2007;68(2):213–223.
Keefe RS, Bilder RM, Davis SM. Neurocognitive effects of antipsychotic
medications in patients with chronic schizophrenia in the CATIE Trial.
Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;64(6):633–647.
Kumra S, Kranzler H, Gerbino-Rosen G, Kester HM, De Thomas C,
Kafantaris V, Correll CU, Kane JM. Clozapine and “high-dose” olanzapine
in refractory early-onset schizophrenia: a 12-week randomized and doubleblind comparison. Biol Psychiatry. 2008;63(5):524–529.
Kumra S, Oberstar JV, Sikich L, Findling RL, McClellan JM. Efficacy and
tolerability of second-generation antipsychotics in children and adolescents


<<<PAGE 2252>>>
with schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2008;34(1):60–71.
Leucht S, Cores C, Arbter D, Engel R, Li C, Davis J. Second-generation
versus first-generation antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia: a metaanalysis. Lancet. 2009;373:31–41.
Leucht S, Komossa K, Rummel-Kluge C, Corves C, Hunger H, Schmid F,
Lobos CA, Schwartz S, Davis JM. A meta-analysis of head-to-head
comparisons of secondgeneration antipsychotics in the treatment of schizophrenia. Am J
Psychiatry. 2009;
166(2):152–163.
Leucht S, Pitschel-Walz G, Abraham D, Kissling W. Efficacy and
extrapyramidal side-effects of the new antipsychotics olanzapine,
quetiapine, risperidone, and sertindole compared to conventional
antipsychotics and placebo. A meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Schizophr Res. 1999;35(1):51–68.
Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Rosenheck RA. Clinical
Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) investigators.
N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1209.
Mamo D, Graff A, Mizrahi R, Shammi CM, Romeyer F. Differential effects
of aripiprazole on D(2), 5-HT(2), and 5-HT(1A) receptor occupancy in
patients with schizophrenia: a triple tracer PET study. Am J Psychiatry.
2007;164(9):1411–1417.
Marder SR, Essock SM, Miller AL, Buchanan RW, Davis JM. The Mount
Sinai conference on the pharmacotherapy of schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull.
2002;28(1):5.
Marder SR, Hurford IM, van Kammen DP. Second-generation
antipsychotics. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3206.
McEvoy JP, Lieberman JA, Perkins DO, Hamer RM, Gu H. Efficacy and
tolerability of olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone in the treatment of
early psychosis: a randomized, double-blind 52-week comparison. Am J
Psychiatry. 2007;164(7):
1050–1060.
McEvoy JP, Lieberman JA, Stroup TS. Effectiveness of clozapine versus
olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone in patients with chronic


<<<PAGE 2253>>>
schizophrenia who did not respond to prior atypical antipsychotic
treatment. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(4):
600–610.
Novick D, Haro JM, Suarez D, Vieta E, Naber D. Recovery in the outpatient
setting: 36-month results from the Schizophrenia Outpatients Health
Outcomes (SOHO) study. Schizophr Res. 2009;108(1–3):223–230.
Owen RT. Inhaled loxapine: a new treatment for agitation in schizophrenia or
bipolar disorder. Drugs Today. 2013;49(3):195–201.
Pacciardi B, Mauri M, Cargioli C, Belli S, Cotugno B, Di Paolo L, Pini S.
Issues in the management of acute agitation: how much current guidelines
consider safety? Front Psychiatry. 2013;4:26.
Patil ST, Zhang L, Martenyi F, Lowe SL, Jackson KA. Activation of
mGlu2/3 receptors as a new approach to treat schizophrenia: a randomized
phase 2 clinical trial. Nat Med. 2007;13(9):1102–1107.
Ray WA, Chung CP, Murray KT, Hall K, Stein CM. Atypical antipsychotic
drugs and the risk of sudden cardiac death. N Engl J Med.
2009;360(3):225–235.
Sikich L, Frazier JA, McClellan J, Findling RL, Vitiello B, Ritz L, Ambler D,
Puglia M, Maloney AE, Michael E, De Jong S, Slifka K, Noyes N,
Hlastala S, Pierson L, McNamara NK, Delporto-Bedoya D, Anderson R,
Hamer RM, Lieberman JA. Double-blind comparison of first- and secondgeneration antipsychotics in early-onset schizophrenia and schizoaffective
disorder: findings from the treatment of early-onset schizophrenia
spectrum disorders (TEOSS) study. Am J Psychiatry. 2008;165(11):1420.
Smith RC, Segman RH, Golcer-Dubner T, Pavlov V, Lerer B. Allelic
variation in ApoC3, ApoA5 and LPL genes and first and second generation
antipsychotic effects on serum lipids in patients with schizophrenia.
Pharmacogenomics J. 2008;8:
228–236.
Stroup TS, Lieberman JA, McEvoy JP. Results of phase 3 of the CATIE
schizophrenia trial. Schizophr Res. 2009;107(1):1–12.
Suzuki H, Gen K, Inoue Y. Comparison of the anti-dopamine D(2) and antiserotonin 5-HT(2A) activities of chlorpromazine, bromperidol, haloperidol
and secondgeneration antipsychotics parent compounds and metabolites thereof. J
Psychopharmacol. 2013;27(4):396–400.


<<<PAGE 2254>>>
Tandon R, Belmaker RH, Gattaz WF, Lopez-Ibor JJ Jr, Okasha A, Singh B,
Stein DJ, Olie JP, Fleischhacker WW, Moeller HJ. World Psychiatric
Association Pharmacopsychiatry Section statement on comparative
effectiveness of antipsychotics in the treatment of schizophrenia. Schizophr
Res. 2008;100(1–3):20–38.
van Kammen DP, Hurford I, Marder SR. First-generation antipsychotics. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3105.
Wu B-J, Chen H-K, Lee S-M. Do atypical antipsychotics really enhance
smoking reduction more than typical ones? The effects of antipsychotics
on smoking reduction in patients with schizophrenia. J Clin
Psychopharmacol. 2013;33(3):319–328.
Antidepressants
Adli M, Pilhatsch M, Bauer M, Köberle U, Ricken R, Janssen G, Ulrich S,
Bschor T. Safety of high-intensity treatment with the irreversible
monoamine oxidase inhibitor tranylcypromine in patients with treatmentresistant depression. Pharmacopsychiatry. 2008;41:252–257.
Altshuler LL, Bauer M, Frye MA, Gitlin MJ, Mintz J. Does thyroid
supplementation accelerate tricyclic antidepressant response? A review in
meta-analysis of the literature. Am J Psychiatry. 2001;158:1617–1622.
Amsterdam JD, Bodkin JA. Selegiline transdermal system in the prevention
of relapse of major depressive disorder: a 52-week, double-blind, placebosubstitution, parallel-group clinical trial. J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2006;26:579–586.
Amsterdam JD, Wang CH, Shwarz M, Shults J. Venlafaxine versus lithium
monotherapy of rapid and non-rapid cycling patients with bipolar II major
depressive episode: a randomized, parallel group, open-label trial. J Affect
Disord. 2009;112(1–3):
219–230.
Anderson I. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors versus tricyclics
antidepressant: a meta-analysis of efficacy and tolerability. J Affect Disord.
2000;58:19.
Andrisano C, Chiesa A, Serretti A. Newer antidepressants and panic disorder:
a meta-analysis. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2013;28(1):33–45.


<<<PAGE 2255>>>
Anton RF, Burch EA. Amoxapine versus amitriptyline combined with
perphenazine in the treatment of psychotic depression. Am J Psychiatry.
1990;147:1203–1208.
Appelhof BC, Brouwer JP, van Dyck R, Fliers E, Hoogendijk WJ.
Triiodothyronine addition to paroxetine in the treatment of major
depressive disorder. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004;89:6271–6276.
Aronson R, Offman HJ, Joffe RT, Naylor CD. Triiodothyronine
augmentation and the treatment of refractory depression: a meta-analysis.
Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1996;35:842–848.
Ashton AK, Longdon MC. SSNRI-induced, dose dependent, nonmenstrual,
vaginal spotting and galactorrhea accompanied by prolactin elevation
(Letter). Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164:1121.
Baker GB, Sowa S, Todd KG. Amine oxidases and their inhibitors: what can
they tell us about neuroprotection and the development of drugs for
neuropsychiatric disorders? J Psychiatr Neurosci. 2007;32:313–315.
Baldessarini RJ, Pompili M, Tondo L. Suicidal risk in antidepressant drug
trials. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2006;63:246–248.
Balu DT, Hoshaw BA, Malberg JE. Differential regulation of central BDNF
protein levels by antidepressant and non-antidepressant drug treatments.
Brain Res. 2008;1211:37–43.
Banerjee S, Hellier J, Romeo R, Dewey M, Knapp M, Ballard C, Baldwin R,
Bentham P, Fox C, Holmes C, Katona C, Lawton C, Lindesay J,
Livingston G, McCrae N, Moniz-Cook E, Murray J, Nurock S, Orrell M,
O’Brien J, Poppe M, Thomas A, Walwyn R, Wilson K, Burns A. Study of
the use of antidepressants for depression in dementia: the HTA-SADD trial
—a multicentre, randomised, doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial of the clinical effectiveness and costeffectiveness of sertraline and mirtazapine. Health Technol Assess.
2013;17(7):1–166.
Barbui C, Esposito E, Cipriani A. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and
risk of suicide: a systematic review of observational studies. CMAJ.
2009;180:291–297.
Bauer M, Baur H, Bergebifer A, Strohle A, Hellweg R. Effects of
supraphysiological thyroxine administration in healthy controls in patients
with depressive disorders. J Affect Dis. 2002;68:285–294.
Baungartner A. Thyroxine and the treatment of affective disorders: an


<<<PAGE 2256>>>
overview of the results of basic and clinical research. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2000;3:149–165.
Bech P, Allerup P, Larsen E, Csillag C, Licht R. Escitalopram versus
nortriptyline: how to let the clinical GENDEP data tell us what they
contained. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2013;127(4):328–329.
Cettomai D, McArthur JC. Mirtazapine use in human immunodeficiency
virus-infected patients with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.
Arch Neurol. 2009;66(2):255–258.
Chambers CD, Hernandez-Diaz S, Van Marter LJ, Werler MM, Louik C.
Selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors and risk of persistent pulmonary
hypertension of the newborn. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:579–587.
Charney DS, Delgado PL, Price LH, Heninger GR. The receptor sensitivity
hypothesis of antidepressant action: a review of antidepressant effects on
serotonin function. In: Brown SL, van Praag HM, eds. The Role of
Serotonin in Psychiatric Disorders. New York: Brunner/Mazel; 1991:29.
Choung RS, Cremonini F, Thapa P, Zinsmeister AR, Talley NJ. The effect of
short-term, low-dose tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressant treatment on
satiation, postnutrient load gastrointestinal symptoms and gastric
emptying: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial.
Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2008;20:220–227.
Cipriani A, Barbui C, Brambilla P, Furukawa TA, Hotopf M. Are all
antidepressants really the same? The case of fluoxetine: a systematic
review. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67:850–864.
Cipriani A, Furukawa TA, Salanti G, Geddes JR, Higgins JPT. Comparative
efficacy and acceptability of 12 new-generation antidepressants: a
multiple-treatments meta-analysis. Lancet. 2009;373:746–758.
Ciraulo DA, Knapp C, Rotrosen J, Sarid-Segal O, Seliger C. Nefazodone
treatment of cocaine dependence with comorbid depressive symptoms.
Addiction. 2005;
100(Suppl 1):23–31.
Clayton A, Kornstein S, Prakash A, Mallinckrodt C, Wohlreich M. Changes
in sexual functioning associated with duloxetine, escitalopram, and
placebo in the treatment of patients with major depressive disorder. J Sex
Med. 2007;4:917–929.
Clayton AH, Montejo AL. Major depressive disorder, antidepressants, and
sexual dysfunction. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67(Suppl 6):33.


<<<PAGE 2257>>>
Cohen LS, Altshuler LL, Harlow BL, Nonacs R, Newport DJ. Relapse of
major depression during pregnancy in women who maintain or discontinue
antidepressant treatment. JAMA. 2006;295:499.
Cooper-Kazaz A, Apter JT, Cohen R, Karapichev L, Mohammed-Moussa S.
Combined treatment with sertraline and liothyronine in major depression: a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2007;64:679–688.
Couturier J, Sy A, Johnson N, Findlay S. Bone mineral density in adolescents
with eating disorders exposed to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
Eat Disord. 2013;21(3):238–248.
Cowen P, Sherwood AC. The role of serotonin in cognitive function:
evidence from recent studies and implications for understanding
depression. J Psychopharmacol. 2013;27(7):575–583.
Danish University Antidepressant Group. Paroxetine: a selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitor showing better tolerance, but weaker antidepressant
effect than clomipramine in a controlled multicenter study. J Affect Dis.
1990;18:289.
DeBattista C, Schatzberg AF. Bupropion. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3056.
DeBattista C, Solvason B, Poirier J, Kendrick E, Loraas E. A placebocontrolled, randomized, double-blind study of adjunctive bupropion
sustained release in the treatment of SSRI-induced sexual dysfunction. J
Clin Psychiatry. 2005; 66(7):
844–848.
DeBattista C, Solvason HB, Poirier J, Kendrick E, Schatzberg AF. A
prospective trial of bupropion SR augmentation of partial and nonresponders to serotonergic antidepressants. J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2003;23(1):27–30.
DeBattista C. Augmentation and combination strategies for depression. J
Psychopharmacol. 2006;20(3 Suppl):11–18.
DellaGioia N, Devine L, Pittman B, Hannestad J. Bupropion pretreatment of
endotoxininduced depressive symptoms. Brain Behav Immun. 2013;31:197–204.
DeSanty KP, Amabile CM. Antidepressant-induced liver injury. Ann
Pharmacother. 2007;41(7):1201.


<<<PAGE 2258>>>
Diem SJ, Blackwell TL, Stone KL, Yaffe K, Haney EM. Use of
antidepressants and rates of hip bone loss in older women: the study of
osteoporotic fractures. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167:1240–1245.
Duman RS, Heninger GR, Nestler EJ. A molecular and cellular theory of
depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1997;54:597–606.
Dykens JA, Jamieson JD, Marroquin LD, Nadanaciva S, Xu JJ, Dunn MC,
Smith AR, Will Y. In vitro assessment of mitochondrial dysfunction and
cytotoxicity of nefazodone, trazodone, and buspirone. Toxicol Sci.
2008;103(2):335–345.
Elkin I, Shea T, Watkins JT. NIMH treatment of depression collaborative
research program: general effectiveness of treatments. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 1989;46:971.
Elmer LW, Bertoni JM. The increasing role of monoamine oxidase type B
inhibitors in Parkinson’s disease therapy. Expert Opin Pharmacother.
2008;9:2759–2772.
Fava M, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR, Nierenberg AA, Alpert JE. A comparison
of mirtazapine and nortriptyline following two consecutive failed
medication treatments for depressed outpatients: a STAR*D report. Am J
Psychiatry. 2006;163(7):1161–1172.
Foley KF, DeSanty KP, Kast RE. Bupropion: pharmacology and therapeutic
applications. Expert Rev Neurother. 2006;6(9):1249–1265.
Frampton JE, Plosker GL. Duloxetine: a review of its use in the treatment of
major depressive disorder. CNS Drugs. 2007;21:581–609.
Frampton JE, Plosker GL, Masand PS. Selegiline transdermal system in the
treatment of major depressive disorder. Drugs. 2007;67:257.
Frank E, Kupfer DJ, Perel JM. Three-year outcomes for maintenance
therapies in recurrent depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1990;47:1093.
Glassman AH, O’Connor CM, Califf RM, Swedberg K, Schwartz P.
Association of low bone mineral density with selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor use by older men. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167(12):1246–1251.
Goldberg JF. A preliminary open trial of nefazodone added to mood
stabilizers for bipolar depression. J Affect Disord. 2013;144(1–2):176–178.
Goldberg JF, Thase ME. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors revisited: what you
should know. J Clin Psychiatry. 2013;74(2):189–191.
Hettema JM, Kornstein SG. Trazodone. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.


<<<PAGE 2259>>>
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3253.
Holt A, Berry MD, Boulton AA. On the binding of monoamine oxidase
inhibitors to some sites distinct from the MAO active site, and effects
thereby elicited. Neurotoxicology. 2004;25:251–266.
Hu X-Z, Rush AJ, Charney D, Wilson AF, Sorant AJM. Association between
a functional serotonin transporter promoter polymorphism and citalopram
treatment in adult outpatients with major depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2007;64:783–792.
Joffe RT. Thyroid hormones. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan
& Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3248.
Joffe RT, Sokolov ST, Levitt AJ. Lithium and triiodothyronine augmentation
of antidepressants. Can J Psychiatry. 2006;51:791–793.
Johansson P, Almqvist EG, Johansson J-O, Mattsson N, Hansson O, Wallin
A, Blennow K, Zetterberg H, Svensson J. Reduced cerebrospinal fluid
level of thyroxine in patients with Alzheimer’s disease.
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2013;38(7):
1058–1066.
Kasper S, Corruble E, Hale A, Lemoine P, Montgomery SA, Quera-Salva MA. Antidepressant efficacy of agomelatine versus SSRI/SNRI: results from
a pooled analysis of head-to-head studies without a placebo control. Int
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2013;28(1):12–19.
Keller MB, Trivedi MH, Thase ME, Shelton RC, Kornstein SG, Nemeroff
CB, Friedman ES, Gelenberg AJ, Kocsis JH, Dunner DL, Hirschfeld
RMA, Rothschild AJ, Ferguson JM, Schatzberg AF, Zajecka JM, Pedersen
RD, Yan B, Ahmed S, Musgnung J, Ninan PT. The Prevention of
Recurrent Episodes of Depression with Venlafaxine for Two Years
(PREVENT) Study: outcomes from the 2-year and combined maintenance
phases. J Clin Psychiatry. 2007;68:1246–1256.
Kennedy SH, Holt A, Baker GB. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3154.
Khan AA, Kornstein SG. Nefazodone. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3164.


<<<PAGE 2260>>>
Kim SW, Shin IS, Kim JM, Park KH, Youn T, Yoon JS. Factors potentiating
the risk of mirtazapine-associated restless legs syndrome. Hum
Psychopharmocol. 2008;(7):615–620.
Kocsis JH, Leon AC, Markowitz JC, Manber R, Arnow B, Klein DN, Thase
ME. Patient preference as a moderator of outcome for chronic forms of
major depressive disorder treated with nefazodone, cognitive behavioral
analysis system of psychotherapy, or their combination. J Clin Psychiatry.
2009;70(3):354–361.
Koibuchi N. The role of thyroid hormone on functional organization in the
cerebellum. Cerebellum. 2013;12(3):304–306.
Kostrubsky SE, Strom SC, Kalgutkar AS, Kulkarni S, Atherton J. Inhibition
of hepatobiliary transport as a predictive method for clinical hepatotoxicity
of nefazodone. Toxicol Sci. 2006;90(2):451–459.
Lai MW, Klein-Schwartz W, Rodgers GC, Abrams JY, Haber DA. 2005
Annual report of the American Association of Poison Control Centers’
national poisoning and exposure database. Clin Toxicol. 2006;44:803–932.
Lam RW, Andersen HF, Wade AG. Escitalopram and duloxetine in the
treatment of major depressive disorder: a pooled analysis of two trials. Int
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;23(4):181.
Lapierre YD. A review of trimipramine: 30 years of clinical use. Drugs.
1989;38(Suppl 1):
17–24.
Lieberman DZ, Montgomery SA, Tourian KA, Brisard C, Rosas G. A pooled
analysis of two placebo-controlled trials of desvenlafaxine in major
depressive disorder. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;23:188–197.
Liebowitz MR, Manley AL, Padmanabhan SK, Ganguly R, Tummala R.
Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of desvenlafaxine 50 mg/day and 100
mg/day in outpatients with major depressive disorder. Curr Med Res Opin.
2008;24:1877–1890.
Liebowitz MR, Quitkin FM, Stewart JW. Antidepressant specificity in
atypical depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1988;45:129–137.
Lojko D, Rybakowski JK. L-Thyroxine augmentation of serotonergic
antidepressants in female patients with refractory depression. J Affect
Disord. 2007;103(1–3):
253–256.
Looper KL. Potential medical and surgical complications of serotonergic


<<<PAGE 2261>>>
antidepressant medications. Psychosomatics. 2007;48:1–9.
Maruyama W, Naoi M. “70th birthday professor riederer” induction of glial
cell line-derived and brain-derived neurotrophic factors by rasagiline and ()deprenyl: a way to a disease-modifying therapy? J Neural Transm.
2013;120(1):83–89.
McGrath PJ, Stewart JW, Fava M, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR.
Tranylcypromine versus venlafaxine plus mirtazapine following three
failed antidepressant medication trials for depression: a STAR*D report.
Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(9):1531–1541.
McIntyre RS, Panjwani ZD, Nguyen HT, Woldeyohannes HO, Alsuwaidan
M. The hepatic safety profile of duloxetine: a review. Expert Opin Drug
Metab Toxicol. 2008;4:281–285.
Montgomery SA, Baldwin DS, Blier P, Fineberg NA, Kasper S. Which
antidepressants have demonstrated superior efficacy? A review of the
evidence. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2007;22:323–329.
Nasky KM, Cowan GL, Knittel DR. False-positive urine screening for
benzodiazepines: an association with sertraline? A two-year retrospective
analysis. Psychiatry (Edgemont). 2009;6(7):36–39.
Nelson JC. Tricyclics and tetracyclics. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3259.
Nelson JC, Mazure C, Jatlow PI. Antidepressant activity of 2-hydroxydesipramine. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1988;44:283.
Nemeroff CB, Entsuah R, Benattia I, Demitrack M, Sloan DM.
Comprehensive analysis of remission (COMPARE) with venlafaxine
versus SSRIs. Biol Psychiatry. 2008;63:424–434.
Nierenberg AA, Fava M, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR, Thase ME, McGrath
PJ, Alpert JE, Warden D, Luther JF, Niederehe G, Lebowitz B, ShoresWilson K, Rush AJ. A comparison of lithium and T(3) augmentation
following two failed medication treatments for depression: a STAR*D
report. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:1519–1530.
Nolen WA, Kupka RW, Hellemann G, Frye MA, Altshuler LL.
Tranylcypromine vs. lamotrigine in the treatment of refractory bipolar
depression: a failed but clinically useful study. Acta Psychiatr Scand.
2007;115:360–365.
Nurnberg GH, Hensley PL, Heiman JR, Croft HA, Debattista C. Sildenafil


<<<PAGE 2262>>>
treatment of women with antidepressant-associated sexual dysfunction: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2008;300:395–404.
O’Malley PG, Jackson JL, Santoro J, Tomkins G, Balden E. Antidepressant
therapy for unexplained symptoms and symptom syndromes. J Fam Pract.
1999;48:980.
Owens MJ, Dole KC, Knight DL, Nemeroff CB. Preclinical evaluation of the
putative antidepressant nefazodone. Depression. 2008;1(6):315.
Owens MJ, Krulewicz S, Simon JS, Sheehan DV, Thase ME. Estimates of
serotonin and norepinephrine transporter inhibition in depressed patients
treated with paroxetine or venlafaxine. Neuropsychopharmacology.
2008;33:3201–3212.
Pae CU, Lim HK, Ajwani N, Lee C, Patkar AA. Extended-release
formulation of venlafaxine in the treatment of posttraumatic stress
disorder. Expert Rev Neurother. 2007;7:603–615.
Papakostas GI, Fava M. A meta-analysis of clinical trials comparing
milnacipran, a serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, with a
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor for the treatment of major depressive
disorder. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2007;17:32.
Papakostas GI, Fava M. A meta-analysis of clinical trials comparing the
serotonin (5HT)-2 receptor antagonists trazodone and nefazodone with
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for the treatment of major
depressive disorder. Eur Psychiatry. 2007;22(7):444–447.
Papakostas GI, Homberger CH, Fava M. A meta-analysis of clinical trials
comparing mirtazapine with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for the
treatment of major depressive disorder. J Psychopharmacol.
2008;22(8):843–848.
Papakostas GI, Thase ME, Fava M, Nelson JC, Shelton RC. Are
antidepressant drugs that combine serotonergic and noradrenergic
mechanisms of action more effective than the selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors in treating major depressive disorder? A meta-analysis of studies
of newer agents. Biol Psychiatry. 2007;62:1217–1227.
Passos SR, Camacho LA, Lopes CS, dos Santos MAB. Nefazodone in outpatient treatment of inhaled cocaine dependence: a randomized doubleblind placebocontrolled trial. Addiction. 2005;100(4):489–494.
Perahia DG, Pritchett YL, Kajdasz DK, Bauer M, Jain R. A randomized,


<<<PAGE 2263>>>
double-blind comparison of duloxetine and venlafaxine in the treatment of
patients with major depressive disorder. J Psychiatr Res. 2008;42:22–34.
Perkins KA, Karelitz JL, Jao NC, Stratton E. Possible reinforcement
enhancing effects of bupropion during initial smoking abstinence. Nicotine
Tob Res. 2013;15(6):
1141–1145.
Posternak M, Novak S, Stern A, Hennessey J, Joffe A. A pilot effectiveness
study: placebo-controlled trial of adjunctive L-triiodothyronine (T3) used
to accelerate and potentiate the antidepressant response. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008;11(1):15–25.
Reeves RR, Ladner ME. Additional evidence of the abuse potential of
bupropion. J Clin Pharmacol. 2013;33(4):584–585.
Roose S, Laghrissi-Thode F, Kennedy JS, Nelson JC, Bigger JT. A
comparison of paroxetine and nortriptyline in depressed patients with
ischemic heart disease. JAMA. 1998;279:287–91.
Rynn M, Russell J, Erickson J, Detke MJ, Ball S. Efficacy and safety of
duloxetine in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder: a flexible-dose,
progressive-titration, placebo-controlled trial. Depress
Anxiety.
2008;25:182–189.
Salahudeen MS, Wright C M, Peterson GM. “Esketamine: new hope for the
treatment of treatment-resistant depression? A narrative review.” Ther Adv
Drug
Saf.
2020;11:
2042098620937899.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2042098620937899.
Salsali M, Holt A, Baker GB. Inhibitory effects of the monoamine oxidase
inhibitor tranylcypromine on the cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP2C19,
CYP2C6, and CYP2D6. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2004;24:63–76.
Sasada K, Iwamoto K, Kawano N, Kohmura K, Yamamoto M, Aleksic B,
Ebe K, Noda Y, Ozaki N. Effects of repeated dosing with mirtazapine,
trazodone, or placebo on driving performance and cognitive function in
healthy volunteers. Hum Psychopharmacol. 2013;28(3):281–286.
Scarff JR. “Use of Brexanolone for Postpartum Depression.” Innov Clin
Neurosci. 2019;16(11–12):32–35.
Schatzberg AF, Kremer C, Rodrigues HE, Murphy GM Jr. Double-blind,
randomized comparison of mirtazapine and paroxetine in elderly depressed
patients. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2002;10:541–550.


<<<PAGE 2264>>>
Schatzberg AF, Prather MR, Keller MB, Rush AJ, Laird LK. Clinical use of
nefazodone in major depression: a 6-year perspective. J Clin Psychiatry.
2002;63(1):18–31.
Schatzberg AF, Rush AJ, Arnow BA, Banks PL, Blalock JA. Chronic
depression: medication (nefazodone) or psychotherapy (CBASP) is
effective when the other is not. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005;62(5):513–520.
Schittecatte M, Dumont F, Machowski R, Fontaine E, Cornil C, Mendlewicz
J, Wilmotte J. Mirtazapine, but not fluvoxamine, normalizes the blunted
REM sleep response to clonidine in depressed patients: implications for
subsensitivity of alpha(2)-adrenergic receptors in depression. Psychiatry
Res. 2002;109:1–8.
Shenouda R, Desan PH. Abuse of tricyclic antidepressant drugs: a case
series. J Clin Psychopharmcol. 2013;33(3):440–442.
Smith T, Nicholson RA. Review of duloxetine in the management of diabetic
peripheral neuropathic pain. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2007;3:833–844.
Stahl SM, Felker A. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors: a modern guide to an
unrequited class of antidepressants. CNS Spectr. 2008;13:855–870.
Stenberg JH, Terevnikov V, Joffe M, Tiihonen J, Chukhin E, Burkin M, Joffe
G. Predictors and mediators of add-on mirtazapine-induced cognitive
enhancement in schizophrenia—a path model investigation.
Neuropharmacology. 2013;64:248–253.
Sussman N. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3190.
Sylven SM, Elenis E, Michelakos T, Larsson A, Olovsson M, Poromaa IS,
Skalkidou A. Thyroid function tests at delivery and risk for postpartum
depressive symptoms. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2013;38(7):1007–1013.
Tanimukai H, Murai T, Okazaki N, Matsuda Y, Okamoto Y, Kabeshita Y,
Ohno Y, Tsuneto S. An observational study of insomnia and nightmare
treated with trazodone in patients with advanced cancer. Am J Hosp Palliat
Care. 2013;30(4):359–362.
Thase ME. Mirtazapine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2009:3152.
Thase ME. Selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors. In:


<<<PAGE 2265>>>
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3184.
Thase ME, Haight BR, Richard N, Rockett CB, Mitton M. Remission rates
following antidepressant therapy with bupropion or selective reuptake
inhibitors: a meta-analysis of original data from 7 randomized controlled
trials. J Clin Psychiatry. 2005;66:974–981.
Thase ME, Pritchett YL, Ossanna MJ, Swindle RW, Xu J. Efficacy of
duloxetine and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors: comparisons as
assessed by remission rates in patients with major depressive disorder. J
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2007;27:672–676.
Tremblay P, Blier P. Catecholaminergic strategies for the treatment of major
depression. Curr Drug Targets. 2006;7:149.
Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR, Nierenberg AA, Warden D, Ritz L,
Norquist G, Howland RH, Lebowitz B, McGrath PJ, Shores-Wilson K,
Biggs MM, Balasubramani GK, Fava M, STAR*D Study Team.
Evaluation of outcomes with citalopram for depression using
measurement-based care in STAR*D: implications for clinical practice.
Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:28–40.
Tulen JH, Volkers AC, van den Broek WW, Bruijn JA. Sustained effects of
phenelzine and tranylcypromine on orthostatic challenge in antidepressantrefractory depression. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2006;26:542–544.
Van Ameringen M, Mancini C, Oakman J. Nefazodone in the treatment of
generalized social phobia: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2007;
68(2):288–295.
Verena H, Mergl R, Allgaier AK, Kohnen R, Möller HJ. Treatment of
depression with atypical features: a meta-analytic approach. Psychiatry
Res. 2006;141:89–101.
Weissman AM, Levy BT, Hartz, AJ, Bentler S, Donohue M. Pooled analysis
of antidepressant levels in lactating mothers, breast milk, and nursing
infants. Am J Psychiatry. 2004;161:1066.
Whitmyer VG, Dunner DL, Kornstein SG, Meyers AL, Mallinckrodt CH. A
comparison of initial duloxetine dosing strategies in patients with major
depressive disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 2007;68:1921.
Wilens TE, Spencer TJ, Biederman J, Girard K, Doyle R. A controlled


<<<PAGE 2266>>>
clinical trial of bupropion for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in
adults. Am J Psychiatry. 2001;158(2):282.
Wood PL, Khan MA, Moskal JR, Todd KG, Tanay VAMI. Aldehyde load in
ischemia-reperfusion injury: neuroprotection by neutralization of reactive
aldehydes with phenelzine. Brain Res. 2006;184–190.
Xu JJ, Henstock PV, Dunn MC, Smith AR, Chabot JR, de Graaf D. Cellular
imaging predictions of clinical drug-induced liver injury. Toxicol Sci.
2008;105(1):97–105.
Yoshimura M, Furue H. Mechanisms for the anti-nociceptive actions of the
descending noradrenergic and serotonergic systems in the spinal cord. J
Pharmacol Sci. 2006;101:107–117.
Zanos P, Gould T D. “Mechanisms of ketamine action as an antidepressant.”
Mol
Psychiatry.
2018;23(4):
801–811.
https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2017.255.
Zisook S, Rush AJ, Haight BR, Clines DC, Rockett CB. Use of bupropion in
combination with serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Biol Psychiatry.
2006;59(3):203–210.
Mood Stabilizers
Alvarez G, Marsh W, Camacho IA, Gracia SL. Effectiveness and tolerability
of carbamazepine vs. oxcarbazepine as mood stabilizers. Clin Res Reg
Affairs. 2003;20:365.
Atmaca M, Ozdemir H, Cetinkaya S, Parmaksiz S, Poyraz AK. Cingulate
gyrus volumetry in drug free bipolar patients and patients treated with
valproate or valproate and quetiapine. J Psychiatr Res. 2007;41:821–827.
Atmaca M, Yildirim H, Ozdemir H, Ogur E, Tezcan E. Hippocampal 1H
MRS in patients with bipolar disorder taking valproate versus valproate
plus quetiapine. Psychol Med. 2007;37:121–129.
Bachmann RF, Schloesser RJ, Gould TD, Manji HK. Mood stabilizers target
cellular plasticity and resilience cascades. Mol Neurobiol. 2005;32:173–
202.
Bauer M, Grof P, Müller-Oerlinghausen B. Lithium in Neuropsychiatry: The
Comprehensive Guide. Oxon, UK: Informa UK; 2006.
Bearden CE, Thompson PM, Dalwani M, Hayashi KM, Lee AD. Greater
cortical gray matter density in lithium-treated patients with bipolar
disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2007;62:7–16.


<<<PAGE 2267>>>
Benedetti A, Lattanzi L, Pini S, Musetti L, Dell’Osso L. Oxcarbazepine as
add-on treatment in patients with bipolar manic, mixed, or depressive
episode. J Affect Disord. 2004;79:273–277.
Bialer M. Extended-release formulations for the treatment of epilepsy. CNS
Drugs. 2007;21:765–774.
Bowden CL, Swann AC, Calabrese JR, Rubenfaer LM, Wozniak PJ.
Depakote ER Mania Study Group. A randomized, placebo-controlled,
multicenter study of divalproex sodium extended release in the treatment
of acute mania. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67:1501.
Bray GA, Hollander P, Klein S, Kushner R, Levy B. A 6-month randomized,
placebo-controlled, dose-ranging trial of topiramate for weight loss in
obesity. Obes Res. 2003;11(6):722–733.
Calabrese JR, Huffman RF, White RL. Lamotrigine in the acute treatment of
bipolar depression: results of five double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical
trials. Bipolar Disord. 2008;10:323–333.
Chen PS, Wang CC, Bortner CD, Peng GS, Wu X, Pang H. Valproic acid and
other histone deacetylase inhibitors induce microglial apoptosis and
attenuate lipopolysaccharide-induced dopaminergic neurotoxicity.
Neuroscience. 2007;149:203–212.
Chustecka Z. Hydralazine and valproate appear to overcome resistance to
chemotherapy. Ann Oncol. 2007;18:1529.
Cipriani A, Hawton K, Stockton S, Geddes JR. Lithium in the prevention of
suicide in mood disorders: updated systematic review and meta-analysis.
BMJ. 2013;346: f3646.
Cohen LS, Friedman JM, Jefferson JW, Johnson EM, Weiner ML. A
reevaluation of risk of in utero exposure to lithium. JAMA. 1994;271:146–
150.
Collins J, McFarland B. Divalproex, lithium and suicide among medicaid
patients with bipolar disorder. J Affect Dis. 2008;107:23–28.
Cousins DA, Aribisala B, Ferrier I, Blamire AM. Lithium, gray matter, and
magnetic resonance imaging signal. Biol Psychiatry. 2013;73(7):652–657.
Crofford LJ, Rowbotham MC, Mease PJ, Russell IJ, Dworkin RH. Pregabalin
for the treatment of fibromyalgia syndrome: results of a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2005;52(4):1264.
Delvendahl I, Lindemann H, Heidegger T, Normann C, Ziemann U, Mall V.
Effects of lamotrigine on human motor cortex plasticity. Clin


<<<PAGE 2268>>>
Neurophysiol. 2013;124(1):
148–153.
Du J, Suzuki K, Wei Y, Wang Y, Blumenthal R. The anticonvulsants
lamotrigine, riluzole, and valproate differentially regulate AMPA receptor
membrane localization: Relationship to clinical effects in mood disorders.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2007;32:793–802.
Dubovsky SL. Calcium channel inhibitors. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz
P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3065.
Dubovsky SL, Buzan RD, Thomas M, Kassner C, Cullum CM. Nicardipine
improves the antidepressant action of ECT but does not improve cognition.
J ECT. 2001;17:
3–10.
Einat H, Manji HK. Cellular plasticity cascades: genes-to-behavior pathways
in animal models of bipolar disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2006;59:1160–1171.
Findling RL, Frazier TW, Youngstrom EA, McNamara NK, Stansbrey RJ.
Doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial of divalproex monotherapy in the treatment
of symptomatic youth at high risk for developing bipolar disorder. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2007;68:781–788.
Freeman R, Durso-Decruz E, Emir B. Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of
pregabalin treatment for painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy: findings
from seven randomized, controlled trials across a range of doses. Diabetes
Care. 2008;31:1448–1454.
Frye MA, Ketter TA, Kimbrell TA, Dunn RT, Speer AM. A placebocontrolled study of lamotrigine and gabapentin monotherapy in refractory
mood disorders. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2000;20(6):607–614.
Gadde KM, Franciscy DM, Wagner HR 2nd, Krishnan KR. Zonisamide for
weight loss in obese adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2003;289(14):1820–1825.
Geddes JR, Burgess S, Hawton K, Jamison K, Goodwin GM. Long-term
lithium therapy for bipolar disorder: systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Am J Psychiatry. 2004;161:217–222.
Geddes JR, Calabrese JR, Goodwin GM. Lamotrigine for treatment of bipolar
depression: Independent meta-analysis and meta-regression of individual
patient data from five randomised trials. Br J Psychiatry. 2009;194:4.


<<<PAGE 2269>>>
Ghaemi NS, Ko JY, Katzow JJ. Oxcarbazepine treatment of refractory
bipolar disorder: a retrospective chart review. Bipolar Disord.
2002;4(1):70–74.
Goldberg JF, Bowden CL, Calabrese JR. Six-month prospective life charting
of mood symptoms with lamotrigine monotherapy versus placebo in rapid
cycling bipolar disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2008;63:125.
Goodwin FK, Jamison KR. Manic-Depressive Illness. 2nd ed. New York:
Oxford University Press; 2007.
Goodwin GM, Bowden CL, Calabrese JR, Grunze H, Kasper S. A pooled
analysis of 2 placebo-controlled 18-month trials of lamotrigine and lithium
maintenance in bipolar I disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 2004;65:432–441.
Grunze H, Erfurth A, Marcuse A, Amann B, Normann C. Tiagabine appears
not to be efficacious in the treatment of acute mania. J Clin Psychiatry.
1999;60(11):
759–762.
Hartong EG, Moleman P, Hoogduin CA, Broekman TG, Nolen WA.
Prophylactic efficacy of lithium versus carbamazepine in treatment-naive
bipolar patients. J Clin Psychiatry. 2003;64:144–151.
Harwood AJ. Lithium and bipolar mood disorder: the inositol-depletion
hypothesis revisited. Mol Psychiatry. 2005;10:117.
Hasan M, Pulman J, Marson AG. Calcium antagonists as an add-on therapy
for drug-resistant epilepsy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2013;3:CD002750.
Hoopes SP, Reimherr FW, Hedges DW, Rosenthal NR, Kamin M. Treatment
of bulimia nervosa with topiramate in a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial, part 1: improvement in binge and purge measures.
J Clin Psychiatry. 2003;64(11):
1335–1341.
Ikeda A, Kato T. Biological predictors of lithium response in bipolar
disorder. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2003;57:243–250.
Ishioka M, Yasui-Furukori N, Hashimoto K, Sugawara N. Neuroleptic
malignant syndrome induced by lamotrigine. Clin Neuropharmacol.
2013;36(4):131–132.
Isojarvi JI, Huuskonen UE, Pakarinen AJ, Vuolteenaho O, Myllyla VV. The
regulation of serum sodium after replacing carbamazepine with
oxcarbazepine. Epilepsia. 2001;42(6):741–745.


<<<PAGE 2270>>>
Jefferson JW, Greist JH. Lithium. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3132
Johnson BA, Rosenthal N, Capece JA. Improvement of physical health and
quality of life of alcohol-dependent individuals with topiramate treatment:
US multisite randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med.
2008;168:1188–1199.
Johnson BA, Rosenthal N, Capece JA, Wiegand F, Mao L. Topiramate for
treating alcohol dependence: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2007;298(14):1641.
Kamalinia G, Brand S, Ghaeli P, Abedi N, Bajoghli H, Sharifi V, Zahiroddin
A, Amini M, Rouini MR, Holsboer-Trachsler E, Mohammadpoor AH.
Serum levels of sodium valproate in patients suffering from bipolar
disorders: comparing acute and maintenance phases of mania.
Pharmacopsychiatry. 2013;46(3):83–87.
Kato T, Ishiwata M, Mori K, Washizuka S, Tajima O. Mechanisms of altered
Ca2+ signaling in transformed lymphoblastoid cells from patients with
bipolar disorder. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2003;6:379–389.
Ketter TA, Brooks JO, Hoblyn JC. Effectiveness of lamotrigine in bipolar
disorder in a clinical setting. J Psychiatr Res. 2008;43:13–23.
Ketter TA, Greist JH, Graham JA, Roberts JN, Thompson TR. The effect of
dermatologic precautions on the incidence of rash with addition of
lamotrigine in the treatment of bipolar I disorder: a randomized trial. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2006;67(3):400–406.
Ketter TA, Wang PW. Anticonvulsants: Gabapentin, levetiracetam,
pregabalin, tiagabine, topiramate, zonisamide. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:3021.
Ketter TA, Wang PW. Lamotrigine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3127.
Ketter TA, Wang PW, Becker OV, Nowakowska C, Yang YS. The diverse
roles of anticonvulsants in bipolar disorders. Ann Clin Psychiatry.
2003;15:95–108.
Klitgaard H. Epilepsy therapy: anticonvulsants, lessons learned and unmet


<<<PAGE 2271>>>
medical needs. Expert Rev Neurother. 2013;13(1):13–14.
Kozaric-Kovacic D, Eterovic M. Lamotrigine abolished aggression in a
patient with treatment-resistant posttraumatic stress disorder. Clin
Neuropharmacol. 2013;36(3):94–95.
Kremer I, Vass A, Gorelik I, Bar G, Blanaru M, Javitt DC. Placebocontrolled trial of lamotrigine added to conventional and atypical
antipsychotics in schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry. 2004;56(6):441–446.
Kushner SF, Khan A, Lane R, Olson WH. Topiramate monotherapy in the
management of acute mania: results of four double-blind placebocontrolled trials. Bipolar Disord. 2006;8(1):15–27.
Livingston C, Rampes H. Lithium: a review of its metabolic adverse effects.
J Psychopharmacol. 2006;20:347–355.
McClellan J, Kowatch R, Findling RL, Work Group on Quality Issues.
Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of children and
adolescents with bipolar disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2007;46:107–125.
McElroy SL, Hudson JI, Capece JA, Beyers K, Fisher AC. Topiramate for
the treatment of binge eating disorder associated with obesity: a placebocontrolled study. Biol Psychiatry. 2007;61(9):1039–1048.
McElroy SL, Kotwal R, Guerdjikova AI, Welge JA, Nelson EB. Zonisamide
in the treatment of binge eating disorder with obesity: a randomized
controlled trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67(12):1897–906.
Mease PJ, Russell IJ, Arnold LM. A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled, phase III trial of pregabalin in the treatment of patients with
fibromyalgia. J Rheumatol. 2008;35:502–514.
Merideth CH. A single-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled evaluation of
lamotrigine in the treatment of obesity in adults. J Clin Psychiatry.
2006;67(2):258–262.
Nahorski SR. Pharmacology of intracellular signaling pathways. Br J
Pharmacol. 2006;147:S38.
Perucca P, Mula M. Antiepileptic drug effects on mood and behavior:
molecular targets. Epilepsy Behav. 2013;26(3):440–449.
Post RM, Frye MA. Carbamazepine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3073.
Post RM, Frye MA. Valproate. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.


<<<PAGE 2272>>>
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3271.
Raedler
TJ,
Wiedemann
K.
Lithium-induced
nephropathies.
Psychopharmacol Bull. 2007;40:134.
Rao JS, Bazinet RP, Rapoport SL, Lee HJ. Chronic treatment of rats with
sodium valproate downregulates frontal cortex NF-kappaB DNA binding
activity and COX-2 mRNA Bipolar Disord. 2007;9:513–520.
Redmond JR, Jamison KL, Bowden CL. Lamotrigine combined with
divalproex or lithium for bipolar disorder: a case series. CNS Spectr.
2006;11:12.
Rosenberg G. The mechanisms of action of valproate in neuropsychiatric
disorders: can we see the forest for the trees? Cell Mol Life Sci.
2007;64:2090.
Rowe MK, Wiest C, Chuang D-M. GSK-3 is a viable potential target for
therapeutic intervention in bipolar disorder. Neurosci Biobehav Rev.
2007;31:920.
Shaltiel G, Chen G, Manji HK. Neurotrophic signaling cascades in the
pathophysiology and treatment of bipolar disorder. Curr Opin Pharmacol.
2007;7:22.
Sienaert P, Geeraerts I, Wyckaert S. How to initiate lithium therapy: a
systematic review of dose estimation and level prediction methods. J Affect
Dis. 2013;146(1):15–33.
Simeon D, Baker B, Chaplin W, Braun A, Hollander E. An open-label trial of
divalproex extended-release in the treatment of borderline personality
disorder. CNS Spectr. 2007;12:6.
Suppes T, Marangell LB, Bernstein IH. A single blind comparison of lithium
and lamotrigine for the treatment of bipolar II depression. J Affect Disord.
2008;111:
334–343.
Suzuki K, Kusumi I, Sasaki A, Koyama T. Serotonin-induced platelet
intracellular calcium mobilization in various psychiatric disorders: is it
specific to bipolar disorder? J Affect Disord. 2001;64:291–296.
Thomas SV, Ajaykumar B, Sindhu K, Nair MK, George B, Sarma PS. Motor
and mental development of infants exposed to antiepileptic drugs in utero.
Epilepsy Behav. 2008;13:229.
Tiihonen J, Hallikainen T, Ryynanen OP, Repo-Tiihonen E, Kotilainen I.


<<<PAGE 2273>>>
Lamotrigine in treatment-resistant schizophrenia: a randomized placebocontrolled crossover trial. Biol Psychiatry. 2003;54(11):1241–1248.
Trankner A, Sander C, Schonknecht P. A critical review of the recent
literature and selected therapy guidelines since 2006 on the use of
lamotrigine in bipolar disorder. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2013;9:101–
111.
Triggle DJ. Calcium channel antagonists: clinical uses—past, present and
future. Biochem Pharmacol. 2007;74:1–9.
Trinka E, Marson AG, Paesschen WV, Kälviäinen R, Marovac J, Duncan B,
Buyle S, Hallström Y, Hon P, Muscas GC, Newton M, Meencke HJ, Smith
PE, Pohlmann-Eden B, KOMET Study Group. KOMET: an unblinded,
randomised, two parallel group, stratified trial comparing the effectiveness
of levetiracetam with controlled-release carbamazepine and extendedrelease sodium valproate as monotherapy in patients with newly diagnosed
epilepsy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013;84(10):1138–1147.
Tritt K, Nickel C, Lahmann C, Leiberich PK, Rother WK. Lamotrigine
treatment of aggression in female borderline-patients: a randomized,
double-blind, placebocontrolled study. J Psychopharmacol. 2005;19(3):287–291.
Viguera AC, Newport DJ, Ritchie J, Stowe Z, Whitfield T. Lithium in breast
milk and nursing infants: clinical implications. Am J Psychiatry.
2007;164:342–345.
Vrielynck P. Current and emerging treatments for absence seizures in young
patients. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2013;9:963–975.
Wagner KD, Kowatch RA, Emslie GJ, Findling RL, Wilens TE, McCague K.
A doubleblind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of oxcarbazepine in the
treatment of bipolar disorder in children and adolescents. Am J Psychiatry.
2006;163(7):
1179–1186.
Walz JC, Frey BN, Andreazza AC, Cereser KM, Cacilhas AA. Effects of
lithium and valproate on serum and hippocampal neurotrophin-3 levels in
an animal model of mania. J Psychiatr Res. 2008;42(5):416–421.
Wang HY, Friedman E. Increased association of brain protein kinase C with
the receptor for activated C kinase-1 (RACK1) in bipolar affective
disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2001;50:364.


<<<PAGE 2274>>>
Waring WS. Management of lithium toxicity. Toxicol Rev. 2006;25:221.
Weisler RH, Kalai AK, Ketter TA. A multicenter, randomized, placebocontrolled trial of extended-release carbamazepine capsules as
monotherapy for bipolar disorder patients with manic or mixed episodes. J
Clin Psychiatry. 2004;65(4):478–484.
Wisner KL, Peindl KS, Perel JM, Hanusa BH, Piontek CM. Verapamil
treatment for women with bipolar disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2002;51:745–
752.
Yatham LN, Kennedy SH, O’Donovan C, Parikh S, MacQueen G. Canadian
network for mood and anxiety treatments (CANMAT) guidelines for the
management of patients with bipolar disorder; consensus and
controversies. Bipolar Disord. 2005;7(Suppl 3):5–69.
Yatham LN, Vieta E, Young AH, Moller HJ, Paulsson B. A double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled trial of quetiapine as an add-on therapy to
lithium or divalproex for the treatment of bipolar mania. Int Clin
Psychopharmacol. 2007;22;212–220.
Yingling DR, Utter G, Vengalil S, Mason B. Calcium channel blocker,
nimodipine, for the treatment of bipolar disorder during pregnancy. Am J
Obstet Gynecol. 2002;187:1711–1712.
Zhang ZJ, Kang WH, Tan QR, Li Q, Gao CG, Zhang FG. Adjunctive herbal
medicine with carbamazepine for bipolar disorders: a double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled study. J Psychiatr Res. 2007;41(3–4):360–
369.
Zoccali R, Muscatello MR, Bruno A, Cambria R, Mico U. The effect of
lamotrigine augmentation of clozapine in a sample of treatment-resistant
schizophrenic patients: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Schizophr
Res. 2007;93(1–3):
109–116.
Anxiolytics
Antonelli-Incalzi R, Pedone C. Respiratory effects of beta-adrenergic
receptor blockers. Curr Med Chem. 2007;14(10):1121–1128.
Appelberg BG, Syvalahti EK, Koskinen TE, Mehtonen OP, Muhonen TT,
Naukkarinen HH. Patients with severe depression may benefit from
buspirone augmentation of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors: results
from a placebo-controlled, randomized, double-blind, placebo wash-in


<<<PAGE 2275>>>
study. J Clin Psychiatry. 2001;62:448.
Bahmad FM Jr, Venosa AR, Oliveira CA. Benzodiazepines and GABAergics
in treating severe disabling tinnitus of predominantly cochlear origin. Int
Tinnitus J. 2006;12:140–144.
Baker JG. The selectivity of beta-adrenoceptor antagonists at the human
beta1, beta2 and beta3 adrenoceptors. Br J Pharmacol. 2005;144(3):317–
322.
Ballesteros J, Callado LF. Effectiveness of pindolol plus serotonin uptake
inhibitors in depression: a meta-analysis of early and late outcomes from
randomised controlled trials. J Affect Disord. 2004;79(1–3):137.
Benyamina A, Lecacheux M, Blecha L, Reynaud M, Lukasiewcz M.
Pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy in cannabis withdrawal and
dependence. Expert Rev Neurother. 2008;8:479–491.
Bigal ME, Lipton RB. Excessive acute migraine medication use and migraine
progression. Neurology. 2008;71:1821.
Brands B, Blake J, Marsh DC, Sproule B, Jeypalan R, Li S. The impact of
benzodiazepine use on methadone maintenance treatment outcomes. J
Addictive Disease. 2008; 27:37–48.
Chen HI, Malhotra NR, Oddo M, Heuer GG, Levine JM, Le Roux PD.
Barbiturate infusion for intractable intracranial hypertension and its effect
on brain oxygenation. Neurosurgery. 2008;63:880–886.
Das RK, Freeman TP, Kamboj SK. The effects of N-methyl D-aspartate and
β-adrenergic receptor antagonists on the reconsolidation of reward
memory: a meta-analysis. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2013;37(3):240–255.
de Quervain DJ, Aerni A, Roozendaal B. Preventive effect of betaadrenoceptor blockade on glucocorticoid-induced memory retrieval
deficits. Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164(6):967–969.
Dell’ osso B, Lader M. Do benzodiazepines still deserve a major role in the
treatment of psychiatric disorders? A critical reappraisal. Eur Psychiatry.
2013;28(1):7–20.
Dubovsky SL. Barbiturates and similarly acting substances. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3038.
Dubovsky SL. Benzodiazepine receptor agonists and antagonists. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook


<<<PAGE 2276>>>
of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3044.
Faber J, Sansone RA. Buspirone: a possible cause of alopecia. Innov Clin
Neurosci. 2013;10(1):12–13.
Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS, Howland MA, Lewin NA.
Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill;
2006.
Hutto B, Fairchild A, Bright R. γ-Hydroxybutyrate withdrawal and chloral
hydrate. Am J Psychiatry. 2000;157:1706.
Jovaisas B; and Canadian Pharmacists Association. CPS 2020: Compendium
of Pharmaceuticals and Specialities: Canada’s Trusted Drug Reference.
Canadian Pharmacists Association, 2020.
Kaplan GB, Greenblatt DJ, Ehrenberg BL, Goddard JE, Harmatz JS.
Differences in pharmacodynamics but not pharmacokinetics between
subjects with panic disorder and healthy subjects after treatment with a
single dose of alprazolam. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2000;20:338–346.
Katsura M. Functional involvement of cerebral diazepam binding inhibitor
(DBI) in the establishment of drug dependence. Nippon Yakurigaku Zasshi.
2001;117:
159–168.
Koerner IK, Brambrink AM. Brain protection by anesthetic agents. Curr
Opin Anaesthesiol. 2006;19:481.
Korpi ER, Matilla MJ, Wisden W, Luddens H. GABA(A)-receptor subtypes:
clinical efficacy and selectivity of benzodiazepine site ligands. Ann Med.
1997;29:275–282.
Le Foll B, Boileau I. Repurposing buspirone for drug addiction treatment. Int
J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013;16(2):251–253.
Levitt AJ, Schaffer A, Lanctôt KL. Buspirone. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins:
2009:3060.
McAinsh J, Cruickshank JM. Beta-blockers and central nervous system side
effects. Pharmacol Ther. 1990;46(2):163–197.
McCarron MM, Schulze BW, Walberg CB, Thompson GA, Ansari A. Short
acting barbiturate overdosage: correlation of intoxication score with serum
barbiturate concentration. JAMA. 1982;248:55.


<<<PAGE 2277>>>
McIntyre RS. β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:3009.
Myers RA, Plym MJ, Signor LJ, Lodge NJ. 1-(2-pyrimidinyl)-piperazine, a
buspirone metabolite, modulates bladder function in the anesthetized rat.
Neurourol Urodyn. 2004;23(7):709–115.
Navines R, Martin-Santos R, Gomez-Gil E, Martinez De Osaba MJ, Gasto C.
Interaction between serotonin 5-Htla receptors and beta-endorphins
modulates antidepressant response. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry. 2008;32:1804–1809.
Peskind ER, Tsuang DW, Bonner LT, Pascualy M, Riekse RG. Propranolol
for disruptive behaviors in nursing home residents with probable or
possible Alzheimer disease: a placebo-controlled study. Alzheimer Dis
Assoc Disord. 2005;19(1):23–28.
Rosa MA, Rosa MO, Marcolin MA, Fregni F. Cardiovascular effects of
anesthesia in ECT: a randomized, double-blind comparison of etomidate,
propofol and thiopental. J ECT. 2007;23:6–8.
Sempere T, Urbina M, Lima L. 5-HT1A and beta-adrenergic receptors
regulate proliferation of rat blood lymphocytes. Neuroimmunomodulation.
2004;11(5):307.
Silberstein SD, McCrory DC. Butalbital in the treatment of headache: history,
pharmacology, and efficacy. Headache. 2001;41:953–967.
Smith MC, Riskin BJ. The clinical use of barbiturates in neurological
disorders. Drugs. 1991;42:365–378.
Syvalahti E, Penttila J, Majasuo H, Palvimaki EP, Laakso A. Combined
treatment with citalopram and buspirone: effects on serotonin 5-HT2A and
5-HT2C receptors in the rat brain. Pharmacopsychiatry. 2006;39(1):1–8.
Van Oudenhove L, Kindt S, Vos R, Coulie B, Tack J. Influence of buspirone
on gastric sensorimotor function in man. Aliment Pharmacol Ther.
2008;28:1326–1333.
Wheeler DS, Jensen RA, Poss WB. A randomized, blinded comparison of
chloral hydrate and midazolam sedation in children undergoing
echocardiography. Clin Pediatr. 2001;40:381–387.
Wong H, Dockens RC, Pajor L, Yeola S, Grace JE Jr. 6-Hydroxybuspirone is


<<<PAGE 2278>>>
a major active metabolite of buspirone: assessment of pharmacokinetics
and 5-hydroxytryptamine 1A receptor occupancy in rats. Drug Metab
Dispos. 2007;35(8):1387–1392.
Drugs Used to Treat Sleep Disorders
Bannan N, Rooney S, O’Connor J. Zopiclone misuse: an update from Dublin.
Drug Alcohol Rev. 2007;26:83–85.
Boehlein JK, Kinzie JD. Pharmacologic reduction of CNS noradrenergic
activity in PTSD: the case for clonidine and prazosin. J Psychiatr Pract.
2007;13:72–78.
Calvo JR, Gonzalez-Yanes C, Maldonado M. The role of melatonin in the
cells of the innate immunity: a review. J Pineal Res. 2013;55(2):103–120.
DeMicco M, Wang-Weigand S, Zhang J. Long-term therapeutic effects of
ramelteon treatment in adults with chronic insomnia: a 1-year study. Sleep.
2006;
29(Suppl):A234.
Doghramji K. Melatonin and its receptors: a new class of sleep-promoting
agents. J Clin Sleep Med. 2007;3(5 Suppl):S17.
Erman M, Seiden D, Zammit G, Sainati S, Zhang J. An efficacy, safety, and
dose-response study of ramelteon in patients with chronic primary
insomnia. Sleep Med. 2006;7(1):17–24.
Johnson MW, Suess PE, Griffiths RR. Ramelteon: a novel hypnotic lacking
abuse liability and sedative adverse effects. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2006;63(10):
1149–1157.
Karim A, Bradford D, Siebert F, Zhao Z. Pharmacokinetic effect of multiple
oral doses of donepezil on ramelteon, and vice versa, in healthy adults.
Sleep. 2007;
30(Suppl):A244.
Kato K, Hirai K, Nishiyama K, Uchikawa O, Fukatsu K. Neurochemical
properties of ramelteon (TAK-375), a selective MT1/MT2 receptor agonist.
Neuropharmacology. 2005;48(2):301–310.
Lemmer B. The sleep–wake cycle and sleeping pills. Physiol Behav.
2009;90:285.
Lieberman JA. Update on the safety considerations in the management of
insomnia with hypnotics: incorporating modified-release formulations into


<<<PAGE 2279>>>
primary care. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry. 2007;9(1):25–31.
Mahajan B, Kaushal S, Chopra SC. Ramelteon: a new melatonin receptor
agonist. J Anaesth Clin Pharmacol. 2008;24(4):463.
Mundey K, Benloucif S, Harsanyi K, Dubocovich ML, Zee PC. Phasedependent treatment of delayed sleep phase syndrome with melatonin.
Sleep. 2005;28(10):
1271–1278.
Najib J. Eszopiclone, a nonbenzodiazepine sedative-hypnotic agent for the
treatment of transient and chronic insomnia. Clin Ther. 2006;28:490–516.
Natural Standard Research Collaboration. Melatonin. Medline Plus—Herbs
and
Supplements.
2007.
Available
at
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/natural/patientmelatonin.html.
Norris ER, Karen B, Correll JR, Zemanek KJ, Lerman J, Primelo RA,
Kaufmann MW. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of
adjunctive ramelteon for the treatment of insomnia and mood stability in
patients with euthymic bipolar disorder. J Affect Disord.2013;144(1–
2):141–147.
Roth T, Seiden D, Sainati S, Wang-Weigand S, Zhang J. Effects of ramelteon
on patient-reported sleep latency in older adults with chronic insomnia.
Sleep Med. 2006;7(4):312–318.
Roth T, Stubbs C, Walsh JK. Ramelteon (TAK-375), a selective MT1/MT2receptor agonist, reduces latency to persistent sleep in a model of transient
insomnia related to a novel sleep environment. Sleep. 2005;28(3):303–307.
Scharf MB, Lankford A. Melatonin receptor agonists: ramelteon and
melatonin. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3145.
Srinivasan V, Ohta Y, Espino J, Pariente JA, Rodriguez AB, Mohamed M,
Zakaria R. Metabolic syndrome, its pathophysiology and the role of
melatonin. Recent Pat Endocr Metab Immune Drug Discov. 2013;7(1):11–
25.
Turek FW, Gillette MU. Melatonin, sleep, and circadian rhythms: rationale
for development of specific melatonin agonists. Sleep Med. 2004;5(6):523.
Zammit G, Erman M, Wang-Weigand S, Sainati S, Zhang J. Evaluation of


<<<PAGE 2280>>>
the efficacy and safety of ramelteon in subjects with chronic insomnia. J
Clin Sleep Med. 2007;3(5):495.
Stimulants
Adler LA, Sutton VK, Moore RJ, Dietrich AP, Reimherr FW. Quality of life
assessment in adult patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
treated with atomoxetine. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2006;26(6):648–652.
Aiken CB. Pramipexole in psychiatry: a systematic review of the literature. J
Clin Psychiatry. 2007;68(8):1230–1236.
Amiri S, Mohammadi MR, Mohammadi M, Nouroozinejad GH, Kahbazi M.
Modafinil as a treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in
children and adolescents: a double-blind, randomized clinical trial. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2008;32(1):145–149.
Bangs ME, Emsile GJ, Spencer TJ, Ramsey JL, Carlson C. Efficacy and
safety of atomoxetine in adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder and major depression. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol.
2007;17(4):407–420.
Barone P, Scazella L, Marconi R, Antonini A, Morgante L. Pramipexole
versus sertraline in the treatment of depression in Parkinson’s disease: a
national multicenter parallel-group randomized study. J Neuro.
2006;253(5):601–607.
Cheng JY, Chen RY, Ko JS, Ng EM. Efficacy and safety of atomoxetine for
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents-metaanalysis and meta-regression analysis. Psychopharmacology (Berl).
2007;194(2):197.
Eliyahu U, Berlin S, Hadad E, Heled Y, Moran DS. Psychostimulants and
military operations. Mil Med. 2007;172(4):383.
Fava M, Thase ME, DeBattista C, Doghramji K, Arora S. Modafinil
augmentation of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor therapy in MDD
partial responders with persistent fatigue and sleepiness. Ann Clin
Psychiatry. 2007;19(3):153.
Fawcett J. Sympathomimetics and dopamine receptor agonists. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3241.
Fleckenstein AE, Volz TJ, Riddle EL, Gibb JW, Hanson GR. New insights


<<<PAGE 2281>>>
into the mechanism of action of amphetamines. Annu Rev Pharmacol
Toxicol. 2007;47:
681–698.
Frye MA, Grunze H, Suppes T, McElroy SL, Keck PE Jr. A placebocontrolled evaluation of adjunctive modafinil in the treatment of bipolar
depression. Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164(8):1242–1249.
Geller D, Donnelly C, Lopez F, Rubin R, Newcorn J. Atomoxetine treatment
for pediatric patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder with
comorbid anxiety disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2007;46(9):1119–1127.
Hirshkowitz M, Black J. Effect of adjunctive modafinil on wakefulness and
quality of life in patients with excessive sleepiness-associated obstructive
sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome: a 12-month, open-label extensions
study. CNS Drugs. 2007;21(5):407–416.
Makris AP, Rush CR, Frederich RC, Taylor AC, Kelly TH. Behavioral and
subjective effects of d-amphetamine and modafinil in healthy adults. Exp
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2007;15(2):123–133.
McElroy SL, Guerdjikova A, Kotwal R, Weige JA, Nelson EB. Atomoxetine
in the treatment of binge-eating disorder: a randomized placebo-controlled
trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2007;68(3):390–398.
Minzenberg MJ, Carter CS. Modafinil: a review of neurochemical actions
and effects on cognition. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008;97(7):1477.
Pivonello R, De Martino MC, Cappabianca P, De Leo M, Faggiano A,
Lombardi G, Hofland LJ, Lamberts SWJ, Colao A. The medical treatment
of Cushing’s disease: effectiveness of chronic treatment with the dopamine
agonist cabergoline in patients unsuccessfully treated by surgery. J Clin
Endocrinology Metabolism. 2009;94(1):223–230.
Pizzagalli DA, Evins AE, Schetter EC, Frank MJ, Pajtas PE, Santesso DL,
Culhane M. Single dose of a dopamine agonist impairs reinforcement
learning in humans: behavioral evidence from a laboratory-based measure
of reward responsiveness. Psychopharmacology. 2008;196(2):221–232.
Quintana H, Cherlin EA, Duesenberg DA, Bangs ME, Ramsey JL. Transition
from methylphenidate or amphetamine to atomoxetine in children and
adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a preliminary
tolerability and efficacy study. Clin Ther. 2007;29(6):1168–1177.
Rothenhausler HB, Ehrentraut S, von Degenfeld G, Weis M, Tichy M.


<<<PAGE 2282>>>
Treatment of depression with methylphenidate in patients difficult to wean
from mechanical ventilation in the intensive care unit. J Clin Psychiatry.
2007;61(10):750.
Scott JC, Woods SP, Matt GE, Meyer RA, Heaton RK. Neurocognitive
effects of methamphetamine: a critical review with meta-analysis.
Neuropsychol Rev. 2007;17(3):275–297.
Weisler RH. Review of long-acting stimulants in the treatment of attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Exper Opin Pharmacother. 2007;8(6):745–
758.
Wernicke JF, Holdridge KC, Jin L, Edison T, Zhang S. Seizure risk in
patients with attention-deficit-hyperactivity disorder treated with
atomoxetine. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2007;49(7):498–502.
Drugs Used to Treat Substance Use Disorders
Anton RF, O’Malley SS, Ciraulo DA, Cisler RA, Couper D. Combined
pharmacotherapies
and
behavioral
interventions
for
alcohol
dependence:the COMBINE study: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2006;295(17):2003–2017.
Arnsten AFT, Li B. Neurobiology of executive functions: catecholamine
influences on prefrontal cortical functions. Biol Psychiatry. 2005;57:1377.
Biederman J, Melmed RD, Patel A, McBurnett K, Konow J, Lyne A, Scherer
N. A randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled study of guanfacine
extended release in children and adolescents with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. Pediatrics. 2008;121(1):e73–e84.
Carroll KM, Ball SA, Nich C, O’Connor PG, Eagan D. Targeting behavioral
therapies to enhance naltrexone treatment of opioid dependence: efficacy
of contingency management and significant other involvement. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2001;58:755–761.
Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. Medication-Assisted Treatment for
Opioid Addiction in Opioid Treatment Programs. Treatment Improvement
Protocol (TIP) Series 43. DHHS Publication No. (SMA) 05–4048.
Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration; 2005.
Collins ED, Kleber HD, Whittington RA, Heitler NE. Anesthesia-assisted vs.
buprenorphine- or clonidine-assisted heroin detoxification and naltrexone
induction: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2005;294(8):903–913.


<<<PAGE 2283>>>
Ducharme LJ, Knudsen HK, Roman PM. Trends in the adoption of
medications for alcohol dependence. J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2006;26(Suppl 1):S13.
Ehret GB, Voide C, Gex-Fabry M, Chabert J, Shah D. Drug-induced long QT
syndrome in injection drug users receiving methadone: high frequency in
hospitalized patients and risk factors. Arch Intern Med.
2006;166(12):1280–1287.
Fiellin DA, Moore BA, Sullivan LE, Becker WC, Pantalon MV, Chawarski
MC, Barry DT, O’Connor PG, Schottenfeld RS. Long-term treatment with
buprenorphine/
naloxone in primary care: results at 2–5 years. Am J Addict. 2008;17:116.
Fuehrlein BS, Gold MS. Medication-assisted recovery in alcohol and opioid
dependence. Dir Psychiatry. 2013;33(1):15–27.
Gibson A, Degenhardt L, Mattick RP, Ali R, White J, O’Brien S. Exposure to
opioid maintenance treatment reduces long-term mortality. Addiction.
2008;103:462.
Grant JE, Kim SW, Potenza MN. Advances in the pharmacological treatment
of pathological gambling. J Gambling Stud. 2003;19:85.
Grant JE, Kim SW. An open-label study of naltrexone in the treatment of
kleptomania. J Clin Psychiatry. 2002;63(4):349.
Gryczynski J, Jaffe JH, Schwartz RP, Dušek KA, Gugsa N, Monroe CL,
O’Grady KE, Olsen YK, Mitchell SG. Patient perspectives on choosing
buprenorphine over methadone in an urban, equal-access system. Am J
Addict. 2013;22(3):285–291.
Gueorguieva R, Wu R, Pittman B, O’Malley S, Krystal JH. New insights into
the efficacy of naltrexone for alcohol dependence from the trajectory-based
analyses. Biol Psychiatry. 2007;61(11):1290–1295.
Heit HA, Gourlay DL. Buprenorphine: new tricks with an old molecule for
pain management. Clin J Pain. 2008;24:93–97.
Helm SI, Trescot AM, Colson J, Sehgal N, Silverman S. Opioid antagonists,
partial agonists, and agonists/antagonists: the role of office-based
detoxification. Pain Physician 2008;11:225.
Hollander E, Petras JN. α2-Adrenergic receptor agonists: clonidine and
guanfacine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA:


<<<PAGE 2284>>>
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3004.
Hser YI, Hoffman V, Grella CE, Anglin MD. A 33-year follow-up of
narcotics addicts. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2001;58:503–508.
Ivanov I. Disulfiram and acamprosate. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3099.
Johnson BA. Update on neuropharmacological treatments for alcoholism:
scientific basis and clinical findings. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008;75(1):34.
Johnson BA, Ait-Daoud N, Prihoda TJ. Combining ondansetron and
naltrexone effectively treats biologically predisposed alcoholics: from
hypotheses to preliminary clinical evidence. Alcoholism Clin Exp Res.
2000;24(5):737–742.
Karachalios GN, Charalabopoulos A, Papalimneou V, Kiortsis D, Dimicco P.
Withdrawal syndrome following cessation of antihypertensive drug
therapy. Int J Clin Pract. 2005;5:562.
King A, De Wit H, Riley RC, Cao D, Niaura R. Efficacy of naltrexone in
smoking cessation: a preliminary study and an examination of sex
differences. Nicotine Tobacco Res. 2006;8(5):671–682.
Kleber HD. Methadone maintenance 4 decades later: thousands of lives saved
but still controversial. JAMA. 2008;300:2303.
Kornfield R, Watson S, Higashi AS, Conti RM, Dusetzina SB, Garfield CF,
Dorsey ER, Huskamp HA, Alexander GC. Effects of FDA advisories on
the pharmacologic treatment of ADHD, 2004–2008. Psychiatr Serv.
2013;64(4):339–346.
Krishnan-Sarin S, Rounsaville BJ, O’Malley SS. Opioid receptor antagonists:
naltrexone and nalmefene. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan
& Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3171.
Krystal JH, Cramer JA, Kroll WF, Kirk GF, Rosenheck RA. Naltrexone in
the treatment of alcohol dependence. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(24):1734.
Laaksonen E, Koski-Jännes A, Salaspuro M, Ahtínen H, Alho H. A
randomized, multicentre, open-label, comparative trial of disulfiram,
naltrexone and acamprosate in the treatment of alcohol dependence.
Alcohol. 2008;43(1):53–61.
Likar R, Kayser H, Sittl R. Long-term management of chronic pain with
transdermal buprenorphine: a multicenter, open-label, follow-up study in


<<<PAGE 2285>>>
patients from three short-term clinical trials. Clin Ther. 2006;28(6):943–
952.
Mann K, Kiefer F, Spanagel R, Littleton J. Acamprosate: recent findings and
future research directions. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2008;32(7):1105–1110.
Marsch LA, Bickel WK, Badger GJ, Stothart ME, Quesnel KJ. Comparison
on pharmacological treatments for opioid-dependent adolescents: a
randomized controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005;62:1157.
Mattick RP, Kimber J. Breen C, Davoli M. Buprenorphine maintenance
versus placebo or methadone maintenance for opioid dependence.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD002207.
Ming X, Gordon E, Kang N, Wagner GC. Use of clonidine in children with
autism spectrum disorders. Brain Dev. 2008;30(7):454–760.
Monterosso JR, Flannery BA, Pettinati HM, Oslin DW, Rukstalis M.
Predicting treatment response to naltrexone: the influence of craving and
family history. Am J Addict. 2001;10(3):258–268.
Myers SM. The status of pharmacotherapy for autism spectrum disorders.
Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2007;8(11):1579.
Neumann AM, Blondell RD, Jaanimagi U, Giambrone AK, Homish GG,
Lozano JR, Kowalik U, Azadfard M. A preliminary study comparing
methadone and buprenorphine in patients with chronic pain and coexistent
opioid addiction. J Addict Dis. 2013;32(1):68–78.
Niederhofer H, Staffen W. Naltrexone and disulfiram in patients with alcohol
dependence and comorbid psychiatric disorders. Biol Psychiatry.
2005;57(10):1128.
Oliva EM, Trafton JA, Harris AH, Gordon AJ. Trends in opioid agonist
therapy in the Veterans Health Administration: is supply keeping up with
demand? Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse. 2013;39(2):103–107.
O’Malley SS, Cooney JL, Krishnan-Sarin S, Dubin J, McKee SA. A
controlled trial of naltrexone augmentation of nicotine replacement for
smoking cessation. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:667.
Raymond NC, Grant JE, Kim SW, Coleman E. Treatment of compulsive
sexual behavior with naltrexone and serotonin reuptake inhibitors: two
case studies. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2002;17(4):201.
Ritvo JI, Park C. The psychiatric management of patients with alcohol
dependence. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2007;9(5):381.
Sallee F, Connor DF, Newcorn JH. A review of the rationale and clinical


<<<PAGE 2286>>>
utilization of 2-adrenoceptor agonists for the treatment of attentiondeficit/hyperactivity and related disorders. J Child Adolesc
Psychopharmacol. 2013;23(5):308–319.
Savage SR. Principles of pain treatment in the addicted patient. In: Graham
AW, Schultz TK, eds. Principles of Addiction Medicine. 2nd ed. Chevy
Chase, MD: American Society of Addiction Medicine; 1998:919.
Saxon AJ, McRae-Clark AL, Brady KT. Opioid receptor agonists: methadone
and buprenorphine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3171.
Schmitz JM, Stotts AL, Rhoades HM, Grabowski J. Naltrexone and relapse
prevention treatment for cocaine-dependent patients. Addict Behav.
2001;26(2):167.
Sigmon SC, Moody DE, Nuwayser ES, Bigelow GE. An injection depot
formulation of buprenorphine: extended bio-delivery and effects.
Addiction. 2006;101(3):420.
Srisurapanont M, Jarusuraisin N. Opioid antagonists for alcohol dependence.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002(2):CD001867.
Strain EC, Moody DE, Stoller KB, Walsh SL, Bigelow GE. Relative
bioavailability of different buprenorphine formulations under chronic
dosing conditions. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2004;74:37.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Results from
the 2005 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: National Findings
(Office of Applied Studies, NSDUH Series H-30, DHHS Publication No.
SMA 06–4194). Rockville, MD: Department of Health and Human
Services; 2006.
Swift RM. Naltrexone and nalmefene: any meaningful difference? Biol
Psychiatry. 2013;73(8):700–701.
Tetrault JM, Kozal MJ, Chiarella J, Sullivan LE, Dinh AT, Fiellin DA.
Association between risk behaviors and antiretroviral resistance in HIVinfected patients receiving opioid agonist treatment. J Addict Med.
2013;7(2):102–107.
Vaglini F, Viaggi C, Piro V, Pardini C, Gerace C, Scarselli M. Acetaldehyde
and parkinsonism: role of CYP450 2E1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2013;7:71.
Weiss RD, Kueppenbender KD. Combining psychosocial treatment with
pharmacotherapy for alcohol dependence. J Clin Psychopharmacol.


<<<PAGE 2287>>>
2006;26(Suppl 1):S37.
Weiss RD, O’malley SS, Hosking JD, Locastro JS, Swift R, COMBINE
Study Research Group. Do patients with alcohol dependence respond to
placebo? Results from the COMBINE Study. J Stud Alcohol Drugs.
2008;69(6):878.
Zarkin GA, Bray JW, Aldridge A, Mitra D, Mills MJ, Couper DJ, Cisler RA,
COMBINE Cost-Effectiveness Research Group. Cost and costeffectiveness of the COMBINE study in alcohol-dependent patients. Arch
Gen Psychiatry. 2008;65(10):1214–1221.
Drugs Used for Cognitive Enhancement
Auchus AP, Brasher HR, Salloway S, Korczyn AD, DeDeyn PP.
Galantamine treatment of vascular dementia: a randomized trial.
Neurology. 2007;69:448.
Black SE, Doody R, Li H, McRae T, Jambor KM. Donepezil preserves
cognition and global function in patients with severe Alzheimer’s disease.
Neurology. 2007;
69:459.
Cummings J, Lefevre G, Small G, Appel-Dingemanse S. Pharmacokinetic
rationale for rivastigmine patch. Neurology. 2007;69(4 Suppl 1):S10.
Droogsma E, Veeger N, van Walderveen P, Niemarkt S, van Asselt D. Effect
of treatment gaps in elderly patients with dementia treated with
cholinesterase inhibitors. Neurology. 2013;80(17):1622.
Edwards K, Royall D, Hershey L, Lichter D, Ake A. Efficacy and safety of
galantamine in patients with dementia with Lewy body: a 24-week openlabel study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2007;23:401.
Jann MW, Small GW. Cholinesterase inhibitors. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:3089.
Porsteinsson AP, Grossberg GT, Mintzer J, Memantine MEM MD 12 Study
Group. Memantine treatment in patients with mild to moderate
Alzheimer’s disease already receiving a cholinesterase inhibitor: a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Curr Alzheimer Res.
2008;5:83–89.
Qassem A, Snow V, Cross JT Jr, Forcicea MA, Hopkins R Jr, Shekelle P,


<<<PAGE 2288>>>
Adelman A, Mehr D, Schellhase K, Campos-Outcalt D, Santagoida P,
Owens DK. Current pharmacologic treatment of dementia: a clinical
practice guideline from the American College of Physicians and the
American Academy of Family Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2008;148:370–
378.
Reisberg B, Doody R, Stoffer A, Schmidt F, Ferris S. A 24-week open label
extension study on memantine in moderate to severe Alzheimer’s disease.
Arch Neurol. 2006;63:49.
Ritchie C, Zhinchin G. Low dose, high dose, or no dose: better prescribing of
cholinesterase inhibitors for Alzheimer’s disease. Int Psychogeriatr.
2013;25(4):511–515.
Seltzer B. Donepezil: an update. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2007;8:1011–
1023.
Wagle KC, Rowan PJ, Poon O-YI, Kunik ME, Taffet GE, Braun UK.
Initiation of cholinesterase inhibitors in an inpatient setting. Am J
Alzheimer Dis Other Demen. 2013;28(4):377–383.
Drugs Used to Treat Sexual Disorders
Chivers ML, Rosen RC. Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors and female
sexual response: faulty protocols or paradigms? J Sex Med. 2010;7(2 Pt
2):858–872.
Claes HI, Goldstein I, Althof SE, Berner MM, Cappelleri JC, Bushmakin
AG, Symonds T, Schnetzler G. Understanding the effects of sildenafil
treatment on erection maintenance and erection hardness. J Sex Med.
2010;7(6):2184–2191.
Hatzimouratidis K, Burnett AL, Hatzichristou D, McCullough AR, Montorsi
F, Mulhall JP. Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors in postprostatectomy
erectile dysfunction: a critical analysis of the basic science rationale and
clinical application. Eur Urol. 2009;55(2):334–347.
Hosain G, Latini DM, Kauth M, Goltz HH, Helmer DA. Sexual dysfunction
among male veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan: prevalence and
correlates. J Sex Med. 2013;10(2):516–523.
Khan AS, Sheikh Z, Khan S, Dwivedi R, Benjamin E. Viagra deafness—
Sensorineural hearing loss and phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors.
Laryngoscope. 2011;121(5):
1049–1054.


<<<PAGE 2289>>>
Kotera J, Mochida H, Inoue H, Noto T, Fujishige K, Sasaki T, Kobayashi T,
Kojima K, Yee S, Yamada Y, Kikkawa K, Omori K. Avanafil, a potent
and highly selective phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor for erectile dysfunction.
J Urol. 2012;188(2):
668–674.
McCullough AR, Hellstrom WG, Wang R, Lepor H, Wagner KR, Engel JD.
Recovery of erectile function after nerve sparing radical prostatectomy and
penile rehabilitation with nightly intraurethral alprostadil versus sildenafil
citrate. J Urol. 2010;183(6):2451–2456.
Reffelmann T, Kloner RA. Phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors: are they
cardioprotective? Cardiovasc Res. 2009;83(2):204–212.
Roberson DW, Kosko DA. Men living with HIV and experiencing sexual
dysfunction: an analysis of treatment options. J Assoc Nurses AIDS Care.
2013;24(1 Suppl):
S135–S145.
Roustit M, Blaise S, Allanore Y, Carpentier PH, Caglayan E, Cracowski JL.
Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors for the treatment of secondary Raynaud’s
phenomenon: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised trials.
Ann Rheum Dis. 2013;
72(10):1696–1699.
Schwartz BG, Kloner RA. Drug interactions with phosphodiesterase-5
inhibitors used for the treatment of erectile dysfunction or pulmonary
hypertension. Circulation. 2010;122(1):88–95.
Tuncel A, Nalcacioglu V, Ener K, Aslan Y, Aydin O, Atan A. Sildenafil
citrate and tamsulosin combination is not superior to monotherapy in
treating lower urinary tract symptoms and erectile dysfunction. World J
Urol. 2010;28(1):17–22.
Drugs Used to Treat the Side Effects of Psychotropic Drugs
Adan RA. Mechanisms underlying current and future antiobesity drugs.
Trend Neurosci. 2013;36(2):133–140.
Ahmad S. Anticholinergics and amantadine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz
P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3009.
Armstrong SC, Cozza KL. Antihistamines. Psychosomatics. 2003;44(5):430.
Astrup A, Carraro R, Finer N, Harper A, Kunesova M, Lean MEJ, Niskanen


<<<PAGE 2290>>>
L, Rasmussen MF, Rissanen A, Rössner S, Savolainen MJ, Van Gaal L,
NN8022-1807 Investigators. Safety, tolerability and sustained weight loss
over 2 years with the once-daily human GLP-1 analog, liraglutide. Int J
Obes. 2012;36(6):843–854.
Brown RE, Stevens DR, Haas HL. The physiology of brain histamine. Prog
Neurobiol. 2001;63(6):637.
Buhrich N, Weller A, Kevans P. Misuse of anticholinergic drugs by people
with serious mental illness. Psychiatr Serv. 2000;51:928.
Caligiuri MR, Jeste DV, Lacro JP. Antipsychotic-induced movement
disorders in the elderly: epidemiology and treatment recommendations.
Drugs Aging. 2000;
17:363.
Camelo-Nunes IC. New antihistamines: a critical view. J Pediatr (Rio J).
2006;82(5 Suppl):S173.
Colman E, Golden J, Roberts M, Egan A, Weaver J, Rosebraugh C. The
FDA’s assessment of two drugs for chronic weight management. N Engl J
Med. 2012;
367(17):1577–1579.
Davies AJ, Harindra V, McEwan A. Cardiotoxic effect with convulsions in
terfenadine overdose. BMJ. 1989;298(6669):325.
Dose M. Tempel HD: abuse potential of anticholinergics.
Pharmacopsychiatry. 2000;33:43.
Drimer T, Shahal B, Barak Y. Effects of discontinuation of long-term
anticholinergic treatment in elderly schizophrenia patients. Int Clin
Pharmacol. 2004;19(1):27.
Finnema SJ, Bang-Andersen B, J⊘rgensen M, Christoffersen CT, Gulyás B,
Wikström HV, Farde L, Halldin C. The dopamine D1 receptor agonist (S)[11C] N-methyl-NNC 01-0259 is not sensitive to changes in dopamine
concentration—a positron emission tomography examination in the
monkey brain. Synapse. 2013;67(9):
586–595.
Garvey WT. New tools for weight-loss therapy enable a more robust medical
model for obesity treatment: rationale for a complications-centric
approach. Endocr Pract. 2013;19(5):864–874.
Haas H, Panula P. The role of histamine and the tuberomammillary nucleus


<<<PAGE 2291>>>
in the nervous system. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2003;4(2):121.
Hampl JS, Lehmann J, Fielder EG. How United States newspapers framed
weight-loss drugs. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2013;113(9):A20.
Javitt DC, Zukin SR, Heresco-Levy U, Umbricht D. Has an angel shown the
way? Etiological and therapeutic implications of the PCP/NMDA model of
schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2012;38(5):958–966.
Kelly AS, Metzig AM, Rudser KD, Fitch AK, Fox CK, Nathan BM, Deering
MM, Schwartz BL, Abuzzahab MJ, Gandrud LM, Moran A, Billington CJ,
Schwarzenberg SJ. Exenatide as a weight-loss therapy in extreme pediatric
obesity: a randomized, controlled pilot study. Obesity. 2012;20(2):364–
370.
Linnet K, Ejsing TB. A review on the impact of P-glycoprotein on the
penetration of drugs into the brain. Focus on psychotropic drugs. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008;18(3):157.
McIntyre RS. Antihistamines. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3033.
Melis M, Scheggi S, Carta G, Madeddu C, Lecca S, Luchicchi A, Cadeddu F,
Frau R, Fattore L, Fadda P, Ennas MG, Castelli MP, Fratta W, Schilstrom
B, Banni S, De Montis MG, Pistis M. PPARα regulates cholinergic-driven
activity of midbrain dopamine neurons via a novel mechanism involving
α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. J Neurosci. 2013;33(14):6203–6211.
Miller CH, Fleischhacker WW. Managing antipsychotic-induced acute and
chronic akathisia. Drug Saf. 2000;22:73.
Monn JA, Valli MJ, Massey SM, Hao J, Reinhard MR, Bures MG, Heinz
BA, Wang X, Carter JH, Getman BG, Stephenson GA, Herin M, Catlow
JT, Swanson S, Johnson BG, McKinzie DL, Henry SS. Synthesis and
pharmacological characterization of 4-substituted-2-aminobicyclo [3.1. 0]
hexane-2, 6-dicarboxylates: Identification of new potent and selective
metabotropic glutamate 2/3 receptor agonists. J Med Chem.
2013;56(11):4442–4555.
Montoro J, Sastre J, Bartra J, del Cuvillo A, Davila I. Effect of H1
antihistamines upon the central nervous system. J Investig Allergol Clin
Immunol. 2006;16(Suppl 1):24.
Naicker P, Anoopkumar-Dukie S, Grant GD, Kavanagh JJ. The effects of


<<<PAGE 2292>>>
antihistamines with varying anticholinergic properties on voluntary and
involuntary movement. Clin Neurophysiol. 2013;124(9):1840–1845.
O’Neil PM, Smith SR, Weissman NJ, Fidler MC, Sanchez M, Zhang J, Brian
Raether, Anderson CM, Shanahan WR. Randomized placebo-controlled
clinical trial of lorcaserin for weight loss in type 2 diabetes mellitus: the
BLOOM-DM study. Obesity. 2012;20(7):1426–1436.
Papanastasiou E, Stone JM, Shergill S. When the drugs don’t work: the
potential of glutamatergic antipsychotics in schizophrenia. Br J Psychiatry.
2013;202(2):91–93.
Shapiro BJ, Lynch KL, Toochinda T, Lutnick A, Cheng HY, Kral AH.
Promethazine misuse among methadone maintenance patients and
community-based injection drug users. J Addict Med. 2013;7(2):96–101.
Simons FE. Advances in H1-antihistamines. N Engl J Med.
2004;351(21):2203.
Suplicy H, Boguszewski CL, dos Santos CMC, de Figueiredo MD, Cunha
DR, Radominski R. A comparative study of five centrally acting drugs on
the pharmacological treatment of obesity. Int J Obes. 2014:1–7.
Tejeda HA, Shippenberg TS, Henriksson R. The dynorphin/κ-opioid receptor
system and its role in psychiatric disorders. Cell Mol Life Sci.
2012;69(6):857–896.
Theunissen EL, Vermeeren A, Vuurman EF, Ramaekers JG. Stimulating
effects of H1-antagonists. Curr Pharm Des. 2006;12(20):2501.
Vilsb⊘ll T, Christensen M, Junker AE, Knop FK, Gluud LL. Effects of
glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists on weight loss: systematic
review and meta-analyses of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2012;344.
Welch MJ, Meltzer EO, Simons FE. H1-antihistamines and the central
nervous system. Clin Allergy Immunol. 2002;17:337.
Wright JM, Dobosiewicz MR, Clarke PB. The role of dopaminergic
transmission through D1-like and D2-like receptors in amphetamineinduced
rat
ultrasonic
vocalizations.
Psychopharmacology.
2013;225(4):853–868.
Yanai K, Tashiro M. The physiological and pathophysiological roles of
neuronal histamine: an insight from human positron emission tomography
studies. Pharmacol Ther. 2007;113(1):1.


<<<PAGE 2293>>>
Nutritional Supplements and Related
Camp KM, Lloyd-Puryear MA, Huntington KL. Nutritional treatment for
inborn errors of metabolism: Indications, regulations, and availability of
medical foods and dietary supplements using phenylketonuria as an
example. Mol Gen Metab. 2012;107(1–2):3–9.
Long SJ, Benton D. Effects of vitamin and mineral supplementation on
stress, mild psychiatric symptoms, and mood in nonclinical samples: a
meta-analysis. Psychosom Med. 2013;75(2):144–153.
Nelson JC. The evolving story of folate in depression and the therapeutic
potential of l-methylfolate. Am J Psychiatry. 2012;169(12):1223–1225.
Reichenbach S, Jüni P. Medical food and food supplements: not always as
safe as generally assumed. Ann Intern Med. 2012;156(12):894–895.
Shah R. The role of nutrition and diet in Alzheimer disease: a systematic
review. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2013;14(6):398–402.
Sonuga-Barke EJS, Brandeis D, Cortese S, Daley D, Ferrin M, Holtmann M,
Stevenson S, Danckaerts M, van der Oord S, Döpfner M, Dittmann RW,
Simonoff E, Zuddas A, Banaschewski T, Buitelaar J, Coghill D, Hollis C,
Konofal E, Lecendreux M, Wong IC, Sergeant J, European ADHD
Guidelines Group. Nonpharmacological interventions for ADHD:
systematic review and meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials of
dietary and psychological treatments. Am J Psychiatry. 2013;170(3):275–
289.
Thaipisuttikul P, Galvin JE. Use of medical foods and nutritional approaches
in the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Clin Pract. 2012;9(2):199–209.
Umhau JC, Garg K, Woodward AM. Dietary supplements and their future in
health care: commentary on draft guidelines proposed by the Food and
Drug Administration. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2012;16(5):461–462.


<<<PAGE 2294>>>
22
Other Somatic Therapies
ELECTROCONVULSIVE THERAPY
Convulsive therapies for major psychiatric illnesses predate the modern
therapeutic era, with the use of camphor reported as early as the 16th century
and the existence of several accounts of camphor convulsive therapies from
the late 1700s to the mid-1800s.
Unaware of the history of camphor convulsive therapy, the Hungarian
neuropsychiatrist Ladislas von Meduna observed that the brains of people
with epilepsy had more glial cells than other brains. In contrast, the brains of
patients with schizophrenia had fewer glial cells, and von Meduna
hypothesized that there might be a biologic antagonism between convulsions
and schizophrenia. Following animal experimentation, camphor was (again)
selected as the appropriate agent to use for the therapeutic induction of
seizures. In 1934, the first catatonic psychotic patient was successfully treated
using intramuscular injections of camphor in oil to produce therapeutic
seizures. Later, other chemicals were used, including pentylenetetrazol.
Insulin coma was also used in the 1940s and 1950s, which also sometimes
induced seizures. Lucio Bini and Ugo Cerletti were interested in the use of
electricity to induce seizures, and, after a series of animal experiments and
observation of the use of electricity commercially, they were able to safely
apply current across the heads of animals for this purpose. In 1938, the first
electroconvulsive treatment was administered to a delusional and incoherent
patient, who improved with one treatment and remitted after 11 treatments.
Electrical induction of convulsive therapy could be made more reliable and
shorter-acting than chemically induced convulsive therapies, and, by the early
1940s, it had replaced them. In 1940, the first use of electroconvulsive


<<<PAGE 2295>>>
therapy (ECT) occurred in the United States.
Explorations of nondominant electrode placement and alternative, more
efficient waveforms were then undertaken to reduce the retrograde memory
problems that persisted for some patients after the initial recovery period
post-ECT. The practice of ECT also benefited from the introduction of
controlled trials methodology, which demonstrated its safety and efficacy,
and from refinements made in diagnostic systems and the process of
informed consent. In the 1980s and 1990s, efforts to ensure uniformly high
standards of practice were underway with the publication of
recommendations for treatment delivery, education, and training by
professional organizations in the United States, England, Scandinavia, and
Canada, among others.
With the widespread use of pharmacologic agents as first-line treatments
for major psychiatric disorders, ECT is now more commonly used for
patients with resistance to those treatments, except in the case of lifethreatening illness due to inanition, severe suicidal symptoms, or catatonia.
Although subconvulsive stimulation was ineffective and a seizure is
necessary, it is now known that there is a dose–response relationship with
right unilateral ECT and bilateral ECT is likely to be ineffective with
ultrabrief pulse widths. Work continues to explore the underlying
mechanisms and biologic characteristics of effective ECT treatments, with
interest in having the treatment focus on appropriate neural networks with a
more efficient stimulus as a method of reducing cognitive side effects. With
the growing understanding that depression is a chronic disease for many
patients, more emphasis has been placed on continuation and maintenance
treatments following an acute course of ECT. Utilization of ECT has
diminished since the middle of the 20th century, but because ECT remains
the most effective treatment for major depression and is a rapidly effective
treatment for life-threatening psychiatric conditions, ECT, unlike its
contemporaneous somatic therapies, such as insulin coma, remains in the
active treatment portfolio of modern therapeutics. Its use has shifted from
public to private institutions, and it is estimated that approximately 100,000
patients have received ECT annually over the past few decades in the United
States (Table 22-1).
The Nobel Laureate Paul Greengard has suggested that the term
electrocortical therapy might be used to replace the current term


<<<PAGE 2296>>>
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). Greengard has acknowledged that if the
mechanism of action of ECT, as yet unknown, turns out to be subcortical,
then the term might have limited use. Until that time, however, the authors of
this text think Greengard’s suggestion deserves consideration. It would help
diminish the fear associated with the word convulsion and help destigmatize
a very effective treatment method.
Electrophysiology in Electroconvulsive Therapy
Neurons maintain a resting potential across the plasma membrane and may
propagate an action potential, which is a transient reversal of the membrane
potential. Regular brain activity is desynchronized; that is, neurons fire action
potentials asynchronously. A convulsion, or seizure, occurs when a large
percentage of neurons fire in unison. Such rhythmical changes in the
extracellular potential entrain neighboring neurons, propagate the seizure
activity across the cortex and into deeper structures, and eventually engulf the
entire brain in high-voltage synchronous neuronal firing. Cellular
mechanisms work to contain the seizure activity and to maintain cellular
homeostasis, and the seizure eventually ends. In epilepsy, any of possibly
several hundred genetic defects can alter the balance in favor of unrestrained
activity. In ECT, seizures are triggered in normal neurons by application
through the scalp of pulses of current, under conditions that are carefully
controlled to create a seizure of a particular duration over the entire brain.
Ohm’s law can describe the qualities of the electricity used in ECT: E = IR,
or I = E/R, in which E is voltage, I is current, and R is resistance. The
intensity or dose of electricity in ECT is measured in terms of charge
(milliampere-seconds or millicoulombs) or energy (watt-seconds or joules).
Resistance is synonymous with impedance, and, in the case of ECT, both the
electrode’s contact with the body and the nature of the bodily tissues are the
significant determinants of resistance. The skull has a high impedance; the
brain has a low impedance. Because scalp tissues are much better conductors
of electricity than bone, only about 20 percent of the applied charge enters the
skull to excite neurons. The ECT machines that are now widely used can be
adjusted to administer the electricity under conditions of constant current,
voltage, or energy.


<<<PAGE 2297>>>
Table 22-1
Milestones in the History of Convulsive Therapy
1500s

Paracelsus induces seizures by administering camphor
(by mouth) to treat psychiatric illness.

1785

First published report of the use of seizure induction to
treat mania, again using camphor.

1934

Ladislas von Meduna begins the modern era of convulsive
therapy using intramuscular injection of camphor for
catatonic schizophrenia. Camphor is soon replaced with
pentylenetetrazol.

1938

Ugo Cerletti and Lucio Bini conduct the first electrical
induction of a series of seizures in a catatonic patient
and produce a successful treatment response

1940s

ECT is introduced to the United States.
Curare developed for use as a muscle relaxant at ECT.

1951

Introduction of succinylcholine.

1958

First controlled study of unilateral ECT.

1960

Attenuation of seizure expression with an anticonvulsant
agent (lidocaine) reduces the efficacy of ECT.
Subconvulsive treatment produces only weak clinical
responses; the hypothesis that seizure activity is
necessary and sufficient for efficacy is upheld.

1960s

Randomized clinical trials of the efficacy of ECT versus
medications in the treatment of depression yield
response rates that are significantly higher with ECT.
Comparisons of neuroleptics and ECT show that
neuroleptic medication is superior for acute treatment,
although ECT may be more effective in the long term.

1970

The most common electrode positioning for right unilateral


<<<PAGE 2298>>>
ECT developed.
1976

A constant current, brief pulse ECT device, the prototype
for modern devices, is developed.

1978

The American Psychiatric Association publishes the first
Task Force Report on ECT with the aim of establishing
standards for consent and the technical and clinical
aspects of the conduct of ECT.

Late
Randomized, controlled trials demonstrate that ECT is
1970s–
more effective than sham treatment for major
early
depression.
1980s
1985

The National Institutes of Health and National Institute of
Mental Health Consensus Conference on ECT endorse
a role for the use of ECT and advocate research and
national standards of practice.

1987

The belief that the seizure in itself is sufficient for clinical
response is challenged by H. A. Sackheim and
collaborators, who report that the combination of
dosage just above seizure threshold and right unilateral
electrode placement, while producing a seizure of
sufficient duration, is ineffective.

1988

Randomized, controlled clinical trials of ECT versus
lithium demonstrate them to be equally effective in
mania.

2000

In controlled trials, the dose–response relationship for
right unilateral ECT is validated; high-dose right
unilateral and bilateral ECT show equal response rates
in major depression, but right unilateral electrode
placement is associated with fewer adverse cognitive
effects.
Convulsive treatment is induced with magnetic stimulation
by S. H. Lisanby and colleagues.


<<<PAGE 2299>>>
2001

The largest modern controlled trial of relapse prevention
post-ECT with continuation pharmacotherapy
demonstrates a significantly better outcome for
combined treatment with a tricyclic antidepressant
(nortriptyline) plus lithium compared with nortriptyline
alone or placebo during the first 6 months post-ECT.

ECT, electroconvulsive therapy.

Mechanism of Action
The induction of a bilateral generalized seizure is necessary for both the
beneficial and adverse effects of ECT. Although a seizure superficially seems
as though it is an all-or-none event, some data indicate that not all generalized
seizures involve all the neurons in deep brain structures (e.g., the basal
ganglia and the thalamus); recruitment of these deep neurons may be
necessary for full therapeutic benefit. After the generalized seizure, the
electroencephalogram (EEG) shows about 60 to 90 seconds of postictal
suppression. This period is followed by high-voltage delta and theta waves,
with a return to preseizure activity in about 30 minutes. During a series of
ECT treatments, the interictal EEG is generally slower and of greater
amplitude than usual, but the EEG returns to pretreatment appearance 1
month to 1 year after the end of the course of treatment.
Positron emission tomography (PET) studies of both cerebral blood flow
and glucose use have shown that during seizures, cerebral blood flow, use of
glucose and oxygen, and permeability of the blood–brain barrier increase.
After the seizure, blood flow and glucose metabolism are decreased, perhaps
most markedly in the frontal lobes. Some research indicates that the degree of
decrease in cerebral metabolism is correlated with therapeutic response.
Seizure foci in idiopathic epilepsy are hypometabolic during interictal
periods; ECT itself acts as an anticonvulsant because its administration is
associated with an increase in the seizure threshold as treatment progresses.
Recent data suggest that for 1 to 2 months following a session of ECT, EEGs
record a massive increase in slow-wave activity located over the prefrontal
cortex in patients who responded well to the ECT. High-intensity, bilateral
stimulation produced the best response; low-intensity, unilateral stimulation,


<<<PAGE 2300>>>
the weakest. These data are of unclear significance, however, because the
specific EEG correlate disappears 2 months after ECT, whereas the clinical
benefit persists.
ECT affects the cellular mechanisms of memory and mood regulation and
raises the seizure threshold. The latter effect may be blocked by the opioid
antagonist naloxone.
Neurochemical research into the mechanisms of action of ECT has focused
on changes in neurotransmitter receptors and, recently, changes in secondmessenger systems. Virtually every neurotransmitter system is affected by
ECT, but a series of ECT sessions results in the downregulation of
postsynaptic β-adrenergic receptors, the same receptor change observed with
virtually all antidepressant treatments. The effects of ECT on serotonergic
neurons remain controversial. Various research studies have reported an
increase in postsynaptic serotonin receptors, no change in serotonin receptors,
and a change in the presynaptic regulation of serotonin release. ECT has also
been reported to effect changes in the muscarinic, cholinergic, and
dopaminergic neuronal systems. In second-messenger systems, ECT has been
reported to affect the coupling of G-proteins to receptors, the activity of
adenylyl cyclase and phospholipase C, and the regulation of calcium entry
into neurons.
Recently, there has been increased interest in structural changes in the
brain associated with psychiatric syndromes and response to treatment. This
interest has been particularly so for microscopic changes associated with
electroconvulsive stimulation, as well as antidepressants and other
medications. In animals, mostly rodents, synaptic plasticity in the
hippocampus, including mossy fiber sprouting, alterations in cytoskeletal
structure, increased connectivity in perforant pathways, promotion of
neurogenesis, and suppression of apoptosis have been observed. We also see
many of these structural events, although less often, with antidepressant
medications such as fluoxetine. These reports have also galvanized
controversy over various aspects of the technical validity of the observations.
It is unknown whether such changes occur clinically and, if they do, what
significance to efficacy and cognitive side effects might be discovered.
Indications


<<<PAGE 2301>>>
Major Depressive Disorder. The most common indication for ECT is
major depressive disorder, for which ECT is the fastest and most effective
available therapy. ECT should be considered for use in patients who have
failed medication trials, have not tolerated medications, have severe or
psychotic symptoms, are acutely suicidal or homicidal, or have marked
symptoms of agitation or stupor. Controlled studies have shown that up to 70
percent of patients who fail to respond to antidepressant medications may
respond positively to ECT. Table 22-2 presents the indications for the use of
ECT.
ECT is effective for depression in both major depressive disorder and
bipolar I disorder. Delusional or psychotic depression has long been
considered exceptionally responsive to ECT, but recent studies have
indicated that major depressive episodes with psychotic features are no more
responsive to ECT than nonpsychotic depressive disorders. Nevertheless,
because major depressive episodes with psychotic features respond poorly to
antidepressant pharmacotherapy alone, ECT should be considered much more
often as the first-line treatment for patients with the disorder. Major
depressive disorder with melancholic features (e.g., markedly severe
symptoms, psychomotor retardation, early morning awakening, diurnal
variation, decreased appetite and weight, and agitation) is considered likely to
respond to ECT. ECT is particularly indicated for persons who are severely
depressed, who have psychotic symptoms, who show suicidal intent, or who
refuse to eat. Depressed patients less likely to respond to ECT include those
with somatic symptom disorder. Elderly patients tend to respond to ECT
more slowly than do young patients. ECT is a treatment for major depressive
episode and does not provide prophylaxis unless it is administered on a longterm maintenance basis.
Table 22-2
Indications for the Use of Electroconvulsive Therapy
Major diagnostic indications
Major depressive disorder
Mania, including mixed episodes
Schizophrenia with acute exacerbation or catatonic subtype


<<<PAGE 2302>>>
Schizoaffective disorder
Other diagnostic indications
Parkinson disease
Neuroleptic malignant disorder
Clinical indications
Primary use
Rapid definitive response required on medical or psychiatric grounds
Risks of alternative treatments outweigh benefits
Past history of poor response to medications or good response to
ECT
Patient preference
Secondary use
Failure to respond to pharmacotherapy in the current episode
Intolerance of pharmacotherapy in the current episode
Rapid definitive response necessitated by deterioration of the
patient’s condition
ECT, electroconvulsive therapy.

Manic Episodes. ECT is at least equal to lithium for the treatment of acute
manic episodes. The pharmacologic treatment of manic episodes, however, is
so effective in the short term and for prophylaxis that the use of ECT to treat
manic episodes is generally limited to situations with specific
contraindications to all available pharmacologic approaches. The relative
rapidity of the ECT response indicates its usefulness for patients whose
manic behavior has produced dangerous levels of exhaustion. ECT should not
be used for a patient who is receiving lithium because lithium can lower the
seizure threshold and may be more likely to predispose the patient to
delirium.
Schizophrenia. Although an effective treatment for the symptoms of acute
schizophrenia, ECT is not for those of chronic schizophrenia. Patients with
schizophrenia who have marked positive symptoms, catatonia, or affective
symptoms are considered most likely to respond to ECT. In such patients, the
efficacy of ECT is about equal to that of antipsychotics, but improvement


<<<PAGE 2303>>>
may occur faster.
Other Indications. Small studies have found ECT effective in the
treatment of catatonia, a symptom associated with mood disorders,
schizophrenia, and medical and neurologic disorders. ECT is also reportedly
useful to treat episodic psychoses, atypical psychoses, obsessive-compulsive
disorder (OCD), and delirium and such medical conditions as a neuroleptic
malignant syndrome, hypopituitarism, intractable seizure disorders, and the
on–off phenomenon of Parkinson disease. ECT may also be the treatment of
choice for depressed, suicidal pregnant women who cannot take medication.
It also may be the treatment of choice for geriatric and medically ill patients
who cannot take antidepressant drugs safely. It may also be appropriate for
severely depressed and suicidal children and adolescents who may be less
likely to respond to antidepressant drugs compared with adults. ECT is not
effective in somatic symptom disorder (unless accompanied by depression),
personality disorders, or anxiety disorders.
Clinical Guidelines
Patients and their families are often apprehensive about ECT; therefore,
clinicians must explain both beneficial and adverse effects and alternative
treatment approaches. The informed-consent process should be documented
in the patients’ medical records and should include a discussion of the
disorder, its natural course, and the option of receiving no treatment. Printed
literature and videotapes about ECT may be useful in attempting to obtain
genuinely informed consent. The use of involuntary ECT is rare today and
should be reserved for patients who urgently need treatment and who have a
legally appointed guardian who has agreed to its use. Clinicians must know
local, state, and federal laws about the use of ECT.
Pretreatment Evaluation. Pretreatment evaluation should include
standard physical, neurologic, and preanesthesia examinations and complete
medical history. Laboratory evaluations should include blood and urine
chemistries, a chest x-ray, and an electrocardiogram (ECG). A dental
examination to assess the state of patients’ dentition is advisable for elderly
patients and patients who have had inadequate dental care. An x-ray of the
spine is needed if other evidence of a spinal disorder is seen. Computed


<<<PAGE 2304>>>
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be performed
if a clinician suspects the presence of a seizure disorder or a space-occupying
lesion. Practitioners of ECT no longer consider even a space-occupying
lesion to be an absolute contraindication to ECT, but with such patients, the
procedure should be performed only by experts.
CONCOMITANT MEDICATIONS.

Patients’ ongoing medications should be
assessed for possible interactions with the induction of a seizure, for effects
(both positive and negative) on the seizure threshold, and drug interactions
with the medications used during ECT. Most antidepressants except
bupropion, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and antipsychotics are generally
acceptable. Benzodiazepines should be withdrawn because of their
anticonvulsant activity; lithium should be withdrawn because it can result in
increased postictal delirium and can prolong seizure activity; clozapine and
bupropion should be withdrawn because they are associated with the
development of late-appearing seizures. Lidocaine should not be
administered during ECT because it markedly increases the seizure threshold;
theophylline is contraindicated because it increases the duration of seizures.
Reserpine is also contraindicated because it is associated with the further
compromise of the respiratory and cardiovascular systems during ECT.
Premedications, Anesthetics, and Muscle Relaxants. Patients
should not be given anything orally for 6 hours before treatment. Just before
the procedure, the patient’s mouth should be checked for dentures and other
foreign objects, and an intravenous (IV) line should be established. A bite
block is inserted in the mouth just before the treatment is administered to
protect the patient’s teeth and tongue during the seizure. Except for the brief
interval of electrical stimulation, 100 percent oxygen is administered at a rate
of 5 L a minute during the procedure until spontaneous respiration returns.
Emergency equipment for establishing an airway should be immediately
available in case it is needed.
MUSCARINIC ANTICHOLINERGIC DRUGS. Muscarinic anticholinergic drugs are

administered before ECT to minimize oral and respiratory secretions and to
block bradycardias and asystoles unless the resting heart rate is above 90
beats a minute. Some ECT centers have stopped the routine use of


<<<PAGE 2305>>>
anticholinergics as premedications, although their use is still indicated for
patients taking β-adrenergic receptor antagonists and those with ventricular
ectopic beats. The most commonly used drug is atropine, which can be
administered 0.3 to 0.6 mg intramuscularly (IM) or subcutaneously (SC) 30
to 60 minutes before the anesthetic or 0.4 to 1.0 mg IV 2 or 3 minutes before
the anesthetic. An option is to use glycopyrrolate (0.2 to 0.4 mg IM, IV, or
SC), which is less likely to cross the blood–brain barrier and less likely to
cause cognitive dysfunction and nausea, although it is thought to have less
cardiovascular protective activity than does atropine.
The administration of ECT requires general anesthesia and
oxygenation. The depth of anesthesia should be as light as possible, not only
to minimize adverse effects but also to avoid elevating the seizure threshold
associated with many anesthetics. Methohexital (0.75 to 1.0 mg/kg IV bolus)
is the most commonly used anesthetic because of its shorter duration of
action and lower association with postictal arrhythmias than thiopental (usual
dose 2 to 3 mg/kg IV). However, this difference in cardiac effects is not
universally accepted. Four other anesthetic alternatives are etomidate,
ketamine, alfentanil, and propofol. Etomidate (0.15 to 0.3 mg/kg IV) is
sometimes used because it does not increase the seizure threshold; this effect
is particularly useful for elderly patients because the seizure threshold
increases with age. Ketamine (6 to 10 mg/kg IM) is sometimes used because
it does not increase the seizure threshold, although its use is limited by the
association of psychotic symptoms with emergence from anesthesia with this
drug. Alfentanil (2 to 9 mg/kg IV) is sometimes coadministered with
barbiturates to allow the use of low doses of the barbiturate anesthetics and,
thus, reduce the seizure threshold less than usual, although its use can be
associated with an increased incidence of nausea. Propofol (0.5 to 3.5 mg/kg
IV) has anticonvulsant properties.
ANESTHESIA.

MUSCLE RELAXANTS. After the onset of the anesthetic effect, usually within a

minute, a muscle relaxant is administered to minimize the risk of bone
fractures and other injuries resulting from motor activity during the seizure.
The goal is to produce profound relaxation of the muscles, not necessarily to
paralyze them, unless the patient has a history of osteoporosis or spinal injury
or has a pacemaker and, therefore, is at risk for injury related to motor


<<<PAGE 2306>>>
activity during the seizure. Succinylcholine, an ultrafast-acting depolarizing
blocking agent, has gained virtually universal acceptance for the purpose.
Succinylcholine is usually administered in a dose of 0.5 to 1 mg/kg as an IV
bolus or drip. Because succinylcholine is a depolarizing agent, its action is
marked by the presence of muscle fasciculations, which move in a
rostrocaudal progression. The disappearance of these movements in the feet
or the absence of muscle contractions after peripheral nerve stimulation
indicates maximal muscle relaxation. In some patients, tubocurarine (3 mg
IV) is administered to prevent myoclonus and increases in potassium and
muscle enzymes; these reactions can be a problem in patients with
musculoskeletal or cardiac disease. A blood pressure cuff may be inflated at
the ankle to apply pressure over the systolic pressure before infusion of the
muscle relaxant to allow observation of relatively innocuous seizure activity
in the foot muscles to monitor the duration of the convulsion.
If a patient has a known history of pseudocholinesterase deficiency,
atracurium (0.5 to 1 mg/kg IV) or curare can be used instead of
succinylcholine. In such a patient, the metabolism of succinylcholine is
disrupted, and prolonged apnea may necessitate emergency airway
management. In general, however, because of the short half-life of
succinylcholine, the duration of apnea after its administration is generally
shorter than the delay in regaining consciousness caused by the anesthetic
and the postictal state.
Historically, most practitioners have used
bifrontotemporal electrode placement because of its reliability in producing
efficacy and its ease of use. This electrode placement is also associated with
more short- and long-term adverse cognitive effects and is more likely to
produce delirium, which may require interrupting a course of ECT and
perhaps even terminating it before optimal therapeutic effects have been
obtained. Hence, when bifrontotemporal ECT is used, attention should be
paid to restricting the dose to a moderately suprathreshold level to attenuate
adverse cognitive effects as much as possible. It should be emphasized that
the combination of ultrabrief pulse and bifrontotemporal electrode placement
has not been demonstrated to be effective. Treatment with bilateral electrode
placements, particularly a bifrontal configuration, is more likely to manifest
EEG seizure without a motor seizure, and EEG monitoring can be
ELECTRODE

PLACEMENT.


<<<PAGE 2307>>>
particularly useful in detecting its occurrence.
Newer electrode placements include bifrontal configuration and
asymmetrical placements. There are limitations to these strategies, imposed
by the fact that the high impedance of the skull and scalp causes the
spreading of the electrical stimulus and restricts possibilities for localization
of the stimulus. Bifrontal electrode placement, located sufficiently lateral to
minimize interference with impedance relations, has been investigated. There
have been several demonstrations that bifrontal electrode placements are
equally effective as bifrontotemporal and adequately dosed right unilateral
electrode configurations. Evidence of advantages in sparing of cognitive
effects is quite preliminary, and adequately powered investigations with more
extensive and sensitive cognitive batteries are needed. The seizure threshold
is likely to be relatively higher with bifrontal ECT.
The relatively better cognitive side effect profile of right unilateral ECT
(also called the d’Elia placement) should encourage wider use now that the
efficacy of this electrode placement can be ensured with adequate dosing
strategies. In contrast to bilateral ECT, a dose closer to 500 percent above the
seizure threshold is more likely to ensure efficacy. ECT devices in the United
States are restricted to an output in the range of 504 to 576 mCi.
Approximately 90 percent of patients have seizure thresholds that can
accommodate optimal dosing with brief pulse right unilateral ECT, and the
combination of right unilateral electrode placement with ultrabrief pulse
width extends the range of US devices, so that most patients can be treated
within these constraints. Individuals with an exceptionally high seizure
threshold may require bilateral electrode placements to remain within the
device restrictions. Maximizing interelectrode distance by using the d’Elia
placement may also be optimal. Many other right unilateral placements have
been described, but there is little work to support their use (Fig. 22-1).


<<<PAGE 2308>>>
FIGURE 22-1
Electrode placements. Position 1 represents the frontotemporal position, used for
both electrodes, one on each side of the head, in conducting bilateral
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). For right unilateral ECT, one electrode is in the
right frontotemporal position, and the other is just to the right of the vertex at
position 2. (Courtesy of American Psychiatric Association, with permission.)

There has been some concern that left-handed patients may require
different electrode placement than right-handed patients, especially if a
unilateral placement is desired. Even when handedness is lateralized to the
left, the anatomic localization of language function in 70 percent of lefthanded individuals is the same as in those who are right-handed.


<<<PAGE 2309>>>
Furthermore, there is evidence for independent lateralization of affect, with
the right hemisphere involved in sustaining depressed mood regardless of
handedness. Because of limited indications that affective function and
efficacy of ECT are associated with handedness, handedness is not generally
used to guide the choice of electrode placement.
Electrical Stimulus. The electrical stimulus must be sufficiently strong to
reach the seizure threshold (the level of intensity needed to produce a
seizure). The electrical stimulus is given in cycles, and each cycle contains a
positive and a negative wave. Old machines use a sine wave; however, this
type of machine is now considered obsolete because of the inefficiency of
that wave shape. When a sine wave is delivered, the electrical stimulus in the
sine wave before the seizure threshold is reached and after the seizure is
activated is unnecessary and excessive. Modern ECT machines use a brief
pulse waveform that administers the electrical stimulus, usually in 1 to 2
milliseconds, at a rate of 30 to 100 pulses a second. Machines that use an
ultrabrief pulse (0.5 milliseconds) are not as effective as brief pulse
machines.
Establishing a patient’s seizure threshold is not straightforward. A 40 times
variability in seizure thresholds occurs among patients. Also, during ECT
treatment, a patient’s seizure threshold may increase 25 to 200 percent. The
seizure threshold is also higher in men than in women and higher in older
than in younger adults. A common technique is to initiate treatment at an
electrical stimulus that is thought to be below the seizure threshold for a
particular patient and then to increase this intensity by 100 percent for
unilateral placement and by 50 percent for bilateral placement until the
seizure threshold is reached. A debate in the literature concerns whether a
minimally suprathreshold dose, a moderately suprathreshold dose (one and a
half times the threshold), or a high suprathreshold dose (three times the
threshold) is preferable. The debate about stimulus intensity resembles the
debate about electrode placement. Essentially, the data support the conclusion
that doses of three times the threshold are the most rapidly effective and that
minimal suprathreshold doses are associated with the fewest and least severe
cognitive adverse effects.
Induced Seizures. A brief muscular contraction, usually strongest in a


<<<PAGE 2310>>>
patient’s jaw and facial muscles, is seen concurrently with the flow of
stimulus current, regardless of whether a seizure occurs. The first behavioral
sign of the seizure is often a plantar extension, which lasts 10 to 20 seconds
and marks the tonic phase. This phase is followed by rhythmic (i.e., clonic)
contractions that decrease in frequency and finally disappear. The tonic phase
is marked by high-frequency, sharp EEG activity on which a higherfrequency muscle artifact may be superimposed. During the clonic phase,
bursts of polyspike activity coincide with the muscular contractions but
usually persist for at least a few seconds after the clonic movements stop.
MONITORING SEIZURES. A physician must have an objective measure that a

bilateral generalized seizure has occurred after the stimulation. The physician
should be able to observe either some evidence of tonic–clonic movements or
electrophysiologic evidence of seizure activity from the EEG or
electromyogram (EMG). Seizures with unilateral ECT are asymmetrical, with
higher ictal EEG amplitudes over the stimulated hemisphere than over the
nonstimulated hemisphere. Occasionally, unilateral seizures are induced; for
this reason, at least a single pair of EEG electrodes should be placed over the
contralateral hemisphere when using unilateral ECT. For a seizure to be
effective in the course of ECT, it should last at least 25 seconds.
FAILURE TO INDUCE SEIZURES. If a particular stimulus fails to cause a seizure

of sufficient duration, up to four attempts at seizure induction can be tried
during a course of treatment. The onset of seizure activity is sometimes
delayed as long as 20 to 40 seconds after the stimulus administration. If a
stimulus fails to result in a seizure, the contact between the electrodes and the
skin should be checked, and the intensity of the stimulus should be increased
by 25 to 100 percent. The clinician can also change the anesthetic agent to
minimize increases in the seizure threshold caused by the anesthetic.
Additional procedures to lower the seizure threshold include hyperventilation
and administration of 500 to 2,000 mg IV of caffeine sodium benzoate 5 to
10 minutes before the stimulus.
Prolonged seizures (seizures lasting
more than 180 seconds) and status epilepticus can be terminated either with
additional doses of the barbiturate anesthetic agent or with IV diazepam (5 to
PROLONGED AND TARDIVE SEIZURES.


<<<PAGE 2311>>>
10 mg). Management of such complications should be accompanied by
intubation because the oral airway is insufficient to maintain adequate
ventilation over an extended apneic period. Tardive seizures—that is,
additional seizures appearing sometime after the ECT treatment—may
develop in patients with preexisting seizure disorders. Rarely, ECT
precipitates the development of an epileptic disorder in patients. Such
situations should be clinically managed as if they were pure epileptic
disorders.
Number and Spacing of Treatments. ECT treatments are usually
administered two to three times a week; twice-weekly treatments are
associated with less memory impairment than thrice-weekly treatments. In
general, the course of treatment of major depressive disorder can take 6 to 12
treatments (although up to 20 sessions are possible); the treatment of manic
episodes can take 8 to 20 treatments; the treatment of schizophrenia can take
more than 15 treatments, and the treatment of catatonia and delirium can take
as few as 1 to 4 treatments. Treatment should continue until the patient
achieves what is considered the maximal therapeutic response. Further
treatment does not yield any therapeutic benefit but increases the severity and
duration of the adverse effects. The point of maximal improvement is usually
thought to occur when a patient fails to continue to improve after two
consecutive treatments. If a patient is not improving after 6 to 10 sessions,
bilateral placement and high-density treatment (three times the seizure
threshold) should be attempted before ECT is abandoned.
Multiple-monitored
ECT (MMECT) involves giving multiple ECT stimuli during a single
session, most commonly two bilateral stimuli within 2 minutes. This
approach may be warranted in severely ill patients and those at exceptionally
high risk from the anesthetic procedures. MMECT is associated with the
most frequent occurrences of serious cognitive adverse effects.
MULTIPLE-MONITORED ELECTROCONVULSIVE THERAPY.

Maintenance Treatment. A short-term course of ECT induces remission
in symptoms but does not, of itself, prevent a relapse. Post-ECT maintenance
treatment should always be considered. Maintenance therapy is generally
pharmacologic, but maintenance ECT treatments (weekly, biweekly, or


<<<PAGE 2312>>>
monthly) have been reported to be effective relapse prevention treatments,
although data from extensive studies are lacking. Indications for maintenance
ECT treatments can include rapid relapse after initial ECT, severe symptoms,
psychotic symptoms, and the inability to tolerate medications. If ECT was
used because a patient was unresponsive to a specific medication, then,
following ECT, the patient should be given a trial of different medications.
Failure of Electroconvulsive Therapy Trial. Patients who fail to
improve after a trial of ECT should have another medication trial, even if that
agent previously failed. Although the data are primarily anecdotal, many
reports indicate that patients who had previously failed to improve while
taking an antidepressant drug do improve while taking the same drug after
receiving a course of ECT treatments, even if the ECT seemed to be a
therapeutic failure. Nonetheless, with the increased availability of drugs that
act at diverse receptor sites, it is less often necessary to return to a drug that
has failed than it was formerly.
Adverse Effects
Contraindications. ECT has no absolute contraindications, only situations
in which a patient is at increased risk and has an increased need for close
monitoring. Pregnancy is not a contraindication for ECT, and fetal
monitoring is generally considered unnecessary unless the pregnancy is high
risk or complicated. Patients with space-occupying central nervous system
lesions are at increased risk for edema and brain herniation after ECT. If the
lesion is small, however, pretreatment with dexamethasone is given, and
hypertension is controlled during the seizure, and the risk of serious
complications minimized for these patients. Patients who have increased
intracerebral pressure or are at risk for cerebral bleeding (e.g., those with
cerebrovascular diseases and aneurysms) are at risk during ECT because of
the increased cerebral blood flow during the seizure. This risk can be
lessened, although not eliminated, by control of the patient’s blood pressure
during the treatment. Patients with recent myocardial infarctions are another
high-risk group, although the risk is greatly diminished 2 weeks after the
myocardial infarction and is even further reduced 3 months after the
infarction. Patients with hypertension should be stabilized on their


<<<PAGE 2313>>>
antihypertensive medications before ECT is administered. Propranolol and
sublingual nitroglycerin can also be used to protect such patients during
treatment.
Mortality. The mortality rate with ECT is about 0.002 percent per treatment
and 0.01 percent for each patient. These numbers compare favorably with the
risks associated with general anesthesia and childbirth. ECT death is usually
from cardiovascular complications and is most likely to occur in patients
whose cardiac status is already compromised.
Central Nervous System Effects. Common adverse effects associated
with ECT are headache, confusion, and delirium shortly after the seizure
while the patient is coming out of anesthesia. Marked confusion may occur in
up to 10 percent of patients within 30 minutes of the seizure and can be
treated with barbiturates and benzodiazepines. Delirium is usually most
pronounced after the first few treatments and in patients who receive bilateral
ECT or who have coexisting neurologic disorders. The delirium
characteristically clears within days or a few weeks at the longest.
MEMORY. The most significant concern about ECT is the association between

ECT and memory loss. About 75 percent of all patients given ECT say that
memory impairment is the worst adverse effect. Although memory
impairment during a course of treatment is almost the rule, follow-up data
indicate that almost all patients are back to their cognitive baselines after 6
months. Some patients, however, complain of persistent memory difficulties.
For example, a patient may not remember the events leading up to the
hospitalization and ECT, and such autobiographical memories may never be
recalled. The degree of cognitive impairment during treatment and the time it
takes to return to baseline are related, in part, to the amount of electrical
stimulation used during treatment. Memory impairment is most often
reported by patients who have experienced little improvement with ECT.
Despite the memory impairment, which usually resolves, no evidence
indicates brain damage caused by ECT. This subject has been the focus of
several brain-imaging studies, using a variety of modalities; virtually all
concluded that permanent brain damage is not an adverse effect of ECT.
Neurologists and epileptologists generally agree that seizures that last less


<<<PAGE 2314>>>
than 30 minutes do not cause permanent neuronal damage.
Other Adverse Effects of Electroconvulsive Therapy. Fractures
often accompanied treatments in the early days of ECT. With routine use of
muscle relaxants, fractures of long bones or vertebrae should not occur. Some
patients, however, may break teeth or experience back pain because of
contractions during the procedure. Muscle soreness can occur in some
individuals, but it often results from the effects of muscle depolarization by
succinylcholine and is most likely to be particularly troublesome after the
first session in a series. This soreness can be treated with mild analgesics,
including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). A significant
minority of patients experience nausea, vomiting, and headaches following an
ECT treatment. Nausea and vomiting can be prevented by treatment with
antiemetics at the time of ECT (e.g., metoclopramide, 10 mg IV, or
prochlorperazine, 10 mg IV; ondansetron is an acceptable alternative if
adverse effects preclude the use of dopamine receptor antagonists).
ECT can be associated with headaches, although this effect is usually
readily manageable. Headaches often respond to NSAIDs given in the ECT
recovery period. In patients with severe headaches, pretreatment with
ketorolac (30 to 60 mg IV), an NSAID approved for brief parenteral use, can
be helpful. Acetaminophen, tramadol, and more potent analgesia provided by
opioids can be used individually or in various combinations to manage more
intractable headache. ECT can induce migrainous headache and related
symptoms; sumatriptan (6 mg SC or 25 mg orally) may be a useful addition
to the agents described above. Ergot compounds can exacerbate
cardiovascular changes observed during ECT and probably should not be a
component of ECT pretreatment.
Investigations in Electrical Brain Stimulation Treatment
There is interest in continued refinements of ECT techniques. Common
themes in these approaches are focusing the treatment spatially to optimize
dosing in brain areas associated with putative neural networks involved in
depression and other psychopathologies that are indications for ECT,
diminishing dosing in areas associated with adverse cognitive effects, and
improving the efficiency of a noninvasive electrical stimulus in direction and


<<<PAGE 2315>>>
amplitude, even to a subconvulsive level. This research is parallel to
investigations in magnetic stimulation (e.g., repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation [TMS]) and the renaissance of invasive electrical techniques (e.g.,
vagal nerve stimulation and deep brain stimulation [DBS]).

OTHER BRAIN STIMULATION METHODS
Brain stimulation in psychiatric practice and research uses electrical currents
or magnetic fields to alter neuronal firing. There is a growing list of tools
capable of eliciting such neuromodulation, each with a different spectrum of
action. These tools either apply electrical or magnetic fields transcranially or
involve the surgical implantation of electrodes to deliver electrical currents to
a cranial nerve or the brain directly. The transcranial techniques include
cranial electrical stimulation (CES), ECT, transcranial direct current
stimulation (tDCS, also called direct current polarization), TMS, and
magnetic seizure therapy (MST). The surgical techniques include cortical
brain stimulation (CBS), DBS, and vagus nerve stimulation (VNS).
In 1985, nearly 50 years after the first use of ECT, Anthony Barker and
colleagues published on the first use of pulsed magnetic fields to stimulate
the brain with a procedure called transcranial magnetic stimulation. TMS
was initially used in neurology for studies of nerve conduction, but it quickly
caught the attention of psychiatrists eager to explore other, less invasive
alternatives to ECT. This nonconvulsive stimulation method through TMS is
under active study, with some promising results in the treatment of various
psychiatric disorders, including depression, anxiety, and schizophrenia. A
convulsive treatment derived from the application of more powerful magnetic
stimulation has been under investigation in nonhuman primates and human
studies in both the United States and Europe. The first MST procedure was
performed in an animal in 1998 and a human in 2000. MST is under
development as a more focal means of inducing seizures in an attempt to
retain the thus-far-unparalleled efficacy of ECT with fewer cognitive side
effects.
Two more additions to brain stimulation methods, DBS and VNS, were
introduced about a decade following the first trials of TMS. Both were first
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1997 in the
realm of treating sequelae of neurologic syndromes. DBS was initially


<<<PAGE 2316>>>
approved for the treatment of essential tremor and Parkinson tremors,
whereas VNS was approved for the treatment of epilepsy. Five years later, in
2002, indications for DBS were expanded to include treatment of all
symptoms of Parkinson disease, including tremor, slowness, and stiffness, as
well as involuntary movements induced by medications. TMS, DBS, and
VNS originated in the field of neurology. Psychiatrists quickly saw the
potential for those tools in the treatment of psychiatric conditions, however,
and as a result of clinical trials in depression, VNS subsequently received
FDA approval for the long-term adjunctive treatment of chronic or recurrent
depression in adults. Also, human studies are underway to validate the
efficacy of DBS in the treatment of depression and OCD.
Therapeutic Neuromodulation: Treating Psychiatric Disorders
Through Brain Stimulation
Mechanism of Action
The brain stimulation
modalities just reviewed generate either electrical or magnetic pulses.
However, both of these share a common final pathway—they affect the
neurons electrically. That electrical effect may either be through the direct
application of electricity or the indirect induction of electricity via magnetic
stimulation. The direct forms of electrical stimulation are exemplified in
either transcranial delivery, as with ECT, CES, and tDCS, or intracerebral
delivery, as in the case of DBS or direct cortical stimulation (epidural or
subdural). The indirect forms of electrical stimulation include TMS and MST,
which induce electrical fields in the brain through the application of
alternating magnetic fields. Of note, both the epidural and intracerebral
modalities are more focal than the transcranial application of electricity
because electrodes are placed directly in the neuronal tissue, bypassing the
impedance of the scalp and skull. The relatively more contemporary magnetic
stimulation methods (TMS and MST) also bypass the impedance of the scalp
and skull and are thus likewise more focal. However, magnetic stimulation is,
in fact, an example of an indirect method of electrical brain stimulation, in
that the changing magnetic fields from these devices induce electricity in the
brain, the latter acting as a conductor, according to the principle first
ELECTRICAL

STIMULATION—COMMON

PATHWAY.


<<<PAGE 2317>>>
described by Michael Faraday in a law that bears his name and later
incorporated into James Clerk Maxwell’s equations, which unify all of
electromagnetism. The magnetic modalities achieve their enhanced focality
noninvasively, in contrast to the intracerebral and epidural methods, and are
thus at the center of intensive research in that they offer the promise of an
unparalleled degree of spatial specificity without the need for surgery.
All but one of the brain stimulation modalities described here act by
stimulating neurons. The one exception is tDCS, which does not stimulate but
instead polarizes. In this sense, the “S” of tDCS is a misnomer. It is more
accurate to conceptualize tDCS as exerting a polarizing effect that may alter
the likelihood of neuronal firing.
The action of the subconvulsive modalities of stimulation relies on the
effects of the repeated stimulation of the targeted neural circuitry. However,
in the case of the convulsive modalities (ECT and MST), the action depends
on the seizure induced by the stimulation and the effects of repeated seizure
induction on brain processes. This is not to say that the form of stimulation
that triggers the seizure does not affect the outcome. Indeed, it is well
replicated that electrode placement and electrical stimulus parameters have a
profound effect on the efficacy and side effects of ECT. Whether the same
will be valid for MST is under active investigation.
ACUTE VERSUS PROLONGED EFFECTS. Brain stimulation can have immediate or

lasting effects. A single electrical pulse delivered at sufficient intensity can
induce depolarization, trigger an action potential, release neurotransmitters at
the synapse, and result in transsynaptic propagation with subsequent
activation of a functional circuit. For example, brain stimulation applied to
the hand area of the primary motor cortex may activate the corticospinal tract
and induce a muscle twitch in the contralateral hand. Such stimulation can
result acutely in the induction of either a positive effect, as in the case of a
muscle twitch or visualization of phosphenes, or a disruptive effect, as in the
case of visual masking.
Repetitive pulses delivered at fixed frequencies can exert even more
powerful effects. Epstein and colleagues described in 1999 how repetitive
TMS (rTMS) applied to the language-dominant hemisphere induced an arrest
of speech. After termination of the stimulation, speech returned to normal.
Some more invasive brain stimulation modalities, such as DBS or VNS,


<<<PAGE 2318>>>
are programmed to operate chronically, thus extending the acute action for as
long as the stimulation is turned on. In the case of DBS, the pulses are
typically given continuously at a high frequency, whereas in the case of VNS,
the pulses are given in trains lasting up to 30 seconds and typically repeated
every 5 minutes. The less invasive modalities, such as rTMS, tDCS, CES,
and even ECT, presumably require the induction of some form of
neuroplasticity for their effect to become lasting.
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
Definition. TMS is the application of a rapidly changing magnetic field to
the superficial layers of the cerebral cortex, which locally induces small
electric currents, also referred to as eddy currents. This induction was initially
discovered by Faraday through his experiments in 1831 and later quantified
in Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism. Thus, TMS may be referred to
as electrical stimulation without an electrode, in that it uses magnetic fields to
induce electrical pulses indirectly. TMS devices deliver intense magnetic
pulses via a coil that is held on the scalp. Because magnetic fields are
unaffected by the electrical impedance of the scalp and skull, this method of
stimulation enables the focal stimulation of smaller areas of the brain than is
possible with other noninvasive devices that use either alternating (ECT,
CES) or direct (tDCS) electrical current for primary stimulation. TMS is an
example of noninvasive stimulation of focal regions of the brain and, as such,
can be used for research or therapeutically without the need for anesthesia.
Mechanisms of Action. At sufficient intensity, electrical currents will
stimulate neuronal depolarization, which can result in an action potential. For
example, when the TMS coil is positioned over the hand area of the cerebral
cortex’s motor strip, the changing magnetic field generated by the repetitive
pulses induces local currents immediately below the site of stimulation that
cause the neurons in area M1 to fire. In turn, this action potential propagates
through the polysynaptic corticospinal tract and results in a twitch in the
contralateral hand muscle. In essence, TMS uses magnetic fields to indirectly
induce focal electrical currents in the brain, thereby triggering the firing of
functional neuronal circuits that can lead to observable behavioral effects.
This effect can be easily demonstrated by single TMS pulses that can be used


<<<PAGE 2319>>>
to map the homunculus by merely moving the TMS coil across the cortical
representation of neighboring muscle groups and simultaneously to study the
excitability of the corticospinal system.
Single TMS pulses can exert other effects when moved to different cortical
areas. When positioned over the primary visual cortex (V1), scotomas, or
“blind spots,” are often elicited. This illustrates that TMS can transiently
disrupt functions.
Activation of motor neurons resulting in a muscle twitch and disruption of
visual perception with a single-pulse TMS represent examples of the acute
effects of TMS-induced neuronal depolarization, as shown in Table 22-3. The
effects of single TMS pulses are believed to be immediate and short-lived.
The muscle twitch, as induced by TMS to area M1, is nearly instantaneous,
with the hand movement occurring approximately 20 milliseconds after the
TMS pulse is applied. The visual masking likewise operates on a similar time
scale measured in milliseconds. TMS can, however, exert longer-lasting
effects when the pulses are repeated at regular intervals in the process of
rTMS. It also occurs when they are paired with other forms of stimulation in
which TMS pulses are coupled with electrical stimulation of a peripheral
nerve (as in paired associative stimulation [PAS]) or when TMS is paired
with audiovisual stimuli, as in the example of classical conditioning of the
brain response to TMS. The mechanisms underlying these lasting effects of
TMS have been described by various researchers and are thought to be
related to neuroplasticity and alterations in synaptic efficacy.
Treatment of psychiatric disorders with rTMS has been informed by
attempts to focally alter pathologic cortical excitability, believed to be linked
to a specific illness. Reduced activity in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
has been implicated in several studies as a physiologic correlate of affective
disorders. Numerous studies have applied high frequencies of rTMS, which
have been reported to increase excitability to the left dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC) in an attempt to normalize activity in this region. In a related
approach, some investigators who implicated abnormal interhemispheric
balance in activation between the right and left DLPFC applied lowfrequency rTMS, which has been reported to be inhibitory, to the right
DLPFC in an attempt to normalize this balance.


<<<PAGE 2320>>>
Table 22-3
Acute and Prolonged Mechanisms of Action
Acute Effects
Phasic activation of neural circuits
Observable motor responses (e.g., twitch)
Temporary disruption (e.g., speech arrest) or facilitation of ongoing
processing (e.g., speeds reaction time)
Prolonged Effects
Neuroplasticity
• Change in synaptic efficacy, akin to long-term potentiation or
depression
• Alterations in neurotrophic factors
• Modulation of cortical excitability
• Modulation of functional connectivity
Side Effects, Interactions with Medications, and Other Risks.
Administration of TMS is a noninvasive, relatively benign procedure when
applied by a knowledgeable professional to a subject who has been
appropriately evaluated. However, it is not entirely without risk. The most
severe known risk of TMS is an unintended seizure. Several factors may
contribute to seizure risk. Primarily, these include the form of TMS, with
single-pulse stimulation less likely to result in a seizure than rTMS, and, in an
equally important manner, the dose, which is the combination of treatment
parameters including frequency, power, train duration, and intertrain interval.
Also, subject factors can be significant, such as the presence of a neurologic
disorder (epilepsy or a focal brain lesion) or the use of seizure-lowering
medications.
Single-pulse TMS is generally considered to be of minimal risk when
administered to appropriately screened adults without seizure risk factors. On
the other hand, rTMS can induce seizures in individuals without predisposing
conditions when given at sufficiently high doses.
Patient Selection. Patients who have failed a trial of one or more
antidepressant medications or have untoward side effects to medications may


<<<PAGE 2321>>>
be good candidates for TMS. However, given the lower effect size of TMS,
for urgent or severely refractory cases, ECT would remain the gold standard
treatment.
Future Directions and Controllable Pulse Shape TMS. TMS and
other forms of magnetic stimulation hold a tremendous promise in psychiatric
treatment due to their focality and noninvasiveness. However, much research
is needed to replicate preliminary findings, improve optimal dosing, establish
the patient characteristics that predict response, and examine the influence of
concomitant medications on the TMS effect. Posttreatment relapse prevention
is one of many areas that have to be adequately explored. Other vigorously
pursued directions are attempts to develop stimulation coils that will allow
deeper brain penetration and work on pulse shapes that may be more
physiologically optimal for human stimulation.
Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation
Definition. tDCS is a noninvasive form of treatment that uses very weak (1
to 3 mA) direct electrical current applied to the scalp. Because direct current
(DC) polarizes rather than stimulates with discrete pulses, its action does not
appear directly to result in action potential firing in cortical neurons. It is also
this DC form of electrical stimulation that distinguishes it from devices that
use alternating currents (AC) as found in CES, ECT, VNS, and DBS, which
produce discrete pulse stimulation. Also, because tDCS works via
polarization and does not affect action potential firing in cortical neurons, the
term transcranial direct current polarization is favored by some modern
investigators, and both terms appear interchangeably in the literature today.
The small device is very portable and usually operated by readily available
DC batteries.
Side Effects. There are no known severe adverse effects of tDCS. It is well
tolerated, with reported common side effects in the literature listing mostly
minimal tingling at the site of stimulation, with a few reported cases of skin
irritation.
Mechanism of Action. tDCS is believed to act via the alteration of


<<<PAGE 2322>>>
neuronal membrane polarization, but little is known about the actual
mechanism of action of tDCS. Polarization may affect the firing and
conductance of neurons by either lowering or raising the threshold of
activation. Because tDCS involves the application of low currents to the scalp
via cathodal and anodal electrodes, depending on the direction of current
flow, polarization can either inhibit (cathodal) or facilitate (anodal) function.
Clinical Studies. Preliminary research suggests that tDCS may enhance
certain brain functions independent of mood; however, tDCS technology and
its use in psychiatry are in the early stages of exploration. Research is
focusing on its potential effectiveness in facilitating recovery from stroke and
certain forms of dementia.
Future Directions. Most of the current tDCS devices use large, saline
solution–soaked electrodes. Future device development will most likely
investigate electrode shape and contact material to optimize the intended
clinical effects and further improve ease of use. However, fundamental
questions of efficacy, indications, and dose–response relationships, as well as
predictors of response, will need to be explored first.
Cranial Electrical Stimulation
Definition. CES, like tDCS, uses a weak (1- to 4-mA) current. However,
with CES, the current is alternating. It is traditionally applied via salinesoaked, felt-covered electrodes clipped onto the earlobes. Other placement
strategies are also being investigated.
Mechanism of Action. The exact mechanism of action has not been
elicited, and there is no agreement among researchers on the predominant
mode of action. Previous hypotheses proposed that the stimulation with the
alternating microcurrent affects the thalamic and hypothalamic brain tissue
and facilitates the release of neurotransmitters. Claims have been made that
through interaction with cell membranes, the stimulation produces changes in
signal transduction associated with classic second-messenger pathways,
including calcium channels and cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP).
There are summary reports that CES causes increases in plasma serotonin,


<<<PAGE 2323>>>
norepinephrine, dopamine, and monoamine oxidase type B (MAOB) in blood
platelets and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), as well as the release of 5hydroxyindoleacetic acid, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), and enkephalins
and reduction of cortisol and tryptophan. However, most of these reports
have not been validated through modern research.
Side Effects. It is believed that the CES stimulation is not harmful,
primarily due to its low-voltage power supply (9-V battery) and lack of any
reported adverse event by the FDA. Local skin effects, as well as a general
feeling of dizziness, have been reported, however, and device manufacturers
do not advise the use of the device during pregnancy, in those with low blood
pressure, or in people who have arrhythmias or pacemakers.
Clinical Studies. In a meta-analysis by the Harvard School of Public
Health, 18 human clinical trials were examined that used CES to treat
depression, anxiety, drug addiction, insomnia, headache, and pain. The
overall pooled result showed CES to be better than sham treatment for
anxiety at a statistically significant level.
Current Status in Treatment Algorithms, Patient Selection, and
Dosing. The use of CES has not been studied sufficiently in the United
States, and it does not have a specific place in any algorithm of standard US
psychiatric practice.
Future Directions. As with tDCS, fundamental issues of indications,
patient selection, dose–response relationship, and efficacy are under active
research and remain to be optimized.
Magnetic Seizure Therapy
Definition. MST is a novel form of convulsive treatment that is under
development in several research institutions in the United States and Europe.
The treatment uses an alternating magnetic field that crosses the scalp and the
calvarium bone unaffected by their high electrical impedance, to in turn
induce a more-localized electrical current in the targeted regions of the
cerebral cortex than is possible with ECT. The aim is to produce a seizure


<<<PAGE 2324>>>
whose focus and patterns of spread may be controlled.
MST is a convulsive treatment that is similar to ECT. It is performed under
general anesthesia. It requires approximately the same preparation and
infrastructure as ECT. However, MST is given using a modified TMS device,
one that can administer higher output than the conventional TMS devices and
thus relies on magnetic stimulation, unlike electric stimulation in ECT. The
MST procedure is performed under general anesthesia with a muscle
relaxant. MST is under investigation and is not FDA approved.
Mechanism of Action. Induction of a seizure is hypothesized to be the
underlying event responsible for the likely multiple specific mechanisms of
action of MST treatment. As in ECT, these are not fully understood.
However, due to its focality, MST appears to represent a tool better suited
than ECT to study the mechanisms of action of convulsive therapy through
its potential of inducing seizures initiated in different regions of the brain.
Side Effects. Adverse effects from MST, like those of ECT, are primarily
connected to the risks associated with anesthesia and generalized seizure.
Also, the MST magnetic coil produces a clicking noise that may potentially
affect hearing. Earplugs should be worn by both the patient and members of
the treating team to mitigate that risk and prevent any cumulative damage.
Studies suggest that MST results in less retrograde and anterograde amnesia
than ECT, although this result should be replicated in a larger trial.
Current Status in Treatment Algorithms. No clinical algorithms exist
for MST, given that it is still an investigational protocol, and treatments
outside of research are not FDA approved. Assuming the hypothesis that
MST can approach the efficacy of ECT (but with fewer side effects) is
correct, this magnetically induced convulsive treatment will play an essential
role before referral for ECT.
Future Directions. MST is a novel treatment in the early phases of clinical
testing. Clinical treatment variables, including dosing, optimal coil
placement, patient selection, and mechanisms of action, are the topics of
ongoing and future studies.


<<<PAGE 2325>>>
Vagus Nerve Stimulation
Definition. VNS is the direct, intermittent electrical stimulation of the left
cervical vagus nerve via an implanted pulse generator, usually in the left
chest wall. The electrode is wrapped around the left vagus nerve in the neck
and is connected to the generator subcutaneously.
Mechanisms of Action. The majority of the fibers contained in the left
vagus are afferents. It is estimated that as many as 80 percent of these fibers
are up-going afferents. Thus chronic stimulation of these nerve fibers
predominantly changes activity in the brainstem nuclei such as the nucleus of
the tractus solitarius and other neighboring nuclei (e.g., raphe) that alter
serotonergic activity in cortical and limbic structures. Also, persistent
stimulation of the vagal afferents is anticonvulsant, an effect that appears to
depend on the norepinephrine-producing locus ceruleus.
Side Effects and Contraindications. To date, reasonably
comprehensive literature confirms that VNS is generally well tolerated. The
adverse events that are most frequently reported are voice alteration, dyspnea,
and neck pain. Besides of the risk of perioperative infection, the surgical
implantation carries a small risk of vocal cord paralysis, bradycardia, or
asystole.
Current Status in Treatment Algorithms. The FDA indicated VNS for
the long-term adjunctive treatment of chronic or recurrent depression in
patients 18 years or older experiencing a major depressive episode in the
setting of unipolar or bipolar disease who have not had an adequate response
to four or more adequate antidepressant treatments. Consultation with another
clinician experienced with treatment-resistant depression and VNS is
recommended.
VNS treatment success rates are lower than those with ECT. Its onset of
action is also comparatively slow—typically, an approximately 30 percent
response rate is observed after 1 year. VNS may be worth considering,
therefore, when patients have failed to respond to less invasive treatments,
ECT was ineffective, or post-ECT relapse cannot be prevented with less
invasive means. VNS might be helpful with longer-term relapse prevention,


<<<PAGE 2326>>>
but results of controlled trials would be useful to guide practice.
Patient Selection. VNS is approved as a long-term adjunctive treatment
for chronic or recurrent depressive episodes in adults with a major depressive
episode who have not had a satisfactory response to four or more adequate
antidepressant trials. The efficacy of VNS in other disorders is unknown.
ECT can be safely used in patients with an implant as long as the VNS
generator is turned off during the convulsive treatment. This precaution is
needed because of the anticonvulsant effects of VNS. It remains to be studied
whether VNS could be useful in relapse prevention post-ECT.
Dosing. The optimal dosing for psychiatric applications of VNS is still
mostly an area of investigation. The published studies do not identify optimal
dosing parameters like time on, time off, frequency, current, or pulse width.
However, the epilepsy literature suggests that there is a threshold current for
efficacy. Given current knowledge of VNS dosing, electrical current is
typically increased up to greater than 1 mA, and clinical benefit is assessed
over several months. Because the adverse effects of VNS are known to be
dose-dependent, treatment parameters are often chosen to mitigate specific
side effects. For example, lowering the pulse width reduces neck pain,
allowing patients to tolerate higher currents.
Future Directions. More research is required to establish dose–response
relationships for VNS. Future studies may explore optimal medication
strategies to augment responses, test the potential role of VNS for long-term
relapse prevention (e.g., after ECT), and study its mechanism of action.
Implanted Cortical Stimulation
Definition. CBS is a novel neurosurgical approach in which electrodes are
implanted over the surface of the cortex to provide electrical brain
stimulation in a targeted superficial region. This approach is being studied for
the treatment of conditions like stroke, tinnitus, and treatment-resistant
depression.

NEUROSURGICAL TREATMENTS AND DEEP BRAIN


<<<PAGE 2327>>>
STIMULATION
After a long and checkered history, neurosurgical treatments for psychiatric
illness have reemerged as a focus of great interest. Many still associate
psychiatric neurosurgery with the bygone era of crude freehand
“psychosurgery” when prefrontal lobotomy saw broad and indiscriminate
use.
Those
primitive
operations,
which
predated
modern
psychopharmacology, yielded modest reductions in symptoms but were
accompanied by unacceptable adverse effects. Over nearly five decades,
techniques, and significantly, procedures and practices have evolved
tremendously. First, ablative lesions are now accurately, precisely, and
reproducibly placed in specific brain targets stereotactically guided by MRI
and specialized software. Alternative methods include radiosurgery, which
allows stereotactic lesion placement without craniotomy. DBS, while
requiring craniotomy to implant stimulating electrodes in specific brain
targets, is intentionally nonablative and allows flexible and reversible
modulation of brain function. Second, strict criteria for patient selection are
observed, and the process of determining appropriate candidacy has been
formalized.
Currently, surgical intervention is predominantly reserved for patients with
severe, incapacitating major depression or OCD who have failed an
exhaustive array of standard treatments. Surgery is not approved unless a
multidisciplinary committee reaches consensus regarding its appropriateness
for a given candidate, and the patient renders informed consent. Although a
large body of clinical data has already been collected that indicates the
effectiveness and safety of modern neurosurgical interventions, major centers
providing these treatments continue to gather information prospectively, and
controlled trials are underway or planned. With these advances in
neurosurgical techniques and better-established selection criteria and longterm follow-up procedures, available data suggest that psychiatric
neurosurgery yields a substantial improvement in symptoms and functioning
in approximately 40 to 70 percent of cases, with morbidity and mortality
drastically lower than for earlier procedures.
Although lesion procedures have been influenced by theories implicating
corticolimbic systems in disordered behavior, they were initially mainly
developed empirically. Although psychiatric neurosurgery is sometimes


<<<PAGE 2328>>>
criticized for this reason, as for any clinical therapy, the relevant issues are
safety and efficacy, not a correction of pathophysiologic processes that are
not yet fully understood. However, psychiatric neurosurgery is now
developing in a scientific context where the translation of data between
clinical results to cross-species anatomical, neuroimaging, and physiologic
studies of neural networks involved a promise to illuminate mechanisms of
therapeutic action.
History
Trephination performed by ancient civilizations probably represents the
earliest form of surgical intervention for psychopathology. In 1891, the first
formal report of neurosurgical treatment in psychiatry was published,
describing bilateral cortical excisions in demented and depressed patients,
which yielded mixed results. After four decades in which little progress was
made, in 1935, John Fulton and Charles Jacobsen presented their research on
primate behavior following frontal cortical ablation. They observed that
lobectomized chimpanzees showed a reduction in “experimental neurosis”
and were less fearful while retaining an ability to perform complex tasks.
António Egaz Moniz, a renowned Portuguese neurologist, pioneered
prefrontal leukotomy in collaboration with his neurosurgical colleague,
Almeida Lima. First, by using absolute alcohol injections and subsequently
by mechanical means with a leucotome, Moniz and Lima performed
“psychosurgery” on 20 severely ill institutionalized patients; 14 were said to
have exhibited worthwhile improvement. In an era of overflowing asylums
and few effective treatments for chronic debilitating psychiatric illness, this
mode of therapy was initially enthusiastically embraced, and Moniz won the
1949 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for this contribution.
From the mid-1930s until the emergence of the phenothiazines in the mid1950s, these techniques proliferated globally. Walter Freeman, a
neuropsychiatrist, was perhaps the most zealous promoter of psychosurgery
in the United States. Pioneering a series of freehand procedures to achieve
prefrontal lobotomy (i.e., severing the white matter connections between the
prefrontal cortex and the rest of the brain), Freeman, together with
neurosurgeon James Watts, reported on their first 200 cases by 1942.
Although the benefits of the surgery were highlighted, others acknowledged a


<<<PAGE 2329>>>
significant complication rate, including frontal lobe syndrome, seizures, and
even deaths. At its peak, lobotomy was being performed on approximately
5,000 patients per year in the United States alone. A review of the results of
10,365 prefrontal lobotomies performed from 1942 to 1954 in Britain
concluded that, while 70 percent showed an improvement, adverse effects
included 6 percent mortality, seizures in 1 percent, and disinhibition
syndromes in 1.5 percent. There were widespread reports of blunted
personality and socially inappropriate behavior. In the late 1940s and early
1950s, recognition of these risks prompted attempts to develop modified
stereotactic surgical procedures that might yield better results. For example,
Ernest Spiegel and Henry Wycis, who began stereotactic neurosurgery in
humans, reported in the 1940s that dorsomedial thalamotomies improved
obsessive-compulsive symptoms. However, with the introduction of
chlorpromazine in 1954, medical management of psychiatric illness became
possible. Following this, psychiatric neurosurgery was all but abandoned in
favor of nonsurgical therapies.
Patient Selection: Indications and Contraindications
Although limited reports have suggested efficacy across a broad range of
psychiatric conditions and research is expanding rapidly, as of this writing,
the best-established indications for psychiatric neurosurgery remain major
depression and OCD. In evaluating candidates, several factors are considered:
1. Primary diagnosis: The patient must meet clinical criteria for the
diagnostic indication, and this disorder should be a primary cause of the
patient’s debility and suffering.
2. Severity: The patient must have a chronic, severe, and debilitating
illness; the duration of the primary illness must exceed 1 year and
typically exceeds 5 years. Severity is gauged on standardized
instruments (e.g., patients with OCD typically have Yale-Brown
Obsessive-Compulsive Scale scores of 25 to 30; patients with major
depression typically have Beck Depression Inventory scores of 30 or
higher), while a low level of functioning should indicate debility (e.g., a
Global Assessment of Functioning score of 50 or less) and a low quality
of life.
3. Adequacy of previous treatment: Patients must have already undergone


<<<PAGE 2330>>>
an exhaustive array of other available established treatments, which are
documented in detail.
4. Psychiatric comorbidity: Appropriate treatment must have been
rendered for any comorbid psychiatric disorder; the presence of
psychoactive substance use or severe personality disorders are
considered strong relative contraindications.
5. Medical comorbidity and surgical fitness: Structural brain lesions or
significant central nervous system injuries are strong contraindications.
Medical conditions that increase neurosurgical risks (e.g.,
cardiopulmonary disease) and age greater than 65 years are relative
contraindications for lesion procedures, while for DBS, the relative age
restriction might be older. A history of past seizures is a risk factor for
perioperative seizures after lesion procedures and must be weighed in
the overall risk–benefit assessment (again, data are currently less clear in
this regard for psychiatric DBS).
6. Access to postoperative care: The psychiatric neurosurgery procedures
themselves represent the beginning of a new episode of care. Patients
must have access to adequate postoperative treatment, including a
psychiatrist (typically the referring physician) who will accept
responsibility for managing the case after discharge. Arrangements for
postoperative care (e.g., intensive behavior therapy) should be
confirmed ahead of time. Notably, after lesion procedures, care can
generally be delivered in standard treatment settings without the need
for highly specialized psychiatric neurosurgery teams. For DBS, access
to such teams is essential over the long term. Once implanted, patients
require clinical monitoring and device adjustment, which can be
intensive and time-consuming, especially early in treatment. Device
monitoring and replacements may need to occur on a relatively urgent
basis. The continuing costs incurred can be substantial, and adequacy of
third-party reimbursement needs to be ensured in advance to the extent
possible. After either lesion procedures or DBS, family or significant
others may be needed to support and accompany patients to follow-up
care, similar to the level of support that is usually necessary during the
intensive evaluation process.
7. Informed consent: Under no circumstances should psychiatric
neurosurgery be performed on patients against their will. The patient
must be able and willing to render informed consent. Formal consent


<<<PAGE 2331>>>
monitoring may be used to ensure that the consent process is adequate.
In rare instances, these procedures are performed with the assent of the
patient and formal consent from a legal guardian. In this context, age
less than 18 years also represents a relative contraindication.
Postoperative Care
Immediate postoperative care includes the standard medical and surgical
considerations following any stereotactic neurosurgical procedure. Special
attention is paid to signs or symptoms of potential surgical complications,
including infection, hemorrhage, seizures, or altered mental status. A
postoperative MRI should be obtained to document the placement and extent
of lesions. Intensive postoperative psychiatric treatment is recommended
since the efficacy of the surgery may rely on some synergy between the
neurosurgical intervention itself and enhanced response to pharmacologic or
behavioral therapies. Although dosages of psychotropic medications may be
reduced during the immediate perioperative period, the medication regimen
should be readjusted as tolerated postoperatively. Moreover, in the case of
OCD, intensive behavior therapy should be initiated as soon as possible,
preferably within the first month postoperatively.
For DBS, electrode implantation is usually followed by a several-week
delay to enable resolution of local edema and stabilization of other factors
that might influence the response to stimulation. Then, systematic outpatient
adjustment of stimulation parameters is performed before initial settings are
determined. This adjustment is often a time-consuming process, lasting hours
over one or more days. Ongoing protocols for DBS entail frequent follow-up,
especially during the approximate 6 months after implantation, to enable
optimization of stimulation parameters, monitoring of the patient, and
coordination of other pharmacologic and behavioral therapies.
Lesion Procedures
Although numerous approaches have been tried, four lesion procedures have
evolved as the safest and most effective for treating psychiatric disorders. All
four entail bilateral lesions and are performed using modern stereotactic
methods.


<<<PAGE 2332>>>
Subcaudate Tractotomy. Subcaudate tractotomy was introduced by
Geoffrey Knight in Great Britain in 1964 as one of the first attempts to limit
adverse effects by restricting lesion size. By targeting the substantia
innominata (just inferior to the head of the caudate nucleus), the goal was to
interrupt white matter tracts connecting the orbitofrontal cortex and
subcortical structures. The surgery involved the placement of radioactive
yttrium-90 seeds at the desired centroid, yielding lesion volumes of
approximately 2 cc on each side. Indications for subcaudate tractotomy are
major depression, OCD, and other severe anxiety disorders.
Anterior Cingulotomy. Anterior cingulotomy remains the most commonly
employed neurosurgical treatment for psychiatric disease in North America.
The surgery is conducted under local anesthesia, and two or three
approximately 1-cc lesions are made on each side by thermocoagulation
through bilateral burr holes. The target is within the anterior cingulate cortex
(Brodmann areas 24 and 32), at the margin of the white matter bundle known
as the cingulum. Initially, the placement of lesions was determined by
ventriculography; however, since 1991, anterior cingulotomy has been
conducted via MRI guidance. Approximately 40 percent of patients return
several months following the first operation for a second procedure to extend
the first set of lesions. The indications for anterior cingulotomy include major
depression and OCD.
Limbic Leukotomy. Desmond Kelly and colleagues introduced limbic
leukotomy in England in 1973. The procedure combines the targets of
subcaudate tractotomy and anterior cingulotomy. The lesions have typically
been made via thermocoagulation or with a cryoprobe. Historically, the
precise placement of the lesions was guided by intraoperative stimulation;
pronounced autonomic responses were believed to designate the optimal
lesion site. The indications for limbic leukotomy include major depression,
OCD, and other severe anxiety disorders. More recently, there is also some
evidence that this procedure might be beneficial for repetitive self-injurious
behaviors or in the context of severe tic disorders.
Anterior Capsulotomy. Anterior capsulotomy or its newer variant,
Gamma Knife (Elekta, Stockholm) capsulotomy, are used in Scandinavia, the


<<<PAGE 2333>>>
United States, Belgium, Brazil, and elsewhere. The procedure places lesions
within the anterior limb of the internal capsule, which impinges on the
adjacent ventral striatum, thereby interrupting fibers of passage between the
prefrontal cortex and subcortical nuclei, including the dorsomedial thalamus.
Although the original anterior capsulotomy procedure is performed using
thermocoagulation via burr holes in the skull, for the past 15 years,
capsulotomy has used the Gamma Knife as an alternative. This radiosurgical
instrument makes craniotomy unnecessary. Typically, gamma capsulotomy
lesions are smaller than those induced by thermocapsulotomy, remaining
within the ventral portion of the anterior capsule. Hence, the term gamma
ventral capsulotomy is coming into use to describe this procedure.
In contrast to thermocapsulotomy, gamma ventral capsulotomy may be
performed as an outpatient procedure, and at most, the patient might require
one night of hospitalization. The relative advantages and disadvantages of
this radiosurgical approach are the focus of ongoing research. Some data
suggest, unsurprisingly, that the rates of neuropsychiatric adverse effects may
be considerably lower for gamma ventral capsulotomy than for earlier
procedures in which much larger tissue volumes were lesioned. Indications
for anterior capsulotomy include major depression, OCD, and other severe
anxiety disorders.
Deep Brain Stimulation
DBS for psychiatric illness is not a new idea, although the devices, surgical
techniques, and theoretical models of relevant neurocircuitry have all
advanced. The procedure involves the placement of small-diameter brain
“leads” (e.g., approximately 1.3 mm) with multiple electrode contacts into
subcortical nuclei or specific white matter tracts. The surgeon drills burr
holes in skull bone under local anesthesia and then places the leads, guided
by multimodal imaging and precise stereotactic landmarking. Usually, this is
done bilaterally. The patient is typically sedated but awake during surgery.
Later, the “pacemaker” (also known as an implantable neurostimulator or
pulse generator) is implanted subdermally (e.g., in the upper chest wall) and
connects via extension wires tunneled under the skin to the brain leads. The
goals of DBS are to achieve improved efficacy and more favorable adverse
effect profiles in comparison with ablation. Because various combinations of


<<<PAGE 2334>>>
electrodes can be activated, at adjustable polarity, intensity, and frequency,
DBS allows more flexible modulation of brain function, referred to as
neuromodulation. Thus, parameters can be optimized for individual patients,
but the process, typically performed by a specially trained psychiatrist in the
outpatient setting, can be quite time-consuming and requires attentive longterm follow-up. In cases where no beneficial settings can be identified despite
extensive efforts, the electrodes can be inactivated, and devices may be
removed. In that event, devices are usually only partly explanted, with the
brain electrodes left in place given the small risk of hemorrhage upon
removal. The relative advantages and disadvantages of DBS are the focus of
very active research.
Treatment Outcome
For all four contemporary ablative procedures, outcomes cannot be fairly
assessed for a considerable period postoperatively, which could extend from
6 months to 2 years. In the first two or three decades of this work, clinical
reports usually employed measures of global improvements, such as the
Pippard Postoperative Rating Scale, which rates outcomes as follows: (1)
symptom-free, (2) much improved, (3) slightly improved, (4) unchanged, and
(5) worse. Most studies have operationalized significant improvement as
categories 1 and 2. Also, many of the reports employ a measure of symptom
severity that is specific to the indication for the procedure (e.g., the YaleBrown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale for OCD and the Beck Depression
Inventory for major depression). Most studies focus on one or another of the
procedures and are best reviewed according to the surgical approach.
Outcome with Subcaudate Tractotomy. Significant improvement was
seen in 68 percent of patients with major depression, 50 percent of patients
with OCD, and 62.5 percent of patients with other anxiety disorders. Patients
with schizophrenia, substance abuse, or personality disorders did poorly.
Short-term side effects include transient headache and confusion or
somnolence, which typically resolve in less than 1 week. Patients are usually
ambulatory by the third postoperative day. Transient disinhibition syndromes
were common. In 1994, a large-scale review of 1,300 cases was conducted
and concluded that the procedure enables 40 to 60 percent of patients to lead


<<<PAGE 2335>>>
normal or near-normal lives, with a reduction in suicide rate to 1 percent
versus 15 percent in a similarly affected control group with major affective
disorders.
Outcome with Anterior Cingulotomy. Significant improvement
occurred in 62 percent of patients with affective disorders, 56 percent with
OCD, and 79 percent with other anxiety disorders. Among patients with
unipolar depression, 60 percent responded favorably; among patients with
bipolar disorder, 40 percent responded favorably; and among patients with
OCD, 27 percent were classified as responders with another 27 percent
categorized as possible responders. Short-term side effects include headache,
nausea, or difficulty with urination; however, these typically resolve within a
few days. Patients are usually ambulatory within 12 hours following the
operation and discharged on the third to fifth postoperative day. Over the past
10 years, the practice of treating patients who experience perioperative
seizures with chronic anticonvulsant therapy has been discontinued, and no
cases of new-onset recurrent seizures have been seen. Although patients have
occasionally (5 percent or less) noted transient problems with memory, an
independent analysis of 34 patients was performed. It demonstrated no
significant intellectual or behavioral impairments attributable to anterior
cingulotomy; a subsequent study of 57 patients likewise found no evidence
for lasting neurologic or behavioral adverse effects.
Outcome with Limbic Leukotomy. Significant improvement occurred in
89 percent of patients with OCD, 78 percent with major depression, and 66
percent with other anxiety conditions. Short-term side effects include
headache, lethargy or apathy, confusion, and lack of sphincter control, which
may last from a few days to a few weeks. In particular, it is common for
postoperative confusion to last at least several days, and patients are often not
discharged in less than 1 week. There were no seizures and no deaths;
however, one patient suffered severe memory loss due to improper lesion
placement, and enduring lethargy was present in 12 percent of cases.
Outcome with Anterior Capsulotomy
THERMOCAPSULOTOMY. A favorable response occurred in 50 percent of those


<<<PAGE 2336>>>
with OCD and 48 percent of those with major depression. Short-term side
effects can include transient headache or incontinence. Postoperative
confusion often lasts for up to 1 week. Recovery from gamma capsulotomy is
swifter and characterized by less discomfort and virtually no confusion, but
side effects from radiation exposure, principally cerebral edema, may be
delayed for up to 8 to 12 months. For the open capsulotomy, patients are
typically ambulatory in a matter of hours to days following the operation,
although the duration of confusion may influence the length of hospital stay.
Weight gain has been noted to be a common enduring side effect with a mean
increase in the mass of 10 percent.
GAMMA VENTRAL CAPSULOTOMY. Gamma capsulotomy was generally well

tolerated and effective for patients with otherwise intractable OCD. Adverse
events included cerebral edema and headache, small asymptomatic caudate
infarctions, and possible exacerbation of preexisting bipolar mania. A
therapeutic response, defined conservatively, was seen in 60 percent of over
50 patients receiving a gamma capsulotomy procedure, in which pairs of
lesions in the ventral capsule are made bilaterally, impinging on the ventral
striatum. The therapeutic benefit was achieved over 1 to 2 years and was
essentially stable by 3 years. Adverse effects of gamma ventral capsulotomy
include significant radiation-induced edema, appearing months after the
procedure, apparently due to differential sensitivity to radiation that remains
poorly understood. Long-term follow-up will be necessary to clarify the risks
and benefits of gamma ventral capsulotomy. The same applies to any
neurosurgery, including lesion procedures and DBS.
Outcomes with DBS
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER. Long-term outcomes of open stimulation

in 26 patients showed clinically significant symptom reductions and
functional improvement in about two-thirds of patients overall.
Conservatively defined responses (35 percent or more significant reductions
on the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale) were seen in one-third of
patients in the initial group, irrespective of the study center, while the
response rate was over 70 percent in the second and third patient cohorts
treated. The development of psychiatric DBS is following the path of


<<<PAGE 2337>>>
stimulation for movement disorders, where several targets have been pursued
with therapeutic benefit. As in movement disorders, overlapping or
converging effects of DBS at different anatomical sites on the neurocircuitry
involved are likely and are a focus of active research. The same reasoning
applies to DBS for depression.
MAJOR DEPRESSION. A body of functional neuroimaging research implicates

the subgenual cingulate cortex as a node in circuits involved in the normal
experience of sadness, symptoms of depressive illness, and responses to
depression treatments. Chronic DBS for up to 6 months was associated with
sustained remission of depression in four of the six patients studied. Another
line of research on DBS for depression was prompted by the OCD research
discussed above and also by the reported antidepressant effects of anterior
capsulotomy on which the VC/VS (ventral capsule/ventral striatum)
stimulation target was initially based. The OCD patients, who had very high
rates of comorbid depression, characteristically responded to stimulation
onset with mood enhancement and reductions in nonspecific as well as OCDrelated anxiety. Such effects were accompanied, or even preceded by,
improvements in social interaction and daily functioning. Worsening in these
same clinical domains was noted in some patients with the cessation of
VC/VS stimulation. Moreover, DBS-induced changes in mood and
nonspecific anxiety often seemed to precede reductions in core OCD
symptoms.
Outcome Across Contemporary Neurosurgical Procedures.
Although the field is developing rapidly, the conclusion reached is that 40 to
70 percent of carefully selected psychiatric patients should meaningfully
benefit from contemporary neurosurgical treatment. Twenty-five percent or
more might be expected to show outstanding improvement. Responses to
ablative procedures have appeared marginally superior for major depression
than for OCD generally. The adverse effect profiles of this group of
procedures are influenced by lesion size, the surgical approach, and whether
radiosurgical methods (in which the tempo of lesion development is very
slow vs. thermocoagulation) are used. However, adverse effects are greatly
minimized in comparison with the procedures of the past. Although minor
short-term side effects may be expected after some modern ablative


<<<PAGE 2338>>>
procedures, severe or enduring adverse consequences are relatively rare.
These can include seizures in about 1 to 5 percent of cases. Although frontal
syndromes, confusion, or subtle cognitive deficits can still be seen, overall
cognitive function, as indicated by the standard intelligence quotient, is
generally enhanced, a finding that has been attributed to the overriding
beneficial effects of symptomatic improvement. Psychiatric neurosurgery
likely reduces mortality, as evidenced by data on comparative suicide rates.
Nonetheless, patients who undergo and fail to benefit from these procedures
are at exceptionally high risk for completed suicide. Therefore, as with any
therapy, the potential risks and benefits of psychiatric neurosurgery must be
weighed against the potential risks and benefits of undergoing this brand of
treatment.
The advent of DBS in psychiatry has created tremendous interest and
considerable research activity. This therapy is intentionally nonablative, can
be optimized for individual patients, is reversible, and is based on devices
that are (to varying degrees) removable. DBS may therefore be accepted by
patients who would not choose to undergo lesion procedures (although the
reverse is also true). With all of its advantages, DBS requires that patients be
treated by highly specialized teams willing and able to provide long-term
care. The logistics and expenses involved can represent significant barriers.
In contrast, psychiatric care can be delivered in standard treatment settings
after lesion procedures. However, although the relative risks of enduring
adverse effects after psychiatric DBS remain to be established, at this stage,
ablative methods appear to carry a more significant risk. Because rates of
adverse outcomes are low when modern lesion procedures are performed at
highly experienced centers, there may be a particularly strong rationale for
referral of appropriate patients to such expert centers.
References
Belmaker R, Agam G. Deep brain drug delivery. Brain Stimulation.
2012;6(3):455–456.
Boggio PS, Rigonatti SP, Ribeiro RB, Myczkowski ML, Nitsche MA,
Pascual-Leone A, Fregni F. A randomized, double-blind clinical trial on
the efficacy of cortical direct current stimulation for the treatment of major
depression. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008;11(2):249–254.
Byrne P, Cassidy B, Higgins P. Knowledge and attitudes towards


<<<PAGE 2339>>>
electroconvulsive therapy among health care professionals and students. J
ECT. 2006;22(2):133–138.
Cristancho MA, Alici Y, Augoustides JG, O’Reardon JP. Uncommon but
serious complications associated with electroconvulsive therapy:
Recognition and management for the clinician. Curr Psychiatry Rep.
2008;10(6):474–480.
deSouza RM, Moro E, Lang AE, Schapira AH. Timing of deep brain
stimulation in Parkinson disease: a need for reappraisal. Ann Neurol.
2013;73(5):565–575.
Dougherty DD, Baer L, Cosgrove GR, Cassem EH, Price BH, Nierenberg
AA, Jenike MA, Rauch SL. Prospective long-term follow-up of 44 patients
who received cingulotomy for treatment-refractory obsessive-compulsive
disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2002;159(2):269–275.
Englot DJ. Vagus nerve stimulation versus “best drug therapy” in epilepsy
patients who have failed best drug therapy. Seizure. 2013;22(5):409–410.
Esser SK, Huber R, Massimini M, Peterson MJ, Ferrarelli F, Tononi G. A
direct demonstration of cortical LTP in humans: a combined TMS/EEG
study. Brain Res Bull. 2006;69(1):86–94.
Fins JJ, Rezai AR, Greenberg BD. Psychosurgery: Avoiding an ethical redux
while advancing a therapeutic future. Neurosurgery. 2006;59(4):713–716.
Fitzgerald PB, Brown TL, Marston NAU, Oxley T, de Castella A, Daskalakis
ZJ, Kulkarni J. Reduced plastic brain responses in schizophrenia: a
transcranial magnetic stimulation study. Schizophren Res. 2004;71(1):17–
26.
Fregni F, Boggio PS, Nitsche M, Pascual-Leone A. Transcranial direct
current stimulation. Br J Psychiatry. 2005;186(5):446–467.
Gabriels L, Nuttin B, Cosyns P. Applicants for stereotactic neurosurgery for
psychiatric disorders: the role of the Flemish advisory board. Acta
Psychiatr Scand. 2008;17(5):381–389.
Greenberg BD, Gabriels LA, Malone DA Jr, Rezai AR, Friehs GM, Okun
MS, Shapira NA, Foote KD, Cosyns PR, Kubu CS, Malloy PF, Salloway
SP, Giftakis JE, Rise MT, Machado AG, Baker KB, Stypulkowski PH,
Goodman WK, Rasmussen SA, Nuttin BJ. Deep brain stimulation of the
ventral internal capsule/ventral striatum for obsessive-compulsive disorder:
worldwide experience. Mol Psychiatry. 2010;15(1):64–79.
Greenberg BD, Price LH, Rauch SL, Friehs G, Noren G, Malone D,


<<<PAGE 2340>>>
Carpenter LL, Rezai AR, Rasmussen SA. Neurosurgery for intractable
obsessive-compulsive disorder and depression: critical issues. Neurosurg
Clin North Am. 2003;14(2):199–212.
Heeramun-Aubeeluck A, Lu Z. Neurosurgery for mental disorders: a review.
Afr J Psychiatry. 2013;16(3):177–181.
Hooten WM, Rasmussen KG Jr. Effects of general anesthetic agents in adults
receiving electroconvulsive therapy: a systematic review. J ECT.
2008;24(3):208–223.
Ingram A, Saling MM, Schweitzer I. Cognitive side effects of brief pulse
electroconvulsive therapy: a review. J ECT. 2008;24(1):3–9.
Kellner CH, Knapp RG, Petrides G, Rummans TA, Husain MM, Rasmussen
K, Mueller M, Bernstein HJ, O’Connor K, Smith G, Biggs M, Bailine SH,
Malur C, Yim E, McClintock S, Sampson S, Fink M. Continuation
electroconvulsive therapy vs pharmacotherapy for relapse prevention in
major depression: a multisite study from the Consortium for Research in
Electroconvulsive
Therapy
(CORE).
Arch
Gen
Psychiatry.
2006;63(12):1337–1344.
Lapidus KA, Shin JS, Pasculli RM, Briggs MC, Popeo DM, Kellner CH.
Low-dose right unilateral electroconvulsive therapy (ECT): effectiveness
of the first treatment. J ECT. 2013;29(2):83–85.
Lisanby SH, Kinnunen LH, Crupain MJ. Applications of TMS to therapy in
psychiatry. J Clin Neurophysiol. 2002;19(4):344–360.
Lisanby SH, Luber B, Schlaepfer TE, Sackeim HA. Safety and feasibility of
magnetic seizure therapy (MST) in major depression: randomized withinsubject
comparison
with
electroconvulsive
therapy.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2003;28(10):1852–1865.
Luber B, Kinnunen LH, Rakitin BC, Ellsasser R, Stern Y, Lisanby SH.
Facilitation of performance in a working memory task with rTMS
stimulation of the precuneus: frequency- and time-dependent effects. Brain
Res. 2007;1128(1):120–129.
Luber B, Stanford AD, Malaspina D, Lisanby SH. Revisiting the backward
masking deficit in schizophrenia: individual differences in performance
and modeling with transcranial magnetic stimulation. Biol Psychiatry.
2007;62(7):793–799.
Mall V, Berweck S, Fietzek UM, Glocker FX, Oberhuber U, Walther M,
Schessl J, Schulte-Mönting J, Korinthenberg R, Heinen F. Low level of


<<<PAGE 2341>>>
intracortical inhibition in children shown by transcranial magnetic
stimulation. Neuropediatrics. 2004;35(2):120–125.
Mayberg HS, Lozano AM, Voon V, McNeely HE, Seminowicz D, Hamani
C, Schwalb JM, Kennedy SH. Deep brain stimulation for treatmentresistant depression. Neuron. 2005;45(5):651–650.
Montoya A, Weiss AP, Price BH, Cassem EH, Dougherty DD, Nierenberg
AA, Rauch SL, Cosgrove GR. Magnetic resonance imaging-guided
stereotactic limbic leukotomy for treatment of intractable psychiatric
disease. Neurosurgery. 2002;50(5):1043–1049; discussion 1049–1052.
Munk-Olsen T, Laursen TM, Videbech P, Rosenberg R, Mortensen PB.
Electroconvulsive therapy: predictors and trends in utilization from 1976 to
2000. J ECT. 2006;22(2):127–132.
OCD-DBS Collaborative Group. Deep brain stimulation for psychiatric
disorders. Neurosurgery. 2002;51(2):519.
Painuly N, Chakrabarti S. Combined use of electroconvulsive therapy and
antipsychotics in schizophrenia: the Indian evidence. a review and a metaanalysis. J ECT. 2006;22(1):59–66.
Peterchev AV, Kirov G, Ebmeier K, Scott A, Husain M, Lisanby SH.
Frontiers in TMS technology development: controllable pulse shape TMS
(cTMS) and magnetic seizure therapy (MST) at 100 Hz. Biol Psychiatry.
2007;61(8):107S.
Prudic J. Electroconvulsive therapy. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3285.
Prudic J. Strategies to minimize cognitive side effects with ECT: aspects of
ECT technique. J ECT. 2008;24(1):46–51.
Rapinesi C, Serata D, Casale AD, Carbonetti P, Fensore C, Scatena P, Caccia
F, Di Pietro S, Angeletti G, Tatarelli R, Kotzalidis GD, Giradi P.
Effectiveness of electroconvulsive therapy in a patient with a treatmentresistant major depressive episode and comorbid body dysmorphic
disorder. J ECT. 2013;29(2):145–146.
Rauch SL, Dougherty DD, Malone D, Rezai A, Friehs G, Fischman AJ,
Alpert NM, Haber SN, Stypulkowski PH, Rise MT, Rasmussen SA,
Greenberg BD. A functional neuroimaging investigation of deep brain
stimulation in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder. J Neurosurg.
2006;104(4):558–565.


<<<PAGE 2342>>>
Rauch SL. Neuroimaging and neurocircuitry models pertaining to the
neurosurgical treatment of psychiatric disorders. Neurosurg Clin N Am.
2003;14(2):213–223, vii–viii.
Rush AJ, Marangell LB, Sackeim HA, George MS, Brannan SK, Davis SM,
Howland R, Kling MA, Rittberg BR, Burke WJ, Rapaport MH, Zajecka J,
Nierenberg AA, Husain MM, Ginsberg D, Cooke RG. Vagus nerve
stimulation for treatment-resistant depression: A randomized, controlled
acute phase trial. Biol Psychiatry. 2005;58(5):347–354.
Sackeim HA, Prudic J, Nobler MS, Fitzsimons L, Lisanby SH, Payne N,
Berman RM, Brakemeier EL, Perera T, Devanand DP. Effects of pulse
width and electrode placement on the efficacy and cognitive effects of
electroconvulsive therapy. Brain Stimul. 2008;1(2):71–83.
Schestatsky P, Simis M, Freeman R, Pascual-Leone A, Fregni F. Noninvasive brain stimulation and the autonomic nervous system. Clin
Neurophysiol. 2013;124(9):1716–1728.
Schlaepfer TE, Lancaster E, Heidbreder R, Strain EC, Kosel M, Fisch HU,
Pearlson GD. Decreased frontal white-matter volume in chronic substance
abuse. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2006;9(2):147–153.
Schmidt EZ, Reininghaus B, Enzinger C, Ebner C, Hofmann P, Kapfhammer
HP. Changes in brain metabolism after ECT-positron emission tomography
in the assessment of changes in glucose metabolism subsequent to
electroconvulsive therapy–lessons, limitations and future applications. J
Affect Disord. 2008;106(1–2):203–208.
Shorter E, Healy D. Shock Therapy: The History of Electroconvulsive
Therapy in Mental Illness. Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers University Press; 2007.
Tomlinson SP, Davis NJ, Bracewell R. Brain stimulation studies of nonmotor cerebellar function: a systematic review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev.
2013;37(5):766–789.
Van Laere K, Nuttin B, Gabriels L, Dupont P, Rasmussen S, Greenberg BD,
Cosyns P. Metabolic imaging of anterior capsular stimulation in refractory
obsessive-compulsive disorder: a key role for the subgenual anterior
cingulate and ventral striatum. J Nucl Med. 2006;47(5):740–747.
Weiner R, Lisanby SH, Husain MM, Morales OG, Maixner DF, Hall SE,
Beeghly J, Greden JF, National Network of Depression Centers.
Electroconvulsive therapy device classification: response to FDA advisory
panel hearing and recommendations. J Clin Psychiatry. 2013;74(1):38–42.


<<<PAGE 2343>>>
23
Psychotherapy
This chapter provides an overview of common psychotherapeutic approaches,
covering a broad spectrum of therapy modalities.

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND PSYCHOANALYTIC
PSYCHOTHERAPY
As broadly practiced today, psychoanalytic treatment encompasses a wide
range of uncovering strategies used in varying degrees and blends. Despite
the inevitable blurring of boundaries in actual application, we describe the
original modality of classic psychoanalysis and major modes of
psychoanalytic psychotherapy (expressive and supportive) separately here
(Table 23-1). Analytical practice, in all its complexity, resides on a
continuum. The individual technique is always a matter of emphasis, as the
therapist titrates the treatment according to the needs and capacities of the
patient at every moment.
Psychoanalysis is virtually synonymous with the renowned name of its
founding father, Sigmund Freud. It is also referred to as “classic” or
“orthodox” psychoanalysis to distinguish it from more recent variations
known as psychoanalytic psychotherapy.
Psychoanalysis is based on the theory of sexual repression and traces the
unfulfilled infantile libidinal wishes in the individual’s unconscious
memories. It remains unsurpassed as a method to discover the meaning and
motivation of behavior, especially the unconscious elements that inform
thoughts and feelings.
Psychoanalysis


<<<PAGE 2344>>>
Psychoanalytic Process. The psychoanalytic process involves bringing
to the surface repressed memories and feelings through a scrupulous
unraveling of hidden meanings of verbalized material and of the unwitting
ways in which the patient wards off underlying conflicts through defensive
forgetting and repetition of the past.
The overall process of analysis is one in which unconscious neurotic
conflicts are recovered from memory and verbally expressed, reexperienced
in the transference, reconstructed by the analyst, and, ultimately, resolved
through understanding. Freud referred to these processes as recollection,
repetition, and working through, which make up the totality of remembering,
reliving, and gaining insight. Recollection entails the extension of memory
back to early childhood events, a time in the distant past when the core of
neurosis developed. The actual reconstruction of these events comes through
reminiscence, associations, and autobiographical linking of developmental
events. Repetition involves more than mere mental recall; it is an emotional
replay of former interactions with significant individuals in the patient’s life.
The replay occurs within the unique context of the analyst as a projected
parent, a fantasized object from the patient’s past with whom the latter
unwittingly reproduces forgotten, unresolved feelings and experiences from
childhood. Finally, working through is both an affective and cognitive
integration of previously repressed memories that are brought into
consciousness and through which the patient is gradually set free (cured of
neurosis). The analytical course includes three major stages (Table 23-2).
Indications and Contraindications. In general, all of the so-called
psychoneuroses are suitable for psychoanalysis. These include anxiety
disorders, obsessional thinking, compulsive behavior, conversion disorder,
sexual dysfunction, depressive states, and many other nonpsychotic
conditions, such as personality disorders. Significant suffering must be
present so that patients are motivated to make the sacrifices of time and
financial resources required for psychoanalysis. Patients who enter analysis
must have a genuine wish to understand themselves, not a desperate hunger
for symptomatic relief. They must be able to withstand frustration, anxiety,
and other strong affects that emerge in the analysis without fleeing or acting
out their feelings in a self-destructive manner. They must also have a
reasonable, mature superego that allows them to be honest with the analyst.


<<<PAGE 2345>>>
Intelligence must be at least average, and above all, they must be
psychologically minded in the sense that they can think abstractly and
symbolically about the unconscious meanings of their behavior.
Many contraindications for psychoanalysis are the flip side of the
indications. The absence of suffering, poor impulse control, inability to
tolerate frustration and anxiety, and low motivation to understand are all
contraindications. The presence of extreme dishonesty or antisocial
personality disorder contraindicates analytic treatment. Concrete thinking or
the absence of psychological mindedness is another contraindication. Some
patients who might ordinarily be psychologically minded are not suitable for
analysis because they are in the midst of a major upheaval or life crisis, such
as a job loss or a divorce. Serious physical illness can also interfere with a
person’s ability to invest in a long-term treatment process. Patients of low
intelligence generally do not understand the procedure or cooperate in the
process. An age older than 40 years was once considered a contraindication,
but today analysts recognize that patients are malleable and analyzable in
their 60s or 70s. One final contraindication is a close relationship with the
analyst. Analysts should avoid analyzing friends, relatives, or persons with
whom they have other involvements.
Patient Requisites. Table 23-3 lists the most important patient requisites
for psychoanalysis.
Table 23-1
Scope of Psychoanalytic Practice: A Clinical Continuum
Features

“Classic”
Analytic

Expressive Mode
(Exploratory)

Supportive
Mode

Frequency

Regular 4–5
times/wk; “50minute hour”

Regular 1–3
times/wk; 1/2 to
full hour

Flexible 1 time/wk
or less; or as
needed 1/2
full hour

Duration

Long term; usually Short or long term; Short or
3–5+ yr; maybe
several sessions
intermittent
considerably
to months or
long term;


<<<PAGE 2346>>>
longer

years
Patient and
therapist face to
face; occasional
use of couch

single session
to lifetime

Setting

Patient primarily
on couch with
analyst out of
view

Patient and
therapist faceto-face; couch
contraindicated

Modus operandi

Systematic
Partial analysis of Formation of
analysis of all
dynamics and
therapeutic
positive and
defenses; focus
alliance and
negative
on current
real object
transference and
interpersonal
relationship;
resistance;
events and
analysis of
primary focus on
transference to
transference
analyst and
others outside of
contraindicated
intrasession
sessions;
with rare
events;
analysis of
exceptions;
transference
negative
focus on
neurosis
transference;
conscious
facilitated;
positive
external events;
regression
transference left
regression
encouraged
unexplored
discouraged
unless it impedes
progress; limited
regression
encouraged

Analyst/therapist
role

Absolute neutrality; Modified neutrality; Neutrality
frustration of
implicit
suspended;
patient;
gratification of
limited explicit
reflector/mirror
patient and
gratification,
role
greater activity of
direction, and
therapist
disclosure

Mutative change
agents

Insight
predominates
within relatively

Insight within more Auxiliary or
empathic
surrogate ego
environment;
as a temporary


<<<PAGE 2347>>>
deprived
environment

identification with
benevolent
object

substitute;
holding
environment;
insight to the
degree possible

Patient population Neuroses; mild
Neuroses; mild to
Severe character
character
moderate
disorders,
psychopathology
character
latent or
psychopathology,
manifest
especially
psychoses,
narcissistic and
acute crises,
borderline
physical illness
disorders
Patient requisites

High motivation,
psychological
mindedness,
good previous
object
relationships,
ability to
maintain
transference
neuroses, good
frustration
tolerance

High moderate
motivation and
psychologicalmindedness,
ability to form
therapeutic
alliance, some
frustration
tolerance

Some degree of
motivation and
ability to form
therapeutic
alliance

Basic goals

Structural
Partial
Reintegration of
reorganization of
reorganization of
self and ability
personality;
personality and
to cope;
resolution of
defenses;
stabilization or
unconscious
resolution of
restoration of
conflicts; insight
preconscious
preexisting
into intrapsychic
and conscious
equilibrium;
events;
derivatives of
strengthening
symptom relief
conflicts; insight
of defenses;


<<<PAGE 2348>>>
an indirect result

into current
interpersonal
events; improved
object relations;
symptom relief a
goal or prelude to
further
exploration

better
adjustment or
acceptance of
pathology;
symptom relief
and
environmental
restructuring as
primary goals

Major techniques

Free association
Limited free
Free association
method
association;
method
predominates;
confrontation,
contraindicated;
full dynamic
clarification, and
suggestion
interpretation
partial
(advice)
(including
interpretation
predominates;
confrontation,
predominate,
abreaction
clarification, and
with emphasis on
useful;
working
here-and-now
confrontation,
through), with
interpretation and
clarification,
emphasis on
limited genetic
and
genetic
interpretation
interpretation in
reconstruction
the here-andnow are
secondary;
genetic
interpretation is
contraindicated

Adjunct treatment

Primarily avoided;
if applied, all
negative and
positive
meanings and
implications
thoroughly
analyzed more

May be necessary, Often necessary,
e.g.,
e.g.,
psychotropic
psychotropic
drugs as
drugs, family
temporary
rehabilitative
measure; if
therapy, or
applied, negative
hospitalization;
implications are
if applied,


<<<PAGE 2349>>>
recently,
medication
adjunct

explored and
diffused

positive
implications are
emphasized

This division is not categorical; all practice resides on a clinical continuum.

Ms. M, a 29-year-old unmarried woman who worked in a low-level
capacity for a magazine, presented for consultation with the chief
complaints of considerable sadness and distress over her parent’s reaction
when they found that she had had a homosexual relationship. She also
realized that she had been working far below her potential. She had never
sought any treatment before. She was clearly intelligent, sensitive, selfreflective, and insightful. When she learned about the possibility of
psychoanalysis as a treatment option, she worried that meant she was
“sicker.” Ms. M, however, began reading Freud, realized that analysis
was actually recommended for those who are higher functioning, and
became intrigued by the idea. She agreed to come 4 days a week for 50minute sessions.
She was the oldest of three children and the only girl. Ms. M’s father, a
successful professional, was described as very demanding and intrusive;
someone who never thought anything was good enough. He had always
expected his children to do the “extra credit” assignments as part of their
regular work. Ms. M, however, was very proud of her father’s
accomplishments. She spoke of her mother in conflicting terms as well:
she was a homemaker, weak, and sometimes acquiescent to the powerful
father but also an individual in her own right who was involved in
community volunteer work and could be a powerful public speaker.
Just before beginning her analysis, Ms. M had had her wallet stolen. In
her first analytic session, she spoke of losing all of her identification
cards, and to her, it seemed as if she were starting analysis “with a
completely new identity.” Initially, she was somewhat hesitant to use the
couch because she wanted to see her analyst’s reactions, but Ms. M
quickly appreciated that she could associate more easily without seeing
the analyst.
As her analysis proceeded, through dreams and free associations, Ms.
M became quite focused on the analyst. She became extremely curious


<<<PAGE 2350>>>
about the analyst’s life. What emerged from her associations to seeing the
analyst’s appointment book on the desk was that she felt “slotted in.”
Whenever Ms. M saw other patients, she felt the office was “like an
assembly line.” Further associations led to her feeling slotted in by her
parents as they ran from one activity to another. Her resistance
manifested itself in Ms. M, often coming as much or more than 15
minutes late to her sessions. Her associations led to her admitting that she
did not want her analyst to think that she was “too eager.” Ms. M was
able to see that she needed to devalue her analyst and her importance to
Ms. M as a defense against an overwhelmingly positive and even erotic
transference toward her.
For example, Ms. M wanted to improve her appearance so that the
therapist, whom she called a “role model,” would find her more
attractive. Her negative transference, however, was never far from the
surface, and she denigrated the analyst by wondering if the analyst were a
“clotheshorse” who was financing her wardrobe with the patient’s
payments.
Her conflicts about her sexual orientation were a central preoccupation
in the course of her analysis, particularly because her father was
homophobic. Early on, Ms. M felt awkward and uncomfortable when she
went to a lesbian bar, and when asked if she qualified for the “lesbian
discount,” she said she did not. At one point, she began seeing several
men, including a male psychologist. The analyst made the transference
interpretation, which Ms. M accepted, that a date with this man seemed
as if it were a date with the analyst, and sleeping with him would be
equivalent to sleeping with the analyst. Ms. M was also able to see that
her transient choice of dating a male therapist was a defensive
compromise. Although her homosexual object choice was
multidetermined, Ms. M came to appreciate, through her work in
analysis, that at least a part of her conflicts about homosexuality stemmed
from her relationship with her father. It was a means of securing his
attention as well as infuriating him.
Over 4 years, Ms. M performed considerably better at work and earned
a promotion to a job commensurate with her potential. She was also able
to deal better with both her parents and particularly her father, regarding
her sexual orientation. She became much more comfortable with her


<<<PAGE 2351>>>
“new identity” and became involved in a relationship with a professional
woman. At the end of therapy, Ms. M and this woman were committed to
each other and considering adopting a child. (Courtesy of T. Byram
Karasu, M.D. and S. R. Karasu, M.D.)
Goals. In developmental terms, psychoanalysis aims at the gradual removal
of amnesias rooted in early childhood based on the assumption that filling all
gaps in memory will lead to cessation of the morbid condition because the
patient no longer needs to repeat or remain fixated to the past. The patient
should be better able to relinquish former regressive patterns and to develop
new, more adaptive ones, particularly as he or she learns the reasons for his
or her behavior. A related goal of psychoanalysis is for the patient to achieve
some measure of self-understanding or insight.
Table 23-2
Stages of Psychoanalysis
Stage one: Patient becomes familiar with the methods, routines, and
requirements of analysis, and a realistic therapeutic alliance is
formed between patient and analyst. Basic rules are established;
the patient describes his or her problems; there is some review of
history, and the patient gains initial relief through catharsis and a
sense of security before delving more deeply into the source of the
illness. The patient is primarily motivated by the wish to get well.
Stage two: Transference neurosis emerges that substitutes for the
actual neurosis of the patient and in which the wish for health
comes into direct conflict with the simultaneous wish to receive
emotional gratification from the analyst. There is a gradual
surfacing of unconscious conflicts; an increased irrational
attachment to the analyst, with regressive and dependent
concomitants of that bond; a developmental return to earlier forms
of relating (sometimes compared with that of mother and infant);
and a repetition of childhood patterns and recall of traumatic
memories through transfer to the analyst of unresolved libidinal
wishes.


<<<PAGE 2352>>>
Stage three: The termination phase is marked by the dissolution of
the analytical bond as the patient prepares for leave-taking. The
irrational attachment to the analyst in the transference neurosis
has subsided because it has been worked through, and more
rational aspects of the psyche preside, providing greater mastery
and more mature adaptation to the patient’s problems. Termination
is not a hard-and-fast event, and the patient invariably has to
continue to work through any problems outside of the therapy
situation without the analyst or may need intermittent assistance
after analysis has technically terminated.
Courtesy of T. Byram Karasu, M.D.

Table 23-3
Patient Prerequisites for Psychoanalysis
High motivation. The patient needs a strong motivation to persevere,
in light of the rigors of intense and lengthy treatment. The desire
for health and self-understanding must surpass the neurotic need
for unhappiness. The patient must be willing to face issues of time
and money and to endure the pain and frustration associated with
sacrificing rapid relief in favor of future cure and with foregoing the
secondary gains of illness.
Ability to form a relationship. The capacity to form and maintain, as
well as to detach from, a trusting object relationship is essential.
The patient also has to withstand a frustrating and regressive
transference without decompensating or becoming excessively
attached. Patients with a history of impaired or transient
interpersonal relations who cannot establish a viable connection to
another human make poor candidates for psychoanalysis.
Psychological mindedness and capacity for insight. As an
introspective process, psychoanalysis requires curiosity about
oneself and the capacity for self-scrutiny. Those who are unable to
articulate and comprehend their inner thoughts and feelings cannot
negotiate with the fundamental analytical coin words and their
meanings. The inability to examine one’s own motivations and


<<<PAGE 2353>>>
behaviors precludes benefits from the analytical method.
Ego strength. Ego strength is the integrative capacity to oscillate
appropriately between two antithetical types of ego functioning: On
the one hand, the patient must be able to reflect temporarily, to
relinquish reality for fantasy, and to be dependent and passive. On
the other hand, the patient has to be able to accept analytical
rules, to integrate interpretations, to defer important decisions, to
shift perspectives to become an observer of his or her intrapsychic
processes, and to function in a sustained interpersonal relationship
as a responsible adult.
Courtesy of T. Byram Karasu, M.D.

Psychoanalytic goals often seem formidable (e.g., a total personality
change), involving the radical reorganization of old developmental patterns
based on earlier affects and the entrenched defenses built up against them.
Goals may also be elusive, framed as they are in theoretical intrapsychic
terms (e.g., greater ego strength) or conceptually ambiguous ones (resolution
of the transference neurosis). Criteria for successful psychoanalysis may be
largely intangible and subjective, and it is best to view them as conceptual
endpoints of treatment that the therapist must translate into more realistic and
practical terms.
In practice, the goals of psychoanalysis for any patient naturally vary, as
do the many manifestations of neuroses. The form that the neurosis takes—
unsatisfactory sexual or object relationships, inability to enjoy life,
underachievement, and fear of work or academic success, or excessive
anxiety, guilt, or depressive ideation—determines the focus of attention and
the general direction of treatment, as well as the specific goals. Such goals
may change at any time during analysis, especially as many years of
treatment may be involved.
Major Approach and Techniques. Structurally, psychoanalysis usually
refers to individual (dyadic) treatment that is frequent (four or five times per
week) and long term (several years). All three features take their precedent
from Freud himself.
The dyadic arrangement is a direct function of the Freudian theory of
neurosis as an intrapsychic phenomenon, which takes place within the person


<<<PAGE 2354>>>
as instinctual impulses continually seek discharge. Because it is crucial to
resolve dynamic conflicts internally if structural personality reorganization is
to take place, the individual’s memory and perceptions of the repressed past
are pivotal.
Freud initially saw patients 6 days a week for 1 hour each day, a routine
now reduced to four or five sessions per week of the classic 50-minute hour,
which leaves time for the analyst to take notes and organize relevant thoughts
before the next patient. Therapists should avoid long intervals between
sessions so that the momentum gained in uncovering conflictual material is
not lost, and confronted defenses do not have time to restrengthen.
Freud’s belief that successful psychoanalysis always takes a long time
because profound changes in the mind occur slowly still holds. The process is
similar to the fluid sense of time that is characteristic of our unconscious
processes. Moreover, because psychoanalysis involves a detailed
recapitulation of present and past events, any compromise in time presents
the risk of losing pace with the patient’s mental life.
As with other forms of psychotherapy,
psychoanalysis takes place in a professional setting, apart from the realities of
everyday life, in which the therapist offers the patient a temporary sanctuary
in which to ease psychic pain and reveal intimate thoughts to an accepting
expert. The design of the psychoanalytic environment promotes relaxation
and regression. The setting is usually spartan and sensorially neutral and
minimizes external stimuli.
PSYCHOANALYTIC

SETTING.

Use of the Couch. The couch has several clinical advantages that are both real
and symbolic: (1) the reclining position is relaxing because it is associated
with sleep and so eases the patient’s conscious control of thoughts; (2) it
minimizes the intrusive influence of the analyst, thus curbing unnecessary
cues; (3) it permits the analyst to make observations of the patient without
interruption; and (4) it holds a symbolic value for both parties, a tangible
reminder of the Freudian legacy that gives credibility to the analyst’s
professional identity, allegiance, and expertise. The reclining position of the
patient with analyst nearby can also generate threat and discomfort, however,
as it recalls anxieties derived from the earlier parent–child configuration that
it physically resembles. It may also have personal meanings—for some, a


<<<PAGE 2355>>>
portent of dangerous impulses or submission to an authority figure; for
others, relief from confrontation by the analyst (e.g., fear of the use of the
couch and over-eagerness to lie down may reflect resistance and, thus, need
to be analyzed). Although the use of the couch is requisite to the analytical
technique, it is not applied automatically; the therapist introduces it gradually
and may suspend its use whenever additional regression is unnecessary or
countertherapeutic.
Fundamental Rule. The fundamental rule of free association requires patients
to tell the analyst everything that comes into their heads—however
disagreeable, unimportant, or nonsensical—and to let themselves go as they
would in a conversation that leads from “cabbages to kings.” It differs
decidedly from ordinary conversation—instead of connecting personal
remarks with a rational thread, the therapist asks the patient to reveal those
very thoughts and events that are objectionable precisely because of being
averse to doing so.
This directive represents an ideal because free association does not arise
freely but is guided and inhibited by a variety of conscious and unconscious
forces. The analyst must not only encourage free association through the
physical setting and a nonjudgmental attitude toward the patient’s
verbalizations but also examine those very instances when the flow of
associations is diminished or comes to a halt—they are as important
analytically as the content of the associations. The analyst should also be alert
to how individual patients use or misuse the fundamental rule.
Aside from its primary purpose of eliciting recall of deeply hidden early
memories, the fundamental rule reflects the analytical priority placed on
verbalization, which translates the patient’s thoughts into words, so the
patient does not channel them physically or behaviorally. As a direct
concomitant of the fundamental rule, which prohibits action in favor of
verbal expression, patients should postpone making significant alterations in
their lives, such as marrying or changing careers, until they discuss and
analyze them within the context of treatment.
Principle of Evenly Suspended Attention. As a reciprocal corollary to the rule
that patients communicate everything that occurs to them without criticism or
selection, the principle of evenly suspended attention requires the analyst to


<<<PAGE 2356>>>
suspend judgment and to give impartial attention to every detail equally. The
method consists simply of making no effort to concentrate on anything
specific while maintaining a neutral, quiet attentiveness to all that the patient
says.
Analyst as Mirror. A second principle is the recommendation that the analyst
is impenetrable to the patient and, like a mirror, only reflect what the patient
shows. Analysts should be neutral blank screens and not bring their
personalities into treatment. They are not to bring their values or attitudes
into the discussion or to share personal reactions or mutual conflicts with
their patients, although they may sometimes feel the temptation to do so. The
bringing in of reality and external influences can interrupt or bias the
patient’s unconscious projections. Neutrality also allows the analyst to accept
without censure all forbidden or objectionable responses.
Rule of Abstinence. The fundamental rule of abstinence does not mean
corporal or sexual abstinence but refers to the frustration of emotional needs
and wishes that the patient may have toward the analyst or part of the
transference. It allows the patient’s longings to persist and serve as driving
forces for analytical work and motivation to change. Freud advised that the
analyst proceeds through the analytical treatment in a state of renunciation.
The analyst must deny the patient who is longing for love the satisfaction he
or she craves.
LIMITATIONS. At present, the predominant treatment constraints are often

economic, relating to the high cost in time and money, both for patients and
in the training of future practitioners. In addition, because clinical
requirements emphasize such requisites as psychological mindedness, verbal
and cognitive ability, and stable life situation, psychoanalysis may be unduly
restricted to a diagnostically, socioeconomically, or intellectually advantaged
patient population. Other intrinsic issues pertain to the use and misuse of its
stringent rules, whereby overemphasis on technique may interfere with an
authentic human encounter between analyst and patient, and to the major
long-term risk of interminability, in which protracted treatment may become
a substitute for life. The reification of the classic analytical tradition may
interfere with a more open and flexible application of its tenets to meet


<<<PAGE 2357>>>
changing needs. It may also obstruct a comprehensive view of patient care
that includes a greater appreciation of other treatment modalities in
conjunction with or as an alternative to psychoanalysis.
Ms. A, a 25-year-old articulate and introspective medical student began
analysis complaining of mild, chronic anxiety, dysphoria, and a sense of
inadequacy, despite above-average intelligence and performance. She
also expressed difficulty in long-term relationships with her male peers.
Ms. A began the initial phase of analysis with enthusiastic selfdisclosure, frequent reports of dreams and fantasies, and over idealization
of the analyst; she tried to please him by being a compliant, good patient,
just as she had been a good daughter to her father (a professor of
medicine) by going to medical school.
Over the next several months, Ms. A gradually developed a strong
attachment to the analyst and settled into a phase of excessive
preoccupation with him. Simultaneously, however, she began dating an
older psychiatrist and proceeded to complain about the analyst’s coldness
and unresponsiveness, even considering dropping out of the analysis
because he did not meet her demands.
In the course of analysis, through dreams and associations, Ms. A
recalled early memories of her ongoing competition with her mother for
her father’s attention and realized that failing to obtain his exclusive love,
she had tried to become like him. She was also able to see how her
increasing interest in becoming a psychiatrist (rather than following her
original plan to be a pediatrician), as well as her recent choice of a man to
date, were recapitulations of the past vis-à-vis the analyst. As this
repeated pattern was recognized, the patient began to relinquish her
intense erotic and dependent tie to the analyst, viewing him more
realistically and beginning to appreciate how his quiet presence reminded
her of her mother. She also became less disturbed by the similarities she
shared with her mother and was able to disengage from her father more
comfortably. By the fifth year of analysis, she was happily married to a
former classmate, was pregnant, and was a pediatric chief resident. Her
anxiety had attenuated and become situation-specific (i.e., she was
concerned about motherhood and the termination of analysis). (Courtesy


<<<PAGE 2358>>>
of T. Byram Karasu, M.D.)
Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy
Psychoanalytic psychotherapy, based on fundamental dynamic formulations
and techniques that derive from psychoanalysis, is designed to broaden its
scope. Psychoanalytic psychotherapy, in its narrowest sense, is the use of
insight-oriented methods only. As generically applied today to an ever-larger
clinical spectrum, it incorporates a blend of uncovering and suppressive
measures.
The strategies of psychoanalytic psychotherapy currently range from
expressive (insight-oriented, uncovering, evocative, or interpretive)
techniques to supportive (relationship-oriented, suggestive, suppressive, or
repressive) techniques. Although those two methods may seem antithetical,
their precise definitions and the distinctions between them are by no means
absolute.
The duration of psychoanalytic psychotherapy is generally shorter and
more variable than in psychoanalysis. Treatment may be brief, even with an
initially agreed-upon or fixed time limit, or may extend to a less definite
number of months or years. Brief treatment is chiefly used for selected
problems or highly focused conflict, whereas more prolonged treatment may
be applied for more chronic conditions or for intermittent episodes that
require ongoing attention to deal with pervasive conflict or recurrent
decompensation. Unlike psychoanalysis, psychoanalytic psychotherapy rarely
uses the couch; instead, the patient and therapist sit face to face. This posture
helps to prevent regression because it encourages the patient to look at the
therapist as a real person from whom to receive direct cues, even though
transference and fantasy will continue. The couch is unnecessary because the
free-association method is rarely used, except when the therapist wishes to
gain access to fantasy material or dreams to enlighten a particular issue.
Expressive Psychotherapy
Diagnostically, psychoanalytic
psychotherapy in its expressive mode is suited to a range of psychopathology
with mild to moderate ego weakening, including neurotic conflicts, symptom
INDICATIONS

AND

CONTRAINDICATIONS.


<<<PAGE 2359>>>
complexes, reactive conditions, and the whole realm of nonpsychotic
character disorders, including those disorders of the self that are among the
more transient and less profound on the severity-of-illness spectrum, such as
narcissistic personality disorders. It is also one of the treatments
recommended for patients with borderline personality disorders (BPDs),
although special variations may be required to deal with the associated
turbulent personality characteristics, primitive defense mechanisms,
tendencies toward regressive episodes, and irrational attachments to the
analyst.
Ms. B, an intelligent and verbal 34-year-old divorced woman, presented
with complaints of being unappreciated at work. Always angry and
irritable, she considered quitting her job and even leaving the city. Her
social life was also being negatively affected; her boyfriend had
threatened to leave her because of her extremely hostile, clinging
behavior (the same reason her ex-husband had given when he left her 9
years earlier after only 16 months of marriage). Her past included
promiscuity and experimentation with various drugs, and, currently, she
indulged in heavy drinking on weekends and occasionally smoked
marijuana. She had held many jobs and had lived in various cities.
The eldest of three children of a middle-class family, she came from an
unhappy and unstable home: her brother had been in and out of
psychiatric hospitals; her sister had left home at the age of 16 after
becoming pregnant and being forced to marry; and her overly controlling
parents had subjected their children to psychological (and occasionally
physical) abuse, alternating between heated arguments and passionate
reconciliations.
Initially, Ms. B attempted to contain her rage in treatment, but it
frequently surfaced and alternated with child-like helplessness; she
interrogated the psychiatrist regarding his credentials, ridiculed
psychodynamic concepts, constantly challenged statements, and would
demand practical advice but then denigrate or fail to follow the guidance
given. The psychiatrist remained unprovoked by her aggression and
explored with her the need to engage him negatively. Her response was to
question and test his continued concern.


<<<PAGE 2360>>>
When her boyfriend left her, she attempted suicide (she cut her wrists
superficially), was briefly hospitalized, and, on discharge, was placed on
a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) for 6 months for her
minor, but protracted, depression. The psychiatrist maintained their
regular frequency of sessions despite her greater demands. Although she
was puzzled by the steadiness of his interest, she gradually felt safe
enough to express her vulnerabilities. As they explored her lack of full
commitment to work, friends, and therapy, she began to understand the
meaning of her anger in terms of the early abusive relationship with her
parents and her tendency to bring it into contemporary relationships.
With the psychiatrist’s encouragement, she also began to seek work and
make small strides in relationship-oriented efforts. By the end of her
second year of treatment, she decided to remain in the city, to stay at her
place of employment, and to continue therapy. She needed to experience
and practice her somewhat fragile new self, which included greater
intimacy in relationships, additional mastery of work skills, and a more
cohesive sense of self. (Courtesy of T. Byram Karasu, M.D.)
The persons best suited for the expressive psychotherapy approach have
reasonably well-integrated egos and the capacity to both sustain and detach
from a bond of dependency and trust. They are, to some degree,
psychologically minded and self-motivated, and they are generally able, at
least temporarily, to tolerate doses of frustration without decompensating.
They must also have the ability to manage the rearousal of painful feelings
outside the therapy hour without additional contact. Patients must have some
capacity for introspection and impulse control, and they should be able to
recognize the cognitive distinction between fantasy and reality.
GOALS. The overall goals of expressive psychotherapy are to increase the

patient’s self-awareness and to improve object relations through the
exploration of current interpersonal events and perceptions. In contrast to
psychoanalysis, expressive psychotherapy modifies major structural changes
in ego function and defenses in light of patient limitations. The aim is to
achieve a more limited and, thus, select and focused understanding of one’s
problems. Rather than uncovering deeply hidden and past motives and tracing


<<<PAGE 2361>>>
them back to their origins in infancy, the major thrust is to deal with
preconscious or conscious derivatives of conflicts as they became manifest in
present interactions. Although the therapy seeks insight, it is less extensive;
instead of delving to a genetic level, greater emphasis is on clarifying recent
dynamic patterns and maladaptive behaviors in the present.
MAJOR APPROACH AND TECHNIQUES. The primary modus operandi involves

the establishment of a therapeutic alliance and early recognition and
interpretation of negative transference. Only limited or controlled regression
is encouraged, and positive transference manifestations are generally left
unexplored unless they are impeding therapeutic progress; even here, the
emphasis is on shedding light on current dynamic patterns and defenses.
A general limitation of expressive psychotherapy, as of
psychoanalysis, is the problem of emotional integration of cognitive
awareness. The primary danger for patients who are at the more disorganized
end of the diagnostic spectrum, however, may have less to do with the over
intellectualization that is sometimes seen in neurotic patients than with the
threat of decompensation from or acting out of, deep or frequent
interpretations that the patient is unable to integrate properly.
Some therapists fail to accept the limitations of a modified insight-oriented
approach and so apply it inappropriately to modulate the techniques and goals
of psychoanalysis. Overemphasis on dreams and fantasies, zealous efforts to
use the couch, indiscriminate deep interpretations, and continual focus on the
analysis of transference may have less to do with the patient’s needs than
with those of a therapist who is unwilling or unable to be flexible.
LIMITATIONS.

Ms. S was an attractive 30-year-old unmarried woman working as a
secretary when she presented for consultation. Her chief complaints at the
time were feeling “only anger and tension” and an inability to apply
herself to studying voice, “which is one of the most important things to
me.”
In obtaining a history, the therapist noted that Ms. S had never
completed anything: she had dropped out of college, never pursued a
music degree, and switched from job to job, and even city to city. What


<<<PAGE 2362>>>
initially seemed like a woman with diverse interests (e.g., jobs as a
research assistant; freelance copyeditor; part-time radio announcer;
manager of data entry for a software company; and, most recently,
secretary) actually reflected a woman with a chaotic lifestyle and serious
difficulties committing to anyone or anything. Although obviously
intelligent, Ms. S presented with unrealistic expectations regarding her
consultation. For example, after the first consultative session, Ms. S said
she felt good afterward but felt there were “no revelations yet.” Because
of Ms. S’s inability to commit and her somewhat disorganized life, the
therapist recommended a course of psychotherapy, beginning twice a
week, rather than something more intense like psychoanalysis. The
therapist also realized throughout the consultation that Ms. S would have
difficulty with free association without getting disorganized. The
therapist also thought that Ms. S might regress unproductively on the
couch without visual contact with the therapist.
Ms. S was the second oldest of four children—two brothers and a
younger sister, with whom she was most competitive and who seemed the
mother’s favorite. She described her mother as a successful professor
who was demanding and critical as if she had a “raised eyebrow” in
disapproval. For example, much to her mother’s chagrin, Ms. S had once
wanted a sandwich “with everything on it.” Ms. S was also disappointed
when she received one piece of luggage rather than a complete set for a
Christmas gift. She was able to accept the therapist’s interpretation that
she felt “part of a set” by being one of four siblings. Ms. S initially
idealized her father, who was active in the family church, but eventually
saw him as disappointing and rejecting.
Ms. S’s ideal therapist would be “flexible,” by which she meant a
therapist who might do hypnosis one session, psychotherapy the next,
and, maybe, analysis another session. In fact, within the first week of
beginning therapy, Ms. S had simultaneously consulted a hypnotherapist,
which she mentioned in passing only weeks later, for her neck pain and
tension. Although she did not pursue hypnosis, she did maintain a
chiropractor for most of her therapy, also something she mentioned many
months after beginning therapy. She did speak of wanting to be “on best
behavior” and “follow the rules.” Her tremendous sense of entitlement,
however, was evident: she expected “cut-rate prices” on everything from


<<<PAGE 2363>>>
haircuts and car repairs to doctors’ visits. Her initial fee was a much
reduced one, which she paid late and begrudgingly.
Although she had therapy only twice a week, Ms. S developed intense
feelings for her therapist. Mostly she experienced rage when she saw
evidence of the therapist’s other patients, such as footprints on the
waiting room floor after a snowstorm or a coat hanger turned around. She
expressed the wish to keep some of her things, like bobby pins and
hairspray, in the therapist’s bathroom. She vacillated between feelings
she wanted to move in and feelings that the therapist did not exist. For
example, before she took a plane flight, she wondered who would tell her
therapist if something happened to her. She had never given the
therapist’s name to anyone, nor did she have her name in her weekly
appointment book. The therapist interpreted that she had a simultaneous
wish to devalue her and not to share her with anyone else. Associations to
a dream with an image of a string of baroque pearls led to thoughts that
these pearls—irregular and imperfect—defective and even lopsided,
represented how she viewed herself.
Over the next few years, Ms. S was able to commit to regularly coming
to therapy, although the course was somewhat tumultuous, with many
threats of quitting and much withholding of information. At one point,
she even tried to provoke the therapist by seeking a consultation with
another therapist in order to “tattle” on her, just as she had tattled on her
siblings. Her therapist remained unprovoked and continued to provide a
safe environment for Ms. S to explore her ambivalence to the therapist
and the therapeutic situation. The therapist was also able to contain Ms.
S’s tendency to regress, particularly with separations, by providing her
with the therapist’s telephone number.
She had actually entered therapy with an unconscious wish to become
a world-famous singer who would win her mother’s approval and praise.
Her narcissism and sense of entitlement made it difficult for her to give
up on that fantasy despite repeated evidence that she did not have
sufficient talent. She was finally able to settle on a compromise: she
began to work diligently and closely as a research assistant to her mother,
who was writing a book, and as Ms. S became more focused and
organized over time, she even thought she might write a book about the
church. (Courtesy of T. Byram Karasu, M.D. and S. R. Karasu, M.D.)


<<<PAGE 2364>>>
Supportive Psychotherapy. Supportive psychotherapy aims at the
creation of a therapeutic relationship as a temporary buttress or bridge for the
deficient patient. It has roots in virtually every therapy that recognizes the
ameliorative effects of emotional support and a stable, caring atmosphere in
the management of patients. As a nonspecific attitude toward mental illness,
it predates scientific psychiatry, with foundations in 18th-century moral
treatment, whereby for the first time, patients received understanding and
kindness in a humane, interpersonal treatment environment free from
mechanical restraints.
Supportive psychotherapy has been the primary form used in the general
practice of medicine and rehabilitation, frequently to augment other
measures, such as prescriptions of medication to suppress symptoms, rest to
remove the patient from excessive stimulation, or hospitalization to provide a
structured therapeutic environment, protection, and control of the patient. It
can serve as primary or ancillary treatment. The global perspective of
supportive psychotherapy (often part of a combined treatment approach)
places major etiologic emphasis on external rather than intrapsychic events,
particularly on stressful environmental and interpersonal influences on a
severely damaged self.
INDICATIONS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS. Supportive psychotherapy is generally

indicated for those patients for whom classic psychoanalysis or insightoriented psychoanalytic psychotherapy is typically contraindicated—those
who have poor ego strength and whose potential for decompensation is high.
Amenable patients fall into the following major areas: (1) individuals in acute
crisis or a temporary state of disorganization and inability to cope (including
those who might otherwise be well functioning) whose intolerable life
circumstances have produced extreme anxiety or sudden turmoil (e.g.,
individuals going through grief reactions, illness, divorce, job loss, or who
were victims of crime, abuse, natural disaster, or accident); (2) patients with
chronic severe pathology with fragile or deficient ego functioning (e.g., those
with latent psychosis, impulse disorder, or severe character disturbance); (3)
patients whose cognitive deficits and physical symptoms make them
particularly vulnerable and, thus, unsuitable for an insight-oriented approach


<<<PAGE 2365>>>
(e.g., certain psychosomatic or medically ill persons); and (4) individuals
who are psychologically unmotivated, although not necessarily
characterologically resistant to a depth approach (e.g., patients who come to
treatment in response to family or agency pressure and are interested only in
immediate relief or those who need assistance in very specific problem areas
of social adjustment as a possible prelude to more exploratory work).
Mr. C, a 50-year-old married man with two sons, the owner of a small
construction company, was referred by his internist after recovery from
bypass surgery because of frequent, unfounded physical complaints. He
was taking minor tranquilizers in increasing doses, not adhering to his
daily regimen, avoiding sexual contact with his wife, and had dropped
out of group therapy for postsurgical patients after one session.
He came to his first appointment 20 minutes late, after having
“forgotten” two previous appointments. He was extremely anxious, often
lost in his train of thought, and was semi-delusional about his wife and
sons, suggesting that they might want to have him locked up. He briefly
told his life history, which included his coming from a strict and hardworking but caring middle-class family and the death of his mother when
he was only 11 years old. He had joined his father’s business (taking over
after his father’s death 2 years earlier), with both of his sons as
associates. Describing himself as successful in work and marriage, he
claimed that “the only test I ever failed was the stress test.”
Mr. C explained his lack of adherence to dietary restrictions as a lack
of will and his constant contact with the internist as his having real
physical problems not yet diagnosed; he rejected the idea of addiction to
tranquilizers, insisting that he could quit any time. He had no fantasy life,
remembered no dreams, made it clear that he had entered treatment on his
internist’s instruction only, and started each session by stating that he had
nothing to discuss.
After suggesting that Mr. C was coming to sessions just to pass the
“sanity test” and that there was no reason to have him locked up, the
psychiatrist encouraged the patient to join him in figuring out the real
reasons for his anxiety. Initial sessions were devoted to discussing the
patient’s medical condition and providing factual information about heart


<<<PAGE 2366>>>
and bypass surgery. The therapist likened the patient’s condition to that
of an older house getting new plumbing, trying to allay his unrealistic
fears of impending death. As Mr. C’s anxiety declined, he became less
defensive and more psychologically accessible. As the therapist began to
explore his difficulty in accepting help, Mr. C was able to talk about his
inability to admit problems (i.e., weaknesses). The therapist’s explicit
recognition of the patient’s strength in admitting his weaknesses
encouraged the patient to reveal more about himself—how he had
welcomed his father’s death and his belief that perhaps his illness was
punishment. The psychiatrist also encouraged him to speak about his
unrealistic guilt and, at the same time, helped him recognize his suspicion
of his sons as the reflection of his own wishes concerning his father and
his lack of commitment to his medical regimen as a wish to die to expiate
guilt. After steady urging by the therapist, Mr. C returned to work. He
agreed to meet monthly with the psychiatrist and to taper off his use of
tranquilizers. He even agreed that he might see the psychiatrist for “deep
analysis” in the future because his wife now jokingly complained of his
obsessive dieting, his uncompromising exercise regimens, and his
regularly scheduled sexual activities. (Courtesy of T. Byram Karasu,
M.D.)
Because support forms a tacit part of every therapeutic modality, it is
rarely contraindicated as such. The typical attitude regards better-functioning
patients as unsuitable not because a supportive approach will harm them, but
because they will not be sufficiently benefited by it. In aiming to maximize
the patient’s potential for further growth and change, supportive therapy is
relatively restricted and superficial and, thus, is not recommended as the
treatment of choice if the patient is available for, and capable of, a more indepth approach.
GOALS. The general aim of supportive treatment is the amelioration or relief

of symptoms through behavioral or environmental restructuring within the
existing psychic framework. Supportive therapy helps the patient to adapt
better to problems and to live more comfortably with his or her
psychopathology. To restore the disorganized, fragile, or decompensated


<<<PAGE 2367>>>
patient to a state of relative equilibrium, the therapist’s primary goal is to
suppress or control symptomatology and to stabilize the patient in a
protective and reassuring benign atmosphere that militates against
overwhelming external and internal pressures. The ultimate goal is to
maximize the integrative or adaptive capacities so that the patient increases
the ability to cope while decreasing vulnerability by reinforcing assets and
strengthening defenses.
MAJOR APPROACH AND TECHNIQUES. Supportive therapy uses several methods,

either singly or in combination, including warm, friendly, strong leadership;
partial gratification of dependency needs; support in the ultimate
development of legitimate independence; help in developing pleasurable
activities (e.g., hobbies); adequate rest and diversion; removal of excessive
strain, when possible; hospitalization, when indicated; medication to alleviate
symptoms; and guidance and advice in dealing with current issues. This
therapy uses techniques to help patients feel secure, accepted, protected,
encouraged, safe, and not anxious.
To the extent that much supportive therapy is spent on
practical, everyday realities and on dealing with the external environment of
the patient, it may be viewed as more mundane and superficial than depth
approaches. Because those patients attend therapy sessions intermittently and
less frequently, the interpersonal commitment may not be as compelling on
the part of either the patient or the therapist. Greater severity of illness (and
possible psychoses) also makes such treatment potentially more erratic,
demanding, and frustrating. The need for the therapist to deal with other
family members, caretakers, or agencies (auxiliary treatment, hospitalization)
can become an additional complication because the therapist comes to serve
as an ombudsman to negotiate with the outside world of the patient and with
other professional peers. Finally, the supportive therapist must be able to
accept personal limitations and the patient’s limited psychological resources
and to tolerate the often unrewarded efforts until the patient makes small
gains.
LIMITATIONS.

Mr. W was a 42-year-old widowed businessman who was referred by his


<<<PAGE 2368>>>
internist because of the sudden death of his wife, who had had an
intracranial hemorrhage, about 2 months earlier. Mr. W had two children,
a boy and a girl, ages 10 and 8 years, respectively.
Mr. W had never been to a psychiatrist before, and when he arrived, he
admitted he was not sure what a psychiatrist could do for him. He just
had to get over his wife’s death. He was not sure how talking about
anything could help. He had been married for 15 years. He admitted to
having difficulty sleeping, particularly awakening in the middle of the
night with considerable anxiety about the future. One of his relatives had
given him some of her clonazepam for his anxiety, which helped
tremendously, but he feared getting dependent on it. He was also drinking
more than he thought he should. He was most concerned about raising his
children alone and felt somewhat overwhelmed by the responsibility. He
was beginning to appreciate just how wonderful a mother his wife had
been and now saw how critical he had been of her for spending so much
time with the children. “It really does take a lot of effort,” he said.
Mr. W did admit to feelings of guilt. For one thing, he admitted to
some sense that he could now start over. He had been somewhat restless
in the marriage recently before his wife’s death and had been unfaithful
for a brief period early in the marriage. He also felt some guilt that had he
been awake the night of his wife’s hemorrhage, and maybe he could have
saved his wife. In reality, there was nothing he could have done.
Mr. W agreed to come for a few sessions to talk about his wife. At this
point, only 2 months after her death, he seemed to have an uncomplicated
mourning reaction. Although he talked easily in session, he was clearly
worried that he might like “being here too much.” The therapist chose not
to interpret his dependency conflicts. Mr. W seemed to have good coping
skills and used humor as a high-functioning defense. For example, in
giving a eulogy for his wife (who had been a very popular member of
their congregation), he looked around at the enormous crowd of people at
the church service and said he had never seen so many people attending
church before, adding, “Sorry, Reverend.”
After about four sessions, Mr. W said that he felt better and no longer
saw the need for further sessions. He was sleeping better and had stopped
drinking excessively. The therapist suggested that he might want to
continue to talk more about his guilt and his life as he went forward


<<<PAGE 2369>>>
without his wife. The therapist was also reassuring that there seemed to
be nothing else Mr. W could have done to save his wife. He also
encouraged the patient to begin dating when he felt ready, something that
Mr. W’s in-laws were not encouraging. For now, however, Mr. W was
not interested in any further therapy. He was appreciative of the therapist
and felt that talking about his wife’s death had been helpful. The therapist
accepted his wish to discontinue their sessions but encouraged Mr. W to
keep in touch to let him know how he was doing. (Courtesy of T. Byram
Karasu, M.D. and S. R. Karasu, M.D.)
CORRECTIVE EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE. The relationship between therapist and

patient allows a therapist to display behavior different from the destructive or
unproductive behavior of a patient’s parent. At times, such experiences seem
to neutralize or reverse some effects of the parents’ mistakes. If the patient
had overly authoritarian parents, the therapist’s friendly, flexible,
nonjudgmental, nonauthoritarian—but at times firm and limit setting—
attitude allows the patient to adjust to, be led by, and identify with a new
parent figure. Franz Alexander described this process as a corrective
emotional experience. It draws on elements of both psychoanalysis and
psychoanalytic psychotherapy.

BRIEF PSYCHODYNAMIC PSYCHOTHERAPY
Brief psychodynamic psychotherapy has gained widespread popularity, partly
because of the great pressure on health care professionals to contain treatment
costs. It is also easier to evaluate treatment efficacy by comparing groups of
persons who have had short-term therapy for mental illness with control
groups than it is to measure the results of long-term psychotherapy. Thus,
short-term therapies have been the subject of much research, especially on
outcome measures, which have found them to be effective. Other short-term
methods include interpersonal therapy and cognitive-behavioral therapy
(CBT, discussed later in this chapter).
Brief psychodynamic psychotherapy is a time-limited treatment (10 to 12
sessions) based on psychoanalysis and psychodynamic theory. It is useful in
helping persons with depression, anxiety, and posttraumatic stress disorder


<<<PAGE 2370>>>
(PTSD), among others. There are several methods, each having its own
treatment technique and specific criteria for selecting patients; however, they
are more similar than different.
In 1946, Franz Alexander and Thomas French identified the basic
characteristics of brief psychodynamic psychotherapy. They described a
therapeutic experience designed to put patients at ease, to manipulate the
transference, and to use trial interpretations flexibly. Alexander and French
conceived psychotherapy as a corrective emotional experience capable of
repairing traumatic events of the past and convincing patients that new ways
of thinking, feeling, and behaving are possible. At about the same time, Eric
Lindemann established a consultation service at Massachusetts General
Hospital in Boston for persons experiencing a crisis. He developed new
treatment methods to deal with these situations and eventually applied these
techniques to persons who were not in crisis, but who were experiencing
various kinds of emotional distress. Since then, the field has been influenced
by many workers such as David Malan in England, Peter Sifneos in the
United States, and Habib Davanloo in Canada.
Types
Brief Focal Psychotherapy (Tavistock–Malan). Brief focal
psychotherapy was originally developed in the 1950s by the Balint team at
the Tavistock Clinic in London. Malan, a member of the team, reported the
results of the therapy. Malan’s selection criteria for treatment included
eliminating absolute contraindications, rejecting patients for whom certain
dangers seemed inevitable, clearly assessing patients’ psychopathology, and
determining patients’ capacities to consider problems in emotional terms,
face disturbing material, respond to interpretations, and endure the stress of
the treatment. Malan found that high motivation invariably correlated with a
successful outcome. Contraindications to treatment were serious suicide
attempts, substance dependence, chronic alcohol abuse, incapacitating
chronic obsessional symptoms, incapacitating chronic phobic symptoms, and
gross destructive or self-destructive acting out.
In Malan’s routine, therapists should
identify the transference early and interpret it and the negative transference.
REQUIREMENTS AND TECHNIQUES.


<<<PAGE 2371>>>
They should then link the transferences to patients’ relationships with their
parents. Both patients and therapists should be willing to become deeply
involved and to bear the ensuing tension. Therapists should formulate a
circumscribed focus and set a termination date in advance, and patients
should work through grief and anger about termination. An experienced
therapist should allow about 20 sessions as an average length for the therapy;
a trainee should allow about 30 sessions. Malan himself did not exceed 40
interviews with his patients.
Time-Limited Psychotherapy (Boston University–Mann). A
psychotherapeutic model of exactly 12 interviews focusing on a specified
central issue was developed at Boston University by James Mann and his
colleagues in the early 1970s. In contrast with Malan’s emphasis on clear-cut
selection and rejection criteria, Mann was not as explicit about the
appropriate candidates for time-limited psychotherapy. Mann considered the
major emphases of his theory to be determining a patient’s central conflict
reasonably correctly and exploring young persons’ maturational crises with
many psychological and somatic complaints. Mann’s exceptions, similar to
his rejection criteria, include persons with major depressive disorder that
interferes with the treatment agreement, those with acute psychotic states, and
desperate patients who need, but cannot tolerate, object relations.
REQUIREMENTS AND TECHNIQUES. Mann’s technical requirements included

strict limitation to 12 sessions, positive transference predominating early,
specification and strict adherence to a central issue involving transference,
positive identification, making separation a maturational event for patients,
absolute prospect of termination to avoid development of dependence,
clarification of present and past experiences and resistances, active therapists
who support and encourage patients, and education of patients through direct
information, reeducation, and manipulation. The conflicts likely to be
encountered included independence versus dependence, activity versus
passivity, unresolved or delayed grief, and adequate versus inadequate selfesteem.
Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy (McGill University–
Davanloo). As conducted by Davanloo at McGill University, short-term


<<<PAGE 2372>>>
dynamic psychotherapy encompasses nearly all varieties of brief
psychotherapy and crisis intervention. Davanloo’s series classified patients
treated as those whose psychological conflicts are predominantly oedipal,
those whose conflicts are not oedipal, and those whose conflicts have more
than one focus. Davanloo also devised a specific psychotherapeutic technique
for patients with severe, long-standing neurotic problems, specifically those
with incapacitating obsessive-compulsive disorders (OCDs) and phobias.
Davanloo’s selection criteria emphasize evaluating those ego functions of
primary importance to psychotherapeutic work: the establishment of a
psychotherapeutic focus; the psychodynamic formulation of the patient’s
psychological problems; the ability to interact emotionally with evaluators; a
history of give-and-take relationships with a significant person in the
patient’s life; the patient’s ability to experience and tolerate anxiety, guilt,
and depression; the patient’s motivations for change, psychological
mindedness, and an ability to respond to interpretation and to link evaluators
with persons in the present and past. Both Malan and Davanloo emphasized a
patient’s responses to interpretation as an essential selection and prognostic
criterion.
The highlights of Davanloo’s
psychotherapeutic approach are flexibility (therapists should adapt the
technique to the patient’s needs), control, the patient’s regressive tendencies,
active intervention to avoid having the patient develop overdependence on a
therapist, and the patient’s intellectual insight and emotional experiences in
the transference. These emotional experiences become corrective as a result
of the interpretation.
REQUIREMENTS

AND

TECHNIQUES.

Ana, a divorced 60-year-old woman, sought psychiatric help following a
severe depressive episode lasting several months. This episode, which
was one of many in her life, was especially severe in terms of loss of
energy, interest, motivation, and the intensity of her sadness and wish to
die. Only her profound religious convictions protected her from acting on
these wishes. Ana had lost much weight, had trouble sleeping,
experienced many nightmares, and had difficulty with concentration.
Pervasive feelings of hatred for her mother plagued Ana; her mother was


<<<PAGE 2373>>>
very old, ill, and dependent on Ana, who was unable to forgive her for
abandoning her in an orphanage when she was 5 or 6 years of age.
After an extensive assessment, the dynamic formulation of Ana’s
problem was:
1. Life problems: Recurrent depressive episodes plagued by feelings of
guilt and self-reproach; problems with men involving choosing
partners who are commonly cold, distant, or otherwise unavailable;
involuntary and painful emotional distance from her children,
friends, and other close relationships; and unproductive and
unrewarding work life, despite considerable intellectual gifts.
2. Dynamics: Ambivalent relationship with her mother, whom she
blames for most of the tragedies of her life; guilt and need for
punishment concerning her unrelenting hatred for her mother; and
pathologic grief reaction for the loss of an idealized and more
optimal relationship with her mother, the one she remembers she
had before her orphanage placement. From this focus, there flows a
melancholic conviction of the inevitable failure of human
relationships.
3. Pathogenic foci: Grief and inability to mourn the loss of her mother
after going to live in the orphanage, with attendant rage and guilt;
pathologic grief for the loss of her father, who, because of severe
alcoholism, abandoned the family first, a move that caused the
mother to place her children in an orphanage in order to be able to
work and ultimately recover their care. Unconsciously, she blamed
her mother for the family catastrophe, thus “protecting” an idealized
view of her father, to whom she was profoundly attached.
For Ana, the initial phase of treatment focused on the clarification and
the experience of her destructive impulses toward her mother, which, as
they were worked through, made possible the appearance of a modicum
of empathy with her mother’s painful life situation around the time she
placed Ana and her sisters in the orphanage. Next, the therapy focused on
Ana’s father. She experienced deep feelings of idealization,
disappointment, anger, and grief with increasing clarity and intensity,
frequently via displaced feelings in the transference and after overcoming
considerable resistance. The last phase of treatment permitted the


<<<PAGE 2374>>>
development of realistic feelings of empathy and appreciation for her
mother, now without anger or emotional distancing, and the reawakening
within Ana of feelings of joy and hope, as well as professional ambition.
(Courtesy of M. Trujillo, M.D.)
Short-Term
Anxiety-Provoking
Psychotherapy
(Harvard
University–Sifneos). Sifneos developed short-term anxiety-provoking
psychotherapy at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston during the
1950s. He used the following criteria for selection: a circumscribed chief
complaint (implying a patient’s ability to select one of a variety of problems
to be given top priority and the patient’s desire to resolve the problem in
treatment), one meaningful or give-and-take relationship during early
childhood, the ability to interact flexibly with an evaluator and to express
feelings appropriately, above-average psychological sophistication (implying
not only above-average intelligence but also an ability to respond to
interpretations), a specific psychodynamic formulation (usually a set of
psychological conflicts underlying a patient’s difficulties and centering on an
oedipal focus), a contract between therapist and patient to work on the
specified focus and the formulation of minimal expectations of outcome, and
good to excellent motivation for change, not just for symptom relief.
Chris, a 31-year-old single man, sought help for a moderate depressive
episode precipitated by the loss of his relationship with his girlfriend,
Joanna. She had broken off the relationship after approximately 1 year,
tired of Chris’s erratic work ethic and emotional instability and
discouraged by his fear of commitment to the future of their relationship.
This cycle of infatuation, increasing fear of commitment, and relationship
loss had become a pattern in Chris’s interpersonal life. His work life
experienced similar problems. He frequently lost jobs because of serious
conflict and threatening confrontations with his superiors. As conflicts
arose at both work and home, Chris typically suffered increasing anxiety
and episodic panic attacks. After the loss of each relationship, Chris
usually confronted moderate depressive feelings, at times accompanied
by suicidal ideation.
After an assessment, the dynamic hologram for Chris was:


<<<PAGE 2375>>>
1. Life problems: Recurrent episodes of anxiety and depression; work
problems; unstable interpersonal relationships; conflict with
authority figures; antagonism toward, and emotional distance from,
his father, brother, and male friends; and fears of heterosexual
intimacy and commitment.
2. Dynamic forces: Ongoing hostility and envy toward males, authority
figures, and successful people, and compulsive and possessive
seeking of female love objects with a serious inability to consider,
fulfill, or tolerate their independent needs.
3. Genetic pathogenic foci: Unconscious loss of maternal objects
precipitated by birth of a brother when Chris was age 2 years;
uncontrolled grief for that loss with a compulsive drive to
experience child-like possession of love objects; and compulsive
hostility toward others perceived as rivals.
The therapist’s active inquiry yielded additional confirmation of the
persistence of repressed sexual feelings toward his mother and the
presence of hostile feelings toward all rivals for his mother’s affection. A
memory suffused with very visceral feelings emerged in this phase as a
result of the therapist’s active inquiry. In this memory, Chris saw himself
in his mother’s arms in a dark room. He remembered the intense pleasure
of contact with his mother’s warm skin, the texture of her clothes, and the
smell of her perfume vividly. While narrating this memory to the
therapist, Chris became so absorbed in the experience that he blushed
intensely. He also described the painful termination of this moment of
pleasure by his father’s sudden and disruptive opening of the door and the
flood of light that disturbed his pleasurable absorption. This sequence
gave way to experiencing grief at the loss of the intense and exclusive
bond with his mother after his brother’s birth and a reexperiencing of
anger, impotence, and loneliness. These feelings were all too familiar in
his present life when his romantic attachments would be threatened or
lost. The affective link between this childhood experience and his
intimacy problems in the present became very obvious to Chris, and the
acceptance of this link enhanced his capacity to work through this
essential component of his pathology. A parallel conflict appeared in the


<<<PAGE 2376>>>
transference as the patient resented the “intrusion” of the inquiring
therapist into the zealously guarded privacy of this primal fantasy of
material possession. (Courtesy of M. Trujillo, M.D.)
Treatment includes four major phases:
patient–therapist encounter, early therapy, height of treatment, and evidence
of change and termination. Therapists use the following techniques during the
four phases.
REQUIREMENTS AND TECHNIQUES.

Patient–Therapist Encounter. A therapist establishes a working alliance by
using the patient’s quick rapport with, and positive feelings for, the therapist
that appear in this phase. The judicious use of open-ended and forced-choice
questions enables the therapist to outline and concentrate on a therapeutic
focus. The therapist specifies the minimal expectations of outcome to be
achieved by the therapy.
Early Therapy. Transference involves clarifying feelings for the therapist as
soon as they appear, a technique that establishes a true therapeutic alliance.
Height of the Treatment. Height of treatment emphasizes active concentration
on the oedipal conflicts that have been chosen as the therapeutic focus;
repeated use of anxiety-provoking questions and confrontations; avoidance of
pregenital characterologic issues, which the patient uses defensively to avoid
dealing with the therapist’s anxiety-provoking techniques; avoidance at all
costs of a transference neurosis; repetitive demonstration of the patient’s
neurotic ways or maladaptive patterns of behavior; concentration on the
anxiety-laden material, even before the defense mechanisms have been
clarified; repeated demonstrations of parent-transference links by the use of
properly timed interpretations based on material given by the patient;
establishment of a corrective emotional experience; encouragement and
support of the patient, who becomes anxious while struggling to understand
the conflicts; new learning and problem-solving patterns; and repeated
presentations and recapitulations of the patient’s psychodynamics until the
defense mechanisms used in dealing with oedipal conflicts are understood.
Evidence of Change and Termination of Psychotherapy. The final phase of


<<<PAGE 2377>>>
therapy emphasizes the tangible demonstration of change in the patient’s
behavior outside therapy, evidence that the patient is using adaptive patterns
of behavior, and initiation of talk about terminating the treatment.
Overview and Results
The shared techniques of all the brief psychotherapies described above
outdistance their differences. They share the therapeutic alliance or dynamic
interaction between therapist and patient, the use of transference, the active
interpretation of a therapeutic focus or central issue, the repetitive links
between parental and transference issues, and the early termination of
therapy.
The outcomes of these brief treatments have undergone extensive
investigation. Contrary to prevailing ideas that the therapeutic factors in
psychotherapy are nonspecific, controlled studies and other assessment
methods (e.g., interviews with unbiased evaluators, patients’ self-evaluations)
point to the importance of the specific techniques used. The capacity for
genuine recovery in certain patients is far greater than was thought. A certain
type of patient receiving brief psychotherapy can benefit greatly from a
practical working through of his or her nuclear conflict in the transference.
Such patients can be recognized in advance through a process of dynamic
interaction because they are responsive, motivated, and able to face
disturbing feelings and because they have a circumscribed focus formulated
for them. The more radical the technique in terms of transference, depth of
interpretation, and the link to childhood, the more radical the therapeutic
effects will be. For some disturbed patients, a carefully chosen partial focus
can be therapeutically effective.

GROUP PSYCHOTHERAPY, COMBINED INDIVIDUAL
AND GROUP PSYCHOTHERAPY, AND PSYCHODRAMA
Group psychotherapy is a modality that employs a professionally trained
leader who selects, composes, organizes, and leads a collection of members
to work together toward the maximal attainment of the goals for each
individual in the group and for the group itself. Certain properties present in
groups, such as mutual support, can be harnessed in the service of providing
relief from psychological suffering and supply peer support to counter


<<<PAGE 2378>>>
isolation experienced by many who seek psychiatric help. Similarly,
homogeneously composed small groups are ideal settings for the
dissemination of accurate information about a condition shared by group
members. Medical illness, substance use disorders, and chronic and persistent
severe psychiatric conditions, including schizophrenia and major affective
disorders, are cases in point.
A widely accepted psychiatric treatment modality, group psychotherapy
uses therapeutic forces within the group, constructive interactions among
members, and interventions of a trained leader to change the maladaptive
behaviors, thoughts, and feelings of emotionally distressed individuals.
Group therapy applies to inpatient and outpatient settings, institutional work,
partial hospitalization units, halfway houses, community settings, and private
practice. Group psychotherapy is also widely used by those who are not
mental health professionals in the adjuvant treatment of physical disorders.
Application of group psychotherapy principles has also found success in the
business and education fields in the form of training, sensitivity, and roleplaying.
Group psychotherapy is a treatment in which carefully selected persons
who are emotionally ill meet in a group guided by a trained therapist and help
one another effect personality change. By using a variety of technical
maneuvers and theoretical constructs, the leader directs group members’
interactions to bring about changes.
Classification
Group therapy, at present, has many approaches. Many individually derived
forms of psychotherapy have their group counterparts. A representative
sample of major theoretical orientations toward group therapy can be broadly
subsumed under the psychodynamic, interpersonal, and cognitive-behavioral
schools of thought. Table 23-4 illustrates some of the similarities and
differences among representative group formats.
Patient Selection
To determine a patient’s suitability for group psychotherapy, a therapist
needs to gather a great deal of information in a screening interview. The
psychiatrist should take a psychiatric history and perform a mental status


<<<PAGE 2379>>>
examination to obtain certain dynamic, behavioral, and diagnostic
information.
Robert entered therapy seeking to understand why he was unable to
maintain close or lasting relationships. A handsome and successful
businessman, he had made a painful and courageous transition away from
self-centered, dysfunctional parents early in his life. Although Robert
made good initial impressions in his jobs, he was always puzzled and
disappointed when his superiors gradually lost interest in him, and his
colleagues avoided him. In one-on-one therapy, he was charming and
entertaining, but perceived narcissistic slights caused him to become
angry and attack. His therapist recommended group psychotherapy when
the patient’s transference feelings remained intense, and therapy was at a
seeming impasse. Initially, Robert charmed the group and strove to be the
center of attention. Visibly annoyed whenever he felt the group leader
was paying more attention to other members, Robert was especially
critical and hostile toward older people in the group and displayed little
empathy for others. After repeated and forceful confrontations from the
group about his antagonistic behavior, he gradually realized that he was
repeating childhood patterns in his family of desperately seeking the
attention of unloving parents and then entering violent rages when they
lost interest. (Courtesy of Normund Wong, M.D.)
Diagnosis. The diagnosis of patients’ disorders is essential in determining
the best therapeutic approach and in evaluating patients’ motivations for
treatment, capacities for change, and personality structure strengths and
weaknesses. Few contraindications exist for group therapy. Antisocial
patients generally do poorly in a heterogeneous group setting because they
cannot adhere to group standards, but if the group is composed of other
antisocial patients, they may respond better to peers than to perceived
authority figures. Depressed patients profit from group therapy after they
have established a trusting relationship with the therapist. Patients who are
actively suicidal or severely depressed should not be treated solely in a group
setting. Patients who are manic are disruptive but, once under pharmacologic
control, do well in the group setting. Therapists should exclude patients who


<<<PAGE 2380>>>
are delusional and who may incorporate the group into their delusional
system, as well as patients who pose a physical threat to other members
because of uncontrollable aggressive outbursts.
Table 23-4
Comparison of Major Group Therapy Orientations

Preparation
Patients prepared by a therapist for a group experience tend to continue in
treatment longer and report less initial anxiety than those who are not
prepared. The preparation consists of having a therapist explain the procedure
in as much detail as possible and answer the patient’s questions before the
first session.
Size. Group therapy has been successful with as few as 3 members and as
many as 15, but most therapists consider 8 to 10 members the optimal size.
Interaction may be insufficient with fewer members unless they are especially
verbal, and with more than 10 members, the interaction may be too great for
the members or the therapist to follow.


<<<PAGE 2381>>>
Frequency and Length of Sessions. Most group psychotherapists
conduct group sessions once a week. Maintaining continuity in sessions is
essential. When there are alternate sessions, the group meets twice a week,
once with and once without the therapist. Group sessions generally last
anywhere from 1 to 2 hours, but the time limit should be constant.
Marathon groups were most popular in the 1970s but are much less
common today. In time-extended therapy (marathon group therapy), the
group meets continuously for 12 to 72 hours. Enforced interactional
proximity and, during the most prolonged time-extended sessions, sleep
deprivation break down certain ego defenses, release affective processes, and
theoretically promote open communication. Time-extended sessions,
however, can be dangerous for patients with weak ego structures, such as
persons with schizophrenia or BPD.
Homogeneous versus Heterogeneous Groups. Most therapists
believe that groups should be as heterogeneous as possible to ensure maximal
interaction. Members with different diagnostic categories and varied
behavioral patterns, from all races, social levels, and educational
backgrounds, and of varying ages and both sexes, should be brought together.
Patients between the ages of 20 and 65 years can be included effectively in
the same group. Age differences help in developing parent–child and
brother–sister models, and patients have the opportunity to relive and rectify
interpersonal difficulties that may have appeared insurmountable.
Both children and adolescents benefit the most in groups comprising
mostly persons in their age groups. Some adolescent patients are capable of
assimilating the material of an adult group, regardless of content, but they
may benefit significantly from a constructive peer experience that they might
otherwise not have.
Open versus Closed Groups. Closed groups have a set number and
composition of patients. If members leave, no new members are accepted. In
open groups, membership is more fluid, and new members join whenever old
members leave.
Mechanisms


<<<PAGE 2382>>>
Group Formation. Each patient approaches group therapy differently, and,
in this sense, groups are microcosms. Patients use typical adaptive abilities,
defense mechanisms, and ways of relating, and when these tactics are
ultimately reflected back to them by the group, they learn to be introspective
about their personality functioning. A process inherent in group formation
requires that patients suspend their previous ways of coping. In entering the
group, they allow their executive ego functions—reality testing, adaptation to
and mastery of the environment, and perception—to be assumed, to some
degree, by the collective assessment provided by the total membership,
including the leader.
Therapeutic Factors. Table 23-5 outlines 20 significant therapeutic
factors that account for change in group psychotherapy.
Table 23-5
Therapeutic Factors
Factor

Definition

Abreaction

A process by which repressed material, particularly
a painful experience or conflict, is brought back to
consciousness. During the process, the person
not only recalls, but also relives the material,
which is accompanied by the appropriate
emotional response; insight usually results from
the experience.

Acceptance

The feeling of being accepted by other members of
the group; differences are tolerated, and there is
an absence of censure.

Altruism

The act of one member’s being of help to another;
putting another person’s need before one’s own
and learning that there is value in giving to others.
The term was originated by Auguste Comte
(1798–1857), and Freud believed it was a major
factor in establishing group cohesion and


<<<PAGE 2383>>>
community feeling.
Catharsis

The expression of ideas, thoughts, and suppressed
material that is accompanied by an emotional
response that produces a state of relief in the
patient.

Cohesion

The sense that the group is working together toward
a common goal; also referred to as a sense of
we-ness; believed to be the most important factor
related to positive therapeutic effects.

Consensual
validation

Confirmation of reality by comparing one’s own
conceptualizations with those of other group
members; interpersonal distortions are thereby
corrected. The term was introduced by Harry
Stack Sullivan. Trigant Burrow had used the
phrase consensual observation to refer to the
same phenomenon.

Contagion

The process in which the expression of emotion by
one member stimulates the awareness of a
similar emotion in another member.

Corrective
familial
experience

The group recreates the family of origin for some
members who can work through conflicts
psychologically through group interaction (e.g.,
sibling rivalry, anger toward parents).

Empathy

A capacity of a group member to put himself or
herself into the psychological frame of reference
of another group member and, thereby,
understand his or her thinking, feeling, or
behavior.

Identification

An unconscious defense mechanism in which the
person incorporates the characteristics and
qualities of another person or object into his or
her ego system.


<<<PAGE 2384>>>
Imitation

The conscious emulation or modeling of one’s
behavior after that of another (also called role
modeling); also known as “spectator therapy,” as
one patient learns from another.

Insight

Conscious awareness and understanding of one’s
own psychodynamics and symptoms of
maladaptive behavior. Most therapists distinguish
two types: (1) intellectual insight—knowledge and
awareness without any changes in maladaptive
behavior and (2) emotional insight—awareness
and understanding leading to positive changes in
personality and behavior.

Inspiration

The process of imparting a sense of optimism to
group members; the ability to recognize that one
has the capacity to overcome problems; also
known as installation of hope.

Interaction

The free and open exchange of ideas and feelings
among group members; effective interaction is
emotionally charged.

Interpretation

The process during which the group leader
formulates the meaning or significance of a
patient’s resistance, defenses, and symbols; the
result is that the patient develops a cognitive
framework within which to understand his or her
behavior.

Learning

Patients acquire knowledge about new areas, such
as social skills and sexual behavior; they receive
advice, obtain guidance, and attempt to influence
and are influenced by other group members.

Reality testing

Ability of the person to evaluate objectively the
world outside the self; includes the capacity to
perceive oneself and other group members
accurately.


<<<PAGE 2385>>>
Transference

Projection of feelings, thoughts, and wishes onto the
therapist, who has come to represent an object
from the patient’s past. Such reactions, although
perhaps appropriate for the condition prevailing in
the patient’s earlier life, are inappropriate and
anachronistic when applied to the therapist in the
present. Patients in group therapy may also direct
such feelings toward one another, a process
called multiple transferences.

Universalization The awareness of the patient that he or she is not
alone in having problems; others share similar
complaints or difficulties in learning; the patient is
not unique.
Ventilation

The expression of suppressed feelings, ideas, or
events to other group members; the sharing of
personal secrets that ameliorates a sense of sin
or guilt (also referred to as self-disclosure).

Role of the Therapist
Although opinions differ about how active or passive a group therapist should
be, the consensus is that the therapist’s role is primarily facilitative. Ideally,
the group members themselves are the primary source of cure and change.
The climate produced by the therapist’s personality is a potent agent of
change. The therapist is more than an expert applying techniques; he or she
exerts a personal influence that taps such variables as empathy, warmth, and
respect.
Inpatient Group Psychotherapy
Group therapy is an integral part of hospitalized patients’ therapeutic
experiences. Group organization can take many forms on a ward. In a
community meeting, an entire inpatient unit meets with all the staff members
(e.g., psychiatrists, psychologists, and nurses). In team meetings, 15 to 20


<<<PAGE 2386>>>
patients and staff members meet; a regular or small group comprising 8 to 10
patients may meet with 1 or 2 therapists, as in traditional group therapy.
Although the goals of each group vary, they all have common purposes: to
increase patients’ awareness of themselves through their interactions with the
other group members, who provide feedback about their behavior; to provide
patients with improved interpersonal and social skills; to help the members
adapt to an inpatient setting; and, to improve communication between
patients and staff. In addition, one type of group meeting is attended only by
inpatient hospital staff in order to improve communication among the staff
members and to provide mutual support and encouragement in their day-today work with patients. Community meetings and team meetings are more
helpful for dealing with patient treatment problems than they are for
providing insight-oriented therapy, which is the province of the small-group
therapy meeting.
Group Composition. Two critical factors of inpatient groups common to
all short-term therapies are the heterogeneity of the members and the rapid
turnover of patients. Outside the hospital, therapists have large caseloads
from which to select patients for group therapy. On the ward, therapists have
a limited number of patients to choose from and have restrictions in terms of
those patients who are both willing to participate and suitable for a smallgroup experience. In certain settings, group participation may be mandatory
(e.g., in substance use disorder units), but mandatory attendance does not
usually apply in a general psychiatry unit. Most group experiences are more
productive when the patients themselves choose to enter them.
More sessions are preferable to fewer. During patients’ hospital stays,
groups may meet daily to allow interactional continuity and the carryover of
themes from one session to the next. A new group member can be brought up
to date quickly, either by the therapist in an orientation meeting or by another
group member. A newly admitted patient has often learned many details
about the small-group program from another patient before actually attending
the first session. The less frequently the group sessions are held, the greater
the need for a therapist to structure the group and be active in it.
Inpatient versus Outpatient Groups. Although the therapeutic factors
that account for change in small inpatient groups are similar to those in the


<<<PAGE 2387>>>
outpatient settings, there are qualitative differences. For example, the
relatively high turnover of patients in inpatient groups complicates the
process of cohesion. However, the fact that all the group members are
together in the hospital aids cohesion, as do the therapists’ efforts to foster
the process. Sharing of information, universalization, and catharsis are the
main therapeutic factors at work in inpatient groups. Although insight more
likely occurs in outpatient groups because of their long-term nature, some
patients can obtain a new understanding of their psychological makeup
within the confines of a single group session. A unique quality of inpatient
groups is the patients’ extra-group contacts, which are extensive because they
live together on the same ward. Verbalizing their thoughts and feelings about
such contacts in the therapy sessions encourages interpersonal learning. In
addition, conflicts between patients or between patients and staff members
can be anticipated and resolved.
Twelve former psychiatric inpatients who attended the monthly
medication clinic would meet for 1 hour before their individual
appointments with the psychiatrist to review their current social situation
and medications. All received treatment from the same ward doctor and
had known one another while on the inpatient service. The psychiatrist
who performed the medication reviews also served as the group leader.
Periodically, a staff member who was also familiar with the patients
assisted with the group. Coffee was available, and the patients often
brought pastries from home. The patients socialized with one another
during the hour and frequently exchanged helpful ideas and tips about job
opportunities. Those without cars shared rides with other members. The
group was open-ended and well attended. Most of the patients were
single and had a long history of psychotic illness. For most, this meeting
was their only opportunity to socialize and be among peers. Frequently,
when a member entered the hospital again, many in the group would visit
their colleague on the ward. (Courtesy of Normund Wong, M.D.)
Self-Help Groups
Leaderless or self-help group experiences, usually homogeneously composed


<<<PAGE 2388>>>
of participants with a common issue, represent an additional use of the group
setting as a vehicle for change. Although these groups are not strictly
considered a form of psychotherapy, they do share several parameters and
can have therapeutic benefits for participants. Perhaps the best-known
examples are the Twelve Step groups of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), AlAnon, Adult Children of Alcoholics (ACoA), and other substance use
disorder centered groups. In addition, many self-help groups develop around
health and illness, loss, or shared life experience. Cancer support groups,
groups for widows or widowers, parents without partners, and bipolar support
groups are but a few well-known self-help groups.
Combined Individual and Group Psychotherapy
In combined individual and group psychotherapy, patients see a therapist
individually and also take part in group sessions. The therapist for the group
and individual sessions is usually the same person. Groups can vary in size
from 3 to 15 members, but the most helpful size is 8 to 10. Patients must
attend all group sessions. Attendance at individual sessions is also essential,
and the therapeutic process should examine failure to attend either group or
individual sessions.
Combined therapy is a particular treatment modality, not a system by
which to augment individual therapy by an occasional group session or a
group therapy in which a participant meets alone with a therapist from time to
time. Instead, it is an ongoing plan in which meaningful integration of the
group experience with the individual sessions yields reciprocal feedback to
help form an integrated therapeutic experience. Although the one-to-one
doctor–patient relationship makes an in-depth examination of the transference
reaction possible for some patients, it may not provide other patients with the
corrective emotional experiences necessary for therapeutic change. The group
gives patients a variety of persons with whom they can have transferential
reactions. In the microcosm of the group, patients can relive and work
through familial and other important influences.
Techniques. The combined therapy format may include different
techniques based on varying theoretical frameworks. Some clinicians
increase the frequency of individual sessions to encourage the emergence of


<<<PAGE 2389>>>
the transference neurosis. In the behavioral model, individual sessions occur
regularly, but they tend to be less frequent than in other approaches. Whether
patients use a couch or a chair during individual sessions depends on a
therapist’s orientation. Other techniques include alternate meetings or “aftersessions” without the therapist present. A combined therapy approach called
structured interactional group psychotherapy has a different group member
as the focus of each weekly group session who is discussed in depth by the
other members.
Results. Most workers in the field believe that combined therapy has the
advantages of both dyadic and group settings, without sacrificing the qualities
of either. Generally, the dropout rate in combined therapy is lower than that
in group therapy alone. In many cases, combined therapy appears to bring
problems to the surface and to resolve them more quickly than might be
possible with either method alone.
Psychodrama
Psychodrama is a method of group psychotherapy originated by the
Viennese-born psychiatrist Jacob Moreno that explores personality makeup,
interpersonal relationships, conflicts, and emotional problems through special
dramatic methods. Therapeutic dramatization of emotional problems includes
the protagonist or patient, the person who acts out problems with the help of
auxiliary egos, persons who enact varying aspects of the patient, and the
director, psychodramatist, or therapist, the person who guides those in the
drama toward the acquisition of insight.
Roles
DIRECTOR. The director is the leader or therapist and so must be an active

participant. He or she has a catalytic function by encouraging the members of
the group to be spontaneous. The director must also be available to meet the
group’s needs without superimposing his or her values. Of all the group
psychotherapies, psychodrama requires the most participation from the
therapist.
PROTAGONIST. The protagonist is the patient in conflict. The patient chooses


<<<PAGE 2390>>>
the situation to portray in the dramatic scene, or the therapist chooses it if the
patient so desires.
AUXILIARY EGO. An auxiliary ego is another group member who represents

something or someone in the protagonist’s experience. The auxiliary egos
help account for the great range of therapeutic effects available in
psychodrama.
GROUP. The members of the psychodrama and the audience make up the

group. Some are participants, and others are observers, but all benefit from
the experience to the extent that they can identify with the ongoing events.
The concept of spontaneity in psychodrama refers to the ability of each group
member, especially the protagonist, to experience the thoughts and feelings
of the moment and to communicate emotion as authentically as possible.
Techniques. The psychodrama can focus on any particular area of
functioning (a dream, a family, or a community situation), a symbolic role, an
unconscious attitude, or an imagined future situation. The group can also act
out such symptoms as delusions and hallucinations. Techniques to advance
the therapeutic process and to increase productivity and creativity include the
soliloquy (a recital of overt and hidden thoughts and feelings), role reversal
(the exchange of the patient’s role for the role of a significant person), the
double (an auxiliary ego acting as the patient), the multiple double (several
egos acting as the patient did on varying occasions), and the mirror technique
(an ego imitating the patient and speaking for him or her). Other techniques
include the use of hypnosis and psychoactive drugs to modify the acting
behavior in various ways.
Ethical and Legal Issues
Confidentiality. Except where the law requires disclosure, the group
therapist legally and ethically gives information about the group members to
others only after obtaining appropriate patient consent. The therapist is
obligated to take appropriate steps to be responsible to society, as well as to
patients, when patients pose a danger to themselves or others. The guidelines
for ethics of the American Group Psychotherapy Association state that


<<<PAGE 2391>>>
therapists must obtain specific permission to confer with the referring
therapist or with the individual therapist when the patient is in conjoint
therapy.
Although the group members, as well as the therapist, should protect the
identity of the members and maintain confidentiality, the group members are
not legally bound to do so. During the preparation of patients for group
psychotherapy, therapists should routinely instruct the prospective members
to keep all material discussed in the group confidential. Theoretically, in a
legal case, one member of a group can be asked to testify against another, but
such a situation is likely to be rare.
A therapist must exercise clinical judgment and caution in placing a patient
in a group if he or she thinks that the burdens of maintaining secrets will be
too great for some potential members or if a prospective group patient
harbors a secret of such magnitude or notoriety that membership in a group
would not be wise.
Violence and Aggression. Although reports of violence and aggression
are rare, the potential exists that a group member may physically attack
another patient or a therapist. The attack may occur within the group or
outside the group. Careful selection of group members can diminish the
likelihood of such an event. Patients with a demonstrated history of assaultive
behavior and psychotic patients who pose a potential for violence should not
participate in a group. In institutional settings, in which group therapy is
common, sufficient safeguards must be in place to discourage any physical
danger to others—for example, guards or attendants can act as observers.
Sexual Behavior. For therapists, sexual intercourse with a patient or a
former patient is unethical; in many states, such behavior is considered a
criminal act. The issue is complicated in group psychotherapy, however,
because members may engage in sexual activities with one another. The
issues of pregnancy, rape, and sexually transmitted infections by group
members are open questions. If an injury results from sexual activity by
group members, the therapist could be held accountable for not preventing
such behavior. The therapist should advise prospective group members that
each patient is responsible for reporting any sexual contact between
members. The therapist cannot anticipate every group sexual encounter or


<<<PAGE 2392>>>
prevent sexual relationships from developing, but he or she is obligated to
provide patients with guidelines of acceptable behavior. The therapist should
identify sexual, vulnerable, or exploitive patients in the selection and
preparation of patients for the group. Explicitly inform sociopathic patients
who sexually exploit others that such behavior is not acceptable in the group
and should be verbalized rather than acted out. The therapist must not
encourage or tacitly allow sexual activity in the conduct of the group. Patients
with AIDS are encouraged to reveal that they harbor the virus.

FAMILY THERAPY AND COUPLES THERAPY
Family Therapy
The family is the foundation of most societies. The study of families in
different cultures has been a subject of fascination and scientific interest from
viewpoints as diverse as sociology, group dynamics, anthropology, ethnicity,
race, evolutionary biology, and, of course, the mental health field. The
confluence of information gleaned from family studies has set the backdrop
against which the contemporary practice of family therapy has evolved.
Family therapy is any psychotherapeutic endeavor that explicitly focuses
on altering the interactions between or among family members and seeks to
improve the functioning of the family as a unit. Both family therapy and
couple therapy aim at some change in relational functioning. In most cases,
they also aim at some other change, typically in the functioning of specific
individuals in the family. Family therapy meant to heal a rift between parents
and their adult children is an example of the use of family therapy centered
on relationship goals. Family therapy aimed at increasing the family’s coping
with schizophrenia and at reducing the family’s expressed emotion is an
example of family therapy aimed at individual goals (in this case, the
functioning of the person with schizophrenia), as well as family goals. In the
early years of family therapy, experts viewed change in the family system as
sufficient to produce individual change. More recent treatments aimed at
change in individuals, as well as in the family system, tend to supplement the
interventions that focus on interpersonal relationships with specific strategies
that focus on individual behavior.


<<<PAGE 2393>>>
Indications. The presence of a relational difficulty is a clear indication for
family and couple therapy. Couples and family therapies are the only
treatments with evidence to support their use for such problems as marital
maladjustment, and other methods, such as individual therapy, often have
deleterious effects in these situations. Couples and family therapy also have a
clear and important role in the treatment of numerous specific psychiatric
disorders, often as a component within a multimethod treatment.
Of course, as with any therapy, the indications for family and couple
therapy are broad and vary from case to case. Family therapy is a therapeutic
collage of ideas regarding the underpinnings of family and individual
stability and change, psychopathology, and problems in living, as well as
relational ethics. Family therapy might better be called systemically sensitive
therapy, and, in this sense, reflects a basic worldview as much as a clinical
treatment methodology. For therapists thus inclined, then, all clinical
problems involve salient interactional components; thus, some kind of family
(or other functionally significant other’s) involvement in therapy is always
indicated, even in treatment that emphasizes individual problems.
An impressive array now exists of common clinical disorders and
problems, including child, adolescent, and adult disorders, for which research
has demonstrated family or couple treatment methods to be effective. In a
few instances, couple and family interventions are probably even the
treatment of choice, and for several disorders, the research argues for family
intervention to be an essential part of treatment.
Techniques
INITIAL CONSULTATION. Family therapy is familiar enough to the general

public for families with a high level of conflict to request it specifically.
When the initial complaint is about an individual family member, however,
pretreatment work may be needed. Underlying resistance to a family
approach typically includes fears by parents that the therapist will blame
them for their child’s difficulties, that the entire family will be pronounced
sick, that a spouse will object, and that open discussion of one child’s
misbehavior will have a negative influence on siblings. Refusal by an
adolescent or young adult patient to participate in family therapy is frequently
a disguised collusion with the fears of one or both parents.


<<<PAGE 2394>>>
INTERVIEW TECHNIQUE. The unique quality of a family interview springs

from two important facts. A family comes to treatment with its history and
dynamics firmly in place. To a family therapist, the established nature of the
group, more than the symptoms, constitutes the clinical problem. Family
members usually live together and, at some level, depend on one another for
their physical and emotional well-being. Whatever transpires in the therapy
session is known to all. Central principles of technique also derive from these
facts. For example, the therapist must carefully channel the catharsis of anger
by one family member toward another. The person who is the object of the
anger will react to the attack, and the anger may escalate into violence and
fracture relationships, with one member or more withdrawing from therapy.
For another example, free association is inappropriate in family therapy
because it can encourage one person to dominate a session. Thus, therapists
must always control and direct the family interview.
Unless an emergency arises,
sessions occur no more than once a week. Each session, however, may
require as much as 2 hours. Extended sessions can include an intermission to
give the therapist time to organize the material and plan a response. A
flexible schedule is necessary when geography or personal circumstances
make it physically difficult for the family to get together. The length of
treatment depends both on the nature of the problem and on the therapeutic
model. Therapists who use problem-solving models exclusively may
accomplish their goals in a few sessions, whereas therapists using growthoriented models may work with a family for years and may schedule sessions
at long intervals.
FREQUENCY AND LENGTH OF TREATMENT.

Schools of Family Therapy. Many schools of family therapy exist, none
of which is superior to the others. The particular model used depends on the
training received, the context in which therapy occurs, and the personality of
the therapist. Table 23-6 outlines the major schools of family therapy, the
influential practitioners of each method, and the focus of each technique.
Table 23-6
Schools of Family and Couple Therapy


<<<PAGE 2395>>>

<<<PAGE 2396>>>
Modifications of Techniques
FAMILY GROUP THERAPY. Family group therapy combines several families

into a single group. Families share mutual problems and compare their
interactions with those of the other families in the group. Treatment of
families impacted by schizophrenia has been effective in multiple family
groups. Parents of disturbed children may also meet together to share their
situations.
SOCIAL NETWORK THERAPY. In social network therapy, the social community

or network of a disturbed patient meets in group sessions with the patient.
The network includes those with whom the patient comes into contact in
daily life, not only the immediate family but also relatives, friends,
tradespersons, teachers, and coworkers.
With the paradoxical therapy approach, which
evolved from the work of Gregory Bateson, a therapist suggests that the
patient intentionally engage in the unwanted behavior (called the paradoxical
PARADOXICAL THERAPY.


<<<PAGE 2397>>>
injunction) and, for example, avoid a phobic object or perform a compulsive
ritual. Although paradoxical therapy and the use of paradoxical injunctions
seem to be counterintuitive, the therapy can create new insights for some
patients. It is used in individual therapy as well as in family therapy.
REFRAMING. Reframing, also known as positive connotation, is a relabeling of

all negatively expressed feelings or behavior as positive. When the therapist
attempts to get family members to view behavior from a new frame of
reference, “This child is impossible,” becomes “This child is desperately
trying to distract and protect you from what he or she perceives as an
unhappy marriage.” Reframing is an important process that allows family
members to view themselves in new ways that can produce change.
Goals. Family therapy has several goals: to resolve or reduce pathogenic
conflict and anxiety within the matrix of interpersonal relationships; to
enhance the perception and fulfillment by family members of one another’s
emotional needs; to promote appropriate role relationships between the sexes
and generations; to strengthen the capacity of individual members and the
family as a whole to cope with destructive forces inside and outside the
surrounding environment; to influence family identity and values to orient
members toward health and growth. The therapy ultimately aims to integrate
families into the large systems of society, extended family, and community
groups and social systems, such as schools, medical facilities, and social,
recreational, and welfare agencies.
Couples (Marital) Therapy
Couples or marital therapy is a form of psychotherapy designed to
psychologically modify the interaction of two persons in conflict with each
other over one parameter or a variety of parameters—social, emotional,
sexual, or economic. In couples therapy, a trained person establishes a
therapeutic contract with a patient-couple and, through definite types of
communication, attempts to alleviate the disturbance, to reverse or change
maladaptive patterns of behavior, and to encourage personality growth and
development.
Marriage counseling may be considered more limited in scope than
marriage therapy: the focus is only surrounding a particular familial conflict,


<<<PAGE 2398>>>
and the counseling is primarily task-oriented, geared to solving a specific
problem, such as child-rearing. Marriage therapy, by contrast, emphasizes
restructuring a couple’s interaction and sometimes explores the
psychodynamics of each partner. Both therapy and counseling emphasize
helping marital partners cope effectively with their problems. Most important
is the definition of appropriate and realistic goals, which may involve
extensive reconstruction of the union or problem-solving approaches or a
combination of both.
Types of Therapies
In individual therapy, the partners may consult
different therapists, who do not necessarily communicate with each other and
indeed may not even know each other. The goal of treatment is to strengthen
each partner’s adaptive capacities. At times, only one of the partners is in
treatment, and, in such cases, it is often helpful for the person who is not in
treatment to visit the therapist. Not only can the visiting partner provide data
about the patient that the therapist might otherwise overlook, but the therapist
can identify and deal with overt or covert anxiety in the visiting partner
resulting from change in the patient, correct irrational beliefs about treatment
events, and examine conscious or unconscious attempts by the partner to
sabotage the patient’s treatment.
INDIVIDUAL THERAPY.

INDIVIDUAL COUPLES THERAPY. In individual couples therapy, each partner is

in therapy, which is either concurrent, with the same therapist, or
collaborative, with each partner seeing a different therapist.
CONJOINT THERAPY. In conjoint therapy, the most common treatment method

in couples therapy, either one or two therapists treat the partners in joint
sessions. Cotherapy with therapists of both sexes prevents a particular patient
from feeling ganged up on when confronted by two members of the opposite
sex.
FOUR-WAY SESSION. In a four-way session, each partner is seen by a different

therapist, with regular joint sessions in which all four persons participate. A
variation of the four-way session is the roundtable interview, developed by


<<<PAGE 2399>>>
William Masters and Virginia Johnson for the rapid treatment of sexually
dysfunctional couples. Two patients and two opposite-sex therapists meet
regularly.
GROUP PSYCHOTHERAPY. Group therapy for couples allows a variety of group

dynamics to affect the participants. Groups usually consist of three to four
couples and one or two therapists. The couples identify with one another and
recognize that others have similar problems; each gains support and empathy
from fellow group members of the same or opposite sex. They explore sexual
attitudes and have an opportunity to gain new information from their peer
groups, and each receives specific feedback about his or her behavior, either
negative or positive, which may have more meaning and be better assimilated
coming from a neutral, nonspouse member, for example, than from the
spouse or the therapist.
During the middle phase of a couples group comprising four couples, the
theme of whether to have children arose. One couple had just come from
a visit to the gynecologist, who informed them that they were running out
of time because of the wife’s age. The woman in the couple did not want
to have children, but her husband did. His complaint about the marriage
was that his wife never was demonstrative in showing her loving feelings
for him. He felt her to be detached, distant, and sexually inhibited.
The prevailing sentiment among the other couples who had children
was that children only added additional stress to an already stressed
relationship. One other couple, however, voiced their different view by
describing how their children had enriched their lives.
As the talk about going forward and getting pregnant progressed, the
group leader noted the nonverbal communication between the ambivalent
couple. Whenever the tone of the group leaned toward having children,
the wife would reach out and grasp the hand of her husband tenderly.
This action invariably had the effect of stopping him from pursuing the
topic for fear of the withdrawal of her affection. All this occurred without
words. Once identified, this repetitive nonverbal pattern was available for
examination in the group, and the supportive elements provided by other
members and the leader encouraged a frank, direct, and open


<<<PAGE 2400>>>
conversation between the partners, who eventually chose to go forward
and attempt to have a child. (Courtesy of H. I. Spitz, M.D. and S. Spitz,
ACSW.)
COMBINED THERAPY. Combined therapy refers to all or any of the preceding

techniques used concurrently or in combination. Thus, a particular patientcouple may begin treatment with one or both partners in individual
psychotherapy, continue in conjoint therapy with the partner, and terminate
therapy after a course of treatment in a married couples’ group. The rationale
for combined therapy is that there is no evidence to support that a single
approach to marital problems is superior to another. Familiarity with a variety
of approaches thus allows therapists flexibility that provides maximal benefit
for couples in distress.
Indications. Whatever the specific therapeutic technique, initiation of
couples therapy is appropriate when individual therapy has failed to resolve
the relationship difficulties, when the onset of distress in one or both partners
is clearly a relational problem, and when a couple in conflict requests couples
therapy. Problems in communication between partners are a prime indication
for couples therapy. In such instances, one spouse may be intimidated by the
other, may become anxious when attempting to tell the other about thoughts
or feelings, or may project unconscious expectations onto the other. The
therapy works toward enabling each partner to see the other realistically.
Conflicts in one or several areas, such as the partners’ sexual life, are also
indications for treatment. Similarly, difficulty in establishing satisfactory
social, economic, parental, or emotional roles implies that a couple needs
help. Clinicians should evaluate all aspects of the marital relationship before
attempting to treat only one problem, which could be a symptom of a
pervasive marital disorder.
Contraindications. Contraindications for couples therapy include patients
with severe forms of psychosis, particularly patients with paranoid elements
and those in whom the marriage’s homeostatic mechanism is a protection
against psychosis, marriages in which one or both partners really want to
divorce, marriages in which one spouse refuses to participate because of


<<<PAGE 2401>>>
anxiety or fear, and when there is a threat of domestic violence.
Goals. Nathan Ackerman defined the aims of couples therapy as follows: the
goals of therapy for partner relational problems are to alleviate emotional
distress and disability and to promote the levels of well-being of both
partners together and of each as an individual. Ideally, therapists move
toward these goals by strengthening the shared resources for problemsolving, by encouraging the substitution of adequate controls and defenses for
pathogenic ones, by enhancing both the immunity against the disintegrative
effects of emotional upset and the complementarity of the relationship, and
by promoting the growth of the relationship and of each partner.
Part of a therapist’s task is to persuade each partner in the relationship to
take responsibility for understanding the psychodynamic makeup of
personality. The emphasis is on each person’s accountability for the effects of
behavior on his or her own life, the life of the partner, and the lives of others
in the environment. The result is often a deep understanding of the problems
that created marital discord.
Couples therapy does not ensure the maintenance of any marriage or
relationship. Indeed, in certain instances, it may show the partners that they
are in a nonviable union and should consider dissolution. In these cases,
couples may continue to meet with therapists to work through the difficulties
of separating and obtaining a divorce, a process referred to as divorce
therapy.

DIALECTICAL BEHAVIOR THERAPY
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is the psychosocial treatment that has
received the most empirical support for patients with BPD. Put simply, the
overarching goal of DBT is to help create a life worth living for patients who
often suffer tremendously from chronic and pervasive problems across many
areas of their lives. DBT is a type of psychotherapy initially developed for
chronically self-injurious patients with BPD and parasuicidal behavior. In
recent years, its use has extended to other forms of mental illness. The
method is eclectic, drawing on concepts derived from supportive, cognitive,
and behavioral therapies. Some elements trace back to Franz Alexander’s
view of therapy as a corrective emotional experience and other elements from


<<<PAGE 2402>>>
certain Eastern philosophical schools (e.g., Zen).
Weekly visits aim to improve interpersonal skills and decrease selfdestructive behavior using techniques involving advice, metaphor,
storytelling, and confrontation, among others. Patients with BPD especially
are helped to deal with the ambivalent feelings that are characteristic of the
disorder. Marsha Linehan, Ph.D., developed the treatment method based on
her theory that such patients cannot identify emotional experiences and
cannot tolerate frustration or rejection. As with other behavioral approaches,
DBT assumes all behavior (including thoughts and feelings) is learned and
that patients with BPD behave in ways that reinforce or even reward their
behavior, regardless of how maladaptive it is.
Functions of DBT
As described by its originator, there are five essential “functions” in
treatment: (1) to enhance and expand the patient’s repertoire of skillful
behavioral patterns; (2) to improve patient motivation to change by reducing
reinforcement of maladaptive behavior, including dysfunctional cognition
and emotion; (3) to ensure that new behavioral patterns generalize from the
therapeutic to the natural environment; (4) to structure the environment so
that effective behaviors, rather than dysfunctional behaviors, are reinforced;
and (5) to enhance the motivation and capabilities of the therapist so that the
treatment rendered is effective. Figure 23-1 illustrates how DBT breaks the
cycle of problem behavior being used to avoid emotional distress.
The four modes of treatment in DBT are as follows: (1) group skills
training, (2) individual therapy, (3) phone consultations, and (4) consultation
team. Descriptions of these modes of treatment are below. Other ancillary
treatments used are pharmacotherapy and hospitalization when needed.
Group Skills Training. In group format, patients learn specific behavioral,
emotional, cognitive, and interpersonal skills. Unlike traditional group
therapy, observations about others in the group are discouraged. Instead,
DBT takes a didactic approach, using specific exercises from a skills training
manual, many of which emphasize control of emotional dysregulation and
impulsive behavior.
Individual Therapy. Sessions in DBT occur weekly, generally for 50 to 60


<<<PAGE 2403>>>
minutes, in which review of skills learned during group training takes place,
along with examination of life events from the previous week. Therapists
note episodes of pathologic behavioral patterns that could have been
corrected if learned skills had been put into effect. Patients are encouraged to
record their thoughts, feelings, and behaviors on diary cards, which therapists
analyze in the session.
Telephone Consultation. Therapists are available for phone consultation
24 hours per day. Patients are encouraged to call when they feel themselves
heading toward some crisis that might lead to injurious behavior to
themselves or others. Calls are intended to be brief and usually last about 10
minutes.
Consultation Team. Therapists meet in weekly meetings to review their
work with their patients. By doing so, they provide support for one another
and maintain motivation in their work. The meetings enable them to compare
the techniques used and to validate those that are most effective (Table 23-7).
Results
Several studies evaluating the effect of DBT for patients with BPD found that
such therapy was positive. Patients had a low dropout rate from treatment, the
incidence of parasuicidal behaviors declined, self-report of angry affect
decreased, and social adjustment and work performance improved. The
method is now being applied to other disorders, including substance use
disorders, eating disorders, schizophrenia, and PTSD.
Table 23-7
Consultation Team Agreements in Dialectical Behavior
Therapy
1. Meet weekly for 1–2 hr
2. Discuss cases according to the treatment hierarchy (i.e., selfinjurious/life-threatening behavior, treatment-interfering behavior, and
quality-of-life–interfering behavior)
3. Accept a dialectical philosophy


<<<PAGE 2404>>>
4. Consult with the patient on how to interact with other therapists,
and do not tell other therapists how to interact with the patient
5. Do not expect consistency of therapists with one another (even
across the same patient)
6. Allow all therapists to observe their own limits without fear of
judgmental reactions from other consultation group members
7. Search for nonpejorative, empathic interpretation of patient’s
behavior
8. Acknowledge that all therapists are fallible

FIGURE 23-1
How dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) works.


<<<PAGE 2405>>>
BIOFEEDBACK
Biofeedback involves the recording and display of small changes in the
physiologic levels of the feedback parameter. The display can be visual, such
as a big meter or a bar of lights, or auditory. Therapists instruct patients to
change the levels of the parameter, using the feedback from the display as a
guide. The basis of biofeedback is the idea that the autonomic nervous system
can come under voluntary control through operant conditioning. Biofeedback
can be used by itself or in combination with relaxation. For example, patients
with urinary incontinence use biofeedback alone to regain control over the
pelvic musculature. The rehabilitation of neurologic disorders also uses
biofeedback. The relaxation that patients learn to facilitate may augment the
benefits of biofeedback.
Theory
Neal Miller demonstrated the medical potential of biofeedback by showing
that the normally involuntary autonomic nervous system is susceptible to
operant conditioning by the use of appropriate feedback. Utilizing
instruments, patients acquire information about the status of involuntary
biologic functions, such as skin temperature and electrical conductivity,
muscle tension, blood pressure, heart rate, and brain wave activity. Patients
then learn to regulate one or more of these physiologic states that affect
symptoms. For example, a person can learn to raise the temperature of his or
her hands to reduce the frequency of migraines, palpitations, or angina
pectoris. Presumably, patients lower the sympathetic activation and
voluntarily self-regulate arterial smooth muscle vasoconstrictive tendencies.
Methods
Instrumentation. The feedback instrument used depends on the patient and
the specific problem. The most effective instruments are the electromyogram
(EMG), which measures the electrical potentials of muscle fibers; the
electroencephalogram (EEG), which measures alpha waves that occur in
relaxed states; the galvanic skin response (GSR) gauge, which shows
decreased skin conductivity during a relaxed state; and the thermistor, which
measures skin temperature (which drops during tension because of peripheral


<<<PAGE 2406>>>
vasoconstriction). Patients are attached to one of the instruments that measure
a physiologic function and translate the measurement into an audible or
visual signal that patients use to gauge their responses. For example, in the
treatment of bruxism, an EMG is attached to the masseter muscle. The EMG
emits a high tone when the muscle contracts and a low tone when at rest.
Patients can learn to alter the tone to indicate relaxation. Patients receive
feedback about the masseter muscle, the tone reinforces the learning, and the
condition ameliorates—all of these events interacting synergistically.
Many less-specific clinical applications (e.g., treating insomnia,
dysmenorrhea, and speech problems; improving athletic performance;
treating volitional disorders; achieving altered states of consciousness;
managing stress; and supplementing psychotherapy for treating anxiety
associated with somatic symptom and related disorders) use a model in which
frontalis muscle EMG biofeedback is combined with thermal biofeedback
and verbal instructions in progressive relaxation.
Relaxation Therapy. Muscle relaxation is used as a component of
treatment programs (e.g., systematic desensitization) or as a treatment in its
own right (relaxation therapy). Relaxation involves (1) immobility of the
body, (2) control over the focus of attention, (3) low muscle tone, and (4)
cultivation of a specific frame of mind, described as contemplative,
nonjudgmental, detached, or mindful.
Edmund Jacobson developed progressive relaxation in 1929. Jacobson
observed that when an individual lies “relaxed,” in the ordinary sense, the
following clinical signs reveal the presence of residual tension: respiration is
slightly irregular in time or force; the pulse rate, although often normal, is in
some instances moderately increased as compared with later tests; voluntary
or local reflex activities are evident in such slight marks as wrinkling of the
forehead, frowning, movements of the eyeballs including frequent or rapid
winking, restless shifting of the head, a limb, or even a finger; and finally, the
mind continues to be active, and once started, worry or oppressive emotion
will persist. It is incredible that a faint degree of tension can be responsible
for all of this.
Learning relaxation, therefore, involves cultivating a muscle sense. To
develop the muscle sense further, patients learn to isolate and contract
specific muscles or muscle groups, one at a time. For example, patients flex


<<<PAGE 2407>>>
the forearm while the therapist holds it back to observe tenseness in the
biceps muscle. (Jacobson used the word “tenseness” rather than “tension” to
emphasize the patient’s role in tensing the muscles.) Once the patient reports
this sensation, Jacobson would say, “This is your doing! What we wish is the
reverse of this—simply not doing.” The therapist repeatedly reminds the
patient that relaxation involves no effort. In fact, “making an effort is being
tense and therefore is not to relax.” As the session progresses, the therapist
instructs the patient to let go further and further, even past the point when the
body part seems perfectly relaxed.
Patients would work in this fashion with different muscle groups, often
over more than 50 sessions. For example, an entire session might involve
relaxing the biceps muscle. Another feature of Jacobson’s method was to
give instructions tersely so they would not interfere with a patient’s focus on
muscle sensations; suggestions commonly used today (e.g., “Your arm is
becoming limp”) were avoided. Patients were also frequently left alone, while
the therapist attended to other patients.
In psychiatry, relaxation therapy is primarily a component of multifaceted
broad-spectrum programs. Its use in desensitization was mentioned
previously. Relaxing breathing exercises are often helpful for patients with
panic disorder, especially when considered to be related to hyperventilation.
In the treatment of patients with anxiety disorders, relaxation can serve as an
occasion-setting stimulus (i.e., as a context of safety in which to try other
specific interventions confidently). Table 23-8 describes some common
relaxation techniques.
Table 23-8
Example Relaxation Techniques
Technique

Approach

Autogenic training

The patient is instructed to concentrate on
feelings of warmth, heaviness, and
relaxation throughout their body.

Biofeedback-assisted
relaxation

The patient uses real-time biofeedback
data to concentrate on certain
physiologic functions, such as muscle


<<<PAGE 2408>>>
tension.
Deep
breathing/breathing
exercises

The patient focuses on taking slow, deep,
even breaths.

Guided imagery

The patient is taught to focus on pleasant
images as a replacement for negative
ones.

Progressive
The patient is instructed to tighten and relax
relaxation/progressive
various muscle groups.
muscle relaxation
Self-hypnosis

The patient is taught to produce a
relaxation response when prompted by a
suggestion (usually a phrase or a
nonverbal cue).

Adapted from National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. Relaxation
technique for health. https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/relaxation-techniques-for-health

Later Adaptation of Progressive Muscular Relaxation. Joseph
Wolpe chose progressive relaxation as a response incompatible with anxiety
when designing his systematic desensitization treatment (discussed below).
For this purpose, Jacobson’s original method was too lengthy to be practical.
Wolpe abbreviated the program to 20 minutes during the first six sessions
(devoting the remainder of these sessions to other things, such as behavioral
analysis). In a later modification of progressive relaxation, patients completed
work with all the principal muscle groups in one session. Once patients have
mastered this procedure (typically after three sessions), they learn to combine
these groups into larger groups. Finally, patients practice relaxation by recall
(i.e., without tensing the muscles).
Autogenic Training. Autogenic training is a method of self-suggestion that
originated in Germany. It involves the patients directing their attention to
specific bodily areas and hearing themselves think certain phrases reflecting a
relaxed state. In the original German version, patients progressed through six
themes over many sessions. Table 23-9 contains a list of these six areas,


<<<PAGE 2409>>>
along with representative autogenic phrases. Autogenic relaxation is an
American modification of autogenic training, in which one session covers all
six areas.
Applied Tension. Applied tension is a technique that is the opposite of
relaxation; applied tension can counteract the fainting response. The
treatment extends over four sessions. In the first session, patients learn to
tense the muscles of the arms, legs, and torso for 10 to 15 seconds (as if they
were bodybuilders). The tension is maintained long enough for a sensation of
warmth to develop in the face. The patients then release the tension but do
not progress to a state of relaxation. The maneuver is repeated five times at
half-minute intervals. Feedback of the patient’s blood pressure during the
muscle contraction can augment this method; increased blood pressure
suggests the achievement of appropriate muscle tension. The patients
continue to practice the technique five times a day. An adverse effect of
treatment that sometimes develops is headache. In this case, the patient
reduces the intensity of the muscle contraction and the frequency of
treatment.
Table 23-9
Sample Autogenic Phrases
Theme

Examples of Self-Statements

Heaviness

“My left arm is heavy.”

Warmth

“My left arm is warm.”

Cardiac regulation

“My heartbeat is calm and regular.”

Breathing adjustment

“It breathes me.”

Solar plexus

“My solar plexus is warm.”

Forehead

“My forehead is cool.”

Patients with blood and injury phobia show a unique, biphasic response
when exposed to a phobic stimulus. The first phase is associated with
increased heart rate and blood pressure. In the second phase, however, blood


<<<PAGE 2410>>>
pressure suddenly falls, and the patient faints. To treat the problem, the
therapist shows the patient a series of slides that are provocative (e.g.,
mutilated bodies). The patient learns to identify early warning signs of
fainting, such as queasiness, cold sweats, or dizziness, and to apply the
learned muscle tension response quickly, contingent on these warning signs.
Patients can also perform applied tension while donating blood or watching a
surgical operation. The technique of isometric tension raises blood pressure,
which prevents fainting.
Table 23-10
Steps in Applied Relaxation
Technique

Instructions

Progressive
relaxation

Session 1: hands, arms, face, neck, and shoulders.
Session 2: back, chest, stomach, breathing, hips,
legs, and feet.

Release-only As with progressive relaxation, except that the tension
relaxation
phase is omitted; when release-only relaxation is
mastered, the patient can relax within 5–7 min.
Cuecontrolled
relaxation

A stimulus—the word relax—is presented just before
exhalation; patients focus on their breathing while
already in a relaxed state; the therapist says the
word inhale just before each inhalation and the
word relax just before each exhalation; after
approximately five cycles, the patient mentally says
these words (optionally dropping the inhale).

Differential
relaxation

Patients can remain relaxed and move at the same
time by differentially keeping muscles unrelated to
the movement in a relaxed state; after achieving a
relaxed state, patients lift an arm or a leg or look
around in the room, while keeping movements and
tension in other body parts at a minimum; patients


<<<PAGE 2411>>>
also perform differential relaxation in other settings,
including sitting in different chairs, sitting at a desk
while writing, talking on the phone, and walking.
Rapid
relaxation

Patients relax by taking one to three breaths with slow
exhalations, thinking the word relax before each
exhalation and scanning their bodies for areas of
tension; with this practice, relaxation is shortened to
20–30 s; patients are instructed to relax in this
manner 15–20 times per day at certain
predetermined events in their natural environment
(e.g., when they look at a watch or make a
telephone call. As a reminder, colored dots might
be taped on the watch or phone. After some time,
the dots are changed to a different color to keep
their reminding power fresh).

Application
training

Patients relax just before entering the target situation;
they stay in the situation for 10–15 min, using their
relaxation skills as a coping technique; patients
may initially be accompanied by the therapist;
alternatively, if the patient’s problem is panic
attacks or generalized anxiety, imagery or physical
exercise is used to induce fearful sensations, which
then are used for application training.

Applied Relaxation. Applied relaxation involves eliciting a relaxation
response in the stressful situation itself. The previous discussion showed that
this is not advisable right away because of the possible ironic effects of
relaxation. Therefore, patients should first practice relaxation in nonstressful
circumstances. The method developed by Lars-Göran Öst and coworkers in
Sweden has been proven efficacious for panic disorder and generalized
anxiety disorder. Establishing the relaxation response in the patient’s natural
environment consists of seven phases of one to two sessions each:
progressive relaxation, release-only relaxation, cue-controlled relaxation,
differential relaxation, rapid relaxation, application training, and


<<<PAGE 2412>>>
maintenance. Table 23-10 provides details.
Results
Biofeedback, progressive relaxation, and applied tension are effective
treatment methods for a broad range of disorders. They form one basis of
behavioral medicine in which the patient changes (or learns how to change)
behavior that contributes to illness. They form a basis on which many
complementary and alternative medical procedures are effective (e.g., yoga
and Reiki) in which relaxation is a critical component. Relaxation also
informs more mainstream treatments, such as hypnosis.

COGNITIVE THERAPY
Cognitive therapy, developed by Aaron T. Beck, MD, is based on the
cognitive model, which has been widely studied and has received substantial
empirical support. The cognitive model posits that it is not situations that
directly impact one’s reaction (emotional, behavioral, and physiologic).
Rather, it is one’s automatic perception of the situation that is more closely
associated with the reaction. A depressed individual, for example, who is
reading this chapter (situation), might think, “I can’t concentrate. There is
something seriously wrong with me. I’ll never get better” (“automatic
thoughts”). As a result, his sadness and hopelessness increase (emotional
reaction); he stops reading altogether (behavioral reaction); and he feels a
weight in his chest (physiologic reaction). On the other hand, another
individual might think, “I don’t want to read this. I don’t want to know
anything about this topic, but I have to.” She then feels annoyed, her body
becomes somewhat tense, and she skims the pages instead of reading the
article carefully. One important component of cognitive therapy involves
teaching patients to identify the thoughts that lead to distress or dysfunction,
to evaluate their thinking, and to effectively respond to these cognitions.
Figure 23-2 depicts the cognitive model.


<<<PAGE 2413>>>
FIGURE 23-2
Cognitive model.

A strong therapeutic alliance is essential for effective treatment, and the
relationship is collaborative. Both patients and clinicians are active in solving
problems, evaluating cognitions, and modifying behavior. Cognitive therapy
is educative; clinicians teach patients how to use the techniques at home that
they have employed in session. The clinician’s stated goal is to help patients
become their own therapists. They emphasize that the way patients get better
is to apply what they have learned in session to make small changes in their
thinking and behavior every day.
Originally designed as a short-term treatment for depression, cognitive
therapy has evolved over the years. Patients with straight-forward cases of
anxiety and depression, who were relatively psychologically healthy before
the onset of their disorder, often benefit from a short course of treatment,
perhaps 6 to 12 sessions. At the other end of the spectrum are patients whose
disorders are chronic or complex, or those for whom standard treatment
needs to be varied due to personality disorders. They may need many more
sessions over a significantly longer period of time. Those with recurrent
episodes or with serious mental illnesses may require intermittent treatment
through their lifetime.
Cognitive Theory of Depression
According to the cognitive theory of depression, cognitive dysfunctions are
the core of depression, and affective and physical changes and other


<<<PAGE 2414>>>
associated features of depression are consequences of cognitive dysfunctions.
For example, apathy and low energy result from a person’s expectation of
failure in all areas. Similarly, paralysis of will stems from a person’s
pessimism and feelings of hopelessness. From a cognitive perspective,
depression can be explained by the cognitive triad, which explains that
negative thoughts are about the self, the world, and the future.
The goal of therapy is to alleviate depression and to prevent its recurrence
by helping patients to identify and test negative cognitions, to develop
alternative and more flexible schemas, and to rehearse both new cognitive
and behavioral responses. Changing the way a person thinks can alleviate the
psychiatric disorder.
Strategies and Techniques
The goal of cognitive therapy is to facilitate remission and prevent or reduce
relapse by teaching skills patients can use for their lifetime, within a highly
supportive, collaborative relationship. Both patients and clinicians are active
participants, jointly solving current problems, evaluating patients’ cognitions
in specific situations, and working toward needed behavior change. As a
result, patients’ symptoms decrease and their mood and day-to-day
functioning improves.
As with other psychotherapies, therapists’ attributes are important to
successful therapy. Therapists must exude warmth, understand the life
experience of each patient, and be genuine and honest with themselves and
with their patients. They must be able to relate skillfully and interactively
with their patients. Cognitive therapists set the agenda at the beginning of
each session, assign homework between sessions, and teach new skills. The
therapist and patient collaborate actively. There are several techniques
utilized in cognitive therapy; three common components are described below.
Didactic Aspects. The therapy’s didactic aspects include explaining to
patients the cognitive triad, schemas, and faulty logic. Therapists must tell
patients that they will formulate hypotheses together and test them
throughout the treatment. Cognitive therapy requires a full explanation of the
relation between symptoms and thinking, affect, and behavior, as well as the
rationale for all aspects of treatment. This explanation contrasts with


<<<PAGE 2415>>>
psychoanalytically oriented therapies, which require little explanation.
Cognitive Techniques. The therapy’s cognitive approach includes four
processes: eliciting automatic thoughts, testing automatic thoughts,
identifying maladaptive underlying assumptions, and testing the validity of
maladaptive assumptions.
ELICITING AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS. Automatic thoughts, also called cognitive

distortions, are cognitions that intervene between external events and a
person’s emotional reaction to the event. For example, the belief that “people
will laugh at me when they see how badly I bowl” is an automatic thought
that occurs to someone who receives an invitation to go bowling and
responds negatively. Another example is the thought, “She doesn’t like me,”
when someone passes in the hall without saying, “Hello.” Examples of
cognitive distortions are illustrated in Figure 23-3.
TESTING AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS. Acting as a teacher, a therapist helps a

patient test the validity of automatic thoughts. The goal is to encourage the
patient to reject inaccurate or exaggerated automatic thoughts after careful
examination. Patients often blame themselves when things that are outside
their control go awry. The therapist reviews the entire situation with the
patient and helps reassign the blame or cause of the unpleasant events.
Generating alternative explanations for events is another way of undermining
inaccurate and distorted automatic thoughts.
As the patient and therapist
continue to identify automatic thoughts, patterns usually become apparent.
The patterns represent rules or maladaptive general assumptions that guide a
patient’s life. Samples of such rules are, “In order to be happy, I must be
perfect,” and, “If anyone doesn’t like me, I’m not lovable.” Such rules
inevitably lead to disappointments and failure and, ultimately, to psychiatric
symptoms such as depression. See Figure 23-4 for a sample automatic
thought record.
IDENTIFYING MALADAPTIVE ASSUMPTIONS.


<<<PAGE 2416>>>
FIGURE 23-3
Cognitive distortions. (From Beck JS. Cognitive Behavior Therapy: Basics and
Beyond. 2nd ed; 2011. Reprinted with permission of Guilford Press.)
TESTING THE VALIDITY OF MALADAPTIVE ASSUMPTIONS. Testing the accuracy

of maladaptive assumptions is similar to testing the validity of automatic
thoughts. In a particularly effective test, therapists ask patients to defend the
validity of their assumptions. For example, patients may state that they
should always work up to their potential, and a therapist may ask, “Why is
that so important to you?” Table 23-11 gives examples of some interventions
designed to elicit, identify, test, and correct the cognitive distortions that lead
to depressive and other painful affects.


<<<PAGE 2417>>>
A woman presented for therapy with anger control problems. Before
therapy, she sent a slew of hostile voicemail and e-mail messages to a
colleague, alienated her neighbors with her noise complaints, and
received a request to leave her bowling league after two physical
altercations with members of other teams. A careful review of the
patient’s thoughts and beliefs surrounding these situations revealed a
common denominator of a sense of mistrust and entitlement. In each
situation, she believed that others had gone out of their way to mistreat
her. Furthermore, she had an exaggerated sense of self-importance
represented by beliefs such as, “Nobody has the right to treat me that
way,” “I shouldn’t have to deal with these people and their stupidity,”
and “I have to show them they can’t ever push me around.” To this
patient, her anger was justified, as she was trying to defend herself from
the misbehavior of others. However, to the outside observer, the patient
was a “loose cannon” who took offense at the drop of a hat and whose
behavior was outrageous and indefensible. In therapy, the patient at first
was not open to viewing her anger problem in the manner just described.
However, as she learned to recognize the activation of her schemas of
mistrust and entitlement, she became more willing to consider ways in
which she could modify her viewpoints and behaviors. This positive
change was facilitated by the therapist’s empathic responses to the
patient’s more credible stories of mistreatment she had received from her
family, whose abusive behavior gave her the message that she should
never trust anyone, and that she should never put up with being
mistreated again. (Courtesy of C. F. Newman, Ph.D. and A. T. Beck,
M.D.)
Behavioral Techniques. Behavioral and cognitive techniques go hand in
hand; behavioral techniques test and change maladaptive and inaccurate
cognitions. The overall purposes of such techniques are to help patients
understand the inaccuracy of their cognitive assumptions and learn new
strategies and ways of dealing with issues.


<<<PAGE 2418>>>
FIGURE 23-4
Sample automatic thought record.

Among the behavioral techniques in cognitive therapy are scheduling
activities, mastery and pleasure, graded task assignments, cognitive rehearsal,
self-reliance training, role-playing, and diversion techniques. One of the first
tasks in therapy is to schedule activities on an hourly basis. Patients keep
records of the activities and review them with the therapist. In addition to
scheduling activities, patients rate the amount of mastery and pleasure their
activities bring them. Patients often express surprise that they have much
more mastery of activities and enjoy them more than they had thought.
Table 23-11
Cognitive Errors Derived from Assumptions
Cognitive Error Assumption

Intervention

Overgeneralizing If it’s true in one case, Exposure of faulty logic.
it applies to any
Establish criteria of
case that is even
which cases are similar


<<<PAGE 2419>>>
slightly similar.

to what degree.

Selective
abstraction

The only events that
Use log to identify
matter are failures,
successes patient
deprivation, etc.
forgot.
Should measure self
by errors,
weaknesses, etc.

Excessive
responsibility
(assuming
personal
causality)

I am responsible for all Disattribution technique.
bad things, failures,
etc.

Assuming
temporal
causality
(predicting
without
sufficient
evidence)

If it has been true in
Expose faulty logic.
the past, it’s always
Specify factors that
going to be true.
could influence outcome
other than past events.

Self-references

I am the center of
Establish criteria to
everyone’s attention
determine when patient
—especially my bad
is the focus of attention
performances. I am
and also the probable
the cause of
facts that cause bad
misfortunes.
experiences.

Catastrophizing

Always think of the
worst. It’s almost
likely to happen to
you.

Calculate real
probabilities. Focus on
evidence that the worst
did not happen.

Dichotomous
thinking

Everything is either
one extreme or
another (black or

Demonstrate that events
may be evaluated on a
continuum.


<<<PAGE 2420>>>
white, good or bad).
From Beck AT, Rush AJ, Shaw BF, Emery G. Cognitive Therapy of Depression. New York:
Guilford; 1979:48, with permission.

To simplify the situation and allow mini-accomplishments, therapists often
break tasks into subtasks, as in graded task assignments, to show patients that
they can succeed. In cognitive rehearsal, patients imagine and rehearse the
various steps in meeting and mastering a challenge.
Patients (especially inpatients) are encouraged to become self-reliant by
doing such simple things as making their own beds, doing their own
shopping, and preparing their own meals. This process is called self-reliance
training. Role-playing is a particularly powerful and useful technique to elicit
automatic thoughts and to learn new behaviors. Diversion techniques are
effective in helping patients get through difficult times and include physical
activity, social contact, work, play, and visual imagery.
Imagery or thought stoppage can treat impulsive or obsessive behavior. For
instance, patients imagine a stop sign with a police officer nearby or another
image that evokes inhibition at the same time that they recognize an impulse
or obsession that is alien to the ego. Similarly, obesity can be treated by
having patients visualize themselves as thin, athletic, trim, and well-muscled,
and then training them to evoke this image whenever they have an urge to
eat. Hypnosis or autogenic training can enhance such imagery. In a technique
called guided imagery, therapists encourage patients to have fantasies that
can be interpreted as wish fulfillments or attempts to master disturbing affects
or impulses.
Indications
Cognitive therapy may be used to (1) eliminate or moderate the symptoms of
a psychiatric disorder or psychological distress as an independent treatment
or in combination with medication; (2) modify underlying beliefs and
schemas that contribute to the development and maintenance of disorders; (3)
address psychosocial problems (e.g., marital discord, job stress, caregiver
burnout) that may have preceded, coincided with, or been caused by the
disorder; (4) reduce the likelihood of relapse or recurrence of a disorder after
symptoms have resolved; (5) increase adherence to recommended medical
treatment (e.g., medication, weight loss, diabetes management); or moderate


<<<PAGE 2421>>>
the impact of a medical condition on level of functioning (e.g., chronic pain,
cancer).

BEHAVIOR THERAPY
The term behavior in behavior therapy refers to a person’s observable actions
and responses. Behavior therapy involves changing the behavior of patients
to reduce dysfunction and to improve quality of life. Behavior therapy
includes a methodology, referred to as behavior analysis, for the strategic
selection of behaviors to change, and a technology to bring about behavior
change, such as modifying antecedents or consequences or giving
instructions. Behavior therapy has not only influenced mental health care but,
under the rubric of behavioral medicine, it has also made inroads into other
medical specialties.
Behavior therapy represents clinical applications of the principles
developed in learning theory. Behavioral psychology, or behaviorism, arose
in the early 20th century in reaction to the method of introspection that
dominated psychology at the time. John B. Watson, the father of
behaviorism, had initially studied animal psychology. This background made
it a small conceptual leap to argue that psychology should concern itself only
with publicly observable phenomena (i.e., overt behavior). According to
behavioristic thinking, because mental content is not publicly observable, it
cannot be subjected to rigorous scientific inquiry. Consequently, behaviorists
developed a focus on overt behaviors and their environmental influences.
Today, different behavioral schools continue to share a focus on verifiable
behavior. Behavioral views differ from cognitive views in holding that
physical, rather than mental, events control behavior. According to
behaviorism, mental phenomena or speculations about them are of little or no
scientific interest.
History
As early as the 1920s, scattered reports about the application of learning
principles to the treatment of behavioral disorders began to appear, but they
had little effect on the mainstream of psychiatry and clinical psychology. Not
until the 1960s did behavior therapy emerge as a systematic and
comprehensive approach to psychiatric (behavioral) disorders; at that time, it


<<<PAGE 2422>>>
arose independently on three continents. Joseph Wolpe and his colleagues in
Johannesburg, South Africa, used Pavlovian techniques to produce and
eliminate experimental neuroses in cats. From this research, Wolpe
developed systematic desensitization, the prototype of many current
behavioral procedures for the treatment of maladaptive anxiety produced by
identifiable stimuli in the environment. At about the same time, a group at the
Institute of Psychiatry of the University of London, particularly Hans Jurgen
Eysenck and M. B. Shapiro, stressed the importance of an empirical,
experimental approach to understanding and treating individual patients,
using controlled, single-case experimental paradigms and modern learning
theory. The third origin of behavior therapy was work inspired by the
research of Harvard psychologist B. F. Skinner. Skinner’s students began to
apply his operant-conditioning technology, developed in animal-conditioning
laboratories, to human beings in clinical settings.
Systematic Desensitization
The foundation of systematic desensitization is the behavioral principle of
counterconditioning, whereby a person overcomes maladaptive anxiety
elicited by a situation or an object by approaching the feared situation
gradually, in a psychophysiological state that inhibits anxiety. In systematic
desensitization, patients attain a state of complete relaxation and are then
exposed to the stimulus that elicits the anxiety response. The relaxed state
inhibits the negative reaction of anxiety, a process called reciprocal
inhibition. Rather than using actual situations or objects that evoke fear,
patients and therapists prepare a graded list or hierarchy of anxiety-provoking
scenes associated with a patient’s fears. Treatment systematically pairs the
learned relaxation state and the anxiety-provoking scenes. Thus, systematic
desensitization consists of three steps: relaxation training, hierarchy
construction, and desensitization of the stimulus.
Relaxation Training. Relaxation produces physiologic effects opposite to
those of anxiety: slow heart rate, increased peripheral blood flow, and
neuromuscular stability. A variety of relaxation methods exist. Some, such as
yoga and Zen, have been known for centuries. Most methods use the socalled progressive relaxation, discussed above. Patients relax major muscle


<<<PAGE 2423>>>
groups in a fixed order, beginning with the small muscle groups of the feet
and working cephalad or vice versa. Some clinicians use hypnosis to
facilitate relaxation or use tape-recorded exercises to allow patients to
practice relaxation on their own. Mental imagery is a relaxation method in
which patients imagine themselves in a place associated with pleasant,
relaxed memories. Such images allow patients to enter a relaxed state or
experience (as Herbert Benson termed it) the relaxation response.
The physiologic changes that take place during relaxation are the opposite
of those induced by the adrenergic stress responses that are part of many
emotions. Muscle tension, respiration rate, heart rate, blood pressure, and
skin conductance decrease. Finger temperature and blood flow to the finger
usually increase. Relaxation increases respiratory heart rate variability, an
index of parasympathetic tone.
Hierarchy Construction. When constructing a hierarchy, clinicians
determine all the conditions that elicit anxiety, and then patients create a
hierarchy list of 10 to 12 scenes in order of increasing anxiety. For example,
an acrophobic hierarchy may begin with a patient imagining standing near a
window on the second floor and end with being on the roof of a 20-story
building, leaning on a guard rail and looking straight down.
Desensitization of the Stimulus. In the final step, called desensitization,
patients proceed systematically through the list from the least to the most
anxiety-provoking scene while in a deeply relaxed state. Their responses to
the stimuli determine the rate at which patients progress through the list.
When patients can vividly imagine the most anxiety-provoking scene of the
hierarchy with equanimity, they experience little anxiety in the corresponding
real-life situation.
ADJUNCTIVE USE OF DRUGS. Clinicians have used various drugs to hasten

relaxation, but drugs should be used cautiously and only by clinicians trained
and experienced in potential adverse effects. Either the ultra-rapidly acting
barbiturate sodium methohexital or diazepam is given intravenously in
subanesthetic doses. By implementing the procedural details carefully, almost
all patients find the procedure pleasant, with few unpleasant side effects. The
advantages of pharmacologic desensitization are a shortening of preliminary


<<<PAGE 2424>>>
training in relaxation, the ability for nearly all patients to relax adequately,
and a more rapid progression of treatment than without the drugs.
INDICATIONS. Systematic desensitization works best in cases of a clearly

identifiable anxiety-provoking stimulus. Phobias, obsessions, compulsions,
and certain sexual disorders have been treated successfully with this
technique.
Therapeutic-Graded Exposure
Therapeutic-graded exposure is similar to systematic desensitization, except
that relaxation training is not involved, and treatment usually occurs in a reallife context. The individual must be brought in contact with (i.e., be exposed
to) the warning stimulus to learn firsthand that no dangerous consequences
will ensue. Exposure is graded according to a hierarchy. Patients afraid of
cats, for example, might progress from looking at a picture of a cat to holding
one.
Flooding
Flooding (sometimes called implosion) is similar to graded exposure in that it
involves exposing the patient to the feared object in vivo; however, there is
no hierarchy. The basis of flooding is the premise that escaping from an
anxiety-provoking experience reinforces the anxiety through conditioning.
Thus, clinicians can extinguish the anxiety and prevent the conditioned
avoidance behavior by not allowing patients to escape the situation.
Clinicians encourage patients to confront feared situations directly, without a
gradual buildup, as in systematic desensitization or graded exposure. No
relaxation exercises are used, as in systematic desensitization. Patients
experience fear, which gradually subsides after a time. The success of the
procedure depends on having patients remain in the fear-generating situation
until they are calm and feel a sense of mastery. Prematurely withdrawing
from the situation or prematurely terminating the fantasized scene is
equivalent to an escape, which then reinforces both the conditioned anxiety
and the avoidance behavior and produces the opposite of the desired effect. In
a variant, called imaginal flooding, the feared object or situation is confronted
only in the imagination, not in real life. Many patients refuse flooding


<<<PAGE 2425>>>
because of the psychological discomfort involved. Contraindications include
situations when intense anxiety would be hazardous to a patient (e.g., those
with heart disease or fragile psychological adaptation). The technique works
best with specific phobias. The case study below presents an example of in
vivo flooding.
The patient was a 33-year-old woman with social fears of eating in
public. In particular, she was afraid of being observed by others when
chewing and swallowing, particularly at dinner parties. The therapist
arranged a contrived situation in which the patient came to the session
with a prepared meal and drink. She entered a conference room in which
five persons in professional attire were already seated at a table. The
therapist instructed the patient to eat her meal in front of these
individuals. Between bites, she was instructed to look at them often, and
they had been coached to avoid staring contests. She was not to distract
herself from her anxiety symptoms. She was to eat her meal slowly,
paying attention to the behavior of the observers and to her anxiety
symptoms (e.g., dry mouth or difficulty swallowing). No conversation
between the patient and the observers was permitted. The observers
would look at her and observe her chewing and swallowing behaviors, at
times writing comments in a notebook. Occasionally, observers would
communicate by whispering to each other, exchanging written notes, or
giving knowing glances and smiles.
The only other communication occurred between the patient and
therapist, and this was limited to the patient providing her subjective units
of distress rating. The session lasted 90 minutes. Note: this situation may
seem quite traumatizing. Because the exposure session is long and
continues until ratings decline, the patient becomes desensitized.
(Courtesy of Rolf G. Jacob, M.D. and William H. Pelham, M.D.)
In most cases, flooding (exposure) is accompanied by response prevention.
Response prevention involves discontinuing all avoidance and other anxietyreducing behaviors. In order for exposure to produce extinction, avoidance
behaviors that typically reduce fear need to be prevented (e.g., looking at the
floor when talking can reduce social anxiety; during exposure, therefore, to


<<<PAGE 2426>>>
incorporate response prevention, the patient looks directly at people and not
at the floor). Over time, while the patient remains in the fear-producing
situation, the anxious emotional response will decrease. Exposure and
response prevention (ERP) is actually the treatment of choice for obsessive
compulsive disorder. In ERP, patients are exposed to feared stimuli and
obsessions while rituals, which typically serve to reduce anxiety, are
prevented.
Participant Modeling
In participant modeling, patients learn a new behavior by imitation, primarily
by observation, without having to perform the behavior until they feel ready.
Just as a person can acquire irrational fears by learning, a person may unlearn
them by observing a fearless model confront the feared object. The technique
is effective with phobic children who observe other children of their own age
and sex who approach the feared object or situation. With adults, a therapist
may describe the feared activity in a calm manner that a patient can identify.
Or, the therapist may act out the process of mastering the feared activity with
a patient. Sometimes a hierarchy of activities is established, and the patient
tackles the least anxiety-provoking activity first. The participant-modeling
technique is successful in treating agoraphobia by having a therapist
accompany a patient into the feared situation. In a variant of the procedure,
called behavior rehearsal, the patient acts out real-life problems under a
therapist’s observation or direction.
The following is a self-report by a patient with a contamination phobia,
who is afraid to touch objects for fear of being infected or contaminated.
She describes her reactions.
[The therapist] started touching everything very slowly. I was told to
follow behind and touch everything she touched. It was like we were
spreading the contamination. She touched doorknobs, light switches,
walls, pictures, and woodwork. She opened drawers in each bedroom and
touched the contents. She opened closets and touched clothes hanging on
the rods. She touched the towels and sheets in the linen closet. She went
through the children’s rooms, touching dolls, stuffed animals, models,
Star Wars figures, Transformers, and books.


<<<PAGE 2427>>>
[The therapist] kept talking to me quietly and calmly all the time we
went along. I had been anxious when we started, but as we continued, my
anxiety level decreased. At one point, when I had begun to think the
worst was over, she pointed to the attic door and said we were going
inside. I said, “No, that’s where the mice were.” She told me I didn’t
want to have a place in my home that was off-limits. I agreed but became
very anxious. It was very hard for me to go inside. I began touching the
boxes too, but I was very upset. Then, she put her hands down on the
floor and wanted me to do the same. I said, “I can’t. I just can’t.” [The
therapist] said, “Yes, you can.”
[The therapist] spent several hours with me that day. Before she left,
she made a list of things for me to do by myself. Twice a day, I was to go
through the house, touching everything the way she had done with me. I
was to invite my friend who had a pet to come and visit, as well as
friends of my children who had pets. (Courtesy of Rolf G. Jacobs, M.D.
and William H. Pelham, M.D.)
Exposure to Stimuli Presented in Virtual Reality
Advances in computer technology have made it possible to present
environmental cues in virtual reality for exposure treatment. Beneficial
effects have been reported with virtual reality exposure of patients with
height phobia, fear of flying, spider phobia, and claustrophobia. Much
experimental work is ongoing. One model uses an avatar of the patient
walking through a crowded supermarket filled with other avatars (including
one of the therapist) as a way of conquering agoraphobia.
Assertiveness Training
Assertiveness is assertive behavior that enables a person to act in his or her
own best interest, to stand up for herself or himself without undue anxiety, to
express honest feelings comfortably, and to exercise personal rights without
denying the rights of others.
Two types of situations frequently call for assertive behaviors: (1) setting
limits on pushy friends or relatives and (2) commercial situations, such as
countering a sales pitch or being persistent when returning defective


<<<PAGE 2428>>>
merchandise. Early assertiveness training programs tended to define specific
behaviors as assertive or nonassertive. For example, individuals were
encouraged to assert themselves if somebody got in front of them in a
supermarket checkout line. Context has received increasing attention; that is,
what would be assertive behavior in this situation depends on circumstances.
Social Skills Training
The negative symptoms in patients with schizophrenia constitute behavioral
deficits that go beyond difficulties with assertiveness. These patients have
inadequate expressive behaviors and inappropriate stimulus control of their
social behaviors (i.e., they do not pick up social cues). Similarly, patients
with depression often experience a lack of social reinforcement because of a
lack of social skills, and studies have found social skills training to be
efficacious for depression. Patients with social phobia similarly often have
not acquired adolescents’ social skills. In fact, their social defensive
behaviors (e.g., avoiding eye contact, making brief statements, and
minimizing self-disclosure) increase the probability of the rejection that they
fear.
Social skills training programs for patients with schizophrenia cover skills
in the following areas: conversation, conflict management, assertiveness,
community living, friendship and dating, work and vocation, and medication
management. Each of these skills has several components. For example,
assertiveness skills include making requests, refusing requests, making
complaints, responding to complaints, expressing unpleasant feelings, asking
for information, making apologies, expressing fear, and refusing alcohol and
street drugs. Each component involves specific steps. For example, conflict
management includes skills in negotiating, compromising, tactful
disagreeing, responding to untrue accusations, and leaving overly stressful
situations. A situation in which a patient would use conflict management
skills could be when the patient and a friend decide to go to a movie, and
their choice of movie differs.
Negotiating and compromising, for example, involves the following steps:
1. Explain one’s viewpoint briefly.
2. Listen to the other person’s viewpoint.
3. Repeat the other person’s viewpoint.


<<<PAGE 2429>>>
4. Suggest a compromise.
At his initial appointment, Phillip described severe symptoms of
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). He was 23 years old and living at
home because he was no longer able to work or go to school. His days
were consumed with behaviors related to checking, repeating, and
hoarding. Phillip was unable to throw away anything—he saved junk
mail, used tissues and napkins, old papers and magazines, and any kind
of receipt for fear that he might lose something important. Phillip spent
many hours checking his trash, his car, and his home to be sure that he
had not thrown away anything important. He also checked everything he
wrote (e.g., checks, school exams and papers, letters and e-mails) to be
sure that he had not made a mistake, and he read and reread books,
magazines, and articles to be sure he understood the written material
adequately. Phillip constantly worried that he had done something wrong
and would disappoint his parents. He was also depressed because he was
unable to function well in life, and he had tremendous social anxiety that
had plagued him for many years, making it difficult to make and keep
friends.
By the end of Phillip’s second session, his therapist was beginning to
get a good idea of the general nature and severity of his symptoms and
some of the maintaining factors. However, to plan the treatment in more
detail and to get a better idea of how the symptoms occurred during his
daily life, she asked Phillip to keep daily records over the next week
using a form that she had prepared for him. The form had a place for
recording the amount of time he spent in rituals each morning, afternoon,
and evening, as well as another place to record more details about at least
one episode of rituals each day (e.g., what was happening before, during,
and after the rituals; see Table 23-12).
Phillip’s therapist determined that his difficulties with obsessions,
rituals, depression, and social fears reflected a core fear of negative
evaluation. Phillip was overly concerned with making mistakes, being
imperfect, and disappointing others. Even as a child, Phillip was worried
about not doing well enough, and he had difficulty making friends for
fear that others would not like him. His highly anxious parents provided


<<<PAGE 2430>>>
much adulation when Phillip did things well (e.g., learned to ride a bike,
got good grades in school), and they spent a great deal of time instructing
him on improving his performance when an activity or grade was not
perfect. As Phillip took on more responsibility at school and with parttime work, he became more concerned about doing things right. He
learned that going back and checking his work relieved his anxiety. He
also learned that saving his papers for future checking reassured him that
he would be able to fix any unrecognized mistakes at a later time. His
parents helped him to reduce his anxiety when he was uncertain about his
work by reassuring him that he was doing okay. As Phillip progressed
from elementary school to middle school to high school, his workload
and anxiety gradually increased, but he was able to manage things with
some moderate checking and saving. When he began attending college,
however, the workload increased extensively, and he found himself doing
even more checking and hoarding to reduce his fears about making
mistakes. Phillip began to feel that these behaviors were getting out of
control, but he could not stop them. He had to check and recheck to be
sure that he was not making mistakes. The cycle of anxiety to ritual to
reduced anxiety was so powerfully reinforcing that he could not stop. He
needed help to break this cycle and to address his persistent fear of
negative evaluation.
Phillip’s therapist decided to begin treatment with a course of exposure
and response prevention (ERP) to get his obsessions and rituals under
control and begin to address his core fear of making mistakes and being
evaluated negatively. Given that Phillip’s depression had grown from the
disability associated with his OCD, the therapist expected that a
successful course of ERP might also help to reduce his depressive
symptoms. ERP for Phillip began with a home visit, where the therapist
helped him to complete common daily activities with adherence to his RP
plan, which included the following:
No more checking: After eating, leave the table immediately without
inspecting your plate and the surrounding areas (including under the
table and chair) for lost items. Leave the restroom immediately after
using it, without checking the toilet, trash, and sink for lost items.
When leaving the car, do not check seats, floors, and windows.


<<<PAGE 2431>>>
Write everything (papers, checks, etc.) only once; no checking to be
sure that letters and words are correct.
No more repeating: No more rereading books. No staring repeatedly
at items to ensure that nothing is lost.
No more saving. Throw tissues away immediately after using them.
Discard trash and junk mail immediately. Do not look into the trash
can for lost items.
Phillip’s parents also were asked to stop reassuring him and to
discontinue doing rituals for him. This session was very difficult for
Phillip and his family, but they understood the logic of ERP, and they
were willing to try anything.
For the next 3 weeks, Phillip and his therapist met three times a week
to conduct in vivo exposure sessions that helped him to face his core
fears. For many of these sessions, the therapist asked Phillip to bring
hoarded items from home and to discard all unnecessary items during the
therapy session. At first, this created tremendous anxiety, but over time,
Phillip was able to throw things away with less fear of losing something
important. He also developed the ability to conduct self-directed exposure
at home. Other exposure sessions involved writing letters and mailing
them without checking, reading passages from magazines and books only
once, and sorting through junk mail to make quick decisions about what
to save or discard. As Phillip was able to take on more responsibility for
home-based exposure, session frequency decreased to two times per
week, and then to once per week. After 3 months of treatment, Phillip’s
scores on the YBOCS (Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale) and
BDI (Beck Depression Inventory) had decreased to 20 and 19,
respectively, demonstrating significant improvement in obsessivecompulsive symptoms and depression. His SPAI (Social Phobia and
Anxiety Inventory) score, however, remained relatively unchanged,
suggesting that he was still experiencing significant social anxiety.
Next, while Phillip worked on maintaining the gains he had made
following ERP, he and his therapist conducted some role-plays to
evaluate his social skills. It was apparent that Phillip had extreme
difficulty with initiating and maintaining conversations. His eye contact
also was quite poor in social interactions. Thus, the therapist devised a


<<<PAGE 2432>>>
plan for teaching and practicing new skills, which also involved
additional exposure to Phillip’s core fears as the therapist asked him to
resume contact with old friends and identify activities where he could
meet new people. He practiced new behaviors first in session with his
therapist and then developed a hierarchy of feared social situations in
which he could practice his new behaviors. These practice exercises also
involved a form of exposure, as the therapist asked Phillip to make social
contact, which produced fears of negative evaluation. After another 3
months of treatment focused on social skills training (and associated
exposure), Phillip’s scores on the YBOCS and BDI had decreased further
(YBOCS = 15; BDI = 13), and his SPAI score had decreased to 100.
Phillip had gone back to school to take one class, he was spending small
amounts of time with old friends, and he was volunteering a few hours
each week at his church. (Courtesy of M. A. Stanley, Ph.D. and D. C.
Beidel, Ph.D.)
Table 23-12
Daily Monitoring of Rituals

Aversion Therapy
When a noxious stimulus (punishment) is presented immediately after a
specific behavioral response, theoretically, the response is eventually
inhibited and extinguished. Aversion therapy can use many types of noxious


<<<PAGE 2433>>>
stimuli: electric shocks, substances that induce vomiting, corporal
punishment, and social disapproval. The therapist pairs the negative stimulus
with the behavior, resulting in suppression of the behavior. The unwanted
behavior may disappear after a series of such sequences. Aversion therapy
has been used for alcohol abuse, paraphilias, and other behaviors with
impulsive or compulsive qualities, but this therapy is controversial for many
reasons. For example, punishment does not always lead to the expected
decreased response and can sometimes be positively reinforcing.
Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing
Saccadic eye movements are rapid oscillations of the eyes that occur when a
person tracks an object that is moved back and forth across the line of vision.
Several studies have demonstrated that inducing saccades while a person is
imagining or thinking about an anxiety-producing event can yield a positive
thought or image that results in decreased anxiety. Eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing therapy is effective in the treatment of
PTSDs and phobias.
Positive Reinforcement
When a generally rewarding event, such as food or praise, follows a
behavioral response, the response tends to be strengthened and to occur more
frequently than before the reward. This principle can be applied to a variety
of situations. On inpatient hospital wards, patients with mental disorders
receive a reward for performing a desired behavior, such as tokens that they
can use to purchase luxury items or certain privileges. The process, known as
token economy, has successfully altered behavior.
Behavioral Activation
Based on behavioral theory, depression persists because: (a) reinforcement
for nondepressed (healthy) behavior is low or nonexistent, (b) depressed
behavior produces positive (e.g., sympathy from others) or negative
reinforcement (decrease in responsibilities or avoidance of undesirable
situations), (c) exposure to aversive or unpleasant life experiences is
significant, or (d) some combination of these factors. Severely depressed
mood leads to behavioral withdrawal, which in turn results in loss of


<<<PAGE 2434>>>
reinforcement from pleasurable events or activities.
Behavioral activation emphasizes structured attempts to increase overt
behaviors that bring patients into contact with reinforcing environmental
contingencies and corresponding improvements in thoughts, mood, and
quality of life. Patients begin by engaging in a self-monitoring (or daily
diary) exercise to examine already occurring daily activities to provide a
baseline measurement and to provide some potential activities to target
during treatment. For each behavior, they indicate their levels of reward,
difficulty, and importance. Emphasis then shifts to identifying patients’
values and goals within life areas that include family, social, and intimate
relationships, education, employment/career, hobbies/recreation, volunteer
work/charity, physical/health issues, spirituality, and anxiety-eliciting
situations. An activity hierarchy is constructed, where activities are rated
from “easiest” to “most difficult” to accomplish. Patients progressively move
through the hierarchy, moving from easier behaviors to the more difficult.
Charles was a 70-year-old retired business executive. Throughout his life,
his work consumed him. Although he married and had a family, his job
was his primary focus. He went to the office early and came home late.
He enjoyed what he did—it was stimulating and made him feel important
and useful. But as he got older, his performance was not what it used to
be, and he decided it was time to retire. However, his mood was pretty
low when he no longer had a job. He did not have the energy to get more
involved in his church or to develop other hobbies, so he sat around all
day, without any social contacts. His wife and best friend encouraged him
to talk to someone. The therapist suggested that they try behavioral
activation. Charles was somewhat skeptical, as it seemed too simple, but
he needed to do something. The therapist spent some time with Charles
talking about the kinds of activities that used to make him feel good and
some of the things he used to enjoy. They then put together a list of
things he might be able to do—even if he did not feel much like it—just
to see what would happen. The list included looking for volunteer work
where he could use his job skills, spending more time with his wife in
some of the activities they once had enjoyed (e.g., watching movies,
taking walks), and rejuvenating an old hobby from his college days—


<<<PAGE 2435>>>
fishing. Charles initially agreed to do some easy activities—go to one
movie a week, take one walk a week, and contact his church activity
leader about possible volunteer activities. He was surprised to find that
even these “baby steps” helped him feel better. He had the chance to talk
with other people and began to see that, even in retirement, he could find
useful and fun things to do. (Courtesy of M. A. Stanley, Ph.D. and D. C.
Beidel, Ph.D.)
Results
Behavior therapy has a wide range of applications and is useful for a wide
variety of psychiatric disorders (e.g., anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, and
bipolar disorder), psychological problems (e.g., marital discord, school
refusal, and stress), and medical problems (e.g., adjustment to chronic illness,
medication adherence, and healthy behaviors). Behavioral treatments have
also been administered effectively with individual patients, couples, families,
and groups, and they are useful in a range of treatment settings, including
inpatient, outpatient, day treatment, and community settings.

HYPNOSIS
The concept of hypnosis conjures up myriad perceptions among clinicians
and the lay public. Even the term hypnosis can be misleading, coming as it
does from the Greek root hypnos (meaning “sleep”). In reality, hypnosis is
not sleeping. It is more likely a complex process that requires alert focus and
receptive attention. Hypnosis is a powerful means of directing innate
capabilities of imagination, imagery, and attention. Many also believe the
myth that the clinician projects the hypnotic trance onto the patient or has the
power to influence the patient. In reality, it is the patient who has the
hypnotic gift, and the clinician’s role is to assess the patient’s capacity to
capitalize on this asset and to help the patient discover and use it effectively.
Patient motivation, personality style, and biologic predisposition may
contribute to the manifestation of this talent.
The hypnotic trance enhances focal attention and imagination and
simultaneously decreases peripheral awareness. A hypnotist may induce this
trance through formalized induction procedures, but it can also occur


<<<PAGE 2436>>>
spontaneously. The capacity to be hypnotized and, relatedly, the occurrence
of spontaneous trance states, is a trait that varies among individuals but is
relatively stable throughout a person’s life cycle.
History
Descriptions of trance states, ecstatic states, and spontaneous dissociative
states abound in the Eastern and Western religious, literary, and philosophical
traditions. Anton Franz Anton Mesmer (1734–1815) first formally described
hypnosis as a therapeutic modality in the 18th century and believed it to be
the result of magnetic energy or an invisible fluid that the therapist channels
into the patient to correct imbalances, restoring health. James Braid (1795–
1860), an English physician and surgeon, used eye fixation and closure to
induce trance states. Later, Jean Martin Charcot (1825–1893) theorized the
hypnotic state to be a neurophysiologic phenomenon that was a sign of
mental illness. Contemporaneously, Hippolyte Bernheim (1840–1919)
believed it to be a function of the normal brain.
Early in his career, Sigmund Freud (1856–1939) used hypnosis as part of
his psychoanalysis and noticed that patients in a trance could relive traumatic
events, a process called abreaction. Later, Freud switched from hypnosis to
free association because he wanted to minimize the transference that
sometimes accompanies the trance state. Importantly, the switch did not
eliminate the occurrence of spontaneous trance during the analysis.
World War I produced many shell-shocked soldiers, and Ernst Simmel
(1882–1947), a German psychoanalyst, developed a technique for accessing
repressed material that he named hypnoanalysis. During World War II,
hypnosis played a prominent role in the treatment of pain, combat fatigue,
and neurosis. Formal recognition of hypnosis as a therapeutic modality did
not occur, however, until the 1950s. The British Medical Society
recommended its teaching in medical schools in 1955, and the American
Medical Association and American Psychiatric Association officially stated
its safety and efficacy in 1958.
Definition
The current understanding of hypnosis is that it is a normal activity of a
normal mind through which attention is more focused, critical judgment is


<<<PAGE 2437>>>
partially suspended, and peripheral awareness is diminished. The trance state,
being a function of the subject’s mind, cannot be forcibly projected by an
outside person. The hypnotist, however, may aid in the achievement of the
state and use its uncritical, intense focus to facilitate the acceptance of new
thoughts and feelings, thereby accelerating therapeutic change. For the
subject, hypnosis typically involves a sense of involuntariness, and
movements seem automatic.
Trait of Hypnotizability
A person’s degree of hypnotizability is a trait that is relatively stable
throughout the life cycle and is measurable. The process of hypnosis takes the
hypnotizability trait and transforms it into the hypnotized state. Experiencing
the hypnotic concentration state requires a convergence of three essential
components: absorption, dissociation, and suggestibility.
Absorption is an ability to reduce peripheral awareness that results in
greater focal attention. A metaphorical description is that of a psychological
zoom lens that increases attention to the given thought or emotion to the
increasing exclusion of all contexts, even including orientation to time and
space.
Dissociation is the separating out from consciousness elements of the
patient’s identity, perception, memory, or motor response as the hypnotic
experience deepens. The result is that components of self-awareness, time,
perception, and physical activity can occur without being known to the
patient’s consciousness and so may seem involuntary.
Suggestibility is the tendency of the hypnotized patient to accept signals
and information with a relative suspension of normal critical judgment; it is
controversial whether a person can completely suspend critical judgment.
This trait will vary from an almost compulsive response to input in the highly
hypnotizable to a sense of automaticity in the less hypnotizable individual.
Quantification of Hypnotizability. Quantifying a patient’s degree of
hypnotizability is useful in a clinical setting because it predicts the
effectiveness of hypnosis as a therapeutic modality. Quantification also
provides useful information about the way patients relate to themselves and
the social environment. Highly hypnotizable patients have an increased


<<<PAGE 2438>>>
incidence of spontaneous trance-like states and so may be unduly influenced
by ideas and emotions that are not being appropriately self-critiqued.
Induction
Many different induction protocols follow the same basic principles and
pattern but may be better suited to patients with different levels of
hypnotizability.
Doctor: Take a long, deep breath—inhale and exhale; now close your
eyes and relax. Pay particular attention to the muscles in and about
your eyes—relax them to the point that they just won’t work. Are you
trying to do that? Good. If you really have them relaxed, right at this
very moment, no matter how hard you try, they just won’t open. Test
them. The harder you try, the faster they stick together, just as if they
were glued together. That’s fine!
Now you can open your eyes; that’s good. When I tell you to and not
before, open and close your eyes once more, and, when you close them
this time, you will be ten times as relaxed as you are right now. Go
ahead, open and close, and feel that surge of relaxation go through
your whole body, from the top of your head to the tip of your toes.
Very good!
Now once again, open and close your eyes, and this time, when you close
them, you will double the relaxation that you currently have. Fine.
If you have followed my suggestions, right at this very moment, when I
lift your hand and let it drop into your lap, it will drop like a wet cloth,
heavy and limp. That’s very, very good.
You now have good physical relaxation, but medical hypnosis consists of
two phases: physical, which you currently have, and mental, which I
will now show you how to achieve.
When I ask you to, and not before, I want you to start counting backward
from 100. I know you can count; that is not what we’re after. I just
want you to relax mentally. As you say each number, pause
momentarily until you feel a wave of relaxation cover your whole
body, from the top of your head to the tip of your toes. When you feel
this wave of relaxation, then say the next number, and each time you


<<<PAGE 2439>>>
say a number, you will double the relaxation you had before you said
the number. If you do this properly, an interesting thing will happen—
as you say the numbers and relax, the succeeding numbers will start to
disappear and vanish from your mind. Command your mind to dispel
these numbers. Now, aloud and slowly, start counting backward from
100.
Patient: One hundred.
Doctor: Very good.
Patient: Ninety-nine.
Doctor: Make them start to disappear now.
Patient: Ninety-eight.
Doctor: Now they’re fading away, and after the next number, they’ll all
be gone. Make them disappear. Let the numbers go.
Patient: Ninety-seven.
Doctor: And now they’re all gone. Are they gone? Fine. If there are any
numbers still lurking in your mind, when I lift your hand and drop it,
they will all disappear.
(Courtesy of William Holt, M.D.)
Indications
A patient’s degree of hypnotizability and the technique of hypnosis are
clinically useful in diagnosis and treatment, respectively. The existence of
spontaneous, trance-like states in everyday life and the potential of
individuals to uncritically accept emotions and information in these states
make a person’s degree of hypnotizability a factor in the way the world is
viewed and processed.
Therapeutically, hypnosis’s effectiveness in facilitating acceptance of new
thoughts and feelings makes it useful in treating habitual problems and also
with symptom management. Smoking, overeating, phobias, anxiety,
conversion symptoms, and chronic pain are all indications for hypnosis. They
can often be treated in a single session, in which a patient learns to perform
self-hypnosis. Hypnosis can also aid in psychotherapy, notably for PTSD,
and may also be useful for memory retrieval.


<<<PAGE 2440>>>
A 32-year-old man presented to the emergency department with a severe
headache. He was a chronic migraine sufferer and was unable to control
the pain on this occasion with his propranolol. The emergency
department recognized that he had a high hypnotic capacity. The
physician suggested imagery of an icepack resting on his forehead.
Initially, they placed some real ice on his forehead to help. The patient
was able to control his pain completely with this imagery. He did not
require narcotics, as he had on previous visits. On follow-up several
weeks later, the patient reported being able to use this strategy to control,
as well as prevent, migraine attacks, and he no longer had to rely on
frequent emergency department visits for pain relief. (Courtesy of A. D.
Axelrad, M.D., D. Brown, Ph.D., and H. J. Wain, Ph.D.)

A 22-year-old male patient presented to the emergency room with
bilateral blindness. An evaluation by ophthalmology revealed that the
blindness was psychogenic. The emergency physician referred the patient
to psychiatry. After an initial evaluation and the development of a
therapeutic alliance, the psychiatrist used hypnosis to take the patient to a
safe place and then back to the time immediately before the blindness.
After two sessions, the patient described seeing his wife in an adulterous
relationship. At that moment, the patient vocalized a desire to harm his
wife and her suitor. Immediately after this vocalization, he became
amnesic for the event and blind. On describing this under hypnosis, the
therapist suggested that, when he became alert, “He would only
remember what he felt comfortable remembering.” After the patient
became alert, he had no idea what had occurred, and each day after
initiation of the hypnotic intervention, the patient’s anger was reframed.
When the patient felt comfortable, he then confronted his wife. The
patient became aware that the amnesia was being used to prevent him
from acting out. The use of a psychodynamic, cognitive reframing
approach with a hypnotic milieu helped this patient to gain control and
understanding of his symptoms. The therapist referred the patient and his
wife for marital counseling. (Courtesy of A. D. Axelrad, M.D., D. Brown,
Ph.D., and H. J. Wain, Ph.D.)


<<<PAGE 2441>>>
A 29-year-old woman presented for evaluation and treatment of ongoing
facial pain that was not responding to traditional methods of intervention.
The neurologic evaluation showed no objective physical correlations.
Initially, hypnotic intervention controlled the pain, but it returned 24
hours later. Her self-hypnotic technique ceased to be effective. The
therapist decided to explore more completely the meaning of the pain.
Using age regression under hypnosis, the patient regressed to a time
before the pain. She related that her brother had been injured by a car
while he was running in the street. The patient was babysitting at the
time, and her father was so angry that he hit her. Recently her friend’s
dog ran away, and she felt responsible. As she began to recognize her
need to punish herself because of her guilt over what occurred, she was
able to understand her feelings and reframe her thoughts more
productively. An “affect bridge” was also used, and the patient went back
to a previous time when she felt guilty and received punishment. She then
described her feelings of being hit by her alcoholic, abusive father. She
continued to gain insight and mastery over the past and was able to ablate
her pain. (Courtesy of A. D. Axelrad, M.D., D. Brown, Ph.D., and H. J.
Wain, Ph.D.)

A 42-year-old married mother of three children was kidnapped and
locked in a large packing trunk. After she freed herself and broke out, her
abductors stabbed her multiple times, tied her up, put her back in the
trunk, and threw her down a cliff. She eventually managed to break out
and crawl to safety. Eventually, a passerby called 911, and paramedics
transported her to a hospital. She reported that others saw her lying on the
road and appeared frightened to approach her.
Following medical stabilization, she was discharged from the hospital
and found herself developing nightmares, reexperiencing avoidance, and
having hyperarousal symptoms. Her internist referred her for treatment.
The psychiatrist initiated sertraline. She was found to be a mid- to highrange hypnotic subject. She learned to go to a safe place and to use a


<<<PAGE 2442>>>
split-screen technique. The therapist also gave her permission to describe
her nightmares, reexperiences, and overwhelming anxieties and fears that
she faced while being captive, as well as her feelings of abandonment
while lying on the road. The therapist reinforced her ingenuity in
breaking out of the trunk. She responded to a reframing of the feeling of
blame for her capture while under hypnosis. She learned to calm herself
and to reframe her negative feelings about her helplessness. Hypnotic age
regression helped her master her experiences and facilitate their
becoming like a bad movie. Initially, her startle response was a signal for
her to go to her comfort zone. Age progression helped her to rehearse the
future. The treatment used the milieu of hypnosis along with exposure,
cognitive reframing, psychodynamic approaches, and pharmacology.
(Courtesy of A. D. Axelrad, M.D., D. Brown, Ph.D., and H. J. Wain,
Ph.D.)
Contraindications
No intrinsic dangers to the hypnotic process exist. Because of the increased
dependence that the hypnotized patient has toward the therapist, a strong
transference may occur, however, in which the patient exhibits feelings for
the therapist that are inappropriate in regard to their relationship. Strong
attachments may occur, and these must be respected and properly interpreted.
Negative emotions may also surface in the patient, especially in those who
are emotionally fragile or who have poor reality testing. To minimize the
likelihood of this negative transference, the therapist must use caution when
choosing patients who have problems with basic trust, such as those who are
paranoid or who require high levels of control. The hypnotized patient also
has a reduced ability to evaluate hypnotic suggestions critically and, thus, the
hypnotist must have a strong ethical value system. Controversy exists about
whether patients can perform acts during a trance state that they would
otherwise find repugnant or that run contrary to their moral system.

INTERPERSONAL THERAPY
Interpersonal psychotherapy (ITP) is a time-limited treatment for major
depressive disorder developed by Gerald L. Klerman and Myrna Weissman


<<<PAGE 2443>>>
in the 1970s. The initial formulation of ITP was an attempt to represent the
current practice of psychotherapy for depression. It assumes that the
development and maintenance of some psychiatric illnesses occur in a social
and interpersonal context and that interpersonal relations between the patient
and significant others influence the onset, response to treatment, and
outcomes of these illnesses. The overall goal of ITP is to reduce or eliminate
psychiatric symptoms by improving the quality of the patient’s current
interpersonal relations and social functioning.
The typical course of ITP lasts 12 to 20 sessions over a 4- to 5-month
period. ITP moves through three defined phases: (1) the initial phase
identifies the problem area that will be the target for treatment; (2) the
intermediate phase works on the target problem area(s); and (3) the
termination phase focuses on consolidating gains made during treatment and
preparing the patients for future work on their own (Table 23-13).
Techniques
Individual Interpersonal Psychotherapy
INITIAL PHASE. Sessions one through five typically constitute the initial phase

of ITP. After assessing the patient’s current psychiatric symptoms and
obtaining a history of these symptoms, the therapist gives the patient a formal
diagnosis. The therapist and patient then discuss the diagnosis, as well as
what to expect from treatment. Assignment of the sick role during this phase
serves the dual function of granting the patient both the permission to recover
and the responsibility to recover. The therapist explains the rationale of ITP,
underscoring that therapy will focus on identifying and altering dysfunctional
interpersonal patterns related to psychiatric symptomatology. To determine
the precise focus of treatment, the therapist conducts an interpersonal
inventory with the patient and develops an interpersonal formulation based
on this. In the interpersonal formulation, the therapist links the patient’s
psychiatric symptomatology to one of the four interpersonal problem areas—
grief, interpersonal deficits, interpersonal role disputes, or role transitions.
The patient’s concurrence with the therapist’s identification of the problem
area and agreement to work on this area are essential before beginning the
intermediate treatment phase.


<<<PAGE 2444>>>
Table 23-13
Phases of Time-Limited Interpersonal Psychotherapy
Initial Phase: Sessions 1–5
Give the syndrome a name; provide information about the prevalence
and characteristics of the disorder
Describe the rationale and nature of the therapy
Conduct the interpersonal inventory to identify the current
interpersonal problem area(s) associated with the onset or
maintenance of the psychiatric symptoms
Review significant relationships, past and present
Identify interpersonal precipitants of episodes of psychiatric
symptoms
Select and reach consensus about the interpersonal problem area(s)
and treatment plan with patient
Intermediate Phase: Sessions 6–15
Implement strategies specific to the identified problem area(s)
Encourage and review work on goals specific to the problem area
Illuminate connections between symptoms and interpersonal events
during the week
Work with the patient to identify and manage negative or painful
affects associated with his or her interpersonal problem area
Termination Phase: Sessions 16–20
Discuss termination explicitly
Educate the patient about the end of treatment as a potential time of
grieving; encourage the patient to identify associated emotions
Review progress to foster feelings of accomplishment and
competence
Outline goals for remaining work; identify areas and warning signs of
anticipated future difficulty
Formulate specific plans for continued work after termination of
treatment


<<<PAGE 2445>>>
INTERMEDIATE PHASE. The intermediate phase—typically sessions 6 to 15—

constitutes the “work” of the therapy. An essential task throughout the
intermediate phase is to strengthen the connections the patient makes between
the changes in his or her interpersonal life and the changes in psychiatric
symptoms. During the intermediate phase, the therapist implements the
treatment strategies specific to the identified problem area, as specified in
Table 23-14.
TERMINATION PHASE. In the termination phase (usually, sessions 16 through

20), the therapist discusses termination explicitly with the patient and assists
him or her in understanding that the end of treatment is a potential time of
grief. During this phase, the therapist encourages patients to describe specific
changes in their psychiatric symptoms, especially as they relate to
improvements in the identified problem area(s). The therapist also assists the
patient in evaluating and consolidating gains, detailing plans for maintaining
improvements in the identified interpersonal problem area(s), and outlining
remaining work for the patient to continue on his or her own. The therapist
also encourages patients to identify early warning signs of symptom
recurrence and to identify plans of action.
Table 23-14
Interpersonal Problem Areas: Description, Goals, and
Strategies
Problem Area

Description

Goals

Strategies

Grief

Complicated
bereavement
after death of a
loved one

Facilitate the
Reconstruct the
mourning
patient’s
process
relationship
with the
Help the patient
deceased
to establish
interest in new Explore
activities and
associated
relationships to
feelings
substitute for
(negative
what has been
and positive)


<<<PAGE 2446>>>
lost
Consider ways
of becoming
reinvolved
with others
Interpersonal
deficits

A history of social Reduce patient’s Review past
impoverishment,
social isolation
significant
inadequate or
relationships,
Enhance quality
unsustaining
including
of any existing
interpersonal
negative and
relationships
relationships
positive
Encourage the
aspects
formation of
Explore
new
repetitive
relationships
patterns in
relationships
Note
problematic
interpersonal
patterns in
the session
and relate
them to
similar
patterns in
the patient’s
life

Interpersonal
Conflicts with a
Identify the
role disputes
significant other
nature of the
—a partner,
dispute
other family
Explore options
member,
to resolve
coworker, or
dispute
close friend
Modify

Determine the
stage of the
dispute:
renegotiation
(calm down
participants
to facilitate


<<<PAGE 2447>>>
expectations
resolution);
and faulty
impasse
communication
(increase
to bring about
disharmony
a satisfactory
to reopen
resolution
negotiation);
dissolution
If modification is
(assist
unworkable,
mourning
encourage
and
patient to
adaptation)
reassess the
expectations
Understand
for the
how
relationship
nonreciprocal
and to
role
generate
expectations
options to
relate to the
either resolve
dispute
it or dissolve it Identify
and mourn its
available
loss
resources to
bring about
change in the
relationship
Role
transitions

Economic or
Mourn and
Review positive
family change—
accept the loss
and negative
the beginning or
of the old role
aspects of
end of a
old and new
Recognize the
relationship or
roles
positive and
career, a move,
negative
Explore
promotion,
aspects of the
feelings
retirement,
new role and
about what is
graduation,
assets and
lost
diagnosis of a
liabilities of the Encourage
medical illness
old role
development


<<<PAGE 2448>>>
Restore selfesteem by
developing a
sense of
mastery
regarding the
demands of
the new role

of social
support
system and
new skills
called for in
new role

Reprinted with permission from Wilfley D, Stein R, Welch R. Interpersonal psychotherapy. In:
Treasure J, van Furth E, Schmidt U, eds. Handbook of Eating Disorders. 2nd ed. Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley; 2003:253.

Ms. G is a 51-year-old woman who presented for treatment of binge
eating disorder. She is college-educated, has her own business, and is a
divorced mother of one adult son in his early 20s. Before treatment, she
had a body mass index (BMI) of 42, and her binge eating occurred
approximately 10 to 15 days per month over the past 8 years. Along with
her current diagnosis of binge eating disorder, Ms. G struggled with
recurrent major depression.
During the initial phase, Ms. G and her therapist began to review her
history and the interpersonal events that were associated with her binge
eating. Ms. G shared that she began overeating and gaining weight at age
14. When she was 18 years of age, she moved to a foreign country with
her parents. Soon after the move, Ms. G’s father left her and her mother
to return to the United States. Ms. G was enraged at her father for leaving
them and still gets very tearful and angry when discussing the separation.
She and her mother decided to stay abroad because she had started
university, and her mother was working. Both had developed strong
social ties and felt comfortable in their new home. During this time, Ms.
G continued to gain weight and started dieting. Shortly after graduating
from university, Ms. G met and married a foreign national and, at the age
of 28, delivered their only son. Two years later, she and her husband went
through a very bitter divorce. Although Ms. G described this as a terrible
time in her life, she maintained close ties with her friends and her mother.
During this time, she began to diet and reached her lowest adult weight.


<<<PAGE 2449>>>
At the age of 35, when her mother died of a heart condition, Ms. G had
her first episode of major depression, which was treated and resolved
with antidepressants and a brief course of psychotherapy. Although she
had previous cycles of weight loss and weight regain, she did not
evidence any sign of eating disturbance at this point. She continued to
maintain close social ties and enjoyed her close relationship with her son.
When Ms. G was in her early 40s, an economic downturn in her adopted
country forced her to return to the United States. Having lost all of her
savings, she struggled financially while she looked for work. During this
time, she started binge eating and gaining weight. Within 1 year of this
move, Ms. G’s son decided to return to live with his father (who was very
wealthy). Ms. G felt angry and betrayed. Yet, when her son would visit,
she would assume a subservient role with him, because she was afraid of
losing his affection. He, in turn, became quite demanding and critical of
her. Before seeking treatment, her heightened feelings of isolation and
loneliness were leading to increased binge eating, depression, and weight
gain.
By session three of the initial phase, Ms. G’s therapist began to
consider which problem area would be the focus of the remainder of
treatment. Ms. G had a history of important relationship losses and
subsequent grief—the loss of her father, her husband, her mother, and,
most recently, her son. However, none of these losses led to the
development of binge eating problems (although her dieting clearly
linked to her feelings of anger after the divorce from her husband, and her
depression intimately related to her mother’s death). Ms. G’s anger at her
son for returning to live with the enemy was clearly a role dispute, yet her
binge eating had begun 2 years before his departure (although it clearly
worsened after he left). Because neither of these problem areas directly
linked to the onset of the eating disorder, Ms. G’s therapist decided that
the focus of treatment would be to assist her in managing her role
transition. Her move back to the United States, with the subsequent loss
of her support and friendship networks, was clearly associated with the
onset and continued maintenance of her binge eating. During session four
of the initial phase, Ms. G’s therapist shared her formulation of the
problem area with her: “From what you have described, your binge eating
really began after you returned to the United States. After that transition,


<<<PAGE 2450>>>
you felt more isolated and alone than you have ever been. It seems that
binge eating was a way for you to manage that transition and the
subsequent feelings of isolation and loneliness. Your transition has also
negatively impacted your relationship with your son. Even though you
are a very social person and enjoy the company of others, you have yet to
develop the kind of support that you had before you moved. Although
you have struggled with some very significant issues throughout your life
—your father leaving, the pain of the divorce, and the death of your
mother—your friends and support systems sustained you. If we work
together to help you find and develop more intimate and supportive
relationships here, I believe you will be much less likely to turn to food
and binge eating as a source of support or comfort.”
Ms. G agreed with the formulation and worked with her therapist to
establish some treatment goals to help her resolve the problem area. First,
the therapist encouraged her to become more aware of her feelings
(notably isolation and loneliness) when she was binge eating and of how
binge eating seemed to be the way she managed those feelings. A second
goal was for her to take steps to increase her social contacts and develop
more friendships. The third goal, which was a secondary problem area,
centered on helping Ms. G resolve the role dispute with her son.
Specifically, the therapist developed a goal with her to help her establish
a clearer parental role with her son.
During the intermediate phase, the therapist helped Ms. G to grieve the
loss of her previous role and the extensive support that she once had. Ms.
G and her therapist worked to identify several sources of support and
friendships of which she had not been aware. Soon after, Ms. G reported
significant progress in initiating and establishing relationships with
others. This change appeared to help give her confidence in her new
roles. In fact, she began to receive a few social invitations. She became
more attuned to the ways that she would rely on food, especially when
she felt lonely or felt that she was not receiving enough time from others.
The connection between the lack of supportive contacts and binge eating
was becoming very clear to her in these intermediate sessions. During
this phase, the therapist also assisted her in setting appropriate limits in
her relationship with her adult son and in recognizing his adult-like
responses in return. By the termination phase, Ms. G reported that she no


<<<PAGE 2451>>>
longer felt so lonely and isolated and that her binge eating had all but
disappeared. She remarked how the quality of her relationship with her
son had changed dramatically. He was more supportive and respectful,
visited more frequently, and stayed with her for more extended periods.
In the final sessions, she talked about her need to let go of the past and
move on with her life as it is now, assuming her new roles more fully.
She worked closely with her therapist to develop a plan to maintain the
gains that she made in treatment and used the final session to review the
important work that she accomplished. (Courtesy of D. E. Wilfley, Ph.D.
and R. W. Guynn, M.D.)
Interpersonal Psychotherapy Delivered in a Group Format. ITP
delivered in a group format has many potential benefits in comparison with
individual treatment. For example, a group format based on members’
diagnostic similarity (e.g., depression, social phobia, eating disorders) can
help alleviate patients’ concerns that they are the only one with a particular
psychiatric disorder, while offering a social environment for patients who are
isolated, withdrawn, or disconnected from others. Given the number and
different types of interpersonal interactions in a group setting, the
interpersonal skills that develop may be more readily transferable to the
patient’s outside social life than are the relationship patterns that develop in a
one-on-one setting. Moreover, a group modality has therapeutic features not
present in individual psychotherapy (e.g., interpersonal learning). The group
format also facilitates the identification of problems common to many
patients and provides a cost-effective alternative to individual treatment.
Table 23-15 links the phases of ITP to the stages of group development.
TIMELINE AND STRUCTURE OF TREATMENT. The typical course of group ITP

lasts 20 sessions over 5 months. The recommended group size ranges from
six to nine members, with one or two group leaders, depending on resources
and training needs. Three individual meetings (pregroup, midgroup, and
postgroup), sequenced to correspond with critical time points in the three
phases of ITP, in combination with other techniques, maintain the exclusive
and strategic focus on individual patients’ interpersonal problem areas—the
hallmark of ITP.


<<<PAGE 2452>>>
Table 23-15
Linking the Phases of Interpersonal Psychotherapy to the
Stages of Group Development
Phases/Tasks Group Stages

Members’
Work

Therapist
Interventions

Initial:
Engagement:
Sessions 1–
Sessions 1–2
5; identify
problem
areas

Members look Establish a
for structure
structure that
as they
encourages
grapple with
appropriate
the anxiety
self-disclosure;
of being in a
facilitate norms
group and
for effective
sharing their
communication
problems

Differentiations:
Sessions 3–5

Members work Help members to
to manage
understand
negative
their reactions
feelings over
in the context
interpersonal
of
differences
interpersonal
as they
differences in
emerge in
their outside
the group
social lives

Middle:
Work: Sessions
Sessions 6–
6–15
15; work on
goals

Members work Facilitate
out
connections
differences
among
and strive
members as
toward
they share
common
their work with
goals
each other;
encourage
practice of
newly acquired


<<<PAGE 2453>>>
interpersonal
skills in and
outside of the
group
Final:
Sessions
15–20;
consolidate
treatment

Terminations:
Sessions 16–
20

Members
Help members to
struggle with
consolidate
how to
their work and
manage the
to plan
impending
continued
loss of
work; assist
connection
members in
with other
grieving the
group
loss of the
members
group

Reprinted with permission from Wilfley DE, MacKenzie KR, Welch RR, Ayers VE, Weissman
MM. Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Group. New York: Basic Books; 2000:20.
PREGROUP MEETING. The pretreatment meeting is crucial for facilitating a

patient’s individualized work in the first phase of group ITP. The focus of the
2-hour pretreatment meeting is to identify interpersonal problem areas,
establish an explicit treatment contract to work on problem areas, and prepare
patients for group treatment. After identifying a patient’s interpersonal
problem(s) (i.e., interpersonal deficits, role disputes, role transitions, or grief),
the therapist works collaboratively with the patient to formulate concrete
prescriptions for change, in addition to the specific steps the patient will take
to improve social relationships and patterns of relating. The therapist
expresses these goals of treatment in language that is as specific and
personally meaningful to the patient as possible. Before the start of the group,
each group member receives a written summary of his or her goals and
instructions that these goals will guide his or her work in the group.
Another important element of the pregroup meeting involves adequately
preparing patients for group treatment. That is, the therapist encourages
patients to think of the group as an “interpersonal laboratory” in which they
can experiment with new approaches to handle challenging interpersonal
situations. In this regard, patients hear about the important interpersonal skills


<<<PAGE 2454>>>
that they will learn while participating in a group (e.g., interpersonal
confrontation, honest communication, expression of feelings) and receive
encouragement to learn from others as they see changes occur. The therapist
stresses to patients the importance of keeping their work in the group focused
on changing their current interpersonal situations or intensifying important
existing relationships and not using the group as a substitute social network.
INITIAL PHASE. The first five sessions of the group treatment comprise the

initial phase in group ITP. During this phase, the therapist works to cultivate
positive group norms and group cohesion, while emphasizing the
commonality of symptoms among members and how the group context will
address these. During this phase, group members review their goals with the
group and begin to make some initial changes in their respective
interpersonal problem areas. As members begin to experiment with the
changes outlined in their goals, the therapist works collaboratively with each
group member to refine and make any alterations in the target areas before
the beginning of the intermediate phase.
INTERMEDIATE PHASE. During the intermediate “work” phase of group ITP

(sessions 6 through 15), the therapist works to facilitate connections among
members as they share the work on their goals with one another. In contrast
to other interactive group approaches, the group interpersonal psychotherapist
is much less likely to focus on intragroup processes and relationships unless
they are specific to the work on a member’s interpersonal problem area (e.g.,
interpersonal deficits). The therapist, however, consistently and continuously
encourages group members to practice newly acquired interpersonal skills
both inside and, most importantly, outside the group. As is the case with
individual ITP, an essential task throughout the intermediate phase is to
strengthen the connections the group members make between difficulties in
their interpersonal lives and their psychiatric problems.
MIDTREATMENT MEETING. The midtreatment meeting is held midway (usually

between sessions 10 and 11) through the intermediate phase. This meeting
provides an opportunity to conduct a detailed review of each group member’s
progress on his or her individual problems and to refine interpersonal goals.
The therapist recontracts with group members during this meeting to outline


<<<PAGE 2455>>>
and emphasize the work that remains, both inside and outside of the group,
before treatment concludes.
TERMINATION PHASE. In the termination phase (sessions 16 through 20), the

therapist discusses termination explicitly with the group members and begins
to help them recognize that the end of treatment is a time of possible grief
and loss. The therapist helps members recognize their own progress and the
progress made by other group members. During this phase, group members
describe the specific changes in their psychiatric symptoms, especially as
they relate to improvements in the identified problem area(s) and
relationships. Although it is common for group members to want to keep
meeting on their own or to have frequent reunions, the therapist encourages
group members to use this phase of the group to formally say goodbye to one
another and the therapist. The therapist also uses this time to encourage
members to detail their plans for maintaining improvements in their identified
interpersonal problem area(s) and to outline their remaining work.
POSTTREATMENT MEETING. The posttreatment meeting occurs within 1 week

after the final group session. The therapist uses this final individual meeting
to develop an individualized plan for each group member’s continued work
on his or her interpersonal goals. The therapist reviews the group experience
and the changes the patient has made in his or her interpersonal problem area
and significant relationships.


<<<PAGE 2456>>>
NARRATIVE PSYCHOTHERAPY
More than anything else psychiatrists do, they listen to stories. These stories
so saturate the clinical encounter that it would be impossible to imagine a
clinical encounter without them. In the very first meeting between
psychiatrist and patient, the psychiatrist begins with an open-ended invitation
to a story: “What brings you here?” or “What seems to be the problem?”
Patients respond to these questions by telling psychiatrists about their lives,
their troubles, when the troubles began, what seems to have caused them,
how they create difficulty, and what kinds of problem-solving they have
tried. Such stories may be rudimentary, they may be only partially worked
out, and they may even be baffled and confused. The patient may also be
perplexed enough to answer, “I don’t know why I came,” or “I’m not really
sure what’s wrong; my family sent me.” Nonetheless, the patient’s response
to the psychiatrist’s initial questions always involves a story.
Narrative psychotherapy emerges out of this increased interest in clinical
stories. The two main tributaries that lead to narrative psychotherapy come
from the two different sides of psychiatry: narrative medicine and narrative
psychotherapy. Narrative psychiatrists are psychiatrists who combine the
wisdom of these two domains. Following the lead of narrative medicine,
narrative psychiatrists recognize that psychiatric patients, like medical
patients, come to clinics with intense stories to tell. Contemporary narrative
medicine has developed from 30 years of work in bioethics and medical
humanities devoted to humanizing the clinical encounter through a better
understanding of patient stories. The term narrative medicine comes from
Rita Charon, an internist and literary scholar, who used it to describe an
approach to medicine that uses narrative approaches to augment scientific
understandings of illness. Narrative medicine brings together insights from
human-centered medical models, such as George Engel’s biopsychosocial
model and Eric Cassel’s person-centered model, with research and insights
from phenomenology, the humanities, and interpretive social sciences.
Narrative medicine uses these resources to understand the illness
experience better, “to recognize, absorb, interpret, and be moved by the
stories of illness.” As Charon argued, when clinicians possess narrative
competency, they can enter the clinical setting with a nuanced capacity for


<<<PAGE 2457>>>
“attentive listening…, adopting alien perspectives, following the narrative
thread of the story of another, being curious about other people’s motives and
experiences, and tolerating the uncertainty of stories.” She further argued that
doctors “need rigorous and disciplined training” in narrative reading and
writing not just for their own sake (helping them to deal with the strains and
traumas of clinical work), but also “for the sake of their practice.” Without
such narrative competency, clinicians lack the ability to understand their
client’s experience of illness fully. For Charon and others in narrative
medicine, narrative study is not a mere adornment to a doctor’s medical
training; it is a crucial and basic science that physicians should master for
medical practice.
A major task of narrative medicine, and therefore narrative psychotherapy,
is to be a good listener and to connect empathically with the patient’s story. A
narrative psychiatrist, like a narrative physician, seeks to understand the
patient first and foremost. This understanding brings patient and clinician
together into a shared experience of the patient’s world. This narrative
understanding is much more than a causal explanation of problem A or
problem B that the patient might have. It does not simply abstract from the
person’s situation a categorical label that groups problems under a wellknown abstract grid. Instead, narrative understanding tunes in to the
uniqueness of the individual and the unrepeatability of their experience and
difficulties. Narrative understanding, in short, is a deep appreciation of the
person as a whole—what it feels like for this person, in this particular
context, going through these particular problems.
In addition to following the lead of narrative medicine colleagues,
narrative psychiatrists also follow the lead of contemporary colleagues in
narrative psychotherapy. The history of narrative psychotherapy goes back to
Sigmund Freud’s early work at the inception of psychoanalysis. At that time,
Freud lamented how his case histories sounded more like narrative fiction
than hard science.
Contemporary narrative psychotherapy’s motivation for returning to the
role of narrative comes partly from the broader turn to narrative in
humanities, psychology, and social science and partly from the history of
psychotherapy since Freud. The past century of psychotherapy has been a
century of strife, with one faction after another splitting off from
psychoanalysis. Leading alternatives to psychoanalysis included behavioral,


<<<PAGE 2458>>>
humanistic, family, cognitive, feminist, and interpersonal, just to name some.
These splits are characterized by further splits within splits, fragmenting the
field of psychotherapy to the point of more than 400 approaches to
psychotherapy. Narrative approaches emerge at this particular moment as part
of an important trend away from further fragmentation and toward
psychotherapy reintegration. Narrative approaches are invaluable for
psychotherapy integration because they provide a metatheoretical orientation
from which to understand and practice psychotherapy.
Metaphor
Metaphor performs this function by allowing us to understand and experience
one thing in terms of something else. The metaphor selects, accentuates, and
backgrounds aspects of two systems of ideas so that they come to be seen as
similar: “Men are seen to be more like wolves after the wolf metaphor is
used, and wolves seem to be more human.”
In narrative psychotherapy, understanding metaphor connects to broader
work in continental linguistic philosophy, and that work, as a whole, attempts
to shift standard ideas about truth and objectivity. It sidesteps the binary
concepts of relativism (anything goes) and realism (there is only one correct
or true way to describe the world). Rather than using the binary distinction
between true and false, narrative psychotherapy instead uses a postmodern
language of semiotic realism and pluridimensional consequences.
Plot
Plot works like metaphor in that it also orders experiences and provides form
for narratives. Plot, or the process of emplotment, adds to metaphor two key
dimensions: (1) it brings together what would otherwise be separate and
heterogeneous elements, and (2) it organizes understanding and experience or
time, or what could be called temporal perception.
The critical function of plot for narrative is that plot creates a narrative
synthesis between multiple individual events and brings them together into a
single story, making an intelligible connection between them. Remarkably,
plot can create a synthesis between events and elements that are surprisingly
incongruous or heterogeneous—events that do not seem to fit together.
Plot also configures these multiple elements into a temporal order. This


<<<PAGE 2459>>>
temporal order is of two sorts. First, each plot comprises a discrete series of
incidents, of theoretically infinite nows. Second, each plot takes these infinite
nows, proceeding one after another in succession, and organizes them into a
humanly manageable experience.
Character
In narrative theory, the concept of character connects directly to
contemporary controversy surrounding the related and, some may argue,
more basic concept of identity. The controversy around identity may be
understood as a tension between essentialist and nonessentialist approaches.
Essentialist notions of identity tell us that each person has a fixed personality,
perhaps biologically stamped, that authentically belongs to that person and is
at the core of that person’s being. This “true self” or “core self” may be
distorted or covered over, but it is nonetheless there for the discovery if
individuals apply themselves patiently and persistently to the task.
Nonessentialist critiques, however, have deconstructed this ideal of identity
and its notion of an integral, originary, and unified self. One of the most
productive ways to navigate the tension between essentialist and
nonessentialist understandings of identity is to draw a comparison between
identity (in life) and character (in fiction). Rather than adopting a linear logic
that understands identity as a more fundamental concept to character, this
approach uses a circular logic to argue that people understand themselves in
the same way they understand characters.
Narrative approaches to identity allow people to navigate the tension
between essentialist and nonessentialist identities because narrative identity
allows for a kind of continuity over time, a relative stability of self, without
implying a substantial or essentialist core to this stability. People’s
interpretations of themselves use the cultural stories surrounding them to tell
a story of self that escapes the two poles of random change and absolute
identity. In this way, a narrative identity is also a cultural identification. A
person’s identification may seem original, but he or she narrates them with
the resources of history, language, and culture.
Narrative Psychiatry
With this brief introduction to narrative medicine, narrative psychotherapy,


<<<PAGE 2460>>>
and narrative theory, it is possible further to draw out the meaning of
narrative for psychiatry.
Fortunately, one of the most helpful aspects of narrative theory for
psychiatry is that it provides an overarching, or metatheoretical, rationale for
understanding how these many psychotherapies work. From a narrative
perspective, all therapies involve a process of storytelling and story retelling.
No matter which style of psychotherapy one uses, the process of therapy
involves an initial presentation of problems that the client is unable to
resolve. The client and therapist work together to bring additional
perspectives to these problems, allowing the client to understand them in a
new way. These additional perspectives vary greatly depending on the style
of psychotherapy used. It matters, in other words, whether the therapy is
psychodynamic, cognitive, humanistic, feminist, spiritual, or expressive.
From the vantage point of narrative theory, however, what these different
approaches all have in common is that they rework, or “reauthor,” the
patient’s initial story into a new story. This new story allows new degrees of
flexibility for understanding the past and provides new strategies for moving
into the future.
Future Directions
Recent work in narrative medicine, narrative psychotherapy, and narrative
theory has opened the door for the development of narrative psychiatry. This
development provides a critical corrective to contemporary psychiatric
practice that helps self-correct from an overreliance on biologic models
without falling into a morass of antipsychiatry and without throwing away the
bioscience baby with the bathwater. When psychiatrists take a narrative turn,
they do not throw out their other skills and knowledge. The shift to narrative
is, as much as anything else, an attitude shift and an opening out to additional
sources of information. It starts by bringing to the foreground that the clinical
encounter is a human encounter, and it follows by opening out to colleagues
in the humanities, interpretive social sciences, and the arts to help to
understand this human encounter better.
Most of all, narrative psychotherapy joins with other contemporary efforts
in psychiatry—such as the recovery movement—to make clinical encounters
much more client-focused and collaborative. Narrative psychotherapy, at its


<<<PAGE 2461>>>
core, recognizes that there are many ways to tell the story of one’s life. The
choice among these different options is a key way in which people create
their identity. These choices should not be reduced to expert choices or
scientific choices because they are always also personal and ethical choices.
In the end, they are choices about what kind of life one wants to live.
Furthermore, clinicians must come to understand the value of biography,
autobiography, and literature for developing a repertoire of narrative frames
and options. In the end, narrative competency in psychiatry means a
tremendous familiarity with the many possible stories of psychic pain and
psychic difference. The more stories clinicians know, the more likely they are
to help their clients to find a narrative frame that works for them.
For patients and potential service users, a narrative understanding means
that there is a range of possible therapists and healing solutions that might be
helpful. An approach that is right for one person may not be right for another.
There must be a fit between the person and the approach, and people should
feel empowered to take their intuitions and feelings seriously. If the person
getting help does not feel this fit, he or she is likely right. There may well be
another approach that would work better with the person’s proclivities. Like
everything else, however, judgment is critical. Therapeutic experiences of all
kinds can be frustrating, slow, and uncertain. How, for example, does one
know when an approach misses his or her needs and when it is something
that will take time, patience, and perseverance to be helpful? From a narrative
perspective, there can be no gold standard or simple answers. Only judgment,
wisdom, and trial and error can decide.

COMBINED PSYCHOTHERAPY AND
PHARMACOTHERAPY
The use of psychotropic drugs, in combination with psychotherapy, has
become widespread. It has become the standard of care for many patients
seen by psychiatrists. In this therapeutic approach, the use of pharmacologic
agents augments psychotherapy. It should not be a system in which the
therapist meets with the patient only on an occasional or irregular basis to
monitor the effects of medication, to make notations on a rating scale to
assess progress, or to assess side effects. Instead, it should be a system in
which both therapies are integrated and synergistic. In many cases, studies


<<<PAGE 2462>>>
demonstrate that the results of combined therapy are superior to either type of
therapy used alone. The term pharmacotherapy-oriented psychotherapy is
used by some practitioners to refer to the combined approach. The methods
of psychotherapy used can vary immensely, and all can be combined with
pharmacotherapy when indicated.
Indications for Combined Therapy
A major indication for using medication when conducting psychotherapy,
particularly for those patients with major mental disorders such as
schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, is that psychotropics reduce anxiety and
hostility. This improves the patient’s capacity to communicate and to
participate in the psychotherapeutic process. Another indication for combined
therapy is to relieve distress when the signs and symptoms of the patient’s
disorder are so prominent that they require more rapid amelioration than
psychotherapy alone may be able to offer. In addition, each technique may
facilitate the other; psychotherapy may enable the patient to accept a muchneeded pharmacologic agent, and the psychoactive drug may allow the
patient to overcome resistance to entering or continuing psychotherapy
(Table 23-16).
The reduction of symptoms, especially anxiety, does not decrease the
patient’s motivation for psychoanalysis or other insight-oriented
psychotherapy. In practice, drug-induced symptom reduction improves
communication and motivation. All therapies have a cognitive base, and
anxiety generally interferes with the patient’s ability to gain a cognitive
understanding of the illness. Drugs that decrease anxiety facilitate cognitive
understanding. They can improve attention, concentration, memory, and
learning in patients who suffer from anxiety disorders.
Number of Treating Clinicians
Any number of clinicians can be involved in the treatment of a psychiatric
disorder. In one-person therapy, the psychiatrist provides individual
psychotherapy and medication treatment. Multiperson therapy is a form of
treatment in which one clinician conducts psychotherapy while the other
clinician prescribes medications. Other therapists may oversee marriage or
family therapy or group therapy. The terms cotherapy or triangular therapy


<<<PAGE 2463>>>
also describe permutations of multiperson therapy.
Table 23-16
Benefits of Combined Therapy
Improved medication adherence
Better monitoring of clinical status
Decreased number and length of hospitalizations
Decreased risk of relapse
Improved social and occupational functioning
Communication among Therapists
Whenever more than one clinician is involved in treatment, there should be
regular exchanges of information. Some patients split the transference
between the two; the patient may view one therapist as giving and nurturing
and may view the other as withholding and aloof. Similarly,
countertransference issues, such as one therapist’s identifying with the
patient’s idealized or devalued image of the other therapist, can interfere with
therapy. Therapists must address those issues with the patient, and the
cotherapists must be compatible and respectful of each other’s orientation so
that the therapy program can succeed.
A therapist may have some concerns about the quality of the
psychopharmacology or a need to reevaluate the existing regimen. For
example, a patient may not be doing well on medication, experiencing
significant side effects, or showing a lack of sufficient improvement. Some
patients may also be taking many different medications. When and if it is
deemed in the patient’s interest to question the medication regimen or the
prescriber’s skill, these misgivings should not be shared with the patient
without first conferring with the prescribing physician.
If the therapist or pharmacologist, after a good-faith effort to understand
the methods and course of treatment, still has misgivings about treatment, he
or she should inform his or her counterpart that a second opinion would be
useful. The therapist can then suggest to the patient that he or she consider a
second opinion without raising undue alarm. Communication between
treating clinicians should take place as frequently as needed. No standard


<<<PAGE 2464>>>
exists for how frequent that should be.
Orientations of Treating Clinicians
The orientation of the treating psychiatrist or other clinician can influence the
therapeutic process during combination treatment. Clinicians invariably bring
a theoretical bias to the treatment setting. Some, for example, are oriented, by
preference and training, to practice a specific form of psychotherapy, such as
psychoanalysis, CBT, or group therapy. These clinicians view psychotherapy
as the primary treatment modality, with pharmacologic agents being an
adjunct to treatment. Conversely, psychopharmacologically oriented
psychiatrists view psychotherapy as augmenting the use of medication.
Although disagreement may arise on which approach represents the most
active ingredient in clinical response, the optimal use of both modalities
should complement each other.
In addition to having extensive training in one or more psychoanalytic or
psychotherapeutic
techniques,
the
psychiatrist
who
practices
pharmacotherapy-oriented psychotherapy must have a comprehensive
knowledge of psychopharmacology. That knowledge must include a thorough
understanding of the indications for the use of each drug, the
contraindications, the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, the drug–
drug interactions (with all pharmacologic agents, not only the psychoactive
agents), and the adverse effects of medications. The psychiatrist must be able
both to identify adverse effects and to treat them.
Nonpsychiatric physicians often use psychoactive agents inaccurately (too
small or too large a dose for too short or too long a course), because they lack
the requisite psychopharmacological knowledge, training, and experience.
Psychotherapists who work with primary care physicians instead of
psychiatrists should understand the limitations in depth of knowledge that
these practitioners have and should seek a consultation with a psychiatrist if a
patient is not responding to, or tolerating, medication. In some situations, the
same clinician should deliver both psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy;
however, this is often not possible for a variety of reasons, including therapist
availability, time limitations, and economic restraints, among others.
Therapist Attitudes. Psychiatrists trained primarily as psychotherapists


<<<PAGE 2465>>>
may prescribe medication more reluctantly than those more oriented toward
biologic psychiatry. Conversely, those who view medication as the preferred
intervention for most psychiatric disorders may be reluctant to refer patients
for psychotherapy. Therapists who are pessimistic about the value of
psychotherapy or who misjudge the patient’s motivation may prescribe
medications because of their own beliefs; others may withhold medication if
they overvalue psychotherapy or undervalue pharmacologic treatments.
When a patient is in psychotherapy with someone other than the clinician
prescribing medication, it is essential to recognize treatment bias and to avoid
contentious turf battles that put the patient in the middle of such conflict.
Linkage Phenomenon. At some point, patients may view the
improvement achieved in therapy as the result of a conscious or unconscious
linkage between the psychopharmacological agent and the therapist. In fact,
after being weaned from medication, patients often carry a pill with them for
reassurance. In that sense, the pill acts as a transitional object between the
patient and the therapist. Some patients with anxiety disorders, for example,
may carry a single benzodiazepine tablet, which they take when they think
they are about to have an anxiety attack. Then, the patient may report that the
medication aborted the attack—before the medication could even have
entered the bloodstream. In other cases, the patient never takes the pill
because the patient knows that the pill is available and gains reassurance from
that fact. The linkage phenomenon is usually not seen unless the patient is in
a positive transference to the therapist. Indeed, the therapist may use this
phenomenon to his or her advantage by suggesting that the patient carry
medication to use as needed. Eventually, the behavior has to be analyzed, and
patients frequently attribute magical properties to the therapist and then
transfer those properties to the medication. Some clinicians believe this effect
results from conditioning. After repeated trials, the sight of the medicine can
decrease anxiety. The positive transference may also cause transference cure
or flight into health, in which the patient feels better in an unconscious
attempt to meet the presumed expectations of the prescribing physician.
Therapists should consider this phenomenon if the patient reports rapid
improvement well before a particular medication may reach its therapeutic
level.


<<<PAGE 2466>>>
Rachel, a 25-year-old woman, presented with depressive symptoms and
abdominal pain. After an extensive psychiatric and medical evaluation,
she received a diagnosis of major depression of moderate severity and
irritable bowel disorder. She began a course of CBT targeting her
negative attributional style and low self-esteem, and she learned
relaxation and distraction techniques for her pain. After a 12-week trial,
she experienced only partial remission of her symptoms, and the
psychiatrist offered her an antidepressant, citalopram at 20 mg per day.
Her depressive symptoms remitted within 1 month, and she was able to
function better at work but socially remained hesitant to engage with her
peers. Her abdominal pain persisted, and she began to exhibit a pattern of
disordered eating, severely restricting her intake to 500 calories per day
due to the “pain.” She experienced a 15-lb weight loss over the next
several months. An intensive behavioral plan to target eating was begun,
as well as continued probing of her negative cognitions relating to eating,
pain, and newly emerging concerns that she would regain the weight too
quickly and would become “fat.” She did not meet the criteria for
anorexia nervosa, although her cognitive distortions about her body
image were significant. These new concerns resulted in a relapse of her
depressive symptoms, including suicidal ideation, and the psychiatrist
increased her citalopram to 40 mg/day. She reported severe akathisia on
this dose and refused to take any more medication, including an
antidepressant of another class. Rachel did agree to intensify her therapy
to twice weekly, and this allowed her to explore some of the conflicts,
feelings, and thoughts that fostered her treatment-refractory illness. The
psychiatrist used a combination of psychotherapy and hypnosis for this
work. Over the next 6 months, Rachel revealed a history of sexual abuse
as a child, and this made her feel that she did not “deserve” to live or to
eat and that the pain served to “punish” her for being bad. She also
admitted that she resisted the medication “psychologically” because she
felt that she did not deserve to get well. Her newly found insight, as well
as the coping skills she developed in therapy, resulted in a reduction of
her depressive symptoms, marked improvement in her eating habits with
normalization of her weight, and decreased abdominal pain. She
maintained these gains over the next year, including the normalization of


<<<PAGE 2467>>>
her daily functioning, a promotion at work, and the ability to tolerate the
intimacy of a boyfriend. (Courtesy of E. M. Szigethy, M.D., Ph.D. and E.
S. Friedman, M.D.)
Adherence and Patient Education
Adherence. Adherence is the degree to which a patient carries out the
recommendations of the treating physician. A positive doctor–patient
relationship fosters adherence, and the patient’s refusal to take medication
may provide insight into a negative transferential situation. In some cases, the
patient acts out hostilities by nonadherence, rather than by becoming aware
of, and ventilating, such negative feelings toward the doctor. Medication
nonadherence may provide the psychiatrist with the first clue that a negative
transference is present in an otherwise adherent patient who had appeared to
be agreeable and cooperative.
Education. Patients should know the target signs and symptoms that the
drug is supposed to reduce, the length of time they will be taking the drug,
the expected and unexpected adverse effects, and the treatment plan to be
followed if the current drug is unsuccessful. Although some psychiatric
disorders interfere with patients’ abilities to comprehend that information, the
psychiatrist should relay as much of the information as possible. The clear
presentation of such material is often less frightening than are patients’
fantasies about drug treatment. The psychiatrist should tell patients when they
may expect to begin receiving benefits from the drug. That information is
most critical when the patient has a mood disorder and may not observe any
therapeutic effects for 3 to 4 weeks.
Some patients’ ambivalent attitudes toward drugs often reflect the
confusion about drug treatment that exists in the field of psychiatry. Patients
often believe that taking a psychotherapeutic medication means they are not
in control of their lives, or they may become addicted to the drug and have to
take it forever. Psychiatrists should explain the difference between drugs of
abuse that affect the normal brain and psychiatric medications that treat
emotional disorders. They should also point out to patients that
antipsychotics, antidepressants, and antimanic drugs are not addictive in the


<<<PAGE 2468>>>
way in which, for example, heroin is addictive. The psychiatrist’s
straightforward and honest explanation of how long the patient should take
the drug helps the patient adjust to the idea of chronic maintenance
medication if that is the treatment plan. In some cases, the psychiatrist may
appropriately give the patient increasing responsibility for adjusting the
medications as the treatment progresses. Doing so often helps the patient feel
less controlled by the drug and supports a collaborative role with the
therapist.
Attribution Theory
Attribution theory is concerned with how persons perceive the causes of
behavior. According to attribution theory, persons are likely to attribute
changes in their own behavior to external events but are likely to attribute
another’s behavior to internal dispositions, such as that person’s personality
traits. Research on drug effects by attribution theorists has shown that, when
patients take medication and their behaviors change, they attribute it to the
drug and not to any changes that occur within themselves. Accordingly, it
may be unwise to describe a drug as extremely strong or effective, because if
it does have the desired effect, the patient may believe that is the only reason
he or she got better. If the drug does not work, the patient may assume his or
her condition is incurable. Therapists do best by presenting the use of drugs
and psychotherapy as complementary or adjunctive, as neither standing alone
and both being needed for improvements or cure to occur.
Mental Disorders
Depressive Disorders. Some patients and clinicians fear that medication
covers over the depression and impedes psychotherapy. Instead, clinicians
should view medication as a facilitator in overcoming the anergia that can
inhibit the communication process between doctor and patient. The
psychiatrist should explain to the patient that depression interferes with
interpersonal activity in a variety of ways. For instance, depression produces
withdrawal and irritability, which alienate significant others who may
otherwise gratify the strong dependency needs that make up much of
depressive psychodynamics.


<<<PAGE 2469>>>
When the patient is no longer taking medication, the psychiatrist should be
alert for signs and symptoms of a recurrent major depressive episode. The
psychiatrist may need to reinstitute medication. Before doing so, however,
carefully review any stress, especially rejections, that could have precipitated
recurrent major depressive disorder. A new episode of depression may occur
because the patient is in a stage of negative transference, and the psychiatrist
must try to elicit negative feelings. In many cases, the ventilation of angry
feelings toward the therapist without an angry response can serve as a
corrective emotional experience and can forestall a major depressive episode
necessitating medication. Depressed patients are generally maintained on
their medication for 6 months or longer after clinical improvement. The
cessation of pharmacotherapy before that time is likely to result in a relapse.
Combined treatment is superior to either therapy used alone in the
treatment of major depression. It is associated with improved social and
occupational functioning and enhanced quality of life compared with either
therapy alone.
Bipolar I Disorder. Patients taking lithium or other treatments for bipolar I
disorder are usually medicated for an indefinite period to prevent episodes of
mania or depression. Most psychotherapists insist that patients with bipolar I
disorder take medication before starting any insight-oriented therapy.
Without such premedication, most patients with bipolar I disorder are unable
to make the necessary therapeutic alliance. When those patients are
depressed, their abulia seriously disrupts their flow of thoughts, and the
sessions are less productive. When they are manic, their flow of associations
can be rapid, and their pressured speech can flood the therapist with material
and prevent him or her from making appropriate interpretations or
assimilating the material into the patient’s disrupted cognitive framework.
Combined therapy for bipolar disorder increases adherence, decreases
relapse, and reduces the need for hospitalization.
Substance Use Disorders. Patients with substance use disorders present
the most difficult challenge in combined therapy. They are often impulsive,
and, although they may promise not to use a substance, they may do so
repeatedly. In addition, they frequently withhold information from the
psychiatrist about episodes of substance use. For that reason, some


<<<PAGE 2470>>>
psychiatrists do not prescribe any medication to such patients, especially not
those substances with high abuse potential, such as benzodiazepines,
barbiturates, and amphetamines. Drugs with no abuse potential, such as
antidepressants, have an important role in treating the anxiety or depression
that frequently accompanies substance-related disorders. The psychiatrist
conducting psychotherapy with such patients should have no reservations
about sending the patient to a laboratory for random urine toxicologic tests.
Anxiety, Obsessive-Compulsive, and Trauma-Related Disorders.
These disorders encompass OCD, PTSD, generalized anxiety disorder,
phobic disorders, and panic disorder with or without agoraphobia. Many
drugs are effective in managing distressing signs and symptoms. As the
medication controls patients’ symptoms, patients are reassured and develop
confidence that the disorder will not incapacitate them. That effect is
particularly strong in panic disorder, which is often associated with
anticipatory anxiety about the attack. Depression can also complicate the
symptom picture in patients with anxiety disorders and requires
pharmacologic and psychotherapeutic intervention. Studies have shown that
patients with anxiety disorders who receive ongoing psychotherapy are less
likely to experience relapse compared with patients who receive medication
alone.
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders. Included in the group
of schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders are schizophrenia, delusional
disorder, schizoaffective disorder, schizophreniform disorder, and brief
psychotic disorder. Drug treatment for those disorders is always indicated,
and hospitalization is often necessary for diagnostic purposes, to stabilize
medication, to prevent danger to self or others, and to establish a
psychosocial treatment program that may include individual psychotherapy.
In attempting individual psychotherapy, the therapist must establish a
treatment relationship and a therapeutic alliance with the patient. The patient
with schizophrenia defends against closeness and trust and often becomes
suspicious, anxious, hostile, or regressed in therapy. Before the advent of
psychotropics, many psychiatrists were fearful for their safety when working
with such patients. Indeed, many assaults occurred.
Individual psychotherapy for schizophrenia is labor-intensive, expensive,


<<<PAGE 2471>>>
and not often attempted. The recognition that combined psychotherapy and
pharmacotherapy have a greater chance of success than either type of therapy
alone may reverse that situation. The psychiatrist who conducts such
combined therapy must be especially empathic and must be able to tolerate
the bizarre manifestations of the illness. The patient with schizophrenia is
exquisitely sensitive to rejection, and the therapist should never start
individual psychotherapy unless he or she is willing to make a total
commitment to the process.
Other Issues
Evidence suggests that therapy can induce physical changes in the nervous
system. Eric Kandel has provided elegant proof, winning the Nobel Prize for
demonstrating that environmental stimuli produce lasting changes in the
synaptic architecture of living organisms. Imaging studies have shown that
patients who exhibit clinical improvement from psychotherapy show changes
in brain metabolism that are similar to those seen in patients successfully
treated with medications.
Still, some patients do well on only one form of treatment. Even with
identical diagnoses, not all patients respond to the same treatment regimens.
Success may be as dependent on the knowledge and quality of the clinician as
on the potential benefit of a particular drug.
A real dilemma when combining treatment is the additional direct costs of
two treatments. Although successful treatment results in reduced costs to
society, the cost of treatment is usually narrowly defined by the patient as
out-of-pocket expenses and by insurance and managed care companies as
payments to the physician or hospital. Restrictions placed on the frequency
and cost of visits to mental health professionals by managed care
organizations, however, encourage the use of medication rather than
psychotherapy.

MENTALIZATION-BASED TREATMENT
Mentalizing is the social cognitive ability to understand actions by other
people and oneself in terms of mental states, including thoughts, feelings,
wishes, and desires; it is a very human capability that underpins everyday
interactions. In nontechnical language, it is attentiveness to thinking and


<<<PAGE 2472>>>
feeling in oneself and others. It is beyond question that mental states
influence behavior. Beliefs, wishes, feelings, and thoughts, whether within or
outside people’s awareness, always influence what people do. Mentalizing
involves a whole spectrum of capacities: critically, this includes the ability to
experience one’s own behavior as coherently organized by mental states, and
to differentiate oneself psychologically from others. Individuals with a
personality disorder, who lose cognitive and emotional coherence,
particularly at moments of interpersonal (relational) stress, have reduced
mentalizing capacities. Mentalization-based treatment (MBT) is a
psychotherapy developed for BPD that focuses specifically on the
mentalizing vulnerabilities of the patient in the context of an understanding of
the attachment process, which is the developmental context in which
individuals initially acquire mentalizing.
Techniques
MBT is a group and individual treatment. It is anticipated that, at times, the
patient will experience strong affect while focusing on identified problems in
treatment sessions, and their mentalizing will be limited or failing, and/or the
patient’s understanding of the way mental states link to behavior is
inadequate.
The clinician addresses this by a structured process (the sessional
intervention trajectory) of: (1) empathy and validation about problem areas;
(2) clarification, exploration, and where necessary, challenge; (3) following a
structured process to gently expand mentalizing and encourage the patient to
identify the mental states previously outside their awareness.
The process is primarily in the here and now of the session, but
increasingly, as the patient’s mentalizing improves, it comes to concern core
attachment relationships, including how these are activated with the clinician
and key figures in the patient’s life and how they influence mentalizing itself.
Gradually, improvements in mentalizing serve to enable the patient to address
their distorted representations of personal and social relationships.
The assessment and introductory process in MBT facilitates the alliance
between patient and clinician (see Table 23-17) and introduces the patient to
the treatment frame. An MBT-Introductory group of 10 to 12 sessions assists
in the development of the formulation and facilitates the alliance. This


<<<PAGE 2473>>>
psychoeducational intervention covers all areas of mentalizing, attachment
processes, personality disorder, emotion management, and the treatment
itself. This preparatory work aims to ensure patients know what they are
facing in trying to address their problems and are fully aware of the method
and focus of treatment.
MBT is collaborative. Nothing can occur without joint discussion, taking
into account the mental experiences and ideas of both patient and clinician.
The process of mentalizing requires an authentic desire to understand the
mental processes of oneself and others. This applies as much to the clinician
as to the patient. The therapeutic process has to become a shared endeavor
aimed at extending the influence of explicit, reflective, cognitive, internally
focused mentalizing. Initial goals, on the road to improved mentalizing, are
jointly developed and given focus. The goals cannot solely be those of the
patient, although the patient’s aims take priority unless they are antithetical to
the whole process of treatment. The sharing of responsibility for the
therapeutic process is at the core of the effectiveness of the treatment
approach in the pursuit of improved mental state understanding.
Assessment involves delineation of the patient’s mentalizing
vulnerabilities and mentalizing profile, identification of nonmentalizing
cycles, and a shared formulation, which includes specific detail of attachment
patterns and areas of vulnerability to emotional dysregulation. This has to be
understood by the patient and is for both patient and clinician. The
formulation identifies common relational fears, for example, abandonment,
which stimulate the patient’s attachment system and result in the use of
maladaptive attachment strategies in interpersonal interactions. In brief, the
pattern of the patient’s relationships informs an understanding of the
relationship in treatment, and the relationship in treatment is used to
reappraise the relationships in life outside treatment. Finally, it is important
that the patient and clinician consider establishing a goal of improving social
function. This goal will include work, social activity, voluntary work,
education, and other constructive life-affirming activity.
Table 23-17
Alliance Building in MBT
Identification of patient’s mentalizing vulnerabilities in an


<<<PAGE 2474>>>
understandable form
Formulation of problems—agreed between patient and clinician
Identification of patient’s risk profile and crisis management
strategies
Agreement of short- and long-term goals
Indications
MBT is effective in treatment for severe BPD. Patients in the early studies of
the intervention had made serious suicide attempts, been admitted to a
psychiatric hospital for risk, and/or had acted on thoughts of self-harm. Trials
involved both men and women, and patients showed high levels of
comorbidity. Analysis of the data suggested that patients with comorbidity
for a number of personality disorders, including antisocial personality
disorder, did preferentially better in MBT than comparison treatment. At a
clinical level, patients with marked interpersonal problems who have a
personality disorder rooted in mentalizing vulnerability and attachment
problems may benefit from MBT.
Contraindications
MBT is a generic treatment constructed to optimize access both by creating a
low-demand treatment protocol and by facilitating access to training by a
range of professionals. Individuals who have problems with mentalizing
rooted in nonattachment contexts—for example, those with psychosis—may
not benefit from MBT; if they do, the mechanism of change is likely to be
different from that in BPD. Individuals with relatively simple problems, such
as phobias or uncomplicated depression, may do better with more direct
approaches, such as CBT. Even within a population of patients with BPD,
patients with more complex presentations (more than one personality disorder
diagnosis) are more likely to require MBT than those with a single BPD
diagnosis, who may do as well in structured clinical management.

PSYCHOEDUCATIONAL INTERVENTIONS
Psychoeducation is the process of helping individuals to understand a
psychiatric illness affecting them or their loved ones. Through this process,


<<<PAGE 2475>>>
patients and/or family members learn about common signs and symptoms of
the disease, treatment options, and prognosis for recovery. Psychoeducation
moves beyond merely providing information and includes teaching
individuals problem-solving skills, coping strategies, support resources, and
tools to improve communication. Essentially, psychoeducational
interventions provide strategies to support patients and families as they adjust
to living with and managing a psychiatric illness.
Psychoeducation can be delivered individually or in a group setting.
Interventions can be brief and incorporated into other treatment modalities
(e.g., medication management, inpatient hospitalization, outpatient
psychotherapy) or they can be structured and take place across several weeks
or months. Common areas addressed by psychoeducation include treatment
adherence, identifying signs of relapse, lifestyle factors relevant to the illness,
and management of crises.
Individuals and families dealing with serious mental illnesses, such as
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, often benefit from psychoeducation.
However, psychoeducation may be useful for a variety of disorders,
including, for example, major depression, anxiety, autism, dementia,
personality disorders, eating disorders, and substance use disorders.
Effectiveness of Psychoeducational Interventions
Psychoeducational interventions have been shown to improve outcomes for
patients and families, particularly for those dealing with serious or chronic
mental illness. A Cochrane review demonstrated that individuals with
schizophrenia who participated in psychoeducation had improved medication
adherence and lower relapse rates as compared to those without
psychoeducational intervention. Individuals with bipolar disorder who
participate in psychoeducation are also reported to have improved treatment
adherence and reduced relapse, particularly reduced manic/hypomanic
relapse. In addition, psychoeducational interventions for depression have
been associated with better illness prognosis and reduced psychosocial
burden for family members.
References
Psychoanalysis and Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy


<<<PAGE 2476>>>
Brent BK, Holt DJ, Keshavan MS, Seidman LJ, Fonagy P. Mentalizationbased treatment for psychosis: linking an attachment-based model to the
psychotherapy for impaired mental state understanding in people with
psychotic disorders. Isr J Psychiatry Relat Sci. 2014;51(1)17–24.
Buckley P. Revolution and evolution. A brief intellectual history of American
psychoanalysis during the past two decades. Am J Psychother.
2003;57(1):1–17.
Canestri J. Some reflections on the use and meaning of conflict in
contemporary psychoanalysis. Psychoanal Q. 2005;74(1):295–326.
Dodds J. Minding the ecological body: Neuropsychoanalysis and
ecopsychoanalysis. Front Psychol. 2013;4:125.
Joannidis C. Psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic psychotherapy. Psychoanal
Psychother. 2006;20(1):30–39.
Kandel ER. Psychiatry, Psychoanalysis, and the New Biology of Mind.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2005.
Karasu SR. Psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic psychotherapy. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2638–
2675.
Karasu TB. The Art of Serenity. New York: Simon and Schuster; 2003.
McWilliams N. Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy: A Practitioner’s Guide. New
York: Guilford; 2004.
Person ES, Cooper AM, Gabbard GO, eds. The American Psychiatric
Publishing Textbook of Psychoanalysis. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Publishing; 2005.
Roseneil S. Beyond ‘the relationship between the individual and society’:
broadening and deepening relational thinking in group analysis. Group
Anal. 2013;46(2):196–210.
Shulman DG. The analyst’s equilibrium, countertransferential management,
and the action of psychoanalysis. Psychoanal Rev. 2005;92(3):469–478.
Siegel E. Psychoanalysis as a traditional form of knowledge: An inquiry into
the methods of psychoanalysis. Int J Appl Psychoanal Stud.
2006;2(2):146–163.
Strenger C. The Designed Self: Psychoanalysis and Contemporary Identities.
Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press; 2005.
Tummala-Narra P. Psychoanalytic applications in a diverse society.


<<<PAGE 2477>>>
Psychoanal Psychol. 2013;30(3):471–487.
Varvin S. Which patients should avoid psychoanalysis, and which
professionals should avoid psychoanalytic training?: a critical evaluation.
Scand Psychoanal Rev. 2003;26(26):109–122.
Brief Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Beutel ME, Höflich A, Kurth RA, Reimer CH. Who benefits from inpatient
short-term psychotherapy in the long run? Patients’ evaluations, outpatient
after-care and determinants of outcome. Psychol Psychother.
2005;78(2):219–234.
Bianchi-DeMicheli F, Zutter AM. Intensive short-term dynamic sex therapy:
a proposal. J Sex Marital Ther. 2005;31(1):57–72.
Book HE. How to Practice Brief Psychodynamic Psychotherapy.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 2003.
Davanloo H. Basic Principles and Technique of Short Term Dynamic
Psychotherapy. New York: Spectrum; 1978.
Fonagy P, Roth A, Higgitt A. Psychodynamic psychotherapies: evidencebased practice and clinical wisdom. Bull Menninger Clin. 2005;69(1):1–
58.
Heidari S, Lewis AJ, Allahyari A, Azadfallah P, Bertino MD. A pilot study
of brief psychodynamic psychotherapy for depression and anxiety in young
Iranian adults: The effect of attachment style on outcomes. Psychoanal
Psychol. 2013;30(3):381–393.
Hersoug AG. Assessment of therapists’ and patients’ personality: relationship
to therapeutic technique and outcome in brief dynamic psychotherapy. J
Pers Assess. 2004;83(3):191–200.
Keefe JR, McCarthy KS, Dinger U, Zilcha-Mano S, Barber JP. A metaanalytic review of psychodynamic therapies for anxiety disorders. Clin
Psychol Rev. 2014;34(4):309–323.
Leichsenring F, Rabung S, Leibing E. The efficacy of short-term
psychodynamic psychotherapy in specific psychiatric disorders: a metaanalysis. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2004;61(12):1208–1216.
McCullough L, Osborn KA. Short term dynamic psychotherapy goes to
Hollywood: the treatment of performance anxiety in cinema. J Clin
Psychol. 2004;60(8):841–852.
Peretz J. Treating affect phobia: a manual for short-term dynamic


<<<PAGE 2478>>>
psychotherapy. Psychother Res. 2004;14(2):261–263.
Powers TA, Alonso A. Dynamic psychotherapy and the problem of time. J
Contemp Psychother. 2004;34(2):125–139.
Price JL, Hilsenroth MJ, Callahan KL, Petretic-Jackson PA, Bonge D. A pilot
study of psychodynamic psychotherapy for adult survivors of childhood
sexual abuse. Clin Psychol Psychother. 2004;11(6):378–391.
Scheidt CE, Waller E, Endorf K, Schmidt S, König R, Zeeck A, Joos A,
Lacour M. Is brief psychodynamic psychotherapy in primary fibromyalgia
syndrome with concurrent depression an effective treatment? A
randomized controlled trial. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2013;35(2):160–167.
Svartberg M, Stiles TC, Seltzer MH. Randomized, controlled trial of the
effectiveness of short-term dynamic psychotherapy and cognitive therapy
for cluster C personality disorders. Am J Psychiatry. 2004;161(5):810–817.
Trujillo M. Intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapies. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2796-2815.
Group Psychotherapy, Combined Individual and Group Psychotherapy,
and Psychodrama
Billow RM. Bonding in group: the therapist’s contribution. Int J Group
Psychother. 2003;53(1):83–110.
Burlingame GM, Fuhriman A, Mosier J. The differential effectiveness of
group psychotherapy: a meta-analytic perspective. Group Dynamics Thor
Res Prac. 2003;7(1):3–12.
Friedman R. Individual or group therapy? Indications for optimal therapy.
Group Anal. 2013;46(2):164–170.
Higaki Y, Ueda S, Hatton H, Arikawa J, Kawamoto K, Kamo T, Kawasima
M. The effects of group psychotherapy in the quality of life of adult
patients with atopic dermatitis. J Psychosom Res. 2003;55(2):162.
Ogrodniczuk JS, Piper WE, Joyce AS. Treatment compliance in different
types of group psychotherapy: exploring the effect of age. J Nerv Ment
Dis. 2006;194(4):287–293.
Paparella LR. Group psychotherapy and Parkinson’s disease: when members
and therapist share the diagnosis. Int J Group Psychother. 2004;54(3):401–
409; discussion 411–418.
Scheidlinger S. Group psychotherapy and related helping groups today: an


<<<PAGE 2479>>>
overview. Am J Psychother. 2004;58(3):265–280.
Segalla R. Selfish and unselfish behavior: scene stealing and scene sharing in
group psychotherapy. Int J Group Psychother. 2006;56(1):33–46.
Spitz HI. Group psychotherapy. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2735–2748.
Tyminski R. Long-term group psychotherapy for children with pervasive
developmental disorders: evidence for group development. Int J Group
Psychother. 2005;55(2):189–210.
van der Spek N, Vos J, van Uden-Kraan CF, Breitbart W, Cuijpers P,
Knipscheer-Kuipers K, Willemsen V, Tollenaar RA, van Asperen CJ,
Verdonck-de Leeuw IM. Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of meaningcentered group psychotherapy in cancer survivors: protocol of a
randomized controlled trial. BMC Psychiatry. 2014;14(1):22.
Zoger S, Suedland J, Holgers K. Benefits from group psychotherapy in
treatment of severe refractory tinnitus. J Psychosom Res. 2003;55:134.
Family Therapy and Couples Therapy
Dattilio FM, Piercy FP, Davis SD. The divide between “evidenced-based”
approaches and practitioners of traditional theories of family therapy. J
Marital Fam Ther. 2014;40(1):5–16.
Goldenberg I, Goldenberg H. Family Therapy: An Overview. 6th ed. Pacific
Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole; 2004.
Gurman AS. Brief integrative marital therapy. In: Gurman AS, Jacobson NS,
eds. Clinical Handbook of Couple Therapy. 3rd ed. New York: Guilford;
2003:180.
Gurman AS, Jacobson NS, eds. Clinical Handbook of Couple Therapy. 3rd
ed. New York: Guilford; 2003.
Johnson SM, Greenman PS. The path to a secure bond: emotionally focused
couple therapy. J Clin Psychol. 2006;62(5):597–609.
Johnson SM, Whiffen VE, eds. Attachment Processes in Couple and Family
Therapy. New York: Guilford; 2003.
McGoldrick M, Giordano J, Garcia-Preto N, eds. Ethnicity and Family
Therapy. 3rd ed. New York: Guilford; 2005.
Nichols MP, Schwartz RC. Family Therapy: Concepts and Methods. 6th ed.
Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon; 2004.


<<<PAGE 2480>>>
Nichols M, Tafuri S. Techniques of structural family assessment: a
qualitative analysis of how experts promote a systemic perspective. Fam
Process. 2013;52(2):207–215.
Snyder DK, Whisman MA, eds. Treating Difficult Couples. New York:
Guilford; 2003.
Spitz HI, Spitz ST. Family and couples therapy. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2748–2760.
Walker MD. When clients want your help to “pray away the gay”:
implications for couple and family therapists. J Fem Fam Ther.
2013;25(2):112–1134.
Dialectical Behavior Therapy
Bedics JD, Korslund KE, Sayrs JH, McFarr LM. The observation of essential
clinical strategies during an individual session of dialectical behavior
therapy. Psychotherapy. 2013;50(3):454–457.
Brown MZ, Comtois KA, Linehan MM. Reasons for suicide attempts and
nonsuicidal self-injury in women with borderline personality disorder. J
Abnorm Psychol. 2002;111(1):198–202.
Hadjiosif M. From strategy to process: validation in dialectical behaviour
therapy. Counsel Psychol Rev. 2013;28(1):72–80.
Harned MS, Korslund KE, Linehan MM. A pilot randomized controlled trial
of Dialectical Behavior Therapy with and without the Dialectical Behavior
Therapy Prolonged Exposure protocol for suicidal and self-injuring women
with borderline personality disorder and PTSD. Behav Res Ther.
2014;55:7–17.
Krause ED, Mendelson T, Lynch TR. Childhood emotion invalidation and
adult psychological distress: the mediating role of inhibition. Child Abuse
Negl. 2003;27(2):199–213.
Lynch TL, Morse JQ, Mendelson T, Robins CJ. Dialectical behavior therapy
for depressed older adults: a randomized pilot study. Am J Geriatr
Psychiatry. 2003;11(1):33–45.
Rizvi SL, Steffel LM, Carson-Wong A. An overview of dialectical behavior
therapy for professional psychologists. Prof Psychol. 2013;44(2):73–80.
Rosenthal MZ, Rodriguez MA. Dialectical behavior therapy. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of


<<<PAGE 2481>>>
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2784–2795.
Biofeedback
Enger T, Gruzelier JH. EEG biofeedback of low beta band components:
frequency-specific effects on variables of attention and event-related brain
potentials. Clin Neurophysiol. 2004;115(1):131–139.
Enriquez-Geppert S, Huster RJ, Herrmann CS. Boosting brain functions:
improving executive functions with behavioral training, neurostimulation,
and neurofeedback. Int J Psychophysiol. 2013;88(1):1–16.
Hopko DR, Clark CG, Shorter R. Behavior therapy. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2682–2705.
Manko G, Olszewski H, Krawczynski M, Tlokinski W. Evaluation of
differentiated neurotherapy programs for patients recovering from severe
TBI and long term coma. Acta Neuropsychol. 2013;11(1):9–18.
Mitani S, Fujita M, Sakamoto S, Shirakawa T. Effect of autogenic training on
cardiac autonomic nervous activity in high-risk fire service workers for
posttraumatic stress disorder. J Psychosom Res. 2006;60(5):439–444.
Nanke A, Rief W. Biofeedback in somatoform disorders and related
syndromes. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2004;17(2):133–138.
Othmer S, Pollock V, Miller N. The subjective response to neurofeedback.
In: Earleywine M, ed. Mind-Altering Drugs: The Science of Subjective
Experience. New York: Oxford University Press; 2005:345.
Purohit MP, Wells RE, Zafonte R, Davis RB, Yeh GY, Phillips RS.
Neuropsychiatry symptoms and the use of mind-body therapies. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2013;74(6):e520–e526.
Ritz T, Dahme B, Roth WT. Behavioral interventions in asthma: biofeedback
techniques. J Psychosom Res. 2004;56(6):711–720.
Schoenberg PL, David AS. Biofeedback for psychiatric disorders: a
systematic review. Appl Psychophysiol Biofeedback. 2014;39(2):109–135.
Schwartz MS, Andrasik F, eds. Biofeedback: A Practitioner’s Guide. 3rd ed.
New York: Guilford; 2003.
Scott WC, Kaiser D, Othmer S, Sideroff SI. Effects of an EEG biofeedback
protocol on a mixed substance abusing population. Am J Drug Alcohol
Abuse. 2005;31(3):455–469.
Seo JT, Choe JH, Lee WS, Kim KH. Efficacy of functional electrical


<<<PAGE 2482>>>
stimulation-biofeedback with sexual cognitive-behavioral therapy as
treatment of vaginismus. Urology. 2005;66(1):77–81.
Thornton KE, Carmody DP. Electroencephalogram biofeedback for reading
disability and traumatic brain injury. Child Adolesc Psychiatric Clin North
Am. 2005;14(1):137–162, vii.
Yucha C, Gilbert C. Evidence-Based Practice in Biofeedback and
Neurofeedback. Wheat Ridge, CO: Association for Applied
Psychophysiology and Biofeedback; 2004.
Cognitive Therapy
Beck AT, Freeman A, Davis DD. Cognitive Therapy of Personality
Disorders. 2nd ed. New York: Guilford; 2003.
Beck JS, Hindman R. Cognitive therapy. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2760–2775.
Coelho HF, Canter PH, Ernst E. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy:
evaluating current evidence and informing future research. J Consult Clin
Psychol. 2007;75(6):1000–1005.
Dobson KS. The science of CBT: toward a metacognitive model of change.
Behav Ther. 2013;44(2):224–227.
Ehde DM, Dillworth TM, Turner JA. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for
individuals with chronic pain: efficacy, innovations, and directions for
research. Am Psychol. 2014;69(2):153–166.
Hollon SD. Does cognitive therapy have an enduring effect. Cognit Ther Res.
2003;27:71–75.
Leahy RL, ed. Contemporary Cognitive Therapy: Theory, Research, and
Practice. New York: Guilford; 2004.
Mulder R, Chanen AM. Effectiveness of cognitive analytic therapy for
personality disorders. Br J Psychiatry. 2013;202(2):89–90.
Reinecke MA, Clark DA. Cognitive Therapy Across the Lifespan: Evidence
and Practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press; 2003.
Behavior Therapy
Fjorback LO, Arendt M, Ornbol E, Walach H, Rehfeld E, Schröder A, Fink
P. Mindfulness therapy for somatization disorder and functional somatic
syndromes: randomized trial with one-year follow-up. J Psychosom Res.


<<<PAGE 2483>>>
2013;74(1):31–40.
Fjorback LO, Carstensen T, Arendt M, Ornb⊘l E, Walach H, Rehfeld E, Fink
P. Mindfulness therapy for somatization disorder and functional somatic
syndromes: analysis of economic consequences alongside a randomized
trial. J Psychosom Res. 2013;74(1):41–48.
Gilbert C. Clinical applications of breathing regulation. Beyond anxiety
management. Behav Modif. 2003;27(5):692–709.
Hanley GP, Iwata BA, McCord BE. Functional analysis of problem behavior:
a review. J Appl Behav Anal. 2003;36(2):147–185.
Hans E, Hiller W. Effectiveness of and dropout from outpatient cognitive
behavioral therapy for adult unipolar depression: a meta-analysis of
nonrandomized effectiveness studies. J Consult Clin Psychol.
2013;81(1):75–88.
Harmon-Jones E. Anger and the behavioral approach system. Pers Indiv
Differ. 2003;35:995–1005.
Harvey AG, Bélanger L, Talbot L, Eidelman P, Beaulieu-Bonneau S, FortierBrochu E, Ivers H, Lamy M, Hein K, Soehner AM, Mérette C, Morin CM.
Comparative efficacy of behavior therapy, cognitive therapy, and cognitive
behavior therapy for chronic insomnia: a randomized controlled trial. J
Consult Clin Psychol. 2014;82(4):670–683.
Harvey AG, Bryant RA, Tarrier N. Cognitive behaviour therapy for
posttraumatic stress disorder. Clin Psychol Rev. 2003;23(3):501–522.
Haug TT, Blomhoff S, Hellstrom K, Holme I, Humble M, Madsbu HP, Wold
JE. Exposure therapy and sertraline in social phobia: 1-year follow-up of a
randomised controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry. 2003;182:312–318.
Havermans RC, Jansen ATM. Increasing the efficacy of cue exposure
treatment in preventing relapse of addictive behavior. Addict Behav.
2003;28(5):989–994.
Hayes SC, Strosahl KD, Wilson KG. Acceptance and Commitment Therapy:
An Experiential Approach to Behavior Change. New York: Guilford;
2003.
Hopko DR, Clark CG, Shorter R. Behavior therapy. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2682–2705.
Moulds ML, Nixon RD. In vivo flooding for anxiety disorders: proposing its
utility in the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. J Anxiety Disord.


<<<PAGE 2484>>>
2006;20(4):498–509.
van der Valk R, van de Waerdt S, Meijer CJ, van den Hout I, de Haan L.
Feasibility of mindfulness-based therapy in patients recovering from a first
psychotic episode: a pilot study. Early Intervent Psychiatry. 2013;7(1):64–
70.
Hypnosis
Altshuler KZ, Brenner AM. Other methods of psychotherapy. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:2911.
Axelrad AD, Brown DP, Wain HJ. Hypnosis. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2705-2735.
Faymonville ME, Roediger L, Del Fiore G, Delgueldre C, Phillips C, Lamy
M, Luxen A, Maquet P, Laureys S. Increased cerebral functional
connectivity underlying the antinociceptive effects of hypnosis. Brain Res
Cogn Brain Res. 2003;17(2):255–262.
Finkelstein S. Rapid hypnotic inductions and therapeutic strategies in the
dental setting. Int J Clin Exp Hypn. 2003;51(1):77–85.
Ginandes C, Brooks P, Sando W, Jones C, Aker J. Can medical hypnosis
accelerate post-surgical wound healing? Results of a clinical trial. Am J
Clin Hypn. 2003;45(4):333–351.
Gullickson T. Hypnosis and hypnotherapy with children. PsycCRITIQUES.
2004.
Liossi C, Hatira P. Clinical hypnosis in the alleviation of procedure-related
pain in pediatric oncology patients. Int J Clin Exp Hypn. 2003;51(1):4–28.
Montgomery GH, David D, Kangas M, Green S, Sucala M, Bovbjerg DH,
Hallquist MN, Schnur JB. Randomized controlled trial of a cognitivebehavioral therapy plus hypnosis intervention to control fatigue in patients
undergoing radiotherapy for breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(6):557–
563.
Patterson DR, Jensen MP. Hypnosis and clinical pain. Psychol Bull.
2003;129(4):495–521.
Ploghaus A, Becerra L, Borras C, Borsook D. Neural circuitry underlying
pain modulation: expectation, hypnosis, placebo. Trend Cogn Sci.


<<<PAGE 2485>>>
2003;7(5):197–200.
Raz A, Landzberg KS, Schweizer HR, Zephrani ZR, Shapiro T, Fan J, Posner
MI. Posthypnotic suggestion and the modulation of Stroop interference
under cycloplegia. Conscious Cogn. 2003;12(3):332–346.
Santarcangelo EL, Busse K, Carli G. Frequency of occurrence of the F wave
in distal flexor muscles as a function of hypnotic susceptibility and
hypnosis. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res. 2003;16(1):99–103.
Spiegel D. Negative and positive visual hypnotic hallucinations: attending
inside and out. Int J Clin Exp Hypn. 2003;51(2):130–146.
Spiegel H, Spiegel D. Trance and Treatment: Clinical Uses of Hypnosis. 2nd
ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press; 2004.
Interpersonal Therapy
Binder JL, Betan EJ. Essential activities in a session of brief
dynamic/interpersonal psychotherapy. Psychotherapy. 2013;50(3):428–
432.
Bolton P, Bass J, Neugebauer R, Verdeli H, Clougherty KF, Wickramaratne
P, Speelman L, Ndogoni L, Weissman M. Group interpersonal
psychotherapy for depression in rural Uganda: a randomized controlled
trial. JAMA. 2003;289(23):3117–3124.
Gilbert SE, Gordon KC. Interpersonal psychotherapy informed treatment for
avoidant personality disorder with subsequent depression. Clin Case Stud.
2013;12(2):111–127.
Guynn RW. Interpersonal psychotherapy. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2775–2784.
Huibers MJ, van Breukelen G, Roelofs J, Hollon SD, Markowitz JC, van Os
J, Arntz A, Peeters F. Predicting response to cognitive therapy and
interpersonal therapy, with or without antidepressant medication, for major
depression: a pragmatic trial in routine practice. J Affect Disord.
2014:152–154:146–154.
Markowitz JC. Interpersonal psychotherapy for chronic depression. J Clin
Psychol. 2003;59(8):847–858.
Miller MD, Frank E, Cornes C, Houck PR, Reynolds CF 3rd. The value of
maintenance interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) in older adults with
different IPT foci. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2003;11(1):97–102.


<<<PAGE 2486>>>
Spinelli MG, Endicott J. Controlled clinical trial of interpersonal
psychotherapy versus parenting education program for depressed pregnant
women. Am J Psychiatry. 2003;160(3):555–562.
Swartz HA, Frank E, Shear MK, Thase ME, Fleming MA, Scott J. A pilot
study of brief interpersonal psychotherapy for depression among women.
Psychiatr Serv. 2004;55(4):448–450.
Narrative Psychotherapy
Adler JM, Harmeling LH, Walder-Biesanz I. Narrative meaning making is
associated with sudden gains in psychotherapy clients’ mental health under
routine clinical conditions. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2013;81(5):839–845.
Alves D, Fernández-Navarro P, Baptista J, Ribeiro E, Sousa I, Gonçalves
MM. Innovative moments in grief therapy: the meaning reconstruction
approach and the processes of self-narrative transformation. Psychother
Res. 2014;24(1):25–41.
Boudreau JD, Liben S, Fuks A. A faculty development workshop in
narrative-based reflective writing. Perspect Med Educ. 2013;1(3):143–154.
Cassel E. The nature of suffering and the goals of medicine. N Engl J Med.
1982;306(11):639–645.
Charon R. Narrative and medicine. N Engl J Med. 2004;350(9):862–864.
Charon R. Narrative medicine: attention, representation, affiliation.
Narrative. 2005;13(3):261–270.
Charon R. Narrative Medicine: Honoring the Stories of Illness. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press; 2006.
Frank AW. Narrative psychiatry: how stories can shape clinical practice
(review). Lit Med. 2012;30(1):193–197.
Gaines A, Schillace B. Meaning and medicine in a new key: trauma,
disability, and embodied discourse through cross-cultural narrative modes.
Cult Med Psychiatry. 2013;37(4):580–586.
Hansen J. From hinge narrative to habit: self-oriented narrative
psychotherapy meets feminist phenomenological theories of embodiment.
Philos Psychiatry Psychol. 2013;20(1):69–73.
Hazelton L. Improving clinical care through the stories we tell. CMAJ.
2012;184(10):1178.
Launer J. Narrative diagnosis. Postgrad Med J. 2012;88(1036):115–116.
Lewis B. Moving Beyond Prozac, DSM, and the New Psychiatry: The Birth


<<<PAGE 2487>>>
of Postpsychiatry. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press; 2006.
Lewis B. Narrative psychiatry. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2830–2841.
Teichman Y. Echoes of the trauma: relational themes and emotions in
children of Holocaust survivors. Psychother Res. 2013;23(1):117–119.
Combined Psychotherapy and Pharmacotherapy
Anton RF, O’Malley SS, Ciraulo DA, Cisler RA, Couper D, Donovan DM,
Gastfriend DR, Hosking JD, Johnson BA, LoCastro JS, Longabaugh R,
Mason BJ, Mattson ME, Miller WR, Pettinati HM, Randall CL, Swift R,
Weiss RD, Williams LD, Zweben A, COMBINE Study Research Group.
Combined pharmacotherapies and behavioral interventions for alcohol
dependence: the COMBINE study: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2006;295(17):2003–2017.
Arean
PA,
Cook
BL.
Psychotherapy
and
combined
psychotherapy/pharmacotherapy for late life depression. Biol Psychiatry.
2002;52(3):293–303.
Beitman BD, Blinder BJ, Thase ME, Riba M, Safer DL. Integrating
Psychotherapy and Pharmacotherapy: Dissolving the Mind-Brain Barrier.
New York: Norton; 2003.
Blais MA, Malone JC, Stein MB, Slavin-Mulford J, O’Keefe SM, Renna M,
Sinclair SJ. Treatment as usual (TAU) for depression: a comparison of
psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, and combined treatment at a large
academic medical center. Psychotherapy (Chic). 2013;50(1):110–118.
Brent DA, Birmhaher B. Adolescent depression. N Engl J Med.
2002;347:667–671.
Burnand Y, Andreoli A, Kolatte E, Venturini A, Rosset N. Psychodynamic
psychotherapy and clomipramine in the treatment of major depression.
Psychiatr Serv. 2002;53(5):585–590.
Friedman MA, Detweiler-Bedell JB, Leventhal HE, Horne R, Keitner GI,
Miller IW. Combination psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy for the
treatment of major depressive disorder. Clin Psychol. 2004;11(1):47–68.
Karon BP. Effective Psychoanalytic Therapy of Schizophrenia and Other
Severe Disorders. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association;
2002.


<<<PAGE 2488>>>
Otto MW, Smits JAJ, Reese HE. Combination psychotherapy and
pharmacotherapy for mood and anxiety disorders in adults: Review and
analysis. Clin Psychol. 2005;12(1):72–86.
Overholser JC. Where has all the psyche gone? Searching for treatments that
focus on psychological issues. J Contemp Psychother. 2003;33(1):49–61.
Peeters F, Huibers M, Roelofs J, van Breukelen G, Hollon SD, Markowitz
JC, van Os J, Arntz A. The clinical effectiveness of evidence-based
interventions for depression: a pragmatic trial in routine practice. J Affect
Disord. 2013;145(3):349–355.
Preskorn SH. Psychopharmacology and psychotherapy: what’s the
connection? J Psychiatr Pract. 2006;12(1):41–45.
Ray WA, Daugherty JR, Meador KG. Effect of a mental health "carve-out"
program on the continuity of antipsychotic therapy. N Engl J Med.
2003;348(19):1885–1894.
Schmidt NB. Combining psychotherapy and pharmacological service
provision for anxiety pathology. J Cogn Psychother. 2005;19(4):307.
Szigethy EM, Friedman ES. Combined psychotherapy and pharmacology. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009:2923.
Szuhany KL, Kredlow MA, Otto MW. Combination psychological and
pharmacological treatments for panic disorder. Int J Cogn Ther.
2014;7(2):122–135.
Ver Eecke W. In understanding and treating schizophrenia: a rejoinder to the
PORT report’s condemnation of psychoanalysis. J Am Acad Psychanal.
2003;31:11–29.
Mentalization-Based Treatment
Allen JG. Mentalizing in the Development and Treatment of Attachment
Trauma. London, UK: Karnac Books; 2013.
Allen JG, Fonagy P, Bateman AW. Mentalizing in Clinical Practice.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2008.
Asen E, Fonagy P. Mentalization-based therapeutic interventions for families.
J Fam Ther. 2012;34(4):347–370.
Bateman AW. Treating borderline personality disorder in clinical practice.
Am J Psychiatry. 2012;169(6):560–563.


<<<PAGE 2489>>>
Bateman A, Bolton R, Fonagy P. Antisocial personality disorder: a
mentalizing framework. FOCUS. 2013;11(2):178–186.
Bateman A, Fonagy P. 8-year follow-up of patients treated for borderline
personality disorder: mentalization-based treatment versus treatment as
usual. Am J Psychiatry. 2008;165(5):631–638.
Bateman A, Fonagy P. Mentalization-based treatment. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:2894–2904.
Bateman A, Fonagy P. Randomized controlled trial of outpatient
mentalization-based treatment versus structured clinical management for
borderline personality disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2009;166(12):1355–
1364.
Bateman AW, Fonagy P, eds. Handbook of Mentalizing in Mental Health
Practice. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2012.
Bateman A, Fonagy P, eds. Mentalization-Based Treatment for Personality
Disorders: A Practical Guide. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press;
2016.
Bateman AW, Gunderson J, Mulder R. Treatment of personality disorder.
Lancet. 2015;385(9969):735–743.
Bateman A, Krawitz R. Borderline Personality Disorder: An Evidence-Based
Guide for Generalist Mental Health Professionals. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press; 2013
Bateman A, O’Connell J, Lorenzini N, Gardner T, Fonagy P. A randomised
controlled trial of mentalization-based treatment versus structured clinical
management for patients with comorbid borderline personality disorder
and antisocial personality disorder. BMC Psychiatry. 2016;16(1):304.
Bevington D, Fuggle P, Fonagy P. Applying attachment theory to effective
practice with hard-to-reach youth: the AMBIT approach. Attach Hum Dev.
2015;17(2):157–174.
Fonagy P, Luyten P. A multilevel perspective on the development of
borderline personality disorder. In: Cicchetti D, ed. Developmental
Psychopathology. 3rd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 2016.
Fonagy P, Luyten P, Allison E. Epistemic petrification and the restoration of
epistemic trust: a new conceptualization of borderline personality disorder
and its psychosocial treatment. J Pers Disord. 2015;29(5):575–609.
Gergely G. Ostensive communication and cultural learning: the natural


<<<PAGE 2490>>>
pedagogy hypothesis. In: Metcalfe J, Terrace HS, eds. Agency and Joint
Attention. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; 2013.
Ha C, Sharp C, Ensink K, Fonagy P, Cirino P. The measurement of reflective
function in adolescents with and without borderline traits. J Adolesc.
2013;36(6):1215–1223.
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Antisocial Personality
Disorder: Treatment, Management and Prevention. London: The British
Psychological Society and the Royal College of Psychiatrists; 2010.
Robinson P, Hellier J, Barrett B, et al. The NOURISHED randomised
controlled trial comparing mentalisation-based treatment for eating
disorders (MBT-ED) with specialist supportive clinical management
(SSCM-ED) for patients with eating disorders and symptoms of borderline
personality disorder. Trials. 2016;17(1):549.
Rossouw TI, Fonagy P. Mentalization-based treatment for self-harm in
adolescents: a randomized controlled trial. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2012;51(12):1304–1313.
Sharp C, Fonagy P. Practitioner review: borderline personality disorder in
adolescence—recent conceptualization, intervention, and implications for
clinical practice. J Child Psychol. 2015;56(12):1266–1288.
Sharp C, Ha C, Carbone C, Kim S, Perry K, Williams L, Fonagy P.
Hypermentalizing in adolescent inpatients: treatment effects and
association with borderline traits. J Pers Disord. 2013;27(1):3–18.
Sharp C, Venta A. Mentalizing problems in children and adolescents. In:
Midgley N, Vrouva I, eds. Minding the Child: Mentalization-Based
Interventions with Children, Young People and Their Families. London,
UK: Routledge; 2012.
Psychoeducational Interventions
Bond K, Anderson IM. Psychoeducation for relapse prevention in bipolar
disorder: a systematic review of efficacy in randomized controlled trials.
Bipolar Disorder. 2015;17(4):349–362.
Colom F. Keeping therapies simple: psychoeducation in the prevention of
relapse in affective disorders. Br J Psychiatry. 2011;198(5):338–340.
Tursi MF, Baes Cv, Camacho FR, Tofoli SM, Juruena MF. Effectiveness of
psychoeducation for depression: a systematic review. Aust N Z J
Psychiatry. 2013;47(11):1019–1031.


<<<PAGE 2491>>>
Vreeland B. An evidence-based practice of psychoeducation for
schizophrenia: a practical intervention for patients and their families.
Psychiatric Times. 2012;29(2):34–40.
Zhao S, Sampson S, Xia J, Jayaram MB. Psychoeducation (brief) for people
with serious mental illness. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2015;4(9):CD010823.


<<<PAGE 2492>>>
24
Psychiatric Rehabilitation and Other
Interventions
PSYCHIATRIC REHABILITATION
Psychiatric rehabilitation denotes a wide range of interventions designed to
help people with disabilities caused by mental illness improve their
functioning and quality of life by enabling them to acquire the skills and
supports needed to be successful in usual adult roles and the environments of
their choice. Normative adult roles include living independently, attending
school, working in competitive jobs, relating to family, having friends, and
having intimate relationships. Psychiatric rehabilitation emphasizes
independence rather than reliance on professionals, community integration
rather than isolation in segregated settings for persons with disabilities, and
patient preferences rather than professional goals.
Vocational Rehabilitation
In the late 1980s, the emphasis of vocational rehabilitation began to shift to
place-and-train models, termed supported employment, which were borrowed
from the field of developmental disabilities. According to the federal
definition, supported employment involves “competitive work in integrated
settings…consistent with the strengths, resources, priorities, concerns,
abilities, capabilities, interests, and informed choice of the individuals, for
individuals with the most significant disabilities for whom competitive
employment has not traditionally occurred; or for whom competitive
employment has been interrupted or intermittent as a result of a significant
disability.” In contrast to other vocational approaches, supported employment


<<<PAGE 2493>>>
programs (a) did not screen people for work readiness but helped anyone who
says they wanted to work; (b) did not provide intermediate work experiences,
such as prevocational work units, transitional employment, or sheltered
workshops; (c) actively facilitated job acquisition, often accompanying
clients on interviews; and (d) provided ongoing support once the person is
employed.
Antonio is a 45-year-old man who has been a client of a mental health
agency for more than 10 years. He attended the rehabilitative day
treatment program until it was converted to a supported employment
program. His case manager encouraged him to think about the possibility
of working part-time. Antonio told his case manager that he could not
work because of his schizophrenia and because he was helping to raise
his two kids and needed to be home at 3 PM when they returned from
school every day. The case manager explained to Antonio that getting a
job does not necessarily mean working 40 hours a week and that lots of
people in the agency’s supported employment program were working in
part-time jobs, even jobs that only require a few hours a week.
Antonio agreed to meet one of the employment specialists to discuss
the possibility of work. Over the next couple of weeks, the employment
specialist met with Antonio several times, read his clinical record, and
talked with his case manager and psychiatrist. The employment specialist
learned that Antonio loved to drive his car. He also learned that Antonio
had attendance problems in past jobs because he felt unappreciated. The
employment specialist found Antonio to be a sociable and likable person.
Antonio told the employment specialist that he was willing to do any
job. He did not have one specific job in mind. After discussing options
with Antonio and with the team, the employment specialist suggested a
job at Meals on Wheels as a driver for the lunch delivery. Antonio was
hired and loved it right from the start. Absenteeism was never a problem
because he liked driving around and knew that people were counting on
him for their meals. The hours were perfect (10 AM to 2 PM), so Antonio
could be at home when his kids returned from school. He became good
friends with the other workers. He told his case manager that it was
wonderful to be bringing home a paycheck again. Moreover, best of all,


<<<PAGE 2494>>>
he said, was that his kids saw him going to work just like their friends’
dads. (Courtesy of Robert E. Drake, M.D., Ph.D. and Alan S. Bellack,
Ph.D.)
Social Skills Rehabilitation
Social dysfunction is a defining characteristic of schizophrenia. People with
the illness have difficulty fulfilling social roles, such as worker, spouse, and
friend, and they have difficulty meeting their needs when social interaction is
required (e.g., negotiating with merchants, requesting assistance to solve
problems). Social dysfunction is semi-independent of symptomatology and
plays an essential role in the course and outcome of the illness. As shown in
Table 24-1, social competence involves three component skills: (1) social
perception or receiving skills; (2) social cognition, or processing skills; and
(3) behavioral response, or expressive skills. Social perception is the ability
to read or decode social inputs accurately, including accurate detection of
affect cues, such as facial expressions and nuances of voice, gesture, and
body posture, as well as verbal content and contextual information. Social
cognition involves an effective analysis of the social stimulus, integration of
current information with historical information, and planning an adequate
response. Social problem-solving is another term to describe this domain.
Methods. The primary modality of social skills training is the role-play of
simulated conversations. The trainer first provides instructions on how to
perform the skill and then models the behavior to demonstrate its
performance. After identifying a relevant social situation in which the skill
might be appropriate, the patient engages in role-playing with the trainer. The
trainer next provides feedback and positive reinforcement, which are
followed by suggestions for how the response can be improved. The
sequence of role-playing followed by feedback and reinforcement repeats
until the patient can perform the response adequately. Training typically
occurs in small groups (six to eight patients), in which case patients each
practice role-playing for three to four trials and provide feedback and
reinforcement to one another. The therapist tailors the teaching to the
individual—for example, a highly impaired group member might simply
practice saying “no” to a simple request, whereas a less cognitively impaired


<<<PAGE 2495>>>
peer might learn to negotiate and compromise.
Table 24-1
Components of Social Skill
Expressive behaviors
Speech content
Paralinguistic features
Voice volume
Speech rate
Pitch
Intonation
Nonverbal behaviors
Eye contact (gaze)
Posture
Facial expression
Proxemics
Kinesics
Receptive skills (social perception)
Attention to and interpretation of relevant cues
Emotion recognition
Processing skills
Analysis of the situation demands
Incorporation of relevant contextual information
Social problem solving
Interactive behaviors
Response timing
Use of social reinforcers
Turn taking
Situational factors
Social “intelligence” (knowledge of social mores and the demands of
the specific situation)


<<<PAGE 2496>>>
Richard was a single white man first diagnosed with schizophrenia at age
22 when he was in college. He was hospitalized briefly but was unable to
return to school and moved back home with his parents. He attended a
day treatment program intermittently over the next 6 years before he
received a referral for help with getting a job and dating.
Richard had missed out on a critical period of adult development and
had never learned dating skills or the social skills needed to get or
maintain a job. He was appropriately groomed and did not present
himself as a patient, but he seemed quite uncomfortable in social
interactions. He scarcely made eye contact, staring at the floor when he
spoke, and did not initiate conversation, responding to questions with
brief answers.
Richard joined a social skills training group for 3 months with six other
patients. The focus of the group was employment skills. Patients were
taught critical social skills for getting and maintaining a job, such as how
to participate in job interviews; how to approach a supervisor to
understand how to do a job or for help with work-related problems; how
and when to make requests or explain problems, such as getting to work
late because of traffic or needing to leave early to go to a doctor’s
appointment; and socializing with coworkers. Simultaneously, Richard
enrolled in a supported employment program and worked with a case
manager to find a job as a computer support person. He found a 24-hourper-week job at a small company and continued to attend the skills group,
using the sessions to work on interpersonal issues at work, including
engaging in casual conversation with coworkers and dealing with
unreasonable requests from people.
When the vocational skills group ended, Richard joined a dating group
with seven other male and female patients who had similar interests. This
group focused on finding someone to date, dating etiquette, asking
someone out (or being asked out), appropriate conversation for dates,
sexual interactions, and safe sex practices. In addition to role play and
discussion, the group shared ideas on how to meet people and what to do
on dates.
Richard responded well to treatment. He had maintained the computer
job at follow-up, 6 months after he concluded the dating skills group. His


<<<PAGE 2497>>>
case manager also reported that he had a girlfriend, a woman whom he
had met at his church group. He had also expressed an interest in
enrolling in college classes at night. He was still living at home with his
parents, but, for the first time, was seriously considering what he would
need to do to move out. (Courtesy of Robert E. Drake, M.D., Ph.D. and
Alan S. Bellack, Ph.D.)
Goals. In a treatment setting, there are four major goals of social skills
training: (1) improved social skills in specific situations, (2) moderate
generalization of acquired skills to similar situations, (3) acquisition or
relearning of social and conversational skills, and (4) decreased social
anxiety. Learning, however, is tedious or almost nonexistent when patients
are floridly ill with positive symptoms and high levels of distractibility.
Some findings limit the applicability of social skills training. It is more
challenging to teach complex conversational skills than to teach briefer, more
discrete verbal and nonverbal responses in social situations. Because complex
behaviors are more critical for generating social support in the community,
therapy includes methods to improve the learning and durability of
conversational skills. These training methods, focusing on training in social
skills and information-processing skills, are discussed below.
Training in Social Perception Skills. There is a need for strategies for
training patients in affect and social cue recognition. Patients with chronic
psychotic disorders, such as schizophrenia, often have difficulty perceiving
and interpreting the subtle affective and cognitive cues that are critical
elements of communication. Social perception abilities are considered the
first step in effective interpersonal problem solving; difficulties in this area
are likely to lead to a cascade of deficits in social behavior. Training skills in
social perception address these deficits and help provide a foundation for
developing more specific social and coping skills.
Despite attending several social gatherings, Matt felt apart from the rest
of the group. He reported that these events seemed like “a jumble of
sights and sounds.” His therapist, recognizing Matt’s difficulty with
social perception, gave him a series of questions designed to help him


<<<PAGE 2498>>>
organize and give meaning to the social stimuli he encountered. For
example, when Matt was confused about a conversation someone was
having with him, he would ask himself, “What is this person’s short-term
goal? At what level of disclosure should I be? Should I be talking now or
listening?” Identifying the rules and goals of a particular social
interaction provided a template for Matt to recognize and react to a
greater variety of social cues, thus enhancing his behavioral repertoire.
(Courtesy of Robert Paul Liberman, M.D., Alex Kopelowicz, M.D., and
Thomas E. Smith, M.D.)
Methods of training that
follow a cognitive perspective teach patients to use a set of generative rules
that can be adapted for use in various situations. For example, a six-step
problem-solving strategy has developed as an outline for helping patients
overcome interpersonal dilemmas: (1) adopt a problem-solving attitude, (2)
identify the problem, (3) brainstorm alternative solutions, (4) evaluate
solutions and pick one to implement, (5) plan the implementation and carry it
out, and (6) evaluate the efficacy of the effort and, if ineffective, choose
another alternative. Although the step-wise, structured, linear process of
problem-solving occurs intuitively, without conscious awareness in normal
persons, it can be a useful interpersonal crutch to help cognitively impaired
mental patients cope with the information needed to fill their social and
personal needs.
INFORMATION-PROCESSING MODEL OF TRAINING.

Milieu Therapy
The locus of milieu is a living, learning, or working environment. The
defining characteristics of treatment are the use of a team to provide
treatment and the time the patient spends in the environment. Recent
adaptations of milieu therapy include 24-hour-a-day programs situated in
community locales frequented by patients, which provide in vivo support,
case management, and training in living skills.
Most milieu therapy programs emphasize group and social interaction;
peer pressure mediates rules and expectations for normalization of adaptation.
When clinical staff views patients as responsible human beings, the patient
role becomes blurred. Milieu therapy stresses a patient’s rights to goals and to


<<<PAGE 2499>>>
have freedom of movement and informal relationship with staff; it also
emphasizes interdisciplinary participation and goal-oriented, clear
communication.
Token Economy. The use of tokens, points, or credits as secondary or
generalized reinforcers normalizes a mental hospital or day hospital
environment with a program mimicking society’s use of money to meet
instrumental needs. Token economies establish the rules and culture of a
hospital inpatient unit or partial hospitalization program, offering coherence
and consistency to the interdisciplinary team as it struggles to promote
therapeutic progress with challenging patients. These programs are
challenging to establish, however, and their widespread dissemination has
suffered because of the organizational prerequisites and the additional
resources and rewards needed to create a truly positively reinforcing
environment.
Cognitive Rehabilitation
Increased recognition of the prevalence and importance of neurocognitive
deficits over the past decade has stimulated a growing interest in remediation
strategies. Much of the work in this area has focused on
psychopharmacological approaches, especially on the new-generation
antipsychotics. New-generation medications appear to have a positive effect
on neurocognitive test performance. However, the effect size for any of the
medications is small to medium, and little evidence indicates that these
medications have a clinically meaningful impact on neurocognitive
functioning in the community. As a result, a parallel interest has arisen in the
potential for rehabilitation or cognitive remediation. This body of work is
distinct from cognitive-behavioral therapy and cognitive therapy, which focus
on reducing psychotic symptoms.
Ethical Issues
The ethics of conducting rehabilitation strategies are generally the same as
for conducting other psychotherapies. Two issues come up regularly,
however: avoiding infantilization and maintaining confidentiality. The first
issue concerns the risk of viewing the patient as unable to make adult


<<<PAGE 2500>>>
choices, such as whether to participate in rehabilitation, where to live,
whether or not to work, and whether or not to use drugs and alcohol.
Although it may be more of a value than an ethical standard, psychiatric
rehabilitation assumes that the practitioner and the patient are in a partnership
to facilitate recovery and improve quality of life. The basic model involves
collaboration and shared decision-making and does not portray the
practitioner as an authority or parental figure. When patients make what
appear to be bad choices, the practitioner must consider the patient’s right to
choose and whether the choice is dangerous versus merely not the choice the
practitioner would make. If the choice is potentially harmful, a collaborative
process of considering alternatives is more likely to produce good quality
choices than an authoritative, admonitory approach.
Failure to consider the patient as a partner also leads to violations of
confidentiality. Practitioners sometimes assume that they are the primary
arbiters of what information to share with parents, other clinicians, and other
agencies. In fact, in most circumstances that do not involve the safety of
patients or others, the patient should be the arbiter of what information to
share with whom. For example, in supported employment, the patients
always determine whether to disclose information about their illnesses to
employers.

GENETIC COUNSELING
Medical geneticists and specially trained and qualified genetic counselors
have traditionally provided genetic counseling to patients in need of such
help. Many psychiatrists, however, are also well placed to provide genetic
education and counseling because they often have knowledge of their
patient’s needs and family histories and have ongoing therapeutic
relationships. The ideal approach for providing psychiatric genetic counseling
is through a multidisciplinary team approach, with collaboration between
genetics and mental health professionals. Genetic professionals are available
for consultation with psychiatry regarding advanced risk assessment,
collection and construction of complicated family medical history (FMH),
and the availability and limitations of genomic testing. Precision medicine is
evolving to include the use of panels of genetic variants and genome
sequencing to assess the origins of conditions in families where multiple


<<<PAGE 2501>>>
individuals are affected, or psychiatric symptoms accompany signs of rare
disorders.
Definitions
Genetic counseling is the process of helping people to understand and adapt
to the medical, psychological, and familial implications of genetic
contributions to disease. According to the National Society of Genetic
Counseling, it integrates three factors: (1) interpretation of family and
medical histories to assess the chance of disease occurrence or recurrence; (2)
education about inheritance, testing, management, prevention, resources, and
research; and (3) counseling to promote informed choices and adaptation to
the risk or condition. The process aims to minimize distress and facilitate
adaptation, to increase one’s feeling of personal control, and to facilitate
informed decision-making and life planning.

FIGURE 24-1
Standard symbols used in pedigree construction. LMP, last menstrual period.

Although the term genetic counseling suggests a primary focus on the
genetic contributions to disease, it is not limited to that domain. Genetic
counseling entails risk assessment, education, and counseling for common,


<<<PAGE 2502>>>
complex diseases and necessarily considers both genetic and environmental
components of the presenting illness. The growing awareness of the complex
interplay between genes and the environment dictates a comprehensive
approach to care.
To facilitate comprehension and application of the material in this section,
Figure 24-1 demonstrates standard symbols used in pedigree construction,
and Figure 24-2 illustrates a complex FMH presented in the form of a
pedigree.
Genetics and Psychiatric Disorders
It is widely accepted that psychiatric illnesses tend to run in families (Table
24-2). Disorders can recur in families for several reasons, including the
functioning of the genome (rarely, due to one genomic variation with a large
effect on susceptibility, or more commonly due to multiple variations that
each have a small effect on susceptibility) or shared environmental
exposures. Thus, genetic counseling for a complex disorder entails discussion
around both genetic and environmental risk factors. For example, consider a
case in which a father with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) has
concerns about symptoms developing in his children. Genetic counseling
may focus on the following: (1) the family history, indicative of both genetic
and shared environmental risk in the family; (2) risk factors for the children,
stemming from those genetic and environmental factors; (3) early symptom
identification and early intervention (aiming to modify the environment and
thus affect genetically mediated disease progression); (4) a discussion of the
benefits and limitations of environmental modifications aimed at reducing the
risk or minimizing emerging symptoms.
Table 24-2
Examples of Psychiatric Disorders Recognized as Having a
Genetic Component to Their Etiology
Psychotic disorders: Schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder
Mood disorders: Bipolar disorder, recurrent unipolar depression
Personality disorders: Antisocial personality disorder, schizotypal
disorder


<<<PAGE 2503>>>
Anxiety disorders: Generalized anxiety disorder, obsessivecompulsive disorder, panic disorder, phobia
Substance-related disorders: Substance dependence and abuse
Eating disorders: Anorexia nervosa, bulimia
Childhood disorders: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism,
chronic tic disorders, including Tourette syndrome
Memory disorders: Alzheimer disease
The concept of complex disease (which has replaced multifactorial as an
etiologic category for common disorders) not only takes into account the
interplay of the genome and the environment but also includes the broader
biologic and physiologic mechanisms of evolution and development that
operate with societies and cultures. The onset of most cases of psychiatric
disease, like the onset of other common disorders, is thought to arise when an
individual has several risk-increasing genomic variants and has experienced
one or more environmental triggers; development, growth, and maturation
influence the overall risk. The modern perception that psychiatric
symptomatology causes disadvantageous “disease” is related to the effects of
the symptoms on the ability of the individual to interact successfully with his
or her social and cultural environment.
The first evidence that genetic factors were operating in psychiatric
disorders came from the analysis of families with multiple affected members,
twin studies, and adoption studies. Family studies indicated familial etiology,
although the relative contributions of genes and environmental factors were
unclear. Twin and adoption studies provided insights into the relative
contributions of etiologic risk factors, and for all major psychiatric disorders,
consistently indicated the importance of genes and environment. Family,
twin, and adoption studies also provided insight into the genetic
heterogeneity and phenotypic variability of mental disorders.


<<<PAGE 2504>>>
FIGURE 24-2
Pedigree of a family with velocardiofacial (VCF) syndrome. ADHD, attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder; Dx, diagnosed; MR, mental retardation. (From
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009,
with permission.)

Priorities of Psychiatric Genetic Counseling
Requests for genetic counseling often arise from the patient’s or relatives’
questions about the disorder that is present in the family. One can
conceptualize the provision of information on the potential genomic origins
of the condition and the options for genome testing or assessment of the
family as shared decision-making. Patient preference dictates risk assessment


<<<PAGE 2505>>>
and genome testing. It is important to weigh how much the patient prefers to
pursue and for what purpose against the estimated likelihood that useful
information will come from testing. Table 24-3 outlines the essential
components of genetic counseling.
Obtaining the Data Needed for Risk Assessment. The FMH is used
to assess the likely etiology of the disorder and estimate risks for recurrence
in the family. Confirmation or clarification of the diagnosis or diagnoses in
the family is essential to the provision of valid information.
Table 24-3
Steps and Process of Genetic Counseling
Solicit and clarify the client’s presenting questions and goals for
genetic counseling.
Explore client’s existing explanation for cause of illness.
Collect and review medical and family medical history.
Identify support systems.
Verify diagnoses in proband and other affected family members
when possible.
Address issues and concerns identified through the genetic
counseling process.
Assess the client’s emotional and intellectual capacity before
proceeding to determine the approach to the provision of education
and counseling.
Provide information at cognitively appropriate levels.
Note that the processing of emotional reactions is intertwined with
the provision of information.
Assess the personal meaning of the information and the client’s
willingness to negotiate various risks and burdens.
When applicable, assist the client in arriving at a decision by
discussing available options; discuss benefits and limitations of
each alternative.
Assist the client with adapting to the risk status in the family.
Assist in formulating a plan that the client is able to carry out.


<<<PAGE 2506>>>
Provide follow-up counseling and support. Continue to assess the
client’s and family’s understanding of the information and the effect
of the information, risks, or decisions.
Topics that are specific to psychiatric disorders and are essential to include
in the FMH are: (1) any psychiatric diagnosis, whether childhood, adult,
postpartum, or geriatric; (2) age at symptom onset and diagnosis; (3)
subjective assessment of illness severity and treatment response; (4)
potentially significant environmental exposures (e.g., obstetrical
complications, cannabis use, head injury); (5) symptomatic, undiagnosed
individuals or undiagnosed individuals treated with psychiatric medication;
(6) developmental history (e.g., has the individual achieved typical
milestones for age, such as independent living and employment for adults?);
(7) social history; (8) substance abuse; (9) suicide and self-harm; (10)
congenital disabilities, intellectual disability or learning disabilities, and
unusual medical conditions; (11) the age and sex of at-risk family members.
As mental health providers will be aware, challenges to collecting the
psychiatric FMH may include guilt and stigma that limit knowledge of
diagnoses among family members, the frequency of undiagnosed psychiatric
illness, and the dynamic nature of emerging psychiatric symptoms that may
result in diagnostic change over time.
Risk Communication. Different clients seek different types of risk
counseling, and they should be queried about their preferences before risk
communication begins. Some may seek broad information about the
underpinnings of risk for psychiatric disorders, while others prefer a
qualitative discussion of the risk magnitude. These individuals may not
welcome or benefit from receiving numerical risk information. For others
who prefer a detailed numerical estimation of risk for recurrence, risks based
on FMH should be presented as a range to reflect the ambiguity of the
estimates. In some cases, it may be possible to suggest that one end of the
range is more appropriate for a specific client than midrange.
Psychosocial Counseling and Support
Genetic counseling integrates psychological and social issues that result from


<<<PAGE 2507>>>
living with a psychiatric condition in the family with FMH and increasingly
will also include genomic risk information. Historically, genetic counseling
has been nondirective, which is deemed particularly appropriate within the
context of reproductive decisions and presymptomatic testing for untreatable
disorders, such as Huntington disease. However, nondirectiveness is
challenging to practice and has been replaced with a person-centered
approach, as improved treatments and risk behaviors realize health benefits.
The following case exemplifies the personal experiences and meaning of
psychiatric disorders.
A couple in their mid-30s with a 10-year history of infertility had been
trying to adopt a child for several years. Recently, the adoption agency
they were working with told them of a baby who was being placed for
adoption because the biologic mother was affected with bipolar disorder
and did not feel that she could provide adequate care for the baby. The
FMH collected on the newborn baby did not identify others in his family
with psychiatric disorders. The recurrence risk for bipolar disorder to the
newborn was, therefore, estimated to be between 5 and 20 percent, with
additional risks for other psychiatric disorders. The couple individually
reacted quite disparately to the estimated risks. In attempting to help them
clarify the factors contributing to their feelings regarding the risks, the
husband shared his experience with a childhood neighbor who had “some
kind of mental illness” and detailed the “torment and agony” that the
child brought to the family. Retorting, the woman shared the fact that her
coworker also had bipolar disorder and did “just fine” at work with the
help of medication. She, therefore, did not feel that the risks for
psychiatric disorders were of concern. The psychiatrist facilitated the
couple’s discussion of the spectrum and meaning of mental illness, along
with recurrence risks in the context of a genetic education and counseling
session. Although the couple did not agree during that meeting over the
potential for adopting the child, they did feel that the information and
sharing of experiences and perspectives about psychiatric disorders were
beneficial. They agreed to return in 1 week after further considering the
issues to decide on the adoption. (Courtesy of Holly L. Peay, M.S. and
Donald W. Hadley, M.S.)


<<<PAGE 2508>>>
Challenges Posed by Presymptomatic and Susceptibility Genetic
Testing
As genomic technologies continue to improve and knowledge about variants
that can increase vulnerability for psychiatric illness grows, we will more
commonly identify individuals at a higher risk for psychiatric illness.
Appropriate applications of such developments need careful consideration
from both economic and ethical perspectives but may have critical clinical
uses.
Psychiatrists will be on the front line for receiving requests for genetic
counseling and testing because of their established relationship between
patients and families with psychiatric disorders. The clinical identification of
genomic risks will most likely occur before most individuals have access to
preventative options. The option of knowing risks without preventative
options raises concerns regarding the impact of such knowledge on the
individual’s mood, anxiety, distress, self-image, reproductive decisions,
career decisions, family relationships, insurability, employment, and,
potentially, other areas.
Across many disease indications, the majority of persons undergoing
genomic testing and receiving their identified risk status do not experience
long-term adverse effects. However, those receiving results indicating
increased disease risk may experience elevated levels of disease-related
anxiety and depression soon after receiving results, and a small number have
prolonged difficulty in adjusting to their results. Supportive counseling
should be available to facilitate adjustment.
The pursuit of genomic counseling and testing by an individual has clear
and profound implications for other family members. Helping the client
understand the potential reactions and effect that his or her decision to pursue
genomic testing could have on close family members is an important
consideration. The health professional can play a role in assisting the client in
considering ways to share the information with selected significant others.
Similarly, the effect of such information on the spouse or significant other
requires consideration.
Ethical, Legal, and Social Considerations


<<<PAGE 2509>>>
Although there are many benefits of genomics knowledge, scientists and the
lay public have worried, from the beginning of genetic research, about the
potential for harmful consequences of knowing one’s genetic makeup. How
will family members, neighbors, communities, employers, health care
providers, and insurance companies react to such information? Might health
care providers request that those at increased genomic risk take psychiatric
medications prophylactically? Might employers limit job opportunities for
those with increased risk for psychiatric illness, keeping them in positions
with lower levels of stress? Will persons at increased risk be pressured not to
have children? Might providing such risk information induce significant
enough anxiety/stress to trigger the onset of illness? Furthermore, how will
families and the public be educated about the availability of susceptibility
testing for psychiatric illness?
Some individuals and families may experience significant levels of stigma
associated with the identification of a genetic disorder, a situation already
familiar to individuals and families with psychiatric illness. The added
knowledge of a hereditary component may heighten stigmatization.
Conversely, having an identified, biologic basis may supplant current public
perceptions that mental illness is somehow a personal or family failure in
moral, spiritual, or attitudinal perspectives.
References
Aatre RD, Day SM. Psychological issues in genetic testing for inherited
cardiovascular diseases. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2011;4(1):81–90.
Alcalay RN, Caccappolo E, Mejia-Santana H, Tang MX, Rosado L, Ross
BM, Verbitsky M, Kisselev S, Louis ED, Comella C, Colcher A, Jennings
D, Nance MA, Bressman SB, Scott WK, Tanner C, Mickel S, Andrews H,
Waters C, Fahn S, Cote L, Frucht S, Ford B, Rezak M, Novak K, Friedman
JH, Pfeiffer R, Marsh L, Hiner B, Siderowf A, Ottman R, Marder K, Clark
LN. Frequency of known mutations in early-onset Parkinson disease:
implication for genetic counseling: the consortium on risk for early onset
Parkinson disease study. Arch Neurol. 2010;67(9):1116–1122.
Beattie MS, Copeland K, Fehniger J, Cheung E, Joseph G, Lee R, Luce J.
Genetic counseling, cancer screening, breast cancer characteristics, and
general health among a diverse population of BRCA genetic testers. J
Health Care Poor Underserved. 2013;24(3):1150–1166.


<<<PAGE 2510>>>
Becker DR, Drake RE. A Working Life for People with Severe Mental Illness.
New York: Oxford University Press; 2003.
Blau G, Surges Tatum D, Goldberg CW, Viswanathan K, Karnik S,
Aaronson W. Psychiatric rehabilitation practitioner perceptions of
frequency and importance of performance domain scales. Psychiatr
Rehabil J. 2014;37(1):24–30.
Costain G, Esplen MJ, Toner B, Hodgkinson KA, Bassett AS. Evaluating
genetic counseling for family members of individuals with schizophrenia
in the molecular age. Schizophr Bull. 2014;40(1):88–99.
Drake RE, Bond GR, Ben-Zeev D. Psychiatric rehabilitation. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1531–1538.
Finucane B. Genetic counseling for women with intellectual disabilities. In:
LeRoy BS, Veach PM, Bartels DM, eds. Genetic Counseling Practice:
Advanced Concepts and Skills. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley; 2010;281.
Ganju V. Implementation of evidence-based practices in state mental health
systems: implications for research and effectiveness studies. Schizophr
Bull. 2003;29(1):125–131.
Goldman JS, Hahn SE, Catania JW, Larusse-Eckert S, Butson MB,
Rumbaugh M, Strecker MN, Roberts JS, Burke W, Mayeux R, Bird T,
American College of Medical Genetics and the National Society of Genetic
Counselors. Genetic counseling and testing for Alzheimer disease: joint
practice guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and the
National Society of Genetic Counselors. Genet Med. 2011;13(6):597–605.
Hodgson J, Gaff C. Enhancing family communication about genetics: ethical
and professional dilemmas. J Genet Couns. 2013;22(1):16–21.
Klitzman R, Chung W, Marder K, Shanmugham A, Chin LJ, Stark M, Leu
CS, Appelbaum PS. Attitudes and practices among internists concerning
genetic testing. J Genet Couns. 2013;22(1):90–100.
Lawrence RE, Appelbaum PS. Genetic testing in psychiatry: a review of
attitudes and beliefs. Psychiatry. 2011;74(4):315–331.
Mitchell PB, Meiser B, Wilde A, Fullerton J, Donald J, Wilhelm K, Schofield
PR. Predictive and diagnostic genetic testing in psychiatry. Psych Clin
North Am. 2010;33(1):225–243.
Monaco LC, Conway L, Valverde K, Austin JC. Exploring genetic
counselors’ perceptions of and attitudes towards schizophrenia. Public


<<<PAGE 2511>>>
Health Genomics. 2010;13(1):21–26.
Moran GS, Nemec PB. Walking on the sunny side: what positive psychology
can contribute to psychiatric rehabilitation concepts and practice.
Psychiatric Rehab J. 2013;36(3):202–208.
Moseley KL, Nasr SZ, Schuette JL, Campbell AD. Who counsels parents of
newborns who are carriers of sickle cell anemia or cystic fibrosis? J Genet
Couns. 2013;22(2):218–225.
Mueser KT, Noordsy DL, Drake RE, Fox L. Integrated Treatment for Dual
Disorders: Effective Intervention for Severe Mental Illness and Substance
Abuse. New York: Guilford; 2003.
Peay HL, Biesecker BB, Austin JC. Genetic counseling for psychiatric
conditions. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters
Kluwer; 2017:2525–2537.
Potokar DN, Stein CH, Darrah OA, Taylor BC, Sponheim SR. Knowledge
and attitudes about personalized mental health genomics: narratives from
individuals coping with serious mental illness. Comm Ment Health J.
2012;48(5):584–591.
Rudnick A, Eastwood D. Psychiatric rehabilitation education for physicians.
Psychiatric Rehab J. 2013;36(2):126–127.
Twamley EW, Jeste DV, Bellack AS. A review of cognitive training in
schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2003;29(2):359–382.
Zisman-Ilani Y, Roe D, Flanagan EH, Rudnick A, Davidson L. Psychiatric
diagnosis: what the recovery movement can offer the DSM-5 revision
process. Psychosis. 2013;5(2):144–153.


<<<PAGE 2512>>>
25
Consultation to Other Disciplines
Psychiatrists are often asked to consult with other doctors and health
professionals to help with the psychiatric issues in their patients.
Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry is devoted to this role. However, several
other subspecialties have large consultative roles. These include geriatric
psychiatrists, who may work in multidisciplinary settings with diseases that
cross all disciplines (such as the dementias) or forensic psychiatrists who
consult with other doctors, lawyers, and the courts. Much of the forensic
psychiatrists’ expertise concerns legal and ethical issues, and we discuss
these in Chapters 27 and 28. Psychiatrists also work in the emergency
department to help assess and treat psychiatric emergencies. In some larger
hospitals, Emergency Psychiatry exists as a separate division with its own
location. However, in most hospitals, psychiatrists consult in the general
emergency setting. Some child psychiatrists may work in a consultative
setting as well, particularly emergency settings. In this chapter, we cover the
consultative role of consultation-liaison psychiatrists, geriatric psychiatrists,
and both general and child psychiatrists working in the emergency setting.

25.1 Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry
Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry and the field of Psychosomatic Medicine
have been a specific area of concern within psychiatry for more than 50
years. The term psychosomatic is derived from the Greek words psyche (soul)
and soma (body). The term refers to how the mind affects the body.
Unfortunately, it has come to be used, at least by the lay public, to describe
an individual with medical complaints that have no physical cause and are


<<<PAGE 2513>>>
“all in your head.” For this and related reasons, in 2018, the Academy of
Psychosomatic Medicine changed its name to the Academy of ConsultationLiaison Psychiatry. Before that, the DSM deleted the nosologic term
psychophysiological (or psychosomatic) disorders and replaced it with
psychological factors affecting physical conditions.
Nonetheless, the term continues to be used by researchers and is in the title
of significant journals in the field (e.g., Psychosomatic Medicine, and the
Journal of Psychosomatic Research). It is also used by some major national
organizations in the field (the American Psychosomatic Society) as well as
international organizations (e.g., the European Association for ConsultationLiaison Psychiatry and Psychosomatics). In 2003 the American Board of
Medical Specialties and the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology
approved the specialty of Psychosomatic Medicine and in 2017 they changed
the name to Consultation-Liaison psychiatry.

HISTORY
As Edward Shorter discusses in detail in his summary of the history of
psychosomatic illness, ways of presenting illness vary over history because
patients unconsciously select symptoms that are thought to represent actual
somatic illnesses. Psychosomatic presentations have thus varied throughout
recent history. Before 1800, physicians did not conduct clinical evaluations
and could not distinguish somatic from psychogenic illness. As a result, the
diagnoses of hysteria and hypochondriasis could easily be made in the
presence of genuine medical illnesses and did not suggest any specific
disease.
Sigmund Freud helped to bring psyche and soma together. He
demonstrated the importance of emotions in producing mental disturbances
and somatic disorders. His early psychoanalytic formulations detailed the role
of psychic determinism in somatic conversion reactions. Using Freud’s
insight, several workers in the early decades of the 20th century tried to
expand the understanding of the interrelationship of psyche and soma. Karl
Abraham proposed the influence on adult organ tissue of various unresolved
pregenital impulses in 1927. Sándor Ferenczi described the application of the
idea of conversion reaction to organs under the control of the autonomic
nervous systems in 1926, and Georg Groddeck suggested the attaching of


<<<PAGE 2514>>>
symbolic meaning to fever and hemorrhage in 1929.
The field of consultation-liaison psychiatry has existed for many decades,
and George W Henry described the practice in the United States in the 1920s.
Divisions of consultation-liaison psychiatry began springing up in various
academic departments, as did fellowship programs. The American Board of
Psychiatry and Neurology offered the first examination for the subspecialty
in 2005.
In Europe, particularly in Germany, pioneers such as Thure von Uexküll
saw psychosomatic medicine more broadly, and not merely a subspecialty of
psychiatry. The field was understood as central to the concept of all medical
diseases. Diseases were conceived as being multifactorial, with both organic
and psychological etiologies. It is notable that in Europe, most departments of
psychosomatic medicine are independent of departments of psychiatry.

CURRENT TRENDS
The practice of Consultation-Liaison psychiatry has evolved considerably
since its early clinical origins and has come to focus on psychiatric illnesses
that occur in the setting of physical health care. In large part, this evolution
has occurred as a result of the increased complexity of medicine, the
increased understanding of the relationship of medical illness to psychiatric
illness, and the greater appreciation of mind and body as one. Clinical care is
now delivered in a variety of health care settings and utilizes an everexpanding set of diagnostic tools, as well as many effective somatic and
psychotherapeutic interventions. Research in the area has progressed to
include a greater understanding of the relationship between chronic medical
conditions and psychiatric disorders. It has examined the pathophysiologic
relationships, the epidemiology of comorbid medical and psychiatric
disorders, and the role that specific interventions play in physiologic, clinical,
and economic outcomes (Table 25-1).
Table 25-1
Summary of Clinical Problems in Psychosomatic Medicine
Type of Clinical Problem Example
Psychiatric symptoms

Delirium, dementia


<<<PAGE 2515>>>
secondary to medical
conditions
Psychiatric symptoms as a Anxiety related to chemotherapy,
reaction to medical
depression related to limb amputation
conditions or treatments
Psychiatric complications
of medical conditions
and treatments

Depression secondary to interferon
treatment

Psychological factors
precipitating medical
symptoms

Somatic Symptom and related disorders

Medical complications of Neuroleptic malignant syndrome, acute
psychiatric conditions or
withdrawal from alcohol or another
treatments
substance
Co-occurring medical and Recurrence of depressive disorder in the
psychiatric conditions
setting of cancer treatment (conditions
occur independently); schizophrenia in
a patient with end-stage renal disease
Psychiatric/psychosocial
assessment

Capacity evaluation; evaluation prior to
organ transplantation

Psychiatric morbidity is prevalent in patients with medical conditions, with
a prevalence ranging from 20 to 67 percent, depending on the illness and
setting. Patients in the general hospital have the highest rate of psychiatric
disorders when compared with community samples or patients in ambulatory
primary care. For example, compared with community samples, depressive
disorders in the general hospital are more than twice as prevalent, and
substance abuse is two to three times as common. Delirium occurs in 18
percent of patients. Similarly, increased rates are seen in primary and longterm care.
Psychiatric morbidity has severe effects for medically ill patients and is
often a risk factor for their medical conditions. It is well established that


<<<PAGE 2516>>>
depression is both a risk factor and a poor prognostic indicator in coronary
artery disease. Psychiatric illness worsens cardiac morbidity and mortality in
patients with a history of myocardial infarction, diminishes glycemic control
in patients with diabetes, and decreases return to functioning in patients
experiencing a stroke. Depressive and anxiety disorders compound the
disability associated with stroke. In the context of neurodegenerative diseases
such as Parkinson’s or Alzheimer’s, depression, psychosis, and behavioral
disturbances are significant predictors of functional decline,
institutionalization, and caregiver burden. Hospitalized patients with delirium
are significantly less likely to improve in function compared with patients
without delirium. Delirium is associated with worse outcomes after surgery,
even after controlling for the severity of medical illness.
Also, depression and other mental disorders significantly impact the
quality of life and the ability of patients to adhere to treatment regimens (e.g.,
in patients with diabetes mellitus or cancer). Psychiatric disorders are linked
to nonadherence with antiretroviral therapy, adversely affecting the survival
of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients. Psychiatric
disorders are also linked to nonadherence with safe sex guidelines and with
the use of sterile needles in HIV-infected injection drug users, thus having
significant public health implications.

EVALUATION PROCESS IN PSYCHOSOMATIC
MEDICINE
Psychiatric assessment in the medical setting includes a standard psychiatric
assessment as well as a particular focus on the medical history and context of
physical health care. In addition to obtaining a complete psychiatric history,
including history, family history, developmental history, and a review of
systems, the medical history and current treatment should be reviewed and
documented. A full mental status examination, including a cognitive
examination, should be completed, and components of a neurologic and
physical examination may be indicated depending on the nature of the
presenting problem.
Another essential objective of the psychiatric evaluation is to gain an
understanding of the patient’s experience of his or her illness. In many cases,
this becomes the central focus for both the psychiatric assessment and


<<<PAGE 2517>>>
interventions. It is often helpful to develop an understanding of the patient’s
developmental and personal history as well as critical dynamic conflicts,
which in turn may help to make the patient’s experience with illness more
comprehensible. Such an evaluation can include the use of the concepts of
stress, personality traits, coping strategies, and defense mechanisms.
Observations and hypotheses that are developed can help to guide a patient’s
psychotherapy aimed at diminishing distress and may also be helpful for the
primary medical team in their interactions with the patient.
Finally, a full report synthesizing the information should be completed and
include specific recommendations for additional evaluations and intervention.
Ideally, the report should be accompanied by a discussion with the referring
physician.

TREATMENTS USED IN PSYCHOSOMATIC MEDICINE
A host of interventions have been successfully utilized in psychosomatic
medicine. Specific consideration must be given to medical illness and
treatments when making recommendations for psychiatric medications.
Psychotherapy also plays a vital role in psychosomatic medicine and may
vary in its structure and outcomes as compared with therapy that occurs in
mental health practice.
Psychopharmacologic recommendations need to consider several essential
factors. In addition to targeting a patient’s active symptoms, considering the
history of illness and treatments, and weighing the particular side-effect
profile of a particular medication, several other factors must be considered
that relate to the patient’s medical illness and treatment. It is critical to
evaluate potential drug–drug interactions and contraindications to the use of
potential psychiatric agents. Because the majority of psychiatric medications
used are metabolized in the liver, awareness of liver function is essential.
General appreciation of side effects, such as weight gain, risk of developing
diabetes, and cardiovascular risk, must be considered in the choice of
medications. Also, it is critical to incorporate knowledge of recent data that
outlines the effectiveness and specific risks involved for patients with cooccurring psychiatric and physical disorders. For example, a greater
understanding of the side effects of antipsychotic medications has raised
concerns about the use of these medications in patients with dementia.


<<<PAGE 2518>>>
The use of psychosocial interventions also requires adaptation when used
in this population. The methods and the goals of psychosocial interventions
used in the medically ill are often determined by the consideration of disease
onset, etiology, course, prognosis, treatment, and understanding of the nature
of the presenting psychiatric symptoms in addition to an understanding of the
patient’s existing coping skills and social support networks. However, there
are ample data that psychosocial interventions are effective in addressing a
series of identified problems and that such interventions, in many cases, are
associated with a variety of positive clinical outcomes.
Common C-L Problems
Suicide Attempt or Threat. Suicide rates are higher in persons with
medical illness than in those without medical or surgical problems. High-risk
factors for suicide are men over 45 years of age, no social support, alcohol
dependence, previous suicide attempt, and incapacitating or catastrophic
medical illness, especially if accompanied by severe pain. If suicide risk is
present, the patient should be transferred to a psychiatric unit or started on
24-hour nursing care.
Depression. Suicidal risk must be assessed in every depressed patient.
Depression without suicidal ideation is not uncommon in hospitalized
patients, and treatment with antidepressant medication can be started if
necessary. A careful assessment of drug–drug interactions must be made
before prescribing, which should be undertaken in collaboration with the
patient’s primary physician.
Agitation. Agitation is often related to the presence of a cognitive disorder
or associated with withdrawal from drugs (e.g., opioids, alcohol, sedativehypnotics). Antipsychotic medications may be beneficial for excessive
agitation. Physical restraints should be used with great caution and only as a
last resort as sedation is preferable and safer. The patient should be examined
for command hallucinations or paranoid ideation to which they are
responding in an agitated manner. Toxic reactions to medications that cause
agitation should always be ruled out.


<<<PAGE 2519>>>
Hallucinations. A common cause of hallucinations in the general hospital
setting is delirium tremens, which usually begin 3 to 4 days after
hospitalization. Patients in intensive care units (ICUs) who experience
sensory isolation may respond with hallucinatory activity. Conditions such as
brief psychotic disorder, schizophrenia, and neurocognitive disorders are
associated with hallucinations, and they respond rapidly to antipsychotic
medication. Fornication, in which the patient believes that bugs are crawling
over the skin, is often associated with cocaine use.
Sleep–Wake Disorders. A common cause of insomnia in hospitalized
patients is pain, which, when treated, solves the sleep problem. Early
morning awakening is associated with depression, and difficulty falling
asleep is associated with anxiety. Depending on the cause, antianxiety or
antidepressant agents may be prescribed. Early substance withdrawal as a
cause of insomnia should be considered in the differential diagnosis.
Confusion. Delirium is the most common cause of confusion or
disorientation among hospitalized patients in general hospitals. The causes
are myriad and relate to metabolic status, neurologic findings, substance
abuse, and mental illness, among many others. Small doses of antipsychotics
may be used when significant agitation occurs in conjunction with the
confused state; however, sedatives, such as benzodiazepines, can worsen the
condition and cause sundowner syndrome (ataxia, disorientation). If sensory
deprivation is a contributing factor, the environment can be modified so that
the patient has sensory cues (e.g., radio, clock, no curtains around the bed).
Table 25-2 lists the probable causes of confusional states that require urgent
attention.
Noncompliance or Refusal to Consent to Procedure. The
relationship between the patient and their doctor may be a critical underlying
factor when patients are noncompliant or refuse to consent to a procedure. A
negative transference toward the physician is a common cause of
noncompliance. Patients who fear medication or a procedure may respond to
education and reassurance. Patients whose refusal to give consent is related to
impaired judgment can be declared incompetent, but only by a judge. The
leading cause of impaired judgment in hospitalized patients is cognitive


<<<PAGE 2520>>>
disorders.
No Physiologic Basis for Symptoms. The C-L psychiatrist is often
called when the physician cannot find evidence of medical or surgical disease
to account for the patient’s symptoms. In these instances, several psychiatric
conditions must be considered, including conversion disorder, somatization
disorder, factitious disorders, and malingering. Glove and stocking anesthesia
with autonomic nervous system symptoms is seen in conversion disorder;
multiple bodily complaints are present in somatization disorder; the wish to
be in the hospital occurs in factitious disorder, and apparent secondary gain is
observed in patients who are malingering (e.g., compensation cases).
C-L Psychiatry in Special Situations
Intensive Care Units. All ICUs deal with patients who experience anxiety,
depression, and delirium. ICUs also impose extraordinarily high stress on
staff and patients, which is related to the intensity of the problems. Patients
and staff members alike frequently observe cardiac arrests, deaths, and
medical disasters, which leave them all autonomically aroused and
psychologically defensive. ICU nurses and their patients experience
exceptionally high levels of anxiety and depression. As a result, nurse
burnout and high turnover rates are frequent.
The problem of stress among ICU staff receives much attention, especially
in the nursing literature. Much less attention is given to the house staff,
especially those on the surgical services. All persons in ICUs must be able to
deal directly with their feelings about their extraordinary experiences and
challenging emotional and physical circumstances. Regular support groups in
which persons can discuss their feelings are recommended for the ICU staff
and the house staff. Such support groups protect staff members from the
otherwise predictable psychiatric morbidity that some may experience and
also protect their patients from the loss of concentration, decreased energy,
and psychomotor-retarded communications that some staff members
otherwise exhibit.
Hemodialysis Units. Hemodialysis units present a paradigm of
complicated modern medical treatment settings. Patients are coping with


<<<PAGE 2521>>>
lifelong, debilitating, and limiting disease; they are dependent on a multiplex
group of caretakers for access to a machine controlling their well-being.
Dialysis is scheduled three times a week and takes 4 to 6 hours; thus, it
disrupts patients’ previous living routines.
Table 25-2
Some Clues to Causes of Delirium Demanding Urgent
Attention
Metabolic Disorders
1. Hypoglycemia: history of diabetes or alcoholism; reduced level of
consciousness, shaky, sweaty, perhaps combative
2. Hyperglycemia: history of diabetes; complaints of increased thirst,
urination, or flulike symptoms
3. Hyponatremia: underlying illness like lung cancer, recent stroke,
chronic pulmonary infections, heart failure, cirrhosis, diuretic use
4. Hypernatremia: dehydration from inadequate fluid intake or
excessive fluid loss without replacement
5. Hypercalcemia: underlying disorder such as cancer metastatic to
bone, sarcoidosis, lung and renal cell cancer, multiple myeloma,
and/or prolonged immobilization
6. Hypoxia: inadequate oxygen supplied to the brain because of
poor pulmonary or cardiac function or carbon monoxide poisoning
7. Hypercarbia: history of chronic lung disease characterized by
carbon dioxide retention; may use oxygen at home
8. Hepatic encephalopathy: history of chronic liver disease or
alcoholism; probably jaundiced; ascites
9. Uremia: history of kidney disease, enlarged prostate, recent
inability to pass urine
10. Thiamine deficiency (Wernicke encephalopathy): variable
degrees of ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, and mental disturbance;
history of nutritional deficiency secondary to alcoholism,
particularly of thiamine; since remaining thiamine in the body is
rapidly used when the patient is given intravenous glucose, any


<<<PAGE 2522>>>
patient with alcoholism should immediately receive intramuscular
thiamine before glucose infusion to prevent precipitating this
encephalopathy; untreated, the disorder rapidly progresses to a
permanent memory disorder (Korsakoff syndrome) and, in some
advanced cases, death
11. Hypothyroidism: history of progressive fatigue, constipation,
sensitivity to cold, weight gain, coarsening of hair and skin, mental
slowing; examination shows abnormally low temperature and
enlarged heart and slow pulse; may be precipitated by the effects
of lithium on thyroid function
12. Hyperthyroidism: patient may be either hyperactive or apathetic;
history may reveal rapid weight loss, diarrhea, heat intolerance,
and emotional instability; examination shows goiter, silky fine hair,
warm moist skin, proptosis and wide-eyed stare, fine tremor, rapid
or irregular pulse; in elderly patients, muscle weakness and heart
failure may be most apparent
Systemic Illness
1. Decreased cardiac output from various causes, such as
congestive heart failure, arrhythmia, pulmonary embolus, and
myocardial infarction; acute myocardial infarction presents with
confusion as the major symptom in 13% of elderly patients; aged
patients do not complain of typical pain; often they complain of
indigestion; vital signs may be abnormal, and patient may look ill
(ashen coloring, weak, nauseated, sweaty) and be confused
2. Pneumonia: recent history of a cold, becoming bedridden and
aspirating; fever may not be apparent, but tachycardia or
hypotension are evident on vital signs
3. Urinary tract infection: especially in patients with indwelling urinary
catheters, prostatic hypertrophy, diabetes, neurogenic bladder
4. Anemia: especially with acute blood loss (injury, intestinal
bleeding), chronic illness, occult gastrointestinal malignancy
5. Acute surgical emergencies: infarction of the bowel, appendicitis,


<<<PAGE 2523>>>
and volvulus are common and often present only with confusion and
no other complaints
6. Hypertension: sustained or rapid increase in blood pressure may
cause encephalopathy; often has history of elevated blood pressure;
may occur in patient on MAO inhibitor antidepressants who has
eaten food containing tyramine
7. Vasculitides: e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus; confusion arises
from cerebral involvement or treatment with steroids
8. Any febrile illness and infection can cause confusion in the aged
Central Nervous System Disorders
1. Subdural or epidural hematoma: may or may not have history of
head trauma; fluctuating mental status often present; may have no
focal neurologic signs
2. Seizure: unwitnessed seizure may be suggested if patient was
found on floor with evidence of incontinence or vomiting; history of
seizure disorder or alcoholism
3. Stroke: history of transient ischemic attacks or strokes; may have
no signs except confusion
4. Infection: meningitis (bacterial, fungal, or tuberculous), viral
encephalitis
5. Tumor, primary or metastatic: with a growing mass, raised
intracranial pressure may cause local compression of vital structures
or herniation of the brain; in the elderly, brain atrophy allows for
greater space inside the skull so that symptoms may not appear until
the mass is quite large
6. Normal pressure hydrocephalus: presents with triad of gait
disturbance, incontinence, dementia; surgery may be curative
Drugs and Medication
1. Almost all drugs are capable of causing confusion in the elderly;
the most commonly implicated drugs include those with strong


<<<PAGE 2524>>>
anticholinergic effects (antidepressants, antipsychotics, and
antiparkinsonian drugs, and many over-the-counter preparations),
sedative-hypnotics (barbiturates, benzodiazepines), cardiac
medications (digoxin, propranolol, lidocaine, quinidine),
antihypertensives, anticonvulsants, cimetidine, nonnarcotic and
narcotic analgesics, and corticosteroids
2. Alcohol: intoxication and withdrawal syndromes occur as in young
patients, but poor health in the elderly may put geriatric patients at
greater risk
3. Drug abuse: far less common in elderly persons, but chronic
intoxication with bromides, prescription tranquilizers occurs
From Minden SL. Elderly psychiatric emergency patients. In: Bassuk EL, Birk AW, eds.
Emergency Psychiatry. New York: Plenum; 1984:360, with permission.

In this context, patients first and foremost fight the disease. Invariably,
however, they also must come to terms with a level of dependence on others
probably not experienced since childhood. Predictably, patients entering
dialysis struggle for their independence; regress to childhood states; show
denial by acting out against doctor’s orders (by breaking their diet or by
missing sessions); show anger directed against staff members; bargain and
plead; or become infantilized and obsequious; however, most often they are
accepting and courageous. The determinants of patients’ responses to
entering dialysis include personality styles and previous experiences with this
or another chronic illness. Patients who have time to react and adapt to their
disease are less challenged by the need to adapt to new circumstances. Those
with recent renal failure and machine dependence may have more difficulty.
Although little has been written about social factors, the effects of culture
in reaction to dialysis and the management of the dialysis unit are known to
be necessary. Units are run with a firm hand, which is consistent in dealing
with patients; clear contingencies are in place for behavioral failures; and
adequate psychological support is available for staff members, which tend to
produce the best results.
Complications of dialysis treatment can include psychiatric problems, such
as depression, and suicide is not rare. Sexual problems can be neurogenic,


<<<PAGE 2525>>>
psychogenic, or related to gonadal dysfunction and testicular atrophy.
Dialysis dementia is a rare condition that includes loss of memory,
disorientation, dystonias, and seizures. The disorder occurs in patients who
have been receiving dialysis treatment for many years. Although not entirely
understood, the leading cause is probably aluminum toxicity, and reducing
dialysate aluminum levels and minimizing aluminum intake decreases the
incidence of the disease. Chelating agents, such as deferoxamine, may also
help if given early. However, it should be used sparingly because of its
serious adverse effects.
The psychological treatment of dialysis patients falls into two areas. First,
careful preparation before dialysis, including the work of adaptation to
chronic illness, is essential, especially in dealing with denial and unrealistic
expectations. Before dialysis, all patients should have a psychosocial
evaluation. Second, once in a dialysis program, patients need periodic
specific inquiries about adaptation that do not encourage dependence or the
sick role. Staff members should be sensitive to the likelihood of depression
and sexual problems. Group sessions function well for support, and patient
self-help groups restore a useful social network, self-esteem, and selfmastery. When needed, antidepressants can be used for dialysis patients.
Psychiatric care is most effective when brief and problem-oriented.
The use of home dialysis units has improved attitudes toward treatment.
Patients treated at home can integrate the treatment into their daily lives more
efficiently, and they feel more autonomous and less dependent on others for
their care than do those who are treated in the hospital.
Surgical Units. Some surgeons believe that patients who expect to die
during surgery are more likely to die. This belief now seems less superstitious
than it once did. Some patients who are scheduled for surgery and show
evident depression or anxiety but deny it have a higher risk for morbidity and
mortality than those who can express it. Even better results occur in those
with a positive attitude toward impending surgery. The factors that contribute
to an improved outcome for surgery are informed consent and education so
that patients know what they can expect to feel, where they will be (e.g., it is
useful to show patients the recovery room), what loss of function to expect,
what tubes and gadgets will be in place, and how to cope with the anticipated
pain. If patients will not be able to talk or see after surgery, it is helpful to


<<<PAGE 2526>>>
explain before surgery what they can do to compensate for these losses. If
postoperative states such as confusion, delirium, and pain can be predicted,
they should be discussed with patients in advance, so they do not experience
them as unwarranted or as signs of danger. Constructive family support
members can help both before and after surgery.
Transplantation Issues. Transplantation programs have expanded over
the past decade, and C-L psychiatrists play an essential role in helping
patients and families deal with the many psychosocial issues involved: (1)
which and when patients on a waiting list will receive organs, (2) anxiety
about the procedure, (3) fear of death, (4) organ rejection, and (5) adaptation
to life after successful transplantation. After the transplant, patients require
complicated aftercare, and achieving compliance with medication may be
difficult without supportive psychotherapy. This challenge is particularly
relevant to patients who have received liver transplants as a result of hepatitis
C brought on by promiscuous sexual behavior and patients with a history of
substance use disorder who used contaminated needles.
Group therapy with patients who have had similar transplantation
procedures benefits members who can support one another and share
information and feelings about particular stressors related to their disease.
Groups may be conducted or supervised by the psychiatrist. Psychiatrists
must be especially concerned about psychiatric complications. Within 1 year
of transplant, almost 20 percent of patients experience major depression or an
adjustment disorder with depressed mood. In such cases, evaluation for
suicidal ideation and risk is essential. In addition to depression, another 10
percent of patients experience signs of posttraumatic stress disorder, with
nightmares and anxiety attacks related to the procedure. Other issues concern
whether or not the transplanted organ came from a cadaver or from a living
donor who may or may not be related to the patient. Pretransplant consulting
sessions with potential organ donors help them to deal with fears about
surgery and concerns about who will receive their donated organ. Sometimes,
both the recipient and donor may be counseled together, as with a family
member donating a kidney. Peer support groups with both donors and
recipients have also been used to facilitate coping with transplantation issues.

PSYCHO-ONCOLOGY


<<<PAGE 2527>>>
Psycho-oncology seeks to study both the impact of cancer on psychological
functioning and the role that psychological and behavioral variables may play
in cancer risk and survival. A hallmark of psycho-oncology research has been
intervention studies that attempt to influence the course of illness in patients
with cancer. A landmark study by David Spiegel found that women with
metastatic breast cancer who received weekly group psychotherapy survived
an average of 18 months longer than control patients randomly assigned to
routine care. In another study, patients with malignant melanoma who
received structured group intervention exhibited a statistically significant
lower recurrence of cancer and a lower mortality rate than patients who did
not receive such therapy. Patients with malignant melanoma who received the
group intervention also exhibited significantly more large granular
lymphocytes and natural killer (NK) cells as well as indications of increased
NK cell activity, suggesting an increased immune response. Another study
used a group behavioral intervention (relaxation, guided imagery, and
biofeedback training) for patients with breast cancer, who demonstrated
higher NK cell activity and lymphocyte mitogen responses than the controls.
Because new treatment protocols, in many cases, have transformed cancer
from an incurable to frequently chronic and often curable disease, the
psychiatric aspects of cancer—the reactions to both the diagnosis and the
treatment—are increasingly important. At least half of the persons who
contract cancer in the United States each year are alive 5 years later.
Currently, an estimated 3 million cancer survivors have no evidence of the
disease.
About half of all cancer patients have mental disorders. The largest groups
are those with adjustment disorder (68 percent), and major depressive
disorder (13 percent) and delirium (8 percent) are the next most common
diagnoses. Most of these disorders are thought to be reactive to the
knowledge of having cancer.
When persons learn that they have cancer, their psychological reactions
include fear of death, disfigurement, and disability; fear of abandonment and
loss of independence; fear of disruption in relationships, role functioning, and
financial standings; and denial, anxiety, anger, and guilt. Although suicidal
thoughts and wishes are frequent in persons with cancer, the actual incidence
of suicide is only slightly higher than that in the general population.
Psychiatrists should make a careful assessment of psychiatric and medical


<<<PAGE 2528>>>
issues in every patient. Particular attention should be given to family factors,
in particular, preexisting intrafamily conflicts, family abandonment, and
family exhaustion.

25.2 Geriatric Psychiatry
PSYCHIATRIC PROBLEMS OF OLDER PERSONS
Despite the ubiquity of loss in old age, the prevalence of major depressive
disorder and dysthymia is less than in younger age groups. Several
explanations for this phenomenon have been proposed: rarity of late-onset
depression, higher mortality among persons with depression, and a general
decrease in disorders caused by emotional upheavals or substance abuse in
older persons. Depression may, however, be underrecognized in the elderly
as it sometimes presents differently than in younger persons. Depression in
old persons is often accompanied by physical symptoms or cognitive changes
that may mimic dementia.
The incidence of suicide among older persons is high (40 per 100,000
population) and is highest for older white men. The suicide of older persons
is perceived differently by surviving friends and family members based on
gender: men are thought to have been physically ill, and women are thought
to have been mentally ill.
The relation between good mental and good physical health is apparent in
older persons. Adverse effects on the course of chronic medical illness are
correlated with emotional problems.

MENTAL DISORDERS OF OLD AGE
The National Institute of Mental Health’s Epidemiologic Catchment Area
(ECA) program found that the most common mental disorders of old age are
depressive disorders, cognitive disorders, phobias, and alcohol use disorders.
Older adults also have a high risk of suicide and drug-induced psychiatric
symptoms. Many mental disorders of old age can be prevented, ameliorated,
or even reversed. Of particular importance are the reversible causes of
delirium and dementia; if not diagnosed accurately and treated in a timely


<<<PAGE 2529>>>
fashion, however, these conditions can progress to an irreversible state. Table
25-3 lists the general cognitive domains assessed in neuropsychological
evaluation, with the tests used to measure that skill and a description of the
specific behaviors measured by each test. The tests listed in the table
constitute a comprehensive test battery generally appropriate for use with a
geriatric population. The use of a comprehensive battery is preferable for
confident determination of the presence and type of dementia or other
cognitive disorder in elderly persons; in some circumstances, however,
administering a several-hour battery is not possible.
Table 25-3
Cognitive Domains
Gross Cognitive Functioning
Mini-Mental State Examination: orientation, repetition, following
commands, naming, constructional skill, written expression,
memory, mental flexibility, and calculations
Intelligence
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised (WAIS-R) or Wechsler
Intelligence Scale-III (WAIS-III): verbal and nonverbal
intelligence
Basic Attention
WAIS-R or WAIS-III Digit Span: repetition of digits forward and
backward
Information-Processing Speed
WAIS-R or WAIS-III Digit Symbol: rapid graphomotor tracking
Trailmaking Part A: rapid graphomotor tracking
Stroop A and B: rapid word reading and color naming
Motor Dexterity
Finger tapping: right and left index finger dexterity
Language
Boston Naming Test: word retrieval
WAIS-R or WAIS-III Vocabulary: vocabulary range
Visual Perceptual/Spatial


<<<PAGE 2530>>>
WAIS-R or WAIS-III Picture Completion: visual perception
WAIS-R or WAIS-III Block Design: constructional ability
Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure Test: paper-and-pencil copy of
complex design
Beery Developmental Test of Visual Motor Integration: paper-andpencil copy of simple-to-complex designs
Learning and Memory
An 8- to 10-item word list learning task: learning and recall of rote
verbal information
Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised (WMS-R) or Wechsler Memory
Scale-III (WMS-III)
Logical Memory subtest: immediate and delayed recall of
paragraph information
Visual Reproduction subtest: immediate and delayed recall of
visual designs
Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure Test and Recognition Trial: 3minute immediate recall and 30-minute delayed recall of a
complex design
Executive Functions
Trailmaking Part B: rapid alternation between tasks
Stroop C: inhibition of an overlearned response
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test: categorization and mental flexibility
Verbal fluency (FAS and category): rapid word generation
Design fluency: rapid generation of novel designs
Courtesy of Kyle Brauer Boone, Ph.D.

Several psychosocial risk factors also predispose older persons to mental
disorders. These risk factors include loss of social roles, loss of autonomy,
the deaths of friends and relatives, declining health, increased isolation,
financial constraints, and decreased cognitive functioning.
Many drugs can cause psychiatric symptoms in older adults. These
symptoms can result from age-related alterations in drug absorption, a
prescribed dosage that is too large, not following instructions and taking too
large a dose, sensitivity to the medication, and conflicting regimens presented
by several physicians. Drugs can cause almost the entire spectrum of mental


<<<PAGE 2531>>>
disorders.
Dementing Disorders
Only arthritis is a more common cause of disability among adults age 65 and
older than dementia, a generally progressive and irreversible impairment of
the intellect, the prevalence of which increases with age. About 5 percent of
persons in the United States older than age 65 have severe dementia, and 15
percent have mild dementia. Of persons older than age 80, about 20 percent
have severe dementia. Known risk factors for dementia are age, family
history, and female sex.
In contrast to intellectual disability, the intellectual impairment of dementia
develops over time—that is, previously achieved mental functions are lost
gradually. The characteristic changes of dementia involve cognition,
memory, language, and visuospatial functions, but behavioral disturbances
are common as well and include agitation, restlessness, wandering, rage,
violence, shouting, social and sexual disinhibition, impulsiveness, sleep
disturbances, and delusions. Delusions and hallucinations occur during the
dementias in nearly 75 percent of patients.
Cognition is impaired by many conditions, including brain injuries,
cerebral tumors, acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), alcohol,
medications, infections, chronic pulmonary diseases, and inflammatory
diseases. Although dementias associated with advanced age typically are
caused by primary degenerative central nervous system (CNS) disease and
vascular disease, many factors contribute to cognitive impairment; in older
persons, mixed causes of dementia are common.
About 10 to 15 percent of all patients who exhibit symptoms of dementia
have potentially treatable conditions. The treatable conditions include
systemic disorders, such as heart disease, renal disease, and congestive heart
failure; endocrine disorders, such as hypothyroidism; vitamin deficiency;
medication misuse; and primary mental disorders, most notably depressive
disorders.
Depending on the site of the cerebral lesion, dementias are classified as
cortical and subcortical. Subcortical dementia occurs in Huntington disease,
Parkinson disease, normal pressure hydrocephalus, vascular dementia, and
Wilson disease. The subcortical dementias are associated with movement


<<<PAGE 2532>>>
disorders, gait apraxia, psychomotor retardation, apathy, and akinetic mutism,
which can be confused with catatonia. Table 25-4 lists some potentially
reversible conditions that may resemble dementia. The cortical dementias
occur in dementia of the Alzheimer type, Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD),
and Pick disease, which frequently manifests aphasia, agnosia, and apraxia.
In clinical practice, the two types of dementias overlap, and, in most cases, an
accurate diagnosis can be made only by autopsy. Human prion diseases result
from coding mutations in the prion protein gene (PRNP) and may be
inherited, acquired, or sporadic. They include familial CJD, Gerstmann–
Sträussler–Scheinker syndrome, and fatal familial insomnia. These are
inherited as autosomal-dominant mutations. The acquired diseases include
kuru and iatrogenic CJD. Kuru was an epidemic prion disease of the Fore
people of Papua, New Guinea, caused by cannibalistic funeral rituals, which
peaked in incidence in the 1950s. Iatrogenic disease is rare and is caused, for
example, by the use of contaminated dura mater and corneal grafts and
treatment with human cadaveric pituitary-derived growth hormone and
gonadotropin. Sporadic CJD accounts for 85 percent of the human prion
diseases and occurs worldwide, with a uniform distribution and an incidence
of about 1 in 1 million per annum, with a mean age at onset of 65 years. It is
exceedingly rare in individuals under 30 years of age.
Depressive Disorders
Depressive symptoms are present in about 15 percent of all older adult
community residents and nursing home patients. Age itself is not a risk factor
for the development of depression, but being widowed and having a chronic
medical illness are associated with vulnerability to depressive disorders. High
rates of recurrence characterize late-onset depression.
Table 25-4
Some Potentially Reversible Conditions that May Resemble
Dementia
Substance
Anticholinergic agents
Antihypertensives


<<<PAGE 2533>>>
Antipsychotics
Corticosteroids
Digitalis
Narcotics
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents
Phenytoin
Polypharmacotherapy
Sedative hypnotics
Psychiatric Disorders
Anxiety
Depression
Mania
Delusional disorders
Metabolic and Endocrine Disorders
Addison disease
Cushing syndrome
Hepatic failure
Hypercarbia (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)
Hypernatremia
Hyperparathyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
Hypoglycemia
Hyponatremia
Hypothyroidism
Renal failure
Volume depletion
Miscellaneous Conditions
Fecal impaction
Hospitalization
Impaired hearing or vision
Courtesy of Gary W. Small, M.D.

The common signs and symptoms of depressive disorders include reduced
energy and concentration, sleep problems (especially early morning
awakening and multiple awakenings), decreased appetite, weight loss, and


<<<PAGE 2534>>>
somatic complaints. The presenting symptoms may be different in older
depressed patients from those seen in younger adults because of an increased
emphasis on somatic complaints in older persons. Older persons are
particularly vulnerable to major depressive episodes with melancholic
features, characterized by depression, hypochondriasis, low self-esteem,
feelings of worthlessness, and self-accusatory trends (especially about sex
and sinfulness) with paranoid and suicidal ideation. A geriatric depression
scale is given in Table 25-5.
Cognitive impairment in depressed geriatric patients is referred to as
depression-related cognitive dysfunction (sometimes misleadingly called
pseudodementia), which can be confused easily with nonreversible
dementias. In common dementias such as that caused by Alzheimer disease,
intellectual performance usually is global, and impairment is consistently
poor; in depression-related cognitive dysfunction, deficits in attention and
concentration are variable. Compared with patients who have
neurodegenerative dementias, patients with depression-related cognitive
dysfunction are less likely to have language impairment and to confabulate;
when uncertain, they are more likely to say “I don’t know”; and their
memory difficulties are more limited to free recall than to recognition on
cued recall tests. Depression-related cognitive dysfunction occurs in about 15
percent of depressed older patients, and 25 to 50 percent of patients with
neurodegenerative dementias are depressed.
Table 25-5
Geriatric Depression Scale (Short Version)
Answers indicating depression are boldfaced. Each answer counts
one point; scores greater than 5 indicate probable depression.
1. Are you basically satisfied with your life?

Yes/No

2. Have you dropped many of your activities and interests?

Yes/No

3. Do you feel that your life is empty?

Yes/No

4. Do you often get bored?

Yes/No

5. Are you in good spirits most of the time?

Yes/No


<<<PAGE 2535>>>
6. Are you afraid that something bad is going to happen to
you?

Yes/No

7. Do you feel happy most of the time?

Yes/No

8. Do you often feel helpless?

Yes/No

9. Do you prefer to stay at home, rather than going out and
doing new things?

Yes/No

10. Do you feel you have more problems with memory than Yes/No
most?
11. Do you think it is wonderful to be alive now?

Yes/No

12. Do you feel pretty worthless the way you are now?

Yes/No

13. Do you feel full of energy?

Yes/No

14. Do you feel that your situation is hopeless?

Yes/No

15. Do you think that most people are better off than you
are?

Yes/No

Special Instructions. The scale can be used as a self-rating or
observer-rated metric. It has also been used as an observer-rated
scale in mildly demented subjects.
From Yesavage JA. Geriatric depression scale. Psychopharmacol Bull. 1988;24:709, with
permission.

Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia usually begins in late adolescence or young adulthood and
persists throughout life. Although the first episodes diagnosed after age 65
are rare, a late-onset type beginning after age 45 has been described. Women
are more likely to have a late onset of schizophrenia than men. Another
difference between early-onset and late-onset schizophrenia is the greater
prevalence of paranoid schizophrenia in the late-onset type. About 20 percent
of persons with schizophrenia show no active symptoms by age 65; 80


<<<PAGE 2536>>>
percent show varying degrees of impairment. Psychopathology becomes less
marked as patient’s age.
The residual type of schizophrenia occurs in about 30 percent of persons
with schizophrenia. It primarily presents with negative symptoms, including
emotional blunting, social withdrawal, eccentric behavior, and illogical
thinking. Delusions and hallucinations are uncommon. Because most persons
with residual schizophrenia cannot care for themselves, long-term
hospitalization is required.
Older persons with schizophrenic symptoms respond reasonably well to
antipsychotic drugs. Medication must be administered judiciously, and lowerthan-usual dosages often are useful for older adults.
Delusional Disorder
The age of onset of delusional disorder usually is between ages 40 and 55,
but it can occur at any time during the geriatric period. Delusions can take
many forms; the most common are persecutory—patients believe that they
are being spied on, followed, poisoned, or harassed in some way. Persons
with delusional disorder may become violent toward their supposed
persecutors. Some persons lock themselves in their rooms and live reclusive
lives. Somatic delusions, in which persons believe they have a fatal illness,
also can occur in older persons. In one study of persons older than 65 years of
age, pervasive persecutory ideation was present in 4 percent of persons
sampled.
Among those who are vulnerable, delusional disorder can occur under
physical or psychological stress. The death of a spouse can precipitate it, loss
of a job, retirement, social isolation, adverse financial circumstances,
debilitating medical illness or surgery, visual impairment, and deafness.
Delusions also can accompany other disorders—such as dementia of the
Alzheimer type, alcohol use disorders, schizophrenia, depressive disorders,
and bipolar I disorder—which need to be ruled out. Delusional syndromes
also can result from prescribed medications or be early signs of a brain
tumor. The prognosis is fair to good in most cases; the best results are
achieved through a combination of psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy.
Persecutory delusions characterize a late-onset delusional disorder called
paraphrenia. It develops over several years and is not associated with


<<<PAGE 2537>>>
dementia. Some workers believe that the disorder is a variant of
schizophrenia that first becomes manifest after age 60. Patients with a family
history of schizophrenia show an increased rate of paraphrenia.
Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety disorders usually begin in early or middle adulthood, but some
appear for the first time after age 60. The initial onset of panic disorder in
older persons is rare but can occur. The ECA study determined that the 1month prevalence of anxiety disorders in persons age 65 and older is 5.5
percent. By far, the most common disorders are phobias (4 to 8 percent). The
rate for panic disorder is 1 percent.
The signs and symptoms of phobia in older adults are less severe than
those that occur in younger persons, but the effects are equally, if not more,
debilitating for older patients. Existential theories help explain anxiety when
no specifically identifiable stimulus exists for a chronically anxious feeling.
Older persons must come to grips with death. The person may deal with the
thought of death with a sense of despair and anxiety, rather than with
equanimity and Erikson’s “sense of integrity.” The fragility of the autonomic
nervous system in older persons may account for the development of anxiety
after a significant stressor. Because of concurrent physical disability, older
persons react more severely to PTSD than younger persons.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorders
Obsessions and compulsions may appear for the first time in older adults,
although older adults with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) usually had
demonstrated evidence of the disorder (e.g., being orderly, perfectionistic,
punctual, parsimonious) when they were younger. When symptomatic,
patients become excessive in their desire for orderliness, rituals, and
sameness. They may become generally inflexible and rigid and have
compulsions to check things again and again. OCD (in contrast to obsessivecompulsive personality disorder) is characterized by ego-dystonic rituals and
obsessions and may begin late in life.
Somatic Symptom Disorders
Disorders characterized by physical symptoms resembling medical diseases


<<<PAGE 2538>>>
are relevant to geriatric psychiatry because somatic complaints are common
among older adults. More than 80 percent of persons over 65 years of age
have at least one chronic disease—usually arthritis or cardiovascular
problems. After age 75, 20 percent have diabetes, and an average of four
diagnosable chronic illnesses that require medical attention.
Hypochondriasis is common in persons over 60 years of age, although the
peak incidence is in those 40 to 50 years of age. The disorder usually is
chronic, and the prognosis guarded. Repeated physical examinations help
reassure patients that they do not have a fatal illness, but invasive and highrisk diagnostic procedures should be avoided unless medically indicated.
Telling patients that their symptoms are imaginary is counterproductive
and usually engenders resentment. Clinicians should acknowledge that the
complaint and pain are real to the patient, and a psychological or
psychopharmacological approach to the problem is indicated.
Alcohol and Other Substance Use Disorder
Older adults with alcohol dependence usually give a history of excessive
drinking that began in young or middle adulthood. They usually are
medically ill, primarily with liver disease, and are either divorced, widowed,
or are men who never married. Many have arrest records and are numbered
among homeless persons. A large number have a chronic dementing illness,
such as Wernicke encephalopathy or Korsakoff syndrome. Of nursing home
patients, 20 percent have alcohol dependence.
Overall, alcohol and other substance use disorders account for 10 percent
of all emotional problems in older persons, and dependence on such
substances as hypnotics, anxiolytics, and narcotics is more common in old
age than is generally recognized. Substance-seeking behavior characterized
by crime, manipulativeness, and antisocial behavior is rarer in older than in
younger adults. Older patients may abuse anxiolytics to allay chronic anxiety
or to try to help sleep. The maintenance of chronically ill cancer patients with
narcotics prescribed by a physician produces dependence, but the need to
provide pain relief takes precedence over the possibility of narcotic
dependence and is justified.
The clinical presentation of older patients with alcohol and other substance
use disorders varies and includes confusion, poor personal hygiene,


<<<PAGE 2539>>>
depression, malnutrition, and the effects of exposure and falls. The sudden
onset of delirium in older persons hospitalized for medical illness is most
often caused by alcohol withdrawal. Alcohol abuse also should be considered
in older adults with chronic gastrointestinal (GI) problems.
Older persons may misuse over-the-counter substances, or nicotine and
caffeine. Over-the-counter analgesics are used by 35 percent of older persons,
and 30 percent use laxatives. Unexplained GI, psychological, and metabolic
problems should alert clinicians to over-the-counter substance abuse.
Sleep Disorders
Advanced age is the single most important factor associated with the
increased prevalence of sleep disorders. Sleep-related phenomena reported
more frequently by older than by younger adults are sleeping problems,
daytime sleepiness, daytime napping, and the use of hypnotic drugs.
Clinically, older persons experience higher rates of breathing-related sleep
disorder and medication-induced movement disorders than younger adults.
In addition to altered regulatory and physiologic systems, the causes of
sleep disturbances in older persons include primary sleep disorders, other
mental disorders, general medical disorders, and social and environmental
factors. Among the primary sleep disorders, dyssomnias are the most
frequent, mainly primary insomnia, nocturnal myoclonus, restless legs
syndrome, and sleep apnea. Of the parasomnias, rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep behavior disorder occurs almost exclusively among older men. The
conditions that commonly interfere with sleep in older adults also include
pain, nocturia, dyspnea, and heartburn. The lack of a daily structure and
social or vocational responsibilities contributes to poor sleep.
As a result of the decreased length of their daily sleep–wake cycle, older
persons without daily routines, especially patients in nursing homes, may
experience an advanced sleep phase, in which they go to sleep early and
awaken during the night.
Even modest amounts of alcohol can interfere with the quality of sleep and
can cause sleep fragmentation and early morning awakening. Alcohol can
also precipitate or aggravate obstructive sleep apnea. Many older persons use
alcohol, hypnotics, and other CNS depressants to help them fall asleep, but
data show that these persons experience more early morning awakening than


<<<PAGE 2540>>>
trouble falling asleep. When prescribing sedative-hypnotic drugs for older
persons, clinicians must monitor the patients for unwanted cognitive,
behavioral, and psychomotor effects, including memory impairment
(anterograde amnesia), residual sedation, rebound insomnia, daytime
withdrawal, and unsteady gait.
Changes in sleep structure among persons over 65 years of age involve
both REM sleep and nonrapid eye movement (NREM) sleep. The REM
changes include the redistribution of REM sleep throughout the night, more
REM episodes, shorter REM episodes, and less total REM sleep. The NREM
changes include the decreased amplitude of delta waves, a lower percentage
of stages 3 and 4 sleep, and a higher percentage of stages 1 and 2 sleep. Also,
older persons experience increased awakening after sleep onset.
Altered timing and consolidation of the sleep account for much of the
deterioration in the quality of sleep. This is due, in part, to decreasing
melatonin and alternated responses to the adenosine system with age. With
advanced age, persons have a lower amplitude of circadian rhythms, a 12hour sleep-propensity rhythm, and shorter circadian cycles.

SUICIDE RISK
Elderly persons have a higher risk of suicide than any other population. The
suicide rate for white men over the age of 65 is five times higher than that of
the general population. One-third of elderly persons report loneliness as the
principal reason for considering suicide. Approximately 10 percent of elderly
individuals with suicidal ideation report financial problems, poor medical
health, or depression as reasons for suicidal thoughts. Suicide victims differ
demographically from individuals who attempt suicide. About 60 percent of
those who commit suicide are men; 75 percent of those who attempt suicide
are women. Suicide victims, as a rule, use guns or hang themselves, whereas
70 percent of suicide attempters take a drug overdose, and 20 percent cut or
slash themselves. Psychological autopsy studies suggest that most elderly
persons who commit suicide have had a psychiatric disorder, most commonly
depression. Psychiatric disorders of suicide victims, however, often do not
receive medical or psychiatric attention. More elderly suicide victims are
widowed, and fewer are single, separated, or divorced than is true of younger
adults. Violent methods of suicide are more common in the elderly, and


<<<PAGE 2541>>>
alcohol use and psychiatric histories appear to be less frequent. The most
common precipitants of suicide in older individuals are physical illness and
loss, whereas problems with employment, finances, and family relationships
are more frequent precipitants in younger adults. Many elderly persons who
commit suicide communicate their suicidal thoughts to family or friends
before the act of suicide.
Older patients with significant medical illnesses or a recent loss should be
evaluated for depressive symptomatology and suicidal ideation or plans.
Thoughts and fantasies about the meaning of suicide and life after death may
reveal information that the patient cannot share directly. There should be no
reluctance to question patients about suicide because no evidence indicates
that such questions increase the likelihood of suicidal behavior.

OTHER CONDITIONS OF OLD AGE
Vertigo
Feelings of vertigo or dizziness, a common complaint of older adults, cause
many older adults to become inactive because they fear falling. The causes of
vertigo vary and include anemia, hypotension, cardiac arrhythmia,
cerebrovascular disease, basilar artery insufficiency, middle ear disease,
acoustic neuroma, benign postural vertigo, and Ménière disease. Most cases
of vertigo have a vital psychological component, and clinicians should
ascertain any secondary gain from the symptom. The overuse of anxiolytics
can cause dizziness and daytime somnolence. Treatment with meclizine, 25
to 100 mg daily, has been successful in many patients with vertigo.
Syncope
The sudden loss of consciousness associated with syncope results from a
reduction of cerebral blood flow and brain hypoxia. A thorough medical
workup is required to rule out potential causes. Causes of syncope are listed
in Table 25-6.
Hearing Loss
About 30 percent of persons over age 65 have significant hearing loss
(presbycusis). After age 75, that figure rises to 50 percent. The causes vary.


<<<PAGE 2542>>>
Clinicians should be sensitive to hearing loss in patients who complain they
can hear but cannot understand what is being said or who asks that questions
be repeated. Most elderly persons with hearing loss can be treated with
hearing aids.
Elder Abuse
An estimated 10 percent of persons above 65 years of age are abused. The
American Medical Association defines elder abuse as “an act or omission
which results in harm or threatened harm to the health or welfare of an
elderly person.” Mistreatment includes abuse and neglect—physically,
psychologically, financially, and materially. Sexual abuse does occur. Acts of
omission include withholding food, medicine, clothing, and other necessities.
Table 25-6
Causes of Syncope
Cardiac Disorders
Anatomical/valvular
Aortic stenosis
Mitral prolapse and regurgitation
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Myxoma
Electrical
Tachyarrhythmia
Bradyarrhythmia
Heart block
Sick sinus syndrome
Functional
Ischemia and infarct
Situational Hypotension
Dehydration (diarrhea, fasting)
Orthostatic hypotension
Postprandial hypotension
Micturition, defecation, coughing, swallowing


<<<PAGE 2543>>>
Abnormal Cardiovascular Reflexes
Carotid sinus syndrome
Vasovagal syncope
Drugs
Vasodilators
Calcium channel blockers
Diuretics
β-Blockers
Central Nervous System Abnormalities
Cerebrovascular insufficiency
Seizures
Metabolic Abnormalities
Hypoxemia
Hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia
Anemia
Pulmonary Disorders
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Pneumonia
Pulmonary embolus
Family conflicts and other problems often underlie elder abuse. The
victims tend to be very old and frail. They often live with their assailants,
who may be financially dependent on the victims. Both the victim and the
perpetrator tend to deny or minimize the presence of abuse. Interventions
include providing legal services, housing, and medical, psychiatric, and social
services.

SPOUSAL BEREAVEMENT
Demographic data suggest that 51 percent of women and 14 percent of men
over the age of 65 will be widowed at least once. Spousal loss is among the
most stressful of all life experiences. As a group, older adults appear to have
a more favorable outcome than expected following the death of a spouse.
Depressive symptoms peak within the first few months after death but decline


<<<PAGE 2544>>>
significantly within a year. A relationship exists between spousal loss and
subsequent mortality. Elderly survivors of spouses who committed suicide
are especially vulnerable, as are those with psychiatric illness.

PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGICAL TREATMENT OF
GERIATRIC DISORDERS
Specific guidelines should be followed regarding the use of all drugs in older
adults. A pretreatment medical evaluation is essential, including an
electrocardiogram (ECG). It is especially useful to have the patient or a
family member bring in all currently used medications because multiple drug
use could be contributing to the symptoms.
Most psychotropic drugs should be given in equally divided doses three or
four times over 24 hours. Older patients may not be able to tolerate a sudden
rise in drug blood levels resulting from one sizeable daily dose. Any changes
in blood pressure and pulse rate and other side effects should be watched. For
patients with insomnia, however, giving the significant portion of an
antipsychotic or antidepressant at bedtime takes advantage of its sedating and
soporific effects. Liquid preparations are useful for older patients who cannot
or will not swallow tablets. Clinicians should frequently reassess all patients
to determine the need for maintenance medication, changes in dosage, and
development of adverse effects. If a patient is taking psychotropic drugs at
the time of the evaluation, the clinician should discontinue these medications,
if possible, and, after a washout period, reevaluate the patient during a drugfree baseline state.
Adults over 65 years of age use the most significant number of
medications of any age group; 25 percent of all prescriptions are written for
them. Adverse drug reactions caused by medications result in the
hospitalization of nearly 250,000 persons in the United States each year.
Psychiatric drugs are among the most commonly prescribed, along with
cardiovascular and diuretic medications; 40 percent of all hypnotics
dispensed in the United States each year are to those older than 75 years of
age, and 70 percent of older persons use over-the-counter medications,
compared with only 10 percent of young adults.
Principles


<<<PAGE 2545>>>
The primary goals of the pharmacologic treatment of older persons are to
improve the quality of life, maintain persons in the community, and delay or
avoid their placement in nursing homes. The individualization of dosage is
the basic tenet of geriatric psychopharmacology.
Alterations in drug dosages are required because of the physiologic
changes that occur as we age. Renal disease is associated with a decreased
renal clearance of drugs; liver disease results in a decreased ability to
metabolize drugs; cardiovascular disease and reduced cardiac output can
affect both renal and hepatic drug clearance. GI disease and decreased gastric
acid secretion also influence drug absorption. As a person ages, the ratio of
lean to fat body mass also changes. With normal aging, lean body mass
decreases, and body fat increases. Changes in the ratio of lean to fat body
mass that accompany aging affect the distribution of drugs. Many lipidsoluble psychotropic drugs are distributed more widely in fat than in lean
tissue, so a drug’s action can be unexpectedly prolonged in older persons.
Similarly, changes in end-organ or receptor-site sensitivity must be taken into
account. In older persons, the increased risk of orthostatic hypotension from
psychotropic drugs is related to reduced functioning of blood pressure–
regulating mechanisms.
As a general rule, the lowest possible dose should be used to achieve the
desired therapeutic response. Clinicians must know the pharmacodynamics,
pharmacokinetics, and biotransformation of each drug prescribed and the
effects of the interaction of the drug with other drugs that a patient is taking.
An adage in geriatric medicine regarding the use of drugs is: Start low, go
slow.

PSYCHOTHERAPY FOR GERIATRIC PATIENTS
The standard psychotherapeutic interventions—such as insight-oriented
psychotherapy, supportive psychotherapy, cognitive therapy, group therapy,
and family therapy—should be available to geriatric patients. According to
Sigmund Freud, persons older than 50 years are not suited for psychoanalysis
because their mental processes lack elasticity. In the view of many who
followed Freud, however, psychoanalysis is possible after age 50. Advanced
age certainly limits the plasticity of the personality, but as Otto Fenichel
stated, “It does so in varying degrees and at very different ages so that no


<<<PAGE 2546>>>
general rule can be given.” Insight-oriented psychotherapy may help remove
a specific symptom, even in older persons. It is of most benefit when patients
have possibilities for libidinal and narcissistic gratification, but it is
contraindicated if it would bring only the insight that life has been a failure
and that the patient has no opportunity to make up for it.
Common age-related issues in therapy involve the need to adapt to
recurrent and diverse losses (e.g., the deaths of friends and loved ones), the
need to assume new roles (e.g., the adjustment to retirement and the
disengagement from previously defined roles), and the need to accept
mortality. Psychotherapy helps older persons to deal with these issues and the
emotional problems surrounding them and to understand their behavior and
the effects of their behavior on others. In addition to improving interpersonal
relationships, psychotherapy increases self-esteem and self-confidence,
decreases feelings of helplessness and anger, and improves the quality of life.
Psychotherapy helps relieve tensions of biologic and cultural origins and
helps older persons work and play within the limits of their functional status
and as determined by their past training, activities, and self-concept in
society. In patients with impaired cognition, psychotherapy can produce
remarkable gains in both physical and mental symptoms. In one study
conducted in a nursing home, 43 percent of the patients receiving
psychotherapy showed less urinary incontinence, improved gait, greater
mental alertness, improved memory, and better hearing than before
psychotherapy.
Therapists must be more active, supportive, and flexible in conducting
therapy with older than with younger adults, and they must be prepared to act
decisively at the first sign of an incapacity that requires the active
involvement of another physician, such as an internist or that requires
consulting with, or enlisting the aid of, a family member.
Older persons usually seek therapy for a therapist’s unqualified and
unlimited support, reassurance, and approval. Patients often expect a therapist
to be all-powerful, all-knowing, and able to effect a magical cure. Most
patients eventually recognize that the therapist is human and that they are
engaged in a collaborative effort. In some cases, however, the therapist may
have to assume the idealized role, especially when the patient is unable or
unwilling to test reality effectively. With the help of the therapist, the patient
deals with problems that had been avoided previously. As the therapist offers


<<<PAGE 2547>>>
direct encouragement, reassurance, and advice, the patient’s self-confidence
increases as conflicts are resolved.

25.3 Psychiatric Emergencies
A psychiatric emergency is any disturbance in thoughts, feelings, or actions
for which immediate therapeutic intervention is necessary. For a variety of
reasons—such as the growing incidence of violence, the increased
appreciation of the role of medical disease in altered mental status, and the
epidemic of alcoholism and other substance use disorders—the number of
emergency psychiatry patients is on the rise. The widening scope of
emergency psychiatry goes beyond general psychiatric practice to include
such specialized problems as the abuse of substances, children, and spouses;
violence in the form of suicide, homicide, and rape; and such social issues as
homelessness, aging, and competence. The emergency psychiatrist must be
up to date on medicolegal issues and managed care. This section provides an
overview of psychiatric emergencies in general and in adults in particular.
Psychiatric emergencies in children is covered later in this chapter.

TREATMENT SETTINGS
Nonpsychiatrists do most emergency psychiatric evaluations in a general
medical emergency room setting, but specialized psychiatric services are
increasingly favored. Regardless of the type of setting, an atmosphere of
safety and security must prevail. An adequate number of staff members—
including psychiatrists, nurses, aides, and social workers—must be present at
all times. Additional personnel to help out in times of overcrowding should
be available. Specific responsibilities, such as the use of restraints, should be
clearly defined and practiced by the entire emergency team. Clear
communication and lines of authority are essential. The organization of the
staff into multidisciplinary teams is desirable.
Children and young adolescents are best served in a pediatric setting.
Unless there is a risk of behavioral problems or of their leaving the hospital
against advice, they need not be sent to the adult psychiatric emergency
service.


<<<PAGE 2548>>>
Immediate access to the medical emergency department and appropriate
diagnostic services is necessary because one-third of medical conditions
present with psychiatric manifestations. The full spectrum of
psychopharmacological options should be available to the psychiatrist.
Violence in the emergency service cannot be condoned or tolerated. The
code of conduct expected of staff members and patients must be posted and
understood from the time of the patient’s arrival in the emergency room.
Security is best managed as a clinical issue by the clinical staff, not by law
enforcement personnel. Whenever possible, agitated and threatening patients
should be sequestered from the nonagitated. Seclusion and restraint rooms
should be located close to the nursing station for close observation.
The entire staff must understand that patients in physical and emotional
distress are fragile and that various expectations and fantasies, often
unrealistic, influence their responses to treatment. For example, a man with
impaired reality testing who is brought in by the police against his will may
not understand that the clinician is interested in helping him. Other patients,
influenced by previous unsatisfactory treatment experiences, may be hostile.
Some patients believe that psychiatrists can read minds or are only interested
in admitting patients to lock them away. Such people see little point in openly
discussing their problems. Many people have an inaccurate understanding of
their rights as patients. All clinical interventions must take those expectations
and attitudes into account to minimize the possibility of misunderstanding
and consequent problems.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Psychiatric emergency rooms are used equally by men and women and more
by single than by married persons. About 20 percent of these patients are
suicidal, and about 10 percent are violent. The most common diagnoses are
depressive disorders, manic episodes, schizophrenia, and alcohol dependence.
About 40 percent of all patients seen in psychiatric emergency rooms require
hospitalization. Most visits occur during the night hours, but usage difference
is not based on the day of the week or the month of the year. Contrary to
popular belief, studies have not found that the use of psychiatric emergency
rooms increases during the full moon or the Christmas season.


<<<PAGE 2549>>>
EVALUATION
The primary goal of an emergency psychiatric evaluation is the timely
assessment of the patient in crisis. To that end, the physician must make an
initial diagnosis, identify the precipitating factors and immediate needs, and
begin treatment or refer the patient to the most appropriate treatment setting.
Given the unpredictable nature of emergency medicine work, with many
patients presenting both physical and emotional complaints, and because of
the limited space and the competition for ancillary services, a pragmatic
approach to the patient is required. Sometimes, moving the patient out of the
emergency department into the most appropriate diagnostic or treatment
setting is best for the patient. Medical emergencies are generally better
managed elsewhere in the system. Keeping the number of emergency patients
in one place to a minimum reduces the chance of agitation and violence.
The standard psychiatric interview—consisting of a history, a mental status
examination, and, when appropriate and depending on the rules of the
emergency department, a full physical examination and ancillary tests—is the
cornerstone of the emergency psychiatry evaluation. The emergency
department psychiatrist, however, must be ready to introduce modifications
as needed. For example, the emergency psychiatrist may have to structure the
interview with a rambling manic patient, medicate or restrain an agitated
patient, or forgo the usual rules of confidentiality to assess an adolescent’s
risk of suicide. In general, any strategy introduced in the emergency
department to accomplish the goal of assessing the patient is considered
consistent with good clinical practice as long as the rationale for the strategy
is documented in the medical record.
What constitutes a psychiatric emergency is highly subjective. The
emergency department has increasingly come to serve as an admitting area, a
holding area, a detoxification center, and a private medical office. Such
medical conditions as head traumas, acute intoxications, withdrawal states,
and AIDS encephalopathies may present with acute psychiatric
manifestations. The emergency psychiatrists must rapidly assess and
distinguish the genuine emergency psychiatric patients from those who are
less acutely ill and from nonpsychiatric emergencies. A triage system using
psychiatrists, nurses, and psychiatric social workers is an efficient and
effective way to identify emergency, urgent, and nonurgent patients, who can


<<<PAGE 2550>>>
then be prioritized for care (Fig. 25-1).
In one model, every patient who comes to the emergency department is
assessed by a triage nurse on arrival to ascertain the patient’s chief complaint,
clinical condition, and vital signs. The psychiatrist then briefly meets with the
patient and other significant people involved in the case—family members,
emergency medical service technicians, and police—to assign the patient to
one of the three categories—emergency, urgent, and nonurgent—or to refer
the patient to an appropriate treatment setting, such as the medical emergency
medicine service. Having a senior clinician perform that task ensures rapid
identification of the most urgent and troublesome cases, an appropriate
allocation of resources, and an answer to the most common question heard in
the emergency department: “When am I going to see a doctor?”

FIGURE 25-1
Evaluation and treatment of psychiatric emergencies.

The psychiatrist then assigns clinical responsibility for each patient to the
appropriate personnel. As the evaluation often stretches over more than one
shift, a careful procedure to transfer responsibility and to pass along
information from shift to shift must be built into the system by using visual,


<<<PAGE 2551>>>
oral, and written communications. A request for old records should be made
automatically for every patient who is evaluated in the emergency
department. Each emergency should be judged on its own merits. However,
information from previous records and workers in the field and family
members can be of crucial importance in assessing patients, especially
patients who are psychotic, frightened, or otherwise unable or unwilling to
cooperate in giving a good history.
The psychiatrist should have access to multilingual staff and other
translation services. The use of the patient’s friends or family members as
translators is not desirable because of the possibility of unconscious or
deliberate denial or distortion of the clinical picture stemming from their
involvement with the patient.
An initial assessment of the patient’s total biopsychosocial needs is
optimal, but the patient’s emergency status, other patients, waiting to be seen,
and the constraints of the emergency setting often make such a full
assessment a moot point. At a minimum, the emergency evaluation should
address the following five questions before any disposition is decided on: (1)
Is it safe for the patient to be in the emergency department? (2) Is the
problem physiologic, functional, or a combination? (3) Is the patient
psychotic? (4) Is the patient suicidal or homicidal? (5) To what degree is the
patient capable of self-care? Table 25-7 provides a general strategy for
evaluating patients.
Patient Safety
Physicians should consider the question of the patient’s safety before
evaluating every patient. The answer must address the issues of the
emergency department physical layout, staffing patterns and communication,
and patient population. Psychiatrists must then take stock of themselves: Are
they in the proper frame of mind to conduct an evaluation? Do any issues in
the case spark countertransference reactions? The self-assessment should go
on throughout the evaluation. The physical and emotional safety of the
patient takes priority over all other considerations. If verbal interventions fail
or are contraindicated, the use of medication or restraints must be considered
and, if necessary, ordered. Careful attention to the possible outbreak of
agitation or disruptive behavior beyond acceptable limits is often the best


<<<PAGE 2552>>>
insurance against untoward occurrences.
Table 25-7
General Strategy in Evaluating the Patient
I. Self-protection
A. Know as much as possible about the patients before meeting
them.
B. Leave physical restraint procedures to those who are trained.
C. Be alert to risks of impending violence.
D. Attend to the safety of the physical surroundings (e.g., door
access, room objects).
E. Have others present during the assessment if needed.
F. Have others in the vicinity.
G. Attend to developing an alliance with the patient (e.g., do not
confront or threaten patients with persecutory psychoses).
II. Prevent harm
A. Prevent self-injury and suicide. Use whatever methods are
necessary to prevent patients from hurting themselves during the
evaluation.
B. Prevent violence toward others. During the evaluation, briefly
assess the patient for the risk of violence. If the risk is deemed
significant, consider the following options:
1. Inform the patient that violence is not acceptable.
2. Approach the patient in a nonthreatening manner.
3. Reassure, calm, or assist the patient’s reality testing.
4. Offer medication.
5. Inform the patient that restraint or seclusion will be used if
necessary.


<<<PAGE 2553>>>
6. Have teams ready to restrain the patient.
7. When patients are restrained, always closely observe them, and
frequently check their vital signs. Isolate restrained patients from
surrounding agitating stimuli. Immediately plan a further approach—
medication, reassurance, medical evaluation.
III. Rule out nonpsychiatric etiologies.
IV. Rule out impending psychosis.
Medical or Psychiatric?
The most important question for the emergency psychiatrist to address is
whether the problem is medical, psychiatric, or both. Medical conditions—
such as diabetes mellitus, thyroid disease, acute intoxications, withdrawal
states, AIDS, and head traumas—can present with prominent mental status
changes that mimic common psychiatric illnesses. Such conditions may be
life-threatening if not treated promptly. Generally, the treatment of medical
illness is more definitive, and the prognosis is better than for a functional
psychiatric disorder. The psychiatrist must consider all casual possibilities.
Once patients are labeled psychiatric, their complaints may not be taken
seriously by nonmental health professionals. However, such patients’
conditions may deteriorate. Because of such factors as deinstitutionalization,
homelessness, and chronic alcoholism, the mentally ill are at significant risk
of tuberculosis, vitamin deficiencies, and other easily overlooked but easily
treated conditions. Symptoms such as paranoia, internal preoccupation, and
acute psychosis can make a routine medical diagnosis exceedingly tricky.
Each patient must be assessed for the possibility that a nonpsychiatric
medical illness is combined with an underlying psychiatric illness. A young
man who comes to the emergency department intoxicated or in alcohol
withdrawal two or three times a month may one day come with a subdural
hematoma as a result of a fall. Table 25-8 lists feature that point to a medical
cause of a mental disorder.
Table 25-8
Features that Point to a Medical Cause of a Mental


<<<PAGE 2554>>>
Disorder
Acute onset (within hours or minutes, with prevailing symptoms)
First episode
Older age
Current medical illness or injury
Significant substance abuse
Nonauditory disturbances of perception
Neurologic symptoms—loss of consciousness, seizures, head injury,
change in headache pattern, change in vision
Classic mental status signs—diminished alertness, disorientation,
memory impairment, impairment in concentration and attention,
dyscalculia, concreteness
Other mental status signs—speech, movement, or gait disorders
Constructional apraxia—difficulties in drawing clock, cube,
intersecting pentagons, Bender–Gestalt test

SPECIFIC INTERVIEW SITUATIONS
Psychosis
Whether the patient is psychotic refers less to diagnosis and more to the
severity of symptoms and life disruption. The patient’s degree of withdrawal
from objective reality, level of affectivity, intellectual functioning, and degree
of regression are other important parameters. Impairment in any of those
areas may lead to difficulties in conducting an evaluation. Agitated,
assaultive behavior or failure to comply with treatment recommendations
may also result. A paranoid, hypervigilant patient may misperceive a staff
member’s offer of help as an attack and may lash out in self-defense.
Command auditory hallucinations may cause a patient to deny symptoms and
to throw prescriptions in the garbage immediately after leaving the
emergency department. The psychiatrist should be alert to the complications
that can arise with patients whose reality testing is impaired, and the
psychiatrist should modify the approach accordingly.
All communication with patients must be straightforward. All clinical
interventions should be briefly explained using language the patient can


<<<PAGE 2555>>>
understand. Psychiatrists should not assume that the patient trusts or believes
them or even wants their help. Clinicians must be prepared to structure or to
terminate an interview to limit the potential for agitation and regression.
Depression and Potentially Suicidal Patients
The clinician should always ask about suicidal ideas as part of every mental
status examination, especially if the patient is depressed. The patient may not
realize that such symptoms as waking during the night and increased somatic
complaints are related to depressive disorders. The patient should be asked
directly, “Are you or have you ever been suicidal?” “Do you want to die?”
“Do you feel so bad that you might hurt yourself?” Eight of 10 persons who
eventually kill themselves give warnings of their intent. If the patient admits
to a plan of action, that is a particularly dangerous sign. If a patient who has
been threatening suicide becomes quiet and less agitated than before, that
may be an ominous sign. The clinician should be primarily concerned with
the factors listed in Table 25-9.
Table 25-9
History, Signs, and Symptoms of Suicidal Risk
1. Previous attempt or fantasized suicide
2. Anxiety, depression, exhaustion
3. Availability of means of suicide
4. Concern for effect of suicide on family members
5. Verbalized suicidal ideation
6. Preparation of a will, resignation after agitated depression
7. Proximal life crisis, such as mourning or impending surgery
8. Family history of suicide
9. Pervasive pessimism or hopelessness
A suicide note, a family history of suicide, or previous suicidal behavior on
the part of the patient increases the risk of suicide. Evidence of impulsivity or
pervasive pessimism about the future also places the patient at risk. If the
physician decides that the patient is in imminent risk for suicidal behavior,
the patient must be hospitalized or otherwise protected. A difficult situation


<<<PAGE 2556>>>
arises when the risk does not seem to be immediate, but the potential for
suicide is present as long as the patient remains depressed. If the psychiatrist
decides not to hospitalize the patient immediately, the doctor should insist
that the patient promise to call whenever the suicidal pressure mounts.
Violent Patients
Patients may be violent for many reasons, and the interview with a violent
patient must attempt to ascertain the underlying cause of violent behavior
because cause determines intervention. The differential diagnosis of violent
behavior includes psychoactive substance-induced organic mental disorder,
antisocial personality disorder, catatonia, medical infections, cerebral
neoplasms, decompensating obsessive-compulsive personality disorder,
dissociative disorders, impulse control disorders, sexual disorders, alcohol
idiosyncratic intoxication, delusional disorder, paranoid personality disorder,
schizophrenia, temporal lobe epilepsy, bipolar disorder, and uncontrollable
violence secondary to interpersonal stress. The psychiatric interview must
include questions that attempt to sort out the differential for violent behavior
and questions directed toward the prediction of violence.
The best predictors of violent behavior are (1) excessive alcohol intake; (2)
a history of violent acts, with arrests or criminal activity; and (3) a history of
childhood abuse. Table 25-10 lists some of the most significant factors in
assessing and predicting violence.
Rape and Sexual Abuse
Rape is the forceful coercion of an unwilling victim to engage in a sexual act,
usually sexual intercourse, although anal intercourse and fellatio can also be
acts of rape. As with other acts of violence, rape is a psychiatric emergency
that requires immediate, appropriate intervention. Rape victims may suffer
sequelae that persist for a lifetime. Rape is a life-threatening experience, and
the victim has almost always been threatened with physical harm, often with
a weapon. In addition to rape, other forms of sexual abuse include genital
manipulation with foreign objects, infliction of pain, and forced sexual
activity.
Most rapists are male, and most victims are female. Male rape does occur,
however, often in institutions where men are detained (e.g., prisons). Women


<<<PAGE 2557>>>
between the ages of 16 and 24 years are in the highest risk category, but
female victims as young as 15 months and as old as 82 years have been
raped. More than a third of all rapes are committed by rapists known to the
victim, 7 percent by close relatives. About one-quarter of rapes involve more
than one rapist (gang rape).
Table 25-10
Assessing and Predicting Violent Behavior
1. Signs of impending violence
a. Very recent acts of violence, including property violence
b. Verbal or physical threats (menacing)
c. Carrying weapons or other objects that may be used as
weapons (e.g., forks, ashtrays)
d. Progressive psychomotor agitation
e. Alcohol or drug intoxication
f. Persecutory ideation in a psychotic patient
g. Command violent auditory hallucinations—some but not all
patients are at high risk
h. Mental disorders due to a medical condition, global or with
frontal lobe findings; less commonly with temporal lobe
findings (controversial)
i. Patients with catatonic excitement
j. Certain patients with mania
k. Certain patients with agitated depression
l. Personality disorder patients prone to rage, violence, or
impulse dyscontrol
2. Assess the risk of violence
a. Consider violent ideation, wish, intention, plan, availability of
means, implementation of plan, wish for help.
b. Consider demographics—sex (male), age (15–24),
socioeconomic status (low), social supports (few).
c. Consider past history: violence, nonviolent antisocial acts,
impulse dyscontrol (e.g., gambling, substance abuse, suicide
or self-injury, psychosis).
d. Consider overt stressors (e.g., marital conflict, real or


<<<PAGE 2558>>>
symbolic loss).
Typical reactions in both rape and sexual abuse victims include shame,
humiliation, anxiety, confusion, and outrage. Many victims wonder whether
they are partly responsible and somehow invited the assault. Victim behavior
is less critical in precipitating a rape than it is in precipitating a homicide or a
robbery. Rape and sexual abuse victims are often confused after the assault.
Clinicians should be reassuring, supportive, and nonjudgmental. Inform the
patient about the availability of medical and legal services and about rape
crisis centers that provide multidisciplinary services.
If possible, a female clinician should evaluate the patient because the
victim may find it easier to talk with a woman than with a man. The
evaluation should take place in private. When rape or sexual abuse has not
been acknowledged openly, it is usually because many victims hesitate to
discuss the assault and thus avoid the topic. If the patient appears to be
anxious when questioned about sexual history and avoids the discussion, it is
vital to validate the patient’s avoidance. Recognize that the rape victim has
undergone unanticipated, life-threatening stress. It is legally and
therapeutically essential to take a detailed and complete history of the attack.
With the patient’s written consent, collect evidence, such as semen and
pubic hair, that may be used to identify the rapist. Take photographs of the
evidence, if possible. The medical record may be used as evidence in criminal
proceedings; therefore, meticulous objective documentation of all aspects of
the evaluation is essential.

TREATMENT OF EMERGENCIES
Psychotherapy
In an emergency psychiatric intervention, all attempts are made to help
patients’ self-esteem. Empathy is critical to healing in a psychiatric
emergency. The acquired knowledge of how biogenetic, situational,
developmental, and existential forces converge at one point to create a
psychiatric emergency is tantamount to the maturation of skill in emergency
psychiatry. Adjustment disorder in all age groups may result in tantrum-like
outbursts of rage. These outbursts are particularly common in marital


<<<PAGE 2559>>>
quarrels, and police are often summoned by neighbors distressed by the
sounds of a violent altercation. Such family quarrels should be approached
with caution because they may be complicated by alcohol use and the
presence of dangerous weapons. The warring couple frequently turns their
combined fury on an unwary outsider. Wounded self-esteem is a significant
issue, and clinicians must avoid patronizing or contemptuous attitudes and try
to communicate an attitude of respect and an authentic peacemaking concern.
In family violence, psychiatrists should note the unique vulnerability of
selected close relatives. A wife or husband may have a curious masochistic
attachment to the spouse and can provoke violence by taunting and otherwise
undermining a partner’s self-esteem. Such relationships often end in the
murder of the provoking partner and sometimes in the suicide of the other
partner—the dynamics behind most so-called suicide pacts. As with many
suicidal patients, many violent patients require hospitalization and usually
accept the offer of inpatient care with a sense of relief.
More than one psychotherapist or type of psychotherapy is frequently used
in emergency therapy. For example, a 28-year-old man, depressed and
suicidal after a colostomy for intractable colitis, whose wife was threatening
to leave him because of his irritability and their constant altercations, may be
referred to a psychiatrist for supportive psychotherapy and antidepressant
medication, to a marital therapist with his wife to improve their marital
functioning, and to a colostomy support group to learn ways of coping with a
colostomy. Emergency psychiatric clinicians are pragmatic; they use every
necessary mode of therapeutic intervention available to resolve the crisis and
facilitate value exploration and growth, with less concern than usual about
diluting a therapeutic relationship. Emergency therapy emphasizes how
various psychiatric modalities act synergistically to enhance recovery.
No single approach is appropriate for all persons in similar situations.
What should a doctor say to a patient and family experiencing an emergency,
such as a suicide attempt or a schizophrenic break? For some, a genetic
rationale helps; the information that an illness has a vital biologic component
relieves some persons. For others, however, this approach underlines a lack
of control and increases depression and anxiety. All feel helpless because
neither the family nor the patient can alter the behavior to minimize the
likelihood of recurrence. Some persons may benefit from an explanation of
family or individual dynamics. Others only want someone to listen to them;


<<<PAGE 2560>>>
in time, they reach their understanding.
In an emergency, as in any other psychiatric situation, when a clinician
does not know what to say, the best approach is to listen. Persons in crisis
reveal how much they need support, denial, ventilation, and words to
conceptualize the meaning of their crisis and to discover paths to resolution.
Pharmacotherapy
The primary indications for the use of psychotropic medication in an
emergency room include violent or assaultive behavior, massive anxiety or
panic, and extrapyramidal reactions, such as dystonia and akathisia as
adverse effects of psychiatric drugs. Laryngospasm is a rare form of dystonia,
and psychiatrists should be prepared to maintain an open airway with
intubation if necessary.
Persons who are delusional or in a state of catatonic excitement require
tranquilization. Episodic outbursts of violence may respond to antipsychotics
(haloperidol, second-generation antipsychotics), benzodiazepines and
antihistamines. If history suggests a seizure disorder, use clinical studies to
confirm the diagnosis and evaluation to ascertain the cause. If the findings are
positive, anticonvulsant therapy is initiated, or appropriate surgery is
provided (e.g., in the case of a cerebral mass). Conservative measures may
suffice for intoxication from drugs of abuse. Sometimes, drugs such as
haloperidol (5 to 10 mg every half-hour to an hour) are needed until a patient
is stabilized. Benzodiazepines may be used instead of, or in addition to,
antipsychotics (to reduce the antipsychotic dosage). When a recreational drug
has strong anticholinergic properties, benzodiazepines are more appropriate
than antipsychotics.
Violent, struggling patients are subdued most effectively with an
appropriate sedative or antipsychotic. Diazepam (5 to 10 mg) or lorazepam (2
to 4 mg) may be given slowly intravenously (IV) over 2 minutes. Clinicians
must give IV medication with great care to avoid respiratory arrest. Patients
who require IM medication can be sedated with haloperidol (5 to 10 mg IM).
If the furor is caused by alcohol or is part of a postseizure psychomotor
disturbance, the sleep produced by a relatively small amount of an IV
medication may go on for hours. On awakening, patients are often entirely
alert and rational and typically have complete amnesia about the violent


<<<PAGE 2561>>>
episode.
If the disturbance is part of an ongoing psychotic process and returns as
soon as the IV medication wears off, continuous medication may be given. It
is sometimes better to use small IM or oral doses at half-hour to 1-hour
intervals (e.g., haloperidol, 2 to 5 mg, or diazepam, 20 mg) until the patient is
controlled than to use large dosages initially, which can result in an
overmedicated patient. As the disturbing behavior is brought under control,
successively smaller and less frequent doses should be used. During the
preliminary treatment, a patient’s blood pressure and other vital signs should
be monitored.
Restraints
Restraints are used when patients are so dangerous to themselves or others
that they pose a severe threat that cannot be controlled in any other way.
Patients may be restrained temporarily to receive medication or for long
periods if we cannot use medications. Usually, patients in restraints quiet
down after a time. On a psychodynamic level, such patients may even
welcome the control of their impulses provided by restraints. Table 25-11
provides a summary of the use of restraints.
Disposition
In some cases, the usual option of admitting or discharging the patient is not
considered optimal. Suspected toxic psychoses, brief decompensations in a
patient with a personality disorder, and adjustment reactions to traumatic
events, for example, may be best managed in an extended-observation
setting. Allowing the patient more time in a secure environment can result in
sufficient improvement or clarification of the issues to make traditional
inpatient treatment unnecessary. It can also spare the patient the trauma and
stigma of psychiatric admission and can free up bed space for needier
patients. Crisis intervention for victims of rape and other traumas can also be
done in an extended-observation setting.
When the decision is to admit the patient to the hospital, it is preferable to
do so voluntarily. Allowing patients that option gives them a sense of control
over their lives and of participation in the treatment decisions. Patients who
meet involuntary admission criteria based on dangerousness to themselves or


<<<PAGE 2562>>>
others cannot leave the hospital without further review and can always be
converted to involuntary status if warranted.
Table 25-11
Use of Restraints
Recommended principles for physical restraint use
• Use only after nonphysical approaches fail
• Maintain the privacy and dignity of the patient throughout the
intervention
• The limitation on movement should be as nonrestrictive as safely
possible
• Medical personnel should be properly trained for in how to use
and monitor this intervention
• The ED should set appropriate and consistent guidelines for
restraint, including
• what treatments should be given
• what monitoring is necessary
• how the patient will be evaluated for ending the restraint
• The patient should be explicitly and continuously observed by
the treatment team
• The use of physical restraint should be consistent with all
standards and rules
Adapted from: American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP). Use of patient restraints.
Policy statement. Ann Emerg Med. 2014;64(5):574.

Because the initial evaluation is often inconclusive, definitive treatment is
best deferred until the patient can be further assessed in the inpatient unit or
the outpatient department. When the diagnosis is clear, however, and the
patient’s response to previous treatment is known, nothing is gained by delay.
For example, a patient with chronic schizophrenia that has decompensated
after discontinuing the usual regimen of antipsychotic medication is best
served by a prompt resumption of treatment.
Even if patients feel comfortable coming to the emergency department in
times of need, the emergency psychiatrist should always direct or redirect


<<<PAGE 2563>>>
them to the most appropriate treatment setting. Patients in the
psychopharmacology clinic who have missed their regular appointments
should be given only enough medication to sustain them until they can be
seen in the clinic. Feedback to others treating them should be a matter of
course.
The emergency department is often the gateway to the department of
psychiatry or the general hospital. First impressions carry a great deal of
weight. The kind of attention and concern showed to patients on arrival in the
emergency room strongly affects how they will respond to staff members and
treatment recommendations and even their treatment compliance long after
they have left the emergency room.
Documentation
In the interests of good care, respect for patients’ rights, cost control, and
medicolegal concerns, documentation has become a central focus for the
emergency physician. The medical record should convey a concise picture of
the patient, highlighting all pertinent positive and negative findings. Gaps in
information and their reason should be mentioned. The names and the
telephone numbers of interested parties should be noted. A provisional
diagnosis or differential diagnosis must be made. An initial treatment plan or
recommendations should follow from the findings of the patient’s history,
mental status examination and other diagnostic tests, and the medical
evaluation. The writing must be legible. The emergency physician has
unusual latitude under the law to perform an adequate initial assessment;
however, all interventions and decisions must be thought out, discussed, and
documented in the patient’s record.
Specific Psychiatric Emergencies
Table 25-12 outlines common psychiatric emergencies in alphabetical order.
Readers are referred to the index and relevant chapters of this textbook for a
thorough discussion of each disorder.

PSYCHIATRIC EMERGENCIES IN CHILDREN
Few children or adolescents seek psychiatric intervention on their own, even


<<<PAGE 2564>>>
during a crisis; thus, most of their emergency evaluations are initiated by
parents, relatives, teachers, therapists, physicians, and child protective service
workers. Some referrals are for the evaluation of life-threatening situations
for the child or others, such as suicidal behavior, physical abuse, and violent
or homicidal behavior. Other urgent but non–life-threatening referrals pertain
to children and adolescents with exacerbations of clear-cut serious psychiatric
disorders, such as mania, depression, florid psychosis, and school referral.
Less diagnostically obvious situations occur when children and adolescents
present with a history of a wide range of disruptive, aberrant behaviors and
are accompanied by an overwhelmed, anxious, and distraught adult who
perceives the child’s actions as an emergency, despite the absence of lifethreatening behavior of an evident psychiatric disorder. In those cases, the
spectrum of contributing factors is not immediately apparent, and the
emergency psychiatrist must assess the entire family or system involved with
the child. Familial stressors and parental discord can contribute to the
evolution of a crisis for a child. For example, immediate evaluations are
sometimes legitimately indicated for a child caught in the crossfire of feuding
parents or a seemingly irreconcilable conflict between a set of parents and a
school, therapist, or protective service worker regarding the needs of the child
(Table 25-13).
Table 25-12
Common Psychiatric Emergencies
Syndrome

Emergency
Manifestations

Treatment Issues

Abuse of child or adult

Signs of physical
trauma

Management of medical
problems; psychiatric
evaluation; report to
authorities

Acquired immune
deficiency syndrome
(AIDS)

Changes in
behavior
secondary to
medical causes;
changes in

Management of
neurologic illness;
management of
psychological
concomitants;


<<<PAGE 2565>>>
behavior
secondary to fear
and anxiety;
suicidal behavior

reinforcement of
social support

Adolescent crises

Suicidal attempts
Evaluation of suicidal
and ideation;
potential, extent of
substance abuse,
substance abuse,
truancy, trouble
family dynamics;
with law,
crisis-oriented family
pregnancy,
and individual
running away;
therapy;
eating disorders;
hospitalization if
psychosis
necessary;
consultation with
appropriate
extrafamilial
authorities

Agoraphobia

Panic; depression

Alprazolam, 0.25–2 mg;
antidepressant
medication

Agranulocytosis
(clozapine induced)

High fever,
pharyngitis, oral
and perianal
ulcerations

Discontinue medication
immediately;
administer
granulocyte colonystimulating factor

Akathisia

Agitation,
restlessness,
muscle
discomfort;
dysphoria

Reduce antipsychotic
dosage; propranolol
(30–120 mg a day);
benzodiazepines;
diphenhydramine
orally or IV;
benztropine IM

Alcohol-Related Emergencies


<<<PAGE 2566>>>
Alcohol delirium

Confusion,
A benzodiazepine;
disorientation,
haloperidol for
fluctuating
psychotic symptoms
consciousness
may be added if
and perception,
necessary
autonomic
hyperactivity; may
be fatal

Alcohol intoxication

Disinhibited
behavior,
sedation at high
doses

Alcohol-persisting
amnestic disorder

Confusion, loss of
Hospitalization;
memory even for
hypnosis; rule out
all personal
organic cause
identification data

Alcohol-persisting
dementia

Confusion, agitation, Rule out other causes
impulsivity
for dementia; no
effective treatment;
hospitalization if
necessary

Alcohol psychotic
disorder with
hallucinations

Vivid auditory (at
Haloperidol for
times visual)
psychotic symptoms
hallucinations with
affect appropriate
to content (often
fearful); clear
sensorium

Alcohol seizures

Grand mal seizures; Diazepam, phenytoin;
rarely status
prevent by using
epilepticus
chlordiazepoxide
during detoxification

Alcohol withdrawal

Irritability, nausea,

With time and protective
environment,
symptoms abate

Fluid and electrolytes


<<<PAGE 2567>>>
vomiting,
insomnia,
malaise,
autonomic
hyperactivity,
shakiness

maintained; sedation
with benzodiazepines;
restraints; monitoring
of vital signs; 100 mg
thiamine IM

Idiosyncratic alcohol
intoxication

Marked aggressive
or assaultive
behavior

Generally no treatment
required other than
protective
environment

Korsakoff syndrome

Alcohol stigmata,
amnesia,
confabulation

No effective treatment;
institutionalization
often needed

Wernicke
encephalopathy

Oculomotor
disturbances,
cerebellar ataxia;
mental confusion

Thiamine, 100 mg IV or
IM, with MgSO4 given
before glucose
loading

Amphetamine (or
related substance)
intoxication

Delusions, paranoia; Antipsychotics;
violence;
restraints;
depression (from
hospitalization if
withdrawal);
necessary; no need
anxiety, delirium
for gradual
withdrawal;
antidepressants may
be necessary

Anorexia nervosa

Loss of 25% of body Hospitalization;
weight of the
electrocardiogram
norm for age and
(ECG), fluid and
sex
electrolytes;
neuroendocrine
evaluation

Anticholinergic

Psychotic

Discontinue drug, IV


<<<PAGE 2568>>>
intoxication

symptoms, dry
skin and mouth,
hyperpyrexia,
mydriasis,
tachycardia,
restlessness,
visual
hallucinations

physostigmine, 0.5–2
mg, for severe
agitation or fever,
benzodiazepines;
antipsychotics
contraindicated

Anticonvulsant
intoxication

Psychosis; delirium

Dosage of
anticonvulsant is
reduced

Benzodiazepine
intoxication

Sedation,
somnolence, and
ataxia

Supportive measures;
flumazenil, 7.5–45 mg
a day, titrated as
needed, should be
used only by skilled
personnel with
resuscitative
equipment available

Bereavement

Guilt feelings,
Must be differentiated
irritability;
from major depressive
insomnia; somatic
disorder;
complaints
antidepressants not
indicated;
benzodiazepines for
sleep; encouragement
of ventilation

Borderline personality
disorder

Suicidal ideation
Suicidal and homicidal
and gestures;
evaluation (if great,
homicidal
hospitalization); small
ideations and
dosages of
gestures;
antipsychotics; clear
substance abuse;
follow-up plan
micropsychotic


<<<PAGE 2569>>>
episodes; burns,
cut marks on
body
Brief psychotic disorder Emotional turmoil,
extreme lability;
acutely impaired
reality testing
after obvious
psychosocial
stress

Hospitalization often
necessary; low
dosage of
antipsychotics may be
necessary but often
resolves
spontaneously

Bromide intoxication

Delirium; mania;
depression;
psychosis

Serum levels obtained
(>50 mg a day);
bromide intake
discontinued; large
quantities of sodium
chloride IV or orally; if
agitation, paraldehyde
or antipsychotic is
used

Caffeine intoxication

Severe anxiety,
Cessation of caffeineresembling panic
containing
disorder; mania;
substances;
delirium; agitated
benzodiazepines
depression; sleep
disturbance

Cannabis intoxication

Delusions; panic;
dysphoria;
cognitive
impairment

Benzodiazepines and
antipsychotics as
needed; evaluation of
suicidal or homicidal
risk; symptoms
usually abate with
time and reassurance

Catatonia

Marked

Rapid tranquilization


<<<PAGE 2570>>>
psychomotor
disturbance
(either excitement
or stupor);
exhaustion; can
be fatal

with benzodiazepines
or antipsychotics;
monitor vital signs

Cimetidine psychotic
disorder

Delirium; delusions

Reduce dosage or
discontinue drug

Clonidine withdrawal

Irritability;
Symptoms abate with
psychosis;
time, but
violence; seizures
antipsychotics may be
necessary; gradual
lowering of dosage

Cocaine intoxication
and withdrawal

Paranoia and
violence; severe
anxiety; manic
state; delirium:
schizophreniform
psychosis;
tachycardia,
hypertension,
myocardial
infarction,
cerebrovascular
disease;
depression and
suicidal ideation

Antipsychotics and
benzodiazepines;
antidepressants or
electroconvulsive
therapy (ECT) for
withdrawal depression
if persistent;
hospitalization

Delirium

Fluctuating
sensorium;
suicidal and
homicidal risk;
cognitive
clouding; visual,
tactile, and

Evaluate all potential
contributing factors
and treat each
accordingly;
reassurance,
structure, clues to
orientation;


<<<PAGE 2571>>>
auditory
hallucinations;
paranoia

benzodiazepines and
low-dosage, highpotency
antipsychotics must
be used with extreme
care because of their
potential to act
paradoxically and
increase agitation

Delusional disorder

Most often brought
into emergency
department
involuntarily;
threats directed
toward others

Antipsychotics if patient
will comply (IM if
necessary); intensive
family intervention;
hospitalization if
necessary

Dementia

Unable to care for
self; violent
outbursts;
psychosis;
depression and
suicidal ideation;
confusion

Small dosages of highpotency
antipsychotics; clues
to orientation; organic
evaluation, including
medication use; family
intervention

Depressive disorders

Suicidal ideation
and attempts;
self-neglect;
substance abuse

Assessment of danger
to self; hospitalization
if necessary,
nonpsychiatric causes
of depression must be
evaluated

L-Dopa intoxication

Mania; depression; Lower dosage or
schizophreniform
discontinue drug
disorder, may
induce rapid
cycling in patients
with bipolar I


<<<PAGE 2572>>>
disorder
Dystonia, acute

Intense involuntary Decrease dosage of
spasm of muscles
antipsychotic;
of neck, tongue,
benztropine or
face, jaw, eyes, or
diphenhydramine IM
trunk

Group hysteria

Groups of people
exhibit extremes
of grief or other
disruptive
behavior

Hallucinogen-induced
psychotic disorder
with hallucinations

Symptom picture is Serum and urine
result of
screens; rule out
interaction of type
underlying medical or
of substance,
mental disorder;
dose taken,
benzodiazepines (2–
duration of action,
20 mg) orally;
user’s premorbid
reassurance and
personality,
orientation; rapid
setting; panic;
tranquilization; often
agitation; atropine
responds
psychosis
spontaneously

Homicidal and
assaultive behavior

Marked agitation
Seclusion, restraints,
with verbal threats
medication

Hypertensive crisis

Life-threatening
hypertensive
reaction
secondary to
ingestion of
tyramine-

Group is dispersed with
help of other health
care workers;
ventilation, crisisoriented therapy; if
necessary, small
dosages of
benzodiazepines

Antihypertensive
medications as per
emergency medicine
team make sure
symptoms are not
secondary to


<<<PAGE 2573>>>
containing foods
in combination
with monoamine
oxidase inhibitors
(MAOIs);
headache, stiff
neck, sweating,
nausea, vomiting

hypotension (side
effect of MAOIs
alone)

Hyperthermia

Extreme excitement Hydrate and cool; may
or catatonic
be drug reaction, so
stupor or both;
discontinue any drug;
extremely
rule out infection
elevated
temperature;
violent
hyperagitation

Hyperventilation

Anxiety, terror,
Shift alkalosis by having
clouded
patient breathe into
consciousness;
paper bag; patient
giddiness,
education; antianxiety
faintness; blurring
agents
vision

Hypothermia

Confusion; lethargy; IV fluids and rewarming,
combativeness;
cardiac status must
low body
be carefully
temperature and
monitored; avoidance
shivering;
of alcohol
paradoxical
feeling of warmth

Incest and sexual
abuse of child

Suicidal behavior;
Corroboration of charge,
adolescent crises;
protection of victim;
substance abuse
contact social
services; medical and
psychiatric evaluation;


<<<PAGE 2574>>>
crisis intervention
Insomnia

Depression and
Hypnotics only in short
irritability; early
term; treat any
morning agitation;
underlying mental
frightening
disorder; rules of
dreams; fatigue
sleep hygiene

Intermittent explosive
disorder

Brief outbursts of
Benzodiazepines or
violence; periodic
antipsychotics for
episodes of
short term; long-term
suicide attempts
evaluation with
computed
tomography (CT)
scan, sleep-deprived
electroencephalogram
(EEG), glucose
tolerance curve

Jaundice

Uncommon
Change drug to low
complication of
dosage of a lowlow-potency
potency agent in a
phenothiazine use
different class
(e.g.,
chlorpromazine)

Leukopenia and
agranulocytosis

Side effects within
the first 2 mo of
treatment with
antipsychotics

Lithium toxicity

Vomiting; abdominal Lavage with wide-bore
pain; profuse
tube; osmotic
diarrhea; severe
diuresis; medical

Patient should call
immediately for sore
throat, fever, etc., and
obtain immediate
blood count;
discontinue drug;
hospitalize if
necessary


<<<PAGE 2575>>>
tremor, ataxia;
coma; seizures;
confusion;
dysarthria; focal
neurologic signs

consultation; may
require intensive care
unit treatment

Major depressive
episode with
psychotic features

Major depressive
Antipsychotics plus
episode
antidepressants;
symptoms with
evaluation of suicide
delusions;
and homicide risk;
agitation, severe
hospitalization and
guilt; ideas of
ECT if necessary
reference; suicide
and homicide risk

Manic episode

Violent, impulsive
behavior;
indiscriminate
sexual or
spending
behavior;
psychosis;
substance abuse

Marital crises

Precipitant may be Each should be
discovery of an
questioned alone
extramarital affair,
regarding extramarital
onset of serious
affairs, consultations
illness,
with lawyers
announcement of
regarding divorce,
intent to divorce,
and willingness to
or problems with
work in crisis-oriented
children or work;
or long-term therapy
one or both
to resolve the
members of the
problem; sexual,
couple may be in
financial, and
therapy or may be
psychiatric treatment

Hospitalization;
restraints if
necessary; rapid
tranquilization with
antipsychotics;
restoration of lithium
levels


<<<PAGE 2576>>>
psychiatrically ill;
one spouse may
be seeking
hospitalization for
the other

histories from both,
psychiatric evaluation
at the time of
presentation; may be
precipitated by onset
of untreated mood
disorder or affective
symptoms caused by
medical illness or
insidious-onset
dementia; referral for
management of the
illness reduces
immediate stress and
enhances the
healthier spouse’s
coping capacity;
children may give
insights available only
to someone intimately
involved in the social
system

Migraine

Throbbing, unilateral Sumatriptan 6 mg IM
headache

Mitral valve prolapse

Associated with
panic disorder;
dyspnea and
palpitations; fear
and anxiety

Echocardiogram;
alprazolam or
propranolol

Neuroleptic malignant
syndrome

Hyperthermia;
muscle rigidity;
autonomic
instability;
parkinsonian

Discontinue
antipsychotic; IV
dantrolene;
bromocriptine orally;
hydration and cooling;


<<<PAGE 2577>>>
symptoms;
catatonic stupor;
neurologic signs;
10% to 30%
fatality; elevated
creatine
phosphokinase
(CPK)

monitor CPK levels

Nitrous oxide toxicity

Euphoria and lightheadedness

Symptoms abate
without treatment
within hours of use

Nutmeg intoxication

Agitation;
hallucinations;
severe
headaches;
numbness in
extremities

Symptoms abate within
hours of use without
treatment

Opioid intoxication and
withdrawal

Intoxication can lead IV naloxone, narcotic
to coma and
antagonist; urine and
death; withdrawal
serum screens;
is not lifepsychiatric and
threatening
medical illnesses
(e.g., AIDS) may
complicate picture

Panic disorder

Panic, terror; acute
onset

Must differentiate from
other anxietyproducing disorders,
both medical and
psychiatric; ECG to
rule out mitral valve
prolapse; short-acting
benzodiazepines for
symptomatic
management; long-


<<<PAGE 2578>>>
term management
may include an
antidepressant
Parkinsonism

Stiffness, tremor,
bradykinesia,
flattened affect,
shuffling gait,
salivation,
secondary to
antipsychotic
medication

Oral antiparkinsonian
drug for 4 wk to 3 mo;
decrease dosage of
the antipsychotic

Perioral (rabbit) tremor

Perioral tumor
Decrease dosage or
(rabbit-like facial
change to a
grimacing) usually
medication in another
appearing after
class
long-term therapy
with
antipsychotics

Phencyclidine (or
phencyclidine-like
intoxication)

Psychosis; can lead Serum and urine assay;
to death; acute
benzodiazepines may
danger to self and
interfere with
others
excretion;
antipsychotics may
worsen symptoms
because of
anticholinergic side
effects; medical
monitoring and
hospitalization for
severe intoxication

Phenelzine-induced
psychotic disorder

Psychosis and
mania in
predisposed
people

Reduce dosage or
discontinue drug


<<<PAGE 2579>>>
Phenylpropanolamine
toxicity

Psychosis;
paranoia;
insomnia;
restlessness;
nervousness;
headache

Symptoms abate with
dosage reduction or
discontinuation (found
in over-the-counter
diet aids and oral and
nasal decongestants)

Phobias

Panic, anxiety; fear

Treatment same as for
panic disorder

Photosensitivity

Easy sunburning
secondary to use
of antipsychotic
medication

Patient should avoid
strong sunlight and
use high-level
sunscreens

Pigmentary retinopathy Reported with
dosages of
thioridazine of
800 mg a day or
above
Postpartum psychosis

Remain below 800 mg a
day of thioridazine

Childbirth can
Danger to self and
precipitate
others (including
schizophrenia,
infant) must be
depression,
evaluated and proper
reactive
precautions taken;
psychoses,
medical illness
mania, and
presenting with
depression;
behavioral aberrations
affective
is included in the
symptoms are
differential diagnosis
most common;
and must be sought
suicide risk is
and treated; care
reduced during
must be paid to the
pregnancy but
effects on father,
increased in the
infant, grandparents,
postpartum period
and other children


<<<PAGE 2580>>>
Posttraumatic stress
disorder

Panic, terror;
suicidal ideation;
flashbacks

Reassurance;
encouragement of
return to
responsibilities; avoid
hospitalization if
possible to prevent
chronic invalidism;
monitor suicidal
ideation

Priapism (trazodone
induced)

Persistent penile
erection
accompanied by
severe pain

Intracorporeal
epinephrine;
mechanical or
surgical drainage

Propranolol toxicity

Profound
Reduce dosage or
depression;
discontinue drug;
confusional states
monitor suicidality

Rape

Not all sexual
Rape is a major
violations are
psychiatric
reported; silent
emergency; victim
rape reaction is
may have enduring
characterized by
patterns of sexual
loss of appetite,
dysfunction; crisissleep disturbance,
oriented therapy,
anxiety, and,
social support,
sometimes,
ventilation,
agoraphobia; long
reinforcement of
periods of silence,
healthy traits, and
mounting anxiety,
encouragement to
stuttering,
return to the previous
blocking, and
level of functioning as
physical
rapidly as possible;
symptoms during
legal counsel;
the interview
thorough medical
when the sexual
examination and tests


<<<PAGE 2581>>>
history is taken;
fear of violence
and death and of
contracting a
sexually
transmitted
disease or being
pregnant

to identify the
assailant (e.g.,
obtaining samples of
pubic hairs with a
pubic hair comb,
vaginal smear to
identify blood
antigens in semen); if
a woman,
methoxyprogesterone
or diethylstilbestrol
orally for 5 days to
prevent pregnancy; if
menstruation does not
commence within 1
wk of cessation of the
estrogen, all
alternatives to
pregnancy, including
abortion, should be
offered; if the victim
has contracted a
venereal disease,
appropriate
antibiotics; witnessed
written permission is
required for the
physician to examine,
photograph, collect
specimens, and
release information to
the authorities; obtain
consent, record the
history in the patient’s
own words, obtain
required tests, record


<<<PAGE 2582>>>
the results of the
examination, save all
clothing, defer
diagnosis, and
provide protection
against disease,
psychic trauma, and
pregnancy; men’s and
women’s responses
to rape affectively are
reported similarly,
although men are
more hesitant to talk
about homosexual
assault for fear they
will be assumed to
have consented
Reserpine intoxication

Major depressive
Evaluation of suicidal
episodes; suicidal
ideation; lower
ideation;
dosage or change
nightmares
drug; antidepressants
of ECT may be
indicated

Schizoaffective disorder Severe depression; Evaluation of
manic symptoms;
dangerousness to self
paranoia
or others; rapid
tranquilization if
necessary; treatment
of depression
(antidepressants
alone can enhance
schizophrenic
symptoms); use of
antimanic agents


<<<PAGE 2583>>>
Schizophrenia

Extreme selfEvaluation of suicidal
neglect; severe
and homicidal
paranoia; suicidal
potential; identification
ideation or
of any illness other
assaultiveness;
than schizophrenia;
extreme psychotic
rapid tranquilization
symptoms

Schizophrenia in
exacerbation

Withdrawn;
Suicide and homicide
agitation; suicidal
evaluation; screen for
and homicidal risk
medical illness;
restraints and rapid
tranquilization if
necessary;
hospitalization if
necessary;
reevaluation of
medication regimen

Sedative, hypnotic, or
Alterations in mood, Naloxone to differentiate
anxiolytic intoxication
behavior, thought
from opioid
and withdrawal
—delirium;
intoxication; slow
derealization and
withdrawal with
depersonalization;
benzodiazepine;
untreated, can be
hospitalization
fatal; seizures
Seizure disorder

Confusion; anxiety; Immediate EEG;
derealization and
admission and sleepdepersonalization;
deprived and 24-hr
feelings of
EEG; rule out
impending doom;
pseudoseizures;
gustatory or
anticonvulsants
olfactory
hallucinations;
fugue-like state

Substance withdrawal

Abdominal pain;

Symptoms of


<<<PAGE 2584>>>
insomnia,
drowsiness;
delirium; seizures;
symptoms of
tardive dyskinesia
may emerge;
eruption of manic
or schizophrenic
symptoms

psychotropic drug
withdrawal disappear
with time or disappear
with reinstitution of
the substance;
symptoms of
antidepressant
withdrawal can be
successfully treated
with anticholinergic
agents, such as
atropine; gradual
withdrawal of
psychotropic
substances over 2–4
wk generally obviates
development of
symptoms

Sudden death
associated with
antipsychotic
medication

Seizures;
asphyxiation;
cardiovascular
causes; postural
hypotension;
laryngeal–
pharyngeal
dystonia;
suppression of
gag reflex

Specific medical
treatments

Sudden death of
psychogenic origin

Myocardial
infarction after
sudden psychic
stress; voodoo
and hexes;
hopelessness,
especially

Specific medical
treatments; folk
healers


<<<PAGE 2585>>>
associated with
serious physical
illness
Suicide

Suicidal ideation;
hopelessness

Hospitalization,
antidepressants

Sympathomimetic
withdrawal

Paranoia;
Most symptoms abate
confusional
without treatment;
states; depression
antipsychotics;
antidepressants if
necessary

Tardive dyskinesia

Dyskinesia of
No effective treatment
mouth, tongue,
reported; may be
face, neck, and
prevented by
trunk;
prescribing the least
choreoathetoid
amount of drug
movements of
possible for as little
extremities;
time as is clinically
usually but not
feasible and using
always appearing
drug-free holidays for
after long-term
patients who need to
treatment with
continue taking the
antipsychotics,
drug; decrease or
especially after a
discontinue drug at
reduction in
first sign of dyskinetic
dosage; incidence
movements
highest in the
elderly and brain
damaged;
symptoms are
intensified by
antiparkinsonian
drugs and
masked but not
cured by


<<<PAGE 2586>>>
increased
dosages of
antipsychotic
Thyrotoxicosis

Tachycardia;
gastrointestinal
dysfunction;
hyperthermia;
panic, anxiety,
agitation; mania;
dementia;
psychosis

Thyroid function test
(T3, T4, thyroidstimulating hormone
[TSH]); medical
consultation

Toluene abuse

Anxiety; confusion;
cognitive
impairment

Neurologic damage is
nonprogressive and
reversible if toluene
use in discontinued
early

Vitamin B12 deficiency

Confusion; mood
and behavior
changes; ataxia

Treatment with vitamin
B12

Volatile nitrates

Alternations of
mood and
behavior; lightheadedness;
pulsating
headache

Symptoms abate with
cessation of use

An emergency setting is often the site of an initial evaluation of chronic
problem behavior. For example, an identified problem—such as severe
tantrums, violence, and destructive behavior in a child—may have been
present for months or even years. Nevertheless, the initial contact with the
mental health system in the emergency room or private office may be the first
opportunity for the child or adolescent to disclose underlying stressors, such
as physical or sexual abuse.


<<<PAGE 2587>>>
Given the integral relation of severe family dysfunction to childhood
behavioral disturbance, the emergency psychiatrist must assess familial
discord and psychiatric disorder in family members during an urgent
evaluation. One way to make the assessment is to interview the child and the
individual family members, both alone and together, and to obtain a history
from informants outside the family whenever possible. Noncustodial parents,
therapists, and teachers may add valuable information regarding the child’s
daily functioning. Many families, especially those with mental illness and
severe dysfunction, may have little or no inclination to seek psychiatric help
on a nonurgent basis; therefore, the emergency evaluation becomes the only
way to engage them in an extensive psychiatric treatment program.
Table 25-13
Familial Risk Factors
Physical and sexual abuse
Recent family crisis: loss of a parent, divorce, loss of job, family
move
Severe family dysfunction, including parental mental illness
Life-Threatening Emergencies
Suicidal Behavior
ASSESSMENT. Suicidal behavior is the most common reason for an emergency

evaluation in adolescents. Despite the minimal risk for a complete suicide in
a child less than 12 years of age, suicidal ideation or behavior in a child of
any age must be carefully evaluated, with particular attention to the
psychiatric status of the child and the ability of the family or the guardians to
provide the appropriate supervision. The assessment must determine the
circumstances of the suicidal ideation or behavior, its lethality, and the
persistence of the suicidal intention. An evaluation of the family’s sensitivity,
supportiveness, and competence must be done to assess their ability to
monitor the child’s suicidal potential. Ultimately, during an emergency
evaluation, the psychiatrist must decide whether the child may return home to


<<<PAGE 2588>>>
a safe environment and receive outpatient follow-up care or whether
hospitalization is necessary. A psychiatric history, a mental status
examination, and an assessment of family functioning help establish the
general level of risk.
When self-injurious behavior has occurred, the adolescent
likely requires hospitalization in a pediatric unit for treatment of the injury or
the observation of medical sequelae after toxic ingestion. If the adolescent is
medically clear, the psychiatrist must decide whether the adolescent needs
psychiatric admission. If the patient persists in suicidal ideation and shows
signs of psychosis, severe depression (including hopelessness), or marked
ambivalence about suicide, psychiatric admission is indicated. An adolescent
who is taking drugs or alcohol should not be released until an assessment can
be done when the patient is not intoxicated. Patients with high-risk profiles—
such as late-adolescent males, especially those with substance abuse and
aggressive behavior disorders, and those who have severe depression or who
have made prior suicide attempts, particularly with lethal weapons—warrant
hospitalization. Young children who made suicide attempts, even when the
attempt had a low lethality, need psychiatric admission if the family is so
chaotic, dysfunctional, and incompetent that follow-up treatment is unlikely.
MANAGEMENT.

Violent Behavior and Tantrums
ASSESSMENT. The first task in an emergency evaluation of a violent child or

adolescent is to make sure that both the child and the staff members are
physically protected so that nobody gets hurt. If the child appears to be
calming down in the emergency area, the clinician may indicate to the child
that it would be helpful if the child recounted what happened and may ask
whether the child feels in sufficient control to do so. If the child agrees and
the clinician judges the child to be in reasonable control, the clinician may
approach the child with the appropriate backup close at hand. If not, the
clinician may either give the child several minutes to calm down before
reassessing the situation or, with an adolescent, suggest that medication may
help the adolescent relax.
If the adolescent is combative, physical restraint may be necessary before
anything else is attempted. Some rageful children and adolescents brought to


<<<PAGE 2589>>>
an emergency setting by overwhelmed families can regain control of
themselves without the use of physical or pharmacologic restraint. Children
and adolescents are most likely to calm down if approached calmly in a
nonthreatening manner and given a chance to tell their side of the story to a
nonjudgmental adult. At this time, the psychiatrist should look for any
underlying psychiatric disorder that may be mediating the aggression. The
psychiatrist should speak to family members and others who have been
witnessing the episode to understand the context in which it occurred and the
extent to which the child has been out of control.
Prepubertal children, in the absence of major psychiatric
illness, rarely require medication to keep them safe, because they are
generally small enough to be physically restrained if they begin to hurt
themselves or others. It is not immediately necessary to administer
medication to a child or an adolescent who was in a rage but is in a calm state
when examined. Adolescents and older children who are assaultive,
extremely agitated, or overtly self-injurious and who may be difficult to
subdue physically may require medication before a dialogue can take place.
Children who have a history of repeated, self-limited, severe tantrums may
not require admission to a hospital if they can calm down during the
evaluation. However, the pattern, no doubt, will reoccur unless ongoing
outpatient treatment for the child and the family is arranged. For adolescents
who continue to pose a danger to themselves or others during the evaluation
period, admission to a hospital is necessary.
MANAGEMENT.

Fire Setting
ASSESSMENT. A sense of emergency and panic often surrounds the parents of

a child who has set a fire. Parents or teachers often request an emergency
evaluation, even for a very young child who has accidentally lit a fire. Many
children, during normal development, become interested in fire, but in most
cases, a school-aged child who has set a fire has done so accidentally while
playing with matches and seeks help to put it out. When a child has a strong
interest in playing with matches, the level of supervision by family members
must be clarified so that no further accidental fires occur. The clinician must
distinguish between a child who accidentally or even impulsively sets a


<<<PAGE 2590>>>
single fire and a child who engages in repeated fire setting with premeditation
and subsequently leaves the fire without making any attempt to extinguish it.
In repeated fire setting, the risk is more significant than in a single
occurrence, and the psychiatrist must determine whether underlying
psychopathology exists in the child or the family members. The psychiatrist
should also evaluate family interactions because any factors that interfere
with adequate supervision and communication—such as high levels of
marital discord and harsh, punitive parenting styles—can impede appropriate
intervention.
Fire setting is one of a triad of symptoms—enuresis, cruelty to animals,
and fire setting—that were believed, some years ago, to be typical of children
with conduct disorders; however, no evidence indicates that the three
symptoms are genuinely linked, although conduct disorder is the most
frequent psychiatric disorder that occurs with pathologic fire setting.
The critical component of management and treatment for
firesetters is to prevent further incidents while treating any underlying
psychopathology. In general, fire setting alone is not an indication for
hospitalization, unless a continued direct threat exists that the patient will set
another fire. The parents of children with a pattern of fire setting must be
emphatically counseled that the child must not be left alone at home and
should never be left to take care of younger siblings without direct adult
supervision. Children who exhibit a pattern of concurrent aggressive
behaviors and other forms of destructive behavior are likely to have a poor
outcome. Outpatient treatment should be arranged for children who
repeatedly set fires. Behavioral techniques that involve both the child and the
family help decrease the risk for further fire setting, as is positive
reinforcement for alternate behaviors.
MANAGEMENT.

Child Abuse: Physical and Sexual
Assessment. Physical and sexual abuse occurs in girls and boys of all ages,
in all ethnic groups, and at all socioeconomic levels. The abuses vary widely
for severity and duration, but any form of continued abuse constitutes an
emergency for a child. No single psychiatric syndrome is a sine qua non of
physical or sexual abuse, but fear, guilt, anxiety, depression, and ambivalence


<<<PAGE 2591>>>
regarding disclosure commonly surround the child who has been abused.
Young children who are being sexually abused may exhibit precocious
sexual behavior with peers and present detailed sexual knowledge that
reflects exposure beyond their developmental level. Often, children who
endure sexual or physical abuse display sadistic and aggressive behaviors
themselves. Abused children are likely to be threatened with severe and
frightening consequences by the perpetrator if they reveal the situation to
anyone. Frequently, an abused child who is victimized by a family member is
placed in the irreconcilable position of having to choose between enduring
the abuse or risk destroying the family, not being believed or being
abandoned.
In cases of suspected abuse, the child and other family members must be
interviewed individually to give each member a chance to speak privately. If
possible, the clinician should observe the child with each parent individually
to get a sense of the spontaneity, warmth, fear, anxiety, or other prominent
features of the relationships. One observation is generally not sufficient to
make a final judgment about the family relationship. However, abused
children almost always have mixed emotions toward abusive parents.
Physical indicators of sexual abuse in children include sexually transmitted
diseases (e.g., gonorrhea); pain, irritation, and itching of the genitalia and the
urinary tract; and discomfort while sitting and walking. In many instances of
suspected sexual abuse, however, physical evidence is not present. Thus, a
careful history is essential. The physician should speak directly about the
issues without leading the child in any direction, because already frightened
children may be easily influenced to endorse what they think the examiner
wants to hear. Furthermore, children who have been abused often retract all
or part of what has been disclosed during an interview.
The use of anatomically correct dolls in the assessment of sexual abuse can
help the child identify body parts and show what has happened, but no
conclusive evidence supports sexual play with dolls as a means of validating
abuse.
Neglect: Failure to Thrive
Assessment. In child neglect, a child’s physical, mental, or emotional
condition has been impaired because of the inability of a parent or caretaker


<<<PAGE 2592>>>
to provide adequate food, shelter, education, or supervision. Similar to abuse,
any form of continued neglect is an emergency for the child. Parents who
neglect their children range widely and may include parents who are very
young and ignorant about the emotional and concrete needs of a child,
parents with depression and significant passivity, substance-abusing parents,
and parents with a variety of incapacitating mental illnesses.
In its extreme form, neglect can contribute to failure to thrive—that is, an
infant, usually under 1 year of age, becomes malnourished in the absence of
an organic cause. Failure to thrive typically occurs under circumstances in
which adequate nourishment is available, but a disturbance within the
relationship between the caretaker and the child results in a child who does
not eat sufficiently to grow and develop. A negative pattern may exist
between the mother and the child in which the child refuses feedings, and the
mother feels rejected and eventually withdraws. She may then avoid offering
food as frequently as the infant needs it. Observation of the mother and the
child together may reveal a nonspontaneous, tense interaction, with
withdrawal on both sides, resulting in a seeming apathy in the mother. Both
the mother and the child may seem depressed.
A rare form of failure to thrive in children who are at least several years
old and are not necessarily malnourished is the syndrome of psychosocial
dwarfism. In that syndrome, marked growth retardation and delayed
epiphyseal malnutrition accompany a disturbed relationship between the
parent and the child, along with bizarre social and eating behaviors in the
child. Those behaviors sometimes include eating from garbage cans, drinking
toilet water, binging and vomiting, and diminished outward response to pain.
Half of the children with the syndrome have decreased growth hormone.
Once the children are removed from the troubled environment and placed in
another setting, such as a psychiatric hospital with appropriate supervision
and guidance regarding meals, the endocrine abnormalities normalize, and
the children begin to grow at a more rapid rate.
Management. In cases of child neglect, as with physical and sexual abuse,
the most crucial decision to be made during the initial evaluation is whether
the child is safe in the home environment. Whenever neglect is suspected, it
must be reported to the local child protective service agency. In mild cases,
the decision to refer the family for outpatient services, as opposed to


<<<PAGE 2593>>>
hospitalizing the child, depends on the clinician’s conviction that the family
is cooperative and willing to be educated and to enter into treatment and that
the child is not in danger. Before a neglected child is released from an
emergency setting, a follow-up appointment must be made.
Education for the family must begin during the evaluation; the family must
be told, in a nonthreatening manner, that failure to thrive can become lifethreatening, that the entire family needs to monitor the child’s progress, and
that they will receive some help in overcoming the many possible obstacles
interfering with the child’s emotional and physical well-being.
Anorexia Nervosa
Anorexia nervosa occurs in females about 10 times as often as in males. It is
characterized by the refusal to maintain body weight, leading to weight at
least 15 percent below the expected weight, by a distorted body image, by a
persistent fear of becoming fat, and by the absence of at least three menstrual
cycles. The disorder usually begins after puberty, but it has occurred in
children of 9 to 10 years of age, in whom expected weight gain does not
occur, rather than a loss of 15 percent of body weight. The disorder reaches
medical emergency proportions when the weight loss approaches 30 percent
of body weight or when metabolic disturbances become severe.
Hospitalization then becomes necessary to control the ongoing process of
starvation, potential dehydration, and the medical complications of starvation,
including electrolyte imbalances, cardiac arrhythmias, and hormonal changes.
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Assessment. AIDS, which is caused by the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV), occurs in neonate through perinatal transmission from an
infected mother, in children and adolescents secondary to sexual abuse by an
infected person, and adolescents through intravenous drug abuse with an
infected person or intravenous drug abuse with infected needles and sexual
activities with infected partners. Child and adolescent hemophiliac patients
may contract AIDS through tainted blood transfusions.
Children and adolescents may present for emergency evaluations at the
urging of a family member of a peer; in some cases, they take the initiative


<<<PAGE 2594>>>
themselves when they are faced with anxiety or panic about high-risk
behavior. Early screening of high-risk persons may lead to the treatment of
asymptomatic infected patients with such drugs as azidothymidine (AZT) and
possibly other new medications that may slow the course of the disease.
During the assessment of the risks for HIV infection, the doctor can start to
educate the patient and family so that an adolescent who is not infected but
exhibits high-risk behavior can be counseled about that behavior and safe-sex
practices.
In children, the brain is often a primary site for HIV infection; encephalitis,
decreased brain development, and such neuropsychiatric symptoms as
impairment in memory, concentration, and attention span may be present
before the diagnosis is made. The virus can be present in the cerebrospinal
fluid before it shows up in the bloodstream. Changes in cognitive function,
frontal lobe disinhibition, social withdrawal, slowed information processing,
and apathy constitute some common symptoms of the AIDS dementia
complex. Mood disorders, personality changes, and frank psychosis can also
occur in patients infected with HIV.
Munchausen Syndrome by Proxy
Assessment. Munchausen syndrome by proxy, essentially, is a form of
child abuse in which a parent, usually the mother, or a caretaker repeatedly
fabricates or inflicts injury or illness in a child for whom the medical
intervention is then sought, often in an emergency setting. Although it is a
rare scenario, mothers who inflict injury often have some prior knowledge of
medicine, leading to sophisticated symptoms; the mothers sometimes engage
in inappropriate camaraderie with the medical staff regarding the treatment of
the child. Careful observation may reveal that the mothers often do not
exhibit appropriate signs of distress on hearing the details of the child’s
medical symptoms. Prototypically, such mothers tend to present themselves
as highly accomplished professionals in ways that seem inflated or blatantly
untrue.
The illnesses appearing in the child can involve any organ system, but
specific symptoms are commonly presented: bleeding from one or many
sites, including the GI tract, the genitourinary system, and the respiratory
system; seizures; and CNS depression. At times, the illness is simulated,


<<<PAGE 2595>>>
rather than inflicted.
Urgent Non–Life-Threatening Situations
School Refusal
ASSESSMENT. Refusal to go to school may occur in a young child who is first

entering school or in an older child or adolescent who is making a transition
into a new grade or school, or it may emerge in a vulnerable child without an
apparent external stressor. In any case, school refusal requires immediate
intervention, because the longer the dysfunctional pattern continues, the more
difficult it is to interrupt.
School refusal is generally associated with separation anxiety, in which the
child’s distress is related to the consequences of being separated from the
parent, so the child resists going to school. School refusal can also occur in
children with school phobia, in which the school is the target of fear and
distress. In either case, a severe disruption of the child’s life occurs. Although
mild separation anxiety is universal, particularly among very young children
who are first facing the school, treatment is required when a child actually
cannot attend school. Severe psychopathology, including anxiety and
depressive disorders, is often present when school refusal occurs for the first
time in an adolescent. Children with separation anxiety disorder typically
present extreme worries that catastrophic events will befall their mothers,
attachment, or themselves as a result of the separation. Children with
separation anxiety disorder may also exhibit many other fears and symptoms
of depression, including such somatic complaints such as headaches,
stomachaches, and nausea. Severe tantrums and desperate pleas may ensue
when preoccupation that a parent will be harmed during the separation is
frequently verbalized; in adolescents, the stated reasons for refusing to go to
school are often physical complaints.
As part of an urgent assessment, the psychiatrist must ascertain the
duration of the patient’s absence from school and must assess the parents’
ability to participate in a treatment plan that will undoubtedly involve firm
parental guidelines to ensure the child’s return to school. The parents of a
child with separation anxiety disorder often exhibit excessive separation
anxiety or other anxiety disorders themselves, thereby compounding the


<<<PAGE 2596>>>
child’s problem. When the parents are unable to participate in a treatment
program from home, hospitalization should be considered.
MANAGEMENT. When school refusal caused by separation anxiety is identified

during an emergency evaluation, the underlying disorder can be explained to
the family, and an intervention can be started immediately. In severe cases,
however, a multidimensional, long-term family-oriented treatment plan is
necessary. Whenever possible, a separation-anxious child should be brought
back to school the next school day, despite the distress, and a contact person
within the school (counselor, guidance counselor, or teacher) should be
involved to help the child stay in school while praising the child for tolerating
the school situation.
When school refusal has been going on for months or years or when the
family members are unable to cooperate, a treatment program to move the
child back to school from the hospital should be considered. When the child’s
anxiety is not diminished by behavioral methods alone, antidepressants are
helpful. Medication is generally prescribed not at the initial evaluation, but
after a behavioral intervention has been tried.
Other Childhood Disturbances
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Children who have been subjected to a
severe catastrophic or traumatic event may present for a prompt evaluation
because they have extreme fears of the specific trauma occurring again or
sudden discomfort with familiar places, people, or situations that previously
did not evoke anxiety. Within weeks of a traumatic event, a child may
recreate the event in play, in stories, and in dreams that directly replay the
terrifying situation. A sense of reliving the experience may occur, including
hallucinations and flashback (dissociative) experiences, and intrusive
memories of the event come and go. Many traumatized children, over time,
go on to reproduce parts of the event through their victimization behaviors
toward others, without being aware that those behaviors reflect their own
traumatic experiences.
Dissociative Disorders. Dissociative states—including the extreme form,
multiple personality disorder—are believed most likely to occur in children


<<<PAGE 2597>>>
who have been subjected to severe and repetitive physical, sexual, or
emotional abuse. Children with dissociative symptoms may be referred for
evaluation because family members or teachers observe that the children
sometimes seem to be spaced out or distracted or act like different persons.
Dissociative states are occasionally identified during the evaluation of violent
and aggressive behavior, particularly in patients who honestly do not
remember chunks of their behavior.
When a child who dissociates is violent or self-destructive or endangers
others, hospitalization is necessary. A variety of psychotherapy methods have
been used in the complex treatment of children with dissociative disorders,
including play techniques and, in some cases, hypnosis.
References
Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry
Ader R, ed. Psychoneuroimmunology. 4th ed. New York: Elsevier; 2007.
Alexander F. Psychosomatic Medicine: Its Principles and Application. New
York: Norton; 1950.
Cannon WB. The Wisdom of the Body. New York: Norton; 1932.
Chaturvedi SK, Desai G. Measurement and assessment of somatic symptoms.
Int Rev Psychiatry. 2013;25(1):31–40.
Copello A, Walsh K, Graham H, Tobin D, Griffith E, Day E, Birchwood M.
A consultation-liaison service on integrated treatment: A program
description. J Dual Diagn. 2013;9(2):149–157.
Dew MA, DiMartini AD, De Vito Dabbs A, Myaskovsky L, Steel J. Rates
and risk factors for nonadherence to the medical regimen after adult solid
organ transplantation. Transplantation. 2007;83(7):858–873.
DiMartini A, Crone C, Fireman M, Dew MA. Psychiatric aspects of organ
transplantation in critical care. Crit Care Clin. 2008;24:949–981.
Dobbels F, Verleden G, Dupont L, Vanhaecke J, De Geest S. To transplant or
not? The importance of psychosocial and behavioural factors before lung
transplantation. Chronic Respir Dis. 2006;3(1):39–47.
Escobar J. Somatoform disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 1.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:1927.


<<<PAGE 2598>>>
Fava GA, Sonino N. The clinical domains of psychosomatic medicine. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2005;66:849–858.
Goodwin RD, Olfson M, Shea S, Lantigua RA, Carrasquilo O, Gameroff MJ,
Weissman MM. Asthma and mental disorders in primary care. Gen Hosp
Psychiatry. 2004;25:479–483.
Hamilton JC, Eger M, Razzak S, Feldman MD, Hallmark N, Cheek S.
Somatoform, factitious, and related diagnoses in the National Hospital
Discharge Survey: Addressing the proposed DSM-5 revision.
Psychosomatics. 2013;54(2):142–148.
Kaplan HI. History of psychosomatic medicine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
eds: Kaplan and Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 8th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2005:2105.
Lesperance F, Frasure-Smith N, Theroux P, Irwin M. The association
between major depression and levels of soluble intercellular adhesion
molecule 1, interleukin-6, and C-reactive protein in patients with recent
acute coronary syndromes. Am J Psychiatry. 2004;161:271–277.
Lipsitt DR. Consultation-liaison psychiatry and psychosomatic medicine: The
company they keep. Psychosom Med. 2001;63(6):896–909.
Matthews KA, Gump BB, Harris KF, Haney TL, Barefoot JC. Hostile
behaviors predict cardiovascular mortality among men enrolled in the
multiple risk factor intervention trial. Circulation. 2004;109:66–70.
Palta P, Samuel LJ, Miller ER, Szanton SL. Depression and oxidative stress:
Results from a meta-analysis of observational studies. Psychosom Med.
2014;76(1):12–19.
Schrag AE, Mehta AR, Bhatia KP, Brown RJ, Frackowiak RS, Trimble MR,
Ward NS, Rowe JB. The functional neuroimaging correlates of
psychogenic versus organic dystonia. Brain. 2013;136(3):770–781.
Shorter E. From Paralysis to Fatigue: A History of Psychosomatic Illness in
the Modern Era. New York: Free Press; 1992.
Geriatric Psychiatry
Balzer DG, Steffens DC. Essentials of Geriatric Psychiatry. 2nd ed.
Arlington: American Psychiatric Association; 2012.
Bartels SJ, Naslund JA. The underside of the silver tsunami—older adults
and mental health care. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(6):493–496.
Cohen CI, Ibrahim F. Serving elders in the public sector. In: McQuistion HL,


<<<PAGE 2599>>>
Sowers WE, Ranz JM, Feldman JM, eds. Handbook of Community
Psychiatry. New York: Springer Science+Business Media; 2012:485.
Colarusso CA. Adulthood. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3909.
de Waal MWM, van der Weele GM, van der Mast RC, Assendelft WJJ,
Gussekloo J. The influence of the administration method on scores of the
15-item geriatric depression scale in old age. Psychiatry Res.
2012;197(3):280–284.
H⊘iseth G, Kristiansen KM, Kvande K, Tanum L, Lorentzen B, Refsum H.
Benzodiazepines in geriatric psychiatry. Drugs Aging. 2013;30(2):113–
118.
Jeste D. Geriatric psychiatry: Introduction. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz
P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3932.
McDonald WM, Kellner CH, Petrides G, Greenberg RM. Applying research
to the clinical use of ECT in geriatric mood disorders. Am J Geriatr
Psychiatry. 2013;21:S7.
McDonald WM, Reynolds CF, Ancoli-Israel S, McCall V. Understanding
sleep disorders in geriatric psychiatry. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry.
2013;21:S38.
Miller MD, Solai LK, eds. Geriatric Psychiatry. New York: Oxford
University Press; 2013.
Ng B, Atkins M. Home assessment in old age psychiatry: A practical guide.
Adv Psychiatry Treat. 2012;18:400.
Reifler BV, Colenda CC, Juul D. Geriatric psychiatry. In: Aminoff MJ,
Faulkner LR, eds. The American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology:
Looking Back and Moving Ahead. Arlington: American Psychiatric
Publishing; 2012:135.
Steinberg M, Hess K, Corcoran C, Mielke MM, Norton M, Breitner J, Green
R, Leoutsakos J, Welsh-Bohmer K, Lyketsos C, Tschanz J. Vascular risk
factors and neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease: The Cache
County Study. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014;29(2):153–159.
Thakur ME, Blazer DG, Steffens DC, eds. Clinical Manual of Geriatric
Psychiatry. Arlington: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2014.
Thorp S, Stein MB, Jeste DV, Patterson TL, Wetherell JL. Prolonged


<<<PAGE 2600>>>
exposure therapy for older veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder: A
pilot study. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2012;20(3):276–280.
Emergency Psychiatry
Agar L. Recognizing neuroleptic malignant syndrome in the emergency
department: A case study. Perspect Psychiatr Care. 2010;46(2):143–151.
Ballard ED, Stanley IH, Horowitz LM, Cannon EA, Pao M, Bridge JA.
Asking youth questions about suicide risk in the pediatric emergency
department: Results from a qualitative analysis of patient opinions. Clin
Pediatr Emerg Med. 2013;14(1):20–27.
Baron DA, Dubin WR, Ning A. Other psychiatric emergencies. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:2732.
Bienvenu OJ, Neufeld KJ, Needham DM. Treatment of four psychiatric
emergencies in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med. 2012;40(9):2662–
2670.
Bruckner TA, Yonsu K, Chakravarthy B, Brown TT. Voluntary psychiatric
emergencies in Los Angeles County after funding of California’s Mental
Health Services Act. Psychiatr Serv. 2012;63(8):808–814.
Cashman M, Pasic J. Pediatric psychiatric disorders in the emergency
department. In: Zun LS, ed. Behavioral Emergencies for the Emergency
Physician. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2013:211.
Ceballos-Osorio J, Hong-McAtee I. Failure to thrive in a neonate: A lifethreatening diagnosis to consider. J Pediatr Heath Care. 2013;27(1):56–
61.
Dolan MA, Fein JA. Pediatric and adolescent mental health emergencies in
the emergency medical services system. Pediatrics. 2011;127(5):e1356–
e1366.
D’Onofrio G, Jauch E, Jagoda A, Allen MH, Anglin D, Barsan WG, Berger
RP, Bobrow BJ, Boudreaux ED, Bushnell C, Chan YF, Currier G, Eggly S,
Ichord R, Larkin GL, Laskowitz D, Neumar RW, Newman-Toker DE,
Quinn J, Shear K, Todd KH, Zatzick D. NIH roundtable on opportunities
to advance research on neurologic and psychiatric emergencies. Ann
Emerg Med. 2010;56(5):551–564.
Douglass AM, Luo J, Baraff LJ. Emergency medicine and psychiatry


<<<PAGE 2601>>>
agreement on diagnosis and disposition of emergency department patients
with behavioral emergencies. Acad Emerg Med. 2011;18(4):368–373.
Flaherty LT. Models of psychiatric consultation to schools. In: Weist MD,
Lever NA, Bradshaw CP, Owens JS, eds. Handbook of School Mental
Health: Issues in Clinical Child Psychology. 2nd ed. New York: Springer
Science+Business Media; 2014:283.
Frosch E, Kelly P. Issues in pediatric psychiatric emergency care. Emerg
Psychiatry. 2013:193.
Georgieva I, Mulder CL, Wierdsma A. Patients’ preference and experiences
of forced medication and seclusion. Psychiatr Q. 2012;83(1):1–13.
Gilbert SB. Beyond acting out: Managing pediatric psychiatric emergencies
in the emergency department. Adv Emerg Nurs J. 2012;34(2):147–163.
Ginnis KB, White EM, Ross AM, et al. Family-based crisis intervention in
the emergency department: A new model of care. J Child Fam Stud.
2015;24:172–179.
Grupp-Phelan J, Delgado SV. Management of the suicidal pediatric patient:
An emergency medicine problem. Clin Pediatr Emerg Med.
2013;14(1):12–19.
Hamm MP, Osmond M, Curran J, Scott S, Ali S, Hartling L, Gokiert R,
Cappelli M, Hnatko G, Newton AS. A systematic review of crisis
interventions used in the emergency department: Recommendations for
pediatric care and research. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2010;26(12):952–962.
Jaffee SR. Family violence and parent psychopathology: Implications for
children’s socioemotional development and resilience. In: Goldstein S,
Brooks RB, eds. Handbook of Resilience in Children. 2nd ed. New York:
Springer Science+Business Media; 2013:127.
Kalb LG, Stuart EA, Freedman B, Zablotsky B, Vasa R. Psychiatric-related
emergency department visits among children with an autism spectrum
disorder. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2012;28(12):1269–1276.
Lin M-T, Burgess JF Jr, Carey K. The association between serious
psychological distress and emergency department utilization among young
adults in the USA. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2012;47(6):939–
947.
Magallón-Neri EM, Canalda G, De la Fuente JE, Forns M, García R,
González E, Castro-Fornieles J. The influence of personality disorders on
the use of mental health services in adolescents with psychiatric disorders.


<<<PAGE 2602>>>
Compr Psychiatry. 2012;53(5):509–515.
Maunder RG, Halpern J, Schwartz B, Gurevich M. Symptoms and responses
to critical incidents in paramedics who have experienced childhood abuse
and neglect. Emerg Med J. 2012;29(3):222–227.
Miller AB, Esposito-Smythers C, Weismoore JT, Renshaw KD. The relation
between child maltreatment and adolescent suicidal behavior: A systematic
review and critical examination of the literature. Clin Child Fam Psychol
Rev. 2013;16(2):146–172.
Ougrin D, Tranah T, Leigh E, Taylor L, Asarnow JR. Practitioner review:
Self-harm in adolescents. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2012;53(4):337–
350.
Polevoi SK, Shim JJ, McCulloch CE, Grimes B, Govindarajan P. Marked
reduction in length of stay for patients with psychiatric emergencies after
implementation of a comanagement model. Acad Emerg Med.
2013;20(4):338–343.
Reading R. Weight faltering and failure to thrive in infancy and early
childhood. Child Care Health Devel. 2013;39:151.
Rodnitzky RL. Movement disorder emergencies. In: Roos KL, ed. Neurology
Emergencies. New York: Springer Science+Business Media; 2012:259.
Simpson SA, Joesch JM, West II, Pasic J. Risk for physical restraint or
seclusion in the psychiatric emergency service (PES). Gen Hosp
Psychiatry. 2014;36(1):113–118.
Tenenbein M. Urine drug screens in pediatric psychiatric patients. Pediatr
Emerg Care. 2014;30(2):136–137.
Weiss AP, Chang G, Rauch SL, Smallwood JA, Schechter M, Kosowsky J,
Hazen E, Haimovici F, Gitlin DF, Finn CT, Orav EJ. Patient- and practicerelated determinants of emergency department length of stay for patients
with psychiatric illness. Ann Emerg Med. 2012;60(2):162–171.e5.
Ziaei M, Massoudifar A, Rajabpour-Sanati A, Pourbagher-Shahri AM,
Abdolrazaghnejad A. Management of Violence and Aggression in
Emergency Environment; a Narrative Review of 200 Related Articles. Adv
J Emerg Med. 2018;3(1):e7.
Zun LS, ed. Behavioral Emergencies for the Emergency Physician. New
York: Cambridge University Press; 2013.


<<<PAGE 2603>>>
26
Level of Care
Before the 1960s in the United States, most psychiatric care for serious
mental illnesses took place in hospitals. The rest was individual therapy with
a psychiatrist or psychologist or other highly trained professionals; this
treatment was reserved mainly for patients considered “neurotic” and having
the means to pay for hourly sessions that would often occur several days a
week.
Several forces changed this. The community mental health movement was
motivated by social justice, occurring at a time defined by the civil rights
movement. Experts argued that the housing of seriously mentally ill patients
in a public hospital was unjust. The treatment there emphasized long-term
custodial care rather than rehabilitation, and few patients improved.
Visionaries such as Walter Barton, then medical director for the American
Psychiatric Association, argued that the federal government must lead the
way to develop alternatives to the current system of institutionalization. The
result was The Mental Retardation Facilities and Community Mental Health
Centers Construction Act of 1963, championed by President Kennedy, who
proposed a “wholly new emphasis and approach to care for the mentally ill.”
The act and the amendments that followed it under President Johnson
initiated the federal government’s role in mental health care, something
previously left to the states. It established a grant program for states to
establish local mental health centers, under the overview of the National
Institutes of Health. The purpose was to build a robust network of mental
health centers for community-based care as an alternative to long-term
institutionalization.
Only about half of the proposed centers were built, and funding for these
sites has been chronically inadequate. Thus, the movement was more


<<<PAGE 2604>>>
successful at deinstitutionalizing mental health care than it has been at
offering quality alternatives. Part of the reason for this is another crucial force
in the US health care system, the rise of managed care. Managed care
emphasizes seeking the lowest level of care possible and the use of lowercost professionals as a way of saving money.
The result is that we now have a myriad of treatment settings, services, and
options. Most rely on grants and third-party payers, although some require
considerable patient expenditures. The details and terminology differ by
institution and region. However, they roughly fall into several categories. In
this chapter, we briefly describe these options as well as the requirements and
goals for each treatment. Our purpose is to help the reader navigate these
options with an emphasis on choosing the treatment that is best for the
patient. Although analogous services exist for children and adolescents, this
chapter focuses on adult levels of care.
Table 26-1 summarizes the main levels of care that we should consider for
most psychiatric patients.

INPATIENT ADMISSION
Inpatient admission units are usually specializing in intensive psychiatric
care. The patients may voluntarily agree to hospitalization, or clinicians may
hospitalize them against their will in a manner consistent with state law. The
units are usually locked and equipped to restrain or seclude patients when
required. Nurses and other staff are present around the clock. Physicians are
present on the unit at least 5 days a week, and a covering physician is always
available.
The hospitalization allows an intense treatment, with regular observation
throughout a day and robust treatments, including medical adjustments,
group, and individual psychotherapies, case management, and milieu
treatments. Previously the most common form of psychiatric care, inpatient
hospitalization is now reserved for patients who are unsafe in or unlikely to
benefit from other treatments.
The patient’s risk of illness or severity is usually high. Many patients are
hospitalized because they are at high risk of imminently harming themselves
or others. Alternatively, their disorder may be so impairing that they cannot
function adequately outside the hospital or attend to even basic activities of


<<<PAGE 2605>>>
daily living (ADLs).
Usually, the treatments required are ones that clinicians cannot safely or
practically give in other settings. These include treatments that require daily
observation for serious side effects. They may be given with such frequency,
such as some intense psychotherapies, that other settings are not practical. In
the latter case, the clinicians have often already tried other settings and have
decided that the patient is likely to deteriorate should they continue the
attempts to treat the patient in another setting.
In some cases, the practicality of alternative treatments arises from a
patient’s poor insight or inability to cooperate with treatment. Such patients
may require involuntary hospitalization, and an inpatient unit is the only
setting that would be appropriate to hold them against their will until the
treatment allows them an ability to make their ordinary appropriate
judgments. In the most severe cases, staff may have to restrain a violent or
self-harming patient physically.
Except for some specialized care facilities, the goals of treatment are short
term. Treatments aim to manage the crisis and stabilize the patient to the
point that treatment can continue in a less restrictive setting for the patient.
Crisis interventions, intense and frequent therapy, and medications are usual
treatments. Longer-term treatments may begin in this setting, but usually to
continue the treatments following the hospitalization.
The length of stay varies widely. A 2010 Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) survey reported the average length of stay for patients with
schizophrenia as about 7.2 days, and for major depressive disorder, about
10.6 days. This number varies significantly by regional practice.
Internationally, it varies by health care system, economic resources, and
many other factors. Figure 26-1 gives some example comparisons of the
average lengths of stay in 2010 for various countries.
The goal of treatment is to return the patient to a safe and functional state
so that the team can then transition the patient to a lower level of care. This
goal includes reducing the patient’s threat to themselves or others, decreasing
the symptoms of the disorder, and improving the patient’s functional level.
Table 26-1
Main Levels of Care


<<<PAGE 2606>>>
Discharge planning usually begins on day one of the hospitalization. It
helps to identify early on the likely next step in treatment, should it be back
home, to a transitional setting or, less often, to long-term custodial care.

FIGURE 26-1


<<<PAGE 2607>>>
Average lengths of stay (LOS) for mental health disorders for selected countries
in 2010. (Source: Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development
[OECD.Stat].)

PARTIAL HOSPITAL TREATMENT
Partial hospitals are facilities that provide a near hospital level of care, the
exception being that the care takes place for about 6 to 8 hours a day, after
which the patients can go home. The service is fully staffed in a manner
typical to a psychiatric hospital unit, however only during the day. The units
usually offer a full range of treatment from various psychotherapies and
psychosocial options to medication management. The patient usually attends
daily, for 5 days a week.
Appropriate patients for a partial hospital program include patients who
may be at significant risk for harm to themselves or others. However, the
treatment team assesses that the patient is sufficiently stable such that the
reinforcement of the intensive treatment is sufficient to prevent such harm.
Thus, the patient is not an imminent risk or is not too impulsive to be trusted
to be independent during the evening.
The patients are usually of moderate severity in symptoms. Similarly, they
often have moderate dysfunction such that their self-care may be substandard.
They often have ongoing trouble maintaining normal relationships.
The program usually offers a variety of psychotherapy treatments, often in
a group setting. They have the benefit of milieu therapy in the unit
environment. Case management is also available. Psychiatrists are present
and help manage the patient’s medication and overall treatment plan.
The average length of treatment is from 1 to a few weeks, although in
some cases it may be longer. The treatment should continue until the patient
is sufficiently stable for a less intensive mode of treatment.

INTENSIVE OUTPATIENT TREATMENT
Intensive outpatient treatment (IOP) is a treatment in the outpatient setting
that involves 3 to 4 hours of psychosocial treatment for between 1 and 4 days
of treatment, with an average of 6 to 12 hours of treatment per week.
This care is usually appropriate when the level of danger is sufficiently
stable so as not to be at imminent risk of harming themselves or others.


<<<PAGE 2608>>>
Patients usually have moderate symptoms and mild to moderate functioning.
For example, their self-care may be mildly below what we would expect for
them. However, they should be sufficiently functional to be able to live
independently or with assistance from a caregiver.
Although sufficiently stable to live independently, the psychiatrist should
be sure that the patient’s home environment is sufficiently safe and without
illness triggers to allow for improvement with treatment.
The treatments emphasize a group format but often include some
individual psychotherapy treatments or medication management.
Psychotherapies may include cognitive behavioral therapy, interpersonal
therapy, or other therapies in a group format.
The length of treatment varies widely and depends on the illness, but
usually lasts 1 to several weeks. The goal is to address the patient’s
symptoms sufficiently that a less intensive model of care is feasible.

OUTPATIENT CARE
Outpatient care is pharmacologic or psychosocial management, provided by a
health care professional, usually in an office setting.
This care is usually appropriate when the danger to the patient is
considered reasonably low risk. Patients need not be free of all thoughts of
harm to themselves or others; however, this risk should be low, and the
clinician should have a reasonable belief that the patient can warn them
should their situation worsen.
Also, the patient’s disorder should be likely to improve with outpatient
care. This situation, fortunately, includes most psychiatric disorders. The
modes of treatment may include psychotherapy or medication or a
combination of both.
Patients are voluntary and require some level of motivation for their
treatment, sufficient so that they can show up regularly for their
appointments. At times of symptomatic worsening, family members or other
caretakers may assist with providing some external motivation until the
patient can resume on their own.
The length of treatment varies widely depending on the disorder. The
frequency of treatment also varies. In the case of an acute illness, such as an
episode of major depressive disorder, a manic episode, or a worsening of


<<<PAGE 2609>>>
anxiety, the treatment may occur weekly or more frequently. Generally, the
frequency of treatment will decrease as the patient improves, but as many
disorders are chronic, patients often require ongoing medication or therapy to
maintain remission. For patients who have been stable for an extended time,
twice a year follow-ups may be reasonable. However, the clinician should
work out with the patient a plan for increasing the follow-ups when
necessary, as it less likely the clinician will catch a pending recurrence of the
illness early.

RESIDENTIAL CARE
Residential care is a 24-hour facility that offers a level of treatment less
intensive than traditional inpatient treatment. It generally does not have the
level of security typical of an inpatient unit. Although medical and nursing
staff are available, the units do not have the same level of staffing, and the
treatments are not as frequent as an inpatient unit.
Patients may be at some risk of harming themselves or others, but not at
imminent risk and thus not requiring the level of observation or restraint
available in an inpatient unit. Their symptoms are moderately severe, as they
can have severe functional limitations such that they cannot safely live
independently. The patients are usually voluntary, although they may be
court-ordered for treatment; however, in those cases, they are willfully
participating. The units are usually not locked.
The facilities offer a variety of treatments, often in a group setting. The
units differ from long-term rehabilitation units, such as nursing homes, in that
the goals are improvement in symptoms and functioning and return to a lower
level of care.
References
American Association of Community Psychiatrists. Level of care utilization
system for psychiatric and addiction services (LOCUS). Accessed August
31,
2020.
Available
at
https://sites.google.com/view/aacp123/resources/locus
Barton WE. Trends in community mental health programs. Psychiatr Serv.
2000;51(5):611–615.


<<<PAGE 2610>>>
Breland JY, Asch SM, Slightam C, Wong A, Zulman DM. Key ingredients
for implementing intensive outpatient programs within patient-centered
medical homes: a literature review and qualitative analysis. Healthc
(Amst). 2016;4(1):22–29.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. FastStats. Accessed August 4,
2020. Available at https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/mental-health.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Hospital Discharge
Survey— Publications and Reports. Accessed January 22, 2020. Available
at https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhds/nhds_publications.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Number, rate, and average
length of stay for discharges from short-stay hospitals, by age, region, and
sex: United States, 2010. Accessed August 31, 2020. Available at
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhds/1general/2010gen1_agesexalos.pdf
Marshall M, Crowther R, Sledge WH, Rathbone J, Soares-Weiser K. Day
hospital versus admission for acute psychiatric disorders. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2011;2011(12):CD004026.
Nurjannah I, Mills J, Usher K, Park T. Discharge planning in mental health
care: An integrative review of the literature. J Clin Nurs. 2014;23(9–
10):1175–1185.
Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD). OECD
statistics.
Accessed
August
31,2020.
Available
at
https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?ThemeTreeId=9
Sharfstein SS. Whatever happened to community mental health? Psychiatr
Serv. 2000;51(5):616–20.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration. Behavioral health, United States,
2012.
Accessed
August
31,
2020.
Available
at
https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/2012-BHUS.pdf


<<<PAGE 2611>>>
Other Issues Relevant to
C Psychiatry


<<<PAGE 2612>>>
27
Ethics and Professionalism
Ethical guidelines and knowledge of ethical principles help psychiatrists
avoid ethical conflicts (which are tensions between what one wants to do and
what is ethically right to do) and think through ethical dilemmas (conflicts
between ethical perspectives or values).
Ethics deal with the relations between people in different groups and often
entail balancing rights. Professional ethics refers to the appropriate way to act
when in a professional role. Professional ethics derive from a combination of
morality, social norms, and the parameters of the relationship people have
agreed to have.

PROFESSIONAL CODES
Most professional organizations and many business groups have codes of
ethics that reflect a consensus about the general standards of appropriate
professional conduct. The American Medical Association’s (AMA’s)
Principles of Medical Ethics and the American Psychiatric Association’s
(APA’s) Principles of Medical Ethics with Annotations Especially Applicable
to Psychiatry articulate ideal standards of practice and professional virtues of
practitioners. These codes include exhortations to use skillful and scientific
techniques; to self-regulate misconduct within the profession; and to respect
the rights and needs of patients, families, colleagues, and society.

BASIC ETHICAL PRINCIPLES
Four ethical principles that psychiatrists ought to weigh in their work are
respect for autonomy, beneficence, nonmaleficence, and justice. At times, the
principles conflict, and we must make decisions concerning how to balance


<<<PAGE 2613>>>
them.
Respect for Autonomy
Autonomy requires that a person act intentionally after being given sufficient
information and time to understand the benefits, risks, and costs of all
reasonable options. It may mean honoring an individual’s right not to hear
every detail and even choosing someone else (e.g., family or doctor) to
decide the best course of treatment.
Psychiatrists need to provide patients with a rational understanding of their
disorder and options for treatment. Patients need conceptual understanding;
the psychiatrist should not merely state isolated facts. Patients also need time
to think and to talk with friends and family about their decision. Finally, if a
patient is not in a state of mind to make decisions for himself or herself, the
psychiatrist should consider mechanisms for alternative decision-making,
such as guardianship, conservators, and health care proxy.
A young adult experienced a schizophrenic episode in which his religious
fervor turned into psychotic delusions. After being involuntarily
hospitalized because he became suicidal, he insistently refused
medication, claiming that his physicians were trying to poison him. His
psychiatrist decided to respect his refusal of medication as long as he
could control his suicidal tendencies. As his mental suffering became
more intense, in 1 week, the patient changed his mind about medication
and agreed to try it. The therapeutic relationship with his psychiatrist
deepened, and the patient left the hospital willing to continue with both
antipsychotic medication and psychotherapy. Although not all cases work
out so well, this one illustrates the benefits of negotiation about treatment
even when hospitalization is involuntary.
Beneficence
The requirement for psychiatrists to act with beneficence derives from their
fiduciary relationship with patients and the profession’s belief that they also
have an obligation to the society. As a result of the role obligation of trust,
psychiatrists must heed their patients’ interests, even to the neglect of their


<<<PAGE 2614>>>
own.
The expression of the principle is called paternalism, the use of the
psychiatrist’s judgment about the best course of action for the patient or
research subject. Weak paternalism is acting beneficently when the patient’s
impaired faculties prevent an autonomous choice. Strong paternalism is
acting beneficently despite the patient’s intact autonomy.
There are times when it is appropriate to permit beneficence to overrule
patient autonomy. For example, when the patient faces substantial harm or
risk of harm, we would choose the paternalistic act to ensure the optimal
combination of maximal harm reduction, low added risk, and minimal
necessary infringement on patient autonomy.
Nonmaleficence
To adhere to the principle of nonmaleficence (primum non nocere or first, do
no harm), psychiatrists must be careful in their decisions and actions and
must ensure that they have had adequate training for what they do. They also
need to be open to seeking second opinions and consultations. They need to
avoid creating risks for patients by an action or inaction.
Justice
The concept of justice concerns the issues of reward and punishment and the
equitable distribution of social benefits. Relevant issues include whether
resources should be distributed equally to those in greatest need, whether
they should go to where they can have the most significant impact on the
well-being of each individual served, or to where they will ultimately have
the highest impact on society.

SPECIFIC ISSUES
From a practical point of view, several specific issues most frequently
involve psychiatrists. These include (1) sexual boundary violations, (2)
nonsexual boundary violations, (3) violations of confidentiality, (4)
mistreatment of the patient (incompetence, double agentry), and (5) illegal
activities (insurance, billing, insider stock trading).
Sexual Boundary Violations


<<<PAGE 2615>>>
For a psychiatrist to engage a patient in a sexual relationship is unethical.
Furthermore, legal sanctions against such behavior make the ethical question
moot. Psychiatrists who violate this ethical principle are subject to various
criminal law statutes. Rape charges have been used against such psychiatrists;
sexual assault and battery charges also have been used to convict
psychiatrists.
Also, patients who have been victimized sexually by psychiatrists and
other physicians have won damages in malpractice suits. Insurance carriers
for the APA and the AMA no longer insure against patient–therapist sexual
relations, and the carriers exclude liability for any such sexual activity.
The issue of whether sexual relations between an ex-patient and a therapist
violate an ethical principle, however, remains controversial. Proponents of
the view that “Once a patient, always a patient,” insist that any involvement
with an ex-patient—even if it leads to marriage—is unethical. They maintain
that a transferential reaction that always exists between the patient and the
therapist prevents a rational decision about their emotional or sexual union.
Others insist that, if a transferential reaction still exists, the therapy is
incomplete and that as autonomous human beings, ex-patients should not be
subjected to paternalistic moralizing by physicians. Accordingly, they believe
that no sanctions should prohibit emotional or sexual involvement by expatients and their psychiatrists. Some psychiatrists maintain that a reasonable
time should elapse before such a liaison. The length of the “reasonable”
period remains controversial: some have suggested 2 years. Other
psychiatrists maintain that any period of prohibited involvement with an expatient is an unnecessary restriction. The majority of psychiatrists, as well as
the APA, believe that it is always unethical, and their code of ethics states:
“Sexual activity with a current or former patient is unethical.”
Although not spelled out in The Principles, sexual activity with a patient’s
family member is also unethical. This principle is most important when the
psychiatrist is treating a child or adolescent. Most training programs in child
and adolescent psychiatry emphasize that the parents are patients too and that
the ethical and legal proscriptions apply to parents (or parent surrogates) as
well as to the child. Nevertheless, some psychiatrists misunderstand this
concept. Sexual activity between a doctor and a patient’s family member is
also unethical.
As an example of an egregious violation, the Medical Board of California


<<<PAGE 2616>>>
Action Report (July 2006) reported on a psychiatrist who had a 7-year affair
with a patient who had schizophrenia. The doctor not only had sex with the
patient but also had her procure prostitutes with whom he and the patient had
group sex. He paid for their services by providing them with prescriptions for
controlled substances and went so far as to bill Medi-Cal for these encounters
as group therapy. The state revoked the physician’s license, and he was also
criminally convicted of fraud.
Nonsexual Boundary Violations
The doctor–patient relationship is the relationship between a doctor and a
patient to provide and obtain treatment. That relationship has boundaries both
around it and within it. Either person may cross the boundary.
Not all boundary-crossings are boundary violations. For example, a patient
may say to a doctor, “I left my money at home, can you lend me cash for the
parking garage?” The patient has invited the doctor to cross the doctor–
patient boundary and set up a lender–borrower relationship as well.
Depending on the doctor’s theoretical orientation, the clinical situation with
the patient, and other factors, the doctor may elect to cross the boundary.
Whether the boundary-crossing is also a boundary violation is debatable. A
boundary violation is a boundary-crossing that is exploitative. It gratifies the
doctor’s needs at the expense of the patient. The doctor is responsible for
preserving the boundary and for ensuring that they hold boundary-crossings
to a minimum and that exploitation does not occur.
A supervisor told a psychiatry resident never to accept gifts from patients.
In the course of treating a young girl with schizophrenia, the patient
offered her a modest Christmas gift (a cotton scarf), which she refused to
accept. The resident explained, gently, that this was against the “rules of
the hospital.” The next day the patient attempted suicide. She experienced
the resident’s refusal to accept the gift as a profound rejection, which she
could not tolerate. The case illustrates the need to understand the
dynamics of gift-giving and the transferential meaning to the patients of
rejecting (or accepting) the gift.
There is a story (possibly apocryphal) of how Freud, who was an
inveterate cigar smoker, was offered a box of difficult-to-find Havana


<<<PAGE 2617>>>
cigars by a patient during his analysis. Freud accepted the cigars and then
proceeded to ask his patient to explore his motivations in offering the
gift. Freud’s reasons for accepting the cigars are more evident than the
patient’s unconscious motivation for giving them, about which no
information is available.
Harm to the patient is not a component of a boundary violation. For
example, using information supplied by the patient (e.g., a stock tip) is an
unethical boundary violation, although no apparent harm may come to the
patient. For purposes of discussion, nonsexual boundary violations come in
several arbitrary (overlapping and not mutually exclusive) categories.
Business. Almost any business relationship with a former patient is
problematic, and almost any business relationship with a current patient is
unethical. Naturally, the circumstance and location may play a significant
role in this admonition. In a rural area or a small community, a doctor might
be treating the only pharmacist (or plumber or couch upholsterer) in town;
then, when doing business with the pharmacist-patient, the doctor tries to
keep boundaries in check. Ethical psychiatrists try to avoid doing business
with a patient or a patient’s family member or asking a patient to hire one of
their family members. Ethical psychiatrists avoid investing in a patient’s
business and collaborating with a patient in a business deal.
Ideologic Issues. Ideologic issues can cloud judgment and may lead to
ethical lapses. Any clinical decision should reflect what is best for the patient;
the psychiatrist’s ideology should not be a factor in the decision. A
psychiatrist who is consulted by a patient with an illness should tell the
patient what forms of treatment are available to treat the illness and allow the
patient to decide on a course of treatment. Naturally, psychiatrists should
recommend the treatment that they feel is in the best interest of the patient,
but ultimately, the patient should be free to choose.
Social. We should consider the particular locale and circumstances in any
discussion of the behavior of an ethical psychiatrist in social situations. The
overarching principle is that the boundaries of the psychiatrist–patient
relationship should be respected. Furthermore, if options exist, they should be


<<<PAGE 2618>>>
exercised in favor of the patient. Problems often arise in treatment situations
when friendships develop between the psychiatrist and the patient.
Objectivity is compromised, therapeutic neutrality is impaired, and factors
outside the consciousness of either party may play a destructive role. During
treatment, the psychiatrist should avoid such a friendship. Similarly,
psychiatrists should not treat their social friends for the same set of reasons.
Obviously, in an emergency, a person does what a person must.
Financial. For psychiatrists who practice in the private sector, dealing with
the patient about money is a part of treatment. Issues surrounding setting the
fee, collecting the fee, and other financial matters are grist for the mill. Even
so, they must observe ethical concerns. The Principles advises the doctor on
such matters as charging for missed appointments and other contractual
problems. Financial issues are a frequent source of ethics complaints against
doctors. The doctor must recognize the power that these issues have in the
therapeutic relationship. Because the psychotherapeutic relationship is so
much like a social relationship—the office looks like a living room; the
doctor wears regular clothes; some patients might, without recognizing it,
assume that a friendship exists that forgives payment of a fee. When they
receive the bill, their feelings, even though they are unconscious, are ruffled.
We cannot sufficiently emphasize the point that psychiatrists dispense their
services in a contractual context. Early in their careers, psychiatrists are often
reluctant to discuss fees openly out of a sense of embarrassment over
discussing money or a sense of protecting the patient.
How an ethical psychiatrist handles the situation when a patient
temporarily or permanently runs out of money is essential. Many options are
available—some more problematic than others. The psychiatrist can
undoubtedly lower the fee, but caution is needed because a fee lowered to the
point of inadequate compensation for the treatment may evoke
countertransference resentment. The number of patients receiving a reduced
fee is a similar consideration. Running up a bill can also be a problem. Is
there an expectation of eventually being paid? Ultimately, the psychiatrist
may have to alter the frequency of sessions. Any psychiatrist who sees
private patients will eventually face these problems.
Confidentiality


<<<PAGE 2619>>>
Confidentiality refers to the therapist’s responsibility not to release
information learned in the course of treatment to third parties. Privilege refers
to the patient’s right to prevent disclosure of information from treatment in
judicial hearings. Psychiatrists must maintain confidentiality because it is an
essential ingredient of psychiatric care; it is a prerequisite for patients to be
willing to speak freely to therapists. Violating confidentiality by gossiping
embarrasses people and violates nonmaleficence. Violation of confidentiality
also breaks the promise that a psychiatrist has explicitly or implicitly made to
keep material confidential.
Confidentiality must also give way to the responsibility to protect others
when a patient makes a credible threat to harm someone. The situation
becomes complicated when the risk is not to a particular individual, such as
when a doctor is impaired, or someone’s mental state adversely affects his or
her performance of a dangerous job, such as police work, firefighting, or use
of dangerous machinery. Erosion has also arisen from the demands of an
insurance company for detailed information. Psychiatrists should tell patients
if they are going to release their information, under what circumstances, and
when they do. They are not required to warn a patient when they report the
abuse of a child or a threat to others.
There are various settings in which we may use patient data ethically. The
general rule for doing so is to disclose only that information that is truly
necessary. In teaching, research, and supervision, we should avoid using
personal information that might allow others to identify a patient unless it is
necessary. In ward rounds and case conferences, in which one presents
patient material, we should remind those present that what they hear should
not be repeated.
Confidentiality endures after death, with the ethical obligation to withhold
information unless the next of kin provides consent. A subpoena is not an
automatic license to release the entire record. A psychiatrist can petition the
judge for an in-camera (private) review to define what precise information
they must disclose.
Ethics in Managed Care
Psychiatrists have specific responsibilities toward patients treated in managed
care settings, including the responsibilities to disclose all treatment options,


<<<PAGE 2620>>>
exercise appeal rights, continue emergency treatment, and cooperate
reasonably with utilization reviewers.
Responsibility to Disclose. Psychiatrists have a continuing responsibility
to the patient to obtain informed consent for treatments or procedures. The
psychiatrist should disclose all the treatment options, even those not covered
under the terms of a managed care plan. Most states have enacted legislation
making gag rules illegal that limit information about treatment provided to
patients under managed care.
Responsibility to Appeal. The AMA Council on Ethical and Judicial
Affairs states that physicians have an ethical obligation to advocate for any
care that they believe will materially benefit their patients, regardless of any
allocation guidelines or gatekeeper directives.
Responsibility to Treat. Physicians are liable for failure to treat their
patients within the defined standard of care. The treating physician has the
sole responsibility to determine what is medically necessary. Psychiatrists
must be careful not to discharge suicidal or violent patients prematurely
merely because a managed care company does not approve continued
coverage of benefits.
Responsibility to Cooperate with Utilization Review. The
psychiatrist should cooperate with utilization reviewers’ requests for
information on proper authorization from the patient. When the company
denies benefits, it is crucial to understand and follow grievance procedures
carefully, return telephone calls from review agencies, and provide
documented justification for continued treatment.
With the advent of managed care and the need to send periodic progress
reports and documentation of signs and symptoms to third-party reviewers to
pay for treatment, some psychiatrists may diminish or exaggerate
symptomatology. The following case report and discussion illustrate the
ethical difficulties psychiatrists face in dealing with managed care.
Mrs. P admitted herself to the hospital because she was afraid she might
kill herself. She was experiencing a major depressive episode, but she


<<<PAGE 2621>>>
improved markedly during the first weeks in Dr. A’s ward. Although Dr.
A believed that Mrs. P was no longer suicidal, he thought she would
benefit significantly from continued hospitalization. Because he knew
that Mrs. P could not afford to pay for hospitalization and that the
insurance company would only pay if the patient were suicidally
depressed, he decided not to document Mrs. P’s improvement. He noted
in the chart that “the patient continues to have a risk of suicide.”
Does Dr. A engage in deception? Yes, he intentionally misleads by
what he writes and what he omits writing in the chart. Although what he
writes is true in some literal sense, his statement is misleading in the
context of treatment. Mrs. P is not suicidally depressed in the way that
she was.
What Dr. A omits from the chart is also deceptive. Whether a
particular omission is deceptive depends, in part, on the roles and
expectations of the people involved. Not telling a colleague that one
dislikes his tie is not a deception. It is merely polite unless the role or
relationship involves the expectation that one offers a candid opinion. Dr.
A’s case is different. His professional role is to document the patient’s
course, and the expectation is that he will note any significant
improvement. Thus, his failure to document Mrs. P’s progress accurately
is a kind of deception.
The second and more difficult question is whether deception is
justified in this instance. The answer depends on the reasons for and
against the deception and the alternatives available. The reasons for this
deception are apparent. Dr. A’s aim and primary obligation are to help
the patient. He believes that Mrs. P would benefit significantly from
continued hospitalization that she cannot afford. He may also believe that
it is unfair for the insurance company to refuse to pay for the inpatient
treatment of nonsuicidal depression and that his deception rectifies that
unfair practice.
Important reasons also exist against this deception. The first concerns
honesty and social trust. It is a good thing if people can rely on what
others say and write. Without some honesty and trust, many social
exchanges and practices would be impossible. Deception, even for
beneficent purposes, has real potential to damage social trust. A risk
exists that deception may damage people’s trust in the profession of


<<<PAGE 2622>>>
psychiatry and even patients’ trust in their psychiatrists. Damage to trust
may, in turn, compromise treatment.
The second reason concerns future medical treatment. If Mrs. P seeks
medical treatment in the future, the physicians who attend her will read
the misleading notes. If they believe that the notes are an accurate
account of the previous treatment, they may suggest an inappropriate
treatment for the present problem. Even if they doubt the record’s
accuracy, the psychiatrist has deprived their colleagues of an accurate
history and report. In either case, the prior deception can hinder
treatment.
The third reason concerns obligations and coverage policies. Dr. A
seems to ignore the obligation that he has to the population that is
covered by the insurance policy. He shifts a burden onto this population
by forcing the insurance company to pay for treatment that it did not
agree to cover. Perhaps the insurance company should pay for inpatient
treatment in cases such as Mrs. P’s; perhaps its policies are unreasonable
and unfair. However, Dr. A’s deception does not challenge the insurance
company and pressure it to change its policy, nor does his deception
encourage patients and their families to contest the company’s policies.
The use of deception simply circumvents, in an ad hoc way, a policy that
should be challenged and discussed.
Dr. A also seems to ignore his obligation to future patients. By
introducing an inaccuracy into the chart, he compromises the value of
medical records research. His deception works, in a small way, to deprive
future patients of the benefit of the research that relies on medical
records.
One should also consider alternatives to deception. One alternative is
to tailor the chart. Another alternative is to describe Mrs. P’s response
accurately and to discharge her to outpatient care. However, a third
alternative exists. Dr. A can accurately document the patient’s course and
can recommend continued hospitalization. He can petition the insurance
company for coverage. If the insurance company decides not to approve
further inpatient care for the patient, Dr. A can appeal that decision. This
alternative is more time consuming, and nothing guarantees that it will
succeed, but it avoids all the problems associated with the use of
deception.


<<<PAGE 2623>>>
Impaired Physicians
A physician may become impaired as the result of psychiatric or medical
disorders or the use of mind-altering and habit-forming substances (e.g.,
alcohol and drugs). Many illnesses can interfere with the cognitive and motor
skills required to provide competent medical care. Although the legal
responsibility to report an impaired physician varies, depending on the state,
the ethical responsibility remains universal. We should report an
incapacitated physician to an appropriate authority, and the reporting
physician is required to follow the specific hospital, state, and legal
procedures. A physician who treats an impaired physician should not be
required to monitor the impaired physician’s progress or fitness to return to
work. An independent physician or group of physicians who have no
conflicts of interest should perform the monitoring.
Most states have a division that investigates professional misconduct,
usually overseen by their board of health. The definitions of professional
misconduct differ by state but invariably include practicing while impaired.
Professional misconduct complaints derive mainly from the public in addition
to insurance companies, law enforcement agencies, and doctors, among
others. Many states also have a physician health committee, often
independent of the disciplinary board, which helps to ensure that impaired
physicians receive appropriate treatment and monitoring.
Physicians in Training
It is unethical to delegate authority for patient care to anyone who is not
appropriately qualified and experienced, such as a medical student or a
resident, without adequate supervision from an attending physician.
Residents are physicians in training and, as such, must provide a good deal of
patient care. Within a healthy, ethical teaching environment, residents and
medical students may care for many ill patients. However, this care should be
supervised and supported by highly trained and experienced physicians.
Patients have the right to know the level of training of their care providers
and should be informed about the resident’s or medical student’s level of
training. Residents and medical students should know and acknowledge their


<<<PAGE 2624>>>
limitations and should ask for supervision from experienced colleagues as
necessary.
Physician Charter on Professionalism
In 2001, a movement to clarify the concept of “professionalism” was begun
by the American Board of Internal Medicine. A set of principles called the
Physician Charter on Professionalism was developed, which describes what
it means for physicians to perform at their highest and most ethical level.
Table 27-1 lists the principles and commitments of professional behaviors in
the Physician Charter on Professionalism to which all physicians (including
psychiatrists) should adhere.
Table 27-2 considers some common ethical questions that psychiatrists
may face.
Table 27-1
Physician Charter on Professionalism
Fundamental Principles
• Primacy of patient welfare. Altruism contributes to the trust
central to doctor–patient relationships. Market forces, societal
pressures, and administrative exigencies must not compromise
this principle.
• Patient autonomy. Physicians must be honest with patients and
empower them to make informed decisions about treatment.
• Social justice. Physicians should work actively to eliminate
discrimination in health care, whether based on race, gender,
socioeconomic status, ethnicity, religion, or any other social
category.
A Set of Commitments
• Professional competence. Physicians must be committed to
lifelong learning. The profession as a whole must strive to see
that all of its members are competent.
• Honesty with patients. Physicians must ensure that patients
are completely and honestly informed before consenting to a
treatment; they must be empowered to decide about the course


<<<PAGE 2625>>>
of therapy. Physicians should also acknowledge that medical
errors that injure patients sometimes occur. If a patient is injured
through error, he or she should be informed promptly because
failure to do so seriously compromises patient and societal trust.
• Patient confidentiality. Fulfilling the commitment to
confidentiality is more pressing now than ever before given the
widespread use of electronic information systems for compiling
patient data.
• Maintaining appropriate relations with patients. Physicians
should never exploit patients for any sexual advantage, personal
financial gain, or other private purpose.
• Improving quality of care. This commitment entails both
maintaining clinical competence and working collaboratively with
other professionals to reduce medical error, increase patient
safety, minimize overuse of health care resources, and optimize
the outcomes of care.
• Improving access to care. Physicians must individually and
collectively strive to reduce barriers to equitable health care.
• Just distribution of finite resources. Physicians should be
committed to working with other physicians, hospitals, and
payers to develop guidelines for cost-effective care. The
physician’s professional responsibility for appropriate allocation
of resources requires scrupulous avoidance of superfluous tests
and procedures.
• Scientific knowledge. Physicians have a duty to uphold
scientific standards, to promote research, and to create new
knowledge and ensure its appropriate use.
• Maintaining trust by managing conflicts of interest.
Physicians have an obligation to recognize, disclose to the
general public, and address conflicts of interest. Relationships
between industry and opinion leaders should be disclosed.
• Professional responsibilities. Physicians are expected to
participate in the process of self-regulation, including
remediation and discipline of members who have failed to meet
professional standards.


<<<PAGE 2626>>>
Table 27-2
Ethical Questions and Answers
Topic

Question

Abandonment How can
psychiatrists
avoid being
charged with
patient
abandonment on
retirement?

Answer
Retiring psychiatrists are not
abandoning patients if they
provide their patients with
sufficient notice and make
every reasonable effort to
find follow-up care for the
patients.

Is it ethical to
This could constitute
provide only
abandonment unless the
outpatient care to
outpatient practitioner or
a seriously ill
agency arranges for their
patient who may
patients to receive inpatient
require
care from another provider.
hospitalization?
Bequests

A dying patient
bequeaths his or
her estate to his
or her treating
psychiatrist. Is
this ethical?

No. Accepting the bequest
seems improper and
exploitational of the
therapeutic relationship.
However, it may be ethical to
accept a token bequest from
a deceased patient who
named his or her psychiatrist
in the will without that
psychiatrist’s knowledge.

Competency

Is it ethical for
psychiatrists to
perform vaginal
examinations?
Hospital physical
examinations?

Psychiatrists may provide
nonpsychiatric medical
procedures if they are
competent to do so and if the
procedures do not preclude
effective psychiatric


<<<PAGE 2627>>>
treatment by distorting the
transference. Pelvic
examinations carry a high
risk of distorting the
transference and would be
better performed by another
clinician.
Can ethics
committees
review issues of
physician
competency?

Yes. Incompetency is an ethical
issue.

Confidentiality Must confidentiality
be maintained
after the death of
a patient?

Yes. Ethically, confidences
survive a patient’s death.
Exceptions include protecting
others from imminent harm or
proper legal compulsions.

Is it ethical to
Yes, if the information provided
release
is limited to that which is
information about
needed to process the
a patient to an
insurance claim.
insurance
company?
Can a videotaped
segment of a
therapy session
be used at a
workshop for
professionals?

Yes, if informed, uncoerced
consent has been obtained,
anonymity is maintained, the
audience is advised that
editing makes this an
incomplete session, and the
patient knows the purpose of
the videotape.

Should a physician
report mere

No. A physician must make
several assessments before


<<<PAGE 2628>>>
suspicion of child
abuse in a state
requiring reporting
of child abuse?

Conflict of
interest

deciding whether to report
suspected abuse. One must
consider whether abuse is
ongoing, whether abuse is
responsive to treatment, and
whether reporting will cause
potential harm. Check
specific statutes. Make safety
for potential victims the top
priority.

Is there a potential Yes. You must define your role
ethical conflict if a
in advance to the trainees or
psychiatrist has
students. Administrative
both
opinions should be obtained
psychotherapeutic
from a psychiatrist who is not
and administrative
involved in a treatment
duties in dealing
relationship with the trainee
with students or
or student.
trainees?

Diagnosis
Is it ethical to offer a Yes.
without
diagnosis based
examination
only on review of
records to
determine, for
insurance
purposes, if
suicide was the
result of illness?
Is it ethical for a
supervising
psychiatrist to
sign a diagnosis
on an insurance
form for services

Yes, if the psychiatrist ensures
that proper care is given and
the insurance form clearly
indicates the role of
supervisor and supervisee.


<<<PAGE 2629>>>
provided by a
supervisee when
the psychiatrist
has not examined
the patient?
Exploitation
(also see
Bequests)

What constitutes
Exploitation occurs when the
exploitation of the
psychiatrist uses the
therapeutic
therapeutic relationship for
relationship?
personal gain. This includes
adopting or hiring a patient
as well as sexual or financial
relationships.

Fee splitting

What is fee
splitting?

Informed
consent

Is it ethical to refuse No. It is the patient’s decision,
to divulge
not the therapist’s.

Fee splitting occurs when one
physician pays another for a
patient referral. This would
also apply to lawyers giving a
forensic psychiatrist referrals
in exchange for a percentage
of the fee. Fee splitting may
occur in an office setting if
the psychiatrist takes a
percentage of his or her
office mates’ fees for
supervision or expenses.
Costs for such items or
services must be arranged
separately. Otherwise, it
would appear that the office
owner could benefit from
referring patients to a
colleague in the office. Fee
splitting is illegal.


<<<PAGE 2630>>>
information about
a patient who has
agreed to give
this information to
those requesting
it?
Is informed consent Not if the patient is aware of the
needed when
supervisory or teaching
presenting or
process and confidentiality is
writing about case
preserved.
material?
Moonlighting

Can psychiatric
They can if their duties are not
residents ethically
beyond their ability, if they
“moonlight”?
are properly supervised, and
if the moonlighting does not
interfere with their residency
training.

Reporting

Should psychiatrists Psychiatrists are obligated to
expose or report
report colleagues’ unethical
unethical behavior
behavior. A spouse with
of a colleague or
knowledge of unethical
colleagues? Can
behavior can bring an ethical
a spouse bring an
complaint as well.
ethical complaint?

Research

How can ethical
research be
performed with
subjects who
cannot give
informed
consent?

Retirement

See Abandonment.

Consent can be given by a
legal guardian or via a living
will. Incompetent persons
have the right to withdraw
from the research project at
any time.


<<<PAGE 2631>>>
Supervision

What are the ethical The psychiatrist must spend
requirements
sufficient time to ensure that
when a
proper care is given and that
psychiatrist
the supervisee is not
supervises other
providing services that are
mental health
outside the scope of his or
professionals?
her training. It is ethical to
charge a fee for supervision.

Taping and
recording

Can videotapes of
Appropriate and explicit
patient interviews
informed consent must be
be used for
obtained. The purpose and
training purposes
scope of exposure of the
on a national level
tape must be emphasized in
(e.g., workshops,
addition to the resulting loss
board
of confidentiality.
examination
preparation)?

Table by Eugene Rubin, M.D. Data derived from the American Medical Association’s
Principles of Medical Ethics.

Military Psychiatry
Psychiatrists in the military face unique ethical problems because
confidentiality does not exist under the military code of conduct.
Psychiatrists, when treating military patients, are obligated to warn them
regarding these limits. The reasoning is related to concepts of military
necessity; however, many experts have pointed out the problems with this
rule, as many soldiers may avoid needed care rather than risk exposure.
Given the concerns about the rates of suicide in the military, there is growing
pressure to revise this standard. Anecdotally many military psychiatrists
choose to use their judgment as to what they are required to reveal to a
patient’s superiors.
References
Blass DM, Rye RM, Robbins BM, Miner MM, Handel S, Carroll JL Jr,


<<<PAGE 2632>>>
Rabins PV. Ethical issues in mobile psychiatric treatment with homebound
elderly patients: The psychogeriatric assessment and treatment in city
housing experience. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2006;54(5):843–848.
Cervantes AN, Hanson A. Dual agency and ethics conflicts in correctional
practice: Sources and solutions. J Am Acad Psychiatry Law.
2013;41(1):72–78.
DuVal G. Ethics in psychiatric research: Study design issues. Can J
Psychiatry. 2004;49(1):55–59.
Fleischman AR, Wood EB. Ethical issues in research involving victims of
terror. J Urban Health. 2002;79:315–321.
Green SA. The ethical commitments of academic faculty in psychiatric
education. Acad Psychiatry. 2006;30(1):48–54.
Kaldjian LC, Weir RF, Duffy TP. A clinician’s approach to clinical ethical
reasoning. J Gen Intern Med. 2005;20:306–311.
Kipnis K. Gender, sex, and professional ethics in child and adolescent
psychiatry. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2004;13(3):695–708.
Kontos N, Freudenreich O, Querques J. Beyond capacity: Identifying ethical
dilemmas underlying capacity evaluation requests. Psychosomatics.
2013;54(2):103–110.
Marrero I, Bell M, Dunn LB, Roberts LW. Assessing professionalism and
ethics knowledge and skills: Preferences of psychiatry residents. Acad
Psychiatry. 2013;37(6):392–397.
Merlino JP. Psychoanalysis and ethics–relevant then, essential now. J Am
Acad Psychoanal Dyn Psychiatry. 2006;34(2):231–247.
Parker M. Judging capacity: Paternalism and the risk-related standard. J Law
Med. 2004;11(4):482–491.
Roberts LW. Ethical philanthropy in academic psychiatry. Am J Psychiatry.
2006;163(5):772–778.
Schneider PL, Bramstedt KA. When psychiatry and bioethics disagree about
patient decision making capacity (DMC). J Med Ethics. 2006;32:90–93.
Simon L. Psychotherapy as civics: The patient and therapists as citizens.
Ethical Hum Psychol Psychiatry. 2005;7(1):57–64.
Strebler A, Valentin C. Considering ethics, aesthetics and the dignity of the
individual. Cult Med Psychiatry. 2014;38(1):35–59.
Wada K, Doering M, Rudnick A. Ethics education for psychiatry residents. A
mixed-design retrospective evaluation of an introductory course and a


<<<PAGE 2633>>>
quarterly seminar. Camb Q Healthc Ethics. 2013;22(04):425–435.
Weiss LW. Ethics in psychiatry. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Vol.
2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2017.


<<<PAGE 2634>>>
28
Forensic and Legal Issues
“Forensic” is from Latin and means “of the forum.” In Rome, criminal cases
were presented in a public forum, hence the modern connotation of the term
is relating to courts of law. At various times, psychiatry and the law intersect.
Forensic psychiatry is the branch of psychiatry that examines this
intersection. This chapter considers some of the legal aspects of psychiatry.

MEDICAL MALPRACTICE
Medical malpractice is a tort or civil wrong. It is a wrong resulting from a
physician’s negligence. Simply put, negligence means doing something that a
physician with a duty to care for the patient should not do, or not doing
something they should, as defined by current medical practice. Usually,
expert witnesses help to establish the standard of care. Also, journal articles;
professional textbooks, such as the Kaplan and Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry; professional practice guidelines; and ethical practices
promulgated by professional organizations all help to establish the standard
of care.
To prove malpractice, the plaintiff (e.g., patient, or family) must establish
by a preponderance of evidence that (1) a doctor–patient relationship existed
that created a duty of care, (2) a deviation from the standard of care occurred,
(3) the patient was damaged, and (4) the deviation directly caused the
damage.
These elements of a malpractice claim are sometimes called the 4 Ds (duty,
deviation, damage, and direct causation).
Each of the four elements of a malpractice claim must be present, or there
can be no finding of liability. For example, a psychiatrist whose negligence is


<<<PAGE 2635>>>
the direct cause of harm to an individual (physical, psychological, or both) is
not liable for malpractice if no doctor–patient relationship existed to create a
duty of care. Psychiatrists are not likely to be successfully sued if they advise
on a radio program, particularly if they begin with the caveat that there is no
doctor–patient relationship intended from the general advice-giving. No
malpractice claim will be sustained against a psychiatrist if a patient’s
worsening condition is unrelated to negligent care. Not every adverse
outcome is the result of negligence. Psychiatrists cannot guarantee correct
diagnoses and treatments. When the psychiatrist provides due care, they may
make mistakes without necessarily incurring liability. Most psychiatric cases
are complicated. Psychiatrists make judgment calls when selecting a
particular treatment course among the many options that may exist. In
hindsight, the decision may prove wrong but not be a deviation in the
standard of care.
In addition to negligence suits, patients can sue psychiatrists for the
intentional torts of assault, battery, false imprisonment, defamation, fraud or
misrepresentation, invasion of privacy, and intentional infliction of emotional
distress. In an intentional tort, wrongdoers intend harm to another person or
realize, or should have realized, that such harm is likely to result from their
actions. For example, telling a patient that sex with the therapist is therapeutic
perpetrates a fraud. Most malpractice policies do not provide coverage for
intentional torts.
Negligent Prescription Practices
Negligent prescription practices usually include exceeding recommended
dosages and then failing to adjust the medication level to therapeutic levels,
unreasonable mixing of drugs, prescribing medications that are not indicated,
prescribing too many drugs at one time, and failing to disclose medication
effects. Elderly patients frequently take a variety of drugs prescribed by
different physicians. We should only prescribe multiple psychotropic
medications with special care because of possible harmful interactions and
adverse effects. We should also carefully document our reasons for
prescribing multiple medications.
Psychiatrists who prescribe medications must explain the diagnosis, risks,
and benefits of the drug within reason and as circumstances permit (Table 28-


<<<PAGE 2636>>>
1). Obtaining informed consent can be problematic if a psychiatric patient has
diminished cognitive capacity because of mental illness or chronic brain
impairment. In these cases, a substitute health care decision maker may need
to provide consent.
We should obtain informed consent each time we change a medication and
introduce a new drug. If a medication injures a patient and the doctor did not
inform them of this risk, there may be sufficient grounds for a malpractice
action.
The question is often asked: How frequently should patients be seen for
medication follow-up? The answer is that we should see patients according to
their clinical needs. There is no stock answer about the frequency of visits.
The longer the time interval between visits, however, the higher the
likelihood of adverse drug reactions and clinical developments. Patients
taking medications should probably not go beyond 6 months for follow-up
visits. Managed care policies that do not reimburse for frequent follow-up
appointments can result in a psychiatrist prescribing large amounts of
medications. The psychiatrist is duty-bound to provide appropriate treatment
to the patient, quite apart from managed care or other payment policies.
There are several other areas of negligence involving medication that may
result in malpractice actions. A psychiatrist may fail to treat adverse effects
that they have, or should have, recognized. They may also fail to monitor a
patient’s compliance with prescription limits or fail to prescribe the
appropriate amount of medication. Prescribing addictive drugs to a
vulnerable patient creates a risk, as can failing to seek appropriate
consultation when indicated. Finally, stopping a medication inappropriately
can be a cause of a malpractice action.
Split Treatment
In split treatment, the psychiatrist provides medication, and a nonmedical
therapist conducts the psychotherapy. The following vignette illustrates a
possible complication.
Table 28-1
Informed Consent:
Disclosed

Reasonable

Information

to

Be


<<<PAGE 2637>>>
Although there exists no consistently accepted standard for
information disclosure for any given medical or psychiatric
situation, as a rule of thumb, five areas of information are generally
provided:
1. Diagnosis—description of the condition or problem
2. Treatment—nature and purpose of proposed treatment
3. Consequences—risks and benefits of the proposed treatment
4. Alternatives—viable alternatives to the proposed treatment,
including risks and benefits
5. Prognosis—projected outcome with and without treatment
Table by RI Simon, M.D.

A psychiatrist provided medications for a depressed 43-year-old woman.
A master’s level counselor saw the patient for outpatient psychotherapy.
The psychiatrist saw the patient for 20 minutes during the initial
evaluation and prescribed a tricyclic drug, and the patient was prescribed
sufficient drugs for follow-up in 3 months. The psychiatrist initially
diagnosed recurrent major depression. The patient denied suicidal
ideation but had markedly diminished appetite and sleep. The patient had
a long history of recurrent depression with suicide attempts. There were
no further discussions between the psychiatrist and the counselor, who
saw the patient once a week for 30 minutes in psychotherapy. Within 3
weeks, after a failed romantic relationship, the patient stopped taking her
antidepressant medication, started to drink heavily, and committed
suicide with an overdose of alcohol and antidepressant drugs. The
patient’s family sued the counselor and psychiatrist for negligent
diagnosis and treatment.
Psychiatrists must do an adequate evaluation, obtain prior medical records,
and understand that no such thing as a partial patient exists. Split treatments
are potential malpractice traps because patients can “fall between the cracks”
of fragmented care. The psychiatrist retains full responsibility for the
patient’s care in a split-treatment situation. This responsibility does not
preempt the responsibility of the other mental health professionals involved


<<<PAGE 2638>>>
in the patient’s treatment. Section V, annotation 3 of the Principles of
Medical Ethics with Annotations Especially Applicable to Psychiatry, states:
“When the psychiatrist assumes a collaborative or supervisory role with
another mental health worker, he/she must expend sufficient time to assure
that proper care is given.”
In managed care or other settings, a marginalized role of merely
prescribing medication apart from a working doctor–patient relationship does
not meet generally accepted standards of good clinical care. The psychiatrist
must be more than just a medication technician. Fragmented care in which
the psychiatrist only dispenses medication while remaining uninformed about
the patient’s overall clinical status constitutes substandard treatment that may
lead to a malpractice action. At a minimum, such a practice diminishes the
efficacy of the drug treatment itself or may even lead to the patient’s failure
to take the prescribed medication.
Split-treatment situations require that the psychiatrist remain fully
informed of the patient’s clinical status as well as the nature and quality of
treatment the patient is receiving from the nonmedical therapist. In a
collaborative relationship, the psychiatrist and therapist share the
responsibility for the patient’s care according to their qualifications and
limitations. The responsibilities of each discipline do not diminish those of
the other disciplines. The treatment team should explain the separate
responsibilities of each discipline to the patient. The psychiatrist and the
nonmedical therapist must periodically evaluate the patient’s clinical
condition and requirements to determine whether the collaboration should
continue. On termination of the collaborative relationship, both parties
treating the patient should inform the patient either separately or jointly. In
split treatments, if the patient sues the nonmedical therapist, the collaborating
psychiatrist will likely be sued also and vice versa.
Psychiatrists who prescribe medications in a split-treatment arrangement
should be able to hospitalize a patient if it becomes necessary. If the
psychiatrist does not have admitting privileges, they should make
prearrangements with other psychiatrists who can hospitalize patients if
emergencies arise. Many community mental health organizations, group
psychiatry practices, and managed care companies rely on split treatment, and
this is a potential malpractice minefield.


<<<PAGE 2639>>>
PRIVILEGE AND CONFIDENTIALITY
Privilege
Privilege is the right to maintain secrecy or confidentiality in the face of a
subpoena. Privileged communications are statements made by certain persons
within a relationship—such as husband–wife, priest–penitent, or doctor–
patient—that the law protects from forced disclosure on the witness stand. In
the case of the doctor–patient relationship, the right of privilege belongs to
the patient, not to the physician so that the patient can waive the right.
Psychiatrists, who are licensed to practice medicine, may claim medical
privilege, but privilege has some qualifications. For example, this privilege
does not exist in military courts, regardless of whether the physician is in the
military. Also, the state where the trial takes place is irrelevant even if the
state recognizes such privilege as military courts are not under the
jurisdiction of the states.
In 1996, the United States Supreme Court recognized a psychotherapist–
patient privilege in Jaffee v. Redmon. Emphasizing the critical public and
private interests served by the psychotherapist–patient privilege, the court
wrote:
Because we agree with the judgment of the state legislatures and the
Advisory Committee that a psychotherapist-patient privilege will serve a
“public good transcending the normal predominant principle utilizing all
rational means for ascertaining truth”… we hold that confidential
communications between a licensed psychotherapist and her patients in the
course of diagnosis or treatment are protected from compelled disclosure
under Rule 501 of the Federal Rules of Evidence.
Confidentiality
A long-held premise of medical ethics binds physicians to hold secret all
information given by patients. This professional obligation is called
confidentiality. Confidentiality applies to certain populations and not to
others; a group that is within the circle of confidentiality shares information
without receiving specific permission from a patient. Such groups include, in
addition to the physician, other staff members treating the patient, clinical


<<<PAGE 2640>>>
supervisors, and consultants.
A subpoena can force a psychiatrist to breach confidentiality, and courts
must be able to compel witnesses to testify for the law to function adequately.
A subpoena (“under penalty”) is an order to appear as a witness in court or at
a deposition. Physicians usually are served with a subpoena duces tecum,
which requires that they also produce their relevant records and documents.
Although the power to issue subpoenas belongs to a judge, they are routinely
issued at the request of an attorney representing a party to an action.
In bona fide emergencies, we can release information in as limited a way
as feasible to carry out necessary interventions. We should try, time allowing,
to obtain the patient’s permission, and we should always debrief the patient
after an emergency as to what information we released.
As a rule, clinical information may be shared with the patient’s permission
—preferably written permission, although oral permission suffices with
proper documentation. Each release is good for only one piece of
information, and the psychiatrist should obtain permission for each
subsequent release, even to the same party. Permission overcomes only the
legal barrier, not the clinical one; the release is permission, not an obligation.
If a clinician believes that the information may be destructive, they should
discuss this with the patient, and they can refuse the release, with some
exceptions.
Third-Party Payers and Supervision. Increased insurance coverage for
health care is precipitating a concern about confidentiality and the conceptual
model of psychiatric practice. Today, insurance covers about 70 percent of all
health care bills. An insurance carrier must be able to obtain information with
which it can assess the administration and costs of various programs to
provide coverage.
Quality control of care necessitates that confidentiality is not absolute; it
also requires a review of individual patients and therapists. The therapist in
training must breach a patient’s confidence by discussing the case with a
supervisor. Institutionalized patients who have been ordered by a court to get
treatment must have their individualized treatment programs submitted to a
mental health board.
Discussions about Patients. In general, psychiatrists have multiple


<<<PAGE 2641>>>
loyalties: to patients, to society, and the profession. Through their writings,
teaching, and seminars, they can share their acquired knowledge and
experience and provide information that may be valuable to other
professionals and the public. It is not easy to write or talk about a psychiatric
patient without breaching the confidentiality of the relationship. Unlike
physical ailments, which we can usually discuss without anyone recognizing
the patient, a psychiatric history usually entails a discussion of distinguishing
characteristics. Psychiatrists have an obligation not to disclose identifiable
patient information (and, perhaps, any descriptive patient information)
without appropriate informed consent. Failure to obtain informed consent
could result in a claim based on breach of privacy, defamation, or both.
The Internet and Social Media. Psychiatrists and other mental health
professionals must be aware of the legal implications of discussing patients
over the Internet. Internet communications about patients are not confidential,
are subject to hacking, and are open to legal subpoenas. Some psychiatrists
have blogged about patients thinking they were sufficiently disguised only to
find that others do recognize them, including the involved patient. Some
professional organizations have electronic mailing lists in which they ask
advice about patients from their colleagues or make referrals and, in so doing,
provide detailed information about the patient, which others can trace.
Similarly, using social media to communicate about patients is equally risky.
Child Abuse. In many states, all physicians must take a course on child
abuse for medical licensure. All states now legally require that psychiatrists
(along with others), when suspecting child abuse, must immediately report
this to an appropriate agency. In this situation, confidentiality is decisively
limited by legal statute because potential or actual harm to vulnerable
children outweighs the value of confidentiality in a psychiatric setting.
Although many complex psychodynamic nuances accompany the required
reporting of suspected child abuse, such reports generally are considered
ethically justified.

HIGH-RISK CLINICAL SITUATIONS
Tardive Dyskinesia


<<<PAGE 2642>>>
It is estimated that at least 10 to 20 percent of patients and perhaps as high as
50 percent of patients treated with first-generation antipsychotics for more
than 1 year exhibit some tardive dyskinesia. These figures are even higher for
elderly patients. Despite the possibility for many tardive dyskinesia–related
suits, relatively few psychiatrists have been sued. Also, patients who develop
tardive dyskinesia may not have the physical energy and psychological
motivation to pursue litigation. Allegations of negligence involving tardive
dyskinesia occur when there is a failure to evaluate a patient properly, a
failure to obtain informed consent, a negligent diagnosis of a patient’s
condition, and a failure to monitor.
Suicidal Patients
Psychiatrists may face legal action when their patients commit suicide. This
is particularly true when psychiatric inpatients kill themselves. Psychiatrists
are assumed to have more control over inpatients, making the suicide
preventable.
The evaluation of suicide risk is one of the most complex, dauntingly
difficult clinical tasks in psychiatry. Suicide is a rare event. In our current
state of knowledge, clinicians cannot accurately predict when or if a patient
will commit suicide. No professional standards exist for predicting who will
or will not commit suicide. Professional standards do exist for assessing
suicide risk, but at best, only the degree of suicide risk can be judged
clinically after a comprehensive psychiatric assessment.
A review of the case law on suicide reveals that certain affirmative
precautions should be taken with a suspected or confirmed suicidal patient.
For example, failing to perform a reasonable assessment of a suicidal
patient’s risk for suicide or implement an appropriate precautionary plan will
likely render a practitioner liable. The law tends to assume that suicide is
preventable if it is foreseeable. Courts carefully scrutinize suicide cases to
determine if a patient’s suicide was foreseeable. Foreseeability is a
deliberately vague legal term that has no comparable clinical counterpart, a
common sense rather than a scientific construct. It does not (and should not)
imply that clinicians can predict suicide. Foreseeability should not be
confused with preventability, however. In hindsight, many suicides seem
preventable that were not foreseeable.


<<<PAGE 2643>>>
Violent Patients
Psychiatrists who treat violent or potentially violent patients may be sued for
failure to control aggressive outpatients and for the discharge of violent
inpatients. Psychiatrists could be sued for failing to protect society from the
violent acts of their patients if it was reasonable for the psychiatrist to have
known about the patient’s violent tendencies and if the psychiatrist could
have done something that could have safeguarded the public. In the landmark
case Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California, the California
Supreme Court ruled that mental health professionals have a duty to protect
identifiable, endangered third parties from imminent threats of serious harm
made by their outpatients. Since then, courts and state legislatures have
increasingly held psychiatrists to a fictional standard of having to predict
future behavior (dangerousness) of their potentially violent patients. Research
has consistently demonstrated that psychiatrists cannot predict future
violence with any dependable accuracy.
The duty to protect patients and endangered third parties is primarily a
professional and moral obligation and, only secondarily, a legal duty. Most
psychiatrists acted to protect both their patients and others threatened by
violence long before Tarasoff.
If a patient threatens harm to another person, most states require that the
psychiatrist perform some intervention that might prevent the harm from
occurring. In states with duty-to-warn statutes, the states define the options
available to psychiatrists and psychotherapists. In states offering no such
guidance, health care providers should use their clinical judgment and act to
protect endangered third persons. Typically, a variety of options to warn and
protect are clinically and legally available, including voluntary
hospitalization, involuntary hospitalization (when meeting civil commitment
requirements), warning the intended victim of the threat, notifying the police,
adjusting medication, and seeing the patient more frequently. Warning others
of danger, by itself, is usually insufficient. Psychiatrists should consider the
Tarasoff duty to be a national standard of care, even if they practice in states
that do not have a duty to warn and protect.
Tarasoff I. The 1976 case Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California
(now known as Tarasoff I) raised the issue of the legal duty to warn. In this


<<<PAGE 2644>>>
case, Prosenjit Poddar, a student and a voluntary outpatient at the mental
health clinic of the University of California, told his therapist that he intended
to kill a student readily identified as Tatiana Tarasoff. Realizing the
seriousness of the intention, the therapist, with the concurrence of a
colleague, decided to commit Poddar for observation under a 72-hour
emergency psychiatric detention provision of the California commitment law.
The therapist notified the campus police, both orally and in writing that
Poddar was dangerous and should be committed.
Concerned about the breach of confidentiality, the therapist’s supervisor
vetoed the recommendation and ordered all records relating to Poddar’s
treatment destroyed. At the same time, the campus police temporarily
detained Poddar but released him on his assurance that he would “stay away
from that girl.” Poddar stopped going to the clinic when he learned from the
police about his therapist’s recommendation to commit him. Two months
later, he carried out his previously announced threat to kill Tatiana. The
young woman’s parents thereupon sued the university for negligence.
As a consequence, the California Supreme Court, which deliberated the
case for an unprecedented time of about 14 months, ruled that a physician or
a psychotherapist who has reason to believe that a patient may injure or kill
someone should warn the potential victim.
The discharge of the duty imposed on the therapist to warn intended
victims against danger may take one or more forms, depending on the case.
Therefore, stated the court, it may call for the therapist to notify the intended
victim or others likely to notify the victim of the danger, to notify the police,
or to take whatever other steps are reasonably necessary under the
circumstances.
The Tarasoff I ruling does not require therapists to report a patient’s
fantasies; instead, it requires them to report an intended homicide. The
therapist must exercise sound judgment to decide when this is the case.
Tarasoff II. In 1982, the California Supreme Court issued a second ruling in
the case of Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California (now known as
Tarasoff II), which broadened its earlier ruling, extending the duty to warn, to
include the duty to protect.
The Tarasoff II ruling has stimulated intense debates in the medicolegal
field. Lawyers, judges, and expert witnesses argue the definition of


<<<PAGE 2645>>>
protection, the nature of the relationship between the therapist and the patient,
and the balance between public safety and individual privacy.
Clinicians argue that the duty to protect hinders treatment because a patient
may not trust a doctor if confidentiality is not maintained. Furthermore,
because it is not easy to determine whether a patient is sufficiently dangerous
to justify long-term incarceration, unnecessary involuntary hospitalization
may occur because of a therapist’s defensive practices.
As a result of such debates in the medicolegal field, since 1976, the state
courts have not made a uniform interpretation of the Tarasoff II ruling (the
duty to protect). In general, clinicians should note whether a specific
identifiable victim seems to be in imminent and probable danger from the
threat of an action contemplated by a mentally ill patient. The imminent harm
should also be potentially serious or severe. Usually, the patient must be a
danger to another person and not to property; the therapist should take
clinically reasonable action.

HOSPITALIZATION
All states provide for some form of involuntary hospitalization. Such action
usually is taken when psychiatric patients present a danger to themselves or
others in their environment to the extent that their urgent need for treatment
in a closed institution is evident. Individual states allow involuntary
hospitalization when patients are unable to care for themselves adequately.
The doctrine of parens patriae allows the state to intervene and to act as a
surrogate parent for those who are unable to care for themselves or who may
harm themselves. In English common law, parens patriae (“father of his
country”) dates to the time of King Edward I and originally referred to a
monarch’s duty to protect the people. The US. common law transformed the
doctrine into a paternalism in which the state acts for persons who are
mentally ill and for minors.
The statutes governing hospitalization of persons who are mentally ill
generally have been designated commitment laws, but psychiatrists have long
considered the term to be undesirable. Commitment legally means a warrant
for imprisonment. The American Bar Association and the American
Psychiatric Association have recommended that state governments replace
the term commitment with the less offensive and more accurate term


<<<PAGE 2646>>>
hospitalization, which most states have adopted. Although this change does
not correct past mistakes, the emphasis on hospitalization is in keeping with
psychiatrists’ interest in treatment rather than punishment.
Procedures of Admission
Four procedures of admission to psychiatric facilities have been endorsed by
the American Bar Association to safeguard civil liberties and to make sure
that no one can capriciously force a person into a mental hospital. Although
each of the 50 states has the power to enact its laws on psychiatric
hospitalization, the procedures outlined here are gaining much acceptance.
Informal Admission. Informal admission operates on the general hospital
model, in which the procedure for a psychiatric admission is the same as that
for other patients. Under such circumstances, the ordinary doctor–patient
relationship applies, with the patient free to enter and to leave, even against
medical advice.
Voluntary Admission. In cases of voluntary admission, patients apply in
writing for admission to a psychiatric hospital. They may come to the
hospital on the advice of a personal physician, or they may seek help on their
own. In either case, we would admit patients if an examination reveals the
need for hospital treatment. The patient is free to leave, even against medical
advice.
Temporary Admission. We may use a temporary admission for patients
who are so senile or so confused that they require hospitalization and are not
able to make decisions on their own and for patients who are so acutely
disturbed that they must be admitted immediately to a psychiatric hospital on
an emergency basis. Under the procedure, a hospital would admit a person on
the written recommendation of one physician. After admitting the patient, a
psychiatrist or the hospital staff must confirm the need for hospitalization.
The procedure is temporary because we cannot hold these patients against
their will for more than a set time, usually 15 days.
Involuntary Admission. Involuntary admission involves the question of
whether patients are suicidal and, thus, a danger to themselves or homicidal


<<<PAGE 2647>>>
and thus a danger to others. Because these persons lack insight into their
illness, a relative or friend may make the application for admission to a
hospital. After making the application, at least two physicians must examine
the patient, and if both physicians confirm the need for hospitalization, the
hospital can admit the patient.
Involuntary hospitalization involves an established procedure for written
notification of the next of kin. Furthermore, the patients have access at any
time to legal counsel, who can bring the case before a judge. If the judge does
not think that there is an indication for hospitalization, that judge can order
the patient’s release.
Involuntary admission allows us to hospitalize a patient for a set time,
usually defined by the state and often in the range of 60 days. After this time,
if the patient is to remain hospitalized, the case must be reviewed periodically
by a board consisting of psychiatrists, nonpsychiatric physicians, lawyers,
and other citizens not connected with the institution.
Involuntarily hospitalized persons who believe that they should be released
have the right to file a petition for a writ of habeas corpus. Under the law,
those who believe that they have been illegally deprived of liberty can
proclaim a writ of habeas corpus. The legal procedure asks a court to decide
whether a patient was hospitalized without due process of law. The courts
must hear this case immediately, regardless of how the motion is filed.
Hospitals are obligated to submit the petitions to the court immediately.

RIGHT TO TREATMENT
Among the rights of patients, the right to the standard quality of care is
fundamental. This right has been litigated in highly publicized cases under
the slogan of “right to treatment.”
In 1966, Judge David Bazelon, speaking for the District of Columbia Court
of Appeals in Rouse v. Cameron, noted that the purpose of involuntary
hospitalization is treatment and concluded that the absence of treatment
draws into question the constitutionality of the confinement. Treatment in
exchange for liberty is the logic of the ruling. In this case, the patient was
discharged on a writ of habeas corpus, the basic legal remedy to ensure
liberty. Judge Bazelon further held that if alternative treatments that infringe
less on personal liberty are available, involuntary hospitalization cannot take


<<<PAGE 2648>>>
place.
Alabama Federal Court judge Frank Johnson was more venturesome in the
decree he rendered in 1971 in Wyatt v. Stickney. The Wyatt case was a classaction proceeding brought under newly developed rules that sought not
release but treatment. Judge Johnson ruled that persons civilly committed to a
mental institution have a constitutional right to receive such individual
treatment as will give them a reasonable opportunity to be cured or to have
their mental condition improved. Judge Johnson set out minimum
requirements for staffing, specified physical facilities, and nutritional
standards and required individualized treatment plans.
The new codes, more detailed than the old ones, include the right to be free
from excessive or unnecessary medication; the right to privacy and dignity;
the right to the least restrictive environment; the unrestricted right to be
visited by attorneys, clergy, and private physicians; and the right to refuse
lobotomies, electroconvulsive treatments, and other procedures without fully
informed consent. Patients can be required to perform therapeutic tasks but
not hospital chores unless they volunteer for them and receive the federal
minimum wage as payment. This requirement is an attempt to eliminate the
practice of peonage, in which state hospitals forced psychiatric patients to
work at menial tasks, without payment, for the benefit of the state.
In several states today, medication or electroconvulsive therapy cannot be
forcibly administered to a patient without first obtaining court approval,
which may take as long as 10 days.

RIGHT TO REFUSE TREATMENT
The right to refuse treatment is a legal doctrine that holds that, except in
emergencies, we cannot force patients to accept treatment against their will.
An “emergency” is a condition in clinical practice that requires immediate
intervention to prevent death or severe harm to the patient or another person
or to prevent deterioration of the patient’s clinical state.
In the 1976 case of O’Connor v. Donaldson, the Supreme Court of the
United States ruled that harmless mentally ill patients cannot be confined
against their will without treatment if they can survive outside. According to
the Court, a finding of mental illness alone cannot justify a state’s confining
persons in a hospital against their will. Instead, involuntarily confined


<<<PAGE 2649>>>
patients must be considered dangerous to themselves or others or possibly so
unable to care for themselves that they cannot survive outside. As a result of
the 1979 case of Rennie v. Klein, patients have the right to refuse treatment
and to use an appeal process. As a result of the 1981 case of Roger v. Oken,
patients have an absolute right to refuse treatment, but a guardian may
authorize treatment.
Many rightly question psychiatrists’ ability to predict dangerousness. Also,
many psychiatrists worry about the risk entailed by involuntarily
hospitalizing a patient if the patient can then sue them for monetary damages
for infringing on the patient’s civil rights.

CIVIL RIGHTS OF PATIENTS
Because of several clinical, public, and legal movements, criteria for the civil
rights of persons who are mentally ill, apart from their rights as patients, have
been both established and affirmed.
Least Restrictive Alternative
The principle of least restrictive alternative holds that patients have the right
to receive the least restrictive means of treatment for the requisite clinical
effect. Therefore, if it is possible to treat a patient as an outpatient, we should
not pursue commitment. Similarly, if it is safe to treat a patient in an open
ward, we should not seclude them.
Although reasonably straightforward on first reading, the difficulty arises
when clinicians attempt to apply the concept to choose among involuntary
medication, seclusion, and restraint as the intervention of choice.
Distinguishing among these interventions based on restrictiveness proves to
be a purely subjective exercise fraught with personal bias. Moreover, each of
these three interventions is both more and less restrictive than each of the
other two. Nevertheless, we should make an effort to think in terms of
restrictiveness when deciding how to treat patients.
Visitation Rights
Patients have the right to receive visitors and to do so at reasonable hours
(customary hospital visiting hours). Hospitals have to allow for the fact that


<<<PAGE 2650>>>
at certain times, a patient’s clinical condition may not permit visits. We
should document when this is the case, as we should not suspend such rights
without good reason.
Specific categories of visitors are not limited to the regular visiting hours;
these include a patient’s attorney, private physician, and members of the
clergy—all of whom, broadly speaking, have unrestricted access to the
patient, including the right to privacy in their discussions. Even here, a bona
fide emergency may delay such visits. Again, the patient’s needs come first.
Under similar reasoning, we should curtail specific noxious visits (e.g., a
patient’s relative bringing drugs into the ward).
Communication Rights
Patients should generally have free and open communication with the outside
world by telephone or mail, but this right varies regionally to some degree.
Some jurisdictions charge the hospital administration with responsibility for
monitoring the communications of patients. In some areas, hospitals must
make available reasonable supplies of paper, envelopes, and stamps for
patient’s use.
Specific circumstances affect communication rights. A patient hospitalized
with an associated criminal charge of making harassing or threatening phone
calls should not have unrestricted access to the telephone, and similar
considerations apply to mail. As a rule, however, patients should be allowed
private telephone calls, and we should not invade their privacy by listening in
or opening their mail.
Private Rights
Patients have several rights to privacy. In addition to confidentiality, they are
allowed private bathroom and shower space, secure storage space for clothing
and other belongings, and adequate floor space per person. They also have
the right to wear their clothes and to carry their own money.
Economic Rights
Apart from special considerations related to incompetence, psychiatric
patients generally are permitted to manage their financial affairs. One feature
of this fiscal right is the requirement that we pay patients if they work in the


<<<PAGE 2651>>>
institution (e.g., gardening or preparing food). This right often creates tension
between the valid therapeutic need for activity, including jobs, and
exploitative labor. A consequence of this tension is that some hospitals have
had to eliminate valuable occupational, vocational, and rehabilitative
programs because of the failure of legislatures to supply the funding to pay
wages to patients who participate in these programs.
Table 28-2
Indications and Contraindications for Seclusion and
Restraint
Indications
Prevent clear, imminent harm to the patient or others
Prevent significant disruption to treatment program or physical
surroundings
Assist in treatment as part of ongoing behavior therapy
Decrease sensory overstimulationa
Patient’s voluntary reasonable request
Contraindications
Extremely unstable medical and psychiatric conditionsb
Delirious or demented patients who are unable to tolerate decreased
stimulationb
Overtly suicidal patientsb
Patients with severe drug reactions or overdoses or who require
close monitoring of drug dosagesb
For punishment or convenience of staff
aSeclusion only.
bUnless close supervision and direct observation are provided.

Data from The Psychiatric Uses of Seclusion and Restraint (Task Force Report No. 22).
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.

SECLUSION AND RESTRAINT
Seclusion and restraint raise complex legal issues. Seclusion and restraint
have both indications and contraindications (Table 28-2). Seclusion and


<<<PAGE 2652>>>
restraint have become increasingly regulated over the past decade.
Legal challenges to the use of restraints and seclusion have been brought
on behalf of institutionalized persons with psychiatric illnesses or cognitive
disabilities. Typically, these lawsuits do not stand alone but are part of a
challenge to a wide range of alleged abuses.
In general, courts hold, or consent decrees provide that hospitals can only
implement restraints and seclusion when a patient creates a risk of harm to
self or others, and no less restrictive alternative is available. Table 28-3 lists
additional restrictions.
Table 28-3
Restrictions for Seclusion and Restraint
Restraints and seclusion can be implemented only when a patient
creates a risk of harm to self or others and no less restrictive
alternative is available.
Restraint and seclusion can only be implemented by a written order
from an appropriate medical official.
Orders are to be confined to specific, time-limited periods.
A patient’s condition must be regularly reviewed and documented.
Any extension of an original order must be reviewed and
reauthorized.

INFORMED CONSENT
Lawyers representing an injured claimant now invariably add to a claim of
negligent performance of procedures (malpractice) an informed consent claim
as another possible area of liability. Ironically, this is one claim under which
there is no requirement for expert testimony. The usual claim of medical
malpractice requires the litigant to produce an expert to establish that the
defendant physician departed from accepted medical practice. However, in a
case in which the physician did not obtain informed consent, the fact that the
treatment was technically well performed, was in accord with the generally
accepted standard of care, and effected a complete cure is immaterial. As a
practical matter, however, unless the treatment had adverse consequences, a
complainant will not get far with a jury for actions based solely on an


<<<PAGE 2653>>>
allegation that the doctor performed treatment without consent.
In the case of minors, the parent or guardian must give consent to medical
treatment. By statute, most states, however, list specific diseases and
conditions that a minor can consent to have treated—including venereal
disease, pregnancy, substance dependence, alcohol abuse, and contagious
diseases. In an emergency, a physician can treat a minor without parental
consent. The trend is to adopt the so-called mature minor rule, which allows
minors to consent to treatment under ordinary circumstances. As a result of
the Supreme Court’s 1967 Gault decision, all juveniles must now be
represented by counsel, must be able to confront witnesses, and must be
given proper notice of any charges. Emancipated minors have the rights of an
adult when they can show that they are living as adults with control over their
own lives.
Consent Form
The essential elements of a consent form should include a fair explanation of
the procedures and their purposes. The form should identify those procedures
that are experimental. Also, the form should describe any attendant
discomforts and risks than can be expected, as well as the benefits that are
reasonable to expect. The form should also disclose appropriate alternative
procedures that may be advantageous to the patient with an offer to answer
any inquiries concerning the procedures. Finally, the form should explain that
the patient is free to withdraw patient consent and to discontinue participation
in the project or activity at any time without prejudice.
Some theorists suggest that a standardized discussion that covers the issues
noted above can substitute for a form. In such a case, it would be essential to
document the discussion.

CHILD CUSTODY
The action of a court in a child custody dispute centers on the child’s best
interests. The maxim reflects the idea that a natural parent does not have an
inherent right to be named a custodial parent, but the presumption, although a
bit eroded, remains in favor of the mother in the case of young children. As a
rule, the courts presume that the welfare of a child of tender years generally is
best served by maternal custody when the mother is a good and fit parent.


<<<PAGE 2654>>>
Giving the mother custody may also serve her best interest, as many parents
may not otherwise ever resolve the pain of losing a child, but her best interest
is not to be equated ipso facto with the best interest of the child. Care and
protection proceedings are the court’s interventions in the welfare of a child
when the parents are unable to care for the child.
More fathers are asserting custodial claims. In about 5 percent of all cases,
fathers are named custodians. With more women going to work outside the
home, and more men assuming the primary role in child care, the traditional
rationale for maternal custody has less force today than it did in the past.
Currently, every state has a statute allowing a court, usually a juvenile
court, to assume jurisdiction over a neglected or abused child and to remove
the child from parental custody. It usually orders that a welfare or probation
department supervise the care and custody of the child.

TESTAMENTARY AND CONTRACTUAL CAPACITY AND
COMPETENCE
Courts may ask psychiatrists to evaluate patients’ testamentary capacities or
their competence to make a will. Three psychological abilities are necessary
to prove this competence. Patients must know the nature and the extent of
their bounty (property), the fact that they are making a bequest, and the
identities of their natural beneficiaries (spouse, children, and other relatives).
When probating a will, one of the heirs or another person may challenge its
validity. Judgment in such cases must rely on reconstruction, using data from
documents and from expert psychiatric testimony, of the testator’s mental
state at the time they wrote the will. When someone cannot, or chooses not,
to write a will, all states provide for the distribution of property to the heirs. If
there are no heirs, the estate goes to the public treasury.
Witnesses at the signing of a will, which might include a psychiatrist, may
attest that the testator was rational at the time of executing the will. In
unusual cases, a lawyer may videotape the signing to safeguard the will from
attack. Ideally, persons who are thinking of making a will and believe that
there may be questions about their testamentary competence should hire a
forensic psychiatrist to perform a dispassionate examination antemortem to
validate and record their capacity.
An incompetence proceeding and the appointment of a guardian may be


<<<PAGE 2655>>>
necessary when a family member is spending the family’s assets, and the
property is in danger of dissipation, as in the case of patients who are elderly,
have cognitive disabilities, are dependent on alcohol, or have psychosis. An
issue is whether such persons are capable of managing their affairs. A
guardian appointed to take control of the property of one deemed
incompetent, however, cannot make a will for the ward (the incompetent
person).
We determine competence based on a person’s ability to make a sound
judgment—to weigh, to reason, and to make reasonable decisions.
Competence is task-specific, not general; the capacity to weigh decisionmaking factors (competence) often is best demonstrated by a person’s ability
to ask pertinent and knowledgeable questions after explaining the risks and
benefits. Although physicians (especially psychiatrists) often give opinions
on competence, only a judge’s ruling converts the opinion into a finding; a
patient is not competent or incompetent until the court so rules. The diagnosis
of a mental disorder is not, in itself, sufficient to warrant a finding of
incompetence. Instead, the mental disorder must cause impairment in
judgment for the specific issues involved. After they have been declared
incompetent, persons lose specific rights: they cannot make contracts, marry,
start a divorce action, drive a vehicle, handle their property, or practice their
professions. A formal courtroom proceeding decides incompetence, and the
court usually appoints a guardian who will best serve a patient’s interests.
Another hearing is necessary to declare a patient competent. Admission to a
mental hospital, even involuntarily, does not automatically mean that a
person is incompetent.
Competence also is essential in contracts because a contract is an
agreement between parties to do a specific act. A contract is invalid if, when
it was signed, one of the parties was unable to comprehend the nature and
effect of his or her act. The marriage contract is subject to the same standard
and thus can be voided if either party did not understand the nature, duties,
obligations, and other characteristics entailed at the time of the marriage. In
general, however, the courts are unwilling to declare a marriage void based
on incompetence.
Whether competence is related to wills, contracts, or the making or
breaking of marriages, the fundamental concern is a person’s state of
awareness and capacity to comprehend the significance of the particular


<<<PAGE 2656>>>
commitment made.
Durable Power of Attorney
A modern development that permits persons to make provisions for their
anticipated loss of decision-making capacity is called a durable power of
attorney. The document permits the advance selection of a substitute decision
maker who can act without the necessity of court proceedings when the
signatory becomes incompetent through illness or progressive dementia.

CRIMINAL LAW
Competence to Stand Trial
The Supreme Court of the United States stated that the prohibition against
trying someone who is mentally incompetent is fundamental to the US
system of justice. Accordingly, the court, in Dusky v. the United States,
approved a test of competence that seeks to ascertain whether a criminal
defendant “has sufficient present ability to consult with his lawyer with a
reasonable degree of rational understanding—and whether he has a rational
as well as factual understanding of the proceedings against him.”
Competence to Be Executed
One of the new areas of competence to emerge in the interface between
psychiatry and the law is the question of a person’s competence to be
executed. The requirement for competence in this area is believed to rest on
three general principles. First, a person’s awareness of what is happening is
supposed to heighten the retributive element of the punishment. Punishment
is meaningless unless the person is aware of it and knows the punishment’s
purpose. Second, a competent person who is about to be executed is believed
to be in the best position to make whatever peace is appropriate with his or
her religious beliefs, including confession and absolution. Third, a competent
person who is about to be executed preserves, until the end, the possibility
(admittedly slight) of recalling a forgotten detail of the events or the crime
that exonerate the person.
The need to preserve competence was supported recently in the Supreme
Court case of Ford v. Wainwright. However, no matter the outcome of legal


<<<PAGE 2657>>>
struggles with this question, most medical bodies have gravitated toward the
position that it is unethical for any clinician to participate, no matter how
remotely, in state-mandated executions; a physician’s duty to preserve life
transcends all other competing requirements. Major medical societies, such as
the American Medical Association (AMA), believe that doctors should not
participate in the death penalty. A psychiatrist who agrees to examine a
patient slated for execution may find the person incompetent based on a
mental disorder and may recommend a treatment plan, which, if
implemented, would ensure the person’s fitness to be executed. Although
room exists for a difference of opinion regarding whether or not a psychiatrist
should become involved, the authors of this text agree with the AMA.
Criminal Responsibility
According to criminal law, committing a socially harmful act is not the sole
criterion of whether a crime has been committed. Instead, the objectionable
act must have two components: voluntary conduct (actus reus) and evil intent
(mens rea). An evil intent cannot exist when an offender’s mental status is so
deficient, so abnormal, or so diseased to have deprived the offender of the
capacity for rational intent. The law can be invoked only when an illegal
intent is implemented. Neither behavior, however harmful, nor the intent to
harm is, in itself, a ground for criminal action.
M’Naghten Rule. The precedent for determining legal responsibility was
established in 1843 in the British courts. The so-called M’Naghten rule,
which, until recently, has determined criminal responsibility in most of the
United States, holds that persons are not guilty by reason of insanity if they
labored under a mental disease such that they were unaware of the nature, the
quality, and the consequences of their acts or if they were incapable of
realizing that their acts were wrong. Moreover, to absolve persons from
punishment, a delusion used as evidence must be one that, if true, would be
an adequate defense. If the delusional idea does not justify the crime, such
persons are presumably held responsible, guilty, and punishable. The
M’Naghten rule is known commonly as the right–wrong test.
The M’Naghten rule derives from the famous M’Naghten case of 1843.
When Daniel M’Naghten murdered Edward Drummond, the private secretary


<<<PAGE 2658>>>
of Robert Peel, M’Naghten had been suffering from delusions of persecution
for several years, had complained to many persons about his “persecutors,”
and finally had decided to correct the situation by murdering Robert Peel.
When Drummond came out of Peel’s home, M’Naghten shot Drummond,
mistaking him for Peel. The jury, as instructed under the prevailing law,
found M’Naghten not guilty by reason of insanity. In response to questions
about what guidelines could be used to determine whether a person could
plead insanity as a defense against criminal responsibility, the English chief
judge wrote:
1. To establish a defense on the ground of insanity, it must be clearly
proved that, at the time of committing the act, the party accused was
laboring under such a defect of reason, from disease of the mind, as not
to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing, or if he did know
it, he did not know he was doing what was wrong.
2. Where a person labors under partial delusions only and is not in other
respects insane and as a result commits an offense, he must be
considered in the same situation regarding responsibility as if the facts
with respect to which the delusion exists were real.
According to the M’Naghten rule, the question is not whether the accused
knows the difference between right and wrong in general, instead, it is
whether the defendant understood the nature and the quality of their act and
whether they knew the difference between right and wrong—specifically
whether the defendant knew the act was wrong or perhaps thought the act
was correct, a delusion causing the defendant to act in legitimate self-defense.
Jeffery Dahmer killed 17 young men and boys between June 1978 and
July 1991. Most of his victims were either gay or bisexual. He would
meet and select his prey at gay bars or bathhouses and then lure them by
offering them money for posing for photographs or simply to enjoy some
beer and videos. Then he would drug them, strangle them, masturbate on
the body or have sex with the corpse, dismember the body, and dispose of
it. Sometimes he would keep the skull or other body parts as souvenirs.
On July 13, 1992, Dahmer changed his plea to guilty by means of
insanity. The jury, however, decided that Dahmer’s meticulous murder


<<<PAGE 2659>>>
plans and the systematic way that he disposed of his victims’ bodies was
evidence that Dahmer could control his behavior. All of the testimony
bolstered the notion that, as with most serial killers, Dahmer knew what
he was doing and knew right from wrong. Finally, the jury did not accept
the defense that Dahmer experienced a mental illness to the degree that it
had disabled his thinking or behavioral controls. Dahmer was sentenced
to 15 consecutive life terms or a total of 957 years in prison. An inmate
killed him on November 28, 1994.
Irresistible Impulse. In 1922, a committee of jurists in England
reexamined the M’Naghten rule. The committee suggested broadening the
concept of insanity in criminal cases to include the irresistible impulse test,
which rules that a person charged with a criminal offense is not responsible
for an act if the act was committed under an impulse that the person was
unable to resist because of mental disease. The courts interpret this concept
such that it has been called the policeman-at-the-elbow law. In other words,
the court grants an impulse to be irresistible only when it can be determined
that the accused would have committed the act even if a policeman had been
at the accused person’s elbow. To most psychiatrists, this interpretation is
unsatisfactory because it covers only a small, select group of those who are
mentally ill.
Durham Rule. In the case of Durham v. the United States, Judge Bazelon
handed down a decision in 1954 in the District of Columbia Court of
Appeals. The decision resulted in the product rule of criminal responsibility,
namely that an accused person is not criminally responsible if his or her
unlawful act was the product of mental disease or mental defect. In the
Durham case, Judge Bazelon expressly stated that the purpose of the rule was
to get good and complete psychiatric testimony. He sought to release the
criminal law from the theoretical straitjacket of the M’Naghten rule, but
judges and juries in cases using the Durham rule became mired in confusion
over the terms product, disease, and defect. In 1972, some 18 years after the
rule’s adoption, the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, in United
States v. Brawner discarded the rule. The court—all nine members, including
Judge Bazelon—decided in a 143-page opinion to throw out its Durham rule


<<<PAGE 2660>>>
and to adopt in its place the test recommended in 1962 by the American Law
Institute in its model penal code, which is the law in the federal courts today.
Model Penal Code. In its model penal code, the American Law Institute
recommended the following test of criminal responsibility: Persons are not
responsible for criminal conduct if, at the time of such conduct, as a result of
mental disease or defect, they lacked substantial capacity either to appreciate
the criminality (wrongfulness) of their conduct or to conform their conduct to
the requirement of the law. The term mental disease or defect does not
include an abnormality manifested only by repeated criminal or otherwise
antisocial conduct.
Subsection 1 of the American Law Institute rule contains five operative
concepts: mental disease or defect, lack of substantial capacity, appreciation,
wrongfulness, and conformity of conduct to the requirements of law. The
rule’s second subsection, stating that repeated criminal or antisocial conduct
is not, of itself, to be taken as mental disease or defect, aims to keep the
sociopath or psychopath within the scope of criminal responsibility.
Guilty but Mentally Ill. Some states have established an alternative verdict
of guilty but mentally ill. Under guilty but mentally ill statutes, this
alternative verdict is available to the jury if the defendant pleads not guilty by
reason of insanity. Under an insanity plea, four outcomes are possible: not
guilty, not guilty by reason of insanity, guilty but mentally ill, and guilty.
The problem with finding someone guilty but mentally ill is that it is an
alternative verdict without a difference. It is the same as finding the
defendant just plain guilty. The court must still impose a sentence on the
convicted person. Although the convicted person supposedly receives
psychiatric treatment, if necessary, this treatment provision is available to all
prisoners.

OTHER AREAS OF FORENSIC PSYCHIATRY
Emotional Damage and Distress
A rapidly rising trend in recent years is to sue for psychological and
emotional damage, both secondary to physical injury or as a consequence of
witnessing a stressful act and from the suffering endured under the stress of


<<<PAGE 2661>>>
such circumstances as concentration camp experiences. The German
government heard many of these claims from persons detained in Nazi camps
during World War II. In the United States, the courts have moved from a
conservative to a liberal position in awarding damages for such claims.
Psychiatric examinations and testimony are sought in these cases, often by
both the plaintiffs and the defendants.
Recovered Memories
Patients alleging recovered memories of abuse have sued parents and other
alleged perpetrators. In several instances, the alleged victimizers have sued
therapists who, they claim, negligently induced false memories of sexual
abuse. In an about-face, some patients have recanted and joined forces with
others (usually their parents) to sue therapists.
Courts have handed down multimillion-dollar judgments against mental
health practitioners. A fundamental allegation in these cases is that the
therapist abandoned a position of neutrality to suggest, persuade, coerce, and
implant false memories of childhood sexual abuse. The guiding principle of
clinical risk management in recovered memory cases is the maintenance of
therapist neutrality and the establishment of sound treatment boundaries.
Table 28-4 lists the risk management principles that should be considered
when evaluating or treating a patient who recovers memories of abuse in
psychotherapy.
Table 28-4
Risk Management Principles for Cases of Recovered
Memories of Abuse in Psychotherapy
1. Maintain therapist neutrality: Do not suggest abuse.
2. Stay clinically focused: Provide adequate evaluation and
treatment for patients presenting problems and symptoms.
3. Carefully document the memory-recovery process.
4. Manage personal bias and countertransference.
5. Avoid mixing treater and expert witness roles.
6. Closely monitor supervisory and collaborative therapy
relationships.


<<<PAGE 2662>>>
7. Clarify nontreatment roles with family members.
8. Avoid special techniques (e.g., hypnosis or sodium amobarbital
[Amytal]) unless clearly indicated; obtain consultation first.
9. Stay within professional competence: Do not take cases that you
cannot handle.
10. Distinguish between narrative truth and historical truth.
11. Obtain consultation in problematic cases.
12. Foster patient autonomy and self-determination: Do not suggest
lawsuits.
13. In managed care settings, inform patients with recovered
memories that more than brief therapy may be required.
14. When making public statements, distinguish personal opinions
from scientifically established facts.
15. Stop and refer, if uncomfortable with a patient who is recovering
memories of childhood abuse.
16. Do not be afraid to ask about abuse as part of a competent
psychiatric evaluation.
Worker’s Compensation
The stresses of employment can cause or accentuate mental illness. Patients
are entitled to be compensated for their job-related disabilities or to receive
disability retirement benefits. A psychiatrist is often called on to evaluate
such situations.
Civil Liability
Psychiatrists who sexually exploit their patients are subject to civil and
criminal actions in addition to ethical and professional licensure revocation
proceedings. Malpractice is the most common legal action (Table 28-5).
Table 28-5
Sexual Exploitation: Legal and Ethical Consequences
Civil lawsuit
Negligence


<<<PAGE 2663>>>
Loss of consortium
Breach-of-contract action
Criminal sanctions (e.g., statutory, adultery, sexual assault, rape)
Civil action for intentional tort (e.g., battery, fraud)
License revocation
Ethical sanctions
Dismissal from professional organizations
Table by RI Simon, M.D.

Table 28-6
Patients’ Rights under the Privacy Rule
Physicians must give the patient a written notice of his or her privacy
rights; the privacy policies of the practice; and how patient
information is used, kept, and disclosed. A written
acknowledgment should be taken from the patient verifying that he
or she has seen such notice.
Patients should be able to obtain copies of their medical records and
to request revisions to those records within a stated amount of time
(usually 30 days). Patients do not have the right to see
psychotherapy notes.
Physicians must provide the patient with a history of most disclosures
of their medical history on request. Some exceptions exist. The
APA Committee on Confidentiality has developed a model
document for this requirement.
Physicians must obtain authorization from the patient for disclosure
of information other than for treatment, payment, and health care
operations (these three are considered to be routine uses, for
which consent is not required). The APA Committee on
Confidentiality has developed a model document for this
requirement.
Patients may request another means of communication of their
protected information (e.g., request that the physician contact them
at a specific phone number or address).
Physicians cannot generally limit treatment to obtaining patient


<<<PAGE 2664>>>
authorization for disclosure of their information for nonroutine uses.
Patients have the right to complain about Privacy Rule violations to
the physician, their health plan, or to the Secretary of HHS.
APA, American Psychiatric Association; HHS, Department of Health and Human Services.

Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) was
passed in 1996 to address the medical delivery system’s mounting
complexity and its rising dependence on electronic communication. The act
orders that the federal Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
develop rules protecting the transmission and confidentiality of patient
information, and all units under HIPAA must comply with such rules.
The Privacy Rule, administered by the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) at
HHS, protects the confidentiality of patient information (Table 28.6).
References
Adshead G. Evidence-based medicine and medicine-based evidence: The
expert witness in cases of factitious disorder by proxy. J Am Acad
Psychiatry Law. 2005;33:99–105.
Andreasson H, Nyman M, Krona H, Meyer L, Anckarsäter H, Nilsson T,
Hofvander B. Predictors of length of stay in forensic psychiatry: The
influence of perceived risk of violence. Int J Law Psychiatry.
2014;37(6):635–642.
Arboleda-Flórez JE. The ethics of forensic psychiatry. Curr Opin Psychol.
2006;19(5):544–546.
Baker T. The Medical Malpractice Myth. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press; 2005.
Billick SB, Ciric SJ. Role of the psychiatric evaluator in child custody
disputes. In: Rosner R, ed. Principles and Practice of Forensic Psychiatry.
2nd ed. New York: Chapman & Hall; 2003.
Bourget D. Forensic considerations of substance-induced psychosis. J Am
Acad Psychiatry Law. 2013;41(2):168–173.
Chow WS, Priebe S. Understanding psychiatric institutionalization: A
conceptual review. BMC Psychiatry. 2013;13:169.


<<<PAGE 2665>>>
Koh S, Cattell GM, Cochran DM, Krasner A, Langheim FJ, Sasso DA.
Psychiatrists’ use of electronic communication and social media and a
proposed framework for future guidelines. J Psychiatr Pract.
2013;19(3):254–263.
Meyer DJ, Price M. Forensic psychiatric assessments of behaviorally
disruptive physicians. J Am Acad Psychiatry Law. 2006;34(1):72–81.
Reid WH. Forensic practice: A day in the life. J Psychiatr Pract.
2006;12(1):50–54.
Rogers R, Shuman DW. Fundamentals of Forensic Practice: Mental Health
and Criminal Law. New York: Springer; 2005.
Rosner R, ed. Principles and Practice of Forensic Psychiatry. 2nd ed. New
York: Chapman & Hall; 2003.
Simon RI, ed. Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Litigation. 2nd ed.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2003.
Simon RI, Gold LH. The American Psychiatric Publishing Textbook of
Forensic Psychiatry. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing;
2004.
Simon RI, Shuman DW. Clinical-legal issues in psychiatry. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:4427.
Studdert DM, Mello MM, Gawande AA, Gandhi TK, Kachalia A, Yoon C,
Puopolo AL, Brennan TA. Claims, errors, and compensation payments in
medical malpractice litigation. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(19):2024–2033.
Wecht CH. The history of legal medicine. J Am Acad Psychiatry Law.
2005;33(2):245–251.


<<<PAGE 2666>>>
29
End-of-Life Issues and Palliative Care
29.1 Death, Dying, and Bereavement
DEATH AND DYING
Definitions
The terms death and dying require definition: Whereas death may be
considered the absolute cessation of vital functions, dying is the process of
losing these functions. Dying may also be seen as a developmental
concomitant of living, a part of the birth-to-death continuum. Living may
entail numerous mini-deaths—the end of growth and its potential, healthcompromising illnesses, multiple losses, decreasing vitality and growing
dependency with aging, and dying. Dying, and the individual’s awareness of
it, imbues humans with values, passions, wishes, and the impetus to make the
most of the time.
Two terms that have been used with increased frequency in recent years
refer to the quality of living as death comes near. A good death is one that is
free from avoidable distress and suffering for patients, families, and
caregivers and is reasonably consistent with clinical, cultural, and ethical
standards. A bad death, in contrast, is characterized by needless suffering, a
dishonoring of the patient or family’s wishes or values, and a sense among
participants or observers that norms of decency have been offended.
Uniform Determination of Death Act. The President’s Commission for
the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral


<<<PAGE 2667>>>
Research published its definition of death in 1981. Working with the
American Bar Association, the American Medical Association (AMA), and
the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, the
commission established that one who has sustained either (1) irretrievable
cessation of circulatory and respiratory functions or (2) irretrievable cessation
of all functions of the entire brain, including the brainstem, is dead. The
determination of death must be per accepted medical standards.
Generally accepted criteria for determining brain death require a series of
neurologic and other assessments. For children, particular guidelines apply.
They generally specify two assessments separated by an interval of at least 48
hours for those between the ages of 1 week and 2 months, 24 hours for those
between the ages of 2 months and 1 year, and 12 hours for older children;
additional confirmatory tests may also be advisable under some
circumstances. Brain death criteria usually are not applied to infants younger
than 7 days. Table 29-1 lists the clinical criteria for brain death in adults and
children.
Legal Aspects of Death
According to law, physicians must sign the death certificate, which attests to
the cause of death (e.g., congestive heart failure or pneumonia). They must
also attribute the death to natural, accidental, suicidal, homicidal, or unknown
causes. A medical examiner, coroner, or pathologist must examine anyone
who dies unattended by a physician and perform an autopsy to determine the
cause of death. In some cases, a psychological autopsy is performed: A
person’s sociocultural and psychological background is examined
retrospectively by interviewing friends, relatives, and doctors to determine
whether mental illness, such as a depressive disorder, was present. For
example, a determination can be made that a person died because he or she
was pushed (murder) or because he or she jumped (suicide) from a high
building. Each situation has clear medical and legal implications.
Stages of Death and Dying
Elisabeth Kübler-Ross, a psychiatrist and thanatologist, made a
comprehensive and useful organization of reactions to impending death. A
dying patient seldom follows a regular series of responses that can be


<<<PAGE 2668>>>
identified; no established sequence applies to all patients. Nevertheless, the
following five stages proposed by Kübler-Ross are widely encountered.
Stage 1: Shock and Denial. On being told that they are dying, persons
initially react with shock. They may appear dazed at first and then may refuse
to believe the diagnosis; they may deny that anything is wrong. Some persons
never pass beyond this stage and may go from doctor to doctor until they find
one who supports their position. The degree to which denial is adaptive or
maladaptive appears to depend on whether a patient continues to obtain
treatment even while denying the prognosis. In such cases, physicians must
communicate to patients and their families, respectfully and directly,
necessary information about the illness, its prognosis, and the options for
treatment. For effective communication, physicians must allow for patients’
emotional responses and reassure them that they will not be abandoned.
Stage 2: Anger. Persons become frustrated, irritable, and angry at being ill.
They commonly ask, “Why me?” They may become angry at God, their fate,
a friend, or a family member; they may even blame themselves. They may
displace their anger onto the hospital staff members and the doctor, whom
they blame for the illness. Patients in the stage of anger are challenging to
treat. Doctors who have difficulty understanding that anger is a predictable
reaction and is a displacement may withdraw from patients or transfer them
to other doctors’ care.
Table 29-1
Clinical Criteria for Brain Death in Adults and Children
Coma
Absence of motor responses
Absence of pupillary responses to light and pupils at midposition with
respect to dilatation (4–6 mm)
Absence of corneal reflexes
Absence of caloric responses
Absence of gag reflex
Absence of coughing in response to tracheal suctioning


<<<PAGE 2669>>>
Absence of sucking and rooting reflexes
Absence of respiratory drive at a Paco2 that is 60 or 20 mm Hg
above normal baseline values
Interval between two evaluations, according to patient’s age
Term to 2 mo old, 48 hr
>2 mo to 1 yr old, 24 hr
>1 yr to <18 yr old, 12 hr
≥18 yr old, interval optional
Confirmatory tests
Term to 2 mo old, two confirmatory tests
>2 mo to 1 yr old, one confirmatory test
>1 yr to <18 yr old, optional
≥18 yr old, optional
PaCO2, partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide.
Reprinted from Wijdicks EF. The diagnosis of brain death. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:1215–
1221, with permission.

Physicians treating angry patients must realize that the anger being
expressed cannot be taken personally. An empathic, nondefensive response
can help defuse patients’ anger and can help them refocus on their deep
feelings (e.g., grief, fear, loneliness) that underlie the anger. Physicians
should also recognize that anger may represent patients’ desire for control in
a situation in which they feel completely out of control.
Stage 3: Bargaining. Patients may attempt to negotiate with physicians,
friends, or even God; in return for a cure, they promise to fulfill one or many
pledges, such as giving to charity and attending church regularly. Some
patients believe that if they are good (compliant, nonquestioning, cheerful),
the doctor will make them better. The treatment of such patients involves
making it clear that they will be taken care of to the best of the doctor’s
abilities and that everything that can be done will be done, regardless of any
action or behavior on the patients’ part. Patients must also be encouraged to
participate as partners in their treatment and to understand that being a good
patient means being as honest and straightforward as possible.


<<<PAGE 2670>>>
Stage 4: Depression. In the fourth stage, patients show clinical signs of
depression—withdrawal, psychomotor retardation, sleep disturbances,
hopelessness, and, possibly, suicidal ideation. The depression may be a
reaction to the effects of the illness on their lives (e.g., loss of a job,
economic hardship, helplessness, hopelessness, and isolation from friends
and family) or it may be in anticipation of the loss of life that will eventually
occur. A major depressive disorder with vegetative signs and suicidal
ideation may require treatment with antidepressant medication or
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). All persons feel some sadness at the
prospect of their death, and normal sadness does not require biologic
intervention. However, major depressive disorder and active suicidal ideation
can be alleviated and should not be accepted as normal reactions to
impending death. A person who suffers from major depressive disorder may
be unable to sustain hope, which can enhance the dignity and quality of life
and even prolong longevity. Studies have shown that some terminally ill
patients can delay their death until after a loved one’s significant event, such
as the graduation of a grandson from college.
Stage 5: Acceptance. In the stage of acceptance, patients realize that
death is inevitable, and they accept the universality of the experience. Their
feelings can range from a neutral to a euphoric mood. Under ideal
circumstances, patients resolve their feelings about the inevitability of death
and can talk about facing the unknown. Those with strong religious beliefs
and a conviction of life after death sometimes find comfort in the
ecclesiastical maxim, “Fear not death; remember those who have gone before
you and those who will come after.”
Near-Death Experiences
Near-death descriptions are often strikingly similar. They often involve an
out-of-body experience of viewing one’s body and overhearing
conversations, feelings of peace, hearing a distant noise, entering a dark
tunnel, leaving the body behind, meeting dead loved ones, witnessing beings
of light, returning to life to complete unfinished business, and deep sadness
on leaving this new dimension. This pattern of sensations and perceptions is
usually described as peaceful and loving; it feels real to participants, who


<<<PAGE 2671>>>
distinguish it from dreams or hallucinations. These experiences provoke
sweeping lifestyle changes, such as fewer material concerns, a heightened
sense of purpose, a belief in God, joy of life, compassion, less fear of death,
an enhanced approach to life, and intense feelings of love. In a similar vein,
hospice nurses have described experiences among terminally ill patients of
visions that may include a sense of the presence of departed loved ones, of
spiritual beings, of bright light, or of being in a particular place, often
described with a sense of warmth and love. Although such “visions” do not
readily lend themselves to scientific investigation and thus are not
legitimized, patients may benefit from discussing them with clinicians. A
term to describe this experience is unio mystica, which refers to an oceanic
feeling of mystic unity with infinite power.
Life Cycle Considerations about Death and Dying
The clinical diversity of death-related attitudes and behaviors between
children and adults has its roots in developmental factors and age-dependent
differences in causes of death. As opposed to adults, who usually die from
chronic illness, children are apt to die from sudden, unexpected causes.
Almost half of the children who die between the ages of 1 and 14 years and
nearly 75 percent of those who died in late adolescence and early adulthood
die from accidents, homicides, and suicides. With their characteristics of
violence, suddenness, and mutilation, such unnatural causes of death are
extraordinary stressors for grieving survivors. Bereaved parents and siblings
of dead young children and teenagers often feel victimized and traumatized
by their losses; their grief reactions resemble posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD). Devastating family disruptions can occur, and surviving siblings risk
having their emotional needs put on the back burner, ignored, or completely
unnoticed.
Children. Children’s attitudes toward death mirror their attitudes toward
life. Although they share with adolescents, adults, and elderly adults similar
fears, anxieties, beliefs, and attitudes about dying, some of their
interpretations and reactions are age specific. None welcome it without
ambivalence, and all temper their acceptance with healthy doses of denial and
avoidance. Dying children are often aware of their condition and want to


<<<PAGE 2672>>>
discuss it. They often have more sophisticated views about dying than their
medically well counterparts, engendered by their failing health, separation
from parents, subjection to painful procedures, and the deaths of hospital
chums.
At the preschool, preoperational stage of cognitive development, death is
seen as a temporary absence, incomplete and reversible, like departure or
sleep. Separation from the primary caretaker(s) is the main fear of preschoolage children. This fear surfaces as an increase in nightmares, more aggressive
play, or concern about the deaths of others rather than direct discourse.
Terminally ill children may assume responsibility for their death, feeling
guilty for dying. Preschool children may be unable to relate the treatment to
the illness, instead of viewing treatment as punishment and family separation
as rejection. They need reassurance that they are loved, have done nothing
wrong, are not responsible for their illness, and will not be abandoned.
School-age children manifest concrete-operational thinking and recognize
death as a final reality. They, however, view death as something that happens
to older people, not to them. Between the ages of 6 and 12 years, children
have active fantasies of violence and aggression, often dominated by themes
of death and killing. School-age children ask questions about serious illness
and death if encouraged to do so; however, if they receive cues that the
subject is taboo, they may withdraw and participate less fully in their care.
Facilitating open discussion and updating children with relevant information,
including prognostic changes, can be very helpful. Also, children may need
help coping with peers and school demands. Teachers should be informed
and updated. Classmates may need education and assistance to help them
understand the situation and respond appropriately.
Adolescents. Capable of formal cognitive operations, adolescents
understand that death is inevitable and final but may not accept that their
death is possible. The significant fears of dying teenagers parallel those of all
teenagers. These include losing control, being imperfect, and being different.
Concerns about body image, hair loss, or loss of bodily control can generate
resistance to continuing treatment. Alternating emotions of despair, rage,
grief, bitterness, numbness, terror, and joy are typical. The potential for
withdrawal and isolation is high because teenagers may equate parental
support with loss of independence or may deny their fears of abandonment by


<<<PAGE 2673>>>
actually repulsing friendly gestures. Teenagers must be included in all
decision-making processes surrounding their deaths. Many are capable of
great courage, grace, and dignity in facing death.
Adults. Some of the most often expressed fears of adult patients entering
hospice care, listed in the approximate order of frequency, include fears of (1)
separation from loved ones, homes, and jobs; (2) becoming a burden to
others; (3) losing control; (4) what will happen to dependents; (5) pain or
other worsening symptoms; (6) being unable to complete life tasks or
responsibilities; (7) dying; (8) being dead; (9) the fears of others (reflected
fears); (10) the fate of the body; and (11) the afterlife. Problems in
communication arise out of trepidation, making it essential for those involved
in health care to provide environments of trust and safety in which people can
begin to talk about uncertainties, anxieties, and concerns.
Late-age adults often accept that their time has come. Their main fears
include long, painful, and disfiguring deaths; prolonged vegetative states;
isolation; and loss of control or dignity. Elderly patients may talk or joke
openly about dying and sometimes welcome it. In their 70s and beyond, they
rarely harbor illusions of indestructibility—most have already had several
close calls: Their parents have died, and they have gone to funerals of friends
and relatives. Although they may not be happy to die, they can be reconciled
to it.
According to Erik Erikson, the eighth and final stage in the life cycle
brings a sense of either integrity or despair. As elderly adults enter the last
phase of their lives, they reflect on their pasts. When they have taken care of
their affairs, have been relatively successful, and have adapted to the
triumphs and disappointments of life, they can look back with satisfaction
and only a few regrets. The integrity of the self allows people to accept
inevitable disease and death without fear of succumbing helplessly. If elderly
individuals look back on life as a series of missed opportunities or personal
misfortunes, however, they feel a sense of bitter despair, a preoccupation
with what might have been if only this or that had happened. Then death is
fearsome because it symbolizes emptiness and failure.
Management


<<<PAGE 2674>>>
Caring for a dying patient is highly individual. Caretakers need to deal with
death honestly, tolerate wide ranges of affects, connect with suffering patients
and bereaved loved ones, and resolve routine issues as they arise. Although
each therapeutic relationship between a patient and health provider has a
uniqueness derived from the patient’s and health provider’s gender,
constitution, life experience, age, stage of life, resources, faith, culture, and
other considerations, major themes confront all health providers caring for
dying patients.

BEREAVEMENT, GRIEF, AND MOURNING
Bereavement, grief, and mourning are terms that apply to the psychological
reactions of those who survive a significant loss. Grief is the subjective
feeling precipitated by the death of a loved one. The term is used
synonymously with mourning, although, in the strictest sense, mourning is
the process by which grief is resolved; it is the societal expression of post
bereavement behavior and practices. Bereavement means the state of being
deprived of someone by death and refers to being in the state of mourning.
Regardless of the fine points that differentiate these terms, the experiences of
grief and bereavement have sufficient similarities to warrant a syndrome that
has signs, symptoms, a demonstrable course, and an expected resolution.
Normal Bereavement Reactions
The first response to loss, protest, is followed by a more extended period of
searching behavior. As hope to reestablish the attachment bond diminishes,
searching behaviors give way to despair and detachment before bereaved
individuals eventually reorganize themselves around the recognition that the
lost person will not return. Although the bereaved ultimately learn to accept
the reality of death, they also find psychological and symbolic ways of
keeping the memory of the deceased person very much alive. Grief work
allows the survivor to redefine his or her relationship to the deceased person
and to form new but enduring ties.
Duration of Grief. Most societies mandate modes of bereavement and time
for grieving. In contemporary America, bereaved individuals are expected to
return to work or school in a few weeks, to establish equilibrium within a few


<<<PAGE 2675>>>
months, and to be capable of pursuing new relationships within 6 months to 1
year. Ample evidence suggests that the bereavement process does not end
within a prescribed interval; certain aspects persist indefinitely for many
otherwise high-functioning, typical individuals.
The most lasting manifestation of grief, especially after spousal
bereavement, is loneliness. Often present for years after the death of a spouse,
loneliness may, for some, be a daily reminder of the loss. Other common
manifestations of protracted grief occur intermittently. For example, a man
who has lost his wife may experience elements of acute grief every time he
hears her name or sees her picture on the nightstand. Usually, these reactions
become increasingly short-lived over time, dissipating within minutes and
become tinged with positive and pleasant affects. Such bittersweet memories
may last a lifetime. Thus, most grief does not fully resolve or permanently
disappear; instead, grief becomes circumscribed and submerged only to
reemerge in response to specific triggers.
Anticipatory Grief
In anticipatory grief, grief reactions are brought on by the slow dying process
of a loved one through injury, illness, or high-risk activity. Although
anticipatory grief may soften the blow of the eventual death, it can also lead
to premature separation and withdrawal while not necessarily mitigating later
bereavement. At times, the intensification of intimacy during this period may
heighten the actual sense of loss even though it prepares the survivor in other
ways.
Anniversary Reactions. When the trigger for an acute grief reaction is a
special occasion, such as a holiday or birthday, the rekindled grief is called an
anniversary reaction. It is not unusual for anniversary reactions to occur each
year on the same day the person died or, in some cases, when the bereaved
individual becomes the same age the deceased person was at the time of
death. Although these anniversary reactions tend to become relatively mild
and brief over time, they can be experienced as the reliving of one’s original
grief and prevail for hours or days.
Mourning


<<<PAGE 2676>>>
From earliest history, every culture records its own beliefs, customs, and
behaviors related to bereavement. Specific patterns include rituals for
mourning (e.g., wakes or Shiva), for disposing of the body, for invocation of
religious ceremonies, and periodic official remembrances. The funeral is the
prevailing public display of bereavement in contemporary North America.
The funeral and burial service acknowledge the real and final nature of the
death, countering denial; they also garner support for the bereaved,
encouraging tribute to the dead, uniting families, and facilitating community
expressions of sorrow. If cremation replaces burial, ceremonies associated
with the dissemination of the ashes perform similar functions. Visits, prayers,
and other ceremonies allow for continuing support, coming to terms with
reality, remembering, emotional expression, and concluding unfinished
business with the deceased. Several cultural and religious rituals provide
purpose and meaning, protect the survivors from isolation and vulnerability,
and set limits on grieving. Subsequent holidays, birthdays, and anniversaries
serve to remind the living of the dead and may elicit grief as real and fresh as
the original experience; over time, these anniversary grievings become
attenuated but often remain in some form.
Bereavement
Because bereavement often evokes depressive symptoms, it may be
necessary to demarcate normal grief reactions from major depressive disorder
(Table 29-2). DSM-5 took a significant step from DSM-IV in that it removed
the bereavement exclusion from a major depressive disorder so that we can
diagnose individuals experiencing a recent loss as having major depression if
we believe that is the case. To acknowledge that some persons may have a
syndrome of disabling grief that is not depression, DSM-5 proposed criteria
for persistent complex bereavement, which they included as a condition for
further study. ICD-10 considers this an adjustment disorder and includes the
grief reaction as a category of that disorder. Table 29-3 summarizes the
criteria for each approach.
Complicated Bereavement
Complicated bereavement has a confusing array of terms to describe it
—abnormal, atypical, distorted, morbid, traumatic, and unresolved, to name


<<<PAGE 2677>>>
a few types. Three patterns of complicated, dysfunctional grief syndromes
have been identified—chronic, hypertrophic, and delayed grief. These are not
diagnostic categories within DSM-5 but are descriptive syndromes that, if
present, may be prodromal of a major depressive disorder.
Table 29-2
Differentiating the Depressive Symptoms Associated with
Bereavement from Major Depression
Bereavement

Major Depressive
Disorder

Symptoms may meet syndromal criteria for
major depressive episode, but the survivor
rarely has morbid feelings of guilt and
worthlessness, suicidal ideation, or
psychomotor retardation

Any symptoms as
defined by DSM-5

Considers self-bereaved

May consider selfweak, defective, or
bad

Dysphoria often triggered by thoughts or
reminders of the deceased

Dysphoria is often
autonomous and
independent of
thoughts or
reminders of the
deceased

Onset is within the first 2 mo of bereavement

Onset at any time

Duration of depressive symptoms is less than Depression often
2 mo
becomes chronic,
intermittent, or
episodic
Functional impairment is transient and mild

Clinically significant
distress or
impairment


<<<PAGE 2678>>>
No family or personal history of major
depression

Family or personal
history of major
depression

Table 29-3
Approaches to Diagnosing Bereavement
DSM-5

ICD-10

Diagnostic name Persistent Complex
Adjustment Disorder,
Bereavement Disorder (list
Grief Reaction
under “conditions for
further study”)
Duration

Experiences symptoms from Occurs while
each group of symptoms
adapting to a
below, more days than
period of life
not, for 12 mo (adults) or 6
change
mo (children)

Symptoms

Since the death of someone Distress/Emotional
close to them,
disturbance
experiencing following
• Depression
symptoms, out of
• Anxiety
proportion or inconsistent
• Worry
with sociocultural norms
• Difficulty coping
(Symptom group B)
• Difficulty
• Longing for the
planning
deceased
• Difficulty
• Sorry/pain about the
carrying out
death
daily routines
• Preoccupied with the
• Disturbance of
lost person
conduct
• Preoccupied with the
(adolescents)
circumstances
surrounding the death


<<<PAGE 2679>>>
(Symptom group C)
• Difficulty accepting the
death
• Cannot believe or is
numb to the loss
• Difficulty thinking about
positive memories
• Bitter or angry about the
loss
• Self-blame
• Avoids things that
remind them of the lost
person
• Wants to die to be with
the person
• Cannot trust others
• Feels alone/detached
• Feels empty or unable to
function without the lost
person
• Trouble seeing their
purpose independent of
the lost person
• Trouble/reluctance
pursuing other interests
Required
number of
symptoms

Symptom group B: 1
symptom
Symptom group C: 6
symptoms

Any combination of
the above

Psychosocial
Distress of functional
consequences
impairment
of symptoms

Usually interferes
with functioning


<<<PAGE 2680>>>
Symptoms
specifiers

With traumatic bereavement:
the death was violent
(homicide, suicide), and
the bereaved is
preoccupied with the
suffering that preceded
death

Chronic Grief. The most common type of complicated grief is chronic
grief, often highlighted by bitterness and idealization of the dead person.
Chronic grief is most likely to occur when the relationship between the
bereaved and the deceased had been extremely close, ambivalent, or
dependent; or when social supports are lacking, and friends and relatives are
not available to share the sorrow over the extended time needed for most
mourners.
Hypertrophic Grief. Most often seen after a sudden and unexpected death,
bereavement reactions are extraordinarily intense in hypertrophic grief.
Customary coping strategies are ineffectual to mitigate anxiety, and
withdrawal is frequent. When one family member is experiencing a
hypertrophic grief reaction, disruption of family stability can occur.
Hypertrophic grief frequently takes on a long-term course, albeit one
attenuated over time.
Delayed Grief. Absent or inhibited grief when one usually expects to find
overt signs and symptoms of acute mourning is referred to as delayed grief.
This pattern is marked by prolonged denial; anger and guilt may complicate
its course.
Traumatic Bereavement. Traumatic bereavement refers to grief, which is
both chronic and hypertrophic. This syndrome is characterized by recurrent,
intense pangs of grief with persistent yearning, pining, and longing for the
deceased; recurrent intrusive images of the death; and a distressing admixture
of avoidance and preoccupation with reminders of the loss. Positive
memories are often blocked or excessively sad, or they are experienced in
prolonged states of reverie that interfere with daily activities. A history of


<<<PAGE 2681>>>
psychiatric illness appears to be frequent in this condition, as is a very close,
identity-defining relationship with the deceased person.
Medical or Psychiatric Illnesses Associated with Bereavement.
Medical complications include exacerbations of existing diseases and
vulnerability to new ones; fear for one’s health and more trips to the doctor;
and an increased mortality rate, especially in men. The highest relative
mortality risk is found immediately after bereavement, particularly from
ischemic heart disease. The greatest effect of bereavement on mortality is for
men younger than 65 years. Higher mortality rates in bereaved men than in
bereaved women are due to increase in the relative risk of death by suicide,
accident, cardiovascular disease, and some infectious diseases. In widows,
the relative risk of death from cirrhosis and suicide may increase. In both
sexes, bereavement appears to exacerbate health-compromising behaviors,
such as increased alcohol consumption, smoking, and the use of over-thecounter medications.
Psychiatric complications of bereavement include an increased risk for
major depressive disorder, prolonged anxiety, panic, and posttraumatic
stress–like syndrome; increased alcohol, drug, and cigarette consumption;
and an increased risk of suicide. Because of their psychosocial, emotional,
and cognitive immaturity, bereaved children may be especially vulnerable to
psychopathology.
Bereavement and Depression. Although symptoms overlap, grief can be
distinguished from a full depressive episode. Most bereaved individuals
experience intense sadness, but only a few meet DSM-5 criteria for a major
depressive episode. Grief is a complex experience in which positive emotions
take their place beside the negative ones. Grief is fluid and changing, an
evolving state in which emotional intensity gradually lessens, and positive,
comforting aspects of the lost relationship come to the fore. Pangs of grief are
stimulus bound, related to internal and external reminders of the deceased
person. This condition differs from depression, which is more pervasive and
characterized by significant difficulties experiencing self-validating, positive
feelings. Grief is a fluctuating state with individual variability, in which
cognitive and behavioral adjustments are progressively made until the
bereaved individual can hold the deceased person in a comfortable place in


<<<PAGE 2682>>>
memory, and a satisfying life can be resumed. By contrast, a major
depressive episode consists of a recognizable and stable cluster of debilitating
symptoms accompanied by a protracted, enduring low mood. Major
depressive episode tends to be persistent and associated with poor work and
social functioning, pathologic psychoneuroimmunological function, and other
neurobiologic changes unless treated.
Bereavement and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Unnatural and
violent deaths, such as homicide, suicide, or death in the context of terrorism,
are much more likely to precipitate PTSD in surviving loved ones than are
natural deaths. In such circumstances, themes of violence, victimization, and
volition (i.e., the choice of death over life, as in the case of suicide) are
intermixed with other aspects of grief, and traumatic distress marked by fear,
horror, vulnerability, and disintegration of cognitive assumptions ensues.
Disbelief, despair, anxiety symptoms, preoccupation with the deceased
person, and the circumstances of the death, withdrawal, hyperarousal, and
dysphoria are more intense and more prolonged than they are under
nontraumatic circumstances, and an increased risk may exist for other
complications. Although treatment studies in survivors of sudden death are
few and far between, most experts agree that initial attention should be
focused on traumatic distress, that a role is seen for both pharmacotherapy
and psychotherapy, and that self-help support groups can be enormously
beneficial.
Biologic Perspectives
Grief is both a physiologic and emotional response. During acute grief (as
with other stressful events), persons may experience disruption of biologic
rhythms. Grief is also accompanied by impaired immune functioning,
including decreased lymphocyte proliferation and impaired functioning of
natural killer cells. Whether the immune changes are clinically significant has
not been established, but the mortality rate for widows and widowers
following the death of a spouse is higher than that in the general population.
Widowers appear to be at risk longer than widows.
Phenomenology of Grief. Bereavement reactions include intense feeling
states; invoke a variety of coping strategies; and lead to alterations in


<<<PAGE 2683>>>
interpersonal relationships, biopsychosocial functioning, self-esteem, and
world view that can last indefinitely. Manifestations of grief reflect the
individual’s personality, previous life experiences, and past psychological
history; the significance of the loss; the nature of the bereaved person’s
relationship with the deceased person; the existing social network;
intercurrent life events; health; and other resources. Despite individual
variations in the bereavement process, investigators have proposed grieving
process models, which include at least three partially overlapping phases or
states: (1) initial shock, disbelief, and denial; (2) an intermediate period of
acute discomfort and social withdrawal; and (3) a culminating period of
restitution and reorganization. As with Kübler-Ross’ stages of dying, the
grieving stages do not prescribe a correct course of grief; instead, they are
general guidelines describing an overlapping and fluid process that varies
with the survivors (Table 29-4).
Table 29-4
Phases of Grief
Shock and denial (min, days, wk)
Disbelief and numbness
Searching behaviors: pining, yearning, and protest
Acute anguish (wk, mo)
Waves of somatic distress
Withdrawal
Preoccupation
Anger
Guilt
Lost patterns of conduct
Restless and agitated
Aimless and amotivational
Identification with the bereaved
Resolution (mo, yr)
Have grieved
Return to work
Resume old roles


<<<PAGE 2684>>>
Acquire new roles
Reexperience pleasure
Seek companionship and love of others

LIFE CYCLE PERSPECTIVES ABOUT BEREAVEMENT
Bereavement during Childhood and Adolescence
Approximately 4 percent of North American children lose one or both parents
by the age of 15 years; sibling death is the second most commonly
experienced bereavement. Grief reactions are colored by developmental
levels and concepts of death and may not resemble adult reactions. Children
may display minimal grief at the time of death and experience the full effect
of the loss later. Grieving children may not withdraw and dwell on the person
who died, but instead, may throw themselves into activities. Indifference,
anger, or misbehavior may be displayed rather than the sadness; behaviors
can be erratic and labile. Strong feelings of anger and fears of abandonment
or death may show up in the behavior of grieving children. Children often
play death games as a way of working out their feelings and anxieties. These
games are familiar to the children and provide safe opportunities to express
their feelings. Although they may seem to show grief only occasionally and
briefly, in reality, a child’s grief often lasts longer than that of an adult.
Mourning in children may need to be addressed again and again as the
child ages. Children will think about the loss repeatedly, especially during
critical times in their lives, such as going to camp, graduating from school,
getting married, or giving birth to their children. A child’s grief can be
influenced by his or her age, personality, developmental stage, earlier
experiences with death, and relationship with the deceased person. The
surroundings, cause of death, and family members’ ability to communicate
with one another and to continue as a family after death can also affect grief.
The child’s ongoing need for care, his or her opportunity to share feelings
and memories, the parent’s ability to cope with stress, and the child’s steady
relationships with other adults are other factors that may influence grief. Even
older children frequently feel abandoned or rejected when a parent dies and
may show hostility toward the deceased or the surviving parent, now
perceived as one who might also “abandon” them. They may feel responsible


<<<PAGE 2685>>>
because of earlier misbehavior or because they said or wished that that person
would die at some time.
Children younger than 2 years may show loss of speech or diffuse distress.
Children younger than 5 years are apt to respond with eating, sleeping, and
bowel and bladder dysfunctions. Intense feelings of sadness, fear, and anxiety
can occur, but these feelings are not persistent and tend to alternate between
longer lasting normal states. School-age children may become phobic or
hypochondriacal, withdrawn, or pseudomature, and school performance and
peer relations often suffer. Adolescents, as with adults, run the gamut in
expressing bereavement, ranging from behavioral problems, somatic
symptoms, and erratic moods to stoicism. Whereas adolescent boys losing a
parent may become delinquent, girls may turn to a sexual pattern for comfort
and reassurance. Behavioral disturbances and depression are familiar at all
ages. Rates of depressive episodes in bereaved children and adolescents are
as high as in bereaved adults.
Bereaved children must be treated in a manner that considers their levels of
emotional and cognitive maturity. They need to be told that death is real and
irreversible and that they are blameless. Feelings and concerns should be
expressed, and questions should be invited and answered with simplicity,
candor, and clarity. Children, as with adults, need rituals to commemorate
their loved ones; attendance at the funeral and participation in mourning may
be beneficial first steps.
Bereavement during Adulthood
No consensus exists on which type of loss is associated with the most severe
reactions. Although the death of a spouse is often ranked as the most stressful
life event, some have argued that losing a child is even more profound. The
death of a child is a particular sorrow, a lifelong loss for surviving mothers,
fathers, brothers, sisters, grandparents, and other family members. A child’s
death is a life-altering experience. The deaths of parents and siblings in adult
life have not achieved much systematic study, but they are generally
considered relatively mild compared with the loss of a spouse or child.
Grief appears most intense for the mother in late perinatal losses (stillbirths
or neonatal deaths rather than miscarriages) and often is reexperienced during
subsequent pregnancies. Sudden infant death syndrome is particularly


<<<PAGE 2686>>>
problematic in that death is sudden and unexpected. Parents may experience
extra guilt or blame each other, often resulting in subsequent marital
difficulties.
The surviving family members, friends, or lovers of individuals who have
died from acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) are uniquely
challenged. The illness carries with it the stigmata of the illness itself and the
gay community in general; it carries with it caretakers’ fear of contracting the
illness, and it is most prevalent in people who are in the prime of life.
Asymptomatic infection may permit the infected person and those close to
him or her time to adapt to the diagnosis. When a person who is human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) positive begins to manifest symptoms of
opportunistic infection or associated cancer; however, the illness again
becomes a threat. Coping with emotional reality is arduous and complicated.
Often caretakers, as well as HIV-positive patients, wish for death, which can
evoke feelings of guilt. For bereaved lovers, their own HIV status, multiple
losses, and other concurrent stressors can complicate recovery. Gay men who
have lost lovers to AIDS may be more depressed, consider suicide more
often, and be more vulnerable to illicit drug use than are other bereaved
individuals.
Elderly adults face more losses than individuals at other phases of the life
cycle, and intense loneliness may be a lasting memorial to those who have
died. For highly impaired elders who lose a spouse they depended on for
daily functions or who was their sole source of companionship, bereavement
reactions are profound.
Grief Therapy
Persons in normal grief seldom seek psychiatric help because they accept
their reactions and behaviors as appropriate. Accordingly, a bereaved person
should not routinely see a psychiatrist or psychologist unless a markedly
divergent reaction to the loss is noted. For example, under usual
circumstances, a bereaved person does not make a suicide attempt; if
someone seriously contemplates suicide, psychiatric intervention is indicated.
When professional assistance is sought, it usually involves a request for
sleeping medication from a family physician. A mild sedative to induce sleep
may be useful in some situations, but antidepressant medication or


<<<PAGE 2687>>>
antianxiety agents are rarely indicated in normal grief. Bereaved persons may
have to go through the mourning process, however painful it is, for a
successful resolution to occur. Narcotizing patients with drugs interferes with
the normal process that ultimately can lead to a desired outcome.
Because grief reactions can develop into a depressive disorder or
pathologic mourning, specific counseling sessions for bereaved individuals
are often valuable. Grief therapy is an increasingly important skill. In
regularly scheduled sessions, grieving persons are encouraged to talk about
feelings of loss and about the person who has died. Many bereaved persons
have difficulty recognizing and expressing angry or ambivalent feelings
toward a deceased person, and they must be reassured that these feelings are
normal.
Grief therapy need not be conducted only on a one-to-one basis; group
counseling is also useful. Self-help groups also have great value in some
instances. About 30 percent of widows and widowers report that they become
isolated from friends, withdraw from social life, and thus experience feelings
of isolation and loneliness. Self-help groups offer companionship, social
contacts, and emotional support; they eventually enable their members to
reenter society in a meaningful way. Bereavement care and grief therapy have
been most effective with widows and widowers. The necessity for this
therapy stems, in part, from the contraction of the family unit; extended
family members are no longer available to provide the needed emotional
support and guidance during the mourning period.

29.2 Palliative Care
Psychological symptoms are nearly universal at the end of life. Psychiatric
syndromes occur with an increased but definable frequency and have
different age and gender distribution. For example, anxiety and depression
are as common in men as in women. Psychiatric classification remains an
essential framework on which to base clinical observations, but it was not
designed with dying patients in mind. Hence, for such patients, it is
pragmatically useful to think of a few syndromes for which this exists. The
most common ones are anxiety states, depressive states, and confusional


<<<PAGE 2688>>>
states. These frequently coexist and overlap. Rarely, specific phobias of
needles, enclosures, and the like may interfere with comfort and should be
addressed, adapting the usual treatments to the patient’s medical status.
Occasionally, an emotional crisis or exacerbation of symptoms can be
identified as an adjustment disorder, but it is occurring against the backdrop
of other severe symptoms, so technically, it does not meet diagnostic criteria.
However, this should not prevent the consultant from identifying the
precipitating factor and defusing the response in the usual ways. Major
psychotic disorders become submerged by the increasing symptomatology of
the active dying process and only require specific attention when the patient
is not actively dying and when the psychotic symptoms are separated from
and superimposed on the symptoms of the illness.

PREVALENCE
Much of the research on prevalence has been done in cancer and AIDS and
shows a marked increase in psychiatric conditions near the end of life. Severe
depressive symptoms were found in from 25 to 77 percent in a sample of
hospitalized cancer patients, although stricter criteria find 15 percent with
major depression and another 15 percent having severe depressive symptoms.
The prevalence of delirium rises from a range from 25 to 40 percent to as
high as 85 percent with increasingly advanced disease. The association of
psychiatric symptoms with pain was demonstrated in one of several
consistent studies in which 39 percent of patients with a psychiatric diagnosis
reported significant pain compared with 19 percent for those without a
psychiatric diagnosis. In a sample of inpatients with AIDS, 65 percent had an
organic mental disorder, and 27 percent had major depression. The financial
cost of psychiatric disorders can be inferred from a study in which patients
with a psychiatric diagnosis remained in the hospital 60 days longer than
those without a psychiatric diagnosis.
Most commonly, terminally ill patients demonstrate an intertwining of
anxiety and depression. These are difficult to tease apart, and the term
negative affect has been suggested to define them as a symptom complex. It
is hard not to feel grief at what is being lost and fear about the ultimate
unknown. Individuals whose deep faith in an afterlife animates their spirit are
an exception, and, even among them, many describe coexisting regret at the


<<<PAGE 2689>>>
loss of their temporal life and its furnishings.

GENERAL TREATMENT PRINCIPLES
Because the improved quality of life is the primary goal, pharmacologic
treatment and any other measures that bring symptom relief should be
instituted rapidly while an integrated plan for psychological and family
interventions is being designed and set into motion. Psychiatric syndromes in
this group are often secondary to medical conditions; hence, an etiologic
diagnosis often yields useful clues to prevention and improved management.
It should be sought simultaneously as long as the search is in line with
treatment goals.

ANXIETY IN PATIENTS WITH ADVANCED DISEASE
Anxiety can be the presenting symptom for almost all medical disorders and
can occur as a side effect from many medications. However, in patients with
advanced disease, it usually presents with somatic symptoms, such as
restlessness, hyperactivity, tachycardia, gastrointestinal (GI) distress, nausea,
insomnia, shortness of breath, numbness, or tremor. It lowers the threshold
for pain, worsens functional impairment, and increases the distress
experienced in all comorbid conditions. It often interferes with the patient’s
ability to cooperate with other treatments or to relate optimally with loved
ones. Patients refer to fear, worry, apprehension, or ruminations more often
than to anxiety per se.
Mr. S, a 50-year-old physical therapist with newly diagnosed advanced
lung cancer, was noted by his family to be anxious to the point of having
panic symptoms when his wife would leave his bedside to attend to
chores. He would start hyperventilating, would feel short of breath,
would become restless and unable to concentrate on anything, and would
be overwhelmed with morbid ruminations about his future. He was upset
and felt guilty at having become overly dependent on his wife. He was
taught relaxation and breathing exercises and was treated with
clonazepam, which brought about a marked resolution of his anxiety. Mr.
S felt more relaxed, less anxious, and more resilient and became able to


<<<PAGE 2690>>>
withstand periods of solitude without difficulty. (Courtesy of Marguerite
Lederberg, M.D.)

DEPRESSION IN PATIENTS WITH ADVANCED DISEASE
Depressive symptoms are also common in advanced disease and are
associated with the same existential factors found with anxiety. Studies have
found a prevalence ranging from 9 percent, using the strictest criteria, to 58
percent, with less demanding ones. Risk factors include a previous history or
family history. Having a way of differentiating somatic effects of disease
from the neurovegetative criteria of major depression is especially daunting
in terminally ill patients.
Table 29-5 describes the Endicott Substitution Criteria, which have been
found to perform as well as the DSM criteria for depression and go further in
that they also reflect the clinical observation which classically described that
depressive thoughts and feelings are not universal in terminally ill patients
and, when present, reflect depression just as they do in physically healthy
patients.
Table 29-5
Endicott Substitution Criteria for Depression
Physical-Somatic Symptoms

Psychological Symptom
Substitute

Changes in appetite or weight, or
both

Tearfulness, depressed
appearance

Sleep disturbance

Social withdrawal, decreased
talkativeness

Fatigue, loss of energy

Brooding, self-pity, pessimism

Memory and concentration deficits,
indecisiveness

Lack of reactivity

Although there are not many studies on the treatment of depression in
terminally ill individuals, the available studies and a large body of clinical


<<<PAGE 2691>>>
experience with medically ill patients show that the pharmacologic treatment
of depression can be useful even when definable medical causes exist and
even in the last days of life.
A patient with diabetes and end-stage renal disease who had been on
dialysis for 2 years was diagnosed with depression with marked insomnia
and was started on 15 mg by mouth every day of mirtazapine, which
helped her sleep immediately and showed an antidepressant effect within
3 weeks. Four weeks later, she was admitted to the hospital in congestive
heart failure for what was to be her terminal admission. She did not wish
to give up the antidepressant but now felt oversedated and wished that
she could be more alert during the day to interact with her loved ones.
She was started on methylphenidate 5 mg by mouth twice daily, after
which she was more alert, engaged, and communicative with her family.
On her death, her family was grateful to have been able to connect with
her until the end.

CONFUSIONAL STATES IN PATIENTS WITH ADVANCED
DISEASE
The prevalence of delirium rises to 85 percent in patients with advanced
disease. If one includes the last hours of life, it nears 100 percent unless the
patient lapses rapidly into a coma or dies of an acute event, such as
pulmonary embolus. Acute events are always unexpected and traumatize the
survivors even though they knew full well that the patient was near the end of
life. Some patients slip into an irreversible coma, leaving families in a
bedside vigil, which may give them a period of adaptation before the final
instant of death. However, for some 75 to 85 percent of patients, death is
associated with a period of delirium.
Patients frequently experience some disorientation, impaired memory,
concentration, and altered arousal as they become increasingly ill. These
symptoms may remain mild or may be the harbingers of full delirium.
Clinicians should be aware that mild and early signs of delirium are often
mistaken for depression, anxiety, and poor coping.


<<<PAGE 2692>>>
A psychiatric consultation was sought to evaluate depression in a 56year-old practicing attorney with pancreatic cancer. His moderately
severe back pain was being treated with morphine. The patient was noted
by the inpatient staff to be more withdrawn, disengaged, and quiet,
making poor eye contact and sleeping most of the day.
On examination, the psychiatric consultant found Mr. K to have
disturbed arousal and to be mildly confused and disoriented. His speech
was slow and his thought process disorganized. Mr. K admitted to
intermittently experiencing visual hallucinations that he had been too
embarrassed to report earlier to the nursing staff.
Mr. K was diagnosed with a hypoactive delirium secondary to opioid
medications. He was treated with a low dose of olanzapine, 2.5 mg at
bedtime. Mr. K’s sensorium improved dramatically. He became alert,
fully oriented, and better related, without any perceptual disturbances or
thought disorder. This treatment was accomplished without needing to
decrease his much-needed pain medications.

DISEASE-SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
Different illnesses bring special issues. For example, a patient on dialysis can
opt for death three times a week and is more vulnerable to acting on feelings
of depression, anger, hopelessness, and reactions to family neglect or
conflict. Patients with cancer must acknowledge possible death while hoping
for a cure or remission. Treatment decisions in the face of a disease that is
less and less treatable become increasingly difficult and can cause acute
anxiety. Stem cell transplant patients experience high levels of anxiety and
depression because they are getting a last chance with high stakes and high
risks. The availability of organ transplants has created a large population of
patients who wait, knowing that they may die while waiting for a cure that
could be just around the corner. Neurodegenerative disorders are associated
with increased physical disability and dependence. When there is associated
loss of cognitive faculties, the problems may be behavioral. Otherwise,
depression is frequent, although not an inevitable problem. Many patients
state that they will not tolerate complete immobility and dependence, yet
when the time comes, they go on life supports and stay on them. It has been


<<<PAGE 2693>>>
shown in several settings that as patients become increasingly ill, they accept
an increasingly limited quality of life as worth living and opt for more
onerous, less promising treatments if they offer even a small chance of help.

PATIENT–FAMILY UNIT
The intensity of family relationships becomes even more significant during
the terminal period. The response of family members can be a conspiracy of
silence. Nothing is sadder than a bedside where family members are tense
and silent because they want to protect the patient by not talking about dying,
and the patient is tense and silent because he or she is protecting the family
by not talking about things that will upset them. Instead of closeness,
expressions of gratitude, apologies, reminiscences, and farewells, there is a
distance, and the patient is dying alone even though others physically
surround the patient.
The psychiatrist can use family sessions to open patient–family dialogues.
He or she can identify discrepant views of the illness, can deal with conflicts
regarding treatment, and can explore concerns regarding an absent member,
all of which undermine patient support and medical management. A major
crisis, such as the imminent loss of a member, destabilizes the family
structure, creating an opportunity for the psychiatrist to promote adaptive
change and reconstitution. Family-centered grief therapy, which initially
includes the patient and continues after the patient’s death, provides a natural
setting for such interventions.
When an older adolescent dropped out of college to take over her dying
mother’s duties, the family subtly discouraged her return to school after
her mother’s death. Psychiatric intervention allowed the patient to play a
part in reorganizing family roles in a way that made it more possible for
her daughter to continue her studies.

DECISION POINTS, ADVANCE DIRECTIVES, PROXIES,
AND SURROGATES
This section reviews the transitions and decisions that characterize the end of


<<<PAGE 2694>>>
life.
Transition to Palliative Care
The transition to palliative care is not always clear. As soon as a diagnosis of
an incurable disease is made, a cure is no longer the goal of care. However, if
death is distant or even if some life extension can still be obtained, the patient
and family focus on this positive goal. The physician is under no illusion
about the future but has the delicate task of promoting short-term gains
without obliterating the awareness of what lies ahead. Only when the
nearness of death is acknowledged can thoughtful decisions be made about
palliative care.
Where to Die?
Unattended Deaths. Many traumatic or unexpected deaths become known
from a catastrophic phone call. The traumatized family then needs help to
absorb the loss, to cope with the circumstances, and to come to some kind of
closure. It is not realized how much the experience of living through the
illness, death, and the funeral rites is crucial to the normal resolution of the
mourning process.
An unexpected death, even an understandable one, such as a heart attack,
leaves an aching sense of unfinished business over and above the expected
grief. If the person was the victim of a crime, obsessive thoughts might be
difficult to repress, and grief may turn to unquenchable anger with profound
psychological disruption. It is also difficult, if not impossible, for survivors to
make peace with suicide.
Emergency departments, police departments, and religious and community
institutions should be equipped with a list of referral resources to help
survivors of traumatic deaths. Psychiatric input can include program
development and consultation to a wide range of professionals and
individuals. Families must be helped to construct their ritual whereby they
acknowledge to themselves and others the finality of their loss and perhaps
create a place, if not a grave, around which to center their memorializing.
Attended Deaths. Patients can die in an acute hospital, in nursing homes,
in hospices, and at home, with or without hospice support.


<<<PAGE 2695>>>
Most patients still die in acute care hospitals, having received active care
until shortly before they die. This may occur because death is sudden or
because the family or patient needed to be in a place where “everything is
being done.” Fortunately, a growing number of hospitals have palliative care
teams that provide appropriate care in the acute hospital setting.
Many patients die in nursing homes without the benefit of special care.
This unfortunate situation could be remedied by bringing formal hospice care
into nursing homes, but funding sources and turf issues need to be settled
before it can become routine practice.
Inpatient hospice care was the first model of care to be developed and is
warmly remembered by grateful families whose multiple human needs and
those of their loved ones had been met in ways that they had not been trained
to expect. As hospice gained acceptance, the insufficiency of inpatient beds
encouraged the development of home hospice. Its existence has, in turn,
encouraged more families to elect to keep dying patients at home.
In a home hospice program, the patient is evaluated and accepted in the
usual manner but stays at home. The patient and family receive extensive
instruction about what to expect. They are helped to obtain necessary
materials, taught how to use them, and helped to obtain as much home help
as they need. All the while, they receive medical supervision, nursing care,
and emotional support with 24-hour phone availability and routine daily
contacts.
Without this kind of help, a good death at home can be challenging to
achieve. With it, patients feel safe from the abandonment that is so
commonly feared, and families feel safe from the terror of an unmanageable
event. The families of these patients work hard, but they are more likely to
feel competent and in control. They experience more of a sense of
achievement and less of the gnawing sense of inadequacy that is otherwise
common.

CARING FOR THE DYING PATIENT
Marguerite S. Lederberg, M.D., at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
in New York makes the following observation:
A dying human being whose physical, social, emotional, and spiritual needs


<<<PAGE 2696>>>
are being effectively attended to seldom demands to be helped to commit
suicide, and the family members—given proper help and support—derive a
deep sense of peace from having helped their loved one to die feeling loved
and secure.
One of the most critical tasks for a physician caring for a dying patient is to
determine when the time for curative care has ceased. It is only then that
palliative care can begin. Some physicians are so upset by death that they are
reluctant to use palliative methods; instead, they continue to treat the patient
knowing that efforts are futile. Alternatively, they resort to using so-called
heroic methods that do not prevent death, and that may produce needless
suffering. Ideally, physicians should strive to extend the patient’s life and
decrease suffering; at the same time, they must accept death as a defining
characteristic of life. Some physicians, however, develop dysfunctional
attitudes about death, which they reinforce throughout their lives in their
experiences and training. It has been postulated that doctors are more
frightened of death than members of other professional groups and that many
enter the study of medicine so they may gain control of their mortality using
the defense mechanism of intellectualization. Risk factors that can interfere
with a physician’s ability to care optimally for dying patients are listed in
Table 29-6. These factors range from overidentifying with the patient to
being fearful of death, as mentioned.
Physicians able to deal with death and dying can communicate effectively
in several areas: diagnosis and prognosis, the nature of the terminal illness,
advance directives about life-sustaining treatment, hospice care, legal and
ethical issues, grief and bereavement, and psychiatric care. Also, palliative
care physicians must be skilled in pain management, especially in the use of
potent opioids—the gold standard of drugs used for pain relief. In 1991, the
American Board of Pain Medicine was established to ensure that physicians
treating patients in pain were both qualified to do so and were kept up to date
on the latest advances in the field.
Table 29-6
Risk Factors for the Development of Aversive Reactions in
Physicians


<<<PAGE 2697>>>
The physician:
Identifies with the patient: looks, profession, age, character, and
so on.
Identifies the patient with someone in his or her own life.
Is currently dealing with a sick family member.
Is recently bereaved or dealing with unresolved loss or grief
issues.
Feels professionally insecure.
Is fearful of death and disability.
Is unconsciously reflecting feelings felt or expressed by the
patient or family.
Cannot tolerate high and protracted levels of ambiguity or
uncertainty.
Carries a psychiatric diagnosis, such as depression or substance
abuse.
Adapted from Meier DE, Back AL, Morrison RS The inner life of physicians and care of the
seriously ill. JAMA. 2001;286:3007–3014, with permission.

COMMUNICATION
After a diagnosis and prognosis have been made, physicians need to talk to
the patient and the patient’s family. Formerly, doctors subscribed to a
conspiracy of silence, believing that their patient’s chances for recovery
would improve if they knew less, because news of impending death might
bring despair. The standard of care is to be honest and open toward a patient.
The question is no longer whether to tell a patient, but when and how. In
1972, the American Hospital Association drafted the Patient’s Bill of Rights,
declaring that patients have the “right to obtain complete, current information
regarding diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis in terms the patient can be
reasonably expected to understand.”
Breaking Bad News
When breaking news of impending death to the patient, as when relating any
bad news, diplomacy and compassion should be the guiding principles.
Often, the bad news is not entirely related during one meeting but instead is
absorbed gradually over a series of separate conversations. Preparations,


<<<PAGE 2698>>>
including scheduling sufficient time for the visit, researching pertinent
information such as test results and facts about the case, and even arranging
furniture can help make the patient feel comfortable.
If possible, these conversations should take place in a private, suitable
space with the patient on equal terms with the physician (i.e., the patient
dressed and the physician seated). If it is possible and desired by the patient,
the patient’s spouse or partner should be present. The treating physician
should explain the current situation to the patient in clear, simple language
even when speaking to highly educated patients. Information may need to be
repeated, or additional meetings may be necessary to communicate all of the
information. A gentle, sensible approach will help modulate the patient’s
denial and acceptance. At no time should physicians take their patient’s angry
comments personally, and they should never criticize the patient’s response
to the bad news.
Physicians can signal their availability for honest communication by
encouraging and answering questions from patients. Estimates on how long a
patient has to live are usually inaccurate and thus should not be given, or
given with that caveat. Also, physicians should make it clear to their patients
that they are willing to see them through until death occurs. Ultimately,
physicians must choose how much information to give and when based on
each patient’s needs and capacities.
The same general approaches apply as physicians seek to comfort
members of the patient’s family. Helping family members deal with feelings
about the patient’s illness can be just as important as comforting the patient
because family members are often the primary source of emotional support
for patients.
Telling the Truth
Tactful honesty is the doctor’s most valuable aid. Honesty, however, need not
preclude hope or guarded optimism. It is essential to be aware that if 85
percent of patients with a particular disease die in 5 years, 15 percent are still
alive after that time. When deciding when and what to tell a patient about
their prognosis, we should consider our commitment to the principle of “do
no harm.” In general, most patients want to know the truth about their
condition. Various studies of patients with malignancies show that 80 to 90


<<<PAGE 2699>>>
percent want to know their diagnosis.
Doctors, however, should ask patients how much they want to know
because some persons do not want to know all the facts about their illness.
Such patients, if told the truth, deny that they ever were told, and they cannot
participate in end-of-life decisions, such as the use of life-sustaining
equipment. The patients who openly request that they not be given “bad
news” are often those who most fear death. Physicians should deal with these
fears directly, but if the patient still cannot bear to hear the truth, someone
closely related to the patient must be informed.
Informed Consent
In the United States, informed consent is legally required for both
conventional and experimental treatment. Patients must be given sufficient
information about their diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment options to make
knowledgeable decisions. This information includes a discussion of potential
risks and benefits, available alternative treatments, and the results of not
receiving treatment. This approach may come at some psychological cost;
severe anxiety and occasional psychiatric decompensation can occur when
patients feel overburdened by demands to make decisions. Nevertheless,
patients respond best to doctors who explain the various options in detail.
Physicians must be prepared to deal with difficult questions posed by
patients. Some of them are listed in Table 29-7.
End-of-life discussions are challenging, mainly because they can influence
how patients make informed choices.

TERMINAL CARE DECISIONS
Modern society is poorly equipped to cope with the life-and-death decisions
spawned by technology. When it first emerged, cardiopulmonary
resuscitation was enthusiastically supported by the medical profession. It was
endowed with magical power and eventually became a ritualized rite rather
than an optional medical treatment. That practice played into the therapeutic
activism characteristic of many physicians. By the end of the 20th century,
however, a countermovement began. First, the right to refuse treatment was
established, mostly because of synergy between the consumer movement and
the bioethics movement, with its emphasis on patient autonomy. Next, the


<<<PAGE 2700>>>
legality of DNR orders and the moral equivalence of stopping and not
starting treatment were established. The medical profession was less
enthusiastic than the public about these changes, perhaps because
practitioners know too well the emotional ambiguities that surround death
and must repeatedly experience them.
Table 29-7
Some Difficult Questions from Patients
“Why me?”
“Why didn’t you catch this earlier? Did you make a mistake?”
“How long do I have?”
“What would you do in my shoes?”
“Should I try experimental therapy?”
“Should I go to a ‘medical mecca’ for treatment or a second opinion?”
“If my suffering gets really bad, will you help me die?”
“Will you work with me all the way through to my death, no matter
what?”
From Quill TF. Perspectives on care at the close of life. Initiating end-of-life discussions with
seriously ill patients: Addressing the “elephant in the room”. JAMA. 2000;284:2502–2507, with
permission.

Table 29-8
Persistent Vegetative State
No evidence of awareness of self or environment; no interaction with
others
No meaningful response to stimuli
No receptive or expressive language
Return of sleep–wake cycles, arousal, even smiling, frowning,
yawning
Preserved brainstem or hypothalamic autonomic functions to permit
survival
Bowel and bladder incontinence
Variably preserved cranial nerve and spinal reflexes


<<<PAGE 2701>>>
Brain Death and Persistent Vegetative State
In an attempt to deal with these ambiguities, the concept of brain death
emerged. Brain death is associated with the loss of higher brain functions
(e.g., cognition) and all brain stem functions (e.g., pupillary and reflex eye
movement), respiration, and gag and corneal reflexes. Determination of brain
death is a generally accepted criterion for death. Some clinicians advocate an
absence of brain waves on electroencephalography (EEG) to confirm the
diagnosis.
The American Academy of Neurology defined the persistent vegetative
state as a condition in which no awareness exists of self or environment
associated with severe neurologic damage (Table 29-8). The medical
treatment provides no benefits to patients in a persistent vegetative state, and
after the diagnosis is established, DNR and do-not-intubate (DNI) orders can
be followed and life-sustaining methods (e.g., feeding tubes, ventilators) can
be removed.
In 1976, the case of Karen Ann Quinlan made international headlines
when her parents sought the assistance of a judge to discontinue the use
of a ventilator in their daughter, who was in a persistent vegetative state.
Ms. Quinlan’s physician had refused her parents’ request to remove the
ventilator because they said they feared that they might be held civilly or
even criminally liable for her death. The New Jersey Supreme Court
ruled that competent persons have a right to refuse life-sustaining
treatment and that this right should not be lost when a person becomes
incompetent. Because the court believed that the physicians were
unwilling to withdraw the ventilator because of the fear of legal liability,
not precepts of medical ethics, it devised a mechanism to grant the
physicians prospective legal immunity for taking this action. The New
Jersey Supreme Court ruled that after a prognosis, confirmed by a
hospital ethics committee, that “no reasonable possibility of a patient
returning to a cognitive, sapient state,” exists, life-sustaining treatment
can be removed, and no one involved, including the physicians, can be
held civilly or criminally responsible for the death.
The publicity surrounding the Quinlan case motivated two independent
developments: It encouraged states to enact “living will” legislation that


<<<PAGE 2702>>>
provided legal immunity to physicians who honored patients’ written
“advance directives,” specifying how they would want to be treated if
they ever became incompetent. It also encouraged hospitals to establish
ethics committees that could attempt to resolve similar treatment disputes
without going to court. (Courtesy of Annas GJ. “Culture of Life” politics
at the bedside—the case of Terri Schiavo. N Eng J Med. 2005;352:1710–
1715.)
Advance Directives
Advance directives are wishes and choices about medical intervention when
the patient’s condition is considered terminal. Advance directives, which are
legally binding in all 50 states, include three types: living will, health care
proxy, and DNR and DNI orders.
Living Will. In a living will, a mentally competent patient gives specific
instructions that doctors must follow when the patient cannot communicate
with them because of illness. These instructions may include rejection of
feeding tubes, artificial airways, and any other measures to prolong life.
Health Care Proxy. Also known as a durable power of attorney, the health
care proxy gives another person the power to make medical decisions if the
patient cannot do so. That person, also known as the surrogate, is empowered
to make all decisions about terminal care based on what he or she thinks the
patient would want.
Do-Not-Resuscitate and Do-Not-Intubate Orders. These orders
prohibit doctors from attempting to resuscitate (DNR) or intubate (DNI) the
patient who is in extremis. DNR and DNI orders are made by the patient who
is competent to do so. They can be made part of the living will or expressed
by the health care proxy. Figure 29-1 is an infographic that includes a
checklist of important items to consider when making an advanced directive.
The Uniform Rights of the Terminally Ill Act, drafted by the National
Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws was approved and
recommended for enactment in all states. This act authorizes an adult to
control the decisions regarding the administration of life-sustaining treatment


<<<PAGE 2703>>>
by executing a declaration instructing a physician to withhold or to withdraw
life-sustaining treatment if the person is in a terminal condition and cannot
participate in medical treatment decisions. In 1991, the Federal Patient SelfDetermination Act became law in the United States. It required that all health
care facilities (1) provide each patient admitted to a hospital with written
information about the right to refuse treatment, (2) ask about advance
directives, and (3) keep written records of whether the patient has an advance
directive or has designated a health care proxy.
Today, patients who have left no advance directives or who are legally
incompetent to do so have access to hospital ethics committees that hold
active legal and ethical debates about these issues. These ethics committees
are also of help to doctors, who can gain both legal and moral support when
recommending that no further treatment occur. It is much easier for all
parties, however, if the patient has advance directives or a proxy. Ideally,
physicians should initiate discussions with patients about advance directives
and proxies early even while the patient is healthy. The patient should be
reminded that these early formulations can be modified but that even having
preliminary advance directives will ensure that treating physicians observe
the patient’s wishes in the event of an emergency.

CARING FOR THE FAMILY
Family members play an essential role as caregivers to terminally ill patients
and have needs of their own that often go unrecognized. Their responsibilities
can be overwhelming, especially if only one family member is available or if
family members themselves are infirm or elderly. Table 29-9 lists some
family caregiving tasks. Many of these tasks require long hours of work or
supervision that can lead to physical and emotional fatigue. One study of
caregivers reports that 25 to 30 percent lost their jobs, and more than half
moved to lower-paying jobs to accommodate the need for flexibility. The
highest stress level was found in families who cared for a terminally ill
patient at home, mainly when the death occurred in the home and realized in
retrospect that they would have preferred an environment in which death
occurs in the presence of skilled caretakers.


<<<PAGE 2704>>>

<<<PAGE 2705>>>
FIGURE 29-1
Advance Care planning checklist. (Source: National Institute on Aging,
https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/infographics/getting-your-affairs-order-advancecare-planning.)

Table 29-9
Tasks of Family Members of Dying Individuals
1. Administering medications
2. Dealing with adverse effects of medications
3. Providing help with, or actually performing, activities of daily living
4. Changing wound dressing
5. Managing ambulatory infusion pumps or other equipment
6. Providing symptom management (e.g., for pain, nausea and
vomiting, shortness of breath, seizures, and terminal agitation)
7. Notifying the nurse or doctor when they are needed
8. Shopping for needed items and picking up prescriptions
9. Providing a presence and companionship
10. Attending to spiritual and religious needs
11. Carrying out advance directives
12. Managing financial matters
Dying at Home
Depending on the patient’s wishes and the specific disease, the choice to die
at home is one that should be explored. Although it is more burdensome on a
family than dying in a hospital or hospice, death at home can be a welcome
alternative for the patient and family seeking to spend quality time together.
A home care team can assess a home for its suitability and suggest ways to
facilitate activities of daily living, including modifications to furniture;
hospital bed leasing; and installation of assistive devices, such as handrails
and commodes. The family’s care can be supplemented with house calls by


<<<PAGE 2706>>>
physicians, nurses, therapists, and chaplains. In any case, the family must
know what their responsibilities are and must be well prepared to care for the
patient. Recently, hospice home care was approved by Medicare and is being
more widely used.
Family therapy sessions allow family members to explore feelings about
death and dying. They serve as a forum in which anticipatory grief and
mourning can take place. The ability to share feelings can be cathartic,
especially if guilt is involved. Family members often have to deal with
feelings of guilt about past interactions with the dying patient. Family
sessions also help to achieve consensus about the patient’s advance
directives. If family members disagree about the patient’s wishes, the medical
staff may be unable to act. In such cases, legal action may be needed to
resolve family disputes about what course of action to pursue.

PALLIATIVE CARE
Palliative care is the most critical part of end-of-life care. It refers to
providing relief from the suffering caused by pain or other symptoms of a
terminal disease. Although this is most commonly associated with analgesic
drug administration, many other medical interventions and surgical
procedures fall under the umbrella of palliative care because they can make
the patient more comfortable. Monitors and their alarms, peripheral and
central lines, phlebotomy, measurement of signs, and even supplemental
oxygen are usually discontinued to allow the patient to die peacefully.
Relocating the patient to a quiet, private room (as opposed to an intensive
care unit) and allowing family members to be present is another critical
palliative care modality.
The shift from active, curative treatment to palliative care is sometimes the
first tangible sign that the patient will die, a transition that is emotionally
difficult for everyone concerned about the patient to accept. The
discontinuation of machines and measurements, which, up until this point,
have been an integral part of the hospital experience, can be extremely
disconcerting to the patient, family members, and even other physicians.
Indeed, if these parties are not active in planning this transition, it can easily
seem that persons have given up on the patient.
Because of this difficulty, palliative care is sometimes avoided altogether


<<<PAGE 2707>>>
(i.e., curative treatment is continued until the patient dies). This approach is
likely to cause problems if it is adopted merely to avoid the reality of
impending death. A well-negotiated transition to palliative care often
decreases anxiety after the patient and family go through an appropriate
anticipatory grief reaction. Furthermore, a positive emotional outcome is
much more likely if the physician and staff project a conviction that palliative
care will be an active, involved process, without a hint of withdrawal or
abandonment. When this does not occur or when the family cannot tolerate
the transition, the ensuing stress frequently results in a need for psychiatric
consultation.
A 36-year-old physician with end-stage leukemia was seen in psychiatric
consultation because he reported seeing the “angel of death” at the foot of
his hospital bed. He described the experience as frightening and
inexplicable. The consultant asked the patient, “Are you afraid that you
are going to die?” That was the first time anyone had mentioned death or
dying in any context to the patient. He welcomed the opportunity to talk
openly about his fears to the medical staff and his family and eventually
died a peaceful death.
Psychiatric consultation is indicated for patients who become severely
anxious, suicidal, depressed, or overtly psychotic. In each instance,
appropriate psychiatric medication can be prescribed to provide relief.
Patients who are suicidal do not always have to be transferred to a psychiatric
service. An attendant or nurse can be assigned to the patient on a 24-hour
basis (one-on-one coverage). In such instances, the relationship that develops
between the observer and the patient may have therapeutic overtones,
especially with patients whose depression is related to a sense of
abandonment. Patients who are terminal and who are at high risk for suicide
are usually in pain. When pain is relieved, suicidal ideation is likely to
diminish. A careful evaluation of suicide potential is required for all patients.
A premorbid history of past suicide attempts is a high-risk factor for suicide
in terminally ill patients. In patients who become psychotic, impaired
cognitive function secondary to metastatic lesions to the brain must always be
considered. Such patients respond to antipsychotic medications, and


<<<PAGE 2708>>>
psychotherapy may also be of use.

PAIN MANAGEMENT
Types of Pain
Dying patients are subject to several different kinds of pain, as summarized in
Table 29-10. The distinctions are important because they call for different
treatment strategies; whereas somatic and visceral pain is responsive to
opiates, neuropathic and sympathetically maintained pain may require
adjuvant medications in addition to opiates. Most patients with advanced
cancer, for example, have more than one kind of pain and require complex
treatment regimens.
Treatment of Pain
It cannot be overemphasized that pain management should be aggressive, and
treatment should be multimodal. A good pain regimen may require several
drugs or the same drug used in different ways and administered via different
routes. For example, intravenous morphine can be supplemented by selfadministered oral “rescue” doses, or intravenous bolus doses can supplement
a continuous epidural drip. Transdermal patches may provide baseline
concentrations in patients for whom intravenous or oral intake is difficult.
Patient-controlled analgesia systems for intravenous opiate administration
result in better pain relief with lower amounts dispensed than in staffadministered dosing.
Table 29-10
Types of Pain
Nociceptive Pain
Somatic pain

Usually, but not always constant, aching, gnawing,
and well localized (e.g., bone metastases)

Visceral pain

Usually, but not always constant, deep, squeezing,
poorly localized, with possible cutaneous referral
(e.g., pleural effusion leading to deep chest pain,


<<<PAGE 2709>>>
diaphragmatic irritation referred to the shoulder)
Neuropathic
pain

Burning dysesthetic pain with shock-like paroxysms
associated with direct damage to peripheral
receptors, afferent fibers, or the central nervous
system, leading to loss of central inhibitory
modulation and spontaneous firing (e.g., phantom
limb pain; can involve sympathetic somatic
afferents)

Psychogenic
pain

Variable characteristics secondary to psychological
factors in the absence of medical factors; rare as a
pure phenomenon in patients with cancer but often
an additional factor in the presence of organic pain

Courtesy of Marguerite S. Lederberg, M.D. and Jimmie C. Holland, M.D.

Opioids commonly cause delirium and hallucinations. A frequent
mechanism of psychotoxicity is the accumulation of drugs or metabolites
whose durations of analgesia are shorter than their plasma half-lives
(morphine, levorphanol, and methadone). The use of drugs such as
hydromorphone, which have half-lives closer to their analgesic duration, can
relieve the problem without loss of pain control. Cross-tolerance is
incomplete between opiates; hence, several should be tried in any patient with
the dosage lowered when switching drugs. Table 29-11 lists opioid
analgesics.
The benefits of maintenance analgesia administration in terminally ill
patients compared with as-needed administration cannot be overemphasized.
Maintenance dosing improves pain control, increases drug efficiency, and
relieves patient anxiety, but as-needed orders allow pain to increase while
waiting for the drug to be given. Moreover, as-needed analgesia
administration perversely sets up the patient for staff complaints about drugseeking behavior. Even when maintenance treatment is used, extra doses of
medication should be available for breakthrough pain, and repeated use of
these medications should signal the need to raise the maintenance dose.
Depending on their previous experiences with opioid analgesics and their
weight, it is not unusual for some patients to require 2 g or more of morphine


<<<PAGE 2710>>>
per day for relief of symptoms.
Knowing doses of different drugs and different routes of administration is
essential to avoid accidental undermedication. For example, when changing a
patient from intramuscular to oral morphine use, the intramuscular dose must
be multiplied by 6 to avoid causing the patient pain and provoking drugseeking behavior. Many adjuvant drugs used for pain are psychotropic with
which psychiatrists are familiar, but in some cases, their analgesic effect is
separate from their primary psychotropic effect. Commonly used adjuvants
include antidepressants, mood stabilizers (e.g., gabapentin) phenothiazines,
butyrophenones, antihistamines, amphetamines, and steroids. They are
particularly crucial in neuropathic and sympathetically maintained pain, for
which they can be the mainstay of treatment.
Table 29-11
Opioid Analgesics for Management of Pain

Other developments in pain management include more intrusive
procedures, such as nerve blocks or the use of continuous epidural infusions.


<<<PAGE 2711>>>
Additionally, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and even surgical resection
can be considered as pain management modalities in palliative care. Short
courses of radiotherapy or chemotherapy can be used to shrink tumors or
manage metastatic lesions that cause pain or impairment. In patients with
end-stage Hodgkin disease, for example, systemic chemotherapy can improve
the patient’s quality of life by decreasing tumor burden. Surgical resection of
invasive tumors, most notably breast carcinomas, can be useful for the same
reason.

PALLIATION OF OTHER SYMPTOMS
Symptom management is a high priority in palliative care. Patients are often
more concerned about the day-to-day distress of their symptoms than they are
about their impending death, which may not be as real to them. Table 29-12
lists common end-of-life symptoms. A comprehensive approach to palliation
involves attending to these end-of-life symptoms as well as pain. Sources of
distress include psychiatric symptoms, such as anxiety and physical
symptoms. Foremost among physical symptoms are those involving the GI
system, including diarrhea, constipation, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and
bowel obstruction. Other significant symptoms include insomnia, confusion,
mouth sores, dyspnea, cough, pruritus, decubitus ulcers, and urinary
frequency or incontinence. Caretakers should follow these symptoms
carefully and establish appropriate early and aggressive care for these
symptoms before they become burdensome.
An effective treatment for nausea and vomiting associated with
chemotherapy is the use of Δ-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the active
ingredient of marijuana. The oral synthetic cannabinoid, dronabinol
(Marinol), is used in 1- to 2-mg doses every 8 hours. The use of marijuana
cigarettes to deliver THC is believed to be more effective than pills.
Proponents say that its absorption is faster and antiemetic properties are more
potent via the pulmonary system. Repeated attempts to legalize marijuana
cigarettes for medical use have met with only limited success in this country.
A 47-year-old man with incurable lung cancer who had been treated
unsuccessfully with chemotherapy and radiotherapy had been suffering


<<<PAGE 2712>>>
from intractable dyspnea for 1 week. His family, nursing, and other staff
were increasingly upset by his difficulty breathing and his pleas for relief.
The attending physician refused to prescribe anything more substantial
than codeine. The palliative care team at the hospital intervened at the
family’s request. Relief was obtained with the use of 5 to 10 mg of an
intravenous bolus of morphine every 15 minutes. When the patient
became comfortable, a continuous drip of intravenous morphine was
instituted, complemented by subcutaneous morphine as needed.
Table 29-12
Common End-of-Life Symptoms/Signs
Symptom/Sign

Comments

Cachexia

All terminal disease
Feeding tubes useful in
states are associated
some cases; small
with cachexia
sips of water of help
secondary to
anorexia and
dehydration

Delusions

Common in terminal
state

Delirium/Confusion Occurs in nearly 90%
of all terminal
patients but is
reversible in over
50%

Management/Care

Antipsychotic
medication useful
Can be reversed if
cause is found and
treatable; may
respond to
antipsychotic and/or
pain medication

Depression or
anxiety

Psychological factors, Antianxiety and
e.g., fear of death,
antidepressant
abandonment and/or
medication of use;
physiologic factors,
opioids have strong
e.g., pain, hypoxia
antianxiety effects

Dysphagia

Seen in neurologic

Attention to oral care,


<<<PAGE 2713>>>
disease, e.g.,
multiple sclerosis,
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis

e.g., ice chips, lip
balm; adjust to
upright position when
feeding

Dyspnea or cough Associated with severe Opioids, supplemental
anxiety; fear of
oxygen,
suffocation in
bronchodilators of
extreme case;
use
common in lung
cancer patients
Fatigue

Most common
occurrence in
terminal illness

Psychostimulants can
be used for relief

Incontinence

Associated with
radiation induced
fistulas

Keep patient clean and
dry; use indwelling or
condom catheter if
necessary

Nausea or
vomiting

Side effect of radiation
and chemotherapy

Antiemetics, e.g.,
metoclopramide,
prochlorperazine;
marijuana of use

Loss of skin
integrity

Decubiti most common Turn body frequently;
on weight-bearing
elbow and hip pads;
areas
inflating mattresses

Pain

Pain medications can
be administered
orally, sublingually,
by injection or
infusion, or via skin
patch

Opioids are the gold
standard

Data from National Coalition on Health Care (NCHC) and the Institute for Healthcare
Improvement (IHI). Promises to Keep: Changing the Way We Provide Care at the End of Life,
release, October 12, 2000.


<<<PAGE 2714>>>
The AMA supports the position that patients with a terminal condition
require substantial doses of opioids regularly and should not be denied drugs
for fear of producing physical dependence.

HOSPICE CARE
In 1967, the founding of St. Christopher’s Hospice in England by Cicely
Saunders launched the modern hospice movement. Several factors in the
1960s propelled the development of hospices, including concerns about
inadequately trained physicians, inept terminal care, gross inequities in health
care, and neglect of elderly adults. Life expectancy had increased, and heart
disease and cancer were becoming more common. Saunders emphasized an
interdisciplinary approach to symptom control, care of the patient and family
as a unit, the use of volunteers, continuity of care (including home care), and
follow-up with family members after a patient’s death. The first hospice in
the United States, Connecticut Hospice, opened in 1974. By 2000, more than
3,000 hospices were open in the United States. Round-the-clock pain control
with opioids is an essential component of hospice management.
In 1983, Medicare began reimbursing hospice care. Medicare hospice
guidelines emphasize home care, with benefits provided for a broad spectrum
of physician, nursing, psychosocial, and spiritual services at home or, if
necessary, in a hospital or nursing home. The patient is eligible for these
services if the physician certifies them as having 6 months or less to live. By
electing hospice care, patients agree to receive palliative rather than curative
treatment. Many hospice programs are hospital-based, sometimes in separate
units and sometimes in the form of hospice beds interspersed throughout the
facility. Other program models include free-standing hospices and programs,
hospital-affiliated hospices, nursing home hospice care, and home care
programs. Nursing homes are the site of death for many elderly patients with
incurable chronic illness, yet dying nursing home residents have limited
access to palliative and hospice care. Families generally express satisfaction
with their involvement in hospice care. Savings with hospice care vary, but
home care programs generally cost less than conventional institutional care,
particularly in the final months of life. Hospice patients are less likely to
receive diagnostic studies or such intensive therapy as surgery or
chemotherapy; however, a new trend is to allow treatment programs to


<<<PAGE 2715>>>
continue while the patient remains in the hospice. Hospice care is a proven,
viable alternative for patients who elect a palliative approach to terminal care.
Also, hospice goals of dignified, comfortable death for terminally ill patients
and care for patients and families together have been increasingly adopted in
mainstream medicine.

NEONATAL AND INFANT END-OF-LIFE CARE
Advances in reproductive medicine have increased the number of infants
born prematurely as well as the number of multiple births. These advances
have increased the need for life-sustaining methods of care and have made
decisions about when to use palliative care more complicated. Some
bioethicists believe that withholding life-sustaining interventions is
appropriate under certain circumstances; others maintain that life-sustaining
methods should not be used at all. An extensive study of attitudes among
neonatologists about end-of-life decisions found no consensus about if and
when to terminate life.
For newborns, the decision to forego life-sustaining procedures is usually
limited to those children whose death is imminent. Even if their future quality
of life is determined to be bleak, most physicians believe that some life is
better than no life at all. Physicians who support withholding intensive care
consider the following quality-of-life issues: (1) extent of bodily damage
(e.g., severe neurologic impairment), (2) the burden that a disabled child will
place on the family, and (3) the ability of the child to derive some pleasure
from existence (e.g., having an awareness of being alive and being able to
form relationships).
The American Academy of Pediatrics permits nontreatment decisions for
newborns when the infant is irreversibly comatose or when treatment would
be futile and only prolong the process of dying. These standards do not
permit the parents to have any input in the decision-making process. In a
well-publicized case in England in 2000, doctors decided to surgically
separate conjoined twins, even though one would die from the procedure.
This procedure occurred despite the objections of the parents, who believed
that nature should take its course. Neonatal end-of-life decisions remain in a
state of limbo. No clear-cut criteria exist about which patients should receive
intensive care and which should receive palliative care.


<<<PAGE 2716>>>
CHILD END-OF-LIFE CARE
After accidents, cancer is the second most common cause of death in
children. Although many childhood cancers are treatable, palliative care is
necessary for children with cancers that are not. Children require more
support than adults in coping with death. On average, a child does not view
death as permanent until the age of about 10 years. Before then, death is
viewed as sleep or separation. Therefore, children should be told what they
can understand. If they are capable, they should be involved in the decisionmaking process about treatment plans. Assurances that patients are pain-free
and physically comfortable are just as crucial for children as they are for
adults.
A unique aspect of end-of-life care in children involves addressing their
fear of being separated from their parents. It is helpful to have parents
participate in end-of-life care tasks within their capacities. Family sessions
with the child in attendance allow feelings to emerge and questions to be
answered.

SPIRITUAL ISSUES
There is increasing awareness of the importance of this area to patients,
families, and many staff members as well. Several studies have shown that
religious beliefs are often associated with mature and active coping methods,
and the field of psychological and spiritual interfaces in terminally ill patients
is spawning a whole new area of psychological research within the traditional
medical establishment. The psychiatric consultant should inquire about faith,
its meaning, associated religious practices, and impact on the coping
response. It can be a source of strength or guilt at all stages of the disease,
ranging from the earliest “What did I do to cause this?” through “Will God
give me only what I can carry?” to the poignant life review of the late stage.
It is often a primary factor in the reactions to suicidality and attitudes toward
terminal care decisions. Mental health professionals should deal with these
areas in an unselfconscious and noncondescending manner and work to help
patients fully integrate this aspect of their personality into their current crisis.
The professional should also work in harmony with the patient’s spiritual
guide if one is available. Sometimes an experienced chaplain working with


<<<PAGE 2717>>>
the appropriate patient can achieve positive results more directly than any
psychotherapy. The following case exemplifies how creative pastoral care
can relieve suffering.
A young woman was admitted to Calvary Hospital in a terminal state.
She was experiencing a severe depression, which she attributed to not
being able to see her oldest daughter receive her first communion.
Arrangements were made for a ceremonial communion for her daughter
to take place at Calvary Hospital. After the ceremony, the patient’s mood
improved markedly as one of her fears was alleviated, and a religious
need was satisfied. As her mood improved, she was able to address other
unresolved issues and had quality visits with her children in her
remaining days. (From O’Neil MT. Pastoral care. In: Cimino JE, Brescia
MJ, eds. Calvary Hospital Model for Palliative Care in Advanced
Cancer. Bronx, NY: Palliative Care Institute; 1998, with permission.)

ALTERNATIVE AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINE
Many patients, when they are told they are terminally ill, seek alternative
treatments, ranging from innocuous programs aimed at enhancing general
health to more aggressive, harmful, or fraudulent regimens. Although most
patients combine the alternative and the traditional, a substantial number
favor complementary medicine as the only treatment for their disease.
Complementary methods to cure terminal illness, especially cancer,
emphasize a holistic approach, involving purification of the body,
detoxification through internal cleansing, and attention to nutritional and
emotional well-being. Despite their widespread appeal, not one of these
methods has been demonstrated to cure cancer or prolong life, yet all have
strong followings bolstered by anecdotal accounts of their efficacy. The
popular metabolic therapy attributes cancer and other potentially fatal
illnesses to toxins and waste materials accumulating in the body; treatment is
based on reversing this process by diet, vitamins, minerals, enzymes, and
colonic irrigations. Another approach includes macrobiotic diets or
megavitamins to enhance the body’s capacity to destroy malignancy. In 1987,
the National Research Council recommended minimizing carcinogenic


<<<PAGE 2718>>>
substances and fat in the diet and increasing whole-grain, fruit, and vegetable
consumption as preventive guidelines. Psychological approaches cite
maladaptive personality and coping styles as contributors to fatal diseases;
treatment consists of shaping a positive attitude. Spiritual approaches aim at
achieving harmony between the patient and nature. Some groups use
spirituality as a way to ward off illness, which is sometimes seen as an
external evil to be exorcised. Immunotherapies have gained popularity in
recent years; cancer is attributed to a defective immune system, and
restoration of immunocompetency is seen as the cure. Many patients find
increased strength to endure the suffering of terminal illness with the help of
alternative medicine even though the course of the disease may not be
affected. (For a further discussion of alternative medicine, see Chapter 21.)

29.3 Euthanasia and Physician-Assisted
Suicide
EUTHANASIA
From the Greek term for a good death, euthanasia means compassionately
allowing, hastening, or causing the death of another. Generally, someone
resorts to euthanasia to relieve suffering, maintain dignity, and shorten the
course of dying when death is inevitable. Euthanasia can be voluntary if the
patient has requested it or involuntary if the decision is made against the
patient’s wishes or without the patient’s consent. Euthanasia can be passive—
simply withholding heroic lifesaving measures—or active—deliberately
taking a person’s life. Euthanasia assumes that the physician intends to aid
and abet the patient’s wish to die.
Arguments for euthanasia revolve around patient autonomy and dignified
death. One of the most dramatic ways patients can exercise their right to selfdetermination is by asking that life-sustaining treatment to be withdrawn. If
the patient is mentally competent, physicians must respect such wishes.
Proponents of active, voluntary euthanasia argue that the same rights should
be extended to patients who are not on life-sustaining treatment but also
choose to have their physicians help them die.


<<<PAGE 2719>>>
Opponents of euthanasia also provide strong ethical and medical
justification for their position. First, active euthanasia, even if the patient
voluntarily requests it, is a form of killing and should never be sanctioned.
Second, many patients who request aid in dying may be suffering from
depression, which, when treated, will change the patient’s mind about
wanting to die.
Most medical, religious, and legal groups in the United States are against
euthanasia. Both the American Psychiatric Association (APA) and the AMA
condemn active euthanasia as illegal and contrary to medical ethics; however,
few individuals have been convicted of euthanasia. Most physicians and
medical groups in other parts of the world also oppose legalizing euthanasia.
In the United Kingdom, for example, the British Medical Association
believes that euthanasia is “alien to the traditional ethos and moral focus of
medicine” and, if legalized, “would irrevocably change the context of health
care for everyone, but especially for the most vulnerable.”
The World Medical Association issued the following declaration on
euthanasia in October 2019:
The WMA is firmly opposed to euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide…
no physician should be forced to participate in euthanasia or assisted
suicide, nor should any physician be obliged to make referral decisions to
this end.
Separately, the physician who respects the basic right of the patient to
decline medical treatment does not act unethically in forgoing or withholding
unwanted care, even if respecting such a wish results in the death of the
patient. (Adopted by the 70th WMA General Assembly, Tbilisi, Georgia,
October 2019, https://www.wma.net/policies-post/declaration-on-euthanasiaand-physician-assisted-suicide/)
Similarly, the New York State Committee on Bioethical Issues issued a
statement declaring its opposition to euthanasia. The committee stated that
physicians are obligated to relieve pain and suffering for the dying patient,
even at the risk of hastening a patient’s death. Physicians, however, should
not perform active euthanasia or participate in assisted suicide. The
Committee believed that support, comfort, respect for patient autonomy,
good communication, and adequate pain control would dramatically decrease


<<<PAGE 2720>>>
the demand for euthanasia and assisted suicide. They argued that the societal
risks of involving physicians in medical interventions to cause a patient’s
death were too significant to condone active euthanasia or physician-assisted
suicide. In response to shifting public opinion and lobbying groups with
different views, state laws that banned physician-assisted death in
Washington State and New York were sent to the United States Supreme
Court, challenging the constitutionality of these prohibitions. In June 1997,
the Court unanimously held that terminally ill patients do not have the right
to physician aid in dying. The ruling, however, left room for continuing
debate and future policy initiatives at the state level.

PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED SUICIDE
In the United States, most of the debate centers on physician-assisted suicide
rather than on euthanasia. Some have argued that physician-assisted suicide is
a humane alternative to active euthanasia in that the patient maintains more
autonomy, remains the actual agent of death, and may be less likely to be
coerced. Others believe that the distinctions are capricious in that the intent in
both cases is to bring about a patient’s death. Indeed, it may be difficult to
justify providing a lethal dose of medication to a terminally ill patient
(physician-assisted suicide) while ignoring the desperate pleas of another
patient who may be even more ill and distressed but who cannot complete the
action because of problems with swallowing, dexterity, or strength.
Several degrees are seen to which a physician may assist the suicidal
patient to end his or her life. Physician-assisted suicide can involve providing
information on ways of committing suicide, supplying a prescription for a
lethal dose of medication or a means of inhaling a lethal amount of carbon
monoxide, or perhaps even providing a suicide device that the patient can
operate.
The controversy over physician-suicide came to national attention
surrounding the activities of retired pathologist Jack Kevorkian, who, in
1989, provided his suicide machine to a 54-year-old woman with probable
Alzheimer disease. After the woman killed herself with his device, Kevorkian
was charged with first-degree murder. The charges were later dismissed
because Michigan had no law against physician-assisted suicide. Since that
first case, Kevorkian assisted in several more suicides, often for persons he


<<<PAGE 2721>>>
met on only a few occasions and frequently for persons who did not have a
terminal illness. Claiming to have helped more than 130 people take their
lives, Kevorkian was sent to prison in 1999, was released in 2006, and died in
2011. His attorneys and followers applauded his courage in easing pain and
suffering; his detractors countered that he was a serial mercy killer.
Opponents of Kevorkian’s methods charged that, without safeguards,
consultations, and thorough psychiatric evaluations, patients might search out
suicide not because of terminal illness or intractable pain but because of
untreated depressive disorders. They argued that suicide rarely occurs in the
absence of psychiatric illness. Finding more effective treatments for pain and
depression, rather than inventing more sophisticated devices to help desperate
patients kill themselves, defines compassionate and effective physician care.
In 1994, Oregon passed a ballot initiative legalizing physician-assisted
suicide (Death with Dignity Act), making Oregon the first state in the United
States to permit assisted suicides (Table 29-13). An assessment of the first 4
years revealed the following: Patients dying from physician-assisted suicide
represent approximately eight of 10,000 deaths. The most common
underlying illnesses were cancer, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and chronic
lower respiratory disease. The three most common end-of-life concerns were
loss of autonomy (85 percent), a decreasing ability to participate in activities
that made life enjoyable (77 percent), and losing control of bodily functions
(63 percent). Eighty percent of the patients were enrolled in hospice
programs, and 91 percent died at home. The prescribing physician was
present in 52 percent of the cases.
In 2001, Attorney General John Ashcroft attempted to prosecute Oregon
doctors who helped terminally ill patients die, claiming that doctor-assisted
suicide is not a legitimate medical purpose. The case was brought to the
Supreme Court, which in 2006 supported the Oregon law and said the
“authority claimed by the attorney general is both beyond his expertise and
incongruous with the statutory purposes and design.” Since 2001, three other
states—Washington (2008), Montana (2009), and Vermont (2011)—have
passed laws similar to the one in Oregon.
Table 29-13
Oregon’s Assisted Suicide Law


<<<PAGE 2722>>>
The patient must be terminally ill and expected to die within 6 mo;
mentally competent; fully informed about his or her diagnosis,
prognosis, risks, and alternatives, such as comfort care; and be
making a voluntary choice.
A second doctor must agree that the patient is terminally ill, acting on
his or her own free will, fully informed, and capable of making
health care decisions.
If either doctor thinks that the patient is suffering from any form of
mental illness that could affect his or her judgment, they must refer
the patient for counseling.
The patient must make one written request and two spoken requests.
The doctor must ask the patient to tell the next of kin, but the patient
may decide not to do so.
The patient is free to change his or her mind at any time.
There is a 15-day waiting period between the patient making the
request and the doctor writing the prescription.
All information must be written down in the medical records.
Only people who normally live in Oregon may use the Act.
Mercy killing, lethal injection, and active euthanasia are not
permitted.
Pharmacists must be told of the prescribed medication’s ultimate
use.
Physicians, pharmacists, and health care systems are under no
obligation to participate in the Death with Dignity Act.
Despite the abhorrence that many physicians and medical ethicists express
regarding physician-assisted suicide, poll after poll shows that as many as
two-thirds of Americans favor the legalization of physician-assisted suicide
in certain circumstances, and evidence even indicates that the formerly
uniform opposition to physician-assisted suicide within the medical
community has eroded. Consistent with their positions on active euthanasia,
the AMA, APA, and American Bar Association, however, continue to oppose
physician-assisted suicide. Recently, the American College of PhysiciansAmerican Society of Internal Medicine (ACP-ASIM) expressed its
commitment to improving care for patients at the end of life while


<<<PAGE 2723>>>
recommending against the legalization of physician-assisted suicide. The
ACP-ASIM believes physician-assisted suicide raises grave ethical concerns,
undermines the physician–patient relationship, and the trust necessary to
sustain it alters the medical profession’s role in society, and endangers the
values American society places on life, especially on the lives of disabled,
incompetent, and vulnerable individuals.
The American Association of Suicidology in its 1996 Report of the
Committee on Physician-Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia concluded that
involuntary euthanasia could never be condoned; the report also stated,
however, that “intolerable, prolonged suffering of persons in extremis should
never be insisted upon, against their wishes, in single-minded efforts to
preserve life at all cost.” This position acknowledges that patients can die as a
result of treatment given to them for the explicit purpose of relieving
suffering. However, death associated with palliative care differs significantly
from physician-assisted suicide in that death is not the goal of treatment and
is not intentional.
How to Deal with Requests for Suicide
To help guide clinicians facing requests for physician-assisted suicide, the
AMA’s Institute for Ethics proposed an eight-step clinical protocol. Table 2914 lists these steps.
Table 29-14
The AMA’s Recommended Approach to Requests of
Physician-Assisted Suicide
1. Evaluation of the patient for depression or other psychiatric
conditions that could cause disordered thought
2. Evaluation of the patient’s “decision-making competence”
3. Discussion with the patient about his or her goals for care
4. Evaluation and response to the patient’s “physical, mental, social,
and spiritual suffering”
5. Discussion with the patient about the full range of treatment and


<<<PAGE 2724>>>
care options
6. Consultation by the attending physician with other professional
colleagues
7. Assurance that care plans chosen by the patient are being
followed, including removal of unwanted treatment and the provision
of adequate pain and symptom relief
8. Discussion with the patient explaining why physician-assisted
suicide is to be avoided and why it is not compatible with the
principled nature of the care protocol
Psychiatrists view suicide as an irrational act that is the product of mental
illness, usually depression. In almost every case in which a patient asks to be
put to death, a triad exists of depression associated with an incurable medical
condition that causes intolerable pain. In these instances, every effort should
be made to provide antidepressants or psychostimulants for depression and
opioids for pain. Psychotherapy, spiritual counseling, or both may also be
needed. Also, family therapy to help with the stress of dealing with a dying
patient may be necessary. Family therapy is also useful because some
patients may ask to be put to death because they do not wish to be a burden to
their families; others may feel coerced by their families into believing that
they are, or will be, a burden and may choose death as a result. Currently, no
professional codes countenance euthanasia or assisted suicide in the United
States. Therefore, psychiatrists must stand on the side of responsible rescue
and treatment.
A distinction also is needed between major depression and suffering.
Psychiatrists have not sufficiently studied the nature of suffering. It remains
the province of theologians and philosophers. Suffering is a complex mix of
spiritual, emotional, and physical factors that transcends pain and other
symptoms of a terminal illness. Physicians are more skilled at dealing with
depression than with suffering. Anatole Broyard, who chronicled his death in
his book Intoxicated by My Illness, wrote the following:
I see no reason or need for my doctor to love me nor would I expect him
to suffer with me. I wouldn’t demand a lot of my doctor’s time; I just


<<<PAGE 2725>>>
wish he would brood on my situation for perhaps 5 minutes, that he
would give me his whole mind just once, be bonded with me for a brief
space, survey my soul as well as my flesh, to get at my illness, for each
man is ill in his own way.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Advances in technology bring more complex medical, legal, moral, and
ethical controversies regarding life, death, euthanasia, and physician-assisted
suicide. Some forms of euthanasia have found a place in modern medicine,
and expansion of the boundaries of patients’ rights and their ability to choose
the way they live and die is inevitable. Both patients and physicians need to
be better educated about depression, pain management, palliative care, and
quality of life. Medical schools and residency training programs need to give
the topics of death, dying, and palliative care the attention they deserve.
Society must ensure that economics, ageism, and racism do not get in the way
of adequate and humane management of patients with chronic terminal
illnesses. Finally, a national health care policy must provide adequate
insurance coverage, home care, and hospice services to all appropriate
patients. If these mandates are followed, the argument for physician
assistance in dying will lose much of its impact.
References
Bachman B. The development of a sustainable, community-supported
children’s bereavement camp. Omega (Westport). 2013;67:21–35.
Bolton JM, Au W, Walld R, Chateau D, Martens PJ, Leslie WD, Enns MW,
Sareen J. Parental bereavement after the death of an offspring in a motor
vehicle collision: A population-based study. Am J Epidemiol.
2014;179(2):177–185.
Broeckaert B. Palliative sedation, physician-assisted suicide, and euthanasia:
“Same, same but different”? Am J Bioethics. 2011;11:62–64.
Canetto SS. Physician-assisted suicide in the United States: Issues,
challenges, roles and implications for clinicians. In: Qualls SH, KaslGodley JE, eds. End-of-Life Issues, Grief, and Bereavement: What
Clinicians Need to Know. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons; 2011:263.


<<<PAGE 2726>>>
Carvalho TB, Rady MY, Verheijde JL, Robert JS. Continuous deep sedation
in end-of-life care: Disentangling palliation from physician-assisted death.
Am J Bioethics. 2011;11:60–62.
Corr CA, Corr DM. Death & Dying, Life & Living. 7th ed. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth; 2013.
Deschepper R, Distelmans W, Bilsen J. Requests for euthanasia/physicianassisted suicide on the basis of mental suffering: Vulnerable patients or
vulnerable physicians? JAMA Psychiatry. 2014;71(6):617–618.
Fahy BN. Palliative care in the acute care surgery setting. In: Moore LJ,
Turner KL, Todd SR, eds. Common Problems in Acute Care Surgery. New
York: Springer; 2013:477.
Gamliel E. To end life or not to prolong life: The effect of message framing
on attitudes towards euthanasia. J Health Psychol. 2013;18:693.
Hui D, Elsayem A, De la Cruz M, Berger A, Zhukovsky DS, Palla S, Evans
A, Fadul N, Palmer JL, Bruera E. Availability and integration of palliative
care at US cancer centers. JAMA. 2010;303(11):1054–1061.
Jaiswal R, Alici Y, Breitbart W. A comprehensive review of palliative care in
patients with cancer. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2014;26(1):87–101.
Kaplow JB, Saunders J, Angold A, Costello EJ. Psychiatric symptoms in
bereaved versus nonbereaved youth and young adults: A longitudinal
epidemiological study. J Am Acad Child Adol Psych. 2010;49:1145–1154.
Kaspers PJ, Pasman H, Onwuteaka-Philipsen BD, Deeg DJ. Changes over a
decade in end-of-life care and transfers during the last 3 months of life: A
repeated survey among proxies of deceased older people. Palliat Med.
2013;27:544–552.
Kelley AS, Meier DE. Palliative care–a shifting paradigm. N Eng J Med.
2010;363:781–782.
Kimsma GK. Physician-Assisted Death in Perspective. New York:
Cambridge University Press; 2012.
King M, Vasanthan M, Petersen I, Jones L, Marston L, Nazareth I. Mortality
and medical care after bereavement: A general practice cohort study. PLoS
One. 2013;8:e52561.
Kraemer F. Ontology or phenomenology? How the LVAD challenges the
euthanasia debate. Bioethics. 2013;27:140–150.
Lederberg MS. End-of-life and palliative care. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.


<<<PAGE 2727>>>
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2009:2353.
Lerning MR, Dickinson GE. Understanding Death, Dying and Bereavement.
7th ed. Stamford, CT: Cengage Learning; 2010.
Lichtenthal WG, Neimeyer RA, Currier JM, Roberts K, Jordan N. Cause of
death and the quest for meaning after the loss of a child. Death Stud.
2013;37:311–342.
Maple M, Edwards HE, Minichiello V, Plummer D. Still part of the family:
The importance of physical, emotional, and spiritual memorial places and
spaces for parents bereaved through the suicide death of their son or
daughter. Mortality. 2013;18:54.
Matzo M, Sherman MW, eds. Palliative Care Nursing: Quality Care to End
of Life. 3rd ed. New York: Springer Publishing Company; 2013.
Meier DE, Issacs SL, Hughes RG, eds. Palliative Care: Transforming the
Care of Serious Illness. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 2010.
Moore RJ, ed. Handbook of Pain and Palliative Care. New York: Springer;
2013
Neimeyer RA, ed. Techniques of Grief Therapy: Creative Practices for
Counseling the Bereaved. New York: Routledge; 2012.
Nuckols TK, Anderson L, Popescu I, Diamant AL, Doyle B, Capua PD,
Chou R. Opioid prescribing: A systematic review and critical appraisal of
guidelines for chronic pain. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160(1):38–47.
Penman J, Oliver M, Harrington A. The relational model of spiritual
engagement depicted by palliative care clients and caregivers. Int J
Nursing Pract. 2013;19:39–46.
Perper JA, Cina SJ. When Doctors Kill: Who, Why and How. New York:
Springer; 2010:159.
Qualls SH, Kasl-Godley JE, eds. End-of-Life Issues, Grief, and Bereavement:
What Clinicians Need to Know. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons; 2011.
Rady MY, Verheijde JL. Continuous deep sedation until death: Palliation or
physician-assisted death? Am J Hosp Palliat Med. 2010;27:205–214.
Raus K, Sterckx S, Mortier F. Is continuous sedation at the end of life an
ethically preferable alternative to physician-assisted suicide? Am J Bioeth.
2011;11:32–40.
Risse GB, Balboni MJ. Shifting hospital-hospice boundaries: Historical
perspectives on the institutional care of the dying. Am J Hosp Palliat Med.
2013;19:325–330.


<<<PAGE 2728>>>
Rys S, Deschepper R, Mortier F, Deliens L, Atkinson D, Bilsen J. The moral
difference or equivalence between continuous sedation until death and
physician-assisted death: Word games or war games? J Bioeth Inq.
2012;9:171–183.
Saaty TL, Vargas LG. Models, Methods, Concepts & Applications of the
Analytic Hierarchy Process. New York: Springer; 2012:249.
Schachter SR, Holland JC. Loss, grief, and bereavement: Implications for
family caregivers and health care professionals of the mentally ill. In:
Talley RC, Fricchione GL, Druss BG, eds. The Challenges of Mental
Health Caregiving. New York: Springer; 2014:145.
Servaty-Seib HL, Taub DJ. Bereavement and college students: The role of
counseling psychology. Counseling Psychol. 2010;38:947.
Smith TJ, Temin S, Alesi ER, Abernethy AP, Balboni TA, Basch EM, Ferrell
BR, Loscalzo M, Meier DE, Paice JA, Peppercorn JM, Somerfield M,
Stovall E, Von Roenn JH. American Society of Clinical Oncology
provisional clinical opinion: The integration of palliative care into standard
oncology care. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:880–887.
Stroebe M, Schut H, van den Bout J, eds. Complicated Grief: Scientific
Foundations for Health Care Professionals. New York: Routledge; 2013.
Temel JS, Greer JA, Muzikansky A, Gallagher ER, Admane S, Jackson VA,
Dahlin CM, Blinderman CD, Jacobsen J, Pirl WF, Billings JA, Lynch TJ.
Early palliative care for patients with metastatic non-small-cell lung
cancer. N Eng J Med. 2010;363:733–742.
Vadivelu N, Kaye AD, Berger JM, eds. Essentials of Palliative Care. New
York: Springer; 2013.
Westefeld JS, Casper D, Lewis AM. Physician-assisted death and its
relationship to the human service professions. J Loss Trauma.
2013;18:539–555.
Zisook S, Shear MK, Irwin SA. Death, dying, and bereavement. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:2378.


<<<PAGE 2729>>>
30
Community Psychiatry
INTRODUCTION
The subject area of public psychiatry embodies a fundamental core of
experience and tradition. In the context of the reexamination of American
health care initiated by the effect of managed care and the health care reform,
the experience of public psychiatry is poised to serve as the foundation for a
transformation of behavioral health care.
The term public can refer to psychiatric programs, treatments, or
institutions paid for by public funds or as objects of public policy, whether
paid for or not. The traditional concept of public psychiatry has been
expanded to include medical and psychosocial initiatives directed for the
public good, whether funded by public or private funds and directed in
particular to those who are economically disadvantaged.
The care and treatment offered under public psychiatry are delivered in a
variegated mosaic of inpatient and community-based services that are more
or less integrated into a coherent network sponsored by public agencies.
Funding for public psychiatric services tends to be provided by federally
legislated appropriations that are passed through the state, county, and
municipal government agencies (such as departments of mental health;
substance use treatment services; children, youth, and family services; and
public health, social services, education, adult corrections, and juvenile
justice agencies). Ultimately, most public psychiatry and community services
are provided by not-for-profit community mental health, substance use
treatment, child guidance, or health care organizations that are either funded
by or subcontracted to government agencies. Thus, the very existence of
public and community psychiatric services and the policies and resources


<<<PAGE 2730>>>
determining how they are delivered are dependent on legislative mandates
and fiscal appropriations from all levels of public government.

CONTEMPORARY PUBLIC AND COMMUNITY
PSYCHIATRY
There are five themes around which the discussion of contemporary public
and community psychiatry is structured: public health, public agencies,
evidence-based psychiatry, roles for psychiatrists, and delivery systems.
Public Health
Public health is not merely publicly funded health care but is instead a
specific discipline and tradition. It is a complicated field that historically has
been defined negatively by the dominance of personal health, that is, the
health care delivery systems that take care of individual patients. Until the
advent of managed care in the 1990s, U.S. health care was an industry mainly
organized in terms of individual doctor-entrepreneurs. Each jurisdiction
uniquely defined and organized its public health programs, and the particular
pattern of personal health practices had a substantial influence—hence the
wide variation in public health programs. Nonetheless, as a discipline and
tradition, public health’s mission is to assure the conditions in which people
can be healthy. Public health consists of organized community efforts aimed
at the prevention of disease and the promotion of health. It involves many
disciplines but rests on the scientific core of epidemiology. It provides an
essential template for contemporary public and community psychiatry.
The Surgeon General’s report on mental health underscored the necessity
of a public health approach to care and rehabilitation for people experiencing
mental illness that is “broader in focus than medical models that concentrate
on diagnosis and treatment.” Although diagnosis and treatment are core areas
of expertise for all psychiatrists, the Surgeon General recommended that even
when psychiatric diagnosis or treatment is the primary focus for practitioners,
researchers, or educators, they should ground their professional activities in a
vision and knowledge base that is “population-based… encompass[ing] a
focus on epidemiologic surveillance, health promotion, disease prevention,
and access to services.” These fundamental public health functions define the
public health perspective in public and community psychiatry. In the


<<<PAGE 2731>>>
discussion that follows, these four public health components are framed in
current terms of health care reform to define a coherent “public health”
strategy for public and community psychiatry.
Health Promotion
Psychiatric professionals can contribute substantially to the promotion of
public health by working with primary health care professionals and
educators to identify and provide front-line treatment and referrals to adults
and children who have undetected psychiatric symptoms, subthreshold
syndromes, and psychiatric disorders. Collaborative care models bring
psychiatric professionals into primary care and school settings as consultants
for medical, nursing, and education professionals. These professionals work
in those settings, as well as for educators and direct treatment providers to atrisk or psychiatrically impaired individuals.
Furthermore, people with identified mental illness or addictive disorders
can benefit from enhanced physical and mental health care, as well as from
the alleviation or management of psychiatric symptoms. Achieving or
regaining physical or mental health (i.e., recovery) depends not only on
genetic and biologic factors but also on a person’s or family’s access to social
and psychological resources and integration into supportive social networks.
Illness management (also known as disease management or chronic illness
care management) is a framework that has been adapted from medicine to
guide mental health professionals in delivering services that go beyond
traditional diagnostic treatment to promote the health and recovery of people
with mental illness or addiction. Illness management has been defined as
“professional-based interventions designed to help people collaborate with
professionals in the treatment of their mental illness, reduce their
susceptibility to relapses, and cope more effectively with their symptoms…
[to] improve self-efficacy and self-esteem and to foster skills that help people
pursue their personal goals.” Several approaches to illness management have
been scientifically and clinically evaluated and have been found to enhance
standard psychiatric treatment.
Prevention. Psychiatric disorders most often follow a course over time that
begins with an often lengthy period in which prodromal or subthreshold


<<<PAGE 2732>>>
symptoms or functional problems precede the full onset of a disorder with
marked impairment. Intervention with adults, adolescents, or children who
are not clinically impaired but who are at high risk or who are manifesting
preclinical symptoms or functional problems is an approach to prevention
that is cost-effective because it targets a relatively small group of individuals
promptly. Examples of high-risk patients include those with a family history
of psychiatric or addictive disorders or exposure to extreme stressors, such as
violence, neglect, or antisocial behavior. Also, prodromal symptoms and
behaviors that would argue for early intervention include periodic or
pervasive dysphoria, problems with separation from caregivers, or
involvement with deviant peers.
Application of the traditional public health concepts of primary,
secondary, and tertiary psychiatry has been confusing in psychiatry. Primary
prevention involves addressing the root causes of illness with healthy
individuals, to prevent illness before it occurs. Secondary prevention involves
the early identification and early treatment of individuals with acute or
subclinical disorders or high-risk persons to reduce morbidity. Tertiary
prevention attempts to reduce the effects of a disorder on an individual
through rehabilitation and chronic illness care management. The Institute of
Medicine, to help clarify different aspects of prevention, developed a
classification system with three different categories. Universal interventions
are those intended for the general public, such as immunizations or media
campaigns, providing information about illnesses, early warning signs, and
resources for health promotion and timely treatment. Selective interventions
focus on individuals at higher-than-average risk (e.g., persons with prodromal
symptoms or a family history of psychiatric disorders) to reduce morbidity by
enhancing resilience and preventing the onset of illness. Indicated
interventions target individuals who are experiencing impairment as a result
of illness as early as possible in the course of the illness, to reduce the burden
of the illness on the individual, family, community, and treatment system.
Psychiatric services most often take the form of indicated interventions, but
the smaller number of psychiatric practitioners and researchers who conduct
and evaluate selective or universal interventions in public and community
settings is making a substantial contribution to the broader health of society.
Prevention interventions are effective with adults with a variety of risk
factors or preclinical problems. For example, women who have been raped


<<<PAGE 2733>>>
are less likely to develop posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) if they receive
a five-session cognitive-behavioral treatment than if their recovery is left to
chance. People with subthreshold symptoms of depression who are identified
early by their primary care providers are less likely to develop the full
syndrome if their medical treatment includes education about depression and
learning skills for coping actively with depressive symptoms or stressors.
Prevention with adults must be judiciously designed to address the specific
factors that place a person at risk for illness or that enhance the person’s
ability to cope effectively. For example, brief supportive meetings with
people who have experienced a traumatic stressor (e.g., a mass disaster or
life-threatening accident) tend to have little benefit and may inadvertently
intensify posttraumatic stress. In contrast, a focused cognitive-behavioral
approach to teaching skills for coping with traumatic memories and stress
symptoms is effective in preventing posttraumatic stress and depressive
disorders with adult and child disaster or accident survivors.
Several prevention programs have been developed and evaluated to
address physical and mental health risks in childhood and adolescence,
incorporating several elements that influence intervention effectiveness. Their
broad and systematic implementation, however, has been halting. Some states
have made an effort to implement school-based interventions involving
teachers and the peer group. These tend to be more effective than programs
exclusively relying on intervening with parents or children alone. Such
interventions in middle childhood have been successful in influencing peer
group norms regarding alcohol and substance use, violence and bullying, and
depression, thus achieving the dual outcome of reducing immediate initiation
of alcohol and substance use and increasing the long-term support within the
peer group for sustained abstinence into adolescence. Thus, systems-based
multimodal interventions simultaneously targeting and developing enhanced
relationships among the child, peer group, school personnel, parents, and the
wider community tend to be most effective as universal or selected
approaches to early prevention of what otherwise may become lifelong
behavioral, legal, academic, and addictive problems.
Access to Effective Mental Health Care. Access is a significant
problem for most people with severe mental illness or addictions. In the
United States, the National Comorbidity Survey (NCS) and the National


<<<PAGE 2734>>>
Comorbidity Survey-Replication (NCS-R) found that fewer than 40 percent
of people with severe psychiatric disorders had received any mental health
treatment in the previous year, and fewer than one in six (15 percent) had
received minimally adequate mental health services. Young adults, African
Americans, people residing in specific geographical areas, people with
psychotic disorders, and patients treated by medical but not mental health
providers were at the highest risk for inadequate psychiatric treatment.
Although income was not a predictor of inadequate treatment, many of the
people who did not receive adequate mental health services were likely to be
uninsured or underinsured. Such people often cannot access mental health
care other than through a primary care provider or clinic or in the public
mental health system.
Even when mental illness is identified, people with socioeconomic
adversities often do not, or cannot, get adequate mental health services in
their communities. For example, although it is estimated that more than
200,000 incarcerated adults in the United States have psychiatric disorders,
few were detected or received treatment until they reached jail or prison.
Federal and state correctional systems have instituted mental health screening
and treatment programs to address psychiatric disorders as a health problem
for incarcerated adults and to manage the problematic behavior that can occur
in controlled settings as a result of mental illness. On returning to the
community, the vast majority of prisoners with psychiatric disorders cease to
receive more than minimal mental health services: A recent study found that
fewer than one in six (16 percent—strikingly similar to the NCS finding)
received steady mental health services, and only one in 20 with addictions
received steady substance abuse recovery services. Thus, access to mental
health and addiction treatment services is far better in prison than in the
community! This disparity has caused great concern because of the
possibility that correctional facilities may be a de facto system of care for
low-income people (often of minority backgrounds) with serious mental
illness.
Evidence of severe and pervasive barriers to accessing mental health care
can be found in several social crises. Impoverished children and adults
increasingly are deferring physical and mental health care until illnesses
become chronic and severe and then often do not know or cannot gain entry
into any setting for services except public hospital emergency departments.


<<<PAGE 2735>>>
Children with severe psychiatric or behavioral disorders are being held in
emergency department facilities for days and even weeks because the staff
cannot locate any available treatment facilities with an appropriate level of
care, especially if they are underinsured. People who cannot afford private
services thus face daunting obstacles when seeking appropriate mental health
care as a result of a severe underfunding of practitioners and programs. The
public policy dilemmas that are driven by the ever-increasing cost of health
care bear directly on the field of public psychiatry. It also tragically affects
the lives of tens or hundreds of thousands of people who do not receive
adequate care.
Psychiatry and Public Agencies
Psychiatry’s relationship to public sector agencies has, with some specific
exceptions, been one of detachment because of the dominance of the private
practice models before the advent of managed care and also mainly because
of the nature and structure of U.S. social welfare programs. This separation is
a divide that often begins during academic preparation, in that many
psychiatry training programs eschew meaningful rotations in public sector
settings. In contrast to most industrial nations in which comprehensive social
welfare reforms have been initiated, U.S. social welfare programs grew
incrementally and categorically, that is, one category of service at a time.
Large-scale initiatives, such as President Johnson’s War on Poverty, have
been implemented in piecemeal fashion by fragmented federal, state, and
local government bureaucracies and have been vastly reduced through
subsequent initiatives, such as the recent changes in federal regulations to
“end welfare as we know it.” Various social service agencies have been
created through a process, and set of alliances called the iron triangle.
Advocates form an organization to champion a particular cause. Example
causes may include blindness, developmental disabilities, primary care, or
mental health, among others. The advocates then find key legislative
sponsors to advance the cause through legislation and appropriation. This
creates a bureaucracy and bureaucrats that join the alliance. Through
successive legislative sessions, the alliance of advocates, lawmakers, and
bureaucrats builds a more durable and more reliable categorical agency, for
example, adults and families with dependent children or people with


<<<PAGE 2736>>>
biologically based severe mental illness. From the 1930s through the end of
the twentieth century, U.S. social welfare agencies were created on this
pattern; the system has resulted in generous funding but a hopeless
fragmentation of services at local service delivery levels in which each
agency depends on separate funding silos that also deliver conflicting rules
and regulations.
It has been said that “mental health is not a place.” Psychiatrists have a role
at the receiving end of every categorical silo, as the clients in each agency
experience mental illness. Services for children with severe emotional,
mental, or behavioral disturbances are a dramatic case. Five categorical
agencies—child welfare, education, primary health, substance abuse, and
juvenile justice—all have a responsibility to care for these children (and,
indirectly, for their caregivers, including parents and families). Especially for
the children with the most severe disabilities, the protective service worker
taking a child into court, the special education teacher working day to day
with the child, the juvenile probation officer, the substance abuse counselor,
and the child’s pediatrician all need the consultation and support of a skilled
psychiatrist. The situation is similar for adults with severe mental illness, for
whom case managers, vocational rehabilitation counselors, basic needs
benefits specialists, social workers, psychotherapists, substance abuse
counselors, parole or probation officers, legal conservators, visiting nurses,
peer specialists, and physicians all may be mandated to deliver services.
Workforce Influences on Contemporary Practice
Shortages in the ranks of psychiatry have been well documented historically,
and some project this to continue. However, as the field of psychiatry
connects with its science and evidence base (e.g., neuroscience, genetics,
pharmacology, outcomes science) while retaining its strength in the
meaningful connection with patients and their families, some would argue
that the reversal of the shortage trend has begun. The National Institutes of
Health (NIH) sponsored Decade of the Brain (the 1990s), and Decade of the
Mind (the 2000s) contributed to this change. Medical students are
increasingly stimulated to enter the field by recognizing the importance of
psychiatry to health care in general, realizing that this is still a field in which
the practitioner (and by extension, the interdisciplinary team) is an instrument


<<<PAGE 2737>>>
of change through integration of contemporary knowledge, skillful learned
interactions with patients, and a willingness to commit to providing value.
The national aggregate numbers, however, cannot adequately capture the
extreme variations that exist geographically; rural and frontier sites are
dramatically more likely to experience shortages than more urban
environments.
Because subsets of the public sector populations have special needs,
responses to their needs have to be correspondingly tailored:
Children and family needs are expressed differently than those for adults
and require different responses.
Mental illnesses have culturally driven ways of presenting, and
interventions must be culturally competent.
Issues of language (including American Sign Language with deaf and
hard of hearing individuals) can complicate diagnosis and treatment.
The rapidly expanding elderly population will pose significant new
challenges for effective treatment.
Just these few examples suggest the sophistication with which education
and training must be engineered to meet the existing and changing demands
of people in need of services.
Contemporary Evidence Base for Effective Public and
Community Psychiatry
Since the 1980s, several structured interventions have been developed to
address the gap between what historically has been taught in most psychiatry
training programs—typically, an office-, clinic-, or hospital-based approach
focusing on diagnoses and pharmacotherapy supplemented by psychotherapy
—and the competencies required to deliver or to support the delivery of the
full array of psychiatric rehabilitation services. Public and community
approaches to psychiatric rehabilitation involve not only pharmacotherapy
but also an array of complementary services. These services must be
coordinated to assist people with severe mental illness or behavioral
disorders. The services much also help patient’s families and support
systems. Patient’s and their loved ones need help with managing symptoms,
accessing resources, and using these resources effectively. The goal of this


<<<PAGE 2738>>>
support is to help patients gain the highest degree of autonomy in the least
restrictive setting possible. The competencies required to effect these
interventions go beyond the scope of psychiatry, thus requiring that
psychiatrists effectively collaborate with other rehabilitation and mental
health specialists. Although psychiatrists rarely implement the educational
psychotherapy and other interventions involved, psychiatrists should be
aware of them and understand how to reinforce them. Hence, familiarity with
the manuals that describe how to implement these interventions with fidelity
is strongly advised—and increasingly incorporated into psychiatry training.
Evidence-Based Manualized Interventions for Child Psychiatric
Rehabilitation. Children with severe emotional disturbances and
adolescents with severe behavioral disorders traditionally have been removed
from their families and placed in restrictive psychiatric or juvenile justice
settings (e.g., psychiatric inpatient wards, residential group homes, and
juvenile detention centers). These placements separate the child from the
natural family, school, peer group, and community environments, which may
provide some benefit by reducing the child’s exposure to addiction, conflict,
violence, or deviant behavior. However, the placements also deprive the child
and family of the opportunity to build better relationships with one another
and with other children, families, teachers, and community groups. The
second key ingredient to effective public and community child psychiatry
comprises interventions that complement pharmacotherapy. Since the 1970s,
several rehabilitative approaches for children with severe disorders (and their
families) have been developed, tested, and disseminated in replicable
manuals and training programs.
Implementation of evidence-based practices is not always easy. It rarely
occurs even in clinics and practice groups that are well trained and motivated
to use evidence-based treatment models, given that most current systems of
payment and service delivery were not designed to accommodate or support
the use of science-based interventions such as those highlighted here. Also,
evidence-based dissemination and implementation strategies must be
deliberately designed to support the initial adoption and sustained use of
evidence-based mental health treatment models. For example, a recent study
of the implementation of one of the most widely disseminated evidencebased mental health interventions for children and families, multisystemic


<<<PAGE 2739>>>
therapy (MST), demonstrated that initial training yielded a very positive early
rate of adoption of the program with reasonable fidelity to the model.
However, only teams that were provided with regular ongoing supervision
and support (for supervisors as well as therapists) from expert consultants
were able to sustain the initial successes.
Roles of Psychiatrists in Public and Community Psychiatry
Multidisciplinary Teams
Psychiatrists in the public sector rarely work in isolation. Most often,
psychiatrists work within a team of professionals. The team includes many
disciplines, including psychology, social work, nursing, occupational therapy,
rehabilitation or addiction counseling, social services, housing, and
employment specialists. It also includes nondegreed direct care workers, such
as bachelor’s degree-level counselors or case managers, high school graduate
indigenous outreach workers, peer-support specialists, and family advocates.
Each of these members brings unique skills and experience to address the
needs of people with severe and persistent mental illnesses. The team, rather
than any single provider, assumes responsibility for the ongoing care of each
patient across the many levels of services and often for many years. Its
success is based on effective communication. Every communication should
be explicitly focused on the client’s (i.e., patient and family) stated goals, as
well as on the team’s technical and logistical issues, to maximize the client’s
motivation to participate actively and productively in all services by ensuring
that the services indeed are patient-centered and collaborative.
Psychiatrists play three primary roles in multidisciplinary psychiatric
rehabilitation teams: Conducting psychiatric evaluations, providing
pharmacotherapy, and serving as the team’s medical director (and, at times,
as the administrative supervisor or team leader).
Psychiatric Evaluation and Diagnosis. As with any practice setting, the
sine qua non in the public and community setting is a thorough evaluation.
This involves a complete history and examination leading to an accurate
diagnosis. The goal of evaluation and diagnosis is to develop the most
clinically useful individualized approach to treatment and rehabilitation for
each patient. Psychiatric evaluations in public and community settings must


<<<PAGE 2740>>>
include a careful review of the individual’s psychosocial strengths and
resources. The focus on strengths and resources often is lost or obscured
when systemic factors (e.g., eligibility regulations for government funded
services or benefits) emphasize disability. It can also limit the individual’s or
family’s access to services or benefits (e.g., welfare-to-work regulations that
place a time or other eligibility restrictions on types of temporary aid, such as
food stamps or vouchers for household supplies or housing).
Pharmacotherapy. The psychiatrist’s most visible role usually is
providing pharmacotherapy. The most difficult challenge in public sector
mental health settings often is not the technical formulation of an effective
medication regimen but instead the arranging of a plan of care so that the
patient reliably follows the prescribed regimen (i.e., adherence or
compliance). A recent review of interventions designed to enhance adherence
to psychotropic medication regimens by patients with schizophrenia found
that education alone often was the only strategy used. This is true despite
evidence showing that the optimal strategy includes such approaches as
concrete problem solving, motivational techniques, and practical assistant
(reminders or cues for example). Although the psychiatrist must address
technical, medical issues around diagnosis and treatment, effective
pharmacotherapy largely depends on providing practical assistance. This
approach includes helping patients manage the stresses and problems that
might affect adherence. Such practical assistance might be direct, as in
encounters with patients, or indirect, by working closely with nonpsychiatric
mental health professionals and nondegreed care workers.
Team Leadership. The psychiatrist also often plays a leadership role as the
project or program medical director—with the attendant responsibilities of
monitoring the medical safety and well-being of all patients and establishing
or supporting management and clinical procedures that support the quality of
care and a cohesive treatment team. As the team leader or only as a team
member, the psychiatrist serves as a role model for compassionate and
professional behavior in relation not only to patients but also to all other team
members. Formal or informal leadership is especially important when
psychiatry residents and medical students work on a team as a training
experience. The team psychiatrist serves not only as a mentor and a role


<<<PAGE 2741>>>
model for the core aspects of psychiatric practice but also to demonstrate the
values and skills necessary to integrate psychiatry within the framework of
multimodal community-based longitudinal psychosocial interventions.
Psychiatrists who work in these settings and desire a leadership role must
go beyond their prescription pads to acquire more expertise. This expertise
requires gaining the knowledge, attitudes, and skills relevant to the
contemporary practice guidelines for psychiatric rehabilitation. It also
includes respecting and supporting other team members and earning their
respect and support in return. Also, the psychiatrist must cope with large
caseloads, and collaborate with agencies and programs to ensure continuity,
consistency, and coordination of care. If psychiatrists can incorporate these
attitudes and skills, they can expect reciprocity and cohesion from other team
members, and clients will benefit. Surveys of psychiatrists in the public
sector indicate that those who embrace the rehabilitation perspective by
expanding their roles to be consultants and teachers for patients, families,
trainees, and colleagues from other mental health disciplines are more
satisfied professionally than those who focus on diagnosis and treatment
alone.
New Paradigms. Virtually all health care should be integrated and
coordinated to deliver practical, rational, and cost-efficient care. The broader,
contemporary definition of care must include public health. Linking public
health models with acute care management, which, in turn, is coupled with
chronic illness care management, rehabilitation, or recovery models,
represents the continuum for an integrated system.
However, this continuum is insufficient without four other components: (1)
the application of new research to improve care and the application of benchto-bedside models to translational research, (2) meaningful involvement of
patients and families in a shared decision-making paradigm, (3) integration
with primary and specialty care systems, and (4) the development of the
clinical system as a system of advocacy. Training preprofessionals in such a
model is one approach to introduce meaningful and sustained change to
health care and its delivery and is already operational in some systems.
New Models for Service Delivery and Treatment


<<<PAGE 2742>>>
Organized Systems of Care. The focus of reform has moved
increasingly to coherent, efficient, and accountable delivery systems. The
basic idea of the system of care for children with severe emotional
disturbances can be described in two ways—in terms of interagency
structures and clinical processes. Five categorical agencies in a given
community form a strong consortium that targets a specific population of
children (and their families) to whose needs none of the agencies can
adequately respond on their own. The consortium agencies commit
themselves to treat the child and family with a common plan of care and to
find ways to pool their resources to do so appropriately. This care often
requires that in the central bureaucracies at the state level, a parallel
interagency commitment be in place that supports the local system of care
initiative, resolves any regulatory conflicts that may arise, and gives
permission to innovative aspects of the delivery system. The collaborative
interagency structure provides the resources and flexibility for effective
clinical work.
From the viewpoint of clinical processes, the system of care provides a full
enactment of the traditional clinical practice that meets the requirements of
medical quality assurance. What is different is that it is carried out in-home
and community settings, and it involves participants from different
disciplines—child welfare, special education, and juvenile justice—in one
standardized treatment methodology. The center of the system of care is the
child and family team that is made up of the child and family, clinicians and
agency representatives involved in the case, and significant supportive
individuals identified by the child and family. Current issues are reviewed—
strengths, problems, and needs—diagnostic issues are considered, clinical
goals are articulated, and appropriate treatment strategies are identified. The
expected outcome of each intervention is specified, and progress toward it is
systematically charted. The system of care requires a full array of flexible
services. The essential starters include clinical diagnostic services, care
coordination or case management, crisis intervention services, and a flexible
essential supportive service—child care specialists who can be assigned to
support the child and family in any situation. Particularly effective systems of
care have relied on substantial community organization and collaboration or
innovative funding models, or both, that blend or braid funding streams to
focus on clear assignment of responsibility for a particular child and family,


<<<PAGE 2743>>>
as well as adequate resources.
The basic model for community support for adults was called assertive
community treatment (ACT). ACT was implemented with multidisciplinary
teams with psychiatrists, nurses, psychologists, social workers, psychiatric
aides, and paraprofessionals. The ACT team would assume the care of a
designated number of adult patients with severe and persistent mental illness
and would be available around the clock, 7 days a week. The team would
help find housing, manage money, organize household routines, find social
contacts, find work, and support the individual’s adjustment to workplace
settings. Concurrently, medications would be managed and help provided to
facilitate an individual adjusting to community living. At the heart of the
program was the necessary clinical process that developed and maintained an
individualized treatment plan, which was adjusted continuously to the
changing needs of each client. The ACT model has been modified in various
ways as it has been implemented in different states. Innovative funding
models have been developed in several states by using bundled rates and case
rates, which make it easier to implement and to sustain than traditional feefor-service payment systems.
In contemporary managed care terms, ACT teams are disease and
disability management models that assign accountability to provide systems
that may not assume risk in managing community support of persons with
disabling conditions. The National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) has
developed program models and protocols for the Program for Assertive
Community Treatment (PACT) to encourage public agencies to contract for
ACT services.
Effective Treatment Models. The previous discussions have outlined the
various treatment models that have been introduced since the 1980s to
establish an evidence base for the effectiveness of specific interventions and
approaches to care. The attention to evidence-based treatment models has
been a response to the call for quality and accountability for service outcomes
demanded from health care services in general by purchasers and
policymakers and part of an effort to cope with the difficulties of evaluating
service delivery models or systems of care.
The movement to evidence-based services is necessary to break down
components of the service delivery system to determine the relative


<<<PAGE 2744>>>
effectiveness of specific service interventions using the evaluative tools and
methods that are available. Eventually, the case will be made to address the
broader policy questions concerning the value of coherent and rationally
organized service delivery in mitigating the effects of mental disability on the
development of the child and enabling the recovery process for adults with
severe and persistent mental illness.
Table 30-1 summarizes some of the evidence-based treatments used in
adult psychiatric rehabilitation, and Table 30-2 summarizes treatment for
children.
Table 30-1
Evidence-Based Manualized
Psychiatric Rehabilitation

Interventions

for

Adult

Modality

Goals and
Targeted Areas

Results of Evaluation
Research

Social and
independent
living skills

Teaches skills for Social and independent living
managing
skills evaluated in
symptoms and
randomized, clinical trials
preventing
show positive outcome, with
relapse (mental
increased successful
illness and
community living and
addictions),
reduced rehospitalization
improving social
communication
with providers,
peers, and
family, and
choosing and
engaging in
activities that
match the
person’s
abilities,
limitations, and


<<<PAGE 2745>>>
interests
Assertive
community
treatment
(ACT)

Provides ongoing Randomized effectiveness
care
trials with adults and
coordination and
adolescents with serious
case
and persistent mental
management to
illness and co-occurring
increase ability
addictive disorders
to live
demonstrate increased
independently in
psychiatric, residential, and
the community
vocational stability
and
prevent/manage
psychiatric crises

CognitiveTeaches skills for Meta-analyses support CBT’s
behavior
recognizing and
efficacy in reducing the
therapy (CBT)
modifying
severity of anxiety
thoughts and
disorders, somatoform
beliefs that
disorders, bulimia, anger
increase or
control problems, and
prolong distress,
generalized stress
and
reactions, and offer modest
strengthening
support for CBT as an
thoughts and
adjunctive treatment with
beliefs that are
addictive disorders and
self-affirming
serious mental illness
and
interpersonally
assertive
Dialectical
behavior
therapy

Teaches skills for
regulating
intense
emotions,
tolerating
extreme

Evaluated in randomized
clinical trials with
parasuicidal adult patients
with borderline personality
disorder, resulting in
reduced behavioral and


<<<PAGE 2746>>>
emotional
distress,
achieving
interpersonal
effectiveness,
and developing
mindfulness

psychiatric crises greater
than that achieved by expert
psychiatrists’ treatment

Originally
Randomized clinical trials and
developed for
observational studies show
adults with
positive psychosocial
borderline
outcomes with adults with
personality
severe and persistent
disorder, but has
mental illness and chronic
been adapted for
addictions and with
use with a wide
adolescents who are
range of Axis I
suicidal or self-harming,
disorders in
including those who have
which extreme
substance abuse or
dysregulation
posttraumatic stress
and poor
disorders (PTSDs)
impulse control
are problematic
Acceptance and Teaches skills for Randomized clinical trials
commitment
identifying and
show evidence of increased
therapy
managing (rather
awareness but reduced
than avoiding
distress and impairment due
and feeling
to psychiatric symptoms
controlled by)
across a variety of
the symptoms of
psychiatric disorders in
psychosis,
outpatient and inpatient
affective,
treatment settings
anxiety, eating,
traumatic stress,
and addictive
disorders.


<<<PAGE 2747>>>
Acceptance of
symptoms
facilitated by
explanation that
psychotic
symptoms are
extreme versions
of normal
perception and
cognitive
phenomena
(private
experiences)
Relapse
prevention
therapy

Teaches skills for Randomized clinical trials
identifying the
show efficacy in delaying,
warning signs of
reducing the severity of, and
potential or
preventing substance use
actual
relapse with adults with
resumption of
chronic addictions and cosubstance use or
occurring or comorbid
psychiatric
psychiatric disorders
symptoms
Uses cognitivebehavioral skills
for proactively
modifying
patterns of
thought and
behavior that are
likely to escalate
into a full relapse

Interpersonal
Teaches skills for
psychotherapy
interacting and
communicating

Randomized clinical trials
show evidence of reduced
severity and risk of relapse


<<<PAGE 2748>>>
effectively in
close
relationships,
with a particular
focus on
overcoming four
core
interpersonal
problems:
unresolved grief,
role conflict (e.g.,
dissatisfaction
with parenting),
role transition
(e.g., marital
separation), and
interpersonal
deficits (e.g.,
isolation and
anger
management)
Behavioral
therapy

of moderate to severe
depression, PTSD, anxiety
disorders, and eating
disorders

Provides
Randomized effectiveness
systematic
trials show evidence of
reinforcement
reduced alcohol, drug, and
contingencies to
other addictive behaviors
increase
adaptive
behavior and to
extinguish
maladaptive
behavior

Motivational
Teaches skills for
enhancement
recognizing and
therapy
aligning choices
and behavior

Randomized effectiveness
trials show evidence of
reduced alcohol, drug, and
other addictive behaviors


<<<PAGE 2749>>>
with personal
motivations
Trauma-focused Teaches skills for Randomized clinical trials of
CBT for PTSD
safely recalling
seven approaches with
rather than
adults (prolonged exposure
avoiding
therapy, cognitive
troubling
processing therapy, eye
memories of
movement desensitization
traumatic events
and reprocessing, narrative
and for
exposure therapy, seeking
recognizing and
safety, skills training for
managing PTSD
affect/interpersonal
symptoms, such
regulation with modified
as intrusive
prolonged exposure, and
memories or
emotion-focused trauma
flashbacks,
therapy) show evidence of
emotional
safety and efficacy for
numbing,
adults with severe PTSD,
dissociation, and
co-occurring addictive
distress (e.g.,
disorders, problems with
guilt, grief), and
anger, dissociation, grief,
problems with
and guilt, including one
sleep or anger,
study with adults with
or concentration
chronic mental illness
problems due to
hyperarousal or
hypervigilance
Self-regulation
focused CBT
for PTSD

Teaches emotion Randomized effectiveness
regulation skills
trials of three approaches
for recognizing
with adults (trauma affect
and modulating
regulation: guide for
traumatic stress
education and therapy,
symptoms
patient-centered therapy,
without requiring
and skills training in


<<<PAGE 2750>>>
reworking of
traumatic
memories

Table 30-2
Evidence-Based Manualized
Psychiatric Rehabilitation

affect/interpersonal
regulation) show evidence
of safety and efficacy for
adults with severe PTSD,
co-occurring addictive
disorders, problems with
anger, dissociation, grief,
and guilt, including in
individuals with comorbid
serious mental illness, and
incarcerated women

Intervention

for

Child

Modality

Goals and Targeted
Areas

Problem-solving
skills training
(PSST)

Teaches children skills
Randomized, clinical
and supports parents
trials show
in helping children with
evidence of
self-monitoring,
improved problemprosocial goal setting,
solving and
developing peer
interpersonal skills
positive environments,
and modest
setting limits with
reductions in
friends, and
oppositional and
developing probleminattentive
solving and
behavior
communication skills

Cognitive-behavior Teaches skills for
therapy
recognizing and
modifying thoughts
and beliefs that
increase or prolong

Results of
Evaluation

Meta-analyses
demonstrate
efficacy in reducing
children’s anxiety
and depressive


<<<PAGE 2751>>>
distress, and
strengthening thoughts
and beliefs that are
self-affirming and
interpersonally
prosocial and assertive

symptoms

Parent
Parent management
Randomized
behavior/Teacher
training focuses on
effectiveness
classroom
classroom strategies
studies with two
management
to help teachers and
approaches
training
parents manage
(Incredible Years;
problematic child
Oregon PMT)
behavior and promote
demonstrate
social, emotional, and
reduced antisocial,
academic competence
oppositional,
impulsive behavior,
extending to
adolescence for
children with
severe early
antisocial problems
Brief strategic
family therapy
(BSFT)

A short-term, problemIn a randomized,
focused intervention
clinical trial with
with an emphasis on
inner-city families
modifying maladaptive
whose children had
patterns of
a variety of
interactions. It focuses
behavior problems
on ways to help
and varying
families interact more
degrees of juvenile
effectively
justice
involvement, BSFT
was superior to
usual community
care services


<<<PAGE 2752>>>
Functional family
therapy (FFT)

FFT teaches skills for
Randomized and
problem solving and
quasi-experimental
behavior management
studies show
and delivers to parents
reduced juvenile
and children together
recidivism for
youths receiving
FFT

Multidimensional
family therapy
(MDFT)

MDFT identifies family
Randomized clinical
interaction patterns
trials of MDFT
and restructures them
across a variety of
to increase trust,
ethnocultural and
cooperation, and
socioeconomic
emotional support
subpopulations
among all members of
have shown that it
the family; MDFT has
is associated with
evolved from a
reduced youth
primarily clinic-based
substance abuse
intervention to
and legal problems
delivering services in
and enhanced
the home and
family functioning
community settings to
and school
enhance youth
involvement
engagement and the
immediacy of services;
MDFT is developing a
variant for traumatized
youth incorporating
trauma affect
regulation: guide for
education and therapy
(TARGET)

Multisystemic
therapy (MST)

MST involves up to 6 mo In randomized clinical
of individualized,
trials, MST has
community-based
been shown to


<<<PAGE 2753>>>
contact by an M.A. or
Ph.D. level therapist,
supported by a 24-hr
backup team; MST
addresses all relevant
environments by
empowering parents
with the skills and
resources needed to
independently prevent
and manage crises
and maintain family
rules; variants of MST
are under
development for
sexual offending
youth, youth in
psychiatric crisis, and
youth who have
experienced childhood
maltreatment

Intensive in-home
child and
adolescent
psychiatric
services
(IICAPS)

reduce juvenile
delinquent
recidivism and
crime severity,
psychiatric
symptoms, out-ofhome placements,
and drug use while
improving family
functioning and
school attendance;
large-scale
dissemination
studies in the
United States,
Canada, and
Scandinavia show
that MST is
superior to usual
services on some,
but not all,
psychosocial
outcomes

IICAPS provides
One randomized
assistance in the home
effectiveness trial
for families who have
and observational
children with serious
studies with a
emotional disorders
system of
using a clinical team
community
consisting of clinicians
agencies treating
and counselors who
psychiatrically
are supervised by a
impaired,
child and adolescent
socioeconomically
psychiatrist
disadvantaged
children


<<<PAGE 2754>>>
demonstrate
reduced psychiatric
morbidity
Trauma-informed
affect regulation
therapies for
posttraumatic
stress disorder
(PTSD)

Dyadic therapies for
young children and
their primary
caregivers, and group
and individual
therapies for
adolescents, teach
children and
caregivers skills for
affect regulation to
reduce PTSD-related
emotional and
behavioral problems

Randomized
controlled trials
with young
traumatized
children (child–
parent
psychotherapy,
parent–child
interaction therapy)
and youth (trauma
affect regulation:
guide for education
and therapy;
trauma and grief
components
therapy for
adolescents)
demonstrate
improvements in
parent–child
relationships and
child/youth
emotional,
behavioral, and
interpersonal
functioning

Multidimensional
treatment foster
care (MTFC)

MTFC provides training
and ongoing support,
parent education,
family therapy, and
youth mentoring to

Three randomized
controlled trials
showed that MTFC
reduced
adolescents’


<<<PAGE 2755>>>
enable foster parents
to maintain a
structured therapeutic
environment for
teaching children
skills, setting limits,
and modeling
communication and
problem-solving
strategies

psychiatric
rehospitalization,
arrests and
incarceration,
running away, and
drug use while
improving
vocational and
educational
outcome

Cognitivebehavioral
intervention for
trauma in the
schools (CBITS)

CBITS provides 10Two randomized,
session groups in
controlled trials
school mental health
with inner-city
or counseling settings
children (one with
for preadolescents or
Spanish-speaking
adolescents with
youth) showed
PTSD due to family or
CBITS to be
community violence;
associated with
CBITS includes
reductions in PTSD
education about
and depression but
traumatic stress, skills
not in teacherfor anxiety
reported behavioral
management, and
or emotional
desensitization of
problems
trauma memories

Trauma-focused
cognitive–
behavioral
therapy (TFCBT)

TF-CBT guides
traumatized children
and their parents in
recognizing and
managing PTSD
symptoms and in
desensitizing trauma
memories

Randomized,
controlled trials
with sexually and
physically abused
children and
children who
experienced
traumatic losses,
disasters, or
violence showed


<<<PAGE 2756>>>
reductions in PTSD
and depression
and improvements
in social
functioning, but no
improvement in
disruptive or
oppositional
behavior
Chronic Illness Care Model: Psychiatry in the Context of Primary
Care. Finally, the care of persons with long-term mental health problems is
included in innovative developments in the provision of primary health care
for persons with chronic illnesses (http://www.improvingchroniccare.org).
The Health Resources Services Administration (HRSA), the federal agency
responsible for the community health centers or Federally Qualified Health
Centers (FQHCs), has adopted the chronic illness care model in its training
and technical assistance efforts for community health centers. The model
grows out of the current concern for the quality of care and accountability for
health care delivery systems for effective outcomes. Depression management
is one of the four chronic health conditions that the HRSA has selected for its
training collaboratives.
The model begins with the assumption that the health care delivery system
is part of a community context and must be responsive in its interactions with
the community. Four areas of focus are essential in implementing the model
in the health care delivery system: self-management support, delivery system
design, decision support, and clinical tracking system. Self-management
support gives patients a central role in determining their care, fostering a
sense of responsibility for their health. Patients collaborate with the primary
care team to establish goals, create treatment plans, and solve problems along
the way. Delivery system design requires a reorganization of how the health
system operates so that up-to-date information about a given patient is
centralized, and follow-up responsibility is assigned as a standard procedure,
and so on. Decision support requires that treatment decisions are based on
explicit, proven practice guidelines supported by at least one defining study.


<<<PAGE 2757>>>
Guidelines are discussed with patients and providers, and treatment team
members are trained continuously in the latest proven methods. Finally,
clinical tracking systems track individual patients and populations of patients
with similar problems. These systems must be practical and operational—
able to check an individual’s treatment at any point to confirm that the
treatment conforms to recommended guidelines. The real integration of
psychiatric care into primary care is an important innovation to consider that
would improve physical health care for individuals with psychiatric disorders
and eliminate the separation imposed by placing individuals with psychiatric
problems into community mental health centers.

THE ROLE OF PUBLIC AND COMMUNITY PSYCHIATRY
IN TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY HEALTH CARE
Public psychiatry emerged historically as an attempt to provide humane care
for people with severe mental disabilities who did not have the resources to
be protected from the stigma and approbation that shielded so-called
“eccentrics” and “black sheep” fortunate enough to have been born into the
wealthier social strata. Community psychiatry evolved as an answer to
concerns that public psychiatric treatment was a de facto form of
marginalization and oppression, if not inhumane exile and imprisonment, of
economically disadvantaged persons with mental illness. The best ideas from
community and public psychiatry are sometimes lost amidst the competition
for scarce resources. The spirit and skills of advocacy that sparked the
development and continue to characterize the best practices of public and
community psychiatry, as well as the dedication to bring demonstrably
effective services to the people who are most in need but are least served,
have never been more needed by the entire mental health field.
References
Abualenain J, Frohna WJ, Shesser R, Ding R, Smith M, Pines JM.
Emergency department physician-level and hospital-level variation in
admission rates. Ann Emerg Med. 2013;61(6):638–643.
Agrawal S, Edwards M. Personal Accounts: Upside down: The consumer as
advisor to a psychiatrist. Psychiatr Serv. 2013;64(4):301–302.


<<<PAGE 2758>>>
Andrade LH, Alonso J, Mneimneh Z, Wells JE, Al-Hamzawi A, Borges G,
Bromet E, Bruffaerts R, de Girolamo G, de Graaf R, Florescu S, Gureje O,
Hinkov HR, Hu C, Huang Y, Hwang I, Jin R, Karam EG, Kovess-Masfety
V, Levinson D, Matschinger H, O’Neill S, Posada-Villa J, Sagar R,
Sampson NA, Sasu C, Stein DJ, Takeshima T, Viana MC, Xavier M,
Kessler RC. Barriers to mental health treatment: Results from the WHO
World Mental Health surveys. Psychol Med. 2014;44(6):1303–1317.
Appelbaum PS. Public safety, mental disorders, and guns. JAMA Psychiatry.
2013;70(6):565–566.
Conrad EJ, Lavigne KM. Psychiatry consultation during disaster
preparedness: Hurricane Gustav. South Med J. 2013;106(1):99–101.
Coors ME. Genetic research on addiction: Ethics, the law, and public health.
Am J Psychiatry. 2013;170(10):1215–1216.
Elbogen EB, Wagner HR, Johnson SC, Kinneer P, Kang H, Vasterling JJ,
Timko C, Beckham JC. Are Iraq and Afghanistan veterans using mental
health services? New data from a national random-sample survey.
Psychiatr Serv. 2013;64(2):134–141.
Evans-Lacko S, Henderson C, Thornicroft G. Public knowledge, attitudes and
behaviour regarding people with mental illness in England 2009–2012. Br
J Psychiatry Suppl. 2013;55:s51–s57.
Holzinger A, Matschinger H, Angermeyer MC. What to do about depression?
Help-seeking and treatment recommendations of the public. Epidemiol
Psychiatr Sci. 2011;20(2):163–169.
Huey LY, Ford JD, Cole RF, Morris JA. Public and community psychiatry.
In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:4259.
Kornblith LZ, Kutcher ME, Evans AE, Redick BJ, Privette A, Schecter WP,
Cohen MJ. The “found down” patient: A diagnostic dilemma. J Trauma
Acute Care Surg. 2013;74(6):1548–1552.
LeMelle S, Arbuckle MR, Ranz JM. Integrating systems-based practice,
community psychiatry, and recovery into residency training. Acad
Psychiatry. 2013;37(1):35–37.
Malmin M. Warrior culture, spirituality, and prayer. J Relig Health.
2013;52(3):740–758.
Pandya A. A review and retrospective analysis of mental health services


<<<PAGE 2759>>>
provided after the
2013;58(3):128–134.

September

11

attacks.

Can

J

Psychiatry.


<<<PAGE 2760>>>
31
Global and Cultural Issues in
Psychiatry
Mental disorders are highly prevalent in all regions of the world and
represent a significant source of disability and social burden worldwide.
Treatments for all these disorders are available and are efficacious in both
developed and developing countries. However, mental disorders are
remarkably undertreated worldwide, especially in low-income countries.
National mental health policies are lacking in several countries, especially
low-income ones. Resources for mental health care are scarce and unequally
distributed. World psychiatry focuses on these and other issues, such as the
stigma attached to mental disorders, the relationships between mental and
physical diseases, and the ethics of mental health care.

PREVALENCE AND BURDEN OF MENTAL DISORDERS
WORLDWIDE
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that more than 25 percent
of individuals worldwide develop one or more mental disorders during their
lifetime. Among people seen by primary health care professionals, more than
20 percent have one or more current mental disorders. In a study carried out
by the WHO at 14 sites in Africa, Asia, the Americas, and Europe, the
average current prevalence of any mental disorder was 24 percent, without
consistent differences between low- and high-income countries. The most
common diagnoses were those of depression (average, 10.4 percent) and
generalized anxiety disorder (average, 7.9 percent). Female rates were 1.89
times higher than male rates for depression, but male rates were higher for
alcohol-related disorders so that there was no sex difference in the proportion


<<<PAGE 2761>>>
of people having at least one mental disorder. Physical ill-health and
educational disadvantage were both significantly associated with a diagnosis
of mental disorder.
To quantify the burden of the various diseases and injuries, the WHO, in
collaboration with the Harvard School of Public Health and the World Bank,
introduced the disability-adjusted life year (DALY). DALY for a given
disease or injury is the sum of the years of life lost due to premature mortality
plus the years lost due to disability for incident cases of that disease or injury
in the general population. In the original estimates for the year 1990, mental
and neurologic disorders accounted for 10.5 percent of the total DALYs lost
due to all diseases and injuries. The estimate for the year 2000 was 12.3
percent, with two mental disorders (depression and alcohol use disorders) and
suicide ranking in the top 20 causes of DALYs for all ages.
In the estimates for the year 2005, mental and neurologic disorders
accounted for 13.5 percent of all DALYs in the world, and is the main
contributor to burden among noncommunicable diseases (Table 31-1).
Table 31-2 summarizes the global burden of disease for mental and
substance use disorders at various times in the last few decades.
By 2030, mental and neurologic disorders will likely account for 14.4
percent of all global DALYs and 25.4 percent of those due to
noncommunicable diseases. Depression will rank number 2 in the percentage
of total DALYs in that year (5.7 percent), following HIV/AIDS and
preceding ischemic heart disease (Table 31-3). It will be number 1 in highincome countries (9.8 percent), number 2 in middle-income countries (6.7
percent), and number 3 in low-income countries (4.7 percent).
The WHO estimates that one of four families worldwide has at least one
member with a mental disorder. The objective and subjective burden related
to caring for people with severe mental disorders (in terms of disruption of
family relationships; constraints in social, leisure, and work activities;
financial difficulties; detrimental effects on physical health; feelings of loss,
depression, and embarrassment in social situations; and the stress of coping
with disturbing behaviors) is substantial and significantly higher than that
related to caring for people with long-term physical diseases such as diabetes
and heart, kidney, or lung diseases. Cross-cultural differences exist in some
dimensions of family burden.
Suicide is among the 10 leading causes of death for all ages in most of the


<<<PAGE 2762>>>
countries for which information is available. In some countries (e.g., China),
it is the leading cause of death for people between 15 and 34 years of age.
According to WHO estimates, about 849,000 people died from suicide
worldwide in the year 2001. In that year, the number of suicide deaths
overtook the number of deaths by violence (500,000) and war (230,000). In
2020, approximately 1.53 million people will die from suicide worldwide,
based on current trends, and 10 to 20 times more people will attempt suicide.
Reported suicide rates vary considerably across countries; for instance, in
many Eastern and Central European countries, the annual suicide rates are
between 48.0 and 79.3 per 100,000. In contrast, many Islamic and Latin
American countries report rates of less than 4.0 per 100,000. More than 85
percent of suicides occur in low- or middle-income countries. However, this
figure may represent an underestimate due to the low reliability of official
statistics in those countries: for example, when epidemiologists used a verbal
autopsy in South India, the observed rates for suicide exceeded official
national estimates 10-fold. In the Asia-Pacific region, perhaps 300,000 cases
of suicide per year occur by self-poisoning with pesticides.
Suicide rates are higher in men than in women (3.2:1 in 1950, 3.6:1 in
1995, and an estimated 3.9:1 in 2020). China is the only country where
suicide rates in women are consistently higher than those in men, especially
in rural areas. Over the past few decades, suicide rates are generally stable
worldwide, but there is a rising trend among young men ages 15 to 19 years.
A systematic review covering 15,629 cases in the general population
worldwide estimated that 98 percent of those who committed suicide had a
diagnosable mental disorder, with mood disorders accounting for 35.8
percent, substance-related disorders for 22.4 percent, personality disorders for
11.6 percent, and schizophrenia for 10.6 percent of cases.

TREATMENT GAP AND PROJECTED POPULATIONLEVEL TREATMENT EFFECTIVENESS WORLDWIDE
Clinical trials have convincingly proved the efficacy of pharmacologic and
psychosocial treatments for mood, anxiety, psychotic, and substance-related
disorders carried out in low- and middle-income, as well as in high-income
countries. However, the treatment gap is substantial for all mental disorders
worldwide, particularly in low-income countries.


<<<PAGE 2763>>>
Table 31-1
Disorder-Specific Global Sheehan Disability Scale Ratings for
Commonly Occurring Mental and Chronic Physical Disorders
in Developed and Developing WMH Countries


<<<PAGE 2764>>>

<<<PAGE 2765>>>
In the World Mental Health Surveys, failure and delays in treatment
seeking were generally higher in low-income countries, older cohorts, men,
and cases with earlier ages of onset. People with mood disorders had earlier
treatment contact than other mental disorders, this is likely because many
countries have targeted this disorder, with screening campaigns and public
informational campaigns.

RESOURCES FOR MENTAL HEALTH CARE
WORLDWIDE
According to the Mental Health Atlas 2005, only 62.1 percent of countries
worldwide, accounting for 68.3 percent of the world population, have a
mental health policy (i.e., a document of the government or ministry of health
specifying the goals for improving the mental health situation of the country,
the priorities among those goals, and the main directions for attaining them).
Mental health policies are present in 58.8 percent of low-income and 70.5
percent of high-income countries. In Africa, only 50 percent of countries
have a mental health policy. In Southeast Asia, only about half of countries
have a mental health policy, and only about a quarter of the population are
affected by these policies (Table 31-4).
Community care facilities exist in only 68.1 percent of the countries (51.7
percent of low-income and 93 percent of high-income countries). Only 60.9
percent of the countries report providing treatment facilities for severe mental
disorders at the primary care level (55.2 percent of low-income and 79.5
percent of high-income countries). About one-fourth of low-income countries
do not provide even rudimentary antidepressant medications in primary care
settings. In many others, the supply does not cover all regions of the country
or is very irregular. Because medicines are often not available in health care
facilities, patients and families must pay for them out of pocket.
Whereas 61.5 percent of European countries spend more than 5 percent of
their health budget on mental health care, 70 percent of countries in Africa
and 50 percent of countries in Southeast Asia spend less than 1 percent. Outof-pocket payment is the most important method of financing mental health
care in 38.6 percent of countries in Africa and 30 percent of countries in
Southeast Asia, but it is not the primary method of financing mental health


<<<PAGE 2766>>>
care in any European country (Table 31-5). All countries with out-of-pocket
payment as the dominant method of financing mental health care belong to
low-income or lower-middle-income categories, but almost all countries with
social insurance as the dominant method of financing belong to high-income
or upper-middle-income categories.
The median number of psychiatrists per 100,000 population ranges from
0.04 in Africa and 0.2 in Southeast Asia to 9.8 in Europe (Table 31-6). It is
0.1 in low-income countries compared with 9.2 in high-income countries.
Two-thirds of low-income countries have less than one psychiatrist per
100,000 population. Chad, Eritrea, and Liberia (with populations of 9, 4.2,
and 3.5 million, respectively) each have just one psychiatrist per 100,000
population. Afghanistan, Rwanda, and Togo (with populations of 25, 8.5, and
5 million respectively) each have just two psychiatrists per 100,000
population. Large-scale migration of psychiatrists from low- and middleincome to high-income countries, as part of the larger picture of migration of
health professionals in general, has been consistently documented. India and
some sub-Saharan African countries are the most important contributors to
the mental health workforce in the United Kingdom, although the United
Kingdom has 110 psychiatrists per million population. However, India has 2
per million and sub-Saharan Africa less than 1 per million. The median
number of psychologists working in mental health care per 100,000
population ranges from 0.03 in Southeast Asia and 0.05 in Africa to 3.1 in
Europe. Approximately 69 percent of low-income countries have less than
one psychologist per 100,000 population. The median number of psychiatric
nurses per 100,000 population ranges from 0.1 in Southeast Asia and 0.2 in
Africa to 24.8 in Europe.
Table 31-2
Global Burden of Disease: Mental and Substance Use
Disorders


<<<PAGE 2767>>>
Table 31-3
Leading Causes of Disability-Adjusted Life Year (DALY)
Worldwide as Estimated for the Year 2030
Disease or Injury

Percent of Total

1. HIV/AIDS

12.1

2. Unipolar depressive disorders

5.7

3. Ischemic heart disease

4.7

4. Road traffic accidents

4.2

5. Perinatal conditions

4.0

6. Cerebrovascular disease

3.9


<<<PAGE 2768>>>
7. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

3.1

8. Lower respiratory infections

3.0

9. Hearing loss, adult onset

2.5

10. Cataracts

2.5

From Mathers CD, Loncar D. Projections of global mortality and burden of disease from 2002
to 2030. PLoS Med. 2006;3(11):e442.

Table 31-4
Presence of a Mental Health Policy in Countries of Each
Region of the World Health Organization (WHO)
WHO Region

Percent of
Countries

Percent of Population
Coverage

Africa

50.0

69.4

Americas

72.7

64.2

Eastern
Mediterranean

72.7

93.8

Europe

70.6

89.1

Southeast Asia

54.5

23.6

Western Pacific

48.1

93.8

From World Health Organization: Mental Health Atlas 2005. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2005.

Table 31-5
Countries in Which Out-of-Pocket Payment Is the Most
Common Method of Financing Mental Health Care in Each
Region of the World Health Organization (WHO)
WHO Region

Percent of Countries

Africa

38.6

Americas

12.9


<<<PAGE 2769>>>
Eastern Mediterranean

15.8

Europe

0

Southeast Asia

30.0

Western Pacific

18.5

From World Health Organization: Mental Health Atlas 2005. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2005.

From these figures, it is clear that resources for mental health care are
grossly inadequate compared with the needs, and that inequalities across
countries are substantial, especially between low- and high-income countries.
Moreover, resources tend to be concentrated in urban areas, especially in
low-income countries, leaving vast regions without any form of mental health
care.
Even worse is the situation concerning child and adolescent mental health
care. According to the WHO, only 7 percent of countries worldwide have a
specific child and adolescent mental health policy. In less than one-third of
all countries, is it possible to identify an institution or a governmental entity
with overall responsibility for child mental health. School-based services are
almost exclusively present in high-income countries; and even in Europe,
only 17 percent of countries have a sufficient number of these services. There
are no pediatric beds for mental health identified in low-income countries, but
such beds exist in 50 percent of high-income countries. In all African
countries outside South Africa, there are as little as 10 psychiatrists trained to
work with children. In European countries, the number of child psychiatrists
ranges from one per 5,300 to one per 51,800. In more than 70 percent of
countries worldwide, there is no list of essential psychotropic medications for
children. In 45 percent of countries worldwide, psychostimulants are either
prohibited or unavailable for use in children with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Table 31-6
Median Number of Mental Health Professionals per 100,000
Population in Each Region of the World Health Organization
(WHO)


<<<PAGE 2770>>>
WHO Region

Psychiatrists Psychiatric Psychologists
Nurses
Working in Mental
Health

Africa

0.04

0.20

0.05

Americas

2.00

2.60

2.80

Eastern
0.95
Mediterranean

1.25

0.60

Europe

9.80

24.80

3.10

Southeast Asia

0.20

0.10

0.03

Western Pacific

0.32

0.50

0.03

From World Health Organization: Mental Health Atlas 2005. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2005.

PRINCIPLES FOR MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAM
DEVELOPMENT AND BARRIERS TO CHANGE
WORLDWIDE
According to the WHO, the development of mental health programs
worldwide should adhere to the following principles: (1) providing treatment
in primary care; (2) making psychotropic medications available; (3) giving
care in the community; (4) educating the public; (5) involving communities,
families, and consumers; (6) establishing national policies and legislation; (7)
developing human resources; (8) linking with other relevant sectors; (9)
monitoring community mental health; and (10) supporting more research.
The guiding principles proposed for the prevention of suicide worldwide
include (1) reducing access to means of suicide (e.g., pesticides, firearms), (2)
treating people with mental disorders, (3) improving media portrayal of
suicide, (4) training primary health care personnel, (5) implementing schoolbased programs, and (6) developing hotlines and crisis centers.
The most significant barriers to the implementation of the preceding
principles worldwide, according to the WHO, include the following: (1) some
stakeholders may be resistant to the changes; (2) health authorities may not
believe in the effectiveness of mental health interventions; (3) there may be


<<<PAGE 2771>>>
no consensus among the country’s stakeholders about how to formulate or
implement the new policy; (4) financial and human resources may be scarce;
(5) other essential health priorities may compete with mental health care for
funding; (6) primary care teams may feel overburdened by their workload
and refuse to accept the introduction of the new policy; and (7) many mental
health specialists may not want to work in community facilities or with
primary care teams, preferring to remain in hospitals. The suggested solutions
include (1) adopting an “all-winners approach” that ensures countries take
into account the needs of all stakeholders, (2) developing pilot projects and
evaluating their effect on health and consumer satisfaction, (3) asking for
technical reports from international experts, (4) focusing the implementation
of the mental health policy on a demonstration area and performing costeffectiveness studies, (5) linking mental health programs to other health
priorities, and (6) showing primary care practitioners that people with mental
disorders are already a hidden part of their burden and that the burden will
decrease if they identify and treat these disorders.

STIGMATIZING ATTITUDES TOWARD PEOPLE WITH
MENTAL DISORDERS
Stigmatizing attitudes toward people with mental disorders are widespread in
the general public and even among mental health professionals. Although
stigma may be less severe in some Asian and African countries, a study
carried out in India within the Stigma Programme of the World Psychiatric
Association (WPA), in which the investigators interviewed 463 persons with
schizophrenia and 651 family members in four cities, reported that two-thirds
of the respondents had experienced discrimination. Women and people living
in urban areas were the most stigmatized. Whereas men experienced more
significant discrimination in the job area, women experienced more problems
in the family and social areas.
Unlike people with physical disabilities, those with mental disorders are
often perceived by the public to be in control of their disabilities and
responsible for causing them. The view that “weakness,” “laziness,” or “lack
of willpower” contributes to the development of mental disorders still exists
in many countries. The stigmatization of people with mental disorders may
result in public avoidance, systematic discrimination, and reduced help-


<<<PAGE 2772>>>
seeking behavior. In a survey carried out in 1996 in a probability sample of
1,444 adults in the United States, more than half of the respondents were
unwilling to spend an evening socializing with, work next to, or have a
family member marry a person with mental illness. Although most countries
have some provision for disability benefits, people with mental illness are
often explicitly excluded from such entitlements. Moreover, mental disorders
are frequently not considered in social and private insurance schemes for
health care. Shame is one of the main barriers to seeking help for mental
disorders in both developed and developing countries.
We can subdivide the strategies for addressing the stigmatization of people
with mental disorders into three groups: protest, education, and contact.
There is some evidence that protest campaigns may be useful in reducing
stigmatizing behaviors against people with mental disorders. Education may
promote a better understanding of mental illness, and educated people may be
less likely to endorse stigma and discrimination. There is an inverse
relationship between having contact with a person with mental illness and
endorsing stigmatizing behavior.

RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
DISEASES
People with severe mental disorders have higher mortality from physical
illnesses compared with the general population. In a follow-up study carried
out in the United Kingdom, the standardized mortality ratio (SMR) for
natural causes in people with schizophrenia was 2.32 (i.e., death was more
than twice higher than in the general population). The SMR for causes
“avoidable by appropriate treatment” was 4.68. The highest SMRs were those
for endocrine, nervous, respiratory, circulatory, and gastrointestinal diseases.
There is also an increased nonsuicide all-cause mortality for bipolar disorder
(SMR 1.9 for men and 2.1 for women) and dementia (relative risk [RR] 2.63;
95 percent confidence interval [CI] 2.17 to 3.21). A meta-analysis of 15
population-based studies of the effect of a diagnosis of depression on
subsequent all-cause mortality yielded a pooled odds ratio of 1.7 (CI 1.5 to
2.0). Evidence from low-income countries is limited, but a large population
study conducted in Ethiopia found high mortality rates for major depression
(SMR 3.55, 95 percent CI 1.97 to 6.39) and schizophrenia (almost 5 percent


<<<PAGE 2773>>>
per year).
People with mental disorders also have a higher prevalence of several
physical diseases compared with the general population. In a study carried
out in the United States, people with psychotic disorders were more likely
than other people to develop diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, asthma,
gastrointestinal disorders, skin infections, malignant neoplasms, and acute
respiratory disorders. This high rate remained true even when only
considering patients without a concomitant substance use disorder. In a study
conducted in Nigeria, 55.2 percent of persons with schizophrenia-spectrum
disorders referred for the first time to a psychiatric clinic had at least one
physical disease, but in persons with neurotic disorders, the rate was 11.8
percent. A strong prospective association exists between depression and
coronary heart disease outcomes, including fatal myocardial infarction; on the
other hand, the incidence of depression is increased after myocardial
infarction, especially in the first month after the event. Depression also
increases the risk of type II diabetes. In South Asia, there are reports of an
association between maternal perinatal depression and infant malnutrition and
stunting at 6 months.
People with severe mental disorders are at increased risk of contracting
HIV infection, although prevalence rates vary substantially worldwide. A
large multicenter study conducted in sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, Latin
America, Europe, and the United States reported a higher prevalence of the
depressive disorder among symptomatic HIV-seropositive people than in
asymptomatic HIV-seropositive cases and seronegative control participants.
Evidence from both developed and developing countries shows that
adherence to highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) is negatively
affected by depression, cognitive impairment, and substance abuse.
In a study carried out in the United Kingdom, people with severe mental
illness were significantly more likely to be obese (body mass index higher
than 30) and morbidly obese (body mass index higher than 40) than the
general population; the respective figures were 35.0 versus 19.4 percent and
3.7 versus 1.3 percent. When these figures were broken down by age and sex,
28.7 percent of men with severe mental illness between 18 and 44 years of
age were obese compared with 13.6 percent in the general population, and 3.7
versus 0.4 percent were morbidly obese. Even more striking were the figures
concerning women of the same age; 50.6 versus 16.6 percent and 7.4 versus


<<<PAGE 2774>>>
2.0 percent, respectively.
A meta-analysis of worldwide studies confirmed that there is a highly
significant association between schizophrenia and current smoking. The
weighted average odds ratio was 5.9; it was 7.2 in men and 3.3 in women.
The association remained significant when controls with severe mental illness
were used (odds ratio, 1.9). Heavy smoking and high nicotine dependence
were also more frequent in people with schizophrenia than in the general
population.
The quality of physical health care received by patients with severe mental
illness is often worse than the general population. A study conducted in the
United States found that adverse events during medical and surgical
hospitalizations were significantly more frequent in patients with
schizophrenia than in the other people, including infections due to medical
care, postoperative respiratory failure, postoperative deep venous thrombosis
or pulmonary embolism, and postoperative sepsis. All of these adverse events
were associated with a significantly increased odds of admission to an
intensive care unit and of death.
The decreased access of people with mental disorders to medical services
relates to several factors concerning the health care system. There is a welldocumented effect of lack of insurance and the cost of care. In a study carried
out in the United States, people with mental disorders were twice as likely as
those without mental disorders to have been denied insurance because of a
preexisting condition (odds ratio, 2.18). Having a mental disorder conferred a
higher risk of having delayed seeking care because of cost (odds ratio, 1.76)
and of having been unable to obtain needed medical care (odds ratio, 2.30).
Even when a doctor sees people with mental illness, their physical diseases
often remain undiagnosed. Primary care providers may misperceive the
medical complaints of people with mental disorders as “psychosomatic” or be
unskilled or feel uncomfortable in dealing with this population. Underlying
stigmatization may be involved. Moreover, during hospitalizations in medical
and surgical wards, health care professionals may not be experienced in
dealing with the unique needs of patients with schizophrenia, may minimize
or misinterpret their somatic symptoms, and may make inappropriate use of
restraints or sedative drugs or fail to consider possible interactions of
psychotropic drugs with other medications. On the other hand, many
psychiatrists are unable or unwilling to perform physical and even neurologic


<<<PAGE 2775>>>
examinations or are not up to date on the management of even common
physical diseases.
The first step is raising awareness of the problem among mental health care
professionals, primary care providers, and patients with schizophrenia and
their families. Education and training of mental health professionals and
primary care providers is a further essential step. We should train mental
health professionals to perform at least basic medical tasks. They should
understand the importance of recognizing physical illness in people with
severe mental disorders and become familiar with the most common reasons
for underdiagnosis or misdiagnosis of physical illness in these patients. On
the other hand, primary care providers should overcome their reluctance to
treat people with severe mental illness and learn practical ways to interact and
communicate with them; it is not only an issue of knowledge and skills but
also most of all one of attitudes.
A well-identified professional should be responsible for physical health
care in each person with a severe mental disorder. Mental health services
should be able to provide at least a standard routine assessment of their
patients to identify or at least suspect the presence of physical health
problems. Guidelines about the management of patients receiving
antipsychotic drugs should be known and applied by all mental health
services. Patients should be involved as much as possible; for instance,
mental health professionals should encourage patients to monitor and chart
their weight. Mental health services should routinely provide dietary and
exercise programs. Flexible smoking cessation programs, which have shown
some degree of success, could be considered in some settings.

ETHICAL ISSUES IN MENTAL HEALTH CARE
The protection and promotion of the human rights of people with mental
disorders are emerging as a priority worldwide. In 1991, the United Nations
(UN) issued Resolution 46/119 for the Protection of Persons with Mental
Illness and the Improvement of Mental Health Care. In that resolution, the
UN codified the human rights of people with mental disorders, and their right
to treatment. The 25 principles covered the following areas: definition of
mental illness; protection of confidentiality; standards of care and treatment,
including involuntary admission and consent to treatment; rights of persons


<<<PAGE 2776>>>
with mental disorders in mental health facilities; protection of minors;
provision of resources for mental health facilities; the role of community and
culture; review mechanisms providing for the protection of the rights of
offenders with mental disorders; and procedural safeguards protecting rights
of persons with mental disorders. The UN encouraged national governments
to promote the principles of the resolution by appropriate legislative,
juridical, administrative, educational, and other provisions. However,
violations of the human rights of people with mental disorders still exist in
many countries, and in a substantial number of low- and middle-income
countries, patients in mental hospitals are physically restrained or secluded
for long periods.
In Latin America, an influential document has been the Declaration of
Caracas, adopted in 1990 by the Regional Conference on Restructuring
Psychiatric Care in Latin America, which states that resources, care, and
treatment for people with mental disorders should safeguard their dignity and
human and civil rights and strive to maintain them in their communities. The
Declaration also states that mental health legislation should safeguard the
human rights of people with mental disorders and that countries should
organize services so that they can enforce these rights.
In Africa, the Banjul Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, a legally
binding document supervised by the African Commission on Human and
Peoples’ Rights, in Article 5 addresses the right to respect for the dignity
inherent in human beings and the prohibition of all forms of degradation,
including cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.
According to the WHO, mental health legislation should cover the
following issues: access to fundamental mental health care, least restrictive
care, informed consent to treatment, voluntary and involuntary admission to
treatment, competence issues, periodical review mechanism, confidentiality,
rehabilitation, accreditation of professionals and facilities, and rights of
families and caregivers. Specific legislation in the field of mental health is
present in 74 percent of low-income countries versus 92.7 percent of highincome countries.
In 1996, the WPA released the Madrid Declaration, which contains the
ethical principles by which all national psychiatric societies should abide.
The declaration includes seven general guidelines focusing on the aims of
psychiatry: (1) psychiatrists must serve patients by providing the best therapy


<<<PAGE 2777>>>
available, consistent with accepted scientific knowledge and ethical
principles, and should devise therapeutic interventions that are the least
restrictive to the freedom of the patient; (2) it is the duty of psychiatrists to
keep abreast of scientific developments of their specialty and to convey
updated knowledge to others; (3) the patient should be accepted as a partner
by right in the therapeutic process, and the therapist–patient relationship must
be based on mutual trust and respect, to allow the patient to make free and
informed decisions; (4) treatment must always be in the best interest of the
patient, and no treatment should be provided against the patient’s will, unless
withholding treatment would endanger life of the patient or those who
surround him or her; (5) when psychiatrists are requested to assess a person,
it is their duty to inform the person being assessed about the purpose of the
intervention; (6) information contained in the therapeutic relationship should
be kept in confidence and used exclusively for the purpose of improving the
mental health of the patient; and (7) because psychiatric patients are
particularly vulnerable research subjects, extra caution should be taken to
safeguard their autonomy, as well as their mental and physical integrity.

INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS ACTIVE IN THE
MENTAL HEALTH FIELD
Many international organizations are active in the mental health field. They
include the WHO, which is the world’s leading public health agency; some
professional associations, among which the largest is the WPA, representing
the psychiatric profession worldwide; and several organizations with a
membership of users and families (such as the World Fellowship for
Schizophrenia and Allied Disorders and the Global Alliance of Mental Illness
Advocacy Networks [GAMIAN]) or both mental health professionals and
users and families (such as the World Federation for Mental Health
[WFMH]).
The WHO is a UN agency that is funded by 192 member states. It has six
regional groupings: Africa, the Americas, Eastern Mediterranean, Europe,
Southeast Asia, and Western Pacific. The Department of Mental Health and
Substance Abuse is in Geneva, and it has advisors for mental health in each
of its regional offices. Its main functions are direction and coordination of
international health work and technical cooperation with countries. Among


<<<PAGE 2778>>>
the numerous recent WHO activities in the mental health field, of particular
interest, are the release of the World Health Report 2001 and the
development of the report Mental Health: New Understanding, New Hope,
which was devoted entirely to mental health. It provided a summary of the
current and projected impact of mental disorders and the principles of mental
health policy and service provision, as well as a set of recommendations for
future action that countries can adapt to their various needs and resources.
Project Atlas aims to collect information on mental health resources across
the world. Global and regional analyses of those resources were first
published in 2001 and updated in 2005. Reports from the project focus, for
example, on resources for child and adolescent mental health and psychiatric
education and training worldwide (the latter in collaboration with the WPA).
The WPA is an association of national psychiatric societies aimed at
increasing the knowledge and skills necessary for work in the field of mental
health and the care for the mentally ill. Its member societies number 134, and
it spans 122 countries and represents more than 200,000 psychiatrists. The
WPA organizes the World Congress of Psychiatry every 3 years. It also
organizes international and regional congresses and meetings and thematic
conferences. It has 65 scientific sections, which disseminate information and
promoting collaborative work in specific domains of psychiatry. It has
produced several educational programs, books, and consensus statements
(including the Declaration of Madrid on ethical principles for psychiatric
practice). It has an official journal, World Psychiatry, which is in English,
Spanish, and Chinese and is indexed in PubMed and Current Contents and
reaches more than 33,000 psychiatrists worldwide.
The WFMH is a multidisciplinary advocacy and education organization
aimed at promoting the advancement of mental health awareness, prevention,
advocacy, and best-practice recovery-focused interventions worldwide.
Among its activities is the organization of the World Mental Health Day,
observed every year on October 10, each time with a different theme.

FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
There are several statements from various groups and organizations about the
priorities for future action in the mental health field at the international level.
Of particular interest is a document produced by 39 leaders comprising the


<<<PAGE 2779>>>
Lancet Commission on global mental health and sustainable development, or
the Global Mental Health Commission. This document identifies five main
goals: (1) placing mental health on the public health priority agenda, (2)
improving the organization of mental health services, (3) integrating the
availability of mental health into general health care, (4) developing human
resources for mental health, and (5) strengthening public mental health
leadership.
Among the strategies proposed to place mental health on the public health
priority agenda are the development and use of uniform and understandable
messages for mental health advocacy and the education of decision-makers
within governments and donor agencies on the evidence concerning the
public health significance of mental disorders and the cost-effectiveness of
mental health care. Strategies suggested to improve the organization of
mental health services include, among others, the provision of incentive
arrangements to overcome vested interests blocking change and the
organization of international technical support to learn from countries that
have experienced successful mental health reforms. The authors proposed
that mental health professionals be appointed and trained specially to support
and supervise primary health care staff, to help integrate mental and general
health care. It is also crucial that we increase and diversify the professional
and specialist workforce is increased and diversified and improve the quality
of mental health training to ensure that it is practical and widely practiced in
community or primary care settings.
References
Belsky J, Hartman S. Gene-environment interaction in evolutionary
perspective: Differential susceptibility to environmental influences. World
Psychiatry. 2014;13(1):87–89.
Biglu MH. 2565–Global attitudes towards forensic psychiatry (2006–2012).
Eur Psychiatry. 2013;28:1.
Golhar TS, Srinath S. Global child and adolescent mental health needs:
Perspectives from a national tertiary referral center in India. Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2013;3(1):82–86.
Kirmayer LJ, Raikhel E, Rahimi S. Cultures of the Internet: Identity,
community and mental health. Transcult Psychiatry. 2013;50(2):165–191.


<<<PAGE 2780>>>
Leckman JF. What’s next for developmental psychiatry? World Psychiatry.
2013;12(2):125–126.
Maj M. World aspects of psychiatry. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:4510.
Malhi GS, Coulston CM, Parker GB, Cashman E, Walter G, Lampe LA,
Vollmer-Conna U. Who picks psychiatry? Perceptions, preferences and
personality of medical students. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2011;45(10):861–
870.
Marienfeld C, Rohrbaugh RM. Impact of a global mental health program on a
residency training program. Acad Psychiatry. 2013;37(4):276–280.
Pargament KI, Lomax JW. Understanding and addressing religion among
people with mental illness. World Psychiatry. 2013;12(1):26–32.
Pitel L, Geckova AM, Kolarcik P, Halama P, Reijneveld SA, van Dijk JP.
Gender differences in the relationship between religiosity and healthrelated behaviour among adolescents. J Epidemiol Community Health.
2012;66(12):1122–1128.
Robinson JA, Bolton JM, Rasic D, Sareen J. Exploring the relationship
between religious service attendance, mental disorders, and suicidality
among different ethnic groups: Results from a nationally representative
survey. Depress Anxiety. 2012;29(11):983–990.
White R. The globalisation of mental illness. The Psychologist.
2013;26(3):182–185.


<<<PAGE 2781>>>
Contributions from the Sciences
and Social Sciences to
D Psychiatry


<<<PAGE 2782>>>
32
Normal Development and Aging
32.1 Infant, Child, and Adolescent
Development
The transactional nature of development in infancy, childhood, and
adolescence, consisting of a continuous interplay between biologic
predisposition and environmental experiences, forms the basis of current
conceptualizations of development. There is much evidence that observed
developmental outcomes evolve from interactions between particular biologic
substrates and specific environmental events. For example, the serotonin
transporter gene sensitizes a child with early adverse experiences of abuse or
neglect to increased risk for later development of a depressive disorder. Also,
the degree of resilience and adaptation, that is, the ability to withstand
adversity without damaging effects, is likely to be mediated by endogenous
glucocorticoids, cytokines, and neurotrophins. Thus, allostasis, the process of
achieving stability in the face of adverse environmental events, results from
interactions between specific environmental challenges and particular genetic
backgrounds that combine to result in a response. Adverse childhood
experiences (ACEs) are likely to alter the trajectory of development in a
given individual and that during early development, the brain is especially
vulnerable to injury. Future studies may uncover windows of plasticity in
older children and adolescents that affect vulnerability as well. Acquiring
subtle social skills, for example, relates to changes in the adolescent brain.
Adolescents’ keen abilities, competencies, and interests in a host of
technologic advances—including the Internet, social media sites, and


<<<PAGE 2783>>>
smartphones, to name a few—shed some light on their potential to adapt to
new and challenging demands.

PRENATAL, INFANT, AND CHILD
The phases of development described in this section are defined as follows:
prenatal is the time frame from conception to 8 weeks; the fetus, from 8
weeks to birth; infancy, from birth to 15 months; the toddler period, from 15
months to 2½ years; the preschool period, from 2½ years to 6 years; and the
middle years, from 6 to 12 years.

PRENATAL
Historically, the analysis of human development began with birth. The
influence of endogenous and exogenous in utero factors, however, now
requires that developmental schemes consider intrauterine events. The infant
is not a tabula rasa, a smooth slate upon which outside influences etch
patterns. On the contrary, myriad factors within the womb have already
influenced the newborn. For example, the studies of Stella Chess and
Alexander Thomas (described later) have demonstrated a wide range of
temperamental differences among newborns. Maternal stress, through the
production of adrenal hormones, also influences the behavioral characteristics
of newborns.
The time frame in which the development of the embryo and fetus occurs
is known as the prenatal period. After implantation, the egg begins to divide
and is known as an embryo. Growth and development occur at a rapid pace;
by the end of 8 weeks, the shape is recognizably human, and the embryo has
become a fetus. Figure 32-1 illustrates a sonogram of a 9-week and 15-week
fetus in utero.
The fetus maintains an internal equilibrium that, with variable effects,
interacts continuously with the intrauterine environment. In general, most
disorders that occur are multifactorial—the result of a combination of effects,
some of which can be cumulative. Damage at the fetal stage usually has a
more global impact than damage after birth, because rapidly growing organs
are the most vulnerable. Boys are more vulnerable to developmental damage
than girls are; geneticists recognize that in humans and animals, female


<<<PAGE 2784>>>
fetuses show a propensity for greater biologic vigor than male fetuses,
possibly because of the second X chromosome in the female.
Prenatal Life
Much biologic activity occurs in utero. A fetus is involved in a variety of
behaviors that are necessary for adaptation outside the womb. For example, a
fetus sucks on thumb and fingers; folds and unfolds its body, and eventually
assumes a position in which its occiput is in an anterior vertex position,
which is the position in which fetuses usually exit the uterus.
Behavior. Pregnant women are extraordinarily sensitive to fetal movements.
They describe their unborn babies as active or passive, as kicking vigorously
or rolling around, as quiet when the mothers are active, but as kicking as soon
as the mothers try to rest.
Women usually detect fetal movements 16 to 20 weeks into the pregnancy;
the fetus can be artificially set into total body motion by in utero stimulation
of its ventral skin surfaces by the 14th week. The fetus may be able to hear by
the 18th week, and it responds to loud noises with muscle contractions,
movements, and an increased heart rate. A bright light flashed on the
abdominal wall of the 20-week pregnant woman causes changes in fetal heart
rate and position. The retinal structures begin to function at that time. Eyelids
open at 7 months. Smell and taste develop then, and the fetus can respond to
substances injected into the amniotic sac, such as contrast medium. Some
reflexes present at birth exist in utero: the grasp reflex, which appears at 17
weeks; the Moro (startle) reflex, which appears at 25 weeks; and the sucking
reflex, which appears at about 28 weeks.


<<<PAGE 2785>>>
FIGURE 32-1
A: Sonogram of fetus at 9 weeks. B: Same fetus at 15 weeks. (Courtesy K.C.
Attwell, M.D.)

Nervous System. The nervous system arises from the neural plate, which
is a dorsal ectodermal thickening that appears on about day 16 of gestation.
By the sixth week, part of the neural tube becomes the cerebral vesicle, which
later becomes the cerebral hemispheres (Fig. 32-2).

FIGURE 32-2
Formation of the neural tube and neural crest. These schematic illustrations follow
the early development of the nervous system in the embryo. The drawings above
are dorsal views of the embryo; those below are cross sections. A: The primitive
embryonic central nervous system (CNS) begins as a thin sheet of ectoderm. B:
The first important step in the development of the nervous system is the formation
of the neural groove. C: The walls of the groove, called neural folds, come
together and fuse, forming the neural tube. D: The bits of neural ectoderm that
are pinched off when the tube rolls up are called the neural crest, from which the
peripheral nervous system (PNS) will develop. The somites are mesoderm that
will give rise to much of the skeletal system and the muscles. (Reprinted from
Bear MF, Conners BW, Paradiso MA, eds. Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain.
2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001:179, with
permission.)

The cerebral cortex begins to develop by the 10th week, but layers do not
appear until the sixth month of pregnancy; the sensory cortex and the motor
cortex form before the association cortex. Some brain function has been


<<<PAGE 2786>>>
detected in utero by fetal encephalographic responses to sound. The human
brain weighs about 350 g at birth and 1,450 g at full adult development, a
fourfold increase, mainly in the neocortex. This increase is almost entirely
because of the growth in the number and branching of dendrites establishing
new connections. After birth, the number of new neurons is negligible.
Uterine contractions can contribute to fetal neural development by causing
the developing neural network to receive and transmit sensory impulses.
Pruning. Pruning refers to the programmed elimination during the
development of neurons, synapses, axons, and other brain structures from the
original number, present at birth, to a lesser number. Thus, the developing
brain contains structures and cellular elements that are absent in the older
brain. The fetal brain generates more neurons than it will need for adult life.
For example, in the visual cortex, neurons increase in number from birth to 3
years of age, at which point they diminish in number. The adult brain
contains fewer neural connections than were present during the early and
middle years of childhood. About twice as many synapses are present in
certain parts of the cerebral cortex during early postnatal life than during
adulthood.
Pruning occurs to rid the nervous system of cells that have served their
function in the development of the brain. Some neurons, for example, exist to
produce neurotrophic or growth factors and are programmed to die once they
complete their task, a process called apoptosis.
These observations imply that the immature brain can be vulnerable in
locations that lack sensitivity to injury later on. The developing white matter
of the human brain before 32 weeks of gestation is especially sensitive to
damage from hypoxic and ischemic injury and metabolic insults.
Neurotransmitter receptors located on synaptic terminals are subject to injury
from excessive stimulation by excitatory amino acids, (e.g., glutamate,
aspartate), a process referred to as excitotoxicity. This process may be
relevant to the etiology of disorders such as schizophrenia.
Maternal Stress
Maternal stress correlates with high levels of stress hormones (epinephrine,
norepinephrine, and adrenocorticotropic hormone) in the fetal bloodstream,


<<<PAGE 2787>>>
which act directly on the fetal neuronal network to increase blood pressure,
heart rate, and activity level. Mothers with high levels of anxiety are more
likely to have babies who are hyperactive, irritable, and of low birth weight,
and who have problems feeding and sleeping than are mothers with low
anxiety levels. Fever in the mother causes the fetus’s temperature to rise.
Genetic Disorders
In many cases, genetic counseling depends on prenatal diagnosis. The
diagnostic techniques used include amniocentesis (transabdominal aspiration
of fluid from the amniotic sac), ultrasound examinations, x-ray studies,
fetoscopy (direct visualization of the fetus), fetal blood and skin sampling,
chorionic villus sampling, and α-fetoprotein screening. In about 2 percent of
women tested, the results are positive for some abnormality, including Xlinked disorders, neural tube defects (detected by high levels of αfetoprotein), chromosomal disorders (e.g., trisomy 21), and various inborn
errors of metabolism (e.g., Tay–Sachs disease and the lipoidoses). Figure 323 illustrates hypertelorism of the eyes.

FIGURE 32-3
Hypertelorism. Note the wide distance between the eyes, flat nasal bridge, and


<<<PAGE 2788>>>
external strabismus. (Courtesy of Michael Malone, M.D. Children’s Hospital,
Washington, DC.)

FIGURE 32-4
Photographs of children with “fetal-alcohol syndrome.” A: Severe case. B: Slightly
affected child. Note in both children the short palpebral fissures and hypoplasia of
the maxilla. Usually, the defect includes other craniofacial abnormalities.
Cardiovascular defects and limb deformities are also common symptoms of the
fetal alcohol syndrome. (From Langman J. Medical Embryology. 7th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Williams & Wilkins; 1995:108, with permission.)

Some diagnostic tests carry a risk; for instance, about 5 percent of women
who undergo fetoscopy miscarry. Amniocentesis, usually performed between
the 14th and 16th weeks of pregnancy, causes fetal damage or miscarriage in
less than 1 percent of women tested. Fully 98 percent of all prenatal tests in
pregnant women reveal no abnormality in the fetus. Women older than 35
years of age and those with a family history of a congenital disability should
have prenatal testing.
Parental reactions to congenital disabilities can include feelings of guilt,
anxiety, or anger. The loss of the fantasized perfect child may cause
depression. Some women may choose to terminate a pregnancy because of a
known or suspected congenital malformation.
Maternal Drug Use


<<<PAGE 2789>>>
Alcohol. Alcohol use in pregnancy is a significant cause of severe physical
and mental congenital disabilities in children. Each year, up to 40,000 babies
are born with some degree of alcohol-related damage. The National Institute
on Drug Abuse (NIDA) reports that 19 percent of pregnant women used
alcohol during their pregnancy, the highest rate being among white women.
Fetal alcohol syndrome (Fig. 32-4) affects about one-third of all infants
born to alcoholic women. Table 32-1 lists the characteristics of the disorder.
The incidence of infants born with fetal alcohol syndrome is about 0.5 per
1,000 live births.
Some studies suggest that alcohol use during pregnancy may also
contribute to attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
Smoking. Smoking during pregnancy may cause both premature births and
below-average infant birth weight. Some reports have associated sudden
infant death syndrome (SIDS) with mothers who smoke.
Table 32-1
Characteristics of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome
Growth retardation of prenatal origin (height, weight)
Facial Dysmorphism
Microcephaly (head circumference below the third percentile)
Hypertelorism (large distance between eyes)
Microphthalmia (small eyeballs)
Short palpebral fissures
Inner epicanthal folds
Midface hypoplasia (underdevelopment)
Smooth or short philtrum
Thin upper lip
Short, turned up nose
Cardiac Defects
Central nervous system (CNS) manifestations
Delayed development
Hyperactivity
Attention deficits
Learning disabilities


<<<PAGE 2790>>>
Intellectual deficits
Seizures
Other Substances. Chronic marijuana use is associated with low infant
birth weight, prematurity, and withdrawal-like symptoms, including
excessive crying, tremors, and hyperemesis (severe and chronic vomiting).
Crack cocaine use by women during pregnancy may cause behavioral
abnormalities such as increased irritability and crying and decreased desire
for human contact. Infants born to mothers dependent on narcotics go
through a withdrawal syndrome at birth.
Table 32-2
Causes of Human Malformations Observed During the First
Year of Life
Suspected Cause

% of
Total

Genetic
Autosomal genetic disease

15–
20

Cytogenic (chromosomal abnormalities)

5

Unknown
Polygenic
Multifactorial (genetic–environmental interactions)
Spontaneous error of development
Synergistic interactions of teratogens
Environmental
Maternal conditions: diabetes; endocrinopathies; nutritional 4
deficiencies, starvation; drug and substance addictions
Maternal infections: rubella, toxoplasmosis, syphilis,
herpes, cytomegalic inclusion disease, varicella,

3


<<<PAGE 2791>>>
Venezuelan equine encephalitis, parvovirus B19
Mechanical problems (deformations): abnormal cord
constrictions, disparity in uterine size and uterine
contents
Chemicals, drugs, radiation, hyperthermia

1–2

<1

Preconception exposures (excluding mutagens and infectious <1
agents)
Reprinted from Brent RL, Beckman DA. Environmental teratogens. Bull NY Acad Med.
1990;66(2):123–163, with permission.

Prenatal exposure to various prescribed medications can also result in
abnormalities. Common drugs with teratogenic effects include antibiotics
(tetracyclines), anticonvulsants (valproate, carbamazepine, phenytoin),
progesterone-estrogens, lithium, and warfarin. Table 32-2 outlines the
etiologies of malformations that may emerge during the first year of life.

INFANCY
The average newborn weighs about 3,400 g (7.5 lb). Small fetuses (birth
weight below the 10th percentile for their gestational age) occur in about 7
percent of all pregnancies. From the 26th to the 28th week of gestation, the
prematurely born fetus has a good chance of survival. Arnold Gesell
described developmental landmarks that are widely used in both pediatrics
and child psychiatry. These landmarks outline the sequence of children’s
motor, adaptive, and personal–social behavior from birth to 6 years (Table
32-3).
Premature infants are born before 34 weeks or weigh less than 2,500 g (5.5
lb). Such infants are at increased risk for learning disabilities, such as
dyslexia, emotional and behavioral problems, mental retardation, and child
abuse. With each 100 g increment of weight, beginning at about 1,000 g (2.2
lb), infants have a progressively better chance of survival. A 36-week-old
fetus has less chance of survival than a 3,000 g (6.6 lb) fetus born close to
term. Figure 32-5 gives examples of some differences between full-term and
premature infants.


<<<PAGE 2792>>>
FIGURE 32-5
Premature baby at breast during a gavage feed. (Photo courtesy of Mike
McCarter, Connecticut Children’s Medical Center.)

Postmature infants are born 2 weeks or more beyond the expected date of
birth. The incidence of postmaturity is high if based on menstrual history
alone. The postmature baby typically has long nails, scanty lanugo, more
scalp hair than usual, and increased alertness.
Developmental Milestones in Infants
Reflexes and Survival Systems at Birth. Primitive reflexes are present
at birth. They include the rooting reflex (puckering of the lips in response to
perioral stimulation), the grasp reflex, the plantar (Babinski) reflex, the knee
reflex, the abdominal reflexes, the startle (Moro) reflex (Fig. 32-6), and the
tonic neck reflex. In healthy children, the grasp reflex, the startle reflex, and
the tonic neck reflex disappear by the fourth month. The Babinski reflex
usually disappears by the 12th month.


<<<PAGE 2793>>>
FIGURE 32-6
The Moro reflex. The head is allowed to fall backward. The arms abduct and
extend.

Survival systems—breathing, sucking, swallowing, and circulatory and
temperature homeostasis—are relatively functional at birth, but the sensory
organs are still developing. Further differentiation of neurophysiologic
functions depends on an active process of stimulatory reinforcement from the
external environment, such as persons touching and stroking the infant. The
newborn infant is awake for only a short period each day; rapid eye
movement (REM) and non-REM sleep are present at birth. Other
spontaneous behaviors include crying, smiling, and penile erection in males.
Infants 1 day old can detect the smell of their mother’s milk, and those 3 days
old distinguish their mother’s voice.
Table 32-3
Landmarks of Normal Behavioral Development
Age

Motor and Sensory

Adaptive

Personal and


<<<PAGE 2794>>>
Behavior

Behavior

Social Behavior

Birth
Hand-to-mouth reflex, Anticipatory
Responsiveness
to 4
grasping reflex
feedingto mother’s
wk Rooting reflex
approach
face, eyes, and
behavior at 4
voice within first
(puckering lips in
days
few hours of life
response to perioral
stimulation), Moro
Responds to
Endogenous smile
reflex (digital
sound of rattle Independent play
extension when
and bell
(until 2 yr)
startled), sucking
Regards moving Quiets when
reflex, Babinski
objects
picked up
reflex (toes spread
momentarily
Impassive face
when sole of foot is
touched)
Differentiates sounds
(orients to human
voice) and sweet
and sour tastes
Visual tracking
Fixed focal distance of
8 in
Makes alternating
crawling movements
Moves head laterally
when placed in
prone position
4 wk

Tonic neck reflex
Follows moving
positions
objects to the
predominate
midline
Hands fisted
Shows no
interest and
Head sags but can
drops object
hold head erect for a

Regards face and
diminishes
activity
Responds to
speech
Smiles


<<<PAGE 2795>>>
few seconds
Visual fixation,
stereoscopic vision
(12 wk)

immediately

preferentially to
mother

16 wk Symmetrical postures Follows a slowly Spontaneous
predominate
moving object
social smile
well
(exogenous)
Holds head balanced
Head lifted 90 degrees Arms activate on Aware of strange
sight of
situations
when prone on
dangling
forearm
object
Visual accommodation
28 wk Sits steadily, leaning
One-hand
Takes feet to
forward on hands
approach and
mouth
grasp of toy
Bounces actively when
Pats mirror image
placed in standing
Bangs and
Starts to imitate
position
shakes rattle
mother’s sounds
Transfers toys
and actions
40 wk Sits alone with good
Matches two
coordination
objects at
midline
Creeps
Attempts to
Pulls self to standing
imitate
position
scribble
Points with index finger

Separation anxiety
manifest when
taken away from
mother
Responds to
social play, such
as pat-a-cake
and peek-a-boo
Feeds self cracker
and holds own
bottle

52 wk Walks with one hand
held
Stands alone briefly

Cooperates in
dressing

15 mo Toddles

Seeks novelty

Points or vocalizes


<<<PAGE 2796>>>
Creeps up stairs

wants
Throws objects in
play or refusal

18 mo Coordinated walking,
seldom falls
Hurls ball
Walks up stairs with
one hand held

Builds a tower of Feeds self in part,
three or four
spills
cubes
Pulls toy on string
Scribbles
Carries or hugs a
spontaneously
special toy,
and imitates a
such as a doll
writing stroke Imitates some
behavioral
patterns with
slight delay

2 yr

Builds a tower of Pulls on simple
six or seven
garment
cubes
Domestic mimicry
Aligns cubes,
Refers to self by
imitating train
name
Imitates vertical Says “no” to
and circular
mother
strokes
Separation anxiety
Develops
begins to
original
diminish
behaviors
Organized
demonstrations
of love and
protest
Parallel play
(plays side by
side but does
not interact with
other children)

Runs well, no falling
Kicks large ball
Goes up and down
stairs alone
Fine motor skills
increase


<<<PAGE 2797>>>
3 yr

Rides tricycle
Jumps from bottom
steps
Alternates feet going
up stairs

Builds tower of 9 Puts on shoes
or 10 cubes
Unbuttons buttons
Imitates a three- Feeds self well
cube bridge
Understands
Copies a circle
taking turns
and a cross

4 yr

Walks down stairs one Copies a cross
step to a tread
Repeats four
Stands on one foot for
digits
5–8 s
Counts three
objects with
correct
pointing

5 yr

Skips, using feet
alternately
Usually has complete
sphincter control
Fine coordination
improves

Copies a square Dresses and
undresses self
Draws a
recognizable Prints a few letters
person with a Plays competitive
head, a body,
exercise games
and limbs
Counts 10
objects
accurately

6 yr

Rides two-wheel
bicycle

Prints name
Copies triangle

Washes and dries
own face
Brushes teeth
Associative or joint
play (plays
cooperatively
with other
children)

Ties shoelaces

Adapted from Arnold Gessell, M.D., Ph.D. and Stella Chess, M.D.

Table 32-4
Language Development
Age and Stage
Mastery of
of Development Comprehension

Mastery of Expression

0–6 mo

Has vocalizations other

Shows startle


<<<PAGE 2798>>>
response to loud or
sudden sounds;
Attempts to
localize sounds,
turning eyes or
head; Appears to
listen to speakers,
may respond with
smile; Recognizes
warning, angry,
and friendly voices;
Responds to
hearing own name
7–11 mo
Attending-toLanguage

than crying; Has
differential cries for
hunger, pain; Makes
vocalizations to show
pleasure; Plays at
making sounds Babbles
(a repeated series of
sounds)

Shows listening
Responds to own name
selectivity
with vocalizations;
(voluntary control
Imitates the melody of
over responses to
utterances; Uses jargon
sounds); Listens to
(own language); Has
music or singing
gestures (shakes head
with interest;
for no); Has exclamation
Recognizes “no,”
(“oh-oh”); Plays
“hot,” own name;
language games (pat-aLooks at pictures
cake, peekaboo)
being named for
up to 1 min;
Listens to speech
without being
distracted by other
sounds

12–18 mo Single- Shows gross
Uses single words (mean
Word
discriminations
age of first word is 11
between dissimilar
mo; by age 18 mo, child
sounds (bells vs.
is using up to 20 words);
dog vs. horn vs.
“Talks” to toys, self, or


<<<PAGE 2799>>>
mother’s or father’s
voice);
Understands basic
body parts, names
of common
objects; Acquires
understanding of
some new words
each week; Can
identify simple
objects (baby, ball,
etc.) from a group
of objects or
pictures;
Understands up to
150 words by age
18 mo

others using long
patterns of jargon and
occasional words;
Approximately 25% of
utterances are
intelligible; All vowels
articulated correctly;
Initial and final
consonants often
omitted

12–24 mo TwoWord
Messages

Responds to simple Uses two-word utterances
directions (“Give
(“Mommy sock,” “all
me the ball”)
gone,” “ball here”);
Imitates environmental
Responds to action
sounds in play (“moo,”
commands (“Come
“mmm, mmm,” etc.);
here,” “Sit down”)
Refers to self by name,
Understands
begins to use pronouns;
pronouns (me,
Echoes two or more last
him, her, you)
words of sentences;
Begins to understand
Begins to use three-word
complex sentences
telegraphic utterances
(“When we go to
(“all gone ball,” “me go
the store, I’ll buy
now”); Utterances 26–
you some candy”)
50% intelligible; Uses
language to ask for
needs

24–36 mo

Understands small

Uses real sentences with


<<<PAGE 2800>>>
Grammar
Formation

36–54 mo
Grammar
Development

body parts (elbow,
chin, eyebrow);
Understands family
name categories
(grandma, baby)
Understands size
(little one, big one)
Understands most
adjectives
Understands
functions (why do
we eat, why do we
sleep)

grammatical function
words (can, will, the, a);
Usually announces
intentions before acting
“Conversations” with
other children, usually
just monologues Jargon
and echolalia gradually
drop from speech
Increased vocabulary
(up to 270 words at 2 yr,
895 words at 3 yr);
Speech 50–80%
intelligible P, b, m
articulated correctly;
Speech may show
rhythmic disturbances

Understands
Correct articulation of n, w,
prepositions
ng, h, t, d, k, g; Uses
(under, behind,
language to relate
between)
incidents from the past;
Uses wide range of
Understands many
grammatical forms:
words (up to 3,500
plurals, past tense,
at 3 yr, 5,500 at 4
negatives, questions;
yr)
Plays with language:
Understands cause
rhymes, exaggerates;
and effect (What
Speech 90% intelligible,
do you do when
occasional errors in the
you’re hungry?
ordering of sounds within
cold?)
words; Able to define
Understands
words; Egocentric use of
analogies (Food is
language rare; Can
to eat, milk is to
repeat a 12-syllable
____)
sentence correctly;


<<<PAGE 2801>>>
Some grammatical
errors still occur
55 mo on True
Understands
Uses language to tell
Communication
concepts of
stories, share ideas, and
number, speed,
discuss alternatives;
time, space;
Increasing use of varied
Understands left
grammar; spontaneous
and right;
self-correction of
Understands
grammatical errors;
abstract terms; Is
Stabilizing of articulation
able to categorize
f, v, s, z, l, r, th, and
items into semantic
consonant clusters;
classes
Speech 100% intelligible
Reprinted from Rutter M, Hersov L, eds. Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. London: Blackwell;
1985, with permission.

Language and Cognitive Development. At birth, infants can make
noises, such as crying, but they do not vocalize until about 8 weeks. At that
time, guttural or babbling sounds occur spontaneously, especially in response
to the mother. The persistence and further evolution of children’s
vocalizations depend on parental reinforcement. Language development
occurs in well-delineated stages, as outlined in Table 32-4.
By the end of infancy (about 2 years), infants have transformed reflexes
into voluntary actions that are the building blocks of cognition. They begin to
interact with the environment, to experience feedback from their bodies, and
to become intentional in their actions. By the end of the second year of life,
children begin to use symbolic play and language.
Table 32-5
Piaget’s Stages of Cognitive Development
Period of
Development
Gestational

Cognitive Spatial Stages
and Associated
Concepts

Cognitive
Achievements
Fetus can “learn”


<<<PAGE 2802>>>
sounds and
respond
differentially to them
after birth
Infancy: Birth–
2 yr

Sensorimotor

Infants “think” with
their eyes, ears,
and senses

Birth–1 mo

Reflective; egocentric
(newer research refutes
this)

Newborns can learn to
associate stroking
with sucking

4–8 mo

Secondary circular: looks
for objects partially
hidden

Newborns can learn to
suck to produce
certain visual
displays or music

8–12 mo

Secondary circulation
Can remember for 1coordinated: peek-a-boo,
mo periods
finds hidden objects
Can play with parent
by looking for
partially hidden
objects

12–18 mo

Tertiary circular: explores
properties and drops
objects

Memory improves

18 mo–2 yr

Mental representation,
make-believe play;
memory of objects

Body parts used as
objects
Can stack one object
within another
Remembers hidden
objects
Drops objects over
crib
Knows animal sounds;


<<<PAGE 2803>>>
names objects
Knows body parts and
familiar pictures
Can understand
causes not visible
Early
Childhood:
2–7 yr

Preoperational

2–7 yr

Egocentrism: “I want you to Preschoolers use
eat this too.”
symbols
Animistic: “I’m afraid of the Development of
moon.”
language and
make-believe
Lack of hierarchy: “Where
do these blocks go?”
No sign of logic
Centration: “I want it now, 3-yr-olds can count 2–
not after dinner.”
3 objects; know
colors and age
Irreversibility: “I don’t know
how to go back to that
4-yr-olds can
room.”
fantasize without
concrete props

2–5 yr

Transductive reasoning:
“We have to go this way
because that’s the way
Daddy goes.”

Middle
Childhood:
7–11 yr

Concrete operational

5–6-yr-olds get
humor; understand
good and bad; can
do some chores
7–11-yr-olds have
good memory;
recall; can solve
problems

Hierarchical classification Children begin to think
—arranges cars by types
logically
Reversibility—can play
Understand


<<<PAGE 2804>>>
games backward and
conservation of
forward (e.g., checkers,
matter
triple kings)
Frozen milk same
Conservation—lose two
amount as melted
dimes and look for same Can organize objects
Decentration—worry about
into hierarchies
small details, obsessive Children seem rational
Spatial operations—likes
and organized
models for directions
Horizontal decalage—
conservation of weight,
logic
Transitive inference—
syllogisms; compare
everything, brand names
important
Adolescence:
11–19 yr

Formal operational

11 yr onward

Hypothetical-deductive
Abstraction and
reasoning; adolescent
reason
quick thinking or excuses Can think of all
possibilities
Imaginary audience—
everyone is looking at
them
Personal fable—inflated
opinion of themselves
Propositional thinking—
logic

Jean Piaget (1896–1980), a Swiss psychologist, observed the growing
capacity of young children (including his own) to think and to reason. Table


<<<PAGE 2805>>>
32-5 outlines Piaget’s stages of cognitive development.
Emotional and Social Development. By the age of 3 weeks, infants
imitate the facial movements of adult caregivers. They open their mouths and
thrust out their tongues in response to adults who do the same. By the third
and fourth months of life, we can easily elicit these behaviors. These
imitative behaviors are likely the precursors of the infant’s emotional life.
The smiling response occurs in two phases: the first phase is endogenous
smiling, which occurs spontaneously within the first 2 months and is
unrelated to external stimulation; the second phase is exogenous smiling,
usually stimulated by the mother, and occurs by the 16th week.
The stages of emotional development parallel those of cognitive
development. The caregiving person provides the primary stimulus for both
aspects of mental growth. Human infants depend totally on adults for
survival. Through warm and predictable interactions, an infant’s social and
emotional repertoire expands with the interplay of caregivers’ social
responses (Table 32-6).
Table 32-6
Emotional Development
Stages First
Seen

Emotional Skills

Emotional Behavior

0–2 mo onward Love, evoked by
touching

Social smile and joy
shown

Gestational–
Infancy: 0–2
yr

Fear, evoked by loud
noise

Responds to emotions of
others

Rage, evoked by body
restrictions

All emotions there

Brain pathways for
emotion forming


<<<PAGE 2806>>>
3–4 mo onward Self-regulation of
emotions starts; brain
pathways of emotion
growing

Laughter possible and
more control over
smiles; anger shown

7–12 mo

Self-regulation of
emotion grows

Able to elicit more
responsiveness

Increased intensity of
basic three

Denies to cope with
stress

Shame and pride
appear; envy,
embarrassment
appear
Displaces onto other
children

Some indications of
empathy starting;
expressions of feeling:
“I like you, Daddy” “I’m
sorry”
Likes attention and
approval; enjoys play
alone or next to peers

1–2 yr

Early
Childhood:
2–5 yr
3–6 yr

Can understand causes Empathy increases with
of many emotions
understanding
Can begin to find ways
More response and less
for regulating emotions
reaction; selfand for expressing
regulation: “Use your
them Identifies with
words to say that you
adult to cope
are angry with him”
Aggression becomes
competition
By age 5, shows
sensitivity to criticism
and cares about
feelings of others


<<<PAGE 2807>>>
Middle
Childhood:
5–11 yr
7–11 yr

Ego rules until age 6

Can react to the feelings Empathy becomes
of others
altruism: “I feel so bad
about their fire, I’m
More aware of other’s
going to give them
feelings
some of my things”
Superego dominates

In the first year, infants’ moods are highly variable and intimately related
to internal states such as hunger. Toward the second two-thirds of the first
year, infants’ moods grow increasingly related to external social cues; a
parent can get even a hungry infant to smile. When the infant is internally
comfortable, a sense of interest and pleasure in the world and its primary
caregivers should prevail. Prolonged separation from the mother (or other
primary caregivers) during the second 6 months of life can lead to depression
that may persist into adulthood as part of an individual’s character.
Temperamental Differences
Infants vary in their autonomic reactivity and temperament. Chess and
Thomas identified nine behavioral dimensions in which reliable differences
among infants can be observed (Table 32-7).
In studies of temperament, most temperamental dimensions of individual
children remain stable through adulthood, but some do not persist. This is
likely due to genetic and environmental effects on personality. A complex
interplay exists among the initial characteristics of infants, the mode of
parental interactions, and children’s subsequent behavior. Observations of the
stability and plasticity of certain temperamental traits support the importance
of interactions between genetic endowment (nature) and environmental
experience (nurture) in behavior.
Attachment
Bonding is the term used to describe the intense emotional and psychological


<<<PAGE 2808>>>
relationship a mother develops for her baby. Attachment is the relationship
the baby develops with its caregivers. Infants in the first months after birth
become attuned to social and interpersonal interaction. They show a rapidly
increasing responsivity to the external environment and an ability to form a
special relationship with significant primary caregivers—that is, to form an
attachment. Table 32-8 lists the commonly observed attachment styles.
Harry Harlow. Harry Harlow studied social learning and the effects of
social isolation on monkeys. Harlow placed newborn rhesus monkeys with
two types of surrogate mothers—one a wire-mesh surrogate with a feeding
bottle and the other a wire-mesh surrogate covered with terry cloth. The
monkeys preferred the terry-cloth surrogates, which provided contact and
comfort, to the feeding surrogate. (When hungry, the infant monkeys would
go to the feeding bottle but then would quickly return to the terry-cloth
surrogate.) When frightened, monkeys raised with terry-cloth surrogates
showed intense clinging behavior and appeared to be comforted, whereas
those raised with wire-mesh surrogates gained no comfort and appeared to be
disorganized. The results of Harlow’s experiments suggest that infant
attachment is not merely the result of feeding.
Table 32-7
Temperament—Newborn to 6 Years
Dimension

Description

Activity level

Percent of time spent in activities

Distractibility

Degree to which stimuli are allowed to alter
behavior

Adaptability

Ease moving into change

Attention span

Amount of time spent on attending

Intensity

Energy level

Threshold of
responsiveness

Intensity required for response


<<<PAGE 2809>>>
Quality of mood

Amount positive compared to amount
negative behavior

Rhythmicity

Regulation of functions

Approach/withdrawal

Response to new situations

Table 32-8
Types of Attachment
Secure Attachment

Children show fewer adjustment problems;
however, these children have typically
received more consistent and
developmentally appropriate parenting for
most of their life. The parents of securely
attached children are likely better able to
maintain these aspects of parenting
through a divorce. Given that the family
factors that lead to divorce also impact the
children, there could be fewer securely
attached children in divorcing families

Insecure/Avoidant
Attachment

Children become anxious, clinging, and
angry with the parent. These children
typically come from families with adults
who were also insecurely attached to their
families and, thus, were unable to provide
the kind of consistency, emotional
responsiveness, and care that securely
attached parents could offer. Such parents
have a more difficult time with divorce, and
are more likely to become rejecting.

Insecure/Ambivalent
Attachment

Children generally are raised with
disorganized, neglecting, and inattentive
parenting. The parents are even less able
to provide stability and psychological


<<<PAGE 2810>>>
strength for them after a divorce and, as a
result, the children are even more likely to
become clinging but inconsolable in their
distress, as well as to act out, suffer mood
swings, and become oversensitive to
stress.
Both types of surrogate-reared monkeys were subsequently unable to
adjust to life in a monkey colony and had extraordinary difficulty learning to
mate. When impregnated, the female monkeys failed to mother their young.
John Bowlby. John Bowlby studied the attachment of infants to mothers
and concluded that early separation of infants from their mothers had severe
adverse effects on children’s emotional and intellectual development. He
described attachment behavior, which develops during the first year of life, as
the maintenance of physical contact between the mother and child when the
child is hungry, frightened, or in distress.
Mary Ainsworth. Mary Ainsworth expanded on Bowlby’s observations and
found that the interaction between mother and baby during the attachment
period influences the baby’s current and future behavior significantly. Many
observers believe that patterns of infant attachment affect future adult
emotional relationships. Patterns of attachment vary among babies; for
example, some babies signal or cry less than others. Sensitive responsiveness
to infant signals, such as cuddling the baby when it cries, causes infants to
cry less in later months. Close bodily contact with the mother when the baby
signals for her fosters self-reliance, rather than clinging dependence.
Unresponsive mothers produce anxious babies.
Ainsworth also confirmed that attachment serves to reduce anxiety. What
she called the secured base effect enables a child to move away from the
attachment figure and explore the environment. Inanimate objects, such as a
teddy bear or a blanket (called the transitional object by Donald Winnicott),
also serve as a secure base, one that often accompanies children as they
investigate the world. A growing body of literature derived from direct
observation of mother–infant interactions and longitudinal studies has
expanded on and refined Ainsworth’s original descriptions. Maternal


<<<PAGE 2811>>>
sensitivity and responsiveness are the main determinants of secure
attachment. However, when the attachment is insecure, the type of insecurity
(avoidant, anxious, or ambivalent) is determined by infant temperament.
Overall, male infants are less likely to have secure attachments and are more
vulnerable to changes in maternal sensitivity than are female infants.
The birth of a second child decreases the attachment of the firstborn child.
This decrease is most notable when the firstborn is 2 to 5 years of age as
opposed to younger. Not surprisingly, the extent of the decrease also depends
on the mother’s sense of security, confidence, and mental health.
Social Deprivation Syndromes and Maternal Neglect. Investigators,
especially René Spitz, have long documented the severe developmental
retardation that accompanies maternal rejection and neglect. Infants in
institutions characterized by low staff-to-infant ratios and frequent turnover
of personnel tend to display marked developmental retardation, even with
adequate physical care and freedom from infection. The same infants, placed
in adequate foster or adoptive care, exhibit marked acceleration in
development.
Fathers and Attachment. Babies become attached to fathers as well as to
mothers, but the attachment is different. Generally, mothers hold babies for
caregiving, and fathers hold babies for purposes of play. Given a choice of
either parent after separation, infants usually go to the mother, but if the
mother is unavailable, they turn to the father for comfort. Babies raised in
extended families or with multiple caregivers can establish many
attachments.
Stranger Anxiety. A developmentally expected fear of strangers first
appears in infants at about 26 weeks of age and is more fully developed by 32
weeks. At the approach of a stranger, infants cry and cling to their mothers.
Babies exposed to only one caregiver are more likely to have stranger anxiety
than babies exposed to a variety of caregivers. Stranger anxiety likely results
from a baby’s growing ability to distinguish caregivers from all other
persons.
Separation anxiety, which occurs between 10 and 18 months of age, is
related to stranger anxiety but is not identical to it. Separation from the


<<<PAGE 2812>>>
person to whom the infant is attached precipitates separation anxiety.
Stranger anxiety, however, occurs even when the infant is in the mother’s
arms. The infant learns to separate as it starts to crawl and move away from
the mother, but the infant continually looks back and frequently returns to the
mother for reassurance.
Margaret Mahler (1897–1985) proposed a theory to describe how young
children acquire a sense of identity separate from that of their mothers’. Her
observations of children and their mothers lead to her theory of separationindividuation. Table 32-9 lists Mahler’s stages of separation-individuation.
Table 32-9
Stages of Separation-Individuation Proposed by Mahler
1. Normal autism (birth–2 mo)
Periods of sleep outweigh periods of arousal in a state
reminiscent of intrauterine life.
2. Symbiosis (2–5 mo)
Developing perceptual abilities gradually enable infants to
distinguish the inner from the outer world; mother–infant is
perceived as a single fused entity.
3. Differentiation (5–10 mo)
Progressive neurologic development and increased alertness
draw infants’ attention away from self to the outer world.
Physical and psychological distinctiveness from the mother is
gradually appreciated.
4. Practicing (10–18 mo)
The ability to move autonomously increases children’s
exploration of the outer world.
5. Rapprochement (18–24 mo)
As children slowly realize their helplessness and dependence,
the need for independence alternates with the need for
closeness. Children move away from their mothers and come
back for reassurance.
6. Object constancy (2–5 yr)
Children gradually comprehend and are reassured by the
permanence of mother and other important people, even


<<<PAGE 2813>>>
when not in their presence.
Infant Care
Clinicians are now beginning to view infants as important actors in the family
drama, ones who partly determine its course. Infants’ behavior controls
mothers’ behavior, just as mothers’ behavior modulates infants’ behavior. A
calm, smiling, predictable infant is a powerful reward for tender maternal
care. A jittery, irregular, irritable infant tries a mother’s patience. When a
mother’s capacity for giving is marginal, such infant traits may cause her to
turn away from her child and thus complicate the child’s already-troubled
beginnings.
Parental Fit
Parental fit describes how well the mother or father relates to the newborn or
developing infant; the idea takes into account the temperamental
characteristics of both parent and child. Each newborn has innate
psychophysiological characteristics, which are known collectively as
temperament. Chess and Thomas identified a range of standard
temperamental patterns, from the difficult child at one end of the spectrum to
the easy child at the other end.
Difficult children, who make up 10 percent of all children, have a
hyperalert physiologic makeup. They overreact to stimuli (cry easily at loud
noises), sleep poorly, eat at unpredictable times, and are difficult to comfort.
Easy children, who make up 40 percent of all children, are regular in eating,
eliminating, and sleeping; they are flexible, can adapt to change and new
stimuli with a minimum of distress, and are easily comforted when they cry.
The other 50 percent of children are mixtures of these two types. The difficult
child is harder to raise and places higher demands on the parent than the easy
child. Chess and Thomas used the term goodness of fit to characterize the
harmonious and consonant interaction between a mother and a child in their
motivations, capacities, and styles of behavior. Poor fit is likely to lead to
distorted development and maladaptive functioning. A difficult child must be
recognized because parents of such infants often have feelings of inadequacy
and believe that they are doing something wrong to account for the child’s
difficulty in sleeping and eating and their problems comforting the child.


<<<PAGE 2814>>>
Also, most difficult children have emotional disturbances later in life.
Good-Enough Mothering. Winnicott believed that infants begin life in a
state of nonintegration, with unconnected and diffuse experiences, and that
mothers provide the relationship that enables infants’ incipient selves to
emerge. Mothers supply a holding environment in which infants are
contained and experienced. During the last trimester of pregnancy and for the
first few months of a baby’s life, the mother is in a state of primary maternal
preoccupation, absorbed in fantasies about, and experiences with, her baby.
The mother need not be perfect, but she must provide good-enough
mothering. She plays a vital role in bringing the world to the child and
offering empathic anticipation of the infant’s needs. If the mother can
resonate with the infant’s needs, the baby can become attuned to its bodily
functions and drives that are the basis for the gradually evolving sense of self.

TODDLER PERIOD
Accelerated motor and intellectual development occur in the second year.
The ability to walk gives toddlers some control over their actions; this
mobility enables children to determine when to approach and when to
withdraw. The acquisition of speech profoundly extends their horizons.
Typically, children learn to say “no” before they learn to say “yes.” Toddlers’
negativism is vital to the development of independence, but if it persists,
oppositional behavior connotes a problem.
Learning language is a crucial task in the toddler period. Vocalizations
become distinct, and toddlers can name a few objects and make needs known
in one or two words. Near the end of the second year and into the third year,
toddlers sometimes use short sentences. The pace of language development
varies considerably from child to child, and although a small number of
children are genuinely late developers, most child experts recommend a
hearing test if the child is not making two-word sentences by age 2.
Developmental Milestones in Toddlers
Language and Cognitive Development. Toddlers begin to listen to
explanations that can help them tolerate delay. They create new behaviors


<<<PAGE 2815>>>
from old ones (originality) and engage in symbolic activities, for instance,
using words and playing with dolls when the dolls represent something, such
as a feeding sequence. Toddlers have varied capacities for concentration and
self-regulation.
Emotional and Social Development. In the second year, pleasure and
displeasure become further differentiated. Social referencing is often apparent
at this age; the child looks to parents and others for emotional cues about how
to respond to novel events. Toddlers show exploratory excitement, assertive
pleasure, and pleasure in discovery and in developing new behavior (e.g.,
new games), including teasing and surprising or fooling the parent (e.g.,
hiding). The toddler has capacities for an organized demonstration of love, as
when the toddler runs up and hugs, smiles, and kisses the parent at the same
time, and of protest when the toddler turns away, cries, bangs, bites, hits,
yells, and kicks. Comfort with family and apprehension with strangers may
increase. Anxiety appears to be related to disapproval and the loss of a loved
caregiver and can be disorganizing.
Sexual Development. Sexual differentiation is evident from birth when
parents start dressing and treating infants differently because of the
expectations evoked by sex typing. Through imitation, reward, and coercion,
children assume the behaviors that their cultures define as appropriate for
their sexual roles. Children exhibit curiosity about anatomical sex. When
their curiosity is recognized as healthy and elicits age-appropriate replies,
children acquire a sense of the wonder of life and are comfortable with their
roles. If the subject of sex is taboo and parents rebuff children’s questions,
shame and discomfort may result.
Gender identity, the conviction of being male or female, begins to manifest
at 18 months of age and is often fixed by 24 to 30 months. It was once widely
believed that gender identity was primarily a function of social learning. John
Money reported on children with ambiguous or damaged external genitalia
who were raised as the sex opposite to their chromosomal sex. Long-term
follow-up of those individuals suggests that the major part of gender identity
is innate and that rearing may not affect the genetic diathesis.
Gender role describes the behavior that society deems appropriate for one
sex or another, and it is not surprising that significant cultural differences


<<<PAGE 2816>>>
exist. There may be different expectations for boys and girls in what and with
whom they play, their tone of voice, the expression of emotions, and how
they dress. Nevertheless, some generalizations are possible. Boys are more
likely than girls to engage in rough and tumble play. Mothers talk more to
girls than to boys, and by the time the child is 2 years of age, fathers
generally pay more attention to boys. Many educated, middle-class parents
determined to raise nonsexist children are startled to see their children’s
determined preference for sex-stereotyped toys: girls want to play with dolls
and boys with guns.
Toilet Training. The second year of life is a period of increasing social
demands on children. Toilet training serves as a paradigm of the family’s
general training practices; that is, the parent who is overly severe in the area
of toilet training is likely to be punitive and restrictive in other areas also.
Control of daytime urination is usually complete by the age of 2½, and
control of nighttime urination is usually complete by the age of 4 years. Since
1900, the pendulum has swung between extremes of permissiveness and
control in toilet training. The trend in the United States has been toward
delayed training, but in the last few years, this trend appears to be shifting
back to early training.
Toddlers may have sleep difficulties related to fear of the dark, which may
be helped with a nightlight. Most toddlers generally sleep about 12 hours a
day, including a 2-hour nap. Parents must be aware that children of this age
may need reassurance before going to bed and that the average 2-year-old
takes about 30 minutes to fall asleep.
Parenting Challenges. In infancy, the primary responsibility for parents is
to meet the infant’s needs sensitively and consistently. The parental task in
the toddler stage requires firmness about the boundaries of acceptable
behavior and encouragement of the child’s progressive emancipation. Parents
must be careful not to be too authoritarian at this stage; children must be
allowed to operate for themselves and to learn from their mistakes and must
be protected and assisted when challenges are beyond their abilities.
During the toddler period, children are likely to struggle for the exclusive
affection and attention of their parents. They may compete with siblings or
one or another parent for the starring role in the family. Although children are


<<<PAGE 2817>>>
beginning to be able to share, they do so reluctantly. When the demands for
exclusive possession are not resolved effectively, the result is likely to be
jealous competitiveness in relationships with peers and lovers. The fantasies
aroused by the struggle lead to fear of retaliation and displacement of fear
onto external objects. In an equitable, loving family, a child elaborates on a
moral system of ethical rights. Parents need to balance between punishment
and permissiveness and set realistic limits on a toddler’s behavior.

PRESCHOOL PERIOD
Marked physical and emotional growth occurs during the preschool period.
Generally, between 2 and 3 years of age, children reach half their adult
height. The 20 baby teeth are in place at the beginning of the stage, and by
the end, they begin to fall out. Children are ready to enter school by the time
the stage ends at age 5 or 6. They have mastered the tasks of primary
socialization—to control their bowels and urine, to dress and feed
themselves, and to control their tears and temper outbursts, at least most of
the time.
The term preschool for the age group of 2½ to 6 years may be a misnomer;
many children are already in school-like settings, such as preschool nurseries
and daycare centers, where working mothers must often place their children.
Preschool education can be valuable, but stressing academic advancement too
far beyond a child’s capabilities can be counterproductive.
Developmental Milestones in Preschoolers
Language and Cognitive Development. In the preschool period,
children’s use of language expands, and they use sentences. Individual words
have regular and consistent meanings at the beginning of the period, and
children begin to think symbolically. In general, however, their thinking is
egocentric; they cannot place themselves in the position of another child and
are incapable of empathy. Children think intuitively and prelogically and do
not understand causal relations.
Emotional and Social Behavior. At the start of the preschool period,
children can express such complex emotions as love, unhappiness, jealousy,


<<<PAGE 2818>>>
and envy, both preverbally and verbally. Their emotions are still easily
influenced by somatic events, such as tiredness and hunger. Although they
still think mostly egocentrically, children’s capacity for cooperation and
sharing is emerging. Various losses, such as of a loved person or approval,
may cause anxiety. Although still potentially disorganizing, preschool
children can tolerate anxiety better than when they were younger. Four-yearolds are learning to share and to have concern for others and may express
feelings of tenderness.
By the end of the preschool period, children have many relatively stable
emotions. The child balances expansiveness, curiosity, pride, and gleeful
excitement related to the self and the family with coyness, shyness,
fearfulness, jealousy, and envy. Shame and humiliation are evident.
Capacities for empathy and love are developed but are fragile and quickly
lost if competitive or jealous strivings intervene. Anxiety and fears are related
to bodily injury and loss of respect, love, and emerging self-esteem. Guilt
feelings are possible.
Children between the ages of 3 and 6 years are aware of their bodies and
differences between the sexes. Their physical awareness extends beyond
genitalia. Children may be preoccupied with illness or injury, and some call
this the “the Band-Aid phase.” Every injury must be examined and taken care
of by a parent.
Children develop a division between what they want and what others tell
them to do. The division increases until a gap grows between their set of
expanded desires, their exuberance at unlimited growth, and their parents’
restrictions; they gradually turn parental values into self-obedience, selfguidance, and self-punishment.
At the end of the preschool stage, the child’s conscience is evolving. The
development of a conscience sets the tone for the moral sense of “right and
wrong.” Until about 7 years of age, children typically experience rules as
“absolute” and as existing for their own sake. They do not understand that
more than one point of view on a moral issue may exist; a violation of the
rules calls for absolute retribution—that is, children have the notion of
immanent justice.
SIBLING RIVALRY. In the preschool period, children relate to others in new

ways. The birth of a sibling (a common occurrence during this time) tests a


<<<PAGE 2819>>>
preschool child’s capacity for further cooperation and sharing but may also
evoke sibling rivalry, which is most likely to occur at this time. Sibling
rivalry depends on child-rearing practice. Favoritism, for any reason,
commonly aggravates such rivalry. Children who get special treatment
because they are gifted, are defective in some way, or have a preferred gender
are likely to receive angry feelings from their siblings. Experiences with
siblings can influence growing children’s relationships with peers and
authority; for example, a problem may result if the needs of a new baby
prevent the mother from attending to a firstborn child’s needs. If not handled
properly, the displacement of the firstborn can be a traumatic event.
In the preschool years, children begin to distinguish reality from
fantasy, and play reflects this growing awareness. Pretend games are popular
and playfully help test real-life situations. Dramatic play in which children
act out a role is typical. One-to-one play relationships advance to complicated
patterns with rivalries, secrets, and two-against-one intrigues. Children’s play
behavior reflects their level of social development.
Between 2½ and 3 years, children commonly engage in parallel play,
solitary play alongside another child with no interaction between them. By
age 3, play is often associative, that is, playing with the same toys in pairs or
small groups, but still with no real interaction among them. By age 4,
children are usually able to share and engage in cooperative play. Real
interactions and taking turns become possible.
Between 3 and 6 years of age, drawings may trace growth. A child’s first
drawing of a human being is a circular line with marks for the mouth, nose,
and eyes; they add ears and hair later; arms and stick-like fingers appear next,
and then legs appear. Last to appear is a torso in proportion to the rest of the
body. Intelligent children can deal with details in their art. Drawings express
creativity throughout a child’s development: They are representational and
formal in early childhood, make use of perspective in middle childhood, and
become abstract and affect-laden in adolescence. Drawings also reflect
children’s body image concepts and sexual and aggressive impulses.
PLAY.

IMAGINARY COMPANIONS. Imaginary companions most often appear during

preschool years, usually in children with above-average intelligence and
usually in the form of persons. Imaginary companions may also be things,


<<<PAGE 2820>>>
such as anthropomorphized toys. Some studies suggest that up to 50 percent
of children between the ages of 3 and 10 years have imaginary companions at
one time or another. Their significance is not clear, but these figures are
usually friendly, relieve loneliness, and reduce anxiety. In most instances,
imaginary companions disappear by age 12, but they can occasionally persist
into adulthood.

MIDDLE YEARS
The period between age 6 and puberty is the middle years. During this time,
children enter elementary school. The formal demands for academic learning
and accomplishment become significant determinants of further personality
development.
Developmental Milestones in School-Age Children
Language and Cognitive Development. In the middle years, language
expresses complex ideas with relations among several elements. Logical
exploration tends to dominate fantasy, and children show an increased
interest in rules and orderliness and an increased capacity for self-regulation.
During this period, children’s conceptual skills develop, and thinking
becomes organized and logical. The ability to concentrate is well established
by age 9 or 10, and by the end of the period, children begin to think in
abstract terms. Improved gross motor coordination and muscle strength
enable children to write fluently and draw artistically. They are also capable
of complex motor tasks and activities, such as tennis, gymnastics, golf,
baseball, and skateboarding.
Recent evidence has shown that changes in thinking and reasoning during
the middle years result from maturational changes in the brain. Children are
now capable of increased independence, learning, and socialization. Theorists
consider moral development a gradual, stepwise process spanning childhood,
adolescence, and young adulthood.
In the middle years, both girls and boys make new identifications with
other adults, such as teachers and counselors. These identifications may so
influence girls that their goals of wanting to marry and have babies, as their
mothers did, may be combined with a desire for a career or may be postponed


<<<PAGE 2821>>>
or abandoned entirely.
Girls who cannot identify with their mothers or whose fathers are overly
attached may become fixated at about a 6-year-old level; as a result, they may
fear men or women or both or become seductively close to them. A similar
situation can occur in boys who have been unable to identify successfully
with fathers who were aloof, brutal, or absent. As a result, boys may enter
this period with a variety of problems. They may be fearful of men, unsure of
their sense of masculinity, or unwilling to leave their mothers (sometimes
manifested by a school phobia); they may lack initiative and be unable to
master school tasks, thus incurring academic problems.
The school-age period is a time when peer interaction assumes significant
importance. Interest in relationships outside the family takes precedence over
those within the family. Nevertheless, a special relationship exists with the
same-sex parent, with whom children identify and who is now an ideal and a
role model.
Empathy and concern for others begin to emerge early in the middle years;
by the time children are 9 or 10, they have well-developed capacities for love,
compassion, and sharing. They have a capacity for long-term, stable
relationships with family, peers, and friends, including best friends. Emotions
about sexual differences begin to emerge as either excitement or shyness with
the opposite sex. School-age children prefer to interact with children of the
same sex. Although the middle years have sometimes been referred to as a
latency period—a moratorium on psychosexual exploration and play until the
eruption of sexual impulses with puberty—it is now recognized that a
considerable amount of sexual interest continues through these years. Sex
play and curiosity are typical, especially among boys, but also among girls.
Boys compare genitals and sometimes engage in group or mutual
masturbation. Interest in anal humor and toilet jokes is also typical. Children
this age often start using sexual and excretory words as expletives.
BEST FRIEND. Harry Stack Sullivan postulated that a buddy, or best friend, is

an influential phenomenon during the school years. By about 10 years of age,
children develop a close same-sex relationship, which Sullivan believed is
necessary for further healthy psychological growth. Moreover, Sullivan
believed that the absence of a close friend during the middle years of
childhood is an early harbinger of schizophrenia.


<<<PAGE 2822>>>
SCHOOL REFUSAL. Some children refuse to go to school at this time, generally

because of separation anxiety. A fearful mother may transmit her fear of
separation to a child, or a child who has not resolved dependence needs
panics at the idea of separation. School refusal is usually not an isolated
problem; children with the problem typically avoid many other social
situations.
Sex Role Development
Persons’ sex roles are similar to their gender identity; persons see themselves
as male or female. The sex-role also involves identification with culturally
acceptable masculine or feminine ways of behaving, but changing
expectations in society (particularly in the United States) of what constitutes
masculine and feminine behavior can create ambiguity.
Parents react differently to their male and female children. Independence,
physical play, and aggressiveness are encouraged in boys; dependence,
verbalization, and physical intimacy are encouraged in girls. Nowadays,
however, boys are encouraged to verbalize their feelings and to pursue
interests traditionally associated with girls, whereas girls are encouraged to
pursue careers traditionally dominated by men and to participate in
competitive sports. As society grows more tolerant in its expectations of the
sexes, roles become less rigid, and opportunities for boys and girls enlarge
and broaden.
Biologically, boys are more physically aggressive than girls; and parental
expectations, particularly the expectations of fathers, reinforce this trait.
Differences also exist between boys and girls in the influence of persons
outside the family. Girls tend to respond to the expectations and opinions of
girls and teachers of either sex but to ignore boys. Boys, on the other hand,
tend to respond to other boys but to ignore girls and teachers.
Dreams and Sleep
Children’s dreams can have a profound effect on behavior. During the first
year of life, when reality and fantasy are not yet fully differentiated, dreams
may be experienced as if they were, or could be, real. At age 3, many
children believe dreams are shared directly by more than one person, but
most 4-year-olds understand that dreams are unique to each person. Children


<<<PAGE 2823>>>
view dreams either with pleasure or, as is most often reported, with fear. The
dream content depends on the children’s life experience, developmental
stage, mechanisms used during dreaming, and sex.
Disturbing dreams are most common when children are 3, 6, and 10 years
of age. Two-year-old children may dream about being bitten or chased; at the
age of 4, they may have many animal dreams and also dream of persons who
either protect or destroy. At age 5 or 6, dreams of being killed or injured, of
flying and being in cars, and of ghosts become prominent; the role of
conscience, moral values, and increasing conflicts are concerned with these
themes. In early childhood, aggressive dreams rarely seem to occur; instead,
dreamers are in danger, a state that perhaps reflects children’s dependent
position. By about the age of 5, children realize that their dreams are not real;
before then, they believed them to be real events. By age 7, children know
that they create their dreams themselves.
Between the ages of 3 and 6 years, children usually want to keep their
bedroom door open or to have a nightlight, so that they can either maintain
contact with their parents or view the room in a realistic, nonfearful way. At
times, children resist going to sleep to avoid dreaming. Disorders associated
with falling asleep, therefore, are often connected with dreaming. Children
often create rituals to protect themselves in the withdrawal from the world of
reality into the world of sleep. Parasomnias, such as sleepwalking, sleep
talking, enuresis (bed-wetting), and night terrors, are common at this age.
They usually occur during stage 4 sleep when dreaming is minimal, and they
do not indicate emotional trouble or underlying psychopathology. Most
children grow out of parasomnias by adolescence.
Periods of REM occur about 60 percent of the time during the first few
weeks of life, a period when infants sleep two-thirds of the time. Premature
babies sleep even longer than full-term babies, and a higher proportion of
their sleep is REM sleep. The sleep-wake cycle of newborns is about 3 hours
long. Adults spend about 20 percent of sleep dreaming. Even newborns have
brain activity similar to that of the dreaming state.
Birth Spacing
For women in the United States, 10 percent of conceptions that lead to live
births are considered unwanted, and 20 percent are wanted but considered ill-


<<<PAGE 2824>>>
timed.
Children born close together have higher rates of premature or
underweight births and malnutrition; they develop more slowly and are at
increased risk of contracting and dying from childhood infectious diseases.
Studies have shown that a mother and child’s health risks are reduced when
the child is born 3 to 5 years after a previous birth. Compared with 24- to 29month intervals, children born in 36- to 41-month intervals have a 28 percent
reduction in stunting and a 29 percent reduction of low birth weight. Women
who have children at 27- to 32-month intervals are 1.3 times more likely to
avoid anemia, 1.7 times more likely to avoid third-trimester bleeding, and 2.5
times more likely to survive childbirth.
Birth Order
The effects of birth order vary. Firstborn children may be more highly valued
or given more attention than subsequent children. Firstborn children appear to
be more achievement-oriented and motivated to please their parents than
subsequent children born to the same parents. Some studies show that people
in certain competitive occupational areas, such as architecture, accounting,
and engineering, tend to be firstborn children.
Second and third children have the advantage of their parents’ previous
experience. Younger children also learn from their older siblings. For
example, they may show a more sophisticated use of pronouns at an earlier
age than firstborns did. When spacing children too tightly, however, there
may not be enough time for each child. The arrival of new children in the
family affects not only the parents but also the siblings. Firstborn children
may resent the birth of a new sibling, who threatens their sole claim on
parental attention. In some cases, regressive behavior, such as enuresis or
thumb-sucking, occurs.
Some researchers have suggested that there is a relationship between birth
order and personality. However, extensive multicohort analyses have not
supported this.
Children and Divorce
Many children live in homes in which divorce has occurred. Approximately
30 to 50 percent of all children in the United States live in homes in which


<<<PAGE 2825>>>
one parent (usually the mother) is the sole head of the household, and 61
percent of all children born in any given year can expect to live with only one
parent before they reach the age of 18 years. A child’s age at the time of the
parents’ divorce affects the child’s reaction to the divorce. Immediately after
a divorce, an increase in behavioral and emotional disorders appears in all
age groups. Infants do not understand anything about separation or divorce;
however, they do notice changes in their parents’ responses to them and may
experience changes in their eating or sleeping patterns; have bowel problems;
and seem more fretful, fearful, or anxious. Children 3 to 6 years of age may
not understand what is happening, and those who do understand often assume
that they are somehow responsible for the divorce. Older children, especially
adolescents, comprehend the situation and may believe that they could have
prevented the divorce had they intervened in some way, but they are still hurt,
angry, and critical of their parents’ behavior.
Some children harbor the fantasy that their parents will reunite. Such
children may show animosity toward a parent’s real or potential new mate.
Adaptation to the effects of divorce in children typically takes several years;
however, up to about one-third of children from divorced homes may have
lasting psychological trauma. Among boys, physical aggression is a common
sign of distress. Adolescents tend to spend more time away from the parental
home after the divorce. Children who adapt best to divorce are typically in a
situation in which both parents make genuine efforts to spend time and relate
to the child despite the child’s potential anger about the divorce. The predivorce stability of the household is another influence, as are economic
factors. To facilitate adaptation in children, a divorced couple who are
amicable and avoid arguing with one another is most likely to succeed. Table
32-10 lists the potential psychological effects of divorce on children.
Table 32-10
Effects of Divorce on Children
• Children in homes with absent fathers are more likely to suffer from
antisocial personality disorder, child conduct disorder, and
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.
• The divorce rate of children of divorced parents doubles that of
children from stable families.


<<<PAGE 2826>>>
• Children of divorce are far more likely to be delinquent, engage in
premarital sex, and bear children out of wedlock during
adolescence and young adulthood.
• Children from divorced homes function more poorly than children
from continuously married parents across a variety of domains,
including academic achievement, social relations, and conduct
problems.
• Children from divorced homes have more psychological problems
than those from homes disrupted by the death of a parent.
• Children from disrupted marriages experience greater risk of injury,
asthma, headaches, and speech defects than children from intact
families.
• Children of divorce tend to be impulsive, irritable, socially
withdrawn, lonely, unhappy, anxious, and insecure.
• Children of divorce, especially boys, are more aggressive than
children whose parents stayed married.
• Suicide rates for children of divorce are much higher than for
children from intact families.
• Twenty to 25% have significant adjustment problems as teenagers
Data adapted from Americans for Divorce Reform, Arlington, Virginia. Table by Nitza Jones.

Table 32-11
Types of Step-Families
Neo-Traditional • Resembles “traditional” families
Families
• Absent biologic parent is included at times.
• Discipline, boundaries and limits, and
expectations are discussed openly.
• Family coalitions and “side-taking” are better
avoided.
Romantic
Families

• Expect to be a “traditional family” immediately
• The absent biologic parent is expected to
disappear and is often criticized.
• Stepparent/stepchild difficulties are common.


<<<PAGE 2827>>>
• Stress is unbearable.
• Few open and frank discussions about problems
Matriarchal
Families

• Run by a highly competent mom and her
companion follows
• Companion is a “buddy” to the children, not to the
parent.
• Birth of a step-sibling causes problems.

Stepparents. Although many possible scenarios that may occur after a
divorce and remarriage, several potential scenarios have been outlined in
Table 32-11. These include (1) Neo-traditional, (2) Romantic, and (3)
Matriarchal. When remarriage occurs, children must learn to adapt to the
stepparent and the “blended” family. Adaptation is often challenging,
especially when a child feels that a stepparent is nonsupportive, resents the
stepchild, or favors his or her natural children. Of step-families, 25 percent
tend to dissolve within the first 2 years, whereas 75 percent grow to find a
new balance in their blended family. A biologic child born to a new couple
with a stepchild already in the home may receive more attention than the
stepchild, leading to sibling rivalry. After 5 years, about 20 percent of
adolescents in step-families suggest that they move out and try living with
their other biologic parent.
Family Factors in Child Development
Family Stability. Parents and children living under the same roof in
harmonious interaction is the expected cultural norm in Western society.
Within this framework, childhood development presumably proceeds most
expeditiously. Deviations from the norm, such as divorced- and single-parent
families, are associated with a broad range of problems in children, including
low self-esteem, increased risk of child abuse, and increased incidence of
divorce when they eventually marry, and increased incidence of mental
disorders, particularly depressive disorders and antisocial personality disorder
as adults. Why some children from unstable homes are less affected than
others (or even immune to these deleterious effects) is of great interest.
Michael Rutter postulates that sex (boys are more affected than girls), age


<<<PAGE 2828>>>
(older children are less vulnerable than younger ones), and inborn personality
characteristics influence vulnerability. For example, children who have a
placid temperament are less likely to be victims of abuse within a family than
are hyperactive children; they may be less affected by the emotional turmoil
surrounding them.
Adverse Events. It is now well known that significant adverse events,
especially in early childhood, such as sexual and physical abuse, neglect, or
loss of a parent, interact with genetic background in a given child and
influences the trajectory of development. For example, as mentioned earlier,
early severe maltreatment such as sexual abuse increases the risk of multiple
psychosocial difficulties and the emergence of many psychiatric disorders.
Among young maltreated children, those with particular genetics, that is, who
have the “short” variant of the serotonin transporter gene (short 5-HTTLPR
polymorphism), may be more vulnerable to chronic depression in adulthood.
This example of specific gene–environment interaction plays a vital role in a
child’s development as well as in the risk for future psychopathology.
Current investigations are also seeking insight into what factors lead to
resilience in youth exposed to adverse events, yet maintain allostasis, that is,
stability in the face of stressful events. Hormones of the adrenal glands,
thyroid, gonads, as well as metabolic hormones, play a role in the brain’s
ability to maintain stability upon exposure to stress, and the prefrontal cortex,
hippocampus, and amygdala play critical roles in regulating emotionality,
aggression, and resilience.
Daycare Centers. The role of daycare centers for children is under
continuous investigation, and various studies have produced different results.
One study found that children placed in daycare centers before the age of 5
are less assertive and less adequately toilet trained than home-reared children.
Another study found that children in daycare to be more advanced in social
and cognitive development than children who were not in daycare. The
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development reported that 4½year-olds who had spent more than 30 hours a week in child care were more
demanding, more aggressive, and more noncompliant than those raised at
home and showed higher cognitive skills, particularly in math and reading.
These same children continued to score higher in math and reading skills but


<<<PAGE 2829>>>
had more poor work habits and social skills in third grade. The researchers
were careful to note that this behavior was within the normal range, however.
All studies of daycare must take into account the quality of both the
daycare center and the homes from which children come. For example, a
child from a disadvantaged home may be better off at a daycare center than a
child from an advantaged home. Similarly, a woman who wishes to leave
home to work for financial or other reasons and cannot do so may resent
remaining in the home in a child-rearing role, which may adversely affect the
child.
Parenting Styles. How children are raised, vary considerably between and
within cultures. Rutter has clustered this diversity into four general styles.
Subsequent research has confirmed that certain styles tend to correlate with
particular behavior in the children, although the outcomes are by no means
absolute. The authoritarian style, characterized by strict, inflexible rules, can
lead to low self-esteem, unhappiness, and social withdrawal. The indulgentpermissive style, which includes little or no limit setting coupled with
unpredictable parental harshness, can lead to low self-reliance, poor impulse
control, and aggression. The indulgent-neglectful style, one of
noninvolvement in the child’s life and rearing, puts the child at risk for low
self-esteem, impaired self-control, and increased aggression. The
authoritative-reciprocal style, marked by firm rules and shared decisionmaking in a warm, loving environment, is believed to be the style most likely
to result in self-reliance, self-esteem, and a sense of social responsibility.
Development and Expression of Psychopathology
The expression of psychopathology in children can be related to both age and
developmental level. Specific developmental disorders, particularly
developmental language disorders, often are diagnosed in the preschool
years. Delayed development of language is a common parental concern.
Children who do not use words by 18 months or phrases by 2½ to 3 years
may need assessment, particularly if they do not appear to understand typical
verbal cues or much language at all. Mild mental retardation or specific
learning problems often are not diagnosed until after the child begins
elementary school. Disruptive behavior disorder will become apparent at that


<<<PAGE 2830>>>
time as the child begins to interact with peers. Similarly, attention-deficit
disorders may only be apparent in school with its need for sustained attention.
Other conditions, particularly schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, are rare in
preschool and school-aged children.

ADOLESCENCE
Adolescence, marked by the physiologic signs and surging sexual hormones
of puberty, is the period of maturation between childhood and adulthood.
Adolescence is a transitional period in which peer relationships deepen,
autonomy in decision-making grows, and they seek intellectual pursuits and
social belonging. Adolescence is mostly a time of exploration and making
choices, a gradual process of working toward an integrated concept of self.
Adolescents are “works in progress,” characterized by increasing ability for
mastery over complex challenges of academic, interpersonal, and emotional
tasks while searching for new interests, talents, and social identities. A body
of growing literature of the specific mechanisms of brain development in
adolescence has increased our understanding of broadening social skills in
adolescents, in addition to the three expected developmental changes in
adolescence: increased risk-taking, increased sexual behavior, and a move
toward peer affiliation rather than a primary family attachment. The total
cortical gray matter is at its peak at about age 11 years in girls and 13 years in
boys, which enhances the ability to understand subtle social situations,
control impulses, make long-range plans, and think ahead. White matter
volume increases throughout childhood and adolescence, which may allow
for increased “connectivity,” thereby enhancing the abilities of adolescents to
acquire new competencies, such as those needed to master today’s
technology.
What Is Normal Adolescence?
The concept of normality in adolescent development refers to the degree of
psychological adaptation an adolescent achieves while navigating the hurdles
and meeting the milestones characteristic of this period of growth. For up to
approximately 75 percent of youth, adolescence is a period of successful
adaptation to physical, cognitive, and emotional changes, mostly continuous
with their previous functioning. Psychological maladjustment, self-loathing,


<<<PAGE 2831>>>
disturbance of conduct, substance abuse, affective disorders, and other
impairing psychiatric disorders emerge in approximately 20 percent of the
adolescent population.
Adolescent adjustment is continuous with previous psychological function;
thus, psychologically disturbed children are at higher risk for psychiatric
disorders during adolescence. Adolescents with psychiatric disorders are at
increased risk for more significant conflicts with families and for feeling
alienated from their families. Although up to 60 percent of adolescents
endorse occasional distress or a psychiatric symptom, this group of
adolescents functions well academically and with peers and describes
themselves as generally satisfied with their lives.
The developmentalist Erik Erikson characterizes the normative task of
adolescence as identity versus role confusion. The integration of past
experiences with current changes takes place in what Erikson calls ego
identity. Adolescents explore various aspects of their psychological selves by
becoming fans of heroes or other well-known musical or political idols. Some
adolescents appear consumed by their identification with a particular idol,
whereas others are more moderate in their expression. Adolescents who feel
accepted by a peer group and are involved in a variety of activities are less
likely to become consumed by adoration of an idol. Socially isolated
adolescents, feel socially rejected and become overly identified with an idol
to the exclusion of all other activities, are at higher risk for serious emotional
problems, and require psychiatric intervention.
Erickson uses the term moratorium to describe the interim period between
the concrete thinking of childhood and a more evolved complex ethical
development. Erikson defines identity crisis as a normative part of
adolescence in which adolescents pursue alternative behaviors and styles and,
then, successfully mold these different experiences into a stable identity. A
failure to do so would result in identity diffusion, or role confusion, in which
the adolescent lacks a cohesive or confident sense of identity. Adolescence is
the time to bond with peers, experiment with new beliefs and styles, fall in
love for the first time, and explore creative ideas for future endeavors.
Most adolescents go through this developmental process with optimism,
develop good self-esteem, maintain good peer relationships, and sustain
harmonious relationships with their families.


<<<PAGE 2832>>>
Stages of Adolescence
Early Adolescence. Early adolescence, from 12 to 14 years of age, is the
period in which the most striking initial changes occur—physically,
attitudinally, and behaviorally. Growth spurts often begin in these years for
boys, whereas girls may have already had rapid growth for 1 to 2 years. At
this stage, boys and girls begin to criticize usual family habits, insist on
spending time with peers with less supervision, have a greater awareness of
style and appearance, and may question previously accepted family values. A
new awareness of sexuality may be displayed by increased modesty and
embarrassment with their current physical development or may exhibit itself
in an increased interest in the opposite sex.
Early adolescents engage in subtle or overt displays of their growing desire
for autonomy, sometimes with challenging behaviors toward authority
figures, including teachers and school administrators, and exhibit disdain for
rules themselves. At this age, some adolescents begin to experiment with
cigarettes, alcohol, and marijuana.
During early adolescence, there is a normal variation in when new defining
behaviors are acquired. Overall, although many early adolescents make new
friends and modify their public image, most maintain positive connections to
family members, old friends, and their family’s values. However, for some,
early adolescence can a time of overwhelming turmoil, during which there is
a dramatic rejection of family, friends, and lifestyle, resulting in a powerful
alienation of the adolescent.
Jake, a 13-year-old adolescent, had just started the 8th grade. In the past,
he has been a jovial, fun-loving, and cooperative student, but this year he
found the school rules increasingly irritating and felt that his teachers
were too strict. He had always been a good student while putting in a
minimum of work. His older brother Sean, now in 11th grade, had
established himself as a compliant, well-liked, and well-behaved student
who always put maximal effort into school projects in the same school,
so Jake was compared with his brother regularly by many teachers. Jake
resented these comparisons because, unlike his brother, whom Jake felt
was a “nerd,” Jake was more rebellious, took more risks, and made


<<<PAGE 2833>>>
friends with more popular peers. To distinguish himself from his older
brother in school and at home, Jake began to challenge the rules at
school, stating that they were “stupid” and “meaningless.” Jake began to
cut classes, to stay out late, and to experiment with alcohol and
marijuana. He rejected his best friends from sixth and seventh grade and
began to hang out with more daring peers. When Jake was at home, he
was able to relate to his older brother Sean only when they played
basketball and video games.
Jake’s grades began to deteriorate only slightly, but his parents noticed
that on his report cards, his teachers rated his effort and behavior as
unsatisfactory. During the second month of school, Jake’s parents
received a phone call that Jake was going to be suspended due to
possession of a small amount of marijuana on the school grounds during
recess. During a subsequent meeting with the assistant principal and
school counselor, Jake argued that the suspension was unfair because his
grades were still good, and did not understand why his marijuana
possession had triggered a suspension. When confronted with the fact
that he had broken not only the school rules, but also violated the law,
and that he was fortunate because the school did not involve the police,
Jake became angry and continued to insist that they were mistreating him.
He also blurted out that all of his teachers and his parents favored his
older brother Sean and treated him like a second-class citizen. The school
suspended Jake for 5 days but indicated that they would report the
incident to the police unless Jake and his family initiated immediate
counseling.
Jake begrudgingly began psychotherapy and entered into a weekly
therapy group specializing in substance use for teens. Jake’s parents also
sought therapy to work on becoming more unified in their parenting. Jake
remained in psychotherapy for the next 1½ years, during which time his
attitude and reasoning style changed and evolved considerably. At age
15, Jake was able to understand why his school had suspended him for
possession of marijuana and came to appreciate their willingness to give
him the chance to seek counseling, rather than be turned over to the
police. Over time, Jake was able to admit the dangers of using drugs and
took responsibility for his ill-advised behaviors. Alcohol and drug use
continued to be a focus of his therapy and, by 15, Jake had virtually lost


<<<PAGE 2834>>>
interest in alcohol, and admitted to smoking marijuana rarely at parties.
Jake became more open to making friends with a variety of peers, and he
disclosed that he liked himself better now than when he was 13. He now
treated his brother respectfully when alone or with friends, and he felt
that his parents appreciated him for “who he was.” (Courtesy of Caroly S.
Pataki, M.D.)
Middle Adolescence. During the middle phase of adolescence (roughly
between the ages of 14 and 16), adolescents’ lifestyles may reflect their
efforts to pursue their own stated goals of being independent. Their abilities
to combine abstract reasoning with realistic decision-making and judgment
are put to the test. In this phase, sexual behavior intensifies, making romantic
relationships more complicated, and self-esteem becomes a pivotal influence
on positive and negative risk-taking behaviors.
In this phase of development, adolescents tend to identify with a group of
peers who become highly influential in their choices of activities, styles,
music, idols, and role models. Adolescents’ underestimation of the risks
associated with a variety of recreational behaviors and their sense of
“omnipotence,” mixed with their drive to be autonomous, frequently cause
some conflict with parental requests and expectations. Most teens can achieve
the challenge of defining themselves as unique and different from their
families while still connected with family members.
Jenna, a 16-year-old junior in high school, had just gotten her driver’s
license. She realized that she was lucky to have been given a brand new
car at 16 because many of her friends did not yet have cars. Jenna was
upset that her parents disapproved of her agreement to drive all of her
friends to places that she did not even want to go. Jenna was an attractive
and well-liked adolescent who had always been an “A” and “B” student,
and never had school conflicts. She played the flute in the school’s
orchestra and was not involved in any team sports. Jenna started “going
out” with a boy in her grade at school, Brett, who was also 16 years old,
shortly after getting her license, and even though they did not know each
other that well, Jenna felt that they had a close relationship. Since he did
not yet have a car, she was the “identified driver” whenever they went out


<<<PAGE 2835>>>
or to parties. Jenna was glad about this because she did not like alcohol
and was relieved that Brett would not be driving, given that he drank
quite a bit at parties. Jenna got along reasonably well with her parents,
who were considered very “easy-going” by her friends, and she felt that
she and her parents had similar values and ideas.
Things were going well until Brett began to pressure her to go further
in their sexual relationship. When Jenna told him that she was not ready,
Brett hounded her more. When the subject of sex had come up with her
parents “hypothetically” in the past, they had dismissed the subject,
indicating that when it was the right time for her, Jenna would know.
Jenna knew that she was not ready to have sex, although many of her
classmates were sexually active. Jenna was not an impulsive person and
liked to plan things carefully so that they would feel right to her. Jenna
realized that she could not agree with Brett’s request, but she was
confident that she could make him understand. One of Jenna’s friends
suggested that Brett might break up with her as a result, but Jenna was
willing to take that risk. Jenna carefully told Brett that she loved him, but
she was not yet ready for sex. Jenna was slightly surprised that instead of
pressuring her more or breaking up with her, Brett accepted her decision.
He seemed a little relieved.
Jenna and Brett continued their relationship into their senior year of
high school, and, toward the end of her senior year, Jenna desired to be
sexually active with him. They decided to go to a community clinic
known for its positive attitude toward adolescents, to learn about birth
control methods, and pick one without including their parents. Jenna and
Brett took the time to learn about a variety of birth control methods and
chose to use condoms. When they left the clinic, Jenna and Brett felt
closer than they had before and realized how they had both grown in their
relationship. Jenna and Brett both felt that they were doing the right
thing. (Courtesy of Caroly S. Pataki, M.D.)
Late Adolescence. Late adolescence (between the ages of 17 and 19) is a
time when continued exploration of academic pursuits, musical and artistic
tastes, athletic participation, and social bonds lead a teen toward a greater
definition of self and a sense of belonging to specific groups or subcultures


<<<PAGE 2836>>>
within mainstream society. Well-adjusted adolescents can be comfortable
with current choices of activities, tastes, hobbies, and friendships, yet remain
aware that they will continue to refine their “identities” during young
adulthood.
Joey was a second-semester freshman in college, living away from home,
and had just turned 18 years of age. He reflected on the fact that he was
no longer a “minor” and could make almost any decision for himself
without involving his parents.
Joey felt liberated, but at the same time, he was confused and a little
lost. Since 10th grade, Joey had planned to pursue a career in medicine
like his father, so he had taken a heavy load of science courses in the first
semester, all of which he had despised. This semester, however, Joey
signed up for liberal arts classes. He did not mention this to his father. He
then added classes that ranged from art history to architectural drafting to
sociology, philosophy, and music. He had been influenced, he believed,
by his roommate Tony, who was in the architecture program, and by his
girlfriend, Lisa, who was majoring in studio art.
As the semester progressed, Joey found that his favorite course was the
drafting class. Joey could not help but wonder whether he liked the
drafting class so much because of how much he idolized Tony, or
because he enjoyed the class. Joey talked this over with Lisa, who
suggested that he chill out and not figure out the rest of his life right now.
She recommended that he take at least two more semesters of varied
classes, including those in the architecture curriculum, before making a
final decision about a career. Joey realized that Lisa’s approach to college
and life was so relaxed, the opposite of his approach, following his
parents’ pressure to plan, make commitments early, and see them
through, regardless of how it felt. Lisa’s approach left more room for
reflecting on experiences and then making a choice, rather than jumping
into what he was “supposed” to do. Joey took her advice and allowed
himself another year to try out majors and then decide on a career. After
experiencing courses in many varied subjects, Joey decided that he did
truly enjoy architecture and was able to switch his focus from premed to
architecture. (Courtesy of Caroly S. Pataki M.D.)


<<<PAGE 2837>>>
Components of Adolescence
Physical Development. Puberty is the process by which adolescents
develop physical and sexual maturity, along with reproductive ability. The
first signs of the pubertal process are an increased rate of growth in both
height and weight. This process begins in girls by approximately 10 years of
age. By the age of 11 or 12, many girls noticeably tower over their male
classmates, who do not experience a growth spurt, on average, until they
reach 13 years of age. By age 13, many girls have experienced menarche, and
most have developed breasts and pubic hair.
Wide variation exists in the normal range of onset and timing of pubertal
development and its components. A set sequence occurs, however, in the
order in which pubertal development proceeds. Thus, secondary sexual
characteristics in boys, such as increased length and width of the penis, for
example, will occur after the release of androgens from developed enlarged
testes.
Sexual maturity ratings (SMRs), also referred to as Tanner Stages, range
from SMR 1 (prepuberty) to SMR 5 (adult). The SMR ratings include stages
of genital maturity in boys and breast development in girls, as well as pubic
hair development. Table 32-12 outlines SMRs for boys and girls.
The primary female sex characteristic is ovulation, the release of eggs from
ovarian follicles, approximately once every 28 days. When adolescent girls
reach SMR 3 to 4, ovarian follicles are producing enough estrogen to result in
menarche, the onset of menstruation. When adolescent girls reach SMR 4 to
5, an ovarian follicle matures monthly, and ovulation occurs. Estrogen and
progesterone promote sexual maturation, including further development of
fallopian tubes and breasts.
For adolescent boys, the primary sex characteristic is the development of
sperm by the testes. In boys, sperm development occurs in response to
follicle-stimulating hormone acting on the seminiferous tubules within the
testes. The pubertal process in boys consists of the growth of the testes
stimulated by luteinizing hormone. An adolescent boy’s ability to ejaculate
generally emerges within 1 year of reaching SMR 2. Secondary sexual
characteristics in boys include thickening of the skin, broadening of the


<<<PAGE 2838>>>
shoulders, and the development of facial hair.
Cognitive Maturation. Cognitive maturation in adolescence encompasses
a wide range of expanded abilities that fall within the global category of
executive functions of the brain. These include the transition from concrete
thinking to more abstract thinking, an increased ability to draw logical
conclusions in scientific pursuits, with peer interactions, and in social
situations; and new abilities for self-observation and self-regulation.
Adolescents acquire increased awareness of their intellectual, artistic, and
athletic gifts and talents, yet it often takes many more years into young
adulthood to establish a practical application for these abilities.
Table 32-12
Sexual Maturity Ratings for Male and Female Adolescents
Sexual Girls
Maturity
Rating

Boys

Stage 1 Preadolescent, papilla
elevated
No pubic hair

Penis, testes, scrotum
preadolescent
No pubic hair

Stage 2 Breast bud, small mound;
Penis size same, testes and
areola diameter increased
scrotum enlarged, with
scrotal skin reddened
Sparse long pubic hair,
mainly along labia

Sparse long pubic hair,
mainly at the base of penis

Stage 3 Breast and areola larger; no Penis elongated, with
separation of contours
increased size of testes
and scrotum
Pubic hair darker and
coarser; spread over pubic Pubic hair darker and
area
coarser; spread over pubic
area
Stage 4 Breast size increased

Penis increased in length


<<<PAGE 2839>>>
and width
Areola and papilla raised

Testes and scrotum larger

Pubic hair coarse and
thickened; covers less
area than in adults, does
not extend to thighs

Pubic hair coarse and
thickened; covers less
area than in adults, does
not extend to thighs

Stage 5 Breasts resemble adult
Penis, testes, scrotum
female breast; areola has
appear mature
recessed to breast contour Pubic hair increased in
Pubic hair increased in
density; area extends to
density; area extends to
thighs
thighs
The central cognitive change that occurs gradually during adolescence is
the shift from concrete thinking (concrete operational thinking, according to
Jean Piaget) to the ability to think abstractly (formal operational thinking, in
Piaget’s terminology). This evolution occurs as an adaptation to stimuli that
demand an adolescent to produce hypothetical responses, as well as in
response to the adolescent’s expanded abilities to provide generalizations
from specific situations. The development of abstract thinking is not a sudden
epiphany but, rather, a gradual process of expanding logical deductions
beyond concrete experiences and achieving the capacity for idealistic and
hypothetical thinking based on everyday life.
Adolescents often use an omnipotent belief system that reinforces their
sense of immunity from danger, even when confronted with logical risks.
Some degree of child-like magical thinking continues to coexist with more
mature abstract thinking in many adolescents. Despite the persistence of
magical thinking into adolescence, adolescent cognition departs from that of
younger children insofar as the increased ability for self-observation and
development of strategies to promote strengths and compensate for
weaknesses.
One of the essential cognitive tasks in adolescence is to identify and
gravitate toward those pursuits that seem to match the adolescent’s cognitive
strengths, in academic courses, and in thinking about future aspirations.


<<<PAGE 2840>>>
Piaget believed that cognitive adaptation in adolescence is profoundly
influenced by social relationships and the dialogue between adolescents and
peers, making social cognition an integral part of cognitive development in
adolescence.
Socialization. Socialization in adolescence encompasses the ability to find
acceptance in peer relationships, as well as the development of more mature
social cognition. The skills to develop a sense of belonging to a peer group
are of central importance to a sense of well-being. Being viewed as socially
competent by peers is a critical component in building good self-esteem for
most early adolescents. Peer influences are powerful and can foster positive
social interactions, as well as apply pressure in less socially accepted
behaviors or even high-risk behavior. Belonging to a peer group is, in
general, a sign of adaptation and a developmentally appropriate step in
separating from parents and turning the focus of loyalty toward friends.
Children between the ages of 6 and 12 can engage in exchanges of ideas and
opinions and acknowledge feelings of peers, but the relationships often wax
and wane in a discontinuous way based on altercations and good times.
Friendships deepen with repeated good times, but, for some school-aged
children, a variety of peers are often interchangeable—that is, a child may
seek a companion when that child has free time, rather than out of a desire to
spend time with a specific friend. As adolescence ensues, friendships become
more individualized, and adolescents may share personal secrets with a friend
rather than a family member. The adolescent may achieve a comfort level
with one or several early adolescent peers, and the group may “stick
together,” spending most of their free time together. In early adolescence, a
blend of the above two social modes may emerge, small “cliques” arise, and,
even within the cliques, competition and jealousies regarding which dyads
are “preferred” or higher ranked within the clique may result in some
discontinuities in the relationships. In later adolescence, the peer group
solidifies, leading to increased stability in the friendships and a greater
mutuality in the quality of the interactions.
Moral Development. Morality is a set of values and beliefs about codes of
behavior that conform to those shared by others in society. Adolescents, as do
younger children, tend to develop patterns of behaviors characteristic of their


<<<PAGE 2841>>>
family and educational environments and by imitation of specific peers and
adults whom they admire. Moral development does not strictly follow
chronologic age but, instead, is an outgrowth from cognitive development.
Piaget described moral development as a gradual process parallel to
cognitive development, with expanded abilities in differentiating the best
interests for society from those of individuals occurring during late
adolescence. Preschool children simply follow the rules set forth by the
parents; in the middle years, children accept rules but show an inability to
allow for exceptions; and during adolescence, young persons recognize rules
in terms of what is good for the society at large.
Lawrence Kohlberg integrated Piaget’s concepts and described multiple
stages of moral development within three significant levels of morality. The
first level is preconventional morality, in which punishment and obedience to
the parent are the determining factors. The second level is the morality of
conventional role-conformity, in which children try to conform to gain
approval and to maintain good relationships with others. The third and
highest level is the morality of self-accepted moral principles, in which
children voluntarily comply with rules based on a concept of ethical
principles and make exceptions to rules in certain circumstances.
Although Kohlberg’s and Piaget’s notions of moral development focus on
a unified theory of cognitive maturation for both sexes, Carol Gilligan
emphasizes the social context of moral development leading to divergent
patterns in moral development. Gilligan points out that, in women,
compassion and the ethics of caring are dominant features of moral decisionmaking, whereas, for men, predominant features of moral judgments are
related more to a perception of justice, rationality, and a sense of fairness.
Although influential, many psychologists and scholars criticize Gilligan’s
work as primarily observational and lacking scientific rigor. Feminist
scholars note that Gilligan rarely considers the role of societal expectations in
influencing gender-based behavior.
Modern psychologists have incorporated insights from cognitive
psychology and suggest that moral development goes beyond the rationality
of Piaget and Kolberg. Psychologists such as Jonathan Haidt emphasize the
role of intuition and preconceived beliefs based on the fundamental moral
foundations found in a society. He suggests that the logical explanations one
gives to justify one’s actions are post hoc rationalizations meant to justify


<<<PAGE 2842>>>
one’s emotional (i.e., irrational) reactions to the moral dilemmas we face in
society.
Self-Esteem. Self-esteem is a measure of one’s sense of self-worth based
on perceived success and achievements, as well as a perception of how much
one is valued by peers, family members, teachers, and society in general. The
most important correlates of good self-esteem are one’s perception of
attractive physical appearance and high value to peers and family. Secondary
features of self-esteem relate to academic achievement, athletic abilities, and
unique talents. Adolescent self-esteem is mediated, to a significant degree, by
the positive feedback received from a peer group and family members, and
adolescents often seek out a peer group that offers acceptance, regardless of
negative behaviors associated with that group. Adolescent girls have more of
a problem maintaining self-esteem than do boys. Girls continued to rate
themselves with generally lower self-esteem into adulthood.
Current Environmental Influences and Adolescence
Adolescent Sexual Behavior. Sexual experimentation in adolescents
often begins with fantasy and masturbation in early adolescence, followed by
noncoital genital touching with the opposite sex or, in some cases, same-sex
partners, oral sex with partners, and initiation of sexual intercourse at a later
point in development. By high school, most male adolescents report
experience with masturbation, and more than half of adolescent girls report
masturbation. The balance between healthy adolescent sexual
experimentation and emotionally and physically safe sexual practices is one
of the significant challenges for society.
Estimates vary, but about 50 percent of 9th- to 12th-grade students
reported having had sexual intercourse. The median age at first intercourse is
about 16 years for boys and 17 years for girls. Boys generally have more
sexual partners than do girls, and boys are less likely than girls to seek
emotional attachments with their sexual partners.
FACTORS INFLUENCING ADOLESCENT SEXUAL BEHAVIOR. Factors that affect

sexual behavior in adolescents include personality traits, gender, cultural and
religious background, racial factors, family attitudes, and sexual education


<<<PAGE 2843>>>
and prevention programs.
Personality factors are associated with sexual behavior, as well as sexual
risk-taking. Higher levels of impulsivity are associated with a younger age at
the first experience of sexual intercourse; a higher number of sexual partners;
sexual intercourse without the use of contraception, including condoms; and a
history of a sexually transmitted disease (STD, chlamydia).
Historically, male adolescents have initiated sexual intercourse at a
younger age than female adolescents. The younger a teenage girl is when she
has sex for the first time, the more likely she is to have had unwanted sexual
activity. Close to four of ten girls who had first intercourse at 13 or 14 years
of age report it was either not voluntary or unwanted. Three of four girls and
over half of boys report that girls who have sex do so because their
boyfriends want them to. In general, adolescents who initiate sexual
intercourse at younger ages are also more likely to have a higher number of
sexual partners.
The additive effects of more highly educated families, social and religious
youth groups, and school-based educational programs can decrease high-risk
sexual behavior among adolescents. Female empowerment strategies can play
an essential role in decreasing unwanted sexual behavior and teenage
pregnancies. The primary reason that teenage girls who have never had
intercourse give for abstaining from sex is that having sex would be against
their religious or moral values. Other reasons include the desire to avoid
pregnancy, fear of contracting a STD, and not having met the appropriate
partner.
CONTRACEPTIVES. Currently, 98 percent of teenagers 15 to 19 years are using

at least one method of birth control. The two most common methods are
condoms and birth control pills. STDs, despite the use of condoms, are still at
high levels in teens—approximately one in four sexually active teens
contracts an STD every year. Approximately half of all new human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infections occur in people younger than age
25.
PREGNANCY. Each year 750,000 to 850,000 teenage girls younger than age 19

become pregnant. Of this number, 432,000 give birth, a 19 percent decline
from 532,000 in 1991; the rest (418,000) obtain abortions. The largest decline


<<<PAGE 2844>>>
in teen pregnancy by race is for black women. Hispanic teen births have
declined 20 percent, but continue to have the highest teen birth rates
compared with other races.
Teenage pregnancy creates a plethora of health risks for both mother and
child. Children born to teenage mothers have a higher chance of dying before
the age of 5 years. Those who survive are more likely to perform poorly in
school and are at higher risk of abuse and neglect. Teenage mothers are less
likely to gain adequate weight during pregnancy, increasing the risk of
premature births and low–birth-weight infants. Low–birth-weight babies are
more likely to have organs that are not fully developed, resulting in bleeding
in the brain, respiratory distress syndrome, and intestinal problems. Teenage
mothers are also less likely to seek regular prenatal care and to take
recommended daily multivitamins, and they are more likely to smoke, drink,
or use drugs during pregnancy. Only one-third of teenage mothers obtain
high school diplomas, and only 1.5 percent have a college degree by the age
of 30.
The average adolescent mother who cannot care for her child has the child
either placed in foster care or raised by the teenager’s already overburdened
parents or other relatives. Few teenage mothers marry the fathers of their
children; the fathers, usually teenagers, cannot care for themselves, much less
the mothers of their children. If the two do marry, they usually divorce. Many
are more likely to end up on welfare.
ABORTION. Nearly four of ten teen pregnancies end in abortion. Almost all the

girls are unwed mothers from low socioeconomic groups; their pregnancies
result from sex with boys to whom they felt emotionally attached. Most (61
percent) teenagers elect to have abortions with their parents’ consent, but
laws of mandatory parental consent put two rights into a competition: a girl’s
claim to privacy and a parent’s need to know. Most adults believe that
teenagers should have parental permission for an abortion, but when parents
refuse to give their consent, most states prohibit parents from vetoing the
teenager’s decision.
The abortion rate in many European countries tends to be far lower than
that in the United States. The Control and Prevention (CDC) reports that the
abortion rate in the United States for girls between the ages of 15 and 19 is
about 30 per 1,000. In France, about 10.5 of every 1,000 girls under the age


<<<PAGE 2845>>>
of 20 had an abortion, according to World Health Organization statistics. The
rate of abortion in Germany was 6.8; in Italy, 6.3; and in Spain, 4.5. Britain
has a higher rate, 18.5. Family planning experts believe that more sex
education and the availability of contraceptive devices help keep the number
of abortions down. In Holland, where contraceptives are freely available in
schools, the teenage pregnancy rate is among the lowest in the world.
Risk-Taking Behavior. Reasonable risk-taking is a necessary endeavor in
adolescence, leading to confidence both in forming new relationships and in
sports and social situations. High-risk behaviors among adolescents are
associated with severe negative consequences, however, and can take many
forms, including drug and alcohol use, unsafe sexual practices, self-injurious
behaviors, and reckless driving.
Drug Use
ALCOHOL. About 30 percent of 12th graders report having five or more drinks

in a row within 2 weeks. The average age when youths first try alcohol is 11
years for boys and 13 years for girls. The national average age at which
Americans begin regular drinking is 15.9 years of age. People ages 18 to 25
show the highest prevalence of binge and heavy drinking. Drunk driving has
declined since 2002. Alcohol dependence, along with other drugs, is
associated with depression, anxiety, oppositional defiant disorder, antisocial
personality disorder, and an increased rate of suicide.
NICOTINE. The number of young American smokers has declined since 1990.

However, the rate of smoking among teenagers is still as high as or higher
than that of adults. According to the American Cancer Society, on average
more than one of five students have smoked cigarettes. Each day, more than
4,000 teenagers try their first cigarette, and another 2,000 become regular,
daily smokers. Cigarette smokers are more likely to get into fights, carry
weapons, attempt suicide, suffer from mental health problems such as
depression, and engage in high-risk sexual behaviors. One of three will
eventually die from smoking-related diseases. Cigarettes are the most
common type of tobacco used among middle-school students, followed by
cigars, smokeless tobacco, and pipes.


<<<PAGE 2846>>>
CANNABIS. Marijuana is the most popular illicit drug, with 14.6 million people

using it (6.2 percent of the population), two-thirds being under the age of 18.
Its use, however, is slowly declining. About 6 percent of 12th graders report
daily use of marijuana.
One of the primary reasons for such prevalence of marijuana use among
teenagers is because many find that marijuana is easier to get than alcohol or
cigarettes. This belief has declined in recent years. Once teenagers are
dependent on marijuana, they often tumble into truancy, crime, and
depression.
COCAINE. About 13 percent of high school seniors use cocaine, exceeding the

national average of 3.6 percent. Also, about 1 percent of 12th graders admit
to using phencyclidine (PCP). Crystal methamphetamine (ice) has an annual
prevalence in 12th graders of about 2 percent.
OPIOIDS. In recent years, the number of teens using prescription pain relievers

for nonmedical reasons has increased. Prescription drug abuse by people ages
18 to 25 has increased by 15 percent. Drugs of specific concern are the pain
relievers oxycodone and hydrocodone. Oxycodone has gained ground among
high school students since its emergence in 2001, with 5 percent of 12th
graders, 3.5 percent of 10th graders, and 1.7 percent of 8th graders reporting
use. About 9 percent of 12th graders use hydrocodone, 6 percent of 10th
graders, and 2.5 percent of 8th graders.
HEROIN. Heroin use is prevalent among adolescents, although less so than

cocaine. The average age of use is 19, but almost 2 percent of 12th graders
use it. The nasal route (snorting) is the most common method of use.
Violence. Although rates of violent crime have decreased throughout the
United States in recent years, violent crimes by young offenders are on the
increase. Homicides are the second leading cause of death among people
aged 15 to 25. (Accidents are first; suicides are third.) Black male teenagers
are far more likely to be murder victims than are boys from any other racial
or ethnic group or girls of any race. The factor most strongly associated with
violence among adolescent boys is growing up in a household without a
father or father surrogate; this factor aside, race, socioeconomic status, and


<<<PAGE 2847>>>
education show no effect on the propensity toward violence.
BULLYING. Bullying is the use of one’s strength or status to intimidate, injure,

or humiliate another person of lesser strength or status. It can be physical,
verbal, or social. Physical bullying involves physical injury or threat of injury
to someone. Verbal bullying refers to teasing or insulting someone. Social
bullying refers to the use of peer rejection or exclusion to humiliate or isolate
a victim.
About 30 percent of 6th- through 10th-grade students experience
moderate-to-frequent bullying, as a bully, a target, or both. Approximately
1.7 million children within this age group bully other children. Boys are more
likely to be involved in bullying and violent behavior than girls. Girls tend to
use verbal bullying rather than physical.
An estimated 160,000 students miss school each day because of fear of
attack or intimidation from peers; some may drop out. Stresses of
“victimization” can interfere with student’s engagement and learning in
school. Children who bully other children are at risk for engaging in more
violent severe behaviors, such as frequent fighting and carrying a weapon.
Cyberbullying. During the last decade, electronic or internet bullying has
become of great concern to adolescents. Cyberbullying is defined broadly to
convey the use of electronic means to intimidate or harm someone
intentionally. The reported prevalence of cyberbullying is variable, reports
ranging from 1 to 62 percent of youth reporting that they were victims of
cyber victimization. A study of about 700 Australian students, recruited at
age 10 years, and followed until ages 14 to 15 years, found that 15 percent
had engaged in cyberbullying, 21 percent had engaged in traditional bullying,
and 7 percent had engaged in both. Another study of self-reported
information collected from 399 teens in the 8th to 10th grades found that
involvement in cyberbullying, either as a victim or a bully, specifically
contributed to the prediction of depressive symptoms and suicidal ideation.
This correlation between cyberbullying and depressive symptomatology is
more reliable than the association of traditional bullying and affective
disorder.
Gangs. Gang violence is a problem throughout the United States. There are


<<<PAGE 2848>>>
2,000 different youth gangs around the country, with more than 200,000
teens and young adults as members. Most members are between the ages of
12 and 24 years, with an average of 17 to 18 years. Gang membership is a
brief phase for many teenagers; one-half to two-thirds leave the gang by the
1-year mark. Boys are more likely to join gangs than girls; however, female
gang membership may be underrepresented. Female gang members are more
likely to be found in small cities and rural areas and tend to be younger than
male gang members. Female gang members are also involved in less
delinquent or criminal activity than males and commit fewer violent crimes.
WEAPONS. Each day, on average, nearly 10 American children younger than

the age of 18 years are killed in handgun suicides, homicides, and accidents.
Many more are wounded. One in five youths in grades 9 to 12 carries a
weapon: knife, gun, or club.
By law, anyone younger than 18 years cannot purchase a firearm. Twothirds of students in grades 6 to 12 say that they can get a firearm within 24
hours, however. More than 22 million children live in a home with a firearm.
In 40 percent of these homes, at least one gun is not locked, and 13 percent
are unlocked and loaded. Two of three students involved in school shootings
acquired their guns from their own home or that of a relative. At least 60
percent of suicide deaths in teens involve the use of a handgun.
SCHOOL VIOLENCE. According to the CDC, of all youth homicides in 2010,

about 2 percent occurred in schools. Approximately 7 percent of teachers
report they have been threatened with injury or physically attacked by a
student from their school. Also, among students in grades 9 through 12, about
6 percent reported carrying a weapon on school property on one or more days
in the 30 days before the survey.
Many factors can lead to violent acts in teenagers. Some inherited traits
include impulsivity, learning difficulties, low IQ, or fearlessness. A
correlation also exists between witnessing violent acts and involvement in
violence. Children who witness violent acts are more aggressive and grow up
more likely to become involved in violence—either as a victimizer or as a
victim. Table 32-13 lists some of the early and imminent warning signs of
school violence.


<<<PAGE 2849>>>
On April 20, 1999, two teenage boys, ages 17 and 18 years, went on a
shooting rampage through Columbine High School of Littleton,
Colorado. Armed with shotguns, a semiautomatic rifle, and a pistol, they
laughed and shouted as they shot classmates and teachers at point-blank
range while hurling homemade explosives. Fifteen were killed, including
the 2 gunmen, who also injured 25 people.
The gunmen were members of the “trench coat mafia” at the high
school, a clique of social misfits who stood out at the school for their
gothic style of dress and nihilistic attitude. The two gunmen were
obsessed with violent video games and intrigued with Nazi culture, even
though one was part Jewish. They chose the date of the attack to coincide
with Adolf Hitler’s birthday.
On March 21, 2005, a 16-year-old boy went on a shooting rampage at
Red Lake High School on the Red Lake Indian Reservation in far
northern Minnesota. He began his shooting spree by killing his
grandfather and the grandfather’s companion. He then donned his
grandfather’s police-issue gun belt and bulletproof vest before heading to
the school, where he killed a security guard, a teacher, five students, and
then himself. About 15 others were injured.
The gunman had a troubled childhood; his father committed suicide in
1997, and his mother suffered head injuries in an auto accident. He
expressed admiration for Adolf Hitler on a neo-Nazi website, using the
handle “Todesengel,” which is German for “Angel of Death.” He had
bouts of depression, suicide ideation and was taking fluoxetine. He was a
member of a clique of about five students known as “The Darkers,” who
wore black clothes and chains, spiked or dyed their hair, and loved
heavy-metal music. The gunman usually wore a long black trench coat,
eyeliner, and combat boots. Peers described him as a quiet teenager.
Table 32-13
Warning Signs of School Violence
Early Warning Signs
Social withdrawal
Excessive feelings of isolation and being alone


<<<PAGE 2850>>>
Excessive feelings of rejection
Being a victim of violence
Feelings of being picked on and persecuted
Expression of violence in writings and drawings
Uncontrolled anger
Patterns of impulsive and chronic hitting, intimidating, and
bullying behaviors
History of discipline problems
History of violent and aggressive behavior
Intolerance for differences and prejudicial attitudes
Drug and alcohol use
Affiliation with gangs
Inappropriate access to, possession of, and use of firearms
Serious threats of violence
Imminent Warning Signs
Serious physical fighting with peers or family members
Severe destruction of property
Severe rage for seemingly minor reasons
Detailed threats of lethal violence
Possession and/or use of firearms and other weapons
Other self-injurious behaviors or threats of suicide
SEXUAL OFFENSE. Adolescents younger than age 18 years account for 20

percent of arrests for all sexual offenses (excluding prostitution), 20 to 30
percent of rape cases, 14 percent of aggravated sexual assault offenses, and
27 percent of child sexual homicides. These adolescent offenders account for
the victimization of approximately one-half of boys and one-fourth of girls
who are molested or sexually abused. Most instances have involved
adolescent male perpetrators.
Table 32-14
Juvenile Sex Offender Subtypes
Juvenile Offenders Who Sexually Offend against Peers or Adults
Predominantly assault females and strangers or casual


<<<PAGE 2851>>>
acquaintances
Sexual assaults occur in association with other types of criminal
activity (e.g., burglary)
Have histories of nonsexual criminal offenses, and appear more
generally delinquent and conduct disordered
Commit their offenses in public areas
Display higher levels of aggression and violence in the
commission of their sexual crimes
More likely to use weapons and to cause injuries to their victims
Juvenile Offenders Who Sexually Offend against Children
Most victims are male and are related to them, either siblings or
other relatives
Almost half of the offenders have had at least one male victim
The sexual crimes tend to reflect a greater reliance on
opportunity and guile than injurious force. This appears to be
particularly true when their victim is related to them. These
youths may “trick” the child into complying with the
molestation, use bribes, or threaten the child with loss of the
relationship
Within the overall population of juveniles who sexually assault
children are certain youths who display high levels of
aggression and violence. Generally, these are youths who
display more severe levels of personality and/or
psychosexual disturbances, such as psychopathy, sexual
sadism, and so on
Suffer from deficits in self-esteem and social competency
Many show evidence of depression
Characteristics Common to Both Groups
High rates of learning disabilities and academic dysfunction (30–
60%)
The presence of other behavioral health problems, including
substance abuse, and disorders of conduct (up to 80% have
some diagnosable psychiatric disorder)
Observed difficulties with impulse control and judgment


<<<PAGE 2852>>>
There appear to be two types of juvenile sex offenders: those who target
children and those who offend against peers or adults. The age difference
between the victim and the offender is the main difference between the two
groups. Table 32-14 lists the differences and similarities between these two
groups.
Etiologic factors of juvenile sex offending include maltreatment
experiences, exposure to pornography, substance abuse, and exposure to
aggressive role models. A significant number of offending adolescents have a
childhood history of physical abuse (25 to 50 percent) or sexual abuse (10 to
80 percent). Half of the adolescent offenders lived with both parents and one
other juvenile at the time of their offending. Evidence also suggests that most
juvenile sex offenders are likely to become adult sex offenders. The most
common psychosocial deficits of adolescent sexual offenders include low
self-esteem, few social skills, minimal assertive skills, and poor academic
performance. The most common psychiatric diagnoses are conduct disorder,
substance abuse disorder, adjustment disorder, ADHD, specific phobia, and
mood disorders. Male offenders are more often diagnosed with paraphilias
and antisocial behavior, whereas female offenders are more likely to be
diagnosed with mood disorders and engage in self-mutilation.
Prostitution. Teenagers constitute a large portion of all prostitutes, with
estimates ranging up to 1 million teenagers involved in prostitution. The
average age of a recruit is 13 years; however, some are young as 9 years of
age. Most adolescent prostitutes are girls, but boys may become same-sex
prostitutes. Most teenagers who enter a life of prostitution come from broken
homes; however, a growing number of teenage prostitutes come from middleto upper-middle-class homes. Many have been victims of rape or abuse as
children. Most teenagers ran away from home and were taken in by pimps
and substance abusers; the adolescents themselves then became substance
abusers. Twenty-seven percent of teenage prostitution occurs in large cities,
and incidents usually take place at an outside location, such as highways,
roads, alleys, fields, woods, or parking lots. Teenage prostitutes are at high
risk for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), and many (up to 70
percent in some studies) have HIV.
As many as 17,500 individuals are smuggled into the United States each
year as “sex slaves.” They arrive under the pretenses of a better life and job


<<<PAGE 2853>>>
opportunities, but once they are in the United States, they are forced into
prostitution, making little money while traffickers make thousands of dollars
from their services. Many times they are raped and abused.
Tattoos and Body Piercing. Body piercing and tattoos have become
more prevalent among adolescents since the 1980s. In the general population,
approximately 10 to 13 percent of adolescents have tattoos. Of the more than
500 adolescents surveyed in a study, 13.2 percent report at least one tattoo,
and 26.9 percent report at least one body piercing, other than in their ear lobe,
at some point in their lives. Both tattoos and body piercing are more common
in girls than in boys. Adolescents who endorsed possession of at least one
tattoo or body piercing are more likely to endorse the use of gateway drugs
(cigarettes, alcohol, marijuana), as well as experience with hard drugs
(cocaine, crystal methamphetamine, and ecstasy).

32.2 Adulthood
INTRODUCTION
For most of the history of developmental psychology, the predominant theory
held that development ended with childhood and adolescence. Adults were
considered to be finished products in whom the ultimate developmental states
had been reached. Beyond adolescence, the developmental point of view was
relevant only insofar as success or failure to reach adult levels or to maintain
them determined the maturity or immaturity of the adult personality.
In contradistinction were the long-recognized ideas that adult experiences,
such as pregnancy, marriage, parenthood, and aging, had an obvious and
significant impact on mental processes and experience in the adult years. This
view of adulthood suggests that the patient, of any age, is still in the process
of ongoing development, as opposed to merely having a past that influences
mental processes and is the primary determinant of current behavior.
Although the debate continues, the idea that development continues
throughout life is increasingly accepted.
Development in adulthood, as in childhood, is always the result of the


<<<PAGE 2854>>>
interaction among body, mind, and environment, never exclusively the result
of any one of the three variables. Most adults are forced to confront and adapt
to similar circumstances: establishing an independent identity, forming a
marriage or other partnership, raising children, building and maintaining
careers, and accepting the disability and death of one’s parents.
In modern Western societies, adulthood is the most prolonged phase of
human life. Although the exact age of consent varies from person to person,
adulthood can be divided into three main parts: young or early adulthood
(ages 20 to 40), middle adulthood (ages 40 to 65), and late adulthood or old
age.

YOUNG ADULTHOOD (20 TO 40 YEARS OF AGE)
Usually considered to begin at the end of adolescence (about age 20) and to
end at age 40, early adulthood is characterized by peaking biologic
development, the assumption of major social roles, and the evolution of an
adult self and life structure. The successful passage into adulthood depends
on the satisfactory resolution of childhood and adolescent crises.
During late adolescence, young persons generally leave home and begin to
function independently. Sexual relationships become serious, and the quest
for intimacy begins. The 20s are spent, for the most part, exploring options
for occupation and marriage or alternative relationships and making
commitments in various areas.
Early adulthood requires choosing new roles (e.g., husband, father) and
establishing an identity congruent with those new roles. It involves asking
and answering the questions “Who am I?” and “Where am I going?” The
choices made during this time may be tentative; young adults may make
several false starts.
Transition from Adolescence to Young Adulthood
The transition from adolescence to young adulthood is characterized by real
and intrapsychic separation from the family of origin and the engagement of
new, phase-specific tasks (Table 32-15). It involves many important events,
such as graduating from high school, starting a job or entering college, and
living independently. During these years, the individual resolves the issue of
childhood dependency sufficiently to establish self-reliance and begins to


<<<PAGE 2855>>>
formulate new, young-adult goals that eventually result in the creation of new
life structures that promote stability and continuity.
Developmental Tasks
Establishing a self that is separate from parents is a significant task of young
adulthood. For most individuals, the emotional detachment from parents that
takes place in adolescence and young adulthood is followed by a new inner
definition of themselves as comfortably alone and competent, able to care for
themselves in the real world. This shift away from the parents continues long
after marriage, and parenthood results in the formation of new relationships
that replace the progenitors as the most influential individuals in the young
adult’s life.
Psychological separation from the parents is followed by the synthesis of
mental representations from the childhood past and the young-adult present.
The psychological separation from parents in adolescence has been called the
second individuation, and the continued elaboration of these themes in young
adulthood has been called the third individuation. The continuous process of
elaboration of self and differentiation from others that occurs in the
developmental phases of young and middle age continues to influence our
meaningful adult relationships.
Table 32-15
Development Tasks of Young Adulthood
To develop a young-adult sense of self and other: the third
individuation
To develop adult friendships
To develop the capacity for intimacy; to become a spouse
To become a biologic and psychological parent
To develop a relationship of mutuality and equality with parents while
facilitating their midlife development
To establish an adult work identity
To develop adult forms of play
To integrate new attitudes toward time


<<<PAGE 2856>>>
Table 32-16
Psychological Development Concepts
Concept

Definition

Example

Transition

The bridge between two successive
stages

Late
adolescence

Normative
crisis

A period of rapid change or turmoil that Midlife crisis
strains a person’s adaptive
capacities

Stage

Period of consolidation of skills and
capacities

Mature
adulthood

Plateau

Period of developmental stability

Adulthood up
to midlife

Rite of
passage

Social ritual that facilitates a transition

Graduation;
marriage

Adapted from Wolman T, Thompson T. Adult and later-life development. In: Stoudemire A, ed.
Human Behavior. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven; 1998, with permission.

Several different models have been proposed for understanding adult
development. They are all theoretical and somewhat idealized. They all use
metaphors to describe complex social, psychological, and interpersonal
interactions. The models are heuristic: They provide a conceptual framework
for thinking about important common experiences. They are descriptive
rather than prescriptive; that is, they offer a useful way of looking at what
many persons do, not a formula for what all persons should do. Some of the
terms and concepts commonly used are explained in Table 32-16. These
periods involve individuation, that is, leaving the family of origin and
becoming one’s own man or woman, passing through midlife, and preparing
in middle adulthood for the transition into late adulthood.
Work Identity. The transition from learning and play to work may be
gradual or abrupt. Socioeconomic group, gender, and race affect the pursuit
and development of particular occupational choices. Blue-collar workers
generally enter the workforce directly after high school; white-collar workers


<<<PAGE 2857>>>
and professionals usually enter the workforce after college or professional
school. Depending on the choice of career and opportunity, work may
become a source of ongoing frustration or activity that enhances self-esteem.
Symptoms of job dissatisfaction are a high rate of job changes, absenteeism,
mistakes at work, accident proneness, and even sabotage.
UNEMPLOYMENT. The effects of unemployment transcend those of loss of

income; the psychological and physical tolls are enormous. The incidence of
alcohol dependence, homicide, violence, suicide, and mental illness rises with
unemployment. One’s core identity, which is often tied to occupation and
work, is seriously damaged when a job is lost, whether through firing,
attrition, or early or sometimes even regular retirement.
A young adult female patient had much enjoyed her 5 years in college,
and only reluctantly accepted a job with a large real estate firm. During
college, she had limited interest in her appearance, and she began work in
clothing borrowed from family and friends. She scoffed when her boss
began to criticize her dress and gave her an advance to buy an upscale
wardrobe, but she then began to enjoy the fine clothing and the respect
engendered by her appearance and position. As her income began to rise,
work became a source of pleasure and self-esteem and the way to acquire
some of the trappings of adulthood. (Courtesy of Calvin Colarusso, M.D.)
Developing Adult Friendships. In late adolescence and young
adulthood, before marriage and parenthood, friendships are often the primary
source of emotional sustenance. Roommates, apartment-mates, sorority
sisters, and fraternity brothers, as indicated by the names used to describe
them, are substitutes for parents and siblings, temporary stand-ins until more
permanent replacements are found.
Friendships mostly meet the emotional needs of closeness and
confidentiality. All major developmental issues are discussed with friends,
particularly those in similar circumstances. As marriages occur and children
are born, the central emotional importance of friendships diminishes. Some
friendships are abandoned at this point because the spouse objects to the
friend, recognizing at some level that they are competitors. Gradually, there is


<<<PAGE 2858>>>
a movement toward a new form of friendship, couples friendships. They
reflect the newly committed status but are more difficult to form and to
maintain because four individuals must be compatible, not just two.
As children begin to move out of the family into the community, parents
follow. Dance classes and Little League games provide the progenitors with a
new focus and the opportunity to make friends with others who are at the
same point developmentally and who are receptive to the formation of
relationships that help explain and cushion the pressures of young adult life.
Sexuality and Marriage. The developmental shift from sexual
experimentation to the desire for intimacy is experienced in young adulthood
as intense loneliness, resulting from the awareness of an absence of
committed love similar to that experienced in childhood with their parents.
Brief sexual encounters in short-lived relationships no longer significantly
boost self-esteem. Increasingly, the desire is for emotional involvement in a
sexual context. The young adult who fails to develop the capacity for intimate
relationships runs the risk of living in isolation and self-absorption in midlife.
For most individuals in Western culture, the experience of intimacy
increases the desire for marriage. Most persons in the United States marry for
the first time in their mid-to-late 20s. The median age of first marriage has
been rising steadily since 1950 for both men and women, and the number of
persons who never marry has been increasing. Today, approximately 50
percent of all adults ages 18 and older are not married, compared with only
28 percent in 1960. The proportion of 30- to 34-year-olds who never married
has almost tripled, and the ratio of never-married 35- to 39-year-olds
doubled.
INTERRACIAL MARRIAGE. Mixed-race marriages were banned in 19 states until

a U.S. Supreme Court decision in 1967. In 1970, such marriages accounted
for only 2 percent of all marriages. The trend has been steadily upward.
Currently, interracial marriages account for about 1.5 million marriages in the
United States.
Despite the trend toward more interracial marriages, they remain a small
proportion of all marriages. Most persons are more likely to marry someone
from the same racial and ethnic background. Marriages between Hispanic
whites and non-Hispanic whites and between Asians and whites are more


<<<PAGE 2859>>>
common than those between blacks and whites.
SAME-SEX MARRIAGE. Same-sex marriage is recognized as legal by many

states in the United States and by the U.S. Supreme Court, as well as in
several countries around the world (e.g., France and Denmark). It differs
from same-sex civil unions granted by states, which do not provide the same
federal protections or benefits as marriage. No reliable estimates are available
for the number of same-sex marriages in the United States; however, in 2013,
it was estimated to be about 80,000. There is growing consensus in the
United States and around the world that gay and lesbian persons should be
allowed the same marital rights and privileges as straight adults. Same-sex
marriage can be subject to more stress than heterosexual marriage because of
continued prejudice toward such unions among certain conservative political
or religious groups who oppose such unions.
MARITAL PROBLEMS. Although marriage tends to be regarded as a permanent

tie, unsuccessful unions can be terminated, as indeed they are in most
societies. Nevertheless, many marriages that do not end in separation or
divorce are disturbed. In considering marital problems, clinicians are
concerned with both the persons involved and with the marital unit itself.
How any marriage works relates to the partner selected, the personality
organization or disorganization of each, the interaction between them, and the
original reasons for the union. Persons marry for a variety of reasons—
emotional, social, economic, and political, among others. One person may
look to the spouse to meet unfulfilled childhood needs for good parenting.
Another may see the spouse as someone to be saved from an otherwise
unhappy life. Irrational expectations between spouses increase the risk of
marital problems.
MARRIAGE AND COUPLES THERAPY. When families consist of grandparents,

parents, children, and other relatives living under the same roof, assistance
for marital problems can sometimes be obtained from a member of the
extended family with whom one or both partners have rapport. With the
contraction of the extended family in recent times, however, this source of
informal help is no longer as accessible as it once was. Similarly, religion
once played a more important role than it does now in the maintenance of


<<<PAGE 2860>>>
family stability. Wise religious leaders are available to provide counseling.
Still, they are not sought out to the extent they once were, which reflects the
decline in religious influence among large segments of the population.
Traditionally, a couple’s extended family and their religion guided them
during distressing times. In addition to these supports, social pressure helped
to prevent the dissolution of marriages. As family, religious, and societal
pressures have been relaxed, legal procedures for relatively easy separation
and divorce have expanded. Concurrently, the need for formalized marriage
counseling services has developed.
Marital therapy is a form of psychotherapy for married persons in conflict
with each other. A trained person establishes a professional contract with the
patient-couple and, through definite types of communication, attempts to
alleviate the disturbance, to reverse or change maladaptive patterns of
behavior, and to encourage personality growth and development.
In marriage counseling, only a particular conflict related to the immediate
concerns of the family is discussed; marriage counseling is conducted much
more superficially by persons with less psychotherapeutic training than is
marital therapy. Marital therapy places greater emphasis on restructuring the
interaction between the couple, including, at times, exploration of the
psychodynamics of each partner. Both therapy and counseling emphasize
helping marital partners cope effectively with their problems.
Parenthood. Parenthood intensifies the relationship between new parents.
Through their physical and emotional union, the couple has produced a
fragile, dependent being that needs them in the interlocking roles of father
and mother. This recognition expands their internal images of each other to
include thoughts and feelings emanating from the role of parent. As they live
together as a family, the lovers’ relationship with each other changes. They
become parents relating to one another and their children.
Parent–child problems do arise, however. In addition to the economic
burden of raising a child (estimated to be $250,000 for a middle-class family
whose child goes to college), there are emotional costs. Children may
reawaken conflicts that parents themselves had as children, or children may
have chronic illnesses that challenge families’ resources. In general, men
have been more concerned with their work and occupational advancement
than with child-rearing, and women have been more concerned about their


<<<PAGE 2861>>>
role as mothers than with advancement in their occupation. However, this
emphasis is changing dramatically for both sexes. A small but growing
number of couples are choosing to split a job (or work at two part-time jobs)
and share child-rearing duties.
Parenting has been described as a continuing process of letting go.
Children must be allowed to separate from parents and, in some cases, must
be encouraged to do so. Letting go involves separation from children who are
starting school. School phobias and school refusal syndromes that are
accompanied by extreme separation anxiety may have to be handled. Often, a
parent who cannot let go of a child accounts for this situation; some parents
want their children to remain tightly bound to them emotionally. Family
therapy that explores these dynamics may be needed to resolve such
problems.
As children get older and enter adolescence, the process of establishing
identity assumes great importance. Peer relationships become crucial to a
child’s development, and overprotective parents who keep a child from
developing friendships or having the freedom to experiment with friends that
the parents disapprove of can interfere with the child’s passage through
adolescence. Parents need not refrain from exerting influence over their
children; guidance and involvement are crucial. But they must recognize that
adolescents especially require parental approval. However, rebellious on the
surface, adolescents are much more tractable than they appear, provided
parents are not overbearing or generally punitive.
SINGLE-PARENT FAMILIES. More than 10 million single-parent families exist

with one or more children under the age of 18; of these families, 20 percent
are single-parent homes in which a woman is the sole head of the household.
The increase in the number of single-parent families has risen by almost 200
percent since 1980.
ALTERNATIVE LIFESTYLE PARENTING. Single, partnered, and married gay men

and women are choosing to raise children. In most cases, such children are
obtained through adoption. Some, however, may be born to a lesbian through
artificial insemination or obtained from a willing mother surrogate. The
number of such family units is increasing. The data about the development of
children in these homes indicate that they are at no greater risk for emotional


<<<PAGE 2862>>>
problems (or for a gay orientation) than children raised in conventional
households.
ADOPTION. Since the turn of the century, adoption or foster placement has

replaced institutional care as the preferred way to raise children who are
neglected, unwanted, or abandoned. Many couples who are unable to
conceive (and some couples who already have children) turn to adoption.
In addition to the full range of typical parent–child developmental issues,
adoptive parents face particular problems. They must decide how and when
to tell the child about the adoption. They must deal with the child’s possible
desire for information about his or her biologic parents. Adopted children are
more likely to develop conduct disorders, problems with drug abuse, and
antisocial personality traits. It is unclear whether these problems result from
the process of adoption or whether parents who give up children for adoption
are more likely to pass along a genetic predisposition for these behaviors.
With the widespread use of birth control and access to safe abortions, the
number of infants available for adoption has declined steeply. Wealthy
parents may prefer to arrange for private adoption rather than wait many
uncertain years for institutional adoption. (In private adoptions, a biologic
mother is paid for her legal and medical expenses but not for the baby. Baby
selling is a felony in all states.) International adoptions (especially from
Bosnia, Latin America, Eastern Europe, and China) have also become more
common. Questionable regulation in these countries has raised concerns that
some infants put up for adoption in developing countries may not be orphans
but are being sold by impoverished mothers.

MIDDLE ADULTHOOD (40 TO 65 YEARS OF AGE)
Middle adulthood is the golden age of adulthood, similar to the latency years
in childhood, but much longer. Physical health, emotional maturity,
competence, and power in the work situation, and gratifying relationships
with spouse, children, parents, friends, and colleagues all contribute to a
normative sense of satisfaction and well-being. Concerning occupation, many
persons begin to experience the gap between early aspirations and current
achievements. They may wonder whether the lifestyle and the commitments
they chose in early adulthood are worth continuing; they may feel that they


<<<PAGE 2863>>>
would like to live their remaining years in a different, more satisfying way,
without knowing exactly how. As children grow up and leave home, parental
roles change, and persons redefine their roles as husbands and wives.
Significant gender-specific changes occur in middle adulthood. Many
women who no longer need to nurture young children can release their
energy into independent pursuits that require assertiveness and a competitive
spirit, traits that were traditionally considered masculine. Alternatively, men
in middle adulthood may develop qualities that enable them to express their
emotions and recognize their dependency needs, traits that were usually
considered feminine. With the new balance of the masculine and the
feminine, a person may now be able to relate more effectively to someone of
the other sex than in the past.
Transition from Young to Middle Adulthood
The transition from young adulthood to middle adulthood is slow and
gradual, with no sharp physical or psychological demarcation. The aging
process picks up speed and becomes a powerful organizing influence on
intrapsychic life, but the change is gradual, unlike during adolescence.
Mental change is experienced similarly, slow and imperceptible, without a
sense of disruption.
Development in young adulthood is embedded in close relationships.
Intimacy, love, and commitment are related to the mastery of the
relationships most immediate to personal experience. The transition from
young adulthood to middle age includes widening concern for the more
extensive social system and differentiation of one’s own social, political, and
historical system from others. Authors have described middle adulthood in
terms of generativity, self-actualization, and wisdom.
Table 32-17
Features Salient to Middle Adulthood
Issues

Positive Features

Negative Features

Prime of life

Responsible use of power; Winner–loser view;
maturity; productivity
competitiveness

Stock taking:

Possibility; alternatives;

Closure; fatalism


<<<PAGE 2864>>>
what to do with
the rest of
one’s life
Fidelity and
commitments

organization of
commitments; redirection
Commitment to self, others, Hypocrisy; selfcareer, society; filial
deception
maturity

Growth-death (to Naturality regarding body,
grow is to die);
time
juvenescence
and
rejuvenation
fantasies

Obscene or frenetic
efforts (e.g., to be
youthful); hostility
and envy of youth
and progeny;
longing

Communication
and
socialization

Repetitiveness;
boredom;
impatience;
isolation;
conservatism;
confusion; rigidity

Matters understood;
continuity; picking up
where left off; large
social network;
rootedness of
relationships, places,
and ideas

Adapted from Robert N. Butler, M.D.

Developmental Theorists
Robert Butler described several underlying themes in middle adulthood that
appear to be present regardless of marital and family status, gender, or
economic level (Table 32-17). These themes include aging (as changes in
bodily functions are noticed in middle adulthood); taking stock of
accomplishments and setting goals for the future; reassessing commitments to
family, work, and marriage; dealing with parental illness and death, and
attending to all the developmental tasks without losing the capacity to
experience pleasure or to engage in playful activities.
Erik Erikson. Erikson described middle adulthood as characterized either
by generativity or by stagnation. Erikson defined generativity as the process
by which persons guide the oncoming generation or improve society. This


<<<PAGE 2865>>>
stage includes having and raising children, but wanting or having children
does not ensure generativity. A childless person can be generative by (1)
helping others, (2) being creative, and (3) contributing to society. Parents
must be secure in their own identities to raise children successfully: They
cannot be preoccupied with themselves and act as if they were, or wished to
be, the child in the family.
To be stagnant means that a person stops developing. For Erikson,
stagnation was anathema, and he referred to adults without any impulses to
guide the new generation or to those who produce children but don’t care for
them as being “within a cocoon of self-concern and isolation.” Such persons
are in great danger. Because they are unable to negotiate the developmental
tasks of middle adulthood, they are unprepared for the next stage of the life
cycle, old age, which places more demands on the psychological and physical
capacities than all the preceding stages.
George Vaillant. In his longitudinal study of 173 men who were
interviewed at 5-year intervals after they graduated from Harvard, Vaillant
found a strong correlation between physical and emotional health in middle
age. Also, those with the most deficient psychological adjustment during
college years had a high incidence of physical illness in middle age. No
single factor in childhood accounted for adult mental health, but an overall
sense of stability in the parental home predicted well-adjusted adulthood. A
close sibling relationship during college years was correlated with emotional
and physical well-being in middle age. In another study, Vaillant found that
childhood and adult work habits were related and that adult mental health and
good interpersonal relationships were associated with the capacity to work in
childhood. Vaillant’s studies are ongoing and represent the most extended
continuous study of adulthood ever performed.
Calvin Colarusso and Robert Nemiroff. Based on their experience as
clinicians and psychoanalysts, Calvin Colarusso and Robert Nemiroff
propose a broad theoretical foundation for adult development by suggesting
that the developmental process is the same in the adult as in the child
because, like the child, the adult is always in the midst of an ongoing
dynamic process, continually influenced by a constantly changing
environment, body, and mind. Whereas child development focuses primarily


<<<PAGE 2866>>>
on the formation of psychic structure, adult development is concerned with
the continuing evolution of existing psychic structure and with its use.
Although the fundamental issues of childhood continue in altered form as
central aspects of adult life, attempts to explain all adult behavior and
pathology in terms of the experiences of childhood are considered
reductionistic. The adult past must be taken into account in understanding
adult behavior in the same way that the childhood past is considered. The
aging body is understood to have a profound influence on psychological
development in adulthood, as is the growing midlife recognition and
acceptance of the finiteness of time and the inevitability of personal death.
Developing Midlife Friendships
Unlike friendships in latency and adolescence and, to some extent, in young
adulthood, midlife friendships do not usually have a sense of urgency or the
need for the frequent or nearly constant physical presence of the friend.
Midlife individuals have neither the need to build a new psychic structure (as
do latency-age children and adolescents) nor the pressing need to find new
relationships (as do young adults). They may have many sources of
gratification available through relationships with spouses, children, and
colleagues.
As their firstborn sons progressed through high school, two women in
their mid-40s became fast friends. In addition to raising money for the
school activities in which their sons were involved, thus maintaining a
close involvement with the boys, they spent many hours talking about the
boys’ activities, girlfriends, and college plans. Their husbands, who liked
each other, became acquaintances, not friends. They directed their
feelings about their sons into other relationships. After the boys left for
college, the intensity of the friendship diminished, tending to peak again
during vacation periods. (Courtesy of Calvin Colarusso, M.D.)
Because of their unique position in the life cycle, midlife adults are easily
able to initiate and sustain friendships with individuals of different ages, as
well as chronologic peers. In the face of a disrupted marriage or intimacy or


<<<PAGE 2867>>>
the pressure of other midlife developmental themes, friendships may quickly
become vehicles for the direct expression of impulses.
Reappraising Relationships. Midlife is a time of serious reappraisal of
marriage and committed relationships. In the process, individuals struggle
with the question of whether to settle for what they have or to search for
greater perfection with a new partner. For some, the conflict rages internally
and is kept from others; others express it through actions that take the form of
affairs, trial separations, and divorce.
Recent research on happy marriage indicates that these couples, despite
internal and real conflict, have found or achieved a special goodness-of-fit
between their individual needs, wishes, and expectations. In the eyes of these
couples, marital success is based on the ongoing, successful engagement of
several psychological tasks. Among the most important are providing a safe
place for conflict and difference, holding a double vision of the other, and
maintaining a satisfying sexual life.
The decision to leave a long-standing, committed relationship has great
consequences, not only for the two individuals involved but also for their
friends and loved ones. The effect on children, in particular, is especially
profound, extending far beyond childhood. The impact on the abandoned
spouse, parents, and close relatives may be nearly as severe.
Various forms of therapeutic intervention, such as marital counseling,
individual psychotherapy, and psychoanalysis, can be extremely effective in
helping uncertain individuals decide what to do or in helping those who leave
deal with the consequences of their decision on the abandoned partner,
children, and other loved ones. Problems relating to intimacy, love, and sex
can occupy a prominent position in an outpatient practice.
The four case studies presented here by Calvin Colarusso, M.D., illustrate
some of the issues described above.
A couple in their late 50s sought treatment to decide their marriage. Both
had been unhappy for years and wanted to divorce, feeling that they had
to act now while there was still time to begin new relationships that
would fulfill them. Their concerns were for their children and
grandchildren. How would they react? Would they respect their decision


<<<PAGE 2868>>>
to end a relationship of more than 30 years or attempt to stop the
separation? As the work progressed, they decided that seeking happiness
in the hopefully 20 or 30 years that they had left to live had to come
ahead of the feelings of their loved ones. The fact that their decision was
a mutual one facilitated their family’s gradual acceptance of the divorce.

A 43-year-old patient, Mr. S, was continually preoccupied with his
marriage during this 4-year psychoanalysis. Sexually inhibited during
adolescence, he “married the only girl in the world who knew less about
sex than I did.” Both were virgins on their wedding night. As the
marriage progressed, the couple gradually developed a “satisfactory” sex
life, but the patient always wondered what he had missed. As his sexual
inhibitions were explored, Mr. S’s sense of having “missed out on a lot of
opportunities” lead to visits to massage parlors and prostitutes.
Eventually, such behavior ceased because of the recognition that his wife
was a wonderful mother and loving wife and not the cause of the lack of
sexual experience that he brought into the marriage. “I’ll always feel that
I missed out when I was young, but I’ve got so much going for me now,
I’m not going to mess it up over something that I can’t change.”

A 38-year-old woman entered therapy after her husband discovered that
she was having sexual relations with men in their early and middle 20s.
She explained that she loved her husband, but he seemed to take her for
granted. He no longer made her feel attractive and wanted. As the therapy
progressed, it became clear that she felt that as long as she could attract
younger men, she was still young and sexually desirable. Struggling with
the early signs of physical aging, the realization that the young men were
only using her to satisfy their own sexual needs was sobering and
distressing. As she began to see that such behavior was self-destructive,
she approached her husband about starting marital therapy.

Fifty-year-old Mrs. T left her “wonderful” husband because “I’ve missed


<<<PAGE 2869>>>
something. I just have to get out on my own.” Married at 18 years of age,
“after going from my parents’ home to his home,” she recognized that her
rage at her husband for “not being all the other men I could have married,
for closing off all the living I could have done” was irrational but
uncontrollable. “I have to live on my own for a while to see if I can do it
before it’s too late.” Fully intending to return to her husband, she
continued exploring the infantile and adult issues that precipitated the
separation, leaving the future of the marriage in doubt.
Sexuality
Whereas the young adult is preoccupied with developing the capacity for
intimacy, the midlife individual is focused on maintaining intimacy in the
face of deterring physical, psychological, and environmental pressures. In a
long-standing relationship, these pressures include real and imaginary
concerns about diminished sexual capability, emotional withdrawal because
of preoccupation with developmental tasks, and the realistic pressures related
to work and providing for dependent children and, sometimes, elderly parents
as well. In relationships that begin in midlife, the maintenance of intimacy
can be compromised by the absence of a common past, age and generational
differences in interests and activities, and the difficulties involved in forming
a stepfamily.
For sexual intimacy to continue, the participants must (1) accept the
appearance of the partner’s middle-aged body, (2) continue to find it sexually
stimulating, and (3) accept the normative changes that occur in sexual
functioning. For those who master these developmental issues, the partner’s
body remains sexually stimulating. Diminished sexual ability is compensated
for by feelings of love and tenderness generated over the years by a satisfying
relationship. Those who cannot accept the changes in the partner’s body or
their stop having sex, begin affairs or leave the relationship, usually in search
of a younger partner.
Normative changes in midlife sexual functioning include diminished
sexual drive and an increase in mechanical problems. Men have greater
difficulty getting and sustaining erections and experience a longer refractory
period after ejaculation. Because of diminished estrogen production, women
experience a thinning of the vaginal mucosa, a decrease in secretions, and


<<<PAGE 2870>>>
fewer contractions at the time of orgasm. Women do not reach their sexual
prime until their mid-30s; consequently, they have a greater capacity for
orgasm in middle adulthood than in young adulthood. Women, however, are
more vulnerable than men to narcissistic blows to their self-esteem as they
lose their youthful appearance, which is overvalued in today’s society.
During middle adulthood, they may feel less sexually desirable than in early
adulthood and, thus, feel less entitled to adequate sex life. An inability to deal
with changes in body image prompts many women and men to undergo
cosmetic surgery to maintain their youthful appearance.
The demands of raising children interfere with the privacy and emotional
equilibrium required for intimacy, as do the pressures and responsibilities of
work. Fatigue and diminished interest are common denominators in these
circumstances. Patients with deeply rooted problems with sexuality or
relationships may use aging, work, and relationships with children or elderly
parents as a means of rationalizing their conflicts and refusing to analyze
them.
Climacterium
Middle adulthood is the time of the male and female climacterium, the period
in a life characterized by decreased biologic and physiologic functioning. For
women, the menopausal period is considered the climacterium, and it may
start anywhere from the 40s to the early 50s. Bernice Neugarten studied this
period and found that more than 50 percent of women described menopause
as an unpleasant experience. Still, a significant portion believed that their
lives had not changed in any meaningful way, and many women experienced
no adverse effects. Because they no longer had to worry about becoming
pregnant, some women report feeling sexually freer after menopause than
before its onset. Generally, the female climacterium has been stereotyped as a
sudden or radical psychophysiological experience. Still, it is more often a
gradual experience as estrogen secretion decreases with changes in the flow,
timing, and eventual cessation of the menses. Vasomotor instability (hot
flashes) can occur, and menopause can extend over several years. Some
women experience anxiety and depression, but women who have a history of
poor adaptation to stress are more predisposed to the menopausal syndrome.
For men, the climacterium has no clear demarcation; male hormones stay


<<<PAGE 2871>>>
reasonably constant through the 40s and 50s and then begin to decline.
Nevertheless, men must adapt to a decline in biologic functioning and overall
physical vigor. About age 50, a slight decrease in healthy sperm and seminal
fluid occurs, not sufficient, however, to preclude insemination. Coincident
with a decreased testosterone level may be fewer and less firm erections and
decreased sexual activity generally. Some men experience a so-called midlife
crisis during this period. The crisis can be mild or severe, characterized by a
sudden drastic change in work or marital relationships, severe depression,
increased use of alcohol or drugs, or a shift to an alternate lifestyle.
Midlife Transition and Crisis
The midlife transition has been defined as an intensive reappraisal of all
aspects of life precipitated by the growing recognition that life is finite and
approaching an end. It is characterized by mental turmoil, not action. For
most people, the reappraisal results in decisions to keep most life structures,
such as marriages and careers, which have been painstakingly built over time.
When significant changes are made, they are thoughtful and considered, even
when they include major shifts, such as divorce or a job change. The
developmentally aware clinician recognizes that every patient in this age
group is engaged in a midlife transition (whether the patient is talking about it
or not) and facilitates the process by making it conscious and verbal.
A true midlife crisis is a major, revolutionary turning point in life,
involving changes in commitments to career or spouse, or both, and
accompanied by significant, ongoing emotional turmoil for the individual and
others. It is an upheaval of substantial proportions. A flurry of impulsive
actions follows a period of internal agitation, for example, leaving spouse and
children, becoming involved with a new sexual partner, and quitting a job, all
within days or weeks of each other. Although unrecognized warning signs
may have existed, those who are left behind are often shocked by the
suddenness and abruptness of the change.
Efforts by family members or therapists to get the individual to stop and to
reconsider usually fall on deaf ears. The overwhelming need is to avoid
anyone who counsels restraint and to ignore therapists who recommend
examining motivations and feelings before making such major decisions.
Usually, during the crisis, the therapist is left with the painful job of helping


<<<PAGE 2872>>>
those who have been left to deal with their shock and grief.
Empty-Nest Syndrome. Another phenomenon described in middle
adulthood has been called the empty-nest syndrome, a depression that occurs
in some men and women when their youngest child is about to leave home.
Most parents, however, perceive the departure of the youngest child as a
relief rather than stress. If no compensating activities have been developed,
particularly by the mother, some parents become depressed. This is especially
true of women whose predominant role in life has been mothering or of
couples who decided to stay in an otherwise unhappy marriage “for the sake
of the children.”
Other Tasks of Middle Adulthood
As persons approach the age of 50, they clearly define what they want from
work, family, and leisure. Men who have reached their highest level of
advancement in work may experience disillusionment or frustration when
they realize they can no longer anticipate new work challenges. For women
who have invested themselves entirely in mothering, this period leaves them
with no suitable identity after the children leave home. Sometimes, social
rules become rigidly established; lack of freedom in lifestyle and a sense of
entrapment can lead to depression and a loss of confidence. Also, unique
financial burdens can occur in middle age, produced by pressures to care for
aged parents at one end of the spectrum and children at the other end.
Daniel Levinson described a transitional period between the ages of 50 and
55, during which a developmental crisis may occur when persons feel
incapable of changing an intolerable life structure. Although no single event
characterizes the transition, the physiologic changes that begin to appear may
have a dramatic effect on a person’s sense of self. For example, a person may
experience a decrease in cardiovascular efficiency that accompanies aging.
Chronologic age and physical infirmity are not linear; however, those who
exercise regularly, who do not smoke, and who eat and drink in moderation
can maintain their physical health and emotional well-being.
Middle adulthood is when persons frequently feel overwhelmed by too
many obligations and duties, but it is also a time of great satisfaction for most
persons. They have developed a wide array of acquaintances, friendships, and


<<<PAGE 2873>>>
relationships, and the satisfaction they express about their network of friends
predicts positive mental health. Some social ties, however, may be a source
of stress when demands either cannot be met or assault a person’s selfesteem. Middle-aged persons most generally possess power, leadership,
wisdom, and understanding, and if their health and vitality remain intact, it is
indeed the prime of life.

DIVORCE
Divorce is a significant crisis in life. Spouses often grow, develop, and
change at different rates; one spouse may discover that the other is not the
same as when they first married. In truth, both partners have changed and
evolved, not necessarily in complementary directions. Frequently, one spouse
blames a third person for alienation of affections and refuses to examine his
or her role in the marital problems. Certain aspects of marital deterioration
and divorce seem to be related to specific qualities of middle life—the need
for change, weariness with acting responsibly, fear of facing up to oneself.
Types of Separation
Paul Bohannan, an anthropologist with expertise in marriage and divorce,
described the types of separations that take place at the time of divorce.
Psychic Divorce. In psychic divorce, the love object is given up, and a
grief reaction about the death of the relationship occurs. Sometimes a period
of anticipatory mourning sets in before the divorce. Separating from a spouse
forces a person to become autonomous, to change from a position of
dependence. The separation may be difficult to achieve, mainly if both are
used to being dependent on each other (as happens typically in marriage) or if
one was so dependent as to be afraid or incapable of becoming independent.
Most persons report such feelings as depression, ambivalence, and mood
swings at the time of divorce. Studies indicate that recovery from divorce
takes about 2 years; by then, the ex-spouse may be viewed neutrally, and
each spouse accepts his or her new identity as a single person.
Legal Divorce. Legal divorce involves going through the courts so that
each of the parties is remarriageable. Of divorced women and divorced men,


<<<PAGE 2874>>>
75 percent and 80 percent, respectively, remarry within 3 years of divorce.
No-fault divorce, in which neither person is judged to be the guilty party, has
become the most widely used legal mechanism for divorce.
Economic Divorce. Economic divorce involves significant concerns about
the division of the couple’s property between them and economic support for
the wife. Many men who are ordered by the courts to pay alimony or child
support flout the law and create a major social problem.
Community Divorce. The social network of the divorced couple changes
markedly. A few relatives and friends are retained from the community, and
new ones are added. The task of meeting new friends is often tricky for
divorced persons, who may realize how dependent they were on their spouses
for social exchanges.
Coparental Divorce. Coparental divorce is the separation of a parent from
the child’s other parent. Being a single parent differs from being a married
parent.
Custody
The parental right doctrine is a legal concept that awards custody to the more
fit natural parent and attempts to ensure that the best interests of the child are
served. In the past, mothers were almost always awarded custody, but
custody is now given to fathers in about 15 percent of cases. Custodial fathers
are likely to be white, married, older, and better educated than custodial
mothers. Women who are granted custody have a better chance of being
awarded child support and of actually receiving payment than do men who
are given custody. Nevertheless, women who accept payments still have
lower incomes than men who receive compensation.
The types of custody include joint custody, in which a child spends equal
time with each parent, an increasingly common practice; split custody, in
which siblings are separated and each parent has custody of one or more of
the children; and single custody, in which the children live solely with one
parent and the other parent has rights of visitation that may be limited in
some way by the court. Child support payments are more likely to be made
when parents have joint custody or when the noncustodial parent is given


<<<PAGE 2875>>>
visitation rights.
Problems can surface in the parent–child relationship with the custodial or
the noncustodial parent. The absence of the noncustodial parent in the home
represents the reality of the divorce, and the custodial parent may become the
target of the child’s anger about the divorce. The parent under such stress
may not be able to deal with the child’s increased needs and emotional
demands.
The noncustodial parent must cope with limits placed on time spent with
the child. This parent loses the day-to-day gratification and the
responsibilities involved with parenting. Emotional distress is common in
parent and child. Joint custody offers a solution with some advantages, but it
requires substantial maturity on the part of the parents and can present some
problems. Parents must separate their child-rearing practices from their
postdivorce resentments, and they must develop a spirit of cooperation about
rearing the child. They must also be able to tolerate frequent communication
with the ex-spouse.
Reasons for Divorce
Divorce tends to run in families, and rates are highest in couples who marry
as teenagers or come from different socioeconomic backgrounds. Every
marriage is psychologically unique, and so is each divorce. If a person’s
parents were divorced, he or she might choose to resolve a marital problem in
the same way, through a divorce. Expectations of the spouse may be
unrealistic: One partner may expect the other to act as an all-giving mother or
a magically protective father. The parenting experience places the most
significant strain on a marriage. In surveys of couples with and without
children, those without children reported getting more pleasure from their
spouse than those with children. Illness in the child creates the greatest strain
of all and more than 50 percent of marriages in which a child has died
through illness or accident end in divorce.
Other causes of marital distress are problems with sex and money. Both
areas may be used as a means of control, and withholding sex or money is a
means of expressing aggression. Also, less social pressure to remain married
currently exists. As discussed above, the easing of divorce laws and the
declining influence of religion and the extended family make divorce an


<<<PAGE 2876>>>
acceptable course of action today.
Intercourse Outside of Marriage. Adultery is defined as voluntary
sexual intercourse between a married person and someone other than his or
her spouse. For men, the first extramarital affair is often associated with the
wife’s pregnancy, when coitus may be interdicted. Most of these incidents are
kept secret from the spouse and, if known, rarely account for divorce.
Nevertheless, the infidelity can serve as the catalyst for basic dissatisfactions
in the marriage to the surface, and these problems may then lead to its
dissolution. Adultery may decline, as potentially fatal STDs such as acquired
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) serve as sobering deterrents.

ADULT MATURITY
Success and happiness in adulthood are made possible by achieving a
modicum of maturity—a mental state, not an age. The capacity for maturity,
however, is a direct outgrowth of the engagement and mastery of the
developmental tasks of young and middle adulthood. From a developmental
perspective, maturity can be defined as a mental state found in healthy adults
that is characterized by detailed knowledge of the parameters of human
existence, a sophisticated level of self-awareness based on an honest
appraisal of one’s own experience within those basic parameters, and the
ability to use this intellectual and emotional knowledge and insight caringly
concerning one’s self and others.
The achievement of maturity in midlife leads to the emergence of the
capacity for wisdom. Those who possess wisdom have learned from the past
and are fully engaged in life in the present. Just as important, they anticipate
the future and make the necessary decisions to enhance prospects for health
and happiness. In other words, a philosophy of life has been developed that
includes understanding and acceptance of the person’s place in the order of
human existence. Unfortunately, the joys of midlife do not last forever. Old
age lies ahead. Although the hope and statistical expectation is for many
years of mental competence and independence, physical and mental decline,
increased dependence, and, eventually, death must be anticipated. Late
adulthood has its great pleasure, when there is a focus on continued mental
and physical activity, a dominant preoccupation with the present and the


<<<PAGE 2877>>>
future, and involvement with and facilitation of the young. Then, death can
be met with feelings of satisfaction and acceptance, the natural endpoint of
human existence that follows a life lived and well loved.

32.3 Old Age
When we progress from youth to old age, the focus may change from
pursuing wealth to maintaining health. In late adulthood, the aging body
increasingly becomes a central concern, replacing the midlife preoccupations
with career and relationships. This change is so because of diminution in
function, altered physical appearance, and the increased incidence of physical
illness. Despite these occurrences, the body in late adulthood can still be a
source of considerable pleasure and can convey a sense of competence,
particularly when giving attention to regular exercise, a healthy diet, adequate
rest, and preventive maintenance medical care. The normal state in the aged
is physical and mental health, not illness and debilitation. The developmental
tasks of late adulthood that lead to mental health are listed in Table 32-18.
Table 32-18
Developmental Tasks of Late Adulthood
To maintain the body image and physical integrity
To conduct the life review
To maintain sexual interests and activities
To deal with the death of significant loved ones
To accept the implications of retirement
To accept the genetically programmed failure of organ systems
To divest oneself of the attachment to possessions
To accept changes in the relationship with grandchildren
Old age, or late adulthood, usually refers to the stage of the life cycle that
begins at age 65. Gerontologists—those who study the aging process—divide
older adults into two groups: young-old, ages 65 to 74, and old-old, ages 75
and beyond. Some use the term oldest-old to refer to those over 85. Older


<<<PAGE 2878>>>
adults can also be described as well-old (healthy persons) and sick-old
(persons who have an infirmity that interferes with functioning and requires
medical or psychiatric attention). The health needs of older adults have grown
enormously as the population ages, and geriatric physicians and psychiatrists
play significant roles in treating this population.

DEMOGRAPHICS
The number of individuals over age 65 is rapidly expanding. In 1900, for
example, 4 percent of the US population was older than 65 years. By 2012 it
was 13.7 percent, and by 2050, it is projected to be about 20 percent. That
increase far exceeds the general population growth—tenfold compared with
just over threefold between 1900 and 2000—and is projected to continue
(e.g., 2.5 times vs. just over 1.5 times between 1990 and 2050) (Table 32-19).
Table 32-19
Aging Population of the United States: 1900–2050


<<<PAGE 2879>>>
The life expectancy for women at birth is projected to continue to exceed
that for men by 7 years until 2050. By 2050, the composition of the US
population by age and sex is estimated to differ markedly from that today.
Such changes are bound to influence income and marital statistics, the
percentage of elderly persons living alone or in long-term care facilities, and
other aspects of the social network. A summary of demographic highlights of
the aged is given in Table 32-20.
The accuracy of these projections, however, depends on the accuracy of
other predications such as birth rates, immigration, and emigration—all of
which are more difficult to gauge for the future than the remaining variables,
death rates, or life expectancies. Projections concerning life expectancy, for
example, can change substantially within a single decade.


<<<PAGE 2880>>>
BIOLOGY OF AGING
The aging process, or senescence (from the Latin senescere, “to grow old”),
is characterized by a gradual decline in the functioning of all of the body’s
systems—cardiovascular, respiratory, genitourinary, endocrine, and immune,
among others. However, the belief that old age is invariably associated with
profound intellectual and physical infirmity is a myth. Many older persons
retain their cognitive abilities and physical capacities to a remarkable degree.
An overview of the biologic changes that accompany old age is given in
Table 32-21. The various decrements listed do not occur linearly in all
systems. Not all organ systems deteriorate at the same rate, nor do they
follow a similar pattern of decline for all persons. Each person is genetically
endowed with one or more vulnerable systems, or a system may become
vulnerable because of environmental stressors or intentional misuse, such as
excessive ultraviolet exposure, smoking, or alcohol use. Moreover, not all
organ systems deteriorate at the same time. Any one of several organ systems
begins to deteriorate, and this deterioration then leads to illness or death.
Aging generally means the aging of cells. In the most commonly held
theory, each cell has a genetically determined life span, during which it can
replicate itself a limited number of times before it dies. Structural changes
occur in cells with age. In the central nervous system, for example, agerelated cell changes occur in neurons, which show signs of degeneration. In
senility (characterized by severe memory loss and a loss of intellectual
functioning), signs of degeneration are much more severe. An example is the
neurofibrillary degeneration seen most commonly in dementia of the
Alzheimer’s type.
Structural changes and mutations in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and
ribonucleic acid (RNA) are also found in aging cells; these have been
attributed to genotypic programming, x-rays, chemicals, and food products,
among others. Probably no single cause of aging exists, and all areas of the
body are affected to some degree. Genetic factors have been implicated in
disorders that commonly occur in older persons, such as hypertension,
coronary artery disease, arteriosclerosis, and neoplastic disease. Family
studies indicate inheritance factors for breast and stomach cancer, colon
polyps, and certain mental disorders of old age. Huntington disease shows an
autosomal dominant mode of inheritance with complete penetrance. The


<<<PAGE 2881>>>
average age of onset is between 35 and 40 years, but cases have occurred as
late as 70 years.
Longevity
Longevity has been studied since the beginning of recorded history and has
always been a topic of great interest. The research about longevity reveals
that a family history of longevity is the best indicator of a long life; of
persons who live past 80, half of their fathers also lived past 80.
Nevertheless, many conditions leading to a shortened life can be prevented,
ameliorated, or delayed with effective intervention. Heredity is but one factor
—one beyond a person’s control. Predictors of longevity that are within a
person’s control include regular medical checkups, minimal or no caffeine or
alcohol consumption, work gratification, and a perceived sense of the self as
being socially useful in an altruistic role, such as a spouse, teacher, mentor,
parent, or grandparent. Healthy eating and adequate exercise are also
associated with health and longevity.
Table 32-20
Demographic Highlights of the Aged
• The older population (65+) numbered 4.04 million in 2010, an
increase of 5.4 million for 15.3 since 2000.
• The number of Americans aged 45–64—who will reach 65 over the
next two decades—increased by 31% during this decade.
• Over one in every eight, or 13.1%, of the population is an older
American.
• Persons reaching age 65 have an average life expectancy of an
additional 18.8 yr (20 yr for females and 17.3 for males).
• Older women outnumber older men at 23 million older women to
17.5 million older men.
• In 2010, 20% of persons 65+ were minorities—8.4% were African
American.a Persons of Hispanic origin (who may be of any race)
represented 6.9% of the older population. About 3.5% were Asian
or Pacific Islanders,a and less than 1% were American Indian or
Native Alaskan.a


<<<PAGE 2882>>>
• In addition, 0.8% of persons 65+ identified themselves as being of
two or more races.
• Older men were much more likely to be married than older women
—72% of men vs. 42% of women. In 2010, 40% older women were
widows.
• About 29% (11.3 million) of noninstitutionalized older persons live
alone (8.1 million women, 3.2 million men).
• Almost half of older women (47%) age 75+ live alone.
• About 485,000 grandparents aged 65 or more had the primary
responsibility for their grandchildren who lived with them.
• The population 65 and over has increased from 35 million in 2000
to 40 million in 2010 (a 15% increase) and is projected to increase
up to 55 million in 2020 (a 36% increase for that decade).
• The 85+ population is projected to increase from 5.5 million in 2010
and then 6.6 million in 2020 (19%) for that decade.
• Minority populations have increased from 5.7 million in 2000
(16.3% of the elderly population) to 8.1 million in 2010 (20% of the
elderly) and are projected to increase to 13.1 million in 2020 (24%
of the elderly).
• The median income of older persons in 2010 was $25,704 for
males and $15,072 for females. Median money income (after
adjusting for inflation) of all households headed by older people fell
1.5% (not statistically significant) from 2009 to 2010. Households
containing families headed by person 65+ reported a median
income in 2010 of $45,763.
• The major sources of income as reported by older persons in 2009
were Social Security (reported by 87% of older persons), income
from assets (reported by 53%), private pensions (reported by
28%), government employee pensions (reported by 14%), and
earnings (reported by 26%).
• Social Security constituted 90% or more of the income received by
35% of beneficiaries in 2009 (22% married couples and 43% of
nonmarried beneficiaries).
• Almost 3.5 million elderly persons (9.0%) were below the poverty
level in 2010. This poverty rate is not statistically different from the


<<<PAGE 2883>>>
poverty rate in 2009 (8.9%). During 2011, the U.S. Census Bureau
also released a new Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM) that
takes into account regional variations in the living costs, noncash
benefits received, and nondiscretionary expenditures but does not
replace the official poverty measure. The SPM shows a poverty
level for older persons of 15.9%, an increase of over 75% over the
official rate of 9% mainly due to medical out-of-pocket expenses.
• About 11% (3.7 million) of older Medicare enrollees received
personal care from a paid or unpaid source in 1999.
aPrinciple source data for the profile are from the U.S. Census Bureau, the National Center for

Health Statistics, and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The profile incorporates the latest data
(2010) available but not all items are updated on an annual basis.

Table 32-21
Biologic Changes Associated with Aging
Cellular Level
Change in cellular DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA
(ribonucleic acid) structures: intracellular organelle degeneration
Neuronal degeneration in central nervous system, primarily in
superior temporal precentral and inferior temporal gyri; no loss in
brainstem nuclei
Receptor sites and sensitivity altered
Decreased anabolism and catabolism of cellular transmitter
substances
Intercellular collagen and elastin increase
Immune System
Impaired T-cell response to antigen
Increase in function of autoimmune bodies
Increased susceptibility to infection and neoplasia
Leukocytes unchanged, T lymphocytes reduced
Increased erythrocyte sedimentation (nonspecific)
Musculoskeletal
Decrease in height because of shortening of spinal column (2-in


<<<PAGE 2884>>>
loss in both men and women from the second to the seventh
decades)
Reduction in lean muscle mass and muscle strength; deepening of
thoracic cage
Increase in body fat
Elongation of nose and ears
Loss of bone matrix, leading to osteoporosis
Degeneration of joint surfaces may produce osteoarthritis
Risk of hip fracture is 10–25% by age 90
Continual closing of cranial sutures (parietomastoid suture does
not attain complete closure until age 80)
Men gain weight until about age 60, then lose; women gain weight
until age 70, then lose
Integument
Graying of hair results from decreased melanin production in hair
follicles (by age 50, 50% of all persons male and female are at
least 50% gray; pubic hair is last to turn gray)
General wrinkling of skin
Less active sweat glands
Decrease in melanin
Loss of subcutaneous fat
Nail growth slowed
Genitourinary and Reproductive
Decreased glomerular filtration rate and renal blood flow
Decreased hardness of erection, diminished ejaculatory spurt
Decreased vaginal lubrication
Enlargement of prostate
Incontinence
Special Senses
Thickening of optic lens, reduced peripheral vision
Inability to accommodate (presbyopia)
High-frequency sound hearing loss (presbyacusis)—25% show
loss by age 60, 65% by age 80


<<<PAGE 2885>>>
Yellowing of optic lens
Reduced acuity of taste, smell, and touch
Decreased light-dark adaption
Neuropsychiatric
Takes longer to learn new material, but complete learning still
occurs
Intelligence quotient (IQ) remains stable until age 80
Verbal ability maintained with age
Psychomotor speed declines
Memory
Tasks requiring shifting attentions performed with difficulty
Encoding ability diminishes (transfer of short- to long-term memory
and vice versa)
Recognition of right answer on multiple-choice tests remains intact
Simple recall declines
Neurotransmitters
Norepinephrine decreases in central nervous system
Increased monoamine oxidase and serotonin in brain
Brain
Decrease in gross brain weight, about 17% by age 80 in both
sexes
Widened sulci, smaller convolutions, gyral atrophy
Ventricles enlarge
Increased transport across blood–brain barrier
Decreased cerebral blood flow and oxygenation
Cardiovascular
Increase in size and weight of heart (contains lipofuscin pigment
derived from lipids)
Decreased elasticity of heart valves
Increased collagen in blood vessels
Increased susceptibility to arrhythmias
Altered homeostasis of blood pressure


<<<PAGE 2886>>>
Cardiac output maintained in absence of coronary heart disease
Gastrointestinal (GI) System
At risk for atrophic gastritis, hiatal hernia, diverticulosis
Decreased blood flow to gut, liver
Diminished saliva flow
Altered absorption from GI tract (at risk for malabsorption
syndrome and avitaminosis)
Constipation
Endocrine
Estrogen levels decrease in women
Adrenal androgen decreases
Testosterone production declines in men
Increase in follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing
hormone (LH) in postmenopausal women
Serum thyroxine (T4) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
normal, triiodothyronine (T3) reduced
Glucose tolerance test result decreases
Respiratory
Decreased vital capacity
Diminished cough reflex
Decreased bronchial epithelium ciliary action
Life Expectancy
In the United States, the average life expectancy has increased throughout the
last century—from 48 years in 1900 to 77.4 years for men and 82.2 years for
women in 2013. The projected life expectancy at birth, and age 65 is
indicated in Table 32-22. Changes in morbidity and mortality have also
occurred. Over the past 30 years, for example, a 60 percent decline has
occurred in mortality from cerebrovascular disease and a 30 percent decline
in mortality from coronary artery disease. In contrast, mortality from cancer,
which rises steeply with age, has increased, especially cancer of the lung,
colon, stomach, skin, and prostate.
The oldest-old, persons over 85 years of age, is the most rapidly growing


<<<PAGE 2887>>>
segment of the older population. Over the past 25 years, the population of all
older persons increased by 100 percent, compared with 45 percent for the
entire US population, but the increase for the 85 and older group exceeded
275 percent. It is expected that by 2050, the oldest-old will make up about 25
percent of the elderly population and 5 percent of the total population in the
United States. Figure 32-7 gives projected percentages for the average annual
growth rate of the elderly population to 2050.
Table 32-22
Projected Life Expectancy at Birth and Age 65, by Sex:
1990–2050 (in Years)

The leading causes of death among older persons are heart disease, cancer,
and stroke. Accidents are among the leading causes of death of persons over
65. Most fatal accidents are caused by falls, pedestrian incidents, and burns.
Falls are most commonly the result of cardiac arrhythmias and hypotensive
episodes.
Some gerontologists consider death in very old persons (over 85) to result
from an aging syndrome characterized by diminished elastic-mechanical
properties of the heart, arteries, lungs, and other organs. Death results from
trivial tissue injuries that would not be fatal to a younger person; accordingly,


<<<PAGE 2888>>>
senescence is viewed as the cause of death.
Ethnicity and Race
The proportion of older persons in the black, Hispanic, and Asian populations
is smaller than that in the white population, but it is increasing rapidly. By
2050, 20 percent of older persons will be nonwhite. The proportion of older
persons who are Hispanic will increase from 4 percent to approximately 14
percent over the same period. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Hispanic
refers to persons “whose origins are Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central
or South American, and other Hispanic or Latino, regardless of race” (Fig.
32-8).
Sex Ratios
On average, women live longer than men and are more likely than men to
live alone. The number of men per 100 women decreases sharply from ages
65 to 85 (Fig. 32-9).
Geographic Distribution
The most populous states have the largest number of older persons.
California has the most (3.3 million), followed by New York, Pennsylvania,
Texas, Michigan, Illinois, Florida, and Ohio, each with more than 1 million.
States with high proportions of older persons include Pennsylvania, Florida,
Nebraska, and North Dakota. Florida’s high percentage of older adults related
its popularity as a retirement locale. In other states, the reason is usually more
young persons leaving.
Exercise, Diet, and Health
Diet and exercise play a role in preventing or ameliorating chronic diseases of
older persons, such as arteriosclerosis and hypertension. Hyperlipidemia,
which correlates with coronary artery disease, can be controlled by reducing
body weight, decreasing the intake of saturated fat, and limiting the intake of
cholesterol. Increasing the daily intake of dietary fiber can also help decrease
serum lipoprotein levels. A daily intake of 1 oz (about 30 mL) of alcohol has
been correlated with longevity and elevated high-density lipoproteins
(HDLs). Studies have also clearly demonstrated that statin drugs that reduce


<<<PAGE 2889>>>
cholesterol have a dramatic effect on reducing cardiovascular disease in
persons with diet-resistant or exercise-resistant hyperlipidemia.
Low salt intake (less than 3 g a day) is associated with a lowered risk of
hypertension. Hypertensive geriatric patients can often correct their condition
by moderate exercise and decreased salt intake without the addition of drugs.

FIGURE 32-7
Average annual growth rate of the elderly population. (Data from U.S. Bureau of
the Census.)

A regimen of moderate daily exercise (walking for 30 minutes a day) has
been associated with a reduction in cardiovascular disease, decreased
incidence of osteoporosis, improved respiratory function, the maintenance of
ideal weight, and a general sense of well-being. Exercise has been shown to
improve strength and function even among the very old. In many cases, a
disease process has been reversed and even cured by diet and exercise,
without additional medical or surgical intervention.


<<<PAGE 2890>>>
FIGURE 32-8
Percent distribution of people 55 years and over by race, Hispanic origin, and
age: 2002. (Data from U.S. Bureau of the Census.)

Table 32-23 lists the biologic changes associated with diet and exercise. A
comparison with Table 32-19 reveals that almost every biologic change
associated with aging is positively affected by diet and exercise.

STAGE THEORIES OF PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
Early personality theorists proposed that development was completed by the
end of childhood or adolescence. One of the first development theorists to
propose that personality continues to develop and grow over the life span was
Erik Erikson. Erikson believed that development proceeded through a series
of psychosocial stages, each with its conflict that is resolved by the individual
with greater or lesser success. Erikson termed the crisis of the last epoch of
life integrity versus despair and believed that successful resolution of this
crisis involved a process of life review and achieving a sense of peace and
wisdom through coming to terms with how one’s life was lived. For example,
Erikson proposed that successful resolution of this crisis would be
characterized by a sense of having lived one’s life well, whereas a less
successful resolution would be characterized by feeling that life was too
short, that one did not choose wisely, and bitterness that one will not have a
chance to live life over.


<<<PAGE 2891>>>
FIGURE 32-9
Sex ratio of people 55 years and over by age: 2002. (Data from U.S. Bureau of
the Census.)

Table 32-23
Positive and Healthy Physiologic Effects of Exercise and
Nutrition
Increases
Strength of bones, ligaments, and muscles
Muscle mass and body density
Articular cartilage thickness
Skeletal muscle ATP (adenosine triphosphatase), CRP (C-reactive
protein), K+ (potassium), and myoglobin
Skeletal muscle oxidative enzyme content and mitochondria
Skeletal muscle arterial collaterals and capillary density
Heart volume and weight
Blood volume and total circulating hemoglobin
Cardiac stroke volume
Myocardial contractility
Maximal CO2 (A-V)
Maximal blood lactate concentration
Maximal pulmonary ventilation


<<<PAGE 2892>>>
Maximal respiratory work
Maximal oxygen diffusing capacity
Maximal exercise capacity as measured by the maximal oxygen
intake, exercise time, and distance
Serum high-density lipoprotein concentration
Anaerobic threshold
Plasma insulin concentration with submaximal exercise
Decreases
Heart rate at rest and during submaximal exercise
Blood lactate concentration during submaximal exercise
Pulmonary ventilation during submaximal work
Respiratory quotient during submaximal work
Serum triglyceride concentration
Body fatness
Serum low-density lipoprotein concentration
Systolic blood pressure
Core temperature threshold for initiation of sweating
Sweat sodium and chloride content
Plasma epinephrine and norepinephrine with submaximal exercise
Plasma glucagon and growth hormone concentrations with
submaximal exercise
Relative hemoconcentration with submaximal exercise in the heat
Reprinted from Buskirk ER. In: White PL, Monderka T, eds. Diet and Exercise: Synergism in
Health Maintenance. Chicago: American Medical Association; 1982:133, with permission.

Table 32-24
Old Age Developmental Theorists
Sigmund
Freud

Increasing control of the ego and id with aging results
in increased autonomy. Regression may permit
primitive modes of functioning to reappear.

Erik Erikson The central conflict in old age is between integrity, the
sense of satisfaction people feel reflecting on a life
lived productively, and despair, the sense that life


<<<PAGE 2893>>>
has little purpose or meaning. Contentment in old
age comes only with getting beyond narcissism and
into intimacy and generativity.
Heinz Kohut Old people must continually cope with narcissistic
injury as they attempt to adapt to the biologic,
psychological, and social losses associated with the
aging process. The maintenance of self-esteem is a
major task of old age.
Bernice
The major conflict of old age relates to giving up the
Neugarten
position of authority and evaluating achievements
and former competence. It is a time of reconciliation
with others and resolution of grief over the death of
others and the approaching death of self.
Daniel
Levinson

Ages 60–65 is a transition period (“the late adult
transition”). People who are narcissistic and too
heavily invested in body appearance are liable to
become preoccupied with death. Creative mental
activity is a normal and healthy substitute for
reduced physical activity.

Several studies have attempted to validate aspects of Erikson’s theory. In
one study, a sample of more than 400 men was studied prospectively, and the
highest Eriksonian life stage each achieved was rated according to data
gathered on the circumstances of his life. For example, if a man had achieved
independence from his family of origin and was self-sufficient but was
unable to develop an intimate relationship, the highest life stage achieved
would be the identity stage, not the intimacy stage. This study found that
Eriksonian stages are passed through in sequential order, although often not
at the same age for every individual, and that the stages are surprisingly
universal in populations that are ethnically and socioeconomically diverse.
A longitudinal study of approximately 500 subjects from two age cohorts
found that the earlier age cohort scored significantly higher on integrity than
the latter age cohort, and scores for both age cohorts on integrity had declined
significantly by the final time of testing. These data suggest that the conflict


<<<PAGE 2894>>>
of integrity versus despair may have a more favorable outcome in earlier age
cohorts than in later ones, raising the possibility that changing societal values
have hurt the struggle for integrity. Another study found that wisdom, a
construct related to integrity, bore a more substantial relation to life
satisfaction in elderly adults than other variables, including finances, health,
and living situation.
A survey of theories of development in old age is given in Table 32-24.
Personality Over the Life Span: Stability or Change?
Although Erikson and other stage theorists focused on unique developmental
tasks and stages central to each phase of life, other theorists focused on
defining core personality traits within the individual and determining their
course over the life span. For example, do those who are gregarious or
extroverted during early childhood and adolescence remain extroverted
through midlife and old age? Several well-designed longitudinal studies that
have followed individuals over periods ranging from 10 to 50 years have
found strong evidence for stability in five essential personality traits:
extroversion, neuroticism, agreeableness, openness to experience, and
conscientiousness. Some studies found slight decreases in extroversion and
slight increases in agreeableness as individuals move into the oldest-old
category, which contrasts with early theories that proposed that personality
rigidifies as individuals age.
Is the fact that personality appears to have considerable stability over time
inconsistent with the basic tenets of stage theories? Perhaps not. It may be
that although individuals are consistent over time in their basic personality
structure, the themes and conflicts with which they struggle change
considerably over the life span, from concerns about developing identity and
a stable sense of self to finding a life partner, to issues related to life review,
as hypothesized by the stage theories. Also, in developing theories about
personality change, few studies have examined the impact of significant
historical events on personality; thus, how these events may result in
personality change have not been studied systematically.

PSYCHOSOCIAL ASPECTS OF AGING


<<<PAGE 2895>>>
Social Activity
Healthy older persons usually maintain a level of social activity that is only
slightly changed from that of earlier years. For many, old age is a period of
continued intellectual, emotional, and psychological growth. In some cases,
however, physical illness or the death of friends and relatives may preclude
continued social interaction. Moreover, as persons experience an increased
sense of isolation, they may become vulnerable to depression. Growing
evidence indicates that maintaining social activities is valuable for physical
and emotional well-being. Contact with younger persons is also essential. Old
persons can pass on cultural values and provide care services to the younger
generation and thereby maintain a sense of usefulness that contributes to selfesteem.
Ageism
Ageism, a term coined by Robert Butler, refers to discrimination toward old
persons and to the negative stereotypes about old age that are held by
younger adults. Old persons may themselves resent and fear other old persons
and discriminate against them. In Butler’s scheme, persons often associate
old age with loneliness, poor health, senility, and general weakness or
infirmity. The experience of older persons, however, does not consistently
support this attitude. For example, although 50 percent of young adults
expect poor health to be a problem for those over 65 years old, 75 percent of
persons 65 to 74 years of age describe their health as good. Two-thirds of
persons 75 and older feel the same way. Health problems, when they do exist,
more often involve chronic than acute conditions. More than four of five
persons over the age of 65 have at least one chronic condition (Table 32-25).
Good health, however, is not the sole determinant of a good quality of life
in old age. Surveys of old persons show that social contacts are at least as
highly valued. The factors affecting good aging appear to be
multidimensional. Aging “robustly” means considering aging in terms of
productive involvement, affective status, functional status, and cognitive
status. These four indicators are only minimally correlated. The most robustly
aging individuals report more significant social contact, better health and
vision, and fewer significant life events in the past 3 years than their less
robustly aging counterparts. A linear, age-related decrease occurs in


<<<PAGE 2896>>>
robustness, but it can still be found among the oldest-old.
Table 32-25
Top Ten Chronic Conditions for People 65+, by Age and
Race (Number Per 1,000 People)

George Vaillant followed up a group of Harvard freshmen into old age and
found the following about emotional health at age 65: Having been close to
brothers and sisters during college correlated with emotional well-being;
undergoing early traumatic life experiences, such as the death of a parent or
parental divorce, did not correlate with poor adaptation in old age; being
depressed at some point between ages 21 and 50 predicted emotional
problems at age 65, and possessing the personality traits of pragmatism and
dependability as a young adult was associated with a sense of well-being at
age 65.
Transference
Several forms of transference, some of them unique to adulthood, are present
in older adults. First is the well-recognized parental transference, in which the
patient reacts to the therapist as a child to a parent. Peer or sibling
transference, expressions of experiences from a variety of nonparental
relationships, is also common. In this form of transference, the patient looks
to the therapist to share experiences with siblings, spouses, friends, and
associates. At first, therapists may be surprised by older patients’ ability to
ignore their age in creating such transferences.


<<<PAGE 2897>>>
In son or daughter transference, quite common in middle-aged individuals
and the elderly, the therapist is cast in the role of the patient’s child,
grandchild, or son-in-law or daughter-in-law. The themes expressed in this
form of transference are multiple and often center on defenses against
dependency feelings, activity and dominance versus passivity and
submission, and attempts to rework unsatisfying aspects of relationships with
children before time runs out. Finally, sexual transferences in older
individuals are frequent and intense, and the therapist needs to be able to
accept them and manage his or her countertransference responses.
Countertransference
Older individuals are dealing with illness and signs of aging, the loss of
spouses and friends, and the constant awareness of time limitation and the
nearness of death. These are painful issues that are just beginning to come
into focus for younger therapists who would prefer not to confront them with
great intensity daily.
The second source of countertransference responses centers on the older
patient’s sexuality. The presence of a vivid fantasy life, masturbation, and
intercourse is disconcerting in and of themselves if the therapist has not had
much experience in working with individuals who are the same age as their
parents and grandparents. Consider the experience presented in the case study
of a 31-year-old female therapist who was treating a 62-year-old man.
Early in the treatment process, Mr. E’s sexual feelings emerged. His wellgroomed appearance and adolescent-like nervousness caused the therapist
discomfort. Her concern was how to engender respect and develop a
therapeutic alliance with a patient who approached each session as a date,
mainly because he was old enough to be her grandfather. At first shocked
by his open expression of sexual interest in her, with the help of
supervision and her therapy, she was able to recognize that she and the
patient had similar conflicts to resolve, despite the 30-year age difference
between them. She had hoped that Mr. E would be “all grown up,”
devoid of issues that she was grappling with also. She came to recognize
that failure to help him understand the relation between his past and still
vibrant sexuality would do the patient a great disservice. It would spring


<<<PAGE 2898>>>
from her a lack of understanding of late-life sexual development and her
countertransference reaction to him based on her conflicted attitudes
toward the sexuality of her parents and grandparents. (Courtesy of Calvin
A. Colarusso, M.D.)
Socioeconomics
The economics of old age is of paramount importance to older persons
themselves and society at large. The past 30 years have seen a dramatic
decline in the proportion of the US elderly population who are poor,
primarily as a result of the availability of Medicare, Social Security, and
private pensions. In 1959, 35.2 percent of persons over 65 lived below the
poverty line, but by 2012 this figure had declined to 9.1 percent. Persons over
age 65 make up 12 percent of the population, but they include only 9 percent
of those living at low socioeconomic levels. Women are more likely than
men to be impoverished. Income sources vary for persons age 65 and older.
Despite overall economic gains, many older persons are so preoccupied with
money worries that their enjoyment of life is lessened. Obtaining proper
medical care may be incredibly difficult when personal funds are not
available or are insufficient.
Medicare (Title 18) provides both hospital and medical insurance for those
over age 65. About 150 million medical bills are reimbursed under the
Medicare program each year, but only about 40 percent of all medical
expenses incurred by older persons are covered under Medicare. The rest is
paid by private insurance, state insurance, or personal funds. Some services—
such as outpatient psychiatric treatment, skilled nursing care, physical
rehabilitation, and preventive physical examinations—are covered minimally
or not at all.
In addition to Medicare, the Social Security program pays benefits to
persons over age 65 (over age 67 in 2027) and pays benefits at reduced rates
starting at age 62. To qualify for benefits, a person must have worked long
enough to become insured: A worker must have worked for 10 years to be
eligible for benefits. Benefits are also paid to widows, widowers, and
dependent children if those receiving benefits or contributing to Social
Security die (survivor benefits). Social Security is not a pension scheme but a
pay-as-you-go income supplement to prevent mass destitution among older


<<<PAGE 2899>>>
persons. Benefits are paid by those currently working to those who are
retired. Serious difficulties for Social Security are forecast for the next three
decades when the number of baby boomers reaching old age will
significantly exceed the number of younger workers paying into the plan.
Retirement
For many older persons, retirement is a time for the pursuit of leisure and
freedom from the responsibility of previous working commitments. For
others, it is a time of stress, mainly when retirement results in economic
problems or a loss of self-esteem. Ideally, employment after age 65 should be
a matter of choice. With the passage of the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 and its amendments, forced retirement at age 70
has been virtually eliminated in the private sector, and it is not legal in federal
employment.
Most of those who retire voluntarily reenter the workforce within 2 years,
for a variety of reasons, including adverse reactions to being retired, feelings
of being unproductive, economic hardship, and loneliness. The amount of
time spent in retirement has increased as the life span has nearly doubled
since 1900. Currently, the number of years spent in retirement is almost equal
to the number of years spent working.

FIGURE 32-10


<<<PAGE 2900>>>
People age 65 or older in need of long-term care: 1980–2040. (Reprinted from
Manton B, Saldo J. Dynamics of Health Changes in the Oldest Old: New
Perspectives and Evidence. Milbank Q; 1985;63:12, with permission.)

Sexual Activity
The frequency of orgasm, from coitus or masturbation, decreases with age in
men and women. The most critical factors in determining the level of sexual
activity with age are the health and survival of the spouse, one’s health, and
the level of past sexual activity. Although some degree of declining sexual
interest and function is inevitable with age, social and cultural factors appear
to be more responsible for the sexual changes observed than for the
psychological changes of aging per se. Although satisfying sexual activity is
possible for reasonably healthy elderly, many do not actualize this potential.
The widely held notion that the elderly are essentially asexual is often a selffulfilling prophecy.
Long-Term Care
Many older persons who are infirm require institutional care. Although only
5 percent are institutionalized in nursing homes at any one time, about 35
percent of older persons require care in a long-term facility at some time
during their lives (Fig. 32-10). Older nursing home residents are mainly
widowed women, and about 50 percent are over age 85.
Medicare does not cover nursing home care costs; they range from $20,000
to $1 million a year. About 20,000 long-term nursing care institutions are
available in the United States. This number is not enough to meet the need.
Those older persons who do not require skilled nursing care can be managed
in other types of health-related facilities, such as centers they attend during
the daytime hours, but the need for care far exceeds the availability of such
centers.
Besides institutions, the older person’s children tend to care for them. The
most common caregivers are daughters and daughters-in-law, wives, and
other women (Fig. 32-11). More than 50 percent of these women caregivers
also work, and about 40 percent also care for their children. In general,
women end up as caregivers more often than men because of cultural and
societal expectations. According to the American Association of Retired
Persons, daughters with jobs spend an average of 12 hours a week providing


<<<PAGE 2901>>>
care and currently spend about $150 a month for travel, telephone calls,
special foods, and medication for older persons.

FIGURE 32-11
Caretakers and their relationship to the elderly care recipient. (Data from Select
Committee on Aging, U.S. House of Representatives.)

References
Infant, Child, and Adolescent Development
Blackmore SJ. Development of the social brain in adolescence. J R Soc Med.
2012;105(3):111–116.
Blair C, Raver CC. Child development in the context of adversity:
experiential canalization of brain and behavior. Am Psychol.
2012;67(4):309–318.
Bonanno RA, Hymel S. Cyber bullying and internalizing difficulties: above
and beyond the impact of traditional forms of bullying. J Youth Adolesc.
2013;42(5):685–697.
Briggs GG. Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation: A Reference Guide to Fetal
and Neonatal Risk. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2005.
Brown GW, Ban M, Craig TKJ, Harris TO, Herbert J, Uher R. Serotonin


<<<PAGE 2902>>>
transporter length polymorphism, childhood maltreatment and chronic
depression: a specific gene-environment interaction. Depress Anxiety.
2013;30(1):5–13.
Burgess AW, Garbarino C, Carlson MI. Pathological teasing and bullying
turned deadly: shooters and suicide. Victims & Offenders. 2006;1(1):1–14.
Burnett S, Sebastian C, Kadosh KC, Blakemore SJ. The social brain in
adolescence: evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging and
behavioural studies. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2011;35(8):1654–1664.
Doyle AB, Markiewicz D. Parenting, marital conflict and adjustment from
early- to mid-adolescence: mediated by adolescent attachment style. J
Youth Adolesc. 2005;34(2):97–110.
Giedd JN. The digital revolution and adolescent brain evolution. J Adolesc
Health. 2012;51(2):101–105.
Gordon MF. Normal child development. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3338.
Hemphill SA, Kotevski A, Tollit M, Smith R, Herrenkohl TI, Toumbourou
JW, Catalano RF. Longitudinal predictors of cyber and traditional bullying
perpetration in Australian secondary school students. J Adolesc Health.
2012;51(1):59–65.
Karatoreos IN, McEwen BS. Annual research review: the neurobiology and
physiology of resilience and adaptation across the life course. J Child
Psychol Psychiatry. 2013;54(4):337–347.
Ladouceur CD, Peper JS, Crone EA, Dahl RE. White matter development in
adolescence: the influence of puberty and implications for affective
disorders. Dev Cogn Neurosci. 2012;2(1):36–54.
Obradovic J. How can the study of physiological reactivity contribute to our
understanding of adversity and resilience processes in development? Dev
Psychopathol. 2013;24(2):371–387.
Pataki CS. Adolescent development In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3356.
Van den Bergh BR, Mulder EJ, Mennes M, Glover V. Antenatal maternal
anxiety and stress and the neurobehavioural development of the fetus and
child: Links and possible mechanisms. A review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev.
2005;29(2):237–258.


<<<PAGE 2903>>>
Willoughby T, Good M, Adachi PJC, Hamza C, Tavernier R. Examining the
link between adolescent brain development and risk taking form a socialdevelopmental perspective. Brain and Cogn. 2013;83(3):315–323.
Wright MF, Li Y. Kicking the digital dog: a longitudinal investigation of
young adults’ victimization and cyber-displaced aggression. Cyberpsychol
Behav Soc Netw. 2012;15(9):448–454.
Adulthood
Baxter J, Haynes M, Hewitt B. Pathways into marriage: cohabitation and the
domestic division of labor. J Fam Issues. 2010;31(11):1507–1529.
Bottiroli S, Cavallini E, Fastame MC, Hertzog C. Cultural differences in
rated typicality and perceived causes of memory changes in adulthood.
Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2013;57(3):271–281.
Colarusso CA. Adulthood. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3909.
Diehl M, Chui H, Hay EL, Lumley MA, Grühn D, Labouvie-Vief G. Change
in coping and defense mechanisms across adulthood: longitudinal findings
in a European American sample. Dev Psychol. 2014;50(2):634–648.
Gager CT, Yabiku ST. Who has the time? The relationship between
household labor time and sexual frequency. J Fam Issues. 2010;31(2):135–
163.
Goldberg AE, Sayer A. Lesbian couples’ relationship quality across the
transition to parenthood. J Marriage Fam. 2006;68(1):87–100.
Goldberg AE, Smith JZ. Predictors of psychological adjustment in early
placed adopted children with lesbian, gay, and heterosexual parents. J Fam
Psychol. 2013;27(3):431–432.
Howlin P, Moss P, Savage S, Rutter M. Social outcomes in mid- to later
adulthood among individuals diagnosed with autism and average
nonverbal IQ as children. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2013;52(6):572–581.e1.
Jones PB. Adult mental health disorders and their age at onset. Br J
Psychiatry Suppl. 2013;202(s54:s5–s10.
Joyner K, Kao G. Interracial relationships and the transition to adulthood. Am
Sociol Rev. 2005;70(4):563–581.
Kornrich S, Brines J, Leupp K. Egalitarianism, housework, and sexual


<<<PAGE 2904>>>
frequency in marriage. Am Sociol Rev. 2013;78(1):26–50.
Kwon P. Resilience in lesbian, gay, and bisexual individuals. Person Soc
Psychol Rev. 2013;17(4):371–383.
Masarik AS, Conger RD, Martin MJ, Donnellan M, Masyn KE, Lorenz FO.
Romantic relationships in early adulthood: influences of family,
personality, and relationship cognitions. Person Relation. 2013;20(2):356–
373.
Nelson LJ, Barry CM. Distinguishing features of emerging adulthood: the
role of self-classification as an adult. J Adolesc Res. 2005;20(2):242–262.
Perrig-Chiello P, Perren S. Biographical transitions from a midlife
perspective. J Adult Dev. 2005;12(4):169–181.
Schwartz SJ, Côté JE, Arnett J. Identity and agency in emerging adulthood:
two developmental routes in the individualization process. Youth Soc.
2005;37(2):201–229.
Tasker F. Lesbian mothers, gay fathers, and their children: a review. J Dev
Behav Pediatr. 2005;26(3):224–240.
Turk JK. The division of housework among working couples: distinguishing
characteristics of egalitarian couples. Contemp Perspect Fam Res.
2012;6:235–258.
Old Age
Colarusso CA. Adulthood. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3909.
Reifler BV, Colenda CC, Juul D. Geriatric psychiatry. In: Aminoff MJ,
Faulkner LR, eds. The American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology:
Looking Back and Moving Ahead. Arlington, TX: American Psychiatric
Publishing; 2012:135.


<<<PAGE 2905>>>
33
Contributions from the Neurosciences
The human brain is responsible for our cognitive processes, emotions, and
behaviors—that is, everything we think, feel, and do. Although the early
development and adult function of the brain are shaped by multiple factors
(e.g., epigenetic, environmental, and psychosocial experiences), the brain is
the final integrator of these influences. Despite the many advances in neural
sciences, there has not been a genuine transformational advance in the
treatment of mental disorders for more than half a century. The most apparent
reason for the absence of more progress is the profound complexity of the
human brain. A perhaps less apparent reason is the current practice of
psychiatric diagnosis, which, for most clinicians, is based on syndrome-based
classification systems.
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce the neural sciences sections,
which describe the anatomy and function of the human brain, and then to
discuss how an evolution of thinking toward a brain-based or biologically
based diagnostic system for mental illness might facilitate our efforts to
advance brain research, to develop better treatments, and to improve patient
care.
In other fields of medicine, diagnosis is based on physical signs and
symptoms, a medical history, and results of laboratory and radiologic tests. In
psychiatry, a diagnosis is based primarily on the clinician’s impression of the
patient’s interpretation of his or her thoughts and feelings. The patient’s
symptoms are then cross-referenced to a diagnostic or classification manual
(e.g., Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders [DSM-5],
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems [ICD]) containing hundreds of potential syndromes, and one or
more diagnoses are applied to the particular patient. These standard


<<<PAGE 2906>>>
classification systems represent significant improvements in reliability over
previous diagnostic systems, but there is little reason to believe that these
diagnostic categories are valid, in the sense that they represent discrete,
biologically distinct entities. Although a patient with no symptoms or
complaints can be diagnosed as having diabetes, cancer, or hypertension
based on blood tests, x-rays, or vital signs, a patient with no symptoms
cannot be diagnosed with schizophrenia, for example, because there are no
currently recognized objective, independent assessments.
The goals of clinicians and researchers are to reduce human suffering by
increasing our understanding of diseases, developing new treatments to
prevent or cure diseases, and caring for patients optimally. If the brain is the
organ of focus for mental illnesses, then it may be time to be more ambitious
in building the classification of patients with mental illnesses directly from
our understanding of biology, rather than only from the assessment of a
patient’s symptoms.

THE HUMAN BRAIN
The following neural sciences sections each address a field of brain biology.
Each of these fields could be relevant to the pathophysiology and treatment
of mental illnesses. Although the complexity of the human brain is daunting
compared with other organs of the body, progress can only be made if one
approaches this complexity consistently, methodically, and bravely.
The neuronal and glial cells of the human brain are organized in a
characteristic manner, which has been increasingly clarified through modern
neuroanatomical techniques. Also, our knowledge of normal human brain
development has become more robust in the last decade. The human brain
evolved from the brains of lower animal species, allowing inferences to be
made about the human brain from animal studies. Neurons communicate with
one another through chemical and electrical neurotransmission. The major
neurotransmitters are the monoamines, amino acids, and neuropeptides. Other
chemical messengers include neurotrophic factors and an array of other
molecules, such as nitric oxide. Electrical neurotransmission occurs through a
wide range of ion channels. Chemical and electrical signals received by a
neuron subsequently initiate various molecular pathways within other
neurons that regulate the biology and function of individual neurons,


<<<PAGE 2907>>>
including the expression of individual genes and the production of proteins.
Also, to the central nervous system (CNS), the human body contains two
other systems that have complex internal communicative networks: the
endocrine system and the immune system. The recognition that these three
systems communicate with each other has given birth to the fields of
psychoneuroendocrinology and psychoneuroimmunology. Another property
shared by the CNS, the endocrine system, and the immune system is the
regular changes they undergo with time (e.g., daily, monthly), which is the
basis of the field of chronobiology.
Psychiatry and the Human Brain
In the first half of the 20th century, our emphasis on psychodynamic and
social psychiatry divorced psychiatric research from the study of the human
brain. Since the 1950s, the appreciation of the effectiveness of medications in
treating mental disorders and the mental effects of illicit drugs have
reestablished a biologic view of mental illness, which had already been
seeded by the introduction of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and James
Papez’s description of the limbic circuit in the 1930s. This biologic view has
been reinforced further by the development of brain imaging techniques that
have helped reveal how the brain performs in normal and abnormal
conditions. During this period, countless discoveries have been made in basic
neural science research using experimental techniques to assess the
development, structure, biology, and function of the CNS of humans and
animals.
Psychopharmacology. The effectiveness of drugs in the treatment of
mental illness has been a significant feature of the last half-century of
psychiatric practice. The first five editions of this textbook divided
psychopharmacological treatment into four chapters on antipsychotic,
antidepressant, antianxiety, and mood-stabilizing drugs. The prior division of
psychiatric drugs into four classes is less valid now than it was in the past for
the following reasons: (1) Many drugs of one class are used to treat disorders
previously assigned to another class; (2) drugs from all four categories are
used to treat disorders not previously treatable by drugs (e.g., eating
disorders, panic disorders, and impulse control disorders); and (3) drugs such


<<<PAGE 2908>>>
as clonidine, propranolol, and verapamil can effectively treat a variety of
psychiatric disorders and do not fit easily into the other categories of
psychiatric drugs.
The primary motivation for this change was that the variety and application
of the drug treatments no longer fit a division of disorders into psychosis,
depression, anxiety, and mania. In other words, the clinical applications of
biologically based treatments did not neatly align with our syndrome-based
diagnostic system. An implication of this observation could be that drug
response might be a better indicator of underlying biologic brain dysfunction
than any particular group of symptoms. For example, although the DSM-5
distinguishes major depressive disorder from generalized anxiety disorder,
most clinicians are aware that these are often overlapping symptoms and
conditions in clinical practice. Moreover, the same drugs are used to treat
both conditions.
The animal models that are used to identify new drug treatments may also
have affected our ability to advance research and treatment. Many major
classes of psychiatric drugs were discovered serendipitously. Specifically, the
drugs were developed originally for nonpsychiatric indications, but observant
clinicians and researchers noted that psychiatric symptoms improved in some
patients, which led to a focused study of these drugs in psychiatric patients.
The availability of these effective drugs, including monoaminergic
antidepressants and antipsychotics, led to the development of animal models
that could detect the effects of these drugs (e.g., tricyclic antidepressants
[TCAs] increase the time mice spend trying to find a submerged platform in a
“forced swim” test). These animal models were then used to screen new
compounds in an attempt to identify drugs that were active in the same
animal models. The potential risk of this overall strategy is that these animal
models are merely a method for detecting a particular molecular mechanism
of action (e.g., increasing serotonin concentrations), rather than a model for a
true behavioral analog of human mental illness (e.g., behavioral despair in a
depressed patient).
Endophenotypes. A possible diagnosis-related parallel to how this
textbook separated the four classes of psychotropic drugs into approximately
30 different categories is the topic of endophenotypes in psychiatric patients.
An endophenotype is an internal phenotype, which is a set of objective


<<<PAGE 2909>>>
characteristics of an individual that are not visible to the unaided eye.
Because there are so many steps and variables that separate a particular set of
genes from the final functioning of a whole human brain, it may be more
tractable to consider intermediate assessments such as endophenotypes. This
hypothesis is based on the assumption that the number of genes that are
involved in an endophenotype might be fewer than the number of genes
involved in causing what we would conceptualize as a disease. For
psychiatry, an endophenotype is based on neuropsychological, cognitive,
neurophysiologic, neuroanatomical, biochemical, and brain imaging data.
Such an endophenotype, for example, might include specific cognitive
impairments as just one of its objectively measured features. This
endophenotype would not be limited to patients with a diagnosis of
schizophrenia because it might also be found in some patients with
depression or bipolar disorder.
The potential role of an endophenotype can be further clarified by stating
what it is not. An endophenotype is not a symptom, and it is not a diagnostic
marker. A classification based on the presence or absence of one or more
endophenotypes would be based on objective biologic and
neuropsychological measures with specific relationships to genes and brain
function. A classification based on endophenotypes might also be a
productive approach toward the development of more relevant animal models
of mental illnesses, and thus the development of novel treatments.
Psychiatry and the Human Genome
Perhaps 70 to 80 percent of the 25,000 human genes are expressed in the
brain, and because most genes code for more than one protein, there may be
100,000 different proteins in the brain. Perhaps 10,000 of these are known
proteins with somewhat identified functions, and no more than 100 of these
are the targets for existing psychotherapeutic drugs.
The study of families with the use of population genetic methods over the
last 50 years has consistently supported a genetic, heritable component to
mental disorders. More recent techniques in molecular biology have revealed
that specific chromosomal regions and genes are associated with particular
diagnoses. A potentially compelling application of these techniques has been
to study transgenic models of behavior in animals. These transgenic models


<<<PAGE 2910>>>
can help us understand the effects of individual genes as well as discover
completely novel molecular targets for drug development.
It may be a natural response to resist “simple” genetic explanations for
human features. Nonetheless, research on humans generally has found that
approximately 40 to 70 percent of aspects of cognition, temperament, and
personality are attributable to genetic factors. Because these are the very
domains that are affected in mentally ill patients, it would not be surprising to
discover a similar level of genetic influence on mental illness, mostly if we
were able to assess this impact at a more discrete level, such as with
endophenotypes.
Individual Genes and Mental Disorders. Several types of data and
observations suggest that any single gene is likely to have only a modest
effect on the development of a mental disorder and that when a mental
disorder is present in an individual, it represents the effects of multiple genes,
speculatively on the order of five to ten genes. This hypothesis is also
supported by our failure to find single genes with significant effects on
mental illnesses. Some researchers, however, still consider it a possibility that
genes with significant effects will be identified.
“Nature” and “Nurture” within the CNS. In 1977, George Engel, at the
University of Rochester, published a paper that articulated the
biopsychosocial model of disease, which stressed an integrated approach to
human behavior and disease. The biologic system refers to the anatomical,
structural, and molecular substrates of disease; the psychological system
refers to the effects of psychodynamic factors; and the social system
examines cultural, environmental, and familial influences. Engel postulated
that each system affects and is affected by the others.
The observation that a significant percentage of identical twins are
discordant for schizophrenia is one example of the type of data that supports
the understanding that there are many significant interactions between the
genome and the environment (i.e., the biologic basis of the biopsychosocial
concept). Studies in animals have also demonstrated that many factors—
including activity, stress, drug exposure, and environmental toxins—can
regulate the expression of genes and the development and functioning of the
brain.


<<<PAGE 2911>>>
Mental Disorders Reflect Abnormalities in Neuroanatomical
Circuits and Synaptic Regulation. Although genes lead to the
production of proteins, the actual functioning of the brain needs to be
understood at the level of regulation of complex pathways of
neurotransmission and intraneuronal signaling, and networks of neurons
within and between brain regions. In other words, the downstream effects of
abnormal genes are modifications in discrete attributes such as axonal
projections, synaptic integrity, and specific steps in intraneuronal molecular
signaling.
Why Not a Genetic-Based Diagnostic System? Some researchers
have proposed moving psychiatry toward a completely geneticbased diagnostic system. This proposal, however, seems premature
based on the complexity of the genetic factors presumably involved in
psychiatric disorders, the current absence of sufficient data to make these
genetic connections, and the importance of epigenetic and environmental
influences on the final behavioral outcomes resulting from an individual’s
genetic information.
Lessons from Neurology
Clinical and research neurologists seem to have been able to think more than
psychiatrists about their diseases of interest and their causes, perhaps because
the symptoms are generally nonbehavioral. Neurologists have biologically
grounded differential diagnoses and treatment choices. This clarity of
approach has helped lead to significant advances in neurology in the last two
decades, for example, clarification of the amyloid precursor protein
abnormalities in some patients with Alzheimer disease, the presence of
trinucleotide repeat mutations in Huntington disease and spinocerebellar
ataxia, and the appreciation of alpha-synucleinopathies, such as Parkinson
disease and Lewy body dementia.
The continued separation of psychiatry from neurology is, in itself, a
potential impediment to good patient care and research. Many neurologic
disorders have psychiatric symptoms (e.g., depression in patients following a
stroke or with multiple sclerosis or Parkinson disease), and several of the
most severe psychiatric disorders have been associated with neurologic


<<<PAGE 2912>>>
symptoms (e.g., movement disorders in schizophrenia). This overlap is not
surprising given that the brain is the organ shared by psychiatric and
neurologic diseases, and the division between these two disease areas is
arbitrary. For example, patients with Huntington disease are at much greater
risk for a wide range of psychiatric symptoms and syndromes, and thus many
different DSM-5 diagnoses. Because we know that Huntington disease is an
autosomal dominant genetic disorder, the observation that it can manifest
with so many different DSM-5 diagnoses does not speak to a reliable biologic
distinction among the existing DSM-5 categories.
Examples of Complex Human Behaviors
The goal to understand the human brain and its normal and abnormal
functioning is genuinely one of the last frontiers for humans to explore.
Trying to explain why a particular individual is the way he or she is, or what
causes schizophrenia, for example, will remain too large a challenge for some
decades. It is more approachable to consider more discrete aspects of human
behavior.
It is not the role of textbooks to set policies or to write diagnostic manuals,
but rather to share knowledge, generate ideas, and encourage innovation. The
authors believe, however, that it is time to reap the insights of decades of
neural science and clinical brain research and to build the classification of
mental illnesses on fundamental principles of biology and medicine.
Regardless of official diagnostic systems, however, clinicians and researchers
should fully understand the biologic component of the biopsychosocial
model, and not let research or patient care suffer because of a diagnostic
system that is not founded on biologic principles.

FUNCTIONAL NEUROANATOMY
The sensory, behavioral, affective, and cognitive phenomena and attributes
experienced by humans are mediated through the brain. It is the organ that
perceives and affects the environment and integrates past and present. The
brain is the organ of the mind that enables persons to sense, do, feel, and
think.
Sensory systems create an internal representation of the external world by
processing external stimuli into neuronal impulses. A separate map is formed


<<<PAGE 2913>>>
for each sensory modality. Motor systems enable persons to manipulate their
environment and to influence the behavior of others through communication.
In the brain, sensory input, representing the external world, is integrated with
internal drivers, memories, and emotional stimuli in association units, which
in turn drive the actions of motor units. Although psychiatry is concerned
primarily with the brain’s association function, an appreciation of information
processing of the sensory and motor systems is essential for sorting logical
thought from the distortions introduced by psychopathology.
Brain Organization
The human brain contains approximately 86 billion neurons (nerve cells) and
approximately 85 billion glial cells. Neurons most classically consist of a
soma, or cell body, which contains the nucleus; usually multiple dendrites,
which are processes that extend from the cell body and receive signals from
other neurons; and a single axon, which extends from the cell body and
transmits signals to other neurons. Connections between neurons are made at
axon terminals; there, the axons of one neuron generally contact the dendrite
or cell body of another neuron. Neurotransmitter release occurs within axon
terminals and is one of the central mechanisms for intraneuronal
communications, and also for the effects of psychotropic drugs.
There are three types of glial cells, and although they have often been
thought of as having only a supportive role for neuronal functioning, glia has
been increasingly appreciated as potentially involved in brain functions that
may contribute more directly to both normal and disease mental conditions.
The most common type of glial cells are astrocytes, which have several
functions, including the nutrition of neurons, deactivation of some
neurotransmitters, and integration with the blood–brain barrier (BBB). The
oligodendrocytes in the CNS and the Schwann cells in the peripheral nervous
system wrap their processes around neuronal axons, resulting in myelin
sheaths that facilitate the conduction of electrical signals. The third type of
glial cells, the microglia, which are derived from macrophages, are involved
in removing cellular debris following neuronal death.
The neurons and glial cells are arranged in regionally distinct patterns
within the brain. Neurons and their processes form groupings in many
different ways, and these patterns of organization, or architecture, can be


<<<PAGE 2914>>>
evaluated by several approaches. The pattern of distribution of nerve cell
bodies, called cytoarchitecture, is revealed by aniline dyes called Nissl stains
that stain ribonucleotides in the nuclei and the cytoplasm of neuronal cell
bodies. The Nissl stains show the relative size and packing density of the
neurons and, consequently, reveal the organization of the neurons into the
different layers of the cerebral cortex.
Sensory Systems
The external world offers an infinite amount of potentially relevant
information. In this overwhelming volume of sensory information in the
environment, the sensory systems must both detect and discriminate stimuli;
they winnow relevant information from the mass of confounding input by
applying filtration at all levels. Sensory systems first transform external
stimuli into neural impulses and then filter out irrelevant information to
create an internal image of the environment, which serves as a basis for
reasoned thought. Feature extraction is the quintessential role of sensory
systems, which achieve this goal with their hierarchical organizations, first by
transforming physical stimuli into neural activity in the primary sense organs
and then by refining and narrowing the neural activity in a series of higher
cortical processing areas. This neural processing eliminates irrelevant data
from higher representations and reinforces crucial features. At the highest
levels of sensory processing, neural images are transmitted to the association
areas to be acted on in the light of emotions, memories, and drives.
Somatosensory System. The somatosensory system, an intricate array of
parallel point-to-point connections from the body surface to the brain, was
the first sensory system to be understood in anatomical detail. The six
somatosensory modalities are light touch, pressure, pain, temperature,
vibration, and proprioception (position sense). The organization of nerve
bundles and synaptic connections in the somatosensory system encodes
spatial relationships at all levels so that the organization is strictly
somatotopic (Fig. 33-1).
Within a given patch of skin, various receptor nerve terminals act in
concert to mediate distinct modalities. The mechanical properties of the
skin’s mechanoreceptors and thermoreceptors generate neural impulses in


<<<PAGE 2915>>>
response to dynamic variations in the environment while they suppress static
input. Nerve endings are either fast or slow responders; their depth in the skin
also determines their sensitivity to sharp or blunt stimuli. Thus the
representation of the external world is significantly refined at the level of the
primary sensory organs.
The receptor organs generate coded neural impulses that travel proximally
along the sensory nerve axons to the spinal cord. These far-flung routes are
susceptible to varying systemic medical conditions and pressure palsies. Pain,
tingling, and numbness are the typical presenting symptoms of peripheral
neuropathies.
All somatosensory fibers project to and synapse in the thalamus. The
thalamic neurons preserve the somatotopic representation by projecting fibers
to the somatosensory cortex, located immediately posterior to the Sylvian
fissure in the parietal lobe. Despite the considerable overlap, several bands of
cortex roughly parallel to the Sylvian fissure are segregated by a
somatosensory modality. Within each band is the sensory “homunculus,” the
culmination of the careful somatotopic segregation of the sensory fibers at the
lower levels. The clinical syndrome of tactile agnosia (astereognosis) is
defined by the inability to recognize objects based on touch, although the
primary somatosensory modalities—light touch, pressure, pain, temperature,
vibration, and proprioception—are intact. This syndrome, localized at the
border of the somatosensory and association areas in the posterior parietal
lobe, appears to represent an isolated failure of only the highest order of
feature extraction, with preservation of the more basic levels of the
somatosensory pathway.


<<<PAGE 2916>>>
FIGURE 33-1
Pathway of somatosensory information processing. (Adapted from Patestas MA,
Gartner LP. A Textbook of Neuroanatomy. Malden, MA: Blackwell; 2006:149.)

Reciprocal connections are a critical anatomical feature of crucial
importance to conscious perception—as many fibers project down from the
cortex to the thalamus as project up from the thalamus to the cortex. These
reciprocal fibers play a critical role in filtering sensory input. In normal
states, they facilitate the sharpening of internal representations, but in


<<<PAGE 2917>>>
pathologic states, they can generate false signals or inappropriately suppress
sensation. Such cortical interference with sensory perception is thought to
underlie many psychosomatic syndromes, such as the hemisensory loss that
characterizes conversion disorder.
The prenatal development of the strict point-to-point pattern that
characterizes the somatosensory system remains an area of active study.
Patterns of sensory innervation result from a combination of axonal guidance
by particular molecular cues and pruning of exuberant synaptogenesis based
on an organism’s experience. Leading hypotheses weigh contributions from a
genetically determined molecular map—in which the arrangement of fiber
projections is organized by fixed and diffusible chemical cues—against
contributions from the modeling and remodeling of projections based on
coordinated neural activity. Thumbnail calculations suggest that the 30,000 to
40,000 genes in human deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) are far too few to
completely encode the position of all the trillions of synapses in the brain.
Genetically determined positional cues probably steer growing fibers toward
the general target, and activity-dependent mechanisms fine-tune the pattern of
projections. Recent data suggest that well-established adult thalamocortical
sensory projections can be gradually remodeled as a result of a reorientation
of coordinated sensory input or in response to the loss of part of the
somatosensory cortex, for instance, in stroke.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOMATOSENSORY SYSTEM.

A strict somatotopic
representation exists at each level of the somatosensory system. During
development, neurons extend axons to connect to distant brain regions; after
arriving at the destination, a set of axons must therefore sort itself to preserve
the somatotopic organization. A classic experimental paradigm for this
developmental process is the representation of a mouse’s whiskers in the
somatosensory cortex. The murine somatosensory cortex contains a barrel
field of cortical columns, each of which corresponds to one whisker. When
mice are inbred to produce fewer whiskers, fewer somatosensory cortex
barrels appear. Each barrel is expanded in area, and the entire barrel field
covers the same area of the somatosensory cortex as it does in normal
animals. This experiment demonstrates that specific higher cortical structures
can form in response to peripheral input and that different input complexities
determine different patterns of synaptic connectivity. Although the


<<<PAGE 2918>>>
mechanisms by which peripheral input molds cortical architecture are mostly
unknown, animal model paradigms are beginning to yield clues. For example,
in a mutant mouse that lacks monoamine oxidase A and, thus, has
exceptionally high cortical levels of serotonin, barrels fail to form in the
somatosensory cortex. This result indirectly implicates serotonin in the
mechanism of barrel field development.
In adults, the classic mapping studies of Wilder Penfield suggested the
existence of a homunculus, an immutable cortical representation of the body
surface. More recent experimental evidence from primate studies and stroke
patients, however, has promoted a more plastic conception than that of
Penfield. Minor variations exist in the cortical pattern of ordinary individuals,
yet dramatic shifts in the map can occur in response to the loss of cortex from
stroke or injury. When a stroke ablates a significant fraction of the
somatosensory homunculus, the homuncular representation begins to contract
and shift proportionately to fill the remaining intact cortex.
Moreover, the cortical map can be rearranged solely in response to a
change in the pattern of tactile stimulation of the fingers. The somatotopic
representation of the proximal and distal segments of each finger typically
forms a contiguous map, presumably because both segments contact surfaces
simultaneously. However, under experimental conditions in which the distal
segments of all fingers are simultaneously stimulated while contact of the
distal and proximal parts of each finger is separated, the cortical map
gradually shifts 90 degrees to reflect the new sensory experience. In the
revised map, the cortical representation of the proximal segment of each
finger is no longer contiguous with that of the distal segment.
These data support the notion that the internal representation of the
external world, although static in gross structure, can be continuously
modified at the level of synaptic connectivity to reflect relevant sensory
experiences. The cortical representation also tends to shift to fit entirely into
the available amount of cortex.
These results also support the notion that cortical representations of
sensory input, or memories, may be holographic rather than spatially fixed:
The pattern of activity, rather than the physical structure, may encode
information. In sensory systems, this plasticity of cortical representation
allows recovery from brain lesions; the phenomenon may also underlie
learning.


<<<PAGE 2919>>>
Visual System. Visual images are transduced into neural activity within the
retina and are processed through a series of brain cells, which respond to
increasingly complex features, from the eye to the higher visual cortex. The
neurobiologic basis of feature extraction is best understood in the finest detail
in the visual system. Beginning with classic work in the 1960s, research in
the visual pathway has produced two main paradigms for all sensory systems.
The first paradigm, mentioned earlier for the somatosensory system,
evaluates the contributions of genetics and experience—or nature and nurture
—in the formation of the final synaptic arrangement. Transplantation
experiments, resulting in an accurate point-to-point pattern of connectivity,
even when the eye was surgically inverted, have suggested an innate,
genetically determined mechanism of synaptic pattern formation. The crucial
role of early visual experience in establishing the adult pattern of visual
connections, on the other hand, crystallized the hypothesis of the activitydependent formation of synaptic connectivity. The final adult pattern is the
result of both factors.
The second central paradigm, most revealed in the visual system, is that of
highly specialized brain cells that respond exclusively to particular stimuli.
Recent work, for example, has identified cells in the inferior temporal cortex
that respond only to faces viewed at a specific angle. An individual’s
response to a particular face requires the activity of large neural networks and
may not be limited to a single neuron. Nevertheless, the cellular localization
of specific feature extraction is of critical importance in defining the
boundary between sensory and association systems, but only in the visual
system has this significant question been posed experimentally.
In the primary visual cortex, columns of cells respond specifically to lines
of a specific orientation. The cells of the primary visual cortex project to the
secondary visual cortex. There the cells respond specifically to particular
movements of lines and angles. In turn, these cells project to two association
areas, where additional features are extracted and conscious awareness of
images forms.
The inferior temporal lobe detects the shape, form, and color of the object
—the what questions; the posterior parietal lobe tracks the location, motion,
and distance—the where questions. The posterior parietal lobe contains
distinct sets of neurons that signal the intention either to look into a specific


<<<PAGE 2920>>>
part of visual space or to reach for a particular object. In the inferior temporal
cortices (ITCs), adjacent cortical columns respond to complex forms.
Responses to facial features tend to occur in the left ITC, and responses to
complex shapes tend to occur in the right ITC. The brain devotes specific
cells to the recognition of facial expressions and the aspect and position of
faces of others for the individual.
The crucial connections between the feature-specific cells and the
association areas involved in memory and conscious thought remain to be
delineated. Much elucidation of feature recognition is based on invasive
animal studies. In humans, the clinical syndrome of prosopagnosia describes
the inability to recognize faces in the presence of preserved recognition of
other environmental objects. Based on the pathologic and radiologic
examination of individual patients, prosopagnosia is thought to result from
the disconnection of the left ITC from the visual association area in the left
parietal lobe. Such lesional studies are useful in identifying necessary
components of a mental pathway, but they may be inadequate to define the
entire pathway. One noninvasive technique that is still being perfected and is
beginning to reveal the full anatomical relation of the human visual system to
conscious thought and memory is functional neuroimaging.
As is valid for language, there appears to be a hemispheric asymmetry for
individual components of visuospatial orientation. Although both
hemispheres cooperate in perceiving and drawing complex images, the right
hemisphere, especially the parietal lobe, contributes the overall contour,
perspective, and right-left orientation, and the left hemisphere adds internal
detail, embellishment, and complexity. The brain can be fooled in optical
illusions.
Neurologic conditions such as strokes and other focal lesions have
permitted the definition of several disorders of visual perception.
Apperceptive visual agnosia is the inability to identify and draw items using
visual cues, with preservation of other sensory modalities. It represents a
failure of transmission of information from the higher visual sensory pathway
to the association areas and is caused by bilateral lesions in the visual
association areas. Associative visual agnosia is the inability to name or use
objects despite the ability to draw them. It is caused by bilateral medial
occipitotemporal lesions and can occur along with other visual impairments.
Color perception may be ablated in lesions of the dominant occipital lobe that


<<<PAGE 2921>>>
include the splenium of the corpus callosum. Color agnosia is the inability to
recognize a color despite being able to match it. Color anomia is the inability
to name a color despite being able to point to it. Central achromatopsia is a
complete inability to perceive color.
Anton syndrome is a failure to acknowledge blindness, possibly owing to
the interruption of fibers involved in self-assessment. It is seen with bilateral
occipital lobe lesions. The most common causes are hypoxic injury, stroke,
metabolic encephalopathy, migraine, herniation resulting from mass lesions,
trauma, and leukodystrophy. Balint syndrome consists of a triad of optic
ataxia (the inability to direct optically guided movements), oculomotor
apraxia (inability to direct gaze rapidly), and simultanagnosia (inability to
integrate a visual scene to perceive it as a whole). Balint syndrome is seen in
bilateral parietooccipital lesions. Gerstmann syndrome includes agraphia,
calculation difficulties (acalculia), right-left disorientation, and finger
agnosia. It has been attributed to lesions of the dominant parietal lobe.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE VISUAL SYSTEM. In humans, the initial projections from

both eyes intermingle in the cortex. During the development of visual
connections in the early postnatal period, there is a window of time during
which binocular visual input is required for the development of ocular
dominance columns in the primary visual cortex. Ocular dominance columns
are stripes of cortex that receive input from only one eye, separated by stripes
innervated only by fibers from the other eye. Occlusion of one eye during this
critical period eliminates the persistence of its fibers in the cortex and allows
the fibers of the active eye to innervate the entire visual cortex. In contrast,
when normal binocular vision is allowed during the critical development
window, the usual dominance columns form, occluding one eye after the
completion of innervation of the cortex, produces no subsequent alteration of
the ocular dominance columns. This paradigm crystallizes the importance of
early childhood experience on the formation of adult brain circuitry.
Auditory System. Sounds are instantaneous, incremental changes in
ambient air pressure. The pressure changes cause the ear’s tympanic
membrane to vibrate; the vibration is then transmitted to the ossicles
(malleus, incus, and stapes) and thereby to the endolymph or fluid of the
cochlear spiral. Vibrations of the endolymph move cilia on hair cells, which


<<<PAGE 2922>>>
generate neural impulses. The hair cells respond to sounds of different
frequencies in a tonotopic manner within the cochlea, like an extended, spiral
piano keyboard. Neural impulses from the hair cells travel in a tonotopic
arrangement to the brain in the fibers of the cochlear nerve. They enter the
brainstem cochlear nuclei, are relayed through the lateral lemniscus to the
inferior colliculi, and then to the medial geniculate nucleus (MGN) of the
thalamus. MGN neurons project to the primary auditory cortex in the
posterior temporal lobe. Dichotic listening tests, in which different stimuli are
presented to each ear simultaneously, demonstrate that most of the input from
one ear activates the contralateral auditory cortex and that the left hemisphere
tends to be dominant for auditory processing.
Sonic features are extracted through a combination of mechanical and
neural filters. The representation of sound is roughly tonotopic in the primary
auditory cortex, whereas lexical processing (i.e., the extraction of vowels,
consonants, and words from the auditory input) occurs in higher language
association areas, especially in the left temporal lobe. The syndrome of word
deafness, characterized by intact hearing for voices but an inability to
recognize speech, may reflect damage to the left parietal cortex. This
syndrome is thought to result from the disconnection of the auditory cortex
from Wernicke area. A rare, complementary syndrome, auditory sound
agnosia, is defined as the inability to recognize nonverbal sounds, such as a
horn or a cat’s meow, in the presence of intact hearing and speech
recognition. Researchers consider this syndrome to be the right hemisphere
correlate of pure word deafness.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE AUDITORY SYSTEM.

Some children are unable to
process auditory input and therefore have impaired speech and
comprehension of spoken language. Studies on some of these children have
determined that they can discriminate speech if the consonants and vowels—
the phonemes—are slowed two- to fivefold by a computer. Based on this
observation, a tutorial computer program was designed that initially asked
questions in a slowed voice and, as subjects answered questions correctly,
gradually increased the rate of phoneme presentation to approximate typical
rates of speech. Subjects gained some ability to discriminate routine speech
over 2 to 6 weeks and appeared to retain these skills after the tutoring period
was completed. This finding probably has therapeutic applicability to 5 to 8


<<<PAGE 2923>>>
percent of children with speech delay, but ongoing studies may expand the
eligible group of students. This finding, moreover, suggests that neuronal
circuits required for auditory processing can be recruited and be made more
efficient long after language is usually learned, provided that the circuits are
allowed to finish their task correctly, even if this requires slowing the rate of
input. Circuits thus functioning with high fidelity can then be trained to speed
their processing.
A recent report has extended the age at which language acquisition may be
acquired for the first time.
A boy who had intractable epilepsy of one hemisphere was mute because
the uncontrolled seizure activity precluded the development of organized
language functions. At the age of 9 years, he had the abnormal
hemisphere removed to cure epilepsy. Although up to that point in his life
he had not spoken, he initiated an accelerated acquisition of language
milestones beginning at that age and ultimately gained language abilities
only a few years delayed relative to his chronologic age.
Researchers cannot place an absolute upper limit on the age at which
language abilities can be learned, although acquisition at ages beyond the
usual childhood period is usually incomplete. Anecdotal reports document
the acquisition of reading skills after the age of 80 years.
Olfaction. Odorants, or volatile chemical cues, enter the nose, are
solubilized in the nasal mucus, and bind to odorant receptors displayed on the
surface of the sensory neurons of the olfactory epithelium. Each neuron in the
epithelium displays a unique odorant receptor, and cells displaying a given
receptor are arranged randomly within the olfactory epithelium. Humans
possess several hundred distinct receptor molecules that bind the massive
variety of environmental odorants; researchers estimate that humans can
discriminate 10,000 different odors. Odorant binding generates neural
impulses, which travel along the axons of the sensory nerves through the
cribriform plate to the olfactory bulb. Within the bulb, all axons
corresponding to a given receptor converge onto only 1 or 2 of 3,000
processing units called glomeruli. Because each odorant activates several


<<<PAGE 2924>>>
receptors that activate a characteristic pattern of glomeruli, the identity of
external chemical molecules is represented internally by a spatial pattern of
neural activity in the olfactory bulb.
Each glomerulus projects to a unique set of 20 to 50 separate columns in
the olfactory cortex. In turn, each olfactory cortical column receives
projections from a unique combination of glomeruli. The connectivity of the
olfactory system is genetically determined. Because each odorant activates a
unique set of several receptors and thus a unique set of olfactory bulb
glomeruli, each olfactory cortical column is tuned to detect a different
odorant of some evolutionary significance to the species. Unlike the signals
of the somatosensory, visual, and auditory systems, olfactory signals do not
pass through the thalamus but project directly to the frontal lobe and the
limbic system, especially the pyriform cortex. The connections to the limbic
system (amygdala, hippocampus, and pyriform cortex) are significant.
Olfactory cues stimulate strong emotional responses and can evoke powerful
memories.
Olfaction, the most ancient sense in evolutionary terms, is tightly
associated with sexual and reproductive responses. A related chemosensory
structure, the vomeronasal organ, is thought to detect pheromones, chemical
cues that trigger unconscious, stereotyped responses. In some animals,
ablation of the vomeronasal organ in early life may prevent the onset of
puberty. Recent studies have suggested that humans also respond to
pheromones in a manner that varies according to the menstrual cycle. The
structures of higher olfactory processing in phylogenetically more primitive
animals have evolved in humans into the limbic system, the center of the
emotional brain, and the gate through which experience is admitted into
memory according to emotional significance. The elusive basic animal drives
with which clinical psychiatry constantly grapples may, therefore, originate
from the ancient centers of higher olfactory processing.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE OLFACTORY SYSTEM.

During normal development,
axons from the nasal olfactory epithelium project to the olfactory bulb and
segregate into about 3,000 equivalent glomeruli. If an animal is exposed to a
single dominant scent in the early postnatal period, then one glomerulus
expands massively within the bulb at the expense of the surrounding
glomeruli. Thus, as discussed earlier concerning the barrel fields of the


<<<PAGE 2925>>>
somatosensory cortex, the size of brain structures may reflect the
environmental input.
Taste. Soluble chemical cues in the mouth bind to receptors in the tongue
and stimulate the gustatory nerves, which project to the nucleus solitarius in
the brainstem. The sense of taste is believed to discriminate only in broad
classes of stimuli: sweet, sour, bitter, salty and umami. Each modality is
mediated through a unique set of cellular receptors and channels, of which
several may be expressed in each taste neuron. The detection and the
discrimination of foods, for example, involve a combination of the senses of
taste, olfaction, touch, vision, and hearing. Taste fibers activate the medial
temporal lobe, but the higher cortical localization of taste is only poorly
understood.
Autonomic Sensory System. The autonomic nervous system (ANS)
monitors the essential functions necessary for life. The activity of visceral
organs, blood pressure, cardiac output, blood glucose levels, and body
temperature are all transmitted to the brain by autonomic fibers. Most
autonomic sensory information remains unconscious; if such information
rises to conscious levels, it is only as a vague sensation, in contrast to the
capacity of the primary senses to transmit sensations rapidly and precisely.
Alteration of Conscious Sensory Perception through Hypnosis.
Hypnosis is a state of heightened suggestibility attainable by a certain
proportion of the population. Under a state of hypnosis, gross distortions of
perception in any sensory modality and changes in the ANS can be achieved
instantaneously. The anatomy of the sensory system does not change, yet the
same specific stimuli may be perceived with opposed emotional value before
and after induction of the hypnotic state. For example, under hypnosis, a
person may savor an onion as if it were a luscious chocolate truffle, only to
reject the onion as abhorrently pungent seconds later when the hypnotic
suggestion is reversed. The localization of the hypnotic switch has not been
determined, but it presumably involves both sensory and association areas of
the brain. Experiments tracing neural pathways in human volunteers via
functional neuroimaging have demonstrated that shifts in attention in an
environmental setting determine changes in the regions of the brain that are


<<<PAGE 2926>>>
activated on an instantaneous time scale. Thus the organizing centers of the
brain may route conscious and unconscious thoughts through different
sequences of neural processing centers, depending on a person’s ultimate
goals and emotional state. These attention-mediated variations in synaptic
utilization can occur instantaneously, much like the alteration in the routing
of associational processing that may occur in hypnotic states.
Motor Systems
Body muscle movements are controlled by the lower motor neurons, which
extend axons—some as long as 1 m—to the muscle fibers. Lower motor
neuron firing is regulated by the summation of upper motor neuron activity.
In the brainstem, primitive systems produce gross coordinated movements of
the entire body. Activation of the rubrospinal tract stimulates flexion of all
limbs, whereas activation of the vestibulospinal tract causes all limbs to
extend. Newborn infants, for example, have all limbs tightly flexed,
presumably through the dominance of the rubrospinal system. The
movements of an anencephalic infant, who completely lacks a cerebral
cortex, may be indistinguishable from the movements of an average newborn.
In the first few months of life, the flexor spasticity is gradually mitigated by
the opposite actions of the vestibulospinal fibers, and more limb mobility
occurs.
At the top of the motor hierarchy is the corticospinal tract, which controls
fine movements and which eventually dominates the brainstem system during
the first years of life. The upper motor neurons of the corticospinal tract
reside in the posterior frontal lobe, in a section of the cortex known as the
motor strip. Planned movements are conceived in the association areas of the
brain, and in consultation with the basal ganglia and cerebellum, the motor
cortex directs their smooth execution. The importance of the corticospinal
system becomes immediately evident in strokes, in which spasticity returns as
the cortical influence is ablated, and the actions of the brainstem motor
systems are released from cortical modulation.
Basal Ganglia. The basal ganglia, a subcortical group of gray matter
nuclei, appear to mediate postural tone. The four functionally distinct ganglia
are the striatum, the pallidum, the substantia nigra, and the subthalamic


<<<PAGE 2927>>>
nucleus. Collectively known as the corpus striatum, the caudate and putamen
harbor components of both motor and association systems. The caudate
nucleus plays a vital role in the modulation of motor acts. Anatomical and
functional neuroimaging studies have correlated decreased activation of the
caudate with obsessive-compulsive behavior. When functioning correctly, the
caudate nucleus acts as a gatekeeper to allow the motor system to perform
only those acts that are goal-directed. When it fails to perform its gatekeeper
function, extraneous acts are performed, as in obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD) or the tic disorders, such as Tourette disorder. Overactivity of the
striatum owing to lack of dopaminergic inhibition (e.g., in parkinsonian
conditions) results in bradykinesia, an inability to initiate movements. The
caudate, in particular, shrinks dramatically in Huntington disease. This
disorder is characterized by rigidity, on which is gradually superimposed
choreiform, or “dancing,” movements. Psychosis may be a prominent feature
of Huntington disease, and suicide is not uncommon. The caudate is also
thought to influence associative or cognitive processes.
The globus pallidus contains two parts linked in series. In a cross-section
of the brain, the internal and external parts of the globus pallidus are nested
within the concavity of the putamen. The globus pallidus receives input from
the corpus striatum and projects fibers to the thalamus. This structure may be
severely damaged in Wilson disease and in carbon monoxide poisoning,
which are characterized by dystonic posturing and flapping movements of the
arms and legs.
The substantia nigra is named the black substance because the presence of
melanin pigment causes it to appear black to the naked eye. It has two parts,
one of which is functionally equivalent to the globus pallidus interna. The
other part degenerates in Parkinson disease. Parkinsonism is characterized by
rigidity and tremor and is associated with depression in more than 30 percent
of cases.
Finally, lesions in the subthalamic nucleus yield ballistic movements,
sudden limb jerks of such velocity that they are compared to projectile
movement.
Together, the nuclei of the basal ganglia appear capable of initiating and
maintaining the full range of useful movements. Investigators have
speculated that the nuclei serve to configure the activity of the overlying
motor cortex to fit the purpose of the association areas. Also, they appear to


<<<PAGE 2928>>>
integrate proprioceptive feedback to maintain an intended movement.
Cerebellum. The cerebellum consists of a simple six-cell pattern of
circuitry that is replicated roughly 10 million times. Simultaneous recordings
of the cerebral cortex and the cerebellum have shown that the cerebellum is
activated several milliseconds before a planned movement. Moreover, the
ablation of the cerebellum renders intentional movements coarse and
tremulous. These data suggest that the cerebellum carefully modulates the
tone of agonistic and antagonistic muscles by predicting the relative
contraction needed for smooth motion. This prepared motor plan is used to
ensure that precisely the right amount of flexor and extensor stimuli is sent to
the muscles. Recent functional imaging data have shown that the cerebellum
is active, even during the mere imagination of motor acts when no
movements ultimately result from its calculations. The cerebellum harbors
two, and possibly more, distinct “homunculi” or cortical representations of
the body plan.
Motor Cortex. Penfield’s groundbreaking work defined a motor
homunculus in the precentral gyrus, Brodmann area 4 (Fig. 33-2), where a
somatotopic map of the motor neurons is found. Individual cells within the
motor strip cause contraction of single muscles. The brain region
immediately anterior to the motor strip is called the supplementary motor
area, Brodmann area 6. This region contains cells that, when individually
stimulated, can trigger more complex movements by influencing a firing
sequence of motor strip cells. Recent studies have demonstrated a broad
representation of motor movements in the brain.

FIGURE 33-2


<<<PAGE 2929>>>
Drawing of the lateral view (A) and medial view (B) of the cytoarchitectonic
subdivisions of the human brain as determined by Brodmann. (From Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009.)

The skillful use of the hands is called praxis, and deficits in skilled
movements are termed apraxias. The three levels of apraxia are limb-kinetic,
ideomotor, and ideational. Limb-kinetic apraxia is the inability to use the
contralateral hand in the presence of preserved strength; it results from
isolated lesions in the supplementary motor area, which contains neurons that
stimulate functional sequences of neurons in the motor strip.
Ideomotor apraxia is the inability to perform an isolated motor act on
command, despite preserved comprehension, strength, and spontaneous
performance of the same act. Ideomotor apraxia simultaneously affects both
limbs and involves functions so specialized that they are localized to only one
hemisphere. Conditions in two separate areas can produce this apraxia.
Disconnection of the language comprehension area, Wernicke area, from the
motor regions causes an inability to follow spoken commands, and lesions to
the left premotor area may impair the actual motor program as the higherorder motor neurons generate it. This program is transmitted across the
corpus callosum to the right premotor area, which directs the movements of
the left hand. A lesion in this callosal projection can also cause isolated
ideomotor apraxia in the left hand. This syndrome implies the representation
of specific motor acts within discrete sections of the left premotor cortex.
Thus just as some cells respond selectively to specific environmental features
in the higher sensory cortices, some cells in the premotor cortex direct
specific complex motor tasks.
Ideational apraxia occurs when the individual components of a sequence
of skilled acts can be performed in isolation, but the entire series cannot be
organized and executed as a whole. For example, the sequence of opening an
envelope, removing the letter, unfolding it, and placing it on the table cannot
be performed in order, even though the individual acts can be performed in
isolation. The representation of the concept of a motor sequence may involve
several areas, specifically the left parietal cortex, but it likely also relies on
the sequencing and executive functions of the prefrontal cortex. This apraxia
is a typical finding of diffuse cortical degeneration, such as Alzheimer
disease.


<<<PAGE 2930>>>
Autonomic Motor System. The autonomic system is divided into a
sensory component (described earlier) and a motor component. The
autonomic motor system is divided into two branches: the sympathetic and
the parasympathetic. As a rule, organs are innervated by both types of fibers,
which often serve antagonistic roles. The parasympathetic system slows the
heart rate and begins the process of digestion. In contrast, the sympathetic
system mediates the fight or flight response, with increased heart rate,
shunting of blood away from the viscera, and increased respiration. The
sympathetic system is highly activated by sympathomimetic drugs, such as
amphetamine and cocaine, and may also be activated by withdrawal from
sedating drugs such as alcohol, benzodiazepines, and opioids. Investigators
who have found an increased risk of heart attacks in persons with high levels
of hostility have suggested that chronic activation of the sympathetic fight or
flight response, with the elevated secretion of adrenaline, may underlie this
association.
The brain center that drives the autonomic motor system is the
hypothalamus, which houses a set of paired nuclei that appear to control
appetite, rage, temperature, blood pressure, perspiration, and sexual drive.
For example, lesions to the ventromedial nucleus, the satiety center, produce
a voracious appetite and rage. In contrast, lesions to the upper region of the
lateral nucleus, the hunger center, produce a profound loss of appetite.
Numerous research groups are making intense efforts to define the
biochemical regulation of appetite and obesity and frequently target the role
of the hypothalamus.
In the regulation of sexual attraction, the role of the hypothalamus has also
become an area of active research. In the 1990s, three groups independently
reported neuroanatomical differences between some of the hypothalamic
nuclei of straight and gay men. Researchers interpreted this finding to suggest
that human sexual orientation has a neuroanatomical basis, and this result has
stimulated several follow-up studies of the biologic basis of sexual
orientation. At present, however, these controversial findings are not accepted
without question (including by some of the original authors), and no clear
consensus has emerged about whether the structure of the hypothalamus
consistently correlates with sexual orientation. In animal studies, early
nurturing and sexual experiences consistently alter the size of specific
hypothalamic nuclei.


<<<PAGE 2931>>>
Primitive Reflex Circuit. Sensory pathways function as extractors of
specific features from the overwhelming multitude of environmental stimuli,
whereas motor pathways carry out the wishes of the organism. These
pathways may be linked directly, for example, in the spinal cord, where a
primitive reflex arc may mediate the brisk withdrawal of a limb from a
painful stimulus, without immediate conscious awareness. In this loop, the
peripheral stimulus activates the sensory nerve, the sensory neuron synapses
on and directly activates the motor neuron, and the motor neuron drives the
muscle to contract. This response is strictly local and all-or-none. Such
primitive reflex arcs, however, rarely generate an organism’s behaviors. In
most behaviors, sensory systems project to association areas, where sensory
information is interpreted in terms of internally determined memories,
motivations, and drives. The exhibited behavior results from a plan of action
determined by the associated components and carried out by the motor
systems.
Localization of Brain Functions. Many theorists have subdivided the
brain into functional systems. Brodmann defined 47 areas based on
cytoarchitectonic distinctions, a cataloging that has been remarkably durable
as the functional anatomy of the brain has been elucidated. Various distinct
functions, based on data from lesion studies and functional neuroimaging,
have been assigned to nearly all Brodmann areas. At the other extreme,
individual experts have distinguished only three processing blocks: The
brainstem and the thalamic reticular activating system provide arousal and set
up attention; the posterior cortex integrates perceptions and generates
language; and, at the highest level, the frontal cortex generates programs and
executes plans like an orchestra conductor.
Hemispheric lateralization of function is a crucial feature of higher cortical
processing. The primary sensory cortices for touch, vision, hearing, smell,
and taste are represented bilaterally, and the first level of abstraction for these
modalities is also usually represented bilaterally. The highest levels of feature
extraction, however, are generally unified in one brain hemisphere only. For
example, recognition of familiar and unfamiliar faces seems localized to the
left inferior temporal cortex, and cortical processing of olfaction occurs in the
right frontal lobe.


<<<PAGE 2932>>>
Hypotheses about the flow of thought in the brain are based on few
experimental data, although this scarcity of findings has not impeded
numerous theoreticians from speculating about functional neuroanatomy.
Several roles have been tentatively assigned to specific lobes of the brain,
based on the functional deficits resulting from the localized injury. These data
indicate that some areas of the cortex may be necessary for a specific
function, but they do not define the complete set of structures that suffices for
a complicated task. Anecdotal evidence from surface electrocorticography for
the study of epilepsy, for example, suggests that a right parietal seizure
impulse may shoot immediately to the left frontal lobe and then to the right
temporal lobe before spreading locally to the remainder of the parietal lobe.
This evidence illustrates the limitations of naively assigning a mental
function to a single brain region. Functional neuroimaging studies frequently
reveal the simultaneous activation of disparate brain regions during the
performance of even a simple cognitive task. Nevertheless, particularly in the
processing of vision and language, fairly well-defined lobar syndromes have
been confirmed.
Language. The clearest known example of hemispheric lateralization is the
localization of language functions to the left hemisphere. Starting with the
work of Pierre Broca and Karl Wernicke in the 19th century, researchers have
drawn a detailed map of language comprehension and expression.
At least eight types of aphasias in which one or more components of the
language pathway are inured have been defined. Prosody, the emotional and
affective components of language, or “body language,” appears to be
localized in a mirror set of brain units in the right hemisphere.
Because of the significant role of verbal and written language in human
communication, the neuroanatomical basis of language is the most wholly
understood association function. Language disorders, also called aphasias,
are readily diagnosed in routine conversation, whereas perceptual disorders
may escape notice, except during detailed neuropsychological testing,
although these disorders may be caused by injury of an equal volume of the
cortex. Among the earliest models of cortical localization of function were
Broca’s 1865 description of a loss of fluent speech caused by a lesion in the
left inferior frontal lobe and Wernicke’s 1874 localization of language
comprehension to the left superior temporal lobe. Subsequent analyses of


<<<PAGE 2933>>>
patients rendered aphasic by strokes, trauma, or tumors have led to the
definition of the entire language association pathway from sensory input
through the motor output.
Language most demonstrates hemispheric localization of function. In most
persons, the hemisphere dominant for language also directs the dominant
hand. Ninety percent of the population is right-handed, and 99 percent of
right-handers have left hemispheric dominance for language. Of the 10
percent who are left-handers, 67 percent also have left-hemispheric language
dominance; the other 33 percent have either mixed or right-hemispheric
language dominance. This innate tendency to lateralization of language in the
left hemisphere is positively associated with an asymmetry of the planum
temporale, a triangular cortical patch on the superior surface of the temporal
lobe that appears to harbor Wernicke area. Patients with mixed hemispheric
dominance for language lack the expected asymmetry of the planum
temporale. That asymmetry has been observed in prenatal brains suggests a
genetic determinant. Indeed, the absence of asymmetry runs in families,
although both genetic and intrauterine influences probably contribute to the
final pattern.
Language comprehension is processed at three levels. First, in phonologic
processing, individual sounds, such as vowels or consonants, are recognized
in the inferior gyrus of the frontal lobes. Phonologic processing improves if
lip reading is allowed, if speech is slowed, or if contextual clues are provided.
Second, lexical processing matches the phonologic input with recognized
words or sounds in the individual’s memory. Lexical processing determines
whether a sound is a word. Recent evidence has localized lexical processing
to the left temporal lobe, where the representations of lexical data are
organized according to the semantic category. Third, semantic processing
connects the words to their meaning. Persons with an isolated defect in
semantic processing may retain the ability to repeat words in the absence of
an ability to understand or spontaneously generate speech. Semantic
processing activates the middle and superior gyri of the left temporal lobe,
whereas the representation of the conceptual content of words is widely
distributed in the cortex. Language production proceeds in the opposite
direction, from the cortical semantic representations through the left temporal
lexical nodes to either the oromotor phonologic processing area (for speech)
or the graphomotor system (for writing). Each of these areas can be


<<<PAGE 2934>>>
independently or simultaneously damaged by stroke, trauma, infection, or
tumor, resulting in a specific type of aphasia.
The garbled word salad or illogic utterances of an aphasic patient leave
little uncertainty about the diagnosis of left-sided cortical injury, but the right
hemisphere contributes a somewhat more subtle, but equally important,
affective quality to language. For example, the phrase “I feel good” may be
spoken with an infinite variety of shadings, each of which is understood
differently. The perception of prosody and the appreciation of the associated
gestures, or “body language,” appear to require an intact right hemisphere.
Behavioral neurologists have mapped an entire pathway for prosody
association in the right hemisphere that mirrors the language pathway of the
left hemisphere. Patients with right hemisphere lesions, who have impaired
comprehension or expression of prosody, may find it difficult to function in
society despite their intact language skills.
Developmental dyslexia is defined as an unexpected difficulty with
learning in the context of adequate intelligence, motivation, and education.
Whereas speech consists of the logical combination of 44 basic phonemes of
sounds, reading requires a broader set of brain functions and, thus, is more
susceptible to disruption. The awareness of specific phonemes develops at
about the ages of 4 to 6 years. It appears to be a prerequisite to the acquisition
of reading skills. The inability to recognize distinct phonemes is the best
predictor of a reading disability. Functional neuroimaging studies have
localized the identification of letters to the occipital lobe adjacent to the
primary visual cortex. Phonologic processing occurs in the inferior frontal
lobe, and semantic processing requires the superior and middle gyri of the left
temporal lobe. A recent finding of uncertain significance is that phonologic
processing in men activates only the left inferior frontal gyrus, whereas
phonologic processing in women activates the inferior frontal gyrus
bilaterally. Careful analysis of an individual’s particular reading deficits can
guide remedial tutoring efforts that can focus on weaknesses and thus attempt
to bring the reading skills up to the general level of intelligence and verbal
skills.
In children, developmental nonverbal learning disorder is postulated to
result from right hemisphere dysfunction. A nonverbal learning disorder is
characterized by poor fine-motor control in the left hand, deficits in the
visuoperceptual organization, problems with mathematics, and incomplete or


<<<PAGE 2935>>>
disturbed socialization.
Patients with nonfluent aphasia, who cannot complete a simple sentence,
may be able to sing an entire song, apparently because many aspects of music
production are localized to the right hemisphere. Music is represented
predominantly in the right hemisphere, but the full complexity of musical
ability seems to involve both hemispheres. Trained musicians appear to
transfer many musical skills from the right hemisphere to the left as they gain
proficiency in musical analysis and performance.
Arousal and Attention. Arousal, or the establishment and maintenance of
an awake state, appears to require at least three brain regions. Within the
brainstem, the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS), a diffuse set of
neurons, appears to set the level of consciousness. The ARAS projects to the
intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus, and these nuclei, in turn, project widely
throughout the cortex. Electrophysiologic studies show that both the thalamus
and the cortex fire rhythmical bursts of neuronal activity at rates of 20 to 40
cycles per second. During sleep, these bursts are not synchronized. During
wakefulness, the ARAS stimulates the thalamic intralaminar nuclei, which in
turn coordinate the oscillations of different cortical regions. The greater the
synchronization, the higher the level of wakefulness. The absence of arousal
produces stupor and coma. In general, small discrete lesions of the ARAS can
produce a stuporous state, whereas, at the hemispheric level, large bilateral
lesions are required to cause the same depression in alertness. One
particularly unfortunate but instructive condition involving extensive,
permanent, bilateral cortical dysfunction is the persistent vegetative state.
Sleep–wake cycles may be preserved, and the eyes may appear to gaze, but
the external world does not register, and no evidence of conscious thought
exists. This condition represents the expression of the isolated actions of the
ARAS and the thalamus.
The maintenance of attention appears to require an intact right frontal lobe.
For example, a widely used test of persistence requires scanning and
identifying only the letter A from a long list of random letters. Healthy
persons can usually maintain the performance of such a task for several
minutes, but in patients with right frontal lobe dysfunction, this capacity is
severely curtailed. Lesions of similar size in other regions of the cortex
usually do not affect persistence tasks. In contrast, the more generally


<<<PAGE 2936>>>
adaptive skill of maintaining a coherent line of thought is diffusely
distributed throughout the cortex. Many medical conditions can affect this
skill and may produce acute confusion or delirium.
One widely diagnosed disorder of attention is attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). No pathologic findings have been
consistently associated with this disorder. Functional neuroimaging studies,
however, have variously documented either frontal lobe or right hemisphere
hypometabolism in patients with ADHD, compared with normal controls.
These findings strengthen the notion that the frontal lobes—especially the
right frontal lobe—are essential to the maintenance of attention.
Memory. The clinical assessment of memory should test three periods,
which have distinct anatomical correlates. Immediate memory functions over
seconds; recent memory applies on a scale of minutes to days, and remote
memory encompasses months to years. Immediate memory is implicit in the
concept of attention and the ability to follow a train of thought. This ability
has been divided into phonologic and visuospatial components, and
functional imaging has localized them to the left and right hemispheres,
respectively. A related concept, incorporating immediate and recent memory,
is working memory, which is the ability to store information for several
seconds, whereas other, related cognitive operations take place on this
information. Recent studies have shown that single neurons in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex not only record features necessary for working
memory but also record the certainty with which the information is known
and the degree of expectation assigned to the permanence of a particular
environmental feature. Some neurons fire rapidly for an item that is eagerly
awaited but may cease firing if hopes are dashed unexpectedly. The encoding
of the emotional value of an item contained in the working memory may be
of great usefulness in determining goal-directed behavior. Some researchers
localize working memory predominantly to the left frontal cortex. Clinically,
however, bilateral prefrontal cortex lesions are required for severe
impairment of working memory. Other types of memory have been
described: episodic, semantic, and procedural.
Three brain structures are critical to the formation of memories: the medial
temporal lobe, specific diencephalic nuclei, and the basal forebrain. The
medial temporal lobe houses the hippocampus, an elongated, highly


<<<PAGE 2937>>>
repetitive network. The amygdala is adjacent to the anterior end of the
hippocampus. The amygdala has been suggested to rate the emotional
importance of experience and to activate the level of hippocampal activity
accordingly. Thus an emotionally intense experience is indelibly etched in
memory, but neutral stimuli are quickly disregarded.
Animal studies have defined a hippocampal place code, a pattern of
cellular activation in the hippocampus that corresponds to the animal’s
location in space. When the animal is introduced to a novel environment, the
hippocampus is broadly activated. As the animal explores and roams, the
firing of certain hippocampal regions begins to correspond to specific
locations in the environment. In about 1 hour, a highly detailed internal
representation of the external space (a “cognitive map”) appears in the form
of specific firing patterns of the hippocampal cells. These patterns of
neuronal firing may bear little spatial resemblance to the environment they
represent; instead, they may seem randomly arranged in the hippocampus. If
the animal is manually placed in a particular part of a familiar space, only the
corresponding hippocampal regions show intense neural activity. When
recording continues into sleep periods, firing sequences of hippocampal cells
outlining a coherent path of navigation through the environment are
registered, even though the animal is motionless. If the animal is removed
from the environment for several days and then returned, the previously
registered hippocampal place code is immediately reactivated. A series of
animal experiments have dissociated the formation of the hippocampal place
code from either visual, auditory, or olfactory cues, although each of these
modalities may contribute to place code generation. Other factors may
include internal calculations of distances based on counting footsteps or other
proprioceptive information. Data from targeted genetic mutations in mice
have implicated both the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors
and the calcium-calmodulin kinase II (CaMKII) in the proper formation of
hippocampal place fields. These data suggest that the hippocampus is a
significant site for the formation and storage of immediate and recent
memories. Although no data yet support the notion, it is conceivable that the
hippocampal cognitive map is inappropriately reactivated during a déjà vu
experience.


<<<PAGE 2938>>>
The most famous human subject in the study of memory is H. M., a man
with intractable epilepsy, who had both his hippocampi and amygdalae
surgically removed to alleviate his condition. The epilepsy was
controlled, but he was left with a complete inability to form and recall
memories of facts. H. M.’s learning and memory skills were relatively
preserved, which led to the suggestion that declarative or factual memory
may be separate within the brain from procedural or skill-related
memory. A complementary deficit in procedural memory with
preservation of declarative memory may be seen in persons with
Parkinson disease, in whom dopaminergic neurons of the nigrostriatal
tract degenerate. Because this deficit in procedural memory can be
ameliorated with treatment with levodopa, which is thought to potentiate
dopaminergic neurotransmission in the nigrostriatal pathway, a role has
been postulated for dopamine in procedural memory. Additional case
reports have further implicated the amygdala and the afferent and efferent
fiber tracts of the hippocampus as essential to the formation of memories.
Also, lesional studies have suggested mild lateralization of hippocampal
function in which the left hippocampus is more efficient at forming
verbal memories, and the right hippocampus tends to form nonverbal
memories. After unilateral lesions in humans, however, the remaining
hippocampus may compensate to a large extent. Medical causes of
amnesia include alcoholism, seizures, migraine, drugs, vitamin
deficiencies, trauma, strokes, tumors, infections, and degenerative
diseases.
The motor system within the cortex receives directives from the
association areas. The performance of a novel act requires constant feedback
from the sensory and association areas for completion, and functional
neuroimaging studies have demonstrated widespread activation of the cortex
during unskilled acts. Memorized motor acts initially require activation of the
medial temporal lobe. With practice, however, the performance of ever-larger
segments of an act necessary to achieve a goal become encoded within
discrete areas of the premotor and parietal cortices, particularly the left
parietal cortex, with the result that a much more limited activation of the


<<<PAGE 2939>>>
cortex is seen during highly skilled acts, and the medial temporal lobe is
bypassed. This process is called the corticalization of motor commands. In
lay terms, the process suggests a neuroanatomical basis for the adage
“practice makes perfect.”
Within the diencephalon, the dorsal medial nucleus of the thalamus and the
mammillary bodies appear necessary for memory formation. These two
structures are damaged in thiamine deficiency states usually seen in chronic
alcoholics, and their inactivation is associated with Korsakoff syndrome. This
syndrome is characterized by severe inability to form new memories and a
variable inability to recall remote memories.
Alzheimer disease is the most common clinical memory disorder.
Alzheimer disease is characterized pathologically by the degeneration of
neurons and their replacement by senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.
Clinicopathologic studies have suggested that cognitive decline is best
correlated with the loss of synapses. Initially, the parietal and temporal lobes
are affected, with relative sparing of the frontal lobes. This pattern of
degeneration correlates with the early loss of memory, which is mostly a
temporal lobe function. Also, syntactical language comprehension and
visuospatial organization, functions that rely heavily on the parietal lobe, are
impaired early in the course of Alzheimer disease.
In contrast, personality changes, which reflect frontal lobe function, are
relatively late consequences of Alzheimer disease. A rarer, complementary
cortical degeneration syndrome, Pick disease, first affects the frontal lobes
while sparing the temporal and parietal lobes. In Pick disease, disinhibition
and impaired language expression, which are signs of frontal dysfunction,
appear early, with relatively preserved language comprehension and memory.
Memory loss can also result from disorders of the subcortical gray matter
structures, specifically the basal ganglia and the brainstem nuclei, from the
disease of the white matter, or from disorders that affect both gray and white
matter.
Emotion. Individual emotional experiences occupy the attention of all
mental health professionals. Emotion derives from basic drives, such as
feeding, sex, reproduction, pleasure, pain, fear, and aggression, which all
animals share. The neuroanatomical basis for these drives appears to be
centered in the limbic system. Distinctly human emotions, such as affection,


<<<PAGE 2940>>>
pride, guilt, pity, envy, and resentment, are primarily learned and most likely
are represented in the cortex. The regulation of drives appears to require an
intact frontal cortex. The complex interplay of the emotions, however, is far
beyond the understanding of functional neuroanatomists. Where, for
example, are the representations of the id, the ego, and the superego?
Through what pathway are ethical and moral judgments shepherded? What
processes allow beauty to be in the eye of the beholder? These philosophical
questions represent a real frontier of human discovery.
Several studies have suggested that within the cortex exists a hemispheric
dichotomy of emotional representation. The left hemisphere houses the
analytical mind but may have a limited emotional repertoire. For example,
lesions to the right hemisphere, which cause profound functional deficits,
may be noted with indifference by the intact left hemisphere. The denial of
illness and of the inability to move the left hand in cases of right hemisphere
injury is called anosognosia. In contrast, left hemisphere lesions, which cause
profound aphasia, can trigger a catastrophic depression, as the intact right
hemisphere struggles with the realization of the loss. The right hemisphere
also appears dominant for affect, socialization, and body image.
Damage to the left hemisphere produces intellectual disorder and loss of
the narrative aspect of dreams. Damage to the right hemisphere produces
affective disorders, loss of the visual aspects of dreams, and a failure to
respond to humor, shadings of metaphor, and connotations. In dichotic vision
experiments, two scenes of varied emotional content were displayed
simultaneously to each half of the visual field and were perceived separately
by each hemisphere. A more intense emotional response attended the scenes
displayed to the left visual field that was processed by the right hemisphere.
Moreover, hemisensory changes representing conversion disorders have been
repeatedly noted to involve the left half of the body more often than the right,
an observation that suggests an origin in the right hemisphere.
Within the hemispheres, the temporal and frontal lobes play a prominent
role in emotion. The temporal lobe exhibits a high frequency of epileptic foci,
and temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) presents an exciting model for the role of
the temporal lobe in behavior. In studies of epilepsy, abnormal brain
activation is analyzed, rather than the deficits in activity analyzed in classic
lesional studies. TLE is of particular interest in psychiatry because patients
with temporal lobe seizures often manifest bizarre behavior without the


<<<PAGE 2941>>>
classic grand mal shaking movements caused by seizures in the motor cortex.
A proposed TLE personality is characterized by hyposexuality, emotional
intensity, and a perseverative approach to interactions termed viscosity.
Patients with left TLE may generate references to personal destiny and
philosophical themes and display a humorless approach to life. In contrast,
patients with right TLE may display excessive emotionality, ranging from
elation to sadness. Although patients with TLE may display excessive
aggression between seizures, the seizure itself may evoke fear.
The inverse of a TLE personality appears in persons with bilateral injury to
the temporal lobes after head trauma, cardiac arrest, herpes simplex
encephalitis, or Pick disease. This lesion resembles the one described in the
Klüver–Bucy syndrome, an experimental model of temporal lobe ablation in
monkeys. Behavior in this syndrome is characterized by hypersexuality,
placidity, a tendency to explore the environment with the mouth, inability to
recognize the emotional significance of visual stimuli, and continually
shifting attention, called hypermetamorphosis. In contrast to the aggressionfear spectrum sometimes seen in patients with TLE, complete experimental
ablation of the temporal lobes appears to produce a uniform, bland reaction to
the environment, possibly because of an inability to access memories.
The prefrontal cortices influence mood in a complementary way. Whereas
activation of the left prefrontal cortex appears to lift the mood, activation of
the right prefrontal cortex causes depression. A lesion to the left prefrontal
area, at either the cortical or the subcortical level, abolishes the typical moodelevating influences and produces depression and uncontrollable crying. In
contrast, a comparable lesion to the right prefrontal area may produce
laughter, euphoria, and witzelsucht, a tendency to joke and make puns.
Effects opposite to those caused by lesions appear during seizures, in which
occurs abnormal, excessive activation of either prefrontal cortex. A seizure
focus within the left prefrontal cortex can cause gelastic seizures, for
example, in which the ictal event is laughter. Functional neuroimaging has
documented left prefrontal hypoperfusion during depressive states, which
normalized after the depression was treated successfully.
Limbic System Function. James Papez delineated the limbic system in
1937. The Papez circuit consists of the hippocampus, the fornix, the
mammillary bodies, the anterior nucleus of the thalamus, and the cingulate


<<<PAGE 2942>>>
gyrus (Fig. 33-3). The boundaries of the limbic system were subsequently
expanded to include the amygdala, septum, basal forebrain, nucleus
accumbens, and orbitofrontal cortex.
Although this schema creates an anatomical loop for emotional processing,
the specific contributions of the individual components other than the
hippocampus or even whether a given train of neural impulses travels along
the entire pathway is unknown.
The amygdala appears to be a critically important gate through which
internal and external stimuli are integrated. Information from the primary
senses is interwoven with internal drives, such as hunger and thirst, to assign
emotional significance to sensory experiences. The amygdala may mediate
learned fear responses, such as anxiety and panic, and may direct the
expression of certain emotions by producing a particular affect.
Neuroanatomical data suggest that the amygdala exerts a more powerful
influence on the cortex, to stimulate or suppress cortical activity than the
cortex exerts on the amygdala. Pathways from the sensory thalamic relay
stations separately send sensory data to the amygdala and the cortex, but the
subsequent effect of the amygdala on the cortex is the more potent of the two
reciprocal connections.


<<<PAGE 2943>>>
FIGURE 33-3
Schematic drawing of the major anatomic structures of the limbic system. The
cingulate and parahippocampal gyri form the “limbic lobe,” a rim of tissue located
along the junction of the diencephalon and the cerebral hemispheres. (Adapted
from Hendelman WJ. Student’s Atlas of Neuroanatomy. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Saunders; 1994:179.)

In contrast, damage to the amygdala has been reported to ablate the ability
to distinguish fear and anger in other persons’ voices and facial expressions.
Persons with such injuries may have a preserved ability to recognize
happiness, sadness, or disgust. The limbic system appears to house the
emotional association areas, which direct the hypothalamus to express the
motor and endocrine components of the emotional state.
Fear and Aggression. The electrical stimulation of animals throughout
the subcortical area involving the limbic system produces rage reactions (e.g.,
growling, spitting, and arching of the back). Whether the animal flees or
attacks depends on the intensity of the stimulation.
Limbic System and Schizophrenia. The limbic system has been
particularly implicated in neuropathologic studies of schizophrenia. Eugen
Bleuler’s well-known four A’s of schizophrenia—affect, associations,
ambivalence, and autism—refer to brain functions served in part by limbic
structures. Several clinicopathologic studies have found a reduction in the
brain weight of the gray matter but not of the white matter in persons with
schizophrenia. In pathologic as well as in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
reports, persons with schizophrenia may have reduced the volume of the
hippocampus, amygdala, and parahippocampal gyrus. Schizophrenia may be
a late sequela of a temporal epileptic focus, with some studies reporting an
association in 7 percent of patients with TLE.
Functional neuroimaging studies have demonstrated decreased activation
of the frontal lobes in many patients with schizophrenia, particularly during
tasks requiring willed action. A reciprocal increase in activation of the
temporal lobe can occur during willed actions, such as finger movements or
speaking, in persons with schizophrenia. Neuropathologic studies have
shown a decreased density of neuropil, the intertwined axons, and dendrites
of the neurons in the frontal lobes of these patients. During development, the
density of neuropil is highest around age 1 year and then is reduced


<<<PAGE 2944>>>
somewhat through synaptic pruning; the density plateaus throughout
childhood and is further reduced to adult levels in adolescence. One
hypothesis of the appearance of schizophrenia in the late teenage years is that
excessive adolescent synaptic pruning occurs and results in too little
frontolimbic activity. Some experts have suggested that hypometabolism and
paucity of interneuronal connections in the prefrontal cortex may reflect
inefficiencies in working memory, which permits the disjointed discourse and
loosening of associations that characterize schizophrenia. At present, the
molecular basis for the regulation of the density of synapses within the
neuropil is unknown. Other lines of investigation aimed at understanding the
biologic basis of schizophrenia have documented inefficiencies in the
formation of cortical synaptic connections in the middle of the second
trimester of gestation, which may result from a viral infection or malnutrition.
Neurodevelopmental surveys administered during childhood found an
increased incidence of subtle neurologic abnormalities before the appearance
of the thought disorder in persons who subsequently exhibited signs of
schizophrenia.
In one intriguing study, positron emission tomography (PET) scanning was
used to identify the brain regions that are activated when a person hears
spoken language. A consistent set of cortical and subcortical structures
demonstrated increased metabolism when speech was processed. The
researchers then studied a group of patients with schizophrenia who were
experiencing active auditory hallucinations. They found that the same brain
areas that were activated when actual sounds were playing were activated
while the patients were hallucinating. This included the primary auditory
cortex. At the same time, decreased activation was seen of areas thought to
monitor speech, including the left middle temporal gyrus and the
supplementary motor area. This study raises the questions of what brain
structure is activating the hallucinations, and by what mechanism do
neuroleptic drugs suppress the hallucinations. Functional imaging has much
to tell about the neuroanatomical basis of schizophrenia.
Frontal Lobe Function. The frontal lobes, the region that determines how
the brain acts on its knowledge, constitute a category unto themselves. In
comparative neuroanatomical studies, the massive size of the frontal lobes is
the main feature that distinguishes the human brain from that of other


<<<PAGE 2945>>>
primates, and that lends it uniquely human qualities. There are four
subdivisions of the frontal lobes. The first three—the motor strip, the
supplemental motor area, and Broca area—are mentioned in the preceding
discussion of the motor system and language. The fourth, most anterior,
division is the prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal cortex contains three regions
in which lesions produce distinct syndromes: the orbitofrontal, the
dorsolateral, and the medial. Dye-tracing studies have defined dense
reciprocal connections between the prefrontal cortex and all other brain
regions. Therefore, to the extent that anatomy can predict function, the
prefrontal cortex is ideally connected to allow sequential use of the entire
palette of brain functions in executing the goal-directed activity. Indeed,
frontal lobe injury usually impairs the executive functions: motivation,
attention, and sequencing of actions.
Bilateral lesions of the frontal lobes are characterized by changes in
personality—how persons interact with the world. The frontal lobe syndrome,
which is most commonly produced by trauma, infarcts, tumors, lobotomy,
multiple sclerosis, or Pick disease, consists of slow thinking, poor judgment,
decreased curiosity, social withdrawal, and irritability. Patients typically
display apathetic indifference to experience that can explode into impulsive
disinhibition. Unilateral frontal lobe lesions may be mostly unnoticed
because the intact lobe can compensate with high efficiency.
Frontal lobe dysfunction may be challenging to detect using highly
structured, formal neuropsychological tests. Intelligence, as reflected in the
intelligence quotient (IQ), may be average, and functional neuroimaging
studies have shown that the IQ seems to require mostly parietal lobe
activation. For example, during the administration of the Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale-Revised (WAIS-R), the highest levels of increased
metabolic activity during verbal tasks occurred in the left parietal lobe,
whereas the highest levels of increased metabolic activity during performance
skills occurred in the right parietal lobe. In contrast, frontal lobe pathology
may become apparent only under unstructured, stressful, real-life situations.
A famous case illustrating the result of frontal lobe damage involves
Phineas Gage, a 25-year-old railroad worker. While he was working with
explosives, an accident drove an iron rod through Gage’s head. He


<<<PAGE 2946>>>
survived, but both frontal lobes were severely damaged. After the
accident, his behavior changed dramatically. The case was written up by
J. M. Harlow, M.D., in 1868, as follows: [George] is fitful, irreverent,
indulging at times in the grossest profanity (which was not previously his
custom), manifesting but little deference for his fellows, impatient of
restraint or advice when it conflicts with his desires … His mind was
radically changed, so decidedly that his friends and acquaintances said he
was “no longer Gage” (see Fig. 33-4).
In one study of right-handed males, lesions of the right prefrontal cortex
eliminated the tendency to use internal, associative memory cues and led to
an extreme tendency to interpret the task at hand in terms of its immediate
context. In contrast, right-handed males who had lesions of the left prefrontal
cortex produced no context-dependent interpretations and interpreted the
tasks entirely in terms of their internal drives. A mirror image of the
functional lateralization appeared in left-handed subjects. This test thus
revealed the most precise known association of higher cortical functional
lateralization with the subjects’ dominant hand. Future experiments in this
vein will attempt to reproduce these findings with functional neuroimaging. If
corroborated, these studies suggest a remarkable complexity of functional
localization within the prefrontal cortex and may also have implications for
the understanding of psychiatric diseases in which prefrontal pathology has
been postulated, such as schizophrenia and mood disorders.


<<<PAGE 2947>>>
FIGURE 33-4
The life mask and skull of Phineas Gage. Note damage to the frontal region. “A
famous case illustrating the result of frontal lobe damage involves Phineas Gage,
a 25-year-old railroad worker. While he was working with explosives, an accident
drove an iron rod through Gage’s head. He survived, but both frontal lobes were
severely damaged. After the accident, his behavior changed dramatically. The
case was written up by J.M. Harlow, M.D., in 1868, as follows: [Gage] is fitful,
irreverent, indulging at times in the grossest profanity (which was not previously
his custom), manifesting but little deference for his fellows, impatient of restraint
or advice when it conflicts his desires…His mind was radically changed, so
decidedly that his friends and acquaintances said he was ‘no longer Gage’.”
(Courtesy of Anthony A. Walsh, Ph.D.)

The massive innervation of the frontal lobes by dopamine-containing nerve
fibers is of interest because of the action of antipsychotic medications. At the
clinical level, antipsychotic medications may help to organize the rambling
associations of a patient with schizophrenia. At the neurochemical level, most
typical antipsychotic medications block the actions of dopamine at the D2
receptors. The frontal lobes, therefore, may be a significant therapeutic site of
action for antipsychotic medications.
Development
The nervous system is divided into central and peripheral nervous systems
(CNS and PNS). The CNS consists of the brain and spinal cord; the PNS


<<<PAGE 2948>>>
refers to all the sensory, motor, and autonomic fibers and ganglia outside the
CNS. During development, both divisions arise from the neural tube. The
neural tube forms through the folding of the neural plate, a specialization of
the ectoderm (the outermost of the three embryonic layers). During
embryonic development, the neural tube itself becomes the CNS; the
ectoderm immediately superficial to the neural tube becomes the neural crest,
which gives rise to the PNS. The formation of these structures requires
chemical communication between the neighboring tissues in the form of cell
surface molecules and diffusible chemical signals.
In many cases, an earlier-formed structure, such as the notochord, is said to
induce the surrounding ectoderm to form a later structure, in this case, the
neural plate. The identification of the chemical mediators of tissue induction
is an active area of research. Investigators have begun to examine whether
failures of the interactions of these mediators and their receptors could
underlie errors in brain development that cause psychopathology.
Neuronal Migration and Connections. The life cycle of a neuron
consists of a cell birth, migration to the adult position, extension of an axon,
elaboration of dendrites, synaptogenesis, and, finally, the onset of chemical
neurotransmission. Individual neurons are born in proliferative zones,
generally located along the inner surface of the neural tube. At the peak of
neuronal proliferation in the middle of the second trimester, 250,000 neurons
are born each minute. Postmitotic neurons migrate outward to their adult
locations in the cortex, guided by radially oriented astrocytic glial fibers.
Glia-guided neuronal migration in the cerebral cortex occupies much of the
first 6 months of gestation. For some neurons in the prefrontal cortex,
migration occurs over a distance 5,000 times the diameter of the neuronal cell
body. Neuronal migration requires a complex set of cell-cell interactions and
is susceptible to errors in which neurons fail to reach the cortex and instead
reside in ectopic positions. A group of such incorrectly placed neurons is
called a heterotopia. Neuronal heterotopias have been shown to cause
epilepsy and are positively associated with mental retardation. In a
neuropathologic study of the planum temporale of four consecutive patients
with dyslexia, heterotopias were a common finding. Recently, heterotopic
neurons within the frontal lobe have been postulated to play a causal role in
some cases of schizophrenia.


<<<PAGE 2949>>>
Many neurons lay down an axon as they migrate, whereas others do not
initiate axon outgrowth until they have reached their cortical targets.
Thalamic axons that project to the cortex initially synapse on a transient layer
of neurons called the subplate neurons. In normal development, the axons
subsequently detach from the subplate neurons and proceed superficially to
synapse on the actual cortical cells. The subplate neurons then degenerate.
Some brains from persons with schizophrenia reveal an abnormal persistence
of subplate neurons, suggesting a failure to complete axonal pathfinding in
the brains of these persons. This finding does not correlate with the presence
of schizophrenia in every case, however. A characteristic branched dendritic
tree elaborates once the neuron has completed migration. Synaptogenesis
occurs at a furious rate from the second trimester through the first 10 years or
so of life. The peak of synaptogenesis occurs within the first 2 postnatal years
when as many as 30 million synapses form each second. Ensheathment of
axons by myelin begins prenatally; it is mostly complete in early childhood
but does not reach its full extent until late in the third decade of life.
Myelination of the brain is also sequential.
Neuroscientists are tremendously interested in the effect of experience on
the formation of brain circuitry in the first years of life. As noted earlier,
many examples are seen of the impact of early sensory experience on the
wiring of cortical sensory processing areas. Similarly, early movement
patterns are known to reinforce neural connections in the supplemental motor
area that drive specific motor acts. Neurons rapidly form a fivefold excess of
synaptic connections; then, through a Darwinian process of elimination, only
those synapses that serve a relevant function persist. This synaptic pruning
appears to preserve input in which the presynaptic cell fires in synchrony
with the postsynaptic cell, a process that reinforces repeatedly activated
neural circuits. One molecular component that is thought to mediate synaptic
reinforcement is the postsynaptic NMDA glutamate receptor. This receptor
allows the influx of calcium ions only when activated by glutamate at the
same time as the membrane in which it sits is depolarized. Thus, glutamate
binding without membrane depolarization or membrane depolarization
without glutamate binding fails to trigger calcium influx. NMDA receptors
open in dendrites that are exposed to repeated activation, and their activation
stimulates the stabilization of the synapse. Calcium is a crucial intracellular
messenger that initiates a cascade of events, including gene regulation and the


<<<PAGE 2950>>>
release of trophic factors that strengthen particular synaptic connections.
Although less experimental evidence exists for the role of experience in
modulating synaptic connectivity of association areas than has been
demonstrated in sensory and motor areas, neuroscientists assume that similar
activity-dependent mechanisms may apply in all areas of the brain.
Adult Neurogenesis. A remarkable recent discovery has been that new
neurons can be generated in specific brain regions (notably the dentate gyrus
of the hippocampus) in adult animals, including humans. This discovery is in
marked contrast to the previous belief that no neurons were produced after
birth in most species. This discovery has a potentially profound impact on our
understanding of normal development, incorporation of experiences, as well
as the ability of the brain to repair itself after various types of injuries.
Neurologic Basis of Development Theories. In the realm of emotion,
early childhood experiences have been suspected to be at the root of
psychopathology since the earliest theories of Sigmund Freud. Freud’s
psychoanalytic method aimed at tracing the threads of a patient’s earliest
childhood memories. Franz Alexander added the goal of allowing the patient
to relive these memories in a less pathologic environment, a process known
as a corrective emotional experience. Although neuroscientists have no data
demonstrating that this method operates at the level of neurons and circuits,
emerging results reveal a profound effect of early caregivers on an adult
individual’s emotional repertoire. For example, the concept of attunement is
defined as the process by which caregivers “playback a child’s inner
feelings.” If a baby’s emotional expressions are reciprocated consistently and
sensitively, specific emotional circuits are reinforced. These circuits likely
include the limbic system, in particular, the amygdala, which serves as a gate
to the hippocampal memory circuits for emotional stimuli. In one anecdote,
for example, a baby whose mother repeatedly failed to mirror her level of
excitement emerged from childhood a too passive girl, who was unable to
experience a thrill or a feeling of joy.
The relative contributions of nature and nurture are perhaps nowhere more
indistinct than in the maturation of emotional responses, partly because the
localization of emotion within the adult brain is only poorly understood. It is
reasonable to assume, however, that the reactions of caregivers during a


<<<PAGE 2951>>>
child’s first 2 years of life are eventually internalized as distinct neural
circuits, which may be only incompletely subject to modification through
subsequent experience. For example, axonal connections between the
prefrontal cortex and the limbic system, which probably play a role in
modulating basic drives, are established between the ages of 10 and 18
months. Recent work suggests that a pattern of terrifying experiences in
infancy may flood the amygdala and drive memory circuits to be specifically
alert to threatening stimuli, at the expense of circuits for language and other
academic skills. Thus infants raised in a chaotic and frightening home may be
neurologically disadvantaged for the acquisition of complex cognitive skills
in school.
An adult correlate to this cascade of detrimental overactivity of the fear
response is found in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), in which persons
exposed to an intense trauma involving death or injury may have feelings of
fear and helplessness for years after the event. A PET scanning study of
patients with PTSD revealed abnormally high activity in the right amygdala
while the patients were reliving their traumatic memories. The researchers
hypothesized that the stressful hormonal milieu present during the
registration of the memories might have served to burn the memories into the
brain and to prevent their erasure by the usual memory modulation circuits.
As a result, the traumatic memories exerted a pervasive influence and led to a
state of constant vigilance, even in safe, familiar settings.
Workers in the related realms of mathematics have produced results
documenting the organizing effects of early experiences on internal
representations of the external world. Since the time of Pythagoras, music has
been considered a branch of mathematics. A series of studies have shown that
groups of children who were given 8 months of intensive classical music
lessons during preschool years later had significantly better spatial and
mathematical reasoning in school than a control group. Nonmusical tasks,
such as navigating mazes, drawing geometric figures, and copying patterns of
two-color blocks, were performed significantly more skillfully by the musical
children. Early exposure to music, thus, may be ideal preparation for later
acquisition of complex mathematical and engineering skills.
These tantalizing observations suggest a neurologic basis for the
developmental theories of Jean Piaget, Erik Erikson, Margaret Mahler, John
Bowlby, Sigmund Freud, and others. Erikson’s epigenetic theory states that


<<<PAGE 2952>>>
normal adult behavior results from the successful, sequential completion of
each of several infantile and childhood stages. According to the epigenetic
model, failure to complete an early stage is reflected in subsequent physical,
cognitive, social, or emotional maladjustment. By analogy, the experimental
data just discussed suggest that early experience, particularly during the
critical window of opportunity for establishing neural connections, primes the
necessary circuitry for language, emotions, and other advanced behaviors.
Miswiring of an infant’s brain may lead to severe handicaps later when the
person attempts to relate to the world as an adult. These findings support the
vital need for adequate public financing of Early Intervention and Head Start
programs, programs that may be the most cost-effective means of improving
persons’ mental health.

NEURAL DEVELOPMENT AND NEUROGENESIS
The human brain is a structurally and functionally complex system that
exhibits ongoing modification in response to both experience and disease.
The anatomical and neurochemical systems that underlie the cognitive,
social, emotional and sensorimotor functions of the mature nervous system
emerge from neuronal and glial cell populations that arise during the earliest
periods of development.
An understanding of molecular and cellular mechanisms mediating
nervous system development is critical in psychiatry because abnormalities of
developmental processes contribute to many brain disorders. Although a
developmental basis may not be surprising in early childhood disorders, such
as autism, fragile X mental retardation, and Rett syndrome, even mature
diseases, including schizophrenia and depression, reflect ontogenetic factors.
For example, evidence from brain pathology and neuroimaging indicates that
there are reductions in forebrain region volumes, neuron and glial cell
numbers, and some classes of interneurons in schizophrenia that are apparent
at the time of diagnosis. Similarly, in autism, early brain growth is
abnormally increased, and abnormalities of the cellular organization are
observed that reflect disturbances in the fundamental processes of cell
proliferation and migration. When there is abnormal regulation of early brain
development, a foundation of altered neuron populations that may differ in
cell types, numbers, and positions is laid down. They may also develop


<<<PAGE 2953>>>
abnormal connections, which also have consequences for interacting glial
populations. With progressive postnatal development, the maturing brain
systems call upon component neurons to achieve increasing levels of
complex information processing, which may be deficient should initial
conditions be disturbed. New neural properties emerge during maturation as
neuron populations elaborate additional functional networks based on and
modified by ongoing experience. Given the brain’s dynamic character, we
may expect that developmental abnormalities in neural populations and
systems, caused by genetic as well as environmental factors, will manifest at
diverse times in a person’s life.
Overview of Nervous System Morphologic Development
In considering brain development, several overarching principles need to be
considered. First, different brain regions and neuron populations are
generated at distinct times of development and exhibit specific temporal
schedules. This pattern has implications for the consequences of specific
developmental insults, such as the production of autism following fetal
exposure to the drug thalidomide only during days 20 to 24 of gestation.
Second, the sequence of cellular processes comprising ontogeny predicts that
abnormalities in early events necessarily lead to differences in subsequent
stages, although not all abnormalities may be accessible to our clinical tools.
For example, a deficit in the number of neurons will likely lead to reductions
in axonal processes and ensheathing white matter in the mature brain.
However, at the clinical level, since glial cells outnumber neurons 8 to 1, the
glial cell population, the oligodendrocytes, and their myelin appear as an
altered white matter on neuroimaging with little evidence of a neuronal
disturbance. Third, it is clear that specific molecular signals, such as
extracellular growth factors and cognate receptors or transcription factors,
play roles at multiple developmental stages of the cell. For example, both
insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF) regulate multiple cellular processes during the developmental
generation and mature function of neurons, including cell proliferation,
survival promotion, neuron migration, process outgrowth, and the momentary
synaptic modifications (plasticity) underlying learning and memory. Thus
changes in expression or regulation of a ligand or its receptor, by experience,


<<<PAGE 2954>>>
environmental insults, or genetic mechanisms, will have effects on multiple
developmental and mature processes.
The Neural Plate and Neurulation. The nervous system of the human
embryo first appears between 2½ and 4 weeks of gestation. During
development, the emergence of new cell types, including neurons, results
from interactions between neighboring layers of cells. On gestational day 13,
the embryo consists of a sheet of cells. Following gastrulation (days 14 to
15), which forms a two-cell–layered embryo consisting of ectoderm and
endoderm, the neural plate region of the ectoderm is delineated by the
underlying mesoderm, which appears on day 16. The mesoderm forms by
cells entering a midline cleft in the ectoderm called the primitive streak. After
migration, the mesodermal layer lies between the ectoderm and endoderm
and induces the overlying ectoderm to become a neural plate. Induction
usually involves the release of soluble growth factors from one group of cells,
which in turn bind receptors on neighboring cells, eliciting changes in nuclear
transcription factors that control downstream gene expression. In some cases,
cell–cell contact-mediated mechanisms are involved. In the gene-patterning
section below, the critical roles of soluble growth factors and transcription
factor expression are described.

FIGURE 33-5
Mechanisms of neurulation. Neurulation begins with the formation of a neural
plate in response to soluble growth factors released by the underlying notochord.
The neural plate originates as a thickening of the ectoderm that results from


<<<PAGE 2955>>>
cuboidal epithelial cells becoming columnar in shape. With further changes in cell
shape and adhesion, the edges of the plate fold and rise, meeting in the midline to
form a tube. Cells at the tips of the neural folds come to lie between the neural
tube and overlying epidermis, forming the neural crest that gives rise to the
peripheral nervous system and other structures. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:44.)

The neural plate, the induction of which is complete by 18 days, is a sheet
of columnar epithelium and is surrounded by ectodermal epithelium. After
formation, the edges of the neural plate elevate, forming the neural ridges.
Subsequently, changes in intracellular cytoskeleton and cell-extracellular
matrix attachment cause the ridges to merge in the midline and fuse, a
process termed neurulation, forming the neural tube, with a central cavity
presaging the ventricular system (Fig. 33-5). Fusion begins in the cervical
region at the hindbrain level (medulla and pons) and continues rostrally and
caudally. Neurulation occurs at 3 to 4 weeks of gestation in humans, and its
failure results in anencephaly rostrally and spina bifida caudally. Neurulation
defects are well known following exposure to retinoic acid in dermatologic
preparations and anticonvulsants, especially valproic acid, as well as diets
deficient in folic acid.
Another product of neurulation is the neural crest, the cells of which derive
from the edges of the neural plate and dorsal neural tube. From this position,
neural crest cells migrate dorsolaterally under the skin to form melanocytes
and ventromedially to form dorsal root sensory ganglia and sympathetic
chains of the peripheral nervous system and ganglia of the enteric nervous
system. However, neural crest gives rise to diverse tissues, including cells of
neuroendocrine, cardiac, mesenchymal, and skeletal systems, forming the
basis of many congenital syndromes involving the brain and other organs.
The neural crest origin at the border of neural and epidermal ectoderm and its
generation of melanocytes forms the basis of the neurocutaneous disorders,
including tuberous sclerosis and neurofibromatosis. Finally, another
nonneuronal structure of mesodermal origin formed during neurulation is the
notochord found on the ventral side of the neural tube. As we will describe
later in this chapter, the notochord plays a critical role during neural tube
differentiation, since it is a signaling source of soluble growth factors, such as
sonic hedgehog (Shh), which affect gene patterning and cell determination.


<<<PAGE 2956>>>
Regional Differentiation of the Embryonic Nervous System. After
closure, the neural tube expands differentially to form major morphologic
subdivisions that precede the major functional divisions of the brain. These
subdivisions are important developmentally because different regions are
generated according to specific schedules of proliferation and subsequent
migration and differentiation. The neural tube can be described in three
dimensions, including longitudinal, circumferential, and radial. The
longitudinal dimension reflects the rostrocaudal (anterior–posterior)
organization, which mostly consists of the brain and spinal cord.
Organization in the circumferential dimension, tangential to the surface,
represents two significant axes: In the dorsoventral axis, cell groups are
uniquely positioned from top to bottom.
On the other hand, in the medial to the lateral axis, there is mirror-image
symmetry, consistent with the right-left symmetry of the body. Finally, the
radial dimension represents the organization from the innermost cell layer
adjacent to the ventricles to the outermost surface and exhibits region-specific
cell layering. At 4 weeks, the human brain is divided longitudinally into the
prosencephalon
(forebrain),
mesencephalon
(midbrain),
and
rhombencephalon (hindbrain). These three subdivisions or “vesicles” divide
further into five divisions by 5 weeks, consisting of the prosencephalon,
which forms the telencephalon (including cortex, hippocampus, and basal
ganglia) and diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus), the mesencephalon,
(midbrain), and the rhombencephalon, yielding metencephalon (pons and
cerebellum) and myelencephalon (medulla). Morphologic transformation into
five vesicles depends on the region-specific proliferation of precursor cells
adjacent to the ventricles, the so-called ventricular zones (VZs). As discussed
later, proliferation intimately depends on soluble growth factors made by
proliferating cells themselves or released from regional signaling centers. In
turn, growth factor production and cognate receptor expression also depend
on region-specific patterning genes. We now know that VZ precursors, which
appear morphologically homogeneous, express a checkerboard array of
molecular genetic determinants that control the generation of specific types of
neurons in each domain (Fig. 33-6).


<<<PAGE 2957>>>
FIGURE 33-6
Progression of brain regional differentiation. Early after neurulation, the neural
tube differentiates into four regions (forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain, and spinal
cord) that give rise following later divisions and maturation to the different brain
structures. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009:45.)

In the circumferential dimension, the organization begins very early and
extends over many rostrocaudal subdivisions. In the spinal cord, the majority
of tissue comprises the lateral plates, which later divide into dorsal or alar
plates, composed of sensory interneurons, and motor or basal plates,
consisting of ventral motor neurons. Two other diminutive plates, termed the
roof plate and floor plate, are virtually absent in maturity; however, they play
critical regulatory roles as growth factor signaling centers in the embryo.
Indeed, the floor plate, in response to Shh from the ventrally located
notochord, produces its own Shh, which in turn induces neighboring cells in
the ventral spinal cord and brainstem to express region-specific transcription


<<<PAGE 2958>>>
factors that specify cell phenotype and function. For example, in combination
with other factors, floor plate Shh induces midbrain precursors to
differentiate into dopamine-secreting neurons of the substantia nigra.
Similarly, the roof plate secretes growth factors, such as bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), which induce dorsal neuron cell fate in the
spinal cord. In the absence of a roof plate, dorsal structures fail to form, such
as the cerebellum, and midline hippocampal structures are missing. Finally,
in the radial dimension, the organization of layers is subdivision specific,
produced by differential proliferation of VZ precursors and cell migration, as
described later.
The Ventricular and Subventricular Proliferative Zones. The distinct
patterns of precursor proliferation and migration in different regions generate
the radial organization of the nervous system. In each longitudinal
subdivision, the final population size of a brain region depends on the
interplay of regulated neurogenesis with programmed cell death. Traditional
concepts had suggested that there was excess cell production everywhere and
that final cell number regulation was achieved primarily after neurogenesis
through selective cell death mediated by target-derived survival (trophic)
factors. We now know that the patterning genes discussed later play
significant roles in directing regional precursor proliferation that is
coordinated with final structural requirements, and that programmed cell
death occurs at multiple stages. Consequently, in diseases characterized by
brain regions smaller than usual, such as schizophrenia, there may be a
failure to generate neurons initially, as opposed to normal generation with
subsequent cell loss.
Radial and Tangential Patterns of Neurogenesis and Migration. Of
interest to psychiatry, the cerebral cortex is the paradigmatic model of insideto-outside neurogenesis. A large number of studies now relate specific
genetic mutations to distinct cortical malformations that alter neurogenesis,
migration, and cellular organization, thereby increasing our knowledge of
both normal and pathophysiologic cortical development. The characteristic
six-cell layers represent a common cytoarchitectural and physiologic basis for
the neocortical function and are derived from the embryonic forebrain
telencephalic vesicles. Within each layer, neurons exhibit related axodendritic


<<<PAGE 2959>>>
morphologies, use common neurotransmitters, and establish similar afferent
and efferent connections. In general, pyramidal neurons in layer 3 establish
synapses within and between cortical hemispheres, whereas deeper layer 5/6
neurons project primarily to subcortical nuclei, including the thalamus,
brainstem, and spinal cord. The majority of cortical neurons originate from
the forebrain VZ. At the earliest stages, the first postmitotic cells migrate
outward from the VZ to establish a superficial layer termed the preplate. Two
consequential cell types comprise the preplate—Cajal–Retzius cells, which
form outermost layer one or marginal zone, and subplate neurons, which lay
beneath future layer 6. These distinct regions form when later-born cortical
plate neurons migrate within and divide the preplate in two (Fig. 33-7).

FIGURE 33-7
Schematic drawing of radial and tangential migration during cerebral cortex
development. A: A coronal section of one-half of the developing rat forebrain. The
dorsal forebrain gives rise to the cerebral cortex. Medial ganglionic eminences
(MGEs) and lateral ganglionic eminences (LGEs) of the ventral forebrain generate
neurons of the basal ganglia and the cortical interneurons. The arrows indicate
the tangential migration route for γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) interneurons to the
cortex. The boxed area (enlarged in B and C) shows the developing cortex at
early and late stages. B: In the dorsal forebrain, the first cohort of postmitotic
neurons migrate out from the ventricular zone (VZ) and create a preplate (PP)
below the pial surface. C: Subsequent postmitotic neurons will migrate along
radial glia through the intermediate zone (IZ) and take position in the middle of the
preplate, creating a cortical plate (CP) between the outer marginal zone (MZ) and
inner subplate (SP). Ultimately, the CP will be composed of six layers that are
born sequentially, migrating in an inside-to-outside pattern. Horizontal processes


<<<PAGE 2960>>>
in the IZ represent axon terminals of thalamic afferents. (From Nadarajah B,
Parnavelas JG. Modes of neuronal migration in the developing cerebral cortex.
Nat Neurosci. 2002;3:423, with permission.)

A recent discovery, postulated for years, has changed the view of the
origins of cortical neuron populations involved in human brain disease.
Neuron tracing experiments in culture and in vivo demonstrate that the
neocortex, a dorsal forebrain derivative, is also populated by neurons
generated in the ventral forebrain (see Fig. 33-7). Molecular studies of
patterning genes, especially Dlx, strongly support this model (see below). In
contrast to excitatory pyramidal neurons, the overwhelming majority of
inhibitory γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-secreting interneurons originate from
mitotic precursors of the ganglionic eminences that generate the neurons of
the basal ganglia. Subsets of interneurons also secrete neuropeptides, such as
neuropeptide Y (NPY) and somatostatin, and express nitrous oxide (NOS)generating enzyme. Not associated with cortical VZ radial glia, these GABA
interneurons reach the cortical plate by migrating tangentially, in either the
superficial marginal zone or a deep position above the VZ, the subplate
region where thalamic afferents are also growing. Significantly, in brains
from patients with schizophrenia, the prefrontal cortex exhibits a reduced
density of interneurons in layer 2. Also, there is upregulation of GABAAreceptor binding, a potential functional compensation, as well as a relative
deficiency of NOS-expressing neurons. These observations have led to the
hypothesis that schizophrenia is due to reduced GABAergic activity. The
origin of GABA interneurons from the ganglionic eminences and their
association with specific patterning genes raises new genetic models of
disease causation and possible strategies for disease intervention. Thus, more
broadly, normal cortical development depends on a balance of two principal
patterns of neurogenesis and migration, consisting of radial migration of
excitatory neurons from the dorsal forebrain VZ and tangential migration of
inhibitory neurons from the ventral forebrain.
In contrast to inside-to-outside neurogenesis observed in the cortex,
phylogenetically older regions, such as the hypothalamus, spinal cord, and
hippocampal dentate gyrus, exhibit the reverse order of cell generation. Firstformed postmitotic neurons lie superficially, and last-generated cells localize
toward the center. Although this outside-to-inside pattern might reflect


<<<PAGE 2961>>>
passive cell displacement, radial glia, and specific migration signaling
molecules are involved. Furthermore, cells do not always lie in direct
extension from their locus of VZ generation. Instead, some groups of cells
migrate to specific locations, as observed for neurons of the inferior olivary
nuclei.
Of prime importance in psychiatry, the hippocampus demonstrates both
radial and nonradial patterns of neurogenesis and migration. The pyramidal
cell layer, Ammon’s horn Cornu Ammonis (CA) 1 to 3 neurons, is generated
in a typical outside-to-inside fashion in the dorsomedial forebrain for a
discrete period, from 7 to 15 weeks of gestation, and exhibits intricate
migration patterns. In contrast, the other significant population, dentate gyrus
granule neurons, start appearing at 18 weeks and exhibits prolonged postnatal
neurogenesis, originating from several migrating secondary proliferative
zones. In rats, for instance, granule neurogenesis starts at embryonic day 16
(E16) with proliferation in the forebrain VZ. At E18, an aggregate of
precursors migrates along a subpial route into the dentate gyrus. There, they
generate granule neurons in situ. After birth, there is another migration,
localizing proliferative precursors to the dentate hilus, which persists until 1
month of life. After that, granule precursors move to a layer just under the
dentate gyrus, termed the subgranular zone (SGZ), which produces neurons
throughout life in adult rats, primates, and humans. In rodents, SGZ
precursors proliferate in response to cerebral ischemia, tissue injury, and
seizures, as well as growth factors. Finally, the diminished hippocampal
volume reported in schizophrenia raises the possibility that disordered
neurogenesis plays a role in pathogenesis, as either a basis for dysfunction or
a consequence of brain injuries, consistent with associations of gestational
infections with disease manifestation.
Finally, a different combination of radial and nonradial migration is
observed in the cerebellum, which is a brain region that plays an essential
function in nonmotor tasks, with particular significance for autism spectrum
disorders (ASDs). Except for granule cells, the other significant neurons,
including Purkinje and deep nuclei, originate from the primary VZ of the
fourth ventricle, coincident with other brainstem neurons. In rats, this occurs
at E13 to E15, and in humans, at 5 to 7 weeks of gestation. The granule
neurons, as well as the basket and stellate interneurons, originate in the
secondary proliferative zone, the external germinal cell layer (EGL), which


<<<PAGE 2962>>>
covers the newborn cerebellum at birth. EGL precursors originate in the
fourth ventricle VZ and migrate dorsally through the brainstem to reach this
superficial position. The rat EGL proliferates for 3 weeks, generating more
neurons than in any other structure, whereas, in humans, EGL precursors
exist for at least 7 weeks and up to 2 years. When an EGL precursor stops
proliferating, the cell body sinks below the surface and grows bilateral
processes that extend transversely in the molecular layer, and then the soma
migrates further down into the internal granule layer (IGL). Cells reach the
IGL along specialized Bergmann glia, which serve guidance functions similar
to those of the radial glia. However, in this case, cells originate from a
secondary proliferative zone that generates neurons exclusively of the granule
cell lineage, indicating a restricted neural fate. Clinically, this postnatal
population in infants makes cerebellar granule neurogenesis vulnerable to
infectious insults of early childhood and an undesirable target of several
therapeutic drugs, such as steroids, well known to inhibit cell proliferation.
Also, proliferative control of this stem cell population is lost in the common
childhood brain tumor, medulloblastoma (see Fig. 33-8).
Developmental Cell Death. During nervous system development, cell
elimination is required to coordinate the proportions of interacting neural
cells. Developmental cell death is a reproducible, spatially, and temporally
restricted death of cells that occurs during the organism’s development. Three
types of developmental cell death have been described: (1) phylogenetic cell
death that removes structures in one species that served evolutionarily earlier
ones, such as the tail or the vomeronasal nerves; (2) morphogenetic cell
death, which sculpts the fingers from the embryonic paddle and is required to
form the optic vesicles, as well as the caudal neural tube; and (3) histogenetic
cell death, a widespread process that allows the removal of select cells during
development of specific brain regions. Numerous studies have focused on
histogenetic cell death, the impact of which varies among brain regions but
can affect 20 to 80 percent of neurons in some populations. A significant role
for developmental cell death was proposed in the 1980s based on the
paradigm of nerve growth factor, suggesting that following neurogenesis,
neurons compete for trophic factors. In this model, the survival of
differentiating neurons depended absolutely on establishing axonal
connections to the correct targets in order to obtain survival-promoting


<<<PAGE 2963>>>
(trophic) growth factors, such as the neurotrophins. Otherwise, they would be
eliminated by programmed cell death. This competitive process was thought
to ensure the proper matching of new neuronal populations with the size of its
target field. Although such interactions are involved in controlling cell
degeneration, this model is overly simplistic: Developmental cell death also
occurs in neural precursors and immature neurons, before any synaptic
contacts are established.

FIGURE 33-8
Neurogenesis, migration, and differentiation of granule cells during cerebellar
development. Granule cell precursors proliferate in the external germinal layer.
After exiting the cell cycle, they migrate through the molecular layer and past the
Purkinje neurons to reach the internal granule layer where they differentiate and
make synapses. Neurons that do not migrate properly or that do not establish
proper synaptic connections undergo apoptosis. EGL, external germinal cell layer;
Mol, molecular layer; P, Purkinje cell layer; IGL, internal granule cell layer; Wm,
white matter. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009:48.)


<<<PAGE 2964>>>
Apoptotic cell death, or apoptosis, is the primary type of
developmental cell degeneration. Apoptosis or “programmed cell death”
involves specific molecules that possess enzymatic activities such as
cysteine-containing aspartate-specific proteases, also called “caspases,”
which participate in complex intracellular mechanisms. A large number of
signals (both proapoptotic and antiapoptotic) converge to regulate common
signaling pathways. Of importance for psychiatry, both developmental as
well as pathologic cell death, involves many of the same signaling cascades.
A failure to inhibit apoptosis is involved in cancers and autoimmune diseases
(multiple sclerosis), whereas excess stimulation of apoptosis is observed in
neurodegenerative diseases during both development (Huntington disease,
lysosomal diseases, and leukodystrophy) and aging (Alzheimer and
Parkinson diseases). Massive apoptotic cell death is also observed during
acquired developmental brain injuries such as hypoxia-ischemia, fetal alcohol
syndrome, and exposure to ionizing radiations and neurotoxicants. Thus
dysregulation of apoptotic cell death during development can lead to severe
brain abnormalities, which may only manifest later as mature functional
impairments.
Programmed cell death is a necessary process during neurodevelopment, as
genetic deletion of caspases in embryonic mice produces enlarged and
disorganized brains with marked regional specificity. Programmed cell death
occurs at multiple stages of nervous system development, interacting with
neurogenesis and differentiation with precise and complex mechanisms. As
many neuropathologies also involve dysregulation of apoptosis, future studies
hold promise for elucidation and treatment of neurologic diseases.
APOPTOSIS.

The Concept of Neural Patterning
Principles of Function. The morphologic conversion of the nervous
system through the embryonic stages, from the neural plate through the
neural tube to brain vesicles, is controlled by interactions between
extracellular factors and intrinsic genetic programs. In many cases,
extracellular signals are soluble growth factors secreted from regional
signaling centers, such as the notochord, floor, or roof plates, or surrounding
mesenchymal tissues. The precursor’s ability to respond (competence)


<<<PAGE 2965>>>
depends on cognate receptor expression, which is determined by patterning
genes whose proteins regulate gene transcription. The remarkable new
observation is that the subdivisions of the embryonic telencephalon that were
initially based on mature differences in morphology, connectivity, and
neurochemical profiles are also distinguished embryonically by distinct
patterns of gene expression. Classical models had suggested that the cerebral
cortex was generated as a reasonably homogeneous structure, unlike most
epithelia, with individual functional areas specified relatively late, after
cortical layer formation, by the ingrowth of afferent axons from the thalamus.
In marked contrast, recent studies indicate that proliferative VZ precursors
themselves display regional molecular determinants, a “protomap,” which the
postmitotic neurons carry with them as they migrate along radial glia to the
cortical plate.
Consequently, innervating thalamic afferents may serve to modulate only
intrinsic molecular determinants of the protomap. Indeed, in two different
genetic mutants, Gbx2 and Mash1, in which thalamocortical innervation is
disrupted, expression of cortical patterning genes proceeds unaltered. On the
other hand, thalamic afferent growth may be directed by patterning genes and
subsequently play roles in modulating regional expression patterns. Thus
experience-dependent processes may contribute less to cortical specialization
than initially postulated.
The term patterning genes connotes families of proteins that serve
primarily to control transcription of other genes, the products of which
include other transcription factors or proteins involved in cellular processes,
such as proliferation, migration, or differentiation. Characteristically,
transcription factor proteins contain two principal domains, one that binds
DNA promoter regions of genes and the other that interacts with other
proteins, either transcription factors or components of intracellular second
messengers. Notably, transcription factors form multimeric protein
complexes to control gene activation. Therefore, a single transcription factor
will play diverse roles in multiple cell types and processes, according to what
other factors are present, the so-called cellular environment. The
combinatorial nature of gene promoter regulation leads to a diversity of
functional outcomes when a single patterning gene is altered.
Furthermore, because protein interactions depend on protein–protein
affinities, there may be complex changes as a single factor’s expression level


<<<PAGE 2966>>>
is altered. This process may be a critical mechanism of human variation and
disease susceptibility, since polymorphisms in gene promoters, known to be
associated with human disease, can alter levels of gene protein products. A
transcription factor may associate primarily with one partner at a low
concentration but with another at a higher titer. The multimeric nature of
regulatory complexes allows a single factor to stimulate one process while
simultaneously inhibiting another. During development, a patterning gene
may thus promote one event, say the generation of neurons, by stimulating
one gene promoter, while simultaneously sequestering another factor from a
different promoter whose activity is required for an alternative phenotype,
such as glial cell fate. Finally, the factors frequently exhibit cross-regulatory
functions, where one factor negatively regulates the expression of another.
This activity leads to the establishment of tissue boundaries, allowing the
formation of regional subdivisions, such as basal ganglia and cerebral cortex
in the forebrain.
Also, to combinatorial interactions, patterning genes exhibit distinct
temporal sequences of expression and function, acting hierarchically.
Functional hierarchies were established experimentally by using genetic
approaches, either deleting a gene (loss of function) or over-/ectopically
expressing it (gain of function), and defining developmental consequences.
At the most general level, genetic analyses indicate that regionally restricted
patterning genes participate in specifying the identity, and therefore function,
of cells in which they are expressed. Subdivisions of the brain and cerebral
cortex specifically, are identified by regionalized gene expression in the
proliferative VZ of the neural tube, leading to subsequent differentiation of
distinct types of neurons in each mature (postmitotic) region. Thus the
protomap of the embryonic VZ predicts the cortical regions it will generate
and may instruct the hierarchical temporal sequence of patterning gene
expression. It appears that the different genes underlie multiple stages of
brain development, including the following: (1) determining that ectoderm
will give rise to the nervous system (as opposed to the skin); (2) defining the
dimensional character of a region, such as positional identity in dorsoventral
or rostrocaudal axes; (3) specifying cell class, such as neuron or glia; (4)
defining when proliferation ceases, and differentiation begins, (5)
determining specific cell subtype, such as GABA interneuron, as well as
projection pattern; and (6) defining laminar position in the region, such as


<<<PAGE 2967>>>
cerebral cortex. Although investigations are ongoing, studies indicate that
these many steps depend on interactions of transcription factors from
multiple families. Furthermore, a single transcription factor plays regulatory
roles at multiple stages in the developmental life of a cell, yielding complex
outcomes, for instance, in genetic loss of function studies and human disease.
Recent advances in molecular biology have led to the identification of
another principle of nervous system organization, which, if sustained by
further studies, may provide a molecular basis for brain system diseases, such
as Parkinson disease and autism. Using molecular techniques to permanently
identify cells that had expressed during the development of a specific gene, in
this case, the soluble growth factor, Wnt3a, investigators were able to
determine where cells originated embryonically and could trace their path of
migration along the neuraxis during development. These genetic-fate
mapping studies indicate that cells that expressed Wnt3a migrated widely
from the dorsal midline into the dorsal regions of the brain and spinal cord,
thereby contributing to diverse adult structures in the diencephalon, midbrain,
and brainstem, and rostral spinal cord. Of interest, most of these structures
were linked into a functional neural network, specifically the auditory system.
The observation that a single functional system emerges from a specific
group of fated cells would allow for restricted neurologic system–based
disorders, such as deficits in dopamine or catecholamine neurons, or for the
dysfunction of inter-related brain regions that subserve social cognition and
interaction, a core symptom of the ASDs. Other adult system degenerations
may also be considered. This new observation may change the way that we
consider temporal changes in patterning gene expression of specific brain
regions during development.
Finally, patterning gene expression in nervous system subdivisions is not
insensitive to environmental factors. On the contrary, the expression is
intimately regulated by growth factors released from regional signaling
centers. Indeed, although a century of classical experimental embryology
described the induction of new tissues between neighboring cell layers
morphologically, we have only recently defined molecular identities of
soluble protein morphogens and cell response genes underlying development.
Signaling molecules from discrete centers establish tissue gradients that
provide positional information (dorsal or ventral), impart cell specification, or
control regional growth. Signals include the BMPs, the Wingless-Int proteins


<<<PAGE 2968>>>
(Wnts), Shh, fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), and epidermal growth factors
(EGFs), to name a few. These signals set up developmental domains
characterized by expression of specific transcription factors, which in turn
control further regional gene transcription and developmental processes. The
importance of these mechanisms for cerebral cortical development is only
now emerging, altering our concepts of the roles of subsequent thalamic
innervation and experience-dependent processes. In light of the temporal and
combinatorial principles discussed earlier, brain development can be viewed
as a complex and evolving interaction of extrinsic and intrinsic information.
Specific Inductive Signals and Patterning Genes in Development
Induction of the CNS begins at the neural plate stage when the notochord,
underlying mesenchyme, and surrounding epidermal ectoderm produce
signaling molecules that affect the identity of neighboring cells. Specifically,
the ectoderm produces BMPs that prevent neural fate determination by
promoting and maintaining epidermal differentiation. In other words, neural
differentiation is a default state that manifests unless it is inhibited. In turn,
neural induction proceeds when inhibitory proteins block BMP’s epidermisinducing activity, such as noggin, follistatin, and chordin, which are secreted
by Hensen’s node (homologous to the amphibian Spemann organizer), a
signaling center at the rostral end of the primitive streak. Once the neural tube
closes, the roof plate and floor plate become new signaling centers,
organizing dorsal and ventral neural tube, respectively. The same
ligand/receptor system is used sequentially for multiple functions during
development. BMPs are a case in point since they prevent neural
development at the neural plate stage, whereas after neurulation, the factors
are produced by the dorsal neural tube itself to induce sensory neuron fates.
The Spinal Cord. The spinal cord is a prime example of the interaction of
soluble signaling factors with intrinsic patterning gene expression and
function. The synthesis, release, and diffusion of inductive signals from
signaling sources produce concentration gradients that impose distinct neural
fates in the spinal cord (Fig. 33-9). The notochord and floor plate secrete Shh,
which induces motoneurons and interneurons ventrally, whereas the
epidermal ectoderm and roof plate release several BMPs that impart neural


<<<PAGE 2969>>>
crest and sensory relay interneuron fates dorsally. Growth factor inductive
signals act to initiate discrete regions of transcription factor gene expression.
For instance, high concentrations of Shh induce winged-helix transcription
factor Hnf3β gene in floor plate cells and Nkx6.1 and Nkx2.2 in the ventral
neural tube, whereas the expression of more dorsal genes, Pax6, Dbx1/2,
Irx3, and Pax7, is repressed. In response to Shh, ventral motoneurons express
transcription factor gene Isl1, whose protein product is essential for neuron
differentiation. Subsequently, ventral interneurons differentiate, expressing
En1 or Lim1/2 independent of Shh signaling.
In contrast, the release of BMPs by dorsal cord and roof plate induces a
distinct cascade of patterning genes to elicit sensory interneuron
differentiation. In aggregate, the coordinated actions of Shh and BMPs
induce the dorsoventral dimension of the spinal cord. Similarly, other
inductive signals determine the rostrocaudal organization of the CNS, such as
retinoic acid, an upstream regulator of hox patterning genes, anteriorly, and
the FGFs posteriorly. The overlapping and unique expression of the many
hox gene family members are essential for establishing the segmental pattern
in the anterior–posterior axis of the hindbrain and spinal cord, now-classic
models well described in previous reviews.

FIGURE 33-9
Patterning genes in the spinal cord. A: Diagram illustrating the localization of
gene expression in the developing “trunk.” Rhombomere boundaries are specified


<<<PAGE 2970>>>
by specific combinations of transcription factors. (Modified from Darnell, 2005.) B:
Morphogen induction of spinal cord cell fate. Dorsoventral gradients of sonic
hedgehog (Shh) and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) induce expression of
several position identity genes. Combinatorial effects of these factors establish
progenitor domains and result in the expression of specific downstream molecular
markers. D, dorsal neurons; V, ventral neurons. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:51.)

Recent advances in spinal cord transcription factor expression and function
reinforce that these factors play roles at multiple developmental cell stages.
This is likely due to their participation in diverse protein regulatory
complexes: The transcription factors Pax6, Olig2, and Nkx2.2, which define
the positional identity of multipotent progenitors early in development, also
play crucial roles in controlling the timing of neurogenesis and gliogenesis in
the developing ventral spinal cord.
The Cerebral Cortex. Recent evidence suggests that forebrain
development also depends on inductive signals and patterning genes, as
observed in more caudal neural structures. In the embryo, the dorsal forebrain
structures include the hippocampus medially, the cerebral cortex
dorsolaterally, and the entorhinal cortex ventrolaterally, whereas in the basal
forebrain, the globus pallidus lies medially and the striatum laterally. Based
on gene expression and morphologic criteria, it has been hypothesized that
the forebrain is divided into a checkerboard-like grid pattern of domains
generated by the intersection of longitudinal columns and transverse
segments, perpendicular to the longitudinal axis. The columns and segments
(prosomeres) exhibit restricted expression of patterning genes, allowing for
unique combinations of factors within each embryonic subdivision. Many of
these genes, including Hnf3β, Emx2, Pax6, and Dlx2, are first expressed even
before neurulation in the neural plate. They are then maintained, providing
the “protomap” determinants of the VZ described earlier. As in the spinal
cord, initial forebrain gene expression is influenced by a similar array of
signaling center soluble factors—Shh, BMP, and retinoic acid. As the
telencephalic vesicles form, signaling centers localize to the edges of the
cortex. In the dorsal midline, there is the anterior neural ridge, anterior cranial
mesenchyme secreting FGF8, the roof plate, and, at the junction of the roof
plate with the telencephalic vesicle, the cortical hem (Fig. 33-10). Other


<<<PAGE 2971>>>
factors originate laterally from the dorsal–ventral forebrain junction, as well
as from basal forebrain structures themselves.
Do molecular studies identify how different cortical regions interact with
thalamic neurons to establish specific functional modalities, such as vision
and sensation? Moreover, once regional identity is established, can later
developmental events modify it? It has been proposed that initially, there are
no functional distinctions in the cortex but that they are induced by the
ingrowth of extrinsic thalamic axons, which convey positional and functional
specifications, the so-called “protocortex model.” However, in contrast, the
abundant molecular evidence provided earlier suggests that intrinsic
differences are established early in the neuroepithelium by molecular
determinants that regulate areal specification, including the targeting of
thalamic axons, termed the “protomap” model. Experimental tests indicate
that neither model is entirely correct. Although there is early molecular
regionalization of the cortex, the initial targeting of thalamic axons to the
cortex is independent of these molecular differences. In the rodent, thalamic
afferents first target to their usual cortical regions prenatally in the late
embryo. However, once thalamic afferents reach the cortex, which occurs
several days after birth, interactions of thalamic axon branches with local,
regional cues lead to modifications of initial outgrowth and the establishment
of connections that conform to areal molecular identities. Furthermore, the
developing cortex exhibits a remarkable and unexpected level of flexibility in
mediating modality-specific functions: In the ferret, surgical elimination of
visual pathway (lateral geniculate nucleus) in postnatal pups results in the
transfer of visual signaling to the auditory cortex, which successfully
mediates vision! Thus the animal’s visual information is effectively
processed by their auditory cortex.


<<<PAGE 2972>>>
FIGURE 33-10
Patterning genes and signaling centers in the developing cerebral cortex. This
schematic diagram shows a lateral–superior view of the two cerebral hemispheres
of the embryonic mouse, sitting above the midbrain and hindbrain (broken lines).
The anterior–lateral extent of Pax6 gene expression is indicated by circles. The
posterior–medial domain of Emx2 expression is indicated by stripes. The genes
exhibit continuous gradients of expression that decrease as they extend to
opposite poles. The signaling factor fibroblast growth factor 8 (FGF8) is produced
by and released from mesenchymal tissue in the anterior neural ridge, which
regulates Pax6 and Emx2 expression. In the midline, bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMPs) and Wingless-Int proteins (Wnts) are secreted from other
signaling centers, including the roof plate and the cortical hems. (Courtesy of E.
DiCicco-Bloom and K. Forgash.)

The Hippocampus. The hippocampus is a region of significant importance
in schizophrenia, depression, autism, and other disorders, and defining
mechanisms regulating hippocampal formation may provide clues to the
developmental bases of these disorders. In mice, the hippocampus is located


<<<PAGE 2973>>>
in the medial wall of the telencephalic vesicle. Where it joins the roof plate,
the future roof of the third ventricle, there is a newly defined signaling center,
the cortical hem, which secretes BMPs, Wnts, and FGFs (see Fig. 33-10).
Genetic experiments have defined patterning genes localized to the cortical
hem and hippocampal primordia, whose deletions result in a variety of
morphogenetic defects. In mice lacking Wnt3a, which is expressed in the
cortical hem, the hippocampus is either completely missing or significantly
reduced, whereas the neighboring cerebral cortex is mainly preserved. A
similar phenotype is produced by deleting an intracellular factor downstream
to Wnt receptor activation, the Lef1 gene, suggesting that the Wnt3a-Lef1
pathway is required for hippocampal cell specification or proliferation, issues
remaining to be defined. When another cortical hem gene, Lhx5, is deleted,
mice lack both the hem and neighboring choroid plexus, both sources of
growth factors. However, in this case, the cortical hem cells may proliferate
in excess, and the hippocampal primordia may be present but disorganized,
exhibiting abnormalities in cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation.
A related abnormality is observed with Lhx2 mutation. Finally, a sequence of
bHLH transcription factors plays roles in hippocampal neurogenesis: Dentate
gyrus differentiation is defective in NeuroD and Mash1 mutants.
Significantly, expression of all these hippocampal patterning genes is
regulated by factors secreted by anterior neural ridge, roof plate, and the
cortical hem, including FGF8, Shh, BMPs, and Wnts. Moreover, the basal
forebrain region secretes an EGF-related protein, transforming growth factor
α (TGF-α), which can stimulate expression of the classical limbic marker
protein, lysosomal-associated membrane protein (LAMP). These various
signals and genes now serve as candidates for disruption in human diseases
of the hippocampus.
The Basal Ganglia. Also, to the motor and cognitive functions, the basal
ganglia take on new importance in neocortical function, since they appear to
be the embryonic origin of virtually all adult GABA interneurons, reaching
the neocortex through tangential migration. Gene expression studies have
identified several transcription factors that appear in precursors originating in
the ventral forebrain ganglionic eminences, allowing interneurons to be
followed as they migrate dorsally into the cortical layers. Conversely, genetic
deletion mutants exhibit diminished or absent interneurons, yielding results


<<<PAGE 2974>>>
consistent with other tracing techniques. These transcription factors,
including Pax6, Gsh2, and Nkx2.1, establish boundaries between different
precursor zones in the ventral forebrain VZ, through mechanisms involving
mutual repression. As a simplified model, the medial ganglionic eminence
(MGE) expresses Nkx2.1 primarily and gives rise to most GABA
interneurons of the cortex and hippocampus, whereas the lateral ganglionic
eminence (LGE) expresses Gsh2 and generates GABA interneurons of the
SVZ and olfactory bulb. The boundary between the ventral and dorsal
forebrain then depends on LGE interaction with the dorsal neocortex, which
expresses Pax6. When Nkx2.1 is deleted, LGE transcription factor expression
spreads ventrally into the MGE territory, and there is a 50 percent reduction
in neocortical and striatal GABA interneurons.
In contrast, the deletion of Gsh2 leads to ventral expansion of the dorsal
cortical molecular markers and concomitant decreases in olfactory
interneurons. Finally, Pax6 mutation causes both MGE and LGE to spread
laterally and into dorsal cortical areas, yielding increased interneuron
migration. The final phenotypic changes are involved, as these factors exhibit
unique and overlapping expression and interact to control cell fate.
Neuronal Specification. As indicated for basal ganglia, throughout the
nervous system, transcription factors participate in decisions at multiple
levels, including determining the generic neural cell, such as a neuron or glial
cell, as well as neuron subtypes. Mash1 can promote a neuronal fate over a
glial fate as well as induce the GABA interneuron phenotype. However,
another bHLH factor, Olig1/2, can promote oligodendrocyte development,
whereas it promotes motor neuron differentiation elsewhere, indicating that
the variety of factors expressed in a specific cell leads to combinatorial
effects and thus diverse outcomes for cell differentiation. The bHLH
inhibitory factor, Id, is expressed at the transition from somatosensory to the
motor cortex, implying the roles of family members in areal characteristics.
In the hippocampus, granule neuron fate is dependent on NeuroD and Math1,
with deficient cell numbers when either one is deleted. The role of specific
factors in cortical cell layer determination remains an area of active
investigation but likely includes Tbr1, Otx1, and Pax6.


<<<PAGE 2975>>>
FIGURE 33-11
Processing and function of micro RNA (miRNA). After transcription, the primary
miRNA forms a hairpin conformation. This structure allows the enzyme Drosha to
cleave the transcript, producing a pre-miRNA that then exits the nucleus through
nuclear pores. In the cytoplasm, Dicer cleaves the pre-miRNA stem loop, resulting
in the formation of two complementary short RNA molecules. Only one of these
molecules is integrated in the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) and serves
as a guide strand that allows recognition and specificity for target RNA due to its
sequence complementarity. After integration into the RISC complex, the miRNA
matches with the complementary mRNA strand and induces mRNA duplex
degradation by the argonaute protein, the catalytic enzyme of the RISC complex.
(From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:55.)

A New Mechanism for Regulating Gene Expression: miRNAs
Over the last decade, a new mechanism for regulating messenger ribonucleic
acid (mRNA) has been explored in a simple to complex organisms that
involve microRNAs (miRNAs). We now know that miRNAs contribute not
only to normal development and brain function but also to brain disorders,
such as Parkinson and Alzheimer diseases, tauopathies, and brain cancer.
miRNAs can affect the regulation of RNA transcription, alternative splicing,
molecular modifications, or RNA translation. miRNAs are 21- to 23nucleotide-long single-strand RNA molecules. Unlike mRNAs that encode


<<<PAGE 2976>>>
the instructions for ribosome complex translation into proteins, miRNAs are
noncoding RNAs that are not translated but are instead processed to form
loop structures. miRNAs exhibit a sequence that is partially complementary
to one or several other cellular mRNAs. By binding to target mRNA
transcripts, the miRNAs serve to interfere with their function, thereby
downregulating the expression of these gene products. This gene silencing
involves a complex mechanism: The larger miRNA primary transcript is first
processed by the Microprocessor, an enzymatic complex consisting of the
nuclease Drosha and the double-stranded RNA binding protein Pasha. The
mature miRNA binds to its complementary RNA and then interacts with the
endonuclease Dicer that is part of the RNA-induced silencing complex
(RISC), resulting in the cleavage of the target mRNA and gene silencing
(Fig. 33-11).
Currently, 475 miRNAs have been identified in humans, and their total
number is estimated to be between 600 and 3,441. Potentially, up to 30
percent of all genes might be regulated by miRNAs, a whole new layer of
molecular complexity. A connection between miRNAs and several brain
diseases has already been made. For example, miR-133b, which is expressed
explicitly in midbrain dopaminergic neurons, is deficient in midbrain tissue
from patients with Parkinson disease. Furthermore, the miRNAs encoding
miR-9, miR-124a, miR-125b, miR-128, miR-132, and miR-219 are
abundantly represented in the fetal hippocampus, are differentially regulated
in the aged brain, and are altered in Alzheimer disease hippocampus. Similar
RNA species termed short-interfering RNAs (siRNAs) have been discovered
in plants where they prevent the transcription of viral RNA. The mechanisms
involved in these effects are closely related to those of miRNA. Thus siRNAs
are now being used in both basic and clinical research to downregulate
specific cellular gene products, thereby advancing the study of pathways
involved in neurodevelopment and providing new selective tools to regulate
disease-causing genes or therapeutic molecular targets.
Regulation of Neurodevelopment by Extracellular Factors
The interaction of extracellular factors with intrinsic genetic determinants
controlling region-specific neurogenesis includes signals that regulate cell
proliferation, migration, differentiation, and survival (Table 33-1). Patterning


<<<PAGE 2977>>>
genes control the expression of growth factor receptors and the molecular
machinery of the cell division cycle. Extracellular factors are known to
stimulate or inhibit the proliferation of VZ precursors and originate from the
cells themselves, termed autocrine, neighboring cells/tissues, or paracrine, or
from the general circulation, as in endocrine, all sources known to affect
proliferation in the prenatal and postnatal developing brain. Although defined
initially in cell culture, several mitogenic growth factors are now wellcharacterized in vivo, including those stimulating proliferation, such as basic
FGF (bFGF), EGF, IGF-I, Shh, and signals inhibiting cell division, such as
pituitary adenylate-cyclase–activating polypeptide (PACAP), GABA and
glutamate, and members of the TGF-β superfamily. However, in addition to
stimulating reentry of cells into the cell cycle, termed a mitogenic effect,
extracellular signals also enhance proliferation by promoting survival of the
mitotic population, a trophic action. Stimulation of both pathways is
necessary to produce maximal cell numbers. These mitogenic and trophic
mechanisms during development parallel those identified in carcinogenesis,
reflecting roles of c-myc and bcl-2, respectively. Several of the
neurotrophins, especially BDNF and neurotrophin-3 (NT3), promote the
survival of mitotic precursors as well as the newly generated progeny.
Table 33-1
Regulation of Neurodevelopment by Extracellular Factors


<<<PAGE 2978>>>
The developmental significance of extracellular mitogens is demonstrated
by the expression of the factors and their receptors in regions of
neurogenesis. It is also demonstrated by the profound and permanent
consequences of altering their activities during development. For example, by
administering growth factors to developing embryos or pups, one can induce
changes in proliferation in prenatal cortical VZ, postnatal cerebellar EGL,
and hippocampal dentate gyrus that produce lifelong modifications in brain
region population size and cell composition. Such changes may be relevant to
structural differences observed in neuropsychiatric disorders, such as
depression, schizophrenia, and autism. Precisely, in the cerebral cortex VZ of
the embryonic rat, proliferation is controlled by promitogenic bFGF and
antimitogenic PACAP, which are expressed as autocrine/paracrine signals.
Positive and negative effects were shown in living embryos in utero by
performing intracerebroventricular (ICV) injections of the factors or
antagonists. ICV injection of bFGF produced a larger adult cortex composed
of 87 percent more neurons, which employed glutamate, thus increasing the
ratio of excitatory pyramidal neurons to GABA inhibitory neurons, which
were unchanged.


<<<PAGE 2979>>>
Conversely, embryonic PACAP injection inhibited the proliferation of
cortical precursors by 26 percent, reducing the number of labeled layer 5/6
neurons in the cortical plate 5 days later. A similar reduction was
accomplished by genetically deleting promitogenic bFGF or leukocyte
inhibitory factor (LIF)/ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF)/gp130 signaling,
diminishing cortical size. Furthermore, the effects of mitogenic signals
depended critically on the stage-specific program of regional development,
since bFGF injection at later ages when gliogenesis predominates affected
glial numbers selectively. Thus developmental dysregulation of mitogenic
pathways due to genetic or environmental factors (hypoxia, maternal/fetal
infection, or drug or toxicant exposure) will likely produce subtle changes in
the size and composition of the developing cortex. Other signals likely to
play proliferative roles include Wnt’s, TGF-α, IGF-I, and BMPs. Although
interactions between intrinsic cortical programs and extrinsic factors remain
to be defined, a remarkable new study of mouse embryonic stem cells
suggests that embryonic mammalian forebrain specification may be a
developmentally ancestral intrinsic program that emerges in the absence of
extrinsic signals. In specific culture conditions that block endogenous Shh
signaling, mouse embryonic stem cells can sequentially generate the various
types of neurons that display the most salient features of genuine cortical
pyramidal neurons. When grafted into the cerebral cortex, these cells
differentiate into neurons that project to select cortical (visual and limbic
regions) and subcortical targets, corresponding to a wide range of pyramidal
layer neurons. Insight into precision control of neuronal differentiation will
open new avenues to perform neuronal grafts in humans for cellular
replacement in various acquired and neurodegenerative diseases.
Similar to the cerebral cortex, later generated populations of granule
neurons, such as in the cerebellum and hippocampal dentate gyrus, are also
sensitive to growth factor manipulation, which is especially relevant to
therapies administered intravenously to premature and newborn infants in the
neonatal nursery. Like in humans, cerebellar granule neurons are produced
postnatally in rats, but for only 3 weeks, whereas in both species, dentate
gyrus neurons are produced throughout life. Remarkably, a single peripheral
injection of bFGF into newborn rat pups rapidly crossed into the
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and stimulated proliferation in the cerebellar EGL
by 30 percent as well as hippocampal dentate gyrus by twofold by 8 hours,


<<<PAGE 2980>>>
consistent with an endocrine mechanism of action. The consequence of
mitogenic stimulation in the cerebellum was a 33 percent increase in the
number of internal granule layer neurons and a 22 percent larger cerebellum.
In the hippocampus, mitotic stimulation elicited by a single bFGF injection
increased the absolute number of dentate gyrus granule neurons by 33 percent
at 3 weeks, defined stereologically, producing a 25 percent larger
hippocampus containing more neurons and astrocytes, a change that persisted
lifelong. Conversely, genetic deletion of bFGF resulted in smaller cerebellum
and hippocampus at birth and throughout life, indicating that levels of the
growth factor were critical for normal brain region formation. Other
proliferative signals regulating cerebellar granule neurogenesis include Shh
and PACAP, the disruption of which contributes to human medulloblastoma,
whereas in the hippocampus, the Wnt family may be involved.
Clinical Implications. There are several clinical implications of these
surprising growth factor effects observed in newborns. First, we may need to
investigate possible neurogenetic effects of therapeutic agents we administer
in the newborn nursery for long-term consequences. Second, because bFGF
is as effective in stimulating adult neurogenesis (see subsequent text) as in
newborns because of specific transport across the mature BBB, there is the
possibility that other protein growth factors are also preferentially transported
into the brain and alter ongoing neurogenesis. Indeed, in rats, IGF-I also
stimulates mature hippocampal dentate gyrus neurogenesis. Third, other
therapeutics cross the BBB efficiently due to their lipid solubility, such as
steroids, which inhibit neurogenesis across the age spectrum. Steroids are
frequently used perinatally to promote lung maturation and treat infections
and trauma, but effects on human brain formation have not been examined.
Fourth, it is well known that neurologic development may be delayed in
children who experience a severe systemic illness that is associated with
numerous inflammatory cytokines. One may wonder to what degree this
reflects an interference with neurogenesis and concomitant processes,
potentially producing long-term differences in cognitive and motor functional
development. Finally, maternal infection during pregnancy is a known risk
factor for schizophrenia, and cytokines that cross the placental barrier may
directly affect fetal brain cell proliferation and differentiation as well as cell
migration, target selection, and synapse maturation, as shown in animal


<<<PAGE 2981>>>
models, eventually leading to multiple brain and behavioral abnormalities in
the adult offspring.
Cell Migration
Throughout the nervous system, newly generated neurons naturally migrate
away from proliferative zones to achieve final destinations. If this process is
disrupted, abnormal cell localization and function result. In humans, more
than 25 syndromes with disturbed neuronal migration have been described.
As noted earlier, neurons migrate in both radial and tangential fashions
during development and may establish cell layers that are inside-to-outside,
or the reverse, according to region. In the developing cerebral cortex, the
most well-characterized mechanism is radial migration from underlying VZ
to appropriate cortical layers in an inside-to-outside fashion. Also, however,
the inhibitory GABA interneurons that are generated in ventrally located
medial ganglionic eminences reach the cortex through tangential migration in
the intermediate zone along with axonal processes or other neurons. The
neurons in the developing cerebellum also exhibit both radial and tangential
migration. Purkinje cells leave the fourth ventricle VZ and exhibit radial
migration, whereas other precursors from the rhombic lip migrate tangentially
to cover the cerebellar surface, establishing the EGL, a secondary
proliferative zone. From EGL, newly generated granule cells migrate radially
inward to create the internal granule cell layer. Finally, granule interneurons
of the olfactory bulb exhibit a different kind of migration, originating in the
SVZ of the lateral ventricles overlying the striatum. These neuroblasts divide
and migrate simultaneously in the rostral migratory stream in transit to the
bulb, on a path comprising chains of cells that support forward movements.
The most commonly recognized disorders of human neuronal migration are
the extensive lissencephalies (see subsequent text), although incomplete
migration of more restricted neuron aggregates (heterotopias) frequently
underlies focal seizure disorders.
Animal models have defined molecular pathways involved in neuronal
migration. Cell movement requires signals to start and stop migration,
adhesion molecules to guide migration, and functional cytoskeleton to
mediate cell translocation. The best-characterized mouse model of aberrant
neuronal migration is reeler, a spontaneous mutant in which cortical neuron


<<<PAGE 2982>>>
laminar position is inverted, being generated in outside-to-inside fashion.
Reelin is a large, secreted extracellular glycoprotein produced embryonically
by the earliest neurons in the cortical preplate, Cajal–Retzius cells, and
hippocampus and cerebellum. Molecular and genetic analysis has established
a signaling sequence in reelin activity that includes at least two receptors, the
very low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR) and the apoprotein E
receptor 2 (ApoER2), and the intracellular adapter protein, disabled 1 (Dab1),
initially identified in the scrambler mutant mouse, a reelin phenocopy.
Current thoughts consider the reelin system as one mediator of radial gliaguided neuron migration, although its specific functions in starting or
stopping migration remain controversial. The roles of the VLDL and ApoE2
receptors are intriguing for their possible contributions to Alzheimer disease
risk. Recent studies have found human reelin gene (RELN) mutations
associated with autosomal recessive lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia,
exhibiting a markedly thickened cortex with pachygyria, abnormal
hippocampal formations, and severe cerebellar hypoplasia with absent folia.
Additional studies suggest that reelin polymorphisms may contribute to ASD
risk as well.
Concerning cytoskeletal proteins, studies of the filamentous fungus
Aspergillus nidulans surprisingly provided insight into the molecular
machinery underlying the human migration disorder, Miller–Dieker
syndrome, lissencephaly associated with abnormal chromosome 17q13.3.
Lissencephaly is a diverse disorder characterized by a smooth cortical surface
lacking in gyri and sulci, with markedly reduced brain surface area. The
absence of convolutions results from a migration defect: the majority of
neurons fail to reach their final destinations. In classical lissencephaly (type
I), the cerebral cortex is thick and usually four-layered, whereas, in
cobblestone lissencephaly (type II), the cortex is chaotically organized with a
partly smooth and partly pebbled surface and deficient lamination. The most
severely affected parts of the brain are the cerebral cortex and hippocampus,
with the cerebellum less affected. In fungus, the gene NudF was found to be
essential for intracellular nuclear distribution, a translocation process also
involved in mammalian cell migration. The human homolog of NudF is LIS1 or PAFAH1B1, a mutation of which accounts for up to 60 percent of
lissencephaly cases of type I pathology. The LIS-1 gene product interacts
with microtubules and related motor components dynein and dynactin as well


<<<PAGE 2983>>>
as doublecortin (DCX), which may regulate microtubule stability. Mutations
in the DCX gene result in X-linked lissencephaly in males and bands of
heterotopic neurons in white matter in females, appearing as a “double
cortex” on imaging studies, producing severe mental retardation and epilepsy.
Other migratory defects occur when proteins associated with the actin
cytoskeleton are affected, such as a mutation in the filamin 1 gene
responsible for periventricular nodular heterotopias in humans and mutations
of a regulatory phosphokinase enzyme, the CDK5/p35 complex.
Cell migration also depends on molecules mediating cellular interactions,
which provide cell adhesion to establish neuron–neuron and neuron–glia
relationships or induce attraction or repulsion. Astrotactin is a major glial
protein involved in neuronal migration on radial glial processes, whereas
neuregulins and their receptors, ErbB2-4, play roles in neuronal–glial
migratory interactions. Recent genetic studies associate neuregulin
polymorphisms with schizophrenia, suggesting that this developmental
disease may depend on altered oligodendrocyte numbers and activities and
synaptic functions. Furthermore, some work suggests that early appearing
neurotransmitters themselves, GABA and glutamate, and platelet-derived
growth factor (PDGF) regulate migration speed. In contrast to radial
migration from cortical VZ, GABA interneurons generated in ganglionic
eminences employ different mechanisms to leave the ventral forebrain and
migrate dorsally into the cerebral cortex. Several signaling systems have been
identified, including the Slit protein and Robo receptor, the semaphorins and
their neuropilin receptors, and hepatocyte growth factor and its c-Met
receptor, all of which appear to repel GABA interneurons from the basal
forebrain, promoting tangential migration into the cortex. Significantly, the cMet receptor has recently been associated with ASDs, suggesting that altered
GABA interneuron migration into the cortex and deficits in inhibitory
signaling may contribute to the phenotype, including seizures and abnormal
cognitive processing. Finally, several human forms of congenital muscular
dystrophy with severe brain and eye migration defects result from gene
mutations in enzymes that transfer mannose sugars to serine/threonine -OH
groups in glycoproteins, thereby interrupting interactions with several
extracellular matrix molecules and producing type II cobblestone
lissencephalies.


<<<PAGE 2984>>>
Differentiation and Neuronal Process Outgrowth
After newly produced neurons and glial cells reach their final destinations,
they differentiate into mature cells. For neurons, this involves outgrowth of
dendrites and extension of axonal processes, the formation of synapses, and
the production of neurotransmitter systems, including receptors and selective
reuptake sites. Most axons will become insulated by myelin sheaths produced
by oligodendroglial cells. Many of these events occur with a peak period
from 5 months of gestation onward. During the first several years of life,
many neuronal systems exhibit exuberant process growth and branching,
which is later decreased by selective “pruning” of axons and synapses,
dependent on experience. In contrast, myelination continues for several years
after birth and into adulthood.
Although there is tremendous synapse plasticity in the adult brain, a
fundamental feature of the nervous system is the point-to-point or
topographic mapping of one neuron population to another. During
development, neurons extend axons to innervate diverse distant targets, such
as the cortex and spinal cord. The structure that recognizes and responds to
cues in the environment is the growth cone, located at the axon tip. The
axonal process is structurally supported by microtubules that are regulated by
numerous microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs), whereas the terminal
growth cone exhibits a transition to actin-containing microfilaments. The
growth cone has rod-like extensions called filopodia that bear receptors for
specific guidance cues present on cell surfaces and in the extracellular matrix.
Interactions between filopodial receptors and environmental cues cause
growth cones to move forward, turn, or retract. Recent studies have identified
the actin-modulating proteins and kinases involved in rapid growth cone
movements, such as LIMK kinase that causes the language phenotype
associated with Williams syndrome. Perhaps surprising is that activation of
growth cone receptors leads to local mRNA translation to produce synaptic
proteins, whereas traditional concepts assumed that all proteins were
transported to axon terminals from distant neuronal cell somas. The regionspecific expression of extracellular guidance molecules, such as cadherins,
regulated by patterning genes Pax6 and Emx2, results in the highly directed
outgrowth of axons, termed axonal pathfinding. These molecules affect the
direction, speed, and fasciculation of axons, acting through either positive or


<<<PAGE 2985>>>
negative regulation. Guidance molecules may be soluble extracellular factors
or may be bound to extracellular matrix or cell membranes. In the latter class
of signal is the newly discovered family of transmembrane proteins, the
ephrins. Ephrins act via the largest known family of tyrosine kinase receptors
in the brain, Eph receptors, and play a significant role in topographic
mapping between neuron populations and their targets. Ephrins frequently
serve as chemorepellent cues, negatively regulating growth by preventing
developing axons from entering incorrect target fields. For example, the optic
tectum expresses ephrins A2 and A5 in a gradient that decreases along the
posterior to the anterior axis, whereas innervating retinal ganglion cells
express a gradient of Eph receptors. Ganglion cell axons from the posterior
retina, which possess high Eph A3 receptor levels, will preferentially
innervate the anterior tectum because the low-level ephrin expression does
not activate the Eph kinase that causes growth cone retraction. In the category
of soluble molecules, netrins serve primarily as chemoattractant proteins
secreted, for instance, by the spinal cord floor plate to stimulate
spinothalamic sensory interneurons to grow into the anterior commissure. In
contrast, Slit is a secreted chemorepulsive factor that, through its roundabout
(Robo) receptor, regulates midline crossing and axonal fasciculation and
pathfinding.
The Neurodevelopmental Basis of Psychiatric Disease
An increasing number of neuropsychiatric conditions are considered to
originate during brain development, including schizophrenia, depression,
autism, and ADHD. Defining when a condition begins helps direct attention
to underlying pathogenic mechanisms. The term neurodevelopmental
suggests that the brain is abnormally formed from the very beginning due to
disruption of fundamental processes, in contrast to a normally formed brain
that is injured secondarily or that undergoes degenerative changes. However,
the value of the term neurodevelopmental needs to be reconsidered because
of different use by clinicians and pathologists. Also, given that the same
molecular signals function in both development and maturity, altering an
early ontogenetic process by changes in growth factor signaling, for instance,
probably means that other adult functions exhibit ongoing dysregulation as
well. For example, clinical researchers of schizophrenia consider the disorder


<<<PAGE 2986>>>
neurodevelopmental because at the time of onset and diagnosis, the prefrontal
cortex and hippocampus are smaller and ventricles enlarged already at
adolescent presentation.
In contrast, the neuropathologist uses the term neurodevelopmental for
specific morphologic changes in neurons. If a brain region exhibits a normal
cytoarchitecture, but with neurons of smaller than the normal diameter,
reminiscent of “immature” stages, then this may be considered an arrest of
development. However, if the same cellular changes are accompanied by
inflammatory signs, such as gliosis and white blood cell infiltrate, then this is
termed neurodegeneration. These morphologic and cellular changes may no
longer be adequate to distinguish disorders that originate from development
versus adulthood, especially given the roles of glial cells, including
astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia, as sources of neurotrophic
support during both periods of life. Thus abnormalities in glial cells may
occur in both epochs to promote disease or act as mechanisms of repair.
Many neurodegenerative processes, such as in Alzheimer and Parkinson
diseases, are associated with microglial cells.
On the other hand, neuronal dysfunction in adulthood, such as cell
shrinkage, may occur without inflammatory changes. In animal models,
interruption of BDNF neurotrophic signaling in the adult brain results in
neuron and dendrite atrophy in the cerebral cortex without eliciting glial cell
proliferation. Thus finding small neurons without gliosis in the brains of
patients with schizophrenia or autism does not necessarily mean that the
condition is only or primarily developmental in origin. In turn, several
etiologic assumptions about clinical brain conditions may require
reexamination.
Because the same processes that mediate development, including
neurogenesis, gliogenesis, axonal growth and retraction, synaptogenesis, and
cell death, also function during adulthood, a new synthesis has been
proposed. All of these processes, although perhaps in more subtle forms,
contribute to adaptive and pathologic processes. Successful aging of the
nervous system may require precise regulation of these processes, allowing
the brain to adapt appropriately and counteract the numerous intrinsic and
extrinsic events that could potentially lead to neuropathology. For example,
adult neurogenesis and synaptic plasticity are necessary to maintain neuronal
circuitry and ensure proper cognitive functions. Programmed cell death is


<<<PAGE 2987>>>
crucial to prevent tumorigenesis that can occur as cells accumulate mutations
throughout life. Thus dysregulation of these ontogenetic processes in
adulthood will lead to disruption of brain homeostasis, expressing itself as
various neuropsychiatric diseases.
Schizophrenia. The neurodevelopmental hypothesis of schizophrenia
postulates that etiologic and pathogenetic factors occurring before the formal
onset of the illness, that is, during gestation, disrupt the course of normal
development. These subtle early alterations in specific neurons, glia, and
circuits confer vulnerability to other later developmental factors, ultimately
leading to malfunctions. Schizophrenia is a multifactorial disorder, including
both genetic and environmental factors. Clinical studies using risk assessment
have identified some relevant factors, including prenatal and birth
complications (hypoxia, infection, or substance and toxicant exposure),
family history, body dysmorphia, especially structures of neural crest origin,
and presence of mild premorbid deficits in social, motor, and cognitive
functions. These risk factors may affect ongoing developmental processes
such as experience-dependent axonal and dendritic production, programmed
cell death, myelination, and synaptic pruning. An intriguing animal model
using human influenza-induced pneumonia of pregnant mice shows that the
inflammatory cytokine response produced by the mother may directly affect
the offspring’s brain development, with no evidence of the virus in the fetus
or placenta.
Neuroimaging and pathology studies identify structural abnormalities at
disease presentation, including smaller prefrontal cortex and hippocampus
and enlarged ventricles, suggesting abnormal development. More severely
affected patients exhibit a more significant number of affected regions with
more considerable changes. In some cases, ventricular enlargement and
cortical gray matter atrophy increase with time. These ongoing progressive
changes should lead us to reconsider the potential role of active degeneration
in schizophrenia, whether due to the disease or its consequences, such as
stress or drug treatment. However, classic signs of neurodegeneration with
inflammatory cells are not present.
Structural neuroimaging strongly supports the conclusion that the
hippocampus in schizophrenia is significantly smaller, perhaps by 5 percent.
In turn, brain morphology has been used to assess the etiologic contributions


<<<PAGE 2988>>>
of genetic and environmental factors. Comparisons of concordance for
schizophrenia in monozygotic and dizygotic twins support roles for both
factors. Among monozygotic twins, only 40 to 50 percent of both twins have
the illness, indicating that the genetic constitution alone does not ensure
disease and suggesting that the embryonic environment also contributes.
Neuroimaging, pharmacologic, and pathologic studies suggest that some
genetic factors allow for susceptibility and that secondary insults, such as
birth trauma or perinatal viral infection, provide the other. This model is
consistent with imaging studies showing small hippocampus in both affected
and unaffected monozygotic twins.
Moreover, healthy, genetically at-risk individuals show hippocampal
volumes (smaller) more similar to affected probands than normal controls.
Thus hippocampal volume reduction is not pathognomonic of schizophrenia
but instead may represent a biologic marker of genetic susceptibility. It is not
difficult to envision roles for altered developmental regulators in producing a
smaller hippocampus, which in turn limits functional capacity. A smaller
hippocampus may result from subtle differences in the levels of transcription
factors, such as NeuroD, Math1, or Lhx, signaling by Wnt3a and downstream
mediator Lef1, or proliferative control mediated by bFGF, the family
members of which exhibit altered expression levels in schizophrenia brain
samples. Such genetic limitations may only become manifest following
another developmental challenge, such as gestational infection, stressors, or
toxicant exposure.
A regional locus of schizophrenia pathology remains uncertain but may
include the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, multimodal association cortex,
limbic system, amygdala, cingulate cortex, thalamus, and medial temporal
lobe. Despite size reductions in specific regions, attempts to define changes
in cell numbers have been unrewarding since most studies do not quantify the
entire cell population but assess only regional cell density. Without assessing
a region’s total volume, cell density measures alone are limited in revealing
population size. Most studies have found no changes in cell density in diverse
regions. A single study successfully examining total cell number in the
hippocampus found normal neuron density and a 5 percent volume reduction
on the left and 2 percent on the right, yielding no significant change in total
cell number.
In contrast to total neuron numbers, using neuronal cell-type–specific


<<<PAGE 2989>>>
markers, many studies have found a decreased density of nonpyramidal
GABA interneurons in the cortex and hippocampus. In particular,
parvalbumin-expressing interneurons are reduced, whereas calretinincontaining cells are normal, suggesting a deficiency of an interneuron
subtype. These morphometric data are supported by molecular evidence for
decreased GABA neurons, including reduced mRNA and protein levels of the
GABA-synthesizing enzyme, GAD67, in the cortex and hippocampus.
Another product of the adult GABA-secreting neurons, reelin, which initially
appears in Cajal–Retzius cells in the embryonic brain, is reduced 30 to 50
percent in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder with psychotic symptoms. Such
a deficiency, leading to diminished GABA signaling, may underlie a
potential compensatory increase in GABAA receptor binding detected in
hippocampal CA 2 to 4 fields by both pyramidal and nonpyramidal neurons,
apparently selective since benzodiazepine binding is unchanged. More
generally, deficiency in a subpopulation of GABA interneurons raises
intriguing new possibilities for schizophrenia etiology. As indicated in the
preceding gene patterning section, different subpopulations of forebrain
GABA interneurons originate from distinct precursors located in the
embryonic basal forebrain. Thus cortical and hippocampal GABA
interneurons may derive primarily from the MGE under control of the
patterning gene Nkx2.1, whereas SVZ and olfactory neurons derive from
Gsh2-expressing LGE precursors.
Furthermore, the timing and sequence of GABA interneuron generation
may depend on a regulatory network, including Mash1, Dlx1/2, and Dlx5/6,
all gene candidates for schizophrenia risk. Indeed, DLX1 gene expression is
reduced in the thalamus of patients with psychosis. Thus abnormal regulation
of these factors may diminish selectively GABA interneuron formation,
which in turn may represent a genetically determined vulnerability and may
contribute to diminished regional brain size or function.
The most compelling neuropathologic evidence for a developmental basis
is the finding of aberrantly localized or clustered neurons, especially in
lamina II of the entorhinal cortex and in the white matter underlying
prefrontal cortex and temporal and parahippocampal regions. These
abnormalities represent alterations of developmental neuronal migration,
survival, and connectivity. Also, in the hippocampus and neocortex,


<<<PAGE 2990>>>
pyramidal neurons appear smaller in many studies, exhibiting fewer dendritic
arborizations and spines with reduced neuropil, findings that are associated
with reductions in neuronal molecules, including MAP2, spinophilin,
synaptophysin, and SNAP25. Although the genes associated with
schizophrenia are reviewed extensively in other chapters, worth mentioning
here is a particularly intriguing candidate gene, DISC1, whose protein has
roles during development, including regulating cell migration, neurite
outgrowth, and neuronal maturation as well as in the adult brain, where it
modulates cytoskeletal function, neurotransmission, and synaptic plasticity.
DISC1 protein interacts with many other proteins intimately involved in
neuronal cell migration and forms a protein complex with Lis1 and NudEL
that is downstream of reelin signaling.
Autism
Spectrum
Disorders. Another condition that is
neurodevelopmental in origin is ASDs, a complex and heterogeneous group
of disorders characterized by abnormalities in social interaction and
communication and the presence of restricted or repetitive interests and
activities. In the last edition of DSM (DSM-IV), the ASDs included classic
autistic disorder, Asperger syndrome, and pervasive developmental disorder
not otherwise specified. These three disorders were grouped due to their
common occurrence in families, indicating related genetic factors and shared
signs and symptoms. Recent conceptualizations of ASDs propose that there
are multiple “autisms” differing in underlying pathogenetic mechanisms and
manifestations. The different core symptom domains (or other
endophenotypes) will likely be more heritable than the syndromic diagnosis,
which was constructed to be inclusive. The broad diversity of ASD signs and
symptoms reflects the multiplicity of abnormalities observed in pathologic
and functional studies and includes both forebrain and hindbrain regions.
Forebrain neurons in the cerebral cortex and limbic system play critical roles
in social interaction, communication, and learning and memory. For example,
the amygdala, which connects to prefrontal and temporal cortices and
fusiform gyrus, plays a prominent role in social and emotional cognition. In
ASDs, the amygdala and fusiform gyrus demonstrate abnormal activation
during facial recognition and emotional attribution tasks. Some investigators
hypothesize that ASDs reflect dysfunctions in specific neural networks, such
as the social network.


<<<PAGE 2991>>>
On the other hand, neurophysiologic tests of evoked cortical potentials and
oculomotor responses indicate a standard perception of primary sensory
information but disturbed higher cognitive processing. The functional
impairments in higher-order cognitive processing and neocortical circuitry
suggest a developmental disorder involving synaptic organization, a
mechanism that may be uniformly present throughout the brain, a model in
distinct contrast to abnormalities of specific neural networks. The earlier
reference to the expression of Wnt3a in cells that migrated widely during
development and appear in auditory systems is one example of how
developmental changes may affect single functional networks. In contrast,
changes in common and widely expressed synaptic molecules, such as the
neuroligins, would represent the other mechanism.
The most important recent discovery in ASD pathogenesis has been the
widely reported and replicated brain growth phenotype: The brain starts with,
most likely, average size at birth increases in volume at an accelerated rate by
the end of the first year compared to the typically developing child, and this
process continues from ages 2 to 4 years. These data derive from both
neuroimaging studies as well as measures of head circumference performed
by multiple labs. It is not known whether this reflects an acceleration of
normal developmental processes or a disease-specific aberration in postnatal
development, including changes in cell numbers, neuronal processes, synapse
formation, and modifications, or glial cell dysfunction, to name a few. The
most prominent differences are observed in the frontal and parietal cortex,
cerebellar hemispheres, as well as the amygdala. These findings are also
consistent with recent reports of macrocephaly in up to ∼20 percent of ASD
cases in brain and DNA banks. These findings raise many questions to be
addressed by developmental neuroscientists.
Functional neuroimaging studies indicate broad forebrain but also
cerebellar dysfunctions in ASD, and classical pathologic studies have
suggested abnormalities restricted to limbic and cerebellar structures.
However, classical studies were hampered by small sample sizes, poor
control for comorbidities such as epilepsy and mental retardation that affect
neuroanatomy, and the use of tissue cell density measures as opposed to
unbiased stereologic methods to estimate regional neuron numbers. Although
previous studies described increased densities of small neurons in
interconnecting limbic nuclei, including CA fields, septum, mammillary


<<<PAGE 2992>>>
bodies, and amygdala, these results have not been replicated by other
laboratories. In contrast, the most consistent neuropathology has been
observed in the cerebellum (21 of 29 brains), showing reductions in the
number of Purkinje neurons without signs of acquired postnatal lesions, such
as gliosis, empty baskets, and retrograde loss of afferent inferior olive
neurons, suggesting prenatal origins.
A more recent study identifies widespread and nonuniform abnormalities,
suggesting dysregulation of many processes, including neuron proliferation,
migration, survival, organization, and programmed cell death. Four of six
brains were macrocephalic, consistent with an increased size defined by
numerous pathology and neuroimaging studies. In the cerebral cortex, there
was thickened or diminished gray matter, disorganized laminar patterns,
misoriented pyramidal neurons, ectopic neurons in both superficial and deep
white matter, and increased or decreased neuron densities. This evidence of
abnormal cortical neurogenesis and migration accords well with the deficits
in cognitive functions. In the brainstem, neuronal disorganization appeared as
discontinuous and malpositioned neurons in olivary and dentate nuclei,
ectopic neurons in medulla and cerebellar peduncles, and aberrant fiber tracts.
There were widespread patchy or diffuse decreases of Purkinje neurons,
sometimes associated with increased Bergmann glia, or ectopic Purkinje
neurons in the molecular layer. Hippocampal neuronal atrophy was not
observed, and quantitative stereology found no consistent change in neuron
density or number. Moreover, a single recent neuropathologic study using
multiple immunologic indices has reported increased levels of immune
cytokines in the CSF of patients and brain tissues as well as astrocytes
expressing high levels of glial fibrillary acidic protein in the frontal and
cingulated cortex, white matter, and cerebellum, all suggesting potential
immune activation without evidence of an inflammatory process. We await
confirmation of these critical findings.
Although seemingly incompatible, these various data support a model of
developmental abnormalities occurring at different times, altering regions
according to specific schedules of neurogenesis and differentiation. It is
notable that a similar range of abnormalities was found in classical studies
but was excluded since these abnormalities did not occur in every brain
examined. Moreover, in 15 children exposed to the teratogen thalidomide
during days 20 to 24 of gestation, when cranial and Purkinje neurogenesis


<<<PAGE 2993>>>
occurs in the brainstem, four cases exhibited autism. Based on these data,
autism is associated with insults at 3 weeks for thalidomide, 12 weeks when
inferior olivary neurons are migrating, and ∼30 weeks when olivary axons
make synapses with Purkinje cells. These diverse abnormalities in cell
production, survival, migration, organization, and differentiation in both the
hindbrain and forebrain indicate disturbed brain development over a range of
stages. Recent genetic studies have defined two genetic polymorphisms
associated reproducibly with ASD in several datasets, both of which
influence brain developmental processes. The first is ENGRAILED-2, the
cerebellar patterning gene whose dysregulation causes deficits in Purkinje
and granule neurons in animal models and acts to control proliferation and
differentiation. The second is the hepatocyte growth factor receptor cMET,
whose function affects tangential migration of GABA interneurons from the
ventral forebrain ganglionic eminences, potentially leading to imbalances of
excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission.
Furthermore, although the cellular derangements may be directly
responsible for the core symptoms of autism, there is an alternative
hypothesis: Disturbed regulation of developmental processes produces an asyet-unidentified biochemical, cellular lesion that may be associated with
autism. This proposal is supported by the currently known genetic causes of
autism that account for 10 percent of cases, including tuberous sclerosis,
neurofibromatosis, Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome, Rett syndrome, and fragile
X mental retardation. These genetic etiologies interfere with cell proliferation
control, cholesterol biosynthesis and Shh function, and synaptic and dendrite
protein translation and function, fundamental processes in the sequence of
development. An intriguing potential link in these monogenetic causes of
autism symptoms is their participation in protein synthesis in the synapse,
mainly as regulated via the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway and the mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex, an area of active research.
The Remarkable Discovery of Adult Neurogenesis
In the last decade, there has been a fundamental shift in paradigm regarding
the limits of neurogenesis in the brain, with important implications for neural
plasticity, mechanisms of disease etiology and therapy, and possibilities of
repair. Until recently, it has generally been maintained that we do not produce


<<<PAGE 2994>>>
new neurons in the brain after birth (or soon after that, considering cerebellar
EGL); thus, brain plasticity and repair depend on modifications of a
numerically static neural network. We now have strong evidence to the
contrary: new neurons are generated throughout life in certain regions, well
documented across the phylogenetic tree, including birds, rodents, primates,
and humans. As an area of intense interest and investigation, we may expect
rapid progress over the next two decades, likely altering models described
herein.
The term neurogenesis has been used inconsistently in different contexts,
indicating sequential production of neural elements during development, first
neurons then glial cells, but frequently connoting only neuron generation in
the adult brain, in contrast to gliogenesis. For this discussion, we use the first,
more general meaning, and distinguish cell types as needed. The first
evidence of mammalian neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus was reported
in the 1960s in which 3H-thymidine-labeled neurons were documented. As a
standard marker for cell production, these studies used nuclear incorporation
of 3H-thymidine into newly synthesized DNA during chromosome
replication, which occurs before cells undergo division. After a delay, cells
divide, producing two 3H-thymidine-labeled progeny. Cell proliferation is
defined as an absolute increase in cell number, which occurs only if cell
production is not balanced by cell death. Because there is currently little
evidence for a progressive increase in brain size with age, except perhaps for
rodent hippocampus, most neurogenesis in the adult brain is compensated for
by cell loss. More recent studies of neurogenesis employ the more convenient
thymidine analog BrdU, which can be injected into living animals and then
detected by immunohistochemistry.
During embryonic development, neurons are produced from almost all
regions of the ventricular neuroepithelium. Neurogenesis in the adult,
however, is mostly restricted to two regions: the SVZ lining the lateral
ventricles and a narrow proliferative zone underlying the dentate gyrus
granule layer (subgranular zone) in the hippocampus. In mice, rodents, and
monkeys, newly produced neurons migrate from the SVZ in an anterior
direction into the olfactory bulb to become GABA interneurons. The process
has been elegantly characterized at both ultrastructural and molecular levels.
In the SVZ, the neuroblasts (A cells) on their way to the olfactory bulb create
chains of cells and migrate through a scaffold of glial cells supplied by


<<<PAGE 2995>>>
slowly dividing astrocytes (B cells). Within this network of cell chains, there
are groups of rapidly dividing neural precursors (C cells). Evidence suggests
that the B cells give rise to the C cells, which in turn develop into the A cells,
the future olfactory bulb interneurons. The existence of a sequence of
precursors with progressively restricted abilities to generate diverse neural
cell types makes defining mechanisms that regulate adult neurogenesis in
vivo a significant challenge.
As in the developing brain, adult neurogenesis is also subject to regulation
by extracellular signals that control precursor proliferation and survival and,
in many cases, the very same factors. After the initial discovery of adult
neural stem cells generated under EGF stimulation, other regulatory factors
were defined, including bFGF, IGF-I, BDNF, and LIF/CNTF. Although the
hallmark of neural stem cells includes the capacity to generate neurons,
astrocytes, and oligodendroglia, termed multipotentiality, specific signals
appear to produce relatively different profiles of cells that may migrate to
distinct sites. Intraventricular infusion of EGF promotes primarily gliogenesis
in the SVZ, with cells migrating to the olfactory bulb, striatum, and corpus
callosum, whereas bFGF favors the generation of neurons destined for the
olfactory bulb. Both factors appear to stimulate mitosis directly, with
differential effects on the cell lineage produced. In contrast, BDNF may
increase neuron formation in SVZ as well as striatum and hypothalamus,
though effects may be primarily through promoting survival of newly
generated neurons that otherwise undergo cell death. Finally, CNTF and
related LIF may promote gliogenesis or support the self-renewal of adult
stem cells rather than enhancing a specific cell category.
Remarkably, in addition to direct intraventricular infusions, adult
neurogenesis is also affected by peripheral levels of growth factors,
hormones, and neuropeptides. Peripheral administration of both bFGF and
IGF-I stimulate neurogenesis, increasing selectively mitotic labeling in the
SVZ and hippocampal subgranular zone, respectively, suggesting that there
are specific mechanisms for factor transport across the BBB. Of interest,
elevated prolactin levels, induced by peripheral injection or natural
pregnancy, stimulate proliferation of progenitors in the mouse SVZ, leading
to increased olfactory bulb interneurons, potentially playing roles in learning
new infant scents. This process may be relevant to changes in prolactin seen
in psychiatric disease. Conversely, in behavioral paradigms of social stress,


<<<PAGE 2996>>>
such as territorial challenge by male intruders, activation of the
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis with increased glucocorticoids
leads to reduced neurogenesis in the hippocampus, apparently through local
glutamate signaling. Inhibition is also observed after peripheral opiate
administration, a model for substance abuse. Thus neurogenesis may be one
target process affected by changes of hormones and neuropeptides associated
with several psychiatric conditions.
The discovery of adult neurogenesis naturally leads to questions about
whether new neurons can integrate into the complex cytoarchitecture of the
mature brain and speculation about its functional significance, if any. In
rodents, primates, and humans, new neurons are generated in the dentate
gyrus of the hippocampus, an area important for learning and memory. Some
adult-generated neurons in humans have been shown to survive for at least 2
years. Furthermore, newly generated cells in the adult mouse hippocampus
indeed elaborate extensive dendritic and axonal arborizations appropriate to
the neural circuit and display functional synaptic inputs and action potentials.
From a functional perspective, the generation or survival of new neurons
correlates strongly with multiple instances of behavioral learning and
experience. For example, the survival of newly generated neurons is
markedly enhanced by hippocampal-dependent learning tasks and by an
enriched, behaviorally complex environment. Of perhaps greater importance,
a reduction in dentate gyrus neurogenesis impairs the formation of trace
memories, that is when an animal must associate stimuli that are separated in
time, a hippocampal-dependent task. Finally, in songbirds, neurogenesis is
activity-dependent and is increased by foraging for food and learning a new
song, whether it occurs seasonally or is induced by steroid hormone
administration.
From clinical and therapeutic perspectives, fundamental questions are
whether changes in neurogenesis contribute to disease and whether newly
formed neurons undergo migration to and integration into regions of injury,
replacing dead cells and leading to functional recovery. A neurogenetic
response has now been shown for multiple conditions in the adult, including
brain trauma, stroke, and epilepsy. For instance, ischemic stroke in the
striatum stimulates adjacent SVZ neurogenesis, with neurons migrating to the
injury site. Furthermore, in a highly selective paradigm not involving local
tissue damage, degeneration of layer three cortical neurons elicited SVZ


<<<PAGE 2997>>>
neurogenesis and cell replacement. These studies raise the possibility that
newly produced neurons typically participate in recovery and may be
stimulated as a novel therapeutic strategy. However, in contrast to potential
reconstructive functions, neurogenesis may also play roles in pathogenesis: In
a kindling model of epilepsy, newly generated neurons were found to migrate
to incorrect positions and participate in aberrant neuronal circuits, thereby
reinforcing the epileptic state.
Conversely, reductions in neurogenesis may contribute to several
conditions that implicate dysfunction or degeneration of the hippocampal
formation. Dentate gyrus neurogenesis is inhibited by increased
glucocorticoid levels observed in aged rats. It can be reversed by steroid
antagonists and adrenalectomy, observations potentially relevant to the
correlation of elevated human cortisol levels with reduced hippocampal
volumes, and the presence of memory deficits. Similarly, stress-induced
increases in human glucocorticoids may contribute to decreased hippocampal
volumes seen in schizophrenia, depression, and PTSD.
A potential role for altered neurogenesis in disease has gained the most
support in recent studies of depression. Several studies in animals and
humans suggest a correlation of decreased hippocampal size with depressive
symptoms, whereas clinically significant antidepressant therapy elicits
increased hippocampal volume and enhanced neurogenesis, with causal
relationships still being defined. For example, postmortem and brain imaging
studies indicate cell loss in corticolimbic regions in bipolar disorder and
major depression. Significantly, mood stabilizers, such as lithium and
valproic acid, as well as antidepressants and ECT, activate intracellular
pathways that promote neurogenesis and synaptic plasticity. Furthermore, in
a useful primate model, the adult tree shrew, the chronic psychosocial stress
model of depression elicited ∼15 percent reductions in brain metabolites and
a 33 percent decrease in neurogenesis (BrdU mitotic labeling), effects that
were prevented by coadministration of antidepressant, tianeptine. More
importantly, although stress exposure elicited small reductions in
hippocampal volumes, stressed animals treated with antidepressants exhibited
increased hippocampal volumes. Similar effects have been found in rodent
models of depression.
Also, to the previous structural relationships, recent evidence has begun
defining the roles of relevant neurotransmitter systems to antidepressant


<<<PAGE 2998>>>
effects on behavior and neurogenesis. In a most exciting finding, a causal link
between antidepressant-induced neurogenesis and a positive behavioral
response has been demonstrated. In the serotonin 1A receptor null mouse,
fluoxetine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor [SSRI], produced neither
enhanced neurogenesis nor behavioral improvement. Furthermore, when
hippocampal neuronal precursors were selectively reduced (85 percent) by Xirradiation, neither fluoxetine nor imipramine induced neurogenesis or
behavioral recovery. Finally, one study using hippocampal cultures from
normal and mutant rodents strongly supports a neurogenetic role for
endogenous NPY, which is contained in dentate gyrus hilar interneurons.
NPY stimulates precursor proliferation selectively via the Y1 (not Y2 or Y5)
receptor, a finding consistent with the receptor-mediating antidepressive
effects of NPY in animal models and the impact of NPY levels on both
hippocampal-dependent learning and responses to stress. In aggregate, these
observations suggest that volume changes observed with human depression
and therapy may directly relate to alterations in ongoing neurogenesis. More
generally, the discovery of adult neurogenesis has led to significant changes
in our perspectives on the regenerative capacities of the human brain.

NEUROPHYSIOLOGY AND NEUROCHEMISTRY
The study of chemical interneuronal communication is called
neurochemistry, and in recent years there has been an explosion of
knowledge in understanding chemical transmission between neurons and the
receptors affected by those chemicals. It also influences our understanding of
brain physiology. This section chapter focuses on the complex heterogeneity
of both these areas to help explain the complexity of thoughts, feelings, and
behaviors that make up the human experience.
Monoamine Neurotransmitters
The monoamine neurotransmitters and acetylcholine have been historically
implicated in the pathophysiology and treatment of a wide variety of
neuropsychiatric disorders. Each monoamine neurotransmitter system
modulates many different neural pathways, which themselves subserve
multiple behavioral and physiologic processes. Conversely, each CNS
neurobehavioral process is likely modulated by multiple interacting


<<<PAGE 2999>>>
neurotransmitter systems, including monoamines.
This complexity poses a significant challenge to understanding the precise
molecular, cellular, and systems-level pathways through which various
monoamine neurotransmitters affect neuropsychiatric disorders. However,
recent advances in human genetics and genomics, as well as in experimental
neuroscience, have shed light on this question. Molecular cloning has
identified a large number of genes that regulate monoaminergic
neurotransmissions, such as the enzymes, receptors, and transporters that
mediate the synthesis, cellular actions, and cellular reuptake of these
neurotransmitters, respectively. Human genetics studies have provided
evidence of tantalizing links between allelic variants in specific monoaminerelated genes and psychiatric disorders and trait abnormalities. In contrast, the
ability to modify gene function and cellular activity in experimental animals
has clarified the roles of specific genes and neural pathways in mediating
behavioral processes.
Monoamines act on target cells by binding to specific cell-surface
receptors. There are multiple receptor subtypes for each monoamine, which
are expressed in diverse regions and subcellular locales and which engage a
variety of intracellular signaling pathways. This panoply of receptors thus
allows each monoamine neurotransmitter to modulate target cells in many
ways; the same molecule may activate some cells while inhibiting others,
depending on which receptor subtype is expressed by each cell. The various
monoamines are discussed below.
Serotonin. Although only one in a million CNS neurons produces
serotonin, these cells influence virtually all aspects of CNS function. The cell
bodies of these serotonergic neurons are clustered in the midline raphe nuclei
of the brainstem; the rostral raphe nuclei send ascending axonal projections
throughout the brain, whereas the descending caudal raphe nuclei send
projections into the medulla, cerebellum, and spinal cord (Fig. 33-12). The
descending serotonergic fibers that innervate the dorsal horn of the spinal
cord have been implicated in the suppression of nociceptive pathways, a
finding that may relate to the pain-relieving effects of some antidepressants.
The tonic firing of CNS serotonin neurons varies across the sleep–wake
cycle, with an absence of activity during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep.
Increased serotonergic firing is observed during rhythmic motor behaviors


<<<PAGE 3000>>>
and suggests that serotonin modulates some forms of motor output.
Most serotonergic innervation of the cortex and limbic system arises from
the dorsal and median raphe nuclei in the midbrain; the serotonergic neurons
in these areas send projections through the medial forebrain bundle into target
forebrain regions. The median raphe provides most of the serotonergic fibers
that innervate the limbic system, whereas the dorsal raphe nucleus provides
most of the serotonergic fibers that innervate the striatum and thalamus.

FIGURE 33-12
Brain serotonergic pathways (in rats). Serotonergic neurons are located in
brainstem midline raphe nuclei and project throughout the neuraxis. (There is an
approximate similarity between monoamine pathways in rats and in humans.)
AMG, amygdala; CBM, cerebellum; cc, corpus callosum; CP, caudate putamen;
CRN, caudal raphe nuclei; CTX, neocortex; DR, dorsal raphe nucleus; HI,
hippocampus; HY, hypothalamus; LC, locus ceruleus; MR, median raphe nucleus;
NAc, nucleus accumbens; OB, olfactory bulb; SN, substantia nigra; TE, tectum;
TH, thalamus; TM, tuberomammillary nucleus of hypothalamus. (From Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:65.)

Also, to the different target fields of these serotonergic nuclei, there are
cellular differences between their constituent neurons. Dorsal raphe
serotonergic fibers are fine, with small vesicle-coated swellings called
varicosities, whereas median raphe fibers have large spherical or beaded
varicosities. It is unclear to what extent serotonin acts as a true synaptic or
“private” neurotransmitter versus action as a local endocrine hormone or
“social transmitter,” or whether its roles differ depending on the fiber type
from which it is released. These fibers show differential sensitivity to the


<<<PAGE 3001>>>
neurotoxic effects of the amphetamine analog 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, “ecstasy”), which lesions the fine axons of the
dorsal raphe while sparing the thick beaded axons of the median raphe. The
significance of these morphologic differences is unclear, although recent
work has identified functional differences between the serotonergic neurons
of the dorsal and median raphe nuclei.
Dopamine. Dopamine neurons are more widely distributed than those of
other monoamines, residing in the midbrain substantia nigra and ventral
tegmental area (VTA) and the periaqueductal gray, hypothalamus, olfactory
bulb, and retina. In the periphery, dopamine is found in the kidney, where it
functions to produce renal vasodilation, diuresis, and natriuresis. Three
dopamine systems are highly relevant to psychiatry: The nigrostriatal,
mesocorticolimbic, and tuberohypophyseal system (Fig. 33-13).
Degeneration of the nigrostriatal system causes Parkinson disease and has led
to an intense research focus on the development and function of dopamine
neurons in the midbrain substantia nigra nuclei. Dopamine cell bodies in the
pars compacta division of this region send ascending projections to the dorsal
striatum (especially to the caudate and putamen) and thereby modulate motor
control. The extrapyramidal effects of antipsychotic drugs are thought to
result from the blockade of these striatal dopamine receptors.
The midbrain VTA lies medial to the substantia nigra and contains
dopaminergic neurons that give rise to the mesocorticolimbic dopamine
system. These neurons send ascending projections that innervate limbic
structures, such as the nucleus accumbens and amygdala; the mesoaccumbens
pathway is a central element in the neural representation of reward, and
intense research has been devoted to this area in recent years. All known
drugs of abuse activate the mesoaccumbens dopamine pathway, and plastic
changes in this pathway are thought to underlie drug addiction. The
mesolimbic projection is believed to be a significant target for the
antipsychotic properties of dopamine receptor antagonist drugs in controlling
the positive symptoms of schizophrenia, such as hallucinations and delusions.


<<<PAGE 3002>>>
FIGURE 33-13
Brain dopaminergic pathways (in rats). The three principal dopaminergic
pathways: (1) nigrostriatal pathway, (2) mesocorticolimbic pathway, and (3)
tuberohypophyseal pathway. AMG, amygdala; CBM, cerebellum; cc, corpus
callosum; CP, caudate putamen; CTX, neocortex; HI, hippocampus; HY,
hypothalamus; LC, locus ceruleus; NAc, nucleus accumbens; OB, olfactory bulb;
PFC, prefrontal cortex; PI, pituitary; SNC, substantia nigra pars compacta; TE,
tectum; TH, thalamus; VTA, ventral tegmental area. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:66.)

VTA dopamine neurons also project to cortical structures, such as the
prefrontal cortex, and modulate working memory and attention; decreased
activity in this pathway is proposed to underlie negative symptoms of
schizophrenia. Thus antipsychotic drugs that decrease positive symptoms by
blocking dopamine receptors in the mesolimbic pathway may simultaneously
worsen these negative symptoms by blocking similar dopamine receptors in
the mesocortical pathway. The decreased risk of extrapyramidal side effects
seen with clozapine (Clozaril; vs. other typical antipsychotic medications) is
thought to be due to its relatively selective effects on this mesocortical
projection. The tuberohypophyseal system consists of dopamine neurons in
the hypothalamic arcuate and paraventricular nuclei that project to the
pituitary gland and thereby inhibit prolactin release. Antipsychotic drugs that
block dopamine receptors in the pituitary may thus disinhibit prolactin
release and cause galactorrhea.
Norepinephrine and Epinephrine. The postganglionic sympathetic
neurons of the ANS release norepinephrine, resulting in widespread


<<<PAGE 3003>>>
peripheral effects, including tachycardia and elevated blood pressure. The
adrenal medulla releases epinephrine, which produces similar effects;
epinephrine-secreting pheochromocytoma tumors produce bursts of
sympathetic activation, central arousal, and anxiety.
Norepinephrine-producing neurons are found within the brain in the pons
and medulla in two major clusterings: The locus ceruleus (LC) and the lateral
tegmental noradrenergic nuclei (Fig. 33-14). Noradrenergic projections from
both of these regions extensively ramify as they project throughout the
neuraxis. In humans, the LC is found in the dorsal portion of the caudal pons
and contains approximately 12,000 tightly packed neurons on each side of the
brain. These cells provide the central noradrenergic projections to the
neocortex, hippocampus, thalamus, and midbrain tectum. The activity of LC
neurons varies with the animal’s level of wakefulness. Firing rates are
responsive to novel or stressful stimuli, with the largest responses to stimuli
that disrupt ongoing behavior and reorient attention. Altogether, physiologic
studies indicate a role for this structure in the regulation of arousal state,
vigilance, and stress response. The projections from lateral tegmental nucleus
neurons, which are loosely scattered throughout the ventral pons and
medulla, partially overlap those of the LC. Fibers from both cell groups
innervate the amygdala, septum, and spinal cord. Other regions, such as the
hypothalamus and lower brainstem, receive adrenergic inputs predominantly
from the lateral tegmental nucleus. The relatively few neurons that utilize
epinephrine as a neurotransmitter are located in the caudal pons and medulla,
intermingled with noradrenergic neurons. Projections from these groups
ascend to innervate the hypothalamus, LC, and visceral efferent and afferent
nuclei of the midbrain.


<<<PAGE 3004>>>
FIGURE 33-14
Brain noradrenergic pathways (in rats). Projections of noradrenergic neurons
located in the locus ceruleus (LC) and lateral tegmental noradrenergic nuclei
(LTN). AMG, amygdala; CBM, cerebellum; cc, corpus callosum; CP, caudate
putamen; CTX, neocortex; HI, hippocampus; HY, hypothalamus; OB, olfactory
bulb; TE, tectum; TH, thalamus. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:66.)

Histamine. Histamine is perhaps best known for its role in allergies. It is an
inflammatory mediator stored in mast cells and released upon cellular
interaction with allergens. Once released, histamine causes vascular leakage
and edema and other facial and topical allergy symptoms. In contrast, central
histaminergic neural pathways have only more recently been characterized by
immunocytochemistry using antibodies to the synthetic enzyme histidine
decarboxylase and histamine. Histaminergic cell bodies are located within a
region of the posterior hypothalamus termed the tuberomammillary nucleus.
The activity of tuberomammillary neurons is characterized by firing that
varies across the sleep–wake cycle, with the highest activity during the
waking state, slowed firing during slow-wave sleep, and absence of firing
during REM sleep. Histaminergic fibers project diffusely throughout the
brain and spinal cord (Fig. 33-15). Ventral ascending projections course
through the medial forebrain bundle and then innervate the hypothalamus,
diagonal band, septum, and olfactory bulb. Dorsal ascending projections
innervate the thalamus, hippocampus, amygdala, and rostral forebrain.
Descending projections travel through the central midbrain gray to the dorsal
hindbrain and spinal cord. The fibers have varicosities that are seldom


<<<PAGE 3005>>>
associated with classical synapses, and histamine has been proposed to act at
a distance from its sites of release, like a local hormone. The hypothalamus
receives the densest histaminergic innervation, consistent with a role for this
transmitter in the regulation of autonomic and neuroendocrine processes.
Also, muscular histaminergic innervation is seen in monoaminergic and
cholinergic nuclei.
Acetylcholine. Within the brain, the axonal processes of cholinergic
neurons may either project to distant brain regions (projection neurons) or
contact local cells within the same structure (interneurons). Two large
clusters of cholinergic projection neurons are found within the brain: The
basal forebrain complex and the mesopontine complex (Fig. 33-16). The
basal forebrain complex provides most of the cholinergic innervation to the
nonstriatal telencephalon. It consists of cholinergic neurons within the
nucleus basalis of Meynert, the horizontal and vertical diagonal bands of
Broca, and the medial septal nucleus. These neurons project to widespread
areas of the cortex and amygdala, to the anterior cingulate gyrus and
olfactory bulb, and the hippocampus, respectively. In Alzheimer disease,
there is significant degeneration of neurons in the nucleus basalis, leading to
a substantial reduction in cortical cholinergic innervation. The extent of
neuronal loss correlates with the degree of dementia, and the cholinergic
deficit may contribute to the cognitive decline in this disease, consistent with
the beneficial effects of drugs that promote acetylcholine signaling in this
disorder.

FIGURE 33-15


<<<PAGE 3006>>>
Brain histaminergic pathways (in rats). Histaminergic neurons are located in the
tuberomammillary nucleus of the caudal hypothalamus (TM) and project to the
hypothalamus (HY) and more distant brain regions. CBM, cerebellum; cc, corpus
callosum; CP, caudate putamen; CTX, neocortex; HI, hippocampus; NAc, nucleus
accumbens; OB, olfactory bulb; TE, tectum; TH, thalamus. (From Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:67.)

FIGURE 33-16
Brain cholinergic projection pathways (in rats). The majority of cholinergic
projection neurons are located in the basal forebrain complex (BFC) and the
mesopontine complex (MPC). AMG, amygdala; CBM, cerebellum; cc, corpus
callosum; CP, caudate putamen; CTX, neocortex; HI, hippocampus; HY,
hypothalamus; LC, locus ceruleus; NAc, nucleus accumbens; OB, olfactory bulb;
SN, substantia nigra; TE, tectum; TH, thalamus. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:67.)

The mesopontine complex consists of cholinergic neurons within the
pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei of the midbrain and pons
and provides cholinergic innervation to the thalamus and midbrain areas
(including the dopaminergic neurons of the VTA and substantia nigra) and
descending innervation to other brainstem regions such as the LC, dorsal
raphe, and cranial nerve nuclei. In contrast to central serotonergic,
noradrenergic, and histaminergic neurons, cholinergic neurons may continue
to fire during REM sleep and have been proposed to play a role in REM sleep
induction. Acetylcholine is also found within interneurons of several brain
regions, including the striatum. The modulation of striatal cholinergic
transmission has been implicated in the antiparkinsonian actions of


<<<PAGE 3007>>>
anticholinergic agents. Within the periphery, acetylcholine is a prominent
neurotransmitter, located in motoneurons innervating skeletal muscle,
preganglionic autonomic neurons, and postganglionic parasympathetic
neurons. Peripheral acetylcholine mediates the characteristic postsynaptic
effects of the parasympathetic system, including bradycardia and reduced
blood pressure, and enhanced digestive function.
Monoamine Synthesis, Storage, and Degradation
Also, to neuroanatomic similarities, monoamines are synthesized, stored, and
degraded in similar ways (Fig. 33-17). Monoamines are synthesized within
neurons from common amino acid precursors (Fig. 33-17, step 1) and taken
up into synaptic vesicles by way of a vesicular monoamine transporter (Fig.
33-17, step 2). On stimulation, vesicles within nerve terminals fuse with the
presynaptic terminal and release the neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft
(Fig. 33-17, step 3). Once released, the monoamines interact with
postsynaptic receptors to alter the function of postsynaptic cells (Fig. 33-17,
step 4), and they may also act on presynaptic autoreceptors on the nerve
terminal to suppress further release (Fig. 33-17, step 5). Also, released
monoamines may be taken back up from the synaptic cleft into the nerve
terminal by plasma membrane transporter proteins (Fig. 33-17, step 6), a
process known as reuptake. Reuptake plays an essential role in limiting the
total magnitude and temporal duration of monoamine signaling. Once
monoamines are taken up, they may be subject to enzymatic degradation
(Fig. 33-17, step 7), or they may be protected from degradation by uptake
into vesicles. The processing of acetylcholine differs from this scheme and is
described later in this section.


<<<PAGE 3008>>>
FIGURE 33-17
Schematic diagram of a monoaminergic synapse. Steps involved in synaptic
transmission are described in the text. MAO, monoamine oxidase. (From Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:68.)

Serotonin
The CNS contains less than 2 percent of the serotonin in the body; peripheral
serotonin is located in platelets, mast cells, and enterochromaffin cells. More
than 80 percent of all the serotonin in the body is found in the gastrointestinal
system, where it modulates motility and digestive functions. Platelet
serotonin promotes aggregation and clotting through a most unusual
mechanism: The covalent linkage of serotonin molecules to small GTPbinding proteins, which can then activate these proteins, is a process termed
“serotonylation.” Peripheral serotonin cannot cross the BBB, so serotonin is
synthesized within the brain as well. Serotonin is synthesized from the amino
acid tryptophan, which is derived from the diet. The rate-limiting step in
serotonin synthesis is the hydroxylation of tryptophan by the enzyme
tryptophan hydroxylase to form 5-hydroxytryptophan (4-HT) (Fig. 33-18).
Two isoforms of tryptophan hydroxylase exist—one isoform is found mainly
in the periphery, whereas the second isoform is restricted to the CNS.


<<<PAGE 3009>>>
Under normal circumstances, tryptophan concentration is rate-limiting in
serotonin synthesis. Therefore, much attention has focused on the factors that
determine tryptophan availability. Unlike serotonin, tryptophan is taken up
into the brain by way of a saturable active carrier mechanism. Because
tryptophan competes with other large neutral amino acids for transport, brain
uptake of this amino acid is determined both by the amount of circulating
tryptophan and by the ratio of tryptophan to other large neutral amino acids.
This ratio may be elevated by carbohydrate intake, which induces insulin
release and the uptake of many sizeable neutral amino acids into peripheral
tissues.


<<<PAGE 3010>>>

<<<PAGE 3011>>>
FIGURE 33-18
Synthesis and catabolism of serotonin. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia,
PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:68.)

Conversely, high-protein foods tend to be relatively low in tryptophan,
thus lowering this ratio. Moreover, the administration of specialized low
tryptophan diets produces significant declines in brain serotonin levels. After
tryptophan hydroxylation, 5-hydroxytryptophan is rapidly decarboxylated by
aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (an enzyme also involved in dopamine
synthesis) to form serotonin.
The first step in the degradation of serotonin is mediated by monoamine
oxidase type A (MAOA), which oxidizes the amino group to form an
aldehyde. MAOA is located in mitochondrial membranes and is nonspecific
in its substrate specificity; in addition to serotonin, it oxidizes
norepinephrine. The elevation of serotonin levels by MAO inhibitors
(MAOIs) is believed to underlie the antidepressant efficacy of these drugs.
After oxidation by MAOA, the resulting aldehyde is further oxidized to 5hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA). Levels of 5-HIAA are often measured as
a correlate of serotonergic system activity, although the relationship of these
levels to serotonergic neuronal activity remains unclear.
Catecholamines. The catecholamines are synthesized from the amino acid
tyrosine, which is taken up into the brain via an active transport mechanism
(Fig. 33-19). Within catecholaminergic neurons, tyrosine hydroxylase
catalyzes the addition of a hydroxyl group to the meta position of tyrosine,
yielding L-dopa. This rate-limiting step in catecholamine synthesis is subject
to inhibition by high levels of catecholamines (end-product inhibition).
Because tyrosine hydroxylase usually is saturated with substrate,
manipulation of tyrosine levels does not readily affect the rate of
catecholamine synthesis. Once formed, L-dopa is rapidly converted to
dopamine by dopa decarboxylase, which is located in the cytoplasm. It is
now recognized that this enzyme acts not only on L-dopa but also on all
naturally occurring aromatic L-amino acids, including tryptophan, and thus it
is more appropriately termed aromatic amino acid decarboxylase. In
noradrenergic and adrenergic neurons, dopamine is actively transported into


<<<PAGE 3012>>>
storage vesicles, where it is oxidized by dopamine β-hydroxylase to form
norepinephrine. In adrenergic neurons and the adrenal medulla,
norepinephrine is converted to epinephrine by phenylethanolamine Nmethyltransferase (PNMT), which is located within the cytoplasmic
compartment.


<<<PAGE 3013>>>

<<<PAGE 3014>>>
FIGURE 33-19
Synthesis of catecholamines. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:69.)

Two enzymes that play significant roles in the degradation of
catecholamines are monoamine oxidase and catechol-O-methyltransferase
(COMT). MAO is located on the outer membrane of mitochondria, including
those within the terminals of adrenergic fibers, and oxidatively deaminates
catecholamines to their corresponding aldehydes. Two MAO isozymes with
differing substrate specificities have been identified: MAOA, which
preferentially deaminates serotonin and norepinephrine, and MAO type B
(MAOB), which deaminates dopamine, histamine, and a broad spectrum of
phenylethylamines. Neurons contain both MAO isoforms. The blockade of
monoamine catabolism by MAO inhibitors produces elevations in brain
monoamine levels. MAO is also found in peripheral tissues such as the
gastrointestinal tract and liver, where it prevents the accumulation of toxic
amines. For example, peripheral MAO degrades dietary tyramine, an amine
that can displace norepinephrine from sympathetic postganglionic nerve
endings, producing hypertension if tyramine is present in sufficient
quantities. Thus patients treated with MAO inhibitors are cautioned to avoid
pickled and fermented foods that typically have high levels of tyramine.
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) is located in the cytoplasm and is
widely distributed throughout the brain and peripheral tissues, although little
to none is found in adrenergic neurons. It has a broad substrate specificity,
catalyzing the transfer of methyl groups from S-adenosyl methionine to the
m-hydroxyl group of most catechol compounds. The catecholamine
metabolites produced by these and other enzymes are frequently measured as
indicators of the activity of catecholaminergic systems. In humans, the
predominant metabolites of dopamine and norepinephrine are homovanillic
acid (HVA) and 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG), respectively.
Histamine. As is the case for serotonin, the brain contains only a small
portion of the histamine found in the body. Histamine is distributed
throughout most tissues of the body, predominantly in mast cells. Because it
does not readily cross the BBB, it is believed that histamine is synthesized


<<<PAGE 3015>>>
within the brain. In the brain, histamine is formed by the decarboxylation of
the amino acid histidine by a specific L-histidine decarboxylase. This enzyme
is not typically saturated with substrate, so synthesis is sensitive to histidine
levels. This is consistent with the observation that the peripheral
administration of histidine elevates brain histamine levels. Histamine is
metabolized in the brain by histamine N-methyltransferase, producing
methylhistamine. In turn, methylhistamine undergoes oxidative deamination
by MAOB.
Acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is synthesized by the transfer of an acetyl
group from acetyl coenzyme A (ACoA) to choline in a reaction mediated by
the enzyme choline acetyltransferase (ChAT). The majority of choline within
the brain is transported from the blood rather than being synthesized de novo.
Choline is taken up into cholinergic neurons by a high-affinity active
transport mechanism, and this uptake is the rate-limiting step in acetylcholine
synthesis. The rate of choline transport is regulated, such that increased
cholinergic neural activity is associated with enhanced choline uptake. After
synthesis, acetylcholine is stored in synaptic vesicles through the action of a
vesicular acetylcholine transporter. After vesicular release, acetylcholine is
rapidly broken down by hydrolysis by acetylcholinesterase, located in the
synaptic cleft. Much of the choline produced by this hydrolysis is then taken
back into the presynaptic terminal via the choline transporter. Although
acetylcholinesterase is primarily in cholinergic neurons and synapses, a
second class of cholinesterase, butyrylcholinesterase, is primarily in the liver
and plasma as well as in glia. In the treatment of Alzheimer disease,
strategies aimed at enhancing cholinergic function, primarily through the use
of cholinesterase inhibitors to prevent usual degradation of acetylcholine,
have shown moderate efficacy in ameliorating cognitive dysfunction as well
as behavioral disturbances. Cholinesterase inhibitors are also used in the
treatment of myasthenia gravis, a disease characterized by weakness due to
blockade of neuromuscular transmission by autoantibodies to acetylcholine
receptors.
Transporters. A great deal of progress has been made in the molecular
characterization of the monoamine plasma membrane transporter proteins.
These membrane proteins mediate the reuptake of synaptically released


<<<PAGE 3016>>>
monoamines into the presynaptic terminal. This process also involves
cotransport of Na+ and Cl− ions and is driven by the ion concentration
gradient generated by the plasma membrane Na+/K+ ATPase. Monoamine
reuptake is an essential mechanism for limiting the extent and duration of
activation of monoaminergic receptors. Reuptake is also a primary
mechanism for replenishing terminal monoamine neurotransmitter stores.
Moreover, transporters serve as molecular targets for several antidepressant
drugs, psychostimulants, and monoaminergic neurotoxins. Whereas
transporter molecules for serotonin (SERT), dopamine (DAT), and
norepinephrine (NET) have been well characterized, transporters selective for
histamine and epinephrine have not been demonstrated.
Among drugs of abuse, cocaine binds with high affinity to all three known
monoamine transporters, although the stimulant properties of the drug have
been attributed primarily to its blockade of DAT. This view has been recently
supported by the absence of cocaine-induced locomotor stimulation in a
strain of mutant mice engineered to lack this molecule. Psychostimulants
produce a paradoxical locomotor suppression in these animals that has been
attributed to their blockade of the serotonin transporter. The rewarding
properties of cocaine have also been attributed primarily to dopamine
transporter inhibition, although other targets mediate these effects as well
since cocaine still has rewarding effects in mice lacking the dopamine
transporter. It appears that serotonergic as well as dopaminergic mechanisms,
may be involved. Transporters may also provide routes that allow
neurotoxins to enter and damage monoaminergic neurons; examples include
the dopaminergic neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
(MPTP) and the serotonergic neurotoxin MDMA.
Vesicular Monoamine Transporter. Also, to the reuptake of
monoamines into the presynaptic nerve terminal, a second transport process
serves to concentrate and store monoamines within synaptic vesicles. The
transport and storage of monoamines in vesicles may serve several purposes:
(1) to enable the regulated release of the transmitter under appropriate
physiologic stimulation, (2) to protect monoamines from degradation by
MAO, and (3) to protect neurons from the toxic effects of free radicals
produced by the oxidation of cytoplasmic monoamines. In contrast with the
plasma membrane transporters, a single type of vesicular monoamine


<<<PAGE 3017>>>
transporter is believed to mediate the uptake of monoamines into synaptic
vesicles within the brain. Consistent with this, blockade of this vesicular
monoamine transporter by the antihypertensive drug reserpine (Serpasil) has
been found to deplete brain levels of serotonin, norepinephrine, and
dopamine and to increase the risk of suicide and affective dysfunction.
Receptors
Ultimately, the effects of monoamines on CNS function and behavior depend
on their interactions with receptor molecules. The binding of monoamines to
these plasma membrane proteins initiates a series of intracellular events that
modulate neuronal excitability. Unlike the transporters, multiple receptor
subtypes exist for each monoamine neurotransmitter (Table 33-2).
Serotonin Receptors. The 5-hydroxytryptophan type 1 (5-HT1) receptors
comprise the largest serotonin receptor subfamily, with human subtypes
designated 5-HT1A, 5-HT1B, 5-HT1D, 5-HT1E, and 5-HT1F. All five 5-HT1
receptor subtypes display intronless gene structures, high affinities for
serotonin, and adenylate cyclase inhibition. The most intensively studied of
these has been the 5-HT1A receptor. This subtype is found on postsynaptic
membranes of forebrain neurons, primarily in the hippocampus, cortex, and
septum, and on serotonergic neurons, where it functions as an inhibitory
somatodendritic autoreceptor. There is a significant interest in the 5-HT1A
receptor as a modulator of both anxiety and depression. The downregulation
of 5-HT1A autoreceptors by the chronic administration of serotonin reuptake
inhibitors has been implicated in their antidepressant effects, and SSRIs may
produce some behavioral effects via increases in hippocampal neurogenesis
mediated by postsynaptic 5-HT1A receptor activation. Also, partial 5-HT1A
receptor agonists such as buspirone display both anxiolytic and
antidepressant properties.
Much recent attention has focused on the contributions of 5-HT2A/C
receptors to the actions of atypical antipsychotic drugs such as clozapine,
risperidone, and olanzapine. Analysis of the receptor-binding properties of
these drugs has led to the hypothesis that 5-HT2A receptor blockade
correlates with the therapeutic effects of atypical antipsychotics. The 5-HT2A


<<<PAGE 3018>>>
receptor also influences working memory, which is likely impaired in
schizophrenia.
The 5-HT2C receptor is expressed at high levels in many CNS regions,
including the hippocampal formation, prefrontal cortex, amygdala, striatum,
hypothalamus, and choroid plexus. Stimulation of 5-HT2C receptors has been
proposed to produce anxiogenic effects as well as anorectic effects, which
may result from interactions with the hypothalamic melanocortin and leptin
pathways. 5-HT2C receptors may also play a role in the weight gain and
development of type 2 diabetes mellitus associated with atypical
antipsychotic treatment. Indeed, a line of mice lacking this receptor subtype
exhibits an obesity syndrome associated with overeating and enhanced
seizure susceptibility, suggesting that this receptor regulates neuronal
network excitability. A variety of antidepressant and antipsychotic drugs
antagonize 5-HT2C receptors with high affinity.
Conversely, hallucinogens such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
display agonist activity at 5-HT2 (and other) serotonin receptor subtypes. 5HT2C receptor transcripts also undergo RNA editing, producing isoforms of
the receptor with significantly altered basal versus serotonin-induced activity.
Alterations in 5-HT2C receptor mRNA editing have been found in the brains
of suicide victims with a history of major depression, and SSRIs have been
shown to alter these editing patterns.
Table 33-2
Monoamine Receptors: Overview
Transmitter

Subtype

Primary
Effector

Proposed
Clinical
Relevance

Histamine

H1

↑ PI Turnover

Antagonists used
as
antiallergenic
and antiinflammatory
agents, also

H2
H3
H4

↑ AC
↓ AC
↓ AC


<<<PAGE 3019>>>
promote
sedation,
weight gain
Antagonists used
to treat peptic
ulcers, GI
reflux, and GI
bleeding
Antagonists
proposed to
treat sleep
disorders,
obesity,
dementia
Possible role for
antagonists as
antiinflammatory
agents
Epinephrine/Norepinephrine α1A,B,D
α2A,B,C
β1
β2
β3

↑ PI Turnover
↓ AC
↑ AC
↑ AC
↑ AC

Antagonists
in managemen
of prostate
disease
Agonists sedativ
and
hypertensive
Regulation of
cardiac
function,
antagonists
may be
anxiolytic
Agonists used as
bronchodilator


<<<PAGE 3020>>>
Possible role for
agonists to tre
obesity
Serotonergic

5HT1A,1B,1D,1E,1F ↓ AC, ↑ GIRK
currents
5-HT2A, 5-HT2B, ↑ PI Turnover

Partial agonists
(buspirone)
anxiolytic, role
in hippocampa
5-HT2C
neurogenesis;
HT1B/D
+ channel,
Na
5-HT3
antagonists
cell
used as
membrane
antimigraine
depolarization
agents
5-HT4
↑ AC
(triptans)
5-HT5, 5-HT6, 5- ↑ AC
2A antagonists →
HT7
antipsychotic
effects, 2A
agonists →
hallucinogens;
2B agonism →
cardiac
valvulopathy
2C agonists →
under
development a
anorexigens,
antiepileptics?
Agonists
(ondansetron)
are antiemetic

Partial agonists
used in IBS


<<<PAGE 3021>>>
(tegaserod)
Unclear
Unclear
Antagonists may
have
antidepressan
potential
Dopaminergic

D1-like family
(D1, D5)
D2-like family
(D2, D3, D4)

↑ AC
↓ AC

D1 agonists used
in Parkinson
disease

D2 antagonists
are
antipsychotics
(e.g.,
haloperidol)
D3 agonists used
in Parkinson
disease,
restless legs
syndrome (e.g
pramipexole)

From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:71.

Dopamine Receptors. In 1979, it was recognized that the actions of
dopamine are mediated by more than one receptor subtype. Two dopamine
receptors, termed D1 and D2, were distinguished based on differential binding
affinities of a series of agonists and antagonists, distinct effector mechanisms,
and distinct distribution patterns within the CNS. It was subsequently found
that the therapeutic efficacy of antipsychotic drugs correlated strongly with
their affinities for the D2 receptor, implicating this subtype as an essential site
of antipsychotic drug action. Recent molecular cloning studies have
identified three additional dopamine receptor genes encoding the D3, D4, and


<<<PAGE 3022>>>
D5 dopamine receptors. Based on their structure, pharmacology, and primary
effector mechanisms, the D3 and D4 receptors are considered to be “D2-like,”
and the D5 receptor “D1-like.” The functional roles of the recently discovered
subtypes remain to be definitively elucidated.
The D1 receptor was initially distinguished from the D2 subtype by its high
affinity for the antagonist SCH 23390 and relatively low affinity for
butyrophenones such as haloperidol (Haldol). Whereas D1 receptor activation
stimulates cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) formation, D2 receptor
stimulation produces the opposite effect.
Adrenergic Receptors. As for the α1 receptors, the functions of α2
receptor subtypes (designated α2A, α2B, and α2C) have been challenging to
determine due to a lack of selective agonists and antagonists; α2 receptors
display both presynaptic autoreceptor and postsynaptic actions, and all appear
to inhibit the cAMP formation and to activate potassium channels with
resultant membrane hyperpolarization. These receptors regulate
neurotransmitter release from peripheral sympathetic nerve endings. The
stimulation of central α2 autoreceptors (likely the α2A subtype) inhibits firing
of the noradrenergic neurons of the LC, which are implicated in arousal
states. This mechanism has been proposed to underlie the sedative effects of
the α2 receptor agonist clonidine (Catapres). Also, the stimulation of
brainstem α2 receptors has been proposed to reduce sympathetic and to
augment parasympathetic nervous system activity. This action may relate to
the utility of clonidine in lowering blood pressure and in suppressing the
sympathetic hyperactivity associated with opiate withdrawal. Activation of α2
receptors inhibits the activity of serotonin neurons of the dorsal raphe
nucleus, whereas activation of local α1 receptors stimulates the activity of
these neurons, and this is thought to be a significant activating input to the
serotonergic system.
Histamine Receptors. Histaminergic systems have been proposed to
modulate arousal, wakefulness, feeding behavior, and neuroendocrine
responsiveness. Four histaminergic receptor subtypes have been identified


<<<PAGE 3023>>>
and termed H1, H2, H3, and H4. The H4 receptor was identified recently and is
detected predominantly in the periphery, in regions such as the spleen, bone
marrow, and leukocytes. The other three histamine receptors have a
prominent expression in the CNS. H1 receptors are expressed throughout the
body, particularly in the smooth muscle of the gastrointestinal tract and
bronchial walls, as well as on vascular endothelial cells. H1 receptors are
widely distributed within the CNS, with exceptionally high levels in the
thalamus, cortex, and cerebellum. H1 receptor activation is associated with Gq
activation and stimulation of phosphoinositide turnover and tends to increase
excitatory neuronal responses. These receptors are the targets of classical
antihistaminergic agents used in the treatment of allergic rhinitis and
conjunctivitis. The sedative effects of these compounds derive from their
actions in the CNS and implicate histamine in the regulation of arousal and
the sleep–wake cycle. Accordingly, a line of mutant mice lacking histamine
displays deficits in waking and attention. Also, the sedation and weight gain
produced by several antipsychotic and antidepressant drugs have been
attributed to H1 receptor antagonism. Conversely, H1 receptor agonists
stimulate arousal and suppress food intake in animal models.
Cholinergic Receptors. M1 receptors are the most abundantly expressed
muscarinic receptors in the forebrain, including the cortex, hippocampus, and
striatum. Pharmacologic evidence has suggested their involvement in
memory and synaptic plasticity, and recent evaluation of mice lacking the M1
receptor gene revealed deficits in memory tasks believed to require
interactions between the cortex and the hippocampus.
Nicotinic receptors have been implicated in cognitive function, especially
working memory, attention, and processing speed. Cortical and hippocampal
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors appear to be significantly decreased in
Alzheimer disease, and nicotine administration improves attention deficits in
some patients. The acetylcholinesterase inhibitor galantamine used in the
treatment of Alzheimer disease also acts to modulate nicotinic receptor
function positively. The α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subtype has been
implicated as one of many possible susceptibility genes for schizophrenia,
with lower levels of this receptor being associated with impaired sensory
gating. Some rare forms of the familial epilepsy syndrome autosomal


<<<PAGE 3024>>>
dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) are associated with
mutations in the α4 or β2 subunits of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor.
Finally, the reinforcing properties of tobacco use are proposed to involve the
stimulation of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors located in mesolimbic
dopaminergic reward pathways.
Amino Acid Neurotransmitters
For more than 50 years, biogenic amines have dominated thinking about the
role of neurotransmitters in the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders.
However, over the last decade, evidence has accumulated from postmortem,
brain imaging, and genetic studies that the amino acid neurotransmitters, in
particular glutamic acid and GABA, play an important, if not central, role in
the pathophysiology of a broad range of psychiatric disorders including
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, major depression, Alzheimer disease, and
anxiety disorders.
Glutamic Acid. Glutamate mediates fast excitatory neurotransmission in
the brain and is the transmitter for approximately 80 percent of brain
synapses, particularly those associated with dendritic spines. The
repolarization of neuronal membranes that are depolarized by glutamatergic
neurotransmission may explain perhaps 80 percent of the brain’s energy
expenditure. The concentration of glutamate in the brain is 10 mM, the
highest of all amino acids, of which approximately 20 percent represents the
neurotransmitter pool of glutamate.
Two families of receptors mediate the postsynaptic effects of glutamate.
The first are the glutamate-gated cation channels that are responsible for fast
neurotransmission. The second type of glutamate receptor are the
metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR), which are G-protein–coupled
receptors like α-adrenergic receptors and dopamine receptors. The mGluRs
primarily modulate glutamatergic neurotransmission.
MAJOR GLUTAMATERGIC PATHWAYS IN THE BRAIN.

All primary sensory
afferent systems appear to use glutamate as their neurotransmitter, including
retinal ganglion cells, cochlear cells, trigeminal nerve, and spinal afferents.
The thalamocortical projections that distribute afferent information broadly to


<<<PAGE 3025>>>
the cortex are glutamatergic. The pyramidal neurons of the corticolimbic
regions, the primary source of intrinsic, associational, and efferent excitatory
projections from the cortex, are glutamatergic. A temporal lobe circuit that
figures significantly in the development of new memories is a series of four
glutamatergic synapses: The perforant path innervates the hippocampal
granule cells that innervate CA3 pyramidal cells that innervate CA1
pyramidal cells. The climbing fibers innervating the cerebellar cortex are
glutamatergic, as well as the corticospinal tracks.
IONOTROPIC GLUTAMATE RECEPTORS. Three families of ionotropic glutamate

receptors have been identified based on selective activation by
conformationally restricted or synthetic analogs of glutamate. These include
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA), kainic
acid (KA), and N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptors. Subsequent
cloning revealed 16 mammalian genes that encode structurally related
proteins, which represent subunits that assemble into functional receptors.
Glutamate-gated ion channel receptors appear to be tetramers, and subunit
composition affects both the pharmacologic and the biophysical features of
the receptor.
METABOTROPIC GLUTAMATE RECEPTORS. These receptors are so designated

because G proteins mediate their effects. All mGluRs are activated by
glutamate, although their sensitivities vary remarkably. To date, eight
mGluRs have been cloned. These genes encode for seven membranespanning proteins that are members of the superfamily of G-protein–coupled
receptors.
THE ROLE OF ASTROCYTES. Specialized end-feet of the astrocyte surround
glutamatergic synapses. The astrocyte expresses the two Na+-dependent

glutamate transporters that play the primary role in removing glutamate from
the synapse, thereby terminating its action: EAAT1 and EAAT2 (excitatory
amino acid transporter). The neuronal glutamate transporter, EAAT3, is
expressed in upper motor neurons, whereas EAAT4 is expressed primarily in
cerebellar Purkinje cells and EAAT5 in the retina. Mice homozygous for null
mutations of either EAAT1 or EAAT2 exhibit elevated extracellular
glutamate and excitotoxic neurodegeneration. Notably, several studies have


<<<PAGE 3026>>>
described the loss of EAAT2 protein and transport activity in the ventral horn
in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The astrocytes express AMPA receptors so that they can monitor synaptic
glutamate release. GlyT1, which maintains subsaturating concentrations of
glycine in the synapse, is expressed on the astrocyte plasma membrane.
GlyT1 transports three Na+ out for each molecule of glycine transported into
the astrocyte. This stoichiometry results in a robust reversal of the direction
of transport when glutamate released in the synapse activates the AMPA
receptors on the astrocyte, thus depolarizing the astrocyte. Thus glycine
release in the synapse by GlyT1 is coordinated with glutamatergic
neurotransmission.
Similarly, activation of the astrocyte AMPA receptors causes GRIP to
dissociate from the AMPA receptor and bind to serine racemase, activating it
to synthesize D-serine. D-Serine levels are also determined by D-amino acid
oxidase (DAAO) with low D-serine levels in the cerebellum and brainstem
where DAAO expression is high, and high D-serine levels are found in
corticolimbic brain regions where DAAO expression is relatively low. In
contrast, the expression of GlyT1 is highest in the cerebellum and brainstem.
This distribution suggests that D-serine is the primary modulator of the
NMDA receptor in the forebrain, whereas glycine is more prominent in the
brainstem and cerebellum.
The extinction of
conditioned fear is an active process mediated by the activation of NMDA
receptors in the amygdala. Treatment of rats with NMDA receptor
antagonists prevents the extinction of conditioned fear, whereas treatment
with the glycine modulatory site partial agonist D-cycloserine facilitates the
extinction of conditioned fear. (D-Cycloserine is an antibiotic used to treat
tuberculosis that has 50 percent of the efficacy of glycine at the NMDA
receptor.) Patients with acrophobia were administered either placebo or a
single dose of D-cycloserine along with cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)
to determine whether the phenomenon generalizes to humans. D-Cycloserine
plus CBT resulted in a highly significant reduction in acrophobic symptoms
that persisted for at least 3 months as compared to placebo plus CBT. Other
placebo-controlled clinical trials support the notion that D-cycloserine is a
PLASTICITY IN GLUTAMATERGIC NEUROTRANSMISSION.


<<<PAGE 3027>>>
robust enhancer of CBT, suggesting that pharmacologically augmenting
neural plasticity may be used to bolster psychological interventions.
Fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), which is deficient in
individuals with fragile X syndrome, appears to be synthesized locally within
the spine during times of NMDA receptor activation and also plays a role in
transporting specific mRNAs to the spine for translation. Notably, mice in
which the FMRP gene has been inactivated through a null mutation, as well
as patients with fragile X syndrome have fewer dendritic spines, the
preponderance of which have an immature morphology. Loss of FMRP
exaggerates responses of mGluR5, which stimulates dendritic protein
synthesis, and treatment with an mGluR5 antagonist reverses the fragile-X–
like phenotype in mice with the FMRP gene inactivated.
EXCITOTOXICITY.

In the early 1970s, it was shown that the systemic
administration of large amounts of monosodium glutamate to immature
animals resulted in the degeneration of neurons in brain regions where the
BBB was deficient.
Excitotoxicity is also implicated as a proximate cause of neuronal
degeneration in Alzheimer disease. Most evidence points to the toxic
consequences of aggregates of β-amyloid, especially β-amyloid1-42. The βamyloid fibrils depolarize neurons, resulting in loss of the Mg2+ block and
enhanced NMDA receptor sensitivity to glutamate. The fibrils also impair
glutamate transport into astrocytes, thereby increasing the extracellular
concentration of glutamate. β-Amyloid directly promotes oxidative stress
through inflammation that further contributes to neuronal vulnerability to
glutamate. Thus, several mechanisms contribute to neuronal vulnerability to
NMDA-receptor–mediated excitotoxicity in Alzheimer disease. Memantine, a
recently approved treatment for mild to moderate Alzheimer disease, is a
weak noncompetitive inhibitor of NMDA receptors. It reduces the tonic
sensitivity of NMDA receptors to excitotoxicity but does not interfere with
“phasic” neurotransmission, thereby attenuating neuronal degeneration in
Alzheimer disease.
Inhibitory Amino Acids: GABA. GABA is the major inhibitory
neurotransmitter in the brain, where it is broadly distributed and occurs in
millimolar concentrations. Given its physiologic effects and distributions, it is


<<<PAGE 3028>>>
not surprising that the dysfunction of GABAergic neurotransmission has been
implicated in a broad range of neuropsychiatric disorders, including anxiety
disorders, schizophrenia, alcohol dependence, and seizure disorders.
Chemically, GABA differs from glutamic acid, the major excitatory
neurotransmitter, only by the removal of a single carboxyl group from the
latter.
GABA is synthesized from glutamic acid by glutamic acid decarboxylase
(GAD), which catalyzes the removal of the α-carboxyl group. In the CNS, the
expression of GAD appears to be restricted to GABAergic neurons, although
in the periphery, it is expressed in pancreatic islet cells. Two distinct but
related genes encode GAD. GAD65 is localized to nerve terminals, where it
is responsible for synthesizing GABA that is concentrated in the synaptic
vesicles. Consistent with its role in fast inhibitory neurotransmission, mice
homozygous for a null mutation of GAD65 have an elevated risk for seizures.
GAD67 appears to be the primary source for neuronal GABA because mice
homozygous for a null mutation of GAD67 die at birth, have a cleft pallet,
and exhibit significant reductions in brain GABA.
GABA is catabolized by GABA transaminase (GABA-T) to yield succinic
semialdehyde. Transamination generally occurs when the parent compound,
α-ketoglutarate, is present to receive the amino group, thereby regenerating
glutamic acid. Succinic semialdehyde is oxidized by succinic semialdehyde
dehydrogenase (SSADH) into succinic acid, which reenters the Krebs cycle.
GABA-T is a cell surface, a membrane-bound enzyme expressed by neurons
and glia, which is oriented toward the extracellular compartment. As would
be anticipated, drugs that inhibit the catabolism of GABA have
anticonvulsant properties. One of the mechanisms of action of valproic acid
is the competitive inhibition of GABA-T. γ-Vinyl-GABA is a suicide
substrate inhibitor of GABA-T that is used as an anticonvulsant in Europe
(vigabatrin [Sabril]).
The synaptic action of GABA is also terminated by high-affinity transport
back into the presynaptic terminal as well as into astrocytes. Four genetically
distinct GABA high-affinity transporters have been identified with differing
kinetic and pharmacologic characteristics. They all share homology with
other neurotransmitter transporters with the characteristic of 12 membranespanning domains. The active transport is driven by the sodium gradient so
that upon depolarization, transportation of GABA out of the neuron is


<<<PAGE 3029>>>
favored. GABA transported into astrocytes is catabolized by GABA-T and
ultimately converted to glutamic acid and then to glutamine, which is
transported back into the presynaptic terminal for GABA synthesis.
Tiagabine (Gabitril) is a potent GABA transport inhibitor that is used to treat
epilepsy. Preliminary results suggest that it also may be useful in panic
disorder.
GABAA RECEPTORS. GABAA receptors are distributed throughout the brain.

The GABAA complex, when activated, mediates an increase in membrane
conductance with an equilibrium potential near the resting membrane
potential of –70 mV (Fig. 33-20). In the mature neuron, this typically results
with an influx of Cl−, causing membrane hyperpolarization.
Hyperpolarization is inhibitory because it increases the threshold for
generating an action potential. In immature neurons, which have unusually
high levels of intracellular Cl−, activating the GABAA receptor can
counterintuitively cause depolarization. For this reason, anticonvulsants that
act by enhancing GABAA receptor activity may exacerbate seizures in the
neonatal period.
Barbiturates such as phenobarbital and pentobarbital are noted for their
sedative and anticonvulsant activities. Barbiturates allosterically increase the
affinities of the binding sites for GABA and benzodiazepines at
pharmacologically relevant concentrations. Barbiturates also affect channel
dynamics by markedly increasing the extended open state and reducing the
short open state, thereby increasing Cl− inhibition. Chemically modified
analogs of progesterone and corticosterone have been shown in behavioral
studies to have sedative and anxiolytic effects through their interaction with
the GABAA receptor complex. They share features with barbiturates,
although they act at a distinctly different site. Thus, they allosterically
enhance agonist ligand binding to the receptor and increase the duration of
chloride channel opening. A variety of behavioral effects associated with
steroid administration or fluctuation of endogenous steroids and sex-specific
effects of GABAergic drugs have been linked to the action of endogenous
neurosteroids.


<<<PAGE 3030>>>
FIGURE 33-20
Schematic representation of the GABAA receptor. The receptor-channel complex
is a heteropentamer. The GABA binding site is at the interface of the α and β
subunits. The benzodiazepine binding site is at the interface between the γ and α
subunits. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009:81.)

Concerning GABAA receptor antagonists, picrotoxin, like the barbiturates,
alters channel dynamics but in the opposite direction by reducing long open
states and favoring the briefest open state. The proconvulsant
pentylenetetrazol also acts by reducing chloride channel permeability.
Penicillin, which at high concentrations is proconvulsant, binds to the
positively charged residues in the channel, thereby occluding it. As a general
class, anesthetics, including barbiturates, steroids, and volatile anesthetics,
increase chloride conductance, thereby inhibiting neurotransmissions. Amino
acids in the membrane-spanning domain of the GABA receptor subunits
confer sensitivity to anesthetics. The precise mechanism whereby ethanol
enhances GABAA receptor function remains unclear due to inconsistent
results, suggesting that subunit composition may be necessary. However,
recent studies suggest that ethanol increases the response of the tonic GABAactivated currents, which contain the δ subunit and exhibit remarkably high


<<<PAGE 3031>>>
affinity to GABA.
Recently, recombinant DNA strategies exploiting site-directed mutagenesis
have permitted the identification of sites on the specific subunits that mediate
the pharmacologic action of drugs such as the benzodiazepines. Removal of
the binding ability for benzodiazepines has established that the α1 subunit
plays a significant role in the sedative and amnestic effects of
benzodiazepines, whereas inactivating the benzodiazepine site on the α2
subunit eliminates the anxiolytic effect of benzodiazepines
The GABAB receptors are distinguished
pharmacologically from GABAA receptors by the fact that they are
insensitive to the canonical GABAA receptor antagonist bicuculline and that
they are potently activated by baclofen [β-(4-chlorophenyl)-GABA], which is
inactive at GABAA receptors. They are members of the G-protein–coupled
superfamily of receptors but are highly unusual, as they are made of a dimer
of two seven-transmembrane–spanning subunits. GABAB receptors are
widely distributed throughout the nervous system and are localized both
presynaptically and postsynaptically. The postsynaptic GABAB receptors
cause a long-lasting hyperpolarization by activating potassium channels.
Presynaptically, they act as autoreceptors and heteroreceptors to inhibit
neurotransmitter release.
GABAB

RECEPTORS.

GLYCINE AS A NEUROTRANSMITTER. Glycine is an inhibitory neurotransmitter

primarily in the brainstem and spinal cord, although the expression of glycine
receptor subunits in the thalamus, cortex, and hippocampus suggests a
broader role. Glycine is a nonessential amino acid that is synthesized in the
brain from L-serine by serine hydroxymethyltransferase. Glycine is
concentrated within synaptic vesicles by H+-dependent vesicular inhibitory
amino acid transporter (VIAAT or VGAT), which also transports GABA.
Termination of the synaptic action of glycine is through reuptake into the
presynaptic terminal by the glycine transporter II (GlyT2), which is quite
distinct from GlyT1 that is expressed in astrocytes and modulates NMDA
receptor function.
The inhibitory effects of glycine are mediated by a ligand-gated chloride


<<<PAGE 3032>>>
channel, which can also respond to β-alanine, taurine, L-alanine, L-serine, and
proline, but not to GABA. The canonical antagonist for the glycine receptor
is the plant alkaloid strychnine. The receptor was first identified through the
specific binding of [3H]strychnine. [3H]Glycine binds to two sites: One that is
displaceable by strychnine and represents the glycine A receptor and a second
that is insensitive to strychnine and is designated the glycine B receptor,
representing the glycine modulatory site on the NMDA receptor.
Neuropsychiatric Implications of Amino Acid Transmitters
SCHIZOPHRENIA. Evidence accumulating from postmortem, pharmacologic,
and genetic studies is shifting the focus of the pathophysiology of
schizophrenia from dopamine to glutamate and GABA. Indeed, after the use
of D2 receptor antagonists as the sole treatment of schizophrenia for the last
50 years, more than two-thirds of the treated patients remain substantially
disabled. Early postmortem studies indicated a reduction in the activity of
GAD in the cortex in patients with schizophrenia as compared to suitable
controls. With the advent of immunocytochemistry and gene expression
techniques, it has been possible to define the GABAergic deficit in
schizophrenia more precisely. It appears that the parvalbumin-positive
GABAergic interneurons in the intermediate layers of the cortex bear the
brunt of the pathology, which includes reduced expression of GAD67,
parvalbumin, and the GABA transporter (GAT). The finding that GABAA
receptors are upregulated, as measured by autoradiography or with
antibodies, supports the theory that these changes reflect the hypofunction of
the presynaptic GABAergic neurons. These particular GABAergic
interneurons, which include the chandelier cells, play an essential role in
negative feedback inhibition to the pyramidal cells in the cortex. Despite this
highly reproducible neuropathology, genes related to GABAergic function
have not figured prominently in genome-wide searches, suggesting that
GABAergic deficits may be a downstream consequence of some more
proximal genetic defects.
The theory that hypofunction of NMDA receptors is an etiologic factor in
schizophrenia initially arose from the observation that phencyclidine (PCP)
and related dissociative anesthetics that block NMDA receptors produce a
syndrome that can be indistinguishable from schizophrenia (Fig. 33-21).


<<<PAGE 3033>>>
Dissociative anesthetics are so named because they prevent the acquisition of
new memories while the patient is conscious. In fact, under laboratory
conditions, low-dose infusion of ketamine can produce positive symptoms,
negative symptoms, and specific cognitive deficits associated with
schizophrenia in clear consciousness. Subsequent studies indicated that lowdose ketamine could also cause enhanced amphetamine-induced subcortical
dopamine release as is observed in schizophrenia, as well as abnormal
cortical event-related potentials (ERPs) and disruption of prepulse inhibition
in experimental animals.

FIGURE 33-21
Pathologic circuit in schizophrenia. The NMDA receptors on the rapidly firing
parvalbumin (PV) expressing GABAergic interneurons in the intermediate levels
of the cortex are disproportionately sensitive to antagonists or loss of the
coagonist, d-serine. NMDA receptor hypofunction causes reduced expression of
PV, GAD67, and the GABA transporter and upregulation of GABAA receptors on
pyramidal neurons. Disinhibition of the pyramidal neurons causes cognitive
dysfunction and negative symptoms and drives excessive subcortical dopamine
release resulting in psychosis. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:83.)

Several putative risk genes for schizophrenia are closely associated with


<<<PAGE 3034>>>
the NMDA receptor function. DAAO, which encodes a protein that activates
D-amino acid oxidase, has been repeatedly linked to the risk of schizophrenia.
D-Amino acid oxidase itself has been associated with increased risk. Recently
an allelic variant of serine racemase in the promoter region has also been
associated with the risk for schizophrenia. Each of these gene variants could
reduce the availability of D-serine in the cortex, thereby impairing the NMDA
receptor function. Notably, CSF and blood levels of D-serine are significantly
reduced in patients with schizophrenia. Neuregulin 1 appears to be a
convincing risk gene and interacts directly with NMDA receptors. Dysbindin,
another risk gene, is expressed in glutamatergic terminals. mGluR3, which
downregulates glutamate release, has also been associated with
schizophrenia.
Recent findings have provided a link between the GABAergic
neuropathology and NMDA receptor hypofunction. Chronic treatment of rats
with NMDA receptor antagonists causes downregulation of GAD67,
parvalbumin, and GAT. The sensitive subpopulation of GABAergic neurons
are interneurons that fire rapidly and provide the perisomatic innervation of
the pyramidal cells. Their NMDA receptors appear to be much more sensitive
to antagonists than those less active GABAergic neurons and pyramidal cells.
The subtly reduced GABAergic inhibition results in a disinhibition of the
glutamatergic pyramidal output. This degradation of the inhibitory feedback
could account for the cognitive deficits and negative symptoms in
schizophrenia, and the disinhibited output also results in elevated subcortical
dopamine release and psychosis. Thus psychosis would be considered a
downstream event resulting from a disruption in critical glutamatergicGABAergic synaptic function in the cerebral cortex.


<<<PAGE 3035>>>
ANXIETY AND DEPRESSION. GABAergic dysfunction has been associated with

anxiety disorders, especially panic disorder, as well as with major depressive
disorder. Clinically, there is considerable comorbidity between anxiety and
affective disorders. Decreased levels of the GABAA receptor modulators, the
three α-reduced neuroactive steroids, have been found both in plasma and in
CSF in major depressive disorder. Effective treatment with SSRIs increases
the neurosteroid levels. In contrast, in patients with panic disorder, the
plasma neurosteroid levels were significantly elevated, perhaps as a
compensatory mechanism. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) has
disclosed significant reductions in GABA levels in the anterior cingulate and
the basal ganglia of medicated patients with panic disorder. PET scanning
reveals a highly selective reduction in benzodiazepine receptor sites
bilaterally in the insular cortex in panic disorder. A genome-wide screen has
shown significant linkage at 15q in a region containing GABAA receptor
subunit genes and panic disorder. MRS reveals significant reductions in both
GABA and glutamate/glutamine (Glx) in the prefrontal cortex in major
depressive disorder. Postmortem studies indicate upregulation of the GABAA
receptor α1 and β3 subunits in the cerebral cortices of depressed patients who
committed suicide, consistent with a reduction in GABAergic
neurotransmission. The reduced levels of GABA in the occipital cortex in
episodes of major depressive disorder normalized with effective treatment
with SSRI or with ECT.
Glutamatergic dysfunction has also been implicated in depression. NMDA
receptor antagonists have antidepressant effects in several animal models of
depression, including forced swim, tail suspension, and learned helplessness.
A single injection of ketamine protects the induction of behavioral despair in
rats for up to 10 days. Chronic treatment with antidepressants alters the
expression of NMDA receptor subunits and decreases glycine receptor B
binding. Two placebo-controlled clinical trials have shown that a single dose
of ketamine can produce a rapid, substantial, and persistent reduction in
symptoms in patients with major depressive disorder.
ALCOHOLISM. Ethanol at concentrations associated with intoxication has a

dual action of enhancing GABAergic receptor function and attenuating the


<<<PAGE 3036>>>
NMDA receptor function. The GABA receptor effects may be associated
with the anxiolytic effects of ethanol. Persistent abuse and dependency on
ethanol result in a downregulation of GABAA receptors and an upregulation
of NMDA receptors such that acute discontinuation of ethanol results in a
hyperexcitable state characterized by delirium tremens. Furthermore,
supersensitive NMDA receptors in the context of thiamine deficiency may
contribute to the excitotoxic neuron degeneration of Wernicke–Korsakoff
syndrome.
Acamprosate is a derivative of homotaurine that was developed as an agent
to reduce alcohol consumption, craving, and relapse in alcoholic patients, for
which it exhibits moderate efficacy in clinical trials. Because taurine
resembles GABA, it was thought that acamprosate acted via GABAA
receptors, but electrophysiologic studies found little evidence to support this
hypothesis. Subsequent studies demonstrated that it inhibited NMDA
receptor responses in cortical slices and recombinant NMDA receptors. The
precise mechanism whereby acamprosate alters NMDA receptor function,
however, remains unclear.
Fetal alcohol syndrome is the most common preventable cause of mental
retardation. Convincing evidence has been developed that the
microencephaly associated with fetal alcohol exposure results from inhibition
of NMDA receptor function, resulting in widespread neuronal apoptosis in
the immature cortex. NMDA receptor activation is essential for immature
neuronal survival and differentiation.
Neuropeptides
Neuropeptides represent the most diverse class of signaling molecules in the
CNS. Initially discovered for their role in the hypothalamic regulation of
pituitary hormone secretion, the complex role of peptides in brain function
has emerged over the last 30 years. Many neuropeptides and their receptors
are widely distributed within the CNS, where they have an extraordinary
array of direct or neuromodulatory effects, ranging from modulating
neurotransmitter release and neuronal firing patterns to the regulation of
emotionality and complex behaviors. More than 100 unique biologically
active neuropeptides have been identified in the brain, a subset of which is
presented in Table 33-3. Adding to the complexity of neuropeptide systems


<<<PAGE 3037>>>
in the CNS, the actions of many peptides are mediated via multiple receptor
subtypes localized in different brain regions. The discovery of new peptides
and receptor subtypes has outpaced our understanding of the roles of these
peptides in normal or aberrant CNS function. Pharmacologic, molecular, and
genetic approaches are now leading the way in our understanding of the
contribution of neuropeptide systems in psychiatric disorders.
Neuropeptides have been implicated in the regulation of a variety of
behavioral and physiologic processes, including thermoregulation, food and
water consumption, sex, sleep, locomotion, learning and memory, responses
to stress and pain, emotion, and social cognition. Involvement in such
behavioral processes suggests that neuropeptidergic systems may contribute
to the symptoms and behaviors exhibited in major psychiatric illnesses such
as psychoses, mood disorders, dementia, and ASDs.
Table 33-3
Selected Neuropeptide Transmitters
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
Angiotensin
Atrial natriuretic peptide
Bombesin
Calcitonin
Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)
Cocaine and amphetamine regulated transcript (CART)
Cholecystokinin (CCK)
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF)
Dynorphin
β-Endorphin
Leu-enkephalin
Met-enkephalin
Galanin
Gastrin
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
Growth hormone


<<<PAGE 3038>>>
Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH; GRF)
Insulin
Motilin
Neuropeptide S
Neuropeptide Y (NPY)
Neurotensin
Neuromedin N
Orphanin FQ/Nociceptin
Orexin
Oxytocin
Pancreatic polypeptide
Prolactin
Secretin
Somatostatin (SS; SRIF)
Substance K
Substance P
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)
Urocortin (1, 2, and 3)
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP)
Vasopressin (AVP; ADH)
From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:84.

Investigating Neuropeptide Function. The roles of neuropeptides in
CNS function and behavior have been examined using a multitude of
experimental techniques. The levels of analysis include the following:
Molecular structure and biosynthesis of the peptide and its receptor(s), the
neuroanatomical localization of the peptide and its receptor(s), the regulation
of the expression and release of the peptide, and the behavioral effects of the
peptide. Most information on neuropeptide biology is derived from
laboratory animal studies; however, there is a growing database on the
localization, activity, and potential psychiatric relevance of several
neuropeptide systems in humans.
Most neuropeptide structures have been identified based on the chemical


<<<PAGE 3039>>>
analysis of purified biologically active peptides, leading ultimately to the
cloning and characterization of the genes encoding them. Characterization of
the gene structure of peptides and their receptors has provided insight into the
molecular regulation of these systems, and their chromosomal localization is
useful in genetic studies examining the potential roles of these genes in
psychiatric disorders. Structural characterization permits the production of
immunologic and molecular probes that are useful in determining peptide
distribution and regulation in the brain. Quantitative radioimmunoassays on
microdissected brain regions or immunocytochemistry on brain sections are
typically used to localize the distribution of peptide within the brain. Both
techniques use specific antibodies generated against the neuropeptide to
detect the presence of the peptide. Immunocytochemistry allows researchers
to visualize the precise cellular localization of peptide-synthesizing cells as
well as their projections throughout the brain, although the technique is
generally not quantitative. With molecular probes homologous to the mRNA
encoding the peptides or receptor, in situ hybridization can be used to localize
and quantify gene expression in brain sections. This technique is a powerful
way to examine the molecular regulation of neuropeptide synthesis with a
precise neuroanatomical resolution, which is impossible for other classes of
nonpeptide neurotransmitters that are not derived directly from the translation
of mRNAs, such as dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine.
Generally, the behavioral effects of neuropeptides are initially investigated
by infusions of the peptide directly into the brain. Unlike many nonpeptide
neurotransmitters, most neuropeptides do not penetrate the BBB in amounts
sufficient enough to produce CNS effects. Furthermore, serum and tissue
enzymes tend to degrade the peptides before they reach their target sites. The
degradation is usually the result of the cleavage of specific amino acid
sequences targeted by a specific peptidase designed for that purpose. Thus,
intracerebroventricular (ICV) or site-specific infusions of the peptide in
animal models are generally required to probe for the behavioral effects of
peptides. However, there are examples of the delivery of neuropeptides via
intranasal infusions in human subjects, which may help the peptide access the
brain.
One of the most significant impediments for exploring the roles and
potential therapeutic values of neuropeptides is the inability of the peptides or
their agonists/antagonists to penetrate the BBB. Thus the behavioral effects


<<<PAGE 3040>>>
of most peptides in humans are mostly uninvestigated, except for a few
studies utilizing intranasal delivery. However, in some instances, smallmolecule, nonpeptide agonists/antagonists have been developed that can be
administered peripherally and permeate the BBB in sufficient quantities to
affect receptor activation.
The use of pretreatment and posttreatment CSF samples or of samples
obtained during the active disease state versus when the patient is in
remission addresses some of the limitations in study design. For such
progressive diseases as schizophrenia or Alzheimer disease, serial CSF
samples may be a valuable indicator of disease progression or response to
treatment. Even with these constraints, significant progress has been made in
describing the effects of various psychiatric disease states on neuropeptide
systems in the CNS.
Biosynthesis. Unlike other neurotransmitters, neuropeptide biosynthesis
involves mRNA transcription from a specific gene, translation of an mRNAencoded polypeptide preprohormone, and posttranslational processing
involving proteolytic cleavage of the preprohormone. Over the last 25 years,
the gene structures and biosynthetic pathways of many neuropeptides have
been elucidated. The gene structure of selected neuropeptides is illustrated in
Figure 33-22. Neuropeptide genes are generally composed of multiple exons
that encode a protein preprohormone. The N-terminus of the preprohormone
contains a signal peptide sequence, which guides the growing polypeptide to
the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) membrane. The single
preprohormone molecule often contains the sequences of multiple peptides
that are subsequently separated by proteolytic cleavage by specific enzymes.
For example, translation of the gene encoding NT yields a preprohormone,
which upon enzymatic cleavage produces both NT and neuromedin N.


<<<PAGE 3041>>>
FIGURE 33-22
Schematics illustrating the gene structure, preprohormone messenger RNA
(mRNA), and processed neuropeptides of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH),
corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), oxytocin (OT), arginine vasopressin (AVP),
and neurotensin (NT). Boxed regions indicate the locations of the exons in the
respective genes. Shaded or hatched regions indicate coding regions. Each
preprohormone begins with a signal peptide (SP) sequence. Black boxes indicate
the locations of the sequences encoding the neuropeptide. (From Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:87.)


<<<PAGE 3042>>>
Distribution and Regulation. Although many neuropeptides were
initially isolated from the pituitary and peripheral tissues, the majority of
neuropeptides were subsequently found to be widely distributed throughout
the brain. Those peptides involved in regulating pituitary secretion are
concentrated in the hypothalamus. Hypothalamic releasing and inhibiting
factors are produced in neurosecretory neurons adjacent to the third ventricle
that send projections to the median eminence where they contact and release
peptide into the hypothalamohypophysial portal circulatory system. Peptides
produced in these neurons are often subject to regulation by the peripheral
hormones that they regulate. For example, thyrotropin-releasing hormone
(TRH) regulates the secretion of thyroid hormones, and thyroid hormones
negatively feedback on TRH gene expression. However, neuropeptideexpressing neurons and their projections are found in many other brain
regions, including limbic structures, midbrain, hindbrain, and spinal cord.
Neuropeptide Signaling. Neuropeptides may act as neurotransmitters,
neuromodulators, or neurohormones. Neurotransmitters are typically released
from axonal terminals into a synapse where they change the postsynaptic
membrane potential, either depolarizing or hyperpolarizing the cell. For
classical neurotransmitters, this often involves direct modulation of voltagegated ion channels. In contrast, neuromodulators and neurohormones do not
directly affect the firing of the target cell itself but may alter the response of
the cell to other neurotransmitters through the modulation of second
messenger pathways. Neuropeptide release is not restricted to synapses or
axon terminals but may occur throughout the axon or even from dendrites.
Specific neuropeptide receptors mediate the cellular signaling of
neuropeptides. Thus understanding neuropeptide receptor function is
essential for understanding neuropeptide biology. Neuropeptide receptors
have undergone the same process of discovery and characterization that
receptors for other neurotransmitters have enjoyed. Most neuropeptide
receptors are G-protein–coupled, seven-transmembrane domain receptors
belonging to the same family of proteins as the monoamine receptors.
Molecular technology has made it possible to clone and characterize
neuropeptide receptor genes and complementary DNAs (cDNAs). This
process is most often accomplished in one of three ways. First, the
neuropeptide receptor protein is biochemically purified and partially


<<<PAGE 3043>>>
sequenced, which allows the development of oligonucleotide probes that can
be used to isolate the cDNA encoding the protein from a cDNA library. A
second approach involves producing expression libraries in which cells
containing the receptor cDNA can be isolated based on their ability to bind to
a radiolabeled peptide ligand. Finally, many neuropeptide receptors are now
isolated based on their sequence homology with other known peptide
receptors. Once the cDNA of the receptor has been isolated, it can be used to
produce purified receptor protein for structural and functional studies. By
mutation of specific amino acids in the receptor structure and determination
of relative binding affinities of peptides with various amino acid
substitutions, it is possible to elucidate the nature of the ligand–receptor
interaction. This information facilitates the development of drugs that
specifically modulate receptor function, including nonpeptide drugs, leading
to the ability to manipulate peptide systems in ways that are currently
enjoyed by the more classic neurotransmitters. The availability of cDNAs
encoding the receptor also permits the neuroanatomical mapping of the
receptor-producing cells in the brain, which is critical for understanding the
neural circuits modulated by the peptide. Finally, with the cloned receptor in
hand, it is possible to use transgenic techniques, such as targeted gene
overexpression or gene knockouts, to elucidate the functions of these
receptors further. siRNA techniques now allow the targeted synthesis
disruption of specific receptor populations, allowing researchers to examine
the roles of these receptor populations on physiology and behavior.
The following three factors determine the biologic roles of a neuropeptide
hormone: (1) the temporal-anatomical release of the peptide, (2) functional
coupling of the neuropeptide receptor to intracellular signaling pathways, and
(3) the cell type and circuits in which the receptor is expressed. Genetic
studies have demonstrated that regulatory sequences flanking the receptor
coding region determine the expression pattern of the receptor and thus the
physiologic and behavioral response to the neuropeptide.
Peptidases. Unlike monoamine neurotransmitters, peptides are not actively
taken up by presynaptic nerve terminals. Instead, released peptides are
degraded into smaller fragments, and eventually into single amino acids by
specific enzymes termed peptidases. The enzymes may be found bound to
presynaptic or postsynaptic neural membranes or in solution in the cytoplasm


<<<PAGE 3044>>>
and extracellular fluid, and they are distributed widely in peripheral organs
and serum as well as in the CNS. As a result, neuropeptides generally have
half-lives on the order of minutes once released.
Specific Neuropeptides as Prototypes of Neuropeptide Biology
THYROTROPIN-RELEASING
HORMONE.
In
1969,
TRH,
a
pyroglutamylhistidylprolinamide tripeptide (Table 33-4), became the first of
the hypothalamic releasing hormones to be isolated and characterized. The
discovery of the structure of this hormone led to the conclusive
demonstration that peptide hormones secreted from the hypothalamus
regulate the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary. The gene for
TRH in humans resides on chromosome 3q13.3–q21. In the rat, it consists of
three exons (coding regions) separated by two introns (noncoding sequences)
(see Fig. 33-22). The first exon contains the 5′ untranslated region of the
mRNA encoding the TRH preprohormone, the second exon contains the
signal peptide (SP) sequence and much of the remaining N-terminal end of
the precursor peptide, and the third contains the remainder of the sequence,
including five copies of the TRH precursor sequence, the C-terminal region,
and the 3′ untranslated region. The 5′ flanking of the gene, or promoter,
contains sequences homologous to the glucocorticoid receptor and the DNAbinding sites for thyroid hormone, providing a mechanism for the regulation
of this gene by cortisol and negative feedback by thyroid hormone.
Enzymatic processing of TRH begins with excision of the progenitor peptides
by carboxypeptidases, amidation of the C-terminal proline, and cyclization of
the N-terminal glutamine to yield five TRH molecules per prohormone
molecule. TRH is widely distributed in the CNS with TRH immunoreactive
neurons being located in the olfactory bulbs, entorhinal cortices,
hippocampus, extended amygdala, hypothalamus, and midbrain structures.
As is the case for most neuropeptides, the TRH receptor is also a member of
the seven-transmembrane domain, G-protein–coupled receptor family.
Hypothalamic TRH neurons project nerve terminals to the median
eminence; there, they release TRH into the hypothalamohypophyseal portal
system where it is transported to the adenohypophysis, causing the release of
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) into the systemic circulation. TSH
subsequently stimulates the release of the thyroid hormones triiodothyronine


<<<PAGE 3045>>>
(T3) and thyroxine (T4) from the thyroid gland. TRH neurons in the
paraventricular nucleus (PVN) contain thyroid hormone receptors and
respond to increases in thyroid hormone secretion with a decrease in TRH
gene expression and synthesis. This negative feedback of thyroid hormones
on the TRH-synthesizing neurons was first demonstrated by a decrease in
TRH content in the median eminence, but not in the PVN of the
hypothalamus after thyroidectomy. This effect can be reversed with
exogenous thyroid hormone treatment. The treatment of normal rats with
exogenous thyroid hormone decreases TRH concentration in the PVN and the
posterior nucleus of the hypothalamus. With a probe against the TRH
preprohormone mRNA, in situ hybridization studies have demonstrated that
TRH mRNA is increased in the PVN 14 days after thyroidectomy. The ability
of thyroid hormones to regulate TRH mRNA can be superseded by other
stimuli that activate the hypothalamic–pituitary–thyroid (HPT) axis. In that
regard, repeated exposure to cold (which releases TRH from the median
eminence) induces increases in the levels of TRH mRNA in the PVN despite
concomitantly elevated concentrations of thyroid hormones.
Table 33-4
Selected Neuropeptide Structures
Name

Amino Acid Sequence

Thyrotropinreleasing
hormone (TRH)

pE-H-P-NH2

Corticotropinreleasing factor
(CRF)

S-E-E-P-P-I-S-L-D-L-T-F-H-L-L-R-E-V-L-E-M-AR-A-E-Q-L-A-Q-Q-A-H-S-N-R-K-L-M-E-I-I-NH2

Arginine
vasopressin
(AVP)

C-Y-I-Q-N-C-P-L-G-NH2

Oxytocin (OT)

C-Y-F-Q-N-C-P-R-G-NH2

Neurotensin (NT)

pE-L-Y-E-N-K-P-R-R-P-Y-I-L-OH


<<<PAGE 3046>>>
Note the cyclized glutamines at the N-termini of TRH and NT
indicated by pE-, the cysteine–cysteine disulfide bonds of AVP and
OT, and the amidated C-termini of TRH, CRF, AVP, and OT.
From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:85.

Further evidence of the different levels of communication of the HPT axis
is seen in the ability of TRH to regulate the production of mRNA for the
pituitary TRH receptor. It is also seen for TRH concentrations to regulate the
mRNA coding for both the α and β subunits of the thyrotropin (TSH)
molecule. Also, TRH-containing synaptic boutons have been observed in
contact with TRH-containing cell bodies in the medial and periventricular
subdivisions of the paraventricular nucleus, thus providing anatomical
evidence for ultrashort feedback regulation of TRH release. Negative
feedback by thyroid hormones may be limited to the hypothalamic TRH
neurons because negative feedback on TRH synthesis by thyroid hormones
has not been found in extrahypothalamic TRH neurons.
The early availability of adequate tools to assess HPT axis function (i.e.,
radioimmunoassays and synthetic peptides), coupled with observations that
primary hypothyroidism is associated with depressive symptomatology,
ensured extensive investigation of the involvement of this axis in affective
disorders. Early studies established the hypothalamic and extrahypothalamic
distribution of TRH. This extrahypothalamic presence of TRH quickly led to
speculation that TRH might function as a neurotransmitter or
neuromodulator. Indeed, a large body of evidence supports such a role for
TRH. Within the CNS, TRH is known to modulate several different
neurotransmitters, including dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, and opioids.
TRH has been shown to arouse hibernating animals and counteracts the
behavioral response and hypothermia produced by a variety of CNS
depressants, including barbiturates and ethanol.
The use of TRH as a provocative agent for the assessment of the HPT axis
function evolved rapidly after its isolation and synthesis. Clinical use of a
standardized TRH stimulation test, which measures negative feedback
responses, revealed blunting of the TSH response in approximately 25
percent of euthyroid patients with major depression. These data have been
widely confirmed. The observed TSH blunting in depressed patients does not


<<<PAGE 3047>>>
appear to be the result of excessive negative feedback due to hyperthyroidism
because thyroid measures such as basal plasma concentrations of TSH and
thyroid hormones are generally in the normal range in these patients. TSH
blunting may be a reflection of pituitary TRH receptor downregulation due to
median eminence hypersecretion of endogenous TRH. Indeed, the
observation that CSF TRH concentrations are elevated in depressed patients
as compared to those of controls supports the hypothesis of TRH
hypersecretion but does not elucidate the regional CNS origin of this
tripeptide. TRH mRNA expression in the PVN of the hypothalamus is
decreased in patients with major depression. However, it is not clear whether
the altered HPT axis represents a causal mechanism underlying the symptoms
of depression or only a secondary effect of depression-associated alterations
in other neural systems.
There is
convincing evidence to support the hypothesis that CRF and the urocortins
play an intricate role in integrating the endocrine, autonomic, immunologic,
and behavioral responses of an organism to stress.
Although it was initially isolated because of its functions in regulating the
HPA axis, CRF is widely distributed throughout the brain. The PVN of the
hypothalamus is the primary site of CRF-containing cell bodies that influence
anterior pituitary hormone secretion. These neurons originate in the
parvocellular region of the PVN and send axon terminals to the median
eminence, where CRF is released into the portal system in response to
stressful stimuli. A small group of PVN neurons also projects to the
brainstem and spinal cord, where they regulate autonomic aspects of the
stress response. CRF-containing neurons are also found in other
hypothalamic nuclei, the neocortex, the extended amygdala, brainstem, and
spinal cord. Central CRF infusion into laboratory animals produces
physiologic changes and behavioral effects similar to those observed
following stress, including increased locomotor activity, increased
responsiveness to an acoustic startle, and decreased exploratory behavior in
an open field.
The physiologic and behavioral roles of the urocortins are less understood,
but several studies suggest that urocortins 2 and 3 are anxiolytic and may
dampen the stress response. This research has led to the hypothesis that CRF
CORTICOTROPIN-RELEASING

FACTOR

(CRF)

AND

UROCORTINS.


<<<PAGE 3048>>>
and the urocortins act in opposition, but this is likely an oversimplification.
Urocortin 1 is primarily synthesized in the Edinger–Westphal nucleus, lateral
olivary nucleus, and supraoptic hypothalamic nucleus. Urocortin 2 is
synthesized primarily in the hypothalamus, while urocortin three-cell bodies
are found more broadly in the extended amygdala, perifornical area, and
preoptic area.
Hyperactivity of the HPA axis in major depression remains one of the most
consistent findings in biologic psychiatry. The reported HPA axis alterations
in major depression include hypercortisolemia, resistance to dexamethasone
suppression of cortisol secretion (a measure of negative feedback), blunted
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) responses to intravenous CRF
challenge, increased cortisol responses in the combined dexamethasone/CRF
test, and elevated CSF CRF concentrations. The exact pathologic
mechanism(s) underlying HPA axis dysregulation in major depression and
other affective disorders remains to be elucidated.
Mechanistically, two hypotheses have been advanced to account for the
ACTH blunting following exogenous CRF administration. The first
hypothesis suggests that pituitary CRF receptor downregulation occurs as a
result of hypothalamic CRF hypersecretion. The second hypothesis postulates
the altered sensitivity of the pituitary to glucocorticoid negative feedback.
Substantial support has accumulated favoring the first hypothesis. However,
neuroendocrine studies represent a secondary measure of CNS activity; the
pituitary ACTH responses principally reflect the activity of hypothalamic
CRF rather than that of the corticolimbic CRF circuits. The latter of the two
is more likely to be involved in the pathophysiology of depression.
Of particular interest is the demonstration that the elevated CSF CRF
concentrations in drug-free depressed patients are significantly decreased
after successful treatment with ECT, indicating that CSF CRF concentrations,
like hypercortisolemia, represent a state rather than a trait marker. Other
recent studies have confirmed this normalization of CSF CRF concentrations
following successful treatment with fluoxetine. One group demonstrated a
significant reduction of elevated CSF CRF concentrations in 15 female
patients with major depression who remained depression-free for at least 6
months following antidepressant treatment, as compared to little significant
treatment effect on CSF CRF concentrations in 9 patients who relapsed in
these 6 months. This finding suggests that elevated or increasing CSF CRF


<<<PAGE 3049>>>
concentrations during antidepressant treatment may be the harbinger of an
inadequate response in major depression despite early symptomatic
improvement. Of interest, treatment of normal subjects with desipramine or,
as noted above, of individuals with depression with fluoxetine is associated
with a reduction in CSF CRF concentrations.
If CRF hypersecretion is a factor in the pathophysiology of depression,
then reducing or interfering with CRF neurotransmission might be an
effective strategy to alleviate depressive symptoms. Over the last several
years, several pharmaceutical companies have committed considerable effort
to the development of small-molecule CRF1 receptor antagonists that can
effectively penetrate the BBB. Several compounds have been produced with
reportedly promising characteristics.
OXYTOCIN (OT) AND VASOPRESSIN (AVP). The vasopressor effects of posterior

pituitary extracts were first described in 1895, and the potent extracts were
named AVP. OT and AVP mRNAs are among the most abundant messages
in the hypothalamus, being heavily concentrated in the magnocellular
neurons of the PVN and the supraoptic nucleus of the hypothalamus, which
send axonal projections to the neurohypophysis. These neurons produce OT
and AVP, which is released into the bloodstream, where these peptides act
like hormones on peripheral targets. OT and AVP are generally synthesized
in separate neurons within the hypothalamus. OT released from the pituitary
is most often associated with functions associated with female reproduction,
such as regulating uterine contractions during parturition and the milk
ejection reflex during lactation. AVP, also known as antidiuretic hormone,
regulates water retention in the kidney and vasoconstriction through
interactions with vasopressin V2 and V1a receptor subtypes, respectively.
AVP is released into the bloodstream from the neurohypophysis following a
variety of stimuli, including plasma osmolality, hypovolemia, hypertension,
and hypoglycemia. The actions of OT are mediated via a single receptor
subtype (oxytocin receptor, OTR), which is distributed in the periphery and
within the limbic CNS.
In contrast to the OTR, there are three vasopressin receptor subtypes, V1a,
V1b, and V2 receptors, each of which is a G-protein–coupled seventransmembrane domain receptor. The V2 receptor is localized in the kidney


<<<PAGE 3050>>>
and is not found in the brain. The V1a receptor is distributed widely in the
CNS and is thought to mediate most of the behavioral effects of AVP. The
V1b receptor is concentrated in the anterior pituitary, and some reports
describe V1b receptor mRNA in the brain, although its function is unknown.
Neurotensin (NT). Although NT is found in several brain regions, it has
been most thoroughly investigated in terms of its association with other
neurotransmitter systems, particularly the mesolimbic dopamine system, and
has gained interest in research on the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.
There are several lines of evidence suggesting that NT and its receptors
should be considered as potential targets for pharmacologic intervention in
this disorder. First, the NT system is positioned anatomically to modulate the
neural circuits implicated in schizophrenia. Second, peripheral administration
of antipsychotic drugs has been shown to modulate NT systems consistently.
Third, there is evidence that central NT systems are altered in patients with
schizophrenia.
NT was first shown to interact with dopamine systems while undergoing
characterization of its potent hypothermic-potentiating and sedativepotentiating activities. Subsequent work indicated that NT possessed many
properties that were also shared by antipsychotic drugs, including the ability
to inhibit avoidance, but not escape responding in a conditioned active
avoidance task; the ability to block the effects of indirect dopamine agonists
or endogenous dopamine in the production of locomotor behavior; and the
ability to elicit increases in dopamine release and turnover. Perhaps most
importantly, both antipsychotic drugs and NT neurotransmission enhance
sensorimotor gating. Sensorimotor gating is the ability to screen or filter
relevant sensory input, deficits in which may lead to involuntary flooding of
indifferent sensory data. Increasing evidence suggests that deficits in
sensorimotor gating are a cardinal feature of schizophrenia. Both dopamine
agonists and NT antagonists disrupt performance on tasks designed to gauge
sensorimotor gating. Unlike antipsychotic drugs, NT is not able to displace
dopamine from its receptor. As noted earlier, NT is colocalized in specific
subsets of dopamine neurons and is coreleased with dopamine in the
mesolimbic and medial prefrontal cortex dopamine terminal regions that are
implicated as the sites of dopamine dysregulation in schizophrenia.
Antipsychotic drugs that act at D2 and D4 receptors increase the synthesis,


<<<PAGE 3051>>>
concentration, and release of NT in those dopamine terminal regions but not
in others. That effect of antipsychotic drugs in increasing NT concentrations
persists after months of treatment and is accompanied by the expected
increase in NT mRNA concentrations as well as expression of the
“immediate early gene” c-fos within hours of initial drug treatment. The
altered regulation of NT expression by antipsychotic drugs extends to the
peptidases that degrade the peptide because recent reports have revealed
decreased NT metabolism in rat brain slices 24 hours after the acute
administration of haloperidol. When administered directly into the brain, NT
preferentially opposes dopamine transmission in the nucleus accumbens but
not the caudate-putamen. In the nucleus accumbens, NT receptors are located
predominantly on GABAergic neurons, which release GABA on dopamine
terminals, thereby inhibiting release.
Decreased CSF NT concentrations have been reported in several
populations of patients with schizophrenia when compared to those of
controls or other psychiatric disorders. Although treatment with antipsychotic
drugs has been observed to increase NT concentrations in the CSF, it is not
known whether this increase is causal or merely accompanies the decrease in
psychotic symptoms seen with successful treatment. Postmortem studies have
shown an increase in NT concentrations in the dopamine-rich Brodmann area
32 of the frontal cortex, but that result may have been confounded by
premortem antipsychotic treatment. Other researchers have found no
postmortem alterations in NT concentrations of a broad sampling of
subcortical regions. Decreases in NT receptor densities in the entorhinal
cortex have been reported in entorhinal cortices of schizophrenic postmortem
samples. A critical test of the hypothesis that NT may act as an endogenous
antipsychotic-like substance awaits the development of an NT receptor
agonist that can penetrate the BBB.
Other Neuropeptides. Several other neuropeptides have been implicated
in the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders. These include, but are not
limited to, cholecystokinin (CCK), substance P, and neuropeptide Y.
CCK initially discovered in the gastrointestinal tract, and its receptors are
found in areas of the brain associated with emotion, motivation, and sensory
processing (e.g., cortex, striatum, hypothalamus, hippocampus, and
amygdala). CCK is often colocalized with dopamine in the VTA neurons that


<<<PAGE 3052>>>
comprise the mesolimbic and mesocortical dopamine circuits. Like NT, CCK
decreases dopamine release. Infusions of a CCK fragment have been reported
to induce panic in healthy individuals, and patients with panic disorder
exhibit increased sensitivity to the CCK fragment compared to that of normal
controls. Pentagastrin, a synthetic CCK agonist, dose-dependently produced
increased blood pressure, pulse, HPA activation, and physical symptoms of
panic. Recently, a CCK receptor gene polymorphism has been associated
with panic disorder.
The undecapeptide substance P is localized in the amygdala,
hypothalamus, periaqueductal gray, LC, and parabrachial nucleus and is
colocalized with norepinephrine and serotonin. Substance P serves as a pain
neurotransmitter, and administration to animals elicits behavioral and
cardiovascular effects resembling the stress response. More recent data
suggest a role for substance P in major depression and PTSD. Both depressed
and PTSD patients had elevated CSF substance P concentrations.
Furthermore, in PTSD patients, marked increases in CSF substance P
concentrations were detected following precipitation of PTSD symptoms.
One study has indicated that a substance P receptor (termed the neurokinin 1
[NK1] receptor) antagonist capable of passing the BBB is more effective than
a placebo and as useful as paroxetine in patients with major depression with
moderate to severe symptom severity. However, subsequent studies have
been unable to confirm these findings.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a 36 amino acid peptide found in the
hypothalamus, brainstem, spinal cord, and several limbic structures and is
involved in the regulation of appetite, reward, anxiety, and energy balance.
NPY is colocalized with serotonergic and noradrenergic neurons and is
thought to facilitate the containment of adverse effects following exposure to
stress. Suicide victims with a diagnosis of major depression are reported to
have a pronounced reduction in NPY levels in the frontal cortex and caudate
nucleus. Furthermore, CSF NPY levels are decreased in depressed patients.
Chronic administration of antidepressant drugs increases neuropeptide Y
concentrations in the neocortex and hippocampus in rats. Plasma NPY levels
were found to be elevated in soldiers subjected to the “uncontrollable stress”
of interrogation, and NPY levels were correlated with the feelings of
dominance and confidence during the stress. Also, low NPY response to
stress has been associated with increased vulnerability to depression and


<<<PAGE 3053>>>
PTSD.
Novel Neurotransmitters
Nitric Oxide. The discovery that gases could function as neurotransmitters
revealed that highly atypical modes of signaling existed between neurons. In
the early 1990s, nitric oxide was the first gas to be ascribed a
neurotransmitter function and proved to be an atypical neurotransmitter for
several reasons. First, it was not stored in or released from synaptic vesicles,
as it was a small gas it could freely diffuse into the target neuron. Second, its
target was not a specific receptor on the surface of a target neuron, but
intracellular proteins whose activity could directly be modulated by nitric
oxide, leading to neurotransmission. Nitric oxide also lacks a reuptake
mechanism to remove it from the synapse. Although enzymatic inactivation
of it is postulated to exist, nitric oxide appears to have a very short half-life of
a few seconds.
Nitric oxide was initially discovered as a bactericidal compound released
from macrophages, and as an endothelial cell, it derived relaxation factor
allowing for the dilation of blood vessels. A role for nitric oxide in the brain
followed, revealing a role for the gas in neurotransmission, learning and
memory processes, neurogenesis, and neurodegenerative disease.
NITRIC OXIDE AND BEHAVIOR. Nitric oxide neurotransmission can play a role

in behavior, as neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS)-deficient male mice
display exaggerated aggressive tendencies and increased sexual activity. In
female mice, the contrary is true, as they have reduced aggression. As manic
bipolar patients may show both hypersexuality and aggression, the nitric
oxide pathway may participate in the psychopathology of affective states.
In the periphery, nNOS localizes to neurons that innervate blood vessels of
the penis, including the corpus cavernosa. Stimulation of these nerves
releases nitric oxide, leading to cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)
formation, blood vessel wall relaxation and vasodilation, penile engorgement,
and initial erection. The sustained phase of erection also depends on nitric
oxide; turbulent blood flow leads to phosphorylation of eNOS and sustained
nitric oxide production. Drugs used in the treatment of erectile dysfunction—
sildenafil (Viagra), tadalafil (Cialis), and vardenafil (Levitra)—act to inhibit


<<<PAGE 3054>>>
phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5), an enzyme that degrades cGMP in the
penis (Fig. 33-23), thereby potentiating nitric oxide neurotransmission and
penile erection.
Numerous lines of evidence have suggested a role for nitric oxide in the
regulation of sleep–wake cycles. nNOS expressing neurons occur in several
areas that initiate REM sleep, including the pons, dorsal raphe nucleus,
laterodorsal tegmentum, and pedunculopontine tegmentum. In animal
models, microinjection of compounds that release nitric oxide decreases
wakefulness and increases slow-wave sleep compared with controls.
Consistent with this, NOS inhibitors show a trend toward decreasing slowwave and REM sleep. Studies of NOS-deficient mice suggest that nitric oxide
may serve a more involved role than merely promoting sleep. nNOS-deficient
animals also show reduced REM sleep; however, inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS)-deficient mice demonstrate the reverse, suggesting a
complex interplay between NOS enzymatic isoforms.
NITRIC OXIDE AND MOOD DISORDERS.

NOS-expressing neurons are well
represented in areas implicated in depression, including the dorsal raphe
nucleus and prefrontal cortex. A role for nitric oxide has been suggested in
antidepressant response, as SSRI antidepressants can directly inhibit NOS
activity. Moreover, in animal studies such as the forced swim test, NOS and
soluble guanylyl cyclase inhibitors can achieve antidepressant-like effects.
Plasma nitric oxide levels were elevated in patients with bipolar disorder
compared to healthy controls. However, in depressed subjects, studies have
found decreased nitric oxide levels and increased plasma nitrite, a byproduct
of nitric oxide. Reduced NOS has also been described in the paraventricular
nucleus of patients with schizophrenia and depression compared to controls.
Nitric oxide has been questioned as to its ability to regulate
neurotransmission at serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine nerve termini.
However, there has been no clear consensus, and nitric oxide appears to be
able to increase or decrease activity at these neurons depending on the timing
of its activation and the region of the brain studied.
NITRIC OXIDE AND SCHIZOPHRENIA. Nitric oxide has been investigated as a

candidate molecule contributing to symptoms of schizophrenia. Two genetic
studies have identified schizophrenia-associated single nucleotide


<<<PAGE 3055>>>
polymorphisms (SNPs) in CAPON, a protein that associates with nNOS.
SNPs in nNOS itself have been associated with schizophrenia, although
others have not been able to reproduce such findings. Changes in NOS levels
have been reported in postmortem brain samples of individuals with
schizophrenia. Abnormalities have been noted in the cortex, cerebellum,
hypothalamus, and brainstem, although no specific trend can be discerned.
Elevated NOS activity has been noted in platelets from drug-naive and drugtreated individuals with schizophrenia. Some investigators find increased
nitric oxide activity and others the reverse. In autopsy samples, schizophrenic
patients were found to have abnormally localized NOS expressing neurons in
the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and lateral temporal lobe, consistent with
abnormal migration of these neuronal types during development. In a rat
model, prenatal stress led to reduced NOS expressing neurons in the fascia
dentate and hippocampus.

FIGURE 33-23
Neurotransmitter and signaling functions of nitric oxide (NO) via production of
cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). Gaseous nitric oxide is enzymatically
generated and freely diffuses into an adjacent neuron (upper right). In comparison


<<<PAGE 3056>>>
to traditional neurotransmitters (upper left), nitric oxide (NO) does not act via a
specific neurotransmitter receptor on the surface membrane of a neuron. In
contrast, NO freely diffuses across the neuronal membrane and activates the
enzyme, guanylyl cyclase, which converts guanosine 5’-triphosphate (GTP) into
the second messenger, cGMP. Nitric oxide effects are mediated, in part, by cGMP
activation of neuronal protein kinases, new gene expression, and effects on
neuronal long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD). ATP,
adenosine triphosphate. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:104.)
NEUROPATHOLOGIC ROLES OF NITRIC OXIDE. Abundant evidence exists that

nitric oxide is a direct participant in a variety of neuropathic events.
Superoxide, a byproduct of cellular metabolism, can react with nitric oxide to
form peroxynitrite (chemical formula ONOO−). This labile and toxic
compound forms chemical adducts with protein tyrosine residues, a process
termed protein nitration, and DNA, leading to cellular dysfunction.
Cell loss resulting from ischemic stroke is mediated in part by
overstimulation of the glutamate NMDA receptor, a process termed
excitotoxicity. Nitric oxide produced by NMDA activation appears to mediate
a significant portion of this excitotoxic neuronal death, and stroke damage is
reduced in mice with a genetic deletion of nNOS.
S-Nitrosylation has also been implicated in pathologic processes in the
brain. Mutations in the Parkin protein are associated with early-onset
Parkinson disease. Parkin is an E3 ubiquitin ligase, adding ubiquitin
molecules to proteins and targeting them for destruction in the cell
proteasome. In sporadic Parkinson disease (i.e., without the early-onset
mutation), nitric oxide can nitrosylate the Parkin protein and inhibit its
protective E3 ubiquitin ligase function. An overabundance of nitric oxide
signaling may thus predispose to the dysfunction and cell death of
dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson disease by interfering with proteins
essential for cell functioning. In Alzheimer disease, excess oxidation of brain
protein, lipids, and carbohydrates has long been appreciated, but nitrosative
stress from excess nitric oxide also appears to participate in the disease.
Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) is a cellular protective protein that may
help combat the accumulation of misfolded proteins, such as the amyloid
fibrils occurring in the disease. In both Alzheimer and Parkinson disease
brains, PDI appears to be S-nitrosylated in a harmful way that impedes its


<<<PAGE 3057>>>
cellular protective function.
The discovery that nitric oxide participates in neurodegenerative processes
raises the possibility for improved diagnostic processes, such as detecting
damage to cellular components produced by nitric oxide before the onset of
full-blown symptoms. Also, drugs may be designed to attenuate the damage
to crucial neuronal proteins that protect against disease onset. However,
entirely and nonspecifically inhibiting or stimulating NOS is likely to
produce significant side effects because of its wide-ranging activities
throughout the body.
Carbon Monoxide. Although carbon monoxide (CO) is most well known
as an air pollutant derived from combustion reactions, it is produced
physiologically in a great variety of organisms ranging from human to
bacterium. Once thought to be a toxic byproduct of metabolic reactions,
carbon monoxide is increasingly recognized to play an essential role in
regulating a variety of physiologic processes in the brain and other organs.
These varied effects include regulation of olfactory neurotransmission, blood
vessel relaxation, smooth muscle cell proliferation, and platelet aggregation.
Carbon monoxide is far better known for its toxic effects than its activities
at physiologic concentrations. It binds tightly to heme molecules within
hemoglobin, forming carboxyhemoglobin, which can no longer transport
oxygen to tissues. One- to two-pack per day smokers typically have 3 to 8
percent of their hemoglobin as carboxyhemoglobin, with nonsmokers having
less than 2 percent. Following acute carbon monoxide poisoning, 5 to 10
percent of carboxyhemoglobin is associated with impaired alertness and
cognition, and 30 to 50 percent of carboxyhemoglobin leads to significant
drops in oxygen transport to tissues.
CARBON MONOXIDE AND NEUROTRANSMISSION. Carbon monoxide appears to

participate in the neurotransmission of odorant perception. Odorants lead to
carbon monoxide production and subsequent cGMP synthesis that promotes
long-term adaptation to odor stimuli. Carbon monoxide has the potential to
regulate a variety of perceptual and cognitive processes that are yet untested.
Similarly, in the rat retina, long periods of light exposure led to increased
HO1 expression, carbon monoxide production, and cGMP signaling. Carbon
monoxide may also participate in adaptation to chronic pain. HO2-deficient


<<<PAGE 3058>>>
animals manifest reduced hyperalgesia and allodynia after exposure to
chronic pain stimuli. Carbon monoxide may thus set the threshold for pain
perception, although it is unclear whether the effect occurs in the central or
peripheral nervous system. Aside from its role in promoting cGMP
production, carbon monoxide may also directly bind to and open the calciumactivated big potassium (BKCa) channel, leading to as yet uncharacterized
effects on neurotransmission.
In the gastrointestinal (GI) nervous system, carbon monoxide serves as a
neurotransmitter to relax the internal anal sphincter in response to
nonadrenergic noncholinergic (NANC) nerve stimulation and vasoactive
intestinal peptide (VIP).
Carbon monoxide has been implicated in the development of hippocampal
LTP, although lines of evidence are contradictory. Carbon monoxide and
tetanic stimulation of nerves lead to increased excitatory postsynaptic
potentials (EPSPs). HO inhibitors that block carbon monoxide production
lead to impaired induction of LTP and reduced calcium-dependent release of
glutamate neurotransmitter. However, HO2-deficient animals fail to manifest
any differences in LTP. These disparate findings may be explained by a role
for HO1 in LTP, or an ability of HO inhibitors to block some other processes
necessary to LTP induction nonspecifically.
At toxic levels, carbon monoxide is well known to impair oxygen transport
by binding to hemoglobin with a higher affinity than oxygen. Amazingly,
carbon monoxide itself plays a physiologic role in the mechanism by which
the carotid body senses oxygen. HO, expressed in glomus cells of the carotid
body, uses oxygen as a substrate in the production of carbon monoxide (Fig.
33-24). When oxygen levels drop, so does carbon monoxide production,
leading to a resetting of the threshold in which the carotid body senses
oxygen. The molecular mechanism may occur via carbon monoxide
regulation of the carotid body BK ion channel.


<<<PAGE 3059>>>
FIGURE 33-24
Synthesis of carbon monoxide (CO), an unexpected neurotransmitter. Gaseous
carbon monoxide is enzymatically synthesized in neurons by way of the enzyme
heme oxygenase, also converting heme into the molecule biliverdin and liberating
free iron (Fe). Similar to nitric oxide, CO is not stored in neuronal vesicles and can
freely diffuse across neuronal membranes. CO also similarly activates soluble
guanylyl cyclase, and leads to activation of multiple intracellular signaling
molecules such as p38 MAP kinase. CO exerts its neurotransmitter and signaling
functions at concentrations far below that at which classical CO toxicity occurs.
The significance of this pathway in neurons is underlined by the existence of two
distinct heme oxygenase enzymes, one of which is predominantly expressed in
the brain. Biliverdin is converted to bilirubin via the enzyme biliverdin reductase.
Similar to CO, bilirubin is no longer relegated to the status of toxic byproduct and
may be an important antioxidant. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:107.)

Endocannabinoids: From Marijuana to Neurotransmission.
Whether known as cannabis, hemp, hashish, ma-fen, or a variety of slang
terms, marijuana has been cultivated and utilized by human populations for
thousands of years. Despite a long debate about risks and benefits, it has only
been in recent decades that we have started to learn how marijuana exerts its
effects on the brain. The “high” users experience, euphoria and tranquility,
relates to cannabis acting on a neural pathway involving cannabinoids
endogenous to the human brain, or endocannabinoids.
The first described medicinal use of cannabis dates to approximately 2700
BC in the pharmacopeia of Chinese Emperor Shen Nung, who recommended
its use for a variety of ailments. At this time, adverse properties were also


<<<PAGE 3060>>>
apparent, and large amounts of the fruits of hemp could lead to “seeing
devils,” or a user might “communicate with spirits and lightens one’s body.”
For centuries, cannabis was employed in India as an appetite stimulant;
habitual marijuana users remain well acquainted with “the munchies.”
For many years the mechanisms by which the active components of
marijuana, cannabinoids, exerted their psychoactive effects remained a
mystery. Chemists sought to isolate the psychoactive components of cannabis
from the many components of the plant oil (Table 33-5).
Table 33-5
Selected Discoveries in Cannabinoid Research
1899 Cannabinol isolated from cannabis resin
1940 Identification of cannabinol structure
1964 Discovery of the structure of δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),
the most psychoactive component of cannabis
1988 Specific THC-binding sites identified in brain
1990 Identification of a brain cannabinoid receptor, CB1
1992 Discovery of the first endogenous brain endocannabinoid,
anandamide
1993 Identification of a second cannabinoid receptor, CB2
1994 Rimonabant (Acomplia), a CB1 receptor blocker is developed
1995 Report of a second endocannabinoid, 2-AG
1996 Fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), an endocannabinoid
degrading enzyme, is discovered
2003 FAAH inhibitors reduce anxiety-like behaviors in animal studies
2003 Identification of enzymes that synthesize endocannabinoids
2006 Monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL), a second endocannabinoiddegrading enzyme, is found


<<<PAGE 3061>>>
2006 Rimonabant approved for use in Europe for weight loss
2007 Rimonabant meta-analysis finds increased anxiety and
depressive symptoms in humans without a history of
psychiatric illness
From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:109.
DISCOVERY OF THE BRAIN ENDOCANNABINOID SYSTEM. Estimates suggest that

20 to 80 µg of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) reaches the brain after one
smokes a marijuana cigarette (i.e., “joint”). This quantity is comparable to the
100 to 200 µg of norepinephrine neurotransmitter present in the entire human
brain. Thus the effects of THC might be explained by the effects on
neurotransmitter systems. In the 1960s, there were at least two schools of
thought on how THC exerted its psychoactive effects. One held that THC
worked like that of the inhaled volatile anesthetics (i.e., no specific receptor
existed), and it might have a generalized effect on neuronal membranes or
widespread actions on neurotransmitter receptors. A competing school of
thought speculated that specific receptors for cannabinoids existed in the
brain, but they were difficult to identify due to the lipophilic nature of these
chemicals. Novel cannabinoids were synthesized that were more watersoluble, and in the late 1980s, this allowed for the discovery of a specific
cannabinoid receptor, CB1.
Several additional endocannabinoids were soon discovered, 2arachidonylglycerol (2-AG), N-arachidonyldopamine (NADA), 2arachidonoylglycerol ether (noladin ether), and virodhamine (Fig. 33-25).
The different endocannabinoids have differing affinities for the cannabinoid
receptors, CB1 and CB2. Anandamide appears to have the highest selectivity
for the CB1 receptor, followed by NADA and noladin ether. In contrast,
virodhamine prefers CB2 receptors and has only partial agonist activity at
CB1. 2-AG appears not to discriminate between CB1 and CB2.
BIOSYNTHESIS OF ENDOCANNABINOIDS.

Arachidonic acid is utilized as a
building block for the biosynthesis of endocannabinoids, prostaglandins, and
leukotrienes and is found within cellular phospholipids of the plasma
membrane and other intracellular membranes. The synthesis of anandamide


<<<PAGE 3062>>>
requires the sequential action of two enzymes (Fig. 33-26). In the first
reaction, the enzyme N-acetyltransferase (NAT) transfers an arachidonic acid
side chain from a phospholipid to phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), generating
NAPE (N-arachidonyl-phosphatidylethanolamine). In the second reaction, the
enzyme N-arachidonyl-phosphatidylethanolamine phospholipase (NAPDPLD) converts NAPE to anandamide. Because NAPE is already a natural
component of mammalian membranes, it is the second step that generates
anandamide, which is most crucial to neurotransmission.
Endocannabinoids are not stored in synaptic vesicles for later use but are
synthesized on-demand, as is done for the gaseous neurotransmitters. An
essential criterion for a signaling molecule to be considered a
neurotransmitter is that neuronal depolarization should lead to its release.
Depolarization leads to increases in cellular calcium, which in turn promotes
the synthesis of the endocannabinoids and their release. The mechanism is
explained in part by calcium activation of NAPE-PLD and DAGL, leading to
augmented biosynthesis of anandamide and 2-AG, respectively.
Endocannabinoids generated in a neuron must cross the synaptic cleft to
act on cannabinoid receptors. Similar to THC, endocannabinoids are highly
lipophilic and thus poorly soluble in CSF. It is hypothesized that a specific
endocannabinoid transporter exists to allow endocannabinoids to cross the
synaptic cleft and allow entry into the target neuron.
Neurotransmitters are typically
inactivated either by reuptake from the neurons that release them or by
degradation by highly specific enzymes, such as the example of acetylcholine
being hydrolyzed by acetylcholinesterase. At least two enzymes exist to
target the destruction of endocannabinoids and attenuate their
neurotransmission. Fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) converts anandamide
to arachidonic acid and ethanolamine (Fig. 33-26). FAAH is found in regions
of the brain where CB1 receptors are predominant and localize to
postsynaptic neurons where anandamide is made. Rapid degradation of
anandamide in part explains its relatively low potency compared to THC.
Confirming the role of FAAH in anandamide inactivation, knockout mice
without FAAH exhibit a 15-fold increase of anandamide, but not 2-AG.
These mice have more significant behavioral responses to exogenous
anandamide, owing to its decreased degradation. The endocannabinoid 2-AG
INACTIVATION

OF

ENDOCANNABINOIDS.


<<<PAGE 3063>>>
is inactivated by FAAH, but also by a monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL)
located in presynaptic neurons.

FIGURE 33-25
Endogenous cannabinoids. At least five endocannabinoids exist in the
mammalian brain, each differing in affinity for CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid
receptors. All are derived from the essential omega-6 fatty acid, arachidonic acid,
which is also a substrate in the formation of prostaglandins and leukotrienes.
(From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive


<<<PAGE 3064>>>
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:111.)

Pharmacologic inhibitors of FAAH have analgesic effects and reduce
anxiety in animal models, but do not have the undesirable effects of THC
such as immobility, lowered body temperature, or greater appetite. Such a
pharmacologic strategy would be analogous to MAOIs and COMT inhibitors
(COMTIs). MAOIs used to treat depression, slow the breakdown of serotonin
and other monoamines, thereby increasing serotonin, whereas COMTIs
serves an analogous role in blocking the destruction of dopamine and other
catecholamines.
CANNABINOID RECEPTORS. CB1 receptors are possibly the most abundant G-

protein–coupled receptors in the brain. They occur at the highest density in
the basal ganglia, cerebellum, hippocampus, hypothalamus, anterior cingulate
cortex, and cerebral cortex, particularly the frontal cortex. Humans or animals
that receive large doses of THC develop catalepsy, a reduction of
spontaneous movement, and freeze in bizarre and unnatural postures. The
action of cannabinoids in the basal ganglia and cerebellum may be associated
with these behaviors, which may prove relevant in understanding catatonic
symptoms in schizophrenia.
CB1 receptors are predominantly found on axons and nerve termini, with
little presence on neuronal dendrites and the cell body. CB1 receptors localize
to the presynaptic rather than the postsynaptic side of the neuronal cleft,
suggesting a role in the regulation of neurotransmission. A second
cannabinoid receptor, CB2, is predominantly expressed on the surface of
white blood cells of the immune system, but small amounts appear to be
present in the brainstem.


<<<PAGE 3065>>>
FIGURE 33-26
Retrograde neurotransmission of the endocannabinoids, anandamide, and 2arachidonylglycerol (2-AG). Anandamide is synthesized on demand for
neurotransmission via a two-step process. The enzyme NAT transfers the
arachidonic acid chain from a phospholipid (APL) to phosphatidylethanolamine
(PE), thereby producing NAPE. A second enzyme, NAPE-PLD, generates
anandamide. 2-AG is similarly synthesized in two steps by the enzymes PLC and


<<<PAGE 3066>>>
DAGL. The endocannabinoids made in a postsynaptic neuron cross the synapse
and activate presynaptic CB1 receptors, and suppress neurotransmission of the
presynaptic neuron (although activation of the presynaptic neuron occurs in some
cases). 2-AG is predominantly inactivated in the presynaptic neuron by MAGL,
whereas anandamide is destroyed in the postsynaptic neuron by FAAH. PE,
phosphatidylethanolamine; APL, arachidonyl phospholipids; NAT, Nacyltransferase; NAPE, N-arachidonyl-phosphatidylethanolamine; NAPE-PLD, Narachidonyl-phosphatidylethanolamine phospholipase D; FAAH, fatty acid amide
hydrolase; MAGL, monoacylglycerol lipase; PLC, phospholipase C; DAG,
diacylglycerol; DAGL, diacylglycerol lipase; R1-R3, various acyl or akyl side
chains of phospholipids; R’, side chain of phospholipid head group. (From Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:112.)

Effects on Neurotransmission. The cannabinoid CB1 receptor is associated
with G proteins that mediate its intracellular signaling, in part, through
inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. This action leads to a decrease in levels of the
essential second messenger, cyclic adenosine monophosphate. Activation of
the CB1 receptor also leads to the activation of potassium channels and
inhibition of N-type calcium channels. Because calcium is integral to
neurotransmitter release, cannabinoids can block neurotransmission through
this mechanism. Cannabinoid receptors also activate mitogen-activated
protein kinases.
With the use of cell culture models and slices of the brain, cannabinoids
have been shown to block the release of a variety of neurotransmitters,
including GABA, norepinephrine, and acetylcholine. Norepinephrine and
acetylcholine tend to be excitatory neurotransmitters, and cannabinoid
inhibition of their release would be expected to have an overall inhibitory
effect. However, GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter, and cannabinoid
inhibition of it would lead to overall excitatory effects, demonstrating that
cannabinoids can have complex effects on neurotransmission depending on
the specific context. Cannabinoids also appear to increase the release of brain
endorphin neurotransmitters and increase dopamine release in the nucleus
accumbens, a “reward center” relevant to addiction and learning. The
endocannabinoids have been implicated in a variety of forms of synaptic
plasticity, including LTP and long-term depression (LTD).
Endocannabinoid
neurotransmission may be an essential regulator of anxiety, and cannabis
ENDOCANNABINOIDS

IN

ANXIETY

AND

MOOD.


<<<PAGE 3067>>>
users regularly describe a tranquilizing effect of THC. The loss of signaling
by the endocannabinoid system appears to promote anxiety-like states in
animal studies. CB1 receptor-deficient animals exhibit more pronounced
anxiety behavior when exposed to stress or new environs.
The endocannabinoid pathway may represent an attractive target in
understanding posttraumatic stress responses and phobias. Although one
cannot yet safely measure endocannabinoid levels in human subjects, this
model is supported by clinical trials of the cannabinoid receptor blocker,
rimonabant (Acomplia), which may offer promise as a strategy for weight
loss (see below). A frequent adverse reaction to the drug is increased anxiety
and depression.
Addiction. The endocannabinoid system may be an attractive target for
understanding addiction. Mice deficient in CB1 receptors are unsurprisingly
resistant to the behavioral effects of cannabinoids; they also appear to have
reduced addiction to and withdrawal from opiates. Further interaction has
also been found between the opioid and cannabinoid systems, as
cannabinoids appear to increase the release of dopamine in the nucleus
accumbens, a key reward area of the brain implicated in addiction. This
dopamine release appears to require µ-opioid receptors, as pharmacologic
inhibition of these receptors blocks the ability of cannabinoids to increase
dopamine release. Rats with a preference for alcohol have decreased FAAH
activity, suggestive of higher cannabinoid signaling. CB1 receptor
antagonists dampen their alcohol consumption, whereas inhibiting FAAH
increases their alcohol consumption. Furthermore, CB1-deficient animals
also appear to have reduced alcohol intake. A single amino acid mutation in
human FAAH is associated with drug abuse, and this abnormal enzyme
appears to be less stable than its wild-type counterpart.
ENDOCANNABINOIDS IN PSYCHOSIS.

Heavy use of cannabis can produce
psychotic symptoms in individuals with no prior history of psychiatric
disorder, although it is unclear whether this is solely due to the drug or an
underlying vulnerability to psychosis in such persons. Cannabis use often
worsens psychosis in schizophrenia, and heavy use has been associated with
developing schizophrenia, although some suggest that this association is an
accelerated development of symptoms in those who would eventually


<<<PAGE 3068>>>
manifest schizophrenia. Nonetheless, the endocannabinoid system has
implications for the pathophysiology of schizophrenia, as cannabinoid
signaling appears to increase the release of dopamine. Medications that act as
antagonists of D2 receptors will likely remain a component of schizophrenia
treatment for some time.
Feeding. Following drug ingestion, THC users develop an increased appetite
(“the munchies”), and cannabis has been utilized as an appetite stimulant for
centuries. This effect may depend on CB1 receptors present in the
hypothalamus. Endocannabinoid levels increase in the hypothalamus and
limbic system when animals are deprived of food. Mice genetically deficient
in CB1 receptors become resistant to developing obesity after being given a
high-fat diet. Similarly, the CB1 receptor antagonist, rimonabant, appears to
facilitate weight loss by blocking cannabinoid signaling. In a clinical trial of
more than 3,000 obese patients, those treated with 20 mg/day of rimonabant
lost 6.3 kg at 1 year, compared to 1.6 kg in the placebo group. Nausea was
the most common side effect reported. A 2007 meta-analysis of clinical trials
reported an overall 4.7 kg weight loss with rimonabant treatment, besting the
weight-loss drugs orlistat (2.9 kg) and sibutramine (4.2 kg).
EFFECTS ON BRAIN INJURY AND PAIN. In mouse models of traumatic brain

injury, 2-AG appears neuroprotective, reducing brain edema, infarct size, and
cell death, while improving functional outcomes. Anandamide is also
protected against brain injury in a model of multiple sclerosis (MS), and
human patients with the disease have increased production of anandamide. A
study of cannabinoid agonist, HU-211, led to more rapid clinical
improvement following head trauma. FAAH inhibitors improved motor
symptoms in a mouse model of Parkinson disease, likely via cannabinoids
increasing dopamine neurotransmission.
There is increasing evidence that neurotransmission via the
endocannabinoid pathway regulates pain perception. THC and cannabinoid
agonists have proven effective in animal models of acute and chronic pain,
ranging from burn injury to nerve damage and inflammation. The CB1
receptor plays an essential role in these effects, as the analgesic effects of
cannabinoid drugs are lost when CB1 antagonist rimonabant is given.
Similarly, the analgesic effect of THC is lost in mice that are genetically


<<<PAGE 3069>>>
deficient in the CB1 receptor.
Stress has long been associated with diminished pain perception, such as in
cases of injured military personnel who demonstrate remarkable pain
tolerance, a phenomenon known as stress-induced analgesia. The
endocannabinoid system may mediate these effects. Animal models reveal
anandamide and 2-AG production after stress, and stress-induced analgesia is
blocked by the CB1 blocker, rimonabant, in these animals.
Endocannabinoid regulation of pain perception appears to be distinct from
that of the endogenous opiate system, but the two pathways may share
overlapping neural pathways. Evidence for this has been provided using CB1
blocker, rimonabant, and naloxone (Narcan), which blocks opiate receptors.
Rimonabant attenuates analgesia provided by THC and cannabinoids, but
only partially blocks the response to morphine. However, the opposite is true
for opiates: Naloxone blocks morphine-induced analgesia but also partially
blocks the analgesia of THC and cannabinoid drugs. Combinations of
cannabinoid and opiate drugs evince synergistic analgesic effects in animal
models.
Although it was initially assumed that cannabinoids exert their analgesic
effects via the CNS, in animal models, it has been shown that localized
administration of cannabinoids may also be useful, including drugs selective
for the CB2 receptor, whose expression is minimal in the CNS.
Endocannabinoids may also influence pain sensitivity by mechanisms that
do not involve the CB1 and CB2 receptors. Both anandamide and NADA can
also activate a calcium channel known as the vanilloid receptor (also known
as transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 [TRPV-1]) that is found on
sensory nerves. This same receptor is also famous for being activated by
capsaicin, which causes the hot sensation after eating chili peppers. Thus
endocannabinoids can exert opposing functions: Promoting analgesia through
the CB1 and CB2 receptors but potentially increasing pain via TRP channels.
Although CB2 receptors are primarily expressed in the periphery,
postmortem analyses reveal an upregulation in the brain from those with
Alzheimer disease.
The rapid development of novel cannabinoid drugs may allow for targeting
of specific symptoms, rather than elicit all of the typical effects of THC. For
instance, ajulemic acid demonstrates analgesic and anti-inflammatory
properties but may offer a benefit of limited psychoactive side effects. In a


<<<PAGE 3070>>>
randomized clinical trial of this compound, Mathias Karst and colleagues
found efficacy in reducing chronic neuropathic pain.
EFFECTS IN THE PERIPHERY. Cannabinoids lead to direct relaxation of vascular

smooth muscle by local CB1 receptors. This vasodilation extends to the
conjunctiva, leading to a “bloodshot” appearance in some cannabis users.
Relaxation of ocular arteries by cannabinoids may offer utility as a treatment
for glaucoma, a condition of high intraocular pressure, and activation of CB1
receptors in the kidney can improve renal blood flow. A role in generalized
blood pressure regulation is unproven, and blood pressure is unaltered in
persons treated with rimonabant or animals deficient in CB1 receptors.
Cannabinoid signaling may also be relevant to ectopic pregnancy, as CB1deficient mice retain many embryos in the oviduct.
Nonpsychoactive Cannabinoids. Although THC is the principal
psychoactive component of cannabis, the many nonpsychoactive
cannabinoids also have intriguing properties and may regulate
neurotransmission.
Cannabidiol may offer potential therapeutic effects and appears to
stimulate TRPV-1 receptors and influence endocannabinoid degradation.
Also, cannabidiol demonstrated a protective effect in a mouse model of
inflammatory arthritis. Although results have been mixed, purified
cannabidiol may also exert antipsychotic activity, although the net effect of
plant cannabis use typically exacerbates schizophrenia symptoms owing to
THC. Tetrahydrocannabivarin is a plant cannabinoid that antagonizes CB1
receptors. It is a candidate marker to distinguish whether a patient has been
using plant-derived cannabis or prescription THC, which contains no
tetrahydrocannabivarin.
Eicosanoids
OVERVIEW. Clinical findings suggest that the dietary supplements omega-3
fatty acids, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), its ester ethyl-eicosapentaenoic (EEPA), and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) help relieve symptoms of
depression, bipolar illness, schizophrenia, and cognitive impairment. DHA
and EPA may help reduce behavioral outbursts and improve attention in


<<<PAGE 3071>>>
children.
CHEMISTRY. Essential fatty acids are a group of polyunsaturated fats that

contain a carbon–carbon double bond in the third position from the methyl
end group in the fatty acid chain. They are essential because unlike
monosaturated and saturated fatty acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids cannot
be synthesized de novo and can be acquired only through diet from natural
fats and oils. Linoleic acid (LA) is the parent compound of omega-6 fatty
acids, and α-linolenic acid (ALA) is the parent compound of omega-3 fatty
acids. Both omega-3 and omega-6 groups use the same enzymes for
desaturation and chain elongation. Algae and plankton synthesize Omega-3
fatty acids. Fish such as herring, salmon, mackerel, and anchovy feed on
these aquatic species and become a rich dietary source of omega-3. EPA and
DHA are highly unsaturated omega-3 fatty acids that contain 6 and 5 double
bonds on their long structural chain, respectively. They are positioned in the
cell membrane by phospholipids and play a crucial role in cell membrane
signaling.
EFFECTS ON SPECIFIC ORGANS AND SYSTEMS. The most substantial scientific

evidence for treatment with fatty acid supplements comes from the
cardiovascular literature. Several human trials have demonstrated that omega3 fatty acids lower blood pressure, reduce the rate of recurrent myocardial
infarction, and lower triglyceride levels. In the nervous system, fatty acids are
essential components of neurons, immune cells, and glial phospholipid
membrane structures. They increase cerebral blood flow, decrease platelet
aggregation, and delay the progression of atherosclerosis in the
cardiovascular system. Omega-6 fatty acids appear to reduce inflammation
and neuronal apoptosis and decrease phosphatidylinositol second messenger
activity. Omega-3 fatty acids have been suggested to alter gene expression.
In the CNS, fatty acids are selectively concentrated in neuronal membranes
and involved in cell membrane structure. Omega-6 arachidonic acid has been
shown to enhance glutamate neurotransmission, stimulate stress hormone
secretion, and trigger glial cell activation in the setting of oxidative toxicity
and neurodegeneration. The omega-3 fatty acids DHA and EPA appear to
protect neurons from inflammatory and oxidative toxicities. Increases in
serotonin, enhancement of dopamine, and regulation of CRF have been


<<<PAGE 3072>>>
demonstrated in cell culture models.
In rodent models of depression, chronic EPA treatment normalized
behavior in open field tests. Serotonin and norepinephrine were also
increased in the limbic regions. Mice fed omega-3 poor diets had reduced
memory, altered learning patterns, and more behavioral problems.
THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS. Clinical research with the use of fish oil for mood

disorders was based on epidemiology studies where there appears to be a
negative correlation between fish consumption and depressive symptoms.
Countries with lower per capita fish consumption had up to 60 times
increased rates of major depression, bipolar disorder, and postpartum
depression. Observational studies concluded that the lower incidence of
seasonal affective disorder in Iceland and Japan, rather than latitude
predicted, is related to the amount of fatty acid these populations consume in
their diet. A study in Norway showed that the use of cod liver oil decreased
depressive symptoms. Depression after a myocardial infarction shows higher
arachidonic acid to EPA ratio. Postmortem studies in the brains of patients
diagnosed with major depressive disorder show reduced DHA in the
orbitofrontal cortex.
The first randomized, controlled pilot study of omega-3 fatty acids focused
on adjunctive treatment in both bipolar and unipolar patients with depression
in addition to their standard lithium (Eskalith) or valproic acid (Depakene)
treatment. The omega-3 fatty acid group had significant improvement on the
Hamilton Depression Scale and a more extended period of remission than the
placebo group. A subsequent more extensive study supported a benefit from
treatment with E-EPA for bipolar illness. However, a study of a group of
patients with either bipolar disorder or rapid cycling treated with E-EPA
showed no significant difference in any outcome measure between the EPA
and placebo groups. Bleeding time was also increased in the treatment group.
There are no current data on monotherapy in bipolar illness or depression.
The most convincing evidence comes from early brain development and
learning studies. Pregnant mothers who consumed foods rich in DHA gave
birth to infants who had improved problem-solving skills but not necessarily
improved memory. Visual acuity and eye development are also associated
with DHA supplementation during pregnancy.
Reports of behavioral studies of prisoners in England who consumed


<<<PAGE 3073>>>
higher amounts of seafood containing omega-3 fatty acids showed a decrease
in assault rates. A Finnish study of violent criminals identified lower levels of
omega-3 fatty acids in their system compared to the nonviolent offenders.
The negative and psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia may be improved
with supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids. Antipsychotic medications
like haloperidol (Haldol) appear to have fewer extrapyramidal side effects
when combined with antioxidants and omega-3 fatty acids.
EPA and DHA have been associated with decreased dementia incidence.
After reviewing the Rotterdam study of a longitudinal cohort of more than
5,300 patients, fish consumption appeared to be inversely related to the
development of new cases of dementia. Later analysis of the study after 6
years demonstrated that low intake of omega-3 fatty acids was not associated
with an increased risk of dementia. In contrast, the Zutphen study, also in the
Netherlands, concluded that high fish consumption was inversely related to
cognitive decline at a 3-year follow-up and after 5 years. Well-designed
clinical trials are needed before omega-3 fatty acids can be recommended for
the prevention of cognitive impairment.
PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS. The most adverse complication of

eicosanoid use is an increased risk of bleeding. Dietary sources can contain
heavy metals, and there is no standard preparation for capsule formulations.
Treatment studies have yielded a variety of different doses, but evidence for
the therapeutic dose and clinical guidelines are almost nonexistent. The
length of treatment still needs to be determined.
Neurosteroids
BACKGROUND. Although steroids are critical for the maintenance of body
homeostasis, neurosteroids are synthesized from cholesterol in the brain and
independent of peripheral formation in the adrenals and gonads.
Neurosteroids are produced by a sequence of enzymatic processes governed
by cytochrome P450 (CYP) and non-CYP enzymes, either within or outside
the mitochondria of several types of CNS and peripheral nervous system
(PNS) cells.
Recent work has shown that neurosteroids can operate through a
nongenomic pathway to regulate neuronal excitability through their effects on


<<<PAGE 3074>>>
neurotransmitter-gated ion channels. Receptors are generally located in the
nucleus, membrane, or microtubules of the CNS and PNS. Although steroids
and neurosteroids can act on the same nuclear receptors, neurosteroids differ
from steroids in their topologic distribution and regional synthesis. The most
well-known effect of neurosteroids is on the GABA receptor, particularly the
GABAA receptor. Neurosteroids acting primarily at this site include
allopregnanolone (3α,5α-tetrahydroprogesterone), pregnanolone (PREG), and
tetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone (THDOC). Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
(DHEA-S), the most prevalent neurosteroid, acts as a noncompetitive
modulator of GABA. Its precursor dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) has also
been shown to exert inhibitory effects at the GABA receptor. Some
neurosteroids may also act at the NMDA, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4isoxazole-propanoic acid (AMPA), kainate, glycine, serotonin, sigma type-1,
and nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Progesterone is also considered a
neurosteroid and can regulate gene expression at progesterone receptors.
NEUROSTEROIDS IN NEURODEVELOPMENT AND NEUROPROTECTION. In general,

neurosteroids stimulate axonal growth and promote synaptic transmission.
Specific neuroprotective effects are unique to each neurosteroid. DHEA acts
to regulate brain serotonin and dopamine levels, suppress cortisol, increase
hippocampal primed burst potentiation and cholinergic function, decrease
amyloid-β protein, inhibit the production of proinflammatory cytokines, and
prevent free radical scavenging. DHEA and DHEA-S have both been shown
to have a role in glial development and neuronal growth and to promote their
survival in animals; the injection of these substances into the brains of mice
promoted long-term memory while reversing amnesia. Progesterone is linked
to myelinating processes like aiding in the repair of damaged neural
myelination. Allopregnanolone contributes to the reduction of contacts during
axonal regression.
ROLE OF NEUROSTEROIDS IN MENTAL ILLNESS. Neurosteroids have distinct

implications for the maintenance of normal neurologic function and also may
contribute to neuropathology. Neurosteroids are differentially regulated in
males and females and may affect the manifestation of psychological
disorders in these two populations. Specifically, they play a distinct role in
depression and anxiety disorders and may be targeted by psychiatric


<<<PAGE 3075>>>
medications someday soon.
Depression. When compared with nondepressed controls, studies show that
depressed patients have lower plasma and CSF concentrations of
allopregnanolone. Also, this research has elucidated an inverse relationship
between allopregnanolone concentrations and the severity of depressive
illness. However, there are no allopregnanolone-based therapies available for
humans, so its direct efficacy is unsubstantiated. Antidepressant drugs,
specifically fluoxetine (Prozac), have been shown in multiple studies to
increase the levels of certain neurosteroids. Nonetheless, there is debate over
the therapeutic properties of neurosteroids, prompting the investigation of
neurosteroid concentrations in patients undergoing nonpharmacologic
therapies. Preliminary results indicate that the lack of modifications in
neurosteroid levels during nonpharmacologic treatments supports the validity
of the pharmacologic properties of antidepressants, not their therapeutic
action, in the elevation of neurosteroid levels in medicated populations.
Anxiety Disorders. In patients with anxiety disorders, the primary mechanism
of action is on the GABA receptor. Homeostasis characterized by regular
GABAergic activity is restored after panic attacks as neurosteroids are
released in response to stress. Allopregnanolone stimulates GABAergic
activity with 20 times the strength of benzodiazepines and 200 times the
potency of barbiturates. Both positive and negative regulation of the GABAA
receptor are correlated with anxiolytic and anxiogenic action, respectively.
Psychotic Disorders. Also, to their primary relevance to the pharmacologic
treatment of mood and anxiety disorders, neurosteroids contribute to
psychotic, childhood, substance abuse, eating, and postpartum disorders.
DHEA and DHEA-S mediate the effect of neurosteroids on psychotic
disorders such as schizophrenia. DHEA has been dispensed to decrease
anxiety in patients with schizophrenia, as DHEA and DHEA-S suppress
GABA inhibition and heighten the neuronal response at the NMDA and
sigma receptors. DHEA and DHEA-S levels are typically elevated in the
initial episode of a patient with schizophrenia, indicating the onset of
psychosis upregulates neurosteroids. Because neurosteroid levels are studied
across various illness stages, some questions still exist regarding the role of


<<<PAGE 3076>>>
neurosteroids in psychosis.
Childhood Mental Illness. In children, the clinical symptomology of ADHD
is inversely correlated with DHEA and pregnenolone levels.
Substance Abuse. Alcohol is theorized to regulate the GABA receptor and
induce de novo steroid synthesis in the brain, specifically, pregnenolone,
allopregnanolone, and allotetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone levels are increased
in the brain and periphery in response to increases in peripheral alcohol
levels. It is hypothesized that sharp increases in ethanol concentration may
mimic the acute stress response and elevate neurosteroid concentrations by
the HPA axis. To prevent ethanol dependence, researchers are investigating
fluctuations in neurosteroid levels and in vivo neurosteroid responsiveness.
Neurosteroids (increased allopregnanolone levels in particular) are associated
with drug abuse. However, DHEA-S may check the acquisition of morphine
tolerance. Past research has shown that DHEA-S levels were also increased in
patients who abstained from cocaine use in a treatment program, and as
patients relapsed, DHEA-S concentrations decreased accordingly.
Eating Disorders. Concerning eating disorders, DHEA has been shown to
diminish food intake, temper obesity, moderate insulin resistance, and lower
lipids in rats with a model of youth-onset, hyperphagic, and genetic obesity.
By regulating the serotonergic system, DHEA is hypothesized to promote a
reduced caloric load. Although hypothetical, low levels of DHEA and
DHEA-S are recorded in young women with anorexia nervosa, and 3 months
of oral DHEA supplementation increased bone density and tempered the
emotional problems associated with the disorder.
Postpartum and Gynecologic Disorders. Because estrogen and progesterone
levels fluctuate during pregnancy and drop markedly after delivery,
neurosteroids are thought to contribute to postpartum disorders. Low
postpartum DHEA concentrations have been linked to mood instability. Also,
allopregnanolone levels correlated with mood disorders during pregnancy
and in premenstrual syndrome (PMS). It has been noted that women with the
premenstrual dysphoric disorder have higher allopregnanolone/progesterone
ratios than normal controls; women treated for this disorder reported


<<<PAGE 3077>>>
improvement as allopregnanolone levels decreased.
Neurosteroids, Memory Disorders, and Aging. Neurosteroid levels may be
irregular in neurodegenerative disorders and aging conditions such as
Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease. DHEA levels at age 70 are only
about 20 percent of their maximum value recorded in the late 20s, and some
researchers believe DHEA supplementation can prevent or slow the cognitive
declines associated with the aging process. However, conflicting studies have
indicated that DHEA administration does not improve cognitive measures in
patients. Also, in patients with Alzheimer disease, DHEA concentrations are
markedly decreased.

PSYCHONEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
The term psychoneuroendocrinology encompasses the structural and
functional relationships between hormonal systems and the CNS and
behaviors that modulate and are derived from both. Classically, hormones
have been defined as the products of endocrine glands transported by the
blood to exert their action at sites distant from their release. Advances in
neuroscience have shown, however, that in the CNS, the brain not only serves
as a target site for regulatory control of hormonal release but also has
secretory functions of its own and serves as an end-organ for some hormonal
actions. These complex interrelationships make classic distinctions between
the origin, structure, and function of neurons and those of endocrine cells
dependent on physiologic context.
Hormone Secretion
Hormone secretion is stimulated by the action of a neuronal secretory product
of neuroendocrine transducer cells of the hypothalamus. Examples of
hormone regulators (Table 33-6) include corticotropin-releasing hormone
(CRH), which stimulates adrenocorticotropin (adrenocorticotropic hormone
[ACTH]); TRH, which stimulates the release of TSH; gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH), which stimulates the release of luteinizing hormone (LH)
and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH); and somatostatin (somatotropin
release-inhibiting factor [SRIF]) and growth-hormone-releasing hormone
(GHRH), which influence growth hormone (GH) release. Chemical signals


<<<PAGE 3078>>>
cause the release of these neurohormones from the median eminence of the
hypothalamus into the portal hypophyseal bloodstream and subsequent
transport to the pituitary to regulate the release of target hormones. Pituitary
hormones, in turn, act directly on target cells (e.g., ACTH on the adrenal
gland) or stimulate the release of other hormones from peripheral endocrine
organs. Also, these hormones have feedback actions that regulate secretion
and exert neuromodulatory effects in the CNS.
Table 33-6
Examples of Regulating Hormones
Regulating Hormone

Hormone Stimulated (or
Inhibited)

Corticotropin-releasing hormone

Adrenocorticotropic hormone

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone

Thyroid-stimulated hormone

Luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone

Luteinizing hormone

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone

Follicle-stimulating hormone

Somatostatin

Growth hormone (inhibited)

Growth hormone-releasing
hormone

Growth hormone

Progesterone, oxytocin

Prolactin

Arginine vasopressin

Adrenocorticotropic hormone

From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:162.

Table 33-7
Classifications of Hormones
Structure

Examples

Storage

Proteins,

ACTH, β-endorphin, Vesicles

Lipid
Soluble
No


<<<PAGE 3079>>>
polypeptides,
glycoproteins

TRH, LH, FSH

Steroids, steroid-like
compounds

Cortisol, estrogen,
thyroxine

Diffusion after Yes
synthesis

Functions
Autocrine

Self-regulatory
effects

Paracrine

Local or adjacent
cellular action

Endocrine

Distant target site

ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; LH, luteinizing
hormone; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone.
Courtesy of Victor I Reus, M.D. and Sydney Frederick-Osborne, Ph.D.

Hormones are divided into two general classes: (1) proteins, polypeptides,
and glycoproteins, and (2) steroids and steroid-like compounds (Table 33-7);
these are secreted by an endocrine gland into the bloodstream and are
transported to their sites of action.
Developmental Psychoneuroendocrinology
Hormones can have both organizational and activational effects. Exposure to
gonadal hormones during critical stages of neural development directs
changes in brain morphology and function (e.g., sex-specific behavior in
adulthood). Similarly, thyroid hormones are essential for the normal
development of the CNS, and thyroid deficiency during critical stages of
postnatal life will severely impair growth and development of the brain,
resulting in behavioral disturbances that may be permanent if replacement
therapy is not instituted.
Endocrine Assessment
Neuroendocrine function can be studied by assessing baseline measures and
by measuring the response of the axis to some neurochemical or hormonal
challenge. The first method has two approaches. One approach is to measure


<<<PAGE 3080>>>
a single time point—for example, morning levels of growth hormone; this
approach is subject to significant error because of the pulsatile nature of the
release of most hormones. The second approach is to collect blood samples at
multiple points or to collect 24-hour urine samples; these measurements are
less susceptible to significant errors. The best approach, however, is to
perform a neuroendocrine challenge test, in which the person is given a drug
or a hormone that perturbs the endocrine axis in some standard way. Persons
with no disease show much less variation in their responses to such challenge
studies than in their baseline measurements.
Hypothalamic–Pituitary–Adrenal Axis
Since the earliest conceptions of the stress response by Hans Selye and
others, investigation of HPA function has occupied a central position in
psychoendocrine research. CRH, ACTH, and cortisol levels all rise in
response to a variety of physical and psychic stresses and serve as prime
factors in maintaining homeostasis and developing adaptive responses to
novel or challenging stimuli. The hormonal response depends on the
characteristics of the stressor and how one assesses and copes with it. Aside
from generalized effects on arousal, distinct effects on sensory processing,
stimulus habituation and sensitization, pain, sleep, and memory storage and
retrieval have been documented. In primates, social status can influence
adrenocortical profiles and, in turn, be affected by exogenously induced
changes in hormone concentration.
Pathologic alterations in HPA function have been associated primarily with
mood disorders, PTSD, and dementia of the Alzheimer type, although recent
animal evidence points toward the role of this system in substance use
disorders as well. Disturbances of mood are found in more than 50 percent of
patients with Cushing syndrome (characterized by elevated cortisol
concentrations), with psychosis or suicidal thought apparent in more than 10
percent of patients studied. Cognitive impairments similar to those seen in
major depressive disorder (principally in visual memory and higher cortical
functions) are common and relate to the severity of the hypercortisolemia and
possible reduction in hippocampal size. In general, reduced cortisol levels
normalize mood, and mental status. Conversely, in Addison disease
(characterized by adrenal insufficiency), apathy, social withdrawal, impaired


<<<PAGE 3081>>>
sleep, and decreased concentration frequently accompany prominent fatigue.
Replacement of glucocorticoid (but not of electrolyte) resolves behavioral
symptomatology.
Similarly, HPA abnormalities are reversed in persons who are treated
successfully with antidepressant medications. Failure to normalize HPA
abnormalities is a poor prognostic sign. Alterations in HPA function
associated with depression include elevated cortisol concentrations, failure to
suppress cortisol in response to dexamethasone, increased adrenal size and
sensitivity to ACTH, a blunted ACTH response to CRH, and, possibly,
elevated CRH concentrations in the brain.
Hypothalamic–Pituitary–Gonadal Axis
The gonadal hormones (progesterone, androstenedione, testosterone,
estradiol, and others) are steroids that are secreted principally by the ovary
and testes, but significant amounts of androgens arise from the adrenal cortex
as well. The prostate gland and adipose tissue, also involved in the synthesis
and storage of dihydrotestosterone, contribute to individual variance in sexual
function and behavior.
The timing and presence of gonadal hormones play a critical role in the
development of sexual dimorphisms in the brain. Developmentally, these
hormones direct the organization of many sexually dimorphic CNS structures
and functions, such as the size of the hypothalamic nuclei and corpus
callosum, neuronal density in the temporal cortex, the organization of
language ability, and responsivity in Broca motor speech area. Women with
congenital adrenal hyperplasia—a deficiency of the enzyme 21-hydroxylase,
which leads to high exposure to adrenal androgens in prenatal and postnatal
life, in some studies—are more aggressive and assertive and less interested in
traditional female roles than female control subjects. Sexual dimorphisms
may also reflect acute and reversible actions of relative steroid concentrations
(e.g., higher estrogen levels transiently increase CNS sensitivity to serotonin).
Testosterone. Testosterone is the primary androgenic steroid, with both
androgenic (i.e., facilitating linear body growth) and somatic growth
functions. Testosterone is associated with increased violence and aggression
in animals and correlation studies in humans, but anecdotal reports of


<<<PAGE 3082>>>
increased aggression with testosterone treatment have not been substantiated
in investigations in humans. In hypogonadal men, testosterone improves
mood and decreases irritability. Varying effects of anabolic–androgenic
steroids on mood have been noted anecdotally. A prospective, placebocontrolled study of anabolic–androgenic steroid administration in normal
subjects reported positive mood symptoms, including euphoria, increased
energy, and sexual arousal, in addition to increases in the negative mood
symptoms of irritability, mood swings, violent feelings, anger, and hostility.
Testosterone is essential for sexual desire in both men and women. In
males, muscle mass and strength, sexual activity, desire, thoughts, and
intensity of sexual feelings depend on normal testosterone levels, but these
functions are not augmented by supplemental testosterone in those with
normal androgen levels. Adding small amounts of testosterone to routine
hormonal replacement in postmenopausal women has proved, however, to be
as beneficial as its use in hypogonadal men.
Dehydroepiandrosterone. DHEA and DHEA sulfate (DHEA-S) are
adrenal androgens secreted in response to ACTH and represent the most
abundant circulating steroids. DHEA is also a neurosteroid that is synthesized
in situ in the brain. DHEA has many physiologic effects, including a
reduction in neuronal damage from glucocorticoid excess and oxidative
stress. Behavioral interest has centered on its possible involvement in
memory, mood, and several psychiatric disorders. Adrenarche is the
prepubertal onset of adrenal production of DHEA-S and may play a role in
human maturation through increasing the activity of the amygdala and
hippocampus and promoting synaptogenesis in the cerebral cortex. DHEA
has been shown to act as an excitatory neurosteroid and to enhance memory
retention in mice, but studies of DHEA administration to humans have not
consistently shown any improvement in cognition. Several trials of DHEA
administration point to an improvement in well-being, mood, energy, libido,
and functional status in depressed individuals. Administration of DHEA to
women with adrenal insufficiency (e.g., Addison disease) has repeatedly been
demonstrated to enhance mood, energy, and sexual function; effects in men
remain to be assessed. Mood, fatigue, and libido improved in human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-positive patients treated with DHEA in one
study, and DHEA and DHEA-S are inversely correlated with severity in


<<<PAGE 3083>>>
ADHD. Women diagnosed with fibromyalgia have significantly decreased
DHEA-S levels, but supplementation does not improve outcomes. Several
cases of possible DHEA-induced mania have been reported, and DHEA has
been reported to be inversely related to extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) in
patients with schizophrenia who are treated with antipsychotics. DHEA
administration, in these cases, improves EPS.
Double-blind treatment studies have shown antidepressant effects of
DHEA in patients with major depression, midlife-onset dysthymia, and
schizophrenia, although beneficial effects on memory have not been reliably
demonstrated. A small, double-blind trial of DHEA treatment of Alzheimer
disease failed to reveal significant benefit, although a near-significant
improvement in cognitive function was seen after 3 months of treatment.
Animal studies suggest that DHEA may be involved in eating behavior,
aggressiveness, and anxiety as well, with its effects resulting from its
transformation into estrogen, testosterone, or androsterone from its
antiglucocorticoid activity, or direct effects on GABAA, NMDA, and σ
receptors. Because of the putative antiglucocorticoid effects, the ratio of
cortisol to DHEA levels may be particularly crucial in understanding adaptive
responses to stress. Both cortisol and DHEA appear to be involved in fear
conditioning, with the cortisol/DHEA ratio hypothesized to be an index of the
degree to which an individual is buffered against the adverse effects of stress.
This ratio is related to some measures of psychopathology and response to
treatment, predicting the persistence of the first episode major depression and
being related to the degree of depression, anxiety, and hostility in patients
with schizophrenia and response to antipsychotic treatment. Patients with
PTSD have higher DHEA levels and lower cortisol/DHEA ratios related to
symptom severity, suggesting a role in PTSD recovery. Fear-potentiated
startle is more extensive in individuals with high as compared to low
cortisol/DHEA-S ratios and is positively associated with cortisol and
negatively with DHEA-S. More significant DHEA response to ACTH is
related to lower PTSD ratings, and the cortisol/DHEA ratio to negative mood
symptoms. A genetic variation in an ACTH receptor promoter has been
found to influence DHEA secretion in response to dexamethasone and may
underlie some individual differences in stress response.
Estrogen and Progesterone. Estrogens can influence neural activity in


<<<PAGE 3084>>>
the hypothalamus and limbic system directly through the modulation of
neuronal excitability, and they have complex multiphasic effects on
nigrostriatal dopamine receptor sensitivity. Accordingly, evidence indicates
that the antipsychotic effect of psychiatric drugs can change over the
menstrual cycle and that the risk of tardive dyskinesia depends partly on
estrogen concentrations. Several studies have suggested that gonadal steroids
modulate spatial cognition and verbal memory and are involved in impeding
age-related neuronal degeneration. Increasing evidence also suggests that
estrogen administration decreases the risk and severity of dementia of the
Alzheimer type in postmenopausal women. Estrogen has mood-enhancing
properties and can also increase sensitivity to serotonin, possibly by
inhibiting monoamine oxidase. In animal studies, long-term estrogen
treatment results in a decrease in serotonin 5-HT1 receptors and an increase in
5-HT2 receptors. In oophorectomized women, significant reductions in
tritiated imipramine binding sites (which indirectly measure presynaptic
serotonin uptake) were restored with estrogen treatment.
The association of these hormones with serotonin is hypothetically relevant
to mood change in premenstrual and postpartum mood disturbances. In
premenstrual dysphoric disorder, a constellation of symptoms resembling
major depressive disorder occurs in most menstrual cycles, appearing in the
luteal phase and disappearing within a few days of the onset of menses. No
definitive abnormalities in estrogen or progesterone levels have been
demonstrated in women with the premenstrual dysphoric disorder, but
decreased serotonin uptake with premenstrual reductions in steroid levels has
been correlated with the severity of some symptoms.
Most psychological symptoms associated with the menopause are reported
during perimenopause rather than after complete cessation of menses.
Although studies suggest no increased incidence of major depressive
disorder, reported symptoms to include worry, fatigue, crying spells, mood
swings, diminished ability to cope, and diminished libido or intensity of
orgasm. Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is effective in preventing
osteoporosis and reinstating energy, a sense of well-being, and libido;
however, its use is very controversial. Studies have shown that combined
estrogen–progestin drugs (e.g., Premarin) cause small increases in breast
cancer, heart attack, stroke, and blood clots among menopausal women.


<<<PAGE 3085>>>
Studies of the effects of estrogen alone in women who have had
hysterectomies (because estrogen alone increases the risk for uterine cancer)
are ongoing.
Hypothalamic–Pituitary–Thyroid Axis
Thyroid hormones are involved in the regulation of nearly every organ
system, mainly those integral to the metabolism of food and the regulation of
temperature, and are responsible for the optimal development and function of
all body tissues. Also, to its prime endocrine function, TRH has direct effects
on neuronal excitability, behavior, and neurotransmitter regulation.
Thyroid disorders can induce virtually any psychiatric symptom or
syndrome, although no consistent associations of specific syndromes and
thyroid conditions are found. Hyperthyroidism is commonly associated with
fatigue, irritability, insomnia, anxiety, restlessness, weight loss, and
emotional lability; marked impairment in concentration and memory may
also be evident. Such states can progress into delirium or mania, or they can
be episodic. On occasion, a real psychosis develops, with paranoia as a
frequent presenting feature. In some cases, psychomotor retardation, apathy,
and withdrawal are the presenting features rather than agitation and anxiety.
Symptoms of mania have also been reported following the rapid
normalization of thyroid status in hypothyroid individuals and may covary
with thyroid level in individuals with episodic endocrine dysfunction. In
general, behavioral abnormalities resolve with normalization of thyroid
function and respond symptomatically to traditional psychopharmacological
regimens.
The psychiatric symptoms of chronic hypothyroidism are generally well
recognized (Fig. 33-27). Classically, fatigue, decreased libido, memory
impairment, and irritability are noted, but an actual secondary psychotic
disorder or dementia-like state can also develop. Suicidal ideation is
common, and the lethality of actual attempts is profound. In milder,
subclinical states of hypothyroidism, the absence of gross signs
accompanying endocrine dysfunction can result in its being overlooked as a
possible cause of a mental disorder.
Growth Hormone


<<<PAGE 3086>>>
Growth hormone deficiencies interfere with growth and delay the onset of
puberty. Low GH levels can result from a stressful experience.
Administration of GH to individuals with GH deficiency benefits cognitive
function in addition to its more obvious somatic effects, but evidence
indicates poor psychosocial adaptation in adulthood for children who were
treated for GH deficiency. A significant percentage of patients with major
depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder may have a GH deficiency. Some
prepubertal and adult patients with diagnoses of major depressive disorder
exhibit hyposecretion of GHRH during an insulin tolerance test, a deficit that
has been interpreted as reflecting alterations in both cholinergic and
serotonergic mechanisms. Several GH abnormalities have been noted in
patients with anorexia nervosa. Secondary factors, such as weight loss,
however, in both major depressive disorder and eating disorders, may be
responsible for alterations in the endocrine release.

FIGURE 33-27
Myxedema: The patient with severe hypothyroidism (myxedema) has a dull, puffy
facies. The edema, often particularly pronounced around the eyes, does not pit
with pressure. The hair and eyebrows are dry, coarse, and thinned. The skin is
dry. (From Bickley LS, Szilagyi P. Bates’ Guide to Physical Examination and
History Taking, 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2003.)

Nonetheless, at least one study has reported that GHRH stimulates food


<<<PAGE 3087>>>
consumption in patients with anorexia nervosa and lowers food consumption
in patients with bulimia. Administration of GH to older men increases lean
body mass and improves vigor. GH is released in pulses throughout the day,
but the pulses are closer together during the first hours of sleep than at other
times.
Prolactin
Since its identification in 1970, the anterior pituitary hormone prolactin has
been examined as a potential index of dopamine activity, dopamine receptor
sensitivity, and antipsychotic drug concentration in studies of CNS function
in psychiatric patients and as a correlate of stress responsivity. The secretion
of prolactin is under direct inhibitory regulation by dopamine neurons located
in the tuberoinfundibular section of the hypothalamus and is, therefore,
increased by classical antipsychotic medications. Prolactin also inhibits its
secretion using a short-loop feedback circuit to the hypothalamus. Also, a
significant number of prolactin-releasing or prolactin-modifying factors have
been identified, including estrogen, serotonin (mainly through the 5-HT2 and
5-HT3 receptors), norepinephrine, opioids, TRH, T4, histamine, glutamate,
cortisol, CRH, and oxytocin, with interaction effects possible. For example,
estrogen may promote the serotonin-stimulated release of prolactin.
Prolactin is primarily involved in reproductive functions. During
maturation, prolactin secretion participates in gonadal development, whereas,
in adults, prolactin contributes to the regulation of the behavioral aspects of
reproduction and infant care, including estrogen-dependent sexual receptivity
and breast-feeding. In female rats, prolactin secretion is strongly stimulated
with exposure to pups. In women, basal prolactin levels are elevated in the
postpartum period before weaning, and prolactin release is stimulated by
suckling. Hyperprolactinemia is associated with low testosterone in men and
reduced libido in men and women. In rodents, prolactin level is increased
along with corticosterone in response to such stressful stimuli as
immobilization, hypoglycemia, surgery, and cold exposure and may be
specifically associated with the use of passive coping in the face of a stressor.
Prolactin promotes various stress-related behaviors in rats, depending on the
condition, such as increasing object-directed exploration while decreasing
other exploration.


<<<PAGE 3088>>>
Patients with hyperprolactinemia often complain of depression, decreased
libido, stress intolerance, anxiety, and increased irritability. These behavioral
symptoms usually resolve in parallel with decrements in serum prolactin
when surgical or pharmacologic treatments are used. In psychotic patients,
prolactin concentrations and prolactin-related sexual disturbances have been
positively correlated with the severity of tardive dyskinesia. Prolactin levels
are also positively correlated with adverse symptoms in schizophrenia.
Melatonin
Melatonin, a pineal hormone, is derived from the serotonin molecule and it
controls photoperiodically mediated endocrine events (particularly those of
the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis). It also modulates immune
function, mood, and reproductive performance and is a potent antioxidant and
free-radical scavenger. Melatonin has a depressive effect on CNS excitability,
is an analgesic, and has seizure-inhibiting effects in animal studies.
Melatonin can be a useful therapeutic agent in the treatment of circadian
phase disorders such as jet lag. Intake of melatonin increases the speed of
falling asleep, as well as its duration and quality.
Oxytocin
Oxytocin, also a posterior pituitary hormone, is involved in osmoregulation,
the milk ejection reflex, food intake, and female maternal and sexual
behaviors. Oxytocin may be released during orgasm, more so in women than
in men, and promote bonding between the sexes. It has been used in autistic
children experimentally in an attempt to increase socialization.
Insulin
Increasing evidence indicates that insulin may be integrally involved in
learning and memory. Insulin receptors occur in high density in the
hippocampus and are thought to help neurons metabolize glucose. Patients
with Alzheimer disease have lower insulin concentrations in the CSF than
controls, and both insulin and glucose dramatically improve verbal memory.
Depression is frequent in patients with diabetes, as are indexes of impaired
hormonal response to stress. It is not known whether these findings represent
the direct effects of the disease or are secondary, nonspecific effects. Some


<<<PAGE 3089>>>
antipsychotics are known to dysregulate insulin metabolism.
Endocrine Variables in Psychiatric Disorders
Although it is clear that alterations in endocrine regulation are involved in the
pathophysiology and treatment responses of many psychiatric disorders,
incorporating these findings into clinical diagnostic assessment, and decisionmaking remains problematic. Large-scale longitudinal or cost-effectiveness
studies are rare, despite indications that baseline alterations in glucocorticoid
regulation and thyroid status (two of the best-studied abnormalities) may be
useful in subtyping psychiatric disorders and prediction of outcome.
Alterations in HPA/stress regulation underlie several psychiatric diagnoses
and may serve as complementary independent variables in assigning
treatment response and course of illness to the classical behavioral categories
that have thus far defined psychiatric practice. Studying genetic
polymorphisms in factors regulating hormonal response may help us better
understand the influence of hormonal variability on the illness and also
possible underlying differences in the illness as reflected in these genetic
subtypes.

IMMUNE SYSTEM AND CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
INTERACTIONS
Interactions between the immune system and the CNS play a critical role in
the maintenance of bodily homeostasis and the development of diseases,
including psychiatric disease. Alterations in CNS function brought about by a
variety of stressors have been shown to influence both the immune system as
well as diseases that involve the immune system. Moreover, many of the
relevant hormonal and neurotransmitter pathways that mediate these effects
have been elucidated. Of considerable interest is accumulating data that
cytokines, which derive from immune cells and microglia, have profound
effects on the CNS. The relative role of cytokines and their signaling
pathways in the various psychiatric diseases is an area of active investigation,
as is the role of infectious and autoimmune diseases in the pathophysiology
of psychiatric disorders. These findings highlight the importance of
interdisciplinary efforts involving the neurosciences and immunology for
gaining new insights into the etiology of psychiatric disorders.


<<<PAGE 3090>>>
Overview of the Immune System
The immune system can protect the body from the invasion of foreign
pathogens, such as viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites. Also, the immune
system can detect and eliminate cells that have become neoplastically
transformed. These functions are accomplished through highly specific
receptors on immune cells for molecules derived from invading organisms
and a rich intercellular communication network that involves direct cell-tocell interactions and signaling between cells of the immune system by soluble
factors called cytokines. The body’s absolute dependence on the efficient
functioning of the immune system is illustrated by the less than 1-year
survival rate of untreated infants born with severe combined
immunodeficiency disease and the devastating opportunistic infections and
cancers that arise during untreated acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS).
Behavioral Conditioning
The fact that learning processes are capable of influencing immunologic
function is an example of interactions between the immune system and the
nervous system. Several classical conditioning paradigms have been
associated with suppression or enhancement of the immune response in
various experimental designs. The conditioning of immunologic reactivity
provides further evidence that the CNS can have significant
immunomodulatory effects.
Some of the first evidence for immunologic conditioning was derived from
the serendipitous observation that animals undergoing extinction in a tasteaversion paradigm with cyclophosphamide, an immunosuppressive agent,
had unexpected mortality. In that taste-aversion paradigm, animals were
simultaneously exposed to an oral saccharin solution (the conditioned
stimulus) and an intraperitoneal injection of cyclophosphamide
(unconditioned stimulus). Because the animals experienced considerable
physical discomfort from the cyclophosphamide injection, through the
process of conditioning, they began to associate the ill effects of
cyclophosphamide with the taste of the oral saccharin solution. If given a
choice, the animals avoided the saccharin solution (taste aversion).
Conditioned avoidance can be eliminated or extinguished if the saccharin is


<<<PAGE 3091>>>
repeatedly presented in the absence of cyclophosphamide. However, it was
observed that animals undergoing extinction of cyclophosphamide-induced
taste aversion died unexpectedly, leading to the speculation that the oral
saccharin solution had a specific conditioned association with the
immunosuppressive effects of cyclophosphamide. Repeated exposure to the
saccharin-associated conditioned immunosuppression during extinction might
explain the unexpected death of animals. To test that hypothesis, researchers
conditioned the animals with saccharin (conditioned stimulus) and
intraperitoneal cyclophosphamide (unconditioned conditioned stimulus) and
then immunized them with sheep red blood cells. At different times after
immunization, the conditioned animals were re-exposed to saccharin
(conditioned stimulus) and examined. The conditioned animals exhibited a
significant decrease in mean antibody titers to sheep red blood cells when
compared to the control animals. Thus, the evidence demonstrated that
immunosuppression of humoral immunity was occurring in response to the
conditioned stimulus of saccharin alone.
Stress and the Immune Response
Interest in the effects of stress on the immune system grew out of a series of
animal and human studies suggesting that stressful stimuli can influence the
development of immune-related disorders, including infectious diseases,
cancer, and autoimmune disorders. Although stress has been historically
associated with suppression of immune function, recent data indicate that
such a conclusion oversimplifies the complexities of the mammalian immune
response to environmental perturbation and that stress may also activate
certain aspects of the immune system, particularly the innate immune
response.
Stress and Illness. Experiments conducted on laboratory animals in the
late 1950s and the early 1960s indicated that a wide variety of stressors—
including isolation, rotation, crowding, exposure to a predator, and electric
shock—increased morbidity and mortality in response to several types of
tumors and infectious diseases caused by viruses and parasites. However, as
research progressed, it became increasingly clear that “stress” is too
variegated a concept to have singular effects on immunity and that the effects


<<<PAGE 3092>>>
of stress on immunity depend on several factors. Chief among these factors is
whether a stressor is acute or chronic. Other critical variables include stressor
severity and type, as well as the timing of stressor application and the type of
tumor or infectious agent investigated. For example, mice subjected to
electric grid shock 1 to 3 days before the infection of Maloney murine
sarcoma virus-induced tumor cells exhibited decreased tumor size and
incidence. In contrast, mice exposed to grid shock 2 days after tumor cell
injection exhibited an increase in tumor size and number.
The relevance of the effects of stress on immune-related health outcomes
in humans has been demonstrated in studies that have shown an association
between chronic stress and increased susceptibility to the common cold,
reduced antibody responses to vaccination, and delayed wound healing. Also,
stress, as well as depression, through their effects on inflammation, has been
linked to increased morbidity and mortality in infectious diseases, such as
HIV infection, autoimmune disorders, neoplastic diseases, as well as diabetes
and cardiovascular disorders, which are increasingly being recognized as
diseases in which the immune system, inflammation, in particular, plays a
pivotal role (Fig. 33-28).
Effects of Chronic Stress. When challenged with a medical illness or
chronic psychological stressor, complex interactions between the immune
and nervous systems promote a constellation of immune-induced behavioral
changes, alternatively referred to as “sickness syndrome” or “sickness
behavior.” These behavioral changes include dysphoria, anhedonia, fatigue,
social withdrawal, hyperalgesia, anorexia, altered sleep–wake patterns, and
cognitive dysfunction. Although seen in response to infection, the full
syndrome can be reproduced in humans and laboratory animals by the
administration of innate immune cytokines. Blocking cytokine activity
diminishes or prevents the development of sickness behavior in laboratory
animals, even when such behavior develops as a result of psychological
stress. Evidence that cytokine-induced behavioral toxicity is related to
significant depression comes in part from studies showing that in humans and
laboratory animals, antidepressants can abolish or attenuate the development
of sickness behavior in response to cytokine administration.


<<<PAGE 3093>>>
FIGURE 33-28
Inflammation and disease. IL, interleukin; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; NF-kB,
nuclear factor κB; C RP, C-reactive protein. (From Cowles MK, Miller AH. Stress
cytokines and depressive illness. In: Squire LR, ed. The New Encyclopedia of
Neuroscience. Academic Press; 2009:521, with permission.)

Relevance of Immune System–CNS Interactions to Psychiatric
Disorders
Major Depression. The neuropsychiatric disorder that has been best
characterized in terms of the influence of the brain on the immune system and
vice versa is major depression. For many years major depression was seen as
the quintessential example of how stress-related disorders may decrease
immunocompetence. More recently, however, it has become evident that
stress also activates inflammatory pathways, even while suppressing
measures of acquired immunity. Not surprisingly, studies now indicate that,
in addition to immunosuppression, major depression is also frequently
associated with inflammatory activation. Recent research showing that
proinflammatory cytokines are capable of suppressing many of the immune
measures examined in major depression may provide a mechanism to account
for how chronic stress-induced inflammatory activity may give rise to
depression-related suppression of in vitro functional assays, such as


<<<PAGE 3094>>>
lymphocyte proliferation.
Bipolar Disorder. Patients with bipolar disorder evince many of the
immune alterations frequently observed in the context of unipolar depression.
Several studies have observed that bipolar patients, particularly when manic,
demonstrate increased plasma concentrations of inflammatory cytokines.
Other studies indicate that treatments for mania, such as lithium, lower
plasma concentrations of several cytokines. Of interest, the available
literature seems to suggest that patients in the manic phase of the disorder
may be more likely than depressed patients to demonstrate increased
inflammatory markers. It should not be surprising that mania—which seems
the phenomenologic opposite of depression—should be associated with
increased inflammation, given that mania and depression have also been
reported to show identical neuroendocrine and autonomic abnormalities, such
as dexamethasone non suppression and increased sympathetic activity, both
of which would be expected to promote inflammatory activity.
Schizophrenia. There has been growing interest in the idea that infectious
agents, particularly viruses, may underlie at least some cases of
schizophrenia. Although it is well established that viral encephalitis can
present clinically as psychosis, the primary focus of the “viral hypothesis” for
schizophrenia has been on infections during neurodevelopment, given its
congruence with the emerging consensus that prenatal or early postnatal
insult is implicated in the causality of schizophrenia. Several lines of indirect
evidence suggest that viral infection during CNS development may be
involved in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. The data include: (1) an
excess number of patient births in the late winter and early spring, suggesting
possible exposure to viral infection in utero during the fall and winter peak of
viral illnesses, (2) an association between exposure to viral epidemics in
utero and the later development of schizophrenia, (3) higher prevalence of
schizophrenia in crowded urban areas, which have conditions that are
particularly conducive to the transmission of viral pathogens, and (4)
seroepidemiologic studies indicating a higher infection rate for certain viruses
in schizophrenia patients or their mothers.
Also, schizophrenia has been associated with indices of immune activation,
including elevations in cytokines. Although these immune findings in


<<<PAGE 3095>>>
patients with schizophrenia may indicate evidence of immune system
activation secondary to an infection, it should be noted that they might also
indicate that an autoimmune process is involved in the disorder. Despite the
plethora of studies pointing to abnormalities in cellular and humoral
immunity in schizophrenia, the data have not been uniform or conclusive, and
there is a need for more studies that account for confounding variables such
as medication status and tobacco use. Moreover, attempts to isolate infectious
agents from schizophrenic brain tissue or to detect viral nucleic acids in the
CNS or peripheral blood of patients with schizophrenia have generally
yielded negative results.
Because the initial neuronal abnormalities in schizophrenia have been
proposed to arise during neurodevelopment, a perinatal viral infection could
insidiously disrupt development and then be cleared by the immune system
before clinical diagnosis. In such a scenario, host factors such as cytokines
could be responsible for causing the developmental abnormality by
interacting with growth factors or adhesion molecules. Recent animal models
have identified that maternal immune activation with resultant production of
interleukin 6 (IL-6) critically affects behavioral and transcriptional changes in
offspring. Behavioral changes, including deficits in prepulse inhibition and
latent inhibition, are consistent with behavioral abnormalities in animal
models of both schizophrenia and autism. Various animal models using
influenza virus, Borna disease virus, or lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus in
rodents have demonstrated that prenatal or postnatal viral infections can lead
to neuroanatomical or behavioral alterations that are somewhat reminiscent of
schizophrenia in humans. As mentioned earlier, epidemiologic studies also
support the link between infection with a teratogenic virus and the
development of psychotic disorders later in life. Associations have been
observed between maternal infection with rubella or influenza during
gestation and the development of a schizophrenia spectrum disorder in the
offspring. Similarly, maternal antibodies to the herpes simplex virus that
develops during pregnancy are correlated with increased rates of psychosis
during adulthood in the offspring.
Non-HIV retroviruses might also play a role in the pathogenesis of
schizophrenia. Retroviruses integrate into host DNA and can disrupt the
function of adjacent genes. Moreover, the genomes of all humans contain
sequences of “endogenous retroviruses” that hold the capacity to alter the


<<<PAGE 3096>>>
transcriptional regulation of host genes. If genes controlling the development
or function of the brain undergo transcriptional disruption by retroviral
effects, then this might lead to a cascade of biochemical abnormalities,
eventually giving rise to schizophrenia.
Autism. Although a convincing case can be made for a significant immune
component in autism, the relationship of immune abnormalities to the
neurobehavioral symptoms of the disease remains controversial. Recent
epidemiologic studies have not substantiated the claim that childhood
vaccines trigger autism, and immune-based therapies for autism have not
been reliably effective. Thus, although it is tempting to speculate that the
immune system holds a clue to a cure for autism, there is currently not
enough data to determine whether immune anomalies cause autism, are
caused by autism or are just adventitiously associated with the disease.
Alzheimer Disease. Although Alzheimer disease is not considered an
inflammatory disease primarily, emerging evidence indicates that the immune
system may contribute to its pathogenesis. The discovery that amyloid
plaques are associated with acute-phase proteins, such as complement
proteins and C-reactive protein, suggests the possibility of an ongoing
immune response. The idea that inflammatory processes are involved in
Alzheimer disease has been bolstered by recent studies showing that longterm use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is negatively
correlated with the development of Alzheimer disease.
HIV AIDS. AIDS is an immunologic disease associated with a variety of
neurologic manifestations, including dementia. HIV encephalitis results in
synaptic abnormalities and loss of neurons in the limbic system, basal
ganglia, and neocortex.
Multiple Sclerosis. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating disease
characterized by disseminated inflammatory lesions of white matter.
Considerable progress has been made in elucidating the immunopathology of
myelin destruction that occurs in MS and the animal model for the disease,
experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. Although the initial step in lesion
formation has not been determined, disruption of the BBB and infiltration of


<<<PAGE 3097>>>
T cells, B cells, plasma cells, and macrophages appear to be associated with
lesion formation.
Other Disorders. Finally, several disorders are seen in which neuralimmune interactions are suspected but not well documented. Chronic fatigue
syndrome is an illness with a controversial etiology and pathogenesis. Also,
to persistent fatigue, symptoms frequently include depression and sleep
disturbances. Tests of immune function have found indications of both
immune activation and immunosuppression. Neuroendocrine assessments
indicate that patients with chronic fatigue syndrome may be hypocortisolemic
because of impaired activation of the HPA axis. Although an acute viral
infection frequently precedes the onset of chronic fatigue syndrome, no
infectious agent has been causally associated with it.
In contrast, Lyme disease, in which sleep disturbances and depression are
also common, is caused by infection with the tick-borne spirochete Borrelia
burgdorferi, which can invade the CNS and cause encephalitis and
neurologic symptoms. Lyme disease is remarkable because it appears to
produce a spectrum of neuropsychiatric disorders, including anxiety,
irritability, obsessions, compulsions, hallucinations, and cognitive deficits.
Immunopathology of the CNS may be involved because symptoms can
persist or reappear even after a lengthy course of antibiotic treatment, and the
spirochete is frequently difficult to isolate from the brain. Gulf War syndrome
is a controversial condition with inflammatory and neuropsychiatric features.
The condition has been attributed variously to combat stress, chemical
weapons (e.g., cholinesterase inhibitors), infections, and vaccines. Given the
impact of stress on neurochemistry and immune responses, these pathogenic
mechanisms are not mutually exclusive.
Therapeutic Implications
The bidirectional nature of CNS–immune system interactions implies the
therapeutic possibility that agents known to alter stress system activity
positively might benefit immune functioning and, conversely, that agents that
modulate immune functioning may be of potential benefit in the treatment of
neuropsychiatric disturbance, especially in the context of medical illness.
Increasing evidence supports both hypotheses.


<<<PAGE 3098>>>
Antidepressants and the Immune System. Emerging data indicate that
in animals and humans, antidepressants attenuate or abolish behavioral
symptoms induced by inflammatory cytokine exposure. For example,
pretreatment of rats with either imipramine or fluoxetine (a TCA and SSRI,
respectively) for 5 weeks before endotoxin administration significantly
attenuated endotoxin-induced decrements in saccharine preference
(commonly accepted as a measure for anhedonia), as well as weight loss,
anorexia, and reduced exploratory, locomotor, and social behavior. Similarly,
several studies in humans suggest that antidepressants can ameliorate mood
disturbances in the context of chronic cytokine therapies, especially if given
prophylactically before cytokine exposure. For example, the SSRI paroxetine
significantly decreased the development of major depression in patients
receiving high doses of interferon-α (IFN-α) for malignant melanoma.
Behavioral Interventions and Immunity. It has been known for years
that psychosocial factors can mitigate or worsen the effects of stress, not only
on immune functioning but also on the long-term outcomes of medical
conditions in which the immune system is known to play a role. Therefore,
behavioral interventions aimed at maximizing protective psychosocial factors
might be predicted to have a beneficial effect, not only in terms of mitigating
the effect of stress on immune functioning but perhaps also on diminishing
emotional disturbances that arise in the context of immune system
dysregulation.
Two factors that have been repeatedly identified as protective against
stress-induced immune alterations are social support and the ability to see
stressors as being to some degree under the individual’s control. One study
used a genome-wide scan to assess gene expression activity in socially
isolated versus nonisolated individuals. It found that social isolation was
associated with increased activation of several proinflammatory cytokinerelated pathways and reduced activity in anti-inflammatory cytokine
pathways, as well as in the glucocorticoid receptor, which plays an essential
role in the neuroendocrine control of inflammatory processes. Of interest, the
two types of psychotherapy most often examined in illnesses associated with
immune dysregulation are group therapy, which provides social support, and
cognitive behavioral therapy, which provides cognitive reframing techniques
aimed at enhancing one’s sense of agency (and hence control).


<<<PAGE 3099>>>
NEUROGENETICS
Starting from the rediscovery of Gregor Mendel’s basic concepts at the turn
of the 20th century, the field of genetics has matured into an essential
cornerstone not only of the biologic sciences but of all of medicine. The
discovery of the basic structure and properties of DNA in the middle of the
century led to an exponential acceleration in our understanding of all aspects
of the life sciences, including deciphering the complete sequence of the
human genome and those of myriad other species. Massive databases of such
sequences now provide 21st-century biologists with the task of decoding the
functional significance of all this information. In particular, researchers are
trying to determine how to sequence variations contributing to the phenotypic
variation between species and individuals within a species. In humans, we
hope that discoveries about the relationship between genotypes and
phenotypes will revolutionize our understanding of why and how some
individuals but not others develop common diseases. This hope is particularly
vital for psychiatry, as our knowledge of the pathogenic mechanisms of the
psychiatric disease remains sparse.
Genetic mapping studies aim to identify the genes implicated in heritable
diseases, based on their chromosomal location. These studies are carried out
by investigating affected individuals and their families through two
approaches, linkage, and association (Fig. 33-29). It is now straightforward to
genetically map Mendelian traits (traits for which a specific genotype at one
particular locus is both necessary and sufficient to cause the trait). Psychiatric
diseases, however, do not follow simple Mendelian inheritance patterns but
rather are examples of etiologically complex traits. Etiologic complexity may
be due to many factors, including incomplete penetrance (expression of the
phenotype in only some of the individuals carrying the disease-related
genotype), the presence of phenocopies (forms of the disease that are not
caused by genetic factors), locus heterogeneity (different genes associated
with the same disease in different families or populations), or polygenic
inheritance (risk for the disease only increases if susceptibility variants at
multiple genes act in concert). Mapping a complex disorder involves several
component steps, including the definition of the phenotype to be studied,
epidemiologic studies to determine the evidence for genetic transmission of
that phenotype, choice of an informative study population, and determination


<<<PAGE 3100>>>
of the appropriate experimental and statistical approaches.
Genetic Epidemiologic Approaches
Genetic epidemiologic investigations provide quantitative evidence regarding
the degree to which given trait aggregates in families and can suggest to what
degree such aggregation reflects a genetic contribution to the etiology of the
trait. Family studies compare the aggregation of disease among the relatives
of affected individuals compared to control samples. Because these studies do
not differentiate between genetic and environmental contributions to such
familial aggregation, they provide only indirect evidence regarding the
heritability of a trait. Often these studies measure the relative risk (λ), defined
as the rate of occurrence of disease among specified categories of relatives of
an affected individual divided by the rate of occurrence of the disease for the
general population. A relative risk of >1 suggests a genetic etiology, and the
magnitude of the measure gives an estimate of the genetic contribution to the
disease. Relative risks can be calculated for sibling pairs, parent–offspring
pairs, and various other types of family relationships. Likely modes of
transmission can be assessed by comparing the degree of relative risk for
each type of relationship. Multiple family studies have been carried out for
many of the major psychiatric disorders, including major depression, bipolar
disorder, schizophrenia, and OCD. Although these studies have consistently
reported familial aggregation for all of these disorders, the degree of such
aggregation has varied substantially across studies, mainly reflecting
differences in phenotype definition and how study samples were ascertained
and assessed.


<<<PAGE 3101>>>
FIGURE 33-29
Comparison of gene-mapping strategies. Genetic mapping approaches can be
divided into those that rely on linkage analysis and those that rely on association
analysis. Linkage studies can be further categorized as either focused on
investigation of pedigrees or focused on investigation of sib pairs. Association
studies can be categorized as either case–control or family-based. Some of the
key features as well as advantages and disadvantages of these different
approaches are shown. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:321.)

Twin studies examine the concordance rates of a particular disorder (the
percentage of twin pairs where both twins have the disorder) in monozygotic
(MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twins. For a disorder that is strictly determined by
genetic factors, the concordance rate should be 100 percent in MZ twin pairs
(who share 100 percent of their genetic material) and 25 or 50 percent in DZ
twin pairs (who are no more closely related than any siblings), depending on
whether the disease is recessive or dominant, respectively. For a disorder
where genetic factors play a role in disease causation but are not the
exclusive cause of disease, the concordance rates should be more significant
for MZ twins than those for DZ twins. The higher the degree of concordance
of MZ twins, the higher the trait heritability or the evidence for a genetic


<<<PAGE 3102>>>
contribution to disease risk. When genetic factors do not play a role, the
concordance rates should not differ between the twin pairs, under the
simplifying assumption that the environment for MZ twin pairs is no more
similar than that for DZ twin pairs. Several twin studies that have been
conducted for traits such as autism, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia have
consistently suggested high heritability and have therefore spurred efforts to
map loci for each of these conditions genetically. Different twin studies may,
however, generate varying point estimates for the heritability of any given
disorder. When evaluating the results of twin studies, it is, therefore, essential
to scrutinize how the phenotype was ascertained because, as with family
studies, the different heritability estimates are likely due to differences in the
mode of assessing and defining phenotypes. For example, early twin studies
of psychiatric disorders often relied on their phenotypes on unstructured
interviews by a single clinician.
In contrast, modern studies generally utilize standardized assessments and
a review of diagnostic material by a panel of expert clinicians. Similarly, part
of the apparent variation in heritability between different twin studies can be
attributed to the fact that some studies employ narrow definitions of
affectedness for a given phenotype. Other studies employ broader phenotype
definitions (e.g., considering a twin with major depressive disorder to be
phenotypically concordant with a co-twin diagnosed with bipolar disorder).
Because of such differences in approach across studies, it is usually prudent
to view such investigations as providing a rough estimate of the genetic
contribution to trait variability. Nevertheless, even such estimates are useful
in deciding which traits are likely to be mappable.
Basic Concepts of Gene Mapping
Recombination and Linkage. Once genetic epidemiologic studies of
particular phenotypes have suggested that these phenotypes are heritable,
genetic mapping studies are conducted to identify the specific genetic
variants that contribute to the risk of the disorder. All genetic mapping
methods aim to identify disease-associated variants based on their
chromosomal position and the principle of genetic linkage. All cells contain
two copies of each chromosome (called homologs), one inherited from the
mother and one inherited from the father. During meiosis, the parental


<<<PAGE 3103>>>
homologs cross over, or recombine, creating unique new chromosomes that
are then passed on to the progeny. Genes that are physically close to one
another on a chromosome are genetically linked, and those that are farther
apart or are on different chromosomes are genetically unlinked. Unlinked
genes will recombine at random (i.e., there is a 50 percent chance of
recombination with each meiosis). Genetic loci that are linked will recombine
less frequently than expected by random segregation, with the degree of
recombination proportional to the physical distance between them. The
principle of linkage underlies the use of genetic markers, segments of DNA
of known chromosomal locations that contain variations or polymorphisms
(described in more detail later). Strategies to map disease genes are based on
identifying genetic marker alleles that are shared—to a greater extent than
expected by chance—by affected individuals. It is presumed that such sharing
reflects linkage between a disease locus and a marker locus, that is, the alleles
at both loci are inherited “identical by descent” (IBD), from a common
ancestor, and that this linkage pinpoints the chromosomal site of the disease
locus.
The evidence for linkage between two loci depends on the recombination
frequency between them. Recombination frequency is measured by the
recombination fraction (Θ). It is equal to the genetic distance between the two
loci (1 percent recombination equals 1 centimorgan [cM] in the genetic
distance and, on average, covers a physical distance of about 1 megabase
[mB] of DNA). A recombination fraction of 0.5 or 50 percent indicates that
two loci are not linked but rather that they are segregating independently. A
LOD (logarithm of the odds) score is calculated to determine the likelihood
that two loci are linked at any particular genetic distance. The LOD score is
calculated by dividing the likelihood of acquiring the data if the loci are
linked at a given recombination fraction by the likelihood of acquiring the
data if the loci are unlinked (Θ = 0.5). This step gives an odds ratio, and the
log (base 10) of this odds ratio is the LOD score. A LOD score can be
obtained for various values of the recombination fraction, from Θ = 0
(completely linked) to Θ = 0.5 (unlinked). The value of Θ that gives the
largest LOD score is considered to be the best estimate of the recombination
fraction between the disease locus and the marker locus. This recombination
fraction can then be converted into a genetic map distance between the two
loci.


<<<PAGE 3104>>>
Linkage Disequilibrium. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) is a phenomenon
that is used to evaluate the genetic distance between loci in populations rather
than in families. When alleles at two loci occur together in the population
more often than would be expected given the allele frequencies at the two
loci, those alleles are said to be in LD. When strong LD is observed between
two loci, it usually indicates that the two loci are sited in very close physical
proximity to one another on a given chromosome and is useful in mapping
disease susceptibility loci because one locus can be used to predict the
presence of another locus. This predictability is vital because current genemapping strategies can sample only a subset of the estimated 10 million
common human polymorphisms. Because of the existence of LD, one can use
data from a subset of genotyped polymorphisms to infer genotypes at nearby
loci. Clusters of alleles that are in LD and inherited as a single unit are termed
haplotypes. Thus LD mapping “consolidates” genomic information by
identifying haplotypes in populations that can then be used to infer IBD
sharing among unrelated individuals.
There are several methods to measure the extent of LD. One of the most
commonly used measures of LD is r2, a measure of the difference between
observed and expected haplotype probabilities. Unlike D′, another widely
used measure of LD, r2 values do not depend on the allele frequencies of the
loci being assessed. A considerable r2 value indicates that the observed
frequency of association between two alleles is more significant than that
expected by chance; that is, the alleles are in LD. LD studies have
traditionally been used to complement traditional pedigree analyses, for
example, to hone in on a locus that has been mapped by linkage analysis.
However, LD-based association analysis has become the method of choice
for whole-genome screens, particularly for diseases where traditional linkage
studies have been unsuccessful. These studies have one great advantage over
a traditional family analysis. Because affected individuals are chosen from an
entire population, the only limit to the number of potential subjects is the
population size and disease frequency. Maximizing the potential number of
affected individuals that can be included in the analysis is extremely
important for disorders where genetic heterogeneity or incomplete penetrance
is likely to be a factor.


<<<PAGE 3105>>>
Genetic Markers. Mapping studies, regardless of their type, depend on the
availability of genetic markers. The most widely used markers are
microsatellite markers (also called simple tandem repeats [STRs], or simple
sequence length polymorphisms [SSLPs]) and SNPs. SSLPs are stretches of
variable numbers of repeated nucleotides two to four base pairs in length.
These markers are highly polymorphic, as the number of repeat units at any
given STR locus varies substantially between individuals. SNPs, as the name
implies, are single base pair changes at a specific nucleotide; they are the
most common form of sequence variation in the genome. SNPs are widely
used for genetic mapping studies because they are distributed so widely
across the genome and because they can be assessed in a high-throughput,
automated fashion. Other forms of genetic variation that have been
investigated for use as genetic markers include small insertion or deletion
polymorphisms, termed indels, that generally range between 1 and 30 base
pairs and copy number variations (CNVs), which can refer to either deletions
or duplications. Recent genome-wide surveys have revealed that CNVs are
common and can range in length from several base pairs to several million
base pairs. CNVs may contribute to chromosomal recombination and
rearrangements, thereby playing an essential role in generating genetic
diversity. Also, as many of these variants are sizable, it is hypothesized that
they may significantly influence the expression of genes that encompass or
are adjacent to the variant.
Mapping Strategies
The genetic variants that contribute to disease susceptibility can be roughly
categorized into those that are highly penetrant and those that are of low
penetrance. High-penetrance variants, by definition, have a large effect on
phenotype, and therefore identifying these variants usually provides
fundamental insights into pathobiology. Because individuals carrying highpenetrance variants have a high probability of expressing a disease
phenotype, such variants tend to be rare and to segregate in families and are
generally most powerfully mapped using pedigree-based approaches (see Fig.
33-29). In contrast, low-penetrance variants have a relatively weak effect on
phenotype, and therefore identification of individual low-penetrance variants
may, at least initially, provide relatively little new biologic knowledge.


<<<PAGE 3106>>>
However, because of their small effects, such variants are typically frequent,
and identifying them may add to our understanding of disease risk. Because
we do not expect these variants to segregate strongly with the disease
phenotype in pedigrees, efforts to identify them focus on population samples.
Pedigree Analysis. A pedigree analysis, which is conducted in
multigenerational families, consists of scanning the genome or a portion of
the genome with a series of markers in one or more affected pedigrees,
calculating a LOD score at each marker position, and identifying the
chromosomal regions that show a significant deviation from what would be
expected under independent assortment. The primary goal of the pedigree
analysis is to determine if two or more genetic loci (i.e., a genetic marker of
known location and the unknown disease loci) are cosegregating within a
pedigree.
Following the successful application of pedigree analysis to map
Mendelian disorders such as Huntington disease, many investigators adopted
this strategy for mapping psychiatric disease genes with, at best, mixed
success. In the late 1980s and mid-1990s, several pedigree-based studies
reported the mapping of susceptibility loci for Alzheimer disease, bipolar
disorder, and schizophrenia. Although the linkage findings for three
Alzheimer disease loci were relatively quickly replicated, the findings
reported for bipolar disorder and schizophrenia were ultimately determined to
have been false positives. Several different explanations have been proposed
for the failure of pedigree-based approaches to map psychiatric loci;
however, most investigators now recognize that these studies were generally
drastically underpowered, considering the apparent etiologic complexity of
psychiatric disorders.
Pedigree analysis in psychiatry has increasingly turned toward an
application that is more appropriately powered, namely, the mapping of
quantitative trait loci (QTLs). QTLs are defined as genetic loci that contribute
to the variation in continuously varying traits (as opposed to categorical traits
such as disease diagnoses). QTLs are typically loci of small effect that only
contribute to a portion of the observed variance of a trait in the population. It
is now generally accepted that using analytical methods developed in the late
1990s, it may be possible to use pedigree studies to map a wide range of
quantitative traits that are relevant for understanding psychiatric disorders.


<<<PAGE 3107>>>
Several such studies are now being undertaken, typically with multiple
phenotypes being assessed in each individual in the pedigree.
Sib-Pair Analysis. Affected sib-pair (ASP) analysis became widely used
during the 1990s for the genetic mapping of complex traits, including many
psychiatric disorders. Sib-pair analysis examines the frequency with which
sibling pairs concordant for a trait share a particular region of the genome
compared with the frequency that is expected under random segregation.
Sib-pair analysis is based on the fact that siblings share approximately 50
percent of their genomes IBD. Therefore, if a set of unrelated sib pairs
affected with a given trait shares a particular area of the genome at a
frequency significantly more significant than 50 percent (the proportion of
sharing expected under conditions of random segregation), then that area of
the genome is likely to be linked to the trait in question. In this method,
siblings are genotyped, and population frequencies and parental genotypes
are used to estimate the proportion of genes shared IBD at each site for each
sib-pair. The linkage analysis then compares those pairs concordant and
discordant for each locus.
Like pedigree studies, ASP studies have more power to locate genes of a
large effect than genes of small effect. This limitation can be partially
addressed by a two-tiered design that incorporates additional markers or
family members after an initial linkage study in affected siblings or by an
increased sample size. It generally requires less effort to identify and assess
even large sets of affected sibs than to identify and assess all members of
extended pedigrees, mainly when investigators can take advantage of data
repositories that include samples and phenotype data from sib pairs
ascertained from multiple sites. For example, the U.S. National Institute of
Mental Health (NIMH) maintains such repositories for sizable collections of
sib pairs affected with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, autism, and Alzheimer
disease. An additional benefit of the ASP design is that it allows for the
incorporation of epidemiologic information, permitting the simultaneous
examination of environmental and gene–environment interactions.
Association Studies. In the last few years, there has been increasing
acceptance of the notion that association studies are more powerful than
linkage approaches for mapping the loci of relatively small effects that are


<<<PAGE 3108>>>
thought to underlie much of the risk for complex disorders. Whereas linkage
studies attempt to find cosegregation of a genetic marker and a disease locus
within a family or families, association studies examine whether a particular
allele occurs more frequently than expected in affected individuals within a
population. As noted previously in this chapter, mapping of genes using
association studies is based on the idea that specific alleles at markers closely
surrounding a disease gene will be in LD with the gene; that is, these alleles
will be carried in affected individuals more often than expected by random
segregation, because they are inherited IBD.
There are two common approaches to association studies (see Fig. 33-29),
case-control designs, and family-based designs, which typically investigate
trios (mother, father, and an affected offspring). In a case-control study, allele
frequencies are compared between a group of unrelated affected individuals
and a matched control sample. This design is generally more powerful than a
family-based design because large samples of cases and controls are more
straightforward to collect than trios and are less expensive since they require
the genotyping of fewer individuals. Case-control samples may be the only
practical design for traits with a late age of onset (such as Alzheimer disease)
for which parents of affected individuals are typically unavailable. The main
drawback of the case-control approach is the potential problem of population
stratification; if the cases and controls are not carefully matched
demographically, then they may display substantial differences in allele
frequency that reflect population differences rather than associations with the
disease.
Family-based association studies are designed to ameliorate the problem of
population stratification. In this design, the nontransmitted chromosomes (the
copy of each chromosome that is not passed from parent to child) are used as
control chromosomes, and differences between allele frequencies in the
transmitted and nontransmitted chromosomes are examined, eliminating the
problem of stratification, as the comparison group is by definition genetically
similar to the case group. Although more robust to population stratification
than a case-control study, family-based studies are only about two-thirds as
powerful using the same number of affected individuals, as noted previously.
Until recently, it was not practical to conduct association studies on a
genome-wide basis, as relatively few SNPs were available. Therefore,
association studies focused on testing one or a few markers in candidate


<<<PAGE 3109>>>
genes chosen based on their hypothesized function with a given disease.
Recently, however, as a result of international efforts that have identified
millions of SNPs distributed relatively evenly across the genome and that
have developed technology for genotyping them relatively inexpensively,
genome-wide association (GWA) studies are now a reality. Such studies hold
much promise for the identification of common variants contributing to
common diseases. While few GWA studies of psychiatric disorders have
been completed, such studies have already reported remarkable findings for
complex traits such as rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, and
type 2 diabetes. The successful studies of these diseases have made use of
extensive samples (in some cases up to several thousand cases and controls),
providing further support for the hypothesis that underpowered study designs
bear much of the responsibility for the disappointing results to date of
psychiatric genetic investigations.
Statistical Considerations. Scientists in other biomedical research fields
are often surprised by the high level of statistical evidence that geneticists
require to consider a linkage or association result to be significant. This
requirement can be imagined in terms of the very low expectation that any
two loci are either linked or associated with one another. The likelihood that
any two given loci are linked (i.e., the prior probability of linkage) is
expected to be approximately 1:50, based on the genetic length of the
genome. To compensate for this low prior probability of linkage and bring
the posterior (or overall) probability of linkage to about 1:20, which
corresponds to the commonly accepted significance level of p = 0.05, a
conditional probability of 1,000:1 odds in favor of linkage is required,
corresponding to the traditionally accepted LOD score threshold of 3. This
generally provides an acceptable false-positive rate (Fig. 33-30), but some
false-positive findings have exceeded even this threshold.
Geneticists generally expect that the chance that any two loci in the
genome are associated with one another is even lower than that of their being
in linkage. Typically a p-value of less than about 10−7 is considered to
indicate “genome-wide significance.” This standard essentially discounts the
prior probability that some investigators assign to variants in candidate genes
chosen based on their hypothesized functional relevance to a given disorder
or trait. GWA studies are now replicating associations with very low p-values


<<<PAGE 3110>>>
for a wide range of complex traits, whereas most candidate gene associations
(which usually report as significant much higher p-values) remain
unreplicated. It is, therefore, increasingly apparent that genome-wide levels
of significance are appropriately applied to all initial association studies for a
given trait.

FIGURE 33-30
Number of false positives expected in a whole genome scan for a given threshold
of logarithm of odds (LOD) score. Solid line represents the expectation for a
perfect genetic map. Symbols represent the results for 100 sib pairs using genetic
maps with markers spaced every .1 cM (circles), every 1 cM (squares), and every
10 cM (triangles). The dotted line indicates the 5 percent genome-wide
significance level. (Courtesy of Dr. Eric Lander.)

Defining Phenotypes for Mapping Studies
The generally disappointing results of psychiatric genetic mapping studies
have focused increasing attention on the problem of defining and assessing
phenotypes for such studies. Most psychiatric mapping studies to date have
relied on categorical disease diagnoses, as exemplified by the Diagnostic and


<<<PAGE 3111>>>
Statistical Manual (DSM-5) classification scheme. Criticisms of this
approach rest on two arguments. First, diagnosis of the psychiatric disease
depends on subjective clinical evaluation, a fact that underscores the
difficulty in ascertaining individuals who can be considered affected with a
given disease. Second, even when a psychiatric diagnosis can be established
unambiguously, the menu-based system used for psychiatric classification
provides the possibility that any two individuals affected with a given
disorder may display mostly nonoverlapping sets of symptoms, likely
reflecting distinct etiologies. Concern that the diagnosis-based approach to
phenotyping may represent one of the chief obstacles to the genetic mapping
of psychiatric phenotypes has generated considerable interest in mapping
heritable traits known to demonstrate continuous variation in the population.
Continuous measures that are hypothesized to be related to psychiatric
disorders include biochemical measures (e.g., serum or CSF levels of
neurotransmitter metabolites or hormones), cognitive measures, personality
assessments, structural or functional brain images, biophysical markers such
as responses to evoked potentials, or molecular assays such as gene
expression profiles. Critical features of categorical and continuous
phenotyping strategies are shown in Figure 33-31, and each is discussed in
more detail below.

FIGURE 33-31
Two alternate schemes for conceptualizing psychiatric phenotypes. A:
Categorical Traits as conceptualized by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual


<<<PAGE 3112>>>
(DSM-5) represent a “menu-based” approach to psychiatric disorders. Individuals
are assessed for a checklist of signs and symptoms that are then used to
categorize the individual as “affected” according to a specific diagnosis. Not all
symptoms are present in samples of individuals who carry a particular DSM
diagnosis, and many of these symptoms occur across diagnostic boundaries, as
illustrated in this Venn diagram. DSM phenotypes therefore probably represent
etiologically heterogeneous categories, and this fact may help to explain the
limited progress thus far of genetic mapping investigations focused on these
phenotypes. B: Alternatively, in the Continuous Traits model, “affectedness” can
be conceptualized in terms of an expectation that an individual will demonstrate
extreme values on a set of continuous measures that correlate with
psychopathology and thus are hypothesized to underlie the disorder (as illustrated
by examples of six different types of measures shown in the hexagon). Such
measures may also be associated with particular components of categorical
phenotypes, such as those depicted in the Venn diagram in Figure 33-31A. The
justification for using continuous measures as the phenotypes for genetic
mapping studies is that they are considered etiologically simpler and more reliably
assessed compared to categorical phenotypes. In addition, mapping such traits
combines information from all members of the study population (affected and
unaffected individuals alike), which adds considerably to power. (From Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:325.)

Categorical Phenotypes. The most commonly used categorical
phenotypes in psychiatry are DSM diagnoses. Some studies focus on a single
DSM diagnosis, whereas other studies include individuals with a range of
different diagnoses. The latter approach is typically used for disorders that are
hypothesized to represent a single disease spectrum, such as mood disorders.
The categorical approach is designed to help us classify subjects as
unambiguously as possible. Several strategies are used to accomplish this
goal. The first strategy involves deciding on the appropriate diagnostic
criteria for the study in question and deciding how these criteria will be
applied to individuals in the study. One way of standardizing the procedures
used to identify and assess potential study subjects is to use only experienced
clinicians in the diagnostic process and to train them in the administration of
the instruments and the diagnostic criteria to be employed. Also, a “best
estimate” procedure or a consensus diagnosis is frequently used. The best
estimate process involves making use of every piece of available information,
including medical records, interviews, and videotapes, to arrive at a
diagnosis. For a consensus diagnosis, two or more diagnosticians
independently review the material and make a diagnosis for each individual.
The diagnoses are then compared, and individuals for whom an agreement in


<<<PAGE 3113>>>
diagnosis cannot be reached are not entered as “affected” into the study.
A well-designed study makes use of all available information about the
genetic epidemiology of the disorder to choose a sample of affected
individuals to study. It is often the case that a subset of families carries the
disorder in what appears to be a simple Mendelian pattern, whereas the
inheritance pattern is less clear for other families or groups. In a disorder
where there are likely to be multiple genes contributing to the phenotype, it
makes sense, to begin with, a study sample where there may be significant
loci. Redefining the disease phenotype can often simplify the mapping
process by identifying such groups or families. For example, in the search for
a genetic defect for Alzheimer disease, the process was advanced enormously
by limiting the study population to those individuals who had an early age of
onset (before age 65); the early-onset trait segregated in an autosomal
dominant fashion. Other ways of redefining the phenotype include focusing
on factors such as ethnic background, age of onset, treatment response,
symptom severity, or the presence of comorbid disorders.
Narrowing the phenotype using the approaches discussed earlier may
increase the chances of finding a genetic defect in complex diseases, but it
can also significantly reduce the power of the study by limiting the number of
available affected individuals. For this reason, it has been argued that for
some disorders broadening the phenotype is an appropriate strategy. The
suggestion is that for some complex diseases, the phenotype of interest may
represent the end of a spectrum and that other phenotypes within the
spectrum must also be included to have enough power to map genes. For
example, mapping studies of bipolar disorder might include affected
individuals with major depressive disorder as well as those individuals
diagnosed with bipolar disorder.
Although the two approaches of narrowing the disease phenotype and
broadening the disease phenotype may seem to be mutually exclusive, many
groups studying complex disorders have incorporated both approaches into
their study designs. One way to do this is to create stratified diagnostic
categories, ranging from a narrow diagnostic category to a broad diagnostic
category, and test for genetic linkage under each of these schemas. Some
investigators argue that for complex diseases that are part of a spectrum, this
strategy decreases the rate of false negatives, that is, of missing an existing
linkage because of misspecification. Others argue that using several models


<<<PAGE 3114>>>
and picking the one that gives the highest scores dramatically increases the
rates of false positives, that is, of identifying an area of linkage where none
exists. One problem that exists with the use of multiple diagnostic categories
is that as more models are used (and therefore more statistical tests are
performed), increasingly stringent levels of evidence are required to consider
a result significant.
While categorical phenotypes remain the mainstay of psychiatric genetic
studies, the limitations of DSM nosology as the basis of phenotyping for
genetic studies are becoming apparent. Genetic investigations are focusing
increasingly on traits that may be components of one or more DSM
diagnostic categories. For example, there is growing evidence that genetic
susceptibility to psychosis, broadly defined, contributes to both severe bipolar
disorder and schizophrenia, and several investigative approaches are being
employed to attempt to identify genes that underlie such susceptibility and
even to explore possible etiologic relationships between psychiatric and
nonpsychiatric disorders. For example, bioinformatics models have been
employed to investigate medical records databases and have uncovered
extensive pairwise correlations among a diverse list of psychiatric disorders,
neurologic disorders, autoimmune disorders, and infectious diseases.
Eventually, the results of such model-fitting experiments may provide a
framework to design more powerful linkage and association studies that can
search for alleles that contribute to susceptibility to multiple disorders.
Continuous Phenotypes. Because of the difficulties experienced in
genetic mapping of categorical diagnoses, neurobehavioral geneticists are
increasingly focused on investigating quantitative traits that are hypothesized
to underlie a particular psychiatric diagnosis, and that may be simpler to map
genetically. The rationale for efforts to map such alternative phenotypes or
endophenotypes is that the genes identified through such efforts may provide
clues regarding the biologic pathways that are relevant to understanding a
particular disorder. Several features characterize useful endophenotypes.
First, they should be state-independent; that is, they should not fluctuate as a
function of the disease course or medication treatment and should show
adequate test–retest stability. Second, they should be heritable; that is, there
should be evidence that genetic factors are responsible for a substantial
proportion of the variability of the trait within the population. Third, the


<<<PAGE 3115>>>
endophenotype should be correlated with the disease under investigation; that
is, different values of the trait measure are observed in patients compared to
unrelated control subjects.
Measures of brain structure and function provide most of the traits now
under investigation as endophenotypes for psychiatric disorders. For
example, several features of brain morphometry (as assessed by MRI) are
highly heritable (in the range of 60 to 95 percent), including total brain
volume, cerebellar volume, gray and white matter density, amygdala and
hippocampal volume, and regional cortical volume. Several studies show that
brain structural features that are correlated in clinical samples with disorders
such as schizophrenia or bipolar disorder are also abnormal in relatives of
affected individuals. Physiologic measures of brain activity that have been
employed as candidate endophenotypes for psychiatric disorders include
electroencephalography (EEG) patterns. Several “pencil and paper”
assessments have been employed to measure endophenotypes relating to
neurocognitive function and temperament.
Animal Models. In contrast to categorical phenotypes, endophenotypes can
be more straightforwardly related to phenotypes that can be assessed in
animal models. Studies of genetic variations that affect circadian rhythms
provide a good example. Variations in circadian rhythms have long been
recognized as prominent features of mood disorders, and quantitative
assessments of activity patterns have been proposed as endophenotypes for
such disorders. Numerous studies in animal models have demonstrated that
genetically controlled biologic clocks determine circadian activity and that
variations in clock genes are associated with variations in such activity from
bacteria to humans. Genetic mapping efforts in fruit flies starting in the early
1970s resulted in the identification of at least seven “clock genes,” beginning
with a period. Subsequent studies showed that the homologs of several of
these genes play essential roles in regulating mammalian circadian rhythms.
Genetic mapping studies in mice also have identified previously unknown
circadian rhythm genes, beginning with the discovery and characterization in
the early 1990s of a clock. These genetic discoveries have not only explicated
the cellular networks and neurophysiologic circuits responsible for the
control of mammalian circadian rhythms. However, they have also generated
animal models that may shed light on the pathobiology of psychiatric


<<<PAGE 3116>>>
syndromes such as bipolar disorder. For example, mice carrying a targeted
mutation in the clock demonstrate abnormal activity patterns, such as
hyperactivity and decreased sleep, which is modified by the administration of
lithium.
Progress in the Genetics of Specific Disorders
The progress in identifying susceptibility genes for psychiatric disorders has
been disappointing compared to that observed for nonpsychiatric disorders.
Alzheimer disease represents the most successful application of genemapping strategies to complex neurobehavioral disorders, and the section on
this disease provides an example of how genetic linkage studies add to the
understanding of the pathogenesis of a complex trait. An overview section on
autism describes genetic investigations of syndromes that have features of
autism but have relatively simple inheritance patterns and discusses how
these studies have provided starting points for investigations of more
complex ASDs. Finally, the frustrating search for unequivocal gene findings
for bipolar disorder and schizophrenia is used to illustrate the challenges that
are motivating new approaches in the field of neurobehavioral genetics.
Alzheimer Disease. Alzheimer disease provides an excellent example of
the power of genetics to elucidate the complex biology of a neuropsychiatric
disorder. Alzheimer disease is a well-defined form of dementia characterized
by progressive impairment of memory and intellectual functioning. The
clinical signs and symptoms, although characteristic, are not limited to
Alzheimer disease; they are also found in several other types of dementia. For
this reason, the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease can only be confirmed
histopathologically at autopsy. The presence of senile plaques (made up of a
core of β-amyloid fibrils surrounded by dystrophic neurites), tau-rich
neurofibrillary tangles, and congophilic angiopathy in the brain parenchyma
and associated blood vessels are pathognomonic for Alzheimer disease.
A variable age of onset has been noted for Alzheimer disease, ranging
from as early as age 35 to as late as age 95. The concordance rate for
Alzheimer disease in MZ twin pairs is about 50 percent, indicating a
moderately substantial genetic contribution to disease risk. It is now evident
from a wide range of genetic studies that Alzheimer disease can be divided


<<<PAGE 3117>>>
into two broad categories. These are the familial forms, which account for a
tiny minority of Alzheimer disease cases and are characterized by early onset
and autosomal dominant inheritance with high penetrance; and sporadic
forms, in which the genetic contribution is hypothesized to be similar to that
characterizing other common neuropsychiatric diseases.
The search for the genetic basis of familial Alzheimer disease began with
traditional linkage studies. First, an investigation of a candidate locus on
chromosome 21 in humans identified mutations in the amyloid precursor
protein (APP) gene in a small number of families in which significant linkage
had previously been observed to markers from this region. Transgenic mice
with different APP mutations were created and have been shown to produce
β-amyloid deposits and senile plaques as well as to show synapse loss,
astrocytosis, and microgliosis, all part of the pathology of Alzheimer disease.
Mutations in the genes that encode β-APP all lead to an increase in the
extracellular concentration of longer fragments of β-amyloid (Aβ42). Most of
the strains of transgenic mice with mutations in APP exhibit increased rates
of behavioral changes and impairment in several memory tasks, indicating
dysfunction in object-recognition memory and working memory, among
others. These findings represent striking evidence that mutations in the βamyloid gene are indeed responsible for at least some of the histopathologic
elements of Alzheimer disease.
Even as the preceding findings were being reported, it was clear that
mutations in the β-amyloid gene could not wholly explain the etiology and
pathology of Alzheimer disease, not least because it was shown that linkage
to chromosome 21 was excluded in most early-onset Alzheimer disease
families. Also, no neurofibrillary tangles are observed in most of the different
β-amyloid transgenic mice. The subsequent search for the genetic
underpinnings of Alzheimer disease using genome-wide linkage analysis of
early-onset Alzheimer disease families resulted in the identification of two
additional Alzheimer disease susceptibility genes: presenilin-1 (PS-1) on
chromosome 14q24.3 and presenilin-2 (PS-2) on chromosome 1q. PS-1 and
PS-2 are integral transmembrane proteins with at least seven transmembrane
domains. Although their function has not yet been completely elucidated,
they are involved in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. Inactivation of
presenilins in mice leads to neurodegeneration and behavioral manifestations
of memory loss. Biochemical and cellular studies have implicated presenilins


<<<PAGE 3118>>>
in several critical pathways, including apoptosis (programmed cell death) and
protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum.
These findings emphasize one of the strengths of using family-based
linkage analysis. Pedigree-based studies are especially suited to identify
highly penetrant disease genes that serve essential roles in critical biologic
processes. Although mutations in APP and presenilin are rare, research into
the biology of the expressed proteins has provided vital insights into the
pathophysiology of dementia. Because these highly penetrant mutations
elucidate essential biologic functions, they also provide a firm ground to
design therapeutic interventions. For example, amyloid-β “vaccines”
designed to induce an immunogenic response to pathogenic amyloid are now
in advanced clinical trials. Unlike the current psychopharmacological
treatments for Alzheimer disease that nonspecifically target cholinergic and
glutaminergic neuronal systems, the amyloid-β vaccines may specifically
treat the causes of Alzheimer disease by generating an immune response that
may reverse the deposition of senile plaques.
SPORADIC AND LATE-ONSET ALZHEIMER DISEASE. Mutations in APP, PS-1, or

PS-2 are present in a majority of familial cases of early-onset Alzheimer
disease but do not account for sporadic or familial late-onset Alzheimer
disease. For this reason, investigators turned to other approaches to search for
evidence of linkage in a large number of small families with late-onset
Alzheimer disease. In 1991, the results of a nonparametric linkage study
using 36 markers in late-onset Alzheimer disease families provided evidence
for a susceptibility gene on the long arm of chromosome 19. In 1993,
association studies revealed that the e4 allele of the apolipoprotein E gene
was strongly associated with late-onset Alzheimer disease and that this
association almost certainly was responsible for the previously observed
linkage signal on chromosome 19. There are three known alleles of this gene
—e2, e3, and e4. In most populations, the e3 allele is the most common.
However, in familial late-onset Alzheimer disease, the incidence of e4 is
approximately 50 percent, and in sporadic late-onset Alzheimer disease, it is
40 percent, compared with about 16 percent in normal controls.
Epidemiologic studies suggest that between 30 and 60 percent of late-onset
Alzheimer disease cases have at least one apoE-e4 allele. The e4 genotype
appears to be a more important risk factor for Alzheimer disease in


<<<PAGE 3119>>>
populations of European and Asian origin when compared with populations
of African origin. Overall, the association of apoE-e4 with Alzheimer disease
remains probably the most robust association yet identified for a common
human disease.
The establishment of apoE-e4 as a susceptibility allele for late-onset
Alzheimer disease has led to the search for additional alleles that might
interact with apoE-e4 to modify disease risk. In 2007, investigators used
GWA strategies (in histologically confirmed cases and controls) to identify
GAB2 (GRB-associated binding protein 2) as an additional risk allele in
apoE-e4 carriers (but not in Alzheimer disease patients who were not e4
carriers). Initial studies suggest that carriers of both apoE-e4 and GAB2 risk
alleles have an almost 25-fold more significant risk for Alzheimer disease
than individuals who do not carry either risk allele. Larger-scale GWA
studies of Alzheimer disease are in progress and will likely yield further
associations; however, it is unlikely that any will have as strong an effect as
apoE.
Autism. Autism is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder that is
characterized by three primary features: impaired language and
communication; abnormal or impaired social interaction; and restricted,
repetitive, and stereotyped patterns of behavior. Understanding the etiology
of autism has proceeded slowly, but there is convincing evidence that
alterations in specific cellular and molecular neurodevelopmental pathways
are essential in its etiology. In comparison with other neuropsychiatric
disorders, there is particularly strong evidence for a genetic contribution to
the risk of autism and ASDs. The sibling recurrence risk for autism or ASD is
between 2 and 6 percent. Given a population prevalence of about 1 in 2,000
(0.04 percent), this means that the siblings of autistic individuals are
approximately 50 to 100 times more likely to develop autism than a person in
the general population. Twin studies of autism show extraordinarily high
heritability (as demonstrated by MZ twin concordance of 80 to 92 percent)
but also demonstrate the genetic complexity of these disorders, with the DZ
twin concordance rate of 1 to 10 percent suggesting a highly multigenic mode
of inheritance.
Increasing interest is now focused on the possibility that individuals
affected with autism may display more considerable numbers of large-scale


<<<PAGE 3120>>>
chromosomal aberrations (5 to 10 percent in some studies) than unaffected
individuals. Also, to such gross abnormalities, several recent studies have
suggested that autism is associated with an unusually high prevalence of
submicroscopic CNVs. For example, in 2007, the Autism Genome Project
Consortium applied microarray strategies to almost 8,000 individuals from
about 1,500 families, each with at least two affected family members, and
found that about 10 percent of the ASD families carried CNVs, with an
average size of more than 3 million base pairs, mostly consisting of
duplications rather than deletions. Although the design of this study did not
permit assessment of whether the frequency of CNVs is higher in patients
with autism than that in controls, another study found a de novo CNV
incidence of 10 percent in sporadic (no family history) cases of autism
compared to an incidence of 1 percent in controls. These results, while
exciting, are still considered preliminary. Even before the demonstration of
high rates of de novo mutations in autism, epidemiologic studies had strongly
suggested that the genetic basis of this disorder is likely complex. For
example, although the risk of autism in first-degree relatives of autistic
probands is high, there is a substantial falloff for second- and third-degree
relatives of such probands, suggesting that multiple genetic variants must
interact to increase susceptibility to this syndrome. Segregation analyses of
autism also support the hypothesis that it is a heterogeneous disorder that
reflects the actions of multiple genetic variants of small effect. A latent class
analysis performed to study possible modes of transmission suggested an
epistatic model with up to about 10 interacting loci, whereas other studies
have estimated that as many as 15 such loci may be involved. Genetic studies
of autism have included whole-genome screens, candidate gene studies,
chromosome rearrangement studies, mutation analyses, and, most recently,
comparative genomic hybridization studies. Taken together and recognizing
that most findings still await adequate replication, these studies have
contributed to an emerging picture of autism susceptibility that includes
genes involved in three major systems: those involving synapse formation
and maintenance, those involving cell migration, and those involving the
excitatory/inhibitory neurotransmitter networks. Figure 33-32 shows a
schematic of the currently known potential candidate genes for autism and
their molecular relationships with one another.


<<<PAGE 3121>>>
SYNAPSE FORMATION AND MAINTENANCE.

Perhaps the most significant
breakthroughs in identifying susceptibility genes for autism have come from
studies of disorders that display clinical features associated with autism or
ASDs but with simpler inheritance patterns, including fragile X syndrome,
tuberous sclerosis, and Rett syndrome. In general, the genetic defects
associated with these disorders affect synapse formation and maintenance.
Fragile X, which accounts for 3 to 4 percent of autism cases, is caused by an
unstable trinucleotide repeat in the 5′ region of the fragile X mental
retardation 1 (FMR1) gene at Xq27.3. This repeat expands as it is transmitted
to succeeding generations, resulting in abnormal methylation and inhibition
of expression of FMR1. FMR1 produces an RNA-binding protein that acts as
a chaperone for the transport of RNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and
is involved in messenger RNA (mRNA) translation at the synapse.
Abnormalities in dendritic spine density (increased over normal) and
anatomy (longer and thinner than normal) have been reported in individuals
with fragile X as well as in mouse models of this disorder. Tuberous
sclerosis, which accounts for perhaps 2 to 10 percent of autism cases (the rate
of tuberous sclerosis is higher among autistic individuals with seizure
disorders), results from mutations in one of two tumor suppressor genes,
TSC1 on 9q34, and TSC2 on 16p13, both of which are involved in guanosine
triphosphatase (GTPase) inactivation. Loss of a single copy of TSC1 in mice
has been shown to disrupt cytoskeletal dynamics and dendritic spine
structure.
Although somewhat less well understood, the genetics of Rett syndrome,
an X-linked pervasive developmental disorder (the first with a known genetic
etiology), also point to abnormalities in synapse formation and maintenance
in ASD and ASD-like disorders. Mutations in MeCP2 cause Rett syndrome.
The gene makes a methylated-DNA-binding protein that regulates gene
expression and chromatin structure. Although little is known about the exact
role of MeCP2 in the development of Rett syndrome, the pattern of normal
early development and later regression suggests that this gene is more likely
to be involved in synapse maintenance and remodeling than in synapse
development.


<<<PAGE 3122>>>
FIGURE 33-32
Schematic of the cell biology of proteins expressed from genes identified through
mapping studies of autism spectrum disorders. The function of each gene product
falls into three broad functional categories. Proteins involved in synapse formation
and maintenance include FMR1, TSC1, TSC2, MeCP2, NLGN 3 and 4, and
SHANK3. Another set of proteins is involved in neuronal migration and cell fate
including REELIN, WNT2, LAMB1, and NrCAM. Proteins involved in
neurotransmitter systems are also altered in some individuals with autism and
include 5-HTT (serotonin transporter encoded by SLC6A4), GABAR, and the
NMDA subunit encoded by GRIN2A. See text for details. (From Persico AM,
Bourgeron T. Searching for ways out of the autism maze: genetic, epigenetic and
environmental clues. Trends Neurosci. 2006;29:349, with permission.)

Neuroligin (NLGN) 3 and 4 and SHANK3, additional genes that appear to
play a role in synapse formation, may be affected by chromosomal
rearrangements observed in some individuals affected with autism. The
neuroligin genes, sited on the X chromosome, produce cell adhesion
molecules that are located on postsynaptic glutamatergic neurons. When
mutated in rodents, these genes show defective trafficking and synapse
induction. In nonmutated form, their expression induces the formation of
normal, presynaptic terminals in axons. SHANK3 is a binding partner of the


<<<PAGE 3123>>>
neuroligins and regulates the structural organization of dendritic spines.
Mutations in SHANK3 have been identified in ASD-affected members of at
least three families to date, and a comparative genomic hybridization study of
autistic individuals, their family members, and controls recently identified a
large deletion in chromosome 22q13, the region containing SHANK3, in at
least one individual with autism.
CELL MIGRATION. Of the regions highlighted by a genome screen in autism

families, chromosome 7q has provided the most consistent evidence for
linkage, albeit over an extensive region. Known chromosomal
rearrangements in this region in individuals affected with autism add to its
interest. The linkage region on chromosome 7q contains several genes that
are strong candidates for autism, most notably RELN, which maps to
chromosome 7q22. RELN codes for reelin, a signaling protein secreted by
Cajal–Retzius cells located in the marginal zone of the developing brain. It
plays a vital role in neuronal migration as well as in the development of
neural connections. Reeler mice, which have spontaneous deletions of RELN,
have cytoarchitectonic alterations in their brains during development that are
similar to those that have been described in autistic brains. The complete
absence of RELN in humans leads to a more severe phenotype with
lissencephaly and severe mental retardation but not autism. Individuals with
autism show reduced levels of reelin mRNA and protein in brain and blood
serum, suggesting that mutations leading to reduced expression of RELN
rather than its absence may be significant in ASD. Genetic association studies
with RELN have been equivocal, suggesting that if RELN does contribute to
the development of autism, then it may play such a role in a small subset of
affected individuals. WNT2 (wingless-type MMTV integration site family
member 2) is another gene identified as a potential candidate for autism based
on linkage studies. WNT2 is located on 7q31 and is part of a family of genes
that encode secreted signaling proteins implicated in several developmental
processes, including the regulation of cell fate and patterning during
embryogenesis. At least two families have been identified in which
nonconservative coding sequence variants in WNT2 segregate with autism.
LD between an SNP in the 3′ untranslated region of WNT2 and autism is also
present in families with severe language abnormalities that accounted for
most of the evidence for linkage on chromosome 7q in one of the original


<<<PAGE 3124>>>
genome screens.
Although there is
little current evidence that mutations in genes encoding neurotransmitter
transporters or receptors are directly responsible for the development of
autism, there is some evidence that such genes might act as modifiers or
susceptibility factors for autism spectrum phenotype. The evidence is perhaps
most robust for the role of the GABA receptors in the development and
expression of autistic disorders. These receptors occur in a cluster on
chromosome 15q11–13, and duplications of this region are the most common
cytogenetic abnormalities seen in autism cases (up to 6 percent of cases).
GABA is an important inhibitory neurotransmitter in the CNS and is
responsible for controlling excitability in mature brains. Chromosome
15q11–13 is one of the most complex regions of the genome. It has a high
rate of genomic instability, including frequent duplication and deletion
events, and imprinting plays a vital role in the expression of genes in this
region. The 15q11–13 region is the critical region for Angelman and Prader–
Willi syndromes, neurologic disorders due to deletions or mutations in this
region that occur on maternally and paternally inherited chromosomes,
respectively.
Despite the high rate of duplications of 15q11–13 among autistic
individuals, genome screens have not shown strong support for linkage or
association to this region. Candidate gene studies continue, however, in part
because a rate of 6 percent of autistic individuals with duplications in this
region is hard to ignore.
EXCITATORY/INHIBITORY NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS.

Bipolar Disorder. The search for the genetic basis of bipolar disorder has
been fraught with missteps and partial answers. The history of genetic
mapping attempts for bipolar disorder illustrates not only the extreme
complexity of psychiatric disorders but also the evolution of genetic
approaches to such diseases. Bipolar disorder is an episodic illness
characterized by recurrent periods of both mania and depression. Psychotic
symptoms are often a part of the clinical picture, particularly in more severely
affected individuals.
Numerous genetic epidemiologic investigations conducted over several
decades have strongly supported a genetic contribution to risk for bipolar


<<<PAGE 3125>>>
disorder. The definition of the bipolar disorder phenotype in these studies has
varied substantially, resulting in a wide range of heritability estimates. This
problem is typical of many psychogenetic studies. For example, many early
studies into the genetic basis of mood disorders did not distinguish between
unipolar and bipolar mood disorders. Furthermore, the diagnostic
methodology used in such early studies differs substantially from that
employed in current-day genetic studies. For example, a Danish twin study
that suggested a very high heritability for bipolar disorder and thereby had a
substantial influence on the design of initial genetic mapping studies of mood
disorders employed only unstructured diagnostic interviews by a single
clinician rather than the structured assessments used in current studies, which
have suggested somewhat lower heritabilities.
Current estimates of the concordance for bipolar disorder range between
65 and 100 percent in MZ twins and 10 and 30 percent in DZ twins. This
ratio indicates that the disorder is highly heritable (between about 60 and 80
percent). Several studies have shown that bipolar disorder is substantially
more heritable than unipolar major depression, which has an estimated
heritability between 30 and 40 percent.
Early family studies suggested that bipolar disorder segregation patterns
were compatible with single-gene inheritance of a locus of significant effect.
However, although some bipolar disorder pedigrees may segregate such a
locus, mounting evidence indicates that if such pedigrees exist, they must be
quite rare. Furthermore, the fact that genetic linkage studies have failed to
uncover such a locus with unequivocal evidence in any pedigrees argues
against this possibility. The observed rapid decrease in recurrence risk for
bipolar disorder from monozygotic co-twins to first-degree relatives is also
not consistent with single-gene inheritance models but instead suggests
models of multiple interacting genes.
EARLY LINKAGE STUDIES. Tremendous excitement followed the first reports of

linkage to bipolar disorder on chromosomes X and 11 in 1987. Investigators
noted that in several families, bipolar disorder and other affective disorders
appeared to be inherited in an X-linked fashion. Likewise, these disorders
appeared to cosegregate in several Israeli families with color blindness and
G6PD deficiency, which map to the X chromosome. Linkage studies in these
pedigrees, using color blindness or G6PD deficiency as marker loci, gave


<<<PAGE 3126>>>
LOD scores between 4 and 9. Early studies of chromosome 11 were similar
to those for chromosome X in that they reported significant linkage after
testing only a few markers in a single region, in this case, in an extended Old
Order Amish pedigree heavily loaded for bipolar disorder.
Not surprisingly, these findings generated a great deal of interest. Both
studies showed high LOD scores and seemed to provide clear evidence for
linkage. However, replication studies in other populations failed to produce
positive results for either the X chromosome or chromosome 11, and
evidence for linkage virtually disappeared in both chromosomal regions in
the samples in which linkage was initially reported when the pedigrees were
extended to include additional affected individuals and when additional
markers were typed in the putative linkage regions. The most likely
explanation in each case is that the original linkage results were false-positive
findings and may have reflected over-optimistic interpretation of evidence
that, in retrospect, was relatively scanty.
GENOME-WIDE SCREENS.

The early linkage studies of bipolar disorder
evaluated only a few markers because they were all that were available. With
the construction of genetic linkage maps of the genome in the 1990s, linkage
studies of most complex traits, including bipolar disorder, began to search
genome-wide. The advantage of genome-wide mapping studies is that they
do not require a priori knowledge of the biologic underpinnings of a
particular phenotype. Complete genome screens provide an opportunity to
evaluate the evidence of linkage at all points in the genome without bias.
Although genome-wide studies had greater power to detect accurate linkage
than studies focused on only a few markers in arbitrary locations or around a
few candidate genes, these investigations have also generally had
disappointing results. The challenge of achieving replicated significant
linkage results for bipolar disorder and other complex traits is apparent when
one reviews the many gene-mapping studies that have suggested—but not
demonstrated unequivocally—bipolar disorder susceptibility loci on
chromosome 18.
CHROMOSOME 18. The first report of linkage came from a partial genome

screen that examined 11 markers on chromosome 18 and identified
suggestive linkage near the centromere. Because the inheritance patterns for


<<<PAGE 3127>>>
bipolar disorder are unknown, the results were analyzed using both recessive
and dominant models. Some of the markers were positive under a recessive
model in some families, some were positive under a dominant model in other
families, and some markers gave positive LOD scores in a subset of families
under both models. Attempts to replicate this finding in other populations
have been mixed. So far, at least two groups have found no evidence for
linkage to the pericentromeric region of chromosome 18 in their samples,
although one other group has found evidence to support linkage to this
region. Other studies have found suggestive evidence for linkage on
chromosome 18, including a complete genome screen in two large Costa
Rican pedigrees that gave evidence for linkage on chromosome 18q22–23 as
well as in an area on 18p. The combined evidence of these several studies,
although somewhat contradictory and confusing, points to at least two
different susceptibility loci on chromosome 18: one on 18p and one on 18q.
IMPROVING STUDY POWER.

The equivocal findings represented by the
attempts to pinpoint susceptibility loci on chromosome 18 have led
investigators to implement several new strategies to map bipolar disorder
genes. One such strategy is a meta-analysis, which involves combining data
across multiple individual investigations to increase statistical power, and in
some cases, the combined analysis points to loci not initially found in the
individual studies. Several meta-analytical techniques have been used to
explore gene-mapping studies for bipolar disorder. The multiple scan
probability (MSP) and genome scan meta-analysis (GSMA) methods require
only linkage statistics and p-values from each study to examine combined
data. MSP was used to combine chromosomal regions with p-values less than
0.01 from 11 independent bipolar disorder studies and provided evidence for
susceptibility loci on chromosomes 13q and 22q. Although the MSP and
GSMA methods have the advantage of requiring only linkage significance
data, they are not able to account for study-specific issues that will limit the
extent to which multiple studies can be compared. Combining original
genotype data from multiple studies can circumvent this problem. With this
method, the largest meta-analysis to date combined 11 bipolar disorder
genome-wide linkage scans consisting of 5,179 individuals from 1,067
families. Access to the original genotype data allowed the construction of a
standardized genetic map in which the markers of each respective study were


<<<PAGE 3128>>>
mapped onto one standard gender-averaged map. The results of this metaanalysis identified two susceptibility loci with genome-wide significance on
6q and 8q.
Another strategy that has been used to increase the power of gene-mapping
studies in the formation of consortia that combine data across multiple
clinical sites. A consortium combining data from the UK and Ireland led to
support for linkage at 9p21 and 10p14–21. Likewise, combining data from
Spanish, Romanian, and Bulgarian families provided additional support for
findings on chromosomes 4q31 and 6q24. Investigators can also increase
power by standardizing marker sets and clinical evaluation protocols between
independent studies to permit direct comparisons between such studies. This
approach was used to identify a bipolar disorder susceptibility locus on
chromosome 5q31–33. The region showed suggestive nonparametric linkage
results in pedigrees from the Central Valley of Costa Rica. With identical
genetic markers and diagnostic criteria, the same region was highlighted in an
independent analysis of a set of Colombian families who have a genetic
background similar to that of the Costa Rican families. A follow-up study
using additional markers in an expanded set of Colombian and Costa Rican
families confirmed genome-wide significant evidence to a candidate region
of 10 cM in 5q31–33. This finding is especially impressive given that the
linkage peak in the bipolar studies overlaps with linkage regions for
schizophrenia and psychosis, identified in a previous study of 40 families
from the Portuguese Islands. These results contribute to a growing opinion
that there may be substantial genetic overlap between different DSM
disorders.
Schizophrenia. In the past decade we have seen exciting advances in the
genetic studies of schizophrenia. Much of these are due to the several large
consortia formed to investigate the disorder. These collaborative efforts allow
for large samples with sufficient power to investigate the disorder.
Before these studies, family studies established a heritability of between 60
and 80 percent, however we lacked any meaningful genome-wide studies. In
2009 several of the consortia combined samples and identified an SNP in the
MHC on chromosome 6p22 as a risk locus. What followed were several
elegant studies, including a landmark 2016 paper from the Schizophrenia
Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, which focused on


<<<PAGE 3129>>>
the C4 alleles and demonstrated their role in synaptic pruning during critical
developmental period. This supports the hypothesis that schizophrenia is the
result of abnormalities of neurodevelopment.
Before this work, various candidate genes emerged. They spawned a
diverse range of basic and clinical investigations aiming to elucidate their
functional significance, for example, using mouse gene targeting and
functional MRI.
The early identification of chromosome 6p24–22 as implicated in
schizophrenia led to the proposal of Dysbindin (DTNB1) as a candidate gene
for schizophrenia. Additional association studies of Dysbindin have been
equivocal.
Linkage studies subsequently pointed to a region on chromosome 1
containing the candidate genes DISC 1 and DISC 2 (disrupted in
schizophrenia 1 and 2) located on chromosome 1q21–22 and 1q32–42. These
genes were initially identified in a large Scottish pedigree in the early 1990s.
A balanced translocation between chromosomes 1 and 11 segregated in this
pedigree and was possibly associated with severe mental illness. DISC 1 and
2 were identified in the original Scottish family because of their location near
the chromosomal translocation breakpoint. As with Dysbindin, follow-up
studies of DISC 1 and 2 have been equivocal.
Genome screens, including a screen focused on extended Icelandic
kindreds, have identified a schizophrenia candidate region on chromosome
8p21–22. Fine mapping of the region narrowed the search and eventually led
to the proposal of neuregulin 1 (NRG1) as a schizophrenia candidate gene.
Association studies again provided equivocal and difficult-to-interpret
results.
Despite the equivocal genetic studies, significant resources have been
channeled into molecular and neurophysiologic investigations of the
functional products of dysbindin, DISC 1 and 2, and neuregulin. Mutant mice
for each of the three genes are now available and have been used to
demonstrate interesting biologic findings. For example, dysbindin is
expressed in the hippocampus and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. The
dysbindin protein binds to B-dystrobrevin and has been implicated in
synaptic structure and signaling. DISC 1 has been shown to influence neurite
formation in cellular studies, and mutant mice for DISC 1 show impairments
in a wide variety of tests, including learning, memory, and sociability.


<<<PAGE 3130>>>
Neuregulin belongs to a family of growth factors that mediate numerous
functions, including synapse formation, neuronal migration, and
neurotransmission. Targeted disruption of erbB4, the postsynaptic target of
neuregulin, leads to synaptic glutamatergic hypofunction. Despite the
exciting biology uncovered, it remains unclear whether and to what extent
any of these genes contribute to the etiology of schizophrenia in humans, and
many geneticists have been cautious in their endorsement of the legitimacy of
the mutant mice generated from the current list of candidate genes as models
of psychiatric disorders.

APPLIED ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY
EEG is the recording of the electrical activity of the brain. It is used in
clinical psychiatry principally to evaluate the presence of seizures,
particularly temporal lobe, frontal lobe, and petit mal seizures (absence
seizures), which can produce complex behaviors. EEG is also used during
ECT to monitor the success of the stimulus in producing seizure activity and
as a critical component of polysomnography used in the evaluation of sleep
disorders. Quantitative electroencephalography (QEEG) and cerebral evoked
potentials (EPs) represent newer EEG-based methods that provide improved
research and clinical insights into brain functioning.
Electroencephalography
A brain wave is a transient difference in electrical potential (greatly
amplified) between any two points on the scalp or between some electrode
placed on the scalp and a reference electrode located elsewhere on the head
(i.e., ear lobe or nose). The difference in electrical potential measured
between any two EEG electrodes fluctuates or oscillates rapidly, usually
many times per second. It is this oscillation that produces the characteristic
“squiggly line” that is recognized as the appearance of “brain waves.”
Brain waves reflect a change by becoming faster or slower in frequency or
lower or higher in voltage, or perhaps some combination of these two
responses. A routine EEG can never constitute positive proof of the absence
of brain dysfunction. Even in diseases with established brain
pathophysiology, such as multiple sclerosis, deep subcortical neoplasm, some
seizure disorders, and Parkinson disease and other movement disorders, a


<<<PAGE 3131>>>
substantial incidence of patients with normal EEG studies may be
encountered. Nonetheless, a normal EEG can often provide convincing
evidence for excluding certain types of brain pathology that may present with
behavioral or psychiatric symptoms. More often, information from the
patient’s symptoms, clinical course and history, and other laboratory results
identifies a probable cause for the EEG findings. EEG studies are often
ordered when a pathophysiologic process is already suspected, or a patient
experiences a sudden, unexplained change in mental status.
Electrode Placement. The electrodes usually used to record the EEG are
attached to the scalp with a conductive paste. A standard array consists of 21
electrodes. The placement of the electrodes is based on the 10/20
International System of Electrode Placement (Fig. 33-33). This system
measures the distance between readily identifiable landmarks on the head and
then locates electrode positions at 10 percent or 20 percent of that distance in
an anterior–posterior or transverse direction. Electrodes are then designated
by an uppercase letter denoting the brain region beneath that electrode and a
number, with odd numbers used for the left hemisphere and with even
numbers signifying the right hemisphere (the subscript Z denotes midline
electrodes). Thus, the O2 electrode is placed over the right occipital region,
and the P3 lead is found over the left parietal area.
In particular circumstances, other electrodes may be used. Nasopharyngeal
(NP) electrodes can be inserted into the NP space through the nostrils and can
be closer to the temporal lobe than scalp electrodes. No actual penetration of
tissue occurs. These electrodes may be contraindicated with many psychiatric
patients displaying behaviors, such as confusion, agitation, or belligerence,
which could pull the leads out, possibly lacerating the nasal passage.
Sphenoidal electrodes use a hollow needle through which a fine electrode that
is insulated, except at the tip, is inserted between the zygoma and the sigmoid
notch in the mandible until it is in contact with the base of the skull lateral to
the foramen ovale.


<<<PAGE 3132>>>
FIGURE 33-33
International 10–20 Electrode Placement System.

Activated EEG. Specific activating procedures are used to increase the
probability that abnormal discharges, particularly spike or spike-wave seizure
discharges, will occur. Strenuous hyperventilation is one of the most
frequently used activation procedures. While remaining reclined with the
eyes closed, the patient is asked to over breathe through the open mouth with
deep breaths for 1 to 4 minutes, depending on the laboratory (3 minutes is
standard). In general, hyperventilation is one of the safest EEG-activating
procedures, and, for most of the population, it presents no physical risk. It can
pose a risk for patients with cardiopulmonary disease or risk factors for
cerebral vascular pathophysiology, however. Photic stimulation (PS)
generally involves placing an intense strobe light approximately 12 inches in
front of the subject’s closed eyes and flashing at frequencies that can range
from 1 to 50 Hz, depending on how the procedure is carried out. Retinal


<<<PAGE 3133>>>
damage does not occur because each strobe flash, although intense, is too
brief in duration to harm the patient. When the resting EEG is normal, and a
seizure disorder or behavior that is suspected to be a manifestation of a
paroxysmal EEG dysrhythmia is suspected, PS can be a valuable activation
method to use. EEG recording during sleep, natural or sedated, is now widely
accepted as an essential technique for eliciting a variety of paroxysmal
discharges, when the wake tracing is normal, or for increasing the number of
abnormal discharges to permit a more definitive interpretation. It has been
shown that the CNS stress produced by 24 hours of sleep deprivation alone
can lead to the activation of paroxysmal EEG discharges in some cases.
Normal EEG Tracing
The normal EEG tracing (Fig. 33-34) is composed of a complex mixture of
many different frequencies. Discrete frequency bands within the broad EEG
frequency spectrum are designated with Greek letters.
Awake EEG. The four basic waveforms are alpha, beta, delta, and theta.
Highly rhythmic alpha waves with a frequency range of 8 to 13 Hz constitute
the dominant brain wave frequency of the normal eyes-closed awake EEG.
Alpha frequency can be increased or decreased by a wide variety of
pharmacologic, metabolic, or endocrine variables. Frequencies that are faster
than the upper 13 Hz limit of the alpha rhythm are termed beta waves, and
they are not uncommon in average adult waking EEG studies, particularly
over the frontal-central regions. Delta waves (≤3.5 Hz) are not present in the
normal waking EEG but are a prominent feature of deeper stages of sleep.
The presence of significant generalized or focal delta waves in the awake
EEG is strongly indicative of a pathophysiologic process. Waves with a
frequency of 4.0 to 7.5 Hz are collectively referred to as theta waves. A small
amount of sporadic, arrhythmic, and isolated theta activity can be seen in
many normal waking EEG studies, particularly in frontal-temporal regions.
Although theta activity is limited in the waking EEG, it is a prominent feature
of the drowsy and sleep tracing. Excessive theta in awake EEG, generalized,
or focal, suggests the operation of a pathologic process.


<<<PAGE 3134>>>
FIGURE 33-34
Normal electroencephalogram (EEG) tracings in an awake 28-year-old man.
(Reprinted from Emerson RG, Walesak TS, Turner CA. EEG and evoked
potentials. In: Rowland LP, ed. Merritt’s Textbook of Neurology. 9th ed. Baltimore,
MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1995:68, with permission.)

With maturation, EEG activity gradually goes from a preponderance of
irregular medium- to high-voltage delta activity in the tracing of the infant, to
greater frequency and more rhythmic pattern. Rhythmic activity in the upper
theta-lower alpha range (7 to 8 Hz) can be seen in posterior areas by early
childhood, and, by mid-adolescence, the EEG essentially has the appearance
of an adult tracing.
Sleep EEG. The EEG patterns that characterize drowsy and sleep states are
different from the patterns seen during the awake state. The rhythmic
posterior alpha activity of the waking state subsides during drowsiness and is
replaced by irregular low-voltage theta activity. As drowsiness deepens,
slower frequencies emerge, and sporadic vertex sharp waves may appear at
central electrode sites, particularly among younger persons. Finally, the
progression into sleep is marked by the appearance of 14-Hz sleep spindles
(also called sigma waves), which, in turn, gradually become replaced by
high-voltage delta waves as deep sleep stages are reached.
EEG Abnormalities


<<<PAGE 3135>>>
Apart from some of the apparent indications for an EEG study (i.e., suspected
seizures), EEG studies are not routinely performed as part of a diagnostic
work-up in psychiatry. EEG, however, is a valuable assessment tool in
clinical situations in which the initial presentation or the clinical course
appears to be unusual or atypical (Table 33-8). Table 33-9 summarizes some
common types of EEG abnormalities.
Some psychotropic medications and recreational or abused drugs produce
EEG changes, yet, except for the benzodiazepines and some compounds with
a propensity to induce paroxysmal EEG discharges, little, if any, the
clinically relevant effect is noted when the medication is not causing toxicity.
Benzodiazepines, which always generate a significant amount of diffuse beta
activity, have EEG-protective effects so that they can mask alterations caused
by concomitant medications (Table 33-10).
Medical and neurologic conditions produce a wide range of abnormal EEG
findings. EEG studies, thus, can contribute to the detection of unsuspected
organic pathophysiology influencing a psychiatric presentation (Fig. 33-35).
Table 33-11 lists EEG alterations in medical disorders, and Table 33-12 lists
EEG alterations associated with psychiatric disorders.
Table 33-8
Warning Signs of the Presence of Covert Medical or Organic
Factors Causing or Contributing to Psychiatric Presentation
Atypical age of onset (i.e., anorexia nervosa beginning at midadulthood)
Complete lack of positive family history of the disorder when a
positive family history is expected
Any focal or localized symptoms (i.e., unilateral hallucinations)
Focal neurologic abnormalities
Catatonia
Presence of any difficulty with orientation or memory (in general, Mini
Mental State Examination should be normal)
Atypical response to treatment
Atypical clinical course
Note: Clinicians should have a high index of suspicion for underlying medical conditions and a


<<<PAGE 3136>>>
low threshold for initiating appropriate workups.

Table 33-9
Common Electroencephalography (EEG) Abnormalities
Diffuse
Most common EEG abnormality; nonspecific and is
slowing of
present in patients with diffuse encephalopathies of
background
diverse causes
rhythms
Focal slowing Suggests localized parenchymal dysfunction and
focal seizure disorder; seen with focal fluid
collection, such as hematomas
Triphasic
waves

Typically consist of generalized synchronous waves
occurring in brief runs; approximately one-half of
patients with triphasic waves have hepatic
encephalopathy, and the remainder have other
toxic–metabolic encephalopathies

Epileptiform
discharges

Interictal hallmark of epilepsy; strongly associated
with seizure disorders

Periodic
Suggest the presence of an acute destructive
lateralizing
cerebral lesion; associated with seizures,
epileptiform
obtundation, and focal neurologic signs
discharges
Generalized
periodic
sharp
waves

Most commonly seen following cerebral anoxia;
recorded in about 90% of patients with Creutzfeldt–
Jakob disease

Table 33-10
Electroencephalography (EEG) Alterations Associated with
Medication and Drugs
Drug

Alterations


<<<PAGE 3137>>>
Benzodiazepines Increased beta activity
Clozapine
(Clozaril)

Nonspecific change

Olanzapine
(Zyprexa)

Nonspecific change

Risperidone
(Risperdal)

Nonspecific change

Quetiapine
(Seroquel)

No significant changes

Aripiprazole
(Abilify)

No significant changes

Lithium

Slowing or paroxysmal activity

Alcohol

Decreased alpha activity; increased theta activity

Opioids

Decreased alpha activity; increased voltage of
theta and delta waves; in overdose, slow waves

Barbiturates

Increased beta activity; in withdrawal states,
generalized paroxysmal activity and spike
discharges

Marijuana

Increased alpha activity in frontal area of brain;
overall slow alpha activity

Cocaine

Similar to marijuana

Inhalants

Diffuse slowing of delta and theta waves

Nicotine

Increased alpha activity; in withdrawal, marked
decrease in alpha activity

Caffeine

In withdrawal, increase in amplitude or voltage of
theta activity

Topographic Quantitative Electroencephalography (QEEG)


<<<PAGE 3138>>>
Unlike standard EEG interpretation, which relies on waveform recognition,
QEEG involves computer analysis of data extracted from the EEG. Findings
are compared with an extensive population database of subjects without any
known neurologic or psychiatric disorder as well as QEEG profiles that may
be characteristic of some defined diagnostic group. In QEEG, the analogbased electrical signals are processed digitally and converted to graphic,
colored topographical displays. These images are sometimes called “brain
maps.”
Table 33-11
Electroencephalography (EEG) Alterations Associated with
Medical Disorders
Seizures

Generalized, Hemispheric, or Focal Spike,
Spike-Wave Discharge, or Both

Structural lesions

Focal slowing, with possible focal spike activity

Closed head
injuries

Focal slowing (sharply focal head trauma)
Focal delta slowing or more widespread slowing
(subdural hematomas)

Infectious
disorders

Diffuse, often synchronous, high voltage slowing
(acute phase of encephalitis)

Metabolic and
endocrine
disorders

Diffuse generalized slowing of wake frequencies
Triphasic waves: 1.5–3.0 per second highvoltage slow waves, with each slow wave
initiated by a blunt or rounded spike-like
transient (hepatic encephalopathy)

Vascular
Slowed alpha frequency and increased
pathophysiology
generalized theta slowing (diffuse
atherosclerosis)
Focal or regional delta activity (cerebrovascular
accidents)
QEEG remains primarily a research method, but it holds considerable


<<<PAGE 3139>>>
clinical potential for psychiatry, mainly in establishing neurophysiologic
subtypes of specific disorders and for identifying electrophysiologic
predictors of response. Examples of some of the more promising results of
QEEG research include the identification of subtypes of cocaine dependence
and the subtype most likely to be associated with sustained abstinence;
identification of subtypes of OCD that predict clinical responsiveness or lack
of responsiveness to SSRIs; and the differentiation between normals,
attention-deficit disorder and ADHD, and learning disability subpopulations.
QEEG findings in ADHD show that increased theta abnormality frontally
may be a strong predictor of response to methylphenidate and other
psychostimulants and that favorable clinical responses may be associated
with a normalization of the EEG abnormality.

FIGURE 33-35
Diffuse slowing in a 67-year-old patient with dementia. Six- to seven cycles per
second (cps) activity predominates over the parieto-occipital regions. Although
reactive to eye closure, the frequency of this rhythm is abnormally slow.
(Reprinted from Emerson RG, Walesak TS, Turner CA. EEG and evoked
potentials. In: Rowland LP, ed. Merritt’s Textbook of Neurology. 9th ed. Baltimore,
MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1995:68, with permission.)

Table 33-12
Electroencephalography (EEG) Alterations Associated with


<<<PAGE 3140>>>
Psychiatric Disorders
Panic disorder

Paroxysmal EEG changes consistent with
partial seizure activity during attack in onethird of patients; focal slowing in about 25%
of patients

Catatonia

Usually normal, but EEG indicated in new
patient presenting with catatonia to rule out
other causes

AttentionHigh prevalence (up to 60%) of EEG
deficit/hyperactivity
abnormalities versus normal controls; spike
disorder (ADHD)
or spike-wave discharges
Antisocial personality Increased incidence of EEG abnormalities in
disorder
those with aggressive behavior
Borderline
personality
disorder

Positive spikes: 14 and 6 per second seen in
25% of patients

Chronic alcoholism

Prominent slowing and periodic lateralized
paroxysmal discharges

Alcohol withdrawal

May be normal in patients who are not
delirious; excessive fast activity in patients
with delirium

Dementia

Rarely normal in advanced dementia; may be
helpful in differentiating pseudodementia
from dementia

Cerebral Evoked Potentials
Cerebral EPs are a series of surface (scalp) recordable waves that result from
brain visual, auditory, somatosensory, and cognitive stimulation. They are
abnormal in many psychiatric conditions, including schizophrenia and
Alzheimer disease, thus creating difficulty in using cerebral EPs for
differential diagnosis purposes.


<<<PAGE 3141>>>
CHRONOBIOLOGY
Chronobiology is the study of biologic time. The rotation of the Earth about
its axis imposes a 24-hour cyclicity on the biosphere. Although it is widely
accepted that organisms have evolved to occupy geographical niches that can
be defined by the three spatial dimensions, it is less appreciated that
organisms have also evolved to occupy temporal niches that are defined by
the fourth dimension—time. Much like light represents a small portion of the
electromagnetic spectrum, the 24-hour periodicity represents a small time
domain within the spectrum of temporal biology. A broad range of
frequencies exist throughout biology, ranging from millisecond oscillations in
ocular field potentials to the 17-year cycle of emergence seen in the periodic
cicada (Magicicada spp.). Although these different periodicities all fall
within the realm of chronobiology, circadian (Latin: circa, about; dies, day)
rhythms that have a period of about one day are among the most extensively
studied, and best understood biologic rhythms.
A defining feature of circadian rhythms is that they persist in the absence
of time cues and are not driven merely by the 24-hour environmental cycle.
Experimental animals housed for several months under constant darkness,
temperature, and humidity continue to exhibit robust circadian rhythms.
Maintenance of rhythmicity in a “timeless” environment points to the
existence of an internal biologic timing system that is responsible for
generating these endogenous rhythms.
The site of the primary circadian oscillator in mammals, including humans,
is the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), located in the anterior hypothalamus.
The mean circadian period generated by the human SCN is approximately
24.18 hours. Like a slightly slow watch, an individual with such a period
gradually comes out of synchrony with the astronomical day. In slightly more
than 3 months, an ordinarily diurnal human would be in antiphase to the day–
night cycle and thus would become transiently nocturnal. Therefore, a
circadian clock must be reset regularly to be effective at maintaining the
proper phase relationships of behavioral and physiologic processes within the
context of the 24-hour day.
Although factors such as temperature and humidity exhibit daily
fluctuations, the environmental parameter that most reliably corresponds to
the period of Earth’s rotation around its axis is the change in illuminance


<<<PAGE 3142>>>
associated with the day–night cycle. Organisms have evolved to use this daily
change in light levels as a time cue or zeitgeber (German: zeit, time; geber,
giver) to reset the endogenous circadian clock. Regulation of the circadian
pacemaker through the detection of changes in illuminance requires a
photoreceptive apparatus that communicates with the central oscillator. This
apparatus is known to reside in the eyes because surgical removal of the eyes
renders an animal incapable of resetting its clock in response to light.
The circadian clock drives many rhythms. These include rhythms in
behavior, core body temperature, sleep, feeding, drinking, and hormonal
levels. One such circadian-regulated hormone is the indoleamine, melatonin.
Melatonin synthesis is controlled through a multisynaptic pathway from the
SCN to the pineal gland. Serum levels of melatonin become elevated at night
and return to baseline during the day. The nocturnal rise in melatonin is a
convenient marker of circadian phase. Exposure to light elicits two distinct
effects on the daily melatonin profile. First, light acutely suppresses elevated
melatonin levels, immediately decreasing them to baseline levels. Second,
light shifts the phase of the circadian rhythm of melatonin synthesis. Because
melatonin can be assayed easily, it provides a convenient window into the
state of the circadian pacemaker. Any perturbation of the clock is reflected in
the melatonin profile; thus, melatonin offers an output that can be used to
study the regulation of the central circadian pacemaker.
Sleep and Circadian Rhythms
Sleep Regulation. Restful consolidated sleep is most appreciated when
sleep disturbances are experienced. Sleep is the integrated product of two
oscillatory processes. The first process frequently referred to as the sleep
homeostat, is an oscillation that stems from the accumulation and dissipation
of sleep debt. The biologic substrates encoding sleep debt are not known,
although adenosine is emerging as a primary candidate neuromodulator of the
sleep homeostat. The second oscillatory process is governed by the circadian
clock and controls a daily rhythm in sleep propensity or, conversely, arousal.
These interacting oscillations can be dissociated by housing subjects in a
timeless environment for several weeks.
The circadian cycle in arousal (wakefulness) steadily increases throughout
the day, reaching a maximum immediately before the circadian increase in


<<<PAGE 3143>>>
plasma melatonin (Fig. 33-36). Arousal subsequently decreases to coincide
with the circadian trough in core body temperature. Experiments imposing
forced sleep schedules throughout the circadian day have shown that an
uninterrupted 8-hour bout of sleep can only be obtained if sleep is initiated
approximately 6 hours before the temperature nadir. This nadir typically
occurs at approximately 5:00 AM to 6:00 AM. In healthy individuals, initiating
sleep between 11:00 PM and 12:00 AM affords the highest probability of
getting eight solid hours of sleep.

FIGURE 33-36


<<<PAGE 3144>>>
Relative phase relationship of sleep in young adults to other circadian phase
markers. (From Dijk D-J, Lockley SW. Invited review: integration of human sleepwake regulation and circadian rhythmicity. J Appl Physiol. 2002;92:852, with
permission.)

It should be stressed that diurnal preference varies among individuals as a
function of age, endogenous circadian periods, and other factors. This
variability is paralleled by physiology. Clinically, diurnal preference can be
quantified using the Horne-Östberg (HO) Morningness-Eveningness
Questionnaire (MEQ). In qualitative terms, morning people or morning larks
tend to awaken earlier and experience the core body temperature minimum at
an earlier clock time relative to night people or night owls. Sleep deprivation
studies have shown that the homeostatic component of sleep is remarkably
similar among individuals of similar age. (It should be noted that there is a
well-established age-dependent decline in sleep need.) Therefore, diurnal
preference is dictated almost exclusively by the circadian component of sleep
regulation.
Circadian Sleep Disorders. Advanced sleep phase syndrome (ASPS) is a
pathologic extreme of the morning lark phenotype. An autosomal-dominant
familial form of ASPS (FASPS) has been genetically characterized. Afflicted
family members exhibit a striking 4-hour advance of the daily sleep–wake
rhythm. They typically fall asleep at approximately 7:30 PM and
spontaneously awaken at approximately 4:30 AM. Affected individuals have
an SNP in the gene encoding hPER2, the human homolog of the mouse Per2
clock gene. This adenine-to-guanine nucleotide polymorphism results in
serine-to-glycine amino acid substitution that causes the mutant protein to be
inefficiently phosphorylated by casein kinase Iε, an established component of
the circadian molecular clockwork. Similarly, delayed sleep phase syndrome
(DSPS) is influenced by genetics. A length polymorphism in a repeat region
of the hPER3 gene appears to be associated with diurnal preference in
patients with DSPS, the shorter allele being associated with evening
preference.
The advent of the light bulb extended the human day into night. This
encroachment on the night, although increasing productivity, affects our sleep
patterns (Fig. 33-37). The typical use of artificial lights results in a single,
consolidated bout of sleep lasting approximately 8 hours. This pattern of


<<<PAGE 3145>>>
sleep is uncommon among most other mammals, which typically experience
more fractured sleep. Human sleep under more natural photoperiods, where
the duration of the night is longer than in artificial settings, becomes
decompressed. Specifically, a bimodal distribution of sleep is observed; bouts
of sleep occur early and late at night. Periods of quiet wakefulness are
interspersed between the two primary bouts of sleep. This natural sleep
pattern is more similar to the sleep patterns of other mammals.


<<<PAGE 3146>>>
FIGURE 33-37
Change in sleep structure in response to artificial lighting. Total sleep time is
reduced, and periods of quiet wakefulness are abolished by extending daytime


<<<PAGE 3147>>>
into nighttime through artificial lighting. (From Wehr TA, Moul DE, Barbato G,
Giesen HA, Seidel JA, Barker C, Bender C. Conservation of photoperiodresponsive mechanisms in humans. Am J Physiol. 1993;265:R846, with
permission.)

Seasonality
The 24-hour period of the Earth’s rotation around its axis is unchanging.
However, the Earth’s axis is tilted 23.45 degrees from the plane of its orbit
around the sun (the ecliptic). The relative day to night proportion within day
varies as the Earth proceeds through its orbit of the sun. Many organisms are
capable of synchronizing physiology to the seasonal cycle to maximize
survival. For example, precise seasonal cycles in reproduction are seen
throughout the plant and animal kingdoms. Large mammals that typically
have long gestation periods, such as sheep, conceive in the fall when the
nights are long and the days are short, so birth occurs during the relatively
mild season of spring. These animals are referred to as short-day breeders.
Conversely, mammals with gestation periods of only a few weeks, such as
hamsters, conceive and give birth during spring and summer, when the days
are long and the nights are short. Hence, these animals are referred to as longday breeders. Like circadian rhythms, many of these yearly (circannual)
rhythms tend to persist in the absence of seasonal cues with endogenous
periods of approximately 1 year.
Melatonin and Seasonality. The most reliable environmental parameter
providing a faithful representation of the solar day is the day–night cycle.
Similarly, the most reliable environmental parameter reflecting the
progression through the seasons is the change in day length, the fraction of
the 24-hour day between sunrise and sunset. In seasonally breeding animals,
day length is physiologically encoded through the melatonin profile. As
described previously, melatonin levels are elevated during the night. A long
night, such as that experienced during the short day lengths of winter, results
in an elevated melatonin profile of a relatively long duration. A short summer
night, by contrast, results in a short duration of elevated melatonin. This
seasonal signal is interpreted by the reproductive axis, resulting in an
appropriate reproductive response. Melatonin’s role in transducing day length
was elucidated by pinealectomizing seasonally breeding animals, thereby


<<<PAGE 3148>>>
removing the primary endogenous source of melatonin. Melatonin was then
infused in profiles mimicking long days or short days. The duration of
elevated melatonin was the primary determinant of seasonal reproductive
status, even when the infused profile was administered under a conflicting
day length. Variations in other parameters, such as the amplitude of the
melatonin profile, the amount of total melatonin synthesized, or the phase
relationship of the profile to the light-dark cycle, are of limited importance in
producing a humoral signal that transduces day length.
Reproductive responses to changing day length can be dramatic. A male
Siberian hamster (Phodopus sungorus) maintained in long days is
reproductively competent and typically has a testicular weight of
approximately 250 mg per testis. Under short days, however, the testes
regress to approximately 15 mg per testis, representing a 94 percent decrease
in testicular mass. The same degree of regression is observed in response to
melatonin infusions that mimic short days. Communication of the hormonally
transduced day length to the reproductive axis is likely to be mediated, at
least partially, through melatonin receptors in the pars tuberalis of the
pituitary gland. The exact mechanism remains unknown, but activation of
these receptors is hypothesized to regulate an unidentified factor putatively
named tuberalin indirectly. Tuberalin, in turn, controls gene expression and
prolactin release from lactotrophs in the adenohypophysis of the pituitary.
Seasonality in Humans. Whether humans are truly seasonal is still a point
of considerable debate. Several lines of evidence exist that suggest the
presence of a residual tendency toward seasonality. A peak in the rate of
suicide occurs in the summer; this peak is cross-cultural. Birth rates also tend
to show a seasonal variation; a small but distinguishable peak in the rate of
births occurs in spring and summer. This pattern, however, is itself variable
and is heavily influenced by unknown cultural and geographic factors. Of
interest, the amplitude of the spring–summer birth rate peak has diminished
as societies have become industrialized.
The decompressed bimodal structure of human sleep during long nights
indicates that the length of natural sleep is related to the length of the night.
Potentially, a two-oscillator system could function to maintain proper sleep
patterns during changing photoperiods. Such a proposed system would
consist of an evening oscillator that tracks the transition from day to night


<<<PAGE 3149>>>
(dusk) and a morning oscillator that tracks the transition from night to day
(dawn). The relative phase differences between these oscillators may encode
the changing day lengths associated with the passing of the seasons. Biologic
evidence for a two-oscillator system exists in rodents and humans.
The melatonin profile of many vertebrates, including some humans, is
bimodal, with evening and morning peaks. In rodents, metabolic and
electrophysiologic studies of the SCN typically have been done in brain slices
cut in the coronal plane. Results of electrophysiologic studies conducted in
brain slices cut in the horizontal plane have provided new insights. The action
potential frequency in SCN neurons from horizontally cut preparations is
bimodal, with peaks in the early and late subjective day. Furthermore, the
interpeak interval varies as a function of the photoperiod in which the animal
was housed. These studies lend credence to long-standing suspicions that the
SCN of seasonally breeding mammals and, perhaps, nonseasonal mammals
harbor a morning and evening oscillator that interact to convey day-length
information.
Effect of Aging. In general, as humans age, the circadian period shortens,
the circadian phase advances resulting in earlier waking times and bedtimes,
the amplitudes of most circadian rhythms decrease, and dramatic phase shifts
such as those caused by jet-lag are less tolerated. Again, a mouse model has
provided an interesting insight into the interaction of the aging process and
the circadian clock. The effect of chronic jet-lag on aged mice has dramatic
consequences on mortality. About half of aged mice forced to phase advance
6 hours once per week survive this treatment compared with an 83 percent
survival rate in unshifted age-matched mice. Aged mice subjected to weekly
6-hour phase delays show an intermediate survival of 68 percent. These
profound effects of phase-shifting are not observed in younger mice. The
pathogenesis of chronic jet-lag remains to be determined. Of interest, these
mice did not have an increased rate of tumorigenesis. It is likely that in
humans, as in mice, the internal desynchrony of oscillators that result from a
rotating light schedule may have dire consequences that may be exacerbated
by aging.
Circadian Rhythms and Pharmacotherapy


<<<PAGE 3150>>>
Circadian rhythmicity can be affected by drugs, and conversely, the circadian
clock can modulate the efficacy of drugs throughout the day. A better
understanding of these interactions will lead to more effective
pharmacotherapies. Some of the best-studied interactions between
medications and the circadian clock have included the circadian effects of
antidepressants. Elevated nocturnal body temperature is a common feature
among depressed patients. This effect may be due to reduced amplitude of the
master circadian oscillator in the hypothalamus that drives body temperature.
TCAs and SSRIs reduce elevated nocturnal body temperature while
simultaneously enhancing circadian amplitude. Similarly, many depressed
patients exhibit a dampened amplitude in daily activity rhythms. Like body
temperature, the amplitude in daily activity cycles of depressed individuals
may be augmented by TCA or SSRI therapy.
The use of lithium to treat bipolar disorder has been long established.
However, lithium also affects the circadian system, resulting in a lengthening
of the circadian period. The molecular mechanism by which this occurs
remains unknown. Glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β) has been
implicated in participating within the molecular clock mechanism. Of
interest, GSK3β is inhibited by lithium. In cell culture, GSK3β has been
shown to stabilize the negative clockwork regulator REV-ERBα via
phosphorylation. REV-ERBα typically represses the transcription of the
BMAL1 gene. With lithium, however, GSK3β is inhibited, thereby preventing
the phosphorylation and stabilization of REV-ERBα, which is then targeted
for proteasomal degradation. The degradation of REV-ERBα results in the
de-repression of BMAL1 transcription. Whether lithium’s influence on
circadian behavior is attributable to its inhibitory effect on GSK3β-mediated
stabilization of REV-ERBα remains to be determined.
Short-acting benzodiazepines (e.g., triazolam [Halcion] and brotizolam
[Lendormin]) also exert chronobiologic effects. In hamsters, triazolam or
brotizolam administered during the middle of the subjective day induces
circadian phase advances in activity. Brotizolam has been shown to reduce
the light-induced expression of clock genes Per1 and Per2 in the SCN.
Although benzodiazepines are allosteric modulators of γ-aminobutyric acid A
receptors (GABAA), several lines of evidence indicate that the circadian
effects of short-acting benzodiazepines require an intact serotonergic system.


<<<PAGE 3151>>>
When the 5-HT1A/7 receptor agonist 8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino)-tetralin
(8-OH-DPAT) is injected into hamsters at subjective midday, phase advances
in locomotor behavior and SCN neuronal activity are observed in addition to
a reduction in Per1 and Per2 gene expression in the SCN. Recreational drugs
of
abuse
also
affect
the
circadian
system.
3,4Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), or “ecstasy,” can act as a
serotonin neurotoxin. Hamsters treated with MDMA showed reduced
triazolam-induced phase shifts in circadian locomotor activity and a
diminished ability to re-entrain rhythms posttreatment. MDMA-treated
animals exhibited a reduction of serotonergic axonal terminals in the SCN,
again emphasizing the importance of an intact serotonergic system in the
regulation of the circadian axis. Recreational use of methamphetamine has
increased dramatically. Chronic administration of methamphetamine
disorganizes rodent activity rhythms. However, the administration of
methamphetamine to rodents rendered arrhythmic through ablation of the
SCN results in a reemergence of rhythmicity. The mechanism involved in the
rescue of rhythmicity or site of action remains unknown.
The efficacy and toxicity of many pharmacotherapeutics vary as a function
of the circadian phase. Daily variations in fixed-dose lethal toxicity have been
appreciated in rodents for years. Many anticancer drugs, ranging in
mechanism from antimetabolites to DNA intercalators to mitotic inhibitors,
have 2- to 10-fold changes in tolerability in rodents over the day. Much of
this difference is attributed to circadian variations in the body’s ability to
absorb, distribute, metabolize, and eliminate toxic compounds. These four
processes are affected by underlying circadian rhythms in physiologic
processes such as daily variations in gastric pH, gastrointestinal mobility,
glomerular filtration rate, and membrane viscosity. The rhythmic intake of
food during traditionally timed meals also influences how the body handles
therapeutic drugs. It is becoming clear that to maximize efficacy and
minimize the toxicity of drugs, the circadian phase of administration must be
considered. Appropriate circadian timing of the administration of multiple
drugs can be a daunting challenge to infirmed individuals or their caretakers.
The development of small implanted programmable pumps that can be
directed to administer anticancer drugs or other therapeutics at particular
times of day may provide a limited solution to this challenge. The emergence


<<<PAGE 3152>>>
of the field of chronotherapy reflects our increased understanding of the
circadian system’s impact on pharmacologic treatment efficacy.
References
Introduction
Agit Y, Buzsaki G, Diamond DM, Frackowiak R, Giedd J. How can drug
discovery for psychiatric disorders be improved? Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2007;6(3):189–201.
Cacioppo JT, Decety J. Social neuroscience: challenges and opportunities in
the study of complex behavior. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2011;1224(1):162–173.
Gould TD, Gottesman II. Commentary: psychiatric endophenotypes and the
development of valid animal models. Genes Brain Behav. 2006;5(2):113–
119.
Grebb JA, Carlsson A. Introduction and considerations for a brain-based
diagnostic system in psychiatry. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009.
Hoef F, McCandliss BD, Black JM, Gantman A, Zakerani N, Hulme C,
Lyytinen H, Whitfield-Gabrieli S, Glover GH, Reiss AL, Gabrieli JDE.
Neural systems predicting long-term outcome in dyslexia. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2011;108(1):361–366.
Krummenacher P, Mohr C, Haker H, Brugger P. Dopamine, paranormal
belief, and the detection of meaningful stimuli. J Cogn Neurosci.
2010;22(8):1670–1681.
Müller-Vahl KR, Grosskreutz J, Prell T, Kaufmann J, Bodammer N, Peschel
T. Tics are caused by alterations in prefrontal areas, thalamus and putamen,
while changes in the cingulate gyrus reflect secondary compensatory
mechanisms. BMC Neurosci. 2014;15:6.
Niv Y, Edlund JA, Dayan P, O’Doherty JP. Neural prediction errors reveal a
risk-sensitive reinforcement-learning process in the human brain. J
Neurosci. 2012;32(2):551–562.
Peltzer-Karpf A. The dynamic matching of neural and cognitive growth
cycles. Nonlinear Dynamics Psychol Life Sci. 2012;16(1):61–78.
Functional Neuroanatomy


<<<PAGE 3153>>>
Björklund A, Dunnett SB. Dopamine neuron systems in the brain: an update.
Trends Neurosci. 2007;30(5):194–202.
Blond BN, Fredericks CA, Blumberg HP. Functional neuroanatomy of
bipolar disorder: structure, function, and connectivity in an amygdalaanterior paralimbic neural system. Bipolar Disord. 2012;14(4):340–355.
Green S, Lambon Ralph MA, Moll J, Deakin JF, Zahn R. Guilt-selective
functional disconnection of anterior temporal and subgenual cortices in
major depressive disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2012;69(10):1014–1021.
Katschnig P, Schwingenschuh P, Jehna M, Svehlík M, Petrovic K, Ropele S,
Zwick EB, Ott E, Fazekas F, Schmidt R, Enzinger C. Altered functional
organization of the motor system related to ankle movements in
Parkinson’s disease: insights from functional MRI. J Neural Transm.
2011;118(5):783–793.
Kringelbach ML, Berridge KC. The functional neuroanatomy of pleasure and
happiness. Discov Med. 2010;9(49):579–587.
Melchitzky DS, Lewis DA. Functional neuroanatomy. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009.
Morris CA. The behavioral phenotype of Williams syndrome: a recognizable
pattern of neurodevelopment. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet.
2010;154C(4):427–431.
Nguyen AD, Shenton ME, Levitt JJ. Olfactory dysfunction in schizophrenia:
a review of neuroanatomy and psychophysiological measurements. Harv
Rev Psychiatry. 2010;18(5):279–292.
Prats-Galino A, Soria G, de Notaris M, Puig J, Pedraza S. Functional
anatomy of subcortical circuits issuing from or integrating at the human
brainstem. Clin Neurophysiol. 2012;123(1):4–12.
Sapara A, Birchwood M, Cooke MA, Fannon D, Williams SC, Kuipers E,
Kumari V. Preservation and compensation: the functional neuroanatomy of
insight and working memory in schizophrenia. Schizophr Res.
2014;152:201–209.
Vago DR, Epstein J, Catenaccio E, Stern E. Identification of neural targets
for the treatment of psychiatric disorders: the role of functional
neuroimaging. Neurosurg Clin N Am. 2011;22(2):279–305.
Watson CE, Chatterjee A. The functional neuroanatomy of actions.


<<<PAGE 3154>>>
Neurology. 2011;76(16):1428–1434.
Weis S, Leube D, Erb M, Heun R, Grodd W, Kircher T. Functional
neuroanatomy of sustained memory encoding performance in healthy
aging and in Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Neurosci. 2011;121(7):384–392.
Zilles K, Amunts K, Smaers JB. Three brain collections for comparative
neuroanatomy and neuroimaging. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2011;1225:E94–
E104.
Neural Development and Neurogenesis
DiCicco-Bloom E, Falluel-Morel A. Neural development and neurogenesis.
In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009.
Eisch AJ, Petrik D. Depression and hippocampal neurogenesis: a road to
remission? Science. 2012;338(6103):72–75.
Hsieh J, Eisch AJ. Epigenetics, hippocampal neurogenesis, and
neuropsychiatric disorder: unraveling the genome to understand the mind.
Neurobiol Dis. 2010;39(1):73–84.
Kobayashi M, Nakatani T, Koda T, Matsumoto KI, Ozaki R, Mochida N,
Keizo T, Miyakawa T, Matsuoka I. Absence of BRINP1 in mice causes
increase of hippocampal neurogenesis and behavioral alterations relevant
to human psychiatric disorders. Mol Brain. 2014;7:12.
Levenson CW, Morris D. Zinc and neurogenesis: making new neurons from
development to adulthood. Adv Nutr. 2011;2(2):96–100.
Molina-Holgado E, Molina-Holgado F. Mending the broken brain:
neuroimmune
interactions
in
neurogenesis.
J
Neurochem.
2010;114(5):1277–1290.
Sanes DH, Reh TA, Harris WA. Development of the Nervous System. 3rd ed.
Burlington, MA: Academic Press; 2011.
Sek T, Sawamoto K, Parent JM, Alvarez-Buylla A, eds. Neurogenesis in the
Adult Brain I: Neurobiology. New York: Springer; 2011.
Sek T, Sawamoto K, Parent JM, Alvarez-Buylla A, eds. Neurogenesis in the
Adult Brain II: Clinical Implications. New York: Springer; 2011.
Shi Y, Zhao X, Hsieh J, Wichterle H, Impey S, Banerjee S, Neveu P, Kosik
KS. MicroRNA regulation of neural stem cells and neurogenesis. J
Neurosci. 2010;30(45):14931–14936.


<<<PAGE 3155>>>
Neurophysiology and Neurochemistry
Abi-Dargham A. The neurochemistry of schizophrenia: a focus on dopamine
and glutamate. In: Charney DS, Nestler E, eds. Neurobiology of Mental
Illness. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2009:321.
Berger M, Honig G, Wade JM, Tecott LH. Monoamine neurotransmitters. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009.
Butler JS, Foxe JJ, Fiebelkorn IC, Mercier MR, Molholm S. Multisensory
representation of frequency across audition and touch: high density
electrical mapping reveals early sensory-perceptual coupling. J Neurosci.
2012;32(44):15338–15344.
Coyle JT. Amino acid neurotransmitters. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009.
Ferrer I, López-Gonzalez I, Carmona M, Dalfó E, Pujol A, Martínez A.
Neurochemistry and the non-motor aspects of Parkinson’s disease.
Neurobiol Dis. 2012;46:508.
Francis PT. Neurochemistry of Alzheimer’s disease. In: Abou-Saleh MT,
Katona CLE, Kumar A, eds. Principles and Practice of Geriatric
Psychiatry. 3rd ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell; 2011:295.
Hallett M, Rothwell J. Milestones in clinical neurophysiology. Mov Disord.
2011;26(6):958–967.
Kasala ER, Bodduluru LN, Maneti Y, Thipparaboina R. Effect of meditation
on neurophysiological changes in stress mediated depression. Complement
Ther Clin Pract. 2014;20(1):74–80.
Martinez D, Carpenter KM, Liu F, Slifstein M, Broft A, Friedman AC,
Kumar D, Van Heertum R, Kleber HD, Nunes E. Imaging dopamine
transmission in cocaine dependence: link between neurochemistry and
response to treatment. Am J Psychiatry. 2011;168(6):634–641.
Posey DJ, Lodin Z, Erickson CA, Stigler KA, McDougle CJ. The
neurochemistry of ASD. In: Fein D, ed. Neuropsychology of Autism. New
York: Oxford University Press; 2011:77.
Recasens M, Guiramand J, Aimar R, Abdulkarim A, Barbanel G.
Metabotropic glutamate receptors as drug targets. Curr Drug Targets.
2007;8(5):651–681.


<<<PAGE 3156>>>
Reidler JS, Zaghi S, Fregni F. Neurophysiological effects of transcranial
direct current stimulation. In: Coben R, Evan JR, eds. Neurofeedback and
Neuromodulation Techniques and Applications. New York: Academic
Press; 2011:319.
Sedlack TW, Kaplin AI. Novel neurotransmitters. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009.
Smith SM. Resting state fMRI in the human connectome project.
Neuroimage 2013;80:144–158.
Young LJ, Owens MJ, Nemeroff CB. Neuropeptides: biology, regulation, and
role in neuropsychiatric disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009.
Psychoneuroendocrinology
Bartz JA, Hollander E. The neuroscience of affiliation: forging links between
basic and clinical research on neuropeptides and social behavior. Horm
Behav. 2006;50(4):518–528.
Dubrovsky B. Neurosteroids, neuroactive steroids, and symptoms of affective
disorders. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2006;84(4):644–655.
Duval F, Mokrani MC, Ortiz JA, Schulz P, Champeval C. Neuroendocrine
predictors of the evolution of depression. Dialogues Clin Neurosci.
2005;7(3):273–282.
Goldberg-Stern H, Ganor Y, Cohen R, Pollak L, Teichberg V, Levite M.
Glutamate receptor antibodies directed against AMPA receptors subunit 3
peptide B (GluR3B) associate with some cognitive/psychiatric/behavioral
abnormalities
in epilepsy patients. Psychoneuroendocrinology.
2014;40:221–231.
Martin EI, Ressler KJ, Binder E, Nemeroff CB. The neurobiology of anxiety
disorders: brain imaging, genetics, and psychoneuroendocrinology. Clin
Lab Med. 2010;30(4):865–891.
McEwen BS. Physiology and neurobiology of stress and adaptation: central
role of the brain. Physiol Rev. 2007;87(3):873–904.
Phillips DI. Programming of the stress response: a fundamental mechanism
underlying the long-term effects of the fetal environment? J Intern Med.
2007;261(5):453–460.


<<<PAGE 3157>>>
Strous RD, Maayan R, Weizman A. The relevance of neurosteroids to
clinical psychiatry: from the laboratory to the bedside. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2006;16(3):155–169.
Zitzmann M. Testosterone and the brain. Aging Male. 2006;9(4):195–199.
Immune System and Central Nervous System Interactions
Bajramovic JJ. Regulation of innate immune responses in the central nervous
system. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2011;10(1):4–24.
Capuron L, Miller AH. Immune system to brain signaling:
neuropsychopharmacological
implications.
Pharmacol
Ther.
2011;130(2):226–238.
Danese A, Moffitt TE, Pariante CM, Ambler A, Poulton R. Elevated
inflammation levels in depressed adults with a history of childhood
maltreatment. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2008;65(4):409–415.
Dantzer R, O’Connor JC, Freund GG, Johnson RW, Kelley KW. From
inflammation to sickness and depression: when the immune system
subjugates the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008;9(1):46–56.
Raison CL, Borisov AS, Woolwine BJ, Massung B, Vogt G, Miller AH.
Interferon-α effects on diurnal hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity:
relationship with proinflammatory cytokines and behavior. Mol Psychiatry.
2010;15(5):535–547.
Raison CL, Cowles MK, Miller AH. Immune system and central nervous
system interactions. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:175.
Ransohoff RM, Brown MA. Innate immunity in the central nervous system. J
Clin Invest. 2012;122(4):1164–1171.
Steiner J, Bernstein HG, Schiltz K, Müller UJ, Westphal S, Drexhage HA,
Bogerts B. Immune system and glucose metabolism interaction in
schizophrenia: a chicken–egg dilemma. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry. 2014;48:287–294.
Wilson EH, Weninger W, Hunter CA. Trafficking of immune cells in the
central nervous system. J Clin Invest. 2010;120(5):1368–1379.
Yousef S, Planas R, Chakroun K, Hoffmeister-Ullerich S, Binder TM,
Eiermann TH, Martin R, Sospedra M. TCR bias and HLA cross-restriction
are strategies of human brain-infiltrating JC virus-specific CD4+ T cells


<<<PAGE 3158>>>
during viral infection. J Immunol. 2012;189(7):3618–3630.
Neurogenetics
Craddock N, O’Donovan MC, Owen MJ. Phenotypic and genetic complexity
of psychosis. Invited commentary on Schizophrenia: a common disease
caused by multiple rare alleles. Br J Psychiatry. 2007;190:200–203.
De Luca V, Tharmalingam S, Zai C, Potapova N, Strauss J, Vincent J,
Kennedy JL. Association of HPA axis genes with suicidal behaviour in
schizophrenia. J Psychopharmacol. 2010;24(5):677–682.
Demers CH, Bogdan R, Agrawal A. The genetics, neurogenetics and
pharmacogenetics of addiction. Curr Behav Neurosci Rep. 2014;1(1):33–
44.
Farmer A, Elkin A, McGuffin P. The genetics of bipolar affective disorder.
Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2007;20:8.
Fears SC, Mathews CA, Freimer NB. Genetic linkage analysis of psychiatric
disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock, VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 320.
Gianakopoulos PJ, Zhang Y, Pencea N, Orlic-Milacic M, Mittal K,
Windpassinger C, White SJ, Kroisel PM, Chow EW, Saunders CJ,
Minassian BA, Vincent JB. Mutations in MECP2 exon 1 in classical Rett
patients disrupt MECP2_e1 transcription, but not transcription of
MECP2_e2. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet.
2012;159B(2):210–216.
Guerrini R, Parrini E. Neuronal migration disorders. Neurobiol Dis.
2010;38(2):154–166.
Kumar KR, Djarmati-Westenberger A, Grünewald A. Genetics of
Parkinson’s disease. Semin Neurol. 2011;31(5):433–440.
Novarino G, El-Fishawy P, Kayserili H, Meguid NA, Scott EM, Schroth J,
Silhavy JL, Kara M, Khalil RO, Ben-Omran T, Ercan-Sencicek AG,
Hashish AF, Sanders SJ, Gupta AR, Hashem HS, Matern D, Gabriel S,
Sweetman L, Rahimi Y, Harris RA, State MW, Gleeson JG. Mutations in
BCKD-kinase lead to a potentially treatable form of autism with epilepsy.
Science. 2012;338(6105):394–397.
Perisco AM, Bourgeron T. Searching for ways out of the autism maze:
genetic, epigenetic and environmental clues. Trends Neurosci.


<<<PAGE 3159>>>
2006;29(7):349–358.
Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium.
Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature.
2014;511(7510):421–427. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13595
Sekar A, Bialas AR, de Rivera H, Davis A, Hammond TR, Kamitaki N,
Tooley K, Presumey J, Baum M, Van Doren V, Genovese G, Rose SA,
Handsaker RE, Daly MJ, Carroll MC, Stevens B, McCarroll SA;
Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium.
Schizophrenia risk from complex variation of complement component 4.
Nature. 2016;530(7589):177–183. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16549
Spors H, Albeanu DF, Murthy VN, Rinberg D, Uchida N, Wachowiak M,
Friedrich RW. Illuminating vertebrate olfactory processing. J Neurosci.
2012;32(41):14102–14108.
Applied Electrophysiology
Alhaj H, Wisniewski G, McAllister-Williams RH. The use of the EEG in
measuring therapeutic drug action: focus on depression and
antidepressants. J Psychopharmacol. 2011;25(9):1175–1191.
André VM, Cepeda C, Fisher YE, Huynh MY, Bardakjian N, Singh S, Yang
XW, Levine MS. Differential electrophysiological changes in striatal
output neurons in Huntington’s disease. J Neurosci. 2011;31(4):1170–
1182.
Boutros NN, Arfken CL. A four-step approach to developing diagnostic
testing in psychiatry. Clin EEG Neurosci. 2007;38:62.
Boutros NN, Galderisi S, Pogarell O, Riggio S, eds. Standard
Electroencephalography in Clinical Psychiatry: A Practical Handbook.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell; 2011.
Boutros NN, Iacono WG, Galderisi S. Applied electrophysiology. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:211.
Gosselin N, Bottari C, Chen JK, Petrides M, Tinawi S, de Guise E, Ptito A.
Electrophysiology and functional MRI in post-acute mild traumatic brain
injury. J Neurotrauma. 2011;28(3):329–341.
Horan WP, Wynn JK, Kring AM, Simons RF, Green MF.
Electrophysiological correlates of emotional responding in schizophrenia.


<<<PAGE 3160>>>
J Abnorm Psychol. 2010;119(1):18–30.
Hunter AM, Cook IA, Leuchter AF. The promise of the quantitative
electroencephalogram as a predictor of antidepressant treatment outcomes
in major depressive disorder. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2007;30(1):105–
124.
Jarahi M, Sheibani V, Safakhah HA, Torkmandi H, Rashidy-Pour A. Effects
of progesterone on neuropathic pain responses in an experimental animal
model for peripheral neuropathy in the rat: a behavioral and
electrophysiological study. Neuroscience. 2014;256:403–411.
Winterer G, McCarley RW. Electrophysiology of schizophrenia. In:
Weinberger DR, Harrison PJ. Schizophrenia. 3rd ed. Hoboken, NJ:
Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2011:311.
Chronobiology
Delezie J, Challet E. Interactions between metabolism and circadian clocks:
reciprocal disturbances. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2011;1243:30–46.
Dridi D, Zouiten A, Mansour HB. Depression: chronophysiology and
chronotherapy. Biol Rhyth Res. 2014;45:77–91.
Eckel-Mahan K, Sassone-Corsi P. Metabolism and the circadian clock
converge. Physiol Rev. 2013;93(1):107–135.
Glickman G, Webb IC, Elliott JA, Baltazar RM, Reale ME, Lehman MN,
Gorman MR. Photic sensitivity for circadian response to light varies with
photoperiod. J Biol Rhythms. 2012;27(4):308–318.
Gonnissen HK, Rutters F, Mazuy C, Martens EA, Adam TC, WesterterpPlantenga MS. Effect of a phase advance and phase delay of the 24-h cycle
on energy metabolism, appetite, and related hormones. Am J Clin Nutr.
2012;96(4):689–697.
Lanzani MF, de Zavalía N, Fontana H, Sarmiento MI, Golombek D,
Rosenstein RE. Alterations of locomotor activity rhythm and sleep
parameters in patients with advanced glaucoma. Chronobiol Int.
2012;29(7):911–919.
Loddenkemper T, Lockley SW, Kaleyias J, Kothare SV. Chronobiology of
epilepsy: diagnostic and therapeutic implications of chrono-epileptology. J
Clin Neurophysiol. 2011;28(2):146–153.
Provencio I. Chronobiology. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan
& Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia,


<<<PAGE 3161>>>
PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:198.
Shafer SL, Lemmer B, Boselli E, Boiste F, Bouvet L, Allaouchiche B,
Chassard D. Pitfalls in chronobiology: a suggested analysis using
intrathecal bupivacaine analgesia as an example. Anesth Analg.
2010;111(4):980–985.
Wehrens SM, Hampton SM, Kerkhofs M, Skene DJ. Mood, alertness, and
performance in response to sleep deprivation and recovery sleep in
experienced shiftworkers versus non-shiftworkers. Chronobiol Int.
2012;29(5):537–548.


<<<PAGE 3162>>>
34
Contributions from the Behavioral and
Social Sciences
The underpinnings of psychiatry span many disciplines. The previous chapter
covered the neuroscience foundations of psychiatry. However, there are also
contributions from the psychosocial sciences, the sociocultural sciences, and
many more areas of scientific pursuit. Also, many theories and models of the
mind have grown from the psychoanalytic and other theoretical schools that
have had a vital influence on the practice of psychiatry, both historically and
currently.
This chapter provides a brief tour through some of the significant fields
that, along with the neurosciences, have helped psychiatry to grow from a
purely empirical practice into a robust and evidence-based branch of
medicine. Along the way, it also provides some brief biographies of some of
the greatest thinkers and researchers in these fields.

34.1 Contributions from the Psychosocial
Sciences
JEAN PIAGET AND COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT
Jean Piaget (1896–1980) is considered one of the greatest thinkers of the 20th
century. His contributions to the understanding of cognitive development had
a paradigmatic influence in developmental psychology and had significant
implications for interventions with children, both educational and clinical.


<<<PAGE 3163>>>
Piaget was born in Neuchatel, Switzerland, where he studied at the
university and received a doctorate in biology at 22. Interested in psychology,
he studied and researched several centers, including the Sorbonne in Paris,
and he worked with Eugen Bleuler at the Burghöltzli Psychiatric Hospital.
Piaget created a broad theoretical system for the development of cognitive
abilities; in this sense, his work was similar to that of Sigmund Freud, but
Piaget emphasized how children think and acquire knowledge.
Widely renowned as a child (or developmental) psychologist, Piaget
referred to himself primarily as a genetic epistemologist; he defined genetic
epistemology as the study of the development of abstract thought based on a
biologic or innate substrate. That self-designation reveals that Piaget’s central
project was more than articulating developmental child psychology, as this
term is generally understood; it was an account of the progressive
development of human knowledge.
Cognitive Development Stages
According to Piaget, the following four major stages lead to the capacity for
adult thought (Table 34-1): (1) sensorimotor, (2) preoperational thought, (3)
concrete operations, and (4) formal operations. Each stage is a prerequisite
for the following one, but the rate at which different children move through
different stages varies with their native endowment and environmental
circumstances.
Sensorimotor Stage (Birth to 2 Years). Piaget used the term
sensorimotor to describe the first stage: infants begin to learn through sensory
observation, and they gain control of their motor functions through activity,
exploration, and manipulation of the environment. Piaget divided this stage
into six substages, listed in Table 34-2.
From the outset, biology and experience blend to produce learned
behavior. For example, infants are born with a sucking reflex, but a type of
learning occurs when infants discover the location of the nipple and alter the
shape of their mouths. A stimulus is received, and a response results,
accompanied by a sense of awareness that is the first schema, or elementary
concept. As infants become increasingly mobile, one schema is built on
another, and new and more complex schemata are developed. Infants’ spatial,


<<<PAGE 3164>>>
visual, and tactile worlds expand during this period; children interact actively
with the environment and use previously learned behavior patterns. For
example, having learned to use a rattle, infants shake a new toy as they did
the rattle they had already learned to use. Infants also use a rattle in new
ways.
The critical achievement of this period is the development of object
permanence or the schema of the permanent object. This phrase relates to a
child’s ability to understand that objects have an existence independent of
their involvement. Infants learn to differentiate themselves from the world
and maintain a mental image of an object, even when it is not visible. When
an object is dropped in front of infants, they look down to the ground to
search for the object; that is, they behave for the first time as though they
have a reality outside themselves.
At about 18 months, infants begin to develop mental symbols and to use
words, a process known as symbolization. Infants can create a visual image of
a ball or a mental symbol of the word ball to stand for, or signify, the real
object. Such mental representations allow children to operate on new
conceptual levels. The attainment of object permanence marks the transition
from the sensorimotor stage to the preoperational stage of development.
Stage of Preoperational Thought (2 to 7 Years). During the stage of
preoperational thought, children use symbols and language more extensively
than in the sensorimotor stage. Thinking and reasoning are intuitive; children
learn without the use of reasoning. They cannot think logically or
deductively, and their concepts are primitive; they can name objects but not
classes of objects. Preoperational thought is midway between socialized adult
thought and the completely autistic Freudian unconscious. Events are not
linked by logic. Early in this stage, if children drop a glass that breaks, they
have no sense of cause and effect. They believe that the glass was ready to
break, not that they broke the glass. Children in this stage cannot grasp the
sameness of an object in different circumstances: the same doll in a carriage,
a crib, or a chair is perceived to be three different objects. During this time,
things are represented in terms of their function. For example, a child defines
a bike as “to ride” and a hole as “to dig.”
Table 34-1


<<<PAGE 3165>>>
Stages of Intellectual Development Postulated by Piaget
Age (yr)

Period

Cognitive Developmental
Characteristics

0–1.5 (to 2)

Sensorimotor

Divided into six stages,
characterized by:
1. Inborn motor and sensory
reflexes
2. Primary circular reaction
3. Secondary circular reaction
4. Use of familiar means to obtain
ends
5. Tertiary circular reaction and
discovery through active
experimentation
6. Insight and object permanence

2–7

Preoperations
subperioda

Deferred imitation, symbolic play,
graphic imagery (drawing),
mental imagery, and language

7–11

Concrete
operations

Conservation of quantity, weight,
volume, length, and time
based on reversibility by
inversion or reciprocity;
operations; class inclusion
and seriation

11–end of
Formal
adolescence
operations

Combinatorial system, whereby
variables are isolated and all
possible combinations are
examined;
hypotheticodeductive thinking


<<<PAGE 3166>>>
aThis subperiod is considered by some authors to be a separate developmental period.

In this stage, children begin to use language and drawings in more
elaborate ways. From one-word utterances, two-word phrases develop, made
up of either a noun and a verb or a noun and an objective. A child may say,
“Bobby eat,” or “Bobby up.”
Table 34-2
Piaget’s Sensorimotor Period of Cognitive Development
Age

Characteristics

Birth–2
mo

Uses inborn motor and sensory reflexes (sucking,
grasping, looking) to interact and accommodate to the
external world

2–5 mo

Primary circular reaction: Coordinates activities of own
body and five senses (e.g., sucking thumb); reality
remains subjective—does not seek stimuli outside of its
visual field; displays curiosity

5–9 mo

Secondary circular reaction: Seeks out new stimuli in the
environment; starts both to anticipate consequences of
own behavior and to act purposefully to change the
environment; beginning of intentional behavior

9 mo–1
yr

Shows preliminary signs of object permanence; has a
vague concept that objects exist apart from itself; plays
peek-a-boo; imitates novel behaviors

1 yr–18
mo

Tertiary circular reaction: Seeks out new experiences;
produces novel behaviors

18 mo–2 Symbolic thought: Uses symbolic representations of
yr
events and objects; shows signs of reasoning (e.g.,
uses one toy to reach for and get another); attains
object permanence
Children in the preoperational stage cannot deal with moral dilemmas,


<<<PAGE 3167>>>
although they feel good and bad. For example, when asked, “Who is more
guilty, the person who breaks one dish on purpose or the person who breaks
ten dishes by accident?” a young child usually answers that the person who
breaks ten dishes by accident is more guilty because more dishes are broken.
Children in this stage have a sense of immanent justice; the belief that
punishment for bad deeds is inevitable.
Children in this developmental stage are egocentric: they see themselves
as the center of the universe; they have a limited point of view, and they
cannot take the role of another person. Children cannot modify their behavior
for someone else; for example, children are not negativistic when they do not
listen to a command to be quiet because their brother has to study. Instead,
egocentric thinking prevents an understanding of their brother’s point of
view.
During this stage, children also use magical thinking, called
phenomenalistic causality, in which events that occur together are thought to
cause one another (e.g., thunder causes lightning, and bad thoughts cause
accidents). Also, children use animistic thinking, which is the tendency to
endow physical events and objects with life-like psychological attributes,
such as feelings and intentions.
SEMIOTIC FUNCTION. The semiotic function emerges during the preoperational

period. With this new ability, children can represent something—such as an
object, an event, or a conceptual scheme—with a signifier, representing a
representative function (e.g., language, mental image, symbolic gesture). That
is, children use a symbol or sign to stand for something else. Drawing is a
semiotic function initially done as a playful exercise but eventually signifying
something else in the real world.
Stage of Concrete Operations (7 to 11 Years). The stage of concrete
operations is so named because, in this period, children operate and act on the
concrete, real, and perceivable world of objects and events. Egocentric
thought is replaced by operational thought, which involves dealing with a
wide array of information outside the child. Therefore, children can now see
things from someone else’s perspective.
Children in this stage begin to use limited logical thought processes and
can serialize, order, and group things into classes based on common


<<<PAGE 3168>>>
characteristics. Syllogistic reasoning, in which a logical conclusion is formed
from two premises, appears during this stage; for example, all horses are
mammals (premise); all mammals are warm-blooded (premise); therefore, all
horses are warm-blooded (conclusion). Children can reason and follow the
rules and regulations. They can regulate themselves, and they begin to
develop a moral sense and a code of values.
Children who become overly invested in rules may show obsessivecompulsive behavior; children who resist a code of values often seem willful
and reactive. The most desirable developmental outcome in this stage is that a
child attains healthy respect for rules and understands that there are legitimate
exceptions to rules.
Conservation is the ability to recognize that, although the shape of objects
may change, the objects still maintain or conserve other characteristics that
enable them to be recognized as the same. For example, if a ball of clay is
rolled into a long, thin sausage shape, children recognize that each form
contains the same amount of clay. An inability to conserve (which is
characteristic of the preoperational stage) is observed when a child believes
there is more clay in the sausage-shaped piece because it is longer.
Reversibility is the capacity to understand the relation between things and
realize that one thing can turn into another and back again—for example, ice
and water.
The most critical sign that children are still in the preoperational stage is
that they have not achieved conservation or reversibility. The ability of
children to understand concepts of quantity is one of Piaget’s most influential
cognitive developmental theories. Measures of quantity include measures of
substance, length, number, liquids, and area (Fig. 34-1).
The 7- to 11-year-old child must organize and order occurrences in the real
world. Dealing with the future and its possibilities occur in the formal
operational stage.
Stage of Formal Operations (11 through the End of Adolescence).
The stage of formal operations is so named because young persons’ thinking
operates in a formal, highly logical, systematic, and symbolic manner. This
stage is characterized by the ability to think abstractly, to reason deductively,
and to define concepts, and also by the emergence of skills for dealing with
permutations and combinations; young persons can grasp the concept of


<<<PAGE 3169>>>
probabilities. Adolescents attempt to deal with all possible relations and
hypotheses to explain data and events during this stage. Language use is
complex; it follows formal rules of logic and is grammatically correct.
Abstract thinking is shown by adolescents’ interest in various issues—
philosophy, religion, ethics, and politics.
Hypotheticodeductive thinking, the
highest organization of cognition, enables persons to make a hypothesis or
proposition and to test it against reality. Deductive reasoning moves from the
general to the particular and is a more complicated process than inductive
reasoning, which moves from the particular to the general.
Because young persons can reflect on their own and other persons’
thinking, they are susceptible to self-conscious behavior. As adolescents
attempt to master new cognitive tasks, they may return to egocentric thought,
but on a higher level than in the past. For example, adolescents may think
that they can accomplish everything or can change events by thought alone.
Not all adolescents enter the stage of formal operations at the same time or to
the same degree. Depending on individual capacity and intervening
experience, some may not reach the stage of formal operational thought at all
and may remain in the concrete operational mode throughout life.
HYPOTHETICODEDUCTIVE

THINKING.

Psychiatric Applications
Piaget’s theories have many psychiatric implications. Hospitalized children in
the sensorimotor stage have not achieved object permanence and, therefore,
have separation anxiety. They do best if their mothers are allowed to stay
with them overnight. Children at the preoperational stage, who cannot deal
with concepts and abstractions, benefit more from role-playing proposed
medical procedures and situations than by having them described in detail.
For example, a child who receives intravenous therapy is helped by acting out
the procedure with a toy intravenous set and dolls.


<<<PAGE 3170>>>
FIGURE 34-1
Some simple tests for conservation, with approximate ages of attainment. When
the sense of conservation is achieved, the child answers that B contains the same
quantity as A. (Modified from Lefrancois GR. Of Children: An Introduction to Child
Development. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth; 1973:305, with permission.)

Because children at the preoperational stage do not understand cause and
effect, they may interpret physical illness as punishment for bad thoughts or
deeds. Because they have not yet mastered the capacity to conserve and do
not understand the concept of reversibility (which usually occurs during the
concrete operational stage), they cannot understand that a broken bone mends
or that blood loss in an accident can be replaced.
Adolescents’ thinking, during the stage of formal operations, may appear
overly abstract when it is, in fact, a normal developmental stage. Adolescent
turmoil may not herald a psychotic process but may well result from a typical


<<<PAGE 3171>>>
adolescent’s coming to grips with newly acquired abilities to deal with the
unlimited possibilities of the surrounding world.
Adults under stress may regress cognitively as well as emotionally. Their
thinking can become preoperational, egocentric, and sometimes animistic.
Implications for Psychotherapy. Piaget was not an applied psychologist
and did not develop the implications of his cognitive model for
psychotherapeutic intervention. Nevertheless, his work formed one of the
foundations of the cognitive revolution in psychology. One aspect of this
revolution was an increasing emphasis on the cognitive components of the
therapeutic endeavor. In contrast to classical psychodynamic therapy, which
focused primarily on drives and affects, and in contrast to behavior therapy,
which focused on overt actions, cognitive approaches to therapy focused on
thoughts, including automatic assumptions, beliefs, plans, and intentions. By
including “theory theory” and “script theory,” we can see additional
applications to psychotherapy.
Cognitive development theory has influenced psychotherapeutic
approaches in multiple ways. Some therapists have taken developmental
notions from Piaget’s work and developed intervention techniques. Others
have developed cognitive models of treatment independent of Piaget but with
heavy reliance on cognition. Others have included Piaget’s concepts in a
broader set of constructs to undergird new developmental approaches to
psychotherapy.
First, some psychotherapists applied Piagetian notions directly to child
interventions. Susan Harter, for example, discussed techniques for helping
young children become aware of divergent or contradictory emotions and to
integrate these complex emotions within a more abstract or higher class of
emotions. One of Harter’s techniques is to ask the young child to make a
drawing that shows different and conflicting feelings in one person. This
technique represents an application of the concrete operation of class
inclusion to the realm of the emotions. Harter’s work applied Piagetian
findings to the common therapeutic problem of helping children to recognize,
tolerate, and integrate mixed or ambivalent affects within stable object
relations.
As such, it drew on cognitive theory and psychodynamic theory. Similar
techniques are important in work with children who have been exposed to


<<<PAGE 3172>>>
trauma or sexual abuse. It is an essential component of such work to assist
them in labeling, differentiating, and accepting the full range of emotions
stemming from these experiences.
Second, other psychotherapists developed treatment models that, although
not directly dependent on Piagetian psychology, emphasized core ideas quite
similar to those Piaget discovered in his naturalistic observations of cognitive
development. These models are even more closely aligned with recent
developments in “theory theory.” Aaron Beck, for example, developed an
entire school of cognitive therapy that focuses on the role of cognitions in
causing or maintaining psychopathology. Cognitive therapy is an effective
treatment for problems as diverse as depression, anxiety disorders, and
substance use disorders.
A core idea in cognitive therapy is that the patient has developed certain
core beliefs, aspects of the self-schema, and conditional probability beliefs as
a result of developmental experiences, and these contribute to emotional or
behavioral problems. For example, depressed persons may have the core
belief, “I am unlovable.” Addicted persons may have the belief, “Unless I
drink, I cannot feel happy.” In cognitive therapy, the person can be assisted in
identifying the negative automatic thoughts and underlying dysfunctional
attitudes or beliefs that contribute to emotional distress or addictive behavior.
The critical therapeutic process after identification of the maladaptive
thoughts is to help the patient view these thoughts more objectively, not
unquestioningly take them as veridical. Here, cognitive therapy emphasizes
evidence, consistent both with Piagetian theory and “theory theory.” The
patient is assisted in seeking out evidence to test negative thinking; active
involvement, rather than passive listening, is required.
What the cognitive therapist accomplishes through such techniques as
Socratic questioning and asking if there are other ways to look at the same
event is similar to what the talented teacher does in guiding children to a
more adequate, more intelligent understanding of operational tasks. The
notion of equilibration is relevant in both instances. By helping the individual
see that previous cognitive structures are inadequate, the therapist or teacher
disturbs the old cognitive structure, and the patient or student experiences a
disruption that leads to the search for more-adequate structures. The
compensation for external disturbance is what Piaget termed equilibration.
New structures can be constructed only through a process of accommodation,


<<<PAGE 3173>>>
enabling the subject to assimilate a more comprehensive array of data, a new
perspective, or more complex information.
Because it requires thinking about thinking, cognitive therapy seems to
require formal operational thinking, although this has not been empirically
tested. At the least, it requires the ability to recognize and articulate affects, to
recognize and label events that give rise to affects, and to translate into
thought the mediating process that occurs rapidly between the event and the
affect. Cognitive-behavioral models of psychotherapy include cognitive
techniques and more behavioral, interactive techniques, such as increasing
pleasant activities and improving communication and problem-solving skills.
It is possible that the less-cognitive, more-behavioral techniques, although
requiring a lower level of cognitive development, can also lead to the
garnering of evidence and modification of specific expectancies, attributions,
and self-schemata.
Because “script theory” or narrative approaches to cognition in
psychotherapy are empirically based, generated by repetitive experiences
rather than by reflective abstraction, and domain-specific, they may have
even more general application to psychotherapy than classic Piagetian
theories or “theory theory.” For example, in dialectical behavior therapy,
patients provide a “chain analysis” of events, feelings, thoughts, situational
stimuli, and interpersonal factors that led to negative or self-damaging
behavior. This narrative provides guidance to the patient and the therapist
about where and how to intervene to prevent similar behavior.
Developmentally Based Psychotherapy. Developmentally based
psychotherapy, developed by Stanley Greenspan, M.D., integrates cognitive,
affective, drive, and relationship-based approaches with a new understanding
of the stages of human development. The clinician first determines the level
of the patient’s ego or personality development and the presence or absence
of deficits or constrictions. For example, can the person regulate activity and
sensations, relate to others, read nonverbal affective symbols, represent
experience, build bridges between representations, integrate emotional
polarities, abstract feelings, and reflect on internal wishes and feelings?
From a developmental point of view, the integral parts of the therapeutic
process include learning how to regulate experience; to engage more fully
and deeply in relationships; to perceive, comprehend, and respond to


<<<PAGE 3174>>>
complex behaviors and interactive patterns; and to be able to engage in the
ever-changing opportunities, tasks, and challenges during life (e.g., adulthood
and aging) and, throughout, to observe and reflect on one’s own and others’
experiences. These processes are the foundation of the ego, and more
broadly, the personality. Their presence constitutes emotional health and their
absence, emotional disorder. The developmental approach describes how to
harness these core processes and assist the patients in mobilizing their
growth.

ATTACHMENT THEORY
Attachment and Development
Attachment can be defined as the emotional tone between children and their
caregivers and is evidenced by an infant’s seeking and clinging to the
caregiving person, usually the mother. By their first month, infants usually
have begun to show such behavior, designed to promote proximity to the
desired person.
Attachment theory originated in the work of John Bowlby, a British
psychoanalyst (1907–1990). In his studies of infant attachment and
separation, Bowlby pointed out that attachment constituted a central
motivational force and that mother–child attachment was an essential
medium of human interaction that had significant consequences for later
development and personality functioning. Being monotropic, infants tend to
attach to one person; but they can form attachments to several persons, such
as the father or a surrogate. Attachment develops gradually; it results in an
infant’s wanting to be with a preferred person, who is perceived as stronger,
wiser, and able to reduce anxiety or distress. Attachment thus gives infants
feelings of security. The interaction between mother and infant facilitates the
process; the amount of time together is less critical than the activity between
the two.
The term bonding is sometimes used synonymously with attachment, but
the two are different phenomena. Bonding concerns the mother’s feelings for
her infant and differs from attachment. Mothers generally do not rely on their
infants as a source of security, as is the case in attachment behavior. Much
research reveals that the bonding of mother to infant occurs when there is


<<<PAGE 3175>>>
skin-to-skin contact between the two or when other types of contact, such as
voice and eye contact, are made. Some workers have concluded that a mother
who has skin-to-skin contact with her baby immediately after birth shows a
stronger bonding pattern and may provide more attentive care than a mother
who does not have this experience. Some researchers have even proposed a
critical period immediately after birth, during which such skin-to-skin contact
must occur if bonding is to occur. This concept is much disputed: many
mothers are bonded to their infants and display excellent maternal care even
though they did not have skin-to-skin contact immediately postpartum.
Because human beings can develop representational models of their babies in
utero and even before conception, this representational thinking may be as
crucial to the bonding process as skin, voice, or eye contact.
Ethologic Studies. Bowlby suggested a Darwinian evolutionary basis for
attachment behavior; namely, such behavior ensures that adults protect their
young. Ethologic studies show that nonhuman primates and other animals
exhibit attachment behavior patterns that are presumably instinctual and are
governed by inborn tendencies. An example of an instinctual attachment
system is imprinting. Certain stimuli can elicit innate behavior patterns
during the first few hours of an animal’s behavioral development; thus, the
animal offspring becomes attached to its mother at a critical period early in
its development. A similar sensitive or critical period during which
attachment occurs has been postulated for human infants. The presence of
imprinting behavior in humans is highly controversial, but bonding and
attachment behavior during the first year of life closely approximate the
critical period; in humans, however, this period occurs over years rather than
hours.
Harry Harlow’s work with monkeys is relevant to
attachment theory. Harlow demonstrated the emotional and behavioral effects
of isolating monkeys from birth and keeping them from forming attachments.
The isolates were withdrawn, unable to relate to peers, unable to mate, and
incapable of caring for their offspring.
HARRY HARLOW.

Phases of Attachment
In the first attachment phase, sometimes called the preattachment stage (birth


<<<PAGE 3176>>>
to 8 or 12 weeks), babies orient to their mothers, follow them with their eyes
over a 180-degree range, and turn toward and move rhythmically with their
mother’s voice. In the second phase, sometimes called attachment in the
making (8 to 12 weeks to 6 months), infants become attached to one or more
persons in the environment. In the third phase, sometimes called clear-cut
attachment (6 through 24 months), infants cry and show other signs of
distress when separated from the caretaker or mother; this phase can occur as
early as 3 months in some infants. On being returned to the mother, the infant
stops crying and clings to gain further assurance of the mother’s return.
Sometimes, seeing the mother after a separation is sufficient for crying to
stop. In the fourth phase (25 months and beyond), the mother figure is seen as
independent, and a more complex relationship between the mother and the
child develops. Table 34-3 summarizes the development of standard
attachment from birth through 3 years.
Mary Ainsworth. Mary Ainsworth (1913–1999) was a Canadian
developmental psychologist from the University of Toronto. She described
three main types of insecure attachment: insecure-avoidant, insecureambivalent, and insecure-disorganized. The insecure-avoidant child, having
experienced brusque or aggressive parenting, tends to avoid close contact
with people and lingers near caregivers rather than approaching them directly
when faced with a threat. The insecure-ambivalent child finds exploratory
play difficult, even in the absence of danger, and clings to his or her
inconsistent parents. Insecure-disorganized children have parents who are
emotionally absent with a parental history of abuse in their childhood. These
children tend to behave in bizarre ways when threatened. According to
Ainsworth, disorganization is a severe form of insecure attachment and a
possible precursor of severe personality disorder and dissociative phenomena
in adolescence and early adulthood.
Table 34-3
Normal Attachment
Birth to 30 days
Reflexes at birth
Rooting


<<<PAGE 3177>>>
Head turning
Sucking
Swallowing
Hand-mouth
Grasp
Digital extension
Crying—signal for particular kind of distress
Responsiveness and orientation to mother’s face, eyes, and voice
4 days—anticipatory approach behavior at feeding
3–4 wk—infant smiles preferentially to mother’s voice
Age 30 days through 3 mo
Vocalization and gaze reciprocity further elaborated from 1 to 3
mo; babbling at 2 mo, more with the mother than with a stranger
Social smile
In strange situation, increased clinging response to mother
Age 4 through 6 mo
Briefly soothed and comforted by sound of mother’s voice
Spontaneous, voluntary reaching for mother
Anticipatory posturing to be picked up
Differential preference for mother intensifies
Subtle integration of responses to mother
Age 7 through 9 mo
Attachment behaviors further differentiated and focused
specifically on mother
Separation distress, stranger distress, strange-place distress
Age 10 through 15 mo
Crawls or walks toward mother
Subtle facial expressions (coyness, attentiveness)
Responsive dialogue with mother clearly established
Early imitation of mother (vocal inflections, facial expression)
More fully developed separation distress and mother preference
Pointing gesture
Walking to and from mother
Affectively positive reunion responses to mother after separation


<<<PAGE 3178>>>
or, paradoxically, short-lived, active avoidance or delayed
protest
Age 16 mo through 2 yr
Involvement in imitative jargon with mother (12–14 mo)
Head-shaking “no” (15–16 mo)
Transitional object used during the absence of mother
Separation anxiety diminishes
Mastery of strange situations and persons when mother is near
Evidence of delayed imitation
Object permanence
Microcosmic symbolic play
Age 25 mo through 3 yr
Able to tolerate separations from mother without distress when
familiar with surroundings and given reassurances about
mother’s return
Two- and three-word speech
Stranger anxiety much reduced
Object consistency achieved—maintains composure and
psychosocial functioning without regression in absence of
mother
Microcosmic play and social play; cooperation with others begins
Based on material by Justin Call, M.D.

Mary Ainsworth expanded on Bowlby’s observations and found that the
interaction between the mother and her baby during the attachment period
significantly influences the baby’s current and future behavior. Patterns of
attachments vary among babies; for example, some babies signal or cry less
than others. Sensitive responsiveness to infant signals, such as cuddling a
crying baby, causes infants to cry less in later months, rather than reinforcing
crying behavior. Close bodily contact with the mother when the baby signals
for her is also associated with the growth of self-reliance, rather than a
clinging dependence, as the baby grows older. Unresponsive mothers produce
anxious babies; these mothers often have lower intelligence quotients (IQs)
and are emotionally more immature and younger than responsive mothers.


<<<PAGE 3179>>>
Table 34-4
The Strange Situation
Episodea Persons Present

Change

1

Parent, infant

Enter room

2

Parent, infant, stranger

Unfamiliar adult joins the dyad

3

Infant, stranger

Parent leaves

4

Parent, infant

Parent returns, stranger leaves

5

Infant

Parent leaves

6

Infant, stranger

Stranger returns

7

Parent, infant

Parent returns, stranger leaves

aAll episodes are usually 3 minutes long, but episodes 3, 5, and 6 can be curtailed if the infant

becomes too distressed, and episodes 4 and 7 are sometimes extended.
Reprinted from Lamb ME, Nash A, Teti DM, Bornstein MH. Infancy. In: Lewis M, ed. Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry: A Comprehensive Textbook. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Williams &
Wilkins; 1996:256, with permission.

Ainsworth also confirmed that attachment serves to reduce anxiety. What
she called the secure base effect enables children to move away from
attachment figures and to explore the environment. Inanimate objects, such as
a teddy bear and a blanket (called the transitional object by Donald
Winnicott), also serve as a secure base, one that often accompanies them as
they investigate the world.
STRANGE SITUATION. Ainsworth developed the strange situation, the research

protocol for assessing the quality and security of an infant’s attachment. In
this procedure, the infant is exposed to escalating amounts of stress; for
example, the infant and the parent enter an unfamiliar room, an unfamiliar
adult then enters the room, and the parent leaves the room. The protocol has
seven steps (Table 34-4). According to Ainsworth’s studies, about 65 percent
of infants are securely attached by 24 months.
Anxiety


<<<PAGE 3180>>>
Bowlby’s theory of anxiety holds that a child’s sense of distress during
separation is perceived and experienced as anxiety and is the prototype of
anxiety. Any stimuli that alarm children and cause fear (e.g., loud noises,
falling, and cold blasts of air) mobilize signal indicators (e.g., crying) that
cause the mother to respond in a caring way by cuddling and reassuring the
child. The mother’s ability to relieve the infant’s anxiety or fear is
fundamental to the growth of attachment in the infant. When the mother is
close to the child, and the child experiences no fear, the child gains a sense of
security, the opposite of anxiety. When the mother is unavailable to the infant
because of physical absence (e.g., if the mother is in prison) or because of
psychological impairment (e.g., severe depression), anxiety develops in the
infant.
Separation anxiety is the response of a child who is isolated or separated
from its mother or caretaker. It is most common at 10 to 18 months of age
and generally disappears by the end of the third year. It is usually expressed
with tearfulness or irritability. Somewhat earlier (at about 8 months), stranger
anxiety is an anxiety response to someone other than the caregiver appears.
Signal Indicators. Signal indicators are infants’ signs of distress that
prompt or elicit a behavioral response in the mother. The primary signal is
crying. The three types of signal indicators are hunger (the most common),
anger, and pain. Some mothers can distinguish between them, but most
mothers generalize the hunger cry to represent distress from pain, frustration,
or anger. Other signal indicators that reinforce attachment are smiling,
cooing, and looking. The sound of an adult human voice can prompt these
indicators.
Losing Attachments. Persons’ reactions to the death of a parent or a
spouse can be traced to the nature of their past and present attachment to the
lost figure. An absence of demonstrable grief may be owing to real
experiences of rejection and the lack of closeness in the relationship. The
person may even consciously offer an idealized picture of the deceased.
Persons who show no grief usually try to present themselves as independent
and disinterested in closeness and attachment.
Sometimes, however, the severing of attachments is traumatic. The death
of a parent or a spouse can precipitate a depressive disorder, and even


<<<PAGE 3181>>>
suicide, in some persons. The death of a spouse increases the chance that the
surviving spouse will experience a physical or mental disorder during the
next year. The onset of depression and other dysphoric states often involves
rejection by a significant figure in a person’s life.
Disorders of Attachment
Attachment disorders are characterized by biopsychosocial pathology that
results from maternal deprivation, a lack of care by, and interaction with, the
mother or caregiver. Failure-to-thrive syndromes, psychosocial dwarfism,
separation anxiety disorder, avoidant personality disorder, depressive
disorders, delinquency, academic problems, and borderline intelligence have
been traced to negative attachment experiences. When maternal care is
deficient because (1) a mother is mentally ill, (2) a child is institutionalized
for a long time, or (3) the primary object of attachment dies, children sustain
emotional damage. Bowlby initially thought that the damage was permanent
and invariable. However, he revised his theories to consider the time at which
the separation occurred, the type and degree of separation, and the level of
security that the child experienced before the separation.
Bowlby described a predictable set and sequence of behavior patterns in
children who are separated from their mothers for extended periods (more
than 3 months): protest, in which the child protests the separation by crying,
calling out, and searching for the lost person; despair, in which the child
appears to lose hope that the mother will return; and detachment, in which the
child emotionally separates him- or herself from the mother. Bowlby believed
that this sequence involves ambivalent feelings toward the mother; the child
both wants her and is angry with her for her desertion.
Children in the detachment stage respond indifferently when the mother
returns; the mother has not been forgotten, but the child is angry at her for
having gone away in the first place and fears that she will go away again.
Some children have affectionless personalities characterized by emotional
withdrawal, little or no feeling, and a limited ability to form affectionate
relationships.
Anaclitic Depression. Anaclitic depression, also known as hospitalism,
was first described by René Spitz in infants who had made normal


<<<PAGE 3182>>>
attachments but were suddenly separated from their mothers for varying
times and placed in institutions or hospitals. The children became depressed,
withdrawn, nonresponsive, and vulnerable to physical illness, but they
recovered when their mothers returned, or surrogate mothering was available.
Child Maltreatment
Abused children often maintain their attachments to abusive parents. Studies
of dogs have shown that severe punishment and maltreatment increase
attachment behavior. When children are hungry, sick, or in pain, they too
show clinging attachment behavior. Similarly, when children are rejected by
their parents or are afraid of them, their attachment may increase; some
children want to remain with an abusive parent. Nevertheless, when a choice
must be made between a punishing and a nonpunishing figure, the
nonpunishing person is the preferable choice, especially if they are sensitive
to the child’s needs.
Psychiatric Applications
The applications of attachment theory in psychotherapy are numerous. When
a patient can attach to a therapist, a secure base effect is seen. The patient
may then be able to take risks, mask anxiety, and practice new patterns of
behavior that otherwise might not have been attempted. Patients whose
impairments can be traced to never having made an attachment in early life
may do so for the first time in therapy, with salutary effects.
Patients whose pathology stems from exaggerated early attachments may
attempt to replicate them in therapy. Therapists must enable such patients to
recognize the ways their early experiences have interfered with their ability to
achieve independence.
For patients who are children and whose attachment difficulties may be
more apparent than those of adults, therapists represent consistent and trusted
figures who can engender a sense of warmth and self-esteem in children,
often for the first time.
Relationship Disorders. A person’s psychological health and sense of
well-being depend significantly on the quality of his or her relationships and
attachment to others, and a core issue in all close personal relationships is


<<<PAGE 3183>>>
establishing and regulating that connection. In a typical attachment
interaction, one person seeks more proximity and affection, and the other
either reciprocates, rejects, or disqualifies the request. A pattern is shaped
through repeated exchanges. Distinct attachment styles have been observed.
Adults with an anxious-ambivalent attachment style tend to be obsessed with
romantic partners, suffer from extreme jealousy, and have a high divorce rate.
Persons with an avoidant attachment style are relatively uninvested in close
relationships, although they often feel lonely. They seem afraid of intimacy
and tend to withdraw when there is stress or conflict in the relationship.
Break-up rates are high. Persons with a secure attachment style are highly
invested in relationships and tend to behave without much possessiveness or
fear of rejection.

LEARNING THEORY
Learning is defined as a change in behavior resulting from repeated practice.
The principles of learning are always operating and always influencing
human activity. Learning principles are often deeply involved in the etiology
and maintenance of psychiatric disorders because so much of human
behavior (including overt behavior, thought patterns, and emotion) is
acquired through learning. Learning processes also strongly influence
psychotherapy because human behavior changes. Thus, learning principles
can influence the effectiveness of therapy. No method of therapy can be said
to be immune to the effects of learning. Even the simple prescription of
medication can bring learning processes into play because the patient will
have opportunities to learn about the drug’s effects and side effects, will need
to learn to adhere to the instructions and directions for taking it, and will need
to learn to overcome any resistance to adherence.
Basic Concepts and Considerations
A great deal of modern research on learning still focuses on Pavlovian
(classical) and operant learning. Pavlovian conditioning, developed by Ivan
Petrovich Pavlov (1849–1936), occurs when neutral stimuli are associated
with a psychologically significant event. The main result is that the stimuli
come to evoke a set of responses or emotions that may contribute to many
clinical disorders, including (but not limited to) anxiety disorders and drug


<<<PAGE 3184>>>
dependence. The events in Pavlov’s experiment are often described using
terms designed to make the experiment applicable to any situation. The food
is the unconditional stimulus (US) because it unconditionally elicits salivation
before the experiment begins. The bell is the conditional stimulus (CS)
because it only elicits the salivary response conditional on the bell–food
pairings. The new response to the bell is correspondingly called the
conditional response (CR), and the natural response to the food itself is the
unconditional response (UR). Modern laboratory studies of conditioning use
an extensive range of CSs and USs and measure a wide range of conditioned
responses.
Operant conditioning, developed by B.F. Skinner (1904–1990), occurs
when a behavior (instead of a stimulus) is associated with a psychologically
significant event. In the laboratory, the most famous experimental
arrangement is when a rat presses a lever to earn food pellets. In this case, as
opposed to Pavlov’s, the behavior is an operant because it operates on the
environment. The food pellet is a reinforcer—an event that increases the
strength of the behavior of which it is made a consequence. A central idea
behind this method is that the rat’s behavior is “voluntary” in the sense that
the animal is not compelled to make the response (it can perform it whenever
it “wants” to). In this sense, it is similar to the thousands of operant behaviors
that humans choose to commit—freely—in any day. Of course, the even
larger idea is that even though the rat’s behavior appears as though it is
voluntary, it is lawfully controlled by its consequences: if the experimenter
were to stop delivering the food pellet, the rat would stop pressing the lever,
and if the experimenter were to allow the lever press to produce larger pellets,
or perhaps pellets at a higher probability or rate, then the rate of the behavior
might increase. The point of operant conditioning experiments, then, is
mostly to understand the relation of behavior to its payoff.
Pavlovian and operant conditioning differ in several ways. One of the most
fundamental differences is that the responses observed in Pavlov’s
experiment are elicited and thus controlled by presenting an antecedent
stimulus. In contrast, the “response” observed in Skinner’s experiment is not
elicited or compelled by an antecedent stimulus in any obvious way—its
consequences instead control it. This distinction between operants and
respondents is essential in clinical settings. If a young patient is referred to
the clinic for acting out in the classroom, an initial goal of the clinician will


<<<PAGE 3185>>>
be to determine whether the behavior is a respondent or an operant. Then the
clinician will go about changing either its antecedents or its consequences,
respectively, to reduce its probability of occurrence.
Despite the academic separation of operant and respondent conditioning,
they have an important common function: both learning processes allow
organisms to adapt to the environment. The idea is illustrated by considering
the law of effect (Fig. 34-2), which says that whether an operant behavior
increases or decreases in strength depends on the effect it has on the
environment. When the action leads to a positive outcome, the action is
strengthened; conversely, when the action leads to a negative outcome, we
have punishment, and the action is weakened. Similarly, when an action
decreases the probability of a positive event, behavior also declines. (Such a
procedure is now widely known as a time-out from reinforcement.) When an
action terminates or prevents the occurrence of a negative event, the behavior
will strengthen. By enabling the organism to maximize its interaction with
positive events and minimize its interaction with negative ones, operant
conditioning allows the organism to optimize its interaction with the
environment. Reward learning also provides a framework for understanding
the development of somewhat maladaptive behaviors like overeating (in
which behavior is reinforced by food) and drug-taking (in which the
pharmacologic effects of drugs reinforce behaviors)—cases in which reward
principles lead to psychopathology.
A parallel to Figure 34-2 exists in Pavlovian conditioning, in which one
can likewise think of whether the CS is associated with positive or negative
events (Fig. 34-3). Although such learning can lead to a vast constellation or
system of behaviors, in a very general way, it also leads to behavioral
tendencies of approach or withdrawal. Thus, when a CS signals a positive
US, the CS will evoke approach behaviors—called sign tracking. For
example, an organism will approach a signal for food. Analogously, when a
CS signals a negative US, it will evoke behaviors that tend to move the
organism away from the CS.


<<<PAGE 3186>>>
FIGURE 34-2
The law of effect in instrumental/operant learning. Actions either produce or
prevent good or bad events, and the strength of the action changes accordingly
(arrow). “Reinforcement” refers to a strengthening of behavior. Positive
reinforcement occurs when an action produces a positive event, whereas
negative reinforcement occurs when an action prevents or eliminates a negative
event. (Courtesy of Mark E. Bouton, PhD.)

FIGURE 34-3
Sign tracking in Pavlovian learning. Conditional stimuli (CSs) signal either an
increase or a decrease in the probability of good or bad events, and the CS
generally engages approach or withdrawal behaviors accordingly. (Courtesy of
Mark E. Bouton, PhD.)

Conversely, CSs associated with a decrease in the probability of a good


<<<PAGE 3187>>>
thing will elicit withdrawal behaviors, whereas CSs associated with the
decrease in the probability of a bad thing can elicit an approach. An example
of the latter case might be a stimulus that signals safety or decreases the
probability of an aversive event, which evokes an approach in a frightened
organism. In the end, these fundamental behavioral effects of both operant
(see Fig. 34-2) and Pavlovian (see Fig. 34-3) learning serve to maximize the
organism’s contact with good things and minimize contact with bad things.
Perhaps because they have such similar functions, Pavlovian learning and
operant learning are influenced by similar variables. For example, in either
case, the behavior is especially strong if the magnitude of the US or
reinforcer is large, or if the US or reinforcer occurs relatively close to the CS
or operant response in time. In either case, the learned behavior decreases if
the US or reinforcer that was once paired with the CS or the response is
eliminated from the situation. This phenomenon, called extinction, provides a
means of eliminating unwanted behaviors learned through either form of
conditioning and has led to several very effective cognitive-behavioral
therapies.
Pavlovian Conditioning
Effects of Conditioning on Behavior. Many laypeople have the
mistaken impression that Pavlovian learning is a rigid affair in which a fixed
stimulus comes to elicit a fixed response. Conditioning is considerably more
complex and dynamic than that. For example, signals for food may evoke a
broad set of responses that function to prepare the organism to digest food:
they can elicit the secretion of gastric acid, pancreatic enzymes, and insulin
along with Pavlov’s famous salivary response. The CS can also elicit
approach behavior (as described earlier), an increase in body temperature,
and a state of arousal and excitement. When a signal for food is presented to
a satiated animal or human, they may eat more food. Some of these effects
may be motivational; for example, an additional effect of presenting a CS for
food is that it can invigorate ongoing operant behaviors that have been
reinforced with food. CSs thus have powerful behavioral potential. Signals
for food evoke a whole behavior system that is functionally organized to find,
procure, and consume food.
Pavlovian conditioning is also involved in other aspects of eating. Through


<<<PAGE 3188>>>
conditioning, humans and other animals may learn to like or dislike certain
foods. In animals like rats, flavors associated with nutrients (sugars, starches,
calories, proteins, or fats) come to be preferred. Flavors associated with sweet
tastes are also preferred, whereas flavors associated with bitter tastes are
avoided. At least as necessary, flavors associated with illness become
disliked, as illustrated by the person who gets sick drinking an alcoholic
beverage and consequently learns to hate the flavor. The fact that flavor CSs
can be associated with such a range of biologic consequences (USs) is
essential for omnivorous animals to learn about new foods. It also has some
clinical implications. For example, chemotherapy can make cancer patients
sick, causing the conditioning of an aversion to a recently eaten food (or to
the clinic itself). Other evidence suggests that animals may learn to dislike
food that is associated with becoming sick with cancer. On the flip side,
conditioning can enable external cues to trigger food consumption and
craving, potentially influencing overeating and obesity.
Pavlovian conditioning also occurs when organisms ingest drugs.
Whenever a drug is taken, in addition to reinforcing the behaviors that lead to
its ingestion, the drug constitutes a US and may be associated with potential
CSs that are present at the time (e.g., rooms, odors, injection paraphernalia).
CSs that are associated with drug USs can sometimes have an interesting
property: they often elicit a conditioned response that seems opposite to the
unconditional effect of the drug. For example, although morphine causes a rat
to feel less pain, a CS associated with morphine elicits an opposite increase,
not a decrease in pain sensitivity. Similarly, although alcohol can cause a
drop in body temperature, a conditioned response to a CS associated with
alcohol is typically increased in body temperature. In these cases, the
conditioned response is said to be compensatory because it counteracts the
drug effect. Compensatory responses are another example of how classical
(Pavlovian) conditioning helps organisms prepare for a significant US.
Compensatory conditioned responses have implications for drug abuse.
First, they can cause drug tolerance, in which repeated administration of a
drug reduces its effectiveness. As a drug and a CS are repeatedly paired, the
compensatory response to the CS becomes stronger and more effective at
counteracting the effect of the drug. The drug, therefore, has less impact. One
implication is that tolerance will be lost if the drug is taken without being
signaled by the usual CS. Consistent with this idea, administering a drug in a


<<<PAGE 3189>>>
new environment can cause a loss of drug tolerance and make drug overdose
more likely. A second implication stems from the fact that compensatory
responses may be unpleasant or aversive. A CS associated with an opiate may
elicit several compensatory responses—it may cause the drug user to be more
sensitive to pain, change body temperature, and perhaps become hyperactive
(the opposite of another unconditional opiate effect). The unpleasantness of
these responses may motivate the user to retake the drug to get rid of them,
an example of escape learning, or negative reinforcement, and a classic
example of how Pavlovian and operant learning processes might readily
interact. The idea is that the urge to take drugs may be strongest in the
presence of CSs that have been associated with the drug. The hypothesis is
consistent with self-reports of abusers, who, after a period of abstinence, are
tempted to retake the drug when they are reexposed to drug-associated cues.
Pavlovian learning may potentially be involved in anxiety disorders. CSs
associated with frightening USs can elicit a whole system of conditioned fear
responses, broadly designed to help the organism cope. In animals, cues
associated with frightening events (such as a brief foot shock) elicit changes
in respiration, heart rate, and blood pressure, and even a (compensatory)
decrease in sensitivity to pain. Brief CSs that occur close to the US in time
can also elicit adaptively timed protective reflexes. For example, the rabbit
blinks in response to a brief signal that predicts a mild electric shock near the
eye. The same CS, when lengthened in duration and paired with the same US,
elicits mainly fear responses, and fear elicited by a CS may potentiate the
conditioned eyeblink response elicited by another CS or a startle response to
a sudden noise. Once again, CSs do not merely elicit a simple reflex, but also
evoke a complex and interactive set of responses.
Classical fear conditioning can contribute to phobias (in which specific
objects may be associated with a traumatic US), as well as other anxiety
disorders, such as panic disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In
panic disorder, people who have unexpected panic attacks can become
anxious about having another one. In this case, the panic attack (the US or
UR) may condition anxiety to the external situation in which it occurs (e.g., a
crowded bus) and also internal (“interoceptive”) CSs created by early
symptoms of the attack (e.g., dizziness or a sudden pounding of the heart).
These CSs may then evoke anxiety or panic responses. Panic disorder may
begin because external cues associated with panic can arouse anxiety, which


<<<PAGE 3190>>>
may exacerbate the next unconditional panic attack or panic response elicited
by an interoceptive CS. Emotional reactions elicited by CSs may not require
conscious awareness for their occurrence or development. Indeed, fear
conditioning may be independent of conscious awareness.
In addition to eliciting conditioned responses, CSs also motivate ongoing
operant behavior. For example, presenting a CS that elicits anxiety can
increase the vigor of operant behaviors learned to avoid or escape the
frightening US. Thus, an individual with an anxiety disorder will be more
likely to express avoidance in the presence of anxiety or fear cues. Similar
effects may occur with CSs that predict other USs (such as drugs or food)—
as already mentioned. A drug-associated CS may motivate the drug abuser to
take more drugs. The motivating effects of CSs may stem from the fact that
CSs may be associated with both the sensory and emotional properties of
USs. For example, the survivor of a traumatic train derailment might
associate stimuli that occur immediately before derailment (such as the blue
flash that occurs when the train separates from its overhead power supply)
with both the emotional and the sensory aspects of the crash. Consequently,
when the survivor later encounters another flashing blue light (e.g., the lights
on a police car), the CS might evoke both emotional responses (mediated by
association with the trauma’s emotional qualities) and sensory associations
(mediated by association with the trauma’s sensory qualities). Both might
play a role in the nightmares and “reexperiencing” phenomena that are
characteristic of PTSD.
The Nature of the Learning Process. Research beginning in the late
1960s began to uncover some critical details about the learning process
behind Pavlovian conditioning. Several findings proved especially influential.
For example, it was shown that conditioning is not an inevitable consequence
of pairing a CS with a US. Such pairings will not cause conditioning if there
is a second CS present that already predicts the US. This finding (known as
blocking) suggests that a CS must provide new information about the US if
learning occurs. The importance of the CS’s information value is also
suggested by the fact that a CS will not be treated as a signal for the US if the
US occurs equally often (or is equally probable) in the presence and the
absence of the CS. Instead, the organism treats the CS as a signal for the US
if the probability of the US is more significant in the presence of the CS than


<<<PAGE 3191>>>
in its absence. Also, the organism will treat the CS as a signal for “no US” if
the probability of the US is less in the presence of the CS than in its absence.
In the latter case, the signal is called a conditioned inhibitor because it will
inhibit other CSs. The conditioned inhibition phenomenon is clinically
relevant because inhibitory CSs may hold pathologic CRs like fear or anxiety
at bay. A loss of the inhibition would allow the anxiety response to emerge.
There are also essential variants of classical conditioning. In sensory
preconditioning, two stimuli (A and B) are first paired, and then one of them
(A) is later paired with the US. Stimulus A evokes conditioned responding, of
course, but so does stimulus B—indirectly, through its association with A.
One implication is that exposure to a potent US like a panic attack may
influence reactions to stimuli that have never been paired with the US
directly; the sudden anxiety to stimulus B might seem spontaneous and
mysterious. A related finding is second-order conditioning. Here, A is paired
with a US first and then subsequently paired with stimulus B. Once again,
both A and B will evoke responding. Sensory preconditioning and secondorder conditioning increase the range of stimuli that can control the
conditioned response. A third variant worth mentioning occurs, as indicated
previously, when the onset of a stimulus becomes associated with the rest of
that stimulus, as when a sudden increase in heart rate caused by the onset of a
panic attack comes to predict the rest of the panic or feeling, or when the
onset of a drug may predict the rest of the drug effect. Such intraevent
associations may play a role in many of the body’s regulatory functions, such
that an initial change in some variable (e.g., blood pressure or blood glucose
level) may come to signal a further increase in that variable and therefore
initiate a conditioned compensatory response.
Emotional responses can also be conditioned through observation. For
example, a monkey that merely observes another monkey being frightened by
a snake can learn to be afraid of the snake. The observer learns to associate
the snake (CS) with its emotional reaction (US/UR) to the other monkey
being afraid. Although monkeys readily learn to fear snakes, they are less
likely to associate other salient cues (such as colorful flowers) with fear in the
same way. This is an example of preparedness in classical conditioning—
some stimuli are especially useful signals for some USs. Another example is
that tastes are easily associated with illness but not a shock, whereas auditory
and visual cues are easily associated with shock but not an illness.


<<<PAGE 3192>>>
Preparedness may explain why human phobias tend to be for particular
objects (snakes or spiders) and not others (knives or electric sockets) that
may as often be paired with pain or trauma.
Erasing Pavlovian Learning. If Pavlovian learning plays a role in the
etiology of behavioral and emotional disorders, a natural question concerns
how to eliminate it or undo it. Pavlov studied extinction: conditioned
responding decreases if the CS is presented repeatedly without the US after
conditioning. Extinction is based on behavioral or cognitive-behavioral
therapies designed to reduce pathologic conditioned responding through
repeated exposure to the CS (exposure therapy). It is presumably a
consequence of any form of therapy in the course of which the patient learns
that previous harmful cues are no longer harmful. Another elimination
procedure is counterconditioning, in which the CS is paired with a very
different US/UR.
Counterconditioning was the inspiration for systematic desensitization, a
behavior therapy technique in which frightening CSs are deliberately
associated with relaxation during therapy.
Although extinction and counterconditioning reduce unwanted conditioned
responses, they do not destroy the original learning, which remains in the
brain, ready to return to behavior under the right circumstances. For example,
conditioned responses that have been eliminated by extinction or
counterconditioning can recover if time passes before the CS presents again
(spontaneous recovery). Conditioned responses can also return if the patient
returns to the context of conditioning after extinction in another context, or if
the CS is encountered in a context that differs from the one in which
extinction has occurred (all are examples of the renewal effect). The renewal
effect is significant because it illustrates the principle that extinction
performance depends on the organism being in the context in which
extinction was learned. If the CS is encountered in a different context, the
extinguished behavior may relapse or return. Recovery and relapse can also
occur if the current context is associated again with the US (“reinstatement”)
or if the CS is paired with the US again (“rapid reacquisition”). One
theoretical approach assumes that extinction and counterconditioning do not
destroy the original learning but instead entail new learning that gives the CS
a second meaning (e.g., “the CS is safe” in addition to “the CS is


<<<PAGE 3193>>>
dangerous”). As with an ambiguous word, which has more than one meaning,
responding evoked by an extinguished or counterconditioned CS depends
fundamentally on the current context.
Research on context effects in animal and human learning and memory
suggests that a wide variety of stimuli can play context (Table 34-5). Drugs,
for example, can be very salient in this regard. When rats are given fear
extinction while under the influence of a benzodiazepine tranquilizer or
alcohol, fear is renewed when the CS is tested in the absence of the context
provided by the drug. This is an example of state-dependent learning, in
which the retention of information is best when tested in the same state in
which it was initially learned. State-dependent fear extinction has apparent
implications for combining therapy with drugs. It also has implications for
the administration of drugs more generally. For example, if a person were to
take a drug to reduce anxiety, the anxiety reduction would reinforce drugtaking. State-dependent extinction might further preserve any anxiety that
might otherwise be extinguished during natural exposure to the anxietyeliciting cues. Thus, drug use could paradoxically preserve the original
anxiety, creating a self-perpetuating cycle that could provide a possible
explanation for the link between anxiety disorders and substance abuse. One
point of this discussion is that drugs can play multiple roles in learning: they
can be USs or reinforcers on the one hand, and CSs or contexts on the other.
The possible complex behavioral effects of drugs are worth bearing in mind.
Table 34-5
Effective Contextual Stimuli Studied in Animal and Human
Research Laboratories
Exteroceptive context:
Room, place, environment, other external background stimuli
Interoceptive context:
Drug state
Hormonal state
Mood state
Deprivation state
Recent events
Expectation of events


<<<PAGE 3194>>>
Passage of time
From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:652.

Another general message is that contemporary theory emphasizes that
extinction (and other processes, such as counterconditioning) entails new
learning rather than a destruction of the old. Recent psychopharmacological
research has built on this idea: if extinction and therapy constitute new
learning, drugs that might facilitate new learning might also facilitate the
therapy process. For example, there has been considerable recent interest in
D-cycloserine, a partial agonist of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
glutamate receptor. The NMDA receptor is involved in long-term
potentiation, a synaptic facilitation phenomenon that has been implicated in
several examples of learning. Of interest, there is evidence that the
administration of D-cycloserine can facilitate extinction learning in rats and
possibly in humans undergoing exposure therapy for anxiety disorders. In the
studies supporting this conclusion, the administration of the drug increased
the amount of extinction that was apparent after a small (and incomplete)
number of extinction trials. Although such findings are promising, it is
essential to remember that the context-dependence of extinction, and thus the
possibility of relapse with a change of context, may easily remain. Consistent
with this possibility, although D-cycloserine allows fear extinction to be
learned in fewer trials, it does not appear to prevent or reduce the strength of
the renewal effect. Such results further underscore the importance of
behavioral research—and behavioral theory—in understanding the effects of
drugs on therapy. Nonetheless, the search for drugs that might enhance the
learning that occurs in therapy situations will continue to be an essential area
of research.
Another process that might theoretically modify or erase memory is
illustrated by a phenomenon called reconsolidation. Newly learned memories
are temporarily labile and easy to disrupt before they are consolidated into a
more stable form in the brain. The consolidation of memory requires the
synthesis of new proteins and can be blocked by administering protein
synthesis inhibitors (e.g., anisomycin). Animal research suggests that
consolidated memories that have recently been reactivated might also return
briefly to a similarly vulnerable state; protein synthesis inhibitors can


<<<PAGE 3195>>>
likewise block their “reconsolidation.” For example, several studies have
shown that the reactivation of conditioned fear by one or two presentations of
the CS after a brief fear conditioning experience can allow it to be disrupted
by anisomycin. When the CS is tested later, there is little evidence of fear—
as if reactivation and then drug administration diminished the strength of the
original memory. However, like the effects of extinction, these feardiminishing effects do not necessarily mean that the original learning has
been destroyed or erased. There is some evidence that fear of the CS that has
been diminished in this way can still return over time (i.e., spontaneously
recover) or with reminder treatments. This sort of result suggests that the
effect of the drug is somehow able to interfere with retrieval or access to the
memory rather than to be an actual “reconsolidation.”
Generally speaking, eliminating a behavior after therapy should not be
interpreted as the erasure of the underlying knowledge. For the time being, it
may be safest to assume that, after any treatment, a part of the original
learning may remain in the brain, ready to produce relapse if retrieved.
Instead of trying to find treatments that destroy the original memory, another
therapeutic strategy might be to accept the possible retention of the original
learning and build therapies that allow the organism to prevent or cope with
its retrieval. One possibility is to conduct extinction exposure in the contexts
in which relapse might be most problematic to the patient and to encourage
retrieval strategies (such as the use of retrieval cues like reminder cards) that
might help to remind the patient of the therapy experience.
Operant/Instrumental Learning
The Relation Between Behavior and Payoff. Operant learning has
many parallels with Pavlovian learning. As one example, extinction also
occurs in operant learning if the reinforcer is omitted following training.
Although extinction is once again a useful technique for eliminating
unwanted behaviors, just as we saw with Pavlovian learning, it does not
destroy the original learning—spontaneous recovery, renewal, reinstatement,
and rapid reacquisition effects still obtain. Although early accounts of
instrumental learning, beginning with Edward Thorndike, emphasized the
role of the reinforcer as “stamping in” the instrumental action, more-modern
approaches tend to view the reinforcer as a sort of guide or motivator of


<<<PAGE 3196>>>
behavior. A modern, “synthetic” view of operant conditioning (see later
discussion) holds that the organism associates the action with the outcome in
much the way that stimulus–outcome learning is believed to be involved in
Pavlovian learning.
Human behavior is influenced by a wide variety of reinforcers, including
social ones. For example, simple attention from teachers or hospital staff
members has been shown to reinforce disruptive or problematic behavior in
students or patients. In either case, when the attention is withdrawn and
redirected toward other activities, the problematic behaviors can decrease
(i.e., undergo extinction). Human behavior is also influenced by verbal
reinforcers, like praise, and, more generally, by conditioned reinforcers, such
as money, that have no intrinsic value except for the value derived through
association with more basic, “primary” rewards. Conditioned reinforcers have
been used in schools and institutional settings in the so-called token
economies in which positive behaviors are reinforced with tokens that can be
used to purchase valued items. In more natural settings, reinforcers are
always delivered in social relationships, in which their effects are dynamic
and reciprocal. For example, the relationship between a parent and a child is
full of interacting and reciprocating operant contingencies in which the
delivery (and withholding) of reinforcers and punishers shapes the behavior
of each. Like Pavlovian learning, operant learning is always operating and
always influencing behavior.
Research on operant conditioning in the laboratory has offered many
insights into how action relates to its payoff. In the natural world, few actions
are reinforced every time they are performed; instead, most actions are
reinforced only intermittently. In a ratio reinforcement schedule, the
reinforcer is directly related to the amount of work or responding that the
organism emits. That is, there is some work requirement that determines
when the next reinforcer will be presented. In a “fixed ratio schedule,” every
xth action is reinforced; in a “variable ratio schedule,” there is an average
ratio requirement, but the number of responses required for each successive
reinforcer varies. Ratio schedules, especially variable ratio schedules, can
generate high rates of behavior, as seen in the behavior directed at a casino
slot machine. In an interval reinforcement schedule, the presentation of each
reinforcer depends on the organism emitting the response after some time has
also elapsed. In a “fixed interval schedule,” the first response after x seconds


<<<PAGE 3197>>>
have elapsed is reinforced. In a “variable interval schedule,” there is an
interval requirement for each reinforcer, but the length of that interval varies.
A person checking e-mail throughout the day is being reinforced on a
variable interval schedule—a new message is not present to reinforce each
checking response, but the presence of a new message becomes available
after variable time points throughout the day. Of interest, on interval
schedules, the response rate can vary substantially without influencing the
overall rate of reinforcement. (On ratio schedules, there is a more direct
relationship between behavior rate and reinforcement rate.) In part because of
this, interval schedules tend to generate slower response rates than ratio
schedules.
Classic research on operant behavior underscores the fact that the
performance of any action always involves choice. That is, whenever the
individual performs a particular behavior, he or she chooses to engage in that
action over many other possible alternatives. When a choice has been studied
by allowing the organism to perform either of two different operant behaviors
(paying off with their separate schedules of reinforcement), the rate of
operant behavior depends not only on the behavior’s rate of reinforcement
but also on the rate of reinforcement of all other behaviors in the situation.
Put most generally, the strength of Behavior 1 (e.g., the rate at which
Behavior 1 is performed) is given by
B1 = K*R1/(R1 + RO)
where B1 can be seen as the strength of Behavior 1, R1 is the rate at which B1
has been reinforced, and RO is the rate at which all alternative (or “other”)
behaviors in the environment have been reinforced; K is a constant that
corresponds to all behavior in the situation and may have a different value for
different individuals. This principle, known as the quantitative law of effect,
captures several ideas that are relevant to psychiatrists and clinical
psychologists. It indicates that an action can be strengthened either by
increasing its rate of reinforcement (R1) or decreasing the rate of
reinforcement for alternative behaviors (RO). Conversely, an action can be
weakened either by reducing its rate of reinforcement (R1) or increasing
reinforcement for alternative behaviors (RO). The latter point has an


<<<PAGE 3198>>>
especially important implication: in principle, one can slow the strengthening
of new, undesirable behavior by providing an environment that is otherwise
rich in reinforcement (high RO). Thus, an adolescent who experiments with
drugs or alcohol would be less likely to engage in this behavior at a high rate
(high B1) if their environment were otherwise rich with reinforcers (e.g.,
provided by extracurricular activities or outside interests).
The choice among actions is also influenced by the size of their
corresponding reinforcers and how soon the reinforcers will occur. For
example, individuals sometimes have to choose between an action that yields
a small but immediate reward (e.g., taking a hit of a drug) versus another that
yields a larger but delayed reward (e.g., going to a class and earning credit
toward a general educational development certificate). Individuals who
choose the more immediate reward are often said to be “impulsive,” whereas
those who choose the delayed reward are said to exercise “self-control.” Of
interest, organisms often choose immediate small rewards over delayed larger
ones, even though it may be maladaptive to do so in the long run. Such
“impulsive” choices are especially difficult to resist when the reward is
imminent. Choice is believed to be determined by the relative value of the
two rewards, with that value being influenced by both the reinforcer’s size
and its delay. The bigger the reinforcer, the better is the value, and the more
immediate the reinforcer, the better, too: when a reward is delayed, its value
decreases or is “discounted” over time. When offered a choice, the organism
will always choose the action that leads to the reward whose value is
currently higher.
Theories of Reinforcement. It is possible to use the preceding principles
of operant conditioning without knowing in advance what kind of event or
stimulus will be reinforcing for the individual patient. None of the
reinforcement rules say much about what sorts of events in an organism’s
world will play a reinforcer. Skinner defined a reinforcer empirically, by
considering the effect it had on operant behavior. A reinforcer was defined as
any event that could be shown to increase the strength of an operant if it was
made a consequence of the operant. This empirical (some would say
“atheoretical”) view can be valuable because it allows idiosyncratic
reinforcers for idiosyncratic individuals. For instance, if a therapist works


<<<PAGE 3199>>>
with a child who is injuring himself, the approach advises the therapist
merely to search for the consequences of the behavior and then manipulate
them to bring the behavior under control. So, if, for example, the child’s selfinjurious behavior decreases when the parent stops scolding the child for
doing it, then the scold is the reinforcer, which might seem counterintuitive to
everyone (including the parent who thinks that the scold should function as a
punisher). On the other hand, it would also be useful to know what kind of
event will reinforce an individual before the therapist has to try everything.
Several approaches allow for predictions ahead of time. Perhaps the most
useful is the Premack principle (named for researcher David Premack),
which claims that, for any individual, reinforcers can be identified by giving
the individual a preference test in which he or she is free to engage in any
number of activities. The individual might spend the most time engaging in
activity A, the second-most time engaged in activity B, and the third-most
time engaged in activity C. Behavior A can thus be said to be preferred to B
and C, and B is preferred to C. The Premack principle asserts that access to a
preferred action will reinforce any action that is less preferred. In the present
example, if doing activity C allowed access to doing A or B, activity C will
be reinforced—it will increase in strength or probability.
Similarly, activity B will be reinforced by activity A (but not C). The
principle accepts large individual differences. For example, in an early study,
some children given a choice spent more time eating candy than playing
pinball, whereas others spent more time playing pinball then eating candy.
Candy eating reinforced pinball playing in the former group. In contrast,
pinball playing reinforced candy eating in the latter group. There is nothing
particularly special about food (eating) or any particular kind of activity as a
possible reinforcer. Any behavior that is preferred to a second behavior will
theoretically reinforce the second behavior.
The principle has been refined over the years. It is now recognized that
even a less-preferred behavior can reinforce a more-preferred behavior if the
organism has been deprived of doing the low-preferred behavior below its
ordinary level. In the preceding example, even the low-preference activity C
could reinforce A or B if it were suppressed for a while below its baseline
level of preference. However, the main implication is that in the long run, a
person’s reinforcers can be discovered by looking at how they allocate their
activities when access to them is free and unconstrained.


<<<PAGE 3200>>>
Motivational Factors. Instrumental action is often said to be goal-oriented.
As Edward Tolman illustrated in many experiments conducted in the 1930s
and 1940s, organisms may flexibly perform several actions to achieve a goal;
instrumental learning thus provides a variable means to a fixed end. Tolman’s
perspective on the effects of reinforcers has returned to favor. He argued that
reinforcers are not necessary for learning, but instead are essential for
motivating instrumental behavior. The classic illustration of this point is the
latent learning experiment. Rats received several trials in a complex maze in
which they were removed from the maze without reward once they got to a
particular goal location. When arriving at the goal was suddenly rewarded,
the rats suddenly began working through the maze with very few errors.
Thus, they had learned about the maze without the benefit of the food
reinforcer, but the reinforcer was nonetheless crucial for motivating them to
get through the maze efficiently. The reinforcer was unnecessary for learning,
but it gave the organism a reason to translate its knowledge into action.
Subsequent research has identified many motivating effects of reward. For
example, organisms with experience receiving a small reward may show
positive contrast when they are suddenly reinforced with a larger reward.
That is, their instrumental behavior may become more vigorous than that in
control subjects who have received the larger reward all along. Conversely,
organisms show negative contrast when they are switched from a high
reward to a lower reward—their behavior becomes weaker than control
subjects who have received the same smaller reward all along. Negative
contrast involves frustration and emotionality. Both types of contrast are
consistent with the idea that the current effectiveness depends on what the
organism has learned to expect; an increase from expectation causes elation,
whereas a decrease from expectation causes frustration. There is a sense in
which receiving a reward that is smaller than expected might seem punishing.
Negative contrast is an example of a paradoxical reward effect—a set of
behavioral phenomena given the name because they show that reward can
sometimes weaken behavior and that nonreward can sometimes strengthen it.
The best known is the partial reinforcement extinction effect, in which
actions that have been intermittently (or “partially”) reinforced persist longer
when reinforcers are completely withdrawn than actions that have been
continuously reinforced. The finding is considered paradoxical because an


<<<PAGE 3201>>>
action that has been reinforced (say) half as often as another action may be
more persistent. One explanation is that the action that has been partially
reinforced has been reinforced in the presence of some frustration—and is
thus persistent in new adversity or sources of frustration. Other evidence
suggests that effortfulness is a dimension of behavior that can be reinforced.
That is, human and animal participants that have been reinforced for
performing effortful responses learn a sort of “industriousness” that transfers
to new behaviors. One implication is that new behaviors learned in therapy
will be more persistent over time if a high effort has been deliberately
reinforced.
The organism’s current motivational state also influences the effectiveness
of a reinforcer. For example, food is more reinforcing for a hungry organism,
and water is more reinforcing for a thirsty one. Such results are consistent
with many theories of reinforcement (e.g., the Premack principle) because the
presence of hunger or thirst would undoubtedly increase the organism’s
preference ranking for food or water. However, recent research indicates that
the effects of motivational states on instrumental actions are not this
automatic. Specifically, if a motivational state is going to influence an
instrumental action, the individual needs first to learn how the action’s
reinforcer will influence the motivational state. The process of learning about
the effects the reinforcer has on the motivational state is called incentive
learning.
An experimental example best illustrates incentive learning. In 1992,
Bernard Balleine reported a study that taught trained rats that were not
hungry to lever press to earn a novel food pellet. The animals were then fooddeprived and tested for their lever pressing under conditions in which the
lever press no longer produced the pellet. The hunger state did not affect the
lever-press rate; that is, hungry rats did not lever press any more than rats that
were not food-deprived. On the other hand, if the rat had been given separate
experience eating the pellets while it was food-deprived, during the test, it
lever pressed at a high rate. Thus, hunger invigorated the instrumental action
only if the animal had previously experienced the reinforcer in that state,
allowing it to learn that the specific substance influenced the state (incentive
learning). The interpretation of this result, and others like it, will be
developed further later in this section. The main idea is that individuals will
perform an instrumental action when they know that it produces an outcome


<<<PAGE 3202>>>
that is desirable in the current motivational state. The clinical implications are
underexplored but could be significant. For example, persons who abuse
drugs will need to learn that the drug makes them feel better in the
withdrawal state before the withdrawal will motivate drug-seeking. Persons
with anxiety might not be motivated to take a beneficial medication while
anxious until they have had the opportunity to learn how the medication
makes them feel when they are in the anxious state, and a person with
depression may need to learn what natural reinforcers make them feel better
while they are depressed. According to theory, direct experience with a
reinforcer’s effect on depressed mood might be necessary before the person
will be interested in performing actions that help to ameliorate the depressed
state.
Pavlovian and Operant Learning Together
Avoidance Learning. Theories of the motivating effects of reinforcers
have usually emphasized that Pavlovian CSs in the background are also
associated with the reinforcer. The expectancy of the reinforcer (or
conditioned motivational state) the CSs arouse increases the vigor of the
operant response. This is two-factor or two-process theory: Pavlovian
learning co-occurs and motivates behavior during operant learning.
The interaction of Pavlovian and instrumental factors is especially
important in understanding avoidance learning (see Fig. 34-2). In avoidance
situations, organisms learn to perform actions that prevent the delivery or
presentation of an aversive event. The explanation of avoidance learning is
subtle because it is difficult to identify an obvious reinforcer. Although
preventing the occurrence of the aversive event is essential, how can the
nonoccurrence of that event reinforce? The answer is that cues in the
environment (Pavlovian CSs) come to predict the occurrence of the aversive
event, and consequently, they arouse anxiety or fear. The avoidance response
can, therefore, be reinforced if it escapes from or reduces that fear. Pavlovian
and operant factors are thus both important: Pavlovian fear conditioning
motivates and allows reinforcement of an instrumental action through its
reduction. Escape from fear or anxiety is believed to play a significant role in
many human behavior disorders, including anxiety disorders. Thus, the
obsessive-compulsive patient checks or washes his or her hands repeatedly to


<<<PAGE 3203>>>
reduce anxiety, the agoraphobic stays home to escape the fear of places
associated with panic attacks, and the bulimic learn to vomit after a meal to
reduce the learned anxiety evoked by eating the meal.
Although the two-factor theory remains an essential view of avoidance
learning, excellent avoidance can be obtained in the laboratory without
reinforcement: for example, if an animal is required to perform an action that
resembles one of its natural and prepared fear responses—so-called speciesspecific defensive reactions (SSDRs). Rats will readily learn to freeze (remain
motionless) or flee (run to another environment) to avoid shock, two
behaviors that have evolved to escape or avoid predation. Freezing and
fleeing are also respondents rather than operants; they are controlled by their
antecedents (Pavlovian CSs that predict shock) rather than reinforced by their
consequences (escape from fear). Thus, when the rat can use an SSDR for
avoidance, the only necessary learning is Pavlovian—the rat learns about
environmental cues associated with danger, and these arouse fear and evoke
natural defensive behaviors including withdrawal (negative sign tracking;
Fig. 34-3). To learn to perform an action that is not similar to a natural SSDR
requires more feedback or reinforcement through fear reduction.
A good example is lever pressing, which is easy for the rat to learn when
the reinforcer is a food pellet but challenging to learn when the same action
avoids shock. More recent work with avoidance in humans suggests an
essential role for CS-aversive event and response–no aversive event
expectancies. The larger point is that Pavlovian learning is vital in avoidance
learning; when the animal can avoid with an SSDR, it is the only learning
necessary; when the required action is not an SSDR, Pavlovian learning
permits the expectation of something bad.
A cognitive perspective on aversive learning is also encouraged by studies
of learned helplessness. In this phenomenon, organisms exposed to either
controllable or uncontrollable aversive events differ in their reactivity to later
aversive events. For example, the typical finding is that a subject exposed to
inescapable shock in one phase of an experiment is less successful at learning
to escape shock with altogether new behavior in a second phase, whereas
subjects exposed to escapable shock are normal. Both types of a subject are
exposed to the same shock, but its psychological dimension (its
controllability) creates a difference, perhaps because subjects exposed to
inescapable shock learn the independence of their actions and the outcome.


<<<PAGE 3204>>>
Although this finding (and interpretation) was once seen as a model of
depression, the current view is that the controllability of stressors mainly
modulates their stressfulness and negative impact. At a theoretical level, the
result also implies that organisms receiving instrumental contingencies in
which their actions lead to outcomes might learn something about the
controllability of those outcomes.
One of the main conclusions of aversive learning is that there are biologic
and cognitive dimensions to instrumental learning. The possibility that
Pavlovian contingencies can control much instrumental learning is also
consistent with research in which animals have learned to respond to positive
reinforcers. For example, pigeons have been widely used in operant learning
experiments since the 1940s. In the typical experiment, the bird learns to
peck at a plastic disk on a wall of the chamber (a response “key”) to earn
food. Although pecking seems to be an operant response, it turns out that the
pigeon’s peck can be entrained by merely illuminating the key for a few
seconds before presenting the reinforcer on several trials. Although there is
no requirement for the bird to peck the key, the bird will begin to peck at the
illuminated key—a Pavlovian predictor of food—anyway. Its consequences
only weakly control the pecking response; if the experimenter arranges things
so that pecks prevent the delivery of food (which is otherwise delivered on
trials without pecks), the birds will continue to peck almost indefinitely on
many trials. (Although the peck has a negative correlation with food, key
illumination remains a weakly positive predictor of food.) Thus, this classic
“operant” behavior is at least partly a Pavlovian one. Pavlovian contingencies
cannot be ignored. When rats are punished with mild foot shock for pressing
a lever that otherwise produces food, they stop lever pressing at least partly
(and perhaps predominantly) because they learn that the lever now predicts
shock, and they withdraw from it. A child might likewise learn to stay away
from the parent who delivers punishment rather than refrain from performing
the punished behavior. A great deal of behavior in operant learning settings
may be controlled by Pavlovian learning and sign tracking rather than
authentic operant learning.


<<<PAGE 3205>>>
FIGURE 34-4
Any instrumental/operant learning situation permits a number of types of learning,
which are always occurring all the time. R, operant behavior or instrumental
action; S, stimulus in the background; S*, biologically significant event (e.g.,
reinforcer, US). (Courtesy of Mark E. Bouton, PhD.)

A Synthetic View of Instrumental Action. Then, the idea is that several
hypothetical associations control behavior in any instrumental learning
situation, as illustrated in Figure 34-4. Much behavior in an instrumental
learning arrangement can be controlled by a Pavlovian factor in which the
organism associates background cues (CSs) with the reinforcer (S*, denoting
a biologically significant event). As discussed earlier, this type of learning
can allow the CS to evoke a variety of behaviors and emotional reactions
(and motivational states) that can additionally motivate instrumental action.
In modern terms, the instrumental factor is represented by the organism
learning a direct, and similar, association between the instrumental action (R)
and the reinforcer (S*). Evidence for this sort of learning comes from
experiments on reinforcer devaluation (Fig. 34-5). In such experiments, the
organism can first be trained to perform two instrumental actions (e.g.,
pressing a lever and pulling a chain), each paired with a different reinforcer
(e.g., food pellet versus a liquid sucrose solution). In a separate second phase,
one of the reinforcers (e.g., pellet) is paired with illness, which creates the
conditioning of a powerful taste aversion to the reinforcer. In a final test, the


<<<PAGE 3206>>>
organism is returned to the instrumental situation and can perform either
instrumental action. No reinforcers are presented during the test. The result is
that the organism no longer performs the action that produced the reinforcer
that is now aversive. The organism must have (1) learned which action
produced which reinforcer and (2) combined it with the knowledge that it no
longer likes or values that reinforcer. The result cannot be explained by the
simpler, more traditional view that reinforcers merely stamp in or strengthen
instrumental actions.
Organisms also need to learn how reinforcers influence a particular
motivational state called “incentive learning.” Incentive learning is crucially
involved in instrumental learning as a process through which the animal
learns the value of the reinforcer. Thus, in the reinforcer devaluation
experiment shown in Figure 34-5, an important thing that occurs in the
second phase is that the organism must contact the reinforcer and learn that it
does not like it. As described earlier, incentive learning is probably always
involved in making outcomes (and the associated actions that produce them)
more or less desirable.

FIGURE 34-5


<<<PAGE 3207>>>
The reinforcer devaluation effect. Results of the test session. The result indicates
the importance of the response–reinforcer association in operant learning. For the
organism to perform in the way that it does during testing, it must learn which
action leads to which reinforcer and then choose to perform the action that leads
to the outcome it currently liked or valued. R1, R2, operant behaviors or
instrumental actions. (Data from Colwill and Rescorla [1986]. From Bouton ME.
Learning and Behavior: A Contemporary Synthesis. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer;
2007.)

Other experiments have illustrated the other associations to the stimulus
that are represented in Figure 34-4. In addition to being directly associated
with the reinforcer, a stimulus can signal a relation between an action and an
outcome. This is called occasion setting: instead of eliciting a response
directly, stimuli in operant situations can set the occasion for the operant
response. There is good evidence that they do so by signaling a specific
response–reinforcer relationship. For example, in one experiment, rats
learned to lever press and chain pull in background noise and background
light. When the noise was present, lever pressing yielded a pellet reinforcer,
and chain pulling yielded sucrose.
In contrast, when the light was present, the relations were reversed: Lever
pressing yielded sucrose, and chain pulling yielded pellet. There was
evidence that the rats learned corresponding relationships. In a second phase,
pellets were associated with illness, so the rat no longer valued the pellet. In a
final test, rats were allowed to lever press or chain pull in extinction in noise
or light present during separate tests. In the presence of the noise, the
animal’s chain pulled rather than lever pressed. When the light was present,
the animal’s lever pressed rather than chain pulled. Thus, the noise informed
the rat that the lever press yielded a pellet, and the light informed the rat that
the chain pull did. This is the occasion-setting function illustrated in Figure
34-4.
It is worth noting that other stimuli besides lights and noises set the
occasion for operant behavior. Modern research on learning in animals has
underscored the importance of other stimuli, such as temporal and spatial
cues, and particular perception and memory processes. A particularly
interesting example of research on the stimulus control of operant behavior is
categorization. Pigeons can be shown images of cars, chairs, flowers, and cats
on a computer screen positioned on the wall of a Skinner box. Pecking one of
four keys in the presence of these images is reinforced in any picture


<<<PAGE 3208>>>
containing a car, a chair, a flower, or a cat. Of interest, as the number of
exemplars in each category increases, the pigeon makes more errors as it
learns the discrimination. However, more exemplars create better learning in
the sense that it is more ready to transfer to new test images—after many
examples of each category, the pigeon is more accurate at categorizing (and
responding accurately to) new stimuli. One implication is that training new
behaviors in various settings or ways will enhance generalization to new
situations.
The final association in Figure 34-4 is simple habit learning or a direct
association between the stimulus and the response. Through this association,
the background may elicit the instrumental action directly, without the
intervening cognition of R–S* and the valuation of S*. Although S–R
learning was once believed to dominate learning, the current view sees it as
developing only after extensive and consistent instrumental training. In
effect, actions that have been performed repeatedly (and repeatedly
associated with the reinforcer) become automatic and routine. One source of
evidence is the fact that the reinforcer devaluation effect—which implies a
kind of cognitive mediation of operant behavior—no longer occurs after
extensive instrumental training as if the animal reflexively engages in the
response without remembering the actual outcome it produces. It seems
reasonable to expect that many pathologic behaviors that come into the clinic
might also be automatic and blind through repetition. Of interest, the
evidence suggests that the eventual dominance of the S-R habit in behavior
does not replace or destroy more cognitive mediation by learned S–S*, R–S*,
or S–(R–S*) relations. Under some conditions, even a habitual response
might be brought back under the control of the action–reinforcer association.
The conversion of actions to habits and the relation of habit to cognition are
active areas of research.

BIOLOGY OF MEMORY
The topic of memory is fundamental to the discipline of psychiatry. Memory
is the glue that binds our mental life, the scaffolding for our personal history.
In part, personality is an accumulation of habits that have been acquired,
many very early in life, which creates dispositions and influences how we
behave. In the same sense, the neuroses are often products of learning—


<<<PAGE 3209>>>
anxieties, phobias, and maladaptive behaviors that result from particular
experiences. Psychotherapy itself is a process by which new habits and skills
are acquired by accumulating new experiences. In this sense, memory is at
the theoretical heart of psychiatry’s concern with personality, the
consequences of early experience, and the possibility of growth and change.
Memory is also of clinical interest because disorders of memory and
complaints about memory are common in neurologic and psychiatric illness.
Memory impairment is also a side effect of specific treatments, such as
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). Accordingly, the effective clinician needs
to understand something of the biology of memory, the varieties of memory
dysfunction, and how memory can be evaluated.
From Synapses to Memory
Memory is a particular case of the general biologic phenomenon of neural
plasticity. Neurons can show history-dependent activity by responding
differently as a function of prior input, and this plasticity of nerve cells and
synapses is the basis of memory. In the last decade of the 19th century,
researchers proposed that the persistence of memory could be accounted for
by nerve cell growth. This idea has been restated many times, and current
understanding of the synapse as the critical site of change is founded on
extensive experimental studies in animals with simple nervous systems.
Experience can lead to structural change at the synapse, including alterations
in the strength of existing synapses and alterations in the number of synaptic
contacts along specific pathways.
Plasticity. Neurobiologic evidence supports two necessary conclusions:
first, short-lasting plasticity, which may last for seconds or minutes
depending on specific synaptic events, including an increase in
neurotransmitter release; and second, long-lasting memory, which depends
on new protein synthesis, the physical growth of neural processes, and an
increase in the number of synaptic connections.
A significant source of information about memory has come from the
extended study of the marine mollusk Aplysia californica. Individual neurons
and connections between neurons have been identified, and the wiring
diagram of some simple behaviors has been described. Aplysia is capable of


<<<PAGE 3210>>>
associative learning (including classic conditioning and operant conditioning)
and nonassociative learning (habituation and sensitization). Sensitization had
been studied using the gill-withdrawal reflex, a defensive reaction in which
tactile stimulation causes the gill and siphon to retract. When tactile
stimulation is preceded by sensory stimulation to the head or tail, gill
withdrawal is facilitated. The cellular changes underlying this sensitization
begin when a sensory neuron activates a modulatory interneuron, enhancing
the strength of synapses within the circuitry responsible for the reflex. This
modulation depends on a second-messenger system in which intracellular
molecules (including cyclic adenosine monophosphate [cAMP] and cAMPdependent protein kinase) lead to enhanced transmitter release that lasts for
minutes in the reflex pathway. Both short- and long-lasting plasticity within
this circuitry are based on enhanced transmitter release. The long-lasting
change uniquely requires the expression of genes and the synthesis of new
proteins. Synaptic tagging mechanisms allow gene products delivered
throughout a neuron to increase synaptic strength selectively at recently
active synapses. Also, the long-term change, but not the short-term change, is
accompanied by the growth of neural processes of neurons within the reflex
circuit.
In vertebrates, memory cannot be studied as directly as in the simple
nervous system of Aplysia. Nevertheless, it is known that behavioral
manipulations can also result in measurable changes in the brain’s
architecture. For example, rats reared in enriched as opposed to ordinary
environments show an increase in the number of synapses ending on
individual neurons in the neocortex. These changes are accompanied by small
increases in cortical thickness, the diameter of neuronal cell bodies, and the
number and length of dendritic branches. The behavioral experience thus
exerts powerful effects on the wiring of the brain.
Many of these same structural changes have been found in adult rats
exposed to an enriched environment and adult rats given extensive maze
training. In maze training, vision was restricted to one eye, and the corpus
callosum was transected to prevent information received by one hemisphere
from reaching the other hemisphere. The result was that structural changes in
neuronal shape and connectivity were observed only in the trained
hemisphere. This finding rules out several nonspecific influences, including
motor activity, indirect effects of hormones, and overall level of arousal.


<<<PAGE 3211>>>
Long-term memory in vertebrates is believed to be based on morphologic
growth and change, including increases in synaptic strength along particular
pathways.
Long-Term Potentiation. The phenomenon of long-term potentiation
(LTP) is a candidate mechanism for mammalian long-term memory. LTP is
observed when a postsynaptic neuron is persistently depolarized after a highfrequency burst of presynaptic neural firing. LTP has several properties that
make it suitable as a physiologic substrate of memory. It is established
quickly and then lasts for a long time. It is associative, in that it depends on
the co-occurrence of presynaptic activity and postsynaptic depolarization. It
occurs only at potentiated synapses, not all synapses terminating on the
postsynaptic cell. Finally, LTP occurs prominently in the hippocampus, a
structure that is important for memory.
The induction of LTP is known to be mediated postsynaptically and to
involve activation of the NMDA receptor, which permits the influx of
calcium into the postsynaptic cell. LTP is maintained by an increase in the
number of α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionate (AMPA;
non-NMDA) receptors postsynaptic cell and also possibly by increased
transmitter release.
A promising method for elucidating molecular mechanisms of memory
relies on introducing specific mutations into the genome. By deleting a single
gene, one can produce mice with specific receptors or cell signaling
molecules inactivated or altered. For example, in mice with a selective
deletion of NMDA receptors in the CA1 field of the hippocampus, many
aspects of CA1 physiology remain intact, but the CA1 neurons do not exhibit
LTP, and memory impairment is observed in behavioral tasks. Genetic
manipulations introduced reversibly in the adult are particularly
advantageous, in that specific molecular changes can be induced in
developmentally normal animals.
Associative Learning. The study of classical conditioning has provided
many insights into the biology of memory. Classical conditioning has been
especially well studied in rabbits, using a tone as the conditioned stimulus
and an air puff to the eye (which automatically elicits a blink response) as the
unconditioned stimulus. Repeated pairings of the tone and the air puff lead to


<<<PAGE 3212>>>
a conditioned response, in that the tone alone elicits an eye blink. Reversible
lesions of the deep nuclei of the cerebellum eliminate the conditioned
response without affecting the unconditioned response. These lesions also
prevent initial learning from occurring, and, when the lesion is reversed,
rabbits usually learn. Thus, the cerebellum contains essential circuitry for the
learned association. The relevant plasticity appears to be distributed between
the cerebellar cortex and the deep nuclei.
An analogous pattern of cerebellar plasticity is believed to underlie motor
learning in the vestibuloocular reflex and, perhaps, associative learning of
motor responses in general. Based on the idea that learned motor responses
depend on the coordinated control of changes in timing and strength of the
response, it has been suggested that synaptic changes in the cerebellar cortex
are critical for learned timing. In contrast, synaptic changes in the deep nuclei
are critical for forming an association between a conditioned stimulus and an
unconditioned stimulus.
Fear conditioning and fear-potentiated startle are types of learning that
serve as useful models for anxiety disorders and related psychiatric
conditions. For example, mice exhibit freezing behavior when returned to the
same context in which aversive shock was delivered on an earlier occasion.
This type of learning depends on the encoding of contextual features of the
learning environment. Acquiring and expressing this type of learning requires
neural circuits that include both the amygdala and the hippocampus. The
amygdala may be important for associating negative affect with new stimuli.
The hippocampus may be important for representing the context. With
extinction training, when the context is no longer associated with an aversive
stimulus, the conditioned fear response fades. The frontal cortex is believed
to play a critical role in extinction.
Cortical Organization of Memory
One fundamental question concerns the locus of memory storage in the brain.
In the 1920s, Karl Lashley searched for the site of memory storage by
studying the behavior of rats after removing different amounts of their
cerebral cortex. He recorded the number of trials needed to relearn a maze
problem that rats learned before surgery, and he found that the deficit was
proportional to the amount of cortex removed. The deficit did not seem to


<<<PAGE 3213>>>
depend on the particular location of cortical damage. Lashley concluded that
the memory resulting from maze learning was not localized in any one part of
the brain but instead was distributed equivalently over the entire cortex.
Subsequent research has led to reinterpretations of these results. Maze
learning in rats depends on different types of information, including visual,
tactile, spatial, and olfactory information. Neurons that process these various
types of information are segregated into different areas of the rat cerebral
cortex, and memory storage is segregated in a parallel manner. Thus, the
correlation between maze-learning abilities and lesion size that Lashley
observed results from progressive encroachment of larger lesions on
specialized cortical areas serving the many components of information
processing relevant for maze learning.
The functional organization of the mammalian cerebral cortex has been
revealed through neuropsychological analyses of deficits following brain
damage and physiologic studies of intact brains. The cortical areas
responsible for processing and storing visual information have been studied
most extensively in nonhuman primates. Nearly one-half of the primate
neocortex is specialized for visual functions.
The cortical pathways for visual information processing begin in the
primary visual cortex (V1) and proceed from parallel pathways or streams.
One stream projects ventrally to the inferotemporal cortex and is specialized
for processing information concerning the identification of visual objects.
Another stream projects dorsally to the parietal cortex and is specialized for
processing information about spatial location.
Specific visual processing areas in the dorsal and ventral streams, together
with areas in the prefrontal cortex, register the immediate experience of
perceptual processing. The results of perceptual processing are first available
as immediate memory. Immediate memory refers to the amount of
information that can be held in mind (like a telephone number) to be
available for immediate use. Immediate memory can be extended in time by
rehearsing or otherwise manipulating the information, in which case what is
stored is said to be in working memory.
Regions of the visual cortex in forward portions of the dorsal and ventral
streams serve as the ultimate repositories of visual memories. The
inferotemporal cortex, for example, lies at the end of the ventral stream, and
inferotemporal lesions lead to selective impairments in both visual object


<<<PAGE 3214>>>
perception and visual memory. Nonetheless, such lesions do not disrupt
elementary visual functions, such as acuity. Electrophysiologic studies in the
monkey show that neurons in area TE, which is one part of the
inferotemporal cortex, register specific and complex features of visual
stimuli, such as shape, and respond selectively to patterns and objects. The
inferotemporal cortex can thus be thought of as both a higher-order visual
processing system and a storehouse of the visual memories that result from
that processing.
In sum, memory is distributed and localized in the cerebral cortex.
Memory is distributed in the sense that, as Lashley concluded, there is no
cortical center dedicated solely to the storage of memories. Nonetheless,
memory is localized in the sense that different aspects or dimensions of
events are stored at specific cortical sites—namely, in the same regions that
are specialized to analyze and process what is to be stored.
Memory and Amnesia
The principle that the functional specialization of cortical regions determines
both the locus of information processing and the locus of information storage
does not provide a complete account of memory in the brain. If it did, then
brain injury would always include difficulty in memory for a restricted type
of information and a loss of ability to process information of that same type.
This kind of impairment occurs, for example, in the aphasias and the
agnosias. However, there is another kind of impairment that can occur as
well, called amnesia.
The hallmark of amnesia is a loss of new learning ability that extends
across all sensory modalities and stimulus domains. This anterograde
amnesia can be explained by understanding the role of brain structures
critical for acquiring information about facts and events. Typically,
anterograde amnesia occurs together with retrograde amnesia, a loss of
knowledge acquired before the onset of amnesia. Retrograde deficits often
have a temporal gradient, following a principle known as Ribot’s law;
deficits are most severe for information that was most recently learned.
A patient with a presentation of amnesia exhibits severe memory deficits in
the context of the preservation of other cognitive functions, including
language comprehension and production, reasoning, attention, immediate


<<<PAGE 3215>>>
memory, personality, and social skills. The selectivity of the memory deficit
in these cases implies that intellectual and perceptual functions of the brain
are separated from the capacity to lay down in memory the records that
ordinarily result from engaging in intellectual and perceptual work.
Specialized Memory Function. Amnesia can result from damage to the
medial portion of the temporal lobe or damage to regions of the midline
diencephalon. Studies of a severely amnesic patient known as HM stimulated
intensive investigation of the role of the medial temporal lobe in memory.
HM became amnesic in 1953, at 27 years of age, when he sustained a
bilateral resection of the medial temporal lobe to relieve severe epilepsy.
The removal included approximately one-half of the hippocampus, the
amygdala, and most neighboring entorhinal and perirhinal cortices (Fig.
34-6). After the surgery, HM’s seizure condition was much improved, but
he experienced profound forgetfulness. His intellectual functions were
generally preserved. For example, HM exhibited normal immediate
memory, and he could maintain his attention during conversations. After
an interruption, however, HM could not remember what had recently
occurred. HM’s dense amnesia was permanent and debilitating. In HM’s
words, he felt as if he were waking from a dream because he had no
recollection of what had just happened.


<<<PAGE 3216>>>
FIGURE 34-6
Structural magnetic resonance images of the brains of patients HM and EP
through the level of the temporal lobe. Damaged tissue is indicated by bright
signal in these T2-weighted axial images. Both patients sustained extensive
damage to medial temporal structures, as the result of surgery for epilepsy in HM,
and as the result of viral encephalitis in EP. Scale bar: 2 cm. L, left side of the
brain. (Reprinted from Corkin S, Amaral EG, González RG, Johnson KA, Hyman
BT. H. M.’s medial temporal lobe lesion: Findings from magnetic resonance
imaging. J Neurosci. 1997;17(10):3964–3979 and Stefanacci L, Buffalo EA,
Schmolck H, Squire LR. Profound amnesia after damage to the medial temporal
lobe: A neuroanatomical and neuropsychological profile of patient E.P. J
Neurosci. 2000;20(18):7024–7036, with permission.)

In monkeys, many parallels to human amnesia have been demonstrated
after surgical damage to anatomical components of the medial temporal lobe.
Cumulative study of the resulting memory impairment eventually identified
the medial temporal structures and connections crucial for memory. These
include the hippocampus, including the dentate gyrus, hippocampal fields
CA1, CA2, CA3, and the subiculum—and the adjacent cortical regions,
including the entorhinal, perirhinal, and parahippocampal cortices.
Another important medial temporal lobe structure is the amygdala. The
amygdala is involved in the regulation of much of emotional behavior. In
particular, the storage of emotional events engages the amygdala. Modulatory
effects of projections from the amygdala to the neocortex are responsible for
producing enhanced memory for emotional or arousing events compared to


<<<PAGE 3217>>>
neutral events.
A detailed study of amnesic patients offers unique insights into the nature
of memory and its organization in the brain. An extensive series of
informative studies, for example, described the memory impairment of
patient EP.
EP was diagnosed with herpes simplex encephalitis at 72 years of age.
Damage to the medial temporal lobe region (see Fig. 34-6) produced
persistent and profound amnesia. During testing sessions, EP was cordial
and talked freely about his life experiences, but he relied exclusively on
stories from his childhood and early adulthood. He would repeat the same
story many times. Strikingly, his performance on tests of recognition
memory was no better than would result from guessing (Fig. 34-7A).
Tests involving facts about his life and autobiographical experiences
revealed poor memory for the time leading up to his illness but normal
memory for his childhood (Fig. 34-7B). EP also has good spatial
knowledge about the town in which he lived as a child, but he was unable
to learn the layout of the neighborhood where he moved to after he
became amnesic (Fig. 34-7C).
Given the severity of the memory problems experienced by EP and other
amnesic patients, it is noteworthy that these patients nonetheless perform
typically on certain kinds of memory tests. The impairment selectively
concerns memory for factual knowledge and autobiographical events,
collectively termed declarative memory. Amnesia presents as a global deficit,
in that it involves memory for information presented in any sensory modality,
but the deficit is limited, in that it covers only memory for facts and events.


<<<PAGE 3218>>>
FIGURE 34-7
Formal test results for patient EP, showing severe anterograde and retrograde
deficits, with intact remote memory. A: Scores were combined from 42 different
tests of recognition memory for words given to patient EP and a group of five
healthy control subjects. The testing format was either two-alternative forced
choice or yes–no recognition. Brackets for EP indicate the standard error of the
mean. Data points for the control group indicate each participant’s mean score
across all 42 recognition memory tests. EP’s average performance (49.3 percent
correct) was not different from chance and was approximately five standard
deviations (SDs) below the average performance of control subjects (81.1 percent
correct; SD, 6.3). B: Autobiographical remembering was quantified by using a
structured interview known as the Autobiographical Memory Interview. Items
assessed personal semantic knowledge (maximum score 21 for each time
period). Performance for the recent time period reflects poor memory for
information that could have been acquired only subsequent to the onset of his
amnesia. For EP, performance for the early adult period reflects retrograde
memory deficits. Performance for the childhood period reflects good remote
memory. Similar results for semantic and episodic remembering were obtained
from these time periods. (Data from Kopelman MD, Wilson BA, Baddeley AD. The
autobiographical memory interview: A new assessment of autobiographical and
personal semantic memory in amnesic patients. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol.
1989;5:724; and Reed JM, Squire LR. Retrograde amnesia for facts and events:
Findings from four new cases. J Neurosci. 1998;18:3943). C: Assessments of
spatial memory demonstrated EP’s good memory for spatial knowledge from his
childhood, along with extremely poor new learning of spatial information.


<<<PAGE 3219>>>
Performance was compared to that of five individuals (open circles) who attended
EP’s high school at the same time as he did, lived in the region over
approximately the same time period, and, like EP (filled circles), moved away as
young adults. Normal performance was found for navigating from home to
different locations in the area (familiar navigation), between different locations in
the area (novel navigation), and between these same locations when a main
street was blocked (alternative routes). Subjects were also asked to point to
particular locations while imagining themselves in a particular location (pointing to
landmarks), or they were asked about locations in the neighborhoods in which
they currently lived (new topographical learning). EP showed difficulty only in this
last test, because he moved to his current residence after he became amnesic.
(Data from Teng E, Squire LR. Memory for places learned long ago is intact after
hippocampal damage. Nature. 1999;400:675.) (Adapted from Stefanacci L,
Buffalo EA, Schmolck H, Squire LR. Profound amnesia after damage to the
medial temporal lobe: A neuroanatomical and neuropsychological profile of
patient E. P. J Neurosci. 2000;20(18):7024–7036. Printed with permission.)

Hippocampal pathology in patients with amnesia can also be revealed
using high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Such studies
indicate that damage limited to the hippocampus results in clinically
significant memory impairment. In addition to the hippocampus, other medial
temporal lobe regions also make critical contributions to memory. Thus, a
moderately severe memory impairment results from CA1 damage, whereas a
more profound and disabling amnesia results from medial temporal lobe
damage that includes the hippocampus and adjacent cortex. Memory
impairment due to medial temporal lobe damage is also typical in patients
with early Alzheimer disease or amnestic mild cognitive impairment. As
Alzheimer disease progresses, the pathology affects many cortical regions
and produces substantial cognitive deficits and memory dysfunction.
Amnesia can also result from damage to structures of the medial
diencephalon. The critical regions damaged in diencephalic amnesia include
the mammillary nuclei in the hypothalamus, the dorsomedial nucleus of the
thalamus, the anterior nucleus, the internal medullary lamina, and the
mammillothalamic tract. However, uncertainty remains regarding which
specific lesions are required to produce diencephalic amnesia. Alcoholic
Korsakoff syndrome is the most prevalent and best-studied example of
diencephalic amnesia, and in these cases, the damage is found in brain
regions that may be especially sensitive to prolonged bouts of thiamine
deficiency and alcohol abuse. Patients with alcoholic Korsakoff syndrome
typically exhibit memory impairment due to a combination of diencephalic


<<<PAGE 3220>>>
damage and frontal lobe pathology. Frontal damage alone produces
characteristic cognitive deficits and specific memory problems (e.g., in
effortful retrieval and evaluation); in Korsakoff syndrome, the pattern of
deficits thus extends beyond what is commonly found in other amnesia cases
(see Table 34-6).
Table 34-6
Memory and Cognitive Deficits Associated with Frontal
Damage
Test

Amnesia Korsakoff
Syndrome

Frontal
Lobe
Damage

Delayed recall

+

+

−

Dementia Rating Scale: Memory
index

+

+

−

Dementia Rating Scale: Initiation
and perseveration index

−

+

+

Wisconsin Card Sorting Test

−

+

+

Temporal order memory

+

++

++

Metamemory

−

+

+

Release from proactive
interference

−

+

−

+, deficit; −, no deficit; ++, disproportionate impairment relative to item memory.
From Squire LR, Zola-Morgan S, Cave CB, Haist F, Musen G, Suzuki WA. Memory,
organization of brain systems and cognition Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol.
1990;55:1007.

The ability to remember factual and autobiographical events depends on
the integrity of both the cortical regions responsible for representing the
information in question and several brain regions responsible for memory
formation. Thus, medial temporal and diencephalic brain areas work in
concert with widespread areas of neocortex to form and to store declarative


<<<PAGE 3221>>>
memories (Fig. 34-8).
Retrograde Amnesia
Memory loss in amnesia typically affects recent memories more than remote
memories (Fig. 34-9). Temporally graded amnesia has been demonstrated
retrospectively in studies of amnesic patients and prospectively in studies of
monkeys, rats, mice, and rabbits. These findings have important implications
for understanding the nature of the memory storage process. Memories are
dynamic, not static. As time passes after learning, some memories are
forgotten, whereas others become stronger due to a process of consolidation
that depends on cortical, medial temporal, and diencephalic structures.
The study of retrograde amnesia has been important for understanding how
memory changes over time. The dynamic nature of memory storage can be
conceptualized as follows. An event is experienced and encoded by a
collection of cortical regions involved in representing a combination of
different event features. At the same time, the hippocampus and adjacent
cortex receive pertinent high-level information from all sensory modalities.
Later, when the original event is recalled, the same set of cortical regions is
activated. If a subset of the cortical regions is activated, the hippocampus and
related structures can facilitate recall by facilitating the remaining cortical
regions (i.e., pattern completion). When the original event is retrieved and
newly associated with other information, hippocampal–cortical networks can
be modified. In this way, a gradual consolidation process occurs that changes
memory storage (see Fig. 34-8). The neocortical components representing
some events can become so effectively linked together that ultimately a
memory can be retrieved without any contribution from the medial temporal
lobe. As a result, amnesic patients can exhibit normal retrieval of remote facts
and events and autobiographical memories. Distributed neocortical regions
are the permanent repositories of these enduring memories.
In contrast to what is observed after damage restricted to the hippocampus,
extensive retrograde impairments for facts and events from the distant past
can also occur. Damage to the frontal lobes, for example, can lead to
difficulty in organizing memory retrieval. Accurate retrieval often begins
with activation of lifetime periods and proceeds to identify general classes of
events and then more specific events, but this process becomes difficult


<<<PAGE 3222>>>
following frontal damage. Damage to other cortical regions can also impair
memory storage. Networks in the anterolateral temporal cortex, for example,
are critical for retrieving stored information because these areas are essential
for long-term storage itself. Patients with focal retrograde amnesia exhibit
substantial retrograde memory impairments together with only moderately
impaired new learning ability. Some capacity for new learning remains,
presumably, because medial temporal lobe structures can communicate with
other areas of the cortex that remain undamaged.

FIGURE 34-8
Brain regions believed to be critical for the formation and storage of declarative
memory. Medial diencephalon and medial temporal regions are critical for
declarative memory storage. The entorhinal cortex is the major source of
projections for the neocortex to the hippocampus, and nearly two-thirds of the
cortical input to the entorhinal cortex originates in the perirhinal and
parahippocampal cortex. The entorhinal cortex also receives direct connections
from the cingulate, insula, orbitofrontal, and superior temporal cortices. (Adapted
from Paller KA. Neurocognitive foundations of human memory. In: Medin DL, ed.:
The Psychology of Learning and Motivation. Vol. 40. San Diego, CA: Academic
Press; 2008:121 and Gluck MA, Mercado E, Myers CE. Learning and Memory:
From Brain to Behavior. New York: Worth; 2008:109, Fig. 3-16.)


<<<PAGE 3223>>>
FIGURE 34-9
A: Temporally limited retrograde amnesia for free recall of 251 news events.
Scores were aligned relative to the onset of amnesia in patients (N = 6) and to a
corresponding time point in age-matched and education-matched healthy
individuals (N = 12). The time period after the onset of amnesia is labeled AA
(anterograde amnesia) to designate that this time point assessed memory for
events that occurred after the onset of amnesia. Standard errors ranged from 2 to
10 percent. Brain damage in the patient group was limited primarily to the
hippocampal region. B: Temporally limited retrograde amnesia in rats with lesions


<<<PAGE 3224>>>
of the hippocampus and subiculum. Rats learned to prefer an odorous food as the
result of an encounter with another rat with that odor on its breath. Percent
preference for the familiar food was observed for three training-surgery intervals.
At 1 day after learning, the control group performed significantly better than the
rats with lesions (p < 0.05). At 30 days, the two groups performed similarly, and
both groups performed well above chance. Error bars show standard errors of the
mean. (Adapted from Manns JR, Hopkins RO, Squire LR. Semantic memory and
the human hippocampus. Neuron. 2003;38(1):127–133 and Clark RE, Broadbent
NJ, Zola SM, Squire LR. Anterograde amnesia and temporally graded retrograde
amnesia for a nonspatial memory task after lesions of hippocampus and
subiculum. J Neurosci. 2002;22(11):4663–4669, with permission.)

MULTIPLE TYPES OF MEMORY
Memory is not a single faculty of the mind but consists of various subtypes.
Amnesia affects only one kind of memory, declarative memory. Declarative
memory is what is ordinarily meant by the term memory in everyday
language. Declarative memory supports the conscious recollection of facts
and events. The classic impairment in amnesia thus concerns memory for
routes, lists, faces, melodies, objects, and other verbal and nonverbal
material, regardless of the sensory modality in which the material is
presented.
Amnesic patients can display a broad impairment in these components of
declarative memory, while several other memory abilities are preserved. The
heterogeneous set of preserved abilities is collectively termed nondeclarative
memory. Nondeclarative memory includes skill learning, habit learning,
simple forms of conditioning, and priming (see next section). For these kinds
of learning and memory, amnesic patients can perform normally.
In controlled laboratory settings, the acquisition of a variety of perceptual,
perceptual-motor, and cognitive skills can be tested in isolation, and amnesic
patients are found to acquire these skills at rates equivalent to the rates at
which healthy individuals acquire the skills. For example, amnesic patients
can learn to read mirror-reversed text normally, they exhibit the typical
facilitation in reading speed with successive readings of ordinary prose, and
they improve as rapidly as healthy individuals at a speeded reading of
repeating nonwords. Also, amnesic patients can, after seeing strings of letters
generated by a finite-state rule system, classify novel strings of letters as rulebased or not rule-based. Classification performance is normal even though
amnesic patients are impaired at remembering the events of training or the


<<<PAGE 3225>>>
specific items they have studied.
Priming
Priming refers to the facilitation of the ability to detect or to identify a
particular stimulus based on a specific recent experience. Many tests have
been used to measure priming in amnesia and show that it is intact. For
example, words might be presented in a study phase and then again, after a
delay, in a test phase, when a priming measure such as reading speed is
obtained. Patients are instructed to read words as quickly as possible in such
a test, and they are not informed that memory is being assessed.
In one priming test, patients named pictures of previously presented
objects reliably faster than they named pictures of new objects, even after a
delay of 1 week. This facilitation occurred at normal levels, even though the
patients were markedly impaired at recognizing which pictures had been
presented previously. Particularly striking examples of preserved priming
come from studies of patient EP (Fig. 34-10), who exhibited intact priming
for words but performed at chance levels when asked to recognize which
words had been presented. This form of memory, termed perceptual priming,
is thus a distinct class of memory independent of the medial temporal lobe
regions typically damaged in amnesia.
Another form of priming reflects improved access to meaning rather than
percepts. For example, subjects study a list of words, including tent and belt,
and then are asked to free-associate them. Thus, they are given words such as
canvas and strap and asked to produce the first word that comes to mind. The
result is that subjects are more likely to produce tent in response to canvas
and to produce belt in response to strap than if the words tent and belt had
not been presented recently. This effect, called conceptual priming, is also
preserved in amnesic patients, even though they fail to recognize the same
words on a conventional memory test (Fig. 34-11).


<<<PAGE 3226>>>
FIGURE 34-10
Preserved priming in patient EP relative to seven control subjects. A: Stemcompletion priming on six separate tests. Priming reflected a tendency for
subjects to complete three-letter stems with previously encountered words when
they were instructed to produce the first word to come to mind (e.g., MOT___


<<<PAGE 3227>>>
completed to form MOTEL). Priming scores were calculated as percentage
correct for studied words minus percentage correct for baseline words (guessing).
B: Perceptual-identification priming on 12 separate tests. Subjects attempted to
read 48 words that were visually degraded. Priming scores were calculated as
percentage correct identification of previously studied words minus percentage
correct identification of nonstudied words. Brackets indicate standard error of the
mean. (Data from Hamann SB, Squire LR. Intact perceptual memory in the
absence of conscious memory. Behav Neurosci. 1997;111:850.) (Reprinted from
Stefanacci L, Buffalo EA, Schmolck H, Squire LR. Profound amnesia after
damage to the medial temporal lobe: A neuroanatomical and neuropsychological
profile of patient E. P. J Neurosci. 2000;20(18):7024–7036, with permission.)

Not all types of priming are preserved in amnesia. Some priming tests have
been designed to examine the formation of new associations. When priming
tests are based not on preexisting knowledge but the acquisition of new
associative knowledge, priming tends to be impaired. In other words, priming
in certain complex situations can require the same type of linkage among
multiple cortical regions critical for declarative memory.
Memory Systems
Table 34-7 depicts one scheme for conceptualizing multiple types of
memory. Declarative memory depends on medial temporal and midline
diencephalic structures along with large portions of the neocortex. This
system provides for the rapid learning of facts (semantic memory) and events
(episodic memory). Nondeclarative memory depends on several different
brain systems. Habits depend on the neocortex and the neostriatum, and the
cerebellum is essential for the conditioning of skeletal musculature, the
amygdala for emotional learning, and the neocortex for priming.
Declarative memory and nondeclarative memory differ in significant ways.
Declarative memory is phylogenetically more recent than nondeclarative
memory. Also, declarative memories are available to conscious recollection.
The flexibility of declarative memory permits the retrieved information to be
available to multiple response systems. Nondeclarative memory is
inaccessible to awareness and is expressed only by engaging specific
processing systems. Nondeclarative memories are stored as changes within
these processing systems—changes encapsulated such that the stored
information has limited access to other processing systems.
Semantic memory, which concerns general knowledge of the world, has


<<<PAGE 3228>>>
often been categorized as a separate form of memory. Facts committed to
memory typically become independent of the original episodes in which the
facts were learned. Amnesic patients can sometimes acquire information that
would ordinarily be learned as facts, but the patients learn it by relying on a
different brain system than the system that supports declarative memory.
Consider a test requiring the concurrent learning of eight object pairs.
Healthy individuals can rapidly learn which the correct object in each pair is,
whereas severely amnesic patients like EP learn only gradually over many
weeks, and at the start of each session, they cannot describe the task, the
instructions, or the objects. In patients who do not have severe amnesia,
factual information is typically acquired as conscious declarative knowledge.
In these cases, the brain structures that remain intact within the medial
temporal lobe presumably support learning. In contrast, when factual
information is acquired as nondeclarative knowledge, as in the case of EP’s
learning of pairs of objects, learning likely occurs directly as a habit, perhaps
supported by the neostriatum. Humans thus appear to have a robust capacity
for habit learning that operates outside of awareness and independent of the
medial temporal lobe structures that are damaged in amnesia.
Frontal Contributions to Memory
Although amnesia does not occur after limited frontal damage, the frontal
lobes are fundamentally crucial for declarative memory. Patients with frontal
lesions have a poor memory for the context in which information was
acquired, they have difficulty in unaided recall, and they may even have
some mild difficulty on tests of item recognition. More generally, patients
with frontal lesions have difficulty implementing memory retrieval strategies
and evaluating and monitoring their memory performance.

NEUROIMAGING AND MEMORY
The understanding of memory derived from studies of amnesia has been
extended through studies using various methods for monitoring brain activity
in healthy individuals. For example, activation of posterior prefrontal regions
with positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) have shown that these regions are involved in strategic
processing during retrieval and working memory. Anterior frontal regions


<<<PAGE 3229>>>
near the frontal poles have been linked with functions such as evaluating the
products of retrieval. Frontal connections with posterior neocortical regions
support the organization of retrieval and the manipulation of information in
working memory. Consistent with the evidence from patients with frontal
lesions, frontal–posterior networks can be viewed as instrumental in the
retrieval of declarative memories and the online processing of new
information.

FIGURE 34-11
Preserved conceptual priming in amnesia. In the free association test, subjects
studied a set of words (e.g., lemon) and 5 minutes later viewed cue words that
included associates of the studied words (e.g., orange). Subjects were asked to
produce the first word that came to mind in response to each cue word. Results
are shown separately for the control group (CON; n = 12), amnesic patients with
large medial temporal lobe lesions (MTL; n = 2), and amnesic patients with
lesions believed to be limited to the hippocampal region (H; n = 3). The left panel
shows conceptual priming scores computed as the percentage of studied words
produced in the free association test minus a baseline measure of the likelihood
of producing those words by chance. All of the groups performed similarly in the
conceptual priming test. The right panel shows results from a yes–no recognition
memory test using comparable words. Both patient groups were impaired relative
to the control group. The dashed line indicates chance performance. The data
points for the MTL and H groups show the scores of individual patients averaged
across four separate tests. Brackets show standard errors of the mean for the
control group. (Reprinted from Levy DA, Stark CEL, Squire LR. Intact conceptual
priming in the absence of declarative memory. Psychol Sci. 2004;15(10):680–686,
with permission.)

Neuroimaging has also identified contributions to memory made by the
parietal cortex. Multiple parietal regions (including inferior and superior
parietal lobules, precuneus, posterior cingulate, and retrosplenial cortex) are
activated in conjunction with remembering recent experiences. Although


<<<PAGE 3230>>>
many functions have been hypothesized to explain this parietal activity, a
single consensus position has not yet been reached, and it may be the case
that several different functions are relevant.
Neuroimaging studies have also illuminated priming phenomena and how
they differ from declarative memory. Perceptual priming appears to reflect
changes in the early stages of the cortical pathways engaged during
perceptual processing. For example, in the case of stem-completion priming,
in which subjects study a list of words (e.g., MOTEL) and then are tested
with a list of stems (e.g., MOT___) and with instructions to complete each
stem with the first word to come to mind, neuroimaging and divided visualfield studies have implicated visual processing systems in extrastriate cortex,
especially in the right hemisphere. In contrast, the conscious recollection of
remembered words engages brain areas at later stages of processing. Neural
mechanisms supporting priming and declarative memory retrieval have also
been distinguished in brain electrical activity recorded from the scalp (Fig.
34-12). In sum, priming differs from declarative memory in that it is signaled
by brain activity that occurs earlier, and that originates in different brain
regions.
Table 34-7
Types of Memory
A. Declarative memory
1. Facts
2. Events
B. Nondeclarative memory
1. Skills and habits
2. Priming
3. Simple classical conditioning
4. Nonassociative learning


<<<PAGE 3231>>>
FIGURE 34-12
Brain potentials associated with perceptual priming versus declarative memory
retrieval. Paller et al. (2003) studied 16 volunteers, who took a memory test
involving three sorts of faces: new faces, faces they had seen recently and
remembered well, and faces they had seen but did not remember because the
faces had been presented too briefly to process effectively. In a companion
experiment with a priming test, speeded responses were found, indicative of
priming. Frontal recordings of brain waves elicited by the primed faces included
negative potentials from 200 to 400 ms after face presentation that differed from
the brain waves elicited by new faces. These differences were particularly robust
for trials with the fastest responses (data shown were from trials with responses
faster than the median reaction time). Remembered faces uniquely elicited
positive brain waves that began about 400 ms after face presentation. Brain
potential correlates of face recollection occurred later than those for perceptual
priming and were larger over posterior brain regions. (Adapted from Paller KA,
Hutson CA, Miller BB, Boehm SG. Neural manifestations of memory with and
without awareness. Neuron. 2003;38(3):507–516, with permission.)


<<<PAGE 3232>>>
FIGURE 34-13
Activity in the left and right hippocampal regions measured with functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during declarative memory retrieval. Data
were collected from 11 participants who saw words at study and test and from 11
different participants who saw pictures of namable objects at study and test.
Recognition memory accuracy was 80.2 percent correct for words and 89.9
percent correct for objects. Areas of significant fMRI signal change (targets vs.
foils) are typically shown in sagittal sections as color overlays on averaged
structural images. The box indicates the area in which reliable data were available
for all subjects. With words, retrieval-related activity was observed in the
hippocampus on the left side (A) but not on the right side (B). With namable
objects, retrieval-related activity was observed in the hippocampus on both the left
side (C) and the right side (D). (Reprinted from Stark CE, Squire LR. Functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) activity in the hippocampal region during
recognition memory. J Neurosci. 2000;20(20):7776–7781, with permission.)

Hippocampal activity associated with the formation and retrieval of
declarative memories has also been investigated with neuroimaging. In
keeping with the neuropsychological evidence, the hippocampus appears to
be involved in the recollection of recent events (Fig. 34-13). The retrievalrelated hippocampal activity has been observed in memory tests with many
different types of stimuli. The hippocampus is also active during the initial
storage of information. Whereas the left inferior prefrontal cortex is engaged
as a result of attempts to encode a word, hippocampal activity at encoding is
more closely associated with whether encoding leads to a stable memory that


<<<PAGE 3233>>>
can later be retrieved (Fig. 34-14). These findings confirm and extend the
idea that medial temporal and frontal regions are essential for memory
storage and make different contributions.

SLEEP AND MEMORY
The speculation that memories are processed during sleep has a long history.
Freud noted that dreams could reveal fragments of recent experiences in the
form of day residues. Although many questions about how and why
memories may be processed during sleep remain unresolved, recent
experiments have provided new empirical support to bolster the idea that
memory processing during sleep serves an adaptive function. It is now clear
that memory performance can be facilitated when sleep occurs after initial
learning, and that sleep-related facilitation can be observed for many different
types of memory.
Memory storage appears to be aided explicitly by processing during deep
sleep within a few hours after learning, especially in stages 3 and 4 (slowwave sleep). Some results indicate that slow-wave sleep facilitates the storage
of declarative memories but not nondeclarative memories. Direct evidence
for this proposal has been obtained using stimulation with olfactory stimuli
(Fig. 34-15), stimulation with direct current electrical input at the
approximate frequency of electroencephalographic slow waves, and other
methods. Furthermore, neuronal recordings in animals have revealed a
phenomenon of hippocampal replay, in which activity patterns expressed
during the day are later observed during sleep. In summary, declarative
memories acquired during waking can be processed again during sleep, and
this processing can influence the likelihood of subsequent memory retrieval
when the individual is awake. The facilitation of declarative memory is
typically manifest as a reduction in the amount of forgetting that occurs, not
as an improvement in memory.

ASSESSMENT OF MEMORY FUNCTIONS
A variety of quantitative methods are available to assess memory functions in
neurologic and psychiatric patients. Quantitative methods are useful for
evaluating and following patients longitudinally and carrying out a one-time


<<<PAGE 3234>>>
examination to determine the status of memory function. It is desirable to
obtain information about the severity of memory dysfunction, as well as to
determine whether a memory is selectively affected or whether memory
problems are occurring, as they often do, against a background of additional
intellectual deficits. Although some widely available tests, such as the
Wechsler Memory Scale, provide useful measures of memory, most single
tests assess memory rather narrowly. Even general-purpose
neuropsychological batteries provide for only limited testing of memory
functions. A complete assessment of memory usually involves several
specialized tests that sample intellectual functions, new learning capacity,
remote memory, and memory self-report.
The assessment of general intellectual functions is central to any
neuropsychological examination. In the case of memory testing, information
about intellectual functions provides information about a patient’s general
test-taking ability and a way to assess the selectivity of memory impairment.
Useful tests include the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale; a test of object
naming, such as the Boston Naming Test; a rating scale to assess the
possibility of global dementia; a test of word fluency; and specialized tests of
frontal lobe function.


<<<PAGE 3235>>>
FIGURE 34-14
Functional activations of prefrontal and medial temporal regions that were
predictive of later memory performance. Single words were presented visually,
each followed by an instruction to remember (R cue) or to forget (F cue). Trials
were sorted based on the remember or forget instruction and on subsequent
recognition performance. Activity in the left inferior prefrontal cortex and left
hippocampus was predictive of subsequent recognition but for different reasons.
Left inferior prefrontal activation (A) was associated with the encoding attempt, in
that responses were largest for trials with a cue to remember, whether or not the
word was actually recognized later. The time course of activity in this region (B)
was computed based on responses that were time locked to word onset (time 0).
Left inferior prefrontal activity increased for words that were later remembered,
but there was a stronger association with encoding attempt, because responses
were larger for words followed by an R cue that were later forgotten than for
words followed by an F cue that were later remembered. In contrast, left
parahippocampal and posterior hippocampal activation (C) was associated with
encoding success. As shown by the time course of activity in this region (D),
responses were largest for words that were subsequently remembered, whether


<<<PAGE 3236>>>
the cue was to remember or to forget. (Reprinted from Reber PJ, Siwiec RM,
Gitelman DR, Parrish TB, Mesulam MM, Paller KA. Neural correlates of
successful encoding identified using functional magnetic resonance imaging. J
Neurosci. 2002;22(21):9541–9548, with permission.)

FIGURE 34-15
Evidence for memory processing during sleep. Subjects first learned object–
location associations when a rose odor was present. Following learning, subjects
slept wearing a device for delivering odors to the nose, and the rose odor was
administered during the first two slow-wave sleep periods of the night (in 30second periods to prevent habituation). Memory facilitation was observed when
object–location associations were tested the following morning in the absence of
odor stimulation. Facilitated memory was not found when stimulation occurred
during slow-wave sleep but not during learning, when stimulation occurred during
learning and then during rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep, or when subjects
were kept awake. Moreover, odor stimulation during slow-wave sleep was found
to produce anterior and posterior hippocampal activation (lower panels).
(Reprinted from Rasch B, Büchel C, Gais S, Born J. Odor cues during slow-wave
sleep prompt declarative memory consolidation. Science. 2007;315(5817):1426–
1429, with permission.)

New Learning Capacity
Memory tests are sensitive to impaired new learning ability when they adhere
to either of two critical principles. First, tests are sensitive to memory
impairment when more information is presented than can be held in


<<<PAGE 3237>>>
immediate memory. For example, one might ask patients to memorize a list
of 10 faces, words, sentences, or digits, given that 10 items are more than can
be held in mind. The paired-associate learning task is an especially sensitive
test of this kind. In the paired-associate task, the examiner asks the patient to
learn a list of unrelated pairs of words (e.g., queen–garden, office–river) and
then to respond to the first word in each pair by recalling the second word.
Second, tests are sensitive to memory impairment when a delay, filled with
distraction, is interposed between the learning phase and the test phase. In
that case, examiners typically ask patients to learn a small amount of
information and then distract them for several minutes by conversation to
prevent rehearsal. Recollection is then assessed for the previously presented
material. Memory can be tested by the unaided recall of previously studied
material (free recall), presenting a cue for the material to be remembered
(cued recall), or by testing recognition memory. In multiple-choice tests of
recognition memory, the patient tries to select previously studied items from
a group of studied and unstudied items. In yes–no recognition tests, patients
see studied and unstudied items one at a time and are asked to say “yes” if the
item was presented previously and “no” if it was not. These methods for
assessing recently learned material vary in their sensitivity for detecting
memory impairment, with free recall being most sensitive, cued recall
intermediate, and recognition least sensitive.
The specialization of function of the two cerebral hemispheres in humans
means that left and right unilateral damage is associated with different kinds
of memory problems. Accordingly, different kinds of memory tests must be
used when unilateral damage is a possibility. In general, damage to medial
temporal or diencephalic structures in the left cerebral hemisphere causes
difficulty remembering verbal material, such as word lists and stories.
Damage to medial temporal or diencephalic structures in the right cerebral
hemisphere impairs memory for faces, spatial layouts, and other nonverbal
material that is typically encoded without verbal labels. Left medial temporal
damage can lead to impaired memory for spoken and written text. Right
medial temporal damage can lead to impaired learning of spatial arrays,
whether the layouts are examined by vision or touch. A useful way to test for
nonverbal memory is to ask a patient to copy a complex geometric figure,
and then, after a delay of several minutes, without forewarning, ask the
patient to reproduce it.


<<<PAGE 3238>>>
Remote Memory
Evaluations of retrograde memory loss should attempt to determine the
severity of any memory loss and the period that it covers. Most quantitative
tests of remote memory are composed of material in the public domain that
can be corroborated. For example, tests have been used that concern news
event, photographs of famous persons, or former one-season television
programs. An advantage of these methods is that one can sample large
numbers of events and often target particular periods. A disadvantage is that
these tests are not so useful for detecting memory loss for information
learned during the weeks or months immediately before the onset of amnesia.
Most remote memory tests sample periods rather coarsely and cannot detect a
retrograde memory impairment covering only a few months.
In contrast, autobiographical memory tests can potentially provide finegrained information about a patient’s retrograde memory. In the word-probe
task, first used by Francis Galton in 1879, patients are asked to recollect
specific episodes from their past in response to single word cues (e.g., bird
and ticket) and date the episodes. The number of episodes recalled tends to be
systematically related to the time the episode is taken. Most memories
naturally come from recent periods (the last 1 to 2 months). In contrast,
patients with amnesia often exhibit temporally graded retrograde amnesia,
drawing relatively few episodic memories from the recent past but producing
as many remote autobiographical memories as normal subjects (see Fig. 349).
Memory Self-Reports
Patients can often supply descriptions of their memory problems that are
extremely useful for understanding the nature of their impairment. Tests of
the ability to judge one’s memory abilities are called tests of metamemory.
Self-rating scales are available that yield quantitative and qualitative
information about memory impairment. As a result, it is possible to
distinguish memory complaints associated with depression from memory
complaints associated with amnesia. Depressed patients tend to rate their
memory as poor in a relatively undifferentiated way, endorsing equally all of
the items on a self-rating form. By contrast, amnesic patients tend to endorse


<<<PAGE 3239>>>
some items more than others; that is, there is a pattern to their memory
complaints. Amnesic patients do not report difficulty in remembering very
remote events or in following what is being said to them, but they do report
having difficulty remembering an event a few minutes after it happens.
Indeed, self-reports can match rather closely the description of memory
dysfunction that emerges from objective tests. Specifically, new-learning
capacity is affected, immediate memory is intact, and very remote memory is
intact. Some amnesic patients, however, tend to underestimate their memory
impairment markedly. In patients with Korsakoff syndrome, for example,
their poor metamemory stems from frontal lobe dysfunction. In any case,
querying patients in some detail about their sense of impairment and
administering self-rating scales are valuable and informative adjuncts to more
formal memory testing.
Psychogenic Amnesia
Patients sometimes exhibit memory impairment that differs markedly from
the typical patterns of memory loss that follow brain damage. For example,
some cases of amnesia present with a sudden onset of retrograde amnesia, a
loss of personal identity, and minimal anterograde amnesia. These patients
may even be unable to recall their name. Given the psychological forces that
prompt the onset of amnesia in these cases, they are commonly termed
psychogenic amnesia, or sometimes hysterical amnesia, functional amnesia,
or dissociative amnesia.
Differentiating psychogenic amnesia from a memory disorder that results
from frank neurologic injury or disease is often straightforward. Psychogenic
amnesias typically do not affect new-learning capacity. Patients enter the
hospital able to record a continuing procession of daily events. By contrast,
new-learning problems tend to be at the core of neurologic amnesia. The
main positive symptom in psychogenic amnesia is extensive and severe
retrograde amnesia. Patients may be unable to recollect pertinent information
from childhood or some part of their past. Formal neuropsychological testing
has shown that the pattern of memory deficits varies widely from patient to
patient. This variability may reflect a patient’s commonsense concepts of
memory, even when symptoms are not the result of conscious attempts to
simulate amnesia. Some patients may perform poorly only when asked to


<<<PAGE 3240>>>
remember past autobiographical events. Other patients also may fail at
remembering past news events. Some patients perform well when memory
tests appear to assess general knowledge, such as remembering the names of
celebrities or cities. Learning new material is usually intact, perhaps because
such tests appear to concern the present moment, not traveling into the past.
Occasionally, patients with psychogenic amnesia exhibit broad memory
deficits such that they cannot perform previously familiar skills or identify
everyday objects or common vocabulary words.
By contrast, patients with neurologic amnesia never forget their name, and
remote memory for the events of childhood and adolescence is typically
normal unless there is damage to the lateral temporal or frontal lobes. Patients
with psychogenic amnesia sometimes have evidence of head trauma or brain
injury, but the pattern of deficits cannot be taken as a straightforward result of
neurologic insult. The clinician’s challenge is not to distinguish psychogenic
amnesia from neurologic amnesia, but to distinguish psychogenic amnesia
from malingering. Indeed, the diagnosis of psychogenic amnesia can be
difficult to substantiate and may be met with skepticism by hospital staff.
Some features that argue in favor of a genuine psychogenic disorder include
(1) memory test scores that are not as low as possible, and never worse than
chance levels; (2) memory access that is improved by hypnosis or
amobarbital (Amytal) interview; and (3) a significant premorbid psychiatric
history. In some cases, psychogenic amnesia has been observed to clear after
days, but in many cases, it has persisted as a potentially permanent feature of
the personality.

IMPLICATIONS
Memory Distortion
Current understanding of the biology of memory has significant implications
for several fundamental issues in psychiatry. Given the selective and
constructive nature of autobiographical remembering and the imperfect
nature of memory retrieval more generally, it is surprising that memory is so
often accurate. How much can we trust our memories? Subjective feelings of
confidence are not perfect indicators of retrieval accuracy. Moreover,
memory distortion can lead to unfortunate consequences, such as when


<<<PAGE 3241>>>
mistaken eyewitness testimony harms an innocent individual.
It is possible to remember with confidence events that never happened. For
example, it is possible to confuse an event that was only imagined or
dreamed about with a real-life event. One factor contributing to memory
distortion is that similar brain regions are essential both for visual imagery
and for the long-term storage of visual memories (Fig. 34-16). Another factor
contributing to memory distortion is that memory functions best in
remembering the gist of an event, not the particulars from which the gist is
derived. In a noted demonstration, people listen to a list of words: Candy,
sour, sugar, tooth, heart, taste, dessert, salt, snack, syrup, eat, and flavor.
Subsequently, when asked to write down the words they heard, 40 percent
wrote down the word sweet, even though it did not appear on the list. Thus,
many people in this demonstration failed to discriminate between the words
presented and a word strongly associated with all the words but had not itself
been presented. The word sweet can be thought of as a gist word, a word that
represents the other words, which captures the meaning of the whole list.
Presumably, the words in the study list evoked a thought of the word sweet,
either at the time of learning or during the memory test, and people then
tended to confuse merely thinking of the word with actually hearing it.

FIGURE 34-16
Neural substrates of false memories. A: Functional magnetic resonance imaging
data were acquired in a learning phase, when subjects read names of objects and
visualized the referents. One-half of the names were followed 2 seconds later by
a picture of the object. B: In a surprise memory test given outside of the scanner,
subjects listened to object names and decided whether they had seen a picture of
the corresponding object. On some trials, subjects claimed to have seen a picture
of an object that they had only imagined. C: Results showed that the left inferior
prefrontal cortex and the left anterior hippocampus were more active during
learning in response to pictures later remembered compared to pictures later


<<<PAGE 3242>>>
forgotten. D: Several different brain areas showed a greater response to words in
the learning phase that were later falsely remembered as pictures compared to
words not misremembered. Activations that predicted false remembering were
found in a brain network important for the generation of visual imagery in
response to object names (precuneus, inferior parietal cortex, and anterior
cingulate, shown in the left, middle, and right images, respectively). (Reprinted
from Gonsalves B, Reber PJ, Gitelman DR, Parrish TB, Mesulam MM, Paller KA.
Neural evidence that vivid imagining can lead to false remembering. Psychol Sci.
2004;15(10):655–660, with permission.)

The reconstructive nature of recollection means that the interpretation of
eyewitness testimony is not straightforward. Whole episodes are not available
in the neocortex, but rather must be pieced together based on fragmentary
components and in the context of potentially misleading influences present at
the time of retrieval. Studies in adults and children have documented that
illusory memories can be created. Children are particularly susceptible to
these effects, especially when subjected to leading questions and false
suggestions.
Given these features of memory, when memory for childhood abuse is
remembered after many years, it is prudent to ask whether the memory is
accurate. Genuine examples of memory recovery have been documented,
whereby an individual produces a veridical memory for a past traumatic
event after not recalling the event for extended periods. Numerous examples
of apparent memory recovery have also been subsequently discovered to be
instances of false memory. Unfortunately, there is no perfect method, in the
absence of independent corroboration, for determining whether a recollective
experience is based on a real event.
Infantile Amnesia
The biology of memory has also provided insights relevant to the
phenomenon of infantile amnesia—the apparent absence of conscious
memory for experiences from approximately the first 3 years of life.
Traditional views of infantile amnesia have emphasized repression
(psychoanalytic theory) and retrieval failure (developmental psychology). A
common assumption has been that adults retain memories of early events but
cannot bring them into consciousness. However, it now appears that the
capacity for declarative memory does not become fully available until
approximately the third year of life, whereas nondeclarative memory emerges


<<<PAGE 3243>>>
early in infancy (e.g., classical conditioning and skill learning). Thus,
infantile amnesia results not from the adult’s failure to retrieve early
memories, but from the child’s failure to store them adequately in the first
place.
Nevertheless, studies in young infants show that a rudimentary capacity for
declarative memory is present even at a few months of age. As a child
develops, memories can be retained across increasingly long intervals, and
what is represented becomes correspondingly richer and more full of detail.
Medial temporal and diencephalic regions seem to be sufficiently developed
during these early months and years. What limits the capacity for declarative
memory appears to be the gradual development and differentiation of the
neocortex.
As the neocortex develops, the memories represented there become more
complex, language abilities allow for more elaborate verbal descriptions of
events, and a developing sense of self supports autobiographical knowledge.
As new strategies emerge for organizing incoming information, declarative
memories become more persistent, more richly encoded, and better
interconnected with other information. It is not the case that fully formed
childhood memories are stored but cannot be retrieved. The perspective
consistent with the current understanding of the biology of memory is that
declarative memories formed very early in life are fragmentary, simple, and
tied to the specific context of an infant’s understanding of the world. They
are unlike typical declarative memories in adults, which are imbued with
meaning and a complex understanding of events.
Memories and the Unconscious
The existence of multiple memory systems also has implications for issues
central to psychoanalytic theory, including the construct of the unconscious.
How one believes that experience influences current behavior depends on
what view one takes of the nature of memory. By the traditional view,
memory is a unitary faculty, and representations in memory vary mainly in
strength and accessibility. Unconscious material is below some threshold of
accessibility but could potentially be made available to consciousness.
The modern, biologic view begins with the distinction between a kind of
memory that can be brought to mind—declarative memory—and other kinds


<<<PAGE 3244>>>
of memory that are, by their nature, unconscious. Stored nondeclarative
memories are expressed through performance without affording any
conscious memory content. Nondeclarative memories shape our personalities
in the form of numerous habits and conditioned responses. In this view, one’s
behavior is indeed affected by events from early life, but the effects of early
experience persist in a nondeclarative form without necessarily including an
explicit, conscious record of the events. Learned behavior can be expressed
through altered dispositions, preferences, conditioned responses, habits, and
skills, but exhibiting such behavior need not be accompanied by an
awareness that behavior is being influenced by experience, nor is there a
necessity that any particular experience has been recorded as a complete
episode. That is, an influence from early experience does not require memory
of any specific episode. One can be afraid of dogs without remembering
being knocked down by a dog as a child. In this case, the fear of dogs is not
experienced as a memory. It is experienced as a part of the personality.
Furthermore, an intense fear of dogs carries with it no implication that the
brain retains a specific record of any early experience that subsequently
resulted in fear of dogs.
Behavioral change can occur by acquiring new habits that supersede old
ones or by becoming sufficiently aware of a habit that one can to some extent
isolate it, countermand it, or limit the stimuli that elicit it. However, one need
not become aware of any early formative event in the same sense that one
knows the content of declarative memory. The unconscious does not become
conscious. Various forms of nondeclarative memory simply influence
behavior without having the additional capacity for these influences to
become accessible to conscious awareness.

34.2 Normality and Mental Health
There has been an implicit assumption that mental health could be defined as
the antonym of mental illness. In other words, mental health was the absence
of psychopathology and synonymous with normal. Achieving mental health
by alleviating gross pathologic signs and symptoms of illness is also the
definition of the mental health model strongly advocated by third-party


<<<PAGE 3245>>>
payers. Indeed, viewing mental health as simply the absence of mental illness
is at the heart of much of the debate concerning mental health policies. The
great epidemiologic studies of the last half-century also focused on who was
mentally ill, and not well.

DEFINING MENTAL HEALTH
Several steps are necessary for defining positive mental health. The first step
is to note that “average” is not healthy; it always includes mixing in with the
healthy the prevalent amount of psychopathology in the population. For
example, in the general population, being of “average” weight or eyesight is
unhealthy, and if all sources of biopsychosocial pathology were excluded
from the population, the average IQ would be significantly greater than 100.
The second step in discussing mental health is to appreciate the caveat that
what is healthy sometimes depends on geography, culture, and the historical
moment. Sickle cell trait is unhealthy in New York City, but in the tropics,
where malaria is endemic, the sickling of red blood cells may be lifesaving.
The third step is to make clear whether one is discussing trait or state.
Who is physically healthier—an Olympic miler disabled by a temporary but
straightforward (state) sprained ankle or a person with type 1 diabetes (trait)
with temporarily normal blood sugar? In cross-cultural studies, such
differences become especially important. Superficially, an Indian mystic in a
state of trance may resemble a person with catatonic schizophrenia, but the
mystic does not resemble someone in the schizophrenic condition over time.
The fourth and most crucial step is to appreciate the twofold danger of
“contamination by values.” On the one hand, cultural anthropology teaches
us how fallacious any definition of mental health can be. Competitiveness
and scrupulous neatness may be healthy in one culture and regarded as
personality disorders in another. Furthermore, if mental health is “good,”
what is it good for? The self or society? For “fitting in” or for creativity? For
happiness or survival? Furthermore, who should be the judge?

MODELS OF MENTAL HEALTH
This chapter contrasts six different empirical approaches to mental health.
First, mental health can be conceptualized as above normal and a mental state


<<<PAGE 3246>>>
that is objectively desirable, as in Sigmund Freud’s definition of mental
health, which is the capacity to work and love. Second, from the viewpoint of
healthy adult development, mental health can be conceptualized as maturity.
Third, mental health can be conceptualized in terms of positive psychology—
as epitomized by the presence of multiple human strengths. Fourth, mental
health can be conceptualized as emotional intelligence and successful object
relations. Fifth, mental health can be conceptualized as subjective well-being
—a mental state that is subjectively experienced as happy, contented, and
desired. Sixth, mental health can be conceptualized as resilience, as the
capacity for successful adaptation and homeostasis.
Model A: Mental Health as Above Normal
This first perspective differs from the traditional medical approach to health
and illness. No manifest psychopathology equals mental health. In this
medical model, if one were to put all individuals on a continuum, normality
would encompass a significant portion of adults, and abnormality would be
the small remainder. This definition of health correlates with the traditional
role model of the doctor who attempts to free his patient from grossly
observable signs of illness. In other words, in this context, health refers to a
reasonable, rather than an optimal state of functioning. However, as already
pointed out, mental health is not normal; it is above average. Some believe
that true mental health is the exception, not the rule. Moreover, until recently,
some believed that mental health was imaginary.
Model B: Mental Health as Maturity
Unlike other organs of the body that are designed to stay the same, the brain
is designed to be plastic. Therefore, just as optimal brain development
requires almost a lifetime, so does assessing positive mental health. A 10year-old’s lungs and kidneys are more likely to reflect optimal function than
are those of a 60-year-old, but that is not true of a 10-year-old’s central
nervous system. To some extent, then, adult mental health reflects a
continuing process of maturational unfolding. Statistically, physically healthy
70-year-olds are mentally healthier than they were at age 30 years; for
example, Laura Carstensen found through prospective studies that individuals
are less depressed and show greater emotional modulation at age 70 years


<<<PAGE 3247>>>
than they did at age 30 years.
However, if prospective studies of adult development reveal that the
immature brain functions less well than the mature brain, does that mean that
adolescents are mentally healthier than toddlers? Are the middle-aged
mentally healthier than adolescents? The answer is both yes and no, but the
question illustrates that in order to understand mental health, we must first
understand what we mean by maturity.
To confirm the hypothesis that maturity and positive mental health are
almost synonymous, it is necessary to study the behavior and emotional states
of persons over a lifetime. Although such longitudinal studies have come to
fruition only recently, all of them illustrate the association of maturity with
increasing mental health. After age 50 years, of course, the association
between mental health and maturity is contingent on a healthy central
nervous system. The ravages of illnesses like brain trauma, major depression,
arteriosclerosis, Alzheimer’s, and alcoholism must all be avoided.
The association of mental health to maturity is probably mediated not only
by progressive brain myelination into the sixth decade but also by the
evolution of emotional and social intelligence through experience. Erik
Erikson conceptualized that such development produced a “widening social
radius.” In such a view, life after age 50 years was no longer a staircase
leading downward, as in the Pennsylvania Dutch cartoons of life-span
development, but a path leading outward. In Erikson’s model, the adult social
radius expanded over time through the mastery of specific tasks such as
“Identity versus Identity Diffusion,” “Intimacy versus Isolation,”
“Generativity versus Stagnation,” and “Integrity versus Despair.”
Identity. In such a model, the social radius of each adult developmental task
fits inside the next. First, adolescents must achieve an Identity that allows
them to become separate from their parents, for mental health and adult
development cannot evolve through a false self. The task of Identity requires
mastering the last task of childhood: sustained separation from social,
residential, economic, and ideologic dependence on the family of origin.
Identity is not just a product of egocentricity, of running away from home, or
of marrying to get out of a dysfunctional family. There is a world of
difference between the instrumental act of running away from home and the
developmental task of knowing where one’s family values end and one’s


<<<PAGE 3248>>>
values begin. Such separation derives as much from the identification and
internalization of important adolescent friends and nonfamily mentors as it
does from simple biologic maturation. For example, our accents become
relatively fixed by age 16 years and reflect those of our adolescent peer group
rather than the accents of our parents.
Intimacy. Then, young adults should develop Intimacy, which permits them
to become reciprocally, and not selfishly, involved with a partner. However,
living with just one other person in an interdependent, reciprocal, committed,
and contented fashion for years and years may seem neither desirable nor
possible to a young adult. Once achieved, however, the capacity for intimacy
may seem as effortless and desirable as riding a bicycle. Sometimes the
relationship is with a person of the same gender; sometimes, it is entirely
asexual; and sometimes, as in religious orders, the interdependence is with a
community. Superficially, mastery of intimacy may take very different guises
in different cultures and epochs, but “mating-for-life” and “marriage-type
love” are developmental tasks built into the developmental repertoires of
many warm-blooded species, including ours.
Career Consolidation. Career Consolidation is a task that is usually
mastered together with or that follows the mastery of intimacy. Mastery of
this task permits adults to find a career as valuable as they once found play.
On a desert island, one can have a hobby but not a career, for careers involve
being of value to other people. Four crucial developmental criteria transform
a “job” or hobby into a “career:” Contentment, compensation, competence,
and commitment. Such a career can be “wife and mother”—or, in more
recent times, “husband and father.” To the outsider, the process of Career
Consolidation often appears “selfish,” but without such “selfishness,” one
becomes “selfless” and has no “self” to give away in the next stage of
generativity. Persons with schizophrenia and individuals with a severe
personality disorder often manifest a lifelong inability to achieve either
intimacy or sustained, gratifying employment.
Generativity. Generativity involves the demonstration of a clear capacity to
care for and guide the next generation. Research reveals that sometime
between ages 35 and 55 years, our need for achievement declines, and our


<<<PAGE 3249>>>
need for community and affiliation increases. Depending on the opportunities
that the society makes available, generativity can mean serving as a
consultant, guide, mentor, or coach to young adults in the larger society. Like
leadership, generativity means to be in a caring relationship in which one
gives up much of the control that parents retain over young children. Good
mentors learn “to hold loosely” and to share responsibility. Generativity
reflects the capacity to give the self—finally completed through mastery of
the first three tasks of adult development—away. Its mastery is strongly
correlated with successful adaptation to old age. This is because, in old age,
there are inevitable losses, and these may overwhelm us if we have not
continued to grow beyond our immediate family.
Integrity. Finally, in old age, it is common to feel that some life exists after
death and that one is part of something greater than oneself. Thus, the last life
task in Erikson’s words is Integrity, achieving some sense of peace and unity
with respect both to one’s life and to the whole world. Erikson described
integrity as “an experience which conveys some world order and spiritual
sense. No matter how dearly paid for, accepting one’s life cycle as something
that had to be and that, by necessity, permitted no substitutions.”
It must be kept in mind that mastery of one life task is not necessarily
healthier than mastery of another, for adult development is neither a foot race
nor a moral imperative. Instead, these sequential tasks are offered as a road
map to help clinicians make sense of where they are and where their patients
might be located. One can be a mature 20-year-old, that is, healthy. One can
be an immature 50-year-old, which may be unhealthy. Nevertheless,
acquiring a social radius that extends beyond the person by definition allows
more flexibility and is usually healthier than self-preoccupation. Generativity
by ages 40 to 50 years offers a powerful predictor of a contented old age.
Model C: Mental Health as Positive or “Spiritual” Emotions
This model defines mental and spiritual health as the amalgam of the positive
emotions that bind us to other human beings. Love, hope, joy, forgiveness,
compassion, faith, awe, and gratitude comprise the essential positive and
“moral” emotions included in this model. Of great importance, these selected
positive emotions all involve human connection. None of the emotions listed


<<<PAGE 3250>>>
is just about the self. These positive emotions appear to be a common
denominator of all major faiths. Omitted from the list are five other positive
emotions—excitement, interest, contentment (happiness), humor, and a sense
of mastery, for a person can feel these latter five emotions alone on a desert
island.
Negative emotions originating in the hypothalamus, such as fear and anger,
are elaborated in the human amygdala (larger in humans than in other
mammals). Of tremendous importance to individual survival, the negative
emotions are all about “me.” In contrast, positive emotions, apparently
generated in the limbic system and unique to mammals, can free the self from
the self. People feel the emotions of vengeance and forgiveness deeply, but
the long-term results of these two emotions are very different. Negative
emotions are crucial for survival in the present time. The positive emotions
are more expansive and help us to broaden and build. In the future, they
widen one’s tolerance for strangers, expand one’s moral compass, and
enhance one’s creativity. Whereas negative emotions narrow attention and
miss the forest for the trees, positive emotions, especially joy, make thought
patterns more flexible, creative, integrative, and efficient.
The effect of positive emotion on the autonomic (visceral) nervous system
has much in common with the relaxation response to meditation. In contrast
to the metabolic and cardiac arousal that the fight-or-flight response of
negative emotion induces in our sympathetic autonomic nervous system,
positive emotion via our parasympathetic nervous system reduces basal
metabolism, blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, and muscle tension.
fMRI studies of Kundalini yoga practitioners demonstrate that meditation
increases the activity of the hippocampus and the right lateral amygdala,
which in turn leads to parasympathetic stimulation and the sensation of deep
peacefulness.
Positive emotions have a biologic basis, which means that they have
evolved through natural selection. The prosocial emotions probably reflect
adaptations that permitted the survival of relatively defenseless Homo sapiens
and their defenseless children in the African savannah 1 to 2 million years
ago.
Evidence for Positive Emotions. It has taken recent developments in
neuroscience and ethology to make positive emotions a subject fit for


<<<PAGE 3251>>>
scientific study. For example, infantile autism, a not uncommon genetic
disorder of emotional attachment, was not discovered until 1943 by a Johns
Hopkins child psychiatrist, Leo Kanner—in his son. Until then, medicine
could not articulate a positive emotion as basic, but as cognitively subtle, as
attachment. Today, the congenital lack of empathy and difficulties of
attachment in childhood autism can be recognized by any competent
pediatrician.
To locate positive emotion in the mammalian limbic system has been a
slow, arduous process. In 1955, James Olds, an innovative
neuropsychologist, observed that 35 of 41 electrode placements within the
limbic system of rats, but only 2 of 35 placements outside of the limbic
system, proved sufficiently rewarding to lead to self-stimulation. Also in the
1950s, neurobiologist Paul MacLean pointed out that the limbic structures
govern our mammalian capacity not only to remember (cognition), but also to
play (joy), to cry out at separation (faith/trust), and to take care of our own
(love). Except for rudimentary memory, reptiles express none of these
qualities.
Studies using fMRI demonstrated that when individuals subjectively
experience existential states of fear, sadness, or pleasure, blood flow
increases in limbic areas and decreases in many higher brain areas. Various
studies have located pleasurable human experiences (tasting chocolate,
winning money, admiring pretty faces, enjoying music, and experiencing
orgasmic ecstasy) in limbic areas—especially in the orbitofrontal region,
anterior cingulate, and insula. These diverse structures are closely integrated
and organized to help us to seek and to recognize all that falls under the
rubric of mammalian love and human spirituality.
The anterior cingulate gyrus links valence and memory to create
attachment. Along with the hippocampus, the anterior cingulate is the brain
region most responsible for making the past meaningful. In terms of
mediating attachment, the anterior cingulate receives one of the richest
dopaminergic innervations of any cortical area. Thus, the cingulate gyrus
provides motivational salience not only for lovers but also for drug addicts.
The anterior cingulate is crucial in directing whom we should approach and
whom we should avoid. Maternal touch, body warmth, and odor via the
limbic system and primarily via the anterior cingulate regulate a rat pup’s
behavior, neurochemistry, endocrine release, and circadian rhythm. Brain


<<<PAGE 3252>>>
imaging studies reveal that the anterior cingulate gyrus is aroused neither by
facial recognition of friends per se nor by sexual arousal per se. Instead,
anterior cingulate fMRI images light up when a lover gazes at a picture of a
partner’s face or when a new mother hears her infant’s cry.
Perhaps no area of the brain is more ambiguous in its evolutionary heritage
or more crucial to mental health than our prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal
cortex is in charge of estimating rewards and punishments and plays a critical
role in adapting and regulating our emotional response to new situations.
Thus, the prefrontal lobes are deeply involved in emotional, “moral,” and
“spiritual” lives.
From an evolutionary standpoint, the human frontal lobes are not different
from chimpanzees in terms of the number of neurons. Instead, it is the frontal
lobe white matter (the connectivity between neurons through myelinated
fibers) that accounts for larger frontal lobes of humans. This connectivity to
the limbic system underscores its “executive” function, which includes the
ability to delay gratification, comprehend symbolic language, and, most
importantly, to establish temporal sequencing. By being able to connect
memory of the past to “memory of the future,” the frontal lobes establish for
Homo sapiens predictable cause and effect.
Surgical or traumatic ablation of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex can
turn a conscientious, responsible adult into a moral imbecile without any
other evidence of intellectual impairment.
The insula is another part of the limbic system that is only beginning to be
understood. The insula is a medial cortical gyrus located between the
amygdala and the frontal lobe. The brain has no sensation; humans feel
emotion only in their bodies. The insula helps to bring these visceral feelings
into consciousness: The pain in one’s heart of grief, the warmth in one’s heart
of love, and the tightness in one’s gut from fear all make their way into
consciousness through the insula.
Both the limbic anterior cingulate and insula appear to be active in the
positive emotions of humor, trust, and empathy. The higher apes are set apart
from other mammals by a unique neural component called the spindle cell.
Humans have 20 times more spindle cells than chimps or gorillas (adult
chimpanzees average about 7,000 spindle cells; human newborns have four
times more, and human adults have almost 200,000 spindle cells). Monkeys
and other mammals, with the possible exception of whales and elephants, are


<<<PAGE 3253>>>
lacking in these unique cells. These large, cigar-shaped spindle or “von
Economo” neurons appear to be central to the governance of social emotions
and moral judgment. Spindle cells may have helped the Great Apes and
humans integrate their mammalian limbic systems with their expanding
neocortices. Spindle cells are concentrated in the anterior cingulate cortex,
the prefrontal cortex, and the insula. More recently, scientists have
discovered a particular group of “mirror neurons” in the insula and anterior
cingulate. These neurons are more highly developed in humans than in
primates and appear to mediate empathy—the experience of “feeling” the
emotions of another.
Although the practical applications of this newest model of mental health
are still many years away, these findings provide further evidence that the
brain and mind are one. In several studies, the prosocial biologic activity of
the anterior cingulate cortex and insula was highest in individuals with the
highest social awareness (based on objectively scored tests). In other words,
there are not only individual biologic differences for negative mental health,
but also positive mental health.
Model D: Mental Health as Socioemotional Intelligence
High socioemotional intelligence reflects above-average mental health in the
same way that a high IQ reflects above-average intellectual aptitude. Such
emotional intelligence lies at the heart of positive mental health. In the
Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle defined socioemotional intelligence as
follows: “Anyone can become angry—that is easy. However, to be angry
with the right person, to the right degree, at the right time, for the right
purpose, and in the right way—that is not easy.”
All emotions exist to assist in basic survival. Although the exact number of
primary emotions is arguable, seven emotions are currently distinguished
according to characteristic facial expressions connoting anger, fear,
excitement, interest, surprise, disgust, and sadness. The capacity to identify
these different emotions in ourselves and others plays a vital role in mental
health. The benefits of reading feelings from nonverbal cues have been
demonstrated in almost a score of countries. These benefits included being
better emotionally adjusted, more popular, and more responsive to others.
Empathic children do better in school and are more popular than their peers


<<<PAGE 3254>>>
without being more intelligent. The Head Start Program, a program of the
United States Department of Health and Human Services that provides
education and other services for low-income children and their families,
found that early school success was achieved not by intelligence but by
knowing what kind of behavior is expected, knowing how to rein in the
impulse to misbehave, being able to wait, and knowing how to get along with
other children. At the same time, the child must communicate his or her
needs and turn to teachers for help.
Ethologically, emotions are critical to mammalian communication.
Because such communications are not always consciously recognized, the
more skillful individuals are in identifying their emotions, the more skilled
the individual will be in communicating with others, and in empathically
recognizing their emotions. Put differently, the more you are skilled in
empathy, the more others will value you, and the greater will be your social
supports, self-esteem, and intimate relationships.
The following criteria can define social and emotional intelligence:
Accurate conscious perception and monitoring of one’s emotions.
Modification of emotions so that their expression is appropriate. This
involves the capacity to self-soothe personal anxiety and to shake off
hopelessness and gloom.
Accurate recognition of and response to emotions in others.
Skill in negotiating close relationships with others.
Capacity for focusing emotions (motivation) toward the desired goal. This
involves delayed gratification and adaptively displacing and channeling
impulse.
Some behavioral scientists divide emotions into positive and negative as if
negative emotions were unhealthy (this point of view was emphasized in
Model C). This tendency is an oversimplification. As with pus, fever, and
cough, the negative emotions of sadness, fear, and anger are also crucial to
healthy self-preservation. On the one hand, positive emotions like joy, love,
interest, and excitement are associated with subjective contentment; on the
other hand, although negative emotions interfere with contentment, their
expression can be equally healthy.
Advances in Studying Emotional Intelligence. Over the last 15 years,


<<<PAGE 3255>>>
three critical empirical steps have been taken in our understanding of the
relationship of socioemotional intelligence to positive mental health.
The first step is that both fMRI studies and neurophysiologic
experimentation have led to advances in our understanding of integrating the
prefrontal cortex with the limbic system, especially with the amygdala and its
connections. As noted in the previous model, these research advances have
brought us closer to understanding emotions as neurophysiologic phenomena
rather than as Platonic abstractions. The prefrontal cortex is the region of the
brain responsible for working memory, and the frontal lobes, through their
connections to the amygdala, hippocampus, and other limbic structures,
encode emotional learning in a manner quite distinct from both conventional
conditioning and declarative memory.
The second step has been the slow but steady progress in conceptualizing
and measuring “emotional intelligence.” Over the last decade, measures of
emotional intelligence have evolved rapidly.
The third advance is the use of videotape to chart emotional interaction.
Videos of sustained family interactions reveal that an essential aspect of
healthy infant development, of adolescent development, and marital harmony
is how partners or parents respond to emotion in others. To ignore, to punish,
and to be intimidated or contemptuous of how another feels spells disaster.
Children of emotionally attuned parents are better at handling their own
emotions and are more effective at soothing themselves when upset. Such
children even manifest lower levels of stress hormones and other physiologic
indicators of emotional arousal.
There are now many exercises in handling relationships that help couples,
business executives, and diplomats to become more skilled at conflict
resolution and negotiation. In the last decade, there has also been an
increasing effort to teach schoolchildren core emotional and social
competencies, sometimes called “emotional literacy.” The relevance of these
advances in psychology to psychiatry includes teaching emotion recognition
and differentiation in eating disorders and teaching anger modulation and
finding creative solutions to social predicaments for behavior disorders.
Model E: Mental Health as Subjective Well-Being
Positive mental health does not just involve being a joy to others; one must


<<<PAGE 3256>>>
also experience subjective well-being. Long before humankind considered
definitions of mental health, they pondered criteria for subjective happiness.
For example, objective social support accomplishes little if, subjectively, the
individual cannot feel loved. Thus, the capacity for subjective well-being
becomes a vital model of mental health.
Subjective well-being is never categorical. Healthy blood pressure is the
objective absence of hypotension and hypertension, but happiness is less
neutral. Subjective well-being is not just the absence of misery, but the
presence of positive contentment. Nevertheless, if happiness is an inescapable
dimension of mental health, happiness is often regarded with ambivalence. If
through the centuries, philosophers have sometimes regarded happiness as
the highest good, psychologists and psychiatrists have tended to ignore it.
Subjective happiness can have maladaptive as well as adaptive facets. The
search for happiness can appear selfish, narcissistic, superficial, and banal.
Pleasures can come quickly and soon be gone. Happiness is often based on
illusion or dissociative states. Illusory happiness is seen in the character
structure associated with bipolar and dissociative disorders. Maladaptive
happiness can bring temporary bliss but has no sticking power. In the Study
of Adult Development, scaled measures of “happiness” had little predictive
power and, often, insignificant association with other subjective and objective
measures of contentment. It is because of such ambiguity of meaning that,
throughout this section, the term subjective well-being will be substituted for
happiness.
Empirical Evidence. The mental health issues involved in subjective wellbeing are complicated and clouded by historical relativism, value judgment,
and illusion. Europeans have always been skeptical of the American concern
with happiness. Only in the last decade have investigators pointed out that a
primary function of positive emotional states and optimism is that they
facilitate self-care. Subjective well-being makes available personal resources
that can be directed toward innovation and creativity in thought and action.
Thus, subjective well-being, like optimism, becomes an antidote to learned
helplessness. Again, controlling for income, education, weight, smoking,
drinking, and disease, happy people are only half as likely to die at an early
age or become disabled as unhappy people.
A distinction can be made between pleasure and gratification. Pleasure is


<<<PAGE 3257>>>
in the moment, is closely allied with happiness, and involves the satisfaction
of impulse and biologic needs. Pleasure is highly susceptible to habituation
and satiety. If pleasure involves satisfaction of the senses and emotions,
gratification involves joy, purpose, and the satisfaction of “being the best you
can be” and meeting aesthetic and spiritual needs.
Subjective (unhappy) distress can be healthy. As ethologically minded
investigators have long pointed out, subjective negative affects (e.g., fear,
anger, and sadness) can be healthy reminders to seek environmental safety
and not to wallow in subjective well-being. If positive emotions facilitate
optimism and contentment, fear is the first protection against the external
threat; sadness protests against loss and summons help and anger signals
trespass.
Clarifying Subjective Well-Being. Since the 1970s, investigators have
made a serious effort to attend to definitional and causal parameters of
subjective well-being and address critical questions. One such question is: Is
subjective well-being more a function of environmental good fortune or a
function of an inborn, genetically based temperament? Put differently, does
subjective well-being reflect trait or state? If subjective well-being reflects a
safe environment and the absence of stress, it should fluctuate over time, and
those individuals who are happy in one domain or time in their lives might
not be happy in another.
A second question, but one related to the first, is what is a cause and what
is an effect. Are happy people more likely to achieve enjoyable jobs and good
marriages, or do conjugal stability and career contentment lead to subjective
well-being? Or are such positive associations the result of still a third factor?
For example, the absence of a genetic tendency for alcoholism, for major
depression, for trait neuroticism, and even for the presence of a chronic wish
to give socially desirable answers (impression management) might facilitate
both subjective well-being and reports of a good marriage and career
contentment.
As with physiologic homeostasis, evolution has prepared humans to make
subjective adjustments to environmental conditions. Thus, one can adapt to
good and bad events to not remain in a state of either elation or despair.
However, humans have a more challenging time adjusting to their genes.
Studies of adopted-away twins have demonstrated that half of the variance in


<<<PAGE 3258>>>
subjective well-being is due to heritability. The subjective well-being of
monozygotic twins raised apart is more similar than the subjective well-being
of heterozygous twins raised together. Among the heritable factors making a
significant contribution to high subjective well-being are low trait
neuroticism, high trait extraversion, absence of alcoholism, and absence of
major depression. In contrast to tested intelligence, when heritable variables
are controlled, subjective well-being is not affected by environmental factors
like income, parental social class, age, and education.
If subjective well-being were mainly due to the meeting of basic needs,
then there should be a relatively low correlation between subjective wellbeing in work and subjective well-being in recreational settings or subjective
well-being in social versus subjective well-being in solitary settings. Because
women experience more objective clinical depression than men, the fact that
gender is not a determining factor in subjective well-being is interesting. One
explanation is that women appear to report both positive and negative affects
more vividly than men. In one study, gender accounted for only 1 percent of
the variance in happiness, but 13 percent of the variance in the intensity of
reported emotional experiences.
Other Sources of Well-Being. In some instances, the environment can be
critical to subjective well-being. Young widows remain subjectively
depressed for years. Even though their poverty has been endured for
centuries, respondents in impoverished nations, like India and Nigeria, report
lower subjective well-being than other, more prosperous nations. The loss of
a child never stops aching. Although achieving concrete goals like money
and fame does not lead to a sustained increase in subjective well-being, social
comparison, such as seeing a neighbor become more prosperous than you,
can exert a negative effect on subjective well-being.
The maintenance of self-efficacy, agency, and autonomy make additional
environmental contributions to subjective well-being. For example, elders
will use their discretionary income to live independently, even though this
means living alone rather than with relatives. Subjective well-being is usually
higher in democracies than in dictatorships. Assuming responsibility for
favorable or unfavorable outcomes (internalization) is another major factor
leading to subjective well-being. Placing the blame elsewhere
(externalization) significantly reduces subjective well-being. In other words,


<<<PAGE 3259>>>
the mental mechanisms of paranoia and projection make people feel worse
rather than better.
Refined methods of measurement of subjective states of mind have
included the Positive and Negative Affect Scale (PANAS), which assesses
both positive and negative affect, each with 10 affect items. The Satisfaction
with Life Scale represents the most recent evolution of a general life
satisfaction scale. Most recently, the widely validated Short Form 36 (SF-36)
has allowed clinicians to assess the subjective cost/benefits of clinical
interventions. Because short-lived environmental variables can distort
subjective well-being, a consensus is emerging that naturalistic experiencesampling methods are the most valid way to assess subjective well-being.
With such sampling methods, research subjects are contacted at random times
during the day for several days or weeks and asked to assess their subjective
well-being. Finally, to tease verbal self-report from actual subjective
experience, physiologic measures of stress (e.g., measuring galvanic skin
response and salivary cortisol and filming facial expression by concealed
cameras) have also proven useful.
Model F: Mental Health as Resilience
There are three broad classes of coping mechanisms that humans use to
overcome stressful situations. First, there is how an individual elicits help
from appropriate others: Namely consciously seeking social support. Second,
there are conscious cognitive strategies that individuals intentionally use to
master stress. Third, there are adaptive involuntary coping mechanisms (often
called “defense mechanisms”) that distort our perception of internal and
external reality to reduce subjective distress, anxiety, and depression.
Involuntary Coping Mechanisms. Involuntary coping mechanisms
reduce conflict and cognitive dissonance during sudden changes in internal
and external reality. If such changes, in reality, are not “distorted” and
“denied,” they can result in disabling anxiety or depression, or both. Such
homeostatic mental “defenses” shield us from sudden changes in the four
lodestars of conflict: impulse (affect and emotion), reality, people
(relationships), and social learning (conscience). First, such involuntary
mental mechanisms can restore psychological homeostasis by ignoring or


<<<PAGE 3260>>>
deflecting sudden increases in the lodestar of impulse—affect and emotion.
Psychoanalysts call this lodestar “id,” religious fundamentalists call it “sin,”
cognitive psychologists call it “hot cognition,” and neuroanatomists point to
the hypothalamic and limbic regions of the brain.
Second, such involuntary mental mechanisms can provide a mental timeout to adjust to sudden changes in reality and self-image, which cannot be
immediately integrated. Individuals who initially responded to the television
images of the sudden destruction of New York City’s World Trade Center as
if it were a movie provide a vivid example of the denial of an external reality
that was changing too fast for voluntary adaptation. Sudden good news—the
instant transition from student to a physician or winning the lottery—can
evoke involuntary mental mechanisms as often as can an unexpected accident
or a diagnosis of leukemia.
Third, involuntary mental mechanisms can mitigate sudden unresolvable
conflict with important people, living or dead. People become a lodestar of
conflict when one cannot live with them and cannot live without them. Death
is such an example; another is an unexpected proposal of marriage. Internal
representations of essential people may continue to cause conflict for decades
after they are dead yet continue to evoke an involuntary mental response.
Finally, the fourth source of conflict or anxious depression is social
learning or conscience. Psychoanalysts call it “superego,” anthropologists
call it “taboos,” behaviorists call it “conditioning,” and neuroanatomists point
to the associative cortex and the amygdala. This lodestar is not just the result
of admonitions from our parents that we absorb before age 5 years, but it is
formed by our whole identification, with culture, and sometimes by
irreversible learning resulting from overwhelming trauma.
Healthy Involuntary Mental Mechanisms. Longitudinal studies from
both Berkeley’s Institute of Human Development and Harvard’s Study of
Adult Development have illustrated the importance of the mature defenses to
mental health.
HUMOR. Humor makes life easier. With humor, one sees all, feels much, but

does not act. Humor permits the discharge of emotion without individual
discomfort and unpleasant effects upon others. Mature humor allows
individuals to look directly at what is painful, whereas dissociation and


<<<PAGE 3261>>>
slapstick distract them. However, like the other mature defenses, humor
requires the same delicacy as building a house of cards—timing is
everything.
ALTRUISM. When used to master conflict, altruism involves an individual

getting pleasure from giving to others what the individual would have liked
to receive. For example, using reaction formation, a former alcohol abuser
works to ban alcohol in his town and annoys his social drinking friends.
Using altruism, the same former alcoholic serves as an Alcoholics
Anonymous sponsor to a new member—achieving a transformative process
that may be lifesaving to both the giver and receiver. Many acts of altruism
involve a free will, but others involuntarily soothe unmet needs.
SUBLIMATION. The sign of a successful sublimation is neither careful cost

accounting nor shrewd compromise, but rather psychic alchemy. By analogy,
sublimation permits the oyster to transform an irritating grain of sand into a
pearl. In writing his Ninth Symphony, the deaf, angry, and lonely Beethoven
transformed his pain into triumph by putting Schiller’s “Ode to Joy” to
music.
SUPPRESSION. Suppression is a defense that modulates emotional conflict or

internal/external stressors through stoicism. Suppression minimizes and
postpones but does not ignore gratification. Empirically, this is the defense
most highly associated with other facets of mental health. Effective
suppression is analogous to a well-trimmed sail; every restriction is precisely
calculated to exploit, not hide, the winds of passion. Evidence that
suppression is not merely a conscious “cognitive strategy” is provided by the
fact that jails would empty if delinquents could learn just to say “No.”
ANTICIPATION. If suppression reflects the capacity to keep current impulse in

mind and control it, anticipation is the capacity to keep the affective response
to an unbearable future event in mind in manageable doses. The defense of
anticipation reflects the capacity to perceive future danger affectively and
cognitively and by this means to master conflict in small steps. Examples are
that moderate amounts of anxiety before surgery promote postsurgical
adaptation and that anticipatory mourning facilitates the adaptation of parents


<<<PAGE 3262>>>
of children with leukemia.
Psychiatry needs to understand how best to facilitate the transmutation of
less-adaptive defenses into more-adaptive defenses. One suggestion has been
first to increase social supports and interpersonal safety and second, to
facilitate the intactness of the central nervous system (e.g., rest, nutrition, and
sobriety). The newer forms of integrative psychotherapies using videotape
can also catalyze such change by allowing patients actually to see their
involuntary coping style.


<<<PAGE 3263>>>
34.3 Contributions from the Sociocultural
Sciences
SOCIOBIOLOGY AND ETHOLOGY
Sociobiology
The term sociobiology was coined in 1975 by Edward Osborne Wilson, an
American biologist whose book, called Sociobiology, emphasized the role of
evolution in shaping behavior. Sociobiology is the study of human behavior
based on the transmission and modification of genetically influenced
behavioral traits. It explores the ultimate question of why specific behaviors
or other phenotypes came to be.
Evolution. Evolution is described as any change in the genetic makeup of a
population. It is the foundational paradigm from which all of biology arises.
It unites ethology, population biology, ecology, anthropology, game theory,
and genetics. Charles Darwin (1809–1882) posited that natural selection
operates via differential reproduction, in a competitive environment, whereby
specific individuals are more successful than others. Given that differences
among individuals are at least somewhat heritable, any comparative
advantage will result in a gradual redistribution of traits in succeeding
generations, such that favored characteristics will be represented in a more
significant proportion over time. In Darwin’s terminology, fitness meant
reproductive success.
COMPETITION. Animals vie with one another for resources and territory, the

area that is defended for the exclusive use of the animal, and that ensures
access to food and reproduction. The ability of one animal to defend a
disputed territory or resource is called resource holding potential, and the
more significant this potential, the more successful the animal.
AGGRESSION. Aggression serves both to increase territory and to eliminate


<<<PAGE 3264>>>
competitors. Defeated animals can emigrate, disperse, or remain in the social
group as subordinate animals. A dominance hierarchy in which animals are
associated with subtle but well-defined ways is part of every social pattern.
REPRODUCTION. Because behavior is influenced by heredity, those behaviors

that promote reproduction and survival are among the most important. Men
tend to have a higher variance in reproductive success than do women, thus
inclining men to be competitive with other men. Male–male competition can
take various forms; for example, sperm can be thought of as competing for
access to the ovum. Competition among women, although genuine, typically
involves social undermining rather than overt violence. Sexual dimorphism,
or different behavioral patterns for males and females, evolves to ensure the
maintenance of resources and reproduction.
Sociobiologists define altruism as behavior that reduces the
personal reproductive success of the initiator while increasing that of the
recipient. According to the traditional Darwinian theory, altruism should not
occur in nature because, by definition, selection acts against any trait whose
effect is to decrease its representation in future generations. However, an
array of altruistic behaviors occurs among free-living mammals as well as
humans. In a sense, altruism is selfishness at the level of the gene rather than
at the level of the individual animal. A classic case of altruism is the female
worker classes of individual wasps, bees, and ants. These workers are sterile
and do not reproduce, but labor altruistically for the reproductive success of
the queen.
Another possible mechanism for the evolution of altruism is group
selection. If groups containing altruists are more successful than those
composed entirely of selfish members, the altruistic groups succeed at the
expense of the selfish ones, and altruism evolves. However, within each
group, altruists are at a severe disadvantage relative to selfish members;
however well the group as a whole does.
ALTRUISM.

Evolutionary theory provides possible
explanations for some disorders. Some may be manifestations of adaptive
strategies. For example, cases of anorexia nervosa may be partially
understood as a strategy ultimately caused to delay mate selection,
IMPLICATIONS

FOR

PSYCHIATRY.


<<<PAGE 3265>>>
reproduction, and maturation in situations where males are perceived as
scarce. Persons who take risks may do so to obtain resources and gain social
influence. An erotomanic delusion in a single postmenopausal woman may
represent an attempt to compensate for the painful recognition of
reproductive failure.
Studies of Identical Twins Reared Apart: Nature versus Nurture.
Studies in sociobiology have stimulated one of the oldest debates in
psychology. Does human behavior owe more to nature or to nurture?
Curiously, humans readily accept that genes determine most of the behaviors
of nonhumans, but tend to attribute their behavior almost exclusively to
nurture. However, recent data unequivocally identify our genetic endowment
as equally important, if not more important, factors.
The best “experiments of nature” permitting an assessment of the relative
influences of nature and nurture are cases of genetically identical twins
separated in infancy and raised in different social environments. If nurture is
the most important determinant of behavior, they should behave differently.
On the other hand, if nature dominates, each will closely resemble the other,
despite their having never met. Several hundred pairs of twins separated in
infancy, raised in separate environments, and then reunited in adulthood have
been rigorously analyzed. Nature has emerged as a critical determinant of
human behavior.
Laura R and Catherine S were reunited at the age of 35. They were
identical twins that had been adopted by two different families in
Chicago. Growing up, neither twin was aware of the other’s existence. As
children, each twin had a cat named Lucy, and both habitually cracked
their knuckles. Laura and Catherine each began to have migraine
headaches beginning at the age of 14. Both were elected valedictorian of
their high school classes and majored in journalism in college. Each sister
had married a man named John and had given birth to a daughter in
wedlock. Both of their marriages fell apart within 2 years. Each twin
maintained a successful rose garden and took morning spin classes at
their local fitness center. Upon meeting, each twin discovered that the
other had also named her daughter Erin and owned a German Sheppard


<<<PAGE 3266>>>
named Rufus. They had similar voices, hand gestures, and mannerisms.
Jack Y and Oskar S, identical twins born in Trinidad in 1933 and
separated in infancy by their parents’ divorce, were first reunited at age
46. His Catholic mother and grandmother raised Oskar in Nazi-occupied
Sudetenland, Czechoslovakia. Jack was raised by his Orthodox Jewish
father in Trinidad and spent time on an Israeli kibbutz. Each wore aviator
glasses and a blue sport shirt with shoulder plackets, had a trim mustache,
liked sweet liqueurs, stored rubber bands on his wrists, read books and
magazines from back to front, dipped buttered toast in his coffee, flushed
the toilet before and after using it, enjoyed sneezing loudly in crowded
elevators to frighten other passengers, and routinely fell asleep at night
while watching television. Each was impatient, squeamish about germs,
and gregarious.
Bessie and Jessie, identical twins, separated at 8 months of age after
their mother’s death, were first reunited at age 18. Each had had a bout of
tuberculosis, and they had similar voices, energy levels, administrative
talents, and decision-making styles. Each had had her hair cut short in
early adolescence. Jessie had a college-level education, whereas Bessie
had had only 4 years of formal education, yet Bessie scored 156 on
intelligence quotient testing, and Jessie scored 153. Each read avidly,
which may have compensated for Bessie’s sparse education; she created
an environment compatible with her inherited potential.
Neuropsychological Testing Results. The dominant influence of
genetics on behavior has been documented in several sets of identical twins
on the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI). Twins reared
apart generally showed the same degree of genetic influence across the
different scales as twins reared together. For example, despite being reared on
different continents, in countries with different political systems and different
languages, two particularly fascinating identical twin pairs generated scores
more closely correlated across 13 MMPI scales than the already tight
correlation noted among all tested identical twin pairs, most of whom had
shared similar rearing.
Reared-apart twin studies report a high correlation (r = 0.75) for IQ
similarity. In contrast, the IQ correlation for reared-apart nonidentical twin


<<<PAGE 3267>>>
siblings is 0.38, and for sibling pairs in general, it is in the 0.45 to 0.50 range.
Strikingly, IQ similarities are not influenced by similarities in access to
dictionaries, telescopes, and original artwork, in parental education and
socioeconomic status, or characteristic parenting practices. These data overall
suggest that tested intelligence is determined roughly two-thirds by genes and
one-third by the environment.
Studies of reared-apart identical twins reveal a genetic influence on alcohol
use, substance abuse, childhood antisocial behavior, adult antisocial behavior,
risk aversion, and visuomotor skills, as well as on psychophysiological
reactions to music, voices, sudden noises, and other stimulation, as revealed
by brain wave patterns and skin conductance tests. Moreover, reared-apart
identical twins show that genetic influence is pervasive, affecting virtually
every measured behavioral trait. For example, many individual preferences
previously assumed to be due to nurture (e.g., religious interests, social
attitudes, vocational interests, job satisfaction, and work values) are strongly
determined by nature.
A selected glossary of some terms used in this section and other ethologic
terms is given in Table 34-8.
Table 34-8
Selected Glossary of Ethologic Terms
Action-specific
energy

Energy associated with the innate releasing
mechanism and specific to a particular
behavior pattern, which builds up if the
releasing stimulus is not present to activate
the behavior pattern; conversely, it is depleted
by repetition.

Aggression

Intraspecific conflict manifested by physical
attack or social signaling.

Appetitive
behavior

Phase of behavior involving the active seeking of
sign stimuli and thought to be driven by actionspecific energy accumulating through
inactivity of the specific behavior pattern.


<<<PAGE 3268>>>
Consummatory
response

Phase of behavior whereby the energy driving the
appetitive phase is released. Involves the
perception of sign stimuli, the activation of the
innate releasing mechanism (IRM), and the
performance of the fixed action pattern (FAP).

Critical period

The time during which imprinting must occur,
usually shortly after birth or early in life. Also
known as “sensitive period.”

Displacement
activity

A set of behavior patterns occurring alongside an
unrelated set of behavior patterns. Originally,
irrelevant movements from one behavioral
system occurring in the presence of powerful
but thwarted drive from another behavior
system.

Ethology

The biologic study of behavior. From the Greek
ethos, meaning custom, usage, manner, habit.
The modern usage is attributed to Oskar
Heinroth, Konrad Lorenz’s teacher.

Fixed action
pattern (FAP)

A genetically determined behavior pattern that is
initiated by stimuli particular to the pattern and
that consists of species-specific, stereotyped
movements.

Imprinting

A specialized form of learning occurring early in
life and often influencing behavior later in life.
The exposure to the stimulus situation must
occur during a particular period, the critical
period, and the exposure can be of short
duration and without obvious reward. The
learning is particularly resistant to change.

Innate

Genetically determined behavior patterns; in
theory not influenced by experience.

Innate releasing

Sensory mechanism selectively responsive to


<<<PAGE 3269>>>
mechanism
(IRM)

specific external stimuli and responsible for
triggering the stereotyped motor response.

Instinct

A developmental process resulting in speciestypical behavior.

Redirection
activity

The venting of one drive from two or more
incompatible, but simultaneously activated,
drives on some third animal or object.

Ritualization

Process of a behavior pattern being incorporated
through evolution into a primary signaling
function, frequently with exaggeration and
embellishment of some of the movements.

Courtesy of William T. McKinney, Jr., M.D.

Ethology
The systematic study of animal behavior is known as ethology. In 1973, the
Nobel Prize in psychiatry and medicine was awarded to three ethologists,
Karl von Frisch, Konrad Lorenz, and Nikolaas Tinbergen. Those awards
highlighted the particular relevance of ethology, not only for medicine but
also for psychiatry.
Konrad Lorenz. Born in Austria, Konrad Lorenz (1903–1989) is best
known for his studies of imprinting. Imprinting implies that, during a specific
short period of development, a young animal is highly sensitive to a specific
stimulus that then, but not at other times, provokes a specific behavior
pattern. Lorenz described newly hatched goslings programmed to follow a
moving object and thereby become imprinted rapidly to follow it and,
possibly, similar objects. Typically, the mother is the first moving object the
gosling sees, but should it see something else first, the gosling follows it. For
instance, a gosling imprinted by Lorenz followed him and refused to follow a
goose (Fig. 34-17). Imprinting is an essential concept for psychiatrists to
understand to link early developmental experiences with later behaviors.
Lorenz also studied the behaviors that function as sign stimuli—that is,
social releasers—in communications between individual animals of the same
species. Many signals have the character of fixed motor patterns that appear


<<<PAGE 3270>>>
automatically; the reaction of other members of the species to the signals is
equally automatic.
Lorenz is also well known for his study of aggression. He wrote about the
practical function of aggression, such as territorial defense by fish and birds.
Aggression among members of the same species is common, but Lorenz
pointed out that in normal conditions, it seldom leads to killing or even to
serious injury. Although animals attack one another, a certain balance appears
between tendencies to fight and flight, with the tendency to fight to be
strongest in the center of the territory and the tendency to flight strongest at a
distance from the center.


<<<PAGE 3271>>>
FIGURE 34-17
In a famous experiment, Konrad Lorenz demonstrated that goslings responded to
him as if he were the natural mother. (Reprinted from Hess EH. Imprinting, an
effect of early experience, imprinting determines later social behavior in animals.
Science. 1959;130(3368):133–141, with permission.)

In many works, Lorenz tried to draw conclusions from his ethologic
studies of animals that could also be applied to human problems. The
postulation of a primary need for aggression in humans, cultivated by the


<<<PAGE 3272>>>
pressure for selecting the best territory, is a primary example. Such a need
may have served a practical purpose historically, when humans lived in small
groups that had to defend themselves from other groups. Competition with
neighboring groups could become an important factor in selection. Lorenz
pointed out, however, that this once useful trait may be outliving its survival
value, now that we live in an era with weapons that can kill not just
individuals but entire populations.
Nikolaas Tinbergen. Born in the Netherlands, Nikolaas Tinbergen (1907–
1988), a British zoologist, conducted a series of experiments to analyze
various aspects of animal behavior. He was also successful in quantifying
behavior and measuring the power or strength of various stimuli in eliciting
specific behavior. Tinbergen described displacement activities, which have
been studied mainly in birds. For example, in a conflict situation, when the
needs for fight and flight are of roughly equal strength, birds sometimes do
neither. Instead, they display behavior that appears to be irrelevant to the
situation (e.g., a herring gull defending its territory can start to pick grass).
Displacement activities of this kind vary according to the situation and the
species concerned. Humans can engage in displacement activities when under
stress.
Lorenz and Tinbergen described innate releasing mechanisms, animals’
responses triggered by releasers, which are specific environmental stimuli.
Releasers (including shapes, colors, and sounds) evoke sexual, aggressive, or
other responses. For example, big eyes in human infants evoke more
caretaking behavior than do small eyes.
In his later work, Tinbergen, along with his wife, studied early childhood
autistic disorder. They began by observing the behavior of autistic and typical
children when they meet strangers, analogous to the techniques used in
observing animal behavior. In particular, they observed in animals the
conflict between fear and the need for contact and noted that the conflict
could lead to behavior similar to that of autistic children. They hypothesized
that, in certain predisposed children, fear can greatly predominate and can
also be provoked by stimuli that generally have a positive social value for
most children. This innovative approach to studying infantile autistic disorder
opened up new avenues of inquiry. Although their conclusions about
preventive measures and treatment must be considered tentative, their method


<<<PAGE 3273>>>
shows how ethology and clinical psychiatry can relate to each other.
Karl von Frisch. Born in Austria, Karl von Frisch (1886–1982) conducted
studies on changes of color in fish and demonstrated that fish could learn to
distinguish among several colors and that their sense of color was somewhat
congruent with that of humans. He later went on to study the color vision and
behavior of bees and is most widely known for his analysis of how bees
communicate with one another—that is, their language, or what is known as
their dances. His description of the exceedingly complex behavior of bees
prompted an investigation of communication systems in other animal species,
including humans.
Characteristics of Human Communication. Communication is
traditionally seen as an interaction in which a minimum of two participants—
a sender and a receiver—share the same goal: exchanging accurate
information. Although shared interest in accurate communication remains
valid in some domains of animal signaling—notably such well-documented
cases as the “dance of the bees,” whereby foragers inform other workers
about the location of food sources—a more selfish and, in the case of social
interaction, more accurate model of animal communication has mostly
replaced this concept.
Sociobiologic analyses of communication emphasize that because
individuals are genetically distinct, their evolutionary interests are similarly
distinct, although admittedly with significant fitness overlap, especially
among kin, reciprocators, parents and offspring, and mated pairs. Senders are
motivated to convey information that induces the receivers to behave in a
manner that enhances the senders’ fitness. Receivers, similarly, are interested
in responding to communication only insofar as such a response enhances
their fitness. One crucial way to enhance reliability is to make the signal
costly; for example, an animal could honestly indicate its physical fitness,
freedom from parasites and other pathogens, and possibly its genetic quality
as well by growing elaborate and metabolically expensive secondary sexual
characteristics such as the oversized tail of a peacock. Human beings,
similarly, can signal their wealth by conspicuous consumption. This
approach, known as the handicap principle, suggests that effective
communication may require that the signaler engages in exceptionally costly


<<<PAGE 3274>>>
behavior to ensure success.
Subhuman Primate Development
An area of animal research that has relevance to human behavior and
psychopathology is the longitudinal study of nonhuman primates. Monkeys
have been observed from birth to maturity, not only in their natural habitats
and laboratory facsimiles but also in laboratory settings that involve various
degrees of social deprivation early in life. Social deprivation has been
produced through two predominant conditions: social isolation and
separation. Socially isolated monkeys are raised in varying degrees of
isolation and are not permitted to develop normal attachment bonds.
Monkeys separated from their primary caretakers, thereby experience
disruption of an already developed bond. Social isolation techniques illustrate
the effects of an infant’s early social environment on subsequent
development (Figs. 34-18 and 34-19), and separation techniques illustrate the
effects of loss of a significant attachment figure. The name most associated
with isolation and separation studies is Harry Harlow. A summary of
Harlow’s work is presented in Table 34-9.
In a series of experiments, Harlow separated rhesus monkeys from their
mothers during their first weeks. During this time, the monkey infant depends
on its mother for nourishment and protection, and physical warmth and
emotional security—contact comfort, as Harlow first termed it in 1958.
Harlow substituted a surrogate mother made from wire or cloth for the real
mother. The infants preferred the cloth-covered surrogate mother, which
provided contact comfort, to the wire-covered surrogate, which provided food
but no contact comfort (Fig. 34-20).
Treatment of Abnormal Behavior. Stephen Suomi demonstrated that
monkey isolates could be rehabilitated if exposed to monkeys that promote
physical contact without threatening the isolates with aggression or overly
complex play interactions. These monkeys were called therapist monkeys. To
fill such a therapeutic role, Suomi chose normal young monkeys that would
play gently with the isolates and approach and cling to them. Within 2 weeks,
the isolates were reciprocating the social contact, and their incidence of
abnormal self-directed behaviors began to decline significantly. By the end of


<<<PAGE 3275>>>
the 6-month therapy period, the isolates were actively initiating play bouts
with both the therapists and each other, and most of their self-directed
behaviors had disappeared. The isolates were observed closely for the next 2
years, and their improved behavioral repertoires did not regress over time.
The results of this and subsequent monkey-therapist studies underscored the
potential reversibility of early cognitive and social deficits at the human level.
The studies also served as a model for developing treatments for socially
retarded and withdrawn children.

FIGURE 34-18
Social isolate after removal of isolation screen.

Several investigators have argued that social separation manipulations with
nonhuman primates provide a compelling basis for animal models of


<<<PAGE 3276>>>
depression and anxiety. Some monkeys react to separations with behavioral
and physiologic symptoms similar to those seen in depressed human patients;
both ECT and tricyclic drugs effectively reverse the symptoms in monkeys.
Not all separations produce depressive reactions in monkeys, just as
separation does not always precipitate depression in humans, young and old.

FIGURE 34-19
Choo-choo phenomenon in peer-only-reared infant rhesus monkeys.

Table 34-9
Social Deprivation in Nonhuman Primates
Type of
Social
Deprivation

Effects

Total isolation
(not
allowed to
develop

Self-orality, self-clasping, very fearful when placed
with peers, unable to copulate. If impregnated,
female is unable to nurture young (motherless
mothers). If isolation goes beyond 6 mo, no


<<<PAGE 3277>>>
caretaker
or peer
bond)

recovery is possible.

Mother-only
reared

Fails to leave mother and explore. Terrified when
finally exposed to peers. Unable to play or to
copulate.

Peer-only
reared

Engages in self-orality, grasps others in clinging
manner, easily frightened, reluctant to explore,
timid as adult, play is minimal.

Partial
Stares vacantly into space, engages in selfisolation
mutilation, stereotyped behavior patterns.
(can see,
hear, and
smell other
monkeys)
Separation
Initial protest stage changing to despair 48 hours
(taken from
after separation; refuses to play. Rapid
caretaker
reattachment when returned to mother.
after bond
has
developed)
Adapted from work of Harry Harlow, M.D.

Individual Differences. Recent research has revealed that some rhesus
monkey infants consistently display fearfulness and anxiety in situations
where similarly reared peers to show normal exploratory behavior and play.
These situations generally involve exposure to a novel object or situation.
Once the object or situation has become familiar, any behavioral differences
between the anxiety-prone, timid infants and their outgoing peers disappear,
but the individual differences appear to be stable during development. Infant
monkeys at 3 to 6 months of age that are at high risk for fearful or anxious
reactions tend to remain at high risk for such reactions, at least until
adolescence.


<<<PAGE 3278>>>
A long-term follow-up study of these monkeys has revealed some
behavioral differences between fearful and nonfearful female monkeys when
they become adults and have their first infants. Usually, fearful female
monkeys who grow up in socially benign and stable environments become
fine mothers, but fearful female monkeys who have reacted with depression
to frequent social separations during childhood are at high risk for maternal
dysfunction; more than 80 percent of these mothers either neglect or abuse
their first offspring. However, nonfearful female monkeys that encounter the
same number of social separations but do not react to any of these separations
with depression turn out to be good mothers.
Experimental Disorders
Stress Syndromes. Several researchers, including Ivan Petrovich Pavlov
in Russia and W. Horsley Gantt and Howard Scott Liddell in the United
States, studied the effects of stressful environments on animals, such as dogs
and sheep. Pavlov produced a phenomenon in dogs, which he labeled
experimental neurosis, by using a conditioning technique that led to
symptoms of extreme and persistent agitation. The technique involved
teaching dogs to discriminate between a circle and an ellipse and then
progressively diminishing the difference between them. Gantt used the term
behavior disorders to describe the reactions he elicited from dogs forced into
similar conflictual learning situations. Liddell described the stress response
he obtained in sheep, goats, and dogs as experimental neurasthenia, which
was produced in some cases by merely doubling the number of daily test
trials in an unscheduled manner.


<<<PAGE 3279>>>
FIGURE 34-20
Monkey infant with mother (left) and with cloth-covered surrogate (right).

Learned Helplessness. The learned helplessness model of depression,
developed by Martin Seligman, is an excellent example of an experimental
disorder. Dogs were exposed to electric shocks from which they could not
escape. The dogs eventually gave up and did not attempt to escape new
shocks. The apparent giving up generalized to other situations, and
eventually, the dogs always appeared to be helpless and apathetic. Because
the cognitive, motivational, and affective deficits displayed by the dogs
resembled symptoms common to human depressive disorders, learned
helplessness, although controversial, was proposed as an animal model of
human depression. In connection with learned helplessness and the
expectation of inescapable punishment, research on subjects has revealed
brain release of endogenous opiates, destructive effects on the immune
system, and elevation of the pain threshold.
A social application of this concept involves schoolchildren who have
learned that they fail in school no matter what they do; they view themselves
as helpless losers, and this self-concept causes them to stop trying. Teaching
them to persist may reverse the process, with excellent results in self-respect


<<<PAGE 3280>>>
and school performance.
Unpredictable Stress. Rats subjected to chronic unpredictable stress
(crowding, shocks, irregular feeding, and interrupted sleep time) show
decreases in movement and exploratory behavior; this finding illustrates the
roles of unpredictability and lack of environmental control in producing
stress. These behavioral changes can be reversed by antidepressant
medication. Animals under experimental stress (Fig. 34-21) become tense,
restless, hyperirritable, or inhibited in specific conflict situations.
Dominance. Animals in a dominant position in a hierarchy have certain
advantages (e.g., mating and feeding). Being more dominant than peers is
associated with elation, and a fall in position in the hierarchy is associated
with depression. When persons lose jobs, are replaced in organizations, or
otherwise have their dominance or hierarchical status changed, they can
experience depression.
Temperament. Temperament mediated by genetics plays a role in
behavior. For example, one group of pointer dogs was bred for fearfulness
and a lack of friendliness toward persons, and another group was bred for the
opposite characteristics. The phobic dogs were extremely timid and fearful
and showed decreased exploratory capacity, increased startle response, and
cardiac arrhythmias. Benzodiazepines diminished these fearful, anxious
responses. Amphetamines and cocaine aggravated the responses of
genetically nervous dogs to a greater extent than they did the responses of
stable dogs.
Brain Stimulation. Pleasurable sensations have been produced in humans
and animals through self-stimulation of specific brain areas, such as the
medial forebrain bundle, the septal area, and the lateral hypothalamus. Rats
have engaged in repeated self-stimulation (2,000 stimulations per hour) to
gain rewards. Catecholamine production increases with self-stimulation of
the brain area, and drugs that decrease catecholamines decrease the process.
The centers for sexual pleasure and opioid reception are closely related
anatomically. Heroin addicts report that the so-called rush after intravenous
injection of heroin is akin to an intense sexual orgasm.


<<<PAGE 3281>>>
Pharmacologic Syndromes. With the emergence of biologic psychiatry,
many researchers have used pharmacologic means to produce syndrome
analogs in animal subjects. Two classic examples are the reserpine (Serpasil)
model of depression and the amphetamine psychosis model of paranoid
schizophrenia. In the depression studies, animals given the norepinephrinedepleting drug reserpine exhibited behavioral abnormalities analogous to
major depressive disorder in humans. The behavioral abnormalities produced
were generally reversed by antidepressant drugs. These studies tended to
corroborate the theory that depression in humans is, in part, the result of
diminished levels of norepinephrine. Similarly, animals given amphetamines
acted in a stereotypical, inappropriately aggressive, and frightened manner
that resembled paranoid psychotic symptoms in humans. These models are
considered too simplistic in their concepts of cause, but they remain as early
paradigms for this type of research.


<<<PAGE 3282>>>
FIGURE 34-21
The monkey on the left, known as the executive monkey, controls whether both
will receive an electric shock. The decision-making task produces a state of
chronic tension. Note the more relaxed attitude of the monkey on the right. (From
U.S. Army photographs, with permission.)

Studies have also been done on the effects of catecholamine-depleting
drugs on monkeys during separation and reunion periods. These studies
showed that catecholamine depletion and social separation could interact in a


<<<PAGE 3283>>>
highly synergistic fashion and yield depressive symptoms in subjects for
whom mere separation or low-dose treatment alone does not suffice to
produce depression.
Reserpine has produced a severe depression in humans and, as a result, is
rarely used as either an antihypertensive (its original indication) or an
antipsychotic. Similarly, amphetamine and its congeners (including cocaine)
can induce psychotic behavior in persons who use it in overdose or over long
periods.
Sensory Deprivation
The history of sensory deprivation and its potentially deleterious effects
evolved from instances of aberrant mental behavior in explorers, shipwrecked
sailors, and prisoners in solitary confinement. Toward the end of World War
II, startling confessions, induced by the brainwashing prisoners of war,
caused a rise of interest in this psychological phenomenon brought about by
the deliberate diminution of sensory input.
To test the hypothesis that an essential element in brainwashing is
prolonged exposure to sensory isolation, D. O. Hebb and his coworkers
brought solitary confinement into the laboratory. They demonstrated that
volunteer subjects—under conditions of visual, auditory, and tactile
deprivation for periods of up to 7 days—reacted with increased suggestibility.
Some subjects also showed characteristic symptoms of the sensory
deprivation state: anxiety, tension, inability to concentrate or organize
thoughts, increased suggestibility, body illusions, somatic complaints, intense
subjective emotional distress, and vivid sensory imagery—usually visual and
sometimes reaching the proportions of hallucinations with a delusionary
quality.
Psychological Theories. Anticipating psychological explanation,
Sigmund Freud wrote: “It is interesting to speculate what could happen to
ego function if the excitations or stimuli from the external world were either
drastically diminished or repetitive. Would there be an alteration in the
unconscious mental processes and an effect upon the conceptualization of
time?”
Indeed, under conditions of sensory deprivation, the abrogation of such


<<<PAGE 3284>>>
ego functions as perceptual contact with reality and logical thinking brings
about confusion, irrationality, fantasy formation, hallucinatory activity, and
wish-dominated mental reactions. In the sensory-deprivation situation, the
subject becomes dependent on the experimenter and must trust the
experimenter to satisfy such basic needs as feeding, toileting, and physical
safety. A patient undergoing psychoanalysis may be in a kind of sensory
deprivation room (e.g., a soundproof room with dim lights and a couch) in
which primary-process mental activity is encouraged through free
association.
COGNITIVE. Cognitive theories stress that the organism is an information-

processing machine, whose purpose is an optimal adaptation to the perceived
environment. Without sufficient information, the machine cannot form a
cognitive map against which the current experience is matched.
Disorganization and maladaptation then result. To monitor their behavior and
to attain optimal responsiveness, persons must receive continuous feedback;
otherwise, they are forced to project outward idiosyncratic themes that have
little relation to reality. This situation is similar to that of many psychotic
patients.
Physiologic Theories. The maintenance of optimal conscious awareness
and accurate reality testing depends on a necessary state of alertness. This
alert state, in turn, depends on a constant stream of changing stimuli from the
external world, mediated through the ascending reticular activating system in
the brainstem. In the absence or impairment of such a stream, as occurs in
sensory deprivation, alertness drops away, direct contact with the outside
world diminishes, and impulses from the inner body and the central nervous
system may gain prominence. For example, idioretinal phenomena, inner ear
noise, and somatic illusions may take on a hallucinatory character.

TRANSCULTURAL PSYCHIATRY
Culture is defined as a set of meanings, norms, beliefs, values, and behavior
patterns shared by people. These values include social relationships,
language, nonverbal expression of thoughts and emotions, moral and
religious beliefs, rituals, technology, and economic beliefs and practices,


<<<PAGE 3285>>>
among other items. Culture has six essential components: (1) Culture is
learned; (2) culture can be passed on from one generation to the next; (3)
culture involves a set of meanings in which words, behaviors, events, and
symbols have meanings agreed upon by the cultural group; (4) culture acts as
a template to shape and orient future behaviors and perspectives within and
between generations, and to take account of novel situations encountered by
the group; (5) culture exists in a constant state of change; and (6) culture
includes patterns of both subjective and objective components of human
behavior. Also, culture shapes which and how psychiatric symptoms are
expressed; culture influences the meanings that are given to symptoms; and
culture affects the interaction between the patient and the health care system,
as well as between the patient and the physician and other clinicians with
whom the patient and family interact.
Race is a concept, the scientific validity of which is now considered highly
questionable, by which human beings are grouped primarily by
physiognomy. Its effect on individuals and groups, however, is considerable,
due to its reference to physical, biologic, and genetic underpinnings, and
because of the intensely emotional meanings and responses, it generates.
Ethnicity refers to the subjective sense of belonging to a group of people with
a common national or regional origin and shared beliefs, values, and
practices, including religion. It is part of every person’s identity and selfimage.
Cultural Formulation
Culture plays a role in mental health and mental illness; therefore, a cultural
assessment should be a component of every complete psychiatric assessment.
The outline for cultural formulation found in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) is intended to give clinicians a
framework for assessing the role of culture in psychiatric illness. Its purposes
are (1) to enhance the application of diagnostic criteria in multicultural
environments; (2) cultural conceptualizations of distress; (3) psychosocial
stressors and cultural features of vulnerability and resilience; (4) to enable the
clinician to systematically describe the patient’s cultural and social reference
groups and their relevance to clinical care; and (5) to identify the effect that
cultural differences may have on the relationship between the patient and


<<<PAGE 3286>>>
family and the treating clinician, as well as how such cultural differences
affect the course and the outcome of treatment provided.
The outline for cultural formulation consists of five areas of assessment:
(1) cultural identity of the individual; (2) cultural explanations of the
individual’s illness; (3) cultural factors related to psychosocial environment
and levels of functioning; (4) cultural elements of the relationship between
the individual and the clinician; and (5) overall cultural assessment for
diagnosis and care.
Cultural Identity of the Individual. Cultural identity refers to the
characteristics shared by a person’s cultural group. Identity allows for a selfdefinition. Factors that comprise an individual’s cultural identity include race,
ethnicity, country of origin, language use, religious beliefs, socioeconomic
status, migration history, the experience of acculturation, and the degree of
affiliation with the individual’s group of origin. Cultural identity emerges
throughout the individual’s life and in a social context. It is not a fixed trait of
an individual or of the group of which the individual is part. An individual
may have several cultural reference groups.
The clinician should encourage the patient to describe the component
aspects of their cultural identity. Evaluating the cultural identity of the patient
allows identification of potential areas of strength and support that may
enhance treatment effectiveness, as well as vulnerabilities that may interfere
with the progress of treatment. Eliciting this data permits the identification of
unresolved cultural conflicts that may be addressed during treatment. These
conflicts can be between the various aspects of the patient’s identity and
between traditional and mainstream cultural values and behavioral
expectations affecting the individual. Knowledge of the patient’s cultural
identity allows the clinician to avoid misconceptions based on inadequate
background information or stereotypes related to race, ethnicity and other
aspects of cultural identity. Also, it helps build rapport because the clinician
is attempting to understand the individual as a person and not just a
representative of the cultural groups that have shaped the patient’s identity.
Cultural Explanations of the Individual’s Illness. The explanatory
model of illness is the patient’s understanding of and attempts to explain why
they became ill. The explanatory model defines the culturally acceptable


<<<PAGE 3287>>>
means of expression of the symptoms of the illness or idioms of distress, the
particular way individuals within a specific cultural group report symptoms,
and their behavioral response to them heavily influenced by cultural values.
The cultural explanations of illness may also help define the sick role or
behavior the patient assumes. The explanatory model of illness includes the
patient’s beliefs about their prognosis and the treatment options they would
consider. The patient’s explanatory model may be only vaguely
conceptualized or may be quite clearly defined, and it may include several
conceptual perspectives that could conflict with one another. Formulation of
a collaborative model that is acceptable to both the clinician and the patient is
the sought-for endpoint, which would include an agreed-upon set of
symptoms to be treated and an outline of treatment procedures to be used.
Difficulties may arise when there are conceptual differences in the
explanatory model of illness between clinician, patient, family, and
community. Conflicts between the patient’s and the clinician’s explanatory
models may lead to diminished rapport or treatment noncompliance.
Conflicts between the patient’s and the family’s explanatory models of illness
may result in a lack of support from the family and family discord. Conflicts
between the patient’s and the community’s explanatory models could lead to
social isolation and stigmatization of the patient.
Examples of the more common explanatory models of illness include the
moral model, the religious model, the magical or supernatural explanatory
model, the medical model, and the psychosocial stress model. The moral
model implies that the patient’s illness is caused by a moral defect such as
selfishness or moral weakness. The religious model suggests that the patient
is being punished for a religious failing or transgression. The magical or
supernatural explanatory model may involve attributions of sorcery or
witchcraft as being the cause of the symptoms. The medical model attributes
the patient’s illness primarily to a biologic etiology. The psychosocial model
infers that overwhelming psychosocial stressors cause or are primary
contributors to the illness.
Culture has both direct and indirect effects on help-seeking behavior. In
many cultural groups, an individual and their family may minimize
symptoms due to stigma associated with seeking assistance for psychiatric
disorders. Culture affects the patient’s expectations of treatment, such as
whether the clinician should assume an authoritarian, paternalistic,


<<<PAGE 3288>>>
egalitarian, or nondirective demeanor in the treatment process.
Cultural Factors Related to Psychosocial Environment and Level
of Functioning. Understanding the patient’s family dynamics and cultural
values are integral to assessing the patient’s psychosocial environment. The
definition of what constitutes a family and the roles of individuals in the
family differ across cultures. This includes an understanding of the patient’s
cultural group and its relationship to the mainstream culture or cultures. It
includes the patient’s life experience of racial and ethnic discrimination. For
immigrants and refugees, it includes the individual’s and family’s perceptions
of the openness of the host society toward people of their country and region
of origin, their racial, ethnic, religious, and other attributes. The patient and
family may identify strongly or weakly with communal sources of support
familiar from their country or region of origin, or they may identify along the
same gradient with communal sources of support in the host culture.
Cultural Elements of the Relationship between the Individual and
the Clinician. The cultural identity of the clinician and the mental health
team has an impact on patient care. The culture of mental health care
professionals influences diagnosis and treatment. Clinicians who have an
understanding of their own cultural identity may be better prepared to
anticipate the cultural dynamics that may arise in interactions with people of
diverse cultural backgrounds. Unacknowledged differences between the
clinician’s and patient’s cultural identity can result in assessment and
treatment that is unintentionally biased and stressful for all. Clinicians need to
examine their assumptions about other cultures to be optimally effective in
serving the culturally diverse patient populations that are the norm in most
contemporary medical facilities.
Culture influences transference and counter-transference in the clinical
relationship between people seeking psychiatric care and their treating
clinicians. Transference relationships and dynamics are affected when the
patient and clinician have different cultural background characteristics. A
perceived social power differential between the patient and clinician could
lead to overcompliance, resistance in the exploration of family and social
conflict situations, or to the clinician being conceptualized as a cultural role
model or stereotype.


<<<PAGE 3289>>>
Overall Cultural Assessment for Diagnosis and Care. The treatment
plan should include the use of culturally appropriate health care and social
services. Interventions also may be focused on the family and social levels. In
making a psychiatric diagnosis, the clinician should consider principles of
cultural relativism and not fall prone to category fallacy. Many psychiatric
disorders show cross-cultural variation. Objective evaluation of the multiple
possible effects of culture on psychopathology can be a challenging task for
the clinician. Diagnostic dilemmas may arise in dealing with patients of
diverse cultural backgrounds. Some of these dilemmas may include problems
in judging distortion from reality, problems in assessing unfamiliar behaviors
and distinguishing pathologic from normal cultural behavior.
Migration, Acculturation, and Acculturative Stress
From the time of the first significant surge of immigration to the United
States in the 1870s, and for the next 100 years, the predominant national
sentiment toward immigrants, as in most other host countries, was that they
should acculturate to the normative behaviors and values of the majority or
mainstream culture of the host population. Most immigrants had the same
wish to assimilate, to become part of the melting pot. This process of
acculturative change can be seen as unidirectional, as individuals who
identified themselves as part of immigrant, indigenous, and other minority
groups both rejected and progressively lost distinctive aspects of their
cultural heritage in favor of becoming part of the mainstream majority culture
of the host country. In countries that encouraged this outcome of
acculturation, people were expected to progress from unacculturated, through
the gradient of minimally, moderately, and fully acculturated.
The intensity of acculturative stress experienced by immigrant and other
minority groups, and the individuals comprising those groups, has been
directly proportional to the openness of the host government and population.
The central issue is to what extent are immigrants’ and other minority
groups’ customs, values, and differences from the majority population of the
host country accepted, encouraged, and welcomed as an enrichment of the
host country instead of being seen as alien and unwelcome. The acceptance
position encourages the cultural integration of immigrants, whereas the
rejection position encourages either cultural exclusion or cultural


<<<PAGE 3290>>>
assimilation.
To assess the outcome of acculturative stress, for groups and their
component individuals, two determining factors need to be considered. The
first is the extent to which the group and its members value and wish to
preserve their cultural uniqueness, including the language, beliefs, values,
and social behaviors that define the group. The second factor is the mirrorimage issue of the extent to which the group and its members value and wish
to increase their contact and involvement with other groups, particularly the
majority culture. This conceptual framework leads to four possible outcomes
of acculturative stress that are not conceptualized along the unidirectional
gradient from unacculturated to wholly acculturated.
The four possible outcomes are rejection, integration, assimilation, and
marginalization. Rejection is characterized by individuals’ wishes, both
conscious and intuitive, to maintain their cultural integrity, whether by
actively resisting the incorporation of the values and social behavior patterns
of another cultural group or groups with whom they have regular contact or
by disengaging themselves from contact with and the influence of those other
cultural groups. Some religious cults are examples of rejection.
Integration, as an outcome of acculturative stress, derives from the wish to
both maintain a firm sense of one’s cultural heritage and not abandon those
values and behavioral characteristics that define the uniqueness of one’s
culture of origin. At the same time, such individuals can incorporate enough
of the value system and norms of behavior of the other cultural group with
which they interact closely, to feel and behave like members of that cultural
group, principally the majority host culture. Accordingly, the defining feature
of integration is psychological: It is the gradual process of formulation of a
bicultural identity, a sense of self that intertwines the unique characteristics of
two cultures.
Assimilation is the psychological process of the conscious and unconscious
giving up of the unique characteristics of one’s culture of origin in favor of
the more or less complete incorporation of the values and behavioral
characteristics of another cultural group, usually, but not always, the majority
culture. Examples include involuntary migration when war and social
upheaval necessitate such changes for purposes of survival. However, there
are many other life circumstances, including racial, ethnic, and religious
discrimination, that motivate people to overlook, suppress, or deny aspects of


<<<PAGE 3291>>>
their cultural heritage to have a seamless fit within another group. The price
of such an effort, in terms of intrapsychic conflict, can be high.
Marginalization is defined by the psychological characteristics of rejection
or the progressive loss of valuation of one’s cultural heritage, while at the
same time rejecting, or being alienated from, the defining values and
behavioral norms of another cultural group, usually that of the majority
population. This is the psychological outcome of acculturative stress that is
closest to the concept of identity diffusion.
Psychiatric Assessment of Immigrants and Refugees
Migration History. Mental illness among immigrants and refugees may
have been present before migration, may have developed during the
immigration process, such as during months or years living in refugee camps,
or presented for the first time in immigration. The immigration process and
premigration trauma may precipitate the manifestation of underlying
symptoms or result in exacerbation of a preexisting disorder. Obtaining a
thorough migration history will help understand the background and
precipitating stressors and help guide the development of an appropriate
treatment plan.
The premigration history includes inquiry about the patient’s social support
network, social and psychological functioning, and significant premigration
life events. Information about the country and region of origin, the family
history in the country of origin—including an understanding of family
members who may have decided not to immigrate—educational and work
experiences in the country of origin, and prior socioeconomic status should
be obtained. Also, premigration political issues, trauma, war, and natural
disaster faced by the patient and family in the country or region of origin
should be explored. For those who had to escape persecution, warfare, or
natural disaster, what were the means of escape, and what type of trauma was
suffered before and during migration? Traumatic life events are not limited
just to refugees. Immigration may result in losses of social networks,
including family and friends, material losses, business, career, property, and
loss of the cultural milieu, including their familiar community and religious
life. Premigration planning includes reasons for immigrating, duration, and
extent of planning, premigration aspirations, and beliefs about the host


<<<PAGE 3292>>>
country. The type of migration experience, whether as voluntary immigrants
or as unprepared refugees, can have profoundly different effects on migrants’
mental health.
The Mental Status Examination. As with any patient, conducting a
mental status examination is a central component of the psychiatric
examination. However, its interpretation in culturally distinct groups and
immigrant populations requires caution, as it may be culturally biased. The
patient’s response is molded by their culture of origin, educational level, and
type of acculturative adaptation. The components of the standardized mental
status examination are the following: cooperation, appearance, and behavior,
speech, affect, thought process, thought content, cognition, insight, and
judgment. Cultural differences are wide and varied in dress and grooming.
Facial expressions and body movements used in the expression of affect may
be more reflective of normal cultural manifestations than pathology. If the
clinician is unfamiliar with the individual’s culture and the patient’s fluency
in the language of the host country is limited, the clinician must use caution
in interpreting disturbances of speech and thought process, perception, and
affect. The presence of hallucinations, for example, can be easily
misinterpreted, such as hearing encouraging or clarifying comments from
deceased family members, normative experiences in many cultures. The
clinician should not assume that the patient understands what the clinician is
trying to communicate, and miscommunication involving interpreters is a
common problem. The cognitive examination may be particularly tricky.
Education and literacy have an important and biasing role. The patient may
need adequate time to fully express him- or herself through repeating
questions and restating questions to reduce miscommunication. Asking about
the meaning of proverbs unfamiliar to the patient may be an inappropriate
means of determining abstract thinking. An accurate mental status
examination can be accomplished when one allows additional time for
clarification of concepts.
Immigration Acculturation and Mental Health
Many countries have had difficulty coping with the surging numbers of
migrants. This has led to more significant restrictions on migrant numbers,


<<<PAGE 3293>>>
partly in response to public sentiment that the social and cultural integrity of
the nation has become threatened, even undermined, by waves of migrants
from other countries and cultures. During the last 10 years, fears of terrorist
violence and civil disruption have led many countries to adopt increasingly
restrictive and sometimes punitive policies toward legal and illegal migrants,
refugees, and asylum seekers. This trend has been observed in the United
States, in some countries of the European Union, and Australia.
Racial and Ethnic Differences in Psychiatric Disorders in the
United States
Several community-based epidemiologic studies in the United States have
examined the rates of disorders across specific ethnic groups. These studies
have found a lower than expected prevalence of psychiatric disorders among
disadvantaged racial and ethnic minority groups. African Americans were
found to have lower rates of major depression in the Epidemiological
Catchment Area study. The lifetime prevalence rates for major depression for
whites was 5.1 percent; for Hispanics, 4.4 percent; and for African
Americans, 3.1 percent. African Americans, however, had higher rates for all
lifetime disorders combined. This finding of differential rates could be
explained by adjusting for socioeconomic status.
The National Comorbidity Study (NCS) found lower lifetime prevalence
rates of mental illness among African Americans than whites, and in a
particular mood, anxiety, and substance use disorders. The lifetime rates for
mood disorders were 19.8 percent for whites, 17.9 percent for Hispanic
Americans, and 13.7 percent for African Americans. The National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey-III also found lifetime rates of major
depression significantly higher among whites, 9.6 percent, than African
Americans, 6.8 percent, or Mexican Americans, 6.7 percent. Although
African Americans had a lower lifetime risk of mood disorders than whites,
once diagnosed, they were more likely to remain persistently ill.
NCS rates for anxiety disorders were 29.1 percent among whites, 28.4
percent for Hispanic Americans, and 24.7 percent for African Americans.
The rates for lifetime substance use disorders for the three groups, whites,
Hispanic Americans, and African Americans, were 29.5, 22.9, and 13.1
percent. Hispanic Americans, and in particular Mexican Americans, were


<<<PAGE 3294>>>
found to be at lower risk for substance use and anxiety disorders than whites.
In an epidemiologic study conducted in Florida, substantially lower rates
were observed among African Americans for depressive disorders and
substance use disorders. The lower rate for substance use disorders was also
found in the National Epidemiological Survey on Alcohol and Related
Conditions, with whites having a prevalence rate of 1-year alcohol use
disorders of 8.9 percent; Hispanic Americans, 8.9 percent; African
Americans, 6.9 percent; Asian Americans, 4.5 percent; and Native
Americans, 12.2 percent. This study also found lower lifetime rates for major
depression among Hispanic Americans, 10.9 percent, compared to whites,
17.8 percent. In 2007, the National Survey of American Life compared rates
of major depression between Caribbean blacks, African Americans, and
whites. Although there were no significant differences in 1-year prevalence
between the three groups, lifetime rates were highest among whites, 17.9
percent, followed by Caribbean blacks, 12.9 percent, and African Americans,
10.4 percent. The chronicity of major depressive disorder was higher for
African Americans and Caribbean blacks, approximately 56 percent, while
much lower for whites, 38.6 percent. This study was consistent with findings
from the NCS that concluded that members of disadvantaged racial and
ethnic groups in the United States do not have an increased risk for
psychiatric disorders; however, once diagnosed, they do tend to have more
persistent disorders.
Although African Americans have a lower prevalence rate for mood,
anxiety, and substance use disorders, this may not be the case for
schizophrenia. The Child Health and Development Study found that African
Americans were about threefold more likely than whites to be diagnosed with
schizophrenia. The association may be partly explained by African American
families having lower socioeconomic status, a significant risk factor for
schizophrenia.
A more detailed examination of differences across racial groups was
included in the National Comorbidity Study Replication (NCS-R). NonHispanic African Americans and Hispanic Americans were at significantly
lower risk than non-Hispanic whites for anxiety disorders and mood
disorders. Non-Hispanic African Americans had lower rates of substance use
disorders than non-Hispanic whites. More specifically, both minority groups
were at lower risk for depression, generalized anxiety disorder, and social


<<<PAGE 3295>>>
phobia. Also, Hispanic Americans had a lower risk for dysthymia,
oppositional-defiant disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Non-Hispanic African Americans had a lower risk for panic disorder,
substance use disorders, and early-onset impulse-control disorders. The lower
rates among Hispanic Americans and African Americans compared to nonHispanic whites appear to be due to reduced lifetime risk of disorders instead
of the persistence of chronic disorders. The researchers concluded that the
pattern of racial–ethnic differences in risk for psychiatric disorders suggests
the presence of protective factors that originate in childhood and have
generalized effects, as the lower lifetime risk for both Hispanic Americans
and African Americans begins before age 10 years for depression and anxiety
disorders. The retention of ethnic identification and participation in
communal, religious, and other activities have been suggested as protective
factors that may decrease the lifetime risk for psychiatric disorders in closeknit ethnic minority communities. Cultural differences in response to
psychiatric diagnostic survey items may be another possible explanation for
these findings. However, disadvantaged ethnic groups usually overreport in
studies measuring psychological distress, whereas these studies find lower
rates.
Discrimination, Mental Health, and Service Utilization
Disparities in Mental Health Services. Studies, including recent ones,
have shown that racial and ethnic minorities in the United States receive more
limited mental health services than whites. Analysis of medical expenditures
in the United States has shown that the mental health care system provides
comparatively less care to African Americans and Hispanic Americans than
to whites, even after controlling for income, education, and availability of
health insurance. African Americans have about a 10 percent probability of
receiving any mental health expenditure, compared to 20 percent for whites.
Hispanic Americans are about 40 percent less likely than whites to receive
any mental health expenditure. Total mental health expenditure for Hispanic
Americans is about 60 percent less than for whites.
Also, studies conducted over the last 25 years have shown that regardless
of disorder diagnosed, African American psychiatric patients are more likely
than white patients to be treated as in-patients, hospitalized involuntarily,


<<<PAGE 3296>>>
placed in seclusion or restraints without evidence of a greater degree of
violence, and treated with higher doses of antipsychotic medications. These
differences are not due to the greater severity of the disorders between white
and African American patients. One hypothesis for this discrepancy of
treatment between African American and white patients is that whites are
more likely to seek mental health care voluntarily than African Americans,
and African Americans are more likely to enter the mental health care system
through more coercive and less voluntary referral systems. African
Americans are also more likely than whites to use emergency room services,
resulting in more crisis-oriented help-seeking and service utilization. Once
hospitalized in an institution with predominantly white staff, African
American patients may receive differential care due to discrimination. That
is, service personnel who are not familiar with the illness concepts and
behavioral norms of nonwhite groups tend to assess minorities as more
severely ill and more dangerous than patients of their own racial or ethnic
group; consequently, such patients tend more often than white patients to be
hospitalized involuntarily, placed in seclusion or restrains, and treated with
higher doses of antipsychotic medications.
African American patients assessed in psychiatric emergency services are
more likely to be diagnosed with schizophrenia and substance abuse than
matched white patients. White patients are more often diagnosed with a mood
disorder. The cultural distance between the clinician and the patient can affect
the degree of psychopathology inferred and the diagnosis given. These
differences in diagnosis by race have also been found when comparable
research diagnostic instruments have been used for patient assessment.
Semistructured diagnostic instruments based on explicit diagnostic criteria do
not necessarily eliminate racial disparities in diagnostic outcomes. It appears
that the process that clinicians use to link symptom observations to diagnostic
constructs may differ, in particular for schizophrenia, between African
American and white patients. The pattern of psychotic symptoms that
predicts a clinician making a diagnosis of schizophrenia in African American
and white patients is different. Among African American patients, loose
associations, inappropriate affect, auditory hallucinations, and vague speech
increased the likelihood of a diagnosis of schizophrenia. In white patients the
main predictors were vague speech and loose associations. Also, auditory
hallucinations are more frequently attributed to African American patients.


<<<PAGE 3297>>>
African Americans are less likely to have had outpatient treatment and
longer delays in seeking care, and they present more severely ill. The reason
for hospitalization was also different between African Americans and whites.
African American patients were more likely to be admitted for behavioral
disturbance, whereas white patients were more likely to be admitted for
cognitive or affective disturbances. Also, African Americans were more
likely to have police or emergency service involvement, despite no racial
differences in violence, suicidality, or substance use when assessed.
Furthermore, African American patients are more likely, even after
controlling for health insurance status, to be referred to the public rather than
private in-patient psychiatric facilities, suggesting racial bias in psychiatric
emergency room assessment and recommended treatment.
African American patients diagnosed with major depression are less likely
to receive antidepressant medications than whites and less likely to be treated
with ECT. Demographic or socioeconomic differences cannot explain these
findings. One explanation may be that there are conscious or unconscious
biases in psychiatrists’ treatment decisions. Although both African
Americans and Hispanic Americans were less likely to fill an antidepressant
prescription when diagnosed with depression, once a prescription was filled,
they were just as likely as whites to receive an adequate course of treatment.
These findings indicate that initiating care for depression is the biggest hurdle
in overcoming these disparities. African American patients are more likely to
be treated with depot neuroleptics than whites after controlling for the type
and severity of illness. When treated with antipsychotic drugs, African
Americans are less likely to receive second-generation antipsychotics than
whites, placing them at increased risk for tardive dyskinesia and dystonia.
These differences in antipsychotic prescribing patterns may be due to
physicians’ concern over an increased risk of diabetes among African
Americans compared with whites or may be due to physicians perceiving
their symptoms differently. Disparities in mental health care for African
Americans and Hispanic Americans have also been noted in studies
conducted with adolescents.
A disparity in prescription drug use for mental illness also has been found
among Hispanic Americans and Asian Indian Americans. From 1996 to
2000, Asian Indian Americans were found to use prescription drugs 23.6
percent less than whites, whereas the differences between whites and African


<<<PAGE 3298>>>
Americans and between whites and Hispanic Americans were 8.3 and 6.1
percent, respectively. Disparities in mental health service use among Asian
American immigrants may be linked to language-based discrimination,
although racial bias cannot be excluded. A study of Chinese Americans found
a higher level of informal services and help-seeking from friends and
relatives for emotional problems. Those Chinese Americans who reported
experiencing language-based discrimination had a more negative attitude
toward formal mental health services.
Data on racial and ethnic differences in mental health counseling and
psychotherapy are similar to the psychopharmacological studies showing
disparities for minorities. A study examining visits to primary care physicians
based on the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey from 1997 to 2000
found that primary care physicians provided similar or higher rates of general
health counseling to African Americans than white patients. However, the
rates of mental health counseling were significantly lower for African
American patients. The lower rate of mental health counseling among
African Americans may be due to decreased reporting of depressive
symptoms, inadequate communication between African American patients
and their primary care physicians, and decreased willingness to discuss
mental health issues. On the other hand, another study utilizing the Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey from 2000 found that African Americans were
more likely than Hispanic Americans or whites to receive an adequate course
of psychotherapy for depression. These findings suggest that initiating
treatment is the biggest hurdle and that once they are engaged in treatment,
African Americans have high compliance with psychotherapy.
Research in Transcultural Psychiatry
There are three perspectives, among other possible approaches, that offer
great promise for future research in cultural psychiatry. The first would be
based on identifying specific fields in general psychiatry that could be the
subject of focused research from a cultural perspective. Topics of
epidemiology and neurobiology could be assessed in this way. The former
would address issues primarily in the public health arena, including
stigmatization, racism, and acculturation. Several cultural variables should be
considered in conducting cultural psychiatry research, including language,


<<<PAGE 3299>>>
religion, traditions, beliefs, ethics, and gender orientation.
The second would aim to explore critical concepts or instruments in
culturally relevant clinical research. There are four key concepts: idioms of
distress, social desirability, ethnographic data, and explanatory models.
Idioms of distress are the specific ways in which different cultures or
societies report ailments; behavioral responses to threatening or pathogenic
factors; and the uniqueness in the style of description, nomenclature, and
assessment of stress. Social desirability stems from the similarities or
differences among cultures, vis-à-vis the actual experiencing stressful events.
Members of some cultures may be more or less willing to suffer physical or
emotional problems, thus showing different levels of vulnerability or
resignation, resilience, or acceptance. Issues of stigma in different cultural
contexts contribute to this level of desirability or rejection. Third,
ethnographic data should be included, together with strictly clinical data and
laboratory analyses or tests, and narratives of life that enrich the descriptive
aspects of the condition and expand on the surrounding sociocultural and
interpersonal, and environmental aspects of the experience. The fourth
concept is explanatory models. Each culture explains the pathology of any
kind in its distinctive way. The explanation includes not only the presumptive
original cause but also the impact of the adduced factors and the interpersonal
exchanges and interactions that lead to the culturally accepted clinical
diagnosis.
A third approach attempts to combine the first two by examining different
areas of research based on the clinical dimensions of cultural psychiatry. This
deals with conceptual, operational, and topical issues in the field now and in
the future, including their biocultural connections.
Conceptual Issues in Cultural Psychiatry. One of the primary issues in
research in cultural psychiatry is the conceptual differentiation between
culture and environment. Although generally accepted as the conceptual
opposite of genetic, the environment represents a very broad, polymorphic
concept. It is, therefore, essential to establish that, while perhaps part of that
environmental set, culture and cultural factors in health and disease are terms
of a different, even unique, nature.
To what extent does culture apply to the clinical realities of psychiatry?
Culture plays a role in both normality and psychopathology. The role of


<<<PAGE 3300>>>
culture in psychiatric diagnosis is an excellent example of this conceptual
issue. Furthermore, culture impacts treatment approaches based on
conventional medical and psychiatric knowledge and explanatory models.
Finally, cultural variables have a role in prognosis and outcome.
A conceptual debate exists between those who advocate an evidence-based
approach to research and practice versus those who assign a value-based
view to everything clinical, more so if influenced by cultural factors. The
value-based approach invokes poverty, unemployment, internal and external
migration, and natural and human-made disasters. Evidence may be found to
support both positions in scientific research.
Operational Issues in Cultural Psychiatry. The dichotomy of
normality and abnormality in human behavior is a crucial operational issue.
Culture plays a definitive role in shaping these approaches. This raises the
notion of relativism, a strong conceptual pillar in cultural psychiatry.
Normality is a relative idea; that is, it varies in different cultural contexts.
Another operational issue is that of the choice of cultural variables. Each
one has a specific weight and impact on symptoms, syndromes, or clinical
entities in psychiatry. Some of them may be essential in assessing a clinical
topic, namely, language, education, religion, and gender orientation. An
additional operational factor is a description, assessment, and testing of the
strengths and weaknesses of an individual patient. Aspects of an individual’s
behavior, attitudes, disposition, sociability, occupational skills, and other
factors are culturally determined.
Culture plays a significant role in perceiving the severity of symptoms, the
disruption of the individual’s functionality, and the quality of life. The
assessment of severity is also the result of the meaning attributed to causal or
pathogenic factors of psychopathology. Judgments about the level of
dysfunction and the quality of a patient’s life involve elusive concepts such
as happiness, well-being, and peace of mind.
Research on cultural psychiatry issues needs to consider the
representativeness of the study populations and the generalizability of the
findings. Methodologic rigor needs to be applied to collecting demographic
data, delineation of and differentiation between ethnic groups or subgroups,
and measurement of demographic variables, symptoms, diagnosis, and
culturally specific constructs.


<<<PAGE 3301>>>
Many tests and questionnaires used in clinical settings and research have
been developed on English-speaking Western subjects and may not be
appropriate for ethnic minority patients or non–English-speaking individuals
due to lack of cultural equivalence. Translating items is insufficient to
achieve linguistic equivalence, as the meaning and connotation changes and
idioms of expression differ between languages. Also, norms may differ
between ethnic groups, and tests need to be standardized with representative
patients.
The complexity of translating an instrument varies depending on how
much the construct being measured differs between the two cultures. There
are four different approaches to translation. An ethnocentric approach is one
in which the researcher assumes that the concepts overlap entirely in the two
cultures. The instrument is used with individuals who differ from the
population in which the instrument was initially developed and normed. The
pragmatic approach assumes that some overlap between the two cultures and
attempts are made to measure the overlapping aspects of the construct, emic
aspects. An emic plus etic approach goes one step further and also attempts to
measure culture-specific aspects of the construct. Lastly, sometimes the
translation is not possible when the concepts do not overlap at all within the
two cultures.

CULTURE-BOUND SYNDROMES
Cross-cultural mental health professionals have introduced several terms to
refer to and describe culture-specific forms of expressing and diagnosing
emotional distress. The term culture-bound was used to describe patterned
behaviors of distress or illness whose phenomenology appeared distinct from
psychiatric categories and were considered unique to particular cultural
settings. The clear implication was that Western psychiatric categories were
not culture-bound, but rather universal and that proper characterization would
disclose a simple translation key for non-Western syndromes. The dichotomy
between syndromes that are “culture-free,” emerging from Euro-American
and European societies, and those that are “culture-bound,” emerging from
everywhere else, is, of course, patently false. Culture suffuses all forms of
psychological distress, the familiar as well as the unfamiliar.


<<<PAGE 3302>>>
Culture-Bound Syndromes and Their Relationship to Psychiatric
Diagnoses
Only a few of the many cultural forms of expressing distress have received
sustained research attention to integrating cultural and psychiatric research
methods. This chapter focuses on some of those syndromes from diverse
cultural regions, which have received the most intensive research and are
associated with psychiatric categories: Amok, ataques de nervios, possession
syndrome, and shenjing shuairuo.
Amok. Amok is a dissociative episode characterized by a period of
depression followed by an outburst of violent, aggressive, or homicidal
behavior. Episodes tend to be caused by a perceived insult and are often
accompanied by persecutory ideas, automation, amnesia, and exhaustion.
Patients return to premorbid states following the episode. Amok seems to be
prevalent only among males. The term originated in Malaysia, but similar
behavior patterns can be found in Laos, Philippines, Polynesia (cafard or
cathard), Papua New Guinea, and Puerto Rico (mal de pelea), and among the
Navajo (iich’aa).
PHENOMENOLOGY.

A prototypical episode is composed of the following

elements:
1. Exposure to a stressful stimulus or subacute conflict, eliciting in the
subject feelings of anger, loss, shame, and lowered self-esteem. The
stressor usually appears minor in proportion to the resulting behavior
(e.g., an argument with a coworker, verbal insult), but may occasionally
be severe (i.e., death of a loved one).
2. A period of social withdrawal and brooding over the precipitating
conflict, often involving aimless wandering, and sometimes accompanied
by visual perceptual alterations.
3. Transition, usually sudden, to frenzied and extremely violent
homicidality, with or without a brief prodromal stage of preparation (e.g.,
the subject may locate a preferred weapon or reach suddenly for whatever
implement is available).
4. Indiscriminate selection of victims who may or may not symbolically
represent the original actors in the conflict (e.g., subject attacks only


<<<PAGE 3303>>>
Chinese people who are strangers to him, after a conflict with a Chinese
coworker). Occasionally, the subject also attacks animals or objects in his
path, or wounds himself, sometimes severely. The subject perseveres at
these violent activities despite external attempts to bring him under
control.
5. Verbalizations, when present, may be frenzied and guttural, or express
internal conflict (e.g., ask forgiveness of a relative before killing him) or
split consciousness (e.g., subject admits to a positive relationship with the
victim, but denies this for his “spear”).
6. Cessation may be spontaneous but usually results from being
overpowered or killed. It is typically abrupt and leads to a change in
consciousness, usually stupor or sleep.
7. Subsequent partial or total amnesia and report of “unconsciousness” or
description of “darkened vision” (mata gelap) during the acute episode.
8. Perceptual disturbances or affective decompensations may occur for days
or weeks after the acute attack. Psychosis or depression sometimes
ensues.
EPIDEMIOLOGY. Epidemiologic rates of amok in Malaysia and Indonesia are

unknown and may vary regionally and over time. From the available data,
amok appears to follow an endemic pattern in Malayo-Indonesia with some
epidemic increases, the reverse of which has been found for amok-like attacks
in Laos.
Amok is essentially unknown in women (only one case was found in the
literature, and it was considered atypical in that no deaths occurred). It is
thought to occur more frequently in men of Malay extraction, Muslim
religion, low education, and rural origin, who are between the ages of 20 and
45 years.
Precipitants of amok in Malaysia and Indonesia typically
consisted of experiences eliciting in the subject marked feelings of loss,
shame, anger, or lowered self-esteem. Although specific triggers were very
diverse in nature and presentation, including sudden and gradual stressors,
most consisted of interpersonal or social conflicts superficially appearing to
generate only mild to moderate stress. These include arguments with
coworkers, nonspecific family tensions, feelings of social humiliation, bouts
PRECIPITANTS.


<<<PAGE 3304>>>
of possessive jealousy, gambling debts, and job loss. Rarely, however, amok
was precipitated by a severe stressor, such as the simultaneous death of the
spouse and child of the subject.
ADDITIONAL CLINICAL FEATURES. It is unclear whether amok episodes

are
associated with indirect suicidal intent on the part of the subject. Anecdotes
and cultural views supporting a connection are available, but interviews with
surviving subjects have refuted the association.
Rates of relapse are unknown. It is considered very likely in the popular
view, leading currently in Malaysia to permanent psychiatric hospitalization
of surviving subjects, and, in the past, to banishment or execution.
Afflicted individuals in 20th-century Malaysia have been
exempted from legal or moral responsibility for acts committed while in a
state of amok using a kind of “insanity defense,” which characterizes the
attack as “unconscious” and beyond the subject’s control. They were
subsequently hospitalized, sometimes permanently, and frequently received
diagnoses of schizophrenia and were treated with antipsychotic medication.
Alternatively, trials have sometimes resulted in criminal verdicts and
prolonged imprisonment.
TREATMENT.

Ataque de Nervios. Ataque de nervios is an idiom of distress principally
reported among Latinos from the Caribbean but recognized among many
Latin American and Latin Mediterranean groups. Commonly reported
symptoms to include uncontrollable shouting, attacks of crying, trembling,
heat in the chest rising into the head, and verbal or physical aggression.
Dissociative experiences, seizure-like or fainting episodes, and suicidal
gestures are prominent in some attacks but absent in others. A general feature
of an ataque de nervios is a sense of being out of control. Ataques de nervios
frequently occur as a direct result of a stressful event relating to the family
(e.g., news of a death of a close relative, a separation or divorce from a
spouse, conflicts with a spouse or children, or witnessing an accident
involving a family member). People may experience amnesia for what
occurred during the ataque de nervios, but they otherwise return rapidly to
their usual level of functioning.
Ataque de nervios (attack of nerves, in Spanish) is a syndrome indigenous


<<<PAGE 3305>>>
to various Latin American cultures, notably those of the Hispanic Caribbean
(Puerto Rico, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic). It has received
considerable attention in the psychiatric and anthropologic literature since the
mid-1950s, mostly in Puerto Rican communities on the island and in
populations within the United States.
PHENOMENOLOGY. An ataque de nervios can be described as prototypically

composed of the following elements:
1. Exposure to a frequently sudden, stressful stimulus, typically eliciting
feelings of fear, grief, or anger, and involving a person close to the
subject, such as a spouse, child, family member, or friend. The severity of
the trigger ranges from mild–moderate (i.e., marital argument, disclosure
of migration plans) to extreme (i.e., physical or sexual abuse, acute
bereavement).
2. Initiation of the episode is immediate upon exposure to the stimulus, or
after a period of brooding or emotional “shock.”
3. Once the acute attack begins, the rapid evolution of an intense affective
storm follows, characterized by a primary affect usually congruent with
the stimulus (such as anger, fear, grief) and a sense of loss of control
(emotional expressions).
4. All or some of the following accompany these:
A. Bodily sensations: Trembling, chest tightness, headache, difficulty
breathing, heart palpitations, heat in the chest, paresthesias of diverse
location, difficulty moving limbs, faintness, blurred vision, or
dizziness (mareos).
B. Behaviors (action dimension): Shouting, crying, swearing, moaning,
breaking objects, striking out at others or self, attempting to harm self
with the nearest implement, falling to the ground, shaking with
convulsive movements, or lying “as if dead.”
5. Cessation may be abrupt or gradual, but it is usually rapid, and often
results from the ministration of others, involving expressions of concern,
prayers, or use of rubbing alcohol (alcoholado). There is a return of
ordinary consciousness and reported exhaustion.
6. The attack is frequently followed by partial or total amnesia for the events
of the episode, and descriptions such as the following for the acute attack:


<<<PAGE 3306>>>
Loss of consciousness, depersonalization, mind going blank, or general
unawareness of surroundings (alterations in consciousness). However,
some ataques appear to exhibit no alterations in consciousness.
EPIDEMIOLOGY. Risk factors for ataque de nervios span a range of social and

demographic characteristics. The strongest predictors of ataque are female
gender, lower formal education, and disrupted marital status (i.e., divorced,
widowed, or separated). Ataque sufferers also reported less satisfaction in
their social interactions, generally and specifically with their spouses. Also,
people who experienced an ataque de nervios were more likely to describe
their health as only fair or poor, to seek help for an emotional problem, and to
take medications for this purpose. Persons with ataque also reported deriving
less satisfaction from leisure time activities and feeling overwhelmed more
often.
PRECIPITANTS. Prototypically, ataque de nervios was linked by sufferers to an

acute precipitating event or to the summation of many life episodes of
suffering brought to a head by a trigger that overwhelmed the person’s
coping ability. In 92 percent of cases, the ataque was directly provoked by a
distressing situation, and 73 percent of the time, it began within minutes or
hours of the event. A majority of first ataques (81 percent) occurred in the
presence of others, as opposed to when the sufferer was alone and led to a
person receiving help (67 percent). Unlike the typical experience of persons
with panic disorder, most patients reported feeling better (71 percent) or
feeling relieved (81 percent) after their first ataque. The first episodes of
ataque de nervios are closely tied to the interpersonal world of the sufferer,
and they result in an unburdening (desahogarse) of one’s life problems, at
least temporarily.
ADDITIONAL CLINICAL FEATURES. The association between ataque de nervios

and a sense of loss of control and of being overwhelmed highlight the
importance of the association between the cultural syndrome and other
behaviors associated with acute emotional dysregulation. Most concerning
among these is the strong relationship between ataques and suicidal ideation
and attempts. Other related behaviors include loss of aggression control,
expressed as attacks on people or property, and dissociative experiences


<<<PAGE 3307>>>
related to the acute ataque experience.
SPECIFIC CULTURAL FACTORS. The complex relationship between ataque de

nervios and psychiatric diagnosis may be clarified about its broader popular
nosology. In the Hispanic Caribbean and other areas of Latin America,
ataque is part of a popular nosology of nervios (nerves), composed of other
related categories. Experiences of adversity are linked in this nosology to
ensuing “alterations” of the nervous system, which result in its impaired
functioning, including the peripheral nerves. This quasi-anatomical damage is
evidenced in emotional symptoms, including interpersonal susceptibility,
anxiety, and irritability, as well as in physically mediated symptoms, such as
trembling, palpitations, and decreased concentration.
No treatment studies of ataque de nervios have ever been
conducted. Typical treatment involves, first, ensuring the safety of the person
and those around him or her, given the association between ataque,
suicidality, and uncontrolled aggressivity. “Talking the person down” is
usually helpful, accompanied by expressions of support from relatives and
other loved ones; rubbing alcohol (alcoholado) to help calm the person is a
culturally prescribed way of expressing this support.
“Telling the story” of what led to the ataque usually constitutes the
principal therapeutic approach in subsequent stages of treatment. Because one
of the main functions of the attack is to communicate a feeling of being
overwhelmed, indicating receipt of the message and the desire to offer
support are usually perceived as therapeutic. The person should be allowed to
set the pace of disclosure and to give enough details and circumstances to feel
“unburdened” (desahogado[a]).
In the case of single or occasional ataques in the absence of psychiatric
diagnosis, brief follow-up is usually sufficient. This may be discussed with
the patient and the family to ensure a full return to the previous healthy state.
For recurrent ataques, treatment depends on the associated psychopathology,
the nature of the precipitants (including traumatic exposure), the degree of
family conflict or support, the social context, the previous treatment
experiences, and the patient’s and family’s expectations, among other factors.
Psychotherapy is typically the mainstay of treatment, given the usual
source of the overwhelmed behavior in the interpersonal milieu.
TREATMENT.


<<<PAGE 3308>>>
Pharmacotherapy may also help treat ataque-related psychopathology; the
primary emphasis should be placed on treating the underlying disorder. Given
the slow crescendo of many ataques, judicious use of short-acting
benzodiazepines also has a role in helping abort an impending episode.
However, this should not be the primary form of treatment for recurrent
ataques, since it only forestalls the principal function of the syndrome as a
mode of communication. Instead, psychotherapy and a social activism stance
by the therapist that acknowledges the origins of adversity among lowincome Latinos in socioeconomic disenfranchisement and ethnic/racial
discrimination are usually required to address the interpersonal and
sociocultural roots of ataque de nervios.
Possession Syndrome. Involuntary possession trance states are very
common presentations of emotional distress around the world. Cognate
experiences have been reported in extremely diverse cultural settings,
including India, Sri Lanka, Hong Kong, China, Japan, Malaysia, Niger,
Uganda, Southern Africa, Haiti, Puerto Rico, and Brazil. Possession
syndrome is an umbrella English-language term used to describe South Asian
presentations of involuntary possession trance that encompasses multiple
names in regional languages and dialects of India and Sri Lanka. These
presentations are seen as a form of illness by the person’s cultural group
because they are involuntary, they cause distress, and they do not occur as a
normal part of a collective cultural or religious ritual or performance.
It is important to distinguish at the outset between
possession syndrome, as an instance of possession trance, and the broader
category of possession. The latter refers to a general ideology describing the
full range of direct spirit influences on human affairs, including effects on
physical, psychological, spiritual, social, and ecologic realms. By contrast, as
a subset of general possession experience, possession trance refers to specific
alterations in consciousness, memory, behavior, and identity attributed to
direct spirit influence. In addition to pathologic possession, trance states,
South Asian cultures authorize multiple examples of normal possession and
possession trance. When voluntary and normative, these states are typically
seen as instances of religious devotion, mystical ecstasy, social commentary,
asceticism, interpersonal relations, existential reflection, and the study of
PHENOMENOLOGY.


<<<PAGE 3309>>>
consciousness. This chapter discusses possession syndrome as a pathologic
entity with an established phenomenology, that is, as a particular case in the
general continuum of etiologic ideas regarding possession illnesses. A
prototypical episode is composed of the following elements:
1. Onset occurs typically due to subacute conflict or stress and shows
considerable variation. It may be gradual and nonspecific (e.g., diverse
somatic complaints, such as dizziness, headaches, abdominal discomfort,
hot–cold flashes, listlessness, or difficulty breathing) or sudden and
specific, in the form of an abrupt transition to an altered state of
consciousness.
2. Behavior during the altered state consists of some or all of the following:
A. Dramatic, semi-purposeful movements, such as head-bobbing, bodily
shaking, thrashing, gyrating, or falling to the ground, accompanied by
guttural, incoherent verbalizations, such as mumbling, moaning, or
shrieking.
B. Aggressive or violent actions directed at self or others, including
spitting, striking, and impulsive suicidal or homicidal gestures.
Verbalizations may be coherent and consist of derogatory comments
or threats of violence directed against significant others or the subject
(in the third person) and typically considered by observers to be
uncharacteristic of the subject’s usual behavior.
C. Specific gestures, comments, or requests denoting the appearance of a
known possessing personality by (1) reference to standard attributes
of culturally recognizable figures or (2) the name and degree of
deceased family members or acquaintances.
3. In all cases, this state is marked by the emergence of one or several
secondary personalities distinct from that of the subject. Their specific
identities, which may remain undisclosed for some time, adhere to
cultural norms regulating permissible agents of possession, which vary by
religion, region, and caste. Acceptable agents include spirits of deceased
family members, in-law relations, or known village acquaintances who
died under specific conditions of distress, and minor supernatural figures
of the Hindu pantheon (rarely major deities) and the Islamic spiritual
world.
4. Possession by the secondary personality(ies) is episodic, resulting in
alternation between the usual personality of the subject and the altered


<<<PAGE 3310>>>
state. The subject in his or her usual identity appears in a daze, exhausted,
distressed, or confused about the situation and may report visual or
auditory perceptual disturbances regarding the possessing agent and
“unconsciousness” and partial or total amnesia for the altered state.
5. Frequently, the specific identities of possessing personalities remain
undisclosed for some time, requiring the active ministrations of family
members and the intervention of specialized indigenous practitioners. The
process of disclosure is conceived as a struggle between the family
members and the beneficent agents possessing the healer on the one side,
and the troublesome possessing personalities on the other. It is
characterized by remarkable reactivity on the part of the subject to
environmental cues, including direct questioning, strategic neglect, and
aggressive manipulation.
6. The outcome is variable. Total recovery is often reported at the cessation
of a single acute episode, which may be of several weeks’ duration.
Alternatively, prolonged morbidity may result, or even, rarely, death.
Methodologic considerations limit data on the epidemiology, precipitants,
and associated psychopathology of subjects with possession syndrome in
South Asia. These include a lack of representative community samples and
nonsystematic definitions of the syndrome, which shows considerable
regional variation.
EPIDEMIOLOGY. Possession syndrome is more common in women than men,

with a female-to-male ratio of approximately 3 to 1 in both community and
psychiatric cohorts. The age of onset is usually between 15 and 35 years, but
many cases reportedly begin in childhood. Attacks may persist well into
middle age, and geriatric cases have also been reported.
PRECIPITANTS. Precipitants of possession syndrome are varied but typically

consist of marked social or family conflicts, or stressful life transitions, of
subacute duration, eliciting strong feelings of vulnerability in persons without
firm emotional support. Examples encountered in the literature included
marital conflict, abuse, and neglect, at times associated with alcoholism; the
arrival of a new bride to the home of her husband’s family; delay in arranging
a marriage, or in consummating it; forced marriage; widowhood; postpartum


<<<PAGE 3311>>>
status; loss of family social standing; the death of a family member; difficulty
finding employment and financial difficulties; alienation from family support;
and subordination to other family members and in-laws.
SPECIFIC CULTURAL FACTORS. Possession syndrome constitutes a normative

cultural category throughout India and Sri Lanka. It may present initially in a
variety of forms, linked by the attribution of spirit etiology. When it presents
in a nonspecific fashion, indigenous diagnosis is confirmed by the appearance
of the altered state during the therapeutic ritual. It is considered an affliction
by its painful, involuntary nature and attributed to the intervention of specific
spiritual agencies acting independently or at the behest of a witch. Certain
castes and persons in transitional states (e.g., puerperium) are considered
most vulnerable to a spirit attack, especially when deprived of emotional and
material support.
Specialized indigenous practitioners and ritual therapies are
generally available and widely utilized, but psychiatric treatment is typically
avoided. Indigenous treatments include neutralization of the conflict or stress
via the communal rituals involved in exorcism, as well as the reformulation
of the suffering into beneficent individual and communal practice via
initiation into a spirit devotion cult, such as the Siri cult of South India, or
education into the roles of oracle (diviner), exorcist, or, rarely, avatar (divine
incarnation).
TREATMENT.

Shenjing Shuairuo. Shenjing shuairuo (“weakness of the nervous system”
in Mandarin Chinese) is a translation and cultural adaptation of the term
“neurasthenia,” which was transmitted into China from the West and Japan in
the 1920s and 1930s. Revived in its modern form by the American
neurologist George Beard since 1868, his formulation of neurasthenia (Greek
for “lack of nerve strength”) originally denoted a heterogeneous syndrome of
lassitude, pain, poor concentration, headache, irritability, dizziness, insomnia,
and over 50 other symptoms. It was considered at first an “American
disease,” resulting from the “pressures” of a rapidly modernizing society but
was later adopted by European diagnosticians. Its pathophysiology was
thought to derive from a lowering of nervous system function on a physical
rather than emotional basis, due to excessive demand for its use, especially


<<<PAGE 3312>>>
among the educated and wealthier classes. In Soviet psychiatry, buttressed by
Pavlovian research, it was a central component of mental health nosology,
which became especially influential in Chinese psychiatry after the
communist revolution of 1949.
Although neurasthenia declined in importance in Western classification
systems during the 20th century, Shenjing shuairuo underwent marked
popular and professional development in mainland China, Taiwan, Hong
Kong, in Chinese migrant communities, and in Japan, where a similar
syndrome is labeled shinkei suijaku. From a peak in about 1980, when it may
have constituted up to 80 percent of all “neurotic” diagnoses in Chinese
societies, Shenjing shuairuo has undergone intense psychiatric and
anthropologic reexamination. It currently features prominently in the second
edition revised Chinese Classification of Mental Disorders (CCMD-2-R),
under the section on “other neuroses.” The CCMD-2-R diagnosis requires
three symptoms out of five nonhierarchical symptom clusters, organized as
weakness, emotional, excitement, and nervous symptoms, and the fifth
category of sleep disturbances. Like other neurotic disorders in the Chinese
manual, the condition must last at least 3 months, and should (1) lower the
efficiency of work, study, or social function; (2) cause mental distress; or (3)
precipitate treatment seeking.
Given the evolution of diagnostic practice regarding
shenjing shuairuo in Chinese societies over the last decades, which may be
labeled the professional approximation of the condition or its “disease”
aspect, phenomenologic description in this chapter is based instead on
clinical histories of self-identified sufferers, or the “illness” aspect of the
syndrome. The following elements are prototypical:
PHENOMENOLOGY.

1. Onset is usually gradual, sometimes spanning several years, and typically
emerges out of a conflictive, frustrating, or worrying situation that
involves work, family, and other social settings, or their combination. A
sense of powerlessness in changing the precipitating situation appears
central to most illness accounts of the syndrome.
2. Symptoms show substantial individual variation, but usually involve at
least some of the following spontaneous complaints: Insomnia, affective
dysphoria, headache, bodily pains and distortions (e.g., “swelling” of the


<<<PAGE 3313>>>
head), dizziness, difficulty concentrating, tension and anxiety, worry,
fatigue, weakness, gastrointestinal problems, and “troubled vexation”
(,fan nao). This last emotion has been described as a form of irritability
mixed with worry and distress over “conflicting thoughts and unfulfilled
desires,” that may be partially concealed for the sake of preserving social
harmony.
3. The sufferer frequently seeks the sick role, attributing his or her
difficulties in meeting work, school, or other social expectations to the
syndrome. Sources of treatment vary substantially across Chinese
communities, depending on the availability of formal and traditional
service sectors.
4. The course is variable and may respond closely to changing interpersonal
and social circumstances. Amelioration of the precipitating stressor(s)
typically brings about substantial improvement, although residual
symptoms appear common.
5. Response to treatment may be strongly mediated by the illness role and
its relationship to the intractability of precipitating stressors.
An empirical assessment of the precipitants of shenjing
shuairuo has found high rates of work-related stressors, which were made
more intractable by the centrally directed nature of mainland Chinese society.
These included unwelcome work assignments, job postings that caused
family separations, harsh criticism at work, excessive workloads,
monotonous tasks, and feelings of inadequacy or incompatibility of skills and
responsibilities. Students usually described less severe study-related
precipitants, particularly school failure or anxiety over the mismatch between
personal or family aspirations and performance. Other interpersonal and
family-related stressors included romantic disappointments, marital conflict,
and the death of a spouse or other relative. Chinese etiologic understandings
of the syndrome commonly invert the Western view of “psychosomatic”
presentations, whereby social–interpersonal precipitants cause psychological
distress that is displaced onto bodily experience.
PRECIPITANTS.

ADDITIONAL CLINICAL FEATURES. The clinical course of the syndrome may

depend on the associated psychiatric comorbidity and the degree of
persistence of the precipitating stressors. One longitudinal study found a


<<<PAGE 3314>>>
complete resolution of shenjing shuairuo symptoms and reasonable social
adjustment 20 years from the index diagnosis in 83 of 89 cases. Only one
case was receiving continued treatment, and no subjects reported the onset of
depressive disorder after the shenjing shuairuo diagnosis.
Chinese psychiatrists have carried out numerous studies of
neurophysiologic and cognitive function in shenjing shuairuo patients since
the 1950s. Most have reported abnormalities compared to normal controls,
including in tests of polysomnography, electroencephalography,
psychogalvanic reflexes, gastric function, and memory function. These
findings need to be replicated with well-controlled samples using
contemporary diagnostic instruments.
SPECIFIC CULTURAL FACTORS. The evolving definitions of shenjing shuairuo

have emerged from a tradition of syncretism in Chinese medicine between
indigenous illness understandings and international contributions.
Nineteenth-century Western notions of a weakened nervous system due to
overuse (neurasthenia) found an ancient cognate expression in Chinese
concepts of bodily meridians or channels (jing) binding vital organs in
balanced networks along which forces (e.g., qi, vital energy, in yin and yang
forms) could be disrupted from their normal, harmonious flow. This gave rise
to shenjing shuairuo, an illness whereby the jing that carry shen—spirit or
vitality, the capacity of the mind to form ideas and the desire of the
personality to live life—have become shuai (degenerate) and ruo (weak)
following undue nervous excitement.
TREATMENT. When accessing formal sectors of care, most patients used both

Western-trained physicians and traditional Chinese doctors. Nonpsychiatric
medical settings were preferred, including neurology and general medicine
clinics, in concert with cultural understandings of the somatopsychic etiology
of shenjing shuairuo, emphasizing its physical mediation. The modality of
treatment was usually traditional Chinese medicines, which were prescribed
by both Western-trained and Chinese-style doctors. This conformed to the
balanced status still ascribed to both types of training among Chinese
physicians. Polypharmacy was common, combining sedatives, traditional
herbs, antianxiety agents, vitamins, and other tonics. Despite the active
suppression of religious healing in China, almost a quarter of patients were


<<<PAGE 3315>>>
also engaged in such treatment.

34.4 Theories of Personality and
Psychopathology
SIGMUND FREUD: FOUNDER OF CLASSIC
PSYCHOANALYSIS
Psychoanalysis was the child of Sigmund Freud’s genius. He put his stamp
on it from the very beginning, and it can be fairly stated that, although the
science and theory of psychoanalysis have advanced far beyond Freud, his
influence is still strong and pervasive. In recounting the progressive stages in
the evolution of the origins of Freud’s psychoanalytic thinking, it is useful to
keep in mind that Freud himself was working against the background of his
neurologic training and expertise and in the context of the scientific thinking
of his era.
The science of psychoanalysis is the bedrock of psychodynamic
understanding. It forms the fundamental theoretical frame of reference for a
variety of forms of therapeutic intervention, embracing not only
psychoanalysis itself but also various forms of psychoanalytically oriented
psychotherapy and related forms of therapy employing psychodynamic
concepts. Currently, considerable interest has been generated in efforts to
connect psychoanalytic understandings of human behavior and emotional
experience with emerging findings of neuroscientific research.
At the same time, psychoanalysis is undergoing a creative ferment in
which classical perspectives are continually being challenged and revised,
leading to a diversity of emphases and viewpoints, all of which can be
regarded as representing aspects of psychoanalytic thinking. This has given
rise to the question as to whether psychoanalysis is one theory or more than
one. The divergence of multiple theoretical variants raises the question of the
degree to which newer perspectives can be reconciled to classical
perspectives.
Freud himself inaugurated the spirit of creative modifications in theory.
Some of the theoretical modifications of the classic theory after Freud have


<<<PAGE 3316>>>
attempted to reformulate basic analytic propositions while still retaining the
spirit and fundamental insights of a Freudian perspective; others have
challenged and abandoned fundamental analytic insights in favor of divergent
paradigms that seem radically different and even contradictory to basic
analytic principles.
Although there is more than one way to approach the diversity of such
material, the decision has been made to organize this material along roughly
historical lines, tracing the emergence of analytic theory or theories over
time, but with a good deal of overlap. However, there is an overall pattern of
gradual emergence, progressing from early drive theory to structural theory to
ego psychology to object relations, and on to self-psychology,
intersubjectivism, and relational approaches.
Psychoanalysis today is recognized as having three crucial aspects: it is a
therapeutic technique, a body of scientific and theoretical knowledge, and a
method of investigation. This section focuses on psychoanalysis as both a
theory and a treatment, but the basic tenets elaborated here have broad
applications to nonpsychoanalytic settings in clinical psychiatry.
Life of Freud
Sigmund Freud (1856–1939) (Fig. 34-22) was born in Freiburg, a small town
in Moravia, which is now part of the Czech Republic. When Freud was 4
years old, his father, a Jewish wool merchant, moved the family to Vienna,
where Freud spent most of his life. Following medical school, he specialized
in neurology and studied for a year in Paris with Jean-Martin Charcot. He
was also influenced by Ambroise-Auguste Liébeault and Hippolyte-Marie
Bernheim, both of whom taught him hypnosis while he was in France. After
his education in France, he returned to Vienna and began clinical work with
hysterical patients. Between 1887 and 1897, his work with these patients led
him to develop psychoanalysis.
Beginnings of Psychoanalysis
In the decade from 1887 to 1897, Freud immersed himself in the serious
study of the disturbances in his hysterical patients, resulting in discoveries
that contributed to the beginnings of psychoanalysis. These slender
beginnings had a threefold aspect: Emergence of psychoanalysis as a method


<<<PAGE 3317>>>
of investigation, as a therapeutic technique, and as a body of scientific
knowledge based on an increasing fund of information and fundamental
theoretical propositions. These early researches flowed out of Freud’s initial
collaboration with Joseph Breuer and then, increasingly, from his
independent investigations and theoretical developments.
The Case of Anna O
Breuer was an older physician, a distinguished and well-established medical
practitioner in the Viennese community (Fig. 34-23). Knowing Freud’s
interests in hysterical pathology, Breuer told him about the unusual case of a
woman he had treated for approximately 1.5 years, from December 1880 to
June 1882. This woman became famous under the pseudonym Fräulein Anna
O, and the study of her difficulties proved to be one of the essential stimuli in
the development of psychoanalysis.
Anna O was, in reality, Bertha Pappenheim, who later became
independently famous as a founder of the social work movement in
Germany. When she began to see Breuer, she was an intelligent and
strong-minded young woman of approximately 21 years of age who had
developed several hysterical symptoms connected with the illness and
death of her father. These symptoms included paralysis of the limbs,
contractures, anesthesias, visual and speech disturbances, anorexia, and
distressing nervous cough. Two distinct phases of consciousness also
characterized her illness: One relatively standard, but the other reflected a
second and more pathologic personality.
Anna was very fond of and close to her father and shared with her
mother the duties of nursing him on his deathbed. During her altered
states of consciousness, Anna recalled the vivid fantasies and intense
emotions she had experienced while caring for her father. It was with
considerable amazement, both to Anna and Breuer, that when she could
recall, with the associated expression of affect, the scenes or
circumstances under which her symptoms had arisen, the symptoms
would disappear. She vividly described this process as the “talking cure”
and as “chimney sweeping.”
Once the connection between talking through the circumstances of the


<<<PAGE 3318>>>
symptoms and the disappearance of the symptoms themselves had been
established, Anna proceeded to deal with each of her many symptoms,
one after another. She was able to recall that on one occasion when her
mother had been absent, she had been sitting at her father’s bedside and
had had a fantasy or daydream in which she imagined that a snake was
crawling toward her father and was about to bite him. She struggled
forward to try to ward off the snake, but her arm, which had been draped
over the back of the chair, had gone to sleep. She was unable to move it.
The paralysis persisted, and she was unable to move the arm until, under
hypnosis, she could recall this scene. It is easy to see how this kind of
material must have made a profound impression on Freud. It provided a
convincing demonstration of the power of unconscious memories and
suppressed affects in producing hysterical symptoms.
In the course of the somewhat lengthy treatment, Breuer had become
increasingly preoccupied with his fascinating and unusual patient and,
consequently, spent more and more time with her. Meanwhile, his wife
had grown increasingly jealous and resentful. As soon as Breuer began to
realize this, the sexual connotations of it frightened him, and he abruptly
terminated the treatment. Only a few hours later, however, he was
recalled urgently to Anna’s bedside. She had never alluded to the
forbidden topic of sex during her treatment, but she was now
experiencing hysterical childbirth. Freud saw the phantom pregnancy as
the logical outcome of the sexual feelings she had developed toward
Breuer in response to his therapeutic attention. Breuer himself had been
entirely unaware of this development, and the experience was quite
unnerving. He was able to calm Anna down by hypnotizing her, but then
he left the house in a cold sweat and immediately set out with his wife for
Venice on a second honeymoon.
According to a version from Freud through Ernest Jones, the patient
was far from cured and later hospitalized after Breuer’s departure. It
seems ironic that the prototype of a cathartic cure was, in fact, far from
successful. Nevertheless, the case of Anna O provided a critical starting
point for Freud’s thinking and a crucial juncture in the development of
psychoanalysis.


<<<PAGE 3319>>>
FIGURE 34-22
Sigmund Freud at age 79. (Courtesy of Menninger Foundation Archives, Topeka,
KS.)


<<<PAGE 3320>>>
FIGURE 34-23
Joseph Breuer (1842–1925).

The Interpretation of Dreams
In his landmark publication The Interpretation of Dreams in 1900, Freud
presented a theory of the dreaming process that paralleled his earlier analysis
of psychoneurotic symptoms. He viewed the dream experience as a conscious
expression of unconscious fantasies or wishes not readily acceptable to
conscious waking experience. Thus, dream activity was considered to be one
of the usual manifestations of unconscious processes.
The dream images represented unconscious wishes or thoughts, disguised
through a process of a symbolization and other distorting mechanisms. This


<<<PAGE 3321>>>
reworking of unconscious contents constituted the dream work. Freud
postulated the existence of a “censor,” pictured as guarding the border
between the unconscious part of the mind and the preconscious level. The
censor functioned to exclude unconscious wishes during conscious states but,
during regressive relaxation of sleep, allowed specific unconscious contents
to pass the border, only after transforming these unconscious wishes into
disguised forms experienced in the manifest dream contents by the sleeping
subject. Freud assumed that the censor worked in the service of the ego—that
is, as serving the self-preservative objectives of the ego. Although he was
aware of the unconscious nature of the processes, he tended to regard the ego
at this point in developing his theory more restrictively as the source of
conscious processes of reasonable control and volition.
The analysis of dreams elicits material that has been repressed. These
unconscious thoughts and wishes include nocturnal sensory stimuli (sensory
impressions such as pain, hunger, thirst, urinary urgency), the day residue
(thoughts and ideas connected with the activities and preoccupations of the
dreamer’s current waking life), and repressed unacceptable impulses.
Because the sleep state blocks motility, the dream enables partial but limited
gratification of the repressed impulse that gives rise to the dream.
Freud distinguished between two layers of dream content. The manifest
content refers to what is recalled by the dreamer; the latent content involves
the unconscious thoughts and wishes that threaten to awaken the dreamer.
Freud described the unconscious mental operations by which latent dream
content is transformed into the manifest dream as the dream work. Repressed
wishes and impulses must attach themselves to innocent or neutral images to
pass the scrutiny of the dream censor. This process involves selecting
meaningless or trivial images from the dreamer’s current experience, which
are dynamically associated with the latent images that they resemble in some
respect.
Condensation. Condensation is the mechanism by which several
unconscious wishes, impulses, or attitudes can be combined into a single
image in the manifest dream content. Thus, in a child’s nightmare, an
attacking monster may come to represent not only the dreamer’s father but
may also represent some aspects of the mother and even some of the child’s
primitive hostile impulses as well. The converse of condensation can also


<<<PAGE 3322>>>
occur in the dream work, namely, irradiation or diffusion of a single latent
wish or impulse distributed through multiple representations in the manifest
dream content. The combination of mechanisms of condensation and
diffusion provides the dreamer with a highly flexible and economic device
for facilitating, compressing, and diffusing or expanding the manifest dream
content, which is derived from latent or unconscious wishes and impulses.
Displacement. The mechanism of displacement refers to the transfer of
amounts of energy (cathexis) from an original object to a substitute or
symbolic representation of the object. Because the substitute object is
relatively neutral—that is, less invested with affective energy—it is more
acceptable to the dream censor and can pass the borders of repression more
easily. Thus, whereas symbolism can be taken to refer to the substitution of
one object for another, displacement facilitates distortion of unconscious
wishes through the transfer of affective energy from one object to another.
Despite the transfer of cathectic energy, the aim of the unconscious impulse
remains unchanged. For example, in a dream, the mother may be represented
visually by an unknown female figure (at least one who has less emotional
significance for the dreamer), but the naked content of the dream nonetheless
continues to derive from the dreamer’s unconscious instinctual impulses
toward the mother.
Symbolic Representation. Freud noted that the dreamer would often
represent highly charged ideas or objects by using innocent images that were
in some way connected with the idea or object being represented. In this
manner, an abstract concept or a complex set of feelings toward a person
could be symbolized by a simple, concrete, or sensory image. Freud noted
that symbols have unconscious meanings that can be discerned through the
patient’s associations to the symbol, but he also believed that certain symbols
have universal meanings.
Secondary Revision. The mechanisms of condensation, displacement, and
symbolic representation are characteristic of a type of thinking that Freud
referred to as primary process. This primitive mode of cognitive activity is
characterized by illogic, bizarre, and absurd images that seem incoherent.
Freud believed that a more mature and reasonable aspect of the ego works


<<<PAGE 3323>>>
during dreams to organize primitive aspects of dreams into a more coherent
form. Secondary revision is Freud’s name for this process, in which dreams
become somewhat more rational. The process is related to mature activity
characteristic of waking life, which Freud termed secondary process.
Affects in Dreams. Secondary emotions may not appear in the dream at
all, or they may be experienced in somewhat altered form. For example,
repressed rage toward a person’s father may take the form of mild annoyance.
Feelings may also appear as their opposites.
Anxiety Dreams. Freud’s dream theory preceded his development of a
comprehensive theory of the ego. Hence, his understanding of dreams
stresses the importance of discharging drives or wishes through the
hallucinatory contents of the dream. He viewed such mechanisms as
condensation, displacement, symbolic representation, projection, and
secondary revision primarily as facilitating the discharge of latent impulses,
rather than as protecting dreamers from anxiety and pain. Freud understood
anxiety dreams as reflecting a failure in the protective function of the dreamwork mechanisms. The repressed impulses succeed in working their way into
the manifest content in a more or less recognizable manner.
Punishment Dreams. Dreams in which dreamers experience punishment
represented a unique challenge for Freud because they appear to represent an
exception to his wish-fulfillment theory of dreams. He came to understand
such dreams as reflecting a compromise between the repressed wish and the
repressing agency or conscience. In a punishment dream, the ego anticipates
condemnation on the dreamer’s conscience if the latent unacceptable
impulses are allowed direct expression in the manifest dream content. Hence,
the wish for punishment on the part of the patient’s conscience is satisfied by
giving expression to punishment fantasies.
Topographical Model of the MIND
The publication of The Interpretation of Dreams in 1900 heralded the arrival
of Freud’s topographical model of the mind, in which he divided the mind
into three regions: the conscious system, the preconscious system, and the
unconscious system. Each system has its unique characteristics.


<<<PAGE 3324>>>
The Conscious. The conscious system in Freud’s topographical model is
the part of the mind in which perceptions coming from the outside world or
within the body or mind are brought into awareness. Consciousness is a
subjective phenomenon whose content can be communicated only using
language or behavior. Freud assumed that consciousness used a form of
neutralized psychic energy that he referred to as attention cathexis, whereby
persons were aware of a particular idea or feeling as a result of investing a
discrete amount of psychic energy in the idea or feeling.
The Preconscious. The preconscious system is composed of those mental
events, processes, and contents that can be brought into conscious awareness
by focusing attention. Although most persons are not consciously aware of
the appearance of their first-grade teacher, they ordinarily can bring this
image to mind by deliberately focusing attention on the memory.
Conceptually, the preconscious interfaces with both unconscious and
conscious regions of the mind. To reach conscious awareness, the contents of
the unconscious must become linked with words and thus become
preconscious. The preconscious system also serves to maintain the repressive
barrier and to censor unacceptable wishes and desires.
The Unconscious. The unconscious system is dynamic. Its mental
contents and processes are kept from conscious awareness through the force
of censorship or repression, and it is closely related to instinctual drives. At
this point in Freud’s theory of development, instincts were thought to consist
of sexual and self-preservative drives, and the unconscious was thought to
contain the mental representations and derivatives of the sexual instinct
primarily.
The content of the unconscious is limited to wishes seeking fulfillment.
These wishes motivate dream and neurotic symptom formation. This view is
now considered reductionist.
The unconscious system is characterized by primary process thinking,
principally aimed at facilitating wish fulfillment and instinctual discharge. It
is governed by the pleasure principle and, therefore, disregards logical
connections; it has no concept of time, represents wishes as fulfillments,
permits contradictions to exist simultaneously, and denies the existence of
negatives. The primary process is also characterized by extreme mobility of


<<<PAGE 3325>>>
drive cathexis; the investment of psychic energy can shift from object to
object without opposition. Memories in the unconscious have been divorced
from their connection with verbal symbols. Hence, when words are reapplied
to forgotten memory traits, as in psychoanalytic treatment, the verbal cathexis
allows the memories to reach consciousness again.
The contents of the unconscious can become conscious only by passing
through the preconscious. When censors are overpowered, the elements can
enter consciousness.
Limitations of the Topographical Theory. Freud soon realized that two
primary deficiencies in the topographical theory limited its usefulness. First,
many patients’ defense mechanisms that guard against distressing wishes,
feelings, or thoughts were not initially accessible to consciousness. Thus,
repression cannot be identical with preconscious, because, by definition, this
region of the mind is accessible to consciousness. Second, Freud’s patients
frequently demonstrated an unconscious need for punishment. This clinical
observation made it unlikely that the moral agency making the demand for
punishment could be allied with anti-instinctual forces available to conscious
awareness in the preconscious. These difficulties led Freud to discard the
topographical theory. However, certain concepts derived from the theory
continue to be useful, mainly primary and secondary thought processes, the
fundamental importance of wish fulfillment, the existence of a dynamic
unconscious, and a tendency toward regression under frustrating conditions.
Instinct or Drive Theory
After the development of the topographical model, Freud turned his attention
to the complexities of instinct theory. Freud was determined to anchor his
psychological theory in biology. His choice led to terminologic and
conceptual difficulties when he used terms derived from biology to denote
psychological constructs. Instinct, for example, refers to a pattern of speciesspecific behavior that is genetically derived and, therefore, is more or less
independent of learning. Modern research demonstrating that instinctual
patterns are modified through experiential learning has made Freud’s
instinctual theory problematic. Further confusion has stemmed from the
ambiguity inherent in a concept on the borderland between the biologic and


<<<PAGE 3326>>>
the psychological: Should the mental representation aspect of the term and
the physiologic component be integrated or separated? Although drive may
have been closer than the instinct to Freud’s meaning, in contemporary usage,
the two terms are often used interchangeably.
In Freud’s view, an instinct has four principal characteristics: source,
impetus, aim, and object. The source refers to the part of the body from
which the instinct arises. The impetus is the amount of force or intensity
associated with the instinct. The aim refers to any action directed toward
tension discharge or satisfaction, and the object is the target (often a person)
for this action.
Instincts
LIBIDO. The ambiguity in the term instinctual drive is also reflected in the use

of the term libido. Briefly, Freud regarded the sexual instinct as a
psychophysiological process that had both mental and physiologic
manifestations. Essentially, he used the term libido to refer to “the force by
which the sexual instinct is represented in mind.” Thus, in its accepted sense,
libido refers specifically to the mental manifestations of the sexual instinct.
Freud recognized early that the sexual instinct did not originate in a finished
or final form, as represented by genital primacy. Instead, it underwent a
complex process of development, at each phase of which the libido had
specific aims and objects that diverged in varying degrees from the simple
aim of genital union. The libido theory thus came to include all of these
manifestations and the complicated paths they followed in the course of
psychosexual development.
From 1905 on, Freud maintained a dual instinct theory,
subsuming sexual instincts and ego instincts connected with selfpreservation. Until 1914, with the publication of On Narcissism, Freud had
paid little attention to ego instincts; in this communication, however, Freud
invested ego instinct with libido for the first time by postulating an ego libido
and an object libido. Freud thus viewed narcissistic investment as an
essentially libidinal instinct and called the remaining nonsexual components
the ego instincts.
EGO INSTINCTS.

AGGRESSION. When psychoanalysts today discuss the dual instinct theory,


<<<PAGE 3327>>>
they are generally referring to libido and aggression. Freud, however,
originally conceptualized aggression as a component of the sexual instincts in
the form of sadism. As he became aware that sadism had nonsexual aspects,
he made finer gradations, which enabled him to categorize aggression and
hate as part of the ego instincts and the libidinal aspects of sadism as
components of the sexual instincts. Finally, in 1923, to account for the
clinical data he was observing, he was compelled to conceive of aggression
as a separate instinct in its own right. The source of this instinct, according to
Freud, was mostly in skeletal muscles, and the aim of the aggressive instincts
was destruction.
Before designating aggression as a separate
instinct, Freud, in 1920, subsumed the ego instincts under a broader category
of life instincts. These were juxtaposed with death instincts and were referred
to as Eros and Thanatos in Beyond the Pleasure Principle. Life and death
instincts were regarded as forces underlying sexual and aggressive instincts.
Although Freud could not provide clinical data that directly verified the death
instinct, he thought the instinct could be inferred by observing repetition
compulsion, a person’s tendency to repeat past traumatic behavior. Freud
thought that the dominant force in biologic organisms had to be the death
instinct. In contrast to the death instinct, eros (the life instinct) refers to the
tendency of particles to reunite or bind to one another, as in sexual
reproduction. The prevalent view today is that the dual instincts of sexuality
and aggression suffice to explain most clinical phenomena without recourse
to a death instinct.
LIFE AND DEATH INSTINCTS.

Pleasure and Reality Principles. In 1911, Freud described two basic
tenets of mental functioning: the pleasure principle and the reality principle.
He essentially recast the primary process and secondary process dichotomy
into the pleasure and reality principles and thus took an essential step toward
solidifying the notion of the ego. Both principles, in Freud’s view, are aspects
of ego functioning. The pleasure principle is defined as an inborn tendency
of the organism to avoid pain and to seek pleasure through the discharge of
tension. The reality principle, on the other hand, is considered to be a learned
function closely related to the maturation of the ego; this principle modifies
the pleasure principle and requires delay or postponement of immediate


<<<PAGE 3328>>>
gratification.
Infantile Sexuality. Freud set forth the three central tenets of
psychoanalytic theory when he published Three Essays on the Theory of
Sexuality. First, he broadened the definition of sexuality to include forms of
pleasure that transcend genital sexuality. Second, he established a
developmental theory of childhood sexuality that delineated the vicissitudes
of erotic activity from birth through puberty. Third, he forged a conceptual
linkage between neuroses and perversions.
Freud’s notion that sexual drives influence children has made some
persons reluctant to accept psychoanalysis. Freud noted that infants are
capable of erotic activity from birth, but the earliest manifestations of
infantile sexuality are nonsexual and are associated with such bodily
functions as feeding and bowel–bladder control. As libidinal energy shifts
from the oral zone to the anal zone to the phallic zone, each stage of
development is thought to build on and to subsume the accomplishments of
the preceding stage. The oral stage, which occupies the first 12 to 18 months
of life, centers on the mouth and lips and is manifested in chewing, biting,
and sucking. The dominant erotic activity of the anal stage, from 18 to 36
months of age, involves bowel function and control. The phallic stage, from
3 to 5 years of life, initially focuses on urination as the source of erotic
activity. Freud suggested that phallic erotic activity in boys is a preliminary
stage leading to adult genital activity. Whereas the penis remains the
principal sexual organ throughout male psychosexual development, Freud
postulated that females have two principal erotogenic zones: the vagina and
the clitoris. He thought that the clitoris was the chief erotogenic focus during
the infantile genital period, but that erotic primacy shifted to the vagina after
puberty. Studies of human sexuality have subsequently questioned the
validity of this distinction.
Freud discovered that in the psychoneuroses, only a limited number of the
sexual impulses that had undergone repression and were responsible for
creating and maintaining the neurotic symptoms were normal. For the most
part, these were the same impulses that were given overt expression in the
perversions. The neuroses, then, were the negative of perversions.
Object Relationships in Instinct Theory. Freud suggested that the


<<<PAGE 3329>>>
choice of a love object in adult life, the love relationship itself, and the nature
of all other object relationships depend primarily on the nature and quality of
children’s relationships. In describing the libidinal phases of psychosexual
development, Freud repeatedly referred to the significance of a child’s
relationships with parents and other significant persons in the environment.
The awareness of the external world of objects develops gradually in
infants. Soon after birth, they are primarily aware of physical sensations, such
as hunger, cold, and pain, which give rise to tension, and caregivers are
regarded primarily as persons who relieve their tension or remove painful
stimuli. Recent infant research, however, suggests that awareness of others
begins much sooner than Freud initially thought. Table 34-10 summarizes the
stages of psychosexual development and the object relationships associated
with each stage. Although the table goes only as far as young adulthood,
development is now recognized as continuing throughout adult life.
Concept of Narcissism. According to Greek myth, Narcissus, a beautiful
youth, fell in love with his reflection in the water of a pool and drowned in
his attempt to embrace his beloved image. Freud used the term narcissism to
describe situations in which an individual’s libido was invested in the ego
itself rather than other persons. This concept of narcissism presented him
with vexing problems for his instinct theory and essentially violated his
distinction between libidinal instincts and ego or self-preservative instincts.
Freud’s understanding of narcissism led him to use the term to describe a
wide array of psychiatric disorders, very much in contrast to the term’s
contemporary use to describe a specific personality disorder. Freud grouped
several disorders as the narcissistic neuroses, in which a person’s libido is
withdrawn from objects and turned inward. He believed that this withdrawal
of libidinal attachment to objects accounted for the loss of reality testing in
psychotic patients; grandiosity and omnipotence in such patients reflected
excessive libidinal investment in the ego.
Freud did not limit his use of narcissism to psychoses. In states of physical
illness and hypochondriasis, he observed that libidinal investment was
frequently withdrawn from external objects and outside activities and
interests. Similarly, he suggested that in normal sleep, libido was also
withdrawn and reinvested in a sleeper’s own body. Freud regarded
homosexuality as an instance of a narcissistic form of object choice, in which


<<<PAGE 3330>>>
persons fall in love with an idealized version of themselves projected onto
another person. He also found narcissistic manifestations in the beliefs and
myths of primitive people, especially those involving the ability to influence
external events through the magical omnipotence of thought processes. In the
course of normal development, children also exhibit this belief in their
omnipotence.
Table 34-10
Stages of Psychosexual Development
Oral Stage
Definition

Earliest stage of development in which the infant’s
needs, perceptions, and modes of expression are
primarily centered in mouth, lips, tongue, and other
organs related to oral zone and around the sucking
reflex.

Description

Oral zone maintains dominance in psychic
organization through approximately first 18 mo of
life. Oral sensations include thirst, hunger,
pleasurable tactile stimulations evoked by the
nipple or its substitute, and sensations related to
swallowing and satiation. Oral drives consist of two
components: libidinal and aggressive. States of
oral tension lead to seeking oral gratification, as in
quiescence at the end of nursing. Oral triad
consists of wishes to eat, sleep, and reach that
relaxation that occurs at the end of sucking just
before onset of sleep. Libidinal needs (oral
erotism) predominate in early oral phase, whereas
they are mixed with more aggressive components
later (oral sadism). Oral aggression is expressed in
biting, chewing, spitting, or crying. Oral aggression
is connected with primitive wishes and fantasies of
biting, devouring, and destroying.


<<<PAGE 3331>>>
Objectives

To establish a trusting dependence on nursing and
sustaining objects, establish comfortable
expression and gratification of oral libidinal needs
without excessive conflict or ambivalence from oral
sadistic wishes.

Pathologic
traits

Excessive oral gratifications or deprivation can result
in libidinal fixations contributing to pathologic traits.
Such traits can include excessive optimism,
narcissism, pessimism (as in depressive states), or
demandingness. Envy and jealousy are often
associated with oral traits.

Character
traits

Successful resolution of the oral phase results in
capacities to give to and receive from others
without excessive dependence or envy and to rely
on others with a sense of trust as well as with a
sense of self-reliance and self-trust. Oral
characters are often excessively dependent and
require others to give to them and look after them
and are often extremely dependent on others for
maintaining self-esteem. These are readily
amalgamated with narcissistic needs.

Anal Stage
Definition

The stage of psychosexual development promoted by
maturation of neuromuscular control over
sphincters, particularly the anal sphincter,
permitting greater voluntary control over retention
or expulsion of feces.

Description

This period extends roughly from 1 to 3 yr of age,
marked by recognizable intensification of
aggressive drives mixed with libidinal components
in sadistic impulses. Acquisition of voluntary
sphincter control is associated with an increasing
shift from passivity to activity. Conflicts over anal


<<<PAGE 3332>>>
control and struggles with parents over retaining or
expelling feces in toilet training give rise to
increased ambivalence, together with conflicts over
separation, individuation, and independence. Anal
erotism refers to sexual pleasure in anal
functioning, both in retaining precious feces and
presenting them as a precious gift to the parent.
Anal sadism refers to expression of aggressive
wishes connected with discharging feces as
powerful and destructive weapons. These wishes
are often displayed in fantasies of bombing or
explosions.
Objectives

The anal period is marked by greater striving for
independence and separation from dependence on
and control of parents. Objectives of sphincter
control without overcontrol (fecal retention) or loss
of control (messing) are matched by attempts to
achieve autonomy and independence without
excessive shame or self-doubt from loss of control.

Pathologic
traits

Maladaptive character traits, often apparently
inconsistent, derive from anal erotism and
defenses against it. Orderliness, obstinacy,
stubbornness, willfulness, frugality, and parsimony
are features of anal character. When defenses
against anal traits are less effective, anal character
reveals traits of heightened ambivalence, lack of
tidiness, messiness, defiance, rage, and
sadomasochistic tendencies. Anal characteristics
and defenses are typically seen in obsessivecompulsive neuroses.

Character
traits

Successful resolution of the anal phase provides the
basis for development of personal autonomy, a
capacity for independence and personal initiative
without guilt, a capacity for self-determining


<<<PAGE 3333>>>
behavior without a sense of shame or self-doubt, a
lack of ambivalence, and a capacity for willing
cooperation without either excessive willfulness or
self-diminution or defeat.
Urethral Stage
Definition

This stage was not explicitly treated by Freud but
serves as a transitional stage between anal and
phallic stages. It shares some characteristics of
anal phase and some from subsequent phallic
phase.

Description

Characteristics of the urethral phase are often
subsumed under phallic phase. Urethral erotism,
however, refers to pleasure in urination as well as
pleasure in urethral retention analogous to anal
retention. Similar issues of performance and
control are related to urethral functioning. Urethral
functioning may also have sadistic quality, often
reflecting persistence of anal sadistic urges. Loss
of urethral control, as in enuresis, may frequently
have regressive significance that reactivates anal
conflicts.

Objectives

At stake are issues of control and urethral
performance and loss of control. It is not clear
whether or to what extent objectives of urethral
functioning differ from those of anal period, except
that they are expressed in a later developmental
stage.

Pathologic
traits

The predominant urethral trait is competitiveness and
ambition, probably related to compensation for
shame due to loss of urethral control. This may
instigate development of penis envy, related to
feminine sense of shame and inadequacy in being
unable to match male urethral performance. This


<<<PAGE 3334>>>
may also be related to issues of control and
shaming.
Character
traits

Besides healthy effects analogous to those from the
anal period, urethral competence provides a sense
of pride and self-competence based on
performance. Urethral performance is an area in
which the small boy can imitate and try to match
his father’s more adult performance. Resolution of
urethral conflicts sets the stage for budding gender
identity and subsequent identifications.

Phallic Stage
Definition

Phallic stage begins sometime during year 3 and
continues until approximately the end of year 5.

Description

The phallic phase is characterized by a primary
focusing of sexual interests, stimulation, and
excitement in the genital area. The penis becomes
the organ of principal interest to children of both
sexes, with lack of penis in females being
considered as evidence of castration. The phallic
phase is associated with an increase in genital
masturbation accompanied by predominantly
unconscious fantasies of sexual involvement with
the opposite-sex parent. Threats of castration and
the related anxiety are connected with guilt over
masturbation and oedipal wishes. During this
phase oedipal involvement and conflict are
established and consolidated.

Objectives

To focus erotic interest in genital area and genital
functions. This lays the foundation for gender
identity and serves to integrate residues of
previous stages into a predominantly genital–
sexual orientation. Establishing the oedipal
situation is essential for furtherance of subsequent


<<<PAGE 3335>>>
identifications, serving as a basis for important and
perduring dimensions of character organization.
Pathologic
traits

Derivation of pathologic traits from phallic–oedipal
involvement is sufficiently complex and subject to
such a variety of modifications that it encompasses
nearly the whole of neurotic development. Issues,
however, focus on castration in males and penis
envy in females. Patterns of internalization
developed from resolution of the Oedipus complex
provide another important focus of developmental
distortions. The influence of castration anxiety and
penis envy, defenses against them, and patterns of
identification are primary determinants of the
development of human character. They also
subsume and integrate residues of previous
psychosexual stages, so that fixations or conflicts
deriving from preceding stages can contaminate
and modify oedipal resolution.

Character
traits

The phallic stage provides the foundation for an
emerging sense of sexual identity, curiosity without
embarrassment, initiative without guilt, as well as
mastery not only over objects and persons in the
environment but also over internal processes and
impulses. Resolution of the oedipal conflict gives
rise to internal structural capacities for regulation of
drive impulses and their direction to constructive
ends. The internal sources of such regulation are
the ego and superego, based on introjections and
identifications derived primarily from parental
figures.

Latency Stage
Definition

This is the stage of relative instinctual quiescence or
inactivity of sexual drive during the period from the


<<<PAGE 3336>>>
resolution of the Oedipus complex until
pubescence (from about 5–6 yr until about 11–13
yr).
Description

The institution of the superego at the close of the
oedipal period and further maturation of ego
functions allow for considerably greater degrees of
control of instinctual impulses and motives. Sexual
interests are generally thought to be quiescent.
This is a period of primarily homosexual affiliations
for both boys and girls, as well as a sublimation of
libidinal and aggressive energies into energetic
learning and play activities, exploring the
environment, and becoming more proficient in
dealing with the world of things and persons
around them. It is a period for development of
important skills. The relative strength of regulatory
elements often gives rise to patterns of behavior
that are somewhat obsessive and hypercontrolling.

Objectives

The primary objective is further integration of oedipal
identifications and consolidation of gender and
sex-role identity. Relative quiescence and control
of instinctual impulses allow for development of
ego apparatuses and mastery of skills. Further
identificatory components may be added to the
oedipal ones on the basis of broadening contacts
with other significant figures outside the family
(e.g., teachers, coaches, and other adult figures).

Pathologic
traits

Dangers in the latency period can arise either from the
lack of development of inner controls or an excess
of them. Lack of control can lead to failure to
sufficiently sublimate energies in the interest of
learning and the development of skills; an excess
of inner control, however, can lead to premature
closure of personality development and precocious


<<<PAGE 3337>>>
elaboration of obsessive character traits.
Character
traits

The latency period is frequently regarded as a period
of relatively unimportant inactivity in the
developmental schema. More recently, greater
respect has been gained for the developmental
processes in this period. Important consolidations
and additions are made to basic postoedipal
identifications and to processes of integrating and
consolidating previous attainments in
psychosexual development and establishing
decisive patterns of adaptive functioning. The child
can develop a sense of industry and capacity for
mastery of objects and concepts that allows
autonomous functioning and a sense of initiative
without risk of failure or defeat or a sense of
inferiority. These are all important attainments that
need to be further integrated, ultimately as the
essential basis for a mature adult life of satisfaction
in work and love.

Genital Stage
Definition

The genital or adolescent phase extends from the
onset of puberty from approximately ages 11–13
until young adulthood. Current thinking tends to
subdivide this stage into preadolescent, early
adolescent, middle adolescent, late adolescent,
and even postadolescent periods.

Description

Physiologic maturation of systems of genital (sexual)
functioning and attendant hormonal systems leads
to intensification of instinctual, particularly libidinal,
drives. This produces a regression in personality
organization, which reopens conflicts of previous
stages of psychosexual development and provides
opportunity for re-resolution of these conflicts in the
context of achieving a mature sexual and adult


<<<PAGE 3338>>>
identity. This period has been described as a
“second individuation.”
Objectives

Primary objectives are the ultimate separation from
dependence on and attachment to parents and
establishment of mature, nonincestuous,
heterosexual object relations. Related are the
achievement of a mature sense of personal identity
and acceptance and integration of adult roles and
functions that permit new adaptive integrations with
social expectations and cultural values.

Pathologic
traits

Pathologic deviations due to failure to achieve
successful resolution of this stage of development
are multiple and complex. Defects can arise from a
whole spectrum of psychosexual residues, since
the developmental task of adolescence is in a
sense a partial reopening, reworking, and
reintegration of all of these aspects of
development. Previous unsuccessful resolutions
and fixations in various phases or aspects of
psychosexual development will produce pathologic
defects in the emerging adult personality and
defects in identity formation.

Character
traits

Successful resolution and reintegration of previous
psychosexual stages in the adolescent genital
phase set the stage normally for a fully mature
personality with the capacity for full and satisfying
genital potency and a self-integrated and
consistent sense of identity. This provides the
basis for a capacity for self-realization and
meaningful participation in areas of work, love, and
in creative and productive application to satisfying
and meaningful goals and values.


<<<PAGE 3339>>>
Freud postulated a state of primary narcissism at birth in which the libido
is stored in the ego. He viewed the neonate as completely narcissistic, with
the entire libidinal investment in physiologic needs and satisfaction. He
referred to this self-investment as ego libido. The infantile state of selfabsorption changes only gradually, according to Freud, with the dawning
awareness that a separate person—the mothering figure—is responsible for
gratifying an infant’s needs. This realization leads to the gradual withdrawal
of the libido from the self and its redirection toward the external object.
Hence, the development of object relations in infants parallels the shift from
primary narcissism to object attachment. The libidinal investment in the
object is referred to as object libido. If a developing child suffers rebuffs or
trauma from the caretaking figure, object libido may be withdrawn and
reinvested in the ego. Freud called this regressive posture secondary
narcissism.
Freud used the term narcissism to describe many different dimensions of
human experience. At times, he used it to describe a perversion in which
persons used their bodies or body parts as objects of sexual arousal. At other
times, he used the term to describe a developmental phase, as in primary
narcissism. In still other instances, the term referred to a particular object
choice. Freud distinguished love objects who are chosen “according to the
narcissistic type,” in which case the object resembles the subject’s idealized
or fantasied self-image, from objects chosen according to the “anaclitic,” in
which the love object resembles a caretaker from early in life. Finally, Freud
also used the word narcissism interchangeably and synonymously with selfesteem.
Ego Psychology
Although Freud had used the construct of the ego throughout the evolution of
psychoanalytic theory, ego psychology, as it is known today, really began
with the publication in 1923 of The Ego and the Id. This landmark
publication also represented a transition in Freud’s thinking from the
topographical model of the mind to the tripartite structural model of ego, id,
and superego. He had observed repeatedly that not all unconscious processes
could be relegated to a person’s instinctual life. Elements of the conscience,
as well as functions of the ego, are also unconscious.


<<<PAGE 3340>>>
Structural Theory of the Mind. The structural model of the psychic
apparatus is the cornerstone of ego psychology. The three provinces—id, ego,
and superego—are distinguished by their different functions.
ID. Freud used the term id to refer to a reservoir of unorganized instinctual

drives. Operating under the domination of the primary process, the id cannot
delay or modify the instinctual drives with which an infant is born. The id,
however, should not be viewed as synonymous with the unconscious,
because both the ego and the superego have unconscious components.
The ego spans all three topographical dimensions of conscious,
preconscious, and unconscious. Logical and abstract thinking and verbal
expression are associated with conscious and preconscious functions of the
ego. Defense mechanisms reside in the unconscious domain of the ego. The
ego, the executive organ of the psyche, controls motility, perception, contact
with reality, and, through the defense mechanisms available to it, the delay
and modulation of drive expression.
Freud believed that the id is modified due to the impact of the external
world on the drives. The pressures of external reality enable the ego to
appropriate the energies of the id to do its work. As the ego brings influences
from the external world to bear on the id, it simultaneously substitutes the
reality principle for the pleasure principle. Freud emphasized the role of
conflict within the structural model and observed that conflict occurs initially
between the id and the outside world, only to be transformed later to conflict
between the id and the ego.
The third component of the tripartite structural model is the superego. The
superego establishes and maintains an individual’s moral conscience based
on a complex system of ideals and values internalized by parents. Freud
viewed the superego as the heir to the Oedipus complex. Children internalize
parental values and standards at about the age of 5 or 6 years. The superego
then serves as an agency that provides ongoing scrutiny of a person’s
behavior, thoughts, and feelings; it makes comparisons with expected
standards of behavior and offers approval or disapproval. These activities
occur mostly unconsciously.
The ego-ideal is often regarded as a component of the superego. It is an
agency that prescribes what a person should do according to internalized
EGO.


<<<PAGE 3341>>>
standards and values. The superego, by contrast, is an agency of moral
conscience that proscribes—that is, dictates what a person should not do.
Throughout the latency period and after that, persons continue to build on
early identifications through their contact with admired figures who
contribute to the formation of moral standards, aspirations, and ideals.
Functions of the Ego. Modern ego psychologists have identified a set of
essential ego functions that characterizes the operations of the ego. These
descriptions reflect the ego activities that are generally regarded as
fundamental.
CONTROL AND REGULATION OF INSTINCTUAL DRIVES. The development of the

capacity to delay or postpone drive discharge, like the capacity to test reality,
is closely related to the early childhood progression from the pleasure
principle to the reality principle. This capacity is also an essential aspect of
the ego’s role as a mediator between the id and the outside world. Part of
infants’ socialization to the external world is acquiring language and
secondary process or logical thinking.
JUDGMENT. A closely related ego function is judgment, which involves the

ability to anticipate the consequences of actions. As with the control and
regulation of instinctual drives, judgment develops in parallel with the growth
of secondary process thinking. The ability to think logically allows
assessment of how contemplated behavior may affect others.
RELATION TO REALITY. The mediation between the internal world and external

reality is a crucial function of the ego. Relations with the outside world can
be divided into three aspects: the sense of reality, reality testing, and
adaptation to reality. The sense of reality develops in concert with an infant’s
dawning awareness of bodily sensations. The ability to distinguish outside the
body from the inside is an essential aspect of the sense of reality, and
disturbances of body boundaries, such as depersonalization, reflect
impairment in this ego function. Reality testing, an ego function of paramount
importance, refers to the capacity to distinguish internal fantasy from external
reality. This function differentiates persons who are psychotic from those
who are not. Adaptation to reality involves persons’ ability to use their


<<<PAGE 3342>>>
resources to develop effective responses to changing circumstances based on
previous experience with reality.
Table 34-11
Parallel Lines of Development
Instinctual
Phases

Separation–
Individuation

Object
Relations

Psychosocial
Crises

Oral

Autism, symbiosis Primary
narcissism,
needsatisfying

Trust or mistrust

Anal

Differentiation,
Needpracticing,
satisfying,
rapprochement
object
constancy

Autonomy or
shame, selfdoubt

Phallic

Object constancy, Object
Initiative or guilt
Oedipal
constancy,
complex
ambivalence

Latency

—

—

Industry or
inferiority

Adolescence Genitality,
secondary
individuation

Object love

Identity or identity
confusion

Adulthood

—

Intimacy or
isolation,
generativity or
stagnation,
integrity or
despair

Mature genitality

The capacity to form mutually satisfying
relationships is related in part to patterns of internalization stemming from
OBJECT

RELATIONSHIPS.


<<<PAGE 3343>>>
early interactions with parents and other significant figures. This ability is
also a fundamental function of the ego, in that satisfying relatedness depends
on the ability to integrate positive and negative aspects of others and self and
to maintain an internal sense of others even in their absence. Similarly,
mastery of drive derivatives is also crucial to the achievement of satisfying
relationships. Although Freud did not develop an extensive object relations
theory, British psychoanalysts, such as Ronald Fairbairn (1889–1964) and
Michael Balint (1896–1970), elaborated extensively on the early stages in
infants’ relationships with need-satisfying objects and on the gradual
development of a sense of separateness from the mother. Another of their
British colleagues, Donald W. Winnicott (1896–1971), described the
transitional object (e.g., a blanket, teddy bear, or pacifier) as the link between
developing children and their mothers. A child can separate from the mother
because a transitional object provides feelings of security in her absence. The
stages of human development and object relations theory are summarized in
Table 34-11.
SYNTHETIC FUNCTION OF THE EGO. First described by Herman Nunberg in

1931, the synthetic function refers to the ego’s capacity to integrate diverse
elements into an overall unity. Different aspects of self and others, for
example, are synthesized into a consistent representation that endures over
time. The function also involves organizing, coordinating, and generalizing
or simplifying large amounts of data.
PRIMARY AUTONOMOUS EGO FUNCTIONS. Heinz Hartmann described the so-

called primary autonomous functions of the ego as rudimentary apparatuses
present at birth that develop independently of intrapsychic conflict between
drives and defenses. These functions include perception, learning,
intelligence, intuition, language, thinking, comprehension, and motility. In
the course of development, some of these conflict-free aspects of the ego may
eventually become involved in a conflict. They will develop normally if the
infant is raised in what Hartmann referred to as an average expectable
environment.
SECONDARY AUTONOMOUS EGO FUNCTIONS. Once the sphere where primary

autonomous function develops becomes involved with conflict, the so-called


<<<PAGE 3344>>>
secondary autonomous ego functions arise in the defense against drives. For
example, a child may develop caretaking functions as a reaction formation
against murderous wishes during the first few years. Later, the defensive
functions may be neutralized or deinstinctualized when the child grows up to
be a social worker and cares for homeless persons.
Defense Mechanisms. At each phase of libidinal development, specific
drive components evoke characteristic ego defenses. The anal phase, for
example, is associated with reaction formation, as manifested by the
development of shame and disgust concerning anal impulses and pleasures.
Defenses can be grouped hierarchically according to the relative degree of
maturity associated with them. Narcissistic defenses are the most primitive
and appear in children and persons who are psychotically disturbed.
Immature defenses are seen in adolescents and some nonpsychotic patients.
Neurotic defenses are encountered in obsessive-compulsive and hysterical
patients as well as in adults under stress. Table 34-12 lists the defense
mechanisms, according to George Valliant’s classification of the four types.
Theory of Anxiety. Freud initially conceptualized anxiety as “dammed-up
libido.” Essentially, a physiologic increase in sexual tension leads to a
corresponding increase in libido, the mental representation of the physiologic
event. This buildup causes the actual neuroses. Later, with the development
of the structural model, Freud developed a new theory of a second type of
anxiety that he referred to as signal anxiety. In this model, anxiety operates at
an unconscious level and serves to mobilize the ego’s resources to avert
danger. Either external or internal sources of danger can produce a signal that
leads the ego to marshal specific defense mechanisms to guard against or
reduce instinctual excitation.
Freud’s later theory of anxiety explains neurotic symptoms as the ego’s
partial failure to cope with distressing stimuli. The drive derivatives
associated with danger may not have been adequately contained by the
defense mechanisms used by the ego. In phobias, for example, Freud
explained that fear of an external threat (e.g., dogs or snakes) is an
externalization of internal danger.
Danger situations can also be linked to developmental stages and can
create a developmental hierarchy of anxiety. The earliest dangerous situation


<<<PAGE 3345>>>
is a fear of disintegration or annihilation, often associated with concerns
about fusion with an external object. As infants mature and recognize the
mothering figure as a separate person, separation anxiety, or fear of the loss
of an object, becomes more prominent. During the oedipal psychosexual
stage, girls are most concerned about losing the love of the most crucial
figure in their lives, their mother. Boys are primarily anxious about bodily
injury or castration. After resolving the oedipal conflict, a more mature form
of anxiety occurs, often termed superego anxiety. This latency-age concern
involves the fear that internalized parental representations, contained in the
superego, will cease to love, or will angrily punish, the child.
Table 34-12
Classification of Defense Mechanisms
Narcissistic-Psychotic Defenses
These defenses are usually found as part of a psychotic process, but
may also occur in young children and adult dreams or fantasies.
They share the common note of avoiding, negating, or distorting
reality.
Projection

Perceiving and reacting to unacceptable inner
impulses and their derivatives as though they
were outside the self. On a psychotic level, this
takes the form of frank delusions about external
reality, usually persecutory, includes both
perception of one’s own feelings and those of
another with subsequent acting on the
perception (psychotic paranoid delusions).
Impulses may derive from id or superego
(hallucinated recriminations).

Denial

Psychotic denial of external reality, unlike
repression, affects perception of external reality
more than perception of internal reality. Seeing,
but refusing to acknowledge what one sees, or
hearing and negating what is actually heard are


<<<PAGE 3346>>>
examples of denial and exemplify the close
relationship of denial to sensory experience.
Not all denial, however, is necessarily
psychotic. Like projection, denial may function
in the service of more neurotic or even adaptive
objectives. Denial avoids becoming aware of
some painful aspect of reality. At the psychotic
level, the denied reality may be replaced by a
fantasy or delusion.
Distortion

Grossly reshaping the experience of external
reality to suit inner needs, including unrealistic
megalomanic beliefs, hallucinations, wishfulfilling delusions, and employing sustained
feelings of delusional grandiosity, superiority, or
entitlement.

Immature Defenses
These mechanisms are fairly common in preadolescent years and in
adult character disorders. They are often mobilized by anxieties
related to intimacy or its loss. Although they are regarded as
socially awkward and undesirable, they often moderate with
improvement in interpersonal relationships or with increased
personal maturity.
Acting out

The direct expression of an unconscious wish or
impulse in action to avoid being conscious of
the accompanying affect. The unconscious
fantasy, involving objects, is lived out and
impulsively enacted in behavior, thus gratifying
the impulse more than the prohibition against it.
On a chronic level, acting out involves giving in
to impulses to avoid the tension that would
result from postponement of their expression.

Blocking

An inhibition, usually temporary in nature, of
affects especially, but possibly also thinking


<<<PAGE 3347>>>
and impulses. It is close to repression in its
effects but has a component of tension arising
from the inhibition of the impulse, affect, or
thought.
Hypochondriasis Transformation of reproach toward others arising
from bereavement, loneliness, or unacceptable
aggressive impulses, into self-reproach in the
form of somatic complaints of pain, illness, and
so forth. Real illness may also be
overemphasized or exaggerated for its evasive
and regressive possibilities. Thus, responsibility
may be avoided, guilt may be circumvented,
and instinctual impulses may be warded off.
Introjection

In addition to the developmental functions of the
process of introjection, it also can serve specific
defensive functions. The introjection of a loved
object involves the internalization of
characteristics of the object with the goal of
ensuring closeness to and constant presence
of the object. Anxiety consequent to separation
or tension arising out of ambivalence toward
the object is thus diminished. If the object is
lost, introjection nullifies or negates the loss by
taking on characteristics of the object, thus in a
sense internally preserving the object. Even if
the object is not lost, the internalization usually
involves a shift of cathexis reflecting a
significant alteration in the object relationship.
Introjection of a feared object serves to avoid
anxiety through internalizing the aggressive
characteristic of the object, thereby putting the
aggression under one’s own control. The
aggression is no longer felt as coming from
outside, but is taken within and utilized
defensively, thus turning the subject’s weak,


<<<PAGE 3348>>>
passive position into an active, strong one. The
classic example is “identification with the
aggressor.” Introjection can also take place out
of a sense of guilt in which the self-punishing
introject is attributable to the hostile-destructive
component of an ambivalent tie to an object.
Thus, the self-punitive qualities of the object
are taken over and established within one’s self
as a symptom or character trait, which
effectively represents both the destruction and
the preservation of the object. This is also
called identification with the victim.
Passiveaggressive
behavior

Aggression toward an object expressed indirectly
and ineffectively through passivity, masochism,
and turning against the self.

Projection

On a nonpsychotic level, projection involves
attributing one’s own unacknowledged feelings
to others; it includes severe prejudice, rejection
of intimacy through suspiciousness,
hypervigilance to external danger, and injustice
collecting. Projection operates correlatively to
introjection, such that the material of the
projection derives from the internalized but
usually unconscious configuration of the
subject’s introjects. At higher levels of function,
projection may take the form of misattributing or
misinterpreting motives, attitudes, feelings, or
intentions of others.

Regression

A return to a previous stage of development or
functioning to avoid the anxieties or hostilities
involved in later stages. A return to earlier
points of fixation embodying modes of behavior
previously given up. This is often the result of a
disruption of equilibrium at a later phase of


<<<PAGE 3349>>>
development. This reflects a basic tendency to
achieve instinctual gratification or to escape
instinctual tension by returning to earlier modes
and levels of gratification when later and more
differentiated modes fail or involve intolerable
conflict.
Schizoid fantasy The tendency to use fantasy and to indulge in
autistic retreat for the purpose of conflict
resolution and gratification.
Somatization

The defensive conversion of psychic derivatives
into bodily symptoms; tendency to react with
somatic rather than psychic manifestations.
Infantile somatic responses are replaced by
thought and affect during development
(desomatization); regression to earlier somatic
forms or response (resomatization) may result
from unresolved conflicts and may play an
important role in psychophysiological and
psychosomatic reactions.

Neurotic Defenses
These are common in apparently normal and healthy individuals as
well as in neurotic disorders. They function usually in the
alleviation of distressing affects and may be expressed in neurotic
forms of behavior. Depending on circumstances, they can also
have an adaptive or socially acceptable aspect.
Controlling

The excessive attempt to manage or regulate
events or objects in the environment in the
interest of minimizing anxiety and solving
internal conflicts.

Displacement

Involves a purposeful, unconscious shifting of
impulses or affective investment from one
object to another in the interest of solving a


<<<PAGE 3350>>>
conflict. Although the object is changed, the
instinctual nature of the impulse and its aim
remain unchanged.
Dissociation

A temporary but drastic modification of character
or sense of personal identity to avoid emotional
distress; it includes fugue states and hysterical
conversion reactions.

Externalization

A general term, correlative to internalization,
referring to the tendency to perceive in the
external world and in external objects
components of one’s own personality, including
instinctual impulses, conflicts, moods, attitudes,
and styles of thinking. It is a more general term
than projection, which is defined by its
derivation from and correlation with specific
introjects.

Inhibition

The unconsciously determined limitation or
renunciation of specific ego functions, singly or
in combination, to avoid anxiety arising out of
conflict with instinctual impulses, superego, or
environmental forces or figures.

Intellectualization The control of affects and impulses by way of
thinking about them instead of experiencing
them. It is a systematic excess of thinking,
deprived of its affect, to defend against anxiety
caused by unacceptable impulses.
Isolation

The intrapsychic splitting or separation of affect
from content resulting in repression of either
idea or affect or the displacement of affect to a
different or substitute content.

Rationalization

A justification of attitudes, beliefs, or behavior that
might otherwise be unacceptable by an
incorrect application of justifying reasons or the


<<<PAGE 3351>>>
invention of a convincing fallacy.
Reaction
formation

The management of unacceptable impulses by
permitting expression of the impulse in
antithetical form. This is equivalently an
expression of the impulse in the negative.
Where instinctual conflict is persistent, reaction
formation can become a character trait on a
permanent basis, usually as an aspect of
obsessional character.

Repression

Consists of the expelling and withholding from
conscious awareness of an idea or feeling. It
may operate either by excluding from
awareness what was once experienced on a
conscious level (secondary repression) or it
may curb ideas and feelings before they have
reached consciousness (primary repression).
The “forgetting” associated with repression is
unique in that it is often accompanied by highly
symbolic behavior, which suggests that the
repressed is not really forgotten. The important
discrimination between repression and the
more general concept of defense has been
discussed.

Sexualization

The endowing of an object or function with sexual
significance that it did not previously have, or
possesses to a lesser degree, to ward off
anxieties connected with prohibited impulses.

Mature Defenses
These mechanisms are healthy and adaptive throughout the life
cycle. They are socially adaptive and useful in the integration of
personal needs and motives, social demands, and interpersonal
relations. They can underlie seemingly admirable and virtuous
patterns of behavior.


<<<PAGE 3352>>>
Altruism

The vicarious but constructive and instinctually
gratifying service to others, even to the
detriment of the self. This must be
distinguished from altruistic surrender, which
involves a masochistic surrender of direct
gratification or of instinctual needs in favor of
fulfilling the needs of others to the detriment of
the self, with vicarious satisfaction only being
gained through introjection.

Anticipation

The realistic anticipation of or planning for future
inner discomfort: Implies overly concerned
planning, worrying, and anticipation of dire and
dreadful possible outcomes.

Asceticism

The elimination of directly pleasurable affects
attributable to an experience. The moral
element is implicit in setting values on specific
pleasures. Asceticism is directed against all
“base” pleasures perceived consciously, and
gratification is derived from the renunciation.

Humor

The overt expression of feelings without personal
discomfort or immobilization and without
unpleasant effect on others. Humor allows one
to bear, and yet focus on, what is too terrible to
be borne, in contrast to wit, which always
involves distraction or displacement away from
the affective issue.

Sublimation

The gratification of an impulse whose goal is
retained but whose aim or object is changed
from a socially objectionable one to a socially
valued one. Libidinal sublimation involves a
desexualization of drive impulses and the
placing of a value judgment that substitutes
what is valued by the superego or society.


<<<PAGE 3353>>>
Sublimation of aggressive impulses takes place
through pleasurable games and sports. Unlike
neurotic defenses, sublimation allows instincts
to be channeled rather than dammed up or
diverted. Thus, in sublimation, feelings are
acknowledged, modified, and directed toward a
relatively significant person or goal so that
modest instinctual satisfaction results.
Suppression

The conscious or semiconscious decision to
postpone attention to a conscious impulse or
conflict.

Adapted from Vaillant GE. Adaptation to Life. Boston, MA: Little Brown; 1977; Semrad E. The
operation of ego defenses in object loss. In: Moriarity DM, ed. The Loss of Loved Ones.
Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas; 1967; and Bibring GL, Dwyer TF, Huntington DS,
Valenstein AA. A study of the psychological principles in pregnancy and of the earliest
mother–child relationship: Methodological considerations. Psychoanal Stud Child. 1961;16:25.

Character. In 1913, Freud distinguished between neurotic symptoms and
personality or character traits. Neurotic symptoms develop due to the failure
of repression; character traits owe their existence to the success of
repression, that is, to the defense system that achieves its aim through a
persistent pattern of reaction formation and sublimation. In 1923, Freud also
observed that the ego could only give up important objects by identifying
with them or introjecting them. This accumulated pattern of identifications
and introjections also contributes to character formation. Freud specifically
emphasized the importance of superego formation in character construction.
Contemporary psychoanalysts regard character as a person’s habitual or
typical pattern of adaptation to internal drive forces and external
environmental forces. Character and personality are used interchangeably
and are distinguished from the ego in that they mostly refer to styles of
defense and directly observable behavior rather than feeling and thinking.
Character is also influenced by constitutional temperament, the interaction
of drive forces with early ego defenses and with environmental influences,
and various identifications with, and internalizations of, other persons
throughout life. The extent to which the ego has developed a capacity to
tolerate the delay of impulse discharge and to neutralize instinctual energy


<<<PAGE 3354>>>
determines the degree to which such character traits emerge in later life.
Exaggerated development of individual character traits at the expense of
others can lead to personality disorders or produce a vulnerability or
predisposition to psychosis.
Classic Psychoanalytic Theory of Neuroses
The classic view of the genesis of neuroses regards conflict as essential. The
conflict can arise between instinctual drives and external reality or internal
agencies, such as the id and the superego or the id and the ego. Moreover,
because the conflict has not been worked through to a realistic solution, the
drives or wishes that seek discharge have been expelled from consciousness
through repression or another defense mechanism. Their expulsion from
conscious awareness, however, does not make the drives any less powerful or
influential. As a result, the unconscious tendencies (e.g., the disguised
neurotic symptoms) fight their way back into consciousness. This theory of
the development of neurosis assumes that a rudimentary neurosis based on
the same type of conflict existed in early childhood.
Deprivation during the first few months of life because of absent or
impaired caretaking figures can adversely affect ego development. This
impairment, in turn, can fail to make appropriate identifications. The
resulting ego difficulties create problems in mediating between the drives and
the environment. Lack of capacity for the constructive expression of drives,
especially aggression, can lead some children to turn their aggression on
themselves and become overtly self-destructive. Parents who are inconsistent,
excessively harsh, or overly indulgent can influence children to develop
disordered superego functioning. The severe conflict that cannot be managed
through symptom formation can lead to extreme restrictions in ego
functioning and fundamentally impair the capacity to learn and develop new
skills.
Traumatic events that seem to threaten survival can break through defenses
when the ego has been weakened. More libidinal energy is then required to
master the excitation that results. The libido thus mobilized, however, is
withdrawn from the supply that is usually applied to external objects. This
withdrawal further diminishes the strength of the ego and produces a sense of
inadequacy. Frustrations or disappointments in adults may revive infantile


<<<PAGE 3355>>>
longings that are then dealt with through symptom formation or further
regression.
In his classic studies, Freud described four different types of childhood
neuroses, three of which had later neurotic developments in adult life. This
well-known series of cases shown in tabulated form in Table 34-13
exemplifies some of Freud’s important conclusions: (1) neurotic reactions in
the adult are associated frequently with neurotic reactions in childhood; (2)
the connection is sometimes continuous but more often is separated by a
latent period of nonneurosis; and (3) infantile sexuality, both fantasized and
real, occupies a memorable place in the early history of the patient.
Table 34-13
Classic Psychoneurotic Reactions of Childhood

Specific differences are worth noting in the four cases shown in Table 3413. First, the phobic reactions tend to start at about 4 or 5 years of age, the
obsessional reactions between 6 and 7 years, and the conversion reactions at
8 years. The degree of background disturbance is most significant in the
conversion reaction and the mixed neurosis, and it seems only slight in the
phobic and obsessional reactions. The course of the phobic reaction seems
little influenced by severe traumatic factors, whereas traumatic factors, such
as sexual seductions, play an essential role in the three other subgroups. It
was during this period that Freud elaborated his seduction hypothesis for the
cause of the neuroses, in terms of which the obsessive-compulsive and


<<<PAGE 3356>>>
hysterical reactions were alleged to originate in active and passive sexual
experiences.
Treatment and Technique
The cornerstone of psychoanalytic technique is free association, in which
patients say whatever comes to mind. Free association not only provides
analytic content, it helps to induce the regression needed for establishing and
working through the transference neurosis. When this development occurs,
all the original wishes, drives, and defenses associated with the infantile
neurosis are transferred to the person of the analyst.
As patients attempt to free associate, they soon learn that they have
difficulty saying whatever comes to mind without censoring specific
thoughts. They develop conflicts about their wishes and feelings toward the
analyst that reflect childhood conflicts. The transference that develops toward
the analyst may also serve as resistance to the process of free association.
Freud discovered that resistance was not merely a stoppage of a patient’s
associations, but also an essential revelation of the patient’s internal object
relations as they were externalized and manifested in the transference
relationship with the analyst. The systematic analysis of transference and
resistance is the essence of psychoanalysis. Freud was also aware that the
analyst might have transferences to the patient, which he called
countertransference. Countertransference, in Freud’s view, was an obstacle
that the analyst needed to understand so that it did not interfere with
treatment. In this spirit, he recognized the need for all analysts to have been
analyzed themselves. Variations in transference and their descriptions are
contained in Table 34-14. The basic mechanisms by which transferences are
effected—displacement, projection, and projective identification—are
described in Table 34-15.
Table 34-14
Transference Variants
Libidinal Transferences
Follow the classic model and usually in milder forms as positive
transference reactions but can take the form of more intense and


<<<PAGE 3357>>>
disturbing erotic transferences. They are derivatives of phallicoedipal, libidinal impulses and may be permeated variously by
pregenital influences. They can occur with varying degrees of
intensity, and in mild forms, may not even require interpretation if
they contribute to and support the therapeutic relation. Sigmund
Freud recommended that they call for interpretation only when
they begin to serve as a resistance.
Aggressive Transferences
Take the form either of negative or more pathologic paranoid
transferences. Negative transferences are seen at all levels of
psychopathology but can predominate in some borderline patients
who tend to see the therapeutic relationship in terms of power and
victimization, regarding the therapist as omnipotent and powerful,
whereas the patient experiences him- or herself as helpless,
weak, and vulnerable. Negative transferences are identifiable in
varying degrees in all analyses and usually require specific
intervention and interpretation.
Transferences of Defense
Opposed to transferences of impulse; defense against impulses finds
its way into the transference rather than the impulses themselves.
In this form of transference, attention shifts from drives to the
ego’s defensive functioning so that transference is no longer
merely repetition of instinctual cathexes but includes aspects of
ego functioning as well.
Transference Neurosis
Involves the recreation or more ample expression of the patient’s
neurosis enacted anew within the analytical relation and at least
theoretically mirroring aspects of the infantile neurosis. The
transference neurosis usually develops in the middle phase of
analysis, when the patient, at first eager for improved mental
health, no longer consistently displays such motivation but
engages in a continuing battle with the analyst over the desire to
attain some kind of emotional satisfaction from the analyst so that
this becomes the most compelling reason for continuing analysis.


<<<PAGE 3358>>>
At this point of the treatment, the transference emotions become
more important to the patient than alleviation of distress sought
initially, and the major, unresolved, unconscious problems of
childhood begin to dominate the patient’s behavior. They are now
reproduced in the transference, with all their pent-up emotion.
The transference neurosis is governed by three outstanding
characteristics of instinctual life in early childhood: the pleasure
principle (before effective reality testing), ambivalence, and
repetition compulsion. Emergence of the transference neurosis is
usually a slow and gradual process, although in certain patients
with a propensity for transference regression, particularly more
hysterical patients, elements of transference and transference
neurosis may manifest themselves relatively early in the analytical
process. One situation after another in the life of the patient is
analyzed and progressively interpreted until the original infantile
conflict is sufficiently revealed. Only then does the transference
neurosis begin to subside. At that point, termination begins to
emerge as a more central concern.
Contemporary opinion is divided to its importance and centrality,
whether it forms to the extent Freud believed, and whether it is
necessary for successful analysis—for some, it remains an
essential vehicle for analytical interpretation and therapeutic
effectiveness; for others, it may never develop or, to the extent
that it does, may play a less central role in the process of cure.
Transference Psychosis
Occurs when failure of reality testing leads to loss of self–object
differentiation and diffusion of self and object boundaries. This
may reflect an attempt to refuse with an omnipotent object,
investing the self with omnipotent powers as defense against
underlying fears of vulnerability and powerlessness. Transference
psychosis can also include negative transference elements in
which fusion carries the threat of engulfment and loss of self that
may precipitate a paranoid transference reaction.


<<<PAGE 3359>>>
Narcissistic Transferences
Clarified by Heinz Kohut (1971) as variations of patterns of projection
of archaic narcissistic configurations onto the therapist. They are
based on projections of narcissistic introjective configurations,
both superior and inferior—the superior form reflecting narcissistic
superiority, grandiosity, and enhanced self-esteem, and the
inferior opposite qualities of inferiority, self-depletion, and
diminished self-esteem. The therapist comes to represent, in
Kohut’s terms, either the grandiose self in mirror transferences or
the idealized parental imago in idealizing transferences. In
idealizing transferences, all power and strength are attributed to
the idealized object, leaving the subject feeling empty and
powerless when separated from that object. Union with the
idealized object enables the subject to regain narcissistic
equilibrium. Idealizing transferences may reflect developmental
disturbances in the idealized parent imago, particularly at the time
of formation of the ego-ideal by introjection of the idealized object.
In some individuals, narcissistic fixation leads to development of
the grandiose self. Reactivation in analysis of the grandiose self
provides the basis of mirror transferences formation, which occur
in three forms: archaic merger transference, a less archaic alterego or twinship transference, and mirror transference in the
narrow sense. In the most primitive merger transference, the
analyst is experienced only as an extension of the subject’s
grandiose self and, thus, becomes the repository of the patient’s
grandiosity and exhibitionism. In the alter-ego or twinship
transference, activation of the grandiose self leads to experience
of the narcissistic object as similar to the grandiose self. In the
most mature form of mirror transference, the analyst is
experienced as a separate person but, nonetheless, one who
becomes important to the patient and is accepted by him or her
only to the degree that he or she is responsive to the narcissistic
needs of the reactivated grandiose self.
Self–Object Transferences


<<<PAGE 3360>>>
Represent extensions of the self-psychology paradigm beyond
merely narcissistic configurations. The self–object involves
investment of the self in the object so that the object comes to
serve a self-sustaining function that the self cannot perform for
itself—either in maintaining fragile self-cohesion or in regulating
self-esteem. The other, thus, is not experienced as an
autonomous and separate object or agency in its own right but as
present only to serve the needs of the self. Transference in this
sense reflects a continuing developmental need that seeks
satisfaction in the analytical relation.
Self–object transferences reflect the underlying need structure the
patient brings to the therapeutic relationship based on the
predominant pattern of self–object deprivation or frustration and
the corresponding seeking for the appropriate form of self–object
involvement. These configurations have been described as the
understimulated self, the overstimulated self, the overburdened
self, and the fragmenting self. Other descriptions of self–object
need translate patterns of transference interaction based on
narcissistic dynamics into the perspective of the relationship
between self and self–object, as in mirror-hungry personalities
and ideal-hungry personalities. Variations on the mirroring
transference theme include the alter-ego–hungry personality, the
merger-hungry personality, and, in contrast, the contact-shunning
personality. In transferences derived from such personality
configurations, the classic meaning of transference has
undergone radical modification. Rather than displacements or
projections from earlier object relational contexts, the patient
brings to bear a need based in his or her own currently deficient
capacity and defective character structure—a need to involve the
object in a dependent relationship to complete or stabilize his or
her own psychic integration.
Transitional Relatedness
This transference model is based on Donald Winnicott’s notion of the
transitional object. Transference in more primitive character


<<<PAGE 3361>>>
structures is regarded as a form of transitional object relation in
which the therapist is perceived as outside the self but is invested
with qualities from the patient’s own archaic self-image. The
transference field in this view is envisioned as a transitional space
in which the transference illusion is allowed to play itself out.
Transference as Psychic Reality
Reflects the need of each participant in analysis to draw the other
into a stance corresponding to his or her own intrapsychic
configuration and needs as a reflection of the individual subject’s
psychic reality. This regards the classic view of transference,
based on displacement or projection from past objects, as
inadequate, resulting in further diffusion of meaning of
transference as equivalent to the individual’s capacity to create a
meaningful world or to inform the world with meaning. In this
rendition, transference becomes equivalent to the patient’s
psychic reality so that any distinction between the meanings given
to reality and the meanings inherent in transference is lost.
Transference in these terms becomes all-encompassing, and
whatever distinguishing and dynamic significance it may have had
fades into obscurity. In this form of transference, no definable
mechanism seems to be at work other than whatever is involved
in the subject’s psychic reality. The subject’s view of his or her
environment and impression of objects of his or her experience,
including the analytical object, are indistinguishable from ordinary
cognitive and affective processes characterizing personal
involvement and responsiveness to the world about him or her.
Transference as Relational or Intersubjective
The relational or intersubjective view of transference as emerging
from or cocreated by the subjective interaction between analyst
and analysand transforms transference into an interactive
phenomenon in which individual intrapsychic contributions from
either participant are obscured. Transference in this sense is not
anything individual to, or intrapsychically derived from, the patient
but is based on the present ongoing interaction between analyst


<<<PAGE 3362>>>
and patient coconstructing transference. On these terms, analysis
of transference has little to do with past derivatives and everything
to do with the ongoing relation with the analyst, primarily in the
form of interpersonal enactments. Transference in this sense is no
longer a one-person phenomenon but reflects a two-person
transference–countertransference interaction. The supposition is
that no such thing as transference exists without
countertransference and no such thing as countertransference
exists without transference. The patient is thus relieved of any
burden of a personal dynamic unconscious reflecting
developmental vicissitudes and residues of a life history.
Transference is created anew in the immediacy of present
analytical interaction as the product of mutual influence and
communication between analyst and analysand, probably relying
on some form of mutual projective identification to sustain the
interactive connotation.
Table 34-15
Transference Mechanisms
Displacement
The basic mechanism of classic transference paradigms in which an
object representation derived from any level or combination of
levels of the subject’s developmental experience is displaced to
the representation of the new object, namely, the analyst, in the
therapeutic relationship. Displacement is the basic mechanism for
libidinally based transferences, both positive and erotic, as well as
for aggressive and especially negative transferences. By and
large, displacement transferences tend to play a more dominant
role in neurotic disorders in which phallic–oedipal (and to a lesser
degree preoedipal) dynamics tend to play a dominant, although
not exclusive, role.
Projection
Process by which qualities or characteristics of the self-as-object,
usually involving introjections or self-representations, are


<<<PAGE 3363>>>
attributed to an external object, and the subsequent interaction
with the object is determined by the projected characteristics.
Thus, the analyst or object may be seen as sadistic—that is, as
possessing the sadistic character of the analysand or subject, an
aspect of the subject’s self that is denied or disowned by the
subject. Projection tends to play a more prominent, although
again not exclusive, role in formation of transferences in more
primitive character disorders but can be found in variously
modified forms throughout the spectrum of neuroses. Because
projections derive primarily from the configuration of introjects
constituting the patient’s self-as-object, the effect of projective or
externalizing transferences is that the image of the therapist
comes to represent part of the patient’s own self-organization
rather than simply an object representation.
Projections derived from destructive introjects can provide the basis
for both negative and paranoid transference reactions. Those
based on the victim or introject result in the patient relating to the
therapist as his or her victim and him- or herself assuming a
hostile or sadistic position as a destructive aggressor or victimizer
to the therapist’s victim. Then again, projection based on the
aggressor or introject results in the patient relating to the therapist
as an aggressor and him- or herself assuming a weak, vulnerable,
or masochistic position in which he or she becomes a passive and
vulnerable victim to the therapist’s destructive aggression. Similar
patterns can take place around narcissistic issues involving
introjective configurations of narcissistic superiority and inferiority.
Projective dynamics in self–object transferences, however, seem to
involve more than narcissistic projections because these forms of
transference tend to draw the analyst into meeting the pathologic
needs of the self. If anything is projected, it is an infantile wishedfor imago, one lacking earlier in the patient’s experience, as, for
example, an empathic and idealized parental figure. On the other
hand, transitional transferences, despite their considerable
overlap with self–object phenomena, tend to involve a more
explicit projective element as the self-related contribution to the


<<<PAGE 3364>>>
transitional experience.
Projective Identification
The concept of projective identification was first proposed by Melanie
Klein, arguing that the projection of impulses or feelings into
another person brought about an identification with that person
based on attribution of one’s own qualities to that other. This
attribution served as the basis for a sense of empathy and
connection with the other. On these terms, projective identification
was a fantasy taking place solely in the mind of the one
projecting.
Projective identification is often appealed to as a mechanism of
transference, or more exactly transference–countertransference
interactions, particularly in Kleinian usage. Confusion arises from
the failure to clearly distinguish between projection and projective
identification. The notion of projective identification added to the
basic concept of projection of the notes of diffusion of ego
boundaries, a loss or diminishing of self–object differentiation, and
inclusion of the object as part of the self.
Later elaborations of the notion of projective identification
transformed it from a one-body to a two-body phenomenon,
describing interaction between two subjects, one of whom
projects something onto or into the other, whereon the other
introjects or internalizes what has been projected. Instead of the
projection and introjection taking place in the same subject, the
projection now takes place in one and the internalization in the
other. This latter usage has led to extensive extrapolation of the
concept of projective identification to apply to all sorts of object
relations, including transference. The emphasis in Kleinian
transference is less on the influence of the past on the present but
rather the influence of the internal world on the external in the
here-and-now interaction with the analyst.
Analysts after Freud began to recognize that countertransference was not
only an obstacle but also a source of useful information about the patient. In
other words, the analyst’s feelings in response to the patient reflect how other


<<<PAGE 3365>>>
persons respond to the patient and indicate the patient’s own internal object
relations. By understanding the intense feelings in the analytic relationship,
the analyst can help the patient broaden the understanding of past and current
relationships outside the analysis. The development of insight into neurotic
conflicts also expands the ego and provides an increased sense of mastery.


<<<PAGE 3366>>>
ERIK H. ERIKSON
Erik H. Erikson (Fig. 34-24) was one of America’s most influential
psychoanalysts. Throughout six decades in the United States, he
distinguished himself as an illuminator and expositor of Freud’s theories and
as a brilliant clinician, teacher, and pioneer in psychohistorical investigation.
Erikson created an original and highly influential theory of psychological
development and crisis occurring in periods that extended across the entire
life cycle. His theory grew out of his work first as a teacher, then as a child
psychoanalyst, next as an anthropologic field worker, and, finally, as a
biographer. Erikson identified dilemmas or polarities in the ego’s relations
with the family and larger social institutions at nodal points in childhood,
adolescence, and early, middle, and late adulthood. Two of his psychosexual
historical studies, Young Man Luther and Gandhi’s Truth (published in 1958
and 1969, respectively), were widely hailed as profound explorations of how
crucial circumstances can interact with the crises of certain great persons at
particular moments in time. The interrelationships of the psychological
development of the person and the historical developments of the times were
more fully explored in Life History and the Historical Moment, written by
Erikson in 1975.
Erik Homburger Erikson was born on June 15, 1902, in Frankfurt,
Germany, the son of Danish parents. He died in 1994. His father abandoned
his mother before he was born, and he was brought up by his mother, a
Danish Jew, and her second husband, Theodor Homburger, a German-Jewish
pediatrician. Erikson’s parents chose to keep his real parentage a secret from
him, and for many years he was known as Erik Homburger. Erikson never
knew his biologic father; his mother withheld that information from him all
her life. Undoubtedly, the man who introduced the term “identity crisis” into
the language struggled with his sense of identity. Compounding his parents’
deception about his biologic father—their “loving deceit,” as he called it—
was the fact that, as a blond, blue-eyed, Scandinavian-looking son of a Jewish
father, he was taunted as a “goy” among Jews, at the same time being called a
Jew by his classmates. His being a Dane living in Germany added to his
identity confusion. Erikson was later described as a man of the borders. Much
of what he was to study was concerned with how group values are implanted


<<<PAGE 3367>>>
in the very young, how young people grasp onto group identity in the limbo
period between childhood and adulthood, and how a few persons, like
Gandhi, transcend their local, national. Even temporal identities to form a
small band of people with wider sympathies who span the ages.

FIGURE 34-24
Erik Erikson (1902–1994).

The concepts of identity, identity crisis, and identity confusion are central
to Erikson’s thought. In his first book Childhood and Society (published in
1950), Erikson observed that “the study of identity…becomes as strategic in


<<<PAGE 3368>>>
our time as the study of sexuality was in Freud’s time.” By identity, Erikson
meant a sense of sameness and continuity “in the inner core of the individual”
maintained amid external change. A sense of identity, emerging at the end of
adolescence, is a psychosocial phenomenon preceded in one form or another
by an identity crisis; that crisis may be conscious or unconscious, with the
person being aware of the present state and future directions but also
unconscious of the fundamental dynamics and conflicts that underlie those
states. The identity crisis can be acute and prolonged in some people.
The young Erikson did not distinguish himself in school, although he did
show artistic talent. On graduation, he spent a year traveling through the
Black Forest, Italy, and the Alps, pondering life, drawing, and making notes.
After that year of roaming, he studied art in his home city of Karlsruhe and
later in Munich and Florence.
In 1927 Peter Blos, a high school friend, invited Erikson to join him in
Vienna. Blos, not yet a psychoanalyst, had met Dorothy Burlingham, a New
Yorker who had come to Vienna to be psychoanalyzed; she had brought her
four children with her and hired Blos to tutor them. Blos was looking for a
fellow teacher in his new school for the children of English and American
parents and students of his new discipline of psychoanalysis. Erikson
accepted his offer.
Blos and Erikson informally organized their school—much in the style of
the so-called progressive or experimental schools prevalent in the United
States. Children were encouraged to participate in curriculum planning and to
express themselves freely. Erikson, still very much the artist, taught drawing
and painting, but he also exposed his pupils to history and foreign ways of
life, including the cultures of the American Indian and Eskimo.
During that period, Erikson became involved with the Freud family,
friends of Mrs. Burlingham. He became particularly close to Anna Freud,
with whom he began psychoanalysis. Anna Freud, who had been an
elementary school teacher, was at that time formulating the new science of
child psychiatry, trying to turn attention from the adult’s corrective backward
look to a neurosis-preventative study of childhood itself. Under Anna Freud’s
tutelage, Erikson began more and more to turn his attention to childhood,
both his own and that of the children whom he saw in the classroom. The
analysis was not then the rigidly structured procedure into which it later
developed; Erikson met with Miss Freud daily for his analytic hour and


<<<PAGE 3369>>>
frequently saw her socially and as part of the circle of Freud’s followers and
associates. Still undecided about his future, Erikson continued to teach school
while studying psychoanalysis at the Vienna Psychoanalytic Institute. He also
studied to become accredited as a Montessori teacher.
In 1929 he married Joan Mowat Serson, an American of Canadian birth.
He was hastily made a full member, rather than an associate member of the
Vienna Psychoanalytic Society—unorthodoxy that allowed him to leave a
Vienna threatened by fascism immediately after his graduation in 1933.
Earlier, Erikson had met the Viennese Hanns Sachs, co-founder, along with
Otto Rank of the psychoanalytically oriented journal Imago. Sachs—who had
settled in Boston, where he was associated with the Harvard Medical School
—was sure that Erikson would be welcome at Harvard and suggested that he
make Boston his home. After a brief stay in Denmark, the Eriksons moved to
Boston, where he became the city’s only child analyst. He held positions at
the Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, served as a
consultant at the Judge Baker Guidance Center, and maintained a private
practice.
Erikson was much influenced by Cambridge’s circle of young social
scientists, including anthropologists Margaret Mead and Ruth Benedict.
Exposure to the views of those vigorous thinkers helped to shape his theories
of child psychology and his cross-cultural approach to human development.
Classical psychoanalysis had traditionally concerned itself with pathology
and with treating disturbed people. However, Erikson found himself more
interested in the normal personality and applying his observations about how
young people function and how childhood play affects character formation.
Although he remained in the Boston area for only 3 years, he established a
solid reputation as a skilled clinician and researcher before moving to Yale
University’s Institute of Human Relations. There he furthered an interest
sparked at Harvard in the work of American anthropologists. In 1938 he
traveled to South Dakota to study the children of the Sioux Indians of the
Pine Ridge Reservation. His observations about how communal and
historical forces powerfully influence child-rearing became a vital
contribution to psychology and the study of humans in society.
In 1939 Erikson moved to a post at Berkeley, from which he studied the
Yurok Indians, a group of salmon fishers. He left Berkeley in 1950 after
refusing to sign what he called a vague, fearful addition to the loyalty oath.


<<<PAGE 3370>>>
He resettled at the Austen Riggs Center in Stockbridge, Massachusetts,
working with young people. In 1960 he was appointed to a professorship at
Harvard. After he retired from Harvard in 1972, Erickson joined Mount Zion
Hospital in San Francisco as a senior consultant in psychiatry. Until his death
in 1994, he continued to focus on many of his earlier interests, examining the
individual in this historical context and elaborating on concepts of the human
life cycle, especially those of old age.
Epigenetic Principle
Erikson’s formulations were based on the concept of epigenesis, a term
borrowed from embryology. His epigenetic principle holds that development
occurs in sequential, clearly defined stages and that each stage must be
satisfactorily resolved for development to proceed smoothly. According to
the epigenetic model, if a successful resolution of a particular stage does not
occur, all subsequent stages reflect that failure in physical, cognitive, social,
or emotional maladjustment.
Relation to Freudian Theory. Erikson accepted Freud’s concepts of
instinctual development and infantile sexuality. For each of Freud’s
psychosexual stages (e.g., oral, anal, and phallic), Erikson described a
corresponding zone with a specific pattern or mode of behavior. Thus, the
oral zone is associated with sucking or taking-in behavior; the anal zone is
associated with holding on and letting go. Erikson emphasized that the
development of the ego is more than the result of intrapsychic wants or inner
psychic energies. It is also a matter of mutual regulation between growing
children and a society’s culture and traditions.
Eight Stages of the Life Cycle. Erikson’s conception of the eight stages
of ego development across the life cycle is the centerpiece of his life’s work,
and he elaborated on the conception throughout his subsequent writings
(Table 34-16). The eight stages represent points along a continuum of
development. Physical, cognitive, instinctual, and sexual changes combine to
trigger an internal crisis, the resolution of which results in either psychosocial
regression or growth and the development of specific virtues. In Insight and
Responsibility, Erikson defined virtue as “inherent strength,” as in the active
quality of medicine or liquor. He wrote in Identity: Youth and Crisis that


<<<PAGE 3371>>>
“crisis” refers not to a “threat of catastrophe, but a turning point, a crucial
period of increased vulnerability and heightened potential, and therefore, the
ontogenetic source of generational strength and maladjustment.”
STAGE 1: TRUST VERSUS MISTRUST (BIRTH TO ABOUT 18 MONTHS). In Identity:

Youth and Crisis, Erikson noted that the infant “lives through and loves with”
its mouth. Indeed, the mouth forms the basis of its first mode or pattern of
behavior, incorporation. The infant is taking the world through the mouth,
eyes, ears, and sense of touch. The baby is learning a cultural modality that
Erikson termed to get, that is, to receive what is offered and elicit what is
desired. As the infant’s teeth develop, and it discovers the pleasure of biting,
it enters the second oral stage, the active-incorporative mode. The infant is no
longer passively receptive to stimuli; it reaches out for sensation and grasps
at its surroundings—the social modality shifts to that of taking and holding
on to things.
Table 34-16
Erikson’s Psychosocial Stages


<<<PAGE 3372>>>
The infant’s development of essential trust in the world stems from its
earliest experiences with its mother or primary caretaker. In Childhood and
Society, Erikson asserts that trust depends not on “absolute quantities of food
or demonstrations of love, but rather on the quality of the maternal
relationship.” A baby whose mother can anticipate and respond to its needs in
a consistent and timely manner despite its oral aggression will learn to
tolerate the inevitable moments of frustration and deprivation. The defense
mechanisms of introjection and projection provide the infant with the means
to internalize pleasure and externalize pain such that “consistency, continuity,
and sameness of experience provide a rudimentary sense of ego identity.”
Trust will predominate over mistrust, and hope will crystallize. For Erikson,
the element of society corresponding to this stage of ego identity is religion,
as both are founded on “trust born of care.”
In keeping with his emphasis on the epigenetic character of psychosocial
change, Erikson conceived of many forms of psychopathology as examples
of what he termed aggravated development crisis, development, which
having gone awry at one point, affects subsequent psychosocial change. A
person who, as a result of severe disturbances in the earliest dyadic
relationships, fails to develop a basic sense of trust or the virtue of hope may
be predisposed as an adult to the profound withdrawal and regression
characteristic of schizophrenia. Erikson hypothesized that the depressed
patient’s experience of being empty and being no good is an outgrowth of a
developmental derailment that causes oral pessimism to predominate.
Addictions may also be traced to the mode of oral incorporation.
STAGE 2: AUTONOMY VERSUS SHAME AND DOUBT (ABOUT 18 MONTHS TO ABOUT
3 YEARS). In the development of speech and sphincter and muscular control,

the toddler practices the social modalities of holding on and letting go and
experiences the first stirrings of the virtue that Erikson termed will. Much
depends on the amount and type of control exercised by adults over the child.
Control that is exerted too rigidly or too early defeats the toddler’s attempts
to develop its internal controls, and regression or false progression results.
Parental control that fails to protect the toddler from the consequences of
their lack of self-control or judgment can be equally disastrous to the child’s
development of a healthy sense of autonomy. In Identity: Youth and Crisis,
Erikson asserted: “This stage, therefore, becomes decisive for the ratio


<<<PAGE 3373>>>
between loving goodwill and hateful self-insistence, between cooperation and
willfulness, and between self-expression and compulsive self-restraint or
meek compliance.”
Where that ratio is favorable, the child develops an appropriate sense of
autonomy and the capacity to “have and to hold”; where it is unfavorable,
doubt and shame will undermine free will. According to Erikson, the
principle of law and order has at its roots this early preoccupation with the
protection and regulation of will. In Childhood and Society, he concluded,
“The sense of autonomy fostered in the child and modified as life progresses,
serves (and is served by) the preservation in the economic and political life of
a sense of justice.”
A person who becomes fixated at the transition between the development
of hope and autonomous will, with its residue of mistrust and doubt, may
develop paranoiac fears of persecution. When psychosocial development is
derailed in the second stage, other forms of pathology may emerge. The
perfectionism, inflexibility, and stinginess of the person with an obsessivecompulsive personality disorder may stem from conflicting tendencies to
hold on and to let go. The ruminative and ritualistic behavior of the person
with an obsessive-compulsive disorder may be an outcome of the triumph of
doubt over autonomy and the subsequent development of a primitively harsh
conscience.
STAGE 3: INITIATIVE VERSUS GUILT (ABOUT 3 YEARS TO ABOUT 5 YEARS). The

child’s increasing mastery of locomotor and language skills expands its
participation in the outside world and stimulates omnipotent fantasies of
broader exploration and conquest. Here the youngster’s mode of participation
is active and intrusive; its social modality is that of being on the make. The
intrusiveness is manifested in the child’s fervent curiosity and genital
preoccupations, competitiveness, and physical aggression. The Oedipus
complex is in ascendance as the child competes with the same-sex parent for
the fantasized possession of the other parent. In Identity: Youth and Crisis,
Erikson wrote that “jealousy and rivalry now come to a climax in a final
contest for a favored position with one of the parents: the inevitable and
necessary failure leads to guilt and anxiety.”
Guilt over the drive for conquest and anxiety over the anticipated
punishment are both assuaged in the child through repression of the forbidden


<<<PAGE 3374>>>
wishes and development of a superego to regulate its initiative. This
conscience, the faculty of self-observation, self-regulation, and selfpunishment, is an internalized version of parental and societal authority.
Initially, the conscience is harsh and uncompromising; however, it constitutes
the foundation for the subsequent development of morality. Having
renounced oedipal ambitions, the child begins to look outside the family for
arenas in which it can compete with less conflict and guilt. This is the stage
that highlights the child’s expanding initiative and forms the basis for the
subsequent development of realistic ambition and the virtue of purpose. As
Erikson noted in Childhood and Society, “The ‘oedipal’ stage sets the
direction toward the possible and the tangible which permits the dreams of
early childhood to be attached to the goals of active adult life.” Toward this
end, social institutions provide the child with an economic ethos in adult
heroes who begin to replace their storybook counterparts.
When there has been an inadequate resolution of the conflict between
initiative and guilt, a person may ultimately develop a conversion disorder,
inhibition, or phobia. Those who overcompensate for the conflict by driving
themselves too hard may experience sufficient stress to produce
psychosomatic symptoms.
STAGE 4: INDUSTRY VERSUS INFERIORITY (ABOUT 5 YEARS TO ABOUT 13 YEARS).

With the onset of latency, the child discovers the pleasures of production. He
or she develops industry by learning new skills and takes pride in the things
made. Erikson wrote in Childhood and Society that the child’s “ego
boundaries include his tools and skills: the work principle teaches him the
pleasure of work completion by steady attention and persevering diligence.”
Across cultures, this is when the child receives systematic instruction and
learns the fundamentals of technology and how to use necessary utensils and
tools. As children work, they identify with their teachers and imagine
themselves in various occupational roles.
A child unprepared for this stage of psychosocial development, either
through an insufficient resolution of previous stages or by current
interference, may develop a sense of inferiority and inadequacy. In the form
of teachers and other role models, society becomes crucially important in the
child’s ability to overcome that sense of inferiority and achieve the virtue
known as competence. In Identity: Youth and Crisis, Erikson noted: “This is


<<<PAGE 3375>>>
socially a most decisive stage. Since industry involves doing things beside
and with others, a first sense of division of labor and of differential
opportunity, that is, a sense of the technological ethos of a culture, develops
at this time.”
The pathologic outcome of a poorly navigated stage of industry versus
inferiority is less well defined than in previous stages. However, it may
concern the emergence of a conformist immersion into the world of
production in which creativity is stifled, and identity is subsumed under the
worker’s role.
STAGE 5: IDENTITY VERSUS ROLE CONFUSION (ABOUT 13 YEARS TO ABOUT 21
YEARS). With the onset of puberty and its myriad social and physiologic

changes, adolescents become preoccupied with identity. Erikson noted in
Childhood and Society that youth are now “primarily concerned with what
they appear to be in the eyes of others as compared to what they feel they are,
and with the question of how to connect the roles and skills cultivated earlier
with the occupational prototypes of the day.” Childhood roles and fantasies
are no longer appropriate, yet the adolescent is far from equipped to become
an adult. In Childhood and Society, Erikson writes that the integration that
occurs in the formation of ego identity encompasses far more than the
summation of childhood identifications. “It is the accrued experience of the
ego’s ability to integrate these identifications with the vicissitudes of the
libido, with the aptitudes developed out of endowment, and with the
opportunities offered in social roles.”
The formation of cliques and an identity crisis occur at the end of
adolescence. Erikson calls the crisis normative because it is a typical event.
Failure to negotiate this stage leaves adolescents without a stable identity;
they suffer from identity diffusion or role confusion, characterized by not
having a sense of self and by confusion about their place in the world. Role
confusion can manifest in such behavioral abnormalities as running away,
criminality, and overt psychosis. Problems in gender identity and sexual role
may manifest at this time. Adolescents may defend against role diffusion by
joining cliques or cults or by identifying with folk heroes. Intolerance of
individual differences is how the young person attempts to ward off a sense
of identity loss. Falling in love, a process by which the adolescent may clarify
a sense of identity by projecting a diffused self-image onto the partner and


<<<PAGE 3376>>>
gradually seeing it assume a more distinctive shape. An overidentification
with idealized figures is how the adolescent seeks self-definition. With the
attainment of a more sharply focused identity, the youth develops the virtue
of fidelity—faithfulness not only to the nascent self-definition but also to an
ideology that provides a version of self-in-world. As Erik Erikson, Joan
Erikson, and Helen Kivnick wrote in Vital Involvement in Old Age, “Fidelity
is the ability to sustain loyalties freely pledged in spite of the inevitable
contradictions of value systems. It is the cornerstone of identity and receives
inspiration from confirming ideologies and affirming companionships.” Role
confusion ensues when the youth is unable to formulate a sense of identity
and belonging. Erikson held that delinquency, gender-related identity
disorders, and borderline psychotic episodes can result from such confusion.
STAGE 6: INTIMACY VERSUS ISOLATION (ABOUT 21 YEARS TO ABOUT 40 YEARS).

Freud’s famous response to the question of what a normal person should be
able to do well, “Lieben und arbeiten” (to love and to work), is one that
Erikson often cited in his discussion of this psychosocial stage, and it
emphasizes the importance he placed on the virtue of love within a balanced
identity. Erikson asserted in Identity: Youth and Crisis that Freud’s use of the
term love referred to “the generosity of intimacy as well as genital love; when
he said love and work, he meant a general work productiveness which would
not preoccupy the individual to the extent that he might lose his right or
capacity to be a sexual and a loving being.”
Intimacy in the young adult is closely tied to fidelity; it can make and
honor commitments to concrete affiliations and partnerships even when that
requires sacrifice and compromise. The person who cannot tolerate the fear of
ego loss arising out of self-abandonment (e.g., sexual orgasm, moments of
intensity in friendships, aggression, inspiration, and intuition) is apt to
become profoundly isolated and self-absorbed. Distantiation, an awkward
term coined by Erikson to mean “the readiness to repudiate, isolate, and, if
necessary, destroy those forces and persons whose essence seems dangerous
to one’s own,” is the pathologic outcome of conflicts surrounding intimacy
and, in the absence of an ethical sense where intimate, competitive, and
combative relationships are differentiated, forms the basis for various forms
of prejudice, persecution, and psychopathology.
Erikson’s separation of the psychosocial task of achieving identity from


<<<PAGE 3377>>>
achieving intimacy and his assertion that substantial progress on the former
task must precede development on the latter have engendered much criticism
and debate. Critics have argued that Erikson’s emphasis on separation and
occupationally based identity formation fails to consider the importance for
women of continued attachment and the formation of an identity based on
relationships.
STAGE 7: GENERATIVITY VERSUS STAGNATION (ABOUT 40 YEARS TO ABOUT 60
YEARS). Erikson asserted in Identity: Youth and Crisis that “generativity is

primarily the concern for establishing and guiding the next generation.” The
term generativity applies not so much to rearing and teaching one’s offspring
as it does to a protective concern for all the generations and social
institutions. It encompasses productivity and creativity, as well. Having
achieved the capacity to form intimate relationships, the person now broadens
the investment of ego and libidinal energy to include groups, organizations,
and society. Care is the virtue that coalesces at this stage. In Childhood and
Society, Erikson emphasized the importance to the mature person of feeling
needed. “Maturity needs guidance as well as encouragement from what has
been produced and must be taken care of.” Through generative behavior, the
individual can pass on knowledge and skills while obtaining a measure of
satisfaction in having achieved a role with senior authority and responsibility
in the tribe.
When persons cannot develop true generativity, they may settle for
pseudoengagement in occupation. Often, such persons restrict their focus to
the technical aspects of their roles, at which they may now have become
highly skilled, eschewing greater responsibility for the organization or
profession. This failure of generativity can lead to profound personal
stagnation, masked by various escapisms, such as alcohol and drug abuse,
and sexual and other infidelities. Mid-life crisis or premature invalidism
(physical and psychological) can occur. In this case, pathology appears not
only in middle-aged persons but also in the organizations that depend on
them for leadership. Thus, the failure to develop at midlife can lead to sick,
withered, or destructive organizations that spread the effects of failed
generativity throughout society; examples of such failures have become so
common that they constitute a defining feature of modernity.


<<<PAGE 3378>>>
STAGE 8: INTEGRITY VERSUS DESPAIR (ABOUT 60 YEARS TO DEATH). In Identity:

Youth and Crisis, Erikson defined integrity as “the acceptance of one’s one
and only life cycle and of the persons who have become significant to it as
something that had to be and that, by necessity, permitted of no
substitutions.” From the vantage point of this stage of psychosocial
development, the individual relinquishes the wish that important persons in
his life had been different and can love in a more meaningful way—one that
reflects accepting responsibility for one’s own life. The individual in
possession of the virtue of wisdom and a sense of integrity has room to
tolerate the proximity of death and to achieve what Erikson termed in
Identity: Youth and Crisis, a “detached yet active concern with life.”
Erikson underlined the social context for this final stage of growth. In
Childhood and Society, he wrote, “The style of integrity developed by his
culture or civilization thus becomes the ‘patrimony’ of his soul …. In such
final consolidation, death loses its sting.”
When attempting to attain integrity has failed, the individual may become
deeply disgusted with the external world and contemptuous of persons and
institutions. Erikson wrote in Childhood and Society that such disgust masks
a fear of death and a sense of despair that “time is now short, too short for the
attempt to start another life and to try out alternate roads to integrity.”
Looking back on the eight ages of man, he noted the relation between adult
integrity and infantile trust, “Healthy children will not fear life if their elders
have integrity enough not to fear death.”
Psychopathology
Each stage of the life cycle has its psychopathological outcome if it is not
mastered successfully.
Basic Trust. An impairment of basic trust leads to basic mistrust. In infants,
social trust is characterized by ease of feeding, depth of sleep, smiling, and
general physiologic homeostasis. Prolonged separation during infancy can
lead to hospitalism or anaclitic depression. In later life, this lack of trust may
be manifested by dysthymic disorder, a depressive disorder, or a sense of
hopelessness. Persons who develop and rely on the defense of projection—in
which, according to Erikson, “we endow significant persons with the evil


<<<PAGE 3379>>>
which actually is in us”—experienced a sense of social mistrust in the first
years of life and are likely to develop paranoid or delusional disorders. Basic
mistrust is a significant contributor to the development of schizoid
personality disorder and, in most severe cases, to the development of
schizophrenia. Substance-related disorders can also be traced to social
mistrust; substance-dependent personalities have strong oral-dependency
needs and use chemical substances to satisfy themselves because of their
belief that human beings are unreliable and, at worst, dangerous. If not
appropriately nurtured, infants may feel empty, starved not just for food but
also sensual and visual stimulation. As adults, they may become seekers after
stimulating thrills that do not involve intimacy, which helps ward off feelings
of depression.
Autonomy. The stage in which children attempt to develop into
autonomous beings is often called the terrible twos, referring to toddlers’
willfulness at this period of development. If shame and doubt dominate over
autonomy, compulsive doubting can occur. The inflexibility of the obsessive
personality also results from an overabundance of doubt. Too rigorous toilet
training, commonplace in today’s society, requires a clean, punctual, and
deodorized body, can produce an overly compulsive personality that is
stingy, meticulous, and selfish. Known as anal personalities, such persons are
parsimonious, punctual, and perfectionistic (the three P’s).
Too much shaming causes children to feel evil or dirty and may pave the
way for delinquent behavior. In effect, children say, “If that’s what they think
of me, that’s the way I’ll behave.” Paranoid personalities feel that others are
trying to control them, a feeling that may have its origin during the stage of
autonomy versus shame and doubt. When coupled with mistrust, the seeds
are planted for persecutory delusions. Impulsive disorder may be explained as
a person’s refusal to be inhibited or controlled.
Initiative. Erikson stated: “In pathology, the conflict over initiative is
expressed either in hysterical denial, which causes the repression of the wish
or the abrogation of its executive organ by paralysis or impotence; or in
overcompensatory showing off, in which the scared individual, so eager to
‘duck,’ instead ‘sticks his neck out.’” In the past, hysteria was the usual form
of pathologic regression in this area, but a plunge into a psychosomatic


<<<PAGE 3380>>>
disease is now common.
Excessive guilt can lead to a variety of conditions, such as generalized
anxiety disorder and phobias. Patients feel guilty because of normal impulses,
and they repress these impulses, with resulting symptom formation.
Punishment or severe prohibitions during the stage of initiative versus guilt
can produce sexual inhibitions. Conversion disorder or specific phobia can
result when the oedipal conflict is not resolved. As sexual fantasies are
accepted as unrealizable, children may punish themselves for these fantasies
by fearing harm to their genitals. Under the brutal assault of the developing
superego, they may repress their wishes and begin to deny them. If this
pattern is carried forward, paralysis, inhibition, or impotence can result.
Sometimes, in fear of not being able to live up to what others expect, children
may develop a psychosomatic disease.
Industry. Erikson described industry as a “sense of being able to make
things and make them well and even perfectly.” When children’s efforts are
thwarted, they are made to feel that personal goals cannot be accomplished or
are not worthwhile, and a sense of inferiority develops. In adults, this sense
of inferiority can result in severe work inhibitions and a character structure
marked by feelings of inadequacy. For some persons, the feelings may result
in a compensatory drive for money, power, and prestige. Work can become
the main focus of life at the expense of intimacy.
Identity. Many disorders of adolescence can be traced to identity confusion.
The danger is role diffusion. Erikson stated:
Where this is based on a strong previous doubt on one’s sexual identity,
delinquent and outright psychotic incidents are not uncommon. If diagnosed
and treated correctly, those incidents do not have the same fatal significance
that they have at other ages. It is primarily the inability to settle on an
occupational identity that disturbs young persons. Keeping themselves
together, they temporarily overidentify, to the point of apparent complete loss
of identity, with the heroes of cliques and crowds.
Other disorders during the stage of identity versus role diffusion include
conduct disorder, disruptive behavior disorder, gender identity disorder,
schizophreniform disorder, and other psychotic disorders. The ability to leave
home and live independently is an essential task during this period. An


<<<PAGE 3381>>>
inability to separate from the parent and prolonged dependence may occur.
Intimacy. The successful formation of a stable marriage and family depends
on the capacity to become intimate. The years of early adulthood are crucial
for deciding whether to get married and to whom. Gender identity determines
object choice, either straight or gay, but making an intimate connection with
another person is a significant task. Persons with schizoid personality
disorder remain isolated from others because of fear, suspicion, inability to
take risks, or the lack of a capacity to love.
GENERATIVITY. From about 40 to 65 years, the period of middle adulthood,

specific disorders are less clearly defined than in the other stages described
by Erikson. Middle-aged persons show a higher incidence of depression than
younger adults, which may be related to middle-aged persons’
disappointments and failed expectations as they review the past, consider
their lives, and contemplate the future. The increased use of alcohol and other
psychoactive substances also occurs during this time.
INTEGRITY. Anxiety disorders often develop in older persons. In Erikson’s

formulation, this development may be related to persons’ looking back on
their lives with a sense of panic. Time has run out, and chances are used up.
The decline in physical functions can contribute to psychosomatic illness,
hypochondriasis, and depression. The suicide rate is highest in persons over
the age of 65. Persons facing dying and death may find it intolerable not to
have been generative or make significant attachments in life. Integrity, for
Erikson, is characterized by an acceptance of life. Without acceptance,
persons feel despair and hopelessness that can result in severe depressive
disorders.
Treatment
Although no independent Eriksonian psychoanalytic school exists in the same
way that Freudian and Jungian schools do, Erikson made many vital
contributions to the therapeutic process. Among his most important
contributions is his belief that establishing a state of trust between doctor and
patient is the essential requirement for successful therapy. When
psychopathology stems from basic mistrust (e.g., depression), a patient must


<<<PAGE 3382>>>
reestablish trust with the therapist, whose task, like that of the good mother,
is sensitive to the patient’s needs. The therapist must have a sense of personal
trustworthiness that can be transmitted to the patient.
Techniques. For Erikson, a psychoanalyst is not a blank slate in the
therapeutic process, as the psychoanalyst commonly is in Freudian
psychoanalysis. On the contrary, effective therapy requires that therapists
actively convey to patients the belief that they are understood. This is done
through both empathetic listening and verbal assurances, which enable a
positive transference built on mutual trust to develop.
Beginning as an analyst for children, Erikson tried to provide this
mutuality and trust while he observed children recreating their worlds by
structuring dolls, blocks, vehicles, and miniature furniture into the dramatic
situations that were bothering them. Then, Erikson correlated his
observations with statements by the children and their family members. He
began treatment of a child only after eating an evening meal with the entire
family, and his therapy was usually conducted with much cooperation from
the family. After each regressive episode in the treatment of a schizophrenic
child, for instance, Erikson discussed with every member of the family what
had been going on with them before the episode. Only when he was
thoroughly satisfied that he had identified the problem did treatment begin.
Erikson sometimes provided corrective information to the child—for
instance, telling a boy who could not release his feces and had made himself
ill from constipation that food is not an unborn infant.
Erikson often turned to play, which, along with specific recommendations
to parents, proved fruitful as a treatment modality. Play, for Erikson, is
diagnostically revealing and thus helpful for a therapist who seeks to promote
a cure, but it is also curative in its own right. Play is a function of the ego and
gives children a chance to synchronize social and bodily processes with the
self. Children playing with blocks or adults playing out an imagined dramatic
situation can manipulate the environment and develop the sense of control
that the ego needs. Play therapy is not the same for children and adults,
however. Children create models to gain control of reality; they look ahead to
new areas of mastery. Adults use play to correct the past and to redeem their
failures.
Mutuality, which is essential in Erikson’s system of health, is also vital to a


<<<PAGE 3383>>>
cure. Erikson applauded Freud for the moral choice of abandoning hypnosis
because hypnosis heightens both the demarcation between the healer and the
sick and the inequality that Erikson compares with the inequality of child and
adult. Erikson urged that the relationship of the healer to the sick person be
one of equals “in which the observer who has learned to observe himself
teaches the observed to become self-observant.”
Dreams and Free Association. As with Freud, Erikson worked with the
patient’s associations to the dream as the “best leads” to understanding the
dream’s meaning. He valued the first association with the dream, which he
believed to be powerful and essential. Ultimately, Erikson listened for “a
central theme which, once found, gives added meaning to all the associated
material.”
Erikson believed that interpretation was the primary therapeutic agent,
sought as much by the patient as the therapist. He emphasized free-floating
attention as the method that enabled discovery to occur. Erikson once
described this attentional stance by commenting that in clinical work, “You
need a history and you need a theory, and then you must forget them both and
let each hour stand for itself.” This frees both parties from counterproductive
pressures to advance in the therapy and allows them to notice the gaps in the
patient’s narrative that signal the unconscious.
Goals. Erikson discussed four dimensions of the psychoanalyst’s job. The
patient’s desire to be cured and the analyst’s desire to cure is the first
dimension. Mutuality exists in that patient and therapist are motivated by
cure, and labor is divided. The goal is always to help the patient’s ego get
stronger and cure itself. The second dimension Erikson called objectivityparticipation. Therapists must keep their minds open. “Neuroses change,”
wrote Erikson. New generalizations must be made and arranged in new
configurations. The third dimension runs along the axis of knowledgeparticipation. The therapist “applies selected insights to more strictly
experimental approaches.” The fourth dimension is tolerance-indignation.
Erikson stated: “Identities based on Talmudic argument, on messianic zeal,
on punitive orthodoxy, on faddist sensationalism, on professional and social
ambition” are harmful and tend to control patients. Control widens the gap of
inequality between the doctor and the patient and makes the realization of the


<<<PAGE 3384>>>
recurrent idea in Erikson’s thought—mutuality—difficult.
According to Erikson, therapists have the opportunity to work through past
unresolved conflicts in the therapeutic relationship. Erikson encouraged
therapists not to shy away from guiding patients; he believes therapists must
offer patients both prohibitions and permissions. Nor should therapists be so
engrossed in patients’ past life experiences that current conflicts are
overlooked.
The goal of therapy is to recognize how patients have passed through the
various stages of the life cycle and how the various crises in each stage have
or have not been mastered. Equally important, future stages and crises must
be anticipated so that they can be negotiated and mastered appropriately.
Unlike Freud, Erikson does not believe that the personality is so inflexible
that change cannot occur in middle and late adulthood. For Erikson,
psychological growth and development occur throughout the entire span of
the life cycle.
The Austen Riggs Center in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, is a repository of
Erikson’s work, and many of his theories are put into practice there. Erik’s
wife, Joan, developed an activities program at the Austen Riggs Center as an
“interpretation-free zone,” where patients could take up work roles or
function as students with artists and craftspersons, without the burden of the
patient role. This workspace encouraged the play and creativity required for
the patients’ work development to parallel the process of their therapy.

OTHER PSYCHODYNAMIC SCHOOLS
The men and women discussed in this chapter contributed to psychiatric
thought and practice in the early and middle years of the 20th century. Many
of these theories of psychopathology evolved as direct offshoots of Freudian
psychoanalysis. This, however, is derived from various aspects of
psychology, such as learning theory and quantitative methods of personality
assessment. The theories selected for the discussion in this section have stood
the test of time and are most relevant for psychiatry.
Brief synopses of the theories that exert the most significant influence on
current psychiatric thought are listed below in alphabetical order of their
proponent. Each of these theories contains insights that merit consideration
because they enhance our understanding of the complexities of human


<<<PAGE 3385>>>
behavior. They also illustrate the diversity of theoretical orientation that
characterizes psychiatry today.
Karl Abraham (1877–1925)
Karl Abraham, one of Sigmund Freud’s earliest disciples, was the first
psychoanalyst in Germany. He is best known for his explication of
depression from a psychoanalytic perspective and for his elaboration of
Freud’s stages of psychosexual development. Abraham divided the oral stage
into a biting phase and a sucking phase; the anal stage into a destructiveexpulsive (anal-sadistic) phase and a mastering-retentive (anal-erotic) phase;
and the phallic stage into an early phase of partial genital love (true phallic
phase) and a later mature genital phase. Abraham also linked the
psychosexual stages to specific syndromes. For example, he postulated that
obsessional neurosis resulted from fixation at the anal-sadistic phase and
depression from fixation at the oral stage.
Alfred Adler (1870–1937)
Alfred Adler (Fig. 34-25) was born in Vienna, Austria, where he spent most
of his life. A general physician, he became one of the original four members
of Freud’s circle in 1902. Adler never accepted the primacy of the libido
theory, the sexual origin of a neurosis, or the importance of infantile wishes.
Adler thought that aggression was far more critical, specifically in its
manifestation as a striving for power, which he believed to be a masculine
trait. He introduced the term masculine protest to describe the tendency to
move from a passive, feminine role to a masculine, active role. Adler’s
theories are collectively known as individual psychology.
Adler saw individuals as unique, unified biologic entities whose
psychological processes fit together into an individual lifestyle. He also
postulated a principle of dynamism, in which every individual is futuredirected and moves toward a goal. Adler also emphasized the interface
between individuals and their social environment: the primacy of action in
the real work over fantasy.


<<<PAGE 3386>>>
FIGURE 34-25
Alfred Adler (print includes signature). (Courtesy of Alexandra Adler.)

Adler coined the term inferiority complex to refer to a sense of inadequacy
and weakness that is universal and inborn. A physical defect compromises a
developing child’s self-esteem, and Adler referred to this phenomenon as
organ inferiority. He also thought that basic inferiority tied to children’s
oedipal longings could never be gratified.
Adler was one of the first developmental theorists to recognize the


<<<PAGE 3387>>>
importance of children’s birth order in their origin. The firstborn child reacts
with anger to the birth of siblings and struggles against giving up the
powerful position of an only child. They tend not to share and become
conservative. The second-born child must continuously strive to compete
with the firstborn. Youngest children feel secure because they have never
been displaced. Adler thought that a child’s sibling position results in lifelong
influences on character and lifestyle.
The primary therapeutic approach in Adlerian therapy is encouragement,
through which Adler believed his patients could overcome feelings of
inferiority. Consistent human relatedness, in his view, leads to greater hope,
less isolation, and more significant affiliation with society. He believed that
patients needed to develop a greater sense of their dignity and worth and a
renewed appreciation of their abilities and strengths.
Franz Alexander (1891–1964)
Franz Alexander (Fig. 34-26) emigrated from his native Germany to the
United States, where he settled in Chicago and founded the Chicago Institute
for Psychoanalysis. He wrote extensively about the association between
specific personality traits and certain psychosomatic ailments, a point of view
that came to be known as the specificity hypothesis. Alexander fell out of
favor with classic analysts for advocating the corrective emotional experience
as part of the analytic technique. In this approach, Alexander suggested that
an analyst must deliberately adopt a particular mode of relatedness with a
patient to counteract noxious childhood influences from the patient’s parents.
He believed that the trusting, supportive relationship between patient and
analyst enabled the patient to master childhood traumas and grow from the
experience.


<<<PAGE 3388>>>
FIGURE 34-26
Franz Alexander. (Courtesy of Franz Alexander.)

Gordon Allport (1897–1967)
Gordon Allport (Fig. 34-27), a psychologist in the United States, is known as
the founder of the humanistic school of psychology, which holds that each
person has an inherent potential for autonomous function and growth. At
Harvard University, he taught the first course in the psychology of
personality offered at a college in the United States.


<<<PAGE 3389>>>
FIGURE 34-27
Gordon Allport. (© Bettmann/Corbis.)

Allport believed that a person’s only real guarantee of personal existence is
a sense of self. Selfhood develops through a series of stages, from awareness
of the body to self-identity. Allport used the term propriem to describe
strivings related to the maintenance of self-identity and self-esteem. He used
the term traits to refer to the chief units of personality structure. Personal
dispositions are individual traits that represent the essence of an individual’s
unique personality. Maturity is characterized by a capacity to relate to others
with warmth and intimacy and an expanded sense of self. In Allport’s view,
mature persons have security, humor, insight, enthusiasm, and zest.
Psychotherapy is geared to helping patients realize these characteristics.
Michael Balint (1896–1970)
Michael Balint was considered a member of the independent or middle group


<<<PAGE 3390>>>
of object relations theorists in the United Kingdom. Balint believed that the
urge for the primary love object underlies virtually all psychological
phenomena. Infants wish to be loved totally and unconditionally, and when a
mother is not forthcoming with appropriate nurturance, a child devotes his or
her life to a search for the love missed in childhood. According to Balint, the
basic fault is the feeling of many patients that something is missing. As with
Ronald Fairbairn and Donald W. Winnicott, Balint understood this deficit in
internal structure to result from maternal failures. He viewed all
psychological motivations stemming from the failure to receive adequate
maternal love.
Unlike Fairbairn, however, Balint did not entirely abandon drive theory.
He suggested that libido, for example, is both pleasure-seeking and object
seeking. He also worked with seriously disturbed patients, and like
Winnicott, he thought that certain aspects of psychoanalytic treatment occur
at a more profound level than that of the ordinary verbal explanatory
interpretations. Although some material involving genital psychosexual
stages of development can be interpreted from the perspective of intrapsychic
conflict, Balint believed that certain preverbal phenomena are reexperienced
in the analysis. The relationship itself is decisive in dealing with this realm of
early experience.
Eric Berne (1910–1970)
Eric Berne (Fig. 34-28) began his professional life as a training and
supervising analyst in classic psychoanalytic theory and technique, but
ultimately developed his school, known as transactional analysis. A
transaction is a stimulus presented by one person that evokes a corresponding
response in another. Berne defined psychological games as stereotyped and
predictable transactions that persons learn in childhood and continue to play
throughout their lives. Strokes, the basic motivating factors of human
behavior, consist of specific rewards, such as approval and love. All persons
have three ego states that exist within them: the child, which represents
primitive elements that become fixed in early childhood; the adult, which is
the part of the personality capable of objective appraisals of reality; and the
parent, which is an introject of the values of a person’s actual parents. The
therapeutic process is geared toward helping patients understand whether


<<<PAGE 3391>>>
they are functioning in the child, adult, or parent mode in their interactions
with others. As patients learn to recognize characteristic games repeatedly
played throughout life, they can ultimately function in the adult mode as
much as possible in interpersonal relationships.

FIGURE 34-28
Eric Berne. (Courtesy of Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 4.0
International.)

Wilfred Bion (1897–1979)
Wilfred Bion expanded Melanie Klein’s concept of projective identification
to include an interpersonal process in which a therapist feels coerced by a
patient into playing a particular role in the patient’s internal world. He also
developed the notion that the therapist must contain what the patient has


<<<PAGE 3392>>>
projected so that it is processed and returned to the patient in a modified
form. Bion believed that a similar process occurs between mother and infant.
He also observed that “psychotic” and “nonpsychotic” aspects of the mind
function simultaneously as sub-organizations. Bion is probably best known
for his application of psychoanalytic ideas to groups. Whenever a group gets
derailed from its task, it deteriorates into one of three primary states:
dependency, pairing, or fight-flight.
John Bowlby (1907–1990)
John Bowlby is generally considered the founder of attachment theory. He
formed his ideas about attachment in the 1950s while consulting with the
World Health Organization (WHO) on homelessness in children. He stressed
that the essence of attachment is proximity (i.e., the tendency of a child to
stay close to the mother or caregiver). His theory of the mother–infant bond
was firmly rooted in biology and drew extensively from ethology and
evolutionary theory. A basic sense of security and safety is derived from a
continuous and close relationship with a caregiver, according to Bowlby.
This readiness for attachment is biologically driven, and Bowlby stressed that
attachment is reciprocal. Maternal bonding and caregiving are always
intertwined with the child’s attachment behavior. Bowlby felt that without
this early proximity to the mother or caregiver, the child does not develop a
secure base, which he considered a launching pad for independence. In the
absence of a secure base, the child feels frightened or threatened, and
development is severely compromised. Bowlby and attachment theory are
discussed in detail in Section 34.1.
Raymond Cattell (1905–1998)
Raymond Cattell obtained his Ph.D. in England before moving to the United
States. He introduced multivariate analysis and factor analysis—statistical
procedures that simultaneously examine the relations among multiple
variables and factors—to personality. By examining a person’s life record
objectively, using personal interviewing and questionnaire data, Cattell
described various traits representing the building blocks of personality.
Traits are both biologically based and environmentally determined or
learned. Biologic traits include sex, gregariousness, aggression, and parental


<<<PAGE 3393>>>
protectiveness. Environmentally learned traits include cultural ideas, such as
work, religion, intimacy, romance, and identity. An important concept is the
law of coercion to the biosocial mean, which holds that society exerts
pressure on genetically different persons to conform to social norms. For
example, a person with a strong genetic tendency toward dominance is likely
to receive social encouragement for restraint, whereas the naturally
submissive person will be encouraged toward self-assertion.
Ronald Fairbairn (1889–1964)
Ronald Fairbairn, a Scottish analyst who worked most of his life in relative
isolation, was one of the significant psychoanalytic theorists in the British
school of object relations. He suggested that infants are not primarily
motivated by the drives of libido and aggression but are by an object seeking
instinct. Fairbairn replaced the Freudian ideas of energy, ego, and id with the
notion of dynamic structures. When an infant encounters frustration, a
portion of the ego is defensively split off in the course of development and
functions as an entity to internal objects and other subdivisions of the ego. He
also stressed that both an object and an object relationship are internalized
during development, so that a self is always with an object, and the two are
connected with an affect.
Sándor Ferenczi (1873–1933)
Although Sándor Ferenczi, a Hungarian analyst, had been analyzed by Freud
and was influenced by him, he later discarded Freud’s techniques and
introduced his method of analysis. He understood the symptoms of his
patients as related to sexual and physical abuse in childhood and proposed
that analysts need to love their patients in a way that compensates for the love
they did not receive as children. He developed a procedure known as active
therapy, in which he encouraged patients to develop an awareness of reality
through active confrontation by the therapist. He also experimented with
mutual analysis, in which he would analyze his patient for a session and then
allow the patient to analyze him for a session.
Viktor Frankl (1905–1997)
His experience in Nazi concentration camps profoundly shaped the Austrian


<<<PAGE 3394>>>
neurologist and philosopher Viktor Frankl’s distinctive view of human nature
and psychopathology. There he concluded that even the most appalling
circumstances could be endured if one found a way of making them
meaningful. He described his experience in Man’s Search for Meaning, a
book that has been read by millions around the world.
Frankl was both a humanist and an existentialist. He believed that human
beings shared with other animals somatic and psychological dimensions, but
that humans alone also had a spiritual dimension that confers both freedom
and responsibility. People find meaning in their lives through creative and
productive work, through an appreciation of the world and others, and by
freely adopting positive attitudes even in the face of suffering. Those who fail
to find meaning face alienation, despair, and existential neuroses. Traditional
societies provided a framework of meaning in religion and shared cultural
values; in modern society, people must find their sources of meaning, and
Frankl attributed many social problems, such as drug abuse and suicide, to
their failures to do so.
Because of the spiritual dimension, human beings show self-transcendence
and self-distancing. The former refers to the capacity to put other values (e.g.,
the well-being of a loved one) above self-interest. The latter is the ability to
take an external perspective, as seen in a sense of humor. These capacities
form the basis for therapeutic interventions in Frankl’s version of
psychotherapy known as logotherapy. Logotherapy is derived from the Greek
word logos, which means thought or reason, and Frankl believed that man
instinctively attempts to find universal understanding and harmony in life
experiences.
Anna Freud (1895–1982)
Anna Freud (Fig. 34-29), the daughter of Sigmund Freud, ultimately made
her own unique contributions to psychoanalysis. Although her father focused
primarily on repression as the central defense mechanism, Anna Freud
extensively elaborated on individual defense mechanisms, including reaction
formation, regression, undoing, introjection, identification, projection,
turning against the self, reversal, and sublimation. She was also a key figure
in the development of modern ego psychology in that she emphasized that
there was “depth in the surface.” The defenses marshaled by the ego to avoid


<<<PAGE 3395>>>
unacceptable wishes from the id were in and of themselves complex and
worthy of attention. Up to that point, the primary focus had been on
uncovering unconscious sexual and aggressive wishes. She also made
seminal contributions to child psychoanalysis and studied the function of the
ego in personality development. She founded the Hampstead child therapy
course and clinic in London in 1947 and served as its director.

FIGURE 34-29
Anna Freud. (Courtesy of the National Library of Medicine.)


<<<PAGE 3396>>>
FIGURE 34-30
Erich Fromm. (© Bettmann/Corbis.)

Erich Fromm (1900–1980)
Erich Fromm (Fig. 34-30) came to the United States in 1933 from Germany,
where he had received his Ph.D. He was instrumental in founding the
William Alanson White Institute for Psychiatry in New York. Fromm
identified five character types common to, and determined by, Western
culture; each person may possess qualities from one or more types. The types
are (1) the receptive personality is passive; (2) the exploitative personality is
manipulative; (3) the marketing personality is opportunistic and changeable;
(4) the hoarding personality saves and stores; and (5) the productive
personality is mature and enjoys love and work. The therapeutic process


<<<PAGE 3397>>>
involves strengthening the person’s sense of ethical behavior toward others
and developing productive love, characterized by care, responsibility, and
respect for other persons.
Kurt Goldstein (1878–1965)
Kurt Goldstein (Fig. 34-31) was born in Germany and received his M.D.
from the University of Breslau. He was influenced by existentialism and
Gestalt psychology—every organism has dynamic properties, which are
energy supplies that are relatively constant and evenly distributed. When
states of tension-disequilibrium occur, an organism automatically attempts to
return to its normal state. What happens in one part of the organism affects
every other part, a phenomenon known as holocoenosis.
Self-actualization was a concept Goldstein used to describe persons’
creative powers to fulfill their potentialities. Because each person has a
different set of innate potentialities, persons strive for self-actualization along
different paths. Sickness severely disrupts self-actualization. Responses to
disruption of an organism’s integrity may be rigid and compulsive; regression
to more primitive modes of behavior is characteristic. One of Goldstein’s
significant contributions was his identification of the catastrophic reaction to
brain damage, in which a person becomes fearful and agitated and refuses to
perform simple tasks because of the fear of possible failure.


<<<PAGE 3398>>>
FIGURE 34-31
Kurt Goldstein. (Courtesy of New York Academy of Medicine, New York.)

Karen Horney (1885–1952)
German-born physician-psychoanalyst Karen Horney (Fig. 34-32), who
emphasized the preeminence of social and cultural influences on
psychosexual development, focused her attention on the differing psychology
of men and women and explored the vicissitudes of marital relationships. She
taught at the Institute of Psychoanalysis in Berlin before immigrating to the
United States. Horney believed that a person’s current personality attributes
result from the interaction between the person and the environment and are


<<<PAGE 3399>>>
not solely based on infantile libidinal strivings carried over from childhood.
Her theory, known as holistic psychology, maintains that a person needs to be
seen as a unitary whole who influences, and is influenced by, the
environment. She thought that the Oedipus complex was overvalued in terms
of its contribution to adult psychopathology, but she also believed that rigid
parental attitudes about sexuality led to an excessive concern with the
genitals.

FIGURE 34-32
Karen Horney. (Courtesy of the Association for the Advancement of
Psychoanalysis, New York.)

She proposed three separate concepts of the self: the actual self, the total of


<<<PAGE 3400>>>
a person’s experience; the real self, the harmonious, healthy person; and the
idealized self, the neurotic expectation, or glorified image that a person feels
he or she should be. A person’s pride system alienates him or her from the
real self by overemphasizing prestige, intellect, power, strength, appearance,
sexual prowess, and other qualities that can lead to self-effacement or selfhatred. Horney also established the concepts of basic anxiety and basic trust.
The therapeutic process, in her view, aims for self-realization by exploring
distorting influences that prevent the personality from growing.
Edith Jacobson (1897–1978)
Edith Jacobson, a psychiatrist in the United States, believed that the structural
model and an emphasis on object relations are not fundamentally
incompatible. She thought that the ego, self-images, and object images exert
reciprocal influences on one’s development. She also stressed that the
infant’s disappointment with the maternal object is not necessarily related to
the mother’s actual failure. In Jacobson’s view, disappointment is related to a
specific, drive-determined demand, rather than a global striving for contact or
engagement. She viewed an infant’s experience of pleasure or “unpleasure”
as the core of the early mother–infant relationship. Satisfactory experiences
lead to the formation of good or gratifying images, whereas unsatisfactory
experiences create bad or frustrating images. Normal and pathologic
development is based on the evolution of these self-images and object
images. Jacobson believed that fixation refers to modes of object relatedness
rather than modes of gratification.
Carl Gustav Jung (1875–1961)
Carl Gustav Jung (Fig. 34-33), a Swiss psychiatrist, formed a psychoanalytic
school known as analytic psychology, which includes basic ideas related to
but going beyond, Freud’s theories. After initially being Freud’s disciple,
Jung broke with Freud over the latter’s emphasis on infantile sexuality. He
expanded on Freud’s concept of the unconscious by describing the collective
unconscious as consisting of all humankind’s common, shared mythologic
and symbolic past. The collective unconscious includes archetypes—
representational images and configurations with universal symbolic
meanings. Archetypal figures exist for the mother, father, child, and hero,


<<<PAGE 3401>>>
among others. Archetypes contribute to complexes, feeling-toned ideas that
develop from personal experience interacting with archetypal imagery. Thus,
a mother complex is determined not only by the mother–child interaction but
also by the conflict between archetypal expectation and experience with the
real woman who functions in a motherly role.
Jung noted that there are two types of personality organizations:
introversion and extroversion. Introverts focus on their inner world of
thoughts, intuitions, emotions, and sensations; extroverts are more oriented
toward the outer world, other persons, and material goods. Each person has a
mixture of both components. The persona, the mask covering the personality,
is the face a person presents to the outside world. The persona may become
fixed, and the real person hidden from him- or herself. Anima and animus are
unconscious traits possessed by men and women, respectively, and contrast
with the persona. Anima refers to a man’s undeveloped femininity, whereas
animus refers to a woman’s undeveloped masculinity.


<<<PAGE 3402>>>
FIGURE 34-33
Carl Gustav Jung (print includes signature). (Courtesy of National Library of
Medicine, Bethesda, MD.)

Jungian treatment aims to bring about an adequate adaptation to reality,
which involves a person fulfilling their creative potentialities. The ultimate
goal is to achieve individuation, a process continuing throughout life whereby
persons develop a unique sense of their own identity. This developmental
process may lead them down new paths away from their previous directions
in life.
Otto Kernberg (1928–Present)
Otto Kernberg is perhaps the most influential object relations theorist in the
United States. Influenced by both Klein and Jacobson, much of his theory is
derived from his clinical work with patients who have borderline personality


<<<PAGE 3403>>>
disorder. Kernberg places great emphasis on the splitting of the ego and the
elaboration of good and bad self-configurations and object configurations.
Although he has continued to use the structural model, he views the id as
composed of self-images, object images, and their associated affects. Drives
appear to manifest themselves only in the context of internalized
interpersonal experience. Good and bad self-representations and object
relations become associated, respectively, with libido and aggression. Object
relations constitute the building blocks of both structure and drives. Goodness
and badness in relational experiences precede drive cathexis. The dual
instincts of libido and aggression arise from object-directed affective states of
love and hate.
Kernberg proposed the term borderline personality organization for a
broad spectrum of patients characterized by a lack of an integrated sense of
identity, ego weakness, absence of superego integration, reliance on primitive
defense mechanisms such as splitting and projective identification, and a
tendency to shift into primary process thinking. He suggested a specific type
of psychoanalytic psychotherapy for such patients in which transference
issues are interpreted early in the process.
Melanie Klein (1882–1960)
Melanie Klein (Fig. 34-34) was born in Vienna, worked with Abraham and
Ferenczi, and later moved to London. Klein evolved a theory of internal
object relations that was intimately linked to drives. Her unique perspective
grew mainly from her psychoanalytic work with children, in which she
became impressed with the role of unconscious intrapsychic fantasy. She
postulated that the ego undergoes a splitting process to deal with the terror of
annihilation. She also thought that Freud’s concept of the death instinct was
central to understanding aggression, hatred, sadism, and other forms of
“badness,” all of which she viewed as derivatives of the death instinct.
Klein viewed projection and introjection as the primary defensive
operations in the first months of life. Infants project derivatives of the death
instinct into the mother and then fear attack from the “bad mother,” a
phenomenon that Klein referred to as persecutory anxiety. This anxiety is
intimately associated with the paranoid-schizoid position, infants’ mode of
organizing experience in which all aspects of infant and mother are split into


<<<PAGE 3404>>>
good and bad elements. As the disparate views are integrated, infants become
concerned that they may have harmed or destroyed the mother through the
hostile and sadistic fantasies directed toward her. At this developmental
point, children have arrived at the depressive position, in which the mother is
viewed ambivalently as having both positive and negative aspects and as the
target of a mixture of loving and hateful feelings. Klein was also instrumental
in developing child analysis, which evolved from an analytic play technique
in which children used toys and played in a symbolic fashion that allowed
analysts to interpret the play.

FIGURE 34-34
Melanie Klein. (Courtesy of Melanie Klein and Douglas Glass.)


<<<PAGE 3405>>>
FIGURE 34-35
Heinz Kohut. (Courtesy of New York Academy of Medicine, New York.)

Heinz Kohut (1913–1981)
Heinz Kohut (Fig. 34-35) is best known for his writings on narcissism and
the development of self-psychology. He viewed the development and
maintenance of self-esteem and self-cohesion as more critical than sexuality
or aggression. Kohut described Freud’s concept of narcissism as judgmental,
in that development was supposed to proceed toward object relatedness and
away from narcissism. He conceived of two separate lines of development,
one moving in the direction of object relatedness and the other in the
direction of greater enhancement of the self.


<<<PAGE 3406>>>
In infancy, children fear losing the protection of the early mother–infant
bliss and resort to one of three pathways to save the lost perfection: the
grandiose self, the alter ego or twinship, and the idealized parental image.
These three poles of the self manifest themselves in psychoanalytic treatment
in terms of characteristic transferences, known as self-object transferences.
The grandiose self leads to a mirror transference, in which patients attempt
to capture the gleam in the analyst’s eye through exhibitionistic self-display.
The alter ego leads to the twinship transference, in which patients perceive
the analyst as a twin. The idealized parental image leads to an idealizing
transference, in which patients feel enhanced self-esteem by being in the
presence of the exalted figure of the analyst.
Kohut suggested that empathic failures in the mother lead to a
developmental arrest at a particular stage when children need to use others to
perform self-object functions. Although Kohut originally applied this
formulation to narcissistic personality disorder, he later expanded it to apply
to all psychopathology.
Jacques Lacan (1901–1981)
Born in Paris and trained as a psychiatrist, Jacques Lacan founded his
institute, the Freudian School of Paris. He attempted to integrate the
intrapsychic concepts of Freud with concepts related to linguistics and
semiotics (the study of language and symbols). Whereas Freud saw the
unconscious as a seething cauldron of needs, wishes, and instincts, Lacan saw
it as a sort of language that helps to structure the world. His two principal
concepts are that the unconscious is structured like a language, and the
unconscious is a discourse. Primary process thoughts are uncontrolled freeflowing sequences of meaning. Symptoms are signs or symbols of underlying
processes. The role of the therapist is to interpret the semiotic text of the
personality structure. Lacan’s most basic phase is the mirror stage; it is here
that infants learn to recognize themselves by taking the perspective of others.
In that sense, the ego is not part of the self but is something outside of, and
viewed by, the self. The ego comes to represent parents and society more
than it represents the actual self of the person.
Lacan’s therapeutic approach involves the need to become less alienated
from the self and more involved with others. Relationships are often


<<<PAGE 3407>>>
fantasized, which distorts reality and must be corrected. Among his most
controversial beliefs was that the resistance to understanding the real
relationship with the therapist can be reduced by shortening the length of the
therapy session and that psychoanalytic sessions need to be standardized not
to time but, instead, to content and process.
Kurt Lewin (1890–1947)
Kurt Lewin received his Ph.D. in Berlin, came to the United States in the
1930s, and taught at Cornell, Harvard, and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. He adapted the field approach of physics to a concept called
field theory. A field is the totality of coexisting, mutually interdependent
parts. Behavior becomes a function of persons and their environment, which
together make up the life space. The life space represents a field in constant
flux, with valences or needs that require satisfaction. A hungry person is
more aware of restaurants than someone who has just eaten, and a person
who wants to mail a letter is aware of mailboxes.
Lewin applied field theory to groups. Group dynamics refers to the
interaction among members of a group, each of whom depends on the others.
The group can exert pressure on a person to change behavior, but the person
also influences the group when change occurs.
Abraham Maslow (1908–1970)
Abraham Maslow (Fig. 34-36) was born in Brooklyn, New York, and
completed his undergraduate and graduate work at the University of
Wisconsin. Along with Goldstein, Maslow believed in self-actualization
theory—the need to understand the totality of a person. A leader in
humanistic psychology, Maslow described a hierarchical organization of
needs present in everyone. As the more primitive needs, such as hunger and
thirst, are satisfied, more advanced psychological needs, such as affection and
self-esteem, become the primary motivators. Self-actualization is the highest
need.
A peak experience, frequently occurring in self-actualizers, is an episodic,
brief occurrence in which a person suddenly experiences a powerful
transcendental state of consciousness—a sense of heightened understanding,
an intense euphoria, an integrated nature, unity with the universe, and an


<<<PAGE 3408>>>
altered perception of time and space. This powerful experience tends to occur
most often in the psychologically healthy and can produce long-lasting
beneficial effects.

FIGURE 34-36
Abraham H. Maslow. (© Bettmann/Corbis.)

Karl A. Menninger (1893–1990)
Karl A. Menninger was one of the first physicians in the United States to
receive psychiatric training. With his brother, Will, he pioneered the concept
of a psychiatric hospital based on psychoanalytic principles and founded the
Menninger Clinic in Topeka, Kansas. He also was a prolific writer; The
Human Mind, one of his most famous books, brought psychoanalytic
understanding to the lay public. He made a compelling case for the validity of
Freud’s death instinct in Man Against Himself. In The Vital Balance, his


<<<PAGE 3409>>>
magnum opus, he formulated a unique theory of psychopathology.
Menninger maintained a lifelong interest in the criminal justice system and
argued in The Crime of Punishment that many convicted criminals needed
treatment rather than punishment. Finally, his volume titled Theory of
Psychoanalytic Technique was one of the few books to examine the
theoretical underpinnings of psychoanalysts’ interventions.
Adolf Meyer (1866–1950)
Adolf Meyer (Fig. 34-37) came to the United States from Switzerland in
1892 and eventually became director of the psychiatric Henry Phipps Clinic
of the Johns Hopkins Medical School. Not interested in metapsychology, he
espoused a commonsense psychobiological methodology for the study of
mental disorders, emphasizing the interrelationship of symptoms and
individual psychological and biologic functioning. His approach to the study
of personality was biographical; he attempted to bring psychiatric patients
and their treatment out of isolated state hospitals and into communities and
was also a strong advocate of social action for mental health. Meyer
introduced the concept of common sense psychiatry and focused on how a
patient’s current life situation could be realistically improved. He coined the
concept of ergasia, the action of the total organism. His goal in therapy was
to aid patients’ adjustment by helping them modify unhealthy adaptations.
One of Meyer’s tools was an autobiographical life chart constructed by the
patient during therapy.


<<<PAGE 3410>>>
FIGURE 34-37
Adolf Meyer. (From the National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD.)

Gardner Murphy (1895–1979)
Gardner Murphy (Fig. 34-38) was born in Ohio and received his Ph.D. from
Columbia University. He was among the first to publish a comprehensive
history of psychology and made significant contributions to social, general,
and educational psychology. According to Murphy, three essential stages of
personality development are the stage of undifferentiated wholeness, the
stage of differentiation, and the stage of integration. This development is
frequently uneven, with both regression and progression occurring along the
way. The four inborn human needs are visceral-, motor-, sensory-, and


<<<PAGE 3411>>>
emergency-related. These needs become increasingly specific in time as a
person’s experiences mold them in various social and environmental
contexts. Canalization brings about these changes by establishing a
connection between a need and a specific way of satisfying the need.
Murphy was interested in parapsychology. States such as sleep,
drowsiness, specific drug, toxic conditions, hypnosis, and delirium tend to be
favorable to paranormal experiences. Impediments to paranormal awareness
include various intrapsychic barriers, conditions in the general social
environment, and heavy investment in ordinary sensory experiences.
Henry Murray (1893–1988)
Henry Murray (Fig. 34-39) was born in New York City, attended medical
school at Columbia University, and was a founder of the Boston
Psychoanalytic Institute. He proposed the term personology to describe the
study of human behavior. He focused on motivation, a need aroused by
internal or external stimulation; once aroused, motivation produces continued
activity until the need is reduced or satisfied. He developed the Thematic
Apperception Test (TAT), a projective technique used to reveal unconscious
and conscious mental processes and problem areas.


<<<PAGE 3412>>>
FIGURE 34-38
Gardner Murphy. (Courtesy of New York Academy of Medicine, New York.)

Frederick S. Perls (1893–1970)
Gestalt theory developed in Germany under the influence of several men:
Max Wertheimer (1880–1943), Wolfgang Köhler (1887–1967), and Lewin.
Frederick “Fritz” Perls (Fig. 34-40) applied Gestalt theory to a therapy that
emphasizes the current experiences of the patient in the here and now, as
contrasted to the there and then of psychoanalytic schools. In terms of
motivation, patients learn to recognize their needs at any given time and how
the drive to satisfy these needs may influence their current behavior.
According to the Gestalt point of view, behavior represents more than the
sum of its parts. A gestalt, or a whole, includes and goes beyond the sum of
smaller, independent events; it deals with essential characteristics of
experience, such as value, meaning, and form.


<<<PAGE 3413>>>
FIGURE 34-39
Henry Murray. (Courtesy of New York Academy of Medicine, New York.)

Sandor Rado (1890–1972)
Sandor Rado (Fig. 34-41) came to the United States from Hungary in 1945
and founded the Columbia Psychoanalytic Institute in New York. His
theories of adaptational dynamics hold that the organism is a biologic system
operating under hedonic control, which is somewhat similar to Freud’s
pleasure principle. Cultural factors often cause excessive hedonic control and
disordered behavior by interfering with the organism’s ability for self-


<<<PAGE 3414>>>
regulation. In therapy, the patient needs to relearn how to experience
pleasurable feelings.

FIGURE 34-40
Fritz Perls. (Courtesy of the National Library of Medicine.)


<<<PAGE 3415>>>
FIGURE 34-41
Sandor Rado. (Courtesy of New York Academy of Medicine.)

Otto Rank (1884–1939)
An Austrian psychologist and a protégé of Sigmund Freud, Otto Rank (Fig.
34-42) broke with Freud in his 1924 publication, The Trauma of the Birth,
and developed a new theory called birth trauma. Anxiety is correlated with
separation from the mother—specifically, with separation from the womb,
the source of effortless gratification. This painful experience results in primal
anxiety. Sleep and dreams symbolize the return to the womb.


<<<PAGE 3416>>>
FIGURE 34-42
Otto Rank. (Courtesy of New York Academy of Medicine.)


<<<PAGE 3417>>>
FIGURE 34-43
Wilhelm Reich. (Courtesy of New York Academy of Medicine.)

The personality is divided into impulses, emotions, and will. Children’s
impulses seek immediate discharge and gratification. As impulses are
mastered, as in toilet training, children begin the process of will development.
If the will is carried too far, pathologic traits (e.g., stubbornness,
disobedience, and inhibitions) may develop.
Wilhelm Reich (1897–1957)
Wilhelm Reich (Fig. 34-43), an Austrian psychoanalyst, made significant
contributions to psychoanalysis in character formation and character types.
The term character armor refers to the personality’s defenses that serve as
resistance to self-understanding and change. The four primary character types
are as follows: the hysterical character is sexually seductive, anxious, and
fixated at the phallic phase of libido development; the compulsive character
is controlled, distrustful, indecisive, and fixated at the anal phase; the
narcissistic character is fixated at the phallic stage of development, and if the


<<<PAGE 3418>>>
person is male, he has contempt for women; and the masochistic character is
long-suffering, complaining, and self-deprecatory, with excessive demand for
love.
The therapeutic process, called will therapy, emphasizes the relationship
between patient and therapist; the goal of treatment is to help patients accept
their separateness. A definite termination date for therapy is used to protect
against excessive dependence on the therapist.
Carl Rogers (1902–1987)
Carl Rogers (Fig. 34-44) received his Ph.D. in psychology from Columbia
University. After attending Union Theological Seminary in New York,
Rogers studied for the ministry. His name is most clearly associated with the
person-centered theory of personality and psychotherapy, in which the
central concepts are self-actualization and self-direction. Specifically, persons
are born with a capacity to direct themselves in the healthiest way toward a
level of completeness called self-actualization. From his person-centered
approach, Rogers viewed personality not as a static entity composed of traits
and patterns but as a dynamic phenomenon involving ever-changing
communications, relationships, and self-concepts.


<<<PAGE 3419>>>
FIGURE 34-44
Carl Rogers. (Courtesy of the National Library of Medicine.)

Rogers developed a treatment program called client-centered
psychotherapy. Therapists attempt to produce an atmosphere in which clients
can reconstruct their strivings for self-actualization. Therapists hold clients in
unconditional positive regard, which is the total nonjudgmental acceptance of
clients. Other therapeutic practices include attention to the present, focus on
clients’ feelings, emphasis on process, trust in the potential and selfresponsibility of clients, and a philosophy grounded in a positive attitude
toward them, rather than a preconceived structure of treatment.
Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980)
Born in Paris, Jean-Paul Sartre wrote plays and novels before turning to
psychology. He was a German prisoner of war from 1940 to 1941 during


<<<PAGE 3420>>>
World War II. Influenced by the ideas of Martin Heidegger, he developed
what he called existential psychoanalysis. The reflective self was a crucial
concept in Sartre’s psychology. He recognized that humans alone could
reflect on themselves as objects so that the experience of “being” in humans
is unique in the natural world. This capacity to reflect leads humans to
impose meaning on existence. For Sartre, this meaning allows a human being
to create their essence.
Sartre denied the unconscious; he thought that human beings were
condemned to be free and to face the fundamental existential dilemma—their
aloneness without a god to provide meaning. As a result, each individual
creates values and meanings. Neurosis is an escape from freedom, which is
the key to maintaining psychological health. Sartre made no distinction
between philosophy and psychology. Psychologists, as with philosophers,
search for the truth about the world. Part of this truth, in Sartre’s view, was
the dialectic between consciousness and being. Consciousness introduces
nothingness and is a negation of being-in-itself. Ideals are revealed in actions,
not in professed beliefs.


<<<PAGE 3421>>>
FIGURE 34-45
B. F. Skinner. (Courtesy of New York Academy of Medicine, New York.)

B. F. Skinner (1904–1990)
Burrhus Frederic Skinner (Fig. 34-45), commonly known as B. F. Skinner,
received his Ph.D. in psychology from Harvard University, where he taught
for many years. Skinner’s seminal work in operant learning laid much of the
groundwork for many current methods of behavior modification,
programmed instruction, and general education. His global beliefs about the
nature of behavior have been applied more widely. It can be argued, than
those of any other theorist, except, perhaps, Freud. His impact has been
impressive in scope and magnitude.
Skinner’s approach to personality was derived more from his fundamental
beliefs about behavior than from a specific theory of personality per se. To
Skinner, personality did not differ from other behaviors or sets of behaviors;
it is acquired, maintained, and strengthened or weakened according to the


<<<PAGE 3422>>>
same rules of reward and punishment that alter any other behavior.
Behaviorism, as Skinner’s basic theory is most commonly known, is
concerned only with observable, measurable behavior that can be
operationalized. Many abstract and mentalistic hallmarks of other dominant
personality theories have little place in Skinner’s framework. Concepts such
as self, ideas, and ego are considered unnecessary for understanding
behavior. Through the process of operant conditioning and the application of
basic principles of learning, persons are believed to develop sets of behavior
that characterize their responses to the world of stimuli that they face in their
lives. Such a set of responses is called personality.
Harry Stack Sullivan (1892–1949)
Harry Stack Sullivan (Fig. 34-46) is generally acknowledged as the most
original and distinctive American-born theorist in dynamic psychiatry. When
psychiatrists use the term parataxic distortion, apply the concept of selfesteem, consider the importance of preadolescent peer groups in
development, or view a patient’s behavior as an interpersonal manipulation,
they are applying concepts Sullivan first proposed.
Sullivan described three modes of experiencing and thinking about the
world. The prototaxic mode is undifferentiated thought that cannot separate
the whole into parts or use symbols. It occurs in infancy and also appears in
patients with schizophrenia. In the parataxic mode, events are causally
related because of temporal or serial connections. Logical relationships,
however, are not perceived. The syntaxic mode is the logical, rational, and
most mature type of cognitive functioning of which a person is capable.
These three types of thinking and experiencing occur side by side in all
persons; it is the rare person who functions exclusively in the syntaxic mode.


<<<PAGE 3423>>>
FIGURE 34-46
Harry Stack Sullivan. (Courtesy of the National Library of Medicine.)

The total configuration of personality traits is known as the self-system,
which develops in various stages and is the outgrowth of interpersonal
experiences, rather than an unfolding of intrapsychic forces. During infancy,
anxiety occurs for the first time when infants’ primary needs are not satisfied.
During childhood, from 2 to 5 years, a child’s main tasks are to learn the
requirements of the culture and how to deal with influential adults. As a
juvenile, from 5 to 8 years, a child needs peers and must learn how to deal
with them. In preadolescence, from 8 to 12 years, the capacity for love and
collaboration with another person of the same sex develops. This so-called
chum period is the prototype for a sense of intimacy. In the history of patients
with schizophrenia, this experience of chums is often missing. During
adolescence, significant tasks include the separation from the family, the


<<<PAGE 3424>>>
development of standards and values, and the transition to heterosexuality.
The therapy process requires the active participation of the therapist, who
is known as a participant-observer. Modes of experience, particularly the
parataxic, need to be clarified, and new patterns of behavior need to be
implemented. Ultimately, persons need to see themselves as they are, instead
of as they think they are or want others to think they are.
Sullivan is best known for his creative psychotherapeutic work with
severely disturbed patients. He believed that even the most psychotic patients
with schizophrenia could be reached through the human relationship of
psychotherapy.
Donald W. Winnicott (1896–1971)
Donald W. Winnicott (Fig. 34-47) was one of the central figures in the
British school of object relations theory. His theory of multiple selforganization included a true self, which develops in the context of a
responsive holding environment provided by a good-enough mother. When
infants experience a traumatic disruption of their developing sense of self,
however, a false self emerges and monitors and adapts to the conscious and
unconscious needs of the mother; it thus provides a protected exterior behind
which the true self is afforded the privacy that it requires to maintain its
integrity.


<<<PAGE 3425>>>
FIGURE 34-47
Donald Winnicott. (Courtesy of New York Academy of Medicine, New York.)

Winnicott also developed the notion of the transitional object. Ordinarily,
a pacifier, blanket, or teddy bear, this object serves as a substitute for the
mother during infants’ efforts to separate and become independent. It
provides a soothing sense of security in the absence of the mother.
The case history below illustrates how the different psychodynamic
schools discussed in this chapter can be applied to the clinical observations.
Mr. A was a 26-year-old white man who had a history of bipolar I
disorder. He was brought in for treatment after not completing the last


<<<PAGE 3426>>>
required course for his advanced degree and being arrested for disturbing
the peace. He had consistently lied to his family about where he stood
with his coursework and about having skipped an examination that would
have qualified him to use his professional degree. He had also not told
them that he had been using marijuana almost daily for several years and
occasionally used hallucinogens. His arrest for disorderly conduct was for
swimming naked in an apartment complex in the middle of the night
while taking hallucinogens.
Mr. A’s use of marijuana began early in college but became daily
during graduate school. He was diagnosed as having bipolar I disorder
early in his senior year at college after an apparent episode of mania. His
mood disorder was well controlled on lithium (Eskalith). During graduate
school, he was episodically compliant with medications, preferring to try
to maintain a state of hypomania. He saw a psychiatrist every 3 to 6
months for medication checks. During his 4 years in graduate school, he
had two clear episodes of depression and began taking sertraline (Zoloft),
100 mg/day, with questionable benefit. Mr. A believed that he could be a
great writer. He spent most of his time reading and trying to write. He
dreamed of going to New York and becoming part of a group of avantgarde writers that would parallel the Algonquin Club of the 1930s or the
Beat poets of the late 1940s. This aspiration and his marijuana abuse
predated his development of bipolar I disorder. He attended class
episodically, nonetheless performing adequately. His last class had no
final examination but required a paper. He planned to write this paper in
the form of a play, involving a dialogue between two thinkers from
different times and cultures. His professor was very excited about this
idea, but Mr. A kept postponing the task until he was forced to extend his
schooling by a year. His other significant interest during this time
involved growing and photographing flowers.
Mr. A was born and raised in a large city. His father had been very
successful in commercial real estate, and his mother, after raising the
children, used the substantial real estate holdings she inherited from her
father to set up a business to manage them. Most of the money was
placed in trust for the patient and his siblings. His mother had total
financial control of the trusts and doled out the proceeds to the children
as they needed them. There was no family history of any psychiatric


<<<PAGE 3427>>>
disorders.
The patient described his mother as very loving and caring but
intrusive and controlling. For example, the mother arranged the initial
treatment but then was angry that the psychiatrist had not called her
regularly to report on her adult son’s progress. She was also critical of
various aspects of the treatment, as reported to her by her son. The
patient’s two older siblings had attended prestigious colleges and
graduate schools but had returned home to work in the mother’s real
estate management company. The 30-year-old sister was living in the
parents’ home. The 35-year-old brother had lived at home for a time but
then moved out to a location a few blocks away. There was a younger
brother, still in college, who also smoked marijuana excessively. He tried
to minimize the patient’s problems to the family and tried to protect the
patient, who desperately had not wanted to return home. Of note is that
none of the children were married, although the two older ones had a
couple of serious relationships.
The children seemed to regard the mother with affectionate amusement
and bemusement. The father was seen as a very caring but
undemonstrative man who put much energy into keeping the mother from
becoming too upset and encouraged them to do the same. The children
often wanted to provoke the mother for her judgmental, detail-oriented
intrusiveness. The father discouraged them but occasionally found their
provocations amusing.
The family viewed itself as very close, with strong values oriented
toward community service and family loyalty. The family belonged to a
religious community but expressed their involvement primarily in social
service and social action volunteer work, accompanied by generous
financial contributions.
The patient had been a very successful debater in high school and
recalled his development as very positive but provided few details. He
tended to place himself in the role of the outsider, an observer of
humanity, which he saw as consonant with the role of a writer. He was
proud to have bipolar I disorder and tried to regulate his medications so
that he would be hypomanic much of the time, seeing this as enhancing
his creativity. He viewed his use of marijuana in the same vein. One of
the most distressing aspects of his depressive episodes was that marijuana


<<<PAGE 3428>>>
no longer created a feeling of well-being but made him feel worse. His
current depressive episode involved no neurovegetative symptoms.
Instead, he presented as flat, numb, apathetic, ashamed, anhedonic, and
anergic. He was notably ashamed of being back in his hometown and of
living with his parents.
The patient ostensibly understood and accepted his illness well and had
read much about it. However, the family had responded to the
information “with proper treatment, bipolars can live normal lives,”
meaning that the information should be kept secret to be treated normally.
Mr. A, on the other hand, was very open with friends at graduate school
about his illness and his pride in it and the creativity he associated with it.
The patient had two long-standing recurrent dreams. One involved him
flying. The narrative line varied, but the flying theme recurred. Often, he
had other magical powers in his dreams, such as the ability to heal, not to
be killed by bullets, to save the world or some group of people from
mortal danger, and so on. The other recurrent dream was of a hotel lobby.
These dreams regularly began with him entering a hotel lobby to meet a
group of people, accompanied by a feeling of dread.

POSITIVE PSYCHOLOGY
Positive psychology is an umbrella term describing the scientific study of
what makes life most worth living. Research findings from positive
psychology are intended to provide a more complete and balanced scientific
understanding of the human experience. The new field of positive psychology
calls for as much focus on strength as on weakness, as much interest in
building the best things in life as in repairing the worst, and as much concern
with making the lives of normal people fulfilling as with healing pathology.
Positive psychology does not replace business-as-usual psychology, which
often focuses on people’s problems and how to remedy them. Instead,
positive psychology intends to complement and extend problem-focused
psychology. The attention of positive psychologists is increasingly turning to
deliberate interventions that promote the well-being of individuals and
groups, and again, these should be regarded as supplements to existing
therapies.


<<<PAGE 3429>>>
Positive psychology studies what goes right in life, from birth to death. It is
concerned with optimal experience—people being their best and doing their
best. Everyone’s life has peaks and valleys, and positive psychology does not
deny the low points. Its signature premise is nuanced: What is good about life
is as genuine as what is bad and deserves equal attention from psychologists.
Positive psychology assumes that life entails more than avoiding or undoing
problems and that explanations of the good life must do more than reverse
accounts of distress and dysfunction.
Empirical Findings
Although still a young field, positive psychology already has a canon of
established findings worth considering. Indeed, positive psychology is a
bottom-up field, very much defined by its empirical results. Discussed below
are some of the things that have been learned about positive experiences,
positive traits, positive relationships, and positive institutions.
When psychologists study self-reported happiness and life satisfaction,
usually under the rubric of subjective well-being, they administer numerical
rating scales. The consistent and perhaps surprising result is that most people
in most circumstances, most of the time, score above the scale midpoint,
whether they are multimillionaires in the United States or pavement dwellers
in Calcutta. This conclusion holds across demographic characteristics like
age, sex, ethnicity, and education, each of which has a surprisingly small
association with avowed happiness.
The significant correlates of happiness are social. In contrast to the modest
demographic correlates of happiness and well-being, consider the following
robust correlates:
Number of friends
Being married
Being extroverted
Being grateful
Being religious
Pursuing leisure activities
Employment (not income)
In a study that compared happy people to very happy people, there was one


<<<PAGE 3430>>>
striking difference: good relationships with other people. Of the very happy
people in the sample, all had close relationships with others. Psychology
research documents very few necessary or sufficient conditions, but these
data suggest that good social relationships may be a necessary condition for
extreme happiness.
People who are successful in life’s venues are, of course, happy, but the
less obvious and more interesting finding from experimental and longitudinal
research is that happiness foreshadows success in academic, vocational, and
interpersonal realms.
Having good relationships with other people is the most critical contributor
to a satisfying life and may even be a necessary condition for happiness.
Having a “best friend” at work is a strong predictor of satisfaction and even
productivity. A good relationship is one in which the amount of positive
communication considerably outweighs negative communication.
Positive psychologists have taken a close look at the features of positive
communication, describing four ways in which a person can respond to
someone else when something happens, including good events such as a raise
at work:
Active-constructive responding—an enthusiastic response: “That’s great; I
bet you’ll receive many more raises.”
Active-destructive responding—a response that points out the potential
downside: “Are they going to expect more of you now?”
Passive-constructive responding—a muted response: “That’s nice, dear.”
Passive-destructive responding—a response that conveys disinterest: “It
rained all day here.”
Couples who use active-constructive responding have good marriages. The
other responses, if they dominate, are associated with marital dissatisfaction.
Although this research has only been done in the context of marriage, it may
well generalize to other relationships.
Psychology and psychiatry have a long history of either ignoring religion
or regarding it with suspicion. However, research findings have begun to
accumulate, showing that religion has particular benefits in various
psychological domains. Internalized religious beliefs may help a person to
cope with problems and even avoid physical illness in the first place.
Religiousness is robustly associated with longevity, happiness, and other


<<<PAGE 3431>>>
indices of a life lived well.
People who are so poor that they cannot meet their basic needs are
unhappy, but above extreme poverty, increased income has a surprisingly
small relationship with life satisfaction.
Despite the small contribution of income to well-being, whether or not
someone is working is much more strongly related to happiness. People who
are employed and engaged in what they do are happy, regardless of the status
or compensation associated with their job. Happiness and engagement lead
people to regard their work as a calling and be more productive at whatever
they do, take fewer sick days, and even postpone their retirement.
According to Aristotle’s notion of eudaimonia—being faithful to one’s
inner self (demon)—true happiness entails identifying one’s virtues,
cultivating them, and living by them. Contrast this notion with the equally
venerable idea of hedonism—pursuing pleasure and avoiding pain—that is
the foundation for utilitarianism, which in turn provides the underpinning of
psychoanalysis and all but the most radical of the behaviorisms. Research
shows that eudaimonia consistently trumps pleasure as a predictor of life
satisfaction. Those who pursue eudaimonic goals and activities are more
satisfied than those who pursue pleasure. This is not to say that hedonism is
irrelevant to life satisfaction, just that all things being equal, hedonism
contributes less to long-term happiness than does eudaimonia.
Although the study of positive institutions is in its infancy, there is an
agreement that institutions that allow people to flourish—whether families,
schools, workplaces, or even entire societies—share a core of common
characteristics:
Purpose—a shared vision of the moral goals of the institution, one
reinforced by remembrances and celebrations
Safety—protection against threat, danger, and exploitation
Fairness—equitable rules governing reward and punishment and the
means for consistently enforcing them
Humanity—mutual care and concern
Dignity—the treatment of all people in the institution as individuals
regardless of their position
Psychologists, at least in the United States, have long believed that the
human condition can be improved by the intelligent application of what they


<<<PAGE 3432>>>
have learned. Positive psychologists are no exception, and many have turned
their attention to interventions that make people more happy, hopeful,
virtuous, accomplished, and socially involved. In some cases, these
applications are running in front of data that would support them, but in other
cases, outcome research has been done. Even the most compelling research is
not based on follow-up that extends beyond a few years, and the research
participants are usually motivated and willing volunteers. How well these
interventions will generalize—across diverse people and over time—is a
research topic of high priority.
Positive Psychology and Clinical Work
When positive psychology was first described, its stated goal was not to
move people from –5 to zero—the goal of conventional psychology and
psychiatry—but rather from +2 to +5, within the upper right-hand quadrant of
Figure 34-48. This emphasis on promotion instead of remediation is an
essential feature of a positive psychology perspective, but it does not do
justice to this new field and its potential role in clinical work.
Positive Psychology’s Vision of Psychological Health. In its 1948
constitution, the World Health Organization (WHO) defined health as “a
state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not merely the
absence of disease or infirmity.” In more recent years, this statement has been
expanded to include the ability to lead a life that is socially and economically
productive. This definition is an essential declaration that health entails more
than the absence of illness, but it is circular since “well-being” is a synonym
for “health.” Work by positive psychologists makes this definition more
concrete and useful as a guide for research and intervention.
If one can extrapolate from the sorts of topics that have been studied,
positive psychology assumes that people are doing well when they
experience more positive feelings than negative feelings, are satisfied with
their lives as they have been lived, have identified what they do well, and use
these talents and strengths on an ongoing basis, are highly engaged in what
they do, are contributing members of a social community, and have a sense of
meaning and purpose in their lives. Physical health and safety, of course,
provide an essential context for psychological well-being. It is difficult to


<<<PAGE 3433>>>
imagine a cultural group in which these components of the good life are not
valued. Respect for human diversity need not entail extreme cultural
relativism.

FIGURE 34-48
Mental health and mental illness. These are dimensions. Quadrants are shown for
the purpose of illustration only. (From Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia,
PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:2942, with permission.)

Note that this fuller characterization of health reflects the WHO definition
and is drawn from research in all of the domains of concern to contemporary
positive psychology. The relevant research cautions that health so defined is
not unitary. No one can have it all, at least at the same time, given tradeoffs
among the psychological states and traits that reflect doing well.
Psychological health, therefore, needs to be described with a profile of
features and not a single summary score. The fifth edition of the Diagnostic


<<<PAGE 3434>>>
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) describes hundreds of
psychological problems. However, there may be just as many different
manifestations of the good life.
Theory of Psychopathology. As a perspective on topics that deserve
scientific study, positive psychology has no single theory. Like much of
contemporary psychology, it instead relies on midrange theories that draw on
various broader perspectives, from evolutionary to behavioral to cognitive to
sociocultural models, to make sense of specific phenomena. Different topics
are explained with different theories. The eventual integration of psychology
may be a worthy goal, but it has not yet been achieved.
At this early point in the development of positive psychology, the lack of a
consensual or integrated theory is not a problem. The good psychological life
is not yet understood, and positive psychologists are still grappling with the
right vocabulary to describe it. Accordingly, championing a single theory at
present would be premature, even counterproductive.
It has been argued that positive psychology is a descriptive endeavor, not a
prescriptive one. If this means that positive psychology should be an
empirical science—informed by replicable facts—then this claim is
reasonable and a defining feature of the entire field. If this means that
positive psychology is assumption-free or value-neutral, it becomes much
more challenging to defend. After all, positive psychologists make the value
judgment that the “good” life is indeed good—that is, desirable, morally and
otherwise—and the metatheoretical assumption that the good life can be
studied with the conventional methods of psychology. In any event, positive
psychology seems no more prescriptive than clinical psychology or
psychiatry. It may even be less so, given the theoretical diversity of positive
psychology as it now exists.
Positive Psychology Assessment. The assessment has long been a
staple of psychology, and much of it has been tilted—understandably—
toward identifying weaknesses, deficiencies, and problems. The positive
psychology perspective is that business-as-usual assessment should be
expanded (not replaced) by attention to areas of strength and competence.
Low life satisfaction can occur in the absence of psychopathology, but it is
nonetheless related to psychological and social problems. Conversely, high


<<<PAGE 3435>>>
life satisfaction is linked to good functioning, even in the presence of
symptoms.
Positive psychologists have developed an impressive set of measurement
instruments that allow someone to break through the zero point of deficiency
measures. For example, the healthiest that one can score on a typical measure
of depression is zero, but this lumps together people who are blasé with those
filled with zest and joy. The distinction seems well worth making, and the
self-report surveys and interviews developed by positive psychologists allow
it.
Most of the existing positive psychology measures were developed for
research purposes, and they are most valid when aggregated to yield
conclusions about groups of people. They can also be used ipsatively (i.e.,
forced to choose between two options), to describe the psychological
characteristics of an individual and how they stay the same or change over
time, but the cautious use of these descriptions is a point of discussion and a
departure in treatment. None is a robust diagnostic test, and none should be
treated as if it were. Such prudence is appropriate for all psychological
assessments, but it is worth emphasizing in positive psychology measures.
Positive Psychology Techniques. Positive psychologists have
demonstrated that brief interventions in the short term can increase happiness,
satisfaction, and fulfillment. In some cases, there is also evidence that they
can alleviate depression. For example, patients or clients can be asked to
count their blessings:
Every night for 1 week, set aside 10 minutes before you go to bed. Use that
time to write down three things that went really well on that day and why
they went well. You may use a journal or your computer to write about the
events, but you must have a physical record of your writing. It is not enough
to do this exercise in your head. The three things you list can be relatively
small in importance or relatively large in importance. Next to each positive
event in your list, answer the question, “Why did this good thing happen?”
They can also be asked to use their strengths in novel ways. They take the
Values in Action Inventory of Strengths (VIA-IS) questionnaire online and
identify their most signature strengths of character. Then they are instructed
to use these strengths in their daily life:


<<<PAGE 3436>>>
Every day for the next 7 days, use one of your top five strengths in a
way that you have not before. You might use your strength in a new
setting or with a new person. It is your choice.
Outcome research shows that various psychotherapies are effective in
alleviating problems and usually equally so, despite the different
forms they take. One interpretation of the equal effectiveness of
different therapies is that nonspecific factors common to all
treatments are responsible. Perhaps the types of strategies being
studied by positive psychologists reflect these common factors and
give names to them. Strategies like instilling hope and building
strengths may be the critical factors in the effectiveness of any
therapy.
Some qualifications are in order if these techniques are used in the
context of treatment. First, the therapist must ascertain a client’s
readiness to change in the particular ways requested in the exercise
and the client’s capacity to make the change. Like any
psychotherapeutic procedure, these techniques cannot be imposed on
the unwilling or unable.
Second, none of these techniques is akin to a crash diet or an antibiotic.
The degree to which they have lasting effects is related to how
patients or clients integrate them into their regular behavioral routines.
Counting blessings for a week will make a person happier for that
week, but only if they become habitually grateful will there be a more
enduring effect. Research finds—not surprisingly—that the people
who showed lasting benefits were those who continued to use the
exercise.
Third, these exercises are typically presented as one size fits all, but
there is no reason to think that they are equally useful for all patients
or clients. Nothing is known about the match of an exercise with a
client’s particular presenting problems or goals or with a client’s age,
sex, social class, or ethnicity.
Fourth, little is known about the parameters of these interventions. For
example, how many blessings should one count, and how frequently
should this be done? With college students, counting blessings three
times a week may be more effective in increasing happiness than
counting them more frequently. Is this a general phenomenon or one


<<<PAGE 3437>>>
specific to young adults attending college?
Fifth, all interventions run the risk of unintended harm, and although
positive psychologists would like to believe that their techniques
avoid iatrogenic effects, this assertion cannot be made with thorough
confidence. For example, although optimism is related to mental and
physical health, it would be simplistic and potentially hazardous to
tell patients or clients that positive expectations will solve all their
difficulties. Along these lines, if a positive psychology intervention
overemphasizes a client’s choice and responsibility, considerable
damage could be done in cases of abuse and victimization, in which
self-blame needs to be undone and certainly not encouraged.
Interventions based on positive psychology should not preclude the
use of existing therapeutic strategies when these are indicated.
Positive Psychotherapies. Positive psychotherapies are beginning to
appear: therapeutic interventions based on the theories and findings of
positive psychology. What distinguishes these emerging positive
psychotherapies from conventional treatments is that their stated goal is not
symptom reduction or relief but relatively enhanced happiness, life
satisfaction fulfillment, productivity, and the like—one or more components
of positive psychology’s vision of the good life. These new therapies target
people with psychological problems as well as those without them. In the
latter case, positive psychotherapies make contact with life coaching.
The possible field of positive psychotherapies is so broad that it needs
narrowing, and somewhat arbitrarily, the focus here is on approaches
characterized by an explicit therapeutic alliance between the positive
psychologist and the patient or client. This feature goes by many names and
has been variously defined, but its recurring themes include collaboration
between therapist and client, an affective bond between them, and an
agreement on the goals and tasks of the intervention. Asking people to write
about their goals or perform acts of kindness, despite beneficial
consequences, may or may not be instances of positive psychotherapy—what
matters is the relational context of the request.
The unique and explicit goal of emerging positive
psychotherapies is to enhance well-being and to promote the good life among
TAKING

STOCK.


<<<PAGE 3438>>>
those with obvious psychological problems as well as those without them.
They are also similar to more established therapies. Positive psychotherapies
are short-term, structured interventions for individuals or small groups. Most
can be placed in the cognitive-behavioral realm, although their techniques
could be integrated easily into other treatment models. Most positive
psychotherapies entail out-of-sessions exercises and homework assignments,
the results of which are discussed in sessions. Several positive
psychotherapies rely on journal-keeping, and many of these therapies rely on
ongoing assessment.
Like other cognitive-behavioral interventions, positive psychotherapies
take issue with assumptions of the medical model that people in treatment are
ill and that their problems are best described as discrete (present-or-absent)
entities as in DSM-5. According to positive psychology, people’s weaknesses
and strengths exist in degrees.
As emphasized, research support is still accumulating. Enough outcome
studies have been conducted to conclude that positive psychotherapies are
more than just promising, with effect sizes in the small to moderate range
typical of psychological interventions. Not known in most cases is how
positive psychotherapies fare in direct comparison with conventional
treatments for anxiety or depression. Also, as already mentioned, the
boundary conditions of effective positive psychotherapy are unknown.
Many positive psychologists would like to believe that a strengths-based
approach to change is superior to one that focuses on the remediation of
deficiencies, but this hypothesis has yet to be put to a serious test. The evenhanded suspicion is that attention to both strengths and weaknesses is critical
and that no useful purpose is served by regarding these as mutually exclusive
therapeutic strategies.

References
Contributions from the Psychosocial Sciences
Abramowitz JS, Arch JJ. Strategies for improving long-term outcomes in
cognitive behavioral therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder: insights
from learning theory. Cogn Behav Pract. 2014;21:20–31.
Akre KL, Ryan MJ. Complexity increases working memory for mating


<<<PAGE 3439>>>
signals. Curr Biol. 2010;20(6):502–505.
Bond T. Comparing decalage and development with cognitive developmental
tests. J Appl Meas. 2010;11(2):158–171.
Boom J. Egocentrism in moral development: Gibbs, Piaget, Kohlberg. New
Ideas Psychol. 2011;29(3):355.
Bouton ME. Learning and Behavior: A Contemporary Synthesis. Sunderland,
MA: Sinauer; 2007.
Bouton ME. Learning theory. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:647.
Byrne JH, ed. Learning and Memory—A Comprehensive Reference. New
York: Elsevier; 2008.
Crystal JD. Comparative cognition: comparing human and monkey memory.
Curr Biol. 2011;21(11):R432–R434.
Dickinson D. Zeroing in on early cognitive development in schizophrenia.
Am J Psychiatry. 2014;171:9–12.
Freud S. The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of
Sigmund Freud. Vol. 24. London: Hogarth Press; 1953–1974.
Gerstner JR, Lyons LC, Wright KP Jr, Loh DH, Rawashdeh O, Eckel-Mahan
KL, Roman GW. Cycling behavior and memory formation. J Neurosci.
2009;29(41):12824–12830.
Greenberg JR, Mitchell SA. Object Relations in Psychoanalytic Theory.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; 1983.
Greenspan S, Curry J. Piaget and cognitive development. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:635.
Harris PL. Piaget on causality: the whig interpretation of cognitive
development. Br J Psychol. 2009;100(S1):229.
Hockenbury D. Learning. In: Discovering Psychology. 5th ed. New York:
Worth Publishers; 2011:183.
Houdé O, Pineau A, Leroux G, Poirel N, Perchey G, Lanoë C, Lubin A,
Turbelin MR, Rossi S, Simon G, Delcroix N, Lamberton F, Vigneau M,
Wisniewski G, Vicet JR, Mazoyer B. Functional magnetic resonance
imaging study of Piaget’s conservation-of-number task in preschool and
school-age children: a neo-Piagetian approach. J Exp Child Psychol.


<<<PAGE 3440>>>
2011;110(3):332–346.
Illeris K, ed. Contemporary Theories of Learning: Learning Theorists… In
Their Own Words. New York: Routledge; 2009.
Kandel ER. The biology of memory: a forty-year perspective. J Neurosci.
2009;29(41):12748–12756.
Kandel ER, Dudai Y, Mayford MR. The molecular and systems biology of
memory. Cell. 2014;157(1):163–186.
Kosaki Y, Dickinson A. Choice and contingency in the development of
behavioral autonomy during instrumental conditioning. J Exp Psychol
Anim Behav Process. 2010;36(3):334–342.
Laplanche J, Pontalis J-B. The Language of Psycho-analysis. New York:
Norton; 1973.
Lee SH, Dan Y: Neuromodulation of brain states. Neuron. 2012;76(1):209–
222.
Lubin FD. Epigenetic gene regulation in the adult mammalian brain: multiple
roles in memory formation. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2011;96(1):68–78.
Mahler MS, Pine F, Bergman A. The Psychological Birth of the Human
Infant. New York: Basic Books; 1975.
Maia TV. Two-factor theory, the actor-critic model, and conditioned
avoidance. Learn Behav. 2010;38(1):50–67.
Meissner WW. Theories of Personality in Psychotherapy. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:788.
Mesotten D, Gielen M, Sterken C, Claessens K, Hermans G, Vlasselaers D,
Lemiere J, Lagae L, Gewillig M, Eyskens B, Vanhorebeek I, Wouters PJ,
Van den Berghe G. Neurocognitive development of children 4 years after
critical illness and treatment with tight glucose control: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2012;308(16):1641–1650.
Paller KA, Squire LR. Biology of memory. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz
P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:658.
Pallini S, Baiocco R, Schneider BH, Madigan S, Atkinson L. Early childparent attachment and peer relations: A meta-analysis of recent research. J
Fam Psychol. 2014;28(1):118–123.
Rösler R, Ranganath C, Röder B, Kluwe RH, eds. Neuroimaging of Human


<<<PAGE 3441>>>
Memory. New York: Oxford University Press; 2008.
Sigelman CK, Rider EA. Learning theories. In: Life-Span Human
Development. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth; 2012:42.
Solntseva SV, Nikitin BP. Protein synthesis is required for induction of
amnesia elicited by disruption of the reconsolidation of long-term memory.
Neurosci Behavl Physiol. 2011;41(6):654.
Stern D. The Interpersonal World of the Infant. New York: Basic Books;
1985.
Urcelay GP, Miller RR. Two roles of the context in Pavlovian fear
conditioning. J Exp Psychol Anim Behav Process. 2010;36(2):268–280.
Whitbourne SK, Whitbourne SB. Piaget’s cognitive-developmental theory.
In: Adult Development and Aging: Biopsychosocial Perspectives. 4th ed.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2011:32.
Normality and Mental Health
Blom RM, Hagestein-de Bruijn C, de Graaf R, ten Have M, Denys DA.
Obsessions in normality and psychopathology. Depress Anxiety.
2011;28(10):870.
Macaskill A. Differentiating dispositional self-forgiveness from otherforgiveness: Associations with mental health and life satisfaction. J Soc
Clin Psychol. 2012;31:28.
Sajobi TT, Lix LM, Clara I, Walker J, Graff LA, Rawsthorne P, Miller N,
Rogala L, Carr R, Bernstein CN. Measures of relative importance for
health-related quality of life. Qual Life Res. 2012;21:1.
Tol WA, Patel V, Tomlinson M, Baingana F, Galappatti A, Silove D,
Sondorp E, van Ommeren M, Wessells MG, Panter-Brick C. Relevance or
excellence? Setting research priorities for mental health and psychosocial
support in humanitarian settings. Harv Rev Psychiatry. 2012;20:25.
Vaillant GE. Positive mental health: is there a cross-cultural definition?
World Psychiatry. 2012;11(2):93.
Vaillant GE. Spiritual Evolution: A Scientific Defense of Faith. New York:
Doubleday Broadway; 2008.
Vaillant GE, Vaillant CO. Normality and mental health. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:691.


<<<PAGE 3442>>>
Wakefield JC. Misdiagnosing normality: Psychiatry’s failure to address the
problem of false positive diagnoses of mental disorder in a changing
professional environment. J Ment Health. 2010;19(4):337.
Ward D. ‘Recovery’: Does it fit for adolescent mental health? J Child
Adolesc Ment Health. 2014;26:83–90.
Contributions from the Sociocultural Sciences
Aggarwal NK. The psychiatric cultural formulation: translating medical
anthropology into clinical practice. J Psychiatr Pract. 2012;18(2):73–85.
Bhugra D, Popelyuk D, McMullen I. Paraphilias across cultures: contexts and
controversies. J Sex Res. 2010;47(2):242–256.
Bhui K, Bhugra D, eds. Culture and Mental Health. London: Hodder Arnold;
2007.
Biag BJ. Social and transcultural aspects of psychiatry. In: Johnstone EC,
Owens DC, Lawrie SM, Mcintosh AM, Sharpe S, eds. Companion to
Psychiatric Studies. 8th ed. New York: Elsevier; 2010:109.
Bolton SL, Elias B, Enns MW, Sareen J, Beals J, Novins DK, Swampy Cree
Suicide Prevention Team; AI-SUPERPFP Team. A comparison of the
prevalence and risk factors of suicidal ideation and suicide attempts in two
American Indian population samples and in a general population sample.
Transcult Psychiatry. 2014;51(1):3–22.
Breslau J, Aguiler-Gaxiola S, Borges G, Kendler KS, Su M, Kessler RC.
Risk for psychiatric disorder among immigrants and their US-born
descendants: evidence from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.
J Nerv Ment Dis. 2007;195(3):189–195.
Burghardt GM. Darwin’s legacy to comparative psychology and ethology.
Am Psychol. 2009;64(2):102–110.
Burt A, Trivers R. Genes in Conflict: The Biology of Selfish Genetic
Elements. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press; 2006.
Chao RC, Green KE. Multiculturally Sensitive Mental Health Scale
(MSMHS): Development, factor analysis, reliability, and validity. Psychol
Assess. 2011;23(4):876–887.
Confer JC, Easton JA, Fleischman DS, Goetz CD, Lewis DMG, Perilloux C,
Buss DM. Evolutionary psychology. Controversies, questions, prospects,
and limitations. Am Psychol. 2010;65(2):110–126.
Crozier I. Making up koro: multiplicity, psychiatry, culture, and penis-


<<<PAGE 3443>>>
shrinking anxieties. J Hist Med Allied Sci. 2012;67(1):36–70.
De Block A, Adriaens PR. Maladapting Minds: Philosophy, Psychiatry, and
Evolutionary Theory. New York: Oxford University Press; 2011.
De La Rosa M, Babino R, Rosario A, Martinez NV, Aijaz L. Challenges and
strategies in recruiting, interviewing, and retaining recent Latino
immigrants in substance abuse and HIV epidemiologic studies. Am J
Addict. 2012;21(1):11–22.
Donlan W, Lee J. Screening for depression among indigenous Mexican
migrant farmworkers using the Patient Health Questionnaire-9. Psychol
Rep. 2010;106(2):419–432.
Griffith JL. Neuroscience and humanistic psychiatry: a residency curriculum.
Acad Psychiatry. 2014;1–8.
Guarnaccia PJ, Lewis-Fernandez R, Pincay IM, Shrout P, Guo J, Torres M,
Canino G, Alegria M. Ataque de nervios as a marker of social and
psychiatric vulnerability: results from the NLAAS. Int J Soc Psychiatry.
2010;56(3):298–309.
Haque A. Mental health concepts in Southeast Asia: diagnostic
considerations and treatment implications. Psychol Health Med.
2010;15(2):127–134.
Jefee-Bahloul H. Teaching psychiatry residents about culture-bound
syndromes: implementation of a modified team-based learning program.
Acad Psychiatry. 2014;1–2.
Juckett G, Rudolf-Watson L. Recognizing mental illness in culture-bound
syndromes. Am Fam Physician. 2010;81(2):206.
Kagawa-Singer M. Impact of culture on health outcomes. J Pediatr Hematol
Oncol. 2011;33(Suppl 2):S90–S95.
Keller MC, Miller G. Resolving the paradox of common, harmful, heritable
mental disorders: which evolutionary genetic models work best? Behav
Brain Sci. 2006;29(4):385–404; discussion 405–452.
Khalil RB, Dahdah P, Richa S, Kahn DA. Lycanthropy as a culture-bound
syndrome: a case report and review of the literature. J Psychiatr Pract.
2012;18(1):51–54.
Kohn R, Wintrob RM, Alarcón RD. Transcultural psychiatry. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:734.


<<<PAGE 3444>>>
Kortmann F. Transcultural psychiatry: from practice to theory. Transcult
Psychiatry. 2010:47(2):203–223.
Lewis-Fernández R, Guarnaccia PJ, Ruiz P. Culture-bound syndromes. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:2519.
Lipton JE, Barash DP. Sociobiology and psychiatry. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:716.
Llyod K. The history and relevance of culture-bound syndromes. In: Bhui K,
Bhugra D, eds. Culture and Mental Health. London: Hodder Arnold;
2007:98.
Millon T. Classifying personality disorders: an evolution-based alternative to
an evidence-based approach. J Pers Disord. 2011;25(3):279–304.
Ruiz P. A look at cultural psychiatry in the 21st century. J Nerv Ment Dis.
2011;199(8):553–556.
Swartz L. Dissociation and spirit possession in non-Western countries: Notes
towards a common research agenda. In: Sinason V, ed. Attachment,
Trauma and Multiplicity: Working With Dissociative Identity Disorder.
2nd ed. New York: Routledge; 2011:63.
Teo AR, Gaw AC. Hikikomori, a Japanese culture-bound syndrome of social
withdrawal?: A proposal for DSM-5. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2010;198(6):444–
449.
Ton H, Lim RF. The assessment of culturally diverse individuals. In: Lim
RF, ed. Clinical Manual of Cultural Psychiatry. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Publishing; 2006:3–31.
van der Horst FCP, Kagan J. John Bowlby – From Psychoanalysis to
Ethology: Unravelling the Roots of Attachment Theory. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc; 2011.
Theories of Personality and Psychopathology
Aviezer H, Trope Y, Todorov A. Body cues, not facial expressions,
discriminate between intense positive and negative emotions. Science.
2012;338(6111):1225–1229.
Bergmann MS. The Oedipus complex and psychoanalytical technique.


<<<PAGE 3445>>>
Psychoanal Inq. 2010;30(6):535.
Breger L. A Dream of Undying Fame: How Freud Betrayed His Mentor and
Invented Psychoanalysis. New York: Basic Books; 2009.
Britzman DP. Freud and Education. New York: Routledge; 2011.
Brown C, Lowis MJ. Psychosocial development in the elderly: an
investigation into Erikson’s ninth stage. J Aging Stud. 2003;17:415–426.
Caldwell L, Joyce A, eds. Reading Winnicott. New York: Routledge; 2011.
Capps D. The decades of life: Relocating Erikson’s stages. Pastoral Psychol.
2004;53:3–32.
Chodorow NJ. The American independent tradition: Loewald, Erikson, and
the (possible) rise of intersubjective ego psychology. Psychoanal
Dialogues. 2004;14:207–232.
Cotti P. Sexuality and psychoanalytic aggrandisement: Freud’s 1908 theory
of cultural history. Hist Psychiatry. 2011;22(85 Pt 1):58–74.
Cotti P. Travelling the path from fantasy to history: the struggle for original
history within Freud’s early circle, 1908–1913. Psychoanal Hist.
2010;12(2):153–172.
Crawford TN, Cohen P, Johnson JG, Sneed JR, Brook JS. The course and
psychosocial correlates of personality disorder symptoms in adolescence:
Erikson’s developmental theory revisited. J Youth Adolesc.
2004;33(5):373–387.
DeRobertis EM. Deriving a third force approach to child development from
the works of Alfred Adler. J Hum Psychol. 2011;51:492.
DeRobertis EM. Winnicott, Kohut, and the developmental context of wellbeing. Hum Psychol. 2010;38(4):336.
Efklides A, Moraitou D, eds. A Positive Psychology Perspective on Quality
of Life. New York: Springer Science+Business Media; 2013.
Freud S. The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of
Sigmund Freud. Vol. 24. London: Hogarth Press; 1953–1974.
Friedman LJ. Erik Erikson on identity, generativity, and pseudospeciation: a
biographer’s perspective. Psychoanal Hist. 2001;3:179.
Funk R, ed. The Clinical Erich Fromm: Personal Accounts and Papers on
Therapeutic Technique. New York: Editions Rodopi B.V.; 2009.
Gardner H. Sigmund Freud: Alone in the world. In: Creating Minds: An
Anatomy of Creativity Seen Through the Lives of Freud, Einstein, Picasso,
Stravinsky, Eliot, Graham, and Ghandi. New York: Basic Books; 2011:47.


<<<PAGE 3446>>>
Giannopoulos VL, Vella-Brodrick DA. Effects of positive interventions and
orientations to happiness on subjective well-being. J Positive Psychol.
2011;6(2):95.
Guasto G. Welcome, trauma, and introjection: a tribute to Sandor Ferenczi. J
Am Acad Psychoanal Dynam Psych. 2011;39(2):337.
Hoare CH. Erikson’s general and adult developmental revisions of Freudian
thought: “Outward, forward, upward.” J Adult Dev. 2005;12:19–31.
Hoffman L. One hundred years after Sigmund Freud’s lectures in America:
towards an integration of psychoanalytic theories and techniques within
psychiatry. Hist Psychiat. 2010;21(84 Pt 4):455–470.
Hollon SD, Wilson GT. Psychoanalysis or cognitive-behavioral therapy for
bulimia nervosa: the specificity of psychological treatments. Am J
Psychiatry. 2014;171(1):13–16.
Huffman JC, DuBois CM, Healy BC, Boehm JK, Kashdan TB, Celano CM,
Denninger JW, Lyubomirsky S. Feasibility and utility of positive
psychology exercises for suicidal inpatients. Gen Hosp Psychiatry.
2014;36(1):88–94.
Kernberg O. Narcissistic personality disorder. In: Clarkin JF, Fonagy P,
Gabbard GO, eds. Psychodynamic Psychotherapy for Personality
Disorders: A Clinical Handbook. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Publishing; 2010:257.
Kirshner LA, ed. Between Winnicott and Lacan: A Clinical Engagement.
New York: Routledge; 2011.
Kiselica AM, Ruscio J. Scientific communication in clinical psychology:
examining patterns of citations and references. Clin Psychol Psychother.
2014;21(1):13–20.
Kivnick HQ, Wells CK. Untapped richness in Erik H. Erikson’s rootstock.
Gerontologist. 2014;54(1):40–50.
Lachman G. Jung the Mystic: The Esoteric Dimensions of Carl Jung’s Life
and Teachings: A New Biography. New York: Penguin; 2010.
Linley PA, Joseph S, Seligman MEP, eds. Positive Psychology in Practice.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley; 2004.
Meissner WW. Classical psychoanalysis. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:788.
Meissner WW. The God in psychoanalysis. Psychoanal Psychol.


<<<PAGE 3447>>>
2009;26(2):210.
Mohl PC, Brenner AM. Other psychodynamic schools. In: Sadock BJ,
Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:847.
Neukrug ES. Psychoanalysis. In: Neukrug ES, ed. Counseling Theory and
Practice. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole; 2011:31.
Newton DS., Erik H. Erikson. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 8th ed. Vol. 1.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2005:746.[
Palombo J, Bendicsen HK, Koch BJ. Guide to Psychoanalytic Developmental
Theories. New York: Springer; 2009.
Pattakos A, Covey SR. Prisoners of Our Thoughts: Viktor Frankl’s
Principles for Discovering Meaning in Life and Work. San Francisco:
Berrett-Koehler; 2010.
Paul HA. The Karen Horney clinic and the legacy of Horney. Am J
Psychoanal. 2010;70(1):63–64.
Perlman FT, Brandell JR. Psychoanalytic theory. In: Brandell JR, ed. Theory
& Practice in Clinical Social Work. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage;
2011:41.
Peterson C, Park N. Positive psychology. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:2939.
Peterson C. A Primer in Positive Psychology. New York: Oxford University
Press; 2006.
Pietikainen P, Ihanus J. On the origins of psychoanalytic psychohistory. Hist
Psychol. 2003;6(2):171–194.
Revelle W. Personality structure and measurement: The contributions of
Raymond Cattell. Br J Psychol. 2009; 100(S1):253.
Reynolds HR. Positive behavior intervention and support: improving school
behavior and academic outcomes. N C Med J. 2012;73(5):359–360.
Schwartz J. The vicissitudes of Melanie Klein. Or, what is the case? Attach
New Direc Psychother Relation Psychoanal. 2010;4(2):105.
Shapiro ER, Fromm MG. Eriksonian clinical theory and psychiatric
treatment. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 7th ed. New York: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2000.


<<<PAGE 3448>>>
Sheldon KM, Kashdan TB, Steger MF. Designing Positive Psychology:
Taking Stock and Moving Forward. New York: Oxford University Press;
2011.
Slater C. Generativity versus stagnation: an elaboration of Erikson’s adult
stage of human development. J Adult Dev. 2003;10:53.
Snyder CR, Lopez SJ. Oxford Handbook of Positive Psychology. 2nd ed.
New York: Oxford University Press; 2009.
Snyder CR, Lopez SJ, Pedrotti JT. Positive Psychology: The Scientific and
Practical Explorations of Human Strengths. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage;
2010.
Stein M, ed. Jungian Psychoanalysis: Working in the Spirit of Carl Jung.
Chicago: Open Court; 2010.
Tauber AI. Freud, The Reluctant Philosopher. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press; 2010.
Thurschwell P. Sigmund Freud. 2nd ed. New York: Routledge; 2009.
Van Hiel A, Mervielde I, De Fruyt F. Stagnation and generativity: structure,
validity, and differential relationships with adaptive and maladaptive
personality. J Pers. 2006;74(2):543–573.
Westermeyer JF. Predictors and characteristics of Erikson’s life cycle model
among men: a 32-year longitudinal study. Int J Aging Hum Dev.
2004;58(1):29–48.
Wulff D. Freud and Freudians on religion: a reader. Int J Psychol and Rel.
2003;13:223.


<<<PAGE 3449>>>
35
A Brief History of Psychiatry
It is challenging to present a brief history of psychiatry that goes beyond
cherry-picking individual moments as it is difficult to decide what advances
in science are most relevant to the field. Equally significant are the
contributions of related fields, including philosophy, theology, psychology,
sociology, and other disciplines that have contributed to our understanding
and attitudes about mental health.
Psychiatry was not considered a formal discipline of medicine until
relatively recently. However, concern with the causes and treatment of
various mental illnesses go back to antiquity. We can often see specific
familiar themes and debates from different ages. For example, are mental
illnesses truly aberrant, or merely variations of normal behavior. Is there
some value in evolutionary fitness or to society, in mental illness? Are mental
illnesses diseases of the “mind” or the “body,” and what is the difference? Is
the pathogen internal, such as a virus, a malfunctioning gene or a
dysfunctional immune system, or external, such as a god, demon, industrial
life, or a society in general? Who is best suited to treat the diseases—a
medical doctor, or some other professional or nonprofessional healer? We see
such debates emerge throughout society, and even when some no longer have
scientific merit (i.e., mind vs. body debates), they often still linger in the lay
understanding of the illnesses and affect how society treats individuals
suffering from these disorders.

PSYCHIATRY BEFORE THE MODERN ERA
Many of us think of the roots of medicine beginning in Ancient Greece, and
for the western world, that is, in part, true. However, the civilizations of


<<<PAGE 3450>>>
Ancient Asia tended to be more advanced in the medical sciences. For
example, psychiatry was practiced as a discipline in Ancient India, and the
pre-2nd century CE medical treatise, the Charaka Sam․hitaО or
Compendium of Charaka, includes sections on psychiatric diseases (Fig. 351). Psychiatric hospitals existed in India even before that.
The Greeks tended to see psychiatric illnesses as supernatural disorders,
although Hippocrates makes some mention of rudimentary anatomic research
into the causes of psychiatric illness. In a broader sense, the Greeks were
wrestling with what has become a significant theme in modern psychiatry:
whether to view diseases as mere abnormalities or on a continuum with
normal. Thus, the ongoing debate between whether we should see such
disorders as depression on a continuum with normal sadness and grief, or as a
fundamentally different phenomenon has its roots in antiquity. For example,
Galen and Plato stressed a categorical approach to disease, whereas
Hippocrates took a more dimensional approach, often seeing typical human
attributes as being on a continuum with abnormal. This affected treatment
approaches: Galen focused on treating the disease process, whereas
Hippocrates emphasized treating the individual.
In the Middle Ages, Arab countries included psychiatric wards in their
hospitals. The first was built in Baghdad around the early 9th century. Many
of the great Islamic medical scholars, including Abu Ali al-Hussain ibn
Abdallah ibn Sina (known in the West as Avicenna), wrote on mental
disorder treatments.
Psychiatric hospitals appeared in medieval Europe around the 13th
century. However, they did not provide treatment and were merely places for
custodial care. The best known is probably the Bethlem Royal Hospital,
usually shortened to Bethlem, or Bedlam (Fig. 35-2). It was founded in 1247
and was not a hospital in the modern sense but rather a place to collect alms
for the care of the needy. Although the history is somewhat unclear, it may
have taken in and cared for the insane as early as the later 14th century, and
there is documentation of mentally ill inmates by the early 15th century.
Little is known about the treatments that might have occurred. However, the
hospital gradually transitioned from a general hospital to an asylum for the
insane by the later 15th century.


<<<PAGE 3451>>>
PSYCHIATRY IN THE MODERN AGE
Early Modern Age
By the late 17th century, other “lunatic asylums” proliferated, most were
privately run. The first building built specifically as an asylum for the insane
was the Bethel Hospital Norwich, founded by Mary Chapman. Meanwhile, in
France, Louis XIV created what was for Europe the first public mental health
system, although again, there was little treatment.
One of the earliest Western treatises on mental illness was the Anatomy of
Melancholy, What it is: With all the Kinds, Causes, Symptomes,
Prognostickes, and Several Cures of it. In Three Maine Partitions with their
several Sections, Members, and Subsections. Philosophically, Medicinally,
Historically, Opened and Cut Up (usually just called The Anatomy of
Melancholy) by Robert Burton, a mathematician, astrologer, and scholar at
Oxford University (Fig. 35-3). Although going well beyond what we would
consider a medical textbook, Burton’s book does discuss “melancholy,”
which includes depressive illnesses, although it takes a much broader view
and includes much of the human experience.
Although the medieval focus was theoretically on care, not punishment for
the insane, often, the treatments were barbaric. These could include
prolonged chained restraint and physical punishments. These practices began
to change during the enlightenment, with a call for humanitarian reform. For
example, in William Battie’s, Treatise on Madness, he criticized the
treatments occurring at such hospitals as Bethlem and argued for good
hygiene and nutrition as mainstays of treatment. Although many of the
somatic treatments he recommended were likely counterproductive (bleeding,
purgatives), he did raise psychiatry to the level of a respectable discipline and
helped support the humane treatment of mentally ill patients.


<<<PAGE 3452>>>
FIGURE 35-1
Charak Monument in Yog Peeth Campus, Father of Medicine & Surgery. (Source:
Alokprasad,
Balajijagadesh—Own
work,
CC
BY-SA
3.0,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=8124213)

Expanding on the concept, the York Retreat in England, founded by
William Tuke and the Bicêtre Hospital and then Salpêtrière, in France, under
Dr. Philippe Pinel, championed the concept of “moral treatment.” These
approaches emphasized avoiding restraint—Pinel is famous for removing the
patients’ chains (Fig. 35-4). His mentor, Jean-Baptiste Pussin, who, with his
wife and colleague Marguerite, advocated for moral treatment and began
banning chains at the Bicêtre Hospital, which greatly influenced the young
Pinel. Pinel extensively elaborated this and took a scientific approach. He
was one of the first to present a comprehensive categorization of psychiatric
diseases, which reflected a functional view of mental illness emphasizing
phenomenology over pathophysiology.
In Edinburgh, Scotland, the pseudoscience of phrenology gained influence
in the 18th century under the leadership of William Browne and George and
Andrew Combe. Although useless as medical science, it was an important
conceptual and philosophical step in that it shifted the concept of mental
illness from a moral or philosophical disorder to a material one originating in
the physical matter of the brain.
The 19th and Early 20th Century


<<<PAGE 3453>>>
In the early 19th century, the state began playing a larger role in the Western
treatment of mental illness. In 1808, Britain passed the Country Asylums Act,
which established public mental asylums. In 1828 the Commissioners in
Lunacy were appointed to oversee and license private asylums, partly in
response to public concern over the abuses at Bethlem Hospital and similar
private asylums. By then, “Bedlam” had become synonymous with “uproar”
and “confusion,” owing to the mismanagement at the hospital, and
scandalous practices, such as continuing to chain patients (Fig. 35-5), and
allowing the public to visit the hospital and view patients for their
entertainment.

FIGURE 35-2
The Bethlem Royal Hospital. (Source: from John Strype’s, An Accurate Edition of
Stow’s “A Survey of London,” 1720. Public Domain.)


<<<PAGE 3454>>>
FIGURE 35-3
Robert Burton’s The Anatomy of Melancholy, 1628. (Source: The British Library.)

In 1838, France enacted a law regulating asylum services across the
country and built the first school for individuals with intellectual disabilities.
Similarly, the 1845 Lunacy Act in Britain reclassified mentally ill people as
patients requiring treatment. It mandated that asylums be built and required
periodic inspections of these facilities.


<<<PAGE 3455>>>
FIGURE 35-4
Pinel, removing the chains from an inmate at the Salpétrière in 1795. (Source:
Pinel, médecin en chef de la Salpêtrière en 1795, by Tony Robert Fleury. From
the collection at the hôpital de la Pitié-Salpétrière.)


<<<PAGE 3456>>>
FIGURE 35-5
Etching of James Norris by G. Arnald 1815. (Source: Scan of a public domain
image printed in Roy Porter, Madmen: A Social History of Madhouses, MadDoctors and Lunatics (Stroud, 2006).)

In the United States, reformers such as Dorothea Dix (Fig. 35-6) helped
advocate for the first law to establish a state asylum, which became the Utica
State Hospital, founded in about 1850. Dix achieved this after conducting a
statewide investigation of the mentally ill poor in Massachusetts, showing


<<<PAGE 3457>>>
that they were treated like prisoners in cages, often naked and physically
abused. She later conducted similar investigations in other states, always
advocating for moral care for the mentally ill.
The latter half of the 19th century and early 20th century saw the rise of
scientific approaches to mental disorders, which advances in the classification
of psychiatric disorders and beginning insights into the pathophysiology and
etiology of disorders.
The first medical case report formally describing a schizophrenic psychosis
was most likely that of Benedict Morel (1809–1873) in 1852, a French
psychiatrist, who used the term démence précoce to describe deteriorated
patients whose illnesses began in adolescence. Subsequent cases describing
what was likely schizophrenia include those reported by Greisinger in 1867,
Hecker in 1871, and Kahlbaum in 1874. Kalbaum’s case was notable as one
of the first medical case reports of catatonia.
For much of the 19th and early 20th century in Europe, most psychiatric
disorders were thought to derive from either congenital or degenerative
diseases. Jules Falret in 1854 described bipolar disorder (folie circulaire), and
1882, the German psychiatrist Karl Kahlbaum used the term cyclothymia,
describing mania and depression as stages of the same illness.


<<<PAGE 3458>>>
FIGURE 35-6
Dorothea Dix. (Source: United States Library of Congress’s Prints and
Photographs division (Public domain).)

Emil Kraepelin, building on the work of these predecessors, pioneered the
scientific classification of psychiatric disease (Fig. 35-7). Kraepelin declared
that all psychiatric disorders were biologic. As etiologic classification was
not feasible, he based his classification on a careful study of disease
phenomenology in different patients, in which he noted the similarities and
differences in the symptomatology between different diseases.


<<<PAGE 3459>>>
FIGURE 35-7
Emil Kraepelin in 1926. (Source: Wikipedia, original: Münchener Medizinische
Wochenschrift], unknown photographer.)

Kraepelin translated Morel’s démence précoce into dementia praecox, a
term that emphasized the change in cognition (dementia) and early onset
(praecox) of the disorder. Patients with dementia praecox were described as
having a long-term deteriorating course and the clinical symptoms of
hallucinations and delusions. Kraepelin distinguished these patients from
those who underwent distinct episodes of illness alternating with periods of
normal functioning, which he classified as having manic-depressive


<<<PAGE 3460>>>
psychosis. Persistent persecutory delusions characterized another separate
condition called paranoia. These patients lacked the deteriorating course of
dementia praecox and intermittent symptoms of manic-depressive psychosis.
Eugene Bleuler coined the term schizophrenia, which replaced dementia
praecox in the literature. Deriving it from the Ancient Greek words “schizo”
(“I split”) and “phren” (“mind”), he chose the term to express the presence of
schisms among thought, emotion, and behavior in patients with the disorder.
This term is often misconstrued, especially by laypeople, to mean split
personality, a concept that would be closer to that of the dissociative
disorders. Bleuler also stressed that, unlike Kraepelin’s concept of dementia
praecox, schizophrenia need not have a deteriorating course.
Bleuler identified specific fundamental (or primary) symptoms of
schizophrenia to develop his theory about the internal mental schisms of
patients. These symptoms included associational disturbances of thought,
especially looseness, affective disturbances, autism, and ambivalence,
summarized as “the four As”: associations, affect, autism, and ambivalence.
Bleuler also identified accessory (secondary) symptoms, including the
symptoms significant to Kraepelin, such as hallucinations and delusions.
Sigmund Freud (Fig. 35-8) initially also sought a biologic explanation for
mental disease. However, realizing that the contemporary scientific tools
were not up to the task, he instead developed a psychoanalytic approach
based on his experiences with his private patients as he sought to understand
the unconscious meanings behind their thoughts, behaviors, and desires.
Although Freud was a neurologist and arguably working in psychology, his
work was soon adopted by psychiatrists. The psychoanalytic approach
became transcendent in the middle of the 20th century, and many psychiatric
illnesses were explained in psychoanalytic terms; that is, in terms of conflicts
and drives, particularly sexual drives, and stemming from early life
experiences. Like many philosophical movements, psychoanalysis may have
suffered from its overwhelming popularity, and at times it overreached as it
tried to treat illnesses for which it was not suited, or tried to explain many
human behaviors and achievements through the lens of psychoanalytic
theory. In the latter half of the 20th century, as effective biologic treatments
were discovered, many psychiatrists became disenchanted with
psychoanalysis’s lack of empirical data and seeming resistance to scientific
testing. It began to lose influence as a primary approach to understanding and


<<<PAGE 3461>>>
treating psychiatric disease.

FIGURE 35-8
Sigmund Freud at age 47. (Courtesy of Menninger Foundation Archives, Topeka,
KS.)

The Latter 20th Century
The approach to mental illness, including the specific patients treated, shifted
around World War II, as psychiatrists moved out of the asylum to confront
very different patients, moving from the treatment of the “insane” to people
who were “like us.” No longer confined to just the asylum, psychiatrists
proved their usefulness in the military arena, treating both patients
traumatized by combat and those found unfit to serve in the military for
psychological reasons.
Greater importance was attached to the role of the environment on mental
illness. This change drew from the work of Adolph Meyer (Fig. 35-9).


<<<PAGE 3462>>>
Meyer, the founder of psychobiology, saw mental disorders as reactions to
life stresses. It was a maladaptation that was understandable in terms of the
patient’s life experiences.

FIGURE 35-9
Adolf Meyer. (Courtesy of National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, M.D.)


<<<PAGE 3463>>>
FIGURE 35-10
Otto Loewi. (Source: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International.)

Building on Meyer’s social perspective and Freud’s emphasis on early life
experiences, Walter Menninger and others developed the psychosocial model
of mental illness. Depression was seen not as a neurologic illness but as a
failure to adapt. Menninger went as far as to suggest that all psychiatric
disorders could be reduced to “one basic psychosocial process: the failure of
the suffering individual to adapt to his or her environment.”
The second half of the 20th century saw a gradual transition from a
psychoanalytic and sociologic understanding of mental illness to a biologic
one. Many discoveries helped propel this shift in approach.


<<<PAGE 3464>>>
Biologic models had existed before. For example, in the 1930s, Papez
theorized that emotions were caused by a circuit connecting the limbic lobe,
amygdala, septal region, and hippocampus. Electroconvulsive therapy was
also developed in the 1930s and used to treat depression as early as the
1940s.
An early influence on biologic explanations for etiology was Otto Loewi’s
discovery of acetylcholine’s role as a neurotransmitter. In proving this, Loewi
(Fig. 35-10) employed a now-famous experiment, published in 1921, in
which he used the saline solution from one frog heart to stimulate the rate in a
second denervated heart, thus proving that a chemical must control the heart
rate. He later showed that this chemical was acetylcholine. This was the first
experiment that showed that a chemical could cause a response absent of
electrical stimulation, thus discovering the critical role of neurotransmitters.
Loewi’s experiment is famous, not only for its scientific value but also
that the idea for the experiment came in a dream. Although he wrote
down the dream when briefly waking from it, he could not make sense of
his scribbles the next morning. Fortunately, he went on to have the same
dream the next night, and when awakening from that, he rushed to his
laboratory to perform what would become Nobel Prize-winning research.
The practical beginning of biologic psychiatry occurred with the
serendipitous discovery of several drugs that could treat mental disorders,
including chlorpromazine for schizophrenia, imipramine and iproniazid for
depression, and lithium carbonate for bipolar disorder. In each case, the initial
importance of the drug was not appreciated. For example, chlorpromazine
was synthesized from promethazine, an antihistamine, in a search for more
stable antihistamine sedatives. It was initially used as an anesthetic adjunct,
and its antipsychotic properties were only later recognized after psychiatrists
began administering it to manic and psychotic patients, again originally as a
sedative.
Imipramine was also first synthesized as an antihistamine, and, following
in the footsteps of chlorpromazine, tried as an antipsychotic before some case
reports convinced the manufacturers to investigate its role as an
antidepressant. Supporting these findings was the discovery that certain


<<<PAGE 3465>>>
drugs, such as reserpine, which irreversibly blocks monoamine transporters,
could cause depression through the depletion of monoamines. Not only did it
help the development of the first biologic theory for depression, the
monoamine theory, but it also lent what was considered the first reproducible
example of a chemical causing a mental disorder.
Lithium had been used as a medication since the 19th century, initially for
gout. However, the doses needed to, for example, dissolve urate in the body
were toxic. It was later used as a salt substitute for hypertensive patients but
was largely banned after the toxicity became apparent. Lithium was used for
mania in the late 1800s, but this was related to some theories that mood
disorders were a type of “brain gout.” As that theory waned in popularity,
lithium was largely abandoned as a psychotherapeutic. In the late 1940s, John
Cade, an Australian physician, rediscovered lithium’s value for mania.
Because of toxicity concerns, however, it took many decades and much
research before it was adopted in the United States and other countries.
Neuroimaging started being used as an investigatory tool in the 1980s,
following the discovery by Johnstone and others that patients with
schizophrenia had enlarged cerebral ventricles. Pioneers such as Nancy
Andreasen conducted the first MRI studies of schizophrenia and developed
many of the techniques used by other investigators of the disease.
Genetic explorations also yielded interesting findings, such as the high
heritability of certain disorders such as schizophrenia, autism spectrum
disorder, and bipolar disorder. Although actual genetic associations have
been elusive, the research in genetics lent additional support to the drug
research and neuroimaging research which, when combined, created a
growing body of research which moved the understanding of the etiology of
many mental disorders from childhood parenting and other experiences or
social causes to disorders that are, at least in part, inherited.

DEINSTITUTIONALIZATION
The 20th century also saw a shift from the asylum to the office and the
community as the center of psychiatric treatment. The influence of the
psychoanalytic and psychosocial movements also influenced psychiatry’s
belief that most psychiatric diseases had at least potential treatments. In 1963,
President Kennedy introduced legislation that delegated the NIH to


<<<PAGE 3466>>>
administer community mental health centers, thus beginning the community
health movement in the United States (Fig. 35-11). It outlined a plan to
discharge patients, including severely mentally ill patients, from institutions
and instead treat them in the community. Although a laudable goal, it has
been most successful at deinstitutionalization, whereas community centers
have been poorly funded and supported. Thus, although most psychiatric
patients no longer live in asylums, they may be homeless, living in dangerous
environments, or be confined in jails, and in each case, receive little
treatment.

FIGURE 35-11
President John F. Kennedy signs the Mental Retardation Facilities and
Community Mental Health Center Construction Act. (Source JFK Library. Public
Domain.)


<<<PAGE 3467>>>
THE CLASSIFICATION OF PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS
Clinical treatment and classification dragged somewhat behind the science.
Before the 1960s, many institutions and asylums developed their unique
classification systems, and the result was a significant variation in both
diagnostic terminology and how those diagnoses were applied. For example,
in 1953, the American Psychiatric Association held a conference to develop a
research program to evaluate psychiatry therapies. However, the members
concluded that such research would be meaningless without a standardized
approach diagnosis, which did not then exist.
This problem was further exposed in the United States–United Kingdom
study conducted in the 1960s, which showed that many patients diagnosed
with schizophrenia would be diagnosed with bipolar disorder in the United
Kingdom. This variation results from an overemphasis in the United States
on psychotic symptoms as a diagnostic criterion for schizophrenia. Another
telling study was the Rosenhan experiment, in which experimenters feigned
hallucinations to enter psychiatric hospitals, but usually acted normally once
admitted. They were diagnosed with psychiatric disorders and even given
antipsychotic drugs (which they flushed down toilets).
The problem was also apparent in such studies as the Baltimore Morbidity
Study, which used DSM-I criteria and found inconsistent and unreliable
results. The situation was such that in the 1970s, the President’s Commission
on Mental Health, informally called the Carter Commission, concluded that
they could not form meaningful goals for mental health treatment until they
understood the disorders better.
This problem led to an attempt to develop more reliable diagnostic
systems. In the United States, this coalesced into the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), developed by the American
Psychiatric Association (APA). The first two editions are mostly preliminary
works, reflecting the prevalent approaches among psychiatrists. For example,
the second edition of the DSM (1968) distinguished between psychotic
(defined more broadly than today) and neurotic forms of depression. This
division developed into an endogenous/exogenous distinction—virtually
depression due to a disease of the brain versus depression that is a reaction to
stress, be it current or developmental. Although lacking any empirical
validity, the distinction was a convenient way to divide biologic and


<<<PAGE 3468>>>
psychodynamic concepts of depression. This division often drove treatment
during much of the 1970s, in which it was thought some forms of depression
were better treated with psychotherapy, whereas others should be addressed
with medication.
The introduction of the DSM-III in 1980, and its subsequent revisions up
to and including DSM-5, represented a significant paradigm change in
diagnosis, which was borne of research designed to create more reliable
criteria for mental disorders (Fig. 35-12).
Feighner and colleagues at Washington University developed the Feighner,
or St. Louis criteria, criteria for 15 major psychiatric categories. This
approach represented the first systematic approach that relied entirely on
numbers and types of symptoms to diagnose psychiatric disorders. While this
was taking place, Robert Spitzer, Jean Endicott, and other researchers at the
New York State Psychiatric Institute were developing methods to increase the
reliability of psychiatric diagnoses. These groups and other researchers were
brought together by the National Institute of Mental Health in the 1970s,
where they developed the Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC), which were
essentially an elaboration and expansion of the Feighner criteria.
The RDC prepared the way for the DSM-III, which resulted from the work
of the Task Force on Nomenclature and Statistics, headed by Dr. Spitzer,
formed by the APA in the early 1970s. The DSM-III eliminated the
endogenous/exogenous dichotomy previously inherent in many diagnoses,
and eliminated assumptions of cause from the criteria, taking a strictly
phenomenal approach. For example, major depression was defined by
symptomatic criteria. It also divided the mood disorders, with major
depression and bipolar disorder being treated as distinct disorders. Although
acknowledging more minor forms of depression, DSM-III’s categorical
approach created a rigid divide between those with major depressive disorder
and those not meeting the criteria for the disorder, a difference that survives
to this day. This divide risks neglecting some individuals who do not fit into
one of the DSM categories and yet suffer from depression; although DSM
includes ways to categorize them, it is likely that in clinical practice, many
such patients are treated as if they had no disorder.
However, the benefits of this categorical approach have been that it has
created more reliable diagnoses, allowing for research on more homogeneous
populations. This strategy bore significant fruit, and there was a


<<<PAGE 3469>>>
pharmaceutical revolution in the 1980s and 1990s, in which researchers
developed and introduced new classes of medications, such as the SSRIs and
the atypical antipsychotics. Although arguably not more efficacious than the
original antidepressants and antipsychotics, the drugs were considered more
tolerable, and the result was a considerable increase in the number of patients
taking, and benefitting from, psychopharmacological agents. Some have
pointed out that this phenomenon also caused abuses and overuse of the
drugs for conditions that could be more considered part of the human
condition, and there was a predictable backlash in which critics questioned
both the safety and efficacy of many psychiatric drugs. Organized psychiatry
often found itself on the defensive as it had to make a case for the drugs and
contend with critiques that went beyond scientific questions into the effect of
the drugs on culture and society.

FIGURE 35-12
DSM system. Key issues and number of categories.

The DSM-III and its role in contributing to the remedicalization of
psychiatry also affected psychological treatments. Although the more reliable
criteria made it easier to design studies and enroll suitable populations for
treatment studies, it also helped encourage a bias toward psychological


<<<PAGE 3470>>>
treatments that lent themselves to scientific research—ones that were easily
manualized and reproducible in a consistent way. Hence, such therapies as
cognitive-behavioral therapies, behavioral therapies, and interpersonal
therapies gained predominance as treatments for major psychiatric disorders.
In contrast, psychoanalytic treatments, whose depth and complexity made
them inherently harder to study consistently, became more marginalized and
considered “boutique treatments” reserved for those who could pay the
sometimes considerable out-of-pocket costs for these therapies.

LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
The combination of new technologies, such as high-resolution functional
imagining (Fig. 35-13) and total gene mapping, combined with the everincreasing ability of computers to manipulate vast amounts of data, has
resulted in a remarkable explosion in research on such disorders as
schizophrenia, autism, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and major depression
during the past decade, and we have made great strides toward understanding
the genetics and pathophysiology of these disorders. However, there remains
a frustrating gap between basic and clinical research.
In genetics, the limitations of clinical diagnoses for research purposes are
clear, and the search for valid biomarkers has been disappointing. It may be
that a focus on meaningful endophenotypes may be an essential step.
However, the predictive power of many of the proposed endophenotypes
remains to be proven.
Pharmacologic research into treating the disorder, after several fruitful
decades, has stalled. Clozapine, arguably the most effective antipsychotic,
was discovered in the 1960s, the SSRIs became available in the 1980s and
90s, and the subsequent efforts to refine pharmacologic treatment have, so
far, fallen short of hopes. Barriers to translational research include the lack of
a valid animal model for many of the disorders, and efforts are being made in
improving how animal testing is performed. In the meantime, new
approaches are being attempted that deemphasize the importance of single
receptors and emphasize a multi-target approach to psychopharmacology—
essentially using “dirty drugs,” which had previously been discouraged due to
concerns over side effects, as well as moving beyond monoamine targets to
include other receptors, including glutamatergic targets and G-protein–


<<<PAGE 3471>>>
coupled receptors.

FIGURE 35-13
This image is an example of the high level of detail that neuroimaging
technologies can produce to aid investigators. Three-dimensional image
reconstructed based on diffusion data acquired on a 3-T General Electric scanner,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, which
shows several major white matter fiber bundles (generally differing in colors,
converted to grayscale for this book) identified through diffusion tensor imaging.

What is clear, however, is that most psychiatric disorders are very complex
disorders that require multifaceted solutions. These solutions include
attention to psychosocial treatments as well as pharmacologic. The change
from conceptualizing many of the disorders as neurodevelopmental rather
than neurodegenerative disorders also highlights the importance of early
identification of disorders in the hopes that early interventions can alter the
course at a more promising stage.
Table 35-1 presents a summary of some of the significant persons and
events in the history of psychiatry.
Table 35-1


<<<PAGE 3472>>>
A History of Psychiatry Table
Persons and Events in Psychiatry
Person or Event

Country

Hippocrates of Cos (ca.
460–370 BCE)

Publications

Hippocratic Writings. Baltimore, MD
1978

Plato (427–347 BCE)

Greece

The Dialogues of Plato. Jowett B, tr
Random House; 1937

Aristotle (384–322 BCE)

Greece

Ross WD: Aristotle. 6th ed. New Yo


<<<PAGE 3473>>>
Galen of Pergamon (130– Asia Minor
200)
(Turkey) in
the Roman
Empire

On the Affected Parts. Siegel R,
Karger; 1976

St. Augustine (354–430)

Tageste
(Numidia,
North Africa)

Confessions. Pusey EB, trans. New
Library; 1949; Wills G: Saint Aug
Lipper/Viking; 1999

Avicenna (980–1037)

Persia

A Treatise on the Canon of Medicin
London: Luzac; 1930

Constanitus Africanus
(ca. 1010–1087)

Carthage, North Constantino l’Africano. Della melanc
Africa

Petrarch (1304–1374)

Italy

De remediis utriusque fortunae


<<<PAGE 3474>>>
Henry Kramer and James Germany
Sprenger (15th
century)

Malleus maleficarum (Witches’ Ham

Paracelsus (ca. 1493–
1541)

Einsiedeln
Pagel W. “Disease and the stars. ‘T
(Switzerland),
and lunacy. The psychiatry of Pa
then traveled
Paracelsus. 2nd rev. ed. Basel: K
Europe

Juan Luis Vives (1493–
1540)

Born in Spain;
De anima et vita (Of Soul and Life)
from the age
Juan Luis Vives and the Emotion
of 16 yr lived
Southern Illinois University Press
mainly in
Holland and
Belgium

Johann Weyer (1515–
1588)

Holland

De Praestigiis Daemonum (The Dec
(1563); reprinted in Mora G, ed.
Doctors in the Renaissance
Center for Medieval and Early R
1991

Juan Huarte de San Juan Spain
(ca. 1530–1592)

The Examination of Men’s Wits

Giambattista Porta
(1535–1615)

De humana physiognomia

Italy


<<<PAGE 3475>>>
Felix Plater (1536–1614)

Switzerland

Practice of Medicine (1602);
Injurious to Body and Mind

Robert Burton (1577–
1640)

England

The Anatomy of Melancholy

Paolo Zacchia (1584–
1659)

Italy

Questiones medico-legales

Thomas Sydenham
(1624–1689)

England

Dissertatio epistolaris … [1682]. In:
Dr. Thomas Sydenham Newly M


<<<PAGE 3476>>>
Thomas Willis (1621–
1675)

England

Two Discourses Concerning the So

Georg Ernst Stahl (1660– Germany
1734)

Theoria medica vera (1707),

William Battie (1703–
1776)

A Treatise of Madness (1758)

England


<<<PAGE 3477>>>
Boissier de Sauvages
(1706–1767)

France

Nosologia methodica (1765)

John Aiken (1747–1822)

England

Thoughts on Hospitals (1771)

Franz Anton Mesmer
(1734–1815)

Austria, France

Memoire sur la découverte du magn

Vincenzo Chiarugi (1759– Italy
1820)

Regulations of the Hospitals of San
of Bonifazio (1789)

William Cullen (1710–
1790)

Scotland

Nosology, or a Systematic Arrangem
(1800)

Philippe Pinel (1745–
1826)

France

A Treatise on Insanity in Which Are
Principles of a New and More Pr
Mental Disorders (1801)

Johann Reil (1759–1813) Germany

Rhapsodies about the Application o
Mental Disturbances (1803)


<<<PAGE 3478>>>
Benjamin Rush (1745–
1813)

United States

Medical Inquiries and Observations
of the Mind (1812); Farr C: Benja
American psychiatry.
1994;151(Suppl):65

Thomas Sutton (1767–
1835)

England

Tracts on Delirium Tremens

William Tuke (1732–
1822); Samuel Tuke
(1784–1857),
grandson of William
Tuke; Daniel Hack
Tuke (1827–1895),
youngest son of
Samuel Tuke; John
Charles Bucknill
(1817–1895)

England

Tuke S. Description of the Retreat,
York, for Insane Persons of the S
York; 1813; Tuke DH, Bucknill JC
Psychological Medicine Containi
Nosology, Description, Statistics
Pathology, and Treatment of Ins

Joseph Adams (1756–
1818)

England

A Treatise on the Supposed Heredi
Diseases … Particularly in Madn
(1814)


<<<PAGE 3479>>>
Franz Joseph Gall (1758– Austria,
1828), Johann Gaspar
Germany
Spurzheim (1776–
1832)

The Physiognomical System of Drs.
Spurzheim; founded on an anato
physiological examination of the
general and of the brain in partic

Johann Christian Heinroth Germany
(1773–1843)

Disturbances of the Mind (1818); Ha
Metaphors of mind and society: T
German psychiatry in the revolut
1998;89:387; Cauwenbergh LS.
(1773–1843) a psychiatrist of the
era. Hist Psychiatry. 1991;2:365

Robert Gooch (1784–
1830)

England

An Account of … Diseases Peculiar

James Cowles Pritchard
(1786–1848)

England

A Treatise on Insanity and Other Di
Mind (1835)

Jean Etienne Dominique
Esquirol (1782–1840)

France

Mental Maladies: A Treatise on Insa


<<<PAGE 3480>>>
Isaac Ray (1807–1881)

United States

Treatise on Medical Jurisprudence o

James Braid (1795–1860) England

Neurypnology; or, the Rationale of N
(1843)

Daniel M’Naghton (1813– England
1865)

West DJ, Walk A, eds. Daniel M’Na
the Aftermath. London Gaskell B

Wilhelm Griesinger
(1817–1868)

Mental Pathology and Therapeutics

Germany

Jacques-Joseph Moreau France
de Tours (1804–1884)

Du haschich et de l’aliénation menta


<<<PAGE 3481>>>
Walter Cooper Dendy
(1794–1871)

England

Psychotherapeia, or the remedial in
Psychol Med Ment Pathol

Jean-Pierre Falret (1794– France
1870), Jules Baillarger
(1809–1890)

Baillarger J. La folie à double forme
Med. 1853–1854;19:340; Falret
circulaire. Bull Acad Imp Med
Pichot P. The birth of the bipolar
Psychiatry. 1995;10:1

Thomas Kirkbride (1809– United States
1883)

On the Construction, Organisation,
Arrangements of Hospitals for th

John Conolly (1794–
1866)

England

The Treatment of the Insane withou
Restraints (1856)

George Robinson (1821– England
1875)

On the Prevention and Treatment o
(1859)

Gustav Theodor Fechner Germany
(1801–1887)

Elements of Psychophysics


<<<PAGE 3482>>>
Benedict-Augustin Morel
(1809–1873)

France

Traité des maladies mentales

Thomas Laycock (1812–
1876)

England

Mind and Brain (1860)

Forbes B. Winslow
(1810–1874)

England

On Obscure Diseases of the Brain a
Mind (1860)

Ewald Hecker (1843–
1909)

Germany

Die Hebephrenie. Arch Pathol Anat

Karl Kahlbaum (1828–
1899)

Germany

Die Katatonie oder das Spannungsi
1874)

George Miller Beard
(1840–1883)

United States

A Practical Treatise on Nervous Exh
(Neurasthenia) (1880)


<<<PAGE 3483>>>
Richard von Krafft-Ebing
(1840–1902)

Germany

Psychopathia sexualis (1886); Oost
Stepchildren of Nature: Kraft-Ebi
the Making of Sexual Identity.
of Chicago Press; 2000

Pierre Janet (1859–1947) France

L’automatisme psychologique: Essa
experimentale sur les formes infe
(Paris, 1889); van der Kolk BA, v
Pierre Janet and the breakdown
psychological trauma.
1989;146:1530

Herman Emminghaus
(1845–1904)

Germany

Psychic Disturbances of Childhood

Jean-Martin Charcot
(1825–1893)

France

Owen ARG. Hysteria, Hypnosis, an
of JM Charcot. New York: Garre
1971; by Goetz C, Bonduelle M,
Constructing Neurology
Press; 1995


<<<PAGE 3484>>>
Georges Gilles de la
Tourette (1857–1904)

France

Cesare Lombroso (1835– Italy
1909)

Etude sur une affection nerveuse ca
l’incoordination motrice accompa
coprolalie. Arch Neurol
Yorston G, Hindley N, trans. and
nervous disorder characterized b
incoordination with echolalia and
Psychiatry. 1998;9:97; Kushner H
The Histories of Tourette Syndro
MA: Harvard University Press; 1

Genius and Insanity (1864),
(1876), The Female Offender


<<<PAGE 3485>>>
Emil Kraepelin (1856–
1926)

Germany

Kraepelin E. Psychiatrie: Ein Lehrbu
und Aerzte. 6th ed. (1899);
Springer-Verlag; 1987

John Hughlings Jackson
(1834–1911)

England

Selected Writings of John Hughlings
1931–1932)

Sigmund Freud (1856–
1939)

Austria

The Interpretation of Dreams
the Theory of Sexuality
on Psychoanalysis (1915–1917)

Morton Prince (1854–
1929)

United States

The Dissociation of a Personality

Clifford Beers (1876–
1943)

United States

A Mind That Found Itself


<<<PAGE 3486>>>
Eugen Bleuler (1857–
1939)

Switzerland

Dementia Praecox or the Group of S
(1911)

Alfred Binet (1857–1911) France

A Method of Measuring the Develop
Intelligence of Young Children,
English translation, 1913

Hideyo Noguchi (1876–
1928)

Noguchi H, Moore JW. A demonstra
Treponema pallidum in the brain
paralysis. J Exp Med. 1913:17

United States

Alfred Adler (1870–1937) Austria

Study of Organ Inferiority and Its Ps
Compensations (1917); Stepans
Shadow: Adler in Context
Press; 1983

Hermann Rorschach
(1884–1922)

Psychodiagnostik (1921)

Switzerland


<<<PAGE 3487>>>
Julius von WagnerJauregg (1857–1940)

Austria

de Rudoli G. Therapeutic Malaria
Jauregg J. The history
general paresis. Am J Psychiatry
1994;151(Suppl):231; Brown EM
Jauregg won the Nobel Prize for
therapy for general paresis of the
Psychiatry. 2000;11:371

Otto Rank (1884–1939)

Austria, France, The Myth of the Birth of the Hero
United States
Birth (1924), Will Therapy
Acts of Will: The Life and Work o
York: Free Press, Macmillan; 19

American Board of
Psychiatry and
Neurology (ABPN)

United States

Freeman W, Ebaugh F, Boyd D Jr.
American Board of Psychiatry an
Am J Psychiatry. 1959;115:769


<<<PAGE 3488>>>
Henry A. Murray (1893–
1988)

United States

Thematic Apperception Test
University Press; 1943

Charles Bradley (1902–
1979)

United States

Bradley C. The behavior of children
Benzedrine. Am J Psychiatry
Origin of stimulant use for treatm
deficit disorder. Am J Psychiatry


<<<PAGE 3489>>>
Cure of pellagra

United States

Roe D. A Plague of Corn: The Socia
Pellagra. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni

Genetics of schizophrenia Germany,
Rüdin E. Studien über Verebung un
United States
geistiger Störungen. I. Zur Verer
Neuetstehung der Dementia Pra
the Heredity and Genesis of Men
the Heredity and New Formation
Praecox]. Berlin: Verlag von Juliu
Kallman FJ. The Genetics of Sch
York: JJ Augustin; 1938; Rainer
contributions of Franz J. Kallman
schizophrenia. In: Cancro R, Dea
Research in the Schizophrenic D
Stanley R. Dean Award Lectures
New York: Spectrum;


<<<PAGE 3490>>>
ECT

Italy

Abrams R. The treatment that will n
North Am. 1994;17:525; Berrios
origins of electroconvulsive thera
history. Hist Psychiatry

Karen Horney (1885–
1952)

Germany until
1932, then

The Neurotic Personality of Our Tim
Ways in Psychoanalysis


<<<PAGE 3491>>>
United States

Human Growth: The Struggle To
Realization (1950); Paris B.
Psychoanalyst’s Search for SelfHaven, CT: Yale University Pres

Adolf Meyer (1866–1950) Switzerland until Meyer A. A short sketch of the prob
1893, then
Am J Insanity. 1896–1897;53: 53
United States
Meyer and the development of A
Am J Psychiatry. 1996;123:320;
Havens L, ed. Approaches to the
Little, Brown

Constitution, personality,
and mental illness

Germany,
Kretschmer E. Body Build and Char
United States
Sheldon WH. Varieties of Human


<<<PAGE 3492>>>
Führer decree (1939)

Germany

Lifton RJ. The Nazi doctors.
Medical Killing. New York: Basic
Chapter 2; Gallagher HG.
Patients, Physicians, and the Lic
Third Reich. New York: Henry H
Grodin MA, eds. The Nazi Docto
Nuremburg Code. Human Rights
Experimentation. Oxford: Oxford
1992

MMPI

United States

Buchanan R. The development of th
Multiphasic Personality Inventory
1994;29:148


<<<PAGE 3493>>>
Leo Kanner (1894–1981) Austria, United
States

Melanie Klein (1882–
1960), Anna Freud
(1895–1982)

Child Psychiatry. Springfield, IL: CC
Autistic disturbances of affective
1943;2:217

Central Europe, Klein M. The Psychoanalysis of
then England
Kernberg O. Melanie Klein. In: K
AM, Sadock BJ, eds.
Psychiatry. 3rd ed. Baltimore, MD
Wilkins; 1980; Grosskurth P. Me
World and Her Work. New York:
A. The Ego and the Mechanisms
The Psychoanalytic Treatment o
short history of child analysis.
Child. 1966;21:7; Young-Bruehl
Biography. New York: Summit B


<<<PAGE 3494>>>
Helene Deutsch (1884–
1982)

Europe until
The Psychology of Women
1935, then
of emotional disturbance and the
United States
schizophrenia (‘As If’). In: Deutsc
and Character Types.
Universities Press; 1965:
Helene Deutsch: A Psychoanaly
City, NJ: Anchor Press/Doubleda

Ivan Petrovich Pavlov
(1849–1936), Andrew
Salter (1914–1996)

Russia, United
States

Pavlov IP. Lectures on Conditioned
New York: International Publishe
BP. Pavlov: A Biography
Chicago Press; 1949; Salter A.
Therapy. New York: Farrar, Stra

NMHA (1946), NIMH
(1949)

United States

Grob GN. From Asylum to Commun
Policy in Modern America
University Press; 1991: Chapters
Reminiscences: 1938 and since.
1990;147:785


<<<PAGE 3495>>>
Erik H. Erikson (1902–
1994)

Europe; United
States since
1930s

Childhood and Society (1950),
Cycle (1959); Friedman LJ.
Biography of Erik H. Erikson.
1999; Wallerstein R, Goldberger
Identities: The Life and Work of E
Madison, CT: International Unive

Carl Rogers (1902–1987) United States

Client-Centered Theory (1951)

Donald Winnicott (1896–

Winnicott D. Transitional objects an

England


<<<PAGE 3496>>>
1971)

phenomena [1951]. In:
Paediatrics to Psychoanalysis
1958; Kohon H. The British Scho
Psychoanalysis: The Independen
Haven, CT: Yale University Pres
FR. Winnicott: Life and Work
2003

Jean Delay (1907–1987), France
Pierre Deniker (1917–
1999)

Delay J, Deniker P. Le traitement de
une méthode neurolytique dérivé
l’hibernothérapie. C R Congrés M
France. 1952;50:497; Thuillier J.
Changed the Face of Mental Illne
Dunitz; 1999; Healy D.
Psychopharmacology
University Press; 2002

Harry Stack Sullivan
(1892–1949)

Sullivan HS. The Interpersonal Theo
Perry HS, Gawel ML, eds. New Y
1953; Perry HS. Psychiatrist of A
Harry Stack Sullivan. Cambridge

United States


<<<PAGE 3497>>>
Press of Harvard University Pres

Egas Moniz (1874–1955), United States,
Walter Freeman
Europe
(1895–1972)

Valenstein ES. Great and Desperat
and Decline of Psychosurgery an
Treatments for Mental Illness
Books; 1986; Pressman JD.
Psychosurgery and the Limits of
Cambridge: Cambridge Universi


<<<PAGE 3498>>>
Advent of the doubleblind test

United States

Carl Gustav Jung (1875– Switzerland
1961)

Gold H, Kwit NT, Otto H. The xanthi
and aminophylline) in the treatm
JAMA. 1937;108:2173; Hampson
Frank J. A comparative study of
mephenesin and placebo on the
a mixed group of psychiatric outp
Hopkins Hosp. 1954;95:170

Psychological Types (1921),
Psychology (1912–1928),
Dynamics of the Psyche
Archetypes and the Collective U
1955); Kirsch T. The Jungians: A
Historical Perspective


<<<PAGE 3499>>>
Antidepressant drugs

Switzerland,
Kuhn R. The treatment of depressiv
United States
iminodibenzyl derivative (G 2235
1957;87:1135; Loomer HP, Saun
A clinical and pharmacodynamic
iproniazid as a psychic energizer
Rep. 1957;8:129; Healy D.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer
Kuhn R. Hist Psychiatry.

B. F. Skinner (1904–
1990), Joseph Wolpe
(1915–1997)

United States,
South Africa

Skinner BF. Science and Human Be
Free Press; 1953; Wolpe J.
Reciprocal Inhibition. Stanford, C
University Press; 1958

Development of child
psychiatry

United States

Lewis M, ed. Child and Adolescent
Comprehensive Textbook
Williams & Wilkins; 1996: Chapte
Effects of health delivery system
adolescent mental health care);
Recruitment, training, and certific
adolescent psychiatry in the Unit
(Bernstein D. The discovery of th
perspective on child and adolesc

Karl Jaspers (1883–1969) Germany

General Psychopathology
(English trans., 1963)


<<<PAGE 3500>>>
Kurt Schneider (1887–
1967)

Germany

Schneider K. Psychopathic Persona
Cassell; 1958; Schneider K.
Psychopathology. New York: Gru

Michel Foucault (1926–
1984)

France

Histoire de la folie (1961); English tr
Civilization: A History of Insanity
Reason. New York: Pantheon; 1


<<<PAGE 3501>>>
Benzodiazepine drugs

United States

Cohen IM. The benzodiazepines. In
Blackwell B, eds. Discoveries in
Psychiatry. Baltimore, MD: Ayd M
Communications; 1984:130


<<<PAGE 3502>>>
Haloperidol in the
treatment of Gilles de
la Tourette syndrome

France

Seignot JN. Un cas de maladie des
Tourette guéri par le R-1625.
1961;cxix:578; The case of Gille
syndrome: A condition of nervou
R.1625. Hist Psychiatry

Joint Commission on
Mental Illness and
Mental Health (1955–
1961)

United States

Action for Mental Health (1961); Co
Health Centers Act of 1963

Rene Spitz (1887–1974)

Europe, then
The First Year of Life: A Psychoana
United States
Normal and Deviant Developmen
Relations. New York: Internation
Press; 1965


<<<PAGE 3503>>>
Classification of mental
disorders

United States

DSM-I prepared by the Committee o
and Statistics of the APA, G.N. R
Hospital Service, Washington, D
prepared by the Committee on N
Statistics of the APA, E. Gruenbe
Washington, DC, 1968); Grob G
study in appearance and reality.
1991;148:421

Epidemiological evidence United States,
for the genetic
Denmark
transmission of
schizophrenia

Rosenthal D, Kety SS, eds.
Schizophrenia. London: Pergam
(Wender PH, Rosenthal D, Kety
assessment of the adoptive pare
schizophrenics), 345 (Kety SS, R
Wender PH, Schulsinger F. The
prevalence of mental illness in th
adoptive families of adopted sch


<<<PAGE 3504>>>
377 (Rosenthal D, Wender PH, K
F, Welner J. Schizophrenics’ offs
adoptive homes); Kety SS, Wend
Ingraham LJ, Jansson L. Mental
biological and adoptive relatives
adoptees: Replication of the Cop
the rest of Denmark. Arch Gen P
1994;51:442

Lithium therapy for
psychotic excitement

Australia,
Cade J. Lithium salts in the treatme
Denmark,
excitement. Med J Aust
United States
Juel-Nielsen N, Stromgren E, Vo
treatment of manic psychoses by


<<<PAGE 3505>>>
of lithium salts. J Neurol Neurosu
1954;17:250; Schou M. Forty ye
treatment. Arch Gen Psychiatry
Schioldann: Mogens Abelin Scho
Half a century with Lithium.
2007;17:247

William H. Masters
(1915–2001), Virginia
E. Johnson (1925–)

United States

Human Sexual Response
Dysfunction (1970)

Margaret Mahler (1897–

Central Europe

Mahler M, Pine F, Bergman A.


<<<PAGE 3506>>>
1985)

John Bowlby (1907–
1990)

until 1938,
then United
States

England

of the Human Infant: Symbiosis a
New York: Basic Books; 1975;
Margaret S. Mahler. Stepansky P
Free Press; 1988

Attachment (1969), Separation: Anx
(1973), Loss: Sadness and Depr
Secure Base: Clinical Application
Theory (1988); Holmes J.
Attachment Theory. London: Rou


<<<PAGE 3507>>>
Jacques Lacan (1901–
1981), “the French
Freud”

France

The Language of the Self: The Func
Psychoanalysis (1968); Turkle S
Politics: Freud’s French Revoluti
Books; 1978; Roudinesco E.
A History of Psychoanalysis in F
Chicago: University of Chicago P

Heinz Kohut (1913–1981) Austria until
The Analysis of the Self (1971);
1940, then
Self (1977); The two analyses of
United States
Psychoanal. 1979;60:3;
Kohut’s self psychology: An over
Psychiatry. 1987;144:1; Strozier
The Making of a Psychoanalyst
Straus and Giroux; 2001
Jean Piaget (1896–1980) Switzerland

Greenspan S, Curry J. Piaget’s app
functioning. In: Kaplan HI, Sadoc
Comprehensive Textbook of Psy
Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkin


<<<PAGE 3508>>>
NAMI

United States

NAMI: We Are Family. Arlington, VA
page brochure describing the wo
then NAMI has published regula
its work


<<<PAGE 3509>>>
Sociobiologic psychiatry

United States,
Holland

Van Praag H. Sociobiological psych
Psychiatry. 1981;22:441

Roger Sperry (1913–
1994)

United States

Some effects of disconnecting the c
hemispheres. Science
Levi-Montalcini R. In: Finger S, e
Brain: A History of the Pioneers
Discoveries. New York: Oxford U
2000


<<<PAGE 3510>>>
Brief psychotherapy

United States,
England

Malan D. A Study of Brief Psychoth
Plenum Press; 1976; Mann J, Go
Casebook in Time-Limited Psych
York: McGraw-Hill; 1982; Davan
Dynamic Psychotherapy
1980; Sifneos P. Short-Term Dyn
Psychotherapy Evaluation and T
York: Plenum Press; 1979; Crits
efficacy of brief dynamic psychot
analysis. Am J Psychiatry

Psychology of women

United States

Miller JB. Towards a New Psycholo
Boston, MA: Beacon Press; 1976
Different Voice: Psychological Th
Development. Cambridge, MA: H
Press; 1982; Levinson D, in colla
Levinson J. The Seasons of a W
York: Knopf; 1996

NARSAD

United States

NARSAD activities are reported in
and Newsletters


<<<PAGE 3511>>>
Changes in the diagnosis United States
and classification of
homosexuality

Bayer R. Homosexuality and Americ
Politics of Diagnosis. New York:
DSM-III (1980); DSM-III-R (1987


<<<PAGE 3512>>>
Classification of mental
disorders

United States

DSM-III (1980); DSM-III-R (1987); W
and the transformation of Americ
history. Am J Psychiatry.


<<<PAGE 3513>>>
James Masterson
(1926–), Otto
Kernberg (1928–)

United States

Masterson J. Psychotherapy of the
Developmental Approach. New Y
1976; Narcissistic and Borderline
Integrated Developmental
Brunner/Mazel; 1981; Masterson
Psychotherapy of the Disorders
Masterson Approach. New York:
1988; Kernberg O. Borderline Co
Pathological Narcissism
1975; Kernberg O. Severe Perso
Psychotherapeutic Strategies
University Press; 1984

Psychology and
neurophysiology of
dreams

United States

Hobson JA, McCarley RW. The bra
generator: An activation-synthes
dream process. Am J Psychiatry
McCarley RW. Dreams: Disguise
wishes or transparent
state? In: Bilder RM, Lefever FF,
of the Mind: On the Centennial o
a Scientific Psychology.
Academy of Sciences; 1998:116
dream in contemporary psychiat
2001;158:351


<<<PAGE 3514>>>
Theories on the
psychology of love

United States

Bergmann MS. The Anatomy of Lov
Columbia University Press; 1987
Triangle of Love: Intimacy, Pass
New York: Basic Books; 1987; S
ML, eds. The Psychology of Lov
Yale University Press; 1988; Gay
eds. Passionate Attachments: Th
New York: Free Press; 1988; Pe
Love and Fateful Encounters: Th
Romantic Passion. New York: W

Evaluations of
psychotherapy

United States

Bruce R, Staples FR, Cristol AH, Yo
KS. Psychotherapy versus Beha
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer
Elkin I, Shea MT, Watkins JT, Im
National Institute of Mental Healt


<<<PAGE 3515>>>
Depression Collaborative Resea
General effectiveness of treatme
Psychiatry. 1989;48:971
Eric Kandel (1929–)

Austria, United
States after
1939

Kandel E. Psychotherapy and the s
impact of psychiatric neurobiolog
Engl J Med. 1979;301:1028; Fro
to molecular biology: Exploration
anxiety. Am J Psychiatry
nerve cells, and the remembranc
Neuropsychiatry. 1989;1:103; Bi
of psychoanalysis: A new intellec
psychiatry revisited. Am J Psych
In Search of Memory: The Emer
Science of Mind. New York:


<<<PAGE 3516>>>
Aaron Beck (1921–)

United States

Beck A. Cognitive Therapy and the
Disorders. New York: Internation
Press; 1976; Beck A, Rush AJ, S
Cognitive Therapy of Depression
Guilford Press; 1979; Beck A, Em
R. Anxiety Disorders and Phobia
Perspective. New York: Basic Bo
Freeman A. Cognitive Therapy o
Disorders. New York: Guilford Pr


<<<PAGE 3517>>>
Weishaar M. Aaron T. Beck
Counselling and Psychotherapy.
1993; Barsky AJ, Ahern DK. Cog
therapy for hypochondriasis. A ra
controlled trial. JAMA

Karl Menninger (1893–
1990), William
Menninger (1900–
1966)

United States

Faulkner H, Pruitt V, eds.
Correspondence of Karl A. Menn
CT: Yale University Press; 1988;
Menninger: The Family and the C
Knopf; 1990


<<<PAGE 3518>>>
Frederick K. Goodwin
(1936–), Kay Redfield
Jamison (1946–)

United States

Goodwin FK, Jamison KR.
New York: Oxford University Pre
2007

A memoir of depression

United States

Styron W. Darkness Visible: A Mem
New York: Random House; 1990


<<<PAGE 3519>>>
SSRIs

United States

“The Story of Prozac,” Washington,
Manufacturers Association; 1993
Serotonin-specific inhibitors. In: K
BJ, eds. Comprehensive Textbo
ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & W

Jerome Frank (1910–
United States
2005), E. Fuller Torrey
(1937–)

Frank J. Persuasion and Healing: A
of Psychotherapy. Baltimore,
University Press; 1961; 2nd rev.
Frank JB. Persuasion and Healin
Study of Psychotherapy
Johns Hopkins University Press;
The Mind Game: Witchdoctors a
New York: Emerson Hall; 1972;
Witchdoctors and Psychiatrists: T
of Psychotherapy and Its Future.
& Row; 1986 (a revised edition o


<<<PAGE 3520>>>
Psychiatric epidemiology

United States

Robins LN, Regier DA, eds
America: The Epidemiologic Cat
New York: Free Press; 1991


<<<PAGE 3521>>>
Forensic psychiatry

United States

Bursztajn H, Scherr A, Brodsky A. T
forensic psychiatry in light of rec
in criminal responsibility.
1994;1(3):611; Prentice S. A hist
subspecialization in forensic psy
Acad Psychiatry Law. 1995;23(2

Epidemic of AIDS and of
persons infected with
HIV (1981–)

Worldwide

Grmek M. History of AIDS: Emergen
Modern Pandemic. Princeton, NJ
University Press; 1990; Berridge
AIDS and Contemporary History
Cambridge University Press; 199
Miller J, eds. The AIDS Crisis: A
History. Westport, CT: Greenwoo
Bayer R, Oppenheimer G, eds.
Voices from the Epidemic


<<<PAGE 3522>>>
Press; 2000; Treisman G,
Psychiatry of AIDS: A Guide to D
Treatment. Baltimore, MD: Johns
Press; 2004; Mayer K, Pizer H, e
Pandemic: Impact on Science an
Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic P

Classification of mental
disorders

United States

American Psychiatric Association.
Statistical Manual of Mental Diso
rev. Washington, DC: American
Association; 2000 (DSM-IV-TR)


<<<PAGE 3523>>>
Clozapine, risperidone,
and olanzapine in the
treatment of
schizophrenia

United States,
Canada,
Europe,
England,
South
America,
South Africa

Kane J, Honigfield G, Singer J, Melt
Clozaril Collaborative Study Gro
treatment-resistant schizophreni
comparison with chlorpromazine
Psychiatry. 1988;45:789; Kane J
Clozapine benefits and risks.
1994;20:23; Ayd FJ Jr. Risperido
unique antipsychotic. Int Drug Th
1994;29:5; Marder SR, Meibach
the treatment of schizophrenia.
1994;151:825; Kane J. Risperido
Psychiatry. 1994;151:802; Beasl
Tran P, Satterlee W, Sanger T. O
placebo and haloperidol acute ph
North American double-blind ola
Neuropsychopharmacology
G, Kuntz A. Review of recent clin
olanzapine. Br J Psychiatry
Czobor P, Sheitman B, Lindenm
Clozapine, olanzapine, risperido
in the treatment of patients with c
schizophrenia and schizoaffectiv


<<<PAGE 3524>>>
Psychiatry. 2002;159:255; Grilly
clozapine and its emergence
review and analysis. Hist Psychi

Publications in
psychohistory and
psychobiography

United States,
England

Lawton H. The Psychohistorian’s Ha
Psychohistory Press; 1988; Elov
Psyche. Understanding the “Why
Events, History, and Society (19
periodical published by the Psyc
627 Dakota Trail, Franklin Lakes
Sabbadini A, ed. Psychoanalysis
No. 1. London: Artesian Books; 1
first issue, this History
intervals of twice a year; since 20
Forrester, and since 2007 publis
University Press); Szaluta J.
and Practice. New York: Peter L
Psychoanalytic scholarship on A
Annu Psychoanal. 2003;31:135;


<<<PAGE 3525>>>
Handbook of Psychohistory
University Press; 2005


<<<PAGE 3526>>>

<<<PAGE 3527>>>

<<<PAGE 3528>>>
Paul Wender (1934–)

United States

Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disor
York: Oxford University Press; 1


<<<PAGE 3529>>>
Computers and the
Internet

United States

The APA has published two books o
computers in psychiatry: Lieff J.
Applications in Psychiatry
American Psychiatric Publishing
CH, Luo JS, Kennedy RS.
Computers in Clinical Psychiatry
American Psychiatric Publishing
Computer-based testing of the p
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA.
Psychiatry. 7th ed. Philadelphia,
Williams & Wilkins; 2000

Two articles about the Internet are A
Internet and the future of psychia
Psychiatry. 1996;153:861 and R
Internet: Ushering in a new era o
2001;285:804


<<<PAGE 3530>>>
Discoveries of genetic
United States,
variations as causes of
Canada,
mental illnesses
England,
Europe,
Australia

Oberlé I, Rousseau F, Heitz D, Kret
Instability of a 550–base pair DN
X syndrome. Science
Pritchard M, Kremer E, Lynch M
Fragile X genotype characterized
region of DNA. Science
Fu, Kuhl DPA, Pizzuti A, Pieretti
Variation of the CGG repeat at th
results in genetic instability: Res
Sherman paradox. Cell
GD, Bird TD, Wijsman EM, Orr T
Genetic linkage of evidence for a
disease locus on chromosome 1
1992;258:668; Mullen M, Houlde
M, Fidani L, Lombardi C. A locus
onset of Alzheimer’s disease on
chromosome 14, proximal to the
antichymotrypsin gene.


<<<PAGE 3531>>>
Huntington’s Disease Collaborat
A novel gene containing a trinuc
expanded and unstable on Hunti
chromosome. Cell. 1993;72:971;
Veyver IB, Wan M, Tran CQ, Fra
syndrome is caused by mutation
MECP2, encoding methyl-CpG-b
Nat Genet. 1999;23:185

Hyman S, Moldin S. Genetic scienc
Implications for research and tre
Weissman MM, ed. Treatment o
Bridging the 21st Century
American Psychiatric Association
Andreasen NC. Schizophrenia.
New Brain: Conquering Mental Il
the Genome. New York, Oxford:
Press; 2001:199


<<<PAGE 3532>>>
Three books on
psychotherapy

United States

Jackson SW. Care of the Psyche: A
Psychological Healing
University Press; 1999; Sabo AN
The Real World Guide to Psycho
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer
Hersen M, Sledge WH, eds.
Psychotherapy. 2 Vols. San Dieg
Press; 2002

Education of psychiatrists United States

Luhrmann TM. Of Two Minds: The G
American Psychiatry. New York:


<<<PAGE 3533>>>
Theory and treatment of
depression

United States,
England,
Switzerland

In a March 1999 New York City mee
American Psychopathological As
clinical scientists gave papers on
of Depression, all of which were
Weissman MM, ed. Treatment o
Bridging the 21st Century
American Psychiatric Association


<<<PAGE 3534>>>

<<<PAGE 3535>>>
Neuroimaging

United States

Andreasen NC. Mapping the mind.
Conquering Mental Illness in the
Oxford: Oxford University Press;
JM, ed. Advances in Brain Imagi
DC: American Psychiatric Assoc


<<<PAGE 3536>>>
The effects of traumatic
events on individuals

United States,
England,
France,
Germany,
and Italy

Micale MS, Lerner P, eds.
and Trauma in the Modern Age,
Cambridge: Cambridge Universi


<<<PAGE 3537>>>
Diagnosis and treatment
of borderline
personality disorder

United States

Gunderson JG. Borderline Persona
Clinical Guide. Washington, DC:
Psychiatric Association; 2001; A
Association. Practice Guideline f
Patients with Borderline Persona
Washington, DC: American Psyc
2001; Oldham JM. A 44-year-old
borderline personality
2002;287:1031

September 11, 2001,
United States
terrorist attacks on the
World Trade Center
and the Pentagon

Kleinfield NR, Connelly M: 9/11 still
psyche. Poll finds widespread un
fear of terror. The New York Tim
2003, Section A, pp. A1–A2; She
America. One Town’s Passage f


<<<PAGE 3538>>>
Hope. New York: Random Hous
JA, Tylim I, Hoffenberg J, eds.
Psychoanalytic Space: Internatio
from Ground Zero. New York: Pa
2003

Overviews of
psychoanalysis

United States

Erwin E, ed. The Freud Encycloped
and Culture. New York: Routledg
E. Secrets of the Soul: A Social a
of Psychoanalysis. New York: Kn


<<<PAGE 3539>>>

<<<PAGE 3540>>>
Psychosomatic
United States
Medicine/ConsultationLiaison Psychiatry

Blumenfield M, Strain J, eds.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Willi


<<<PAGE 3541>>>
Confinement of the
mentally ill in asylums

South Africa,
Switzerland,
France,
Canada,
Australia,
Germany,
United
States,
Japan,
Argentina,
Mexico,
India,
Nigeria,
Ireland, and
England

Porter R, Wright D, eds.
Insane. International Perspective
Cambridge: Cambridge Universi


<<<PAGE 3542>>>
Treatment of
schizophrenia

United States

American Psychiatric Association.
the Treatment of Patients with S
ed. Washington, DC: American P
Association; 2004


<<<PAGE 3543>>>
College Mental Health

United States

Kadison R, Geronimo I. College of t
The Campus Mental Health Cris
about It. San Francisco: Jossey-

A suppressed psychiatric United States
scandal

Scull A. Madhouse: A Tragic Tale o
Modern Medicine. New Haven, C
Press; 2005


<<<PAGE 3544>>>
Use of amphetamines as
antidepressant drugs

United States

Rasmussen N. Making the first antid
Amphetamine in American medic
Hist Med Allied Sci. 2006;61:288


<<<PAGE 3545>>>
Recollections of treating
schizophrenia

United Sates

Seeman M. Forty-five years of schiz
reflections. Hist Psychiatry

Mental health policy

United States

Frank R, Glide S. Better But Not We
Policy in the United States Since
MD: Johns Hopkins University P


<<<PAGE 3546>>>
George Mora (1923–
Italy and after
Works on the history of Italian psych
2006), and his work in
1953 the
of medical and psychiatric topics
the history of
United States
Johann Weyer’s De praestigiis d
psychiatry
and with Jeanne Brand,
Methodological Problems in Res

Mood disorders

United States

In 2006–2007 two textbooks on moo
published: Stein D, Kupfer D, Sc
The American Psychiatric Publis
Mood Disorders. Arlington, VA: A
Publishing; 2006; Goodwin FK, J
Depressive Illness: Bipolar Disor
Depression. 2nd ed. New York: O
Press; 2007 (1st ed., 1990)


<<<PAGE 3547>>>
Albert Ellis (1913–2007)

United States

Ellis published 75 books, including
Procrastination, How to Live With
Without Guilt, and A Guide to Ra

Mental Health Policy

United States

Mental Health Parity and Addiction
“Fact Sheet”: The Mental Health
Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA). A
19, 2015. Available at
http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/newsroo


<<<PAGE 3548>>>
Publication of DSM-5

United States

American Psychiatric Association.
Statistical Manual of Mental Diso
Washington, DC: American Psyc
2013


<<<PAGE 3549>>>
Mentally ill and gun
violence

United States

Metzl JM, MacLeish KT. Mental illne
and the politics of American firea
Health. 2015:240–249


<<<PAGE 3550>>>
Changes in marijuana
legislation

United States
(23 states)

Wilkinson ST, Yarnell S, Radhakrish
Cyril D’souza D. Marijuana legal
pyschicians and public health.”


<<<PAGE 3551>>>
United States Drug
Enforcement Agency

United States

Wing N. (2015, March 18). DEA App
Psychedelic Drug MDMA In Trea
Ill Patients. Retrieved November
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2
study_n_6888972.htm

Physician-assisted
suicide

United States

Dyer O, Caroline W, Garcia Rada A
law and practice around the worl
Payne K. Consider Assisted Suic
(2015) Fall;78(3):13; Kopelman L
Assisted Suicide: What Are the I
Kluwer Academic Publishers; 20


<<<PAGE 3552>>>
The Human Connectome United States
Project

Hagmann P, Kurant M, Gigandet X,
VJ, Meuli R, Thiran JP (2007). M
whole-brain structural networks w
PLoS ONE. 2, e597; Sporns O, T
(2005). The human connectome
description of the human brain.
e42

ADHD, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; AIDS, acquired immune deficiency syndrome;
APA, American Psychiatric Association; CNS, central nervous system; CRF, corticotropinreleasing factor; CT, computed tomography; DSM, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders; ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration;


<<<PAGE 3553>>>
HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; MAOI, monoamine oxidase inhibitor; MMPI, Minnesota
Multiphasic Personality Inventory; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NAMI, National Alliance
for the Mentally Ill; NARSAD, National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and
Depression; NIMH, National Institute for Mental Health; NMHA, National Mental Health
Association; OCD, obsessive-compulsive disorder; PET, positron emission tomography;
PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TR, text
revision.
This table was conceived and developed by Ralph Colp Jr, M.D., who contributed to many
editions of this book and who died in 2008. It was updated by Dr Benjamin Sadock with the
assistance of Kristel Carrington, M.D.

References

Ban TA. Pharmacotherapy of mental illness–a historical analysis. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2001;25(4):709–727.
Boland RJ, Keller MB. Diagnostic classification of mood disorders: historical
context and implications for neurobiology. In: Charney D, ed.
Neurobiological Foundations of Mental Illness. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford
University Press; 2004.
Cade JF. Lithium salts in the treatment of psychotic excitement. Med J Aust.
1949;2(10):349–352.
Cherry CL. Quakers and Asylum Reform [Internet]. Oxford University Press;
2013
[cited
2020
Sep
16].
Available
at
http://oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199608676.001.0001/oxfordh
9780199608676-e-026
Digby A. The changing profile of a nineteenth-century asylum: the York
Retreat. Psychol Med. 1984;14(4):739–748.
Dunea G. The anatomy of melancholy. BMJ. 2007;335(7615):351.
Edwards M. Mad world: Robert Burton’s the anatomy of melancholy. Brain.
2010;133(11):3480–3482.
Eisdorfer C. The impact of genetics on psychiatry. Curr Psychiatry Rep.
2000;2(3):177–178.
Gerard DL. Chiarugi and pinel considered: soul’s brain/person’s mind. J Hist
Behav Sci. 1997;33(4):381–403.
Haider B. The war of the soups and the sparks: the discovery of
neurotransmitters and the dispute over how nerves communicate. Yale J
Biol Med. 2007;80(3):138–139.
Hassler FA. Charaka Samhita. Science. 1893;22(545):17–18.


<<<PAGE 3554>>>
Healy D. The Antidepressant Era. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press; 2000. 317 p.
Insel TR, Lehner T. A new era in psychiatric genetics? Biol Psychiatry.
2007;61(9):1017–1018.
Johnstone EC, Crow TJ, Frith CD, Husband J, Kreel L. Cerebral ventricular
size and cognitive impairment in chronic schizophrenia. Lancet.
1976;2(7992):924–926.
Kendler KS, Muñoz RA, Murphy G. The development of the Feighner
criteria: a historical perspective. Am J Psychiatry. 2010;167(2):134–142.
Koenig HG, Zaben FA, Khalifa DA. Religion, spirituality and mental health
in the West and the Middle East. Asian J Psychiatr. 2012;5(2):180–182.
Laffey P. Psychiatric therapy in Georgian Britain. Psychol Med.
2003;33(7):1285–1297.
López-Muñoz F, Alamo C, Cuenca E, Shen WW, Clervoy P, Rubio G.
History of the discovery and clinical introduction of chlorpromazine. Ann
Clin Psychiatry. 2005;17(3):113–135.
Marchant J. The Prozac generation [Internet]. New Scientist. [cited 2020 Sep
21]. Available at https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg16822601-000the-prozac-generation/
Mitchell PB, Hadzi-Pavlovic D. John Cade and the discovery of lithium
treatment for manic depressive illness. Med J Aust. 1999;171(5):262–264.
Raju TN. The nobel chronicles. 1936: Henry Hallett Dale (1875–1968) and
Otto Loewi (1873–1961) Lancet. 1999;353(9150):416.
Rosenhan DL. On being sane in insane places. Science. 1973;179(4070):250–
258.
Shoja MM, Tubbs RS. The disorder of love in the Canon of Avicenna (A.D.
980–1037). Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164(2):228–229.
Shorter E. A History of Psychiatry: From the Era of the Asylum to the Age of
Prozac. New York: Wiley; 1997. 436 p.
Shorter E. History of psychiatry. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2008;21(6):593–597.
Shorter E. History of psychiatry. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz PR.
Comprehensive Textbok of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2017.
Shorter E. The history of lithium therapy. Bipolar Disord. 2009;11(Suppl
2):4–9.
Shorter E. The history of nosology and the rise of the diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders. Dialogues Clin Neurosci.


<<<PAGE 3555>>>
2015;17(1):59–67.
Spitzer RL, Cantwell DP. The DSM-III classification of the psychiatric
disorders of infancy, childhood, and adolescence. J Am Acad Child
Psychiatry. 1980;19(3):356–370.
Staff G. The creation of the Prozac myth. The Guardian. 2008. Available at
http://www.theguardian.com/society/2008/feb/27/mentalhealth.health1
Turner T. Chlorpromazine: unlocking psychosis. BMJ. 2007;334(suppl 1):s7.
Unsworth C. Law and lunacy in psychiatry’s ‘golden age’. Oxf J Leg Stud.
1993;13(4):479–507.
Webster C, ed. Health, Medicine, and Mortality in the Sixteenth Century.
Cambridge [Eng.]; New York: Cambridge University Press; 1979. 394 p.
(Cambridge monographs on the history of medicine.)
Wikipedia. History of psychiatry [cited 2020 Sep 16]. Available at
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=History_of_psychiatry&oldid=977801655
Wójciak P, Rybakowski J. Clinical picture, pathogenesis and psychometric
assessment of negative symptoms of schizophrenia. Psychiatr Pol.
2018;52(2):185–197.
Yanni C. The Architecture of Madness: Insane Asylums in the United States.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press; 2007. 191 p. (Architecture,
landscape, and American culture.)


<<<PAGE 3556>>>
Glossary of Terms Relating to Signs
and Symptoms
abreaction: A process by which repressed material, particularly a painful
experience or conflict, is brought back to consciousness; in this process,
the person not only recalls but also relives the repressed material, which is
accompanied by the appropriate affective response.
abstract thinking: Thinking characterized by the ability to grasp the
essentials of a whole, to break a whole into its parts, and to discern
common properties. To think symbolically.
abulia: Reduced impulse to act and to think, associated with indifference
about consequences of action. Occurs as a result of neurologic deficit,
depression, and schizophrenia.
acalculia: Loss of ability to do calculations; not caused by anxiety or
impairment in concentration. Occurs with neurologic deficit and learning
disorder.
acataphasia: Disordered speech in which statements are incorrectly
formulated. Patients may express themselves with words that sound like
the ones intended but are not appropriate to the thoughts, or they may use
totally inappropriate expressions.
acathexis: Lack of feeling associated with an ordinarily emotionally charged
subject; in psychoanalysis, it denotes the patient’s detaching or transferring
of emotion from thoughts and ideas. Also called decathexis. Occurs in
anxiety, dissociative, schizophrenic, and bipolar disorders.
acenesthesia: Loss of sensation of physical existence.
acrophobia: Dread of high places.
acting out: Behavioral response to an unconscious drive or impulse that


<<<PAGE 3557>>>
brings about temporary partial relief of inner tension; relief is attained by
reacting to a present situation as if it were the situation that originally gave
rise to the drive or impulse. Common in borderline states.
aculalia: Nonsense speech associated with marked impairment of
comprehension. Occurs in mania, schizophrenia, and neurologic deficit.
addiction: Psychological or physical dependence on a drug. Sometimes more
broadly used to describe dependence on any potentially pleasurable
experience (gambling, sexual activity).
adiadochokinesia: Inability to perform rapid alternating movements. Occurs
with neurologic deficit and cerebellar lesions.
adynamia: Weakness and fatigability, characteristic of neurasthenia and
depression.
aerophagia: Excessive swallowing of air. Seen in anxiety disorder.
affect: The subjective and immediate experience of emotion attached to ideas
or mental representations of objects. Affect has outward manifestations
that may be classified as restricted, blunted, flattened, broad, labile,
appropriate, or inappropriate. See also mood.
ageusia: Lack or impairment of the sense of taste. Seen in depression and
neurologic deficit.
aggression: Forceful, goal-directed action that may be verbal or physical; the
motor counterpart of the affect of rage, anger, or hostility. Seen in
neurologic deficit, temporal lobe disorder, impulse-control disorders,
mania, and schizophrenia.
agitation: Severe anxiety associated with motor restlessness.
agnosia: Inability to understand the import or significance of sensory stimuli;
cannot be explained by a defect in sensory pathways or cerebral lesion; the
term has also been used to refer to the selective loss or disuse of
knowledge of specific objects because of emotional circumstances, as seen
in certain schizophrenic, anxious, and depressed patients. Occurs with
neurologic deficit. For types of agnosia, see the specific term.
agoraphobia: Morbid fear of open places or leaving the familiar setting of
the home. May be present with or without panic attacks.
agrammatism: Speech in which the patient forms words into a sentence
without regard for grammatical rules. Seen in Alzheimer and Pick diseases.
agraphia: Loss or impairment of a previously possessed ability to write.
ailurophobia: Dread of cats.


<<<PAGE 3558>>>
akataphasia: A form of disordered speech in which thoughts cannot be
expressed directly but are expressed indirectly such as by making a similar
sound (displacement paralogia) or by being derailed into another thought
(derailment paralogia). See also derailment.
akathisia: Subjective feeling of motor restlessness manifested by a
compelling need to be in constant movement; may be seen as an
extrapyramidal adverse effect of antipsychotic medication. May be
mistaken for psychotic agitation.
akinesia: Lack of physical movement, as in the extreme immobility of
catatonic schizophrenia; may also occur as an extrapyramidal effect of
antipsychotic medication.
akinetic mutism: Absence of voluntary motor movement or speech in a
patient who is apparently alert (as evidenced by eye movements). Seen in
psychotic depression and catatonic states.
alexia: Loss of a previously possessed reading facility; not explained by
defective visual acuity. Compare with dyslexia.
alexithymia: Inability or difficulty in describing or being aware of one’s
emotions or moods.
algophobia: Dread of pain.
alogia: Inability to speak because of a mental deficiency or an episode of
dementia.
ambivalence: Coexistence of two opposing impulses toward the same thing
in the same person at the same time. Seen in schizophrenia, borderline
states, and obsessive-compulsive disorders (OCDs).
amimia: Lack of the ability to make gestures or to comprehend those made
by others.
amnesia: Partial or total inability to recall past experiences; may be organic
(amnestic disorder) or emotional (dissociative amnesia) in origin.
amnesic aphasia: Disturbed capacity to name objects, even though they are
known to the patient. Also called anomic aphasia, dysnomia, nominal
aphasia, and amnestic aphasia.
anaclitic: Depending on others, especially as the infant on the mother;
analytic depression in children results from an absence of mothering.
analgesia: State in which one feels little or no pain. Can occur under
hypnosis and in dissociative disorder.
anancasm: Repetitious or stereotyped behavior or thought usually used as a


<<<PAGE 3559>>>
tension-relieving device; used as a synonym for obsession and seen in
obsessive-compulsive (anankastic) personality.
androgyny: Combination of culturally determined female and male
characteristics in one person.
anergia: Lack of energy.
anhedonia: Loss of interest in and withdrawal from all regular and
pleasurable activities. Often associated with depression.
anomia: Inability to recall the names of objects.
anorexia: Loss or decrease in appetite. In anorexia nervosa, appetite may be
preserved, but the patient refuses to eat.
anosognosia: Inability to recognize a physical deficit in oneself (e.g., patient
denies paralyzed limb).
anterograde amnesia: Loss of memory for events subsequent to the onset of
the amnesia; common after trauma. Compare with retrograde amnesia.
anxiety: Feeling of apprehension caused by anticipation of danger, which
may be internal or external.
apathy: Dulled emotional tone associated with detachment or indifference;
observed in certain types of schizophrenia and depression.
aphasia: Any disturbance in the comprehension or expression of language
caused by a brain lesion. For types of aphasia, see the specific term.
aphonia: Loss of voice. Seen in conversion disorder.
apperception: Awareness of the meaning and significance of a particular
sensory stimulus as modified by one’s own experiences, knowledge,
thoughts, and emotions. See also perception.
appropriate affect: Emotional tone in harmony with the accompanying idea,
thought, or speech.
apraxia: Inability to perform a voluntary purposeful motor activity; cannot
be explained by paralysis or other motor or sensory impairment. In
constructional apraxia, a patient cannot draw two- or three-dimensional
forms.
asomatopagnosia: Inability to recognize a part of one’s body as one’s own
(also called ignorance of the body and autotopagnosia).
astasia abasia: Inability to stand or to walk in a normal manner, even though
normal leg movements can be performed in a sitting or lying down
position. Seen in conversion disorder.
astereognosis: Inability to identify familiar objects by touch. Seen with


<<<PAGE 3560>>>
neurologic deficit. See also neurologic amnesia.
asthenia: Weakness or debility.
asyndesis: Disorder of language in which the patient combines unconnected
ideas and images. Commonly seen in schizophrenia.
ataxia: Lack of coordination, physical or mental. (1) In neurology, refers to
loss of muscular coordination. (2) In psychiatry, the term intrapsychic
ataxia refers to lack of coordination between feelings and thoughts; seen in
schizophrenia and in severe OCD.
atonia: Lack of muscle tone. See waxy flexibility.
attention: Concentration; the aspect of consciousness that relates to the
amount of effort exerted in focusing on certain aspects of an experience,
activity, or task. Usually impaired in anxiety and depressive disorders.
auditory hallucination: False perception of sound, usually voices, but also
other noises, such as music. Most common hallucination in psychiatric
disorders.
audible thoughts: A form of auditory hallucination in which everything the
patient thinks or speaks is repeated by the voices. Also known as thought
echoing.
aura: (1) Warning sensations, such as automatisms, fullness in the stomach,
blushing, and changes in respiration, cognitive sensations, and mood states
usually experienced before a seizure. (2) A sensory prodrome that precedes
a classic migraine headache.
autistic thinking: Thinking in which the thoughts are largely narcissistic and
egocentric, with emphasis on subjectivity rather than objectivity, and
without regard for reality; used interchangeably with autism and dereism.
Seen in schizophrenia and autistic disorder.
automatic obedience: Strict obedience of command without critical
judgment. The person may respond to an inner voice, as in schizophrenia,
or to another person’s command, as in hypnosis.
automatism: Activity carried out without conscious knowledge.
autoscopy: Seeing oneself or a double as part of a brief hallucinatory
experience.
behavior: Sum total of the psyche that includes impulses, motivations,
wishes, drives, instincts, and cravings, as expressed by a person’s actions
or motor activity. Also called conation.
bereavement: Feeling of grief or desolation, especially at the death or loss of


<<<PAGE 3561>>>
a loved one.
bizarre delusion: False belief that is patently absurd or fantastic (e.g.,
invaders from space have implanted electrodes in a person’s brain).
Common in schizophrenia. In nonbizarre delusion, content is usually
within the range of possibility.
blackout: Amnesia experienced by alcoholics about behavior during
drinking bouts; usually indicates reversible brain damage.
blocking: Abrupt interruption in train of thinking before a thought or idea is
finished; after a brief pause, the person indicates no recall of what was
being said or was going to be said (also known as thought deprivation or
increased thought latency). Common in schizophrenia and severe anxiety.
blunted affect: Disturbance of affect manifested by a severe reduction in the
intensity of externalized feeling tone; one of the fundamental symptoms of
schizophrenia, as outlined by Eugen Bleuler.
bradykinesia: Slowness of motor activity, with a decrease in normal
spontaneous movement.
bradylalia: Abnormally slow speech. Common in depression.
bradylexia: Inability to read at normal speed.
bruxism: Grinding or gnashing of the teeth, typically occurring during sleep.
Seen in anxiety disorder.
carebaria: Sensation of discomfort or pressure in the head.
catalepsy: Condition in which persons maintain the body position into which
they are placed; observed in severe cases of catatonic schizophrenia.
Compare with waxy flexibility and cerea flexibilitas. See also command
automatism.
cataplexy: Temporary sudden loss of muscle tone, causing weakness and
immobilization; can be precipitated by a variety of emotional states and is
often followed by sleep. Commonly seen in narcolepsy.
catastrophic reaction: Extreme emotional state characterized by
restlessness, irritability, crying, anxiety, and uncooperativeness. Seen in
patients who have had a stroke.
catatonic excitement: Excited, uncontrolled motor activity seen in catatonic
schizophrenia. Patients in catatonic state may suddenly erupt into an
excited state and may be violent.
catatonic posturing: Voluntary assumption of an inappropriate or bizarre
posture, generally maintained for long periods of time. May switch


<<<PAGE 3562>>>
unexpectedly with catatonic excitement.
catatonic rigidity: Fixed and sustained motoric position that is resistant to
change.
catatonic stupor: Stupor in which patients ordinarily are well aware of their
surroundings.
cathexis: In psychoanalysis, a conscious or unconscious investment of
psychic energy in an idea, concept, object, or person. Compare with
acathexis.
cenesthesia: The general awareness of being alive coming from stimuli
arising from the functioning of various bodily organs.
cephalagia: Headache.
cerea flexibilitas: Condition of a person who can be molded into a position
that is then maintained; when an examiner moves the person’s limb, the
limb feels as if it were made of wax. Also called waxy flexibility. Seen in
schizophrenia.
chorea: Movement disorder characterized by random and involuntary quick,
jerky, purposeless movements. Seen in Huntington disease.
circumstantiality: Disturbance in the associative thought and speech
processes in which a patient digresses into unnecessary details and
inappropriate thoughts before communicating the central idea. Observed in
schizophrenia, obsessional disturbances, and certain cases of dementia. See
also tangentiality.
clang association: Association or speech directed by the sound of a word
rather than by its meaning; words have no logical connection; punning and
rhyming may dominate the verbal behavior. Seen most frequently in
schizophrenia or mania.
claustrophobia: Abnormal fear of closed or confining spaces.
clonic convulsion: An involuntary, violent muscular contraction or spasm in
which the muscles alternately contract and relax. Characteristic phase in
grand mal epileptic seizure.
clouding of consciousness: Any disturbance of consciousness in which the
person is not fully awake, alert, and oriented. Occurs in delirium,
dementia, and cognitive disorder.
cluttering: Disturbance of fluency involving an abnormally rapid rate and
erratic rhythm of speech that impedes intelligibility; the affected individual
is usually unaware of communicative impairment.


<<<PAGE 3563>>>
cognition: Mental process of knowing and becoming aware; function is
closely associated with judgment.
coma: State of profound unconsciousness from which a person cannot be
roused, with minimal or no detectable responsiveness to stimuli; seen in
injury or disease of the brain, in systemic conditions such as diabetic
ketoacidosis and uremia, and in intoxications with alcohol and other drugs.
Coma may also occur in severe catatonic states and in conversion disorder.
coma vigil: Coma in which a patient appears to be asleep and cannot be
aroused. A persistent vegetative state.
command automatism: Condition in which suggestions are followed
automatically.
command hallucination: False perception of orders that a person may feel
obliged to obey or unable to resist.
complex partial seizure: A seizure characterized by alterations in
consciousness that may be accompanied by complex hallucinations
(sometimes olfactory) or illusions. During the seizure, a state of impaired
consciousness resembling a dreamlike state may occur, and the patient may
exhibit repetitive, automatic, or semipurposeful behavior.
compulsion: Pathologic need to act on an impulse that, if resisted, produces
anxiety; repetitive behavior in response to an obsession or performed
according to certain rules, with no true end in itself other than to prevent
something from occurring in the future.
conation: That part of a person’s mental life concerned with cravings,
strivings, motivations, drives, and wishes as expressed through behavior or
motor activity.
concrete thinking: Thinking characterized by actual things, events, and
immediate experience rather than by abstractions; seen in young children,
in those who have lost or never developed the ability to generalize (as in
certain cognitive mental disorders), and in schizophrenic persons.
Compare with abstract thinking.
condensation: Mental process in which one symbol stands for a number of
components.
confabulation: Unconscious filling of gaps in memory by imagining
experiences or events that have no basis in fact, commonly seen in
amnestic syndromes; should be differentiated from lying. See also
paramnesia.


<<<PAGE 3564>>>
confusion: Disturbances of consciousness manifested by a disordered
orientation in relation to time, place, or person.
consciousness: State of awareness, with response to external stimuli.
constricted affect: Reduction in intensity of feeling tone that is less severe
than that of blunted affect.
constructional apraxia: Inability to copy a drawing, such as a cube, clock,
or pentagon, as a result of a brain lesion.
conversion phenomena: The development of symbolic physical symptoms
and distortions involving the voluntary muscles or special sense organs;
not under voluntary control and not explained by any physical disorder.
Most common in conversion disorder but also seen in a variety of mental
disorders.
convulsion: An involuntary, violent muscular contraction or spasm. See also
clonic convulsion and tonic convulsion.
coprolalia: Involuntary use of vulgar or obscene language. Observed in some
cases of schizophrenia and in Tourette syndrome.
coprophagia: Eating of filth or feces.
cryptographia: A private written language.
cryptolalia: A private spoken language.
cycloplegia: Paralysis of the muscles of accommodation in the eye; observed,
at times, as an autonomic adverse effect (anticholinergic effect) of
antipsychotic or antidepressant medication.
decompensation: Deterioration of psychic functioning caused by a
breakdown of defense mechanisms. Seen in psychotic states.
déjà entendu: Illusion that what one is hearing one has been heard
previously. See also paramnesia.
déjà pensé: Condition in which a thought never entertained before is
incorrectly regarded as a repetition of a previous thought. See also
paramnesia.
déjà vu: Illusion of visual recognition in which a new situation is incorrectly
regarded as a repetition of a previous experience. See also paramnesia.
delirium: Acute reversible mental disorder characterized by confusion and
some impairment of consciousness; generally associated with emotional
lability, hallucinations or illusions, and inappropriate, impulsive, irrational,
or violent behavior.
delirium tremens: Acute and sometimes fatal reaction to withdrawal from


<<<PAGE 3565>>>
alcohol, usually occurring 72 to 96 hours after the cessation of heavy
drinking; distinctive characteristics are marked autonomic hyperactivity
(tachycardia, fever, hyperhidrosis, and dilated pupils), usually
accompanied by tremulousness, hallucinations, illusions, and delusions.
Called alcohol withdrawal with perceptual disturbance in DSM-5. See also
formication.
delusion: False belief, based on incorrect inference about external reality,
that is firmly held despite objective and obvious contradictory proof or
evidence and despite the fact that other members of the culture do not
share the belief.
delusion of control: False belief that a person’s will, thoughts, or feelings
are being controlled by external forces.
delusion of grandeur: Exaggerated conception of one’s importance, power,
or identity.
delusion of infidelity: False belief that one’s lover is unfaithful. Sometimes
called pathologic jealousy.
delusion of persecution: False belief of being harassed or persecuted; often
found in litigious patients who have a pathologic tendency to take legal
action because of imagined mistreatment. Most common delusion.
delusion of poverty: False belief that one is bereft or will be deprived of all
material possessions.
delusion of reference: False belief that the behavior of others refers to
oneself or that events, objects, or other people have a particular and
unusual significance, usually of a negative nature; derived from idea of
reference, in which persons falsely feel that others are talking about them
(e.g., belief that people on television or radio are talking to or about the
person). See also thought broadcasting.
delusion of self-accusation: False feeling of remorse and guilt. Seen in
depression with psychotic features.
dementia: Mental disorder characterized by general impairment in
intellectual functioning without clouding of consciousness; characterized
by failing memory, difficulty with calculations, distractibility, alterations
in mood and affect, impaired judgment and abstraction, reduced facility
with language, and disturbance of orientation. Although irreversible
because of underlying progressive degenerative brain disease, dementia
may be reversible if the cause can be treated. Also known as major


<<<PAGE 3566>>>
neurocognitive disorder in DSM-5.
denial: Defense mechanism in which the existence of unpleasant realities is
disavowed; refers to keeping out of conscious awareness any aspects of
external reality that, if acknowledged, would produce anxiety.
depersonalization: Sensation of unreality concerning oneself. Experiencing
one’s own behavior, thoughts, or feelings as if they were outside oneself,
or as in a dream.
depression: Mental state characterized by feelings of sadness, loneliness,
despair, low self-esteem, and self-reproach; accompanying signs include
psychomotor retardation or, at times, agitation, withdrawal from
interpersonal contact, and vegetative symptoms, such as insomnia and
anorexia. The term refers to a mood that is so characterized or a mood
disorder.
derailment: Gradual or sudden deviation in train of thought without
blocking; sometimes used synonymously with loosening of association.
derealization: Sensation of changed reality or feeling detached from one’s
surroundings.
dereism: Mental activity that follows a totally subjective and idiosyncratic
system of logic and fails to take the facts of reality or experience into
consideration. Characteristic of schizophrenia. See also autistic thinking.
detachment: Characterized by distant interpersonal relationships and lack of
emotional involvement.
devaluation: Defense mechanism in which a person attributes excessively
negative qualities to self or others. Seen in depression and paranoid
personality disorder.
diminished libido: Decreased sexual interest and drive. (Increased libido is
often associated with mania.)
dipsomania: Compulsion to drink alcoholic beverages.
disinhibition: (1) Removal of an inhibitory effect, as in the reduction of the
inhibitory function of the cerebral cortex by alcohol. (2) In psychiatry, a
greater freedom to act in accordance with inner drives or feelings and with
less regard for restraints dictated by cultural norms or one’s superego.
disorientation: Confusion; impairment of awareness of time, place, and
person (the position of the self in relation to other persons). Characteristic
of cognitive disorders.
displacement: Unconscious defense mechanism by which the emotional


<<<PAGE 3567>>>
component of an unacceptable idea or object is transferred to a more
acceptable one. Seen in phobias.
dissociation: Unconscious defense mechanism involving the segregation of
any group of mental or behavioral processes from the rest of the person’s
psychic activity; may entail the separation of an idea from its
accompanying emotional tone, as seen in dissociative and conversion
disorders.
distractibility: Inability to focus one’s attention; the patient does not respond
to the task at hand but attends to irrelevant phenomena in the environment.
dread: Massive or pervasive anxiety, usually related to a specific danger.
dreamy state: Altered state of consciousness, the semiconscious state
associated with an epileptic attack, particularly from medial temporal
epilepsy.
drowsiness: State of impaired awareness associated with a desire or
inclination to sleep.
dysarthria: Difficulty in articulation, the motor activity of shaping phonated
sounds into speech, not in word finding or in grammar.
dyscalculia: Difficulty in performing calculations.
dysgeusia: Impaired sense of taste.
dysgraphia: Difficulty in writing.
dyskinesia: Uncontrolled, involuntary muscle movement. Seen in
extrapyramidal disorders.
dyslalia: Faulty articulation caused by structural abnormalities of the
articulatory organs or impaired hearing.
dyslexia: Specific learning disability syndrome involving an impairment of
the ability to read; unrelated to the person’s intelligence. Compare with
alexia.
dysmegalopsia: A distortion in which the size and shape of objects is
misperceived, sometimes called the “Alice in Wonderland” effect. See also
illusion.
dysmetria: Impaired ability to gauge distance relative to movements. Seen in
neurologic deficit.
dysmnesia: Impaired memory.
dyspareunia: Physical pain in sexual intercourse, which may be emotionally
caused and more commonly experienced by women; may also result from
cystitis, urethritis, or other medical conditions.


<<<PAGE 3568>>>
dysphagia: Difficulty in swallowing.
dysphasia: Difficulty in comprehending oral language (reception dysphasia)
or in trying to express verbal language (expressive dysphasia).
dysphonia: Difficulty in speaking or singing.
dysphoria: Feeling of unpleasantness or discomfort; a mood of general
dissatisfaction and restlessness. Occurs in depression and anxiety.
dysprosody: Loss of normal speech melody (prosody). Common in
depression.
dystonia: Extrapyramidal motor disturbance consisting of slow, sustained
contractions of the axial or appendicular musculature; one movement often
predominates, leading to relatively sustained postural deviations; acute
dystonic reactions (facial grimacing and torticollis) are occasionally seen
with the initiation of antipsychotic drug therapy.
echolalia: Psychopathological repeating of words or phrases of one person
by another; tends to be repetitive and persistent. Seen in certain kinds of
schizophrenia, particularly the catatonic types.
echopraxia: Similar to echolalia, however this represents the repeating or
mimicking of the movements of another person.
ego-alien: Denoting aspects of a person’s personality that are viewed as
repugnant, unacceptable, or inconsistent with the rest of the personality.
Also called ego-dystonia. Compare with ego-syntonic.
egocentric: Self-centered; selfishly preoccupied with one’s own needs;
lacking interest in others.
ego-dystonic: See ego-alien.
egomania: Morbid self-preoccupation or self-centeredness. See also
narcissism.
ego-syntonic: Denoting aspects of a personality that are viewed as acceptable
and consistent with that person’s total personality. Personality traits are
usually ego-syntonic. Compare with ego-alien.
eidetic image: Unusually vivid or exact mental image of objects previously
seen or imagined.
elation: Mood consisting of feelings of joy, euphoria, triumph, and intense
self-satisfaction or optimism. Occurs in mania when not grounded in
reality.
elevated mood: Air of confidence and enjoyment; a mood more cheerful
than normal but not necessarily pathologic.


<<<PAGE 3569>>>
emotion: Complex feeling state with psychic, somatic, and behavioral
components; external manifestation of emotion is affect.
emotional insight: A level of understanding or awareness that one has
emotional problems. It facilitates positive changes in personality and
behavior when present.
emotional lability: Excessive emotional responsiveness characterized by
unstable and rapidly changing emotions.
encopresis: Involuntary passage of feces, usually occurring at night or during
sleep.
enuresis: Incontinence of urine, often during sleep.
erotomania: Delusional belief, more common in women than in men, that
someone is deeply in love with them (also known as de Clérambault
syndrome).
erythrophobia: Abnormal fear of blushing.
euphoria: Exaggerated feeling of well-being that is inappropriate to real
events. Can occur with drugs such as opiates, amphetamines, and alcohol.
euthymia: Normal range of mood, implying absence of depressed or elevated
mood.
evasion: Act of not facing up to, or strategically eluding, something; consists
of suppressing an idea that is next in a thought series and replacing it with
another idea closely related to it. Also called paralogia and perverted
logic.
exaltation: Feeling of intense elation and grandeur.
excited: Agitated, purposeless motor activity uninfluenced by external
stimuli.
expansive mood: Expression of feelings without restraint, frequently with an
overestimation of their significance or importance. Seen in mania and
grandiose delusional disorder.
expressive aphasia: Disturbance of speech in which understanding remains,
but ability to speak is grossly impaired; halting, laborious, and inaccurate
speech (also known as Broca’s, nonfluent, and motor aphasias).
expressive dysphasia: Difficulty in expressing verbal language; the ability to
understand language is intact.
externalization: More general term than projection that refers to the
tendency to perceive in the external world and in external objects elements
of one’s own personality, including instinctual impulses, conflicts, moods,


<<<PAGE 3570>>>
attitudes, and styles of thinking.
extroversion: State of one’s energies being directed outside oneself.
Compare with introversion.
false memory: A person’s recollection and belief of an event that did not
actually occur. In false memory syndrome, persons erroneously believe that
they sustained an emotional or physical (e.g., sexual) trauma in early life.
fantasy: Daydream; fabricated mental picture of a situation or chain of
events. A normal form of thinking dominated by unconscious material that
seeks wish fulfillment and solutions to conflicts; may serve as the matrix
for creativity. The content of the fantasy may indicate mental illness.
fatigue: A feeling of weariness, sleepiness, or irritability after a period of
mental or bodily activity. Seen in depression, anxiety, neurasthenia, and
somatoform disorders.
fausse reconnaissance: False recognition, a feature of paramnesia. Can
occur in delusional disorders.
fear: Unpleasurable emotional state consisting of psychophysiological
changes in response to a realistic threat or danger. Compare with anxiety.
flat affect: Absence or near absence of any signs of affective expression.
flight of ideas: Rapid succession of fragmentary thoughts or speech in which
content changes abruptly and speech may be incoherent. Seen in mania.
floccillation: Aimless plucking or picking, usually at bedclothes or clothing,
commonly seen in dementia and delirium.
fluent aphasia: Aphasia characterized by inability to understand the spoken
word; fluent but incoherent speech is present. Also called Wernicke’s,
sensory and receptive aphasias.
folie à deux: Mental illness shared by two persons, usually involving a
common delusional system; if it involves three persons, it is referred to as
folie à trois, etc. Also called shared psychotic disorder.
formal thought disorder: Disturbance in the form of thought rather than the
content of thought; thinking characterized by loosened associations,
neologisms, and illogic constructs; thought process is disordered, and the
person is defined as psychotic. Characteristic of schizophrenia.
formication: Tactile hallucination involving the sensation that tiny insects
are crawling over the skin. Seen in cocaine addiction and delirium tremens.
free-floating anxiety: Severe, pervasive, generalized anxiety that is not
attached to any particular idea, object, or event. Observed particularly in


<<<PAGE 3571>>>
anxiety disorders, although it may be seen in some cases of schizophrenia.
fugue: Dissociative disorder characterized by a period of almost complete
amnesia, during which a person actually flees from an immediate life
situation and begins a different life pattern; apart from the amnesia, mental
faculties and skills are usually unimpaired.
galactorrhea: Abnormal discharge of milk from the breast; may result from
the endocrine influence (e.g., prolactin) of dopamine receptor antagonists,
such as phenothiazines.
generalized tonic–clonic seizure: Generalized onset of tonic–clonic
movements of the limbs, tongue biting, and incontinence followed by slow,
gradual recovery of consciousness and cognition; also called grand mal
seizure.
global aphasia: Combination of grossly nonfluent aphasia and severe fluent
aphasia.
glossolalia: Unintelligible jargon that has meaning to the speaker but not to
the listener. Occurs in schizophrenia.
grandiosity: Exaggerated feelings of one’s importance, power, knowledge,
or identity. Occurs in delusional disorder and manic states.
grief: Alteration in mood and affect consisting of sadness appropriate to a
real loss; normally, it is self-limited. See also depression and mourning.
guilt: Emotional state associated with self-reproach and the need for
punishment. In psychoanalysis, refers to a feeling of culpability that stems
from a conflict between the ego and the superego (conscience). Guilt has
normal psychological and social functions, but special intensity or absence
of guilt characterizes many mental disorders, such as depression and
antisocial personality disorder, respectively. Psychiatrists distinguish
shame as a less internalized form of guilt that relates more to others than to
the self. See also shame.
gustatory hallucination: Hallucination primarily involving taste.
gynecomastia: Female-like development of the male breasts; may occur as
an adverse effect of antipsychotic and antidepressant drugs because of
increased prolactin levels or anabolic–androgenic steroid abuse.
hallucination: False sensory perception occurring in the absence of any
relevant external stimulation of the sensory modality involved. For types of
hallucinations, see the specific term.
hallucinosis: State in which a person experiences hallucinations without any


<<<PAGE 3572>>>
impairment of consciousness.
haptic hallucination: Hallucination of touch.
hebephrenia: Complex of symptoms, considered a form of schizophrenia,
characterized by wild or silly behavior or mannerisms, inappropriate affect,
and delusions and hallucinations that are transient and unsystematized.
Hebephrenic schizophrenia is now called disorganized schizophrenia.
holophrastic: Using a single word to express a combination of ideas. Seen in
schizophrenia.
hyperactivity: Increased muscular activity. The term is commonly used to
describe a disturbance found in children that is manifested by constant
restlessness, overactivity, distractibility, and difficulties in learning. Seen
in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
hyperacusis: Extreme sensitivity to sounds.
hyperalgesia: Excessive sensitivity to pain. Seen in somatoform disorder.
hyperesthesia: Increased sensitivity to any sense. It can affect one or more
senses.
hypermnesia: Exaggerated degree of retention and recall. It can be elicited
by hypnosis and may be seen in certain prodigies; also may be a feature of
OCD, some cases of schizophrenia, and manic episodes of bipolar I
disorder.
hyperphagia: Increase in appetite and intake of food.
hyperpragia: Excessive thinking and mental activity. Generally associated
with manic episodes of bipolar I disorder.
hypersomnia: Excessive time spent asleep. May be associated with
underlying medical or psychiatric disorder or narcolepsy, may be part of
the Kleine–Levin syndrome, or may be primary.
hyperventilation: Excessive breathing, generally associated with anxiety,
which can reduce blood carbon dioxide concentration and can produce
lightheadedness, palpitations, numbness, tingling periorally and in the
extremities, and, occasionally, syncope.
hypervigilance: Excessive attention to and focus on all internal and external
stimuli; usually seen in delusional or paranoid states.
hypesthesia: Diminished sensitivity to tactile stimulation.
hypnagogic hallucination: Hallucination occurring while falling asleep, not
ordinarily considered pathologic.
hypnopompic hallucination: Hallucination occurring while awakening from


<<<PAGE 3573>>>
sleep, not ordinarily considered pathologic.
hypnosis: Artificially induced alteration of consciousness characterized by
increased suggestibility and receptivity to direction.
hypoactivity: Decreased motor and cognitive activity, as in psychomotor
retardation; visible slowing of thought, speech, and movements. Also
called hypokinesis.
hypochondria: Exaggerated concern about health that is based not on real
medical pathology but on unrealistic interpretations of physical signs or
sensations as abnormal.
hypomania: Mood abnormality with the qualitative characteristics of mania
but somewhat less intense. Seen in cyclothymic disorder.
idea of reference: Misinterpretation of incidents and events in the outside
world as having direct personal reference to oneself; occasionally observed
in normal persons, but frequently seen in paranoid patients. If present with
sufficient frequency or intensity or if organized and systematized, they
constitute delusions of reference.
illogic thinking: Thinking containing erroneous conclusions or internal
contradictions; psychopathological only when it is marked and not caused
by cultural values or intellectual deficit.
illusion: Perceptual misinterpretation of a real external stimulus. Compare
with hallucination.
immediate memory: Reproduction, recognition, or recall of perceived
material within seconds after presentation. Compare with long-term
memory and short-term memory.
impaired insight: Diminished ability to understand the objective reality of a
situation.
impaired judgment: Diminished ability to understand a situation correctly
and to act appropriately.
impulse control: Ability to resist an impulse, drive, or temptation to perform
some action.
inappropriate affect: Emotional tone out of harmony with the idea, thought,
or speech accompanying it. Seen in schizophrenia.
incoherence: Communication that is disconnected, disorganized, or
incomprehensible. See also word salad.
incorporation: Primitive unconscious defense mechanism in which the
psychic representation of another person or aspects of another person are


<<<PAGE 3574>>>
assimilated into oneself through a figurative process of symbolic oral
ingestion; represents a special form of introjection and is the earliest
mechanism of identification.
increased libido: Increase in sexual interest and drive.
ineffability: Ecstatic state in which persons insist that their experience is
inexpressible and indescribable and that it is impossible to convey what it
is like to one who never experienced it.
initial insomnia: Falling asleep with difficulty; usually seen in anxiety
disorder. Compare with middle insomnia and terminal insomnia.
insight: Conscious recognition of one’s own condition. In psychiatry, it
refers to the conscious awareness and understanding of one’s own
psychodynamics and symptoms of maladaptive behavior; highly important
in effecting changes in the personality and behavior of a person.
insomnia: Difficulty in falling asleep or difficulty in staying asleep. It can be
related to a mental disorder, can be related to a physical disorder or an
adverse effect of medication, or can be primary (not related to a known
medical factor or another mental disorder). See also initial insomnia,
middle insomnia, and terminal insomnia.
intellectual disability: Limitations in intellectual functioning and adaptive
behavior, beginning before age 18 years. Below average intelligence.
intellectual insight: Knowledge of the reality of a situation without the
ability to use that knowledge successfully to effect an adaptive change in
behavior or to master the situation. Compare with true insight.
intelligence: Capacity for learning and ability to recall, to integrate
constructively, and to apply what one has learned; the capacity to
understand and to think rationally.
intoxication: Mental disorder caused by recent ingestion or presence in the
body of an exogenous substance producing maladaptive behavior by virtue
of its effects on the central nervous system (CNS). The most common
psychiatric changes involve disturbances of perception, wakefulness,
attention, thinking, judgment, emotional control, and psychomotor
behavior; the specific clinical picture depends on the substance ingested.
intropunitive: Turning anger inward toward oneself. Commonly observed in
depressed patients.
introspection: Contemplating one’s own mental processes to achieve insight.
introversion: State in which a person’s energies are directed inward toward


<<<PAGE 3575>>>
the self, with little or no interest in the external world.
irrelevant answer: Answer that is not responsive to the question.
irritability: Abnormal or excessive excitability, with easily triggered anger,
annoyance, or impatience.
irritable mood: State in which one is easily annoyed and provoked to anger.
See also irritability.
jamais vu: Paramnestic phenomenon characterized by a false feeling of
unfamiliarity with a real situation that one has previously experienced.
jargon aphasia: Aphasia in which the words produced are neologistic; that
is, nonsense words created by the patient.
judgment: Mental act of comparing or evaluating choices within the
framework of a given set of values for the purpose of electing a course of
action. If the course of action chosen is consonant with reality or with
mature adult standards of behavior, then judgment is said to be intact or
normal; judgment is said to be impaired if the chosen course of action is
frankly maladaptive, results from impulsive decisions based on the need
for immediate gratification, or is otherwise not consistent with reality as
measured by mature adult standards.
kleptomania: Pathologic compulsion to steal.
la belle indifférence: Inappropriate attitude of calm or lack of concern about
one’s disability. May be seen in patients with conversion disorder.
labile affect: Affective expression characterized by rapid and abrupt changes,
unrelated to external stimuli.
labile mood: Oscillations in mood between euphoria and depression or
anxiety.
laconic speech: Condition characterized by a reduction in the quantity of
spontaneous speech; replies to questions are brief and unelaborated, and
little or no unprompted additional information is provided. Occurs in major
depression, schizophrenia, and organic mental disorders. Also called
poverty of speech.
lethologica: Momentary forgetting of a name or proper noun. See blocking.
lilliputian hallucination: Visual sensation that persons or objects are
reduced in size; more properly regarded as an illusion. See also micropsia.
localized amnesia: Partial loss of memory; amnesia restricted to specific or
isolated experiences. Also called lacunar amnesia and patch amnesia.
logoclonia: Repeated use of the same word. See perseveration.


<<<PAGE 3576>>>
logorrhea: Copious, pressured, coherent speech; uncontrollable, excessive
talking; observed in manic episodes of bipolar disorder. Also called
tachylogia, verbomania, and volubility.
long-term memory: Reproduction, recognition, or recall of experiences or
information that was experienced in the distant past. Also called remote
memory. Compare with immediate memory and short-term memory.
loosening of associations: Characteristic schizophrenic thinking or speech
disturbance involving a disorder in the logical progression of thoughts,
manifested as a failure to communicate verbally adequately; unrelated and
unconnected ideas shift from one subject to another. See also
tangentiality.
macropsia: False perception that objects are larger than they really are.
Compare with micropsia.
magical thinking: A form of dereistic thought; thinking similar to that of the
preoperational phase in children (Jean Piaget), in which thoughts, words,
or actions assume power (e.g., to cause or to prevent events).
malingering: Feigning disease to achieve a specific goal, for example, to
avoid an unpleasant responsibility.
mania: Mood state characterized by elation, agitation, hyperactivity,
hypersexuality, and accelerated thinking and speaking (flight of ideas).
Seen in bipolar I disorder. See also hypomania.
manipulation: Maneuvering by patients to get their own way, characteristic
of antisocial personalities.
mannerism: Ingrained, habitual involuntary movement.
melancholia: Severe depressive state. Used in the term involutional
melancholia as a descriptive term and also in reference to a distinct
diagnostic entity.
memory: Process whereby what is experienced or learned is established as a
record in the CNS (registration), where it persists with a variable degree of
permanence (retention) and can be recollected or retrieved from storage at
will (recall). For types of memory, see immediate memory, long-term
memory, and short-term memory.
mental disorder: Psychiatric illness or disease whose manifestations are
characterized primarily by behavioral or psychological impairment of
function, measured in terms of deviation from some normative concept;
associated with distress or disease, not just an expected response to a


<<<PAGE 3577>>>
particular event or limited to relations between a person and society.
mental retardation: Obsolete term, please see intellectual disability.
metonymy: Speech disturbance common in schizophrenia in which the
affected person uses a word or phrase that is related to the proper one but is
not the one ordinarily used; for example, the patient speaks of consuming a
menu rather than a meal or refers to losing the piece of string of the
conversation rather than the thread of the conversation. See also
paraphasia and word approximation.
microcephaly: Condition in which the head is unusually small as a result of
defective brain development and premature ossification of the skull.
micropsia: False perception that objects are smaller than they really are.
Sometimes called lilliputian hallucination. Compare with macropsia.
middle insomnia: Waking up after falling asleep without difficulty and then
having difficulty in falling asleep again. Compare with initial insomnia
and terminal insomnia.
mimicry: Simple, imitative motion activity of childhood.
monomania: Mental state characterized by preoccupation with one subject.
mood: Pervasive and sustained feeling tone that is experienced internally and
that, in the extreme, can markedly influence virtually all aspects of a
person’s behavior and perception of the world. Distinguished from affect,
the external expression of the internal feeling tone. For types of mood, see
the specific term.
mood-congruent delusion: Delusion with content that is mood appropriate
(e.g., depressed patients who believe that they are responsible for the
destruction of the world).
mood-congruent hallucination: Hallucination with content that is consistent
with a depressed or manic mood (e.g., depressed patients hearing voices
telling them that they are bad persons and manic patients hearing voices
telling them that they have inflated worth, power, or knowledge).
mood-incongruent delusion: Delusion based on incorrect reference about
external reality, with content that has no association to mood or is mood
inappropriate (e.g., depressed patients who believe that they are the new
Messiah).
mood-incongruent hallucination: Hallucination not associated with real
external stimuli, with content that is not consistent with depressed or manic
mood (e.g., in depression, hallucinations not involving such themes as


<<<PAGE 3578>>>
guilt, deserved punishment, or inadequacy; in mania, not involving such
themes as inflated worth or power).
mood swings: Oscillation of a person’s emotional feeling tone between
periods of elation and periods of depression.
motor aphasia: Aphasia in which understanding is intact, but the ability to
speak is lost. Also called Broca’s, expressive, or nonfluent aphasias.
mourning: Syndrome following loss of a loved one, consisting of
preoccupation with the lost individual, weeping, sadness, and repeated
reliving of memories. See also bereavement and grief.
muscle rigidity: State in which the muscles remain immovable; seen in
schizophrenia.
mutism: Organic or functional absence of the faculty of speech. See also
stupor.
mydriasis: Dilation of the pupil; sometimes occurs as an autonomic
(anticholinergic) or atropine-like adverse effect of some antipsychotic and
antidepressant drugs.
narcissism: In psychoanalytic theory, divided into primary and secondary
types: primary narcissism, the early infantile phase of object relationship
development, when the child has not differentiated the self from the
outside world, and all sources of pleasure are unrealistically recognized as
coming from within the self, giving the child a false sense of omnipotence;
secondary narcissism, when the libido, once attached to external love
objects, is redirected back to the self. See also autistic thinking.
needle phobia: The persistent, intense, pathologic fear of receiving an
injection.
negative signs: In schizophrenia: flat affect, alogia, abulia, and apathy.
negativism: Verbal or nonverbal opposition or resistance to outside
suggestions and advice; commonly seen in catatonic schizophrenia in
which the patient resists any effort to be moved or does the opposite of
what is asked.
neologism: New word or phrase whose derivation cannot be understood;
often seen in schizophrenia. It has also been used to mean a word that has
been incorrectly constructed but whose origins are nonetheless
understandable (e.g., head shoe to mean hat), but such constructions are
more properly referred to as word approximations.
neurologic amnesia: (1) Auditory amnesia: loss of ability to comprehend


<<<PAGE 3579>>>
sounds or speech. (2) Tactile amnesia: loss of ability to judge the shape of
objects by touch. See also astereognosis. (3) Verbal amnesia: loss of
ability to remember words. (4) Visual amnesia: loss of ability to recall or
to recognize familiar objects or printed words.
nihilism: Delusion of the nonexistence of the self or part of the self; also
refers to an attitude of total rejection of established values or extreme
skepticism regarding moral and value judgments.
nihilistic delusion: Depressive delusion that the world and everything related
to it have ceased to exist.
noesis: The functioning of the intellectual or cognitive processes.
nominal aphasia: Aphasia characterized by difficulty in giving the correct
name of an object. See also anomia and amnesic aphasia.
nymphomania: Abnormal, excessive, insatiable desire in a woman for
sexual intercourse. Compare with satyriasis.
obsession: Persistent and recurrent idea, thought, or impulse that cannot be
eliminated from consciousness by logic or reasoning; obsessions are
involuntary and ego-dystonic. See also compulsion.
olfactory hallucination: Hallucination primarily involving smell or odors;
most common in medical disorders, especially in the temporal lobe.
orientation: State of awareness of oneself and one’s surroundings in terms of
time, place, and person.
overactivity: Abnormality in motor behavior that can manifest itself as
psychomotor agitation, hyperactivity (hyperkinesis), tics, sleepwalking, or
compulsions.
overvalued idea: False or unreasonable belief or idea that is sustained
beyond the bounds of reason. It is held with less intensity or duration than
a delusion but is usually associated with mental illness.
panic: Acute, intense attack of anxiety associated with personality
disorganization; the anxiety is overwhelming and accompanied by feelings
of impending doom.
panphobia: Overwhelming fear of everything.
pantomime: Gesticulation; psychodrama without the use of words.
paramnesia: Disturbance of memory in which reality and fantasy are
confused. It is observed in dreams and in certain types of schizophrenia
and organic mental disorders; it includes phenomena such as déjà vu and
déjà entendu, which may occur occasionally in normal persons.


<<<PAGE 3580>>>
paranoia: Unreasonable false beliefs, characterized by delusions of
persecution, unwarranted jealousy, or exaggerated self-importance,
typically elaborated into an organized system.
paranoid delusions: Includes persecutory delusions and delusions of
reference, control, and grandeur.
paranoid ideation: Thinking dominated by suspicious, persecutory, or
grandiose content of less than delusional proportions.
paraphasia: Abnormal speech in which one word is substituted for another,
the irrelevant word generally resembling the required one in morphology,
meaning, or phonetic composition; the inappropriate word may be a
legitimate one used incorrectly, such as clover instead of hand, or a bizarre
nonsense expression, such as treen instead of train. Paraphasic speech may
be seen in organic aphasias and in mental disorders such as schizophrenia.
See also metonymy and word approximation.
parapraxis: Faulty act, such as a slip of the tongue or the misplacement of an
article. Freud ascribed parapraxes to unconscious motives.
paresis: Weakness or partial paralysis of organic origin.
paresthesia: Abnormal spontaneous tactile sensation, such as a burning,
tingling, or pins-and-needles sensation.
perception: Conscious awareness of elements in the environment by the
mental processing of sensory stimuli; sometimes used in a broader sense to
refer to the mental process by which all kinds of data, intellectual,
emotional, and sensory, are meaningfully organized. See also
apperception.
perseveration: (1) Pathologic repetition of the same response to different
stimuli, as in a repetition of the same verbal response to different
questions. (2) Persistent repetition of specific words or concepts in the
process of speaking. Seen in cognitive disorders, schizophrenia, and other
mental illness. See also verbigeration.
phantom limb: False sensation that an extremity that has been lost is, in fact,
present.
phobia: Persistent, pathologic, unrealistic, intense fear of an object or
situation; the phobic person may realize that the fear is irrational but,
nonetheless, cannot dispel it. For types of phobias, see the specific term.
pica: Craving and eating of nonfood substances, such as paint and clay.
polyphagia: Pathologic overeating.


<<<PAGE 3581>>>
positive signs: In schizophrenia: hallucinations, delusions, and thought
disorder.
posturing: Strange, fixed, and bizarre bodily positions held by a patient for
an extended time. See also catatonic posturing.
poverty of content of speech: Speech that is adequate in amount but
conveys little information because of vagueness, emptiness, or stereotyped
phrases.
poverty of speech: Restriction in the amount of speech used; replies may be
monosyllabic. See also laconic speech.
preoccupation of thought: Centering of thought content on a particular idea,
associated with a strong affective tone, such as a paranoid trend or a
suicidal or homicidal preoccupation.
pressured speech: Increase in the amount of spontaneous speech; rapid,
loud, accelerated speech, as occurs in mania, schizophrenia, and cognitive
disorders.
primary process thinking: In psychoanalysis, the mental activity related
directly to the functions of the id and characteristic of unconscious mental
processes; marked by primitive, prelogical thinking and by the tendency to
seek immediate discharge and gratification of instinctual demands.
Includes thinking that is dereistic, illogic, magical; normally found in
dreams, abnormally in psychosis. Compare with secondary process
thinking.
projection: Unconscious defense mechanism in which persons attribute to
another those generally unconscious ideas, thoughts, feelings, and impulses
that are in themselves undesirable or unacceptable as a form of protection
from anxiety arising from an inner conflict; by externalizing whatever is
unacceptable, they deal with it as a situation apart from themselves.
prosopagnosia: Inability to recognize familiar faces that is not due to
impaired visual acuity or level of consciousness.
pseudocyesis: Rare condition in which a nonpregnant patient has the signs
and symptoms of pregnancy, such as abdominal distention, breast
enlargement, pigmentation, cessation of menses, and morning sickness.
pseudodementia: (1) Dementia-like disorder that can be reversed by
appropriate treatment and is not caused by organic brain disease. (2)
Condition in which patients show exaggerated indifference to their
surroundings in the absence of a mental disorder; also occurs in depression


<<<PAGE 3582>>>
and factitious disorders.
pseudologia fantastica: Disorder characterized by uncontrollable lying in
which patients elaborate extensive fantasies that they freely communicate
and act on.
psychomotor agitation: Physical and mental overactivity that is usually
nonproductive and is associated with a feeling of inner turmoil, as seen in
agitated depression.
psychosis: Mental disorder in which the thoughts, affective response, ability
to recognize reality, and ability to communicate and relate to others are
sufficiently impaired to interfere grossly with the capacity to deal with
reality; the classical characteristics of psychosis are impaired reality
testing, hallucinations, delusions, and illusions.
psychotic: (1) Person experiencing psychosis. (2) Denoting or characteristic
of psychosis.
rationalization: An unconscious defense mechanism in which irrational or
unacceptable behavior, motives, or feelings are logically justified or made
consciously tolerable by plausible means.
reaction formation: Unconscious defense mechanism in which a person
develops a socialized attitude or interest that is the direct antithesis of some
infantile wish or impulse that is harbored consciously or unconsciously.
One of the earliest and most unstable defense mechanisms, closely related
to repression; both are defenses against impulses or urges that are
unacceptable to the ego.
reality testing: Fundamental ego function that consists of tentative actions
that test and objectively evaluate the nature and limits of the environment;
includes the ability to differentiate between the external world and the
internal world and to accurately judge the relation between the self and the
environment.
recall: Process of bringing stored memories into consciousness. See also
memory.
recent memory: Recall of events over the past few days.
recent past memory: Recall of events over the past few months.
receptive aphasia: Organic loss of ability to comprehend the meaning of
words; fluid and spontaneous, but incoherent and nonsensical, speech. See
also fluent aphasia and sensory aphasia.
receptive dysphasia: Difficulty in comprehending oral language; the


<<<PAGE 3583>>>
impairment involves comprehension and production of language.
regression: Unconscious defense mechanism in which a person undergoes a
partial or total return to earlier patterns of adaptation; observed in many
psychiatric conditions, particularly schizophrenia.
remote memory: Recall of events in the distant past.
repression: Freud’s term for an unconscious defense mechanism in which
unacceptable mental contents are banished or kept out of consciousness;
important in normal psychological development and in neurotic and
psychotic symptom formation. Freud recognized two kinds of repression:
(1) repression proper, in which the repressed material was once in the
conscious domain, and (2) primal repression, in which the repressed
material was never in the conscious realm. Compare with suppression.
restricted affect: Reduction in intensity of feeling tone that is less severe
than in blunted affect but clearly reduced. See also constricted affect.
retrograde amnesia: Loss of memory for events preceding the onset of the
amnesia. Compare with anterograde amnesia.
retrospective
falsification:
Memory
becomes
unintentionally
(unconsciously) distorted by being filtered through a person’s present
emotional, cognitive, and experiential state.
rigidity: In psychiatry, a person’s resistance to change, a personality trait.
ritual: (1) Formalized activity practiced by a person to reduce anxiety, as in
OCD. (2) Ceremonial activity of cultural origin.
rumination: Constant preoccupation with thinking about a single idea or
theme, as in OCD.
satyriasis: Morbid, insatiable sexual need or desire in a man. Compare with
nymphomania.
scotoma: (1) In psychiatry, a figurative blind spot in a person’s
psychological awareness. (2) In neurology, a localized visual field defect.
secondary process thinking: In psychoanalysis, the form of thinking that is
logical, organized, reality oriented, and influenced by the demands of the
environment; characterizes the mental activity of the ego. Compare with
primary process thinking.
seizure: An attack or sudden onset of certain symptoms, such as convulsions,
loss of consciousness, and psychic or sensory disturbances; seen in
epilepsy and can be substance induced. For types of seizures, see the
specific term.


<<<PAGE 3584>>>
sensorium: Perceptual awareness or the sensory apparatus considered as a
whole. Sometimes used interchangeably with consciousness.
sensory aphasia: Organic loss of ability to comprehend the meaning of
words; fluid and spontaneous, but incoherent and nonsensical, speech. See
also fluent aphasia and receptive aphasia.
sensory extinction: Neurologic sign operationally defined as failure to report
one of two simultaneously presented sensory stimuli, despite the fact that
either stimulus alone is correctly reported. Also called sensory inattention.
shame: Failure to live up to self-expectations; often associated with fantasy
of how person will be seen by others. See also guilt.
short-term memory: Reproduction, recognition, or recall of perceived
material within minutes after the initial presentation. Compare with
immediate memory and long-term memory.
simultanagnosia: Impairment in the perception or integration of visual
stimuli appearing simultaneously.
somatic delusion: Delusion pertaining to the functioning of one’s body.
somatic hallucination: Hallucination involving the perception of a physical
experience localized within the body.
somnolence: Pathologic sleepiness or drowsiness from which one can be
aroused to a normal state of consciousness.
spatial agnosia: Inability to recognize spatial relations.
speaking in tongues: Expression of a revelatory message through
unintelligible words; not considered a disorder of thought if associated
with practices of specific Pentecostal religions. See also glossolalia.
stereotypy: Continuous mechanical repetition of speech or physical
activities; observed in catatonic schizophrenia.
stupor: (1) State of decreased reactivity to stimuli and less than full
awareness of one’s surroundings; as a disturbance of consciousness, it
indicates a condition of partial coma or semicoma. (2) In psychiatry, used
synonymously with mutism and does not necessarily imply a disturbance
of consciousness; in catatonic stupor, patients are ordinarily aware of their
surroundings.
stuttering: Frequent repetition or prolongation of a sound or syllable, leading
to markedly impaired speech fluency.
sublimation: Unconscious defense mechanism in which the energy
associated with unacceptable impulses or drives is diverted into personally


<<<PAGE 3585>>>
and socially acceptable channels; unlike other defense mechanisms, it
offers some minimal gratification of the instinctual drive or impulse.
substitution: Unconscious defense mechanism in which a person replaces an
unacceptable wish, drive, emotion, or goal with one that is more
acceptable.
suggestibility: State of uncritical compliance with influence or of uncritical
acceptance of an idea, belief, or attitude; commonly observed among
persons with hysterical traits.
suicidal ideation: Thoughts or act of taking one’s own life.
suppression: Conscious act of controlling and inhibiting an unacceptable
impulse, emotion, or idea; differentiated from repression in that repression
is an unconscious process.
symbolization: Unconscious defense mechanism in which one idea or object
comes to stand for another because of some common aspect or quality in
both; based on similarity and association; the symbols formed protect the
person from the anxiety that may be attached to the original idea or object.
synesthesia: Condition in which the stimulation of one sensory modality is
perceived as sensation in a different modality, as when a sound produces a
sensation of color.
syntactical aphasia: Aphasia characterized by the fluent production of
words, however the inability to form normal grammatical constructions.
systematized delusion: Group of elaborate delusions related to a single event
or theme.
tactile hallucination: Hallucination primarily involving the sense of touch.
Also called haptic hallucination.
tangentiality: Oblique, digressive, or even irrelevant manner of speech in
which the central idea is not communicated.
tension: Physiologic or psychic arousal, uneasiness, or pressure toward
action; an unpleasurable alteration in mental or physical state that seeks
relief through action.
terminal insomnia: Early morning awakening or waking up at least 2 hours
before planning to wake up. Compare with initial insomnia and middle
insomnia.
thought broadcasting: Feeling that one’s thoughts are being broadcast or
projected into the environment. See also thought withdrawal.
thought disorder: Any disturbance of thinking that affects language,


<<<PAGE 3586>>>
communication, or thought content; the hallmark feature of schizophrenia.
Manifestations range from simple blocking and mild circumstantiality to
profound loosening of associations, incoherence, and delusions;
characterized by a failure to follow semantic and syntactic rules that is
inconsistent with the person’s education, intelligence, or cultural
background.
thought insertion: Delusion that thoughts are being implanted in one’s mind
by other people or forces.
thought latency: The period of time between a thought and its verbal
expression. Increased in schizophrenia (see blocking) and decreased in
mania (see pressured speech).
thought withdrawal: Delusion that one’s thoughts are being removed from
one’s mind by other people or forces. See also thought broadcasting.
tic disorders: Predominantly psychogenic disorders characterized by
involuntary, spasmodic, stereotyped movement of small groups of
muscles; seen most predominantly in moments of stress or anxiety, rarely
as a result of organic disease.
tinnitus: Noises in one or both ears, such as ringing, buzzing, or clicking; an
adverse effect of some psychotropic drugs.
tonic convulsion: Convulsion in which the muscle contraction is sustained.
trailing phenomenon: Perceptual abnormality associated with
hallucinogenic drugs in which moving objects are seen as a series of
discrete and discontinuous images.
trance: Sleeplike state of reduced consciousness and activity.
tremor: Rhythmical alteration in movement, which is usually faster than one
beat a second; typically, tremors decrease during periods of relaxation and
sleep and increase during periods of anger and increased tension.
true insight: Understanding of the objective reality of a situation coupled
with the motivational and emotional impetus to master the situation or
change behavior.
twilight state: Disturbed consciousness with hallucinations.
twirling: Sign present in autistic children who continually rotate in the
direction in which their head is turned.
unconscious: (1) One of three divisions of Freud’s topographic theory of the
mind (the others being the conscious and the preconscious) in which the
psychic material is not readily accessible to conscious awareness by


<<<PAGE 3587>>>
ordinary means; its existence may be manifest in symptom formation, in
dreams, or under the influence of drugs. (2) In popular (but more
ambiguous) usage, any mental material not in the immediate field of
awareness. (3) Denoting a state of unawareness, with lack of response to
external stimuli, as in a coma.
undoing: Unconscious primitive defense mechanism, repetitive in nature, by
which a person symbolically acts out in reverse something unacceptable
that has already been done or against which the ego must defend itself; a
form of magical expiatory action, commonly observed in OCD.
unio mystica: Feeling of mystic unity with an infinite power. Although this
can be a religious phenomenon, it can also be a type of delusion.
vegetative signs: In depression, denoting characteristic symptoms such as
sleep disturbance (especially early morning awakening), decreased
appetite, constipation, weight loss, and loss of sexual response.
verbigeration: Meaningless and stereotyped repetition of words or phrases,
as seen in schizophrenia. Also called cataphasia. See also perseveration.
vertigo: Sensation that one or the world around one is spinning or revolving;
a hallmark of vestibular dysfunction, not to be confused with dizziness.
visual agnosia: Inability to recognize objects or persons.
visual amnesia: Inability to remember the appearance of objects or to
recognize familiar words
visual hallucination: Hallucination primarily involving the sense of sight.
waxy flexibility: Condition in which a person maintains the body position
into which they are placed with slight resistance to movement giving it a
waxy feel. See also cerea flexibilitas.
word approximation: Use of conventional words in an unconventional or
inappropriate way (metonymy or of new words that are developed by
conventional rules of word formation) (e.g., hand shoes for gloves and time
measure for clock); distinguished from a neologism, which is a new word
whose derivation cannot be understood. See also paraphasia.
word salad: Incoherent, essentially incomprehensible, mixture of words and
phrases commonly seen in far-advanced cases of schizophrenia. See also
incoherence.
xenophobia: Abnormal fear of strangers.
zoophobia: Abnormal fear of animals.


<<<PAGE 3588>>>
Index
Page numbers followed by f indicate figures, page numbers followed by t
indicated tables, and page numbers in boldface indicate main discussions.
AA. See Alcoholics Anonymous (AA)
AACAP. See American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
(AACAP)
AAIDD. See American Association on Intellectual and Developmental
Disability (AAIDD)
Abdominal breathing, for insomnia, 512, 512t
Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC), 85
Abilify. See Aripiprazole
Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS), 11, 347, 597t
Abraham, Karl, 799, 1078
Absence seizure, 250, 251f
Abstinence, 296, 329
Abstract reasoning, assessment of, in MSE, 11, 11t
Acalculia, 48, 145. See also Mathematics deficits
Acamprosate, 694
in alcohol use disorder treatment, 283, 284t
ACC. See Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
Acculturation problem, 586
Acculturative stress, 1048–1049
Acetaminophen toxicity, 63
Acetylcholine, 227
Acetyl coenzyme A (ACoA), 958
Acetylcysteine (Mucomyst), 63
Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist, 77, 78
Ackerman, Nathan, 764


<<<PAGE 3589>>>
Acomplia. See Rimonabant
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), 20, 257, 257t. See also
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection
dementia complex, 244–245
safe-sex guidelines, 257t
Acromegaly, 21
Acrophobic hierarchy, 772
Actigraphy, 503
Actus reus, 843
Acute akathisia, 594
Acute dystonia, 594
Acute intermittent porphyria, 261
Acute stress disorder
diagnosis, 430
in DSM-5 and ICD-10, 432t
and dissociative amnesia, 440. See also Dissociative amnesia
Addict, 269
Addiction, 269, 274. See also Substance use disorders; specific disorders
Addiction Severity Index (ASI), 44
Addison disease, 64, 261
ADHD Rating Scale, 82t
Adjective Checklist (ACL), 58t
Adjunctive medications, 624
Adjustment disorder, 429
classification of
with anxiety, 430
with depressed mood, 430
with disturbance of conduct, 430
with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, 430
with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct, 430
unspecified, 433
clinical features, 429
comorbidity, 433–434
course and prognosis, 434
crisis intervention, 435
diagnosis, 430
in DSM-5 and ICD-10, 432t


<<<PAGE 3590>>>
differential diagnosis of, 433, 433t
epidemiology, 435
etiology, 436–437
in HIV-infected patients, 259
pharmacotherapy for, 435
psychodynamic factors, 436–437
psychotherapy for, 435
treatment approach, 434–435
Adler, Alfred, 1078
Admission to psychiatric facilities, procedures of, 839–840
informal admission, 840
involuntary admission, 840
temporary admission, 840
voluntary admission, 840
Adolescence, 898. See also Adolescents
depression in, 174–179
development in, 898–904
cognitive maturation, 900–901
moral development, 901–902
physical development, 900
self-esteem, 902
socialization, 901
early, 899
late, 900
middle, 899
normal, 898–899
PTSD in, 172–174
Adolescent Drug and Alcohol Diagnostic Assessment (ADAD), 214
Adolescent-onset schizophrenia, 207. See also Early-onset schizophrenia
Adolescent Problem Severity Index (APSI), 214
Adolescents
clinical interviews, 76
drug use, 212
alcohol, 212, 903
club drugs, 213
cocaine, 213, 903
heroin, 213, 903


<<<PAGE 3591>>>
lysergic acid diethylamide, 213
marijuana, 212–213, 903
nicotine, 212, 903
opioids, 903
with intellectual disability, 84
intelligence tests for, 81
mania in, 366
prostitution, 905
psychological assessment instruments, 82–83t
risk-taking behavior, 903
sexual behavior in, 902–903
abortion, 903
contraceptivec use, 902
factors affecting, 902
pregnancy, 902–903
tattoos and body piercing, 905
and violence, 903–905
Adolescent substance use disorders, 211–216, 903
Adoption, 908
Adrenal disease, screening for, 64
Adrenal disorders, 261
Adrenarche, 981
β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists
dosage and clinical guidelines, 676
drug interactions, 675
pharmacologic actions, 674
precautions and adverse reactions, 675
therapeutic indications, 674–675
Adrenergic receptors, 960
Adrenocorticotropic, 968
Adrenoleukodystrophy, 103
Adult antisocial behavior, 584–586
diagnosis and clinical features, 584
epidemiology, 584–585
etiology, 585
genetic factors, 585
social factors, 585


<<<PAGE 3592>>>
prevention, 585–586
symptoms of, 585t
treatment, 585
Adultery, 913
Adulthood, development in, 905–913. See also Late adulthood; Middle
adulthood; Young adulthood
adult maturity, 913
middle adulthood, 908–913
young adulthood, 906–908
Adult patients, psychiatric interview of. See Psychiatric interview
Advance care planning checklist, 859f
Advance directives, 858
Advanced sleep phase syndrome (ASPS), 1002
Affect
assessment of, 9, 12t
schizophrenia and, 934
Affected sib pair (ASP) analysis, 989
African Americans
depression in, 1051
psychiatric patients, 1050–1051
schizophrenia in, 1051
Aganglionic megacolon, 482
Age/aging
neurosteroids and, 978
sleep rhythms and, 1004
Age-associated cognitive decline (AACD), 263t
Age-associated memory impairment (AAMI), 263t
Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, 920
Ageism, 918–919, 919t
Aggression, 1060–1061
fear and, 934
testosterone and, 980–981
Aging, 914. See also Late adulthood
biology of, 914, 915t
psychosocial aspects of, 918–921
Aging parents, abuse of, 588
Agnosias


<<<PAGE 3593>>>
apperceptive visual, 927
associative visual, 927
auditory sound, 927
color, 926
tactile, 925
Agoraphobia, 403
Agrammatism, 48
Agranulocytosis, 593
AIDS mania, 259
Ainsworth, Mary, 167, 892
on insecure attachment, 1011–1012
Akathisia, 703
medication-induced, 597
Akinetic mutism, 254
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 697
Alarm therapy
for enuresis, 484
Alcohol, 275
absorption, 285–286
abuse, 275
neurologic and medical complications, 279t
and seizures, 276
behavioral effects, 286
beverage alcohol, 285
brain, effects on, 286
drug interactions, 286–287
effects of, 285
GABA receptor regulation by, 963, 964
and gastrointestinal system, 286
and insomnia, 491, 491t
intoxication, 276
and blackouts, 277–278
idiosyncratic, 284–285
levels of impairment at various concentrations, 276t
liver, effects on, 286
metabolism, 286
in pregnancy, 279


<<<PAGE 3594>>>
prevalence of drinking, 285
sleep effects, 286
withdrawal, 276, 276t
delirium, 276–277
mild/moderate, 281–282
protracted, 282
and seizures, 276, 281
severe, 282
symptoms of, 276
treatment for, 281–282, 281t
tremors of, 276
Alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), 286
Alcoholic blackouts, 247
Alcoholic encephalopathy. See Wernicke encephalopathy
Alcoholic hepatitis, 286
Alcoholic Korsakoff syndrome, 1025
Alcoholic pellagra encephalopathy, 279, 279t, 284
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), 7, 214, 283
Alcohol-induced anxiety disorder, 278
Alcohol-induced mood disorder, 278
Alcohol-induced persisting amnestic disorder, 277
Alcohol-induced persisting dementia, 277
Alcohol-induced psychotic disorder, 278
Alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction, 278
Alcohol-induced sleep disorder, 278
Alcohol intoxication, test for, 62–63
Alcoholism, GABAergic dysfunction and, 964
Alcohol-related disorders, 275–288
antisocial personality disorder and, 280
and anxiety disorder, 280
comorbidity, 280
course and prognosis, 280
and delirium tremens, 276–277
diagnosis and clinical features, 275–279
epidemiology, 285
etiology, 287–288
laboratory tests, 279, 279t


<<<PAGE 3595>>>
and mood disorders, 280
pathology, 285–287
suicide among persons with, 280, 280t
treatment, 283–285
unspecified, 278
women with, 279
Alcohol use disorders, 62, 275
epidemiology, 285
etiology, 287
behavioral theories, 287
childhood history, 287–288
genetic factors, 288, 288t
psychodynamic theories, 287
psychological theories, 287
sociocultural theories, 287
positive prognostic signs, 280, 280t
treatment of, 280–283
counseling, 282–283
detoxification, 282–282
intervention, 280, 281
medications, 283, 284t
rehabilitation, 282, 282t
Alcohol use, in adolescents, 212, 214–215. See also Substance use
disorders, in adolescents
Alcohol use, in pregnancy, 886, 886f, 886t
Alcohol withdrawal-related hallucinations, 284
Aldehyde dehydrogenase, 286
Alertness, assessment of, in MSE, 10, 11t
Alexander, Franz, 753, 937, 1078–1079
Alexithymia, 275
Alkaline phosphatase elevations, 66
Allopregnanolone, 978
Allport, Gordon, 1079
Alopecia areata, 21
Alpha-synucleinopathies, 924
Alpha waves, 999
Alprazolam (Xanax), 602, 713


<<<PAGE 3596>>>
Altruism, 1040, 1041
Aluminum intoxication, 63
Alzheimer, Alois, 239
Alzheimer disease, 924, 50, 90, 930, 933, 942, 946, 949, 950, 993–994
amyloid precursor proteins in, 993
characterization of, 933
estrogen administration and, 981
genetics of, 993–995
immune component of, 985
late-onset, 93–94
neuron degeneration in, 964
sporadic, 93–94
Amantadine, 594, 595
in autism spectrum disorder, 129
dosage and clinical guidelines, 707
drug interactions, 707
pharmacologic actions, 706
precautions and adverse effects, 707
therapeutic indications, 706–707
Ambivalence, schizophrenia and, 934
Amenorrhea, 20
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP), 137
American Academy of Neurology, 858
American Academy of Sleep Medicine
indications for polysomnography, 501
medications for insomnia, 510
American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disability
(AAIDD), 93
American Bar Association, 847
American Medical Association (AMA), 843, 847
Principles of Medical Ethics, 829
American Psychiatric Association (APA), 28
HIPAA educational packet, 29
Principles of Medical Ethics with Annotations Especially Applicable to
Psychiatry, 28, 829
Amino acid neurotransmitters, 961–964
D-Amino acid oxidase (DAAO), 961


<<<PAGE 3597>>>
Amitriptyline, 713
Amlodipine, 668
Ammonia levels, serum, 66
Ammon’s horn (Cornu Ammonis, CA), 941
Amnesia, 1025
medical causes of, 933
Amnestic disorders, 224, 245–249
anterograde amnesia, 246
causes of, 247, 247t, 249
clinical features and subtypes, 245–247
alcoholic blackouts, 247
cerebrovascular diseases, 246
electroconvulsive therapy, 247
head injuries, 247
Korsakoff syndrome, 246–247
multiple sclerosis, 246
transient global amnesia, 247
course and prognosis, 248
definition, 224
diagnosis, 245
differential diagnosis, 247–248
delirium, 247
dementia, 248, 248t
dissociative disorders, 248
factitious disorders, 248
normal aging, 248
epidemiology, 249
pathology and laboratory examination, 247
retrograde amnesia, 246
treatment, 248–249
psychotherapy, 248–249
Amniocentesis, 97
Amobarbital, 298
Amok, 1053
Amotivational syndrome, 289
Amphetamine-like substances, 302
Amphetamines, 302, 306–307, 710. See also Stimulant-related disorders


<<<PAGE 3598>>>
for ADHD, 135, 136, 136t
dependence, 304
indications for, 302t
neuropharmacology, 307–308
preparations, 302t
Amygdala, 398
function of, 932
Amylase levels, serum, 65
β-Amyloid, 962
Amyloid plaques, 240
Amyloid precursor protein (APP), 240, 993
Amylophagia, 163
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 255
Anabolic-androgenic steroids (AAS), 327
Anabolic-androgenic steroid use, 327–330
AAS withdrawal, 329
adverse reactions, 330
clinical features and diagnosis, 328–329
epidemiology, 329
etiology, 330
examples of anabolic steroids, 328t
pathology, 330
treatment, 329
Anabolic steroid–induced mood disorders, 328–329, 329t
Anabolic steroid–induced psychotic disorder, 329
Anabolic steroids, 215
Anaclitic depression, 1013
Anafranil. See Clomipramine
Anal sphincter, relaxation of, 972
Anandamide
neuroprotective action of, 978
neurotransmission of, 975f
structure of, 975f
synthesis of, 973
Anencephaly, neurulation and, 938
Angelman syndrome, 86t
Anger Coping Program, 193


<<<PAGE 3599>>>
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, 19, 601
Anhedonia, 379
Anima, 1083
Animal models, genetic variation studies, 992–993
Animistic thinking, 1008
Anna O, Fräulein, 1057–1058
Anniversary reactions, 850
Anorexia nervosa, 20, 628
clinical features, 469
comorbidity, 475
course and prognosis, 476
diagnosis and clinical features, 470–471, 470t
differential diagnosis, 474
epidemiology, 478
etiology, 479
developmental factors, 479
environmental and social factors, 479
genetic and biologic factors, 479
psychological factors, 479
pathology and laboratory examination, 473
subtypes of, 469
treatment, 476–477
hospitalization, 476–477
pharmacotherapy, 477
psychotherapy, 477
Anosognosia, 48, 88, 933
Anoxic amnesia, 439
Antabuse. See Disulfiram
Anterior capsulotomy, 741
Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), 398
Anterior cingulotomy, 741
Anterograde amnesia, 1024
Anticholinergic adverse effects, 20, 23
Anticholinergic drugs, 597
dosage and clinical guidelines, 702–703
drug interactions, 702
pharmacologic actions, 701–702


<<<PAGE 3600>>>
precautions and adverse reactions, 702
therapeutic indications, 702
Anticholinergic toxicity, 228
Anticipation, 1040
Anticipatory grief, 850
Anticonvulsants
for acute mania, 373
for borderline personality disorder, 573
for seizures, 253, 253t
Antidepressants, 591
associated suicide, 593–594
in autism spectrum disorder, 129
for bipolar disorder, 373
black box warnings, 593
for borderline personality disorder, 573
for enuresis, 484
and laboratory studies, 64
non-SSRI, 626
for PTSD, 173
and suicidal thoughts and behavior, 626
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 64–65
Anti-DNA antibodies, 65
Antihistamines
dosage and clinical guidelines, 704, 704t
drug interactions, 704
laboratory interferences, 704
pharmacologic actions, 703
precautions and adverse reactions, 703–704
therapeutic indications, 703
used in psychiatry, 703t
Antihypertensives, 643
Anti-NMDA (N-methyl D-aspartate)-receptor encephalitis, 260
Antipsychotics, 591. See also Dopamine receptor antagonists
for bipolar disorder, 373, 375t
for delirium, 230, 231t
drug interactions, 621t
for early-onset bipolar disorder, 183


<<<PAGE 3601>>>
for early-onset schizophrenia, 209
in intellectual disability, 99
for PTSD, 173
for Tourette disorder, 160
Antisocial personality disorder, 280
clinical presentation, 560
comorbidity, 569
course and prognosis, 570
diagnosis, 563–564, 563t
differential diagnosis, 567–568
epidemiology, 574
treatment
pharmacotherapy, 571
psychotherapy, 571
Anton syndrome, 927
Anxiety, 386, 1012–1013
clinical presentation, 401–402
disorders, 21
dreams, 1059
effect of THC on, 974
GABAergic dysfunction in, 964
in terminally ill individuals, 854
losing attachments, 1013
signal indicators, 1013
in special populations, 401–402
Anxiety disorders, 21, 401–413
of children and adolescents, 194–201
characteristics of, 198t
generalized anxiety disorder, 195
separation anxiety disorder, 194–195, 196t
social anxiety disorder, 195
treatment, 198–200
clinical presentation, 401–402
comorbidity, 406
course of, 406–407
diagnosis of, 402
agoraphobia, 403, 403t


<<<PAGE 3602>>>
generalized anxiety disorder, 405, 406t
panic disorder, 402–403, 402t
social anxiety disorder, 404–405, 405t
specific phobia, 403–404, 404t
differential diagnosis, 405–406
epidemiology of, 409, 410t
etiology of, 411–413, 413f
hospitalization in, 407
neurobiology of, 409–411
neurochemical systems involved in, 411–412t
pharmacotherapy for, 407–408, 408t
psychosocial therapies for, 408–409
rating scales for, 405
and social impairment, 401
Anxiolytics, 591
Aphasias
causes of, 931
description of, 931
Apokyn. See Apomorphine
Apolipoprotein E, 993
APOE4, 263
receptor, 948
Apomorphine, 705
Apoptosis, 885, 942. See also Programmed cell death
Appearance
initial assessment of, 9
of patient with schizophrenia, 337
Apperceptive visual agnosia, 927
Applied relaxation, 767, 767t
Applied tension, 766–767
APS. See Attenuated psychosis syndrome (APS)
Arachidonic acid, 973
2-Arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG)
neuroprotective action of, 978
neurotransmission of, 975f
structure of, 974f
The Arc of the United States (The Arc), 93


<<<PAGE 3603>>>
Arginine vasopressin (AVP). See Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
Argyll Robertson pupils, 255
Aripiprazole, 598, 608
for bipolar disorder, 375t
in dissociative identity disorder, 448
dosage and clinical guidelines, 613
drug interactions, 612–613
indications, 612
for irritability in autism spectrum disorder, 128
pharmacology, 612
for PTSD, 173
for schizophrenia, 352t
side effects, 613
for Tourette disorder, 160
Arithmetic skills, impairment of, 48
Arsenic intoxication, 63, 262
Articulation disorders. See Speech sound disorder
Ascending reticular activating system (ARAS), 932
ASD. See Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
Asenapine
for bipolar disorder, 375t
dosage, 613
indications, 613
Maleate, 608
pharmacology, 613
for schizophrenia, 352t
side effects, 613
Ashcroft, John, 864
Asher, Irvin, 261
Asian Indian Americans
mental illness in, 1051
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 697
Asperger disorder, 122
Aspergillus nidulans, 949
Assertive community treatment (ACT), 356, 871
Assertiveness training, 773
Assimilation and acculturative stress, 1049


<<<PAGE 3604>>>
Associations
exploration of, 15
studies, 990
Associative learning, 1023
Associative visual agnosia, 927
Astereognosis, 925
Astrocytes, 50, 924
Astrotactin, 949
Ataque de Nervios, 1053
Ataxia, 21
Atomoxetine, 685–686
for ADHD management, 686
dosage and clinical guidelines, 686
effect on cognition, 686
pharmacologic actions, 686
precautions and adverse reactions, 686
therapeutic indications, 686
for tic disorder, 161
Atopognosia, 88
Atracurium, 733
Ativan, see Lorazepam
Atropine sulfate, 619
Attachment, 891–892, 1012t
anxiety, 1012–1013
defined, 1011
development, 1011
disorders of, 1013
fathers and, 892
phases of, 1011–1012
strange situation, 1012t
theory, 167, 1011–1013
child maltreatment, 1013
psychiatric applications, 1013
types of, 892t
Attachment and Biobehavioral Catch-up (ABC) intervention, 170
Attention, assessment of, 54
Attention cathexis, 1060


<<<PAGE 3605>>>
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 131–141, 932
adult manifestations of, 139–140
course and prognosis, 140–141
diagnosis and clinical features, 140, 140t
differential diagnosis, 140
epidemiology, 141
treatment, 141
atomoxetine for, 686
bupropion for, 635–636
clinical features, 132
course and prognosis, 135
diagnosis, 133, 134t
differential diagnosis, 134–135
DSM-5 on, 131–132, 134t
epidemiology, 138
etiology, 138–139
developmental factors, 139
genetic factors, 139
neuroanatomical aspects, 139
neurochemical factors, 139
neurophysiologic factors, 139
psychosocial factors, 139
guanfacine for, 695
intellectual disability and, 98, 99
mania and, 134
Multimodal Treatment Study of Children with ADHD, 138
pathology and laboratory examination, 133–134
psychiatric and medical history, 133
sympathomimetics for, 682, 683, 684
treatment
pharmacotherapy, 135–137, 136t
psychosocial interventions, 138
unspecified ADHD, 135
Attenuated psychosis syndrome (APS), 210–211
Attribution theory, 785
Attunement, concept of, 937
Audiogram, 126


<<<PAGE 3606>>>
Auditory hallucinations, 10, 17
interviewing patients with, 17
in schizophrenia, 207
Auditory sound agnosia, 927
Auditory system, development of, 927
Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R), 47
Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-Generic (ADOS-G), 125
Autism Genome Project Consortium, 994
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), 122–131
assessment tools, 125
associated behavioral symptoms, 124–125
deficits in language development, 124
hyperactivity and inattention, 124
infections and gastrointestinal symptoms, 124–125
insomnia, 124, 128
intellectual disability, 124
irritability, 124
mood changes and affect, 124
precocious skills, 124
response to sensory stimuli, 124
complementary and alternative medicine for, 129
core symptoms of, 122–124
deficits in social communication and interaction, 122–123
physical anomalies, 124
ritualistic and compulsive behaviors, 123
self-stimulatory and self-injurious behaviors, 123
course and prognosis, 127
developmental basis of, 950
diagnostic approaches to, 123t
differential diagnosis, 125
congenital deafness/hearing impairment, 126–127
intellectual disability, 125–126
language disorders, 126, 126t
psychosocial deprivation, 127
schizophrenia with childhood-onset, 125, 126t
social (pragmatic) communication disorder, 125
DSM-5 on, 122, 123t


<<<PAGE 3607>>>
epidemiology, 130
etiology and pathogenesis
biomarkers, 130–131
genetic factors, 130
immunologic factors, 131
neurologic disorders, 131
prenatal and perinatal factors, 131
psychosocial theories, 131
genetics of, 951–952
ICD-10 on, 122, 123t
immune component of, 985–986
intellectual disability and, 98, 124
language impairment in, 110, 122
neuronal migration in, 948
psychopharmacological interventions, 128–129
psychosocial interventions, 127–128
schizophrenia and, 950–951
susceptibility genes for, 994
treatment, 127
Autogenic training, 766, 767t, 771
Autoinhibition, 604
Automatic thoughts, 768
Autonomic motor system, 930
Autonomic sensory system (ANS), 928
Autonomy, 829
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE), 961
Aversion therapy, 775
Avoidance learning, 1020–1021
Avoidant personality disorder
clinical presentation, 560
comorbidity, 569
course and prognosis, 570
diagnosis, 565, 565t
differential diagnosis, 568
epidemiology, 575
treatment
pharmacotherapy, 573


<<<PAGE 3608>>>
psychotherapy, 573
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, 166–167
course and prognosis, 166
differential diagnosis, 166
epidemiology, 167
treatment, 166–167
Ayahuasca, 321
Babinski reflex, 887
Balint, Michael, 1079
Balint syndrome, 927
Barbital, 298
Barbiturates, 298
dose and clinical guidelines, 677–678
drug interactions, 677
intoxication, 299–300, 300t
overdoses, 299
pharmacologic actions, 676
precautions and adverse reactions, 677
therapeutic indications, 676–677
withdrawal, 300, 301, 301t, 677
Barnes Akathisia Rating Scale (BARS), 347
Basal ganglia, 929
formation, 945
memory loss and, 933
in schizophrenia, 359
Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), 947
Bateson, Gregory, 762
Bath salts, 303, 321
Battery approach, 52
Bayley Scales of Infant Development, 81, 83t
Bazelon, David, 840
Bcl-2, roles of, 947
BDNF. See Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
Beck, Aaron, 399
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), 7, 39, 42, 54t, 55


<<<PAGE 3609>>>
Bed-wetting, 501
Behavioral activation, 775
Behavioral and cognitive techniques, 769–770
Behavioral conditioning, 577
Behavioral dependence, 269. See also Substance use disorders
Behavioral insomnia of childhood, 491
Behavior Assessment System for Children (BASC), 82t
Behavior Problem Inventory (BPI), 85
Behavior rehearsal, 773
Behavior therapy
autism spectrum disorder, 127
for enuresis, 484
outcomes, 775
systematic desensitization, 771–772
Benadryl. See Diphenhydramine
Bender Gestalt Test, 85, 90
Bender, Loretta, 81
Bender Visual Motor Gestalt Test, 151
Beneficence, 829
Benign senescent forgetfulness, 88
Benign sleep myoclonus of infancy, 502, 515
Benton Visual Motor Gestalt Test, 83t
Benton Visual Retention Test, 53t, 83t, 85
Benzodiazepine agonists, 592, 603
Benzodiazepines, 298, 597, 598, 668–669, 732, 801, 814
for alcohol-related seizures, 281
anxiolytic sedative effects of, 669
for delirium, 230, 231t
dosage and clinical guidelines, 672
drug interactions, 672
equivalent therapeutic doses of, 299t
induced anterograde amnesia, 600
intoxication, 299
long-term use of, 302
overdose, 299
pharmacologic actions, 669–670
precautions and adverse reactions, 671–672


<<<PAGE 3610>>>
psychological and physical dependence associated with, 669
signs and symptoms of withdrawal, 672t
therapeutic indications, 670–671
withdrawal, 300, 300t, 301, 301t
Benzphetamine, 302
Benztropine, 594
Bereavement, 176, 582, 849. See also Grief
during adulthood, 853
during childhood and adolescence, 852–853
complicated, 850
and depressive symptoms, 850, 850t, 852
diagnosing, approaches to, 851t
medical/psychiatric illnesses associated with, 851–852
and posttraumatic stress disorder, 852
reactions, 849–850
traumatic, 851
Bergmann glia, 941, 952
Berne, Eric, 1079
Beta waves, 999
Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 1061
Bicarbonate levels, serum, 65
Bilevel positive airway pressure (BPAP), 514
Bilirubin levels, serum, 66
Binge-eating disorder, 473t
clinical features, 469
comorbidity, 475
course and prognosis, 476
diagnosis and clinical features, 473
differential diagnosis, 474
epidemiology, 478
etiology, 480
treatment, 478
Binswanger disease, 242–243, 242f
Biofeedback, 767
applied relaxation, 767, 767t
applied tension, 766–767
autogenic training, 766, 767t


<<<PAGE 3611>>>
benefits of, 765
for insomnia, 512
instrumentation, 765–766
relaxation therapy, 766, 767, 771
theory, 765
thermal, 766
Biomarkers
in autism spectrum disorder, 130–131
in mild cognitive impairment, 263
Bion, Wilfred, 1080
Bipolar disorders, 186, 365– 378, 385t
Cajal-Retzius cells in, 940, 948
in children and adolescents, 366
clinical presentation, 365–366
depressive episodes, 366, 366t
manic episodes, 365–366
comorbidity, 371
course, 371, 372f
diagnosis, 366–369
catatonia, 369
peripartum onset, 369
rapid cycling, 368–369
with seasonal pattern, 369
differential diagnosis, 370–371, 370t
medical conditions, 371
personality disorders, 370–371
psychotic disorders, 370
epidemiology, 376
age of onset, 376
incidence and prevalence, 376, 377f
sex, 376
etiology
biologic theories, 378
psychosocial theories, 378
genetics of
genetic studies, 376–377
inheritance patterns studies, 376


<<<PAGE 3612>>>
genetic basis of, 996
immune system in, 984
inflammatory markers, 377
insomnia and, 491
neurobiology of, 376–377
pathologic imaging findings, 377
prognosis, 372
psychology of, 377
treatment approach
hospitalization, 372
pharmacotherapy, 372–375, 373t, 374f
psychotherapy, 375, 376t
unipolar mania/pure mania, 366
Bipolar I disorder, 365. See also Bipolar disorders
in children and adolescents, 371
course, 371
duration, 371
onset, 371, 376
diagnosis, 366–368, 367–368t
in divorced and single persons, 376
prognosis, 372
rapid cycling, 368–369
Bipolar II disorder, 365. See also Bipolar disorders
course and prognosis, 372
diagnosis, 368, 369t
Birth order, 896
Birth spacing, 896
Black box label, 607
Blackouts, 277–278
Black-patch delirium, 228
Bladder training, for enuresis, 484
Bleuler, Eugene, 934
Blogs, 28
Blood alcohol level (BAL), 62–63
Blotter acid, 319
Body dysmorphic disorder, 416, 417t
Body language, 931


<<<PAGE 3613>>>
Bohannan, Paul, 912
Bonding, 891
Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), 939
Borderline personality disorder
clinical presentation, 560
comorbidity, 569
course and prognosis, 570
diagnosis, 564, 564t
differential diagnosis, 568
epidemiology, 574–575
treatment
pharmacotherapy, 573
psychotherapy, 571–573
Borderline personality organization, 1083
Borrelia burgdorferi. See Lyme disease
Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination, 53t, 54
Boston Naming Test—Revised, 53t, 54
Boston process approach, 52
Boundary violations, 830
Bowlby, John, 892, 1080
on anxiety, 1012
on attachment disorders, 1013
on attachment theory, 1011
Bradykinesia, 929
Bradyphrenia, 244
Brain
cytoarchitectonic subdivisions, 929f
biopsy, 226
death, 847, 848t, 858
differentiation, 939f
dysfunction, 398
effects of alcohol on, 627–628
localization of functions, 930–931
neural sciences and, 922
organization theory of, 551, 924
psychiatry and, 922–923
in schizophrenia, 358


<<<PAGE 3614>>>
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), 395, 938
Brain, mouse, somatosensory cortex, 925
Brain-reward circuitry, 274
Brainstem nuclei, 933
Brain stimulation, in psychiatric practice, 735–739
acute effects, 736
indirect forms of, 736
magnetic modalities, 736
prolonged effects, 736
therapeutic neuromodulation, 736
treating psychiatric disorders through, 736
Brain tumors, 19, 253–254
Brainwashing, 444– 445, 448, 586
BrdU protein, 952
Breathing disorders, sleep-related. See Sleep-related breathing disorders
Breathing exercises, for insomnia, 512
Breuer, Joseph, 1057
Brexanolone, 391
Brexpiprazole, 608
for schizophrenia, 352t
Bridge Reading Program, 144
Brief focal psychotherapy (Tavistock–Malan), 753
Brief Impairment Scale (BIS), 78
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS), 34–38t, 38, 347
Brief psychodynamic psychotherapy, 752–753
outcomes of, 755
types, 753–755
Brief psychotic disorder, 344–345, 344t
Brief Visuospatial Memory Test—Revised, 53t
Briquet syndrome, 467
Broad-bank personality tests, 56
Broca aphasia, 48, 931
Broca, Pierre, 931
Brodmann areas, 929
of human cortex, 48, 48f
NT in area 969
Bromocriptine (Parlodel), 595


<<<PAGE 3615>>>
Bruininks-Oseretsky Test of Motor Development, 151
Bruxism, sleep, 501–502, 515
Bulimia nervosa, 628
clinical features, 469
comorbidity, 475
course and prognosis, 476
diagnosis and clinical features, 471–473, 472t
differential diagnosis, 474
epidemiology, 478
etiology, 479
developmental factors, 479
environmental and social factors, 480
genetic and biologic factors, 479
psychological factors, 479–480
pathology and laboratory examination, 473–474
treatment, 477–478
Bulimia Test-Revised (BULIT-R), 44–45
Bullying, 903–904
cyber, 333, 904
physical, 903
social, 903
verbal, 903
Buprenorphine, 293, 689
for opioid withdrawal, 295
Bupropion, 600, 607, 732
for ADHD, 137
associated euphoric feeling, 636
in bulimia nervosa treatment, 478
dosage and clinical guidelines, 636–637
drug interactions, 636
laboratory interferences, 636
pharmacologic actions, 635
precautions and adverse reactions, 636
for smoking cessation, 310, 310t
therapeutic indications, 635–636
BuSpar. See Buspirone
Buspirone, 672–673


<<<PAGE 3616>>>
dosage and clinical guidelines, 673–674
drug interactions, 673
laboratory interferences, 673
pharmacologic actions, 673
precautions and adverse reactions, 673
therapeutic indications, 673
Butler, Robert, 909, 918
Butyrophenones, 960
Butyrylcholinesterase, 959
Caffeine, 312
cerebral blood flow, effects on, 317
cigarette smokers and, 317
content of common foods and medications, 315–316t
contraindications to use of, 314t
genetic predisposition to use, 317
and insomnia, 491, 491t
intoxication, 312–313, 312t
neuropharmacology, 317
and nonpsychiatric illnesses, 314
subjective effects and reinforcement, 317
withdrawal, 313, 313t
Caffeine-related disorders, 312–317
anxiety disorder, 313
clinical features and diagnosis, 312–314
comorbidity, 314
differential diagnosis, 312, 312t
epidemiology, 314–317
not elsewhere classified, 314
pathology and etiology, 317
sleep disorder, 314
treatment, 314
CAGE questionnaire, 7, 44
Cajal-Retzius cells, 940, 948, 951, 995
Calan. See Verapamil
Calcium-calmodulin kinase II (CaMKII), 932


<<<PAGE 3617>>>
Calcium channel inhibitors
dosage and clinical guidelines, 668
drug interactions, 668
pharmacologic actions, 667–668
precautions and adverse reactions, 668
therapeutic indications, 668
Calcium levels, serum, 65
California Personality Inventory (CPI), 58t
California Verbal Learning Test II, 53t
Cannabidiol, 290, 977
Cannabinoid receptors, 973, 974, 974f, 976
Cannabinoids
endogenous, 974f
research into, 973t
Cannabis, 288
amotivational syndrome, 289
comorbidity, 289
intoxication, 288
cognitive impairment, 289
flashbacks, 289
legal status of, 290t
medical use, 290
neuropharmacology, 291
physical effects of use of, 291, 291t
preparations, 291
rates of cannabis use, 290
withdrawal, 288
symptoms, 289t
Cannabis-induced anxiety disorder, 289
Cannabis-induced psychotic disorder, 289
Cannabis-related disorders, 288–291
clinical features, 288
comorbidity, 289
diagnosis, 288–289
epidemiology, 290, 290t
pathology, 291
treatment and rehabilitation, 289


<<<PAGE 3618>>>
unspecified, 289
Cannabis sativa, 291
Canthinones, 321
Capgras syndrome, 243
Caplyta. See Lumateperone
CAPON protein, 970
Capsaicin, pain sensitivity and, 977
Carbamazepine, 253t, 598, 672
for acute mania, 373
anticonvulsant effects of, 660
assessment of serum concentration of, 63
in bipolar illness, 663t
dosing and administration, 662
drug interactions, 662, 662t
laboratory interferences, 662
pharmacologic actions, 660
precautions and adverse reactions, 661–662, 661t
associated hepatitis, 661
blood dyscrasias, 661
dermatologic effects, 661
renal effects, 661
routine laboratory monitoring, 662–663
therapeutic indications, 660–661
toxicity, 63
Carbohydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT), 62
Carbon monoxide
mechanisms of action, 972
neurotransmission, 972
poisoning, 158t, 179, 972
synthesis of, 972f
Cardiac ultrasound, 68
Cardiovascular system, examination of, 19
Career consolidation, mental health and, 1036
Caregiver–child relationship, 170
Cariprazine, 608
for bipolar disorder, 375t
for schizophrenia, 352t


<<<PAGE 3619>>>
Carter Neurocognitive Assessment, 109
Case-control designs, 990
Cataplexy, 486. See also Sleep–wake disorders
medical disorders causing, 509t
narcolepsy and, 491
Catapres. See Clonidine
Catatonia, 338, 369
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), 958
Categorical constructs, 30
Category Test, 53t
Catha edulis, 303
Cat’s cry (Cri-du-Chat) syndrome, 102
Cattell Infant Intelligence Scale, 81
Cattell, Raymond, 1080
CBT. See Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)
CCK. See Cholecystokinin (CCK)
CCMD-2-R. See Chinese Classification of Mental Disorders (CCMD-2R)
Cenesthetic hallucinations, 339
Central achromatopsia, 927
Central nervous system (CNS), 61
computed tomography, 61
development of, 9983
functional magnetic resonance imaging, 61
magnetic resonance angiography, 61
magnetic resonance imaging, 61
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, 61
neurobehavioral process, 954–955
positron emission tomography, 61
single-photon emission computed tomography, 61
structural, 61
Central sleep apnea (CSA), 493, 494–495t, 495
causes, 495
Cheyne–Stokes breathing, 495
comorbid with opioid use, 495
drug/substance use and, 495
due to high-altitude periodic breathing, 495, 514


<<<PAGE 3620>>>
idiopathic CSA, 495
medical disorders and, 495
primary sleep apnea of infancy, 495
test findings in, 506
treatment, 514
Cerebellum
anatomy of, 929
development, 941f
Cerebral evoked potentials, 1001
Cerebral vascular accident (CVA), 439
Cerebral ventricles, in schizophrenia, 358
CES. See Cranial electrical stimulation (CES)
Chess, Stella, 883, 891
Chief complaint (CC), 6, 12t
Child abuse, reporting of, 838
Child and Adolescent Levels of Care Utilization Services (CALOCUS),
214
Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Assessment (CAPA), 77
Child Attention Profile (CAP), 83t
Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL), 45–46, 75
Child custody, 842, 912
joint, 912
single, 912
split, 912
Childhood and Society (Erikson), 1072
Childhood cancers, 863
Childhood disintegrative disorder, 103, 122
Childhood disorders, scales for assessment of, 45–47
Childhood history, 8, 79
Childhood-onset schizophrenia, 207. See also Early-onset schizophrenia
Childhood, psychoneurotic reactions of, 1068t
Child-onset fluency disorder, 117–119
clinical features, 117–118
comorbidity, 118–119
course and prognosis, 119
diagnosis, 117, 118t
differential diagnosis, 118


<<<PAGE 3621>>>
epidemiology, 119
etiology, 119
learning theories on, 119
phases in development of stuttering, 118
treatment, 119
Children
adopted, 908
end-of-life care in, 863
with intellectual disability. See Intellectual disability (ID)
with learning disorders, 98
Children, evaluation of, 74–75
clinical interviews, 75–77
family interview, 77
infants and young children, 76
parents, 77
school-age children, 76
components of, 78–84, 79t
biopsychosocial formulation, 84
diagnosis, 84
educational tests, 84
history, 79
identifying data, 79
mental status examination, 79–80, 79t, 80t
neuropsychiatric assessment, 80–81
personality tests, 84
psychological tests, 81, 82–83t, 84
diagnostic instruments, 77–78
with intellectual disability
neurologic examination, 85
physical examination, 85
psychiatric interview, 85
psychological assessment, 85
rating scales, 85
mental status examination, 79–80, 79t, 80t
affect, 79
cognition, 80
judgment and insight, 80


<<<PAGE 3622>>>
memory, 80
mood, 79
motor behavior, 80
orientation, 79
parent–child interaction, 79
physical appearance, 79
separation and reunion, 79
social relatedness, 80
speech and language, 79
thought process and content, 79–80
questionnaires and rating scales, 78
recommendations and treatment plan, 84
Children’s Apperception Test (CAT), 84
Children’s Depression Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R), 176, 177
Children’s Interview for Psychiatric Syndromes (ChIPS), 77–78
Children’s Personality Questionnaire, 83t
Chinese Classification of Mental Disorders (CCMD-2-R), 1056
Chloral hydrate, 298, 678–679
Chlordiazepoxide, for alcohol withdrawal treatment, 281
Chlorpromazine, 602, 619, 622
for schizophrenia, 353t
Cholecystokinin (CCK), 479, 969
Cholinesterase inhibitors, 696, 959, 986
dosage and clinical guidelines, 698
drug interactions, 698
pharmacologic actions, 697
precautions and adverse reactions, 697–698, 698t
therapeutic indications, 697
Chorionic villi sampling (CVS), 97
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), 986
immune component of, 985
Chronic grief, 851
Chronic illness care model, 874
Chronic motor or vocal tic disorder, 162
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and insomnia, 491
Chronobiology, 1001–1002
Chronotherapy, 514–515


<<<PAGE 3623>>>
Cialis. See Tadalafil
Ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF), 947
Circadian rhythms, 1001–1005
sleep regulation, 1002
Circadian rhythm sleep–wake disorders. See also Sleep–wake disorders
clinical presentation, 486, 488
diagnosis, 495–497, 496t
advanced sleep phase type, 496
delayed sleep phase type, 496
irregular sleep–wake type, 497
jet lag type, 497
non–24-hour sleep–wake type, 497
shift work type, 497
unspecified type, 497
differential diagnosis, 509
disorders with, 509, 510t
treatment for
chronotherapy, 514–515
light therapy, 514
medications, 514
Circumstantiality, 10, 10t
Cirrhosis, 66
Citalopram, 631, 632
for depression in children and adolescents, 178
Civil liability, 845, 845t
CJD. See Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD)
Clang associations, 10t
Clarifying technique, 15
Climacterium, 911
Clinical chemistry, 65–66
liver function, 66
renal function, 66
serum electrolytes, 65–66
vitamins, 66
Clinical interview, for sleep disorders, 503
Clinical neuropsychology, 47. See also Neuropsychological assessment
neuroanatomical correlates, 47–50


<<<PAGE 3624>>>
arithmetic skills, 48
language disorders, 47–48
limb apraxia, 48
memory disorders, 49–50
motor skills, 50
neuropsychological deficits with left/right hemisphere damage,
47, 47t
spatial disorders, 48–49
referral issue, 50
change in functioning over time, 51
decision-making capacity, assessment of, 51
differential diagnosis, 50–51
forensic evaluation, 51
level of functioning, 50
Clinical tracking systems, 874
Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS), 41, 44
Clock drawing, 53t, 54, 55f
Clock genes, 992
Clomipramine, 628
in autism spectrum disorder, 129
for OCD in childhood, 206
Clonazepam, 253t, 602
Clonidine, 607, 608, 683, 694–696, 923, 960
for ADHD, 137
dosage and clinical guidelines, 696
pharmacologic actions, 694
precautions and adverse reactions, 695–696
protocols for opioid detoxification, 695t
for PTSD, 173
symptoms of overdose, 696
therapeutic indications, 694–695
for tic disorder, 160
Cloninger, C. Robert, 560
Closed-ended questions, in interview, 15
Closing of interview, 15–16
Clozapine, 591, 593, 600, 732
assessment of serum concentration of, 63


<<<PAGE 3625>>>
in autism spectrum disorder, 129
dosages, 613
drug interactions, 613–614
for early-onset schizophrenia, 209
indications, 613
pharmacology, 613
for schizophrenia, 352t, 354
side effects, 614
Clozaril. See Clozapine
Club drugs, 303–304
Clumsy child syndrome, 149
Cluttering, 118
c-Met, 949
c-myc, roles of, 947
Cobalamin deficiency, 262
Cobblestone lissencephaly (type II), 949
Cocaine, 213, 215, 302–303. See also Stimulant-related disorders
methods of use, 303
neuropharmacology, 308
during pregnancy, 886
snorting/tooting, 303
use disorder, 307
Cocaine-induced psychotic disorders, 305
Cochlear nerve fibers, 927
Codeine, 297
Cogentin. See Benztropine
Cognitive-behavioral intervention for trauma in schools (CBITS),
172–173
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), 465, 477
in autism spectrum disorder, 128
for bipolar disorders, 375, 376t
for depression in children and adolescents, 177
for early-onset schizophrenia, 210
for encopresis, 482
for insomnia, 510–511
for OCD in youth, 205
for schizophrenia, 355


<<<PAGE 3626>>>
trauma-focused, 172
Cognitive change, neuropsychological testing for, 50
Cognitive development, 1007–1011
psychiatric applications, 1009–1011
stages, 1007–1009
concrete operations, 1008–1009
formal operations, 1009
preoperational thought, 1007–1008
sensorimotor stage, 1007
Cognitive disorders, 21. See Neurocognitive disorders
scales for assessment of, 45
Cognitive distortions, 769f
Cognitive domains, 804t
Cognitive errors, 770t
Cognitive function
assessment of, in MSE, 10–11, 11t
Cognitive impairments, in schizophrenia, 339
Cognitively impaired no dementia (CIND), 263t
Cognitive maps, 932
Cognitive maturation, in adolescence, 900–901
Cognitive processing therapy (CPT), 435
Cognitive rehabilitation, 794
Cognitive remediation, 356
Cognitive therapy, 767–768, 1010
of depression, 768
indications, 771
for insomnia, 512
strategies and techniques, 768–771
Colarusso, Calvin, 909, 910
Collaborative Lithium Trials (CoLT), 183
Colloid cysts, 254
Color agnosia, 26
Combination therapy, 604–605, 605t
advantages of, 605
combined psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy, 605
limitations, 605
Combined psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy


<<<PAGE 3627>>>
adherence, 785
for anxiety, 786
attribution theory, 785
benefits, 783t
for bipolar I disorder, 786
case study, 784–785
communication among therapists, 784
for depressive disorders, 785
indications for, 783
number of clinicians in, 783–784
for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 786
orientation of treating psychiatrist, 784
patient education, 785
for psychotic disorders, 786
for schizophrenia, 786
for substance use disorders, 786
for trauma-related disorders, 786
COMBINE study (Combined Pharmacotherapies and Behavioral
Interventions), 283
Communication
Internet, 838
nonverbal
during psychiatric interview, 14, 15
in palliative care, 857
privileged, 837
Communication disorders, 107–122
child-onset fluency disorder, 117–119
language disorder, 107–114
social (pragmatic), 119–121
speech sound disorder, 114–117
unspecified, 121–122
Communication rights, 841
Community psychiatry, 867–874
contemporary evidence base for, 869–870
health promotion, 867–869
access to mental health care, 868–869
prevention, 868


<<<PAGE 3628>>>
models for service delivery and treatment, 871–874
evidence-based treatment models, 871, 872t, 873t
organized systems of care, 871
public agencies, 869
public health, 867
roles of psychiatrists, 870–871
workforce influences on contemporary practice, 869
Competence, 842–843
to be executed, 843
to stand trial, 843
Competing-response training, 159–160
Complaint-driven system, 29
Complex disease, concept of, 795
Compliance, 587
Compound questions, in interview, 15
Compulsions, 9
Compulsive sexual behavior, 333
Computed tomography (CT), 61, 225–226
Comrey Personality Scales (CPS), 58t
Concentration, assessment of, in MSE, 10, 11t
Conceptual apraxia, 48
Conceptual priming, 1027
Concrete operations stage (7–11 years), 1008–1009, 1009f
Concurrent validity, 57
Condensation, 1059
Conduct disorder, 189–194, 190t
comorbidity, 192
course and prognosis, 192
diagnosis and clinical features, 190–191
differential diagnosis, 191–192
epidemiology, 193
etiology, 193–194
child abuse and maltreatment, 194
genetic factors, 193
neurobiologic factors, 194
parental factors, 193
psychological factors, 194


<<<PAGE 3629>>>
sociocultural factors, 193
violent video games and violent behavior, 194
pathology and laboratory examination, 191
treatment
psychopharmacologic interventions, 193
psychosocial interventions, 192–193
Conduction aphasia, 48
Confidentiality, 831, 837–838
discussions about patients, 838
Internet and social media, 838
psychiatric interviews and, 1–2
third-party payers and supervision, 838
violations of, 831, 837
Confusional arousals, 499
Confusional states, in terminally ill individuals, 855
Congenital arithmetic disorder, 145. See also Mathematics deficits
Conners Rating Scales, 47
Connors Abbreviated Parent–Teacher Rating Scale for ADHD, 78
Connors Parent or Teacher Rating Scale for ADHD, 75
Conscious system, 1060
Conservation, 1009
Constipation, 20
Constructs, 30
categorical, 30
continuous, 30
validity, 31
Consultation-liaison psychiatry
in hemodialysis units, 802–803
history, 799
in intensive care units, 801
problems
agitation, 801
confusion, 801
confusion or disorientation, 801, 802t
depression, 801
hallucinations, 801
no evidence of symptoms, 801


<<<PAGE 3630>>>
noncompliance, 801
sleep-wake disorders, 801
suicide attempt or threat, 801
in surgical units, 803
in transplantation programs, 803
trends, 799–800
Content validity, 31
Continuous measures, 30
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), 513–514
Conversion disorder, 454t
clinical presentation, 451
comorbidity, 464
course and prognosis, 464
diagnosis, 453–456
identification, 456
la belle indifférence, 456
motor symptoms, 455
primary gain, 455
secondary gain, 455
seizure symptoms, 455
sensory symptoms, 455
differential diagnosis, 463
epidemiology of, 467
etiology of, 467
biologic factors, 467
psychological factors, 467
malingering and, 582, 582t
physical examination in, 455t
symptoms of, 454t
treatment of, 465–466
Copper levels, serum, 65
Copycat suicides, 180
Copy number variations (CNV), 989
Cornelia de Lange syndrome, 86t
Corrective emotional experiences, 937
Corticalization of motor commands, 933
Corticosteroids, 328


<<<PAGE 3631>>>
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), 968–969
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), hormone regulation by, 979
Council for Exceptional Children (CEC), 93
Counterprojection technique, 577
Countertransference, 3, 919, 1069
Couples (marital) therapy, 763–764
combined therapy, 763
conjoint therapy, 763
contraindications, 763–764
four-way session, 763
goals, 764
group therapy, 763
indications, 763
individual therapy, 763
CPT. See Cognitive processing therapy (CPT)
Crack cocaine, 303
Cranial electrical stimulation (CES), 735
clinical studies, 738
definition, 738
dosing, 738
future directions, 738
mechanism of action, 738
side effects, 738
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), 256
Cribriform plate, 928
Cri-du-chat syndrome, 86t
The Crime of Punishment (Menninger), 1085
Criminal responsibility, 843–845
Criterion validity, 31, 56
Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure Scales, 31
Crystal methamphetamine, 215
CSA. See Central sleep apnea (CSA)
Cults, 586
Cultural formulation, 1047–1048
Cultural identity, 1047
Cultural psychiatry, conceptual issues in, 1052
Culture, 1047


<<<PAGE 3632>>>
components of, 1047
definition of, 16
psychiatric interview and, 16–17
Culture-bound syndromes, 1052
psychiatric diagnoses, 1053–1057
Culture shock, 586
Cushing syndrome, 21, 64, 261
CVA. See Cerebral vascular accident (CVA)
Cyclothymia, 365. See also Bipolar disorders
Cyproheptadine, 597
Cytoarchitecture, brain, 925
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6 isoenzyme, 604
Cytomegalic inclusion disease, 104
Dantrium. See Dantrolene
Dantrolene, 595
Darwin, Charles, 1040
Date rape drugs, 304
Davanloo, Habib, 753
Daycare centers, 589, 898
D2 blockade of drugs, 592
DBS. See Deep brain stimulation (DBS)
DBT. See Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT)
Dbx1/2 gene, 943
DCX gene, 949
D-cycloserine, 1017
Deaf children, 126–127
Death. See also Bereavement; Grief; Mourning
attended, 856
bad, 847
brain, 847, 848t, 858
definitions, 847
good, 847
legal aspects of, 847
life cycle considerations about, 848
adolescents, 849


<<<PAGE 3633>>>
adults, 849
children, 848–849
near-death experiences, 848
stages of, 847
acceptance, 848
anger, 847–848
bargaining, 848
depression, 848
shock and denial, 847
unattended, 856
Deception, interviewing patients with, 18
Decision-making capacity, assessment of, 51
Declarative memory, 1025, 1027
Deductive reasoning, 1009
Deep brain stimulation (DBS), 735–736, 741, 743
Defense mechanisms, personality disorders, 576
acting out, 577
dissociation, 576
fantasy, 576
isolation, 576
projection, 576–577
projective identification, 577
splitting, 577
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S), 978
Delayed sleep phase syndrome (DSPS), 1003
Delirious mania, 366
Delirium, 224, 226– 232, 226t, 439, 735
advanced age and, 232
alcohol withdrawal, 276–277
amnestic disorders and, 247
beclouded, 228
cannabis intoxication, 288
core features of, 228t
course and prognosis, 228
definition, 224
diagnosis and clinical features, 227–228, 227t
differential diagnosis


<<<PAGE 3634>>>
dementia v, 228
depression v., 228
schizophrenia v., 228
DSM-5 diagnostic criteria, 227t
epidemiology, 231–232
etiology, 232, 232t
hallmark symptom of, 226
HIV infection and, 259
ICD-10 criteria, 227t
incidence and prevalence rates, 231t
laboratory workup of patient with, 228, 230t
physical examination, 228, 229t
precipitating factors, 232t
predisposing factors, 231t
in terminally ill individuals, 855
treatment, 228
in Parkinson disease, 230
pharmacotherapy, 228–230, 231t
in terminally ill patients, 230–231
Delirium tremens (DTs), 276–277, 277t, 282
Delis–Kaplan Executive Function System (D-KEFS), 53t
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, 291. See also Cannabis
Delta waves, 999
Delusions, 9–10, 17
depressive, 175
in mania, 348
in manic patients, 365
in schizophrenia, 207, 338
Dementia, 224, 233–245, 385, 439, 568. See also Neurocognitive
disorders
alcohol-induced persisting dementia, 236
of Alzheimer type, 239–242
course and prognosis, 238
definition of, 224
delirium and, 228, 230t
and depression, 51
diagnosis and clinical features, 233, 234t, 235–236, 235t


<<<PAGE 3635>>>
differential diagnosis, 236–238
aging, 237–238
delirium, 237
depression, 237, 237t
malingering and factitious disorder, 237
schizophrenia, 237
transient ischemic attacks, 236–237
early, neuropsychological testing for, 51
epidemiology, 239
etiology, 239, 240t
frontotemporal, 243, 243f
head trauma–related, 245
HIV-related, 244–245, 245t
of Huntington disease, 244, 244t
laboratory workup, 236
Lewy body disease, 243, 243f, 243t
neuroimaging in, 68
of Parkinson disease, 244
psychiatric and neurologic changes
abstractions and catastrophic reaction, 236
cognitive change, 235–236
delusions, 235
hallucinations, 235
mood, 235
personality, 235
Sundowner syndrome, 236
psychosocial determinants, 238
subcortical and cortical, 244, 244t
treatment, 238–239
pharmacotherapy, 239
psychosocial therapies, 238–239
vascular, 236, 242–243
Dementia of Alzheimer type (DAT), 239–243
Dementia pugilistica, 245
Demyelinating disorders, 255
Dendrites
human brain, 924


<<<PAGE 3636>>>
outgrowth, 949–950
Dentate gyrus, 945, 953
hippocampal, 941
neurogenesis, 952
Denver Developmental Screening Test, 81
Depade. See Naltrexone
Depakene. See Valproate
Depakote. See Divalproex
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), 28, 29, 846
Dependent personality disorder
clinical presentation, 560
comorbidity, 569
course and prognosis, 570
diagnosis, 565–566
differential diagnosis, 568
epidemiology, 575
treatment
pharmacotherapy, 574
psychotherapy, 573–574
Depersonalization, 10, 172
Depersonalization/derealization disorder, 440–441, 441t
course and prognosis, 445
differential diagnosis, 441
epidemiology, 449
etiology, 449
neurobiologic theories, 449
psychodynamic, 449
traumatic stress, 449
treatment, 446
Depression, 379, 626
bereavement and, 852
breathlessness in, 19
catastrophic, 933
in children and adolescents, 380, 627
clinical anxiety and, 386t
clinician administered scales, 384
docosahexaenoic acid and, 977


<<<PAGE 3637>>>
double, 384
in elderly and medically ill persons, 627
epidemiology of, 393–394
GABAergic dysfunction in, 964
in HIV-infected patients, 259
HPA hyperactivity, 953
hypertension medications and, 19
interviewing patients with, 17
lithium for, 649
neurobiology of, 394–397
neurosteroids and, 978
neurovegetative symptoms of, 380t
nitric oxide synthase in, 53
in older people, 380
pharmacologic factors, 384t
phases of, 388t
during pregnancy and postpartum, 626–627
prognostic indicators for, 388t
psychology of, 397–398
self-administered scales, 384
SSRI and SNRI antidepressant medications, 389t
stress and, 398
in terminally ill individuals, 854–855
therapies for, 392t
and weight loss, 20
Depression-related cognitive dysfunction, 51, 237, 237t
Depressive disorders, 379–400, 381t–382t, 386t
clinical presentation, 379–380
comorbidity, 386–387
course, 387
diagnosis, 380–384
differential diagnosis, 384–386
epidemiology of, 393–394
etiology, 398–400
minor, 384
neurobiology of, 394–397
neurologic conditions, 385


<<<PAGE 3638>>>
psychology of, 397–398
psychotherapies for, 392t
recurrent brief, 384
treatment approach, 387–393
Depressive disorders, in children, 174–179
bereavement and, 176
course and prognosis, 176–177
differential diagnosis, 176
epidemiology, 179
etiology, 179
major depressive disorder, 175
pathology and laboratory examination, 176
persistent depressive disorder, 175–176
treatment, 177–179
duration of, 178–179
electroconvulsive therapy, 179
evidence-based treatment studies, 177
FDA warning and suicidality, 178
pharmacotherapy, 178
psychiatric hospitalization, 177
psychosocial interventions, 177–178
Depressive episodes, in bipolar disorder, 366, 366t
Depressive hallucinations, 175
Depressive personality, 567
Derailment, 10t
Derealization, 10, 172
Desensitization, 772
Desmopressin, for enuresis, 484
Desvenlafaxine
dosage and administration, 634
drug interactions, 634
precautions and adverse reactions, 633
therapeutic indications, 633
Desyrel. See Trazodone
Development, 883
adolescence, 898–904
infants, 887–893


<<<PAGE 3639>>>
middle years, 895–898
neurological basis, 936–937
neuronal, 927
psychoneuroendocrinology, 979
parallel lines of, 1065t
prenatal, 883–887
preschool period, 894–895
toddler period, 893–894
Developmental arithmetic disorder, 145. See also Mathematics deficits
Developmental Behavior Checklist (DBC), 85
Developmental cell death, 941–942
Developmental coordination disorder, 149–152
ADHD and, 151
automatization deficit hypothesis, 152
clinical features, 149–150, 150t
comorbidity, 151
course and prognosis, 151
diagnosis, 150–151, 151t
differential diagnosis, 151
epidemiology, 152
etiology, 151
internal modeling deficit hypothesis, 152
in school-age children, 149
treatment, 151–152
Developmental dyslexia, 931
Developmental Education and Parenting Intervention (DEPI), 178
Developmental history, 8
Developmental Test of Visual- Motor Integration (VMI), 83t
Dexamethasone-suppression test (DST), 64, 395, 575
Dexedrine. See Dextroamphetamine
Dexmethylphenidate
for ADHD, 136, 136t
Dextroamphetamine, 302, 607
Dextromethorphan/Quinidine, 629
DHA (docosahexaenoic acid), 977–978
Diabetes insipidus (DI), 64–65
lithium-induced, 65


<<<PAGE 3640>>>
Diabetes mellitus, 349
schizophrenia and, 349
Diabetic ketoacidosis, 261
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), 27, 31,
429, 488, 1047
Diagnostic Interview for Children and Adolescents (DICA), 77, 78
Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children (DISC), 46–47
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), 180, 447
for borderline personality disorder, 573
consultation team agreements in, 764t
functions, 764
modes of treatment in
consultation team, 764
group skills training, 764
individual therapy, 764
phone consultations, 764
outcomes, 764–765
working of, 765f
Diathesis-stress model, 348
Diazepam, 668
Diencephalon, formation of, 933, 934f
Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act (DHSEA) of 1994, 710
Diethylpropion, 302, 708
Digitalis intoxication, 19
Digit span, 53t, 54
Digit Vigilance Test, 53t
Digoxin, 672
Diltiazem, 668
Diphenhydramine, 594
Diprivan. See Propofol
Direct Instructional System for Teaching and Remediation (DISTAR)
approach, 144
Direct speech therapy, 119
Disability
-adjusted life year (DALY), 875, 877t
scale for assessment of, 31, 32–33t
DISCI genes, 951


<<<PAGE 3641>>>
Disconnect hypothesis, schizophrenia, 362
Discriminant validity, 57
Disease
biopsychosocial model of, 923
scale for assessment of, 31, 32–33t
Disinhibited social engagement disorder, 167–172. See also Reactive
attachment disorder
course and prognosis, 169–170
diagnosis and clinical features, 168–169, 169t
differential diagnosis, 169
DSM-5 on, 168
epidemiology, 170–171
etiology, 171
pathology and laboratory examination, 169
treatment, 170
Disintegrative psychosis, 103
Disorders with inborn errors of metabolism, impairment in, 105t
Displacement, 1059
Disruptive behaviors of childhood, 186
conduct disorder, 189–194
oppositional defiant disorder, 187–189
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, 185–186
comorbidity, 186
course and prognosis, 186
diagnosis and clinical features, 185
differential diagnosis, 186
bipolar disorder, 186
oppositional defiant disorder, 186
DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for, 185, 185t
epidemiology, 186
treatment, 186
Dissociation, defined, 438
Dissociative disorders, 248, 438–449
depersonalization/derealization disorder, 440–441. See also
Depersonalization/derealization disorder
dissociative amnesia, 438–440, 1032
dissociative fugue, 438–439


<<<PAGE 3642>>>
dissociative identity disorder, 440–444, 442t. See also Dissociative
identity disorder
dissociative trance, 444, 448
Distortions, 114. See also Speech sound disorder
Disulfiram, 693–694
in alcohol use disorder treatment, 283, 284t
for cocaine use disorder, 307
Ditropan. See Oxybutynin
Diupres. See Reserpine
Divorce, 587, 589, 912
community, 912
coparental, 912
economic, 912
effects on children, 897, 897t
legal, 912
psychic, 912
reasons for, 912–913
Dlx genes, 940, 944
DOB (2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromoamphetamine), 303
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 977
Doctrine of parens patriae, 839
Domestic violence, 584
Dominic-R, 77, 78
Donepezil, 697
Do-not-intubate (DNI) order, 858
Do-not-resuscitate (DNR) order, 858
L-Dopa, 705–706
Dopamine
function of, 955
metabolites of, 958
mood disorders and, 350
secretion, 955
sexual behavior and, 567–568
transporters, 959
Dopamine agonists, 704–705
dosage and clinical guidelines, 706, 706t
drug interactions, 706


<<<PAGE 3643>>>
for erectile dysfunction, 705
laboratory interferences, 706
for mood disorders, 705
pharmacologic actions, 705
precautions and adverse reactions, 705
therapeutic indications, 705
Dopamine hypothesis, of schizophrenia, 361
Dopamine, in depression, 396
Dopamine receptor antagonists, 593, 615–624, 623t
adjunctive medications, 624
for borderline personality disorder, 618
choice of drug, 624
CNS-depressant effects, 622
for delirium, 618
for delusional disorder, 617
for dementia, 618
for depression with psychotic symptoms, 617
dosage and clinical guidelines, 622–624
early treatment, 622
intermittent medications, 622
long-acting depot preparations, 624
maintenance treatment, 622–624
rapid neuroleptization, 622
short-term treatment, 622
early treatment, 622
extrapyramidal side effects (EPS), 615–616
intermittent medications, 622
laboratory interferences, 622
long-acting depot preparations, 624
maintenance treatment, 622
for mania, 617
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drug interactions, 620–622,
621t
pharmacologic actions, 616–617, 617t
plasma concentration, 624
precautions and adverse reactions, 618t, 619–620
cardiac effects, 619


<<<PAGE 3644>>>
central anticholinergic activity, 619
endocrine effects, 620
hematologic effects, 619–620
jaundice, 620
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 619
orthostatic (postural) hypotension, 619
overdoses, 620
peripheral anticholinergic effects, 620
during pregnancy, 620
sedation, 619
seizure threshold, 619
sexual adverse effects, 620
skin and eye effects, 620
sudden death, 619
for psychiatric and nonpsychiatric indications, 618
rapid neuroleptization, 622
for schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder, 617–618
for severe agitation and violent behavior, 617
short-term treatment, 622
for substance-induced psychotic disorder, 618
therapeutic indications, 617–618, 617t
for Tourette’s disorder, 617
treatment resistance, 624
Dopamine receptors, 960
Dopaminergic pathways, brain, 955f
Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), 737
Doublecortin (DCX), 949
Double simultaneous stimulation, 54
Down, Langdon, 101
Down syndrome, 86t, 95, 97, 101–102, 101f. See also Intellectual
disability (ID)
Doxepin, for insomnia, 509
DRA. See Dopamine receptor antagonists
Dream anxiety attacks, 499
Dressing apraxia, 49
Drive theory, 1060–1064
Dronabinol, 290


<<<PAGE 3645>>>
Droperidol, 229
Drosha protein, 946
Drug dependence, 269, 274. See also Substance use disorders
Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), 290
Drug-induced mental disorders, 62
Drug-Induced Rape Prevention and Punishment Act, 213
Drug screening tests, 62
Drugs of abuse, testing for, 62, 62t
DSM-5. See Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-5)
DST. See Dexamethasone-suppression test (DST)
DTs. See Delirium tremens (DTs)
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 159t
Duloxetine
dosage and administration, 635
drug interactions, 634
laboratory interferences, 635
pharmacologic actions, 634
precautions and adverse reactions, 634
therapeutic indications, 634
Durable power of attorney, 843, 858
Durham rule, 845
Durham v. the United States, 845
Dusky v. the United States, 843
Dying, 847. See also Death
caring for dying patient, 849
at home, 859
stages of, 847–848
Dynactin, 949
Dynein, 949
Dysarthria, 114, 116, 116t. See also Speech sound disorder
Dysbindin (DTNB1) gene, 964
Dyscalculia, 141, 145. See also Mathematics deficits
Dysgraphia, 147
Dyslexia, 141, 142
Dyslexia, developmental, 931
Dysphoria, 379


<<<PAGE 3646>>>
Dyspnea, 19
Dyspraxia, 114. See also Speech sound disorder
Dysprosody, 88
Dysthymia, 175–176. See Dysthymic disorder
Dysthymic disorder, 382–383, 383t
Dystonia musculorum deformans, 158t
EAATs (excitatory amino acid transporters), 961
Early birds/larks, 496
Early-onset bipolar disorder, 181–185
comorbidity, 182
course and prognosis, 183
diagnosis and clinical features, 182
differential diagnosis, 182
epidemiology, 184
etiology
genetic factors, 184
neurobiologic factors, 184
neuropsychological studies, 184–185
pathology and laboratory examination, 182
treatment, 183
pharmacotherapy, 183
psychosocial intervention, 183
Early-onset schizophrenia, 207–210
auditory hallucinations in, 207
course and prognosis, 208
delusions in, 207
diagnosis and clinical features, 207–208
differential diagnosis, 208
epidemiology, 210
etiology, 210
pathology and laboratory examination, 208
treatment, 209–210
pharmacotherapy, 209–210
psychosocial interventions, 210
Early Start Denver Model (ESDM), 127


<<<PAGE 3647>>>
Eating disorders
medical complications of, 471t
psychiatric disorders with, 475t
scales for assessment of, 44–45
sleep-related, 499
Eating disorders examination (EDE), 44
self-report version (EDE-Q), 44
Economic rights, 841
Ecstasy. See 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)
ECT. See Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
Education for all Handicapped Children Act of 1975, 100
Education, psychiatric interviews and, 14
Edwards Personal Preference Schedule (EPPS), 58t
EEG. See Electroencephalographic (EEG)
Effexor. See Venlafaxine
E4 genes, in Alzheimer disease, 240
EGL, 941
The Ego and the Id (Freud), 1064
Ego identity, 899
Ego instincts, 1060
Ego libido, 1064
Ego psychology, 1064–1068
character, 1068
defense mechanisms, 1065
functions of, 1064–1065
structural theory of mind, 1064
theory of anxiety, 1065
Eicosanoids, 977–978
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 977
Elavil. See Amitriptyline
Elder abuse, in the elderly, 808
Electrocardiogram (ECG), 67–68
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 64, 439, 595, 922
adverse effects, 734–735
and amnesia, 247
associated with headaches, 735
for bipolar depression, 374


<<<PAGE 3648>>>
clinical guidelines
as anesthetics, 732
as muscle relaxants, 732
as premedications, 732
pretreatment evaluation, 732
contraindications, 734–735
memory loss, 735
for depression in children and adolescents, 179
efficacy of, 736
electrical stimulus, 733–734
electrode placements, 733, 733f
electrophysiology in, 729–730
failure of, 734
general anesthesia and oxygenation, 732
history of, 729, 730t
indications, 731t, 735
for atypical psychoses, 732
for catatonia, 732, 734
for episodic psychoses, 732
for major depressive disorder, 731
for manic episodes, 731, 734
for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 732
for patients with delirium, 732
for schizophrenia, 731, 734
induced seizures, 734
mechanism of action, 730–731
mortality rate with, 735
number and spacing of, 734
post maintenance treatment, 734
prolonged and tardive seizures, 734
risk for edema and brain herniation, 735
for schizophrenia, 355
utilization of, 729
Electroencephalograms (EEG)
abnormalities, 998–999, 1000t
activated, 999
awake, 999


<<<PAGE 3649>>>
effect of drugs on, 1001t
electrode placement, 998, 998f
medical disorders affecting, 1000t
normal tracing, 999, 999f
overview, 998
psychiatric disorders, 1001t
sleeping, 999
Electrolyte levels, serum, 65–66
Electronic health record (EHR), 16
Electrophysiology, applied, 997
Elimination disorders, 481
encopresis, 481–483
enuresis, 483–485
E-mail, 28
Embryonic development, 936, 953
EMDR. See Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR)
Emotional damage and distress, 845
Emotional expression, 9
Emotions, acknowledgement of, 14
Empathy, 2
in interview, 2
nonverbal response, 2
retaining objectivity in, 2
Empty-nest syndrome, 911
Emx2 gene, 944
Encephalitis, 106
Encephalitis lethargica, 158t
Encoding of new material, 50
Encopresis, 481–483
case study, 481–482
clinical and diagnostic features, 481, 482t
with constipation and overflow incontinence, 481, 482
course, 482
differential diagnosis, 482
epidemiology, 483
etiology, 483
pathology and laboratory examination, 482


<<<PAGE 3650>>>
prognosis, 482
treatment, 482
Encouragement, psychiatric interviews and, 14
Endicott Substitution Criteria, for depression, 854t
Endocannabinoids, 973, 974f, 976–977
Endocrine disease, screening for, 64
adrenal disease, 64
anabolic steroid use, 64
antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 64–65
human chorionic gonadotropin, 65
pancreatic function, 65
parathormone, 65
prolactin, 65
systemic lupus erythematosus, 65
thyroid hormone, 65
End-of-life care, 859–860. See also Palliative care
alternative and complementary medicine in, 863
in children, 863
neonatal and infant, 862–863
spiritual issues, 863
Endophenotypes, 923–924
Endorphins, 297
Engel, George, 923
En1 gene, 943
ENGRAILED-2 gene, 952
Enkephalins, 297, 738
Enuresis, 483–485
and ADHD, 483
clinical and diagnostic features, 483, 483t
course, 484
differential diagnosis, 484
diurnal, 484, 485
epidemiology, 484
etiology, 484–485
nocturnal, 484, 485
pathology and laboratory examination, 483
prognosis, 484


<<<PAGE 3651>>>
treatment, 484
Environmental toxins, 63
Ephrins, 949
Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) study, 371
Epidermal growth factor (EGF), 943
Epigenetic principle, 1073–1076
Freudian theory, 1073
life cycle, stages of, 1073–1076
Epilepsy, 249–253
classification, 249–250, 250t
definitions, 249
diagnosis, 252
generalized seizures, 250–251, 250f
partial seizures, 251
seizure in, 249
symptoms
ictal, 251
interictal, 251
mood disorder symptoms, 252
preictal, 251
psychotic, 251–252
violence, 252
treatment, 253, 253t
Epinephrine, 622, 955–956
Episodic memory, 1028
Equilibration, 1010
ErbB4 gene disruption of, 997
ErbB2-4 protein, 949
Erikson, Erik, 849, 899, 909, 917, 918t, 1071–1073
on integrity, 1036
on mental health, 1035
Erikson’s psychosocial stages, 1073t
Eros, 1061
Erythroxylum coca, 303
Escitalopram, 631, 632
Eskalith. See Lithium
Esketamine, 648


<<<PAGE 3652>>>
Essential fatty acids, 977
Estrogen replacement therapy, 239
Estrogens, neural activity and, 981–982
Eszopiclone, 679
Ethchlorvynol, 298
Ethical conflicts, 829
Ethical dilemmas, 829
Ethics
basic principles of, 829–830
autonomy, 829
beneficence, 829
justice, 829–830
nonmaleficence, 829
codes of, 829
impaired physicians, 832
issues related to, 830
confidentiality, violations of, 831
illegal activities, 830
mistreatment of patient, 830
nonsexual boundary violations, 830–831
sexual boundary violations, 830
in managed care, 831
cooperate with utilization reviewers, 831–832
exercise appeal rights, 831
responsibility to disclose, 831
responsibility to treat, 831
Physician Charter on Professionalism, 832, 833t
physicians in training, 832
professional, 829
in psychiatry, 829–834
questions and answers, 832, 833–834t
Ethnicity, 1047
Ethological studies, attachment, 938
Ethology, 1042–1043
Ethosuximide, for absence (petit mal) seizures, 253
Ethyl alcohol, 285
Etomidate, 679


<<<PAGE 3653>>>
European Outcome of Depression International Network (ODIN), 435
Euthanasia, 863–864
active, 864
arguments for, 864
involuntary, 864
opponents of, 864
passive, 864
voluntary, 864
World Medical Association on, 864
Evidence-based manualized interventions, 871
for adult psychiatric rehabilitation, 872t
for child psychiatric rehabilitation, 870, 873t
Evoked potentials (EP), 67, 359
Evolutionary theory, 400
Exacerbate nightmares, 500
Excitotoxicity, 962
Excoriation disorder, 425
Executive function, 50
Existential psychoanalysis, 1088
Experimental disorders, 1044–1046
brain stimulation, 1045
dominance, 1045
learned helplessness, 1045
pharmacologic syndromes, 1045–1046
stress syndromes, 1044–1045
temperament, 1045
unpredictable stress, 1045
Explanatory models, 1052
Exploding head syndrome, 501
Exposure and response prevention (ERP), 772
Expressive aphasia, 48
Expressive language deficits, 107–111. See also Language disorders
Expressive psychotherapy
approach and techniques, 750
goals, 750
indications and contraindications, 749–750
limitations, 750


<<<PAGE 3654>>>
Extinction, 1015
Extrapyramidal side effects, of antipsychotics, 351
Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR), 172, 435, 447
Eysenck Personality Questionnaire (EPQ), 58t
Face validity, 31, 56
Facial recognition, 53t, 54
Factitious disorder, 248, 582, 456t
clinical presentation, 451–452
comorbidity, 464
course and prognosis, 464–465
diagnosis, 456–457
imposed on self, 456–457
differential diagnosis, 463–464
epidemiology of, 467
etiology of, 467
management of, 466t
methods of, 458t–461t
pediatric, 466t
suspicion for, 457t, 462t
treatment of, 466, 466t
Factor analysis, 57
Factor validity, 57
Failure to thrive, 164, 168
Fairbairn, Ronald, 1080
Familial advanced sleep phase syndrome (FASPS), 1002
Familial multiple system tauopathy, 242
Family-based designs, 990
Family-based therapy (FBT), 477
Family CBT (FCBT), for OCD in youth, 205
Family devastation, chronic illness and, 588
Family group therapy, 762
Family therapy
goals, 762
indications, 760
modifications of, 762


<<<PAGE 3655>>>
for schizophrenia, 355–356
schools of, 760–762, 761t–762t
techniques
frequency and length of treatment, 760
initial consultations, 760
interview, 760
Fanapt. See Iloperidone
Fast Track Preventive Intervention, 192
Fatal familial insomnia (FFI), 257
FBT. See Family-based therapy (FBT)
FDA Modernization Act (FDAMA) of 1997, 606
Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs), 874
Federn, Paul, 363
Feeding and eating disorders, 469–480
avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, 166–167
pica, 162–164
rumination disorder, 164–166
Feldman, Robin, 45
Fenfluramine, in autism spectrum disorder, 129
Ferenczi, Sándor, 799, 1080
Fernald method, 144
Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), 87t, 104, 279, 886, 886f. See also
Intellectual disability (ID)
characteristics of, 106t, 886, 886t
examples of typical defects, 106f
Fibroblast growth factor, 943
Field theory, 1084
Figure drawing, 59t
Filopodia, 949
Finger tapping, 53t, 55
Flashbacks, 322, 323t
cannabis use and, 289
hallucinogens and, 322, 322t
Flight of ideas, 10, 10t
Flooding (implosion), 772
Fluency, 9
Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), 70


<<<PAGE 3656>>>
Flumazenil, 299, 679
Flunitrazepam, 215, 298
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), 96
Fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS) test, 66
Fluoxetine, 594, 627–628, 631
for depression in adolescents, 178
Fluphenazine
for schizophrenia, 353t
for Tourette disorder, 160
Fluvoxamine, 627, 628, 631, 632
FMRI gene, 991
Folate levels, serum, 66
Folic acid deficiencies, 938
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), hormone regulation by, 969
Fölling, Ivar Asbjörn, 102
Ford v. Wainwright, 843
Forensic and legal issues, 836–846
child abuse, 838
child custody, 842
civil liability, 845, 846t
civil rights of patients, 840
communication rights, 841
economic rights, 841
least restrictive alternative, 841
private rights, 841
visitation rights, 841
confidentiality, 837–838
criminal law, 843–845
competence to be executed, 843
competence to stand trial, 843
criminal responsibility, 843–845
guilty but mentally ill, 844f, 845
discussions about patients, 838
durable power of attorney, 843
emotional damage and distress, 845
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, 846
high-risk clinical situations


<<<PAGE 3657>>>
suicidal patients, 838
tardive dyskinesia, 838
violent patients, 838–839
hospitalization, 839–840
informed consent, 841
internet and social media, 838
medical malpractice, 836–837
privilege, 837
procedures of admission, 839
informal admission, 840
involuntary admission, 840
temporary admission, 840
voluntary admission, 840
recovered memories of abuse, 845, 845t
right to refuse treatment, 840
right to treatment, 840
seclusion and restraint, 841, 841t
testamentary capacities and competence, 842–843
third-party payers and supervision, 838
Forensic evaluation, 51
Forensic psychiatry, 836. See also Forensic and legal issues
Foreseeability, 838
Formal operation stage (11 yrs through adolescence), 901, 1009
Formal thought disorders, 338
Formulation, psychiatric interview and, 11
Fourth ventricle, 941
Fragile X mental retardation (FMRP), 952, 962
developmental basis of, 952
genetic etiology of, 962
susceptibility genes for, 961, 993
Fragile X syndrome, 86t, 95, 97, 100, 101f, 102, 159t. See also
Intellectual disability (ID)
Frankl, Viktor, 1080–1081
Freeman, Walter, 740
French, Thomas, 753
Freud, Anna, 1081
Freud, Sigmund, 363, 576, 799, 809, 918t, 1057–1071, 1058f


<<<PAGE 3658>>>
life of, 1057
on narcissism, 1064
on pleasure principle, 1061
on psychoanalysis, 1057–1072
on psychological theories, 1047
on reality principle, 1061
Frisch, Karl von, 1043
Fromm, Erich, 1081
Frontal lobe syndrome, 935
Frontotemporal dementia, 243, 243f
Frostig Movement Skills Test Battery, 151
Fuld Object Memory Evaluation, 53t
Fulton, John, 740
Functional amnesia, 1032
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 61, 73
in alcoholism-related neurotoxicity, 73
in autism spectrum disorder, 131
in dementia, 73
for early-onset bipolar disorder, 184
Functional neurologic symptom disorder. See Conversion disorder
Fusiform gyrus, ASD and, 951
GABAA allosteric modulators, 648
Gabapentin, 253t, 600, 664
Gabitril. See Tiagabine
GAD67 enzyme, 962
Gage, Phineas, 50, 935f
Gait observation, 21
Galactosemia, 87t
Galantamine, 697
Galton, Francis, 1032
Gamblers Anonymous (GA), 7, 332
Gambling disorder, 330–332
clinical features, 330
comorbidity, 331–332
course and prognosis, 332


<<<PAGE 3659>>>
diagnosis, 330, 331t
differential diagnosis, 331
epidemiology, 332
etiology
biologic factors, 332
psychosocial factors, 332
phases of pathologic gambling, 332t
treatment, 332
Gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), 215, 303, 304
Gamma Knife, 741
Gamma ventral capsulotomy, 741, 742
Gandhi’s Truth (Erikson), 1071
Gang violence, 904
Ganser syndrome, 445, 448–449
differential diagnosis, 445
epidemiology, 449
etiology, 449
Gasoline inhalation, 158t
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), and insomnia, 491
Gastrointestinal system, review of, 20, 20f
Gateway drug. See Cannabis
Gbx2 gene, 942
Gender dysphoria, 547–590
Gender identity, 547–590, 894
Gender role, 894
Gene expression mechanisms, 946–947
Gene mapping
basic concepts, 989
phenotype definitions, 991–992, 992f
strategies, 991–992
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), 405, 628, 633, 641, 673
in children and adolescents, 195
diagnosis of, 405, 406t
insomnia and, 491
General observation, 20–22
listening, 21
nonverbal clues, 21


<<<PAGE 3660>>>
smell, 21–22
visual inspection, 21
Generativity, mental health and, 1036
Genes, mental disorders and, 923
Genetic counseling. See also Psychiatric genetic counseling
definitions, 794
risk communication, 797
steps and process, 796t
symbols for pedigree, 795f
Genetic epistemology, 1007
Genetic markers, 989
Genitourinary system, review of, 20
Genome-wide association (GWA) studies, 990
of bipolar disorders, 985
gene mapping and, 987f
Geodon. See Ziprasidone
Geophagia, 163
Geriatric Depression Scale, 54t, 90
Geriatric Depression Scale (Short Version), 806t
Geriatric psychiatry
psychiatric problems of elderly, 804. See also Mental disorders of old
age
psychopharmacological treatment, 809
psychotherapeutic interventions, 809
Gerstmann–Sträussler–Scheinker disorder (GSS), 257
Gerstmann syndrome, 145, 927. See also Mathematics deficits
Gesell, Arnold, 887
Gesell Infant Scale, 81
Gilligan, Carol, 902
Global and cultural issues in psychiatry, 875–881. See also World
psychiatry
Glucophage. See Metformin
Gobal aphasia, 48
Goldstein, Kurt, 236, 1081
Goodenough Draw-a-Person Test, 85
Goodness of fit, 893
Grammar, 107


<<<PAGE 3661>>>
Gray Oral Reading Test-Revised (GORT-R), 84
Greengard, Paul, 729
Greenspan, Stanley, 1011
Grief, 849
anniversary reactions, 850
anticipatory, 850
chronic, 851
delayed, 851
duration of, 849–850
hypertrophic, 851
phases of, 852, 852t
phenomenology of, 852
Grip strength, 53t, 55
Grooved Pegboard, 53t
Group psychotherapy, 755, 763
classification, 755
combined individual and, 758–759
comparison, 756t
diagnosis, 755–756
ethical and legal issues
confidentiality, 759
sexual behavior, 759–760
violence and aggression, 759
inpatient, 758
mechanisms
group formation, 757
therapeutic factors, 757, 757t
patient selection, 755
preparation
frequency and length of sessions, 756
homogeneous vs heterogeneous groups, 756
open vs closed groups, 756
size, 756
role of therapist, 758
self-help group experiences, 758
Growth factor receptors, 943
Growth hormone (GH), 395


<<<PAGE 3662>>>
developmental effects of, 982
hormone regulation by, 982
Gsh2 gene, 946
Guanethidine (Ismelin), 19
Guanfacine, 607, 683, 694–696
for ADHD, 137
dosage and clinical guidelines, 696
extended-release preparation of, 696
pharmacologic actions, 694
for PTSD, 173
symptoms of overdose, 696
therapeutic indications, 694–695
for tic disorder, 160
Guided imagery, 771
for insomnia, 512
Gulf War syndrome, 986
Guthrie inhibition assay, 102
Gynecological disorders, neurosteroids and, 978
Haaland, Kathleen, 48
Habit reversal, 159–160
Haidt, Jonathan, 902
Hair-pulling disorder, 417–418, 418f
Haldol. See Haloperidol
Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome, 158t
Hallucinations, 10
depressive, 175
interviewing patients with, 17
older adults, 88
in schizophrenia, 338–339
sleep-related, 501
Hallucinogen-induced anxiety disorder, 323
Hallucinogen-induced mood disorder, 323
Hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorders, 323, 324
Hallucinogen intoxication, 321–322, 321t, 323–324
Hallucinogen intoxication delirium, 323


<<<PAGE 3663>>>
Hallucinogen-persisting perception disorder, 322, 322t, 324
Hallucinogen-related disorders, 317–325
clinical features, 317–321
diagnosis, 321–323
epidemiology, 324–325
pathology, 325
treatment, 323–324
unspecified, 323
Hallucinogens, 317, 319
ayahuasca, 321
canthinones, 321
ibogaine, 321
incidence of use, 324
ketamine, 319, 320–321
LSD, 319, 319t
mescaline, 320
natural and synthetic, 318t, 319
neuropharmacology, 325
phencyclidine, 319, 320, 320t
phenethylamines, 319–320
physiologic changes from, 321, 321t
psilocybin, 320
psychological effects of, 317t
as Schedule I controlled substances, 319
Hallucinogen use disorder, 321
Haloperidol, 229, 593, 602, 619, 960, 978
for schizophrenia, 353t
for Tourette disorder, 160
Halstead–Reitan Neuropsychological Test Battery (HRNTB), 52, 90, 83t
HAM-D. See Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D)
Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HAM-A), 39, 43t
Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D), 39, 42–43t, 384
Handicap principle, 1043
Harlow, Harry, 891–892
Harlow, J. M., 935
Harrington, Deborah, 48
Headaches, 19


<<<PAGE 3664>>>
Head-banging, 152, 153. See also Stereotypic movement disorder
Head trauma
and amnesia, 247
dementia and, 245
and intellectual disability, 106
and mental symptoms, 254
pathophysiology, 254, 254f
symptoms related to, 254
treatment, 254–255
Health care proxy, 858
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), 1, 28–29,
846
Privacy Rule and, 28, 29, 29t
Transaction Rule and, 28, 29t
Health Resources Services Administration (HRSA), 874
Hearing loss, in the elderly, 808
Heart block, 593
Hebb, D. O., 1046
Heller syndrome, 103
Hemp insanity, 289
Henry, George W, 799
Hepatic cirrhosis, 286
Hepatic encephalopathy, 261
Hepatic failure, 593
Herbal and dietary supplements, used in psychiatry, 711t–712t
medical foods, 713t
Heroin, 291, 297
for pain management in dying patients, 861t
use by adolescents, 903
withdrawal, 293
Herpes simplex encephalitis, 255
Herpes simplex virus
in pregnancy, 104
Hersov, Lionel, 125
Heterotopias, neuronal, 936
Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), 260
Hippocampal activity, 1030, 1030f


<<<PAGE 3665>>>
Hippocampus, 398, 932, 945
Hirschsprung disease, mental illness in, 1051
Histamine receptors, 960
Histaminergic pathways, 956f
Histogenetic cell death, 942
History of present illness (HPI), 6, 12t
History of Psychiatry, 1096–1134
before modern era, 1096
classification, 1101–1102
future, 1102
in modern age, 1096–1097
19th and early 20th century, 1097–1099
latter 20th century, 1099–1100
Histrionic personality disorder
clinical presentation, 560
comorbidity, 569
course and prognosis, 570
diagnosis, 564–565, 565t
differential diagnosis, 568
epidemiology, 575
treatment
pharmacotherapy, 573
psychotherapy, 573
HIV-associated dementia, 258–259
HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder, 259
HIV dementia, 244–245, 245t
Hnf3-β gene, 943, 944
Hoarding disorder, 417, 422t, 425, 426
Hoffman, Albert, 319
Holistic psychology, 1082
Holocaust, 429
Holocoenosis, 1081
Holter monitoring, 68
Holtzman Inkblot Technique (HIT), 59t
Home hospice program, 856
Home Situations Questionnaire—Revised (HSQ-R), 82t
Home sleep testing, 503


<<<PAGE 3666>>>
Homovanillic acid (HVA), 958
Hormones
classification of, 980t
regulation of, 979t
Horne-Östberg (HO), 1002
Horney, Karen, 1082
Hospice care, 862
Hospitalism, 1013
Hospitalization, of mentally ill persons, 839–840
Hostile patients, interviewing of, 18
HPA. See Hypothalamic–Pituitary–Adrenal (HPA)
HPER2 gene, 1002
HPER2 protein, 1002
Human behaviors, complex, 924–925
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), 65
Human communication, 1043
Human genome, psychiatry and, 924
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, 104, 257–260
and AIDS, 257
clinical features, 258–259
conditions associated with, 259t
confidentiality issues, 258
counseling in, 258
perinatal HIV transmission, 104
prevention of, 259–260
serum testing, 258
treatment, 259–260
pharmacotherapy, 260, 260t
psychotherapy, 260
types of HIV, 257
The Human Mind (Menninger), 1085
Human T-cell leukemia viruses (HTLV), 257
Humor, 1040
Hunter syndrome, 87t, 97, 97f
Huntington disease, 68, 69f, 158t, 989
dementia of, 244
caudate in, 989


<<<PAGE 3667>>>
Hurler syndrome, 87t, 97, 97f. See also Intellectual disability (ID)
Hydrocephalus, normal-pressure, 19
Hydrocodone, 607
Hydromorphone, for pain management in dying patients, 861t
Hydrophobia, 255
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, 738
5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), 181, 575, 958
Hypercalcemia, 261
Hypergraphia, 251
Hyperkinesia, initial assessment of, 9
Hypermetamorphosis, 933
Hyperprolactinemia, 982
Hyperreflexias, 158t
Hypersomnolence disorder, 486. See also Sleep–wake disorders
clinical presentation, 486
diagnosis, 491
DSM-5, 491, 492t
ICD, 492t
ICSD, 491, 492t
differential diagnosis, 506
Kleine–Levin syndrome, 491
psychiatric disorders with, 509, 510t
test findings in, 503
treatment for, 512
Hypertelorism, 885, 885f
Hyperthermic syndromes, 598
Hyperthyroidism, 260
Hyperthyroidism, psychiatric symptoms, 982
Hypertrophic grief, 851
Hyperventilation, 19
Hypnagogic hallucinations, 10
Hypnic jerk, 503
Hypnosis, 771
case studies, 776–778
components
absorption, 776
dissociation, 776


<<<PAGE 3668>>>
suggestibility, 776
contraindications, 778
definition, 776
degree of hypnotizability, 776
history, 776
indications, 777
induction protocols, 776
quantification of hypnotizability, 776
Hypnotics, 591
for insomnia, 510
Hypoactive sexual desire disorder
bupropion for, 636
Hypocalcemia, 261
Hypoglycemic encephalopathy, 261
Hypokalemia, in eating disorder patients, 65
Hyponatremia, 65
Hypopnea, 486. See also Sleep-related breathing disorders
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA), 980–981
description of, 980
and depression, 394–395
regulation of, 968
Hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, 980–981
Hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis, 968, 982
Hypothalamus
anatomy, 931
dopamine neurons, 932, 955
Hypothesis testing approach, 52
Hypotheticodeductive thinking, 1009
Hypothyroidism, 261
Hypoventilation disorders, sleep-related, 495
Hysterical amnesia, 1032
Hysterical stigmata, 445
Ibogaine, 321
ID. See Intellectual disability (ID)
Ideational apraxia, 930


<<<PAGE 3669>>>
Identity
crisis, 899
mental health and, 1035–1036
Identity diffusion, 564
Identity: Youth and Crisis (Erikson), 1073
Ideomotor apraxia, 930
Id inhibitory factor, 945
Idioms of distress, 1052
Idiopathic insomnia, 490
Idiopathic parkinsonism, 594
Idiosyncratic reactions to drugs, 600
Illness anxiety disorder
clinical presentation, 451
comorbidity, 464
course and prognosis, 464
diagnosis, 453
differential diagnosis, 463
epidemiology of, 467
etiology of, 467
and hypochondriasis, 453t
treatment of, 465
Illness management, 867–868
Illusion, 10
Iloperidone, 608
dosing, 614
indications, 614
pharmacology, 614
for schizophrenia, 352t
side effects, 614
Imaginal flooding, 772
Imipramine, 986
for cataplexy, 513
for enuresis, 484
for sleep enuresis, 515
Immediate memory, 932
Immigrants and refugees, psychiatric assessment of, 1049
mental status examination, 1049


<<<PAGE 3670>>>
migration history, 1049
Implanted cortical stimulation, 739
Imprinting, 1042–1043
Inadequate sleep hygiene, 491
Incentive learning, 1019, 1021
Inderal. See Propranolol
Individual interpersonal psychotherapy, 778
Individualized education plan (IEP), 100, 144
Individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP), 99
Individuals with Disabilities Act, 1990, 93, 100
Inductive reasoning, 1009
Infant development, 887–893
attachment, 891–892, 892t
cognitive development, 890, 890t
developmental landmarks, 887, 888t
emotional and social development, 890–891, 891t
good-enough mothering, 893
infant care, 893
language development, 889–890, 889t
Mahler stages of separation-individuation, 892, 893t
maternal rejection and neglect, 892
parental fit, 893
postmature infants, 887
premature infants, 887, 887f
reflexes and survival systems at birth, 887, 887f, 889
temperament, 891, 891t
Infantile amnesia, 1034
Infantile sexuality, 1061
Infections
and intellectual disability, 106
and schizophrenia, 360
Infectious disease testing, 66–67
intravenous drug use, 66
syphilis, 66
viral hepatitis, 66–67
Inferior temporal cortices (ITCs), 926
Inflammation, disease and, 984f


<<<PAGE 3671>>>
Informed consent, 602, 837t, 841–842
form, 842
in psychiatric neurosurgery, 740
Ingrezza. See Valbenazine
Inhalant-induced anxiety disorder, 326
Inhalant-induced mood disorder, 326
Inhalant-induced neurocognitive disorder, 326
Inhalant-induced psychotic disorder, 326
Inhalant intoxication delirium, 326
Inhalant-related disorders, 325–327
clinical features, 325
day treatment and residential programs, 326
diagnosis, 325–326
epidemiology, 326–327
pathology, 327
treatment, 326, 327t
Inhalants, 325
as CNS depressant, 327
intoxication, 326
long-term use, 327
neuropharmacology, 327
organ pathology and neurologic effects, 327
psychological symptoms, 325
tolerance for, 325
use of, 215
Inhalant use disorder, 325
Inpatient admission, 825–826
Inpatient hospice care, 856
Insight and Responsibility (Erikson), 1073
Insight, in psychiatric evaluation, 11, 13t
Insight-oriented psychotherapy, 3
Insomnia, 486. See also Sleep–wake disorders
in autism spectrum disorder, 124, 128
behavioral insomnia of childhood, 491
biofeedback, 512
clinical presentation, 486
cognitive behavioral therapy, 510–511


<<<PAGE 3672>>>
cognitive therapy, 512
comorbid with medical condition, 491
comorbid with mental disorder, 491
diagnosis, 488, 490, 490t
differential diagnosis, 506
due to drug/substance use, 491, 491t
idiopathic, 490
inadequate sleep hygiene, 491
paradoxical, 490
paradoxical intention technique, 512
pharmacologic treatment, 509–510
psychiatric disorders with, 509, 510t
psychophysiologic, 488, 490t
relaxation therapy, 511–512
sleep hygiene education, 511, 511t
sleep restriction therapy, 511
stimulus control therapy, 511, 511t
universal sleep hygiene, 511
Instinct theory, 1060–1064
Integration and acculturative stress, 1049
Integrity, mental health and, 1036
Intellectual disability (ID), 93–107, 94t
adaptive functioning and, 93
and autism spectrum disorder, 98, 125–126
classification, 94–95, 94t
clinical features, 95–96
course and prognosis, 98
definition, 93
deinstitutionalization of children with, 93
developmental characteristics, 94t
diagnosis, 96
differential diagnosis, 97–98
disorders with inborn errors of metabolism and, 105t
in DSM-5, 93, 94, 94t, 95
epidemiology, 100
etiology, 100
acquired and developmental factors, 104–106


<<<PAGE 3673>>>
acquired childhood disorders, 106–107
environmental and sociocultural factors, 107
genetic causes, 100–104
history, 96
in ICD-10, 93, 94t
laboratory examination, 96
chromosomal analysis, 96–97
electroencephalography, 97
hearing and speech evaluations, 97
neuroimaging, 97
urine and blood analysis, 97, 97f
mild, 94t, 95
moderate, 94t, 95
pharmacologic interventions, 99
prevalence, 100
prevention
primary, 98
secondary and tertiary, 98
profound, 94t, 95
psychiatric disorders with, 98
attention-deficit disorders, 98
neurologic disorders, 98
psychosocial interventions
behavior therapy, 98
cognitive-behavioral interventions, 98–99
educational interventions, 98
family education, 99
social interventions, 99
and self-injurious behaviors, 95
services and support for children with, 99–100
severe, 94t, 95
societal approaches to children with, 93
treatment, 98–100
unspecified intellectual disability, 95
Intellectual functioning, assessment of, 52, 54
Intelligence quotient (IQ), 93
Intensive outpatient treatment (IOP), 827


<<<PAGE 3674>>>
Interferon-α, 986
Interleukin 6 (IL-6), 985
Intermittent explosive disorder, 553
Internal consistency reliability, 57
International Classification of Diseases, 10th edition (ICD-10), 93, 94t,
488
International Classification of Sleep Disorders, third edition (ICSD-3),
488, 489t
Internet communications, 838
Internet gaming disorder, 332–333, 333t
Interpersonal psychotherapy (ITP)
case studies, 779–780
depression in children and adolescents, 178
group format, 780–781, 780t
problem areas, 779t
techniques, 778, 778t
The Interpretation of Dreams (Freud), 1058, 1059
Interpreter, use of, 16–17
Interracial marriages, 907
Interrater reliability, 30
Interview
of adult patients. See Psychiatric interview
children, 75–77
Interview room, 5
Intimacy, mental health and, 1036
Intoxicated by My Illness (Anatole Broyard), 865
Invega. See Paliperidone
Iron triangle, 869
Isoptin. See Verapamil
Itraconazole, 700
Jackson Personality Inventory (JPI), 58t
Jacobsen, Charles, 740
Jacobson, Edith, 1082
Jacobson, Edmund, 766
Jactatio capitis nocturna. See Sleep-related rhythmic movement disorder


<<<PAGE 3675>>>
Jaffee v. Redmon, 837
Jet lag, 497
Job loss, 584
Judgment, 11
assessment of, 11, 13t
Judgmental interventions, 15
Judgment of line orientation, 53t, 54
Jung, Carl Gustav, 1082–1083
Justice, 829–830
Juvenile sex offenders, 904–905, 905t
Kandel, Eric, 786
Kaplan, Edith, 52
Kaufman Adolescent and Adult Intelligence Test (KAIT), 82t
Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children (K-ABC), 81, 82t
Kaufman Test of Educational Achievement, Brief and Comprehensive
Forms (K-TEA), 82t, 84
Kava, 713
Kernberg, Otto, 1083
Ketalar. See Ketamine
Ketamine, 215, 303, 304, 319, 320–321, 325, 391, 592
Ketamine (Ketalar), 964
Ketanest. See Esketamine
Ketoconazole, 700
Kevorkian, Jack, 864
Khat, 303
Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for SchoolAge Children (K-SADS), 75, 77
Kidney, dopamine in, 955
Kinetic Family Drawing (KFD), 83t
Kleine–Levin syndrome, 163, 474, 491, 602
Klein, Melanie, 1083
Kleptomania, 553–554, 555t
Klinefelter syndrome, 21
Klonopin. See Clonazepam
Klüver–Bucy syndrome, 243, 933


<<<PAGE 3676>>>
Kohlberg, Lawrence, 902
Kohs Block Test, 85
Kohut, Heinz, 918t, 1084
Korsakoff psychosis, 439
Korsakoff syndrome, 246–247, 277, 284, 932–933
Kraepelin, Emil, 366
Kral, VA, 263
Kübler-Ross, Elisabeth, 847
Kuru, 257


<<<PAGE 3677>>>
Laboratory testing and therapeutic blood monitoring, 603
Laboratory testing, in psychiatry. See Medical assessment and laboratory
testing
Lacan, Jacques, 1084
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 66
Lamictal. See Lamotrigine
Lamotrigine, 253t, 375, 593, 600
antiseizure effects or efficacy, 659
dosage and administration, 660, 660t
drug interactions, 659–660
pharmacologic actions, 659
precautions and adverse reactions, 659
therapeutic indications, 659
Language
assessment of, 54
competence, 107
development, milestones in, 108t
Language disorders, 47–48, 107–114, 109t, 143
autism spectrum disorder and, 126, 126t
differential diagnosis of, 111t
in DSM-5, 107, 109, 109t
expressive language deficits, 107–111
clinical features, 109
comorbidity, 111
course and prognosis, 110
diagnosis, 109–110
differential diagnosis, 110, 111t
etiology, 111
treatment, 111
mixed receptive and expressive deficits, 112
clinical features, 112
comorbidity, 113
course and prognosis, 113
diagnosis, 112
differential diagnosis, 113


<<<PAGE 3678>>>
epidemiology, 113
etiology, 114
treatment, 113
Language, hemispheric lateralization, 931–932
Language therapy, 111
Lanoxin. See Digoxin
Lashley, Karl, 1023
Late adulthood, 913–921
ageism, 918–919, 919t
biologic changes with old age, 914, 915t
causes of death, 916
countertransference, 919
demographics, 913–914, 913t, 914t
developmental tasks of, 913t
economics of old age, 919–920
ethnicity and race, 916, 917f
exercise, diet, and health, 916–917, 917t
geographic distribution, 916
life expectancy, 915–916, 916t
longevity, 914–915
long-term care, 920–921, 920f, 921f
retirement, 920
sex ratios, 916, 917f
sexual activity, 920
social activity, 918
theories of development in old age, 917–918, 918t
transference, 919
Latency period, 895
Lateral plates, division of, 939
Latuda. See Lurasidone
Law of coercion, 1080
Laxatives, for encopresis, 482
Lead encephalopathy, 262
Leading technique, during interview, 15
Lead intoxication, 63, 163
Lead poisoning, 262
Learned helplessness theory, 399


<<<PAGE 3679>>>
Learning
concept, 1014–1015
defined, 1013
instrumental learning, 1018–1020
Pavlovian and operant learning together, 1020–1022, 1021f
Pavlovian conditioning, 1015–1018
theory, 1013–1022
Least restrictive alternative, 841
Lederberg, Marguerite S., 856
Legal issues, of psychiatry. See Forensic and legal issues
Leg cramps, sleep-related, 501
Lesch–Nyhan syndrome, 87t, 103, 155, 609
Let’s Face It! program, 128
Level of care, 825–827, 826t
Levetiracetam, 665
Levinson, Daniel, 911, 918t
Levitra. See Vardenafil
Levodopa, 598
Levomilnacipran, 635
Levorphanol, for pain management in dying patients, 861t
Levothyroxine, 607
Levoxyl. See Levothyroxine
Lewin, Kurt, 1084
Lewis, Dorothy, 584
Lewis, N. D. C., 45
Lewy body disease, 243, 243f, 243t
Lexical processing, 931
Lezak, Muriel, 50
Lhx5 gene, 945
Lhx transcription factor, 950
Libido, 1060
Lidcombe Program, 119
Lidocaine, 732
Life and death instincts, 1061
Light therapy, 514
Lima, Almeida, 740
Limb apraxia, 48


<<<PAGE 3680>>>
Limbic leukotomy, 741
outcome with, 742
Limbic system
function of, 934
innervation, 954–955
in schizophrenia, 358
LIMK kinase, 949
Lindemann, Eric, 753
Linkage analysis, gene mapping and, 987f
Linkage disequilibrium (LD), 988–989
Linoleic acid (LA), 977–978
α-Linolenic acid (ALA), 977
Lisdexamfetamine (Vyvanse), 685t
LIS-1 protein, 949
Lissencephalies, 949
Listening, 21
Lithium, 19, 129, 592, 598, 600, 601
for acute mania, 373
dosage and clinical guidelines, 653–654
drug interactions, 653, 654t
for early-onset bipolar disorder, 183
laboratory interferences, 653
laboratory monitoring, 654–655
maintenance treatment with, 649
nonpsychiatric uses of, 650t
patient education, 655, 655t
pharmacologic actions, 649
precautions and adverse effects, 650–653, 651t
in adolescents, 653
cardiac effects, 651, 652
cognitive effects, 651
dermatologic effects, 652
in elderly persons, 653
gastrointestinal effects, 651
neurologic effects, 651
in pregnant women, 653
renal effects, 651–652


<<<PAGE 3681>>>
thyroid effects, 652
toxicity and overdoses, 652–653, 652t
psychiatric uses of, 650t
therapeutic indications, 649–650
toxicity, 63
Liver function tests (LFTs), 66
Living will, 858
LOD (logarithm of the odds) scores, 988
Longitudinal, Expert, All Data (LEAD) standard, 31
Long-term potentiation (LTP), 1023
Lophophora diffusa, 320
Lophophora williamsii, 320
Lorazepam, 615
Lorenz, Konrad, 1042–1043
Loss of ego boundaries, 338
LSD. See Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
L-tryptophan, for insomnia, 509
Lumateperone, 608, 615
Lurasidone, 608
for bipolar disorder, 375t
dosages, 615
drug interactions, 615
indications, 614
for schizophrenia, 352t
side effects, 614–615
Luria, Alexander, 52
Luria-Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery: Children’s Revision
NNB:C, 83t
Lyme disease, 256, 986
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 213, 215, 303, 319
onset of action of, 319
physiologic symptoms of, 319, 319t
Machover Draw-A-Person Test (DAP), 83t
Madrid Declaration, 880
Magnesium levels, in alcohol-abusing patients, 65


<<<PAGE 3682>>>
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), 61
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 61, 70–71, 71f, 225–226
in dementia, 71
in neurotoxicity associated with alcoholism, 71
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), 61, 71–73, 72t
in alcohol dependence, 72–73
in dementia, 72
in schizophrenia, 72
Magnetic seizure therapy (MST), 735
definition, 738
future directions, 738
mechanism of action, 738
side effects, 738
treatment algorithms, 738
Mahler, Margaret, 363, 892, 893t
Maintenance of wakefulness test (MWT), 503
Major depressive disorder (MDD), see Depression
insomnia and, 491
Major depressive episode, in child, 175
Major neurocognitive disorder. See Neurocognitive disorders
Make-a-Picture Story (MAPS), 59t
Making Choices: Social Problem Solving Skills for Children (MC), 193
Maladaptive assumptions, 768–769
Malan, David, 753
Malignant senescent forgetfulness (MSF), 263t
Malingering, 580–582
and conversion disorder, 582, 582t
differential diagnosis, 582, 582t
factitious disorder and, 582
somatoform disorders and, 582
Malpractice. See Medical Malpractice
Man Against Himself (Menninger), 1085
Manganese intoxication, 63
Manganese poisoning, 262
Mania. See bipolar disorder
Man’s Search for Meaning (Frankl), 1080
MAOI. See Monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI)


<<<PAGE 3683>>>
Maple syrup urine disease, 103–104
Marginalization and acculturative stress, 1049
Marijuana, 212–213, 215, 290. See also Cannabis
during pregnancy, 886
by teenagers, 903
Marital discord, 589
Marital therapy, 907
Marriage
and couples therapy, 907
interracial, 907
same-sex, 907
Mash1 gene, 942
mutant, 942, 945
Maslow, Abraham, 1084
MaterniT21, 97
Mathematics deficits, 145–147
clinical features, 145
comorbidity, 146
course and prognosis, 146
diagnosis, 146
differential diagnosis, 146
pathology and laboratory examination, 146
treatment, 146–147
Math1 transcription factor, 950
Maturity and mental health, 1035–1036
Mayo Clinic Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (MCADRC), 262
Maze learning, 1023
McCarthy Scales of Children’s Abilities, 81
MCI. See Mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
MDA (3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine), 303
MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine), 303
MeCP2 gene, 994
Medial ganglionic eminence (MGE), 945
Medial geniculate nucleus (MGN), 927
Medial temporal lobe, function of, 932
Medical assessment and laboratory testing, 60
clinical chemistry, 65–66


<<<PAGE 3684>>>
CNS imaging, 61
electrocardiogram, 67–68
electroconvulsive therapy, 64
electroencephalogram, 67
endocrine evaluations, 64–65
general observation in, 20–22
history and physical examination, 60–61
and insomnia, 491
infectious disease testing, 66–67
medical history in, 18–19
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 64
patients undergoing psychiatric treatment, 23
physical health monitoring, 60
physical examination in. See Physical examination
and restless legs syndrome, 502t
review of systems in, 19–20
serum medication concentrations, 63–64
and sleep-related movement disorders, 502–503
toxicology studies, 61–63, 62t
Medical Board of California Action Report (July 2006), 830
Medical clearance, 23
Medical conditions
and insomnia, 491
and restless legs syndrome, 502t
and sleep-related movement disorders, 502–503
Medical foods, 710, 713t
Medical illnesses
in family histories, 8
history of, 18–19
and psychiatric disorder, 7
Medical malpractice, 836–837
negligent prescription practices, 836
split treatment, 836–837
medical records use in, 27
Medical record, 27–29, 27t
blogs/weblogs, 28
e-mail, 28


<<<PAGE 3685>>>
ethical issues and, 28
HIPAA and, 28–29, 29t
patient access to, 28
personal notes and observations, 27
psychiatric evaluation, 16
psychotherapy notes, 27–28
use of, 27
Medical screening, importance of, 23
Medicare, 920
Medicare hospice guidelines, 862
Medication-induced acute akathisia
diagnosis, 597
epidemiology, 597
signs, 597
symptoms, 597
treatment, 597
Medication-induced acute dystonia
course and prognosis, 596
diagnosis, 595
differential diagnosis, 596
epidemiology, 595
etiology, 595
signs, 595
symptoms, 595
treatment, 596–597
Medication-induced postural tremor
diagnosis, 598
epidemiology, 598
etiology, 598
signs, 598
symptoms, 598
treatment, 598
Medication nonadherence, 785
Medication/substance use
and central sleep apnea, 495
and insomnia, 491, 491t
and sleep-related movement disorders, 502–503, 502t


<<<PAGE 3686>>>
Megacolon, 483
Megaloblastic madness, 262
Melancholia, 380
Melatonin, 514, 1003
circadian rhythms and, 1004
for insomnia, 509–510
function of, 1004
human, 1004
rhythms, 1002
seasonality and, 1003
Melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine), 681
Melatonin receptor agonists, 680–681
Mellaril. See Thioridazine
Memantine
for dementia, 239
dosage and clinical guidelines, 699
drug interactions, 699
pharmacologic actions, 698–699
precautions and adverse reactions, 699
therapeutic indications, 699
Memory
anatomy of, 932–934
assessment of, 54
in MSE, 10, 11t, 13t
cortical organization of memory, 1023–1024
frontal contributions to memory, 1028
functions, assessment of, 1030–1032, 1031f
long-term, 49
older adults, 89
memory systems, 1028
new learning capacity, 1032
priming, 1027–1028
psychogenic amnesia, 1032–1033
remote memory, 1032
retrograde amnesia, 1026–1027
self-reports, 1032
short-term, 49


<<<PAGE 3687>>>
synapses to memory, 1022–1023
systems, 1028
types of, 1029t
and unconscious, 1034
Memory and amnesia, 1024–1026
specialized memory function, 1024–1026, 1024f, 1025f, 1026f, 1026t
Memory disorders, 49–50
Meningitis, 106
Menninger, Karl A., 1085
Menopause, 981
Mens rea, 843
Menstrual history, 20
Mental coprolalia, 156
Mental disorder
insomnia and, 491
Mental health
defining, 1035
discrimination, service utilization, 1050–1051
disparities in, 1050–1051
immigration acculturation and, 1050
models, 1035–1040
normality, 1034–1040
spiritual emotions, 1036–1037
Mental Health Atlas 2005, 876
Mental Health: New Understanding, New Hope (WHO report), 880
Mental imagery, 772
Mentalization-based treatment (MBT), 786–787
alliance building in, 787t
assessment and introductory process in, 787
for borderline personality disorder, 573
contraindications, 787
indications, 787
technique, 786–787
Mentalizing, 786
Mental retardation. See Intellectual disability (ID)
Mental status examination (MSE), 9–11, 12–13t, 27, 52
abstract reasoning, 11


<<<PAGE 3688>>>
affect, 9
appearance and behavior, 9
children, 79–80, 79t, 80t
cognition, 10–11, 11t
insight, 11
judgment, 11
mental status at interview, 9
mood, 9
motor activity, 9
neuropsychiatric, 225, 225t
older adults, 88–89
perceptual disturbances, 10
speech, 9
thought content, 9–10
thought process, 10, 10t
Meprobamate, 298, 668, 678
Mercury
intoxication, 63
poisoning, 262
Merrill program, 144
Mescaline, 319, 320
Mesopontine complex, 956
Metabolic acidosis, 709
Metamemory, 1032
Metformin, 709–710
Methadone, 687, 689
maintenance, 689
in opioid use disorder treatment, 293
for opioid withdrawal, 295
for pain management in dying patients, 861t
withdrawal, 293
Methamphetamine, 302
Methaqualone, 298
overdose of, 299
3-Methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG), 958
α-methyldopa (Aldomet), 621
3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), 215, 319–320


<<<PAGE 3689>>>
Methylphenidate, 302
for ADHD, 135, 136t
in autism spectrum disorder, 129
Methylxanthenes, and insomnia, 491
Meyer, Adolf, 1085
MHPG (3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol), 958
Mibefradil, 700
Mickey Finn, 298
Microglia, human brain, 924
Micro RNAs (miRNAs), 946, 946f
Microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs), 949
Middle adulthood
climacterium, 911
custody of child, 912
developmental crisis, 911
divorce, 912–913
empty-nest syndrome, 911
features, 909t
friendships, 909–910
intercourse outside of marriage, 913
maturity in midlife, 913
midlife crisis, 911
midlife transition, 911
reappraising relationships, 910
sexuality, 910–911
transition from young adulthood to, 908–909
Middle years, development in. See School-age children, development in
Midlife crisis, 911
Midlife transition, 911
Migration and acculturation, 1048–1049
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 262–266
assessment
biomarkers, 263
genetics, 263–264
neuroimaging, 264
neuropsychological, 263
clinical presentation, 263


<<<PAGE 3690>>>
cognitive continuum, 264, 264f
course and prognosis, 264–265
criteria for, 262, 262t
definition, 262
epidemiology and etiology, 265, 265f
historical perspective, 263
terms related to, 263t
treatment, 265, 266t
Milieu therapy, 794
Military psychiatry, 834
Miller, Neal, 765
Million Clinical Multiaxial Inventory (MCMI), 58t
Millon Adolescent Personality Inventory (MAPI), 83t
Milnacipran, 635
Miltown. See Meprobamate
Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE), 9, 45, 52, 89
Minipress. See Prazosin
Minnesota model, 214
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), 1041
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 2 (MMPI-2), 54t, 55, 56,
57, 58t
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-Adolescent (MMPI-A),
83t
Minocycline, 592
Mirapex. See Pramipexole
Mirtazapine
dosage and administration, 638
drug interactions, 638
mechanism of action, 637
precautions and adverse reactions, 637–638, 637t
therapeutic indications, 637
Mixed receptive–expressive language deficits, 112–114. See also
Language disorders
MMPI. See Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI)
MMSE. See Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE)
M’Naghten rule, 843
Mobile or cell phone compulsion, 333


<<<PAGE 3691>>>
Modafinil, 302
for ADHD, 137
for shift work sleep disorder, 514
Model penal code, 845
Modified HIV Dementia Scale, 258–259
Money, John, 894
Moniz, António Egaz, 740
Monoamine hypothesis, 398
Monoamine neurotransmitters, 954
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, 389, 478, 591, 643, 644
and blood pressure measurement, 64
dosage and clinical guidelines, 646–647, 647t
drug interactions, 646
laboratory interferences, 646
pharmacologic actions, 645
precautions and adverse reactions, 645–646
therapeutic indications, 645
Monoamine oxidase type A (MAOA), 957, 1319
Monoamine oxidase type B (MAOB), 958
Monoamine receptors, 960t
Monoaminergic synapses, schematic, 957f
Montessori technique, 152
Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS), 603
Mood
and affect, 9
initial assessment of, 9, 12t
Mood-congruent manic delusions, 365
Mood disorders, 385. See also Depression, Major Depressive Disorder
and Bipolar Disorder
alcohol-related disorders and, 280
misdiagnosis of, 385t
scales for assessment of, 39, 42–43t
Mood stabilizers, 591, 648–668. See also Lithium, Anticonvulsants
in autism spectrum disorder, 129
for early-onset bipolar disorder, 183
Moral development, in adolescence, 901–902
Moratorium (Ericksonian), 899


<<<PAGE 3692>>>
Moro reflex, 887, 887f
Morphine
for pain management in dying patients, 861t
withdrawal, 293
Motivational interviewing, 16
Motor activity, initial assessment of, 9
Motor commands, corticalization of, 933
Motor cortex, anatomy of, 929–930
Motor disorders, 149–162. See also specific disorder
chronic motor or vocal tic disorder, 162
developmental coordination disorder, 149–152
stereotypic movement disorder, 152–155, 153t
Tourette disorder, 155–162, 156t
Motor function, assessment of, 55
Motor strip, 929
Motor systems, organization of, 928–936
Mourning, 850
MSE. See Mental status examination (MSE)
MST. See Magnetic seizure therapy (MST)
Mullen Scales of Early Learning, 83t
Multimodal Treatment Study of Children with ADHD (MTA Study), 137
Multiple personality disorder. See Dissociative identity disorder
Multiple sclerosis (MS), 246, 255
Multiple sleep latency test (MSLT), 503
Munchausen syndrome, 452. See also Factitious Disorder
Munchausen syndrome by proxy, 822–823
Murphy, Gardner, 1085
Murray, Henry, 60, 1085
Muscarinic anticholinergic drugs, 732
Muscle relaxation, 766
Mutism, 342
Myelencephalon, 939
Myelin sheaths
human brain, 924
oligodendroglial cells, 923, 949
Myoclonic disorders, 158t
dystonia, 158t


<<<PAGE 3693>>>
Nabilone, 290
Nabiximols, 290
Nail-biting, 152, 153. See also Stereotypic movement disorder
Nalmefene, 689, 690, 691, 692
Naloxone, 293, 689–690
dosage and clinical guidelines, 692
drug interactions, 692
laboratory interferences, 692
pharmacologic actions, 690
precautions and adverse reactions, 691–692
therapeutic indications, 690–691
Naloxone (Narcan) Challenge Test, 690t, 691
Naltrexone, 293, 297, 689–690
in alcohol use disorder treatment, 283, 284t
in autism spectrum disorder, 129
dosage and clinical guidelines, 692
drug interactions, 692
laboratory interferences, 692
pharmacologic actions, 690
precautions and adverse reactions, 691–692
therapeutic indications, 690–691
Narcan. See Naloxone
Narcissism, 1061–1064
Narcissistic personality disorder
clinical presentation, 560
comorbidity, 569
course and prognosis, 570
diagnosis, 565, 565t
differential diagnosis, 568
epidemiology, 575
treatment
pharmacotherapy, 573
psychotherapy, 573
Narcolepsy, 486. See also Sleep–wake disorders
and cataplexy, 491
clinical presentation, 486


<<<PAGE 3694>>>
diagnosis, 491, 493t
differential diagnosis, 509
hypocretin (orexin) deficit and, 491
psychiatric disorders with, 509, 510t
test findings in, 503, 505
treatment for, 512–513
Narcotic Anonymous (NA), 7, 296
Nardil. See Phenelzine
Narrative medicine, 781–783
Narrative psychotherapy, 781–783
character in, 782
future directions, 783
metaphor in, 782
plot in, 782
Narrow-band personality tests, 56
National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI), 356–357, 871
National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey, 1051
National Comorbidity Study (NCS), 1050
National Comorbidity Study Replication (NCS-R), 1050
National Comorbidity Survey (NCS), 868
National Comorbidity Survey-Replication (NCS-R), 868
National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, 847
National Institute for Mental Health Diagnostic Interview Schedule for
Children Version IV (NIMH DISC-IV), 75
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 589, 898
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), 273, 274, 886
National Institutes of Mental Health (NIMH), 263
National Survey of Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), 274
National Vietnam Veteran Longitudinal Study (NVVLS), 435
National Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study (NVVRS), 435
NCS. See National Comorbidity Study (NCS)
NCS-R. See National Comorbidity Study Replication (NCS-R)
Nefazodone, 593, 638
dosage and clinical guidelines, 639
drug interactions and laboratory interferences, 639
pharmacologic actions, 638
precautions and adverse reactions, 638–639, 639t


<<<PAGE 3695>>>
therapeutic indications, 638
Neglect syndromes, 49
Nemiroff, Robert, 909
Neologism, 10, 10t
Nerve growth factor (NGF), 942
Neugarten, Bernice, 918t
Neural crest, development of, 938
Neural patterning, concept of, 942–943
Neural plasticity, 1022
Neural plate, 938–939
Neuregulin 1 (NRG1) gene, 964
Neuroacanthocytosis, 158t
Neuroblasts, 948, 953
Neurocognitive disorders, 224–266
due to Alzheimer disease, 234t
amnestic disorders, 245–249
clinical evaluation, 224–225
cognitive functions, 225
mental status examination, 225, 225t
definitions of, 224
delirium, 226–232
dementia, 233–245
frontotemporal, 234t
due to general medical condition, 249–262
due to HIV infection, 235t
due to Huntington disease, 235t
with Lewy bodies, 234t
mild cognitive impairment, 262–266
due to Parkinson disease, 235t
pathology and laboratory examination, 225–226, 226t
brain biopsy, 226
computed tomography, 225–226
electroencephalography, 225
magnetic resonance imaging, 225–226
neuropsychologic testing, 226
due to Prion disease, 235t
due to traumatic brain injury, 235t


<<<PAGE 3696>>>
vascular, 234t
Neurocognitive disorders, due to general medical condition, 249–262
brain tumors, 253–254
demyelinating disorders, 255
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 255
multiple sclerosis, 255, 255f
endocrine disorders
adrenal disorders, 261
parathyroid disorders, 261
pituitary disorders, 261
thyroid disorders, 260–261
environmental toxins, 262
arsenic, 262
lead, 262
manganese, 262
mercury, 262
epilepsy, 249–253
head trauma, 254–255
immune disorders, 257
HIV infection and AIDS, 257–260
infectious diseases
chronic meningitis, 255
herpes simplex encephalitis, 255
Lyme disease, 256
neurosyphilis, 255
Prion disease, 256–257
rabies encephalitis, 255
subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, 255–256
metabolic disorders, 261
acute intermittent porphyria, 261
diabetic ketoacidosis, 261
hepatic encephalopathy, 261
hypoglycemic encephalopathy, 261
uremic encephalopathy, 261
nutritional disorders
cobalamin deficiency, 262
niacin deficiency, 261–262


<<<PAGE 3697>>>
thiamine deficiency, 262
Neurodegenerative disorders
and sleep disorders, 491
Neurodevelopment, 942
NeuroD mutant, 945
NeuroD transcription factor, 950
Neuroendocrine function, 986
Neurofeedback, 128
Neurofibrillary tangles, 240, 241f
Neurofibromatosis, 103
Neurogenesis
adult, 952
hypotheses, 398
neural development and, 937
patterns of, 940–941
timing of, 944
Neurogenetics, 986–988
Neuroimaging, 68–74
indications for
in clinical research, 69
dementia, 68
neurologic deficits, 68
intellectual disability, 97
and Memory, 1028–1030, 1029f, 1030f
techniques
CT scan, 69–70, 70f
functional MRI, 73
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, 71–73, 72t
MRI scan, 70–71, 71f
PET, 74
SPECT, 73–74
Neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia, 702–703
Neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism
diagnosis, 594
differential diagnosis, 594
epidemiology, 594
etiology, 594


<<<PAGE 3698>>>
signs, 594
symptoms, 594
treatment, 594
Neuroleptic-induced tardive dyskinesia, 594
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS), 594–595
diagnosis, 594
disease course and prognosis, 595
epidemiology, 595
laboratory workup for, 64
and muscle injury, 64
signs, 594
symptoms, 594
treatment, 595, 596t
Neuroligin (NLGN) genes, 995
Neurologic examination, 22, 68
Neurologic soft signs, 81
Neurons
disturbed migration of, 952
human brain, 951
life cycle of, 936
migration, 940, 948
Neurontin. See Gabapentin
Neuropeptide neurotransmitters, 965t
Neuropeptides, 965–966
biosynthesis of, 966
distribution, 966
functional studies of, 966
regulation, 966
signaling by, 967
Neuropil, 934, 935
Neuroplasticity hypotheses, 398
Neuropsychiatric inventory (NPI), 45
Neuropsychological assessment
approaches to, 52
battery approach, 52
hypothesis testing approach, 52
mental status examinations, 52


<<<PAGE 3699>>>
screening approaches, 52
domains of, 52
attention, 54
effort and motivation, assessment of, 55
executive functions, 55
intellectual functioning, 52, 54
interview, 52
language, 54
memory, 54
psychological factors, 55
sensory and motor functions, 54–55
tests of neuropsychological functioning, 53–54t
visuospatial functions, 54, 55f
therapeutic discussion of results, 55–56
Neuropsychological Assessment Battery (NAB), 52
Neuropsychologic testing, 226
Neuroses, 745, 1068–1069, 1068t
Neurosteroids, 978
Neurosyphilis, 255
Neurotensin (NT), 969
Neurotransmitters
in Alzheimer disease, 240
effects of, on personality traits, 575
in schizophrenia, 358–360
Neurotrophins, mitotic precursors and, 942
Neurulation
mechanisms, 939f
neural plate and, 938–939
Newman, John C., 45
Niacin (nicotinic acid) deficiency, 261–262, 284
Nicotine
adverse effects of, 312
inhaler, 310
lozenges, 310
nasal spray, 310
patches, 310
polacrilex gum, 310


<<<PAGE 3700>>>
Nicotine receptors, 961
Nicotine replacement therapies, 310, 310t
Nifedipine, 668
Night-eating syndrome
clinical features, 469
course and prognosis, 476
diagnosis and clinical features, 473
differential diagnosis, 474
epidemiology, 478
etiology, 480
treatment, 478
Nightmares, 500
exacerbate, 500
treatment for, 515
Night owls, 496, 497
Night terror, 499
Nimodipine, 668
Nitric oxide (NO), 971
Nitric oxide synthase (NOS), 970
Nizoral. See Ketoconazole
Nkx2.1 gene, 951
Nkx2.2 gene, 943
Nkx6.1 gene, 943
Nkx2.2 transcription factor, 944
NMDA. See N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
NMDA receptor antagonists, 648
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), 1017
Nocebo phenomenon, 608
Nocturnal leg cramps, 501
Nocturnal myoclonus, 598. See Periodic limb movement disorder
(PLMD)
Nonapproved dosages and uses, 607–608
Nonbenzodiazepine GABA agonists
dosage and clinical guidelines, 680
drug interactions, 680
pharmacologic action, 679
precautions and adverse reactions, 679–680


<<<PAGE 3701>>>
therapeutic indications, 679
Noncompliance with treatment, 587
Nondeclarative memory, 1027
Nonhuman primates, social deprivation in, 1044t
Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV), 514
Nonmaleficence, 829
Non–rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, 487t, 488
Nonsexual boundary violations, 830
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 601, 735
Non-suicidal self-injury, 333
Nonverbal communication, during psychiatric interview, 14, 15
Noradrenergic agents
for tic disorder, 160
Noradrenergic pathways, Nucleus basalis, 956
Norepinephrine, in depression, 396
Normality, mental health and, 1034–1040
Normal pressure hydrocephalus, 68
Normative sample, 56
NSDUH. See National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH)
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), 70
NudF gene, 949
Nuedexta. See Dextromethorphan/Quinidine
Number dyslexia, 48
Nutritional disorders
cobalamin deficiency, 262
niacin deficiency, 261–262
thiamine deficiency, 262
NVVLS. See National Vietnam Veteran Longitudinal Study (NVVLS)
NVVRS. See National Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study (NVVRS)
Obesity, 628
schizophrenia and, 349
Objective personality tests, 57, 58t
Object libido, 1064
Observation, general, 20–22
Obsessional thoughts, 9


<<<PAGE 3702>>>
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 444, 475, 603, 627, 641, 742,
743, 795, 806–807
caudate nucleus and, 929
clinical presentation, 560
comorbidity, 569
course and prognosis, 570
diagnosis, 566, 566t
differential diagnosis, 568
epidemiology, 575
in children and adolescents, 203–207
course and prognosis, 205
diagnosis and clinical features, 203–204
differential diagnosis, 204–205
epidemiology, 206
etiology, 206–207
genetic factors, 206
neurochemistry, 206
neuroimaging, 206–207
neuroimmunology, 206
pathology and laboratory examination, 204
treatment, 205–206
stimulant-induced, 305–306
treatment
pharmacotherapy, 574
psychotherapy, 574
Obstructive airway disease, 19
Obstructive interventions, 15
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), 492, 494–495t
predisposing factors, 492
test findings in, 505–506
treatment for, 513–514
oral appliances, 514
positional therapy, 514
positive airway pressure, 513–514, 513f
surgical intervention, 514
weight loss, 514
Occasion setting, 1021


<<<PAGE 3703>>>
Occupational history, 19
Occupational problems, 582–584
career and job problems of women, 583–584
chronic illness, 584
domestic violence and work distress, 584
job loss, 584
stress and workplace, 583
suicide risk, 583
work choices and changes, 583
work distress, 583
working teenagers, 584
working within home, 584
OCD. See Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
O’Connor v. Donaldson, 840
Oculomotor apraxia, 927
Odd–even consistent reliability, 57
ODIN. See European Outcome of Depression International Network
(ODIN)
Office of Civil Rights (OCR), 28, 29
Off-label use of a drug, 607
Olanzapine, 598, 600, 608
for bipolar disorder, 375t
for delirium, 230, 231t
for dissociative identity disorder, 448
dosages, 610–611
drug interactions, 611
for early-onset schizophrenia, 209, 210
as extended-release injectable suspension, 611
indications, 610
for irritability in autism spectrum disorder, 128
pharmacology, 610
for schizophrenia, 352t
side effects, 611
for tic disorder, 160
Old age. See Late adulthood
Older adults, psychiatric examination of, 87
early detection and prevention strategies, 90


<<<PAGE 3704>>>
medical history, 90
mental status examination, 88–89
functional assessment, 88
general description, 88
intellectual tasks, 89
judgment, 89
language output, 88–89
memory, 89
mood, feelings, and affect, 88
orientation, 89
perceptual disturbances, 88
reading and writing, 89
sensorium and cognition, 89
thought, 89
visuospatial functioning, 89
neuropsychological examination, 89–90
psychiatric history, 87–88
Olfactory bulb, 953
Olfactory Reference Syndrome, 419
Omega-3 fatty acids, 977–978
Omega-6 fatty acids, 977–978
Omissions, 114. See also Speech sound disorder
Ondansetron, in alcohol use disorder treatment, 283
Open-ended questions
during interview, 5
Operant/instrumental learning, 1018–1020. See also Learning
motivational factors, 1019–1020
relation between behavior and payoff, 1018–1019
theories of reinforcement, 1019
Opioid receptor agonists, 686–687
dosage and clinical guidelines, 689, 692
drug–drug interactions, 689
drug interactions, 692
laboratory interferences, 689, 692
pharmacologic actions, 687, 690
precautions and adverse reactions, 688–689, 691–692
therapeutic indications, 687–688, 690–691


<<<PAGE 3705>>>
Opioid-related disorders, 291–298
induced mood disorder, 293
biologic and genetic factors, 298
clinical features, 292
comorbidity, 293
diagnosis, 292–293
epidemiology, 297
etiology, 297–298
intoxication delirium, 293
pathology, 297
psychosocial factors, 297–298
psychotic disorder, 293
sexual dysfunction, 293
sleep disorder, 293
treatment and rehabilitation, 293–296
unspecified, 293
Opioids, 291, 598
abuse, see opioid use disorder
addiction, 292
adolescents and, 903
adverse effect, 297
antagonists, 293, 296
available in United States, 292
intoxication, 292
neuropharmacology, 297
nonmedical use of, 215
overdose, 297
overdose treatment, 293
for pain management in dying patients, 860, 861t
partial agonist, 293
physical effects of, 297
prenatal exposure to, 104, 106
psychiatric disorders with use, 294t
synthetic, 291
tolerance and dependence, 297
withdrawal, 292–293
treatment, 295, 295t


<<<PAGE 3706>>>
Opioid substitution therapy, 295–296
Opioid use disorder, 292
epidemiology, 297
during pregnancy, 296
treatment of, 295–296
buprenorphine/naloxone combination, 296
education and needle exchange, 296
methadone, 296
opioid antagonists, 296
psychotherapy, 296
therapeutic communities, 296
Oppositional defiant disorder, 186, 187–189, 187t
course and prognosis, 188
diagnosis and clinical features, 187
differential diagnosis, 188
epidemiology, 189
etiology, 189
pathology and laboratory examination, 187–188
treatment, 188–189
Ordinal classification, 30
Organic amnestic disorders, 439
Organ inferiority, 1078
Orlistat (Xenical, Alli), 708–709
Orton Gillingham approach, 144
OSA. See Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
Osborne, Edward, 1040
Other Conditions that May be a Focus of Clinical Attention (DSM-5
section), 580–590, 581t, 586
acculturation problem, 586–587
adult antisocial behavior, 584–586
bereavement, 582
malingering, 580–582
noncompliance with treatment, 587
occupational problems, 582–584
phase of life problems, 587
relational problems, 587–590
Otx gene, 946


<<<PAGE 3707>>>
Outpatient care, 827
Outpatient records, 27
Overdose, safety in, 600–601
Overeaters Anonymous (OA), 7
Over-the-counter (OTC) sleep aids, for insomnia, 509–510
Oxcarbazepine, 253t, 600
dosing and administration, 663
drug interactions, 663
pharmacokinetics, 663
Oxybutynin, 600
Oxybutynin chloride, for sleep enuresis, 515
Oxycodone, for pain management in dying patients, 861t
Oxymorphone, for pain management in dying patients, 861t
Oxytocin (OT)
function of, 969
vasopressin and, 969
Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT), 53t
Paget disease, 19
Pain management, in dying patients, 860–861, 861t
Paired associative stimulation (PAS), 737
Paliperidone, 608
for bipolar disorder, 375t
dosage, 610
indications, 610
pharmacology, 610
for schizophrenia, 353t
side effects, 610
Palliative care, 853–863. See also End-of-life care
advance directives, 858
anxiety in advanced disease, 854
brain death, 858
caring for dying patient, 856–857
caring for family, 858, 859t
communication in, 857
breaking bad news, 857


<<<PAGE 3708>>>
difficult questions from patients, 857, 857t
informed consent, 857
telling truth, 857
confusional states, 855
depression in terminally ill, 854–855
Endicott Substitution Criteria, 854t
disease-specific considerations, 855
end-of-life care, 859–860
end-of-life symptoms, 861–862, 862t
family-centered grief therapy, 855
general treatment principles, 854
pain management, 860–861, 861t
opioids for, 860, 861t
types of pain, 860, 860t
patient–family unit, 855
persistent vegetative state, 858, 858t
prevalence, 854
symptom management, 861–862, 862t
terminal care decisions, 857–858
transition to, 855–856
Panic disorder, 402–403, 402t, 628
with agoraphobia, 641
Panic Disorder Severity Scale (PDSS), 39, 41
Papaver somniferumi, 291
Papez, James, 922, 934
Paradoxical drug responses, 600
Paradoxical insomnia, 490
Paradoxical intention, for insomnia, 512
Paradoxical therapy, 762
Paral. See Paraldehyde
Paraldehyde, 678
Parallel forms of test, 57
Paranoia, 10
Paranoid personality disorder
clinical presentation, 560
comorbidity, 569
course and prognosis, 569


<<<PAGE 3709>>>
diagnosis, 562, 562t
differential diagnosis, 567
epidemiology, 574
symptoms, 562t
treatment
pharmacotherapy, 571
psychotherapy, 571
Parasomnias, 488, 896. See also Parasomnias and sleep-related movement
disorders
NREM-related, 497, 498t, 499
REM-related, 499–500, 499t
test findings in, 506, 507f, 508f
Parasomnias and sleep-related movement disorders
benign sleep myoclonus of infancy, 502, 515
clinical presentation, 488, 488t
differential diagnosis, 509
disorders with, 509, 510t
drug/substance use and, 501, 501t
exploding head syndrome, 501
medical conditions and, 501
NREM-related parasomnias, 497, 498t
confusional arousals, 499
sleep-related eating disorder, 499
sleep terrors, 499
sleepwalking, 497
periodic limb movement disorder, 501
propriospinal myoclonus at sleep onset, 502
REM-related parasomnias, 499, 500t
nightmares, 499–500
recurrent isolated sleep paralysis, 500
REM sleep behavior disorder, 500
restless legs syndrome, 501, 502t
sleep enuresis, 501
sleep-related bruxism, 501–502
sleep-related hallucinations, 501
sleep-related leg cramps, 501
sleep-related rhythmic movement disorder, 502


<<<PAGE 3710>>>
treatment, 515
Parasympathetic system, 930
Parataxic distortion, 1088
Parathormone, 65
Parathyroid disorders, 261
Paraventricular nucleus, 968
Parental fit, 893
Parental right doctrine, 912
Parent–Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT), 111
Parent–Child Interaction Therapy Emotion Development (PCIT-ED),
174, 178
Parent–child relational problem, 588–589
Parenting, 908
Parenting skills, 588
Parent Management Training (PMT), 192
Parents
authoritarian, 588
permissive, 588
Parietal lobe impairment, 933
Parkinson disease, 21
delirium in, 230
dementia of, 244
Parkinsonism, 594
Paroxetine, 604, 627, 631–632, 713
Paroxysmal myoclonic dystonia with vocalization, 158t
Pars tuberalis, melatonin receptors, 1003
Partial hospital treatment, 826–827
Partial seizures, 251
Participant modeling, 772–773
Partner relational problems, 589
Passive-aggressive personality, 567
Paternalism, 829
strong, 829
weak, 829
Pathologic caretaking, 167. See also Reactive attachment disorder
Patient
access to records, 28


<<<PAGE 3711>>>
agitated, 18
deceptive, 18
depressed, 17
difficult patient, interviewing, 17–18
hostile, 18
minimizing concerns of, 15
with psychosis, 17
respect and consideration of, 2
with suicidal ideation, 17–18
violent, 18
Patient education, 602, 785
Patient Health Questionnaire 9 (PHQ-9), 4–5
Patient–physician relationship, 2
in interview, 2–3
Patient-related factors
concurrent medical or psychiatric disorders, 601–602
diagnosis, 601
family response, 601
past treatment response, 601
patient’s attitude toward medication, 601
Patients
civil rights of, 840
communication rights, 841
economic rights, 841
least restrictive alternative, 841
private rights, 841
visitation rights, 841
right to refuse treatment, 840
right to treatment, 840
suicidal, 838
violent, 838–839
Patient selection, for physical examination, 22
Patient Self-Determination Act, 858
Pavlovian conditioning, 1014, 1014f, 1015–1018
conditioned inhibitor, 1016
counterconditioning, 1017
effects on behavior, 1015–1016


<<<PAGE 3712>>>
erasing Pavlovian learning, 1016–1018, 1017t
learning, 1015, 1015f, 1016
nature of learning process, 1016
second-order conditioning, 1016
sensory preconditioning, 1016
Pavlov, Ivan Petrovich
on Pavlovian conditioning, 1014, 1014f
Pavor nocturnus, 499
Pax6 gene, 944
Paxil. See Paroxetine
Pax6 mutation, 946
Pax6 transcription factor, 946
PCT. See Present centered therapy (PCT)
PDGF (platelet-derived growth factor), 949
PE. See Prolonged exposure (PE)
Peabody Individual Achievement Test (PIAT), 84
Peabody Individual Achievement Test-Revised, 143
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test—III (PPVT-III), 82t
Peabody Vocabulary Test, 85
Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with
Streptococcus (PANDAS), 206
Pediatric OCD Treatment Study (POTS), 203
Pedigree analysis, 989
Pedunculopontine nuclei, 970
Peer relationships, 590, 901
Penfield, Wilder, 926
Pentazocine, 689
Pentobarbital test dose procedure, for barbiturate withdrawal, 301, 301t
Pentylenetetrazol, 963
Peptidases, 967–968
Perception, of color, 927
Perceptual disturbances, initial assessment of, 10, 13t
Perceptual priming, 1027
Performance IQ (PIQ), 54
Per genes, 1004
Pergolide, 705
Periactin. See Cyproheptadine


<<<PAGE 3713>>>
Periaqueductal gray, 955, 970
Perimenstrual mood changes, 20
Periodic excessive sleepiness, 497
Periodic insomnia, 497
Periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD), 501
Peripheral nervous system (PNS), 972
Perls, Frederick S., 1086
Permax See Pergolide
Perphenazine, 622
for schizophrenia, 353t
Persecutory anxiety, 1083
Perseveration, 10, 10t
Persistent depressive disorder, in youth, 175–176
Persistent vegetative state, 858, 858t
Personality, 56, 560
Personality assessment, 56
adult psychological tests, 57–60
behavioral assessment, 60
objective personality tests, 57, 58t
projective personality tests, 57–60, 59t
psychometric properties of instruments for, 56–57
normative sample, 56
test characteristics, 56
validity issues, 56–57
purposes of, 56
in differential diagnosis, 56
narrow-band assessment, 56
in psychotherapy, 56
Personality Assessment Inventory (PAI), 57, 58t
Personality change due to general medical condition
clinical presentation, 560–561
course and prognosis, 570
diagnosis, 566–567
differential diagnosis, 568
management of, 574
Personality change, medical conditions associated with, 576t
Personality Disorder Questionnaire (PDQ), 45


<<<PAGE 3714>>>
Personality disorders, 560–579. See also specific disorders
assessment of, 45
clinical presentation, 560–561
comorbidity, 568–569
course and prognosis, 569–570
diagnosis, 561, 561t
differential diagnosis, 567–568
DSM-5 on, 561, 561t
Cluster A, 561, 561t, 562–563, 575
Cluster B, 561, 561t, 563–565, 575
Cluster C, 561, 561t, 565–566, 575
epidemiology, 574–575
etiology, 575–579
biologic factors, 575–576
genetic factors, 575
psychoanalytic factors, 576–577
temperament, 577–579
ICD-10, 561, 561t
treatment approach, 570–574
16 Personality Factor Questionnaire (16 PF), 58t
Personality, theories of, 1057–1093
Personal notes, 27
Person-centered interview, 3–4
Petit mal epilepsy, 250, 251f
PFC. See Prefrontal Cortex (PFC)
Pharmacodynamics, 591–592
Pharmacogenetic research, 592, 601
Pharmacokinetics, 591–592
drug interactions, 601
Pharmacotherapy, for adjustment disorder, 435
Pharmacotherapy, sleep rhythms and, 1004–1005
Phencyclidine (PCP), 319, 320, 320t, 325
intoxication, 324
Phendimetrazine, 302, 708
Phenelzine, 593, 628
Phenethylamines, 319–320
Phenobarbital, 253t, 298


<<<PAGE 3715>>>
Phenomenalistic causality, 1008
Phenothiazines, 619, 621, 622
Phenotypes
categorial, 991–992, 991f
continuous, 992, 992f
Phentermine, 302
Phentermine hydrochloride (Adipex-P), 707–708
Phentermine/Topiramate extended release (Qsymia), 708
Phenylalanine, 102
Phenylephrine (Neo-Synephrine), 700
Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT), 958
Phenylketonuria (PKU), 87t, 102–103
intellectual disability and, 98, 100
Phenylpropanolamine (PPA), 302
Phenytoin, 253t, 672
Phenytoin sodium (Dilantin), 666–667
Pheochromocytoma, 19
Phonology, 107
Phosphodiesterase (PDE)-5 inhibitors, 699
dosage and clinical guidelines, 700–701
drug interactions, 700
pharmacologic actions, 699–700
precautions and adverse reactions, 700
therapeutic indications, 700
treatment of priapism, 700
Photic stimulation (PS), 999
Phototherapy, 391
Physical and Neurological Examination for Soft Signs (PANESS), 81
Physical dependence, 269. See also Substance use disorders
Physical development, in adolescence, 900
Physical education programs, 152
Physical examination, 22–23, 60–61
in initial psychiatric interview, 11
neurologic examination, 22
other findings, 22–23
patient selection, 22
psychiatric patient, 18–23


<<<PAGE 3716>>>
psychological factors, 22
timing of, 22
Physical health, monitoring of, 60
Physician-assisted suicide, 864–865, 865t
AMA’s approach to requests of, 865t
Oregon’s assisted suicide law, 864, 865t
Physician Charter on Professionalism, 832, 833t
Physician marriages, 589
Physicians
impaired, 832
in training, 832
Physostigmine salicylate, 228
Phytomedicines
adverse effects, 713
psychoactive properties, 714–719
Piaget, Jean, 890, 890t, 901, 1007–1011
on cognitive development, 1007
intellectual development stages by, 1008t
life of, 1007
sensorimotor period of cognitive development, 1008t
Pica, 162–164
course and prognosis, 163
diagnosis and clinical features, 163
differential diagnosis, 163
epidemiology, 164
etiology, 163
pathology and laboratory examination, 163
in pregnancy, 163
treatment, 163–164
Pick disease, 243, 243f
Pickwickian syndrome, 21
Pictorial Instrument for Children and Adolescents (PICA-III-R), 77, 78
Pimozide, 619
for Tourette disorder, 160
Pippard Postoperative Rating Scale, 742
Pitolisant, for narcolepsy, 513
Pituitary disorders, 261


<<<PAGE 3717>>>
Pivotal Response Training, 127
Placebos, 608
Plasticity, 1022–1023
PMA (paramethoxyamphetamine), 303
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, 258
Policeman-at-the-elbow law, 844–845
Polyethylene glycol (PEG)
for encopresis, 482
Polysomnography, 67, 503
indications for, 505t
standard polysomnographic measures, 505t
Porphobilinogen levels, urine, 66
Posicor. See Mibefradil
Positive airway pressure (PAP), for obstructive sleep apnea, 513–514,
513f
Positive and Negative Affect Scale (PANAS), 1039
Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), 38–39, 347
Positive connotation, 762
Positive Psychology, 1090
and clinical work, 1091–1093
empirical findings, 1090–1091
Positive reinforcement, 775
Positron emission tomography (PET), 61, 74
Possession syndrome, 1054–1056
cultural factors, 1055
Postangiographic complications, 158t
Postconcussive syndrome, 254
Postinjection delirium sedation syndrome (PDSS), 611
Postpartum depression, 626–627
Postpartum disorders, neurosteroids and, 978
Poststroke syndromes, and neuropsychological testing, 51
Posttraumatic amnesia, 439. See also Dissociative amnesia
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 172–174, 429, 628, 695, 823, 1016
bereavement and, 852
clinical features, 429
comorbidity, 433–434
course and prognosis, 172, 434


<<<PAGE 3718>>>
diagnosis and clinical features, 171–172
avoidance, 171
depressive episodes, 172
hyperarousal, 171
negative alterations in cognition, 171
reexperiencing traumatic event, 171
differential diagnosis for, 172, 433, 433t
and dissociative amnesia, 440
in DSM-5 and ICD-10, 431t
epidemiology, 173–174, 435
etiology, 174
biologic factors, 174
psychological factors, 174
social factors, 174
genetics and risk for, 436
pathology and laboratory examination, 172
positive prognostic factors for, 434t
predisposing vulnerability factors in, 436t
psychotherapy for, 435
risk factors, 435, 436
treatment, 172–173
CBITS, 172–173
psychopharmacological, 173
SPARCS, 173
TARGET, 173
trauma-focused CBT, 172
Potency of drug, 602
Prader–Willi syndrome, 86t, 95, 101, 102. See also Intellectual disability
(ID)
Pragmatics, 107
Pramipexole, 598, 705
for restless legs syndrome, 515
Prazosin, 681–682
Prazosin, for PTSD-related nightmares, 515
Preconscious system, 1060
Prefrontal cortex (PFC), 398, 1037
mood and, 934, 935


<<<PAGE 3719>>>
regions of, 936
in schizophrenia, 358
regabalin, 666
Pregnancy
alcohol use in, 886, 886f, 886t
teenage, 902–903
Premack principle, 1019
Premature advice, 15
Premature infants, 887, 887f
Premature interpretation, 15
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), 602, 628
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS), 979
Premonitory Urge for Tics Scale (PUTS), 159
Prenatal development, 883–887
biologic activity in utero, 883
exposure to medications and malformations, 887, 887t
fetus behavior, 883–884
genetic disorders, 885–886, 885f
maternal drug use, 886–887, 886f, 886t
maternal stress and, 885
nervous system, 884–885
neural tube and neural crest formation, 884, 884f
pruning, 885
sonogram of 9-week and 15-week fetus, 884f
Preoperational thought stage (2–7 years), 1007–1008
Prepulse inhibition, 359
Preschool Age Psychiatric Assessment (PAPA), 178
Preschool period, development in, 894–895
emotional and social behavior, 894–895
imaginary companions, 895
language and cognitive development, 894
play, 895
sibling rivalry, 895
Preschool Reelings Checklist-Scale Version (PFC-S), 178
Present centered therapy (PCT), 435
Prefrontal cortical dysfunction, 558
Primary prevention, 868


<<<PAGE 3720>>>
Primate development, subhuman, 1043–1044
Primidone, 253t
Priming, 1027–1028, 1028f, 1029f
conceptual, 1027
perceptual, 1027
Primitive reflexes, 887
Prion disease, 256–257
Prion protein gene (PrP), 256
Prisoners of war and torture victims, 586–587
Privacy Rule, 28, 29, 29t
patients’ rights under, 846, 846t
Private rights, 841
Privilege, 831, 837
Probing technique, 15
Problem-Solving Skills Training (PSST), 192
Professional ethics, 829. See also Ethics
Progesterone, 979
neural activity and, 981–982
Program for Assertive Community Treatment (PACT), 871
Programmed cell death, 942
Progressive muscle relaxation, for insomnia, 512
Project Atlas, 880–881
Projective identification, 564, 577
Project MATH, 147
Prolactin, 395
Prolactin levels, serum, 65
Prolonged exposure (PE), 435
Propofol, 679
Propranolol, 19, 598, 607
Propriospinal myoclonus at sleep onset, 502, 515
Prosomeres, 944
Prosopagnosia, 88
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA), 20
Prostitutes, adolescent, 905
Protection of Persons with Mental Illness and the Improvement of Mental
Health Care (UN Resolution), 880
Protocortex model, 944–945


<<<PAGE 3721>>>
Protriptyline, for cataplexy, 513
Prozac. See Fluoxetine
Pruning, 885
Pseudocyesis, 20
Pseudologia fantastica, 457
Psilocybin, 320
Psychiatric applications, 1009–1011
developmentally based psychotherapy, 1011
implications for psychotherapy, 1010
Psychiatric assessment, 800
Psychiatric comorbidity, in psychiatric neurosurgery, 740
Psychiatric disorders
racial and ethnic differences in, 1050
Psychiatric disorders, genetic factors of, 795–796, 795t
Psychiatric emergencies, 809–823, 815t–820t
in children, 815, 820
AIDS/HIV, 822
anorexia nervosa, 822
child neglect situation, 822
dissociative disorders, 823
familial risk factors, 820t
Munchausen syndrome by proxy, 822–823
physical and sexual abuse, 821–822
posttraumatic stress disorder, 823
urgent non–life-threatening situations, 823
epidemiology, 810
interventions
disposition, 814
documentation, 814–815
pharmacotherapy, 813–814
psychotherapy, 813
restraints, 814, 814t
life-threatening emergencies, 820–821
patient evaluations, 810–811, 811–812, 811t
assessing and predicting violent behavior, 813t
treatment of medical illness, 811
patient safety, 811


<<<PAGE 3722>>>
specific interview situations
depression and potentially suicidal patients, 812, 812t
psychosis, 812
rape and sexual abuse, 812–813
violent patients, 812
treatment settings, 810
Psychiatric genetic counseling, 796–797
challenges with, 797
Psychiatric history, past, 6–7
Psychiatric interview, 1–18
cultural issues in, 16–17
difficult patient and, 17–18
initial, 1, 5–6, 5t, 12t
chief complaint, 6
developmental and social history, 8
family history, 8
formulation, 11
history of present illness, 6
identifying data, 6
mental status examination, 9–11
past medical history, 7–8
past psychiatric history, 6–7
physical examination, 11
review of systems, 6, 6t, 9
sexual history, 8, 8t
source and reliability, 6
substance use, abuse, and addictions, 7
treatment planning, 11, 13–14
interpreter, use of, 16–17
medical record, 16
mental illness and, 1
as part of treatment process, 1
principles for
agreement as to process, 1
conscious/unconscious processes, 2–3
patient–physician relationship, 2–3
person-centered interview, 3–4


<<<PAGE 3723>>>
privacy and confidentiality, 1–2
rapport/empathy, 2
respect and consideration, 2
safety and comfort, 4
time and number of sessions, 4
process of
initiation of interview, 5
before interview, 4
interview room, 5
open-ended questions, 5
waiting room, 4–5
purpose of, 1
recording of session, 2
settings for, 1
techniques for, 14
closing of interview, 15–16
expanding interventions, 14–15
facilitating interventions, 14
motivational interviewing, 16
obstructive interventions, 15
Psychiatric morbidity, 800
Psychiatric neurosurgery, 739–740
history, 740
lesion procedures, 741
outcome with, 743
patient selection, 740
postoperative care, 740–741
Psychiatric rating scales, 29–47
assessment of, 30
internal consistency, 30
interrater and test–retest reliability, 30
psychometric properties, 30–31
reliability, 30, 31
validity, 31
benefits and limitations of, 29–30
constructs assessment, 30
measurement goals, 30


<<<PAGE 3724>>>
measurement procedures, 30
format, 30
raters, 30
sources of information, 30
selection of, 31
anxiety disorders, 39, 41, 43t, 44
childhood disorders, 45–47
cognitive disorders, 45, 46t
disability assessment, 31, 32–33t
eating disorders, 44–45
mood disorders, 39, 42–43t
personality disorders and personality traits, 45
psychiatric diagnosis, 31
psychotic disorders, 31, 34–38t, 38–39, 40t, 41t
substance use disorders, 44
types and use of, 30
Psychiatric rehabilitation, 792–798
cognitive rehabilitation, 794
ethical, legal, and social considerations, 794, 797–798
genetic counseling and testing, challenges with, 797
milieu therapy, 794
psychosocial counseling and support, 797
social skills rehabilitation, 792–794
token economy, 794
vocational rehabilitation, 792
Psychiatric report, 23–27, 24–26t. See also Mental status examination
(MSE); Psychiatric interview
Psychiatrists, in public sector, 870
new paradigms, 871
pharmacotherapy, 870
psychiatric evaluation and diagnosis, 870
team leadership, 870–871
Psychoanalysis, 745, 1057–1072
approaches and techniques, 748–749
beginnings of, 1057
case study, 1057–1058
classic psychoanalytic theory, 1068–1069


<<<PAGE 3725>>>
contraindications, 745
ego psychology, 1064–1068
goal of, 747–748
indications, 745
instinct or drive theory, 1060–1064
interpretation of dreams, 1058–1059
limitations, 749
patient requisites, 746t–747t
stages of, 747t
topographical model of MIND, 1059–1060
treatment and technique, 1069–1071
Psychoanalytic psychotherapy, 745
duration of, 749
expressive mode
approach and techniques, 750
goals, 750
indications and contraindications, 749–750
limitations, 750
strategies of, 749
supportive mode
approach and techniques, 752
corrective emotional experience, 752
goals, 752
indications and contraindications, 751–752
limitations, 752
Psychodrama, 759
Psychoeducational interventions, 787–788
Psychogenic amnesia, 1032–1033
Psychogenic nonepileptic seizures, 252
and epileptic seizures, 253t
Psychological amnesia, 171
Psychological Assessment Resources (PAR), 45
Psychological dependence, 269. See also Substance use disorders
Psychological Screening Inventory (PSI), 58t
Psychoneuroses, see Neuroses
Psycho-oncology, 803–804
Psychopathology, 1076–1077


<<<PAGE 3726>>>
theories of, 1057–1093
Psychopathology Inventory for Mentally Retarded Adults (PIMRA), 85
Psychopharmacology, 591–719
drug factors
mechanisms of action, 592
pharmacodynamics, 591–592
pharmacokinetics, 591–592
receptor antagonists or agonists, 592, 593t
synaptic concentrations, 592
drug selection, 591
side effects, 592–601
antidepressant-associated suicide, 593–594
cardiovascular disturbances, 600
cognitive impairment, 600
daytime sleepiness, or somnolence, 598
gastrointestinal (GI), 598
glucose abnormalities, 600
hyponatremia, 600
late appearing, 592
medication-induced movement disorders, 594–598, 595t
movement disorders, 598
with newer medicines, 598–600
rashes, 600
sexual dysfunction, 598–599
sweating, 600
in terms of onset and duration, 592–593
weight gain, 599
weight loss, 600
Psychophysiologic insomnia (PPI), 488, 490t. See also Insomnia
Psychosexual development, stages of, 1062t–1063t
Psychosis, see Psychotic Disorders
Psychosocial counseling and support, 797
Psychosocial sciences, 1007–1034
Psychosomatic medicine, see Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry
clinical problems in, 800t
evaluation in, 800
treatments, 800–803


<<<PAGE 3727>>>
Psychotherapist–patient privilege, 837
Psychotherapy, see specific psychotherapies
Psychotherapy notes, 27–28
Psychotic disorders
endocannabinoids in, 973
interviewing patients with, 17
neurosteroids and, 979
scales for assessment of, 31, 34–38t, 38–39, 40t, 41t, 347
Psychotropic drugs, see Psychopharmacology
PTSD. See Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Puberty, 900
Public agencies, 869
Public health, 867
Public Law 94–142, 1975, 93, 100, 141
Punch-drunk syndrome, see Dementia pugilistica
Punishment dreams, see Dementia pugilistica
Purging disorder, 469–470
Pyromania, 555, 556t
Pyloric stenosis, 165
Psychiatric Interview/process ofclosed-ended, 15
compound, 15
judgmental, 15
“why” questions, 15
Qualitative toxicology assessments, 62
Quantitative law of effect, 1018
Quantitative neuropsychologic testing, 247
Quetiapine, 608
in autism spectrum disorder, 129
for bipolar disorder, 375t
for dissociative identity disorder, 448
dosages, 611
drug interactions, 611
for early-onset bipolar disorder, 183
indications, 611
pharmacology, 611


<<<PAGE 3728>>>
for schizophrenia, 353t
side effects, 611–612
for tic disorder, 160
XR, 611
Quick Inventory of Depression Symptomatology Self Report (QIDS-SR),
5
Quinine, 598
Rabbit syndrome, 594
Rabies encephalitis, 255
Race, 1047
Rado, Sandor, 1086–1087
Ramelteon, 680
Rank, Otto, 1087
Rapid Alcohol Problem Screen 4 (RAPS4), 7
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, 487t, 488
Rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test, 66
Rapport, 2
Raskin depression scale, 384
Reactive attachment disorder, 167–171
course and prognosis, 169–170
diagnosis and clinical features, 168–169, 168t
differential diagnosis, 169
epidemiology, 170–171
etiology, 171
pathology and laboratory examination, 169
treatment, 170
Reading impairment, 142–145
clinical features, 142
comorbidity, 143–144
course and prognosis, 144
diagnosis, 143
differential diagnosis, 143
epidemiology, 144
etiology, 144–145
pathology and laboratory examination, 143


<<<PAGE 3729>>>
treatment, 144
Reading instruction programs, 144
Reality testing, 1064
Reassurance technique, 14
Reboxetine
for ADHD, 137
for enuresis, 484
Recent memory, 932
Receptor drug interactions, 593t
Recognition memory, 50
Recollection process, 745
Reconsolidation, 1017
Recovered memories of abuse, 845, 845t
Recreational street drugs abuse, and wakefulness, 497
Recurrent isolated sleep paralysis, 500, 515
Redirecting, interview techniques, 15
Reflection technique, 14
Reframing, 762
Regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) technique, 73
Regulatory issues, 607
Rehabilitation
alcohol, 282, 282t
vocational, 584
Reich, Wilhelm, 576, 1087
Reinforcement interventions, 14
Reinforcer, 1019
devaluation effect, 1021, 1021f
Reitan-Indiana Neuropsychological Test Battery for Children, 83t
Rejection, 1049
Relapse prevention therapy (RPT), 306
Relational problems, 587–590
of children, 590
definition, 587
epidemiology, 587–588
other, 590
parent–child relational problem, 588–589
partner, 589


<<<PAGE 3730>>>
related to mental disorder/general medical condition, 588
sibling, 590
Relaxation response, 772
Relaxation therapy, 766, 771
breathing exercises, 766
for insomnia, 511–512
progressive relaxation, 766–767, 766t, 771
Reliability, 30, 57
internal consistency, 30
interrater, 30
issues in interpreting data, 31
test–retest, 30
Religious/spiritual problem, 586
RELN gene, 995
Remeron. See Mirtazapine
Remission, 603
Remote memory, 932, 1032
REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD), 488, 500, 501t
REM sleep–suppressing drugs, 513
Renal function, tests of, 66
Repetition compulsion, 1061
Repetition process, 745
Repetitive self-mutilation, 333
Repetitive TMS (rTMS), 736, 737
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), 446
Report of the Committee on Physician-Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia,
865
Repression, 3
Reprocessing, 775
Requip. See Ropinirole
Research Units in Pediatric Psychopharmacology (RUPP), 203
Reserpine, 605, 732, 959
Residential care, 827
Resilience and mental health, 1039–1040
Resistances, 3
Resource holding potential, 1040
Respiratory system, examination of, 19


<<<PAGE 3731>>>
Response, defined, 603
Restless legs syndrome (RLS), 501, 502t, 508f, 598
diagnostic approaches to, 502t
differential diagnosis, 506
medical conditions and, 502t
treatment, 515
Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), 274
Retina, dopamine neurons, 955
Retirement, 920
Retrograde amnesia, 1024, 1026–1027, 1027f
Retroviruses, schizophrenia and, 985
Rett, Andreas, 103
Rett syndrome, 103, 122
Reverse transcriptase inhibitors (RTIs), 260, 260t
Reversibility, 1009
Revex. See Nalmefene
Revia. See Naltrexone
Review of systems, 19–20
cardiovascular system, 19
eye, ear, nose, and throat, 19
gastrointestinal system, 20, 20f
genitourinary system, 20
head, 19
menstrual history, 20
in psychiatric interview, 6, 6t, 9
respiratory system, 19
Revised Achenbach Behavior Problem Checklist, 78
Reward circuit pathway, 308
Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure test, 48, 53t, 54, 55f
Rey’s memory test, 55f
Rhythmie du sommeil. See Sleep-related rhythmic movement disorder
Ribot’s law, 1024
Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale, 230
Rifadin. See Rifampicin
Right to refuse treatment, 840
Right to treatment, 840
Rilutek. See Riluzole


<<<PAGE 3732>>>
Riluzole, 607
Rimonabant, 976
Risperdal. See Risperidone
Risperidone, 598, 608, 627
for bipolar disorder, 375t
in dissociative identity disorder, 448
dosages, 609–610
drug interactions, 610
for early-onset bipolar disorder, 183
for early-onset schizophrenia, 209–210
indications, 609
for irritability in autism spectrum disorder, 128
pharmacology, 609
for PTSD, 173
for schizophrenia, 353t
side effects, 610
for tics, 160
Rivastigmine, 697
RLS. See Restless legs syndrome (RLS)
Robidone. See Hydrocodone
Rogers, Carl, 1087–1088
Roger v. Oken, 840
Rohypnol, 303, 304
Role-playing, 771
Ropinirole, 598, 705
for restless legs syndrome, 515
Rorschach, Herman, 58
Rorschach test, 58–59, 59f, 59t
Inkblots, 83t, 84
Rotigotine, for restless legs syndrome, 515
Rotter Incomplete Sentences Blank, 83t
Rouse v. Cameron, 840
Rozerem. See Ramelteon
rTMS. See Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS)
Rubella, 104
Rubinstein–Taybi syndrome, 86t
Rumination disorder, 164–166


<<<PAGE 3733>>>
course and prognosis, 165
diagnosis and clinical features, 164
differential diagnosis, 165
epidemiology, 165
etiology, 165–166
pathology and laboratory examination, 165
treatment, 165
Rutter, Michael, 125, 897, 898
Sabril. See Vigabatrin
Safety, during interview, 4
Salicylate toxicity, 63
Salvia divinorum, 321
Same-sex marriage, 907
SAMHSA. See Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA)
Saphris. See Asenapine
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 1088
Saunders, Cicely, 862
Scale for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS), 39, 41t
Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms (SAPS), 39, 40t
Scales of Independent Behavior—Revised, 82t
Schizoaffective disorder, 342, 343t, 350, 358
Schizoid personality disorder
clinical presentation, 560
comorbidity, 569
course and prognosis, 569
diagnosis, 562–563, 562t
differential diagnosis, 567
epidemiology, 574
social withdrawal in, 560
symptoms, 562t
treatment
pharmacotherapy, 571
psychotherapy, 571
Schizophrenia, 337–363, 603, 806


<<<PAGE 3734>>>
appearance of patient with, 337
Cajal-Retzius cells in, 940, 948
in children and adolescents, 340
childhood-onset, autism spectrum disorder and, 125, 126t
clinical presentation, 337–340
catatonic stupor, 338
cognition, 339
cognitive symptoms, 340
delusions, 338
hallucinations, 338–339
homicide, 339
insight, judgment and reliability, 339
localizing and nonlocalizing neurologic signs, 338
loss of ego boundaries, 338
mood, 338
negative symptoms, 340, 340t
positive symptoms, 340, 340t
suicide, 339
thoughts, 338
violent behavior, 339
comorbidity
cardiovascular disease, 349
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 349
complex partial epilepsy, 349
diabetes mellitus, 349
HIV infection, 349
obesity, 349
rheumatoid arthritis, 349
substance use disorders, 348
course, 349–350
delirium and, 228
diagnosis, 340–347, 341t
brief psychotic disorder, 344–345, 344t
catatonic type, 340–342
delusional disorder, 345–346, 345t
schizoaffective disorder, 342, 343t
schizophreniform disorder, 342–344, 343t


<<<PAGE 3735>>>
shared psychotic disorder, 347
subtypes from previous versions of DSM, 342
diagnostic and rating scales for, 347
differential diagnosis, 347–348, 348t
factitious disorder, 348
malingering, 348
mood disorders, 348
personality disorders, 348
secondary psychotic disorders, 347–348
early in life, 337
effects of cannabis in, 976
epidemiology
age, 358
cannabis use, 358
cognitive deficits, 358
early life experiences, 358
incidence and prevalence, 357, 357f
maternal factors, 358
seasonality of birth, 358
sex, 357–358
urban upbringing, 358
etiology
biologic theories, 361–362
psychoanalytic theories, 363
psychosocial theories, 362–363
financial cost of, 337
genetics of
genetic studies, 360–361
studies of inheritance patterns, 360
immune system in, 985
insomnia and, 491
late-onset, 340
limbic system and, 934
lithium for, 650
neurobiology of
anatomic findings, 358–359
environmental factors, 360


<<<PAGE 3736>>>
infections, 360
neurotransmitters and receptors, 359–360
physiologic findings, 359
psychoneuroendocrinology, 360
psychoneuroimmunology, 360
as neurodevelopmental disorder, 362
object relations deficit model of, 363
in older people, 340
onset of
duration, 350
emergence of symptoms, 350
premorbid signs and symptoms, 349–350, 349f
prognosis, 350
prognostic factors, 350, 350t
psychoeducational interventions for, 788
psychological testing, 347
intelligence tests, 347
projective and personality tests, 347
psychology of, 361
treatment approach, 350–357
art therapy, 356
Assertive Community Treatment (ACT) program, 356
case management, 356
cognitive-behavioral therapy, 355
cognitive remediation, 356
electroconvulsive therapy, 355
family therapy, 355–356
group therapy, 355
hospitalization, 351
individual psychotherapy, 356
pharmacotherapy, 351–355, 352–353t
psychotherapy, 355–357
social skills training, 355
vocational therapy and supported employment, 356
Schizophrenia spectrum disorders, 337. See also Schizophrenia
Schizophreniform disorder, 342–344, 343t, 350, 358
Schizotypal personality disorder


<<<PAGE 3737>>>
clinical presentation, 560
comorbidity, 569
course and prognosis, 569
diagnosis, 563, 563t
differential diagnosis, 567
epidemiology, 574
treatment
pharmacotherapy, 571
psychotherapy, 571
School-age children, development in, 895–898
best friend, 896
birth order, effects of, 896
dreams and sleep, 896
effects of divorce on children, 897, 897t
expression of psychopathology in children, 898
family factors in
adverse events, 897–898
daycare centers, 898
family stability, 897
parenting styles, 898
language and cognitive development, 895–896
school refusal, 896
sex role development, 896
step-families and, 897, 897t
School-based interventions, 868
School-based occupational therapies, 152
School history, 8
School refusal, 896
School Situations Questionnaire (SSQ-R), 83t
School violence, 904, 904t
Schwann cells, 924
Science Research Associates, Inc. (SRA) Basic Reading Program, 144
Scored General Intelligence Test (SGIT), 45, 46t
Scotopic sensitivity syndrome, 145
Script theory, 1010
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD)
diet and, 977


<<<PAGE 3738>>>
Seasonality, 1003–1004
Seclusion and restraint, 841
indications and contraindications for, 841t
restrictions for, 841t
Secobarbital, 298
Secondary autonomous ego functions, 1065
Secondary prevention, 868
Secondary revision, 1059
Second-generation antidepressants, 591
Second-generation or atypical antipsychotic (SGA) drugs, 594, 608
adverse effects, 609
aripiprazole (Abilify), 612–613
asenapine (Saphris), 613
clinical guidelines, 615
clozapine (Clozaril), 613–614
dosing, 616t
drugs approved by FDA, 608
lumateperone (Caplyta), 615
lurasidone (Latuda), 614–615
mechanisms of action, 608–609
for mood disorders, 609
olanzapine (Zyprexa), 610–611
paliperidone (Invega), 610
quetiapine (Seroquel), 611–612
risk of extrapyramidal side effects (EPS), 608
risperidone (Risperdal), 609–610
for schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder, 609
therapeutic indications, 609
ziprasidone (Geodon), 612
Second individuation, 906
Sedating drugs, 602
Sedative-, hypnotic-, anxiolytic-related disorders, 298–302
abuse, patterns of
intravenous use, 299
oral use, 298–299
clinical features
barbiturate-like substances, 298


<<<PAGE 3739>>>
barbiturates, 298
benzodiazepines, 298
delirium, 300
diagnosis, 299–301
epidemiology, 301
neurocognitive disorders, 300
neuropharmacology, 301–302
overdose, 299
pathology, 301–302
psychotic disorders, 300
treatment and rehabilitation, 301
unspecified, 300–301
Sedative-hypnotics, 600t, 604
Seizure disorders, 439. See also Epilepsy
Seizures, 596. See also Epilepsy
alcohol withdrawal and, 276
intellectual disability and, 98
parasomnias and, 501
Selective mutism, 201–203, 201t
course and prognosis, 202
criteria for, 201t
diagnosis and clinical features, 201
differential diagnosis, 202
epidemiology, 203
etiology, 203
pathology and laboratory examination, 202
treatment, 202–203
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), 260, 389, 434, 465, 591,
594, 624–625
anorgasmic effects of, 628
depression in children and adolescents, 178
dosage and clinical guidelines, 631–632
drug interactions, 630–631
for stereotypic movement disorder, 154
laboratory interferences, 631
OCD in youth, 205
off-label uses


<<<PAGE 3740>>>
autism, 628
to improve sexual satisfaction, 628
paraphilias, 628
pharmacodynamics, 625–626
pharmacokinetics, 625
precautions and adverse reactions, 628–630
anticholinergic effects, 630
cardiovascular effects, 629
cataplexy, 513
central nervous system adverse effects, 629–630
electrolyte and glucose disturbances, 630
emotional blunting, 629–630
endocrine and allergic reactions, 630
extrapyramidal symptoms, 630
gastrointestinal adverse effects, 628–629
hematologic adverse effects, 630
incidence of headache in, 629
increase in yawning, 630
seizures, 630
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor withdrawal, 630
sexual dysfunction, 628
sleep effects, 629
PTSD, 173
side effects, 598
therapeutic indications, 628–630
Self-actualization, 1081
Self-esteem, in adolescent, 902
Self-management support, 874
Self-object transferences, 1084
Self-reliance training, 770, 771
Selincro. See Nalmefene
Semantic memory, 1028
Semantic processing, 931
Semantics, 107
Semiotic function, 1008
Senile plaques, 240
Sensitization, 604


<<<PAGE 3741>>>
Sensorimotor stage (birth-2 years), 1007
Sensory deprivation, 1046–1047
psychological theories, 1047
Sensory function
assessment of, 54–55
Sensory integration programs, 152
Sensory systems, 925–928
Sentence completion test, 59t, 60
Separation anxiety, 892
Separation anxiety disorder, 194–195, 196t
Sequential Tests of Educational Progress (STEP), 84
Seroquel. See Quetiapine
Serotonin
anxiety and, 390
in depression, 396
function of, 954–955
in schizophrenia, 361
synthesis of, 956
transporters, 995
Serotonin-dopamine receptor antagonists (SDAs), 74, 591
Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRI), 389, 626
Serpasil. See Reserpine
Sertraline, 627–628, 631, 713
for depression in children and adolescents, 178
Serzone, 593. See Nefazodone
Sexual addiction, 333
Sexual boundary violations, 830
Sexual desire, testosterone and, 981
Sexual history, 8, 8t, 12t
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), testing for, 66
Sexual maturity ratings (SMRs), 900
for male and female adolescents, 900, 901t
Shared psychosis, 347
Sheehan syndrome, 261
Shenjing Shuairuo, 1056–1057
Shipley Scale, 53t
Shorter, Edward, 799


<<<PAGE 3742>>>
Short-term anxiety-provoking psychotherapy (Harvard University–
Sifneos), 754
requirements and techniques, 754–755
Short-term dynamic psychotherapy (McGill University–Davanloo), 753
Shy–Drager syndrome, 501
Sibling relational problem, 590
Sibling rivalry, 895
Sickness syndrome, 985
Sifneos, Peter, 753
Sigma waves, 999
Signal anxiety, 1065
Significantly subaverage, 95
Sign tracking, 1014
in Pavlovian learning, 1015f
Sildenafil, 699, 970
Silence, psychiatric interviews and, 14
Simon, Eric, 297
Simon, Robert I., 27
Simpson Angus Scale (SAS), 347
Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), 61, 73–74
Six-step problem-solving strategy, 794
Skinner, B. F., 1088
on operant conditioning, 1014
Skin observation, 21
Skin-picking disorder, 418, 418f
Sleep. See also Sleep–wake disorders
apnea, 486, 488t, 601
and brain function, 486
characteristics of, 486
disturbances, 391–392
histograms (normal sleep and insomnia), 487f
memory, 1028–1030
NREM sleep, 487t, 488
REM sleep, 487t, 488
stages of, 487t
wakefulness, 487t, 488
Sleep enuresis, 501


<<<PAGE 3743>>>
primary enuresis, 501
secondary enuresis, 501
treatment, 515
Sleep hygiene
inadequate, 491
universal, 511
Sleepiness, excessive, 486
Sleep paralysis, 486, 500, 515
Sleep-related breathing disorders, 486, 501
clinical presentation, 486, 488t
diagnosis, 491–495, 494–495t
central sleep apnea, 493, 494–495t, 495
obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea, 492, 494–495t
sleep-related hypoventilation, 495
differential diagnosis, 509
psychiatric disorders with, 509, 510t
Sleep-related bruxism, 501–502, 515
Sleep-related eating disorder, 499
Sleep-related gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), 491
Sleep-related hallucinations, 501
Sleep-related hypoventilation disorders, 495
Sleep-related leg cramps, 501
Sleep-related motor vehicle accidents, 486
Sleep-related movement disorders, 488, 488t. See also Parasomnias and
sleep-related movement disorders
Sleep-related rhythmic movement disorder, 502
Sleep restriction therapy, for insomnia, 511
Sleep starts, see Hypnic jerks
Sleep talking, 503
Sleep terrors, 499
Sleep–wake disorders, 486. See also specific disorders
circadian rhythm sleep disorders, 486, 488
classification systems for, 488
DSM-5, 488
ICD-10, 488
ICSD-3, 488, 489t
clinical interview in, 503


<<<PAGE 3744>>>
sleep history questionnaire, 503, 504t
clinical presentation, 486, 488, 488t
clinical tests
actigraphy, 503
home sleep testing, 503
maintenance of wakefulness test, 503
multiple sleep latency test, 503
polysomnography, 503, 505t
comorbidities, 509, 510t
cost related to, 486
diagnosis, 488–503
differential diagnosis, 506, 509
hypersomnolence disorder, 486
insomnia, 486
narcolepsy, 486
parasomnias, 488
sleep-related breathing disorders, 486, 488t
sleep-related movement disorders, 488, 488t
test findings in, 503, 505–506, 505f–508f
treatment, 509–515
Sleepwalking, 497
in adults, 497
in children, 497
Slit protein, 949
Smell observation, 21–22
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, 952
Smith–Magenis syndrome, 86t
Smoking
bupropion for, 635
health benefits of, 312
medications for, 310, 310t
during pregnancy, 886
teenagers and, 903
Smooth pursuit eye movements, 575
SNRI. See Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRI)
Social anxiety disorder, 195, 404, 405t, 628
Social (pragmatic) communication disorder, 119–121, 120t


<<<PAGE 3745>>>
and autism spectrum disorder, 125
clinical features, 120
comorbidity, 121
course and prognosis, 121
diagnosis, 120
differential diagnosis, 120–121
DSM-5 on, 119–120, 120t
epidemiology, 121
etiology, 121
treatment, 121
Social desirability, 1052
Social history, 8, 60
Socialization, in adolescence, 901
Social network therapy, 762
Social phobia. See Social anxiety disorder
Social Security program, 920
Social skills rehabilitation, 792–794, 793t
case study, 793
goals, 793
social perception skills, 793–794
Social skills training, 773
in autism spectrum disorder, 127
case study, 773–775
for schizophrenia, 355
Sociobiology, 1040–1041
evolution, 1040
identical twins, 1041
Sociocultural sciences, 1040–1057
ethology, 1042–1043
experimental disorders, 1044–1046
sensory deprivation, 1046–1047
sociobiology, 1040–1041
subhuman primate development, 1043–1044
Socioemotional intelligence and mental health, 1037–1038
Sodium oxybate, for cataplexy, 513
Solodyn. See Minocycline
Solriamfetol, for narcolepsy, 513


<<<PAGE 3746>>>
Solvents. See Inhalants
Somatic symptom disorder, 451–467
clinical presentation, 451
comorbidity, 464
course and prognosis, 464
diagnosis, 452–453
differential diagnosis, 462–463
epidemiology of, 466–467
etiology of, 467
psychological factors, 451
and somatization disorder, 452t
treatment of, 465
Somatic therapies, 729–743
Somatostatin, hormone regulation by, 979
Sonic hedgehog (Shh), 939, 944
The Sorrows of Young Werther, 180
Spastic dysphonia, 118
Spatial disorders, 48–49
Special Olympics, 100
Specific learning disorder, 141, 142t
diagnosis of, 142t
mathematics deficits, 145–147
reading impairment, 142–145
written expression, impairment in, 147–149
Specific patient populations, 605–606
children, 606
elderly patients, 606
medically ill patients, 607
pregnant and nursing women, 606
substance abuse, 607
Speech
evaluation of, 9, 12t
slowed, 21
Speech Foundation of America, 119
Speech sound disorder, 114–117
clinical features, 114
comorbidity, 116


<<<PAGE 3747>>>
course and prognosis, 116
diagnosis, 115, 115t
differential diagnosis, 115–116, 116t
in DSM-5, 115t
epidemiology, 117
etiology, 117
in ICD-10, 115t
treatment, 116–117
phonologic approach, 116
traditional approach, 116
Spelling errors, 147
Spelling mistakes, 147
Spiegel, Ernest, 740
Spina bifida, neurulation and, 938
Spinal cord
patterning genes, 944f
signaling factors, 943
Spindle cell, 1037
Spinocerebellar ataxia, 924
Spiritual emotions and mental health, 1036–1037
Spitz, René, 892
Split-half reliability, 57
Sporanox. See Itraconazole
Spousal bereavement, 808
SSRI. See Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI)
SSRI-associated syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic
hormone (SIADH), 606
Standard error of measurement (SEM), 57
Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale, 81
4th Edition (SB:FE), 82t
State-dependent learning, 1017
Status epilepticus, 276
Step-families, 897
types of, 897, 897t
Stereotactic neurosurgery, 740
Stereotypic movement disorder, 152–155, 153t
autism spectrum disorder and, 152


<<<PAGE 3748>>>
course and prognosis, 154
diagnosis and clinical features, 152–153
head-banging, 153
nail-biting, 153
differential diagnosis, 154
DSM-5 on, 152
epidemiology, 154–155
etiology, 155
intellectual disability and, 152
pathology and laboratory examination, 154
tics and, 152, 154
treatment, 154
Stevens–Johnson syndrome, 593, 709
Stigma Programme of the World Psychiatric Association (WPA), 878
Stimulant
and insomnia, 491, 491t
intoxication, 304, 304t
types of
amphetamine, 302
bath salts, 303
club drugs, 303–304
cocaine, 302–303
substituted amphetamines, 303
withdrawal, 305
Stimulant drugs, 682
dosage and administration, 684–685
pharmacologic actions, 682
precautions and adverse reactions, 683–684
therapeutic indications, 682–683
Stimulant medications, for ADHD, 137
Stimulant-related disorders, 302–308
anxiety disorder, 305
clinical features, 302–304
comorbidity, 306
detoxification and early treatment, 306
diagnosis, 304–306
epidemiology, 307


<<<PAGE 3749>>>
etiology
genetic factors, 308
learning and conditioning, 308
sociocultural factors, 308
mood disorder, 305
network therapy, 306
obsessive-compulsive disorder, 305–306
pathology, 307–308
pharmacologic treatment, 306–307
psychosocial therapies, 306
psychotic disorder, 305
sexual dysfunction, 306
sleep disorder, 306
delirium, 305
Stimulant use disorder, 304
Stimulus control therapy, for insomnia, 511, 511t
St. John’s wort, 713
Strattera. See Atomoxetine
Stress
chronic, 984–985
human responses to, 984–985
illness and, 984
pain perception and, 972, 976
Stress-induced analgesia, 976
Stroke, 593
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM (SCID), 31
Structured interactional group psychotherapy, 759
Structured psychotherapy for adolescents responding to chronic stress
(SPARCS), 173
Strychnine, 963
Stuttering. See Child-onset fluency disorder
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, 106, 255–256
Subcaudate tractotomy, 741
outcome with, 742
Subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy. See Binswanger disease
Subgranular zone (SGZ), 941, 953
Subjective well-being and mental health, 1038–1039


<<<PAGE 3750>>>
Sublimation, 1040
Subplate neurons, 936
Subpoena duces tecum, 837
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA), 394
Substance-induced mental disorder, 269
Substance-induced persisting dementia, 236
Substance intoxication, 269
diagnostic approaches to, 269, 271t
Substance P
characteristics, 970
receptor, 950
schizophrenia and, 950
Substance-related disorders, 269. See also Substance intoxication;
Substance use disorders; Substance withdrawal
clinical presentation, 269
comorbidity, 271–272
depressive symptoms, 272
diagnostic categories, 269–271, 270t, 271t, 272t
DSM-5 on, 269
etiology, 274
and suicide, 272
terminology related to, 269
treatment approach, 272–274
Substance use
and central sleep apnea, 495
and insomnia, 491, 491t
in psychiatric interview, 7
and sleep-related movement disorders, 502–503, 502t
Substance use disorders, 269, 386–387
in adolescents, 211–216
approaches, 269, 270t
behavioral dependence, 269
comorbidity, 213, 271–272
diagnosis and clinical features, 212
alcohol, 212
club drugs, 213


<<<PAGE 3751>>>
cocaine, 213
heroin, 213
lysergic acid diethylamide, 213
marijuana, 212–213
nicotine, 212
epidemiology, 214–215, 274
etiology, 274–275
genetic factors, 215
psychosocial factors, 216
multiple substance use, 215
neurobiology of
genetic factors, 274
neurochemical factors, 274
pathways and neurotransmitters, 274
overview, 211–212
physical dependence, 269
psychological dependence, 269
psychology of
learning and conditioning, 275
psychodynamic factors, 275
scales for assessment of, 44
schizophrenia and, 348
substances abused, 211
treatment of, 213–214
Substance withdrawal, 269
diagnostic approaches to, 269, 271, 272t
Substantia nigra, 929
dopamine neurons, 955
dopamine secretion, 955–956
Subthalamic nucleus lesions, 929
Substitutions, 114. See also Speech sound disorder
Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH), 962
Succinylcholine, 732
Suicide
alcohol-related disorders and, 280, 280t
in children and adolescents, 179–181
diagnosis and clinical features, 179–180


<<<PAGE 3752>>>
epidemiology, 180–181
etiology, 181
suicidal ideation and behavior, 179
treatment, 180
HIV infection and, 259
interviewing patients with, 17–18
passive, 17
patients, 838
physician-assisted, 864–865, 865t
in schizophrenia, 339
Sullivan, Harry Stack, 17, 363, 896, 1088–1089
Summarizing technique, 14
Sundowner syndrome, 236
Suomi, Stephen, 1043
Superego anxiety, 1065
Supplementary motor area, 929
Supportive psychotherapy
approach and techniques, 752
corrective emotional experience, 752
goals, 752
indications and contraindications, 751–752
limitations, 752
Suppression, 1040
Suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), 486
Surgeon General’s Workshop on Violence and Public Health, 585
Susceptibility genes, 961, 993
Suvorexant, for insomnia, 509, 510
Sydenham chorea, 158t
Syllogistic reasoning, 1008
Symbolic representation, 1059
Symbolization, 1007
Symmetrel. See Amantadine
Sympathetic system, 930
Sympathomimetics, 682, 685t
Synapses
formation of, 994–59
maintenance of, 994–995


<<<PAGE 3753>>>
Synaptic pruning, 935
Syncope, in the elderly, 808, 808t
Syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH),
63, 65
Syphilis
in pregnancy, 104
testing for, 66
Systematic desensitization, 771–772
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 65, 260
psychiatric manifestations of, 65
tests for, 65
System of care, 871. See also Community psychiatry
Tacrine, 697–698
Tactile agnosia, 925
Tadalafil, 699, 701, 970
Talwin, see Pentazocine
Tangentiality, 10, 10t
Tanner Stages. See Sexual maturity ratings (SMRs)
Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California, 838–839
Tarasoff I, 839
Tarasoff II, 839
Tardive akathisia, 598
Tardive dyskinesia, 19, 596, 838, 981, 982
antipsychotics and, 351, 354
course and prognosis, 597
diagnosis, 597
epidemiology, 597
signs, 597
symptoms, 597
treatment, 597–598
Tardive dystonia, 598
Tardive Tourette syndrome, 158t
Taste, 928
Tattoos and body piercing, 905
Tbr1 gene, 946


<<<PAGE 3754>>>
TCA. See Tricyclics and tetracyclics
Teen Addiction Severity Index (T-ASI), 214
Teenage mothers, 902–903
Teenagers, working, 584
Tegmental nuclei, 955, 955f
Tegretol. See Carbamazepine
Telegraphic speech, 48
Telencephalon, 939, 942
Temperament, 577–579
harm avoidance, 577–578, 578t
novelty seeking, 578, 578t
persistence, 578–579, 578t
personality disorders and, 578f
reward dependence, 578, 578t
Temporal arteritis, 19
Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE), 933
Tenex. See Guanfacine
Tennessee Self-Concept Scale (TSCS), 58t
Tenuate. See Diethylpropion
Terazosin, 600
Terminal care decisions, 857–858. See also Palliative care
Terminally ill patients, delirium in, 230–231
Terrible twos, 1076
Tertiary prevention, 868
Testosterone, mood effects of, 980–981
Test–retest
evaluations, 30
reliability, 57
Tetrabenazine, for tic disorder, 161
Tetrahydrobiopterin, in autism spectrum disorder, 129
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
for tic disorder, 161
psychoactive effects of, 973
Texas Children’s Medication Algorithm Project (TMAP), 177
TFCBT. See Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy (TFCBT)
Thalamus, in schizophrenia, 358–359
Thalamus, MGN of, 927


<<<PAGE 3755>>>
Thanatos, 1061
Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), 59–60, 59f, 59t, 83t, 84
Theory of Psychoanalytic Technique (Menninger), 1085
Therapeutic alliance, 2–3
Therapeutic communities, 296
Therapeutic-graded exposure, 772
Therapeutic index, 600
Therapeutic trial of a drug, 603
Thermocapsulotomy, 742
Theta waves, 999
Thiamine, 277, 284
deficiency, 262
Thiazides, 601
Thioridazine, 19, 593
and QTc prolongation, 67
Third-generation antidepressants, 591
Third individuation, 906
Thorazine. See Chlorpromazine
Thorndike, Edward, 1018
Thought blocking, 10t
Thought content
compulsions, 9
delusions, 9–10
in initial psychiatric interview, 9–10, 13t
obsessional thoughts, 9
Thought process
formal disorders, 10t
initial assessment of, 10, 13t
Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (Freud), 1061
Thyroid axis activity, 395
Thyroid disorders, 65, 260–261
Thyroid function tests, 648
Thyroid hormones
dosage and clinical guidelines, 648
drug interactions, 647
laboratory interferences, 648
pharmacologic actions, 647


<<<PAGE 3756>>>
precautions and adverse reactions, 647
therapeutic indications, 647
Thyrotropin-releasing hormones (TRH), 967–968
hormone regulation by, 968
stimulation test, 648
Thyroxine (T4), release of, 967
Tiagabine, 253t, 665, 962
Tianeptine, mood stabilization and, 954
Tics, 155. See also Tourette disorder
disorders, 929
motor tics, 155
stereotypic movement disorder and, 152, 154
vocal tics, 155
Tic Symptom Self Report, 156, 156t
Time-limited psychotherapy (Boston University–Mann), 753
Tinbergen, Nikolaas, 1043
TMS. See Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
Tobacco use disorder, 308–312
clinical features, 308
diagnosis, 308–309
education level and, 311
epidemiology, 311
pathology
neuropharmacology, 311–312
psychiatric patients and, 311
psychopharmacological therapies, 309–311, 310t
nicotine replacement therapies, 310
non-nicotine medications, 310–311, 310t
psychosocial therapies, 309
aversive therapy, 309
behavior therapy, 309
hypnotic sessions, 309
tobacco smoke and cancer, 311
treatment, 309–311
5 A’s for helping tobacco cessation, 309, 309t
Tobacco withdrawal, 309
Toddler development, 893–894


<<<PAGE 3757>>>
emotional and social development, 893
language and cognitive development, 893
parenting challenges, 894
sexual development, 893–894
gender identity, 894
gender role, 894
toilet training, 894
Token economy, 775, 794, 1018
Token Test, 53t, 54
Tolerance, 604
Toluene embryopathy, 327
Topamax. See Topiramate
Topiramate, 253t, 600, 607, 664–665, 709
in alcohol use disorder treatment, 283
for tic disorder, 161
Topographical theory, limitations of, 1060
Topographic quantitative electroencephalography (QEEG), 1000
Tourette disorder, 155–162, 156t, 609, 694
clinical assessment tools in, 156, 156t
course and prognosis, 157, 159
diagnosis and clinical features, 155–156, 156t
differential diagnosis, 157, 158–159t
epidemiology, 161
etiology, 161–162
European clinical guidelines for, 159
pathology and laboratory examination, 157
tics in, 155–156
treatment, 159–161
Toxemia of pregnancy, 106
Toxic epidermal necrolysis, 709
Toxicology studies, 61–63, 62t
alcohol, 62–63
drug abuse, 62, 62t
environmental toxins, 63
volatile solvent inhalation, 63
Toxoplasmosis
in pregnancy, 104


<<<PAGE 3758>>>
Trail-Making Test, 53t, 82t
Tramadol, 689
Tranquilizers, 591
Transaction Rule, 28, 29t
Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), 735, 736
clinical studies, 738
definition, 737
future directions, 738
mechanism of action, 738
side effects, 737–738
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), 391, 735
acute effects, 737t
controllable pulse shape, 737
definition, 736
future directions, 737
induced neuronal depolarization, 737
interactions with medications, 737
mechanisms of action, 737
muscle twitch, 737
patient selection, 737
prolonged effects, 737t
risks, 737
side effects, 737
single-pulse, 737
Transcultural psychiatry, 1047–1052
cultural formulation, 1047–1048
discrimination, mental health, and service utilization, 1050–1051
immigrants and refugees, 1049
immigration acculturation and mental health, 1050
migration, acculturation, and acculturative stress, 1048–1049
racial and ethnic differences, 1050
research in, 1051–1052
Transdermal methylphenidate
for ADHD, 135
Transference, 3, 919
for borderline personality disorder, 573
mechanisms, 1071t


<<<PAGE 3759>>>
variants, 1069t–1070t
Transforming growth factor-α (TGF-α), 945
Transgender, 547
Transient disinhibition syndromes, 742
Transient global amnesia, 247, 440. See also Dissociative amnesia
Transient ischemic attacks (TIAs), 236
Transitions, during psychiatric interview, 15
Transporters, 959
Trauma affect regulation: Guide for education and therapy (TARGET),
173
Trauma-and stressor-related disorders, 433
differential diagnosis for, 433
PTSD and acute stress disorder, 433
Trauma- and stressor- related disorders, in children, 167
disinhibited social engagement disorder, 167–172
posttraumatic stress disorder, 172–174
reactive attachment disorder, 167–171
Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy (TFCBT), 435
The Trauma of the Birth (Rank), 1087
Traumatic bereavement, 851
Traumatic brain injury (TBI)
mild, 50–51
neuropsychological testing for, 50
Traumatic infantilism, 445
Trazodone, 638
dosage and clinical guidelines, 640
drug interactions, 640
pharmacologic actions, 639
precautions and adverse reactions, 640
therapeutic indications, 639
Treatment and Education of Autistic and Communication- related
Handicapped Children (TEACCH), 128
Treatment duration, 602–603
Treatment failure, 603–604
Treatment of Adolescent Depression Study (TADS), 174, 177
Treatment of SSRI-Resistant Depression in Adolescents (TORDIA), 177,
179


<<<PAGE 3760>>>
Treatment planning, psychiatric interview and, 11, 13–14
Treatment resistance, 604, 624
Triangulation, 588
Triazolam (Halcion), 604
Trichotillomania, see Hair-pulling disorder
Tricyclics, 591
antiarrhythmic properties of, 643
antihypertensive medication and, 643
birth control pills and, 643
cardiovascular effects, 643
CNS depression and, 643
dosage and clinical guidelines, 643–644
DRAs and, 643
drug interactions, 643
drug preparations, 641t
laboratory interferences, 643
pharmacologic actions, 640–641
precautions and adverse reactions
allergic and hematologic effects, 642
anticholinergic effects, 642
autonomic adverse effect, 642
cardiac effects, 642
hepatic effects, 642
neurologic effects, 642
psychiatric effects, 642
sedation, 642
teratogenicity and pregnancy-related risks, 642–643
therapeutic indications, 641–642
Triiodothyronine (T3) release, 967
Trilafon. See Perphenazine
Trileptal. See Oxcarbazepine
Trisomy 21. See Down syndrome
Tryptophan, hydroxylation of, 957
TSC1 gene, 994
TSC2 gene, 994
Tuberalin, function of, 1003
Tuberomammillary nucleus, 956, 956f


<<<PAGE 3761>>>
Tuberous sclerosis, 103
complex 1 and 2, 86t
genetic etiology of, 994
susceptibility genes for, 993
Tubocurarine, 733
Turner syndrome, 100. See also Intellectual disability (ID)
Twin studies
on bipolar disorders, 988–989
schizophrenia, 991
trait heritability, 988
Unconscious processes
in interview, 3
Unconscious system, 1060
Uniform Rights of the Terminally Ill Act, 858
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 93
United States, psychiatric disorders in, 1050
United States v. Brawner, 845
Unspecified communication disorder, 121–122
Unspecified gender dysphoria, 548
Uremic encephalopathy, 261
Urethral eroticism, 20
Urocortins, 968
U.S. Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA), 213
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP), 514
Vagus nerve stimulation, 391, 735, 736
contraindications, 739
definition, 739
dose–response relationships for, 739
future directions, 739
mechanism of action, 739
optimal dosing for, 739
patient selection, 739


<<<PAGE 3762>>>
side effects, 739
treatment algorithms, 739
treatment of epilepsy, 736
Vaillant, George, 909, 919
Valbenazine, 598
Validity, 31
construct, 31
content, 31
criterion, 31
face, 31
personality test, 56–57
Valium. See Diazepam
Valproate, 598, 655
for absence (petit mal) seizures, 253, 253t
for acute mania, 373
for early-onset bipolar disorder, 183
chemistry, 655
divalproex, 608
dosage and clinical guidelines, 658–659
drug interactions, 657–658
laboratory interferences, 658
laboratory tests during valproate therapy, 658t
pharmacologic actions, 655–656
precautions and adverse reactions, 656–657, 657t
preparations, 658t
serum concentration of, 64
therapeutic indications, 656
Vanilloid receptor, 977
Vardenafil, 699, 701, 970
Varenicline
for smoking cessation, 310–311, 310t
Vascular dementia, 68, 236
caues of, 242–243
dementia of Alzheimer type v., 236
transient ischemic attacks v., 236–237
Vascular (migraine) headaches, 19
Vasopressin (AVP), 996


<<<PAGE 3763>>>
Velocardiofacial (VCF) syndrome, 796f
Venlafaxine, 626, 683
for ADHD, 137
for depression in children and adolescents, 178
dosage and administration, 634
drug interactions, 634
laboratory interferences, 634
precautions and adverse reactions, 633
therapeutic indications, 633
Ventral tegmental area (VTA), 955
Ventricular zones (VZs), 939
Verapamil, 607, 668, 923
Verbal fluency, 53t, 54
Verbal IQ (VIQ), 54
Vertigo, in the elderly, 808
Very low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR), 948
Viagra. See Sildenafil
Vigabatrin, 962
Vigilant coma, 254
Vilazodone, 631, 632
Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale, 82t, 95
Violence, by adolescents, 903–905
Violent patients, 838–839
Viral hepatitis, tests for, 66–67
Virtual café, for children with autism spectrum disorder, 128
Virtual reality, 773
Viscosity of personality, 251, 933
Vision
development of, 926
organization of, 26
Vision impairment, 19
Visitation rights, 841
Visual agnosia, 88
Visual hallucinations, 10
in schizophrenia, 339
Visual inspection, 21
Visual Memory Span, 53t


<<<PAGE 3764>>>
Visual neglect, 49
Visuospatial functions
assessment of, 54, 55f
Visuospatial impairment, 48–49, 49f
Visuospatial orientation, 927
The Vital Balance (Menninger), 1085
VNS. See Vagal nerve stimulation (VNS)
Vocational rehabilitation, 584, 792
Volatile solvent inhalation, 63
Volatile substances. See Inhalants
Vomeronasal organ, 928
von Recklinghausen’s disease. See Neurofibromatosis
Vortioxetine (Trintellix), 632
Waiting room, 4–5
Wakefulness
LC neurons and, 955
quiet, 1003
Weapons use, by youths, 904
Weblogs, 28
Wechsler Intelligence Scales, 52, 54
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised (WAIS-R), 90, 935
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale III (WAIS-III), 52, 53t, 82t
Wechsler Individual Achievement Test (WIAT), 82t
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-III-R), 81, 82t
Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence—Revised
(WPPSI-R), 82t
Wechsler Memory Scale III (WMS-III), 52, 53t, 54
Weight loss, 21
for obstructive sleep apnea, 514
Weight management, drugs for, 707–710
Wellbutrin. See Bupropion
Wernicke aphasia, 48
Wernicke area, 930, 931
Wernicke encephalopathy, 277, 283
Wernicke, Karl, 931


<<<PAGE 3765>>>
Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome, 284
Werther syndrome, 180
WHO Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS 2.0), 31, 32–33t
“Why” questions, in psychiatric interview, 15
Wide Range Achievement Test—3, Levels 1 and 2 (WRAT-3), 82t
Wide-Range Achievement Test-Revised (WRAT-R), 84
Williams syndrome, 86t, 949
Wilson disease, 65, 158t, 929
Wingless-Int proteins (Wnts), 943
Winnicott, Donald, 892, 893, 1089
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, 53t, 82t
Withdrawal reactions, 604
Witzelsucht, 88, 934
Wnt3a growth factor, 945, 950
WNT2 gene, autism and, 995
Wolpe, Joseph, 766
Women, career and job problems of, 583–584
Woodcock–Johnson Psycho- Educational Battery— Revised (W-J), 82t,
143
Word deafness syndrome, 927
Word production, 21
Word salad, 10
Work-at-home experience, 584
Work distress, 583
Worker’s compensation, 845
Work frustration, 583
Work history, 8
Working memory, description of, 49, 932
Working through process, 745
World Federation for Mental Health (WFMH), 880, 881
World Health Organization (WHO), 880–881
on prevalence and burden of mental disorders, 875–876, 876t, 877t
World Health Report 2001 (WHO report), 880
World Mental Health Day, 881
World Mental Health Surveys, 876
World Psychiatric Association (WPA), 878, 881
World psychiatry, 875–881


<<<PAGE 3766>>>
active international organizations, 880–881
barriers to change, 878
development of mental health programs, 878
ethical issues in care, 880
future perspectives, 881
mental and physical diseases, relationships between, 879–880
prevalence and burden of mental disorders, 875–876, 876t, 877t
principles for prevention of suicide, 878
resources for care, 876, 877t, 878, 878t
stigmatizing attitudes toward people with mental disorders, 878–879
treatment gap, 876
World Psychiatry, 881
WPA. See World Psychiatric Association (WPA)
Writing disorder, 147. See also Written expression, impairment in
Written expression, impairment in, 147–149
clinical features, 147
comorbidity, 148
course and prognosis, 148
diagnosis, 148
differential diagnosis, 148
epidemiology, 149
etiology, 149
pathology and laboratory examination, 148
treatment, 149
Wyatt v. Stickney, 840
Wycis, Henry, 740
XXY genetic disorder, 159t
XYY genetic disorder, 158t
Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (YBOCS), 44, 742
Yale Global Tic Severity Scale, 156, 156t
Yohimbine (Yocon), 701
Young adulthood, 906–908
adoption, 908


<<<PAGE 3767>>>
alternative lifestyle parenting, 908
development tasks of, 906, 906t
friendships, 907
interracial marriages, 907
marital problems, 907
marital therapy, 907
parenthood, 908
psychological development concepts, 906, 906t
same-sex marriage, 907
sexuality and marriage, 907
single-parent families, 908
transition from adolescence to, 906
unemployment, 906
work identity, 906
Young Man Luther (Erikson), 1071
Zaleplon, 679
Zeitgeber, 1002
Zidovudine (Retrovir), 104, 689
Ziprasidone, 608
in autism spectrum disorder, 129
for bipolar disorder, 375t
for delirium, 230
for dissociative identity disorder, 448
dosages, 612
indications, 612
pharmacology, 612
and QTc prolongation, 67
for schizophrenia, 353t
side effects, 612
for tic disorder, 160
Zoloft. See Sertraline
Zolpidem, 679
Zonegran. See Zonisamide
Zonisamide, 253t, 600, 607, 666, 709
Zung self-rating depression scale, 384


<<<PAGE 3768>>>
Zyprexa. See Olanzapine

