<<<PAGE 1>>>
With this fully revised Fourth Edition, Dr. Stahl returns to the essential
roots of what it means to become a neurobiologically empowered
psychopharmacologist, expertly guided in the selection and combination
of treatments for individual patients in practice.

Integrating much of the basic neuroscience into the clinical chapters, and
with major additions in the areas of psychosis, antipsychotics, antidepressants, impulsivity, compulsivity, and addiction, this is the single most readily
readable source of information on disease and drug mechanisms.
This remains the essential text for all students and professionals in mental
health seeking to understand and utilize current therapeutics, and to
anticipate the future for novel medications.

Praise for previous editions:
“… essential reading … I would thoroughly recommend
this book to anyone who works with psychotropic drugs
– or who has the task of teaching others about them!”
American Journal of Psychiatry
“The clinically orientated chapters do an impressive
job of bringing together the neuropathological basis
and psychopharmacological approaches to psychiatric
conditions. I would highly recommend this as a concise,
entertaining, and easily accessible source of information.” Addiction Biology
“If there is one basic psychopharmacology text for a
practitioner or teacher of psychiatric medicine to own,
this is it … Cleverly illustrated with simple cartoons, this
book presents complex information in an easily accessible manner … Essential Psychopharmacology is a
first-rate book.” The Lancet
“… an excellent basic textbook covering the key areas
of psychopharmacology. Its concise and structured
approach made reading enjoyable … I would wholeheartedly recommend this book to all psychiatric trainees.”
Journal of Intellectual Disability Research
“As an MRC psychiatry student I have benefited enormously from studying this book. Stahl has allowed me
to see the light in what I previously found to be a very
complex subject; it has made a fascinating and fulfilling
read.” International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry

“Essential Psychopharmacology offers a wide range
of readers an engaging and comprehensive view of
psychopharmacology. It is highly recommended to both
novice and experienced researchers, who stand to gain
a new or renewed appreciation for the complexity and
beauty of how the nervous system mediates the
behavioral effects of drugs.” Contemporary Psychology
“The book is an excellent source of information for the
art of prescribing psychotropic medications. This book
belongs in every clinician’s library and serves as a model
of clarity for others.” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica
“Medical students, psychiatry residents, and fellows
and experienced clinicians will find the style and content
refreshing … I recommend this text as an extremely
useful reference work as we enter the next decade of
discovery in brain neurosciences and its role in clinical
psychiatry.” Psychological Medicine
“We highly recommend this book both to general practitioners who may need information on general mechanisms of psychotropic drugs and to students who would
like to learn more about basic psychopharmacology and
its practical applications.” Clinical Neuropsychiatry

Stahl
Fourth
Edition

Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology

Embracing the unifying themes of “symptom endophenotypes,” dimensions
of psychopathology that cut across syndromes, and “symptoms and
circuits,” every aspect of the text has been updated to the frontiers of
current knowledge, with the clarity of explanation and illustration that
only Dr. Stahl can bring.

Stephen M. Stahl is Adjunct
Professor of Psychiatry at the
University of California at San
Diego, California, USA, and
Honorary Visiting Senior Fellow
in Psychiatry at the University
of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK. He has conducted various
research projects awarded by
the National Institute of Mental
Health, Veterans Affairs, and
the pharmaceutical industry.
Author of more than 500
articles and chapters,
Dr. Stahl is the author of the
bestseller Stahl’s Essential
Psychopharmacology and
The Prescriber’s Guide.

25th

Anniversary

Stephen M. Stahl
Fifth Edition

Stahl’s Essential
Psychopharmacology

Neuroscientific Basis and Practical Applications


<<<PAGE 2>>>

<<<PAGE 3>>>
Stahl’s Essential
Psychopharmacology
Neuroscientific Basis and Practical
Applications
Fifth Edition
Since 1996, students and mental health professionals across the world have turned
to Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology as the single most readable source of
information on the fundamentals of psychopharmacology, disease and drug
mechanisms. 25 years later, the fifth edition of this bestselling book continues
Dr Stahl’s proud legacy of helping readers to understand and utilize current
therapeutics, and to anticipate the future for novel medications.
Long established as the preeminent source in its field, the eagerly anticipated fifth
edition of Dr. Stahl’s essential textbook of psychopharmacology is here! With its use
of icons and figures that form Dr. Stahl’s unique “visual language,” the book is the
single most readable source of information on disease and drug mechanisms for all
students and mental health professionals seeking to understand and utilize current
therapeutics, and to anticipate the future for novel medications.
Every aspect of the book has been updated, with the clarity of explanation that
only Dr. Stahl can bring. The new edition includes over 500 new or refreshed figures,
an intuitive color scheme, 14 new uses for older drugs and 18 brand new drugs,
coverage of Parkinson’s disease psychosis, behavioral symptoms of dementia, and
mixed features in major depressive episodes, and expanded information on the
medical uses of cannabis and hallucinogen-assisted psychotherapy.


<<<PAGE 4>>>
The opportunity to review and comment on Stahl’s
Essential Psychopharmacology, 5th edition, is truly a
pleasure. The depth and comprehension of this edition
reads like a fresh view of everything we would want to
know in the area of psychopharmacology, including
the integration of basic and clinical neuroscience
information. The clarity as a teaching tool for any level of
education and sophistication is remarkable, just as is the
ease of reading and enjoying the unique set of figures and
tables. The book represents a departure from the usual
fare that we are offered as we delve into the mysteries
of our body. In short, this 5th edition is not a simple
reworking of earlier editions but really a brand new view.
It represents a model for the way that we should cover
other areas of neuroscience.
Ellen Frank, PhD, Distinguished Professor
Emeritus of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine
Can you improve on a classic psychopharmacology
textbook? Yes! Updated, restyled, and with enhanced
illustrations, this 5th edition of Stephen Stahl’s “must
have” text is comprehensive, readable, and beautifully
presented.
Professor David Castle, MD, FRANZCP, FRCPsych,
Scientific Director, Centre for Complex Interventions,
Centre for Addictions and Mental Health, Toronto,
Canada; and Professor, University of Toronto
This new edition of a classical textbook is superb.
Unlike most other volumes on psychopharmacology, it
is organized around biological mechanisms, and uses
that framework to review the latest research. Another
unique feature is its use of wonderfully reader-friendly
illustrations, bringing to life many pathways that
would otherwise be difficult for the non-specialist to
understand.

though this approach is it does present challenges for
students, scientists, and clinicians who wish to learn
about or keep up with such a diverse, rich, and rapidly
evolving knowledge base. Essential Psychopharmacology
admirably meets these needs for all who wish to
learn about or develop their skills and knowledge of
psychopharmacology. Written by Dr. Stahl, an author who
is a most accomplished clinician, scientist, and teacher,
it covers all relevant fields of Psychopharmacology in an
expertly informed and accessible way. Previous editions
have established Essential Psychopharmacology as a vital
introductory and reference text for the students and
practitioners of psychopharmacology as well as for all
scientists with an interest in the field. The latest edition
admirably follows its predecessors and will undoubtedly
be a vital resource for all those interested in this
fascinating discipline.
Professor Allan Young, Chair of Mood Disorders,
Director of the Centre for Affective Disorders,
Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience King’s College
London
This book is a must for anyone who would like to dive
into psychotropics and get a state-of-the-art knowledge in
a clear, elegant, and accessible platform.
Professor Stahl has managed to provide simple,
yet accurate, cutting-edge concepts using creative
and innovative graphics and design. In this regard,
it’s presenting the perfect marriage of contemporary
neuroscience knowledge with outstanding accessibility.
I found this book extremely useful for well-informed
clinicians as well as colleagues who are starting to
practice psychiatry and recommend it as an essential
addition for all mental health professionals as well as for
general practitioners with interest in psychiatry.

Joel Paris, MD, Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry,
McGill University and Author of “Nature and Nurture in
Mental Disorders: A Gene-Environment Model”

Professor Joseph Zohar, Director of Psychiatry and
the Anxiety and Obsessive Compulsive Clinic at the Sheba
Medical Center, Tel HaShomer, Israel and Professor of
Psychiatry at Tel Aviv University, Israel

Although the effects of drugs on the mind, via the brain,
have preoccupied humans since the dawn of history, the
scientific discipline of Psychopharmacology has only
developed during modern times. From its inception,
Psychopharmacology has always benefitted from a
virtuous cycle of science informing clinical practice and
clinical questions driving the science. This is now often
called “Translational Medicine,” an approach that has
always been central to Psychopharmacology. Admirable

Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology is without a
doubt the leading textbook on the neuroscientific basis
of psychopharmacology. It covers the neuroscience
relevant to understanding psychotropic drugs and
integrates this with the pharmacology of all the main
drugs used in practice. This 5th edition is extensively
revised and updated to incorporate the latest advances
in neuroscience relevant to psychopharmacology. Dr.
Stahl has distilled the latest advances in neuroscience


<<<PAGE 5>>>
to fully revamp this edition. Dr. Stahl’s talent is to make
complex ideas deceptively easy to grasp. This is no small
feat. He does it with pithy explanations, clear diagrams,
and memorable analogies. My favorite is the “Fab Four”
of cognition but you’ll have to read the book to find
out where “The Beatles” come into it. There are many
textbooks in the field, but this stands out in the clarity
of explanation and cutting-edge neuroscience. True to
its name, it is essential reading for psychiatrists, primary
care physicians, students, and other professionals treating
patients with mental illnesses. It will also be useful for
trainees and neuroscientists. In short, Dr. Stahl does it
again!
Professor Oliver Howes, MRCPsych, PhD, DM,
Professor of Molecular Psychiatry, King’s College London
and Imperial College London
Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology has lived up
to its name as “essential” reading for generations
of psychiatrists and other professionals involved
in the prescription of psychotropic medication at
various levels of skill. Its hallmark has always been its
approachability while maintaining a depth which still
provides important new information for experienced
clinicians. The current edition is even more remarkable
than its predecessors for its ability to provide useful
and indeed essential information at multiple levels of
expertise. It is remarkable that something as readable
and as approachable at a very basic level can still be
incredibly informative to even the most experienced
and expert psychopharmacologists. The fully revised
diagrams are as ever informative, understandable, and
even entertaining. This edition has done what I thought
would be impossible in significantly improving on past
editions and in producing something that is even more
readable and informative to people with a vast range of
experience.
Richard J. Porter, Professor of Psychiatry, Head of the
Department Psychological Medicine and Director of the
Mental Health Clinical Research Unit, University of Otago
Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology, 5th edition, is
truly the preeminent textbook on the pharmacology
of psychotropic drugs. It is comprehensive but very
readable to both students and practitioners alike.
Dr. Stahl is not only an excellent scientist but also a
superb educator, providing a deep understanding of
both disease states and drug mechanisms. His unique
combination of visual and verbal material makes even
the most complex topics approachable. This 5th edition
has been extensively revised with hundreds of new or

revised figures, information on 18 new medications, and
dozens of other additions or changes. Stahl’s Essential
Psychopharmacology will remain the only pharmacology
textbook I recommend to my trainees.
Dr. Richard C. Shelton, Charles Byron Ireland
Professor, Director, UAB Depression and Suicide Center,
Department of Psychiatry and Behavior Neurobiology,
Director of Research, UAB Huntsville Regional Medical
Campus, School of Medicine, The University of Alabama
at Birmingham
Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology is a classic in the
field, which is unique in providing not only excellent
teaching about mechanisms of drug action through the
use of attractive and innovative icons but also a sense
of the actual clinical experience of tailoring therapeutic
drug choices to psychiatric symptom profiles.
Trevor W. Robbins, Professor of Cognitive
Neuroscience, University of Cambridge
Steve Stahl’s “Essential Psychopharmacology” is a
classic, used by clinicians, students, and researchers
throughout the world. For clinicians it’s practical, for
students it’s clear, and for researchers it’s innovative.
Stahl is an experienced clinician, and his text is filled
with useful pearls. Stahl is an expert on the principles of
medical education; these inform the text and figures, and
contribute to their extraordinary impact. Finally, Stahl
is a creative researcher, and his framework for thinking
about psychiatric medications provides the field with
an innovative approach. The 5th edition of the volume
is timely, given ongoing work in the field, and has been
thoroughly updated to reflect recent advances.
Dan Stein, Professor and Head of the Department of
Psychiatry and Mental Health at the University of Cape
Town
Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology, 5th edition,
is a masterpiece of impeccable scholarship and the
art of education. Signature to Dr. Stahl is this book’s
tremendous expanse of knowledge that provides not only
the science but also clarity in understanding complex
concepts of psychiatric psychopharmacology. Dr. Stahl
has demonstrated yet again that he is the “people’s
educator.”
Roger S. McIntyre, MD, FRCPC, Professor of
Psychiatry and Pharmacology, University of Toronto,
Canada Head, Mood Disorders Psychopharmacology
Unit and Chairman and Executive Director, Brain and
Cognition Discovery Foundation (BCDF), Toronto,
Canada


<<<PAGE 6>>>
Since its inception, Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology
has been a real treasure for those learning and teaching
psychopharmacology and the neuroscience of mental
disorders, and as a clinician and medical teacher I have
used and warmly recommended each of the four earlier
editions. However, this new 5th edition is the best yet
in my opinion and resets the bar again for textbooks in
this field. It has been extensively revised and brought
completely up to date throughout without a major
expansion in page count, and covers the entire field
comprehensively while retaining the clarity and ease
of learning it is famous for. I am pleased to see that
with this edition it has moved to a neuroscience-based
nomenclature and that many new drugs have been
added. A particular strength of this textbook has always
been its appeal to visual learners as much as text-based
learners through its wealth of figures and captions.
These have been impressively updated with a new color
scheme and many new figures, so that the book is not
only comprehensive and right up to date but is also a real
pleasure to read and learn from.
Peter S. Talbot, MD, FRCPsych, Consultant
Psychiatrist & Honorary Senior Lecturer, Greater
Manchester Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust &
University of Manchester

The truth is that this book has a secret: it is obviously a
book on pharmacology, but it hides a second one, a book
on neuroscience-based psychopathology.
Going back from the receptors to the
psychopathological dimensions of the disorders Stahl
has his own personal style, starting with his use of
the “incipit”: here he makes it clear what he is going
to explain to you, and where you have to focus your
attention. Concentrate! Then Steve Stahl gives you
picture of the determined domain: this time animated
in sequences to make you figure concretely the matter of
psychopharmacology. At the end, just to make sure that
you really grasped the concepts, he repeats everything
in a convenient summary, which is very useful to
consolidate the knowledge.
Stefano Pallanti, MD, PhD, Professor of Psychiatry
and Neurosciences, Director of the Institute for
Neurosciences – Florence (IT)


<<<PAGE 7>>>
Stahl’s Essential
Psychopharmacology
Neuroscientific Basis and Practical Applications
Stephen M. Stahl

University of California at Riverside and at San Diego, Riverside and San Diego, California

Editorial Assistant

Meghan M. Grady
With illustrations by

Nancy Muntner


<<<PAGE 8>>>
University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre, New Delhi
– 110025, India
79 Anson Road, #06–04/06, Singapore 079906
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of
excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108838573
DOI: 10.1017/9781108975292
© Stephen M. Stahl 1996, 2000, 2008, 2013, 2021
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First edition published 1996
Second edition published 2000
Third edition published 2008
Fourth edition published 2013
Fifth edition published 2021
Printed in Singapore by Markono Print Media Pte Ltd
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978-1-108-83857-3 Hardback
ISBN 978-1-108-97163-8 Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.
Every effort has been made in preparing this book to provide accurate and
up-to-date information that is in accord with accepted standards and practice
at the time of publication. Although case histories are drawn from actual cases,
every effort has been made to disguise the identities of the individuals involved.
Nevertheless, the authors, editors, and publishers can make no warranties that
the information contained herein is totally free from error, not least because
clinical standards are constantly changing through research and regulation.
The authors, editors, and publishers therefore disclaim all liability for direct
or consequential damages resulting from the use of material contained in this
book. Readers are strongly advised to pay careful attention to information
provided by the manufacturer of any drugs or equipment that they plan to use.


<<<PAGE 9>>>
Contents
Preface to the Fifth Edition ix
CME Information xiii

1

Chemical Neurotransmission 1

2

Transporters, Receptors, and Enzymes as
Targets of Psychopharmacological Drug
Action 29

3

Ion Channels as Targets of
Psychopharmacological Drug Action 51

4

Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and the
Neurotransmitter Networks Dopamine,
Serotonin, and Glutamate 77

5

Targeting Dopamine and Serotonin
Receptors for Psychosis, Mood, and
Beyond: So-Called “Antipsychotics” 159

6

Mood Disorders and the Neurotransmitter
Networks Norepinephrine and
γ-Aminobutyric Acid (GABA) 244

7

Treatments for Mood Disorders: SoCalled “Antidepressants” and “Mood
Stabilizers” 283

8 Anxiety, Trauma, and Treatment 359
9 Chronic Pain and Its Treatment 379
10 Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness
and Their Treatment: Neurotransmitter
Networks for Histamine and Orexin 401
11 Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
and Its Treatment 449
12 Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic
Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter
Network Acetylcholine 486
13 Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and
Addiction 538

Suggested Reading and Selected References
Index 615

579

vii


<<<PAGE 10>>>

<<<PAGE 11>>>
Preface to the Fifth Edition

WHAT’S NEW IN THE FIFTH
EDITION?
For this fifth edition of Stahl’s Essential
Psychopharmacology you will notice that every figure in the
book has been revised, refreshed, and updated with new
colors, shading, and outlining. About half the figures are
entirely new. The number of chapters has decreased by one,
with merger of mood stabilizers into treatments for mood
disorders; the text itself and the total number of figures and
tables are all approximately the same in length and number,
although all chapters have been edited, most of them
extensively, with the details of what has changed listed
below. The number of references has now been doubled.
Overall, 14 drugs have new uses and indications presented,
and 18 brand new drugs are introduced and discussed.
Highlights of what has been added or changed since
the fourth edition include:
• New coverage of interference RNA (iRNA) in basic
neuroscience chapters
• Restructuring all chapters to reflect neurosciencebased nomenclature, that is, drugs named for their
mechanism of action rather than use
• Thus, drugs for depression are not “antidepressants”
but “monoamine reuptake inhibitors with
antidepressant action”; drugs for psychosis are not
“antipsychotics” but “serotonin/dopamine antagonists
with antipsychotic actions,” etc.
• The psychosis chapter has:
• new coverage of the direct and indirect striatal
dopamine pathways
• new coverage of trace amines, receptors, and
pharmacology
• revision of the classic dopamine theory of psychosis
• two new theories of psychosis (serotonin and
glutamate)
• coverage of dementia-related psychosis and Parkinson
psychosis in addition to schizophrenia psychosis
• updated coverage of new indications for drugs
previously approved, including lurasidone,
cariprazine, and brexpiprazole

• describes five new drugs for psychosis: lumateperone
approved, and xanomeline, pimavanserin, trace
amine-associated receptor type 1 (TAAR1) agonists,
and roluperidone in development
• updated receptor binding data for all drugs
• new coverage of tardive dyskinesia and new drug
treatments: deutetrabenazine and valbenazine
• new coverage of uses of serotonin–dopamine
drugs for psychosis that are now used even more
frequently for depression
• The chapters on mood disorders have:
• new coverage of mixed mood states
• new coverage of GABAA (γ-aminobutyric acid A)
receptor subtypes and neurosteroid binding sites
• new coverage of neurotrophic growth factors and
neuroplasticity in depression
• new coverage of inflammation in depression
• mood stabilizers redefined
• new/expanded coverage of levomilnacipran,
vortioxetine
• new coverage of treating cognition in depression
• new drugs: neuroactive steroids, ketamine/
esketamine, dextromethorphan combinations,
dextromethadone
• expanded coverage of treatment resistance
and augmentation treatments for monoamine
reuptake inhibitors including brexpiprazole,
ketamine, esketamine, and trials with cariprazine,
pimavanserin
• expanded coverage of new hypotheses of
neuroplastic downstream changes following
NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) antagonist therapy
with ketamine, esketamine, and others
• expanded coverage of treating bipolar depression
with new indications and new drugs lurasidone,
cariprazine
• The anxiety chapter has:
• removal of obsessive–complusive disorder (OCD)
to the impulsivity chapter
• coverage of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as
a traumatic disorder rather than anxiety disorder
ix


<<<PAGE 12>>>
Preface to the Fifth Edition

•
•

•

•

x

• emphasis on anxiety symptoms rather than anxiety
disorders
• GABA moved to mood chapter
• revised discussions on treatments of individual
anxiety disorders
• renewed emphasis on combining psychotherapy
with psychopharmacology for symptoms of anxiety
The pain chapter has:
• new criteria for fibromyalgia diagnosis
The sleep chapter has:
• much expanded coverage of orexin neuroscience
• expanded coverage of histamine neuroscience
• much expanded coverage of neurotransmitters
across the sleep/wake cycle
• presentation of concept of different threshold
levels of drugs of different mechanisms in order to
induce sleep
• expanded coverage of dual orexin receptor
antagonists including a new agent lemborexant
• discussion of new H3 histamine antagonist,
pitolisant, for narcolepsy
• discussion of a new wake-promoting
norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitor
(NDRI), solriamfetol
• expanded circadian rhythm discussion
The attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
chapter has:
• coverage of multiple new dosage formulations of
methylphenidate and amphetamine
• discussion of new drugs on the horizon: viloxazine,
and others
• a presentation of concept of threshold levels
necessary for efficacy of stimulants in ADHD
• expanded coverage of neurodevelopment in ADHD
The dementia chapter has:
• new coverage of acetylcholine and cholinergic
receptors
• introduction of theories for the circuits of memory
versus psychosis versus agitation in dementia
• de-emphasis of the amyloid cascade hypothesis
• new emphasis on new treatments emerging for
the behavioral symptoms of dementia, including
pimavanserin for psychosis in all-cause dementia,
and brexpiprazole and dextromethorphan/
bupropion for agitation in Alzheimer disease
• expanded coverage of Alzheimer disease and new
coverage of vascular dementia, dementia with Lewy
bodies, frontotemporal dementia, and Parkinson
dementia, clinical characteristics, and neuropathology

• The final chapter on impulsivity, compulsivity, and
substance abuse has:
• new coverage of novel combinations of
psychotherapy and hallucinogenic/dissociative
drugs for treatment-resistant depression
• updated and expanded coverage of opioid use
disorder and its treatment
• updated and expanded coverage of the
endocannabinoid neurotransmitter system
and cannabis use for recreation, abuse, and
therapeutics
• update on Ecstasy and psilocybin
• update on impulsive–compulsive disorders

WHAT HAS NOT CHANGED IN
THE FIFTH EDITION?
What has not changed in this new fifth edition is
the didactic style of the first four editions: namely,
this text attempts to present the fundamentals of
psychopharmacology in simplified and readily readable
form. We emphasize current formulations of disease
mechanisms and also drug mechanisms. As in previous
editions, although the total number of references has
been doubled from the fourth edition, the text is not
extensively referenced to original papers, but rather
to textbooks and reviews and a few selected original
papers, with only a limited reading list for each chapter,
but preparing the reader to consult more sophisticated
textbooks as well as the professional literature.
The organization of information continues to apply
the principles of programmed learning for the reader,
namely repetition and interaction, which has been shown
to enhance retention. Therefore, it is suggested that
novices first approach this text by going through it from
beginning to end by reviewing only the color graphics
and the legends for these graphics. Virtually everything
covered in the text is also covered in the graphics and
icons. Once having gone through all the color graphics
in these chapters, it is recommended that the reader
then go back to the beginning of the book, and read the
entire text, reviewing the graphics at the same time. After
the text has been read, the entire book can be rapidly
reviewed again merely by referring to the various color
graphics in the book. This mechanism of using the
materials will create a certain amount of programmed
learning by incorporating the elements of repetition, as
well as interaction with visual learning through graphics.
Hopefully, the visual concepts learned via graphics will


<<<PAGE 13>>>
Preface to the Fifth Edition

reinforce abstract concepts learned from the written
text, especially for those of you who are primarily
“visual learners” (i.e., those who retain information
better from visualizing concepts than from reading
about them). For those of you who are already familiar
with psychopharmacology, this book should provide
easy reading from beginning to end. Going back and
forth between the text and the graphics should provide
interaction. Following review of the complete text, it
should be simple to review the entire book by going
through the graphics once again.

HOW HAS THE ESSENTIAL
PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY
FAMILY OF BOOKS AND
EDUCATIONAL SERVICES
GROWN?
Expansion of Essential Psychopharmacology Books

The fifth edition of Essential Psychopharmacology is the
flagship of this book series, but not the entire fleet, as the
Essential Psychopharmacology Series has further expanded.
For those of you interested, there is an entire suite of
dozens of books and extensive online information now
available that accompany Essential Psychopharmacology,
Fifth Edition. There are now six prescriber’s guides:
• for psychotropic drugs, Stahl’s Essential
Psychopharmacology: the Prescriber’s Guide, now in its
seventh edition
• for psychotropic drugs specifically for use in children
and adolescents, Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology
Prescribers Guide: Children and Adolescents
• for neurology drugs, Essential Neuropharmacology: the
Prescriber’s Guide, second edition.
• for pain drugs: Essential Pain Pharmacology: the
Prescriber’s Guide
• for drugs to treat serious mental illnesses particularly
in forensic settings, a new book, Management of
Complex Treatment Resistant Psychotic Disorders (with
Michael Cummings)
• for the UK, there will soon be published a
Cambridge Prescribers Guide for psychotropic drugs
to fit into UK practice patterns (with Sep Hafizi and
Peter Jones)
For those interested in how the textbook and
prescriber’s guides get applied in clinical practice there
are now three books of case studies:
• Case Studies: Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology,
covering 40 cases from my own clinical practice

• Case Studies, 2nd edition, with cases from Tom
Schwartz’s practice at State University of New York
Syracuse
• Case Studies, 3rd edition, with cases from the
University of California Riverside Department
of Psychiatry (with Takesha Cooper and Gerald
Maguire)
For those teachers and students wanting to assess
objectively their expertise, to pursue maintenance
of certification credits for board recertification
in psychiatry in the US, and for background on
instructional design and how to teach, there are two
books:
• Stahl’s Self Assessment Examination in Psychiatry:
Multiple Choice Questions for Clinicians, now in its
third edition
• Best Practices in Medical Teaching
For those interested in expanded visual coverage of
specialty topics in psychopharmacology, there is the
Stahl’s Illustrated series:
• Antidepressants
• Antipsychotics: Treating Psychosis, Mania and
Depression, 2nd edition
• Mood Stabilizers
• Anxiety, Stress, and PTSD
• Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
• Chronic Pain and Fibromyalgia
• Substance Abuse and Impulsive Disorders
• Violence: Neural Circuits, Genetics, and Treatment
• Sleep and Sleep Wake Disorders
• Dementia
For practical and in-depth management tips and
guidance, a newly introduced Handbook series:
• The Clozapine Handbook (with Jonathan Meyer)
• Handbook of Psychotropic Drug Levels (with Jonathan
Meyer)
• Suicide Prevention Handbook (with Christine Moutier
and Anthony Pisani)
Finally, there is an ever-growing edited series of
subspecialty topics:
• Practical Psychopharmacology (applying evidencebased studies to treatment, with Joe Goldberg)
• Violence in Psychiatry (with Katherine Warburton)
• Decriminalizing Mental Illness (with Katherine
Warburton)
• Evil, Terrorism and Psychiatry (with Donatella
Marazitti)
• Next Generation Antidepressants

xi


<<<PAGE 14>>>
Preface to the Fifth Edition

• Essential Evidence-Based Psychopharmacology, 2nd
edition
• Essential CNS Drug Development
• Cambridge Textbook of Neuroscience for Psychiatrists
(with Mary-Ellen Lynall and Peter Jones)
Online Options
Essential Psychopharmacology Online

Now, you also have the option of accessing all these books
plus additional features online by going to Essential
Psychopharmacology Online at www.stahlonline.org.
In addition, www.stahlonline.org is now linked to:
• the journal CNS Spectrums, www.journals.Cambridge.
org/CNS,
of which I am the editor-in-chief, and which is the
official journal of the Neuroscience Education Institute
(NEI), free online to NEI members. This journal
features readable and illustrated reviews of current
topics in psychiatry, mental health, neurology, and the
neurosciences as well as psychopharmacology

xii

The NEI Website, www.neiglobal.com

• Access CME credits for this and other books in the
Stahl series
• Access the Master Psychopharmacology Program, an
assessment-based certificate program that covers all of
the content in Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology
• Purchase downloadable PowerPoint slides of all the
figures in this book
Hopefully the reader can appreciate that this is an
incredibly exciting time for the fields of neuroscience
and mental health, creating fascinating opportunities for
clinicians to utilize current therapeutics and to anticipate
future medications that are likely to transform the field
of psychopharmacology. Best wishes for your first step on
this fascinating journey.
Stephen M. Stahl, MD, PhD, DSc (Hon.)
In memory of Daniel X. Freedman, mentor,
colleague, and scientific father
To Shakila


<<<PAGE 15>>>
CME Information

Release/expiration dates
Released: May 1, 2021
CME credit expires: May 1, 2024
Learning objectives
After completing this activity, you should be better able
to:
• Describe the neuropathology underlying mental
health disorders
• Describe the differential neurobiological targets for
psychotropic medications
• Link the mechanisms of psychotropic medications to
their clinical targets
Accreditation and credit designation statements
The Neuroscience Education Institute (NEI) is accredited
by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical
Education (ACCME) to provide continuing medical
education for physicians.
NEI designates this enduring material for a maximum
of 61.5 AMA PRA Category 1 Credits TM. Physicians
should claim only the credit commensurate with the
extent of their participation in the activity.
Nurses and Physician Assistants: for your CE
requirements, the ANCC and NCCPA will accept AMA
PRA Category 1 Credits TM from organizations accredited
by the ACCME. The content in this activity pertains to
pharmacology and is worth 61.5 continuing education
hours of pharmacotherapeutics.
Optional posttests and CME credit instructions
Optional posttests and certificates of CME credit are
available for each topical section of the book (total of
nine sections). There is a fee for each posttest (varies per
section) which is waived for NEI members.
1. Read the desired topical section
2. Pass the related posttest (70% score or higher),
available only online at www.neiglobal.com/CME
(under “Book”)
3. Print your certificate

Questions? call 888-535-5600, or email
CustomerService@neiglobal.com

Peer review
The content was peer-reviewed by an MD, PsyD, or PhD
specializing in psychiatry to ensure the scientific accuracy
and medical relevance of information presented and its
independence from bias. NEI takes responsibility for
the content, quality, and scientific integrity of this CME
activity.
Disclosures
All individuals in a position to influence or control
content are required to disclose any relevant financial
relationships. Although potential conflicts of interest
are identified and resolved prior to the activity being
presented, it remains for the participant to determine
whether outside interests reflect a possible bias in either
the exposition or the conclusions presented.
Author
Stephen M. Stahl, MD, PhD, DSc (Hon.)

Clinical Professor, Department of Psychiatry and
Neuroscience, University of California, Riverside School of
Medicine, Riverside, CA
Adjunct Professor, Department of Psychiatry, University
of California, San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA
Honorary Visiting Senior Fellow, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Director of Psychopharmacology Services, California
Department of State Hospitals, Sacramento, CA
Grant/Research: Acadia, Avanir, Braeburn,
Intra-Cellular, Ironshore, Lilly, Neurocrine, Otsuka,
Sunovion
Consultant/Advisor: Acadia, Alkermes, Allergan,
Arbor, Axovant, Axsome, Celgene, ClearView, Concert,
EMD Serono, Eisai, Ferring, Impel, Intra-Cellular,
Ironshore, Janssen, Lilly, Lundbeck, Merck, Otsuka,
Pfizer, Sage, Servier, Sunovion, Takeda, Taliaz, Teva,
Tonix, Tris, Vifor
xiii


<<<PAGE 16>>>
CME Information

Speakers Bureau: Acadia, Lundbeck, Otsuka, Perrigo,
Servier, Sunovion, Takeda, Vertex
Board Member: Genomind

Content Editor
Meghan M. Grady, BA

Vice President, Content Development, Neuroscience
Education Institute, Carlsbad, CA
No financial relationships to disclose.

Editorial Staff
Gabriela Alarcón, PhD

Medical Writer, Neuroscience Education Institute,
Carlsbad, CA
All of Dr. Alarcón’s financial relationships are through
her spouse/partner.
Employee (spouse/partner): Ashfield Healthcare
Communications

Donna M. Wilcock, PhD
Assistant Dean of Biomedicine; Associate Director, Outreach
and Partnerships; Sanders-Brown Center on Aging; SweeneyNelms Professor in Alzheimer’s Disease Research, Alzheimer’s
Disease Center; Associate Professor, Department of Physiology;
University of Kentucky College of Medicine, Lexington, KY
Consultant/Advisor: AC Immune, Alector, AvroBio
The Planning Committee, Editorial, and Design
Staff, and remaining Peer Reviewers have no financial
relationships to disclose.

Disclosure of Off-Label Use
This educational activity may include discussion of unlabeled
and/or investigational uses of agents that are not currently
labeled for such use by the FDA. Please consult the product
prescribing information for full disclosure of labeled uses.

William M. Sauvé, MD

Cultural and Linguistic Competency
A variety of resources addressing cultural and
linguistic competency can be found at this link:
www.neiglobal.com/go/cmeregs.

Regional Medical Director, Greenbrook TMS NeuroHealth
Centers, Virginia
Speakers Bureau: Avanir

Support
This activity is supported solely by the provider, NEI.

Peer Reviewers

xiv


<<<PAGE 17>>>
1

Chemical
Neurotransmission

Anatomical versus Chemical Basis of
Neurotransmission 1
General Structure of a Neuron 2
Principles of Chemical Neurotransmission 5
Neurotransmitters 5
Neurotransmission: Classic, Retrograde, and
Volume 6
Excitation–Secretion Coupling 8
Signal Transduction Cascades 9
Overview 9
Forming a Second Messenger 11
Beyond the Second Messenger to Phosphoprotein
Messengers 13

Modern psychopharmacology is largely the story of
chemical neurotransmission. To understand the actions
of drugs on the brain, to grasp the impact of diseases
upon the central nervous system, and to interpret the
behavioral consequences of psychiatric medicines, one
must be fluent in the language and principles of chemical
neurotransmission. The importance of this fact cannot be
overstated for the student of psychopharmacology. This
chapter forms the foundation for the entire book, and
the roadmap for one’s journey through one of the most
exciting topics in science today, namely the neuroscience
of how disorders and drugs act upon the central nervous
system.

ANATOMICAL VERSUS
CHEMICAL BASIS OF
NEUROTRANSMISSION
What is neurotransmission? Neurotransmission can
be described in many ways: anatomically, chemically,
electrically. The anatomical basis of neurotransmission is
neurons (Figures 1-1 to 1-3) and the connections between
them, called synapses (Figure 1-4), sometimes also called
the anatomically addressed nervous system, a complex of
“hard-wired” synaptic connections between neurons, not
unlike millions of telephone wires within thousands upon
thousands of cables. The anatomically addressed brain

Beyond the Second Messenger to a
Phosphoprotein Cascade Triggering Gene
Expression 15
How Neurotransmission Triggers Gene
Expression 18
Molecular Mechanism of Gene Expression 18
Epigenetics 23
What Are the Molecular Mechanisms of
Epigenetics? 23
How Epigenetics Maintains or Changes the Status
Quo 24
A Brief Word about RNA 26
Alternative Splicing 26
RNA Interference 26
Summary 28

is thus a complex wiring diagram, ferrying electrical
impulses to wherever the “wire” is plugged in (i.e., at a
synapse). Synapses can form on many parts of a neuron,
not just from the axon of one neuron to the dendrite of
another neuron as axodendritic synapses, but also from
the axon of one neuron to the soma of another neuron as
axosomatic synapses, and even from one neuron’s axon
to another neuron’s axon, especially at the beginning and
at the end of the receiving neuron’s axons (axoaxonic
synapses) (Figure 1-2). Such synapses are said to be
“asymmetric” since communication is structurally
designed to be in one direction, i.e., anterograde from
the axon of the first neuron to the dendrite, soma, or
axon of the second neuron (Figures 1-2 and 1-3). This
means that there are presynaptic elements that differ
from postsynaptic elements (Figure 1-4). Specifically, a
neurotransmitter is packaged in the presynaptic nerve
terminal like ammunition in a loaded gun, and then fired
at the postsynaptic neuron to target its receptors.
Neurons are the cells of chemical communication
in the brain. Human brains are comprised of tens of
billions of neurons, and each is linked to thousands of
other neurons. Thus, the brain has trillions of specialized
connections known as synapses. Neurons have many
sizes, lengths, and shapes that determine their functions.
Localization within the brain also determines function.
When neurons malfunction, behavioral symptoms may
1


<<<PAGE 18>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 1-1 General structure of a
neuron. This is an artist’s conception
of the generic structure of a neuron.
All neurons have a cell body known
as the soma, which is the command
center of the nerve and contains the
nucleus of the cell. All neurons are also
set up structurally to both send and
receive information. Neurons send
information via an axon that forms
presynaptic terminals as the axon
passes by (en passant) or as the axon
ends.

dendrites

cell body (soma)

dendritic spines

en passant
presynaptic
axon terminals

axon

presynaptic axon
terminals

occur. When drugs alter neuronal function, behavioral
symptoms may be relieved, worsened, or produced.
General Structure of a Neuron

Although this textbook will often portray neurons with a
generic structure (such as that shown in Figures 1-1 to 1-3),
the truth is that many neurons have unique structures
depending upon where in the brain they are located and
what their function is. On the one hand, all neurons have
a cell body known as the soma, and are set up structurally
to receive information from other neurons through
dendrites, sometimes via spines on the dendrites and
often through an elaborately branching “tree” of dendrites
2

(Figure 1-2). Neurons are also set up structurally to send
information to other neurons via an axon that forms
presynaptic terminals as the axon passes by (en passant,
Figure 1-1) or as the axon ends (presynaptic axon
terminals, Figures 1-1 through 1-4).
Neurotransmission has an anatomical infrastructure,
but it is fundamentally a very elegant chemical
operation. Complementary to the anatomically
addressed nervous system is thus the chemically
addressed nervous system, which forms the chemical
basis of neurotransmission: namely, how chemical
signals are coded, decoded, transduced, and sent along
the way. Understanding the principles of chemical


<<<PAGE 19>>>
Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1
Figure 1-2 Axodendritic,
axosomatic, and axoaxonic
connections. After neurons migrate,
they form synapses. As shown in
this figure, synaptic connections
can form not just between the
axon and dendrites of two neurons
(axodendritic) but also between the
axon and the soma (axosomatic)
or the axons of the two neurons
(axoaxonic). Communication is
anterograde from the axon of the
first neuron to the dendrite, soma, or
axon of the second neuron.

dendritic
spines

dendritic
tree
synaptic
vesicles

spine
axodendritic
synapse
axosomatic
synapse

axoaxonic
(initial segment)
synapse
axon

axoaxonic
(terminal)
synapse
postsynaptic
dendrite

neurotransmission is a fundamental requirement for
grasping how psychopharmacological agents work,
because these agents target key molecules involved in
neurotransmission. Drug targeting of specific chemical
sites that influence neurotransmission is discussed in
Chapters 2 and 3.

Understanding the chemically addressed
nervous system is also a prerequisite for becoming a
“neurobiologically informed” clinician: that is, being
able to translate exciting new findings on brain circuitry,
functional neuroimaging, and genetics into clinical
practice, and potentially improving the manner in which
3


<<<PAGE 20>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Classic Synaptic Neurotransmission
reception

hormone
drug
light

A

integration
chemical
encoding

nerve impulse

electrical
encoding

neurotransmitter

signal
propagation

signal
transduction
neurotransmitter

B

Figure 1-3 Classic synaptic neurotransmission. In classic synaptic neurotransmission, stimulation of a presynaptic neuron (e.g., by
neurotransmitters, light, drugs, hormones, nerve impulses) causes electrical impulses to be sent to its axon terminal. These electrical
impulses are then converted into chemical messengers and released to stimulate the receptors of a postsynaptic neuron. Thus, although
communication within a neuron can be electrical, communication between neurons is chemical.

4


<<<PAGE 21>>>
Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1

presynaptic
neuron
mitochondrion

synaptic
vesicles

vesicles
synaptic cleft
releasing
neurotransmitter

postsynaptic
neuron
Figure 1-4 Enlarged synapse. The synapse is enlarged conceptually here showing the specialized structures that enable chemical
neurotransmission to occur. Specifically, a presynaptic neuron sends its axon terminal to form a synapse with a postsynaptic neuron.
Energy for neurotransmission from the presynaptic neuron is provided by mitochondria there. Chemical neurotransmitters are stored
in small vesicles, ready for release upon firing of the presynaptic neuron. The synaptic cleft is the gap between the presynaptic neuron
and the postsynaptic neuron; it contains proteins and scaffolding and molecular forms of “synaptic glue” to reinforce the connection
between the neurons. Receptors are present on both sides of this cleft and are key elements of chemical neurotransmission.

psychiatric disorders and their symptoms are diagnosed
and treated. The chemistry of neurotransmission in
specific brain regions and how these principles are
applied to various specific psychiatric disorders, treated
with various specific psychotropic drugs, are discussed
throughout the rest of the book.

PRINCIPLES OF CHEMICAL
NEUROTRANSMISSION
Neurotransmitters

There are more than a dozen known or
suspected neurotransmitters in the brain. For
psychopharmacologists, it is particularly important to
know the six key neurotransmitter systems targeted by
psychotropic drugs:
serotonin
norepinephrine
dopamine

acetylcholine
glutamate
GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid)
Each is discussed in detail in the clinical chapters related
to the specific drugs that target them.
Other neurotransmitters that are also important
neurotransmitters and neuromodulators, such as
histamine and various neuropeptides and hormones,
are mentioned in brief throughout the relevant clinical
chapters in this textbook.
Some neurotransmitters are very similar to drugs
and have been called “God’s pharmacopeia.” For
example, it is well known that the brain makes its own
morphine (i.e., β-endorphin) and its own marijuana (i.e.,
endocannabinoids). The brain may even make its own
Prozac, its own Xanax, and and its own hallucinogens!
Drugs often mimic the brain’s natural neurotransmitters
and some drugs have been discovered prior to the natural
neurotransmitter. Thus, morphine was used in clinical
5


<<<PAGE 22>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

practice before the discovery of β-endorphin; marijuana
was smoked before the discovery of cannabinoid
receptors and endocannabinoids; the benzodiazepines
Valium (diazepam) and Xanax (alprazolam) were
prescribed before the discovery of benzodiazepine
receptors; and the antidepressants Elavil (amitriptyline)
and Prozac (fluoxetine) entered clinical practice before
molecular clarification of the serotonin transporter
site. This underscores the point that the great majority
of drugs that act in the central nervous system act
upon the process of neurotransmission. Indeed, this
apparently occurs at times in a manner that can mimic
the actions of the brain itself, when the brain uses its
own chemicals.
Input to any neuron can involve many different
neurotransmitters coming from many different neuronal
circuits. Understanding these inputs to neurons within
functioning circuits can provide a rational basis for
selecting and combining therapeutic agents. This
theme is discussed extensively in each chapter on the
various psychiatric disorders. The idea is that for the
modern psychopharmacologist to influence abnormal
neurotransmission in patients with psychiatric disorders,
it may be necessary to target neurons in specific circuits.
Since these networks of neurons send and receive
information via a variety of neurotransmitters, it may
therefore be not only rational but necessary to use
multiple drugs with multiple neurotransmitter actions
for patients with psychiatric disorders, especially if single
agents with single neurotransmitter mechanisms are not
effective in relieving symptoms.
Neurotransmission: Classic, Retrograde, and Volume

Classic neurotransmission begins with an electrical
process by which neurons send electrical impulses from
one part of the cell to another part of the same cell via
their axons (see neuron A of Figure 1-3). However,
these electrical impulses do not jump directly to other
neurons. Classic neurotransmission between neurons
involves one neuron hurling a chemical messenger, or
neurotransmitter, at the receptors of a second neuron
(see the synapse between neuron A and neuron B in
Figure 1-3). This happens frequently but not exclusively
at the sites of synaptic connections. In the human brain,
a hundred billion neurons each make thousands of
synapses with other neurons for an estimated trillion
chemically neurotransmitting synapses.
Communication between all these neurons at synapses
is chemical, not electrical. That is, an electrical impulse

6

in the first neuron is converted to a chemical signal at
the synapse between it and a second neuron, in a process
known as excitation–secretion coupling, the first stage of
chemical neurotransmission. This occurs predominantly
but not exclusively in one direction, from the presynaptic
axon terminal to a second postsynaptic neuron (Figures
1-2 and 1-3). Finally, neurotransmission continues in
the second neuron either by converting the chemical
information from the first neuron back into an electrical
impulse in the second neuron, or, perhaps more elegantly,
by the chemical information from the first neuron
triggering a cascade of further chemical messages within
the second neuron to change that neuron’s molecular and
genetic functioning (Figure 1-3).
An interesting twist to chemical neurotransmission
is the discovery that postsynaptic neurons can also
“talk back” to their presynaptic neurons. They can do
this via retrograde neurotransmission from the second
neuron to the first at the synapse between them (Figure
1-5, right panel). Chemicals produced specifically as
retrograde neurotransmitters at some synapses include
the endocannabinoids (EC, also known as “endogenous
marijuana”), which are synthesized in the postsynaptic
neuron. They are then released and diffuse to presynaptic
cannabinoid receptors such as the CB1 or cannabinoid
1 receptor (Figure 1-5, right panel). Another retrograde
neurotransmitter is the gaseous neurotransmitter nitric
oxide (NO), which is synthesized postsynaptically and
then diffuses out of the postsynaptic membrane and
into the presynaptic membrane to interact with cyclic
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-sensitive targets
there (Figure 1-5, right panel). A third type of retrograde
neurotransmitter are neurotrophic factors such as nerve
growth factor (NGF), which is released from postsynaptic
sites, and then diffuses to the presynaptic neuron,
where it is taken up into vesicles, and transported all
the way back to the cell nucleus via retrograde transport
systems to interact with the genome there (Figure 1-5,
right panel). What these retrograde neurotransmitters
have to say to the presynaptic neuron and how this
modifies or regulates the communication between pre
and postsynaptic neuron are subjects of intense active
investigation.
In addition to “reverse” or retrograde
neurotransmission at synapses, some neurotransmission
does not need a synapse at all! Neurotransmission
without a synapse is called volume neurotransmission, or
nonsynaptic diffusion neurotransmission (examples are
shown in Figures 1-6 through 1-8). Chemical messengers


<<<PAGE 23>>>
Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1
Classic Neurotransmission versus Retrograde Neurotransmission

NGF
NGF

A
CB1
receptor

cGMP
sensitive
targets

NGF
NGF

EC

A

NO
(nitric oxide)

EC

Classic

Retrograde

A
2

1

a

3

B

c

a

c

a

1

2
2

b

b

b

sent by one neuron to another can spill over to sites
distant to the synapse by diffusion (Figure 1-6). Thus,
neurotransmission can occur at any compatible receptor
within the diffusion radius of the neurotransmitter, not
unlike modern communication with cellular telephones,
which function within the transmitting radius of a

NGF
(nerve growth
factor)

Figure 1-5 Retrograde
neurotransmission. Not all
neurotransmission is classic or
anterograde or from top to bottom –
namely, presynaptic to postsynaptic
(left). Postsynaptic neurons may
also communicate with presynaptic
neurons from the bottom to the top
via retrograde neurotransmission, from
postsynaptic neuron to presynaptic
neuron (right). Some neurotransmitters
produced specifically as retrograde
neurotransmitters at some synapses
include the endocannabinoids (ECs,
or endogenous marijuana), which
are synthesized in the postsynaptic
neuron, released, and diffuse to
presynaptic cannabinoid receptors
such as the cannabinoid 1 receptor
(CB1); the gaseous neurotransmitter
nitric oxide (NO), which is synthesized
postsynaptically and then diffuses both
out of the postsynaptic membrane
and into the presynaptic membrane
to interact with cyclic guanosine
monophosphate (cGMP)-sensitive
targets there; and neurotrophic factors
such as nerve growth factor (NGF),
which is released from postsynaptic sites
and diffuses to the presynaptic neuron,
where it is taken up into vesicles and
transported all the way back to the cell
nucleus via retrograde transport systems
to interact with the genome there.

Figure 1-6 Volume neurotransmission. Neurotransmission
can also occur without a synapse; this is called volume
neurotransmission or nonsynaptic diffusion. In this figure,
two anatomically addressed synapses (neurons A and B) are
shown communicating with their corresponding postsynaptic
receptors (a and b; 1). However, there are also receptors for
neurotransmitter A, neurotransmitter B, and neurotransmitter
C, which are distant from the synaptic connections of the
anatomically addressed nervous system. If neurotransmitter A
or B can diffuse away from its synapse before it is destroyed, it
will be able to interact with other matching receptor sites distant
from its own synapse (2). If neurotransmitter A or B encounters
a different receptor not capable of recognizing it (receptor c),
it will not interact with that receptor even if it diffuses there (3).
Thus, a chemical messenger sent by one neuron to another
can spill over by diffusion to sites distant from its own synapse.
Neurotransmission can occur at a compatible receptor within
the diffusion radius of the matched neurotransmitter. This is
analogous to modern communication with cellular telephones,
which function within the transmitting radius of a given cell. This
concept is called the chemically addressed nervous system, in
which neurotransmission occurs in chemical “puffs.” The brain
is thus not only a collection of wires but also a sophisticated
“chemical soup.”

given cell tower (Figure 1-6). This concept is part of
the chemically addressed nervous system, and here
neurotransmission occurs in chemical “puffs” (Figures
1–6 through 1–8). The brain is thus not only a collection
of wires, but also a sophisticated “chemical soup.” The
chemically addressed nervous system is particularly
7


<<<PAGE 24>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 1-7 Volume neurotransmission:
dopamine. An example of volume
neurotransmission would be that
of dopamine (DA) in the prefrontal
cortex. Since there are few dopamine
reuptake pumps in the prefrontal cortex,
dopamine is available to diffuse to
nearby receptor sites. Thus, dopamine
released from a synapse (arrow 1)
targeting postsynaptic neuron A is
free to diffuse further in the absence
of a reuptake pump and can reach
dopamine receptors on that same
neuron but outside of the synapse from
which it was released, on neighboring
dendrites (arrow 2). Shown here is
dopamine also reaching extrasynaptic
receptors on a neighboring neuron
(arrow 3).

Volume Neurotransmission
DA
neuron
D1
receptors

1

A

2
3

B

Synaptic neurotransmission at 1 and diffusion to 2 and 3

important in mediating the actions of drugs that act at
various neurotransmitter receptors, since such drugs will
act wherever there are relevant receptors, and not just
where such receptors are innervated with synapses by
the anatomically addressed nervous system. Modifying
volume neurotransmission may indeed be a major way in
which several psychotropic drugs work in the brain.
A good example of volume neurotransmission is
dopamine action in the prefrontal cortex. Here there
are very few dopamine reuptake transport pumps
(dopamine transporters or DATs) to terminate the action
of dopamine released in the prefrontal cortex during
neurotransmission. This is much different from other
brain areas, such as the striatum, where dopamine
reuptake pumps are present in abundance. Thus, when
dopamine neurotransmission occurs at a synapse in the
prefrontal cortex, dopamine is free to spill over from that
synapse and diffuse to neighboring dopamine receptors
and stimulate them, even though there is no synapse at
these “spillover” sites (Figure 1-7).
Another important example of volume
neurotransmission is at the sites of autoreceptors on
monoamine neurons (Figure 1-8). At the somatodendritic
8

end of the neuron (top of the neurons in Figure 1-8) are
autoreceptors that inhibit the release of neurotransmitter
from the axonal end of the neuron (bottom of the
neurons in Figure 1-8). Although some recurrent axon
collaterals and other monoamine neurons may directly
innervate somatodendritic receptors, these so-called
somatodendritic autoreceptors also apparently receive
neurotransmitter from dendritic release (Figure 1-8,
middle and right panels). There is no synapse here,
no synaptic vesicles, just neurotransmitter apparently
“leaked” from the neuron’s dendrites upon its own
receptors in a mechanism that is still being clarified. The
nature of a neuron’s regulation by its somatodendritic
autoreceptors is a subject of intense interest, and is
theoretically linked to the mechanism of action of many
antidepressants, as will be explained later in Chapter 7.
The take-home point here is that not all chemical
neurotransmission occurs at synapses.
Excitation—Secretion Coupling

An electrical impulse in the first – or presynaptic – neuron
is converted into a chemical signal at the synapse by a
process known as excitation–secretion coupling. Once an


<<<PAGE 25>>>
Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1
autoreceptor
synaptic vesicles
dendritic monoamine

Figure 1-8 Volume neurotransmission: monoamine autoreceptors. Another example of volume neurotransmission could involve
autoreceptors on monoamine neurons. Autoreceptors located on the dendrites and soma of a neuron (at the top of the neuron in the left
panel) normally inhibit release of neurotransmitter from the axon of that neuron (at the bottom of the neuron in the left panel), and thus
inhibit impulse flow through that neuron from top to bottom. Monoamines released from the dendrites of this neuron (at the top of the
neuron in the middle panel), then bind to these autoreceptors (at the top of the neuron in the right panel) and would inhibit neuronal
impulse flow in that neuron (from the bottom of the neuron in the right panel). This action occurs due to volume neurotransmission and
despite the absence of synaptic neurotransmission in the somatodendritic areas of these neurons.

electrical impulse invades the presynaptic axon terminal,
it causes the release of chemical neurotransmitter stored
there (Figures 1-3 and 1-4). Electrical impulses open ion
channels – both voltage-sensitive sodium channels (VSSCs)
and voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCCs) – by
changing the ionic charge across neuronal membranes. As
sodium flows into the presynaptic nerve through sodium
channels in the axon membrane, the electrical charge of
the action potential moves along the axon until it reaches
the presynaptic nerve terminal where it also opens
calcium channels. As calcium flows into the presynaptic
nerve terminal, it causes synaptic vesicles anchored to the
inner membrane to spill their chemical contents into the
synapse. The way is paved for chemical communication
by previous synthesis of neurotransmitter and storage of
neurotransmitter in the first neuron’s presynaptic axon
terminal.
Excitation–secretion coupling is thus the way that
the neuron transduces an electrical stimulus into a
chemical event. This happens very quickly once the

electrical impulse enters the presynaptic neuron. It is
also possible for the neuron to transduce a chemical
message from a presynaptic neuron back into an
electrical chemical message in the postsynaptic neuron
by opening ion channels linked to neurotransmitters
there. This also happens very quickly when chemical
neurotransmitters open ion channels that change the
flow of charge into the neuron, and ultimately, action
potentials in the postsynaptic neuron. Thus, the process
of neurotransmission is constantly transducing chemical
signals into electrical signals, and electrical signals back
into chemical signals.

SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION
CASCADES
Overview

Neurotransmission can be seen as part of a much larger
process than just the communication of a presynaptic
axon with a postsynaptic neuron at the synapse between
them. That is, neurotransmission can also be seen as
9


<<<PAGE 26>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

1
first
messenger

second
messenger

1
2

++

fourth
messenger

Ca

P
3

2

first
messenger

second
messenger

3

third
messenger
kinase

third
messenger
phosphatase
P

activation/inactivation
of fourth messenger phosphoprotein

diverse biological responses
Figure 1-9 Signal transduction cascade. The cascade of events that occurs following stimulation of a postsynaptic receptor is known as
signal transduction. Signal transduction cascades can activate third-messenger enzymes known as kinases, which add phosphate groups
to proteins to create phosphoproteins (on the left). Other signal transduction cascades can activate third-messenger enzymes known as
phosphatases, which remove phosphates from phosphoproteins (on the right). The balance between kinase and phosphatase activity,
signaled by the balance between the two neurotransmitters that activate each of them, determines the degree of downstream chemical
activity that gets translated into diverse biological responses, such as gene expression and synaptogenesis.

communication from the genome of the presynaptic
neuron (neuron A of Figure 1-3) to the genome of the
postsynaptic neuron (neuron B of Figure 1-3), and then
back from the genome of the postsynaptic neuron to
the genome of the presynaptic neuron via retrograde
neurotransmission (right panel of Figure 1-5). Such a
process involves long strings of chemical messages within
both presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons, called signal
transduction cascades.
Signal transduction cascades triggered by chemical
neurotransmission thus involve numerous molecules,
starting with neurotransmitter first messenger, and
proceeding to second, third, fourth, and more messengers
(Figures 1-9 through 1-30). The initial events occur in
less than a second, but the long-term consequences are
mediated by downstream messengers that take hours to
days to activate, yet can last for many days or even for
the lifetime of a synapse or neuron (Figure 1-10). Signal
transduction cascades are somewhat akin to a molecular
“pony express” with specialized molecules acting as a
sequence of riders, handing off the message to the next
specialized molecule, until the message has reached
a functional destination, such as gene expression or
10

activation of otherwise “sleeping” and inactive molecules
(see for example, Figures 1-9 through 1-19).
An overview of such a molecular “pony express,”
from first-messenger neurotransmitter through several
“molecular riders” to the production of diverse biological
responses, is shown in Figure 1-9. Specifically, a firstmessenger neurotransmitter on the left activates the
production of a chemical second messenger that in turn
activates a third messenger, namely an enzyme known as
a kinase that adds phosphate groups to fourth-messenger
proteins to create phosphoproteins (Figure 1-9, left).
Another signal transduction cascade is shown on the
right with a first-messenger neurotransmitter opening
an ion channel that allows calcium to enter the neuron
and act as the second messenger for this cascade system
(Figure 1-9, right). Calcium then activates a different
third messenger on the right, namely an enzyme known
as a phosphatase that removes phosphate groups from
fourth-messenger phosphoproteins and thus reverses the
actions of the third messenger on the left. The balance
between kinase and phosphatase activity, signaled by the
balance between the two neurotransmitters that activate
each of them, determines the degree of downstream


<<<PAGE 27>>>
Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1
Time Course of Signal Transduction
long-term effects
of late gene products

activation of
late genes
activation of
early genes
activation of third
and fourth messengers

response
enzymatic formation of
second messengers

Figure 1-10 Time course of signal
transduction. The time course of
signal transduction is shown here. The
process begins with binding of a first
messenger (bottom), which leads to
activation of ion channels or enzymatic
formation of second messengers. This,
in turn, can cause activation of third
and fourth messengers, which are
often phosphoproteins. If genes are
subsequently activated, this leads to the
synthesis of new proteins, which can alter
the neuron’s functions. Once initiated,
the functional changes due to protein
activation or new protein synthesis can
last for at least many days and possibly
much longer. Thus, the ultimate effects of
signal transduction cascades triggered
by chemical neurotransmission are not
only delayed but also long-lasting.

activation of ion channels

binding of first messenger

1 hr

1 day

10 days

time

chemical activity that gets translated into active fourth
messengers able to trigger diverse biological responses,
such as gene expression and synaptogenesis (Figure 1-9).
Each molecular site within the cascade of transduction of
chemical and electrical messages is a potential location
for a malfunction associated with a mental illness; it is
also a potential target for a psychotropic drug. Thus, the
various elements of multiple signal transduction cascades
play very important roles in psychopharmacology.
Four of the most important signal transduction
cascades in the brain are shown in Figure 1-11. These
include G-protein-linked systems, ion-channel-linked
systems, hormone-linked systems, and neurotrophinlinked systems. There are many chemical messengers for
each of these four critical signal transduction cascades;
the G-protein-linked and the ion-channel-linked cascades
are triggered by neurotransmitters (Figure 1-11). Many
of the psychotropic drugs used in clinical practice today
target one of these two signal transduction cascades.
Drugs that target the G-protein-linked system are
discussed in Chapter 2; drugs that target the ion channellinked system are discussed in Chapter 3.
Forming a Second Messenger

Each of the four signal transduction cascades
(Figure 1-11) passes its message from an extracellular
first messenger to an intracellular second messenger.

In the case of G-protein-linked systems, the second
messenger is a chemical, but in the case of an ionchannel-linked system, the second messenger can be an
ion such as calcium (Figure 1-11). For some hormonelinked systems, a second messenger is formed when the
hormone finds its receptor in the cytoplasm and binds to
it to form a hormone–nuclear receptor complex (Figure
1-11). For neurotrophins, a complex set of various second
messengers exist (Figure 1-11), including proteins that
are kinase enzymes with an alphabet soup of complicated
names.
The transduction of an extracellular first
neurotransmitter from the presynaptic neuron into
an intracellular second messenger in the postsynaptic
neuron is known in detail for some second-messenger
systems, such as for those that are linked to G proteins
(Figures 1-12 through 1-15). There are four key elements
to this second-messenger system:
• the first-messenger neurotransmitter
• a receptor for the neurotransmitter that belongs to the
receptor superfamily in which all have the structure
of seven transmembrane regions (designated by the
number 7 on the receptor in Figures 1-12 to 1-15)
• a G protein capable of binding both to certain
conformations of the neurotransmitter receptor (7)
and to an enzyme system (E) that can synthesize the
second messenger
11


<<<PAGE 28>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

G-protein-linked ion-channel-linked
neurotransmitter neurotransmitter

First Messenger

NT

NT1

neurotrophin

hormone

7

membrane
Ca++

Second Messenger

Ras/Raf/MEK

2

cAMP

hormone
nuclear
receptor
complex

Third Messenger

A

PO4

Fourth Messenger/
Gene Expression

ERK/RSK/
MAPK/GSK-3

CaMK

CREB

HRE

genes

cell nucleus

Figure 1-11 Different signal transduction cascades. Four of the most important signal transduction cascades in the brain are
shown here. These include G-protein-linked systems, ion-channel-linked systems, hormone-linked systems, and neurotrophin-linked
systems. Each begins with a different first messenger binding to a unique receptor, leading to activation of very different downstream
second, third, and subsequent chemical messengers. Having many different signal transduction cascades allows neurons to respond
in amazingly diverse biological ways to a whole array of chemical messaging systems. Neurotransmitters (NTs) activate both the
G-protein-linked system and the ion-channel-linked system on the left, and both of these systems activate genes in the cell nucleus by
phosphorylating a protein there called cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB). The G-protein-linked system works through
a cascade involving cAMP (adenosine monophosphate) and protein kinase A, whereas the ion-channel-linked system works through
calcium and its ability to activate a different kinase called calcium/calmodulin kinase (CaMK). Certain hormones, such as estrogen and
other steroids, can enter the neuron, find their receptors in the cytoplasm, and bind them to form a hormone–nuclear receptor complex.
This complex can then enter the cell nucleus to interact with hormone-response elements (HREs) there to trigger activation of specific
genes. Finally, the neurotrophin system on the far right activates a series of kinase enzymes, with a confusing alphabet soup of names,
to trigger gene expression, which may control such functions as synaptogenesis and neuronal survival. Ras is a G protein, Raf is a kinase,
and the other elements in this cascade are proteins as well (MEK stands for mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signalregulated kinase; ERK stands for extracellular signal-regulated kinase itself; RSK is ribosomal S6 kinase; MAPK is MAP kinase itself, and
GSK-3 is glycogen synthase kinase 3).

• and finally the enzyme system itself for the second
messenger (Figures 1-12 through 1-15)
The first step is the neurotransmitter binding to its
receptor (Figure 1-13). This changes the conformation
of the receptor so it can now fit with the G protein,
as indicated by the receptor (7) turning green and its
shape changing at the bottom. Next comes the binding
of the G protein to this new conformation of the
receptor–neurotransmitter complex (Figure 1-14). The
12

two receptors cooperate with each other: namely, the
neurotransmitter receptor itself, and the G protein, which
can be thought of as another type of receptor associated
with the inner membrane of the cell. This cooperation is
indicated in Figure 1-14 by the G protein turning green
and its conformation changing on the right so it is now
capable of binding to an enzyme (E) that synthesizes
the second messenger. Finally, the enzyme, in this case
adenylate cyclase, binds to the G protein and synthesizes


<<<PAGE 29>>>
Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1

first messenger

The first messenger
causes the receptor to
change

7

E

receptor
7

E
G protein

Figure 1-12 Elements of G-protein-linked system. Shown here
are the four elements of a G-protein-linked second-messenger
system. The first element is the neurotransmitter itself,
sometimes also referred to as the first messenger. The second
element is the G-protein-linked neurotransmitter receptor,
which is a protein with seven transmembrane regions. The third
element, a G protein, is a connecting protein. The fourth element
of the second-messenger system is an enzyme, which can
synthesize a second messenger when activated.

cAMP (cyclic adenosine monophosphate), which serves
as second messenger (Figure 1-15). This is indicated in
Figure 1-15 by the enzyme turning green and generating
cAMP (the icon with number 2 on it).
Beyond the Second Messenger to Phosphoprotein
Messengers

Recent research has begun to clarify the complex
molecular links between the second messenger and its
ultimate effects upon cellular functions. These links are
specifically the third, fourth, and subsequent chemical
messengers in the signal transduction cascades shown in
Figures 1-9, 1-11, 1-16 through 1-30). Each of the four
classes of signal transduction cascades shown in Figure
1-11 not only begins with a different first messenger
binding to a unique receptor, but this also leads to
activation of very different downstream second, third,

G protein can now bind to the receptor
Figure 1-13 First messenger. In this figure, the
neurotransmitter has docked into its receptor. The first
messenger does its job by transforming the conformation of
the receptor so that the receptor can bind to the G protein,
indicated here by the receptor turning the same color as the
neurotransmitter and changing its shape at the bottom in order
to make it capable of binding to the G protein.

and subsequent chemical messengers. Having many
different signal transduction cascades allows neurons to
respond in amazingly diverse biological ways to a whole
array of chemical messaging systems.
What is the ultimate target of signal transduction?
There are two major targets of signal transduction:
phosphoproteins and genes. Many of the intermediate
targets along the way to the gene are phosphoproteins,
such as the fourth-messenger phosphoproteins shown
in Figures 1-18 and 1-19 that lie dormant in the neuron
until signal transduction wakes them up and they can
spring into action.
The actions shown in Figure 1-9 on fourth-messenger
phosphoproteins as targets of signal transduction can
be seen in more detail in Figures 1-16 through 1–19.
Thus, one signal transduction pathway can activate a
third-messenger kinase through the second-messenger
cAMP (Figure 1-16), whereas another signal transduction
pathway can activate a third-messenger phosphatase
through the second-messenger calcium (Figure 1-17).
In the case of kinase activation, two copies of the second
messenger target each regulatory unit of dormant or
“sleeping” protein kinase (Figure 1-16). When some
protein kinases are inactive, they exist in dimers (two
copies of the enzyme) while binding to a regulatory unit,
thus rendering them in a conformation that is not active.
13


<<<PAGE 30>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

7

7

E

E
Once bound to the receptor, the G protein
changes shape so it can bind to an enzyme capable
of synthesizing a second messenger.

Once this binding takes place, the second
messenger will be released.

Figure 1-14 G protein. The next stage in producing a second
messenger is for the transformed neurotransmitter receptor to
bind to the G protein, depicted here by the G protein turning
the same color as the neurotransmitter and its receptor. Binding
of the binary neurotransmitter–receptor complex to the G
protein causes yet another conformational change, this time in
the G protein, represented here as a change in the shape of the
right-hand side of the G protein. This prepares the G protein
to bind to the enzyme capable of synthesizing the second
messenger.

2

Figure 1-15 Second messenger. The final step in formation
of the second messenger is for the ternary complex
neurotransmitter–receptor–G protein to bind to a messengersynthesizing enzyme, depicted here by the enzyme turning the
same color as the ternary complex. Once the enzyme binds
to this ternary complex, it becomes activated and capable of
synthesizing the second messenger. Thus, it is the cooperation of
all four elements, wrapped together as a quaternary complex, that
leads to the production of the second messenger. Information
from the first messenger thus passes to the second messenger
through use of receptor–G protein–enzyme intermediaries.

Activating a Third-Messenger Kinase through Cyclic AMP
first messenger neurotransmitter
1

E

E

second
messenger

2

R

R

inactive
protein kinase

2

2

2

R

R

activation

2

2

2

R

R

2

2
P

P

3

3

third messenger active protein kinase

Figure 1-16 Third-messenger protein kinase. This figure illustrates activation of a third-messenger protein kinase through the secondmessenger cAMP. Neurotransmitters begin the process of activating genes by producing a second messenger (cAMP), as shown
previously in Figures 1-12 through 1-15. Some second messengers activate intracellular enzymes known as protein kinases. This enzyme
is shown here as inactive when it is paired with another copy of the enzyme plus two regulatory units (R). In this case, two copies of the
second messenger interact with the regulatory units, dissociating them from the protein kinase dimer. This dissociation activates each
protein kinase, readying this enzyme to phosphorylate other proteins.

14


<<<PAGE 31>>>
Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1
1-17 Third-messenger
Activating a Third-Messenger Phosphatase through Calcium Figure
phosphatase. This figure illustrates

first messenger neurotransmitter

1

activation of a third-messenger
phosphatase through the secondmessenger calcium. Shown here
is calcium binding to an inactive
phosphatase known as calcineurin,
thereby activating it and thus readying
it to remove phosphates from fourthmessenger phosphoproteins.

++

Ca

2

2

second
messenger

inactive
calcineurin

3

third messenger active calcineurin
(phosphatase)

In this example, when two copies of cAMP bind to each
regulatory unit, the regulatory unit dissociates from the
enzyme, and the dimer dissociates into two copies of the
enzyme, and the protein kinase is now activated, shown
with a bow and arrow ready to shoot phosphate groups
into unsuspecting fourth-messenger phosphoproteins
(Figure 1-16).
Meanwhile, the nemesis of protein kinase is also
forming in Figure 1-17, namely a protein phosphatase.
Another first messenger is opening an ion channel here,
allowing the second-messenger calcium to enter, which
activates the phosphatase enzyme calcineurin. In the
presence of calcium, calcineurin becomes activated,
shown with scissors ready to rip phosphate groups off
fourth-messenger phosphoproteins (Figure 1-17).
The clash between kinase and phosphatase can
be seen by comparing what happens in Figures 1-18
and 1-19. In Figure 1-18, the third-messenger kinase
is putting phosphates onto various fourth-messenger
phosphoproteins such as ligand-gated ion channels,
voltage-gated ion channels, and enzymes. In Figure
1-19, the third-messenger phosphatase is taking those
phosphates off. Sometimes phosphorylation activates

a dormant phosphoprotein; for other phosphoproteins,
dephosphorylation can be activating. Activation of
fourth-messenger phosphoproteins can change the
synthesis of neurotransmitters, alter neurotransmitter
release, change the conductance of ions, and generally
maintain the chemical neurotransmission apparatus
in either a state of readiness or dormancy. The balance
between phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of
fourth-messenger kinases and phosphatases plays a vital
role in regulating many molecules critical to the chemical
neurotransmission process.
Beyond the Second Messenger to a Phosphoprotein
Cascade Triggering Gene Expression

The ultimate cellular function that neurotransmission
often seeks to modify is gene expression, either turning a
gene on or turning a gene off. All four signal transduction
cascades shown in Figure 1-11 end with the last molecule
influencing gene transcription. Both cascades triggered
by neurotransmitters are shown acting upon the CREB
system, which is responsive to phosphorylation of its
regulatory units (Figure 1-11, left). CREB is cAMP
response element-binding protein, a transcription factor
15


<<<PAGE 32>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

1-18 Third-messenger
Third-Messenger Kinases Put Phosphates on Critical Proteins Figure
kinase puts phosphates on critical

1
first
messenger

proteins. Here the activation of a thirdmessenger kinase adds phosphates
to a variety of phosphoproteins,
such as ligand-gated ion channels,
voltage-gated ion channels, and
various regulatory enzymes.
Adding a phosphate group to some
phosphoproteins activates them; for
other proteins, this inactivates them.

P

second
messenger

2

4

ligand-gated
ion channel

third
messenger kinase

P

P

4

3

regulatory enzymes

P

4

voltage-gated
ion channel

Third-Messenger Phosphatases Undo What Kinases Create - Take Phosphates Off Critical Proteins
first messenger neurotransmitter

1

P

4

Ca++

ligand-gated ion channel

2

second
messenger

P

4

regulatory enzymes

2

P

4

3

inactive
calcineurin

3

third messenger active calcineurin
(phosphatase)

voltage-gated ion channel
Figure 1-19 Third-messenger phosphatase removes phosphates from critical proteins. In contrast to the previous figure, the third
messenger here is a phosphatase; this enzyme removes phosphate groups from phosphoproteins such as ligand-gated ion channels,
voltage-gated ion channels, and various regulatory enzymes. Removing a phosphate group from some phosphoproteins activates them;
for others, it inactivates them.

16


<<<PAGE 33>>>
Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1
in the cell nucleus capable of activating expression of
genes, especially a type of gene known as immediate
genes or immediate early genes. When G-proteinlinked receptors activate protein kinase A, this activated
enzyme can translocate or move into the cell nucleus
and stick a phosphate group on CREB, thus activating
this transcription factor and causing the nearby gene to
become activated. This leads to gene expression, first as
RNA and then as the protein coded by the gene.
Interestingly, it is also possible for ion-channel-linked
receptors that enhance intracellular second-messenger
calcium levels to activate CREB by phosphorylating
it. A protein known as calmodulin, which interacts
with calcium, can lead to activation of certain kinases
called calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases
(Figure 1-11). This is an entirely different enzyme than
the phosphatase shown in Figures 1-9, 1-17, and 1-19.
Here, a kinase and not a phosphatase is activated. When
activated, this kinase can translocate into the cell nucleus
and, just like the kinase activated by the G-protein
system, add a phosphate group to CREB and activate this
transcription factor so that gene expression is triggered.
It is important to bear in mind that calcium is thus
able to activate both kinases and phosphatases. There
is a very rich and sometimes confusing array of kinases
and phosphatases, and the net result of calcium action is
dependent upon what substrates are activated, because
different phosphatases and kinases target very different
substrates. Thus, it is important to keep in mind the
specific signal transduction cascade under discussion and
the specific phosphoproteins acting as messengers in the
cascade in order to understand the net effect of various
signal transduction cascades. In the case illustrated in
Figure 1-11, the G-protein system and the ion-channel
system are working together to produce more activated
kinases and thus more activation of CREB. However, in
Figures 1-9 and 1-16 through 1-19, they are working in
opposition.
Genes are also the ultimate target of the hormone
signal transduction cascade in Figure 1-11. Some
hormones, such as estrogen, thyroid, and cortisol, act
at cytoplasmic receptors, bind them, and produce a
hormone–nuclear receptor complex that translocates
to the cell nucleus, finds elements in the gene that it
can influence (called hormone-response elements, or
HREs), and then acts as a transcription factor to trigger
activation of nearby genes (Figure 1-11).
Finally, a very complicated signal transduction system
with terrible sounding names for their downstream

signal cascade messengers is activated by neurotrophins
and related molecules. Activating this system by firstmessenger neurotrophins leads to activation of enzymes
that are mostly kinases, one kinase activating another
until finally one of them phosphorylates a transcription
factor in the cell nucleus and starts transcribing genes
(Figure 1-11). Ras is a G protein that activates a cascade
of kinases with confusing names. For those who are
good sports with an interest in the specifics, this cascade
starts with Ras activating Raf, which phosphorylates
and activates MEK (MAPK kinase/ERK kinase or
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase/extracellular
signal regulated kinase kinase), which activates ERK
kinase (extracellular signal-regulated kinase itself), RSK
(ribosomal S6 kinase), MAPK (MAP kinase itself), or
GSK-3 (glycogen synthase kinase), leading ultimately to
changes in gene expression. Confused? It is actually not
important to know the names, but to remember the takeaway point that neurotrophins trigger an important signal
transduction pathway that activates kinase enzyme after
kinase enzyme, ultimately changing gene expression.
This is worth knowing because this signal transduction
pathway may be responsible for the expression of genes
that regulate many critical functions of the neuron, such
as synaptogenesis and cell survival, as well as the plastic
changes that are necessary for learning, memory, and
even disease expression in various brain circuits. Both
drugs and the environment target gene expression in
ways that are just beginning to be understood, including
how such actions contribute to the cause of mental
illnesses and to the mechanism of action of effective
treatments for mental illnesses.
In the meantime, it is mostly important to realize that
a very wide variety of genes are targeted by all four of
these signal transduction pathways. These range from the
genes that make synthetic enzymes for neurotransmitters,
to growth factors, cytoskeleton proteins, cellular adhesion
proteins, ion channels, receptors, and the intracellular
signaling proteins themselves, among many others. When
genes are expressed by any of the signal transduction
pathways shown in Figure 1-11, this can lead to making
more or fewer copies of any of these proteins. Synthesis
of such proteins is obviously a critical aspect of the
neuron performing its many and varied functions.
Numerous diverse biological actions are effected within
neurons that alter behaviors in individuals due to gene
expression that is triggered by the four major signal
transduction cascades. These range widely from neuronal
responses such as synaptogenesis, strengthening of

17


<<<PAGE 34>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

a synapse, neurogenesis, apoptosis, increasing or
decreasing the efficiency of information processing in
cortical circuits to behavioral responses such as learning,
memory, antidepressant responses to antidepressant
administration, symptom reduction by psychotherapy,
and possibly even the production of a mental illness.

are expressed that seems to be the important factor in
regulating neuronal function. These same factors of gene
expression are now thought to also underlie the actions
of psychopharmacological drugs and the mechanisms of
psychiatric disorders within the central nervous system.

How Neurotransmission Triggers Gene Expression

Chemical neurotransmission converts receptor
occupancy by a neurotransmitter into the creation of
third, fourth, and subsequent messengers that eventually
activate transcription factors that turn on genes (Figures
1-20 through 1-30). Most genes have two regions, a
coding region and a regulatory region with enhancers
and promoters of gene transcription (i.e., DNA being
transcribed into RNA) (Figure 1-20). The coding
region of DNA is the direct template for making its
corresponding RNA. This DNA is “transcribed” into its
RNA with the help of an enzyme called RNA polymerase.
However, RNA polymerase must be activated, or it won’t
work.
Luckily, the regulatory region of the gene can make
this happen. It has an enhancer element and a promotor
element (Figure 1-20), which can initiate gene expression
with the help of transcription factors (Figure 1-21).
Transcription factors themselves can be activated
when they are phosphorylated, which allows them to
bind to the regulatory region of the gene (Figure 1-21).
This in turn activates RNA polymerase and off we go
with the coding part of the gene transcribing itself
into its messenger RNA (mRNA) (Figure 1-22). Once
transcribed, of course, this messenger RNA goes on to
translate itself into the corresponding protein (Figure
1-22). However, there is a great deal of RNA that never
gets translated into proteins and instead exerts regulatory
functions as explained below.

Molecular Mechanism of Gene Expression

How does the gene express the protein it codes? The
discussion above has shown how the molecular “pony
express” of signal transduction has a message encoded
with chemical information from the neurotransmitter–
receptor complex that is passed along from molecular
rider to molecular rider until the message is delivered to
the appropriate phosphoprotein mailbox (Figures 1-9 and
1-16 through 1-19) or DNA mailbox in the postsynaptic
neuron’s genome (Figures 1-11 and 1-20 through 1-30).
Since the most powerful way for a neuron to alter its
function is to change which genes are being turned
on or off, it is important to understand the molecular
mechanisms by which neurotransmission regulates gene
expression.
How many potential genes can neurotransmission
target? It is estimated that the human genome contains
approximately 20,000 genes located within 3 million base
pairs of DNA on 23 chromosomes. Incredibly, however,
genes only occupy a few percent of this DNA. The other
96% used to be called “junk” DNA since it does not
code proteins, but it is now known that these sections
of DNA are critical for structure and for regulating
whether or not a gene is expressed or is silent. It is not
just the number of genes we have, it is whether and when
and how often and under which circumstances they

cell nucleus

transcription factor
(inactive)

P

3

TF

protein kinase
gene

enhancer

promoter

gene is off

18

RNA polymerase
(inactive)
coding

Figure 1-20 Activation of a gene, part 1: gene
is off. The elements of gene activation shown
here include the enzyme protein kinase; a
transcription factor, a type of protein that can
activate a gene; RNA polymerase, the enzyme
that synthesizes RNA from DNA when the gene
is transcribed; the regulatory regions of DNA,
such as enhancer and promoter areas; and
finally the gene itself. This particular gene is
off because the transcription factor has not yet
been activated. The DNA for this gene contains
both a regulatory region and a coding region.
The regulatory region has both an enhancer
element and a promoter element, which can
initiate gene expression when they interact with
activated transcription factors. The coding region
is directly transcribed into its corresponding RNA
once the gene is activated.


<<<PAGE 35>>>
Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1
Figure 1-21 Activation of a gene, part 2:
gene turns on. The transcription factor is now
activated because it has been phosphorylated
by protein kinase, allowing it to bind to the
regulatory region of the gene.

cell nucleus

P

P

3

TF
4

P

activated
transcription factor

gene

TF
4

enhancer

promoter

coding

transcription factor is activated;
gene is turning on

Figure 1-22 Activation of a gene, part 3:
gene product. The gene itself is now activated
because the transcription factor has bound
to the regulatory region of the gene, in turn
activating the enzyme RNA polymerase. Thus,
the gene is transcribed into messenger RNA
(mRNA), which in turn is translated into its
corresponding protein. This protein is thus the
product of activation of this particular gene.

cell nucleus

4

TF
P

RNA polymerase
activated
gene is activated

DNA

mRNA

protein

Third Messenger Activating a Transcription Factor for an Early Gene

P
P

3

TF

TF

Figure 1-23 Immediate early
gene. Some genes are known as
immediate early genes. Shown here
is a third-messenger protein kinase
enzyme activating a transcription
factor, or fourth messenger, capable of
activating, in turn, an early gene.

4

inactive
transcription factor

Some genes are known as immediate early genes
(Figure 1-23). They have weird names such as cJun
and cFos (Figures 1-24 and 1-25) and belong to a
family called “leucine zippers” (Figure 1-25). These

activated "early"
transcription factor

immediate early genes function as rapid responders to
the neurotransmitter’s input, like the special ops troops
sent into combat quickly and ahead of the full army.
Such rapid deployment forces of immediate early genes
19


<<<PAGE 36>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 1-24 Early genes activate
late genes, part 1. In the top panel,
a transcription factor is activating
the immediate early gene cFos and
producing the protein product Fos.
While the cFos gene is being activated,
another immediate early gene, cJun,
is being simultaneously activated and
producing its protein, Jun, as shown in
the bottom panel. Fos and Jun can be
thought of as fifth messengers.

P

cFOS
5

FOS fifth messenger
nucleus

cJUN

5

JUN fifth messenger

P

nucleus

ZIPPER

nucleus

JUN

FOS

5

FOS fifth messenger

5

Figure 1-25 Early genes activate late
genes, part 2. Once Fos and Jun proteins
are synthesized, they can collaborate as
partners and produce a Fos–Jun combination
protein, which now acts as a sixth-messenger
inactive
transcription factor transcription factor for late genes.

JUN fifth messenger
6

sixth messenger

late gene

late gene
product

mRNA

mRNA
mRNA

nucleus

Figure 1-26 Early genes activate late genes, part 3. The Fos–
Jun transcription factor belongs to a family of proteins called
leucine zippers. The leucine zipper transcription factor formed
by the products of the activated early genes cFos and cJun now
returns to the genome and finds another gene. Since this gene
is being activated later than the others, it is called a late gene.
Thus, early genes activate late genes when the products of
early genes are themselves transcription factors. The product of
the late gene can be any protein the neuron needs, such as an
enzyme, a transport factor, or a growth factor.

20

mRNA

E

Figure 1-27 Examples of late gene activation. A receptor, an
enzyme, a neurotrophic growth factor, and an ion channel are all
being expressed owing to activation of their respective genes.
Such gene products go on to modify neuronal function for many
hours or days.


<<<PAGE 37>>>
Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1
first messenger neurotransmitter
1

1

1

1

E

E

2

second
messenger

2

R

R

inactive
protein kinase

2

2

2

R

R

2

2

2

R

R

2

2

activation

P

P

3

3

third messenger active protein kinase

P

P
TF

TF

3

4

inactive
fourth messenger transcription factor activated "early"
transcription factor
nucleus
P

FOS fifth messenger

TF
4

5

Figure 1-28 Gene regulation by neurotransmitters. This figure summarizes gene regulation by neurotransmitters, from first-messenger
extracellular neurotransmitter to intracellular second messenger, to third-messenger protein kinase, to fourth-messenger transcription
factor, to fifth-messenger protein, which is the gene product of an early gene.

are thus the first to respond to the neurotransmission
signal by making the proteins they encode. In this
example, it is Jun and Fos proteins coming from
cJun and cFos genes (Figure 1-24). These are nuclear
proteins; that is, they live and work in the nucleus.
They get started within 15 minutes of receiving a
neurotransmission, but only last for a half hour to an
hour (Figure 1-10).

When Jun and Fos team up, they form a leucine zipper
type of transcription factor (Figure 1-25), which in turn
activates many kinds of later-onset genes (Figures 1-26,
1-27, 1-29). Thus, Fos and Jun serve to wake up the much
larger army of inactive genes. Which individual “late”
soldier genes are so drafted to active gene duty depends
upon a number of factors, not the least of which is which
neurotransmitter is sending the message, how frequently
21


<<<PAGE 38>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

P

cFOS

5

FOS fifth messenger

cJUN

5

nucleus

JUN fifth messenger
ZIPPER

JUN

FOS

6

sixth messenger

late gene

nucleus

late gene product and
biological response

Figure 1-29 Activating a late gene. This figure summarizes the process of activating a late gene. At the top, immediate early genes
cFos and cJun are expressed and their fifth-messenger protein products Fos and Jun are formed. Next, a transcription factor, namely a
leucine zipper, is created by the cooperation of Fos and Jun together, combining to form the sixth messenger. Finally, this transcription
factor goes on to activate a late gene, resulting in the expression of its own gene product and the biological response triggered by that
late gene product.

it is sending the message, and whether it is working in
concert or in opposition with other neurotransmitters
talking to other parts of the same neuron at the same
time. When Fos and Jun partner together to form a
leucine zipper type of transcription factor, this can lead
to the activation of genes to make anything you can think
of, from enzymes to receptors to structural proteins (see
Figure 1-27).
22

In summary, one can trace the events from the
neurotransmitting first messenger, through gene
transcription (Figures 1-9, 1-11, 1-28, and 1-29). Once
the second-messenger cAMP is formed from its firstmessenger neurotransmitter (Figure 1-28), it can interact
with a protein kinase third messenger. cAMP binds to
the inactive or sleeping version of this enzyme, wakes it
up, and thereby activates protein kinase. Once awakened,


<<<PAGE 39>>>
Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1
the protein kinase third messenger’s job is to activate
transcription factors by phosphorylating them (Figure
1-28). It does this by traveling straight to the cell nucleus
and finding a sleeping transcription factor. By sticking a
phosphate onto the transcription factor, protein kinase
is able to “wake up” that transcription factor and form
a fourth messenger (Figure 1-28). Once a transcription
factor is aroused, it will bind to genes and cause protein
synthesis, in this case, the product of an immediate
early gene, and this functions as a fifth messenger. Two
such gene products bind together to form yet another
activated transcription factor, and this is the sixth
messenger (Figure 1-29). Finally, the sixth messenger
causes the expression of a late gene product, which could
be thought of as a seventh-messenger protein product of
the activated gene. This late gene product then mediates
some biological response important to the functioning of
the neuron.
Of course, neurotransmitter-induced molecular
cascades into the cell nucleus lead to changes not only
in the synthesis of its own receptors, but also in that of
many other important postsynaptic proteins, including
enzymes and receptors for other neurotransmitters. If
such changes in genetic expression lead to changes in
connections and in the functions that these connections
perform, it is easy to understand how genes can modify
behavior. The details of nerve functioning – and thus
the behavior derived from this nerve functioning – are
controlled by genes and the products they produce.
Since mental processes and the behaviors they cause
come from the connections between neurons in the
brain, genes therefore exert significant control over
behavior. But can behavior modify genes? Learning
as well as experiences from the environment can
indeed alter which genes are expressed and thus
can give rise to changes in neuronal connections. In
this way, human experiences, education, and even
psychotherapy may change the expression of genes that
alter the distribution and “strength” of specific synaptic
connections. This in turn may produce long-term
changes in behavior caused by the original experience
and mediated by the genetic changes triggered by that
original experience. Thus, genes modify behavior and
behavior modifies genes. Genes do not directly regulate
neuronal functioning. Rather, they directly regulate the
proteins which create neuronal functioning. Changes
in function have to wait until the changes in protein
synthesis occur, and the events which they cause start
to happen.

EPIGENETICS
Genetics is the DNA code for what a cell can transcribe
into specific types of RNA or translate into specific
proteins. However, just because there are about 20,000
genes in the human genome, it does not mean that every
gene is expressed, even in the brain. Epigenetics is a
parallel system that determines whether any given gene
is actually made into its specific RNA and protein, or if it
is instead ignored or silenced. If the genome is a lexicon
of all protein “words,” then the epigenome is a “story”
resulting from arranging the “words” into a coherent tale.
The genomic lexicon of all potential proteins is the same
in every one of the 100+ billion neurons in the brain,
and indeed is the same in all of the 200+ types of cells in
the body. So, the plot of how a normal neuron becomes
a malfunctioning neuron in a psychiatric disorder, as
well as how a neuron becomes a neuron instead of a liver
cell, is the selection of which specific genes are expressed
or silenced. In addition, malfunctioning neurons
are impacted by inherited genes that have abnormal
nucleotide sequences, which if expressed contribute to
mental disorders. Thus, the story of the brain depends
not only upon which genes are inherited but also
whether any abnormal genes are expressed or even
whether normal genes are expressed when they should
be silent or silenced when they should be expressed.
Neurotransmission, genes themselves, drugs, and the
environment all regulate which genes are expressed or
silenced, and thus all affect whether the story of the brain
is a compelling narrative such as learning and memory, a
regrettable tragedy such as drug abuse, stress reactions,
and psychiatric disorders, or therapeutic improvement of
a psychiatric disorder by medications or psychotherapy.
What Are the Molecular Mechanisms of Epigenetics?

Epigenetic mechanisms turn genes on and off by
modifying the structure of chromatin in the cell nucleus
(Figure 1-30). The character of a cell is fundamentally
determined by its chromatin, a substance composed of
nucleosomes (Figure 1-30). Nucleosomes are an octet of
proteins called histones around which DNA is wrapped
(Figure 1-30). Epigenetic control over whether a gene
is read (i.e., expressed) or is not read (i.e., silenced),
is done by modifying the structure of chromatin.
Chemical modifications that can do this include not
only methylation, but also acetylation, phosphorylation,
and others, and these processes are regulated by
neurotransmission, drugs, and the environment
(Figure 1-30). For example, when DNA or histones are
23


<<<PAGE 40>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

methylated, this compacts the chromatin and acts to
close off access of molecular transcription factors to the
promoter regions of DNA, with the consequence that the
gene in this region is silenced, and not expressed, so no
RNA or protein is manufactured (Figure 1-30). Silenced
DNA means molecular features that are not part of a
given cell’s personality.
Histones are methylated by enzymes called histone
methyltransferases, and this is reversed by enzymes
called histone demethylases (Figure 1-30). Methylation
of histones can silence genes whereas demethylation
of histones can thus activate genes. DNA can also be
methylated and this, too, silences genes. Demethylation
of DNA reverses this. Methylation of DNA is regulated
by DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) enzymes, and
demethylation of DNA by DNA demethylase enzymes
(Figure 1-30). There are many forms of methyltransferase
enzymes, and they all tag their substrates with
methyl groups donated from L-methylfolate via
S-adenosyl-methionine (SAMe) (Figure 1-30). When
neurotransmission, drugs, or the environment impact
methylation, for example, this regulates whether genes
are epigenetically silenced or expressed.
Methylation of DNA can eventually lead to
deacetylation of histones as well, by activating enzymes
called histone deacetylases (HDACs). Deacetylation of
histones also has a silencing action on gene expression
(Figure 1-30). Methylation and deacetylation compress
chromatin, as though a molecular gate has been closed,
and thus transcription factors that activate genes
cannot get access to their promoter regions, and thus
the genes are silenced and not transcribed into RNA or
translated into proteins (Figure 1-30). On the other hand,
demethylation and acetylation do just the opposite: they
decompress chromatin as though a molecular gate has
been opened, and thus transcription factors can get to the
promoter regions of genes, and do activate them (Figure
1-30). Activated genes thus become part of the molecular
personality of a given cell.
How Epigenetics Maintains or Changes the Status Quo

Some enzymes try to maintain the status quo of a cell,
enzymes such as DNMT1 (DNA methyltransferase 1),
which maintain the methylation of specific areas of DNA
and keep various genes quiet for a lifetime. For example,
this process keeps a neuron always a neuron, and a liver
cell always a liver cell, including when a cell divides into
another one. Presumably methylation is maintained at
genes that one cell does not need, even though another
cell type might.
24

It used to be thought that, once a cell differentiated,
the epigenetic pattern of gene activation and gene
silencing remained stable for the lifetime of that
cell. Now, however, it is known that there are various
circumstances in which epigenetics may change in
mature, differentiated neurons. Although the initial
epigenetic pattern of a neuron is indeed set during
neurodevelopment to give each neuron its own lifelong
“personality,” it now appears that the storyline of
some neurons is that they respond to their narrative
experiences throughout life with a changing character
arc, thus causing de novo alterations in their epigenome.
Depending upon what happens to a neuron (such
as experiencing child abuse, adult stress, dietary
deficiencies, productive new encounters, psychotherapy,
drugs of abuse, or psychotropic therapeutic medications),
it now seems that previously silenced genes can become
activated and/or previously active genes can become
silenced (Figure 1-30). When this happens, both favorable
and unfavorable developments can occur in the character
of neurons. Favorable epigenetic mechanisms may be
triggered in order for one to learn (e.g., spatial memory
formation) or to experience the therapeutic actions
of psychopharmacological agents. On the other hand,
unfavorable epigenetic mechanisms may be triggered in
order for one to become addicted to drugs of abuse, or to
experience various forms of “abnormal learning,” such as
when one develops fear conditioning, an anxiety disorder,
or a chronic pain condition.
How these epigenetic mechanisms arrive at the scene
of the crime remains a compelling neurobiological and
psychiatric mystery. Nevertheless, a legion of scientific
detectives is working these cases and is beginning to show
how epigenetic mechanisms are mediators of psychiatric
disorders. There is also the possibility that epigenetic
mechanisms can be harnessed to treat addictions,
extinguish fear, prevent the development of chronic pain
states, and maybe even prevent disease progression of
psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia by identifying
high-risk individuals before the “plot thickens” and
the disorder is irreversibly established and relentlessly
marches on to an unwanted destiny.
One of the mechanisms for changing the status quo
of epigenomic patterns in a mature cell is via de novo
DNA methylation by a type of DNMT enzyme known
as DNMT2 or DNMT3 (Figure 1-30). These enzymes
target neuronal genes for silencing that were previously
active in a mature neuron. Of course, deacetylation
of histones near previously active genes would do the
same thing, namely silence them, and this is mediated


<<<PAGE 41>>>
Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1

Gene Activation and Silencing
Gene Activating
histone acetyl transferase
DNA demethylase
histone demethylase

Ac

gates
open

TF

Me

Ac

neurotransmission/
drugs/
environment

Me

gates
close

TF

Gene Silencing
histone deacetylase
DNMT
histone
methyltransferase
RNA

DNMT
Me

RNA

SAMe
CH3
H

H

L-MF

Gene
Product

H

gene
product

H

activated gene

silenced gene

Key
Me

Me

Me

Me

H

H

chromatin
methylated DNA
(histone + DNA)

Me

Me

methyl group

L-MF

TF

transcription
factor

CH3
H

H

L-methylfolate

Ac

methylated acetyl group
histone core

Figure 1-30 Gene activation and silencing. Molecular gates are opened by acetylation and/or demethylation of histones, allowing
transcription factors access to genes, thus activating them. Molecular gates are closed by deacetylation and/or methylation provided
by the methyl donor SAMe derived from L-methylfolate. This prevents access of transcription factors to genes, thus silencing them. Ac =
acetyl; Me = methyl; DNMT = DNA methyltransferase; TF = transcription factor; SAMe = S-adenosyl-methionine; L-MF = L-methylfolate.

by HDACs. In reverse, demethylation or acetylation of
genes both activate genes that were previously silent. The
real question is how does a neuron know which genes
among its thousands to silence or activate in response
to the environment, including stress, drugs, and diet?
How might this go wrong when a psychiatric disorder

develops? This part of the story remains a twisted mystery
but some very interesting detective work has already been
done by various investigators who hope to understand
how some neuronal stories evolve into psychiatric
tragedies. These investigations may set the stage for
rewriting the narrative of various psychiatric disorders by
25


<<<PAGE 42>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

DNA

Gene

5’

3’
Exon 1

Exon 2

Intron

Exon 3

Exon 4

Transcription

RNA

Primary Transcript

RNA Splicing

mRNA (splice variant 1)

mRNA (splice variant 2)

Protein 1

Protein 2

Figure 1-31 Alternative splicing. When DNA is transcribed into messenger RNA (mRNA), this is called the primary transcript. The
primary transcript can then be translated into a protein; however, sometimes an intermediary step occurs in which the mRNA is spliced,
with certain sections reorganized or removed outright. This means that one gene can give rise to more than one protein.

therapeutically altering the epigenetics of key neuronal
characters so that the story has a happy ending.

A BRIEF WORD ABOUT RNA
Alternative Splicing

As mentioned above, the RNA that encodes our 20,000
genes is called messenger RNA (mRNA) and serves as
an intermediate between DNA and protein. Although
it might seem as if our 20,000 genes would make only
20,000 proteins, that is not so. It turns out that developing
mRNA into protein is a similar process as when an
old-fashioned movie producer makes cinema. That is,
mRNA records the action from DNA just as the movie
studio faithfully develops the film exactly as initially
recorded. In the case of DNA transcription, this “first
draft” is called the primary transcript (Figure 1-31).
However, just as the raw footage from a movie shoot is
26

not “translated” directly into a motion picture, in many
cases, the “raw” mRNA is also not immediately translated
into a protein. Now comes the interesting part: editing. It
turns out that mRNA can be “spliced,” much like a movie
producer edits and splices movie film once the live shoot
is over, organizing the splices into different sequences
and leaving some on the cutting-room floor. For spliced
mRNA, these sections won’t be translated into protein
(Figure 1-31). This “alternative splicing” means that one
gene can give rise to many proteins (Figure 1-31), just
like a movie can have different endings or be edited into a
short trailer. Thus, thanks in part to RNA editing, the true
molecular diversity of the brain is notably greater than
our 20,000 genes.
RNA Interference

There are forms of RNA other than mRNA that are
now known to exist and that do not code for protein


<<<PAGE 43>>>
Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1
DNA

RNA

nucleus
shRNA

Figure 1–32 RNA
interference. Some forms of
RNA do not code for protein
synthesis, and instead have
regulatory functions. As
shown here, small hairpin RNA
(shRNA) is transcribed from
DNA but is not translated into
protein. Instead, it forms hairpin
loops and is exported into
the cytoplasm by the enzyme
exportin, where it is then
chopped into pieces by the
enzyme dicer. The small pieces
bind to a protein complex
called RISC, which in turn binds
to mRNA and inhibits protein
synthesis.

Exportin

Dicer

mRNA undergoing
translation
RISC
ribosome

RISC
ribosome

no translation

RNA interference

synthesis; instead they have direct regulatory functions.
These include ribosomal RNA (rRNA), transfer RNA
(tRNA), and small nuclear RNA (snRNA), along with
a large number of other noncoding RNAs (e.g., small
hairpin RNAs because they are shaped like a hairpin,
sometimes also called microRNA [miRNA]; interference
RNA [iRNA]; and small interfering RNA [siRNA].
When miRNAs are transcribed from DNA, they do not

go on to be translated into proteins. Instead, they form
hairpin loops and are then exported to the cytoplasm
by the enzyme exportin, where they are chopped into
pieces by an enzyme called “dicer” (Figure 1-32). Small
pieces of iRNA then bind to a protein complex called
RISC, which binds in turn to mRNA to inhibit protein
synthesis (Figure 1-32). So, forms of RNA can lead both
to protein synthesis and to blocking protein synthesis.
27


<<<PAGE 44>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Future therapeutics may be able to utilize iRNAs to
inhibit protein synthesis in genetic disorders, such as
Huntington’s disease.

SUMMARY
The reader should now appreciate that chemical
neurotransmission is the foundation of
psychopharmacology. There are many neurotransmitters,
and all neurons receive input from a multitude of
neurotransmitters in classic presynaptic to postsynaptic
asymmetrical neurotransmission. Presynaptic to
postsynaptic neurotransmissions at the brain’s trillion
synapses are key to chemical neurotransmission, but
some neurotransmission is retrograde from postsynaptic
neuron to presynaptic neuron, and other types of
neurotransmission, such as volume neurotransmission,
do not require a synapse at all.
The reader should also have an appreciation for
elegant if complex molecular cascades precipitated by a
neurotransmitter, with molecule-by-molecule transfer of
that transmitted message inside the neuron receiving that
message, eventually altering the biochemical machinery
of that cell in order to carry out the message that was sent
to it. Thus, the function of chemical neurotransmission
is not so much to have a presynaptic neurotransmitter
communicate with its postsynaptic receptors, but to
have a presynaptic genome converse with a postsynaptic
genome: DNA to DNA, presynaptic “command center” to
postsynaptic “command center” and back.
The message of chemical neurotransmission is
transferred via three sequential “molecular pony express”
routes: (1) a presynaptic neurotransmitter synthesis
route from presynaptic genome to the synthesis and
packaging of neurotransmitter and supporting enzymes
and receptors; (2) a postsynaptic route from receptor
occupancy through second messengers all the way to
the genome, which turns on postsynaptic genes; and
(3) another postsynaptic route starting from the newly
expressed postsynaptic genes transferring information
as a molecular cascade of biochemical consequences
throughout the postsynaptic neuron.
It should now be clear that neurotransmission does
not end when a neurotransmitter binds to a receptor

28

or even when ion flows have been altered or second
messengers have been created. Events such as these all
start and end within milliseconds to seconds following
release of presynaptic neurotransmitter. The ultimate
goal of neurotransmission is to alter the biochemical
activities of the postsynaptic target neuron in a profound
and enduring manner. Since the postsynaptic DNA
has to wait until molecular pony express messengers
make their way from the postsynaptic receptors, often
located on dendrites, to phosphoproteins within the
neuron, or to transcription factors and genes in the
postsynaptic neuron’s cell nucleus, it can take a while for
neurotransmission to begin influencing the postsynaptic
target neuron’s biochemical processes. The time it takes
from receptor occupancy by neurotransmitter to gene
expression is usually hours. Furthermore, since the last
messenger triggered by neurotransmission – called a
transcription factor – only initiates the very beginning of
gene action, it takes even longer for the gene activation to
be fully implemented via the series of biochemical events
it triggers. These biochemical events can begin many
hours to days after the neurotransmission occurred, and
can last days or weeks once they are put in motion.
Thus, a brief puff of chemical neurotransmission
from a presynaptic neuron can trigger a profound
postsynaptic reaction that takes hours to days to develop
and that can last days to weeks or even a lifetime. Every
conceivable component of this entire process of chemical
neurotransmission is a candidate for modification by
drugs. Most psychotropic drugs act upon the processes
that control chemical neurotransmission at the level of
the neurotransmitters themselves or their enzymes and
especially their receptors. Future psychotropic drugs
will undoubtedly act directly upon the biochemical
cascades, particularly upon those elements that
control the expression of pre- and postsynaptic genes.
Also, mental and neurological illnesses are known
or suspected to affect these same aspects of chemical
neurotransmission. The neuron is dynamically modifying
its synaptic connections throughout its life, in response
to learning, life experiences, genetic programming,
epigenetic changes, drugs, and diseases, with chemical
neurotransmission being the key aspect underlying the
regulation of all these important processes.


<<<PAGE 45>>>
2

Transporters, Receptors,
and Enzymes as Targets of
Psychopharmacological Drug
Action

Neurotransmitter Transporters as Targets of Drug
Action 29
Classification and Structure 29
Monoamine Transporters (SLC6 Gene Family) as
Targets of Psychotropic Drugs 31
Other Neurotransmitter Transporters (SLC6 and
SLC1 Gene Families) as Targets of Psychotropic
Drugs 34
Where Are the Transporters for Histamine and
Neuropeptides? 35
Vesicular Transporters: Subtypes and Function 35

Psychotropic drugs have many mechanisms of action, but
they all target specific molecular sites that have profound
effects upon neurotransmission. It is thus necessary to
understand the anatomical infrastructure and chemical
substrates of neurotransmission (Chapter 1) in order to
grasp how psychotropic drugs work. Although there are
over 100 essential psychotropic drugs utilized in clinical
practice today (see Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology:
the Prescriber’s Guide), there are only a few sites of action
for all these therapeutic agents (Figure 2-1). Specifically,
about a third of psychotropic drugs target one of the
transporters for a neurotransmitter; another third target
receptors coupled to G proteins; and perhaps only 10%
target enzymes. All three of these sites of action will be
discussed in this chapter. The balance of psychotropic
drugs target various types of ion channels, which
will be discussed in Chapter 3. Thus, mastering how
just a few molecular sites regulate neurotransmission
allows the psychopharmacologist to understand the
theories about the mechanisms of action of virtually all
psychopharmacological agents.
In fact, these molecular targets form the basis of
how psychotropic drugs are now named. That is, there
is a modern movement afoot to name psychotropic
drugs for their pharmacological mechanism of action
(e.g., serotonin transport inhibitor, dopamine D2,
and serotonin 5HT2A antagonist) rather than for
their therapeutic indication (e.g., antidepressant,
antipsychotic, etc.). Naming drugs for therapeutic
indication has led to endless confusion, because many

Vesicular Transporters (SLC18 Gene Family) as
Targets of Psychotropic Drugs 35
G-Protein-Linked Receptors 36
Structure and Function 36
G-Protein-Linked Receptors as Targets of
Psychotropic Drugs 36
Enzymes as Sites of Psychopharmacological Drug
Action 45
Cytochrome P450 Drug Metabolizing Enzymes as
Targets of Psychotropic Drugs 49
Summary 50

drugs are used for indications far beyond their original
use (e.g., so-called antipsychotics that are used for
depression). Thus, throughout this textbook we will use
the new nomenclature for drugs (neuroscience-based
nomenclature), which is based upon mechanism of action
and not therapeutic indication, wherever possible. This
chapter and the next will explain all known mechanisms
targeted by psychotropic drugs that form the basis for
how they are named.
Finally, since there are genetic variants known
for many targets of psychotropic drugs, there is an
ongoing effort to determine to what extent such genetic
variants may increase or decrease the odds that a
patient will have a good clinical response or side effects
to drugs that engage that target, in a process called
pharmacogenomics. The scientific foundation for
clinical application of genetic variants of psychotropic
drug targets is still evolving, but current insights will be
mentioned briefly when the specific target is described
throughout this textbook.

NEUROTRANSMITTER
TRANSPORTERS AS TARGETS OF
DRUG ACTION
Classification and Structure

Neuronal membranes normally serve to keep the internal
milieu of the neuron constant by acting as barriers to
the intrusion of outside molecules and to the leakage
of internal molecules. However, selective permeability
29


<<<PAGE 46>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

The Five Molecular Targets of Psychotropic Drugs

=

=

12

A

7

B

12 transmembrane
region transporter
~ 30% of psychotropic drugs

7 transmembrane region
G-protein linked
~ 30% of psychotropic drugs

E
C

Enzyme
~ 10% of psychotropic drugs

D

E

4 transmembrane region
ligand-gated ion channel
~ 20% of psychotropic drugs

6 transmembrane region
voltage-gated ion channel
~ 10% of psychotropic drugs

Figure 2-1 The molecular targets of psychotropic drugs. There are only a few major sites of action for the wide expanse of
psychotropic drugs utilized in clinical practice. Approximately one-third of psychotropic drugs target one of the twelve-transmembraneregion transporters for a neurotransmitter (A), while another third target seven-transmembrane-region receptors coupled to G proteins
(B). The sites of action for the remaining third of psychotropic drugs include enzymes (C), four-transmembrane-region ligand-gated ion
channels (D), and six-transmembrane-region voltage-sensitive ion channels (E).

of the membrane is required to allow discharge as well
as uptake of specific molecules to respond to the needs
of cellular functioning. Good examples of this are
neurotransmitters, which are released from neurons
during neurotransmission, and in many cases are also
transported back into presynaptic neurons as a recapture
mechanism following their release. This recapture – or
reuptake – is done in order for neurotransmitter to
be reused in a subsequent neurotransmission. Also,
once inside the neuron, most neurotransmitters are
transported again into synaptic vesicles for storage,
protection from metabolism, and immediate use during a
volley of future neurotransmission.
Both types of neurotransmitter transport –
presynaptic reuptake as well as vesicular storage – utilize
a molecular transporter belonging to a “superfamily”
of 12-transmembrane-region proteins (Figures 2-1A
and 2-2). That is, neurotransmitter transporters have
30

in common the structure of going in and out of the
membrane 12 times (Figure 2-1A). These transporters
are a type of receptor that binds to the neurotransmitter
prior to transporting that neurotransmitter across the
membrane.
Recently, details of the structures of neurotransmitter
transporters have been determined and this has led
to a proposed subclassification of neurotransmitter
transporters. That is, there are two major subclasses of
plasma membrane transporters for neurotransmitters
(Tables 2-1 and 2-2). Some of these transporters are
presynaptic and others are on glial membranes. The
first subclass is comprised of sodium/chloride-coupled
transporters, called the solute carrier SLC6 gene
family, and includes transporters for the monoamines
serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine (Table 2-1 and
Figure 2-2A) as well as for the neurotransmitter GABA
(γ-aminobutyric acid) and the amino acid glycine (Table


<<<PAGE 47>>>
Chapter 2: Transporters, Receptors, and Enzymes

Table 2-1 Presynaptic monamine transporters

Transporter

Common abbreviation

Gene family

Endogenous substrate

False substrate

Serotonin transporter

SERT

SLC6

Serotonin

Ecstasy (MDMA)

Norepinephrine transporter

NET

SLC6

Norepinephrine

Dopamine
Epinephrine
Amphetamine

Dopamine transporter

DAT

SLC6

Dopamine

Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
Amphetamine

2

MDMA = 3.4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine

Table 2-2 Neuronal and glial GABA and amino acid transporters

Transporter

Common
abbreviation

Gene
family

Endogenous
substrate

GABA transporter 1 (neuronal and glial)

GAT1

SLC6

GABA

GABA transporter 2 (neuronal and glial)

GAT2

SLC6

GABA beta-alanine

GABA transporter 3 (mostly glial)

GAT3

SLC6

GABA beta-alanine

GABA transporter 4 also called betaine transporter
(neuronal and glial)

GAT4
BGT1

SLC6

GABA betaine

Glycine transporter 1 (mostly glial)

GlyT1

SLC6

Glycine

Glycine tranporter 2 (neuronal)

GlyT2

SLC6

Glycine

Excitatory amino acid transporters 1–5

EAAT1–5

SLC1

L-glutamate
L-aspartate

2-2 and Figure 2-2A). The second subclass is comprised
of high-affinity glutamate transporters, also called the
solute carrier SLC1 gene family (Table 2-2 and Figure
2-2A).
In addition, there are three subclasses of intracellular
synaptic vesicle transporters for neurotransmitters:
the SLC18 gene family comprised both of vesicular
monoamine transporters (VMATs) for serotonin,
norepinephrine, dopamine, and histamine and the
vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT); the SLC32
gene family and their vesicular inhibitory amino acid
transporters (VIAATs); and finally the SLC17 gene family
and their vesicular glutamate transporters, such as
vGluT1–3 (Table 2-3 and Figure 2-2B).
Monoamine Transporters (SLC6 Gene Family) as
Targets of Psychotropic Drugs

Reuptake mechanisms for monoamines utilize unique
presynaptic transporters (Figure 2-2A) in each different
monoamine neuron but the same vesicular transporter
(Figure 2-2B) in the synaptic vesicle membranes of all
three monoamine neurons plus histamine neurons. That

is, the unique presynaptic transporter for the monoamine
serotonin is known as SERT, for norepinephrine is
known as NET, and for dopamine, DAT (Table 2-1 and
Figure 2-2A). All three of these monoamines are then
transported into synaptic vesicles of their respective
neurons by the same vesicular transporter, known
as VMAT2 (vesicular monoamine transporter 2)
(Figure 2-2B and Table 2-3).
Although the presynaptic transporters for these three
neurotransmitters – SERT, NET, and DAT – are unique
in their amino acid sequences and binding affinities for
monoamines, each presynaptic monoamine transporter
nevertheless has appreciable affinity for amines other
than the one matched to its own neuron (Table 2-1).
Thus, if other transportable neurotransmitters or drugs
are in the vicinity of a given monoamine transporter, they
may also be transported into the presynaptic neuron by
hitchhiking a ride on certain transporters that can carry
them into the neuron.
For example, the norepinephrine transporter NET
has high affinity for the transport of dopamine as well as
for norepinephrine; the dopamine transporter DAT has
31


<<<PAGE 48>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

+
Na

Cl
Cl

VM
AT

+
Na

-

T
VMA

SER

T

H+
proton pump

VM

AT
VM

SERT
AT

ATPase

H+

RT

SE

SER

T

H+
VMAT2

VIAAT

+
K

vesicular monoamine transporter
vesicular inhibitory
amino acid transporter
(5HT, NE, DA, HA)
(GABA)

+
K

SERT

GAT

VAChT

VGluT

serotonin transporter

GABA transporter

vesicular acetylcholine
transporter (ACh)

vesicular glutamate
transporter (glutamate)

NET

GlyT

norepinephrine transporter

glycine transporter

DAT

EAAT

dopamine transporter

excitatory amino acid
transporter

Figure 2-2A Sodium–potassium ATPase. Transport of many
neurotransmitters into the presynaptic neuron is not passive,
but rather requires energy. This energy is supplied by sodium–
potassium ATPase, an enzyme that is also sometimes referred to
as the sodium pump. Sodium–potassium ATPase continuously
pumps sodium out of the neuron, creating a downhill
gradient. The “downhill” transport of sodium is coupled to
the “uphill” transport of the neurotransmitter. In many cases
this also involves cotransport of chloride and in some cases
countertransport of potassium. Examples of neurotransmitter
transporters include the serotonin transporter (SERT), the
norepinephrine transporter (NET), the dopamine transporter
(DAT), the GABA transporter (GAT), the glycine transporter
(GlyT), and the excitatory amino acid transporter (EAAT).

32

Figure 2-2B Vesicular transporters. Vesicular transporters
package neurotransmitters into synaptic vesicles through the use
of a proton ATPase, or proton pump. The proton pump utilizes
energy to pump positively charged protons continuously out of
the synaptic vesicle. Neurotransmitter can then be transported
into the synaptic vesicle, keeping the charge inside the vesicle
constant. Examples of vesicular transporters include the vesicular
monoamine transporter (VMAT2), which transports serotonin
(5HT), norepinephrine (NE), dopamine (DA), and histamine (HA);
the vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT), which transports
acetylcholine; the vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter
(VIAAT), which transports GABA; and the vesicular glutamate
transporter (VGluT), which transports glutamate.

high affinity for the transport of amphetamines as well as
for dopamine; the serotonin transporter SERT has high
affinity for the transport of “Ecstasy” (the drug of abuse
MDMA or 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine) as
well as for serotonin (Table 2-1).
How are neurotransmitters transported? Monoamines
are not passively shuttled into the presynaptic neuron,


<<<PAGE 49>>>
Chapter 2: Transporters, Receptors, and Enzymes

Table 2-3 Vesicular neurotransmitter transporters

Transporter

Common abbreviation

Gene family

Endogenous substrate

Vesicular monoamine
transporters 1 and 2

VMAT1
VMAT2

SLC18

Serotonin
Dopamine
Histamine
Norepinephrine

Vesicular acetylcholine transporter

VAChT

SLC18

Acetylcholine

Vesicular inhibitory
amino acid transporter

VIAAT

SLC32

GABA

Vesicular glutamate
transporters 1–3

vGluT1–3

SLC17

Glutamate

because it requires energy to concentrate monoamines
into a presynaptic neuron. That energy is provided
by transporters in the SLC6 gene family coupling the
“downhill” transport of sodium (down a concentration
gradient) with the “uphill” transport of the monoamine
(up a concentration gradient) (Figure 2-2A). Thus,
the monoamine transporters are really sodiumdependent cotransporters; in most cases, this involves
the additional cotransport of chloride, and in some
cases the countertransport of potassium. All of this is
made possible by coupling monoamine transport to
the activity of a sodium–potassium ATPase (adenosine
triphosphatase), an enzyme sometimes called the
“sodium pump” that creates the downhill gradient for
sodium by continuously pumping sodium out of the
neuron (Figure 2-2A).
The structure of a monoamine neurotransmitter
transporter from the SLC6 family has recently been
proposed to have binding sites not only for the
monoamine, but also for two sodium ions (Figure 2-2A).
In addition, these transporters may exist as dimers,
or two copies working together with each other, but
the manner in which they cooperate is not yet well
understood and is not shown in the figures. There
are other binding sites on this transporter – not well
defined – for several drugs such as the many selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (known as SSRIs) and
other related agents used to treat unipolar depression.
When these drugs bind to the transporter, they inhibit
reuptake of monoamines. These drugs do not bind to the
substrate site (where the monoamine itself binds to the
transporter) and are not transported into the neuron, and
thus are said to be allosteric (i.e., “other site”).
In the absence of sodium, there is low affinity of the
monoamine transporter for its monoamine substrate,

2

and in this case, there is binding of neither sodium
nor monoamine. An example of this is shown for the
serotonin transporter SERT in Figure 2-2A where the
transport “wagon” has flat tires indicating no binding
of sodium, as well as absence of binding of serotonin
to its substrate binding site since the transporter has
low affinity for serotonin in the absence of sodium. The
allosteric site for a drug that inhibits this transporter is
also empty (the front seat in Figure 2-2A). However, in
Figure 2-2A in the presence of sodium ions, the tires are
now “inflated” by sodium binding and serotonin can
now also bind to its substrate site on SERT. The situation
is now primed for serotonin transport back into the
serotonergic neuron, along with cotransport of sodium
and chloride down the gradient and into the neuron
and countertransport of potassium out of the neuron
(Figure 2-2A). If a drug binds to an inhibitory allosteric
site, namely the front seat on the SERT transporter wagon
in Figure 2-2A (i.e., drugs such as the selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitor fluoxetine [Prozac]), this reduces the
affinity of the serotonin transporter SERT for its substrate
serotonin, and serotonin binding is prevented.
Why does this matter? Blocking the presynaptic
monoamine transporter has a huge impact on
neurotransmission at any synapse that utilizes
that neurotransmitter. The normal recapture of
neurotransmitter by the presynaptic neurotransmitter
transporter in Figure 2-2A keeps the levels of this
neurotransmitter from accumulating in the synapse.
Normally, following release from the presynaptic
neuron, neurotransmitters only have time for a brief
dance on their synaptic receptors, and the party is soon
over because the monoamines climb back into the
presynaptic neuron on their transporters (Figure 2-2A).
If one wants to enhance normal synaptic activity of
33


<<<PAGE 50>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

these neurotransmitters, or restore their diminished
synaptic activity, this can be accomplished by blocking
these transporters in Figure 2-2A. Although this
might not seem to be a very dramatic thing, the fact is
that this alteration in chemical neurotransmission –
namely the enhancement of synaptic monoamine
action – is thought to underlie the clinical effects of
all the agents that block monoamine transporters,
including most drugs that treat ADHD (attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder). “Stimulants” for ADHD,
such as methylphenidate and amphetamine, as well
as the drug of abuse cocaine, all act on DAT and NET.
Also, most drugs that treat unipolar depression act
at SERT, NET, DAT, or some combination of these
transporters. However, it is a misnomer to call these
agents simply “antidepressants,” since they are not firstline treatments for all forms of depression, and they are
used for many, many other indications in addition to
unipolar depression. Specifically, many drugs that block
monoamine transporters are not only effective in the
treatment of unipolar depression. They are also used to
treat many forms of anxiety, from generalized anxiety
disorder to social anxiety disorder to panic disorder; for
reducing neuropathic pain in fibromyalgia, postherpetic
neuralgia, diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain, and
other pain conditions; for improving eating disorders,
impulsive–compulsive disorders, obsessive–compulsive
disorder, and trauma- and stress-related disorders such
as posttraumatic stress disorder. They have additional
therapeutic actions as well. Furthermore, some forms of
depression, notably bipolar depression and depression
with mixed features, are not treated first-line with drugs
that block monoamine transporters. No wonder we don’t
call agents that block monoamine transporters simply
“antidepressants” anymore!
Given the high prevalence of disorders that inhibitors
of monoamine transporters treat, it may come as no
surprise that these drugs are among the most frequently
prescribed psychotropic drugs. In fact, some estimates
are that a monoamine transport inhibitor is prescribed
every second of every minute of every hour of every day
in the US alone (many millions of prescriptions a year)!
Also, about a third of the currently prescribed essential
100 psychotropic drugs act by targeting one or more of
the three monoamine transporters. Thus, the reader can
see why understanding monoamine transporters and how
various drugs act at these transporters is so important
to grasping how one of the critical classes of agents in
psychopharmacology works.

34

Other Neurotransmitter Transporters (SLC6 and SLC1
Gene Families) as Targets of Psychotropic Drugs

In addition to the three transporters for monoamines
discussed in detail above, there are several other
transporters for various different neurotransmitters or
their precursors. Although this includes a dozen additional
transporters, there is only one psychotropic drug used
clinically that is known to bind to any of these transporters.
Thus, there is a presynaptic transporter for choline, the
precursor to the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, but no
known drugs target this transporter. There are also several
transporters for the ubiquitous inhibitory neurotransmitter
GABA, known as GAT1–4 (Table 2-2). Although debate
continues about the exact localization of these subtypes
to presynaptic neurons, neighboring glia, or even
postsynaptic neurons, it is clear that a key presynaptic
transporter of GABA is the GAT1 transporter, which is
selectively blocked by the anticonvulsant tiagabine, thereby
increasing synaptic GABA concentrations. In addition to
anticonvulsant actions, this increase in synaptic GABA
may have therapeutic actions in anxiety, sleep disorders,
and pain. No other inhibitors of this transporter are
available for clinical use.
Finally, there are multiple transporters for two amino
acid neurotransmitters, glycine and glutamate (Table
2-2). There are no drugs utilized in clinical practice that
are known to block glycine transporters although new
agents are in clinical trials for treating schizophrenia
and other disorders. The glycine transporters, along
with the choline and GABA transporters, are all
members of the SLC6 gene family, the same family to
which the monoamine transporters belong and have a
similar structure (Figure 2-2A and Tables 2-1 and 2-2).
However, the glutamate transporters belong to a unique
family, SLC1, and have a somewhat unique structure
and somewhat different functions compared to those
transporters of the SLC6 family (Table 2-2).
Specifically, there are several transporters for
glutamate, known as excitatory amino acid transporters
1–5 (EAAT1–5; Table 2-2). The exact localization of these
various transporters to presynaptic neurons, postsynaptic
neurons, or glia is still under investigation, but the uptake
of glutamate into glia is well known to be a key system
for recapturing glutamate for re-use once it has been
released. Transport into glia results in conversion of
glutamate into glutamine, and then glutamine enters the
presynaptic neuron for reconversion back into glutamate.
No drugs utilized in clinical practice are known to block
glutamate transporters.


<<<PAGE 51>>>
Chapter 2: Transporters, Receptors, and Enzymes

One difference between transport of neurotransmitters
by the SLC6 gene family and transport of glutamate
by the SLC1 gene family is that glutamate does not
seem to cotransport chloride with sodium when it also
cotransports glutamate. Also, glutamate transport is
almost always characterized by the countertransport of
potassium, whereas this is not always the case with SLC6
gene family transporters. Glutamate transporters may
work together as trimers rather than dimers, as the SLC6
transporters seem to do. The functional significance
of these differences remains obscure, but may become
more apparent if clinically useful psychopharmacological
agents that target glutamate transporters are discovered.
Since it may often be desirable to diminish rather than
enhance glutamate neurotransmission, the future utility
of glutamate transporters as therapeutic targets is also
unclear.
Where Are the Transporters for Histamine and
Neuropeptides?

It is an interesting observation that apparently not all
neurotransmitters are regulated by reuptake transporters.
The central neurotransmitter histamine apparently does
not have a transporter for it presynaptically (although
it is transported into synaptic vesicles by VMAT2,
the same transporter used by the monoamines – see
Figure 2-2B). Histamine’s inactivation is thus thought
to be entirely enzymatic. The same can be said for
neuropeptides, since reuptake pumps and presynaptic
transporters have not been found for them, and are thus
thought to be lacking for this class of neurotransmitter.
Inactivation of neuropeptides is apparently by diffusion,
sequestration, and enzymatic destruction, but not
by presynaptic transport. It is always possible that a
transporter will be discovered in the future for some of
these neurotransmitters, but at the present time there are
no known presynaptic transporters for either histamine
or neuropeptides.
Vesicular Transporters: Subtypes and Function

Vesicular transporters for the monoamines (VMATs)
are members of the SLC18 gene family and have already
been discussed above. They are shown in Figure 2-2B
and listed in Table 2-3. The vesicular transporter for
acetylcholine – also a member of the SLC18 gene family
but known as VAChT – is shown in Figure 2-2B and
listed in Table 2-3. The GABA vesicular transporter is a
member of the SLC32 gene family and is called VIAAT
(vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter; shown in

Figure 2-2B and Table 2-3). Finally, vesicular transporters
for glutamate, called vGluT1–3 (vesicular glutamate
transporters 1, 2, and 3), are members of the SLC17 gene
family and are also shown in Figure 2-2B and listed in
Table 2-3. A novel 12-transmembrane-region synaptic
vesicle transporter of uncertain mechanism and with
unclear substrates, called the SV2A transporter and
localized within the synaptic vesicle membrane, binds the
anticonvulsant levetiracetam, perhaps interfering with
neurotransmitter release and thereby reducing seizures.
How do neurotransmitters get inside synaptic
vesicles? In the case of vesicular transporters, storage
of neurotransmitters is facilitated by a proton ATPase,
known as the “proton pump” that utilizes energy to
pump positively charged protons continuously out of the
synaptic vesicle (Figure 2-2B). The neurotransmitters can
then be concentrated against a gradient by substituting
their own positive charge inside the vesicle for the
positive charge of the proton being pumped out. Thus,
neurotransmitters are not so much transported as they
are “antiported” – i.e., they go in while the protons
are actively transported out, keeping charge inside the
vesicle constant. This concept is shown in Figure 2-2B
for the VMAT transporting dopamine, in exchange
for protons. Contrast this with Figure 2-2A where a
monoamine transporter on the presynaptic membrane
is cotransporting a monoamine along with sodium
and chloride, but with the help of a sodium–potassium
ATPase (sodium pump) rather than a proton pump.
Vesicular Transporters (SLC18 Gene Family) as Targets
of Psychotropic Drugs

Vesicular transporters for acetylcholine (SLC18 gene
family), GABA (SLC32 gene family), and glutamate
(SLC17 gene family) are not known to be targeted
by any drug utilized by humans. However, vesicular
transporters for monoamines in the SLC18 gene family
(VMATs), particularly those in dopamine neurons,
are targeted by several drugs, including amphetamine
(as a transported substrate) and tetrabenazine and
its derivatives deutetrabenazine and valbenazine (as
inhibitors, see Chapter 5) . Amphetamine thus has
two targets: monoamine transporters discussed above
as well as VMATs discussed here. In contrast, other
drugs for ADHD, such as methylphenidate, and the
so-called “stimulant” drug of abuse cocaine, target
only the monoamine transporters, and in much the
same manner as described for SSRIs at the serotonin
transporter.

35

2


<<<PAGE 52>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

G-PROTEIN-LINKED RECEPTORS
Structure and Function

Another major target of psychotropic drugs is the class
of receptors linked to G proteins. These receptors all
have the structure of seven-transmembrane regions,
meaning that they span the membrane seven times
(Figure 2-1). Each of the transmembrane regions
clusters around a central core that contains a binding
site for a neurotransmitter. Drugs can interact at this
neurotransmitter binding site or at other sites (allosteric
sites) on the receptor. This can lead to a wide range of
modifications of receptor actions due to mimicking
or blocking, partially or fully, the neurotransmitter
function that normally occurs at this receptor. Drug
actions at G-protein-linked receptors can thus change
downstream molecular events – e.g., determining
which phosphoproteins are activated or inactivated and
therefore which enzymes, receptors, or ion channels
are modified by neurotransmission. Drug actions at
G-protein-linked receptors can also determine whether
a downstream gene is expressed or silenced, and thus
which proteins are synthesized and which neuronal
functions are amplified, from synaptogenesis, to
receptor and enzyme synthesis, to communication with
downstream neurons innervated by the neuron with the
G-protein-linked receptor.
These actions on neurotransmission at G-proteinlinked receptors are described in detail in Chapter 1 on
signal transduction and chemical neurotransmission.
The reader should have a good command of the

function of G-protein-linked receptors and their role
in signal transduction from specific neurotransmitters
as described in Chapter 1 in order to understand how
drugs acting at G-protein-linked receptors modify the
signal transduction that arises from these receptors.
This is important to understand because such druginduced modifications in signal transduction from
G-protein-linked receptors can have profound actions on
psychiatric symptoms. In fact, the single most common
action of psychotropic drugs utilized in clinical practice
is to modify the actions of one or more G-protein-linked
receptors, resulting in either therapeutic actions or side
effects. More than a dozen G-protein-linked receptors
as targets of various drugs are discussed in the various
clinical chapters that follow. Here we will describe
how various drugs stimulate or block these receptors
in general, and throughout the textbook we will show
how particular drugs acting at specific G-protein-linked
receptors have unique actions on improving distinct
psychiatric symptoms as well as causing characteristic
side effects.
G-Protein-Linked Receptors as Targets of Psychotropic
Drugs

G-protein-linked receptors are a large superfamily of
receptors that interact with many neurotransmitters
and with many psychotropic drugs (Figure 2-1B).
There are many ways to subtype these receptors,
but pharmacological subtypes are perhaps the most
important to understand for clinicians who wish to target
specific receptors with psychotropic drugs utilized in

The Agonist Spectrum

antagonist
partial
agonist

agonist
inverse
agonist

Figure 2-3 Agonist spectrum. Shown here is the agonist spectrum. Naturally occurring neurotransmitters stimulate receptors and are
thus agonists. Some drugs also stimulate receptors and are therefore agonists as well. It is possible for drugs to stimulate receptors
to a lesser degree than the natural neurotransmitter; these are called partial agonists or stabilizers. It is a common misconception that
antagonists are the opposite of agonists because they block the actions of agonists. However, although antagonists prevent the actions
of agonists, they have no activity of their own in the absence of the agonist. For this reason, antagonists are sometimes called “silent.”
Inverse agonists, on the other hand, do have opposite actions compared to agonists. That is, they not only block agonists but can also
reduce activity below the baseline level when no agonist is present. Thus, the agonist spectrum reaches from full agonists to partial
agonists through to “silent” antagonists and finally inverse agonists.

36


<<<PAGE 53>>>
Chapter 2: Transporters, Receptors, and Enzymes

No Agonist: Constitutive Activity

E

Figure 2-4 Constitutive activity. The
absence of agonist does not mean that
there is no activity related to G-proteinlinked receptors. Rather, in the absence
of agonist, the receptor’s conformation
is such that it leads to a low level of
activity, or constitutive activity. Thus,
signal transduction still occurs, but
at a low frequency. Whether this
constitutive activity leads to detectable
signal transduction is affected by the
receptor density in that brain region.

P

2
P

P

3

P

P

clinical practice. That is, the natural neurotransmitter
interacts at all of its receptor subtypes, but many drugs
are more selective than the neurotransmitter itself
for just certain receptor subtypes and thus define a
pharmacological subtype of receptor at which they
specifically interact. This is not unlike the concept of
the neurotransmitter being a master key that opens
all the doors, and selective drugs that interact at
pharmacologically specific receptor subtypes functioning
as a specific key opening only one door. Here we will
develop the concept that drugs have many ways of
interacting at pharmacological subtypes of G-proteinlinked receptors, across what is called an “agonist
spectrum” (Figure 2-3).
No Agonist

An important concept for the “agonist spectrum” is that
the absence of agonist does not necessarily mean that
nothing at all is happening with signal transduction
at G-protein-linked receptors. Agonists are thought to
produce a conformational change in G-protein-linked
receptors that leads to full receptor activation, and thus
full signal transduction. In the absence of agonist, this
same conformational change may still be occurring at
some receptor systems, but only at very low frequency.
This is referred to as constitutive activity, which may be
present especially in receptor systems and brain areas
where there is a high density of receptors. Thus, when
something occurs at very low frequency but among a high

number of receptors, it can still produce detectable signal
transduction output. This is represented as a small – but
not absent – amount of signal transduction in Figure 2-4.
Agonists

An agonist produces a conformational change in the
G-protein-linked receptor that turns on the synthesis of
second messenger to the greatest extent possible (i.e.,
the action of a full agonist) (Figure 2-5). The full agonist
is generally represented by the naturally occurring
neurotransmitter itself, although some drugs can also
act in as full a manner as the natural neurotransmitter
itself. What this means from the perspective of chemical
neurotransmission is that the full array of downstream
signal transduction is triggered by a full agonist
(Figure 2-5). Thus, downstream proteins are maximally
phosphorylated, and genes are maximally impacted. Loss
of the agonist actions of a neurotransmitter at G-proteinlinked receptors, due to deficient neurotransmission of
any cause, would lead to the loss of this rich downstream
chemical tour de force. Thus, agonists that restore this
natural action would be potentially useful in states where
reduced signal transduction leads to undesirable symptoms.
There are two major ways to stimulate G-proteinlinked receptors with full agonist action. Firstly, several
drugs directly bind to the neurotransmitter site on the
G-protein-linked receptor itself and can produce the
same full array of signal transduction effects as a full
agonist (see Table 2-4). These are called direct-acting
37

2


<<<PAGE 54>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Full Agonist: Maximum Signal Transduction
agonist

E
P

2
P

P

3

P

P

P

2
P

P

3

P

P

P

2
P

P

3

P

P

P

2
P

P

3

P

P

Figure 2-5 Full agonist: maximum signal transduction. When a full agonist binds to G-protein-linked receptors, it causes
conformational changes that lead to maximum signal transduction. Thus, all the downstream effects of signal transduction, such as
phosphorylation of proteins and gene activation, are maximized.

38


<<<PAGE 55>>>
Chapter 2: Transporters, Receptors, and Enzymes

Table 2-4 Key G-protein-linked receptors directly targeted by psychotropic drugs

Neurotransmitter

G-protein
receptor and
pharmacological
subtype directly
targeted

Pharmacological
action

Therapeutic
action

Dopamine

D2

Antagonist or
partial agonist

Antipsychotic; antimanic

Serotonin

5HT2A

Antagonist or
inverse agonist

Antipsychotic actions in Parkinson’s disease
psychosis
Antipsychotic actions in dementia-related psychosis
Reduced drug-induced parkinsonism

2

Possible reduction of negative symptoms in
schizophrenia
Possible mood stabilizing and antidepressant
actions in bipolar disorder
Improve insomnia and anxiety
Agonist

Psychotomimetic actions
Experimental treatment of refractory depression
and other disorders, especially accompanying
psychotherapy

5HT1B/1D

Antagonist or
partial agonist

Possible pro-cognitive and antidepressant actions

5HT2C

Antagonist

Antidepressant

5HT6

?

?

5HT7

Antagonist

Possible pro-cognitive and antidepressant actions

5HT1A

Partial agonist

Reduced drug-induced parkinsonism
Anxiolytic
Booster of antidepressant actions of SSRIs/SNRIs

Norepinephrine

Alpha 2

Alpha 1

Antagonist

Antidepressant actions

Agonist

Improved cognition and behavioral disturbance in
ADHD

Antagonist

Improved sleep (nightmares)
Improved agitation in Alzheimer disease
Side effects of orthostatic hypotension and possibly
sedation

GABA

GABA-B

Agonist

Cataplexy
Sleepiness in narcolepsy
Possible enhanced slow-wave sleep
Pain reduction in chronic pain and fibromyalgia
Possible utility for alcohol use disorder and alcohol
withdrawal

Melatonin

MT1

Agonist

Improvement of insomnia and circadian rhythms

MT2

Agonist

Improvement of insomnia and circadian rhythms

39


<<<PAGE 56>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Table 2-4 (cont.)

Neurotransmitter

G-protein
receptor and
pharmacological
subtype directly
targeted

Pharmacological
action

Therapeutic
action

Histamine

H1

Antagonist

Therapeutic effect for anxiety and insomnia
Side effect of sedation and weight gain

H3

Antagonist/
inverse agonist

Improvement of daytime sleepiness

M1

Agonist

Procognitive and antipsychotic

Antagonist

Side effect of sedation and memory disturbance

M4

Agonist

Antipsychotic

M2/3

Antagonist

Dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation, urinary
retention

Acetylcholine

May contribute to metabolic dysregulation
(dyslipidemia and diabetes)
Orexin A, B

M5

?

?

Ox1,2

Antagonist

Hypnotic for insomnia

Table 2-5 Key G-protein-linked receptors indirectly targeted by psychotropic drugs

Neurotransmitter

G-protein receptor and
pharmacological subtype
indirectly targeted

Pharmacological action

Therapeutic action

Dopamine

D1,2,3,4,5 agonist actions

Dopamine reuptake
inhibition/release by
methylphenidate/
amphetamine

Improvement of ADHD,
depression, wakefulness

Serotonin

5HT1A agonist (presynaptic
somatodendritic
autoreceptors)

Serotonin reuptake
inhibition by SSRIs/SNRIs

Antidepressant,
anxiolytic

5HT2A/2C agonist

Serotonin release by MDMA

“Empathogen” experimental
treatment of PTSD especially
with psychotherapy

Norepinephrine

All norepinephrine receptors
agonist

Norepinephrine reuptake
inhibition

Antidepressant; neuropathic
pain; ADHD

Acetylcholine

M1 (possibly M2–M5)

Agonist via increasing
acetylcholine itself at all
acetylcholine receptors
via acetylcholinesterase
inhibition

Cognition in
Alzheimer disease

5HT2A agonist (postsynaptic
receptors; possibly 5HT1A,
5HT2C, 5HT6, 5HT7 postsynaptic
receptors)

ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; SNRIs, serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors; PTSD,
posttraumatic stress disorder; MDMA, 3.4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine.

40


<<<PAGE 57>>>
Chapter 2: Transporters, Receptors, and Enzymes

agonists. Secondly, many drugs can indirectly act to boost
the levels of the natural full agonist neurotransmitter
itself (Table 2-5) and then this increased amount of
natural agonist binds to the neurotransmitter site on
the G-protein-linked receptor. Enhanced amounts of
full agonist happen when neurotransmitter inactivation
mechanisms are blocked. The most prominent examples
of indirect full agonist actions have already been
discussed above, namely inhibition of the monoamine
transporters SERT, NET, and DAT and the GABA
transporter GAT1. Another way to accomplish indirect
full agonist action is to block the enzymatic destruction
of neurotransmitters (Table 2-5). Two examples of this
are inhibition of the enzymes monoamine oxidase (MAO)
and acetylcholinesterase which will be explained in more
detail in later chapters.
Antagonists

On the other hand, it also is possible that full agonist
action can be too much of a good thing and that maximal
activation of the signal transduction cascade may not
always be desirable, as in states of overstimulation by
neurotransmitters. In such cases, blocking the action of
the natural neurotransmitter agonist may be desirable.
This is the property of an antagonist. Antagonists

produce a conformational change in the G-protein-linked
receptor that causes no change in signal transduction –
including no change in whatever amount of any
“constitutive” activity that may have been present in the
absence of agonist (compare Figure 2-4 with Figure 2-6).
Thus, true antagonists are “neutral” and, since they have
no actions of their own, are also called “silent.”
There are many more examples of important antagonists
of G-protein-linked receptors than there are of direct-acting
full agonists in clinical practice (see Table 2-4). Antagonists
are well known both as the mediators of therapeutic actions
in psychiatric disorders and as the cause of undesirable side
effects (Table 2-4). Some of these may prove to be inverse
agonists (see below), but most antagonists utilized in
clinical practice are characterized simply as “antagonists.”
Antagonists block the actions of everything in
the agonist spectrum (Figure 2-3). In the presence
of an agonist, an antagonist will block the actions of
that agonist but do nothing itself (Figure 2-6). The
antagonist simply returns the receptor conformation
back to the same state as exists when no agonist is
present (Figure 2-4). Interestingly, an antagonist will
also block the actions of a partial agonist (explained
below in more detail). Partial agonists are thought to
produce a conformational change in the G-protein-

“Silent” Antagonist: Back to Baseline,
Constitutive Activity Only, Same as No Agonist

antagonist

GE

Figure 2-6 “Silent” antagonist. An
antagonist blocks agonists (both full
and partial) from binding to G-proteinlinked receptors, thus preventing
agonists from causing maximum signal
transduction and instead changing
the receptor’s conformation back
to the same state as exists when no
agonist is present. Antagonists also
reverse the effects of inverse agonists,
again by blocking the inverse agonists
from binding and then returning the
receptor conformation to the baseline
state. Antagonists do not have any
impact on signal transduction in the
absence of an agonist.

P

2
P

P

3

P

P

41

2


<<<PAGE 58>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

linked receptor that is intermediate between a full
agonist and the baseline conformation of the receptor
in the absence of agonist (Figures 2-7 and 2-8). An
antagonist reverses the action of a partial agonist by
returning the G-protein-linked receptor to that same
conformation as exists when no agonist is present
(Figure 2-4). Finally, an antagonist reverses an inverse
agonist (also explained below in more detail). Inverse
agonists are thought to produce a conformational
state of the receptor that totally inactivates it and even

removes the baseline constitutive activity (Figure 2-9).
An antagonist reverses this back to the baseline state
that allows constitutive activity (Figure 2-6), the
same as exists for the receptor in the absence of the
neurotransmitter agonist (Figure 2-4).
By themselves, therefore, it is easy to see that true
antagonists have no activity and why they are sometimes
referred to as “silent.” Silent antagonists return the entire
spectrum of drug-induced conformational changes in
the G-protein-linked receptor (Figures 2-3 and 2-10) to

Partial Agonist: Partially Enhanced Signal Transduction
partial
agonist

GE
P

2
P

P

3

P

P

P

2
P

P

3

P

P

Figure 2-7 Partial agonist. Partial agonists stimulate G-protein-linked receptors to enhance signal transduction but do not lead to
maximum signal transduction the way full agonists do. Thus, in the absence of a full agonist, partial agonists increase signal transduction.
However, in the presence of a full agonist, the partial agonist will actually turn down the strength of various downstream signals. For this
reason, partial agonists are sometimes referred to as stabilizers.

42


<<<PAGE 59>>>
Chapter 2: Transporters, Receptors, and Enzymes

the same place (Figure 2-6) – i.e., the conformation that
exists in the absence of agonist (Figure 2-4).
Partial Agonists

It is possible to produce signal transduction that is
something more than an antagonist yet something less
than a full agonist. Turning down the gain a bit from full
agonist actions, but not all the way to zero, is the property
of a partial agonist (Figure 2-7). This action can also be
seen as turning up the gain a bit from silent antagonist
actions, but not all the way to a full agonist. Depending
upon how close this partial agonist is to a full agonist
or to a silent antagonist on the agonist spectrum will
determine the impact of a partial agonist on downstream
signal transduction events.
The amount of “partiality” that is desired between
agonist and antagonist – that is, where a partial agonist
should sit on the agonist spectrum – is both a matter of
debate as well as trial and error. The ideal therapeutic
agent may have signal transduction through G-proteinlinked receptors that is not too “hot,” yet not too “cold,” but
“just right,” sometimes called the “Goldilocks” solution
(Figure 2-7). Such an ideal state may vary from one clinical
situation to another, depending upon the balance between
full agonism and silent antagonism that is desired.
In cases where there is unstable neurotransmission
throughout the brain, such as when “out-of-tune” neurons
are theoretically mediating psychiatric symptoms, it may
be desirable to find a state of signal transduction that

FULL AGONIST -light is at its brightest

stabilizes G-protein-linked receptor output somewhere
between too much and too little downstream action. For
this reason, partial agonists are also called “stabilizers”
since they have the theoretical capacity to find a stable
solution between the extremes of too much full agonist
action and no agonist action at all (Figure 2-7).
Since partial agonists exert an effect less than that
of a full agonist, they are also sometimes called “weak,”
with the implication that partial agonism means partial
clinical efficacy. That is certainly possible in some
cases, but it is more sophisticated to understand the
potential stabilizing and “tuning” actions of this class
of therapeutic agents, and not to use terms that imply
clinical actions for the entire class of drugs that may only
apply to some individual agents. Several partial agonists
are utilized in clinical practice (Table 2-4) and more are
in clinical development.
Light and Dark as an Analogy for Partial Agonists

It was originally conceived that a neurotransmitter could
only act at receptors like a light switch, turning things on
when the neurotransmitter is present and turning things
off when the neurotransmitter is absent. We now know
that many receptors, including the G-protein-linked
receptor family, can function rather more like a rheostat.
That is, a full agonist will turn the lights all the way on
(Figure 2-8A), but a partial agonist will only turn the
light on partially (Figure 2-8B). If neither full agonist nor
partial agonist is present, the room is dark (Figure 2-8C).

PARTIAL AGONIST -light is dimmed but still shining

A

NO AGONIST -light is off

B

C

Figure 2-8 Agonist spectrum: rheostat. A useful analogy for the agonist spectrum is a light controlled by a rheostat. The light will be
brightest after a full agonist turns the light switch fully on (left panel). A partial agonist will also act as a net agonist and turn the light on,
but only partially, according to the level preset in the partial agonist’s rheostat (middle panel). If the light is already on, a partial agonist
will “dim” the lights, thus acting as a net antagonist. When no full or partial agonist is present, the situation is analogous to the light
being switched off (right panel).

43

2


<<<PAGE 60>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Each partial agonist has its own set point engineered
into the molecule, such that it cannot turn the lights on
brighter even with a higher dose. No matter how much
partial agonist is given, only a certain degree of brightness
will result. A series of partial agonists will differ one from
the other in the degree of partiality, so that theoretically
all degrees of brightness can be covered within the range
from “off ” to “on,” but each partial agonist has its own
unique degree of brightness associated with it.
What is so interesting about partial agonists is that
they can appear as a net agonist, or as a net antagonist,
depending upon the amount of naturally occurring full
agonist neurotransmitter that is present. Thus, when a full
agonist neurotransmitter is absent, a partial agonist will be
a net agonist. That is, from the resting state, a partial agonist
initiates somewhat of an increase in the signal transduction
cascade from the G-protein-linked second-messenger
system. However, when full agonist neurotransmitter
is present, the same partial agonist will become a net
antagonist. That is, it will decrease the level of full signal
output to a lesser level, but not to zero. Thus, a partial
agonist can simultaneously boost deficient neurotransmitter
activity yet block excessive neurotransmitter activity,
another reason that partial agonists are called stabilizers.
Returning to the light-switch analogy, a room will
be dark when agonist is missing and the light switch is
off (Figure 2-8C). A room will be brightly lit when it is
full of natural full agonist and the light switch is fully on
(Figure 2-8A). Adding partial agonist to the dark room
where there is no natural full agonist neurotransmitter
will turn the lights up, but only as far as the partial
agonist works on the rheostat (Figure 2-8B). Relative to
the dark room as a starting point, a partial agonist acts
therefore as a net agonist. On the other hand, adding a
partial agonist to the fully lit room will have the effect
of turning the lights down to the intermediate level of
lower brightness on the rheostat (Figure 2-8B). This is a
net antagonistic effect relative to the fully lit room. Thus,
after adding partial agonist to the dark room and to the
brightly lit room, both rooms will be equally lit. The
degree of brightness is that of being partially turned on as
dictated by the properties of the partial agonist. However,
in the dark room, the partial agonist has acted as a net
agonist, whereas in the brightly lit room, the partial
agonist has acted as a net antagonist.
Having an agonist and an antagonist in the
same molecule is quite an interesting dimension to
therapeutics. This concept has led to proposals that
partial agonists could treat not only states which are
theoretically deficient in full agonist, but also states
44

that are theoretically with an excess of full agonist. An
agent such as a partial agonist may even be able to treat
simultaneously states which are mixtures of both excess
and deficiency in neurotransmitter activity.
Inverse Agonists

Inverse agonists are more than simple antagonists, and
are neither neutral nor silent. These agents have an action
that is thought to produce a conformational change in
the G-protein-linked receptor that stabilizes it in a totally
inactive form (Figure 2-9). Thus, this conformation produces
a functional reduction in signal transduction (Figure 2-9)
that is even less than that produced when there is either no
agonist present (Figure 2-4), or a silent antagonist present
(Figure 2-6). The result of an inverse agonist is to shut
down even the constitutive activity of the G-protein-linked
receptor system. Of course, if a given receptor system has
no constitutive activity, perhaps in cases when receptors are
present in low density, there will be no reduction in activity
and the inverse agonist will look like an antagonist.
In many ways, therefore, inverse agonists do the
opposite of agonists. If an agonist increases signal
transduction from baseline, an inverse agonist decreases
it, even below baseline levels. In contrast to agonists
and antagonists, therefore, an inverse agonist neither
increases signal transduction like an agonist (Figure 2-5)
nor merely blocks the agonist from increasing signal
transduction like an antagonist (Figure 2-6); rather,
an inverse agonist binds the receptor in a fashion so
as to provoke an action opposite to that of the agonist,
namely causing the receptor to decrease its baseline
signal transduction level (Figure 2-9). It is unclear from
Inverse Agonist: Beyond Antagonism;
Even the Constitutive Activity Is Blocked
inverse
agonist

E
2

Figure 2-9 Inverse agonist. Inverse agonists produce
conformational change in the G-protein-linked receptor that
renders it inactive. This leads to reduced signal transduction
as compared not only to that associated with agonists but also
that associated with antagonists or the absence of an agonist.
The impact of an inverse agonist is dependent on the receptor
density in that brain region. That is, if the receptor density is so
low that constitutive activity does not lead to detectable signal
transduction, then reducing the constitutive activity would not
have any appreciable effect.


<<<PAGE 61>>>
Chapter 2: Transporters, Receptors, and Enzymes

a clinical point of view what the relevant differences are
between an inverse agonist and a silent antagonist. In
fact, some drugs that have long been considered to be
silent antagonists, such as serotonin 2A antagonists and
histamine 1 antagonists/antihistamines, may turn out in
some areas of the brain actually to be inverse agonists.
Thus, the concept of an inverse agonist as clinically
distinguishable from a silent antagonist is still evolving
and the clinical differentiation between antagonist and
inverse agonist remains to be clarified.
In summary, G-protein-linked receptors act along an
agonist spectrum, and drugs have been described that
can produce conformational changes in these receptors
to create any state from full agonist, to partial agonist, to
silent antagonist, to inverse agonist (Figure 2-10). When
one considers the spectrum of signal transduction along
this spectrum (Figure 2-10), it is easy to understand why
agents at each point along the agonist spectrum differ so
much from each other, and why their clinical actions are
so different.

ENZYMES AS SITES OF
PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGICAL
DRUG ACTION

2

Enzymes are involved in multiple aspects of chemical
neurotransmission, as discussed extensively in Chapter
1 on signal transduction. Every enzyme is the theoretical
target for a drug acting as an enzyme inhibitor. However,
in practice, only a minority of currently known drugs
utilized in the clinical practice of psychopharmacology
are enzyme inhibitors.
Enzyme activity is the conversion of one molecule
into another, namely a substrate into a product (Figure
2-11). The substrates for each enzyme are very unique
and selective, as are the products. A substrate (Figure
2-11A) comes to the enzyme to bind at the enzyme’s
active site (Figure 2-11B), and departs as a changed
molecular entity called the product (Figure 2-11C).
The inhibitors of an enzyme are also very unique and
selective for one enzyme compared to another. In the

Agonist Spectrum
no agonist or silent antagonist
partial
agonist

GE

agonist

2

G

2

2

inverse
agonist

P

P

3

3

GE

P

GE

GE

3

2

2

2

P

3
P

3

2

P

3

2

P

3

2

P

3

Figure 2-10 Agonist spectrum. This figure summarizes the implications of the agonist spectrum. Full agonists cause maximum signal
transduction, while partial agonists increase signal transduction compared to no agonist but decrease it compared to full agonist.
Antagonists lead to constitutive activity and thus, in the absence of an agonist, have no effects; in the presence of an agonist, they
lead to reduced signal transduction. Inverse agonists are the functional opposites of agonists and actually reduce signal transduction
beyond that produced in the absence of an agonist.

45


<<<PAGE 62>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

presence of an enzyme inhibitor, the enzyme cannot bind
to its substrates. The binding of inhibitors can be either
irreversible (Figure 2-12) or reversible (Figure 2-13).
When an irreversible inhibitor binds to the enzyme, it
cannot be displaced by the substrate; thus, that inhibitor
binds irreversibly (Figure 2-12). This is depicted as binding
with chains (Figure 2-12A) that cannot be cut with scissors

by the substrate (Figure 2-12B). The irreversible type of
enzyme inhibitor is sometimes called a “suicide inhibitor”
because it covalently and irreversibly binds to the enzyme
protein, permanently inhibiting it and therefore essentially
“killing” it by thus making the enzyme nonfunctional
forever (Figure 2-12). Enzyme activity in this case is only
restored when new enzyme molecules are synthesized.

After a Substrate Binds to an Enzyme, It Is
Turned into a Product Which is Then Released
from the Enzyme.

E

E

E

A

B

C

Figure 2-11 Enzyme activity. Enzyme
activity is conversion of one molecule
into another. Thus, a substrate is said to
be turned into a product by enzymatic
modification of the substrate molecule.
The enzyme has an active site at which
the substrate can bind specifically (A).
The substrate then finds the active site
of the enzyme and binds to it (B) so
that a molecular transformation can
occur, changing the substrate into the
product (C).

E

Substrate

Irreversible
inhibitor

A

Irreversible
inhibitor

B

Figure 2-12 Irreversible enzyme inhibitors. Some drugs are inhibitors of enzymes. Shown here is an irreversible inhibitor of an enzyme,
depicted as binding to the enzyme with chains (A). A competing substrate cannot remove an irreversible inhibitor from the enzyme,
depicted as scissors unsuccessfully attempting to cut the chains off the inhibitor (B). The binding is locked so permanently that such
irreversible enzyme inhibition is sometimes called the work of a “suicide inhibitor,” since the enzyme essentially commits suicide by binding
to the irreversible inhibitor. Enzyme activity cannot be restored unless another molecule of enzyme is synthesized by the cell’s DNA.

46


<<<PAGE 63>>>
Chapter 2: Transporters, Receptors, and Enzymes

However, in the case of reversible enzyme inhibitors,
an enzyme’s substrate is able to compete with that
reversible inhibitor for binding to the enzyme, and
literally shove it off the enzyme (Figure 2-13). Whether

the substrate or the inhibitor “wins” or predominates
depends upon which one has the greater affinity for the
enzyme and/or is present in the greater concentration.
Such binding is called “reversible.” Reversible enzyme

E

Substrate

Reversible
inhibitor

A

Reversible
inhibitor

B

Reversible
inhibitor

Substrate

C
Figure 2-13 Reversible enzyme inhibitors. Other drugs are reversible enzyme inhibitors, depicted as binding to the enzyme with a
string (A). A reversible inhibitor can be challenged by a competing substrate for the same enzyme. In the case of a reversible inhibitor,
the molecular properties of the substrate are such that it can get rid of the reversible inhibitor, depicted as scissors cutting the string
that binds the reversible inhibitor to the enzyme (B). The consequence of a substrate competing successfully for reversal of enzyme
inhibition is that the substrate displaces the inhibitor and shoves it off (C). Because the substrate has this capability, the inhibition is said
to be reversible.

47

2


<<<PAGE 64>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

inhibition is depicted as binding with strings (Figure
2-13A), such that the substrate can cut them with
scissors (Figure 2-13B) and displace the enzyme
inhibitor, and bind the enzyme itself with its own strings
(Figure 2-13C).
These concepts can be applied potentially to any
enzyme system. Several enzymes are involved in
neurotransmission, including in the synthesis and
destruction of neurotransmitters, as well as in signal
transduction. Only a few enzymes are known to be
targeted by psychotropic drugs currently used in
clinical practice, namely monoamine oxidase (MAO),
acetylcholinesterase, and glycogen synthase kinase
(GSK). MAO inhibitors are discussed in more detail
in Chapter 7 on treatments for mood disorders and
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors are discussed in more
detail in Chapter 12 on dementia. Briefly, regarding
GSK, the antimanic agent lithium may target this

important enzyme in the signal transduction
pathway of neurotrophic factors (Figure 2-14). That
is, some neurotrophins, growth factors, and other
signaling pathways act through a specific downstream
phosphoprotein, an enzyme called GSK-3 (glycogen
synthase kinase), to promote cell death (so-called
proapoptotic actions). Lithium has the capacity to
inhibit this enzyme (Figure 2-14B). It is possible
that inhibition of GSK-3 is physiologically relevant,
because this action could lead to neuroprotective
actions, long-term plasticity, and may contribute to
the antimanic and mood-stabilizing actions known to
be associated with lithium. It is also possible that the
antimanic agent valproate and the neurostimulatory
treatment for depression ECT (electroconvulsive
therapy) may have actions on GSK-3 as well (Figure
2-14B). The development of novel GSK-3 inhibitors is
in progress.

GSK-3 (Glycogen Synthase Kinase):
Possible Target for Lithium and Other Mood Stabilizers

neurotrophin

insulin
IGF-1

Wnt
glycoproteins

neurotrophin

insulin
IGF-1

Wnt
glycoproteins

membrane

P

GSK-3

P

lithium
? valproate
? ECT

GSK-3

proapoptotic
neuroprotective
long-term plasticity
antimanic / mood stabilizer
Figure 2-14 Receptor tyrosine kinases. Receptor tyrosine kinases are potential targets for novel psychotropic drugs. Left: Some
neurotrophins, growth factors, and other signaling pathways act through a downstream phosphoprotein, an enzyme called GSK-3
(glycogen synthase kinase), to promote cell death (proapoptotic actions). Right: Lithium and possibly some other mood stabilizers
may inhibit this enzyme, which could lead to neuroprotective actions and long-term plasticity as well as possibly contribute to moodstabilizing actions.

48


<<<PAGE 65>>>
Chapter 2: Transporters, Receptors, and Enzymes

CYTOCHROME P450 DRUG
METABOLIZING ENZYMES AS
TARGETS OF PSYCHOTROPIC
DRUGS
Pharmacokinetic actions are mediated through the
hepatic and gut drug metabolizing system known
as the cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzyme system.
Pharmacokinetics is the study of how the body acts
upon drugs, especially to absorb, distribute, metabolize,
and excrete them. The CYP450 enzymes and the
pharmacokinetic actions they represent must be contrasted
with the pharmacodynamic actions of drugs, the latter
being the major emphasis of this book. Pharmacodynamic
actions at the specific drug targets discussed earlier
in this chapter and also in Chapter 3 are known as the
mechanism of action of psychotropic drugs, and account
for the therapeutic effects and side effects of drugs.
However, most psychotropic drugs also target the CYP450
drug metabolizing enzymes either as a substrate, inhibitor,
and/or inducer, and a brief overview of these enzymes and
their interactions with psychotropic drugs is in order.
CYP450 enzymes follow the same principles of
enzymes transforming substrates into products as
illustrated in Figures 2-11 through 2-13. Figure 2-15
depicts the concept of a psychotropic drug being
absorbed through the gut wall on the left and then sent
to the big blue enzyme in the liver to be biotransformed
so that the drug can be sent back into the bloodstream
to be excreted from the body via the kidney. Specifically,
CYP450 enzymes in the gut wall or liver convert the
drug substrate into a biotransformed product in the
bloodstream. After passing through the gut wall and
liver, the drug will exist partially as unchanged drug and
partially as biotransformed product in the bloodstream
(Figure 2-15).
There are several known CYP450 systems. Six of
the most important enzymes for psychotropic drug

1A2

2B6

2D6

2C9

metabolism are shown in Figure 2-16. There are over
30 known CYP450 enzymes, and probably many more
awaiting discovery and classification. Not all individuals
have all the same genetic form of the CYP450 enzymes
and types of enzyme for any individual can now be
readily determined with pharmacogenetic testing.
These enzymes are collectively responsible for the
degradation of a large number of psychotropic drugs,
and variations in the genes encoding for the different
CYP450 enzymes can alter the activity of these enzymes,
resulting in alterations of drug levels at standard doses.
Most individuals have “normal” rates of drug metabolism
from the major CYP450 enzymes and are said to be
“extensive metabolizers”; most drug doses are set for
these individuals. However, some individuals have
genetic variants of these enzymes and may be either
intermediate metabolizers or poor metabolizers, with
reduced enzyme activity that can result in increased risk
for elevated drug levels, drug–drug interactions, and
gut

drug

bloodstream
unchanged
drug
biotransformed
drug

CYP450

Figure 2-15 CYP450. The cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzyme
system mediates how the body metabolizes many drugs,
including antipsychotics. The CYP450 enzyme in the gut wall
or liver converts the drug into a biotransformed product in
the bloodstream. After passing through the gut wall and liver
(left), the drug will exist partly as unchanged drug and partly as
biotransformed drug (right).

2C19

3A4

Figure 2-16 Six CYP450
enzymes. There are many cytochrome
P450 (CYP450) systems; these are
classified according to family, subtype,
and gene product. Five of the most
important are shown here, and include
CYP450 1A2, 2B6, 2D6, 2C9, 2C19,
and 3A4.

1 = family
A = subtype
1 = gene product

49

2


<<<PAGE 66>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

reduced amounts of active metabolites. Such patients may
require less than standard doses of drugs metabolized
by their variant CYP450 enzymes. On the other hand,
some patients can also be ultra-rapid metabolizers, with
elevated enzyme activity, subtherapeutic drug levels,
and poor efficacy with standard doses. When genetic
variations are unknown, it can lead to altered efficacy
and side effects of psychotropic drugs. Since the genes for
these CYP450 enzymes can now be readily measured and
used to predict which patients might need to have dosage
adjustments of certain drugs up or down, the practice
of psychopharmacology is increasingly moving to the
measurement of genes for drug metabolism, especially in
patients who do not respond or do not tolerate standard
doses of psychotropic drugs. This is called genotyping
the patient for pharmacogenomic use. Sometimes it
is useful to couple genotyping with therapeutic drug
monitoring that can detect the actual levels of drug in
the blood and thus confirm the predictions from genetic
testing of which CYP450 enzyme type has been shown
to be present. The use of pharmacogenomic testing
in combination with therapeutic drug monitoring
(sometimes also called phenotyping) can help in the
management particularly of treatment-resistant patients.
Drug interactions mediated by CYP450 enzymes and
their genetic variants are constantly being discovered,
and the active clinician who combines drugs must be
alert to these, and thus be continually updated on what
drug interactions are important. Here we present only
the general concepts of drug interactions at CYP450
enzyme systems, but the specifics should be found in a
comprehensive and up-to-date comprehensive reference
source (such as Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology: the
Prescriber’s Guide, a companion to this textbook) before
prescribing.

SUMMARY
Nearly a third of psychotropic drugs in clinical practice
bind to a neurotransmitter transporter, and another third
of psychotropic drugs bind to G-protein-linked receptors.
These two molecular sites of action, their impact upon
neurotransmission, and various specific drugs that act at
these sites have all been reviewed in this chapter.
Specifically, there are two subclasses of plasma
membrane transporters for neurotransmitters and three
subclasses of intracellular synaptic vesicle transporters for
neurotransmitters. The monoamine transporters (SERT

50

for serotonin, NET for norepinephrine, and DAT for
dopamine) are key targets for most of the known drugs
that treat unipolar depression, ADHD, and numerous
other disorders ranging from anxiety to pain. The
vesicular transporter for all three of these monoamines
is known as VMAT2 (vesicular monoamine transporter
2), which not only stores monoamines and histamine in
synaptic vesicles, but is also inhibited by drugs recently
introduced to treat movement disorders such as tardive
dyskinesia.
G-protein receptors are the most common targets of
psychotropic drugs, and their actions can lead to both
therapeutic effects and side effects. Drug actions at
these receptors occur in a spectrum, from full agonist
actions, to partial agonist actions, to antagonism, and
even to inverse agonism. Natural neurotransmitters
are full agonists, and so are some drugs used in clinical
practice. However, most drugs that act directly on
G-protein-linked receptors act as antagonists. A few act
as partial agonists, and some as inverse agonists. Each
drug interacting at a G-protein-linked receptor causes
a conformational change in that receptor that defines
where on the agonist spectrum it will act. Thus, a full
agonist produces a conformational change that turns on
signal transduction and second-messenger formation
to the maximum extent. One novel concept is that of a
partial agonist, which acts somewhat like an agonist, but
to a lesser extent. An antagonist causes a conformational
change that stabilizes the receptor in the baseline state
and thus is “silent.” In the presence of agonists or partial
agonists, an antagonist causes the receptor to return to
this baseline state as well, and thus reverses their actions.
A novel receptor action is that of an inverse agonist,
which leads to a conformation of the receptor that stops
all activity, even baseline actions. Understanding the
agonist spectrum can lead to prediction of downstream
consequences on signal transduction, including clinical
actions.
Finally, a minority of psychotropic drugs target
enyzmes for their therapeutic effects. Several enzymes are
involved in neurotransmission, including in the synthesis
and destruction of neurotransmitters as well as in signal
transduction, but in practice only three are known to
be targeted by psychotropic drugs. A larger portion
of psychotropic drugs target the cytochrome P450
drug metabolizing enzymes, which is relevant to their
pharmacokinetic profiles but not their pharmacodynamic
profiles.


<<<PAGE 67>>>
3

Ion Channels as Targets
of Psychopharmacological
Drug Action

Ligand-Gated Ion Channels as Targets of
Psychopharmacological Drug Action 51
Ligand-Gated Ion Channels, Ionotropic Receptors,
and Ion-Channel-Linked Receptors 51
Ligand-Gated Ion Channels: Structure and
Function 53
Pentameric Subtypes 53
Tetrameric Subtypes 54
The Agonist Spectrum 56

Many important psychopharmacological drugs target ion
channels. The role of ion channels as important regulators
of synaptic neurotransmission has been covered in
Chapter 1. Here we discuss how targeting these molecular
sites causes alterations in synaptic neurotransmission that
are linked in turn to the therapeutic actions of various
psychotropic drugs. Specifically, we will cover ligandgated ion channels and voltage-sensitive ion channels as
targets of psychopharmacological drug action.

LIGAND-GATED ION
CHANNELS AS TARGETS OF
PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGICAL
DRUG ACTION
Ligand-Gated Ion Channels, Ionotropic Receptors, and
Ion-Channel-Linked Receptors

The terms ligand-gated ion channels, ionotropic receptors,
and ion-channel-linked receptors are in fact different
terms for the same receptor/ion-channel complex. Ions
normally cannot penetrate membranes because of their
charge. In order to selectively control access of ions into
and out of neurons, their membranes are decorated with
all sorts of ion channels. The most important ion channels
in psychopharmacology regulate calcium, sodium,
chloride, and potassium. Many can be modified by various
drugs, and this will be discussed throughout this chapter.
There are two major classes of ion channels, and
each class has several names. One class of ion channels
is opened by neurotransmitters and goes by the names

Different States of Ligand-Gated Ion Channels 63
Allosteric Modulation: PAMs and NAMs 64
Voltage-Sensitive Ion Channels as Targets of
Psychopharmacological Drug Action 66
Structure and Function 66
VSSCs (Voltage-Sensitive Sodium Channels) 67
VSCCs (Voltage-Sensitive Calcium Channels) 70
Ion Channels and Neurotransmission 73
Summary 76

ligand-gated ion channels, ionotropic receptors, and
ion-channel-linked receptors. These channels and their
associated receptors will be discussed next. The other
major class of ion channel is opened by the charge or
voltage across the membrane and is called either a
voltage-gated or a voltage-sensitive ion channel, and these
will be discussed later in this chapter.
Ion channels that are opened and closed by actions
of neurotransmitter ligands at receptors acting as
gatekeepers are shown conceptually in Figure 3-1. When a
neurotransmitter binds to a gatekeeper receptor on an ion
channel, that neurotransmitter causes a conformational
change in the receptor that opens the ion channel (Figure
3-1A). A neurotransmitter, drug, or hormone that binds to
a receptor is sometimes called a ligand (literally, “tying”).
Thus, ion channels linked to receptors that regulate their
opening and closing are often called ligand-gated ion
channels. Since these ion channels are also receptors,
they are also sometimes also called ionotropic receptors
or ion-channel linked receptors. These terms will be used
interchangeably with ligand-gated ion channels here.
Numerous drugs act at many sites around such
receptor/ion-channel complexes, leading to a wide
variety of modifications of receptor/ion-channel actions.
These modifications not only immediately alter the
flow of ions through the channels, but with a delay can
also change the downstream events that result from
transduction of the signal that begins at these receptors.
The downstream actions have been extensively discussed
in Chapter 1 and include both activation and inactivation
51


<<<PAGE 68>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 3-1 Ligand-gated ion-channel
gatekeeper. This schematic shows a
ligand-gated ion channel. In panel A,
a receptor is serving as a molecular
gatekeeper that acts on instruction
from neurotransmission to open the
channel and allow ions to travel into
the cell. In panel B, the gatekeeper is
keeping the channel closed so that
ions cannot get into the cell. Ligandgated ion channels are a type of
receptor that forms an ion channel and
are thus also called ion-channel-linked
receptors or ionotropic receptors.

ENTER

EN NO
TR
Y

A

B

52


<<<PAGE 69>>>
Chapter 3: Ion Channels

of phosphoproteins, shifting the activity of enzymes,
the sensitivity of receptors, and the conductivity of ion
channels. Other downstream actions include changes
in gene expression and thus changes in which proteins
are synthesized and which functions are amplified. Such
functions can range from synaptogenesis, to receptor and
enzyme synthesis, to communication with downstream
neurons innervated by the neuron with the ionotropic
receptor, and many more. The reader should have a good
command of the function of signal transduction pathways
described in Chapter 1 in order to understand how drugs
acting at ligand-gated ion channels modify the signal
transduction that arises from these receptors.
Drug-induced modifications in signal transduction
from ionotropic (sometimes called ionotrophic) receptors
can have profound actions on psychiatric symptoms.
About a fifth of psychotropic drugs currently utilized in
clinical practice, including many drugs for the treatment
of anxiety and insomnia such as the benzodiazepines,
are known to act at these receptors. Because ionotropic
receptors immediately change the flow of ions, drugs
that act on these receptors can have an almost immediate
effect, which is why many drugs for anxiety and for sleep
that act at these receptors may have immediate clinical
onset. This is in contrast to the actions of many drugs at
G-protein-linked receptors described in Chapter 2, some
of which have clinical effects – such as actions on mood –
that may occur with a delay necessitated by awaiting
initiation of changes in cellular functions activated
through the signal transduction cascade. Here we will
describe how various drugs stimulate or block various
molecular sites around the receptor/ion-channel complex.
Throughout the textbook we will show how specific
drugs acting at specific ionotropic receptors have specific
actions on specific psychiatric disorders.
Ligand-Gated Ion Channels: Structure and Function

Are ligand-gated ion channels receptors or ion channels?
The answer is “yes” – ligand-gated ion channels are both
a type of receptor and they also form an ion channel. That
is why they are called not only a channel (ligand-gated
ion channel) but also a receptor (ionotropic receptor and
ion-channel-linked receptor). These terms try to capture
the dual function of these ion channels/receptors and
may explain why there is more than one term for this
receptor/ion-channel complex.
Ligand-gated ion channels are comprised of several
long strings of amino acids assembled as subunits
around an ion channel. Decorated on these subunits

are also multiple binding sites for everything from
neurotransmitters to ions to drugs. That is, these
complex proteins have several sites where some ions
travel through a channel and others also bind to the
channel; where one neurotransmitter or even two
cotransmitters act at separate and distinct binding sites;
where numerous allosteric modulators – i.e., natural
substances or drugs that bind to a site different than
where the neurotransmitter binds – increase or decrease
the sensitivity of channel opening.
Pentameric Subtypes

Many ligand-gated ion channels are assembled from
five protein subunits, and that is why they are called
pentameric. The subunits for pentameric subtypes of
ligand-gated ion channels each have four transmembrane
regions (Figure 3-2A). These membrane proteins go in
and out of the membrane four times (Figure 3-2A). When
five copies of these subunits are selected (Figure 3-2B),
they come together in space to form a fully functional
pentameric receptor with the ion channel in the middle
(Figure 3-2C). The receptor sites are in various locations
on each of the subunits; some binding sites are in the
channel, but many are present at different locations
outside the channel. This pentameric structure is typical
for GABAA receptors, nicotinic cholinergic receptors,
serotonin 5HT3 receptors, and certain glycine receptors
(Table 3-1). Drugs that act directly on pentameric ligandgated ion channels are listed in Table 3-2.
If this structure were not complicated enough,
pentameric ionotropic receptors actually have many
different subtypes. Subtypes of pentameric ionotropic
receptors are defined based upon which forms of each
of the five subunits are chosen for assembly into a fully

Table 3-1 Pentameric ligand-gated ion channels

Four transmembrane regions
Five subunits
Neurotransmitter

Receptor subtype

Acetylcholine

Nicotinic receptors
(e.g. α7 nicotinic receptors;
α4β2 nicotinic receptors)

GABA

GABAA receptors (e.g. α1
subunits; γ subunits; δ subunits)

Glycine

Strychnine-sensitive glycine
receptors

Serotonin

5HT3 receptors
53

3


<<<PAGE 70>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 3-2 Ligand-gated ion channel
structure. The four transmembrane
regions of a single subunit of a
pentameric ligand-gated ion channel
form a cluster, as shown in panel A.
An icon for this subunit is shown on
the right in panel A. Five copies of the
subunits come together in space (panel
B) to form a functional ion channel in
the middle (panel C). Ligand-gated ion
channels have receptor binding sites
located on all five subunits, both inside
and outside the channel.

=
A

=

B

=
C

constituted receptor. That is, there are several subtypes
for each of the four transmembrane subunits, making it
possible to piece together several different constellations
of fully constituted receptors. Although the natural
neurotransmitter binds to every subtype of ionotropic
receptor, some drugs used in clinical practice, and many
more in clinical trials, are able to bind selectively to
one or more of these subtypes, but not to others. This
may have functional and clinical consequences. Specific
receptor subtypes and the specific drugs that bind to
them selectively are discussed in chapters that cover their
specific clinical use.

54

Tetrameric Subtypes

Ionotropic glutamate receptors have a different
structure from the pentameric ionotropic receptors
just discussed. The ligand-gated ion channels for
glutamate are comprised of subunits that have three full
transmembrane regions and a fourth re-entrant loop
(Figure 3-3A), rather than four full transmembrane
regions as shown in Figure 3-2A. When four copies of
these subunits are selected (Figure 3-3B), they come
together in space to form a fully functional ion channel
in the middle with the four re-entrant loops lining the
ion channel (Figure 3-3C). Thus, tetrameric subtypes of


<<<PAGE 71>>>
Chapter 3: Ion Channels

Table 3-2 Key ligand-gated ion channels directly targeted by psychotropic drugs

Neurotransmitter

Ligand-gated ion
channel receptor
subtype directly
targeted

Pharmacological
action

Drug class

Therapeutic
action

Acetylcholine

Alpha4 Beta2
nicotinic

Partial agonist

Nicotinic receptor
partial agonist (NRPA)
(varenicline)

Smoking cessation

GABAA
benzodiazepine
receptors

Full agonist,
phasic inhibition

Benzodiazepines

Anxiolytic

GABAA nonbenzodiazepine
PAM sites

Full agonist,
phasic inhibition

“Z DRUGS”/hypnotics
(zolpidem, zaleplon,
zopiclone, eszopiclone)

Improves insomnia

GABAA neurosteroid
sites
(benzodiazepine
insensitive)

Full agonist,
tonic inhibition

Neuroactive steroids
(allopregnanolone)

Postpartum depression
Rapid-acting
antidepressant
Anesthetic

NMDA
NAM channel sites/
Mg++ sites

Antagonist

NMDA glutamate
antagonist (memantine)

Pro-cognitive in
Alzheimer disease

NMDA openchannel sites

Antagonist

PCP/phencyclidine
Ketamine
Dextromethorphan
Dextromethadone

Dissociative
hallucinogen
Anesthetic
Pseudobulbar affect
Agitation in Alzheimer
disease
Rapid-acting
antidepressant
Treatment-resistant
depression

5HT3

Antagonist

Mirtazapine
Vortioxetine

Pro-cognitive
Antidepressant

5HT3

Antagonist

Anti-emetic

Reduce
chemotherapyinduced emesis

GABA

Glutamate

Serotonin

3

PAM, positive allosteric modulator; NAM, negative allosteric modulator; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate; Mg, magnesium.

ion channels (Figure 3-3) are analogous to pentameric
subtypes of ion channels (Figure 3-2A), but just have four
subunits rather than five. Receptor sites are in various
locations on each of the subunits; some binding sites are
in the channel, but many are present at different locations
outside the channel.
This tetrameric structure is typical of the ionotropic
glutamate receptors known as AMPA (α-amino-3hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid), kainate,

and NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) subtypes (Table 3-3).
Drugs that act directly at tetrameric ionotropic glutamate
receptors are listed in Table 3-2. Receptor subtypes for
glutamate according to the selective agonist acting at that
receptor as well as the specific molecular subunits that
comprise that subtype are listed in Table 3-3. Subtype
selective drugs for ionotropic glutamate receptors are
under investigation but not currently used in clinical
practice.

55


<<<PAGE 72>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

The Agonist Spectrum

Table 3-3 Tetrameric ligand-gated ion channels

Three transmembrane regions and one re-entrant
loop
Four subunits
Neurotransmitter

Receptor subtype

Glutamate

AMPA (e.g. GluR1–4 subunits)
KAINATE (e.g. GluR5–7,
KA1–2 subunits)
NMDA (e.g. NMDAR1,
NMDAR2A–D, NMDAR3A
subunits)

AMPA, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate.

Figure 3-3 Tetrameric ligand-gated ion
channel structure. A single subunit of a
tetrameric ligand-gated ion channel is
shown to form a cluster in panel A, with
an icon for this subunit shown on the
right in panel A. Four copies of these
subunits come together in space (panel
B) to form a functional ion channel in
the middle (panel C). Ligand-gated ion
channels have receptor binding sites
located on all four subunits, both inside
and outside the channel.

=
A

=

B

=
C

56

The concept of an agonist spectrum for G-protein-linked
receptors discussed extensively in Chapter 2 can also be
applied to ligand-gated ion channels (Figure 3-4). Thus,
full agonists change the conformation of the receptor to
open the ion channel the maximal frequency allowed
by that binding site (Figure 3-5). This then triggers the
maximal amount of downstream signal transduction
possible to be mediated by this binding site. The ion
channel can open to an even greater extent (i.e., more
frequently) than with a full agonist alone, but this requires
the help of a second receptor site, that of a positive
allosteric modulator (PAM) as will be shown later.


<<<PAGE 73>>>
Chapter 3: Ion Channels

The Agonist Spectrum
antagonist
partial
agonist

agonist
inverse
agonist

Figure 3-4 Agonist spectrum. The agonist spectrum and its
corresponding effects on the ion channel are shown here. This
spectrum ranges from agonists (on the far left), which open the
channel the maximal frequency allowed by that binding site
(depicted for simplicity’s sake with a wider opening), through
antagonists (middle of the spectrum), which retain the resting
state with infrequent opening of the channel, to inverse agonists
(on the far right), which put the ion channel into a closed and
inactive state. Between the extremes of agonist and antagonist
are partial agonists, which increase the degree and frequency of
ion-channel opening as compared to the resting state, but not
as much as a full agonist. Antagonists can block anything in the
agonist spectrum, returning the ion channel to the resting state
in each instance.

Antagonists stabilize the receptor in the resting state
(Figure 3-6B), which is the same as the state of the
receptor in the absence of agonist (Figure 3-6A). Since
there is no difference between the presence and absence
of the antagonist, the antagonist is said to be neutral or
silent. The resting state is not a fully closed ion channel,
so there is some degree of ion flow through the channel
even in the absence of agonist (Figure 3-6A) and even
in the presence of antagonist (Figure 3-6B). This is due
to occasional and infrequent opening of the channel
even when an agonist is not present and even when an
antagonist is present. This is called constitutive activity
and is also discussed in Chapter 2 for G-protein-linked
receptors. Antagonists of ion-channel-linked receptors
reverse the action of agonists (Figure 3-7) and bring the
receptor conformation back to the resting baseline state,
but do not block any constitutive activity.
Partial agonists produce a change in receptor
conformation such that the ion channel opens to a greater
extent and more frequently than in its resting state but
less than in the presence of a full agonist (Figures 3-8
and 3-9). An antagonist reverses a partial agonist, just
like it reverses a full agonist, returning the receptor to its
resting state (Figure 3-10). Partial agonists thus produce
Figure 3-5 Actions of an agonist. In
panel A, the ion channel is in its resting
state, during which the channel opens
infrequently (constitutive activity). In
panel B, the agonist occupies its binding
site on the ligand-gated ion channel,
increasing the frequency at which the
channel opens. This is represented as
the red agonist turning the receptor red
and opening the ion channel.

t

nis
ago

agonist

agonist

agonist binds to the receptor and the
channel is more frequently open

channel in its resting state in the absence
of agonist
A

B

57

3


<<<PAGE 74>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

t

antagonis

anta

Figure 3-6 Antagonists acting alone. In
panel A, the ion channel is in its resting
state, during which the channel opens
infrequently. In panel B, the antagonist
occupies the binding site normally
occupied by the agonist on the ligandgated ion channel. However, there is
no consequence to this, and the ion
channel does not affect the degree or
frequency of opening of the channel
compared to the resting state. This is
represented as the yellow antagonist
docking into the binding site and
turning the receptor yellow but not
affecting the state of the ion channel.

gonis

t

antagonist

channel in its resting state
A

antagonist binds to the receptor, not affecting
the frequency of opening of the channel
compared to the resting
B
state of no agonist
Figure 3-7 Antagonist acting in the
presence of agonist. In panel A, the
ion channel is bound by an agonist,
which causes it to open at a greater
frequency than in the resting state. This
is represented as the red agonist turning
the receptor red and opening the ion
channel as it docks into its binding
site. In panel B, the yellow antagonist
prevails and shoves the red agonist off
the binding site, reversing the agonist’s
actions and restoring the resting state.
Thus, the ion channel has returned to its
status before the agonist acted.

t

is
gon

st
antagoni

a

antagonist

agonist

the agonist causes the channel to become
open more frequently

the antagonist takes over and puts
the channel back into the resting state

A

B

58


<<<PAGE 75>>>
Chapter 3: Ion Channels

ial
part ist
agon

Figure 3-8 Actions of a partial agonist. In
panel A, the ion channel is in its resting
state and opens infrequently. In panel B, the
partial agonist occupies its binding site on
the ligand-gated ion channel and produces
a conformational change such that the ion
channel opens to a greater extent and at a
greater frequency than in the resting state,
though less than in the presence of a full
agonist. This is depicted by the orange partial
agonist turning the receptor orange and
partially but not fully opening the ion channel.

part
agon ial
ist

partial
agonist

channel in its resting state
A

partial agonist binds to the receptor and
causes it to open more frequently than
the resting state but less frequently B
than with a full agonist

partial
agonist

agonist

1

1

channel in its resting state

the partial agonist
causes the
channel to open
more frequently;
in this case the
partial agonist is
having a net
agonist action

2

the partial agonist
causes the
channel to open
less frequently;
in this case
the partial agonist
2
is having a net
antagonistic action

the full agonist opens
the channel maximally
and frequently

Figure 3-9 Net effect of partial agonist. Partial agonists act either as net agonists or as net antagonists, depending on the amount of
agonist present. When full agonist is absent (on the far left), a partial agonist causes the channel to open more frequently as compared
to the resting state; thus, the partial agonist is having a net agonist action (moving from left to right). However, in the presence of a full
agonist (on the far right), a partial agonist decreases the frequency of channel opening in comparison to the full agonist and thus acts as
a net antagonist (moving from right to left).

59

3


<<<PAGE 76>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

antagonist

pa
agorntial
ist

partial
agonist

partial agonist binds to the receptor and
causes it to open more frequently than
the resting state
A

antagonist

the antagonist causes the channel
to return to baseline

ion flow and downstream signal transduction that is
something more than the resting state in the absence of
agonist, yet something less than a full agonist. Just as is
the case for G-protein-linked receptors, depending upon
how close this partial agonist is to a full agonist or to a
silent antagonist on the agonist spectrum will determine
the impact of a partial agonist on downstream signal
transduction events.
The ideal therapeutic agent should have ion flow
and signal transduction that is not too hot, yet not too
cold, but just right, called the “Goldilocks” solution in
Chapter 2, a concept that can apply here to ligand-gated
ion channels as well. Such an ideal state may vary from
one clinical situation to another, depending upon the
balance between full agonism and silent antagonism
that is desired. In cases where there is unstable
neurotransmission throughout the brain, finding such
a balance may stabilize receptor output somewhere
between too much and too little downstream action. For
this reason, partial agonists are also called “stabilizers,”
since they have the theoretical capacity to find the stable
solution between the extremes of too much full agonist
action and no agonist action at all (Figure 3-9).
Just as is the case for G-protein-linked receptors,
partial agonists at ligand-gated ion channels can
60

Figure 3-10 Antagonist acting in
presence of partial agonist. In panel A,
a partial agonist occupies its binding
site and causes the ion channel to
open more frequently than the resting
state. This is represented as the orange
partial agonist docking to its binding
site, turning the receptor orange, and
partially opening the ion channel. In
panel B, the yellow antagonist prevails
and shoves the orange partial agonist
off the binding site, reversing the partial
agonist’s actions. Thus the ion channel is
returned to its resting state.

B

appear as net agonists, or as net antagonists, depending
upon the amount of naturally occurring full agonist
neurotransmitter which is present. Thus, when a full
agonist neurotransmitter is absent, a partial agonist
will be a net agonist (Figure 3-9). That is, from the
resting state, a partial agonist initiates somewhat of
an increase in the ion flow and downstream signal
transduction cascade from the ion-channel-linked
receptor. However, when full agonist neurotransmitter
agonist is present, the same partial agonist will become
a net antagonist (Figure 3-9). That is, it will decrease
the level of full signal output to a lesser level, but not to
zero. Thus, a partial agonist can simultaneously boost
deficient neurotransmitter activity yet block excessive
neurotransmitter activity, another reason that partial
agonists are called stabilizers. An agonist and an
antagonist in the same molecule acting at ligand-gated
ion channels is quite an interesting new dimension to
therapeutics. This concept has led to proposals that
partial agonists could treat not only states which are
theoretically deficient in full agonist, but also states that
are theoretically in excess of full agonist. As mentioned in
the discussion of G-protein-linked receptors in Chapter 2,
a partial agonist at ligand-gated ion channels could
also theoretically treat states that are mixtures of both


<<<PAGE 77>>>
Chapter 3: Ion Channels

Figure 3-11 Actions of an inverse
agonist. In panel A, the ion channel
is in its resting state and opens
infrequently. In panel B, the inverse
agonist occupies the binding site
on the ligand-gated ion channel
and causes it to close. This is the
opposite of what an agonist does and
is represented by the purple inverse
agonist turning the receptor purple
and closing the ion channel. Eventually,
the inverse agonist stabilizes the
ion channel in an inactive state,
represented by the padlock on the
channel itself.

inverse
agonist

channel closed

channel closed
and inactivated

the inverse agonist causes the channel
to open very infrequently
and eventually stabilizes it
in an inactive state

channel in its resting state

A

B

st

antagoni

the inverse agonist causes the channel
to stabilize in an inactive form

Figure 3-12 Antagonist acting in the
presence of inverse agonist. In panel A,
the ion channel has been stabilized in
inverse
agonist an inactive form by the inverse agonist
occupying its binding site on the ligandgated ion channel. This is represented
as the purple inverse agonist turning
the receptor purple and closing and
padlocking the ion channel. In panel
antagonist
B, the yellow antagonist prevails and
shoves the purple inverse agonist
off the binding site, returning the ion
channel to its resting state. In this way,
the antagonist’s effects on an inverse
agonist’s actions are similar to its
effects on an agonist’s actions; namely,
it returns the ion channel to its resting
state. However, in the presence of an
inverse agonist, the antagonist increases
the frequency of channel opening,
whereas in the presence of an agonist,
the antagonist decreases the frequency
of channel opening. Thus an antagonist
can reverse the actions of either an
agonist or an inverse agonist despite
the fact that it does nothing on its own.
the antagonist returns the channel
to the resting state

A

excessive and deficient neurotransmitter activity. Partial
agonists at ligand-gated ion channels are just beginning
to enter into use in clinical practice (Table 3-2), and
several more are in clinical development.
Inverse agonists at ligand-gated ion channels are
different from simple antagonists, and are neither neutral
nor silent. Inverse agonists are explained in Chapter 2
in relationship to G-protein-linked receptors. Inverse

B

agonists at ligand-gated ion channels are thought to
produce a conformational change in these receptors that
first closes the channel and then stabilizes it in an inactive
form (Figure 3-11). Thus, this inactive conformation
(Figure 3-11B) produces a functional reduction in ion
flow and in consequent signal transduction compared to
the resting state (Figure 3-11A) that is even less than that
produced when there is either no agonist present or when
61

3


<<<PAGE 78>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

a silent antagonist is present. Antagonists reverse this
inactive state caused by inverse agonists, returning the
channel to the resting state (Figure 3-12).
In many ways, therefore, an inverse agonist does
the opposite of an agonist. If an agonist increases signal
transduction from baseline, an inverse agonist decreases
it, even below baseline levels. Also, in contrast to
antagonists, which stabilize the resting state, inverse
agonists stabilize an inactivated state (Figures 3-11 and 313). It is not yet clear if the inactivated state of the inverse
agonist can be distinguished clinically from the resting
state of the silent antagonist at ionotropic receptors. In

the meantime, inverse agonists remain an interesting
pharmacological concept.
In summary, ion-channel-linked receptors act along
an agonist spectrum, and drugs have been described that
can produce conformational changes in these receptors
to create any state from full agonist, to partial agonist, to
silent antagonist, to inverse agonist (Figure 3-4). When
one considers the spectrum of signal transduction along
this spectrum, it is easy to understand why agents at
each point along the agonist spectrum differ so much
from each other, and why their clinical actions are so
different.
Figure 3-13 Inverse agonist actions
reversed by antagonist. Antagonists
cause conformational change in ligandgated ion channels that stabilizes the
receptors in the resting state (top left),
the same state they are in when no
agonist or inverse agonist is present
(top right). Inverse agonists cause
conformational change that closes the
ion channel (bottom right). When an
inverse agonist is bound over time, it
may eventually stabilize the ion channel
in an inactive conformation (bottom
left). This stabilized conformation of
an inactive ion channel can be quickly
reversed by an antagonist, which
restabilizes it in the resting state (top
left).

antagonist

resting state stabilized
by antagonist

resting state

inactivated state possibly reversed
immediately by an antagonist

closed state caused
by inverse agonist

62


<<<PAGE 79>>>
Chapter 3: Ion Channels

Different States of Ligand-Gated Ion Channels

There are even more states of ligand-gated ion channels
than those determined by the agonist spectrum discussed
above and shown in Figures 3-4 through 3-13. The states
discussed so far are those that occur predominantly
with acute administration of agents that work across
the agonist spectrum. These range from the maximal
opening of the ion channel from conformational changes
caused by a full agonist to the maximal closing of the ion
channel caused by an inverse agonist. Such changes in
conformation caused by the acute action of agents across
this spectrum are subject to change over time since these
receptors have the capacity to adapt, particularly when
there is chronic or excessive exposure to such agents.
We have already discussed the resting state, the open
state, and the closed state shown in Figure 3-14. The
best-known adaptive states are those of desensitization
and inactivation, also shown in Figure 3-14. We have also
briefly discussed inactivation as a state that can be caused
by acute administration of an inverse agonist, beginning
with a rapid conformational change in the ion channel
that first closes it, but over time stabilizes the channel in
an inactive conformation that can relatively quickly be
reversed by an antagonist, which then restabilizes the ion
channel in the resting state (Figures 3-11 through 3-13).
Desensitization is yet another state of the ligand-gated
ion channel shown in Figure 3-14. Ion-channel-linked

channel in
resting state

channel open

receptor desensitization can be caused by prolonged
exposure to agonists, and may be a way for receptors to
protect themselves from overstimulation. An agonist
acting at a ligand-gated ion channel first induces a
change in receptor conformation that opens the channel,
but with the continuous presence of the agonist, over
time leads to another conformational change where the
receptor essentially stops responding to the agonist even
though the agonist is still present. This receptor is then
considered to be desensitized (Figures 3-14 and 3-15).
This state of desensitization can at first be reversed
relatively quickly by removal of the agonist (Figure 3-15).
However, if the agonist stays much longer, on the order
of hours, the receptor converts from a state of simple
desensitization to one of inactivation (Figure 3-15). This
state does not reverse simply upon removal of the agonist,
since it also takes hours in the absence of agonist to
revert back to the resting state where the receptor is again
sensitive to new exposure to agonist (Figure 3-15).
The state of inactivation may be best characterized
for nicotinic cholinergic receptors, ligand-gated ion
channels that are normally responsive to the endogenous
neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is
quickly hydrolyzed by an abundance of the enzyme
acetylcholinesterase, so it rarely gets the chance to
desensitize and inactivate its nicotinic receptors.
However, the drug nicotine is not hydrolyzed by

channel closed

channel
desensitized

channel
inactivated

Figure 3-14 Five states of ligand-gated ion channels. Summarized here are five well-known states of ligand-gated ion channels. In the
resting state, ligand-gated ion channels open infrequently, with consequent constitutive activity that may or may not lead to detectable
signal transduction. In the open state, ligand-gated ion channels open to allow ion conductance through the channel, leading to
signal transduction. In the closed state, ligand-gated ion channels are closed, allowing no ion flow to occur and thus reducing signal
transduction to even less than is produced in the resting state. Channel desensitization is an adaptive state in which the receptor stops
responding to agonist even if it is still bound. Channel inactivation is a state in which a closed ion channel over time becomes stabilized
in an inactive conformation.

63

3


<<<PAGE 80>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

agonist

resting state

open state
activated by
acute agonist

agonist

desensitized state
activated by prolonged agonist
order of hours

order of hours

inactivated state
not immediately reversed by
removal of agonist
Figure 3-15 Opening, desensitizing, and inactivating by agonists. Agonists cause ligand-gated ion channels to open more frequently,
increasing ion conductance in comparison to the resting state. Prolonged exposure to agonists can cause a ligand-gated ion channel
to enter a desensitized state in which it no longer responds to the agonist even if it is still bound. Prompt removal of the agonist can
reverse this state fairly quickly. However, if the agonist stays longer, it can cause a conformational change that leads to inactivation of the
ion channel. This state is not immediately reversed when the agonist is removed.

acetylcholinesterase, and is famous for stimulating
nicotinic cholinergic receptors so profoundly and
so enduringly that the receptors are not only rapidly
desensitized in about the time it takes to smoke a single
cigarette, but enduringly inactivated for about the time
most smokers take between cigarettes. Ever wonder why
cigarettes are the length they are and why most smokers
smoke about a pack a day (20 cigarettes) in about 16
waking hours? It all has to do with adjusting the dosing
of nicotine to the nature of receptor action of nicotinic
64

receptors described here. Addiction to nicotine and other
substances is described in more detail in Chapter 13
on impulsivity and substance abuse. These transitions
among various receptor states induced by agonists are
shown in Figure 3-15.
Allosteric Modulation: PAMs and NAMs

Ligand-gated ion channels are regulated by more than
the neurotransmitter(s) that bind to them. That is, there
are other molecules that are not neurotransmitters but


<<<PAGE 81>>>
Chapter 3: Ion Channels

PAM
+

NT1

NT1

3

PAM
+

binding site
within
membrane

NT1

When a neurotransmitter binds to receptors making up an ion channel, the channel
opens more frequently. However, when BOTH the neurotransmitter and
a positive allosteric modulator (PAM) are bound to the receptor,
the channel opens much more frequently,
allowing more ions into the cell.
Figure 3-16 Positive allosteric modulators. Allosteric modulators are ligands that bind to sites other than the neurotransmitter site on
an ion-channel-linked receptor. Allosteric modulators have no activity of their own but rather enhance (positive allosteric modulators, or
PAMs) or block (negative allosteric modulators, or NAMs) the actions of neurotransmitters. When a PAM binds to its site while an agonist
is also bound, the channel opens more frequently than when only the agonist is bound, therefore allowing more ions into the cell.

can bind to the receptor/ion channel complex at different
sites from where neurotransmitter(s) bind. These sites
are called allosteric (literally, “other site”) and ligands that
bind there are called allosteric modulators. These ligands
are modulators rather than neurotransmitters because
they have little or no activity on their own in the absence
of the neurotransmitter. Allosteric modulators thus only
work in the presence of the neurotransmitter.
There are two forms of allosteric modulators – those
that boost what the neurotransmitter does and are thus
called positive allosteric modulators (PAMs), and those
that block what the neurotransmitter does and are thus
called negative allosteric modulators (NAMs).
Specifically, when PAMs or NAMs bind to their
allosteric sites while the neurotransmitter is not binding
to its site, the PAM and the NAM do nothing. However,
when a PAM binds to its allosteric site while the
neurotransmitter is sitting in its site, the PAM causes
conformational changes in the ligand-gated ion channel
that open the channel even further and more frequently

than happens with a full agonist by itself (Figure 3-16).
That is why the PAM is called “positive.” Good examples
of PAMs are benzodiazepines. These ligands boost
the action of GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) at GABAA
types of ligand-gated chloride ion channels. GABA
binding to GABAA sites increases chloride ion flux by
opening the ion channel, and benzodiazepines acting as
agonists at benzodiazepine receptors elsewhere on the
GABAA receptor complex cause the effect of GABA to be
amplified in terms of chloride ion flux by opening the ion
channel to a greater degree or more frequently. Clinically,
this is exhibited as reducing anxiety, inducing sleep,
blocking convulsions, blocking short-term memory, and
relaxing muscles. In this example, benzodiazepines are
acting as full agonists at the PAM site.
On the other hand, when a NAM binds to its allosteric
site while the neurotransmitter resides at its agonist
binding site, the NAM causes conformational changes
in the ligand-gated ion channel that block or reduce the
actions that normally occur when the neurotransmitter
65


<<<PAGE 82>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

neurotransmitter

NAM
-

M
NA-

When a neurotransmitter binds to receptors making up an ion channel, the channel
opens more frequently. However, when BOTH the neurotransmitter and
a negative allosteric modulator (NAM) are bound to the receptor,
the channel opens much less frequently,
allowing fewer ions into the cell.
Figure 3-17 Negative allosteric modulators. Allosteric modulators are ligands that bind to sites other than the neurotransmitter site on
an ion-channel-linked receptor. Allosteric modulators have no activity of their own but rather enhance (positive allosteric modulators,
or PAMs) or block (negative allosteric modulators, or NAMs) the actions of neurotransmitters. When a NAM binds to its site while an
agonist is also bound, the channel opens less frequently than when only the agonist is bound, therefore allowing fewer ions into the cell.

acts alone (Figure 3-17). That is why the NAM is called
“negative.” One example of a NAM is a benzodiazepine
inverse agonist. Although these are only experimental,
as expected, they have the opposite actions of
benzodiazepine full agonists and thus diminish chloride
conductance through the ion channel so much that they
cause panic attacks, seizures, and some improvement
in memory – the opposite clinical effects of a
benzodiazepine full agonist. Thus, the same allosteric site
can either have NAM or PAM actions, depending upon
whether the ligand is a full agonist or an inverse agonist.
NAMs for NMDA receptors include phencyclidine (PCP,
also called “angel dust”) and its structurally related
anesthetic agent ketamine, also used as a treatment for
resistant depression and suicidal thoughts. These agents
bind to a site inside the calcium channel, but can get into
the channel to block it only when the channel is open.
66

When either PCP or ketamine bind to their NAM site,
they prevent glutamate/glycine cotransmission from
opening the channel.

VOLTAGE-SENSITIVE ION
CHANNELS AS TARGETS OF
PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGICAL
DRUG ACTION
Structure and Function

Not all ion channels are regulated by neurotransmitter
ligands. Indeed, critical aspects of nerve conduction,
action potentials, and neurotransmitter release are all
mediated by another class of ion channels, known as
voltage-sensitive or voltage-gated ion channels because
their opening and closing are regulated by the ionic
charge or voltage potential across the membrane in


<<<PAGE 83>>>
Chapter 3: Ion Channels

Ionic Components of an Action Potential
Na+

Ca++
K+

3
A

B

C

Figure 3-18 Ionic components of an action potential. The ionic components of an action potential are shown graphically here. First,
voltage-sensitive sodium channels open to allow an influx of “downhill” sodium into the negatively charged internal milieu of the
neuron (A). The change of voltage potential caused by the influx of sodium triggers voltage-sensitive calcium channels to open and
allow calcium influx (B). Finally, after the action potential is gone, potassium enters the cell while sodium is pumped out, restoring the
neuron’s baseline internal electrical milieu (C).

which they reside. An electrical impulse in a neuron, also
known as the action potential, is triggered by summation
of the various neurochemical and electrical events of
neurotransmission. These are discussed extensively
in Chapter 1, which covers the chemical basis of
neurotransmission and signal transduction.
Electrically, the action potential is shown in
Figure 3-18. The first phase is sodium rushing “downhill”
into the sodium deficient, negatively charged internal
milieu of the neuron (Figure 3-18A). This is made possible
when voltage-gated sodium channels open the gates and
let the sodium in. A few milliseconds later, the calcium
channels get the same idea, with their voltage-gated ion
channels opened by the change in voltage potential caused
by the sodium rushing in (Figure 3-18B). Finally, after the
action potential is gone, during recovery of the neuron’s
baseline internal electrical milieu, potassium makes its
way back into the cell through potassium channels as
sodium is again pumped out (Figure 3-18C). It is now
known or suspected that several psychotropic drugs
work on voltage-sensitive sodium channels (VSSCs) and
voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCCs). These classes
of ion channels will be discussed here. Potassium channels
are less well known to be targeted by psychotropic drugs
and will thus not be emphasized.
VSSCs (Voltage-Sensitive Sodium Channels)

Many dimensions of ion-channel structure are similar
for VSSCs and VSCCs. Both have a “pore” that is the
channel itself, allowing ions to travel from one side of
the membrane to the other. However, voltage-gated ion
channels have a more complicated structure than just a
hole or pore in the membrane. These channels are long
strings of amino acids, comprising subunits, and four
different subunits are connected to form the critical pore,
known as an α subunit. In addition, other proteins are

associated with the four subunits, and these appear to
have regulatory functions.
Let us now build a voltage-sensitive ion channel from
scratch, and describe the known functions for each part of
the proteins that make up these channels. The subunit of
a pore-forming protein has six transmembrane segments
(Figure 3-19). Transmembrane segment 4 can detect the
difference in charge across the membrane, and is thus
the most electrically sensitive part of the voltage-sensitive
channel. Transmembrane segment 4 thus functions like a
voltmeter, and when it detects a change in ion charge across
the membrane, it can alert the rest of the protein, and begin
conformational changes of the ion channel, and either open
it or close it. This same general structure exists for both
VSSCs (Figure 3-19A) and for VSCCs (Figure 3-19B), but
the exact amino acid sequence of the protein subunits are
obviously different for VSSCs compared to VSCCs.
Each subunit of a voltage-sensitive ion channel has an
extracellular amino acid loop between transmembrane
segments 5 and 6 (Figure 3-19). This section of amino
acids serves as an “ionic filter” and is located in a position
so that it can cover the outside opening of the pore.
This is illustrated as a colander configured molecularly
to allow only sodium ions to filter through the sodium
channel on the left and only calcium ions to filter through
the calcium channel on the right (Figure 3-19).
Four copies of the sodium-channel version of this
protein are strung together to form one complete ion
channel pore of a VSSC (Figure 3-20A). The cytoplasmic
loops of amino acids that tie these four subunits together
are sites that regulate various functions of the sodium
channel. For example, on the connector loop between
the third and fourth subunits of a VSSC, there are amino
acids that act as a “plug” to close the channel. Like a ball
on an amino acid chain, this “pore inactivator” stops up
the channel on the inner membrane surface of the pore
67


<<<PAGE 84>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

voltage-sensitive sodium
channel (VSSC)

1

2

3

4

5

voltage-sensitive calcium
channel (VSCC)

outside the cell

6

Na+

1

3

4

5

6

Ca++

inside the cell

A

2

B

Figure 3-19 Ionic filter of voltage-sensitive sodium and calcium channels. The extracellular loop between transmembrane segments
5 and 6 of an α pore unit acts as an ionic filter (illustrated here as a colander). (A) Shown here is an α pore unit of a voltage-sensitive
sodium channel, with the ionic filter allowing only sodium ions to enter the cell. (B) Shown here is an α pore unit of a voltage-sensitive
calcium channel, with the ionic filter allowing only calcium ions to enter the cell.

(Figure 3-20A and B). This is a physical blocking of the
hole in the pore, and reminiscent of an old-fashioned
bathtub plug stopping up the drain in a bathtub. The
pore-forming unit of the VSSC is also shown as an icon in
Figure 3-20B with a hole in the middle of the pore, and a
pore inactivator ready to plug the hole from the inside.
Many figures in textbooks represent voltage-gated ion
channels with the outside of the cell on the top of a figure
and this is the way the ion channel is shown in Figure
3-20A and B. Here, we also show what the channel looks
like when the inside of the cell is at the top of the figure,
since throughout this book these channels will often be
shown on presynaptic membranes where the inside of
the neuron is up and the outside of the neuron, namely
its synapse, is down, like that orientation represented in
Figure 3-20C). In either case, the sodium is kept out of
the neuron when the channel is closed or inactivated, and
the direction of sodium flow is into the neuron when the
channel is open, activated, and the pore is not plugged up
with the pore-inactivating amino acid loops.
Voltage-sensitive sodium channels may have one or
more regulatory proteins, some called β units, located
in the transmembrane area and flanking the α pore
forming unit (Figure 3-20C). The function of these β
subunits is not clearly established, but they may modify
the actions of the α unit and thereby indirectly influence
the opening and closing of the channel. It is possible that
β units may be phosphoproteins, and that their state of
phosphorylation or dephosphorylation could regulate
how much influence they exert on ion-channel regulation.
68

Indeed, the α unit itself may also be a phosphoprotein,
with the possibility that its own phosphorylation state
could be regulated by signal transduction cascades and
thus increase or decrease the sensitivity of the ion channel
to changes in the ionic environment. This is discussed in
Chapter 1 as part of the signal transduction cascade, and
ion channels in some cases may act as third, fourth, or
subsequent messengers triggered by neurotransmission.
Both β subunits and the α subunit itself may have various
sites where various psychotropic drugs act, especially
anticonvulsants, some of which are also useful as mood
stabilizers or as treatments for chronic pain. Specific
drugs will be discussed in further detail in the chapters
on mood stabilizers and pain.
Three different states of a VSSC are shown in Figure
3-21. The channel can be open and active, a state allowing
maximum ion flow through the α unit (Figure 3-21A).
When a sodium channel needs to stop ion flow, it has two
states that can do this. One state acts very quickly to flip the
pore inactivator into place, stopping ion flow so fast that the
channel has not yet even closed (Figure 3-21B). Another
state of inactivation actually closes the channel with
conformational changes in the ion channel’s shape (Figure
3-21C). The pore inactivation mechanism may be for fast
inactivation, and the channel closing mechanism may be for
a more stable state of inactivation, but it is not entirely clear.
There are many subtypes of sodium channels, but the
details of how they are differentiated from each other by
differential location in the brain, by differential functions,
and by differential drug actions are only beginning to


<<<PAGE 85>>>
Chapter 3: Ion Channels

Four Subunits Combine to Form the Alpha Pore Subunit, or Channel,
for Sodium of a VSSC (Voltage-Sensitive Sodium Channel)
outside the cell

Na+

outside the cell

I

II

III

IV

3

=

pore
inactivation

inside the cell
A

pore
inactivation
inside the cell
B

inside the cell

pore
inactivation

=

ß

ß

C

outside the cell
Na+

Figure 3-20 Alpha pore of voltage-sensitive sodium channel. The α pore of a voltage-sensitive sodium channel comprises four
subunits (A). Amino acids in the intracellular loop between the third and fourth subunits act as a pore inactivator, “plugging” the channel.
An iconic version of the α unit is shown here, with the extracellular portion on top (B) and with the intracellular portion on top (C).

Three States of a Voltage-Sensitive Sodium Channel (VSSC)

A

B

open

Figure 3-21 States of voltage-sensitive sodium
channel. Such channels can be in the open
state, in which the ion channel is open and
active and ions flow through the α unit (A).
Voltage-sensitive sodium channels may also be
in an inactivated state, in which the channel is
not yet closed but has been “plugged” by the
pore inactivator, preventing ion flow (B). Finally,
conformational changes in the ion channel can
cause it to close, the third state (C).

C

inactivated

closed and inactivated

69


<<<PAGE 86>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

be clarified. For the psychopharmacologist, what is now
of interest is the fact that various sodium channels may
be the sites of action of several anticonvulsants, some
of which have mood-stabilizing and pain-reducing
properties. Most currently available anticonvulsants
probably have multiple sites of action, including multiple
sites of action at multiple types of ion channels. The
specific actions of specific drugs will be discussed in the
chapters that cover specific disorders.
VSCCs (Voltage-Sensitive Calcium Channels)

Many aspects of VSCCs and VSSCs are similar – not
just their names. Like their sodium-channel cousins,
the VSCCs also have subunits with six transmembrane
segments, with segment 4 a voltmeter, and with the

extracellular amino acids connecting segments 5 and 6
acting as an ionic filter (Figure 3-19) – only this time as
a colander allowing calcium to come into the cell, not
sodium (see Figure 3-19B). Obviously, the exact sequence
of amino acids differs between a sodium channel and
a calcium channel, but they have a very similar overall
organization and structure.
Just like voltage-gated sodium channels, VSCCs
also string together four of their subunits to form a
pore, called in the case of a calcium channel, an α1 unit
(Figure 3-22A and B). The connecting string of amino
acids also has functional activities that can regulate
calcium-channel functioning, but in this case the
functions are different from that for sodium channels.
That is, there is no pore inactivator working as a plug for

Four Subunits Combine to Form the Alpha1 Pore Subunit, or Channel,
for Calcium of a VSCC (Voltage-Sensitive Calcium Channel)
Ca++
outside the cell
outside the cell

I

II

III

IV

=
inside the cell

snare

A

inside the cell

B

inside the cell

ß

=

C

2

outside the cell

Figure 3-22 Alpha1 pore of voltage-sensitive calcium channel. The α pore of a voltage-sensitive calcium channel, termed an α1 unit,
comprises four subunits (A). Amino acids in the cytoplasmic loop between the second and third subunits act as a snare to connect with
synaptic vesicles, thereby controlling neurotransmitter release (A). An iconic version of the α1 unit is shown here, with the extracellular
portion on top (B) and with the intracellular portion on top (C).

70


<<<PAGE 87>>>
Chapter 3: Ion Channels

Opening a Presynaptic Voltage-Sensitive N or P/Q
Calcium Channel: Triggers Neurotransmitter Release
glutamate

ß

3

ß

vesicle
snare
N
P/Q

A

N
P/Q

2

B

Ca++
Figure 3-23 N and P/Q voltage-sensitive calcium channels. Voltage-sensitive calcium channels that are most relevant to
psychopharmacology are termed N and P/Q channels. These ion channels are presynaptic and involved in the regulation of
neurotransmitter release. The intracellular amino acids linking the second and third subunits of the α1 unit form a snare that hooks onto
synaptic vesicles (A). When a nerve impulse arrives, the snare “fires,” leading to neurotransmitter release (B).

the VSCC, as was described above for the VSSC; instead,
the amino acids connecting the second and third subunits
of the VSCC work as a “snare” to hook up with synaptic
vesicles and regulate the release of neurotransmitter
into the synapse during synaptic neurotransmission
(Figure 3-22A and Figure 3-23). The orientation of the
calcium channel in Figure 3-22B is with the outside of the
cell at the top of the page, and this is switched in Figure
3-22C so that the inside of the cell is now at the top of
the page, so the reader can see how these channels might
look in various configurations in space. In all cases, the
direction of ion flow is from outside the cell to the inside
when that channel opens to allow ion flow to occur.
Several proteins flank the α1 pore-forming unit of a
VSCC, called γ, β, and α2δ (Figure 3-22C). Shown here
are γ units that span the membrane, cytoplasmic β units,
and a curious protein called α2δ, because it has two parts:
a δ part that is transmembrane, and an α2 part that is
extracellular (Figure 3-22C). The functions of all these
proteins associated with the α1 pore-forming unit of a
VSCC are just beginning to be understood, but already
it is known that the α2δ protein is the target of certain
psychotropic drugs, such as the anticonvulsants pregabalin
and gabapentin, and that this α2δ protein may be involved
in regulating conformational changes of the ion channel to
change the way the ion channel opens and closes.

As would be expected, there are several subtypes of
VSCCs (Table 3-4). The vast array of VSCCs indicates
that the term “calcium channel” is much too general, and
in fact can be confusing. For example, calcium channels
associated with the ligand-gated ion channels discussed
in the previous section, especially those associated
with glutamate and nicotinic cholinergic ionotropic
receptors, are members of an entirely different class of
ion channels from the VSCCs under discussion here. As
we have mentioned, calcium channels associated with
this previously discussed class of ion channels are called
ligand-gated ion channels, ionotropic receptors, or ionchannel-linked receptors, to distinguish them from VSCCs.
The specific subtypes of VSCCs of most interest to
psychopharmacology are those that are presynaptic, that
regulate neurotransmitter release, and that are targeted
by certain psychotropic drugs. This subtype designation
of VSCC is shown in Table 3-4 and such channels are
known as N or P/Q channels.
Another well-known subtype of VSCC is the L channel.
This channel exists not only in the central nervous system,
where its functions are still being clarified, but also on
vascular smooth muscle where it regulates blood pressure
and where a group of drugs known as dihydropyridine
“calcium channel blockers” interact as therapeutic
antihypertensives to lower blood pressure. R and T
71


<<<PAGE 88>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Table 3-4 Subtypes of voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCCs)

Type

Pore-forming

Location

Function

L

Cav1.2, 1.3

Cell bodies, dendrites

Gene expression, synaptic integration

N

Cav 2.2

Nerve terminals
Dendrites, cell bodies

Transmitter release
Synaptic integration

P/Q

Cav, 2.1

Nerve terminals

Transmitter release

Dendrites, cell bodies

Synaptic integration

R

Cav, 2.3

Nerve terminals
Cell bodies, dendrites

Transmitter release
Repetitive firing, synaptic integration

T

Cav, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3

Cell bodies, dendrites

Pacemaking, repetitive firing, synaptic
integration

Docking of Synaptic Vesicle with Presynaptic Membrane,
VSCC (Voltage-Sensitive Calcium Channel), and Snare Proteins
VMAT

synaptobrevin

synaptotagmin

SV2A

synaptic vesicle
membrane

syntaxin

SNAP 25

ß

N
P/Q
presynaptic membrane
2
++

Ca

Figure 3-24 Snare proteins. Proteins that link the voltage-sensitive calcium channel to the synaptic vesicle, called snare proteins,
are shown here; they include SNAP 25 (synaptosomal-associated protein 25), synaptobrevin, syntaxin, and synaptotagmin. A VMAT
(vesicular monoamine transporter) is shown on the left. Another transporter, SV2A, is shown on the right. The mechanism of this
transporter is not yet clear, but the anticonvulsant levetiracetam is known to bind to this site.

72


<<<PAGE 89>>>
Chapter 3: Ion Channels

channels are also of interest, and some anticonvulsants
and psychotropic drugs may also interact there, but the
exact roles of these channels are still being clarified.
Presynaptic N and P/Q VSCCs have a specialized
role in regulating neurotransmitter release because they
are linked by molecular “snares” to synaptic vesicles
(Figure 3-23). That is, these channels are literally hooked
to synaptic vesicles. Some experts think of this as a
cocked gun – loaded with neurotransmitters packed in
a synaptic vesicle bullet (Figure 3-23A) ready to be fired
at the postsynaptic neuron as soon as a nerve impulse
arrives (Figure 3-23B). Some of the structural details of
the molecular links – namely, with snare proteins – that
connect the N, P/Q VSCC with the synaptic vesicle are
shown in Figure 3-24. If a drug interferes with the ability
of the channel to open and let in calcium, the synaptic
vesicle stays tethered to the voltage-gated calcium channel.
Neurotransmission can thus be prevented, and this may
be desirable in states of excessive neurotransmission, such
as pain, seizures, mania, or anxiety. This may explain the
action of certain anticonvulsants.
Indeed, it is neurotransmitter release that is the raison
d’etre for presynaptic voltage-sensitive N and P/Q channels.
When a nerve impulse invades the presynaptic area, this
causes the charge across the membrane to change, in
turn opening the VSCC, allowing calcium to enter, and
this makes the synaptic vesicle dock into and merge with
the presynaptic membrane, spewing its neurotransmitter
contents into the synapse to effect neurotransmission
(Figures 3-25 and 3-26). This conversion of an electrical
impulse into a chemical message is triggered by calcium
and sometimes called excitation–secretion coupling.
Anticonvulsants are thought to act at various VSSCs
and VSCCs and will be discussed in further detail in the
relevant clinical chapters. Many of these anticonvulsants
have several uses in psychopharmacology, from chronic
pain to migraine, from bipolar mania to bipolar
depression to bipolar maintenance, and possibly as agents
for anxiety and sleep aids. These specific applications and
more details about hypothetical mechanisms of action are
explored in depth in the clinical chapters dealing with the
various psychiatric disorders.

ION CHANNELS AND
NEUROTRANSMISSION
Although the various subtypes of ligand-gated ion
channels and voltage-gated ion channels are presented
separately, the reality is that they work cooperatively
during neurotransmission. When the actions of all these

ion channels are well orchestrated, brain communication
becomes a magical mix of electrical and chemical
messages made possible by ion channels. The coordinated
acts of ion channels during neurotransmission are
illustrated in the Figures 3-25 and 3-26.
The initiation of chemical neurotransmission by a
neuron’s ability to integrate all of its inputs, and then
translate them into an electrical impulse is presented in
Chapter 1. We now show how ion channels are involved
in this process (Figure 3-26). After a neuron receives and
integrates its inputs from other neurons, it then encodes
them into an action potential, and that nerve impulse
is next sent along the axon via VSSCs that line the axon
(Figure 3-25).
The action potential could be described as lighting a
fuse, with the fuse burning from the initial segment of
the axon to the axon terminal. Movement of the burning
edge of the fuse is carried out by a sequence of VSSCs that
open one after the other, allowing sodium to pass into
the neuron, and then carrying the electrical impulse so
generated along to the next VSSC in line (Figure 3-25).
When the electrical impulse reaches the axon terminal,
it meets VSCCs in the presynaptic neuronal membrane,
already loaded with synaptic vesicles and ready to fire
(see axon terminal of neuron A in Figure 3-25).
When the electrical impulse is detected by
the voltmeter in the VSCC, it opens the calcium
channel, allowing calcium to enter, and bang!, the
neurotransmitter is released in a cloud of synaptic
chemicals from the presynaptic axon terminal via
excitation–secretion coupling (see axon terminal of
neuron A in Figure 3-25 and enlarged illustrations
of this in Figure 3-26). Details of this process of
excitation–secretion coupling are shown in Figure 3-26,
beginning with the action potential about to invade the
presynaptic terminal, and with a closed VSSC sitting
next to a closed but poised VSCC snared to its synaptic
vesicle (Figure 3-26A). As the nerve impulse arrives
in the axon terminal, it first hits the VSSC as a wave
of positive sodium charges delivered by the openings
of upstream sodium channels, which are detected by
the sodium channel’s voltmeter (Figure 3-26B). This
opens the last sodium channel shown, allowing sodium
to enter (Figure 3-26C). The consequence of this
sodium entry is to change the electrical charge nearby
the calcium channel, and then this is detected by the
VSCC’s voltmeter (Figure 3-26D). Next, the calcium
channel opens (Figure 3-26E). At this point, chemical
neurotransmission has now been irreversibly triggered,

73

3


<<<PAGE 90>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

and the translation of an electrical message into a
chemical message has begun. Calcium entry from the
VSCC now increases the local concentrations of this ion
in the vicinity of the VSCC, the synaptic vesicle, and the
neurotransmitter release machinery (Figure 3-26F). This
causes the synaptic vesicle to dock into the inside of the

presynaptic membrane, then merge with it, spewing its
neurotransmitter contents out of the membrane and into
the synapse (Figure 3-26G). This amazing process occurs
almost instantaneously and simultaneously from many
VSCCs releasing neurotransmitter from many synaptic
vesicles.

Summary: From Presynaptic to Postsynaptic Signal Propagation

reception

integration
chemical
encoding

A

electrical
encoding

signal
propagation

presynaptic
signal
transduction
postsynaptic
signal
transduction

glutamate

B

reception

integration
chemical
encoding

electrical
encoding

signal
propagation
presynaptic
signal
transduction

Figure 3-25 Signal propagation. Summary of signal propagation from presynaptic to postsynaptic neuron. A nerve impulse is
generated in neuron A, and the action potential is sent along the axon via voltage-sensitive sodium channels until it reaches voltagesensitive calcium channels linked to synaptic vesicles full of neurotransmitters in the axon terminal. Opening of the voltage-sensitive
calcium channel and consequent calcium influx causes neurotransmitter release into the synapse. Arrival of neurotransmitter at
postsynaptic receptors on the dendrite of neuron B triggers depolarization of the membrane in that neuron and, consequently,
postsynaptic signal propagation.

74


<<<PAGE 91>>>
Chapter 3: Ion Channels

Action
Potential

neurotransmitter

3

vesicle

VSSC

A

VSCC

Na+

B

VSSC

VSCC

VSSC

VSCC

C

Ca++

VSSC

VSCC

D

VSSC

Ca++

VSSC

F

VSCC

E

Ca ++

VSCC

VSSC

VSCC

G

Figure 3-26 Excitation–secretion coupling. Details of excitation–secretion coupling are shown here. An action potential is encoded
by the neuron and sent to the axon terminal via voltage-sensitive sodium channels along the axon (A). The sodium released by those
channels triggers a voltage-sensitive sodium channel at the axon terminal to open (B), allowing sodium influx into the presynaptic
neuron (C). Sodium influx changes the electrical charge of the voltage-sensitive calcium channel (D), causing it to open and allow
calcium influx (E). As the intraneuronal concentration of calcium increases (F), the synaptic vesicle is caused to dock and merge with the
presynaptic membrane, leading to neurotransmitter release (G).

75


<<<PAGE 92>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

By now, only about half of the sequential phenomena
of chemical neurotransmission have been described. The
other half occurs on the other side of the synapse. That
is, reception of the released neurotransmitter now occurs
in neuron B (Figure 3-25), which can set up another
nerve impulse in neuron B. This whole process, from
nerve impulse generation and propagation of it along
neuron A to its nerve terminal, then sending chemical
neurotransmission to neuron B, and finally propagating
this second nerve impulse along neuron B, is summarized
in Figure 3-25. VSSCs in presynaptic neuron A propagate
the impulse there, and then VSCCs in presynaptic neuron
A release the neurotransmitter glutamate. Ligand-gated
ion channels on dendrites in postsynaptic neuron B
next receive this chemical input, and translate this
chemical message back into a nerve impulse propagated
in neuron B by VSSCs in that neuron. Also, ligand-gated
ion channels in postsynaptic neuron B translate the
glutamate chemical signal into another type of electrical
phenomenon called long-term potentiation, to cause
changes in the function of neuron B.

SUMMARY
Ion channels are key targets of many psychotropic drugs.
This is not surprising because these targets are key
regulators of chemical neurotransmission and the signal
transduction cascade.
There are two major classes of ion channels: ligandgated ion channels and voltage-sensitive ion channels.
The opening of ligand-gated ion channels is regulated
by neurotransmitters whereas the opening of voltagegated ion channels is regulated by the charge across the
membrane in which they reside.

76

Ligand-gated ion channels are both ion channels and
receptors. They are also commonly called ionotropic
receptors as well as ion-channel-linked receptors. One
subclass of ligand-gated ion channels has a pentameric
structure, and includes GABAA receptors, nicotinic
cholinergic receptors, 5HT3 receptors, and certain glycine
receptors. The other subclass of ligand-gated ion channels
has a tetrameric structure, and includes many glutamate
receptors, including the AMPA, kainate, and NMDA
subtypes.
Ligands act at ligand-gated ion channels across an
agonist spectrum, from full agonist, to partial agonist,
to antagonist, to inverse agonist. Ligand-gated ion
channels can be regulated not only by neurotransmitters
acting as agonists, but also by molecules interacting at
other sites on the receptor, either boosting the action
of neurotransmitter agonists as positive allosteric
modulators (PAMs), or diminishing the action of
neurotransmitter agonists as negative allosteric
modulators (NAMs). In addition, these receptors exist
in several states, from open, to resting, to closed, to
inactivated, to desensitized.
The second major class of ion channels is called
either voltage-sensitive ion channels or voltage-gated
ion channels, since they are opened and closed by the
voltage charge across the membrane. The major channels
from this class of interest to psychopharmacologists are
the voltage-sensitive sodium channels (VSSCs) and the
voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCCs). Numerous
anticonvulsants bind to various sites on these channels,
and may exert their anticonvulsant actions by this
mechanism, as well as their actions as mood stabilizers,
treatments for chronic pain, drugs for anxiety, and sleep
effects.


<<<PAGE 93>>>
4

Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and
the Neurotransmitter Networks
Dopamine, Serotonin, and
Glutamate

Symptoms of Psychosis 77
The Three Major Hypotheses of Psychosis and Their
Neurotransmitter Networks 78
The Classic Dopamine Hypothesis of Psychosis and
Schizophrenia 79
The Dopamine Neurotransmitter Network 79
The Classic Dopamine Hypothesis of the
Positive Symptoms of Psychosis: Mesolimbic
HyperDopaminergia 90
Corollary to the Classic Dopamine Hypothesis of
Schizophrenia: Mesocortical HypoDopaminergia
and the Cognitive, Negative, and Affective
Symptoms of Schizophrenia 95
The Glutamate Hypothesis of Psychosis and
Schizophrenia 95
The Glutamate Neurotransmitter Network 96
The NMDA Glutamate Hypofunction Hypothesis
of Psychosis: Faulty NMDA Neurotransmission at
Glutamate Synapses on GABA Interneurons in
Prefrontal Cortex 105

Psychosis is a difficult term to define and is frequently
misused not only in the media, but unfortunately among
mental health professionals as well. Stigma and fear
surround the concept of psychosis, sometimes using
the pejorative term “crazy.” This chapter gives a general
description of psychotic symptoms and explores the
major theories of how all forms of psychosis are linked to
the neurotransmitter systems dopamine, serotonin, and
glutamate. An overview of specific psychotic disorders,
with an emphasis on schizophrenia, is presented here
but does not list the diagnostic criteria for all the
disorders in which psychosis is either a defining feature
or an associated feature. The reader is referred to
standard reference sources such as the DSM (Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association) and the ICD (International Classification of
Diseases) for that information. Although schizophrenia
is emphasized here, we will approach psychosis as a
syndrome associated with a variety of disorders that are
all targets for the various drugs that treat psychosis and
that will be discussed in Chapter 5.

The Serotonin Hypothesis of Psychosis and
Schizophrenia 111
The Serotonin Neurotransmitter Network 113
The Serotonin Hyperfunction Hypothesis of
Psychosis 131
Summary and Conclusions Regarding Dopamine,
NMDA, and Serotonin Neurotransmission in
Psychosis 141
Schizophrenia as the Prototypical Psychotic
Disorder 141
Beyond the Positive and Negative Symptoms of
Schizophrenia 143
What Is the Cause of Schizophrenia? 148
Other Psychotic Illnesses 156
Mood-Related Psychosis, Psychotic Depression,
Psychotic Mania 157
Parkinson’s Disease Psychosis 157
Dementia-Related Psychosis 157
Summary 158

SYMPTOMS OF PSYCHOSIS
Psychosis is a syndrome – that is, a mixture of
symptoms – that can be associated with many different
psychiatric disorders, but is not a specific disorder itself
in diagnostic schemes such as the DSM or ICD. At a
minimum, psychosis means delusions and hallucinations.
Delusions are fixed beliefs – often bizarre – that have
an inadequate rational basis and can’t be changed
by rational arguments or evidence to the contrary.
Hallucinations are perceptual experiences of any sensory
modality – especially auditory – that occur without a
real external stimulus, yet are vivid and clear, just like
normal perceptions, but not under voluntary control.
Delusions and hallucinations are the hallmarks of
psychosis and are often called the “positive symptoms”
of psychosis. Psychosis can also include other symptoms
such as disorganized speech, disorganized behavior, gross
distortions of reality testing, and so-called “negative
symptoms” of psychosis, such as diminished emotional
expression and decreased motivation.
77


<<<PAGE 94>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Psychosis itself, whether part of schizophrenia or
another disorder, can be paranoid, disorganized/excited,
or depressive. In addition, perceptual distortions and
motor disturbances can be associated with any type of
psychosis. Perceptual distortions include being distressed
by hallucinatory voices; hearing voices that accuse,
blame, or threaten punishment; seeing visions; reporting
hallucinations of touch, taste, or odor; or reporting
that familiar things and people seem changed. Motor
disturbances are peculiar, rigid postures; overt signs of
tension; inappropriate grins or giggles; peculiar repetitive
gestures; talking, muttering, or mumbling to oneself; or
glancing around as if hearing voices.
In paranoid psychosis, the patient has paranoid
projections, hostile belligerence, and grandiose
expansiveness. This type of psychosis often occurs in
schizophrenia and in many drug-induced psychoses.
Paranoid projection includes preoccupation with delusional
beliefs; believing that people are talking about oneself;
believing one is being persecuted, or being conspired
against; and believing people or external forces control
one’s actions. A particular type of paranoid delusion may
be seen in Parkinson’s disease psychosis; namely, the belief
that one’s spouse is being unfaithful or that one’s spouse
or loved ones are stealing from them. Hostile belligerence
is verbal expression of feelings of hostility; expressing an
attitude of disdain; manifesting a hostile, sullen attitude;
manifesting irritability and grouchiness; tending to blame
others for problems; expressing feelings of resentment;
complaining and finding fault; as well as expressing
suspicion of people. This, too may be seen especially in
schizophrenia and drug-induced psychoses. Grandiose
expansiveness is exhibiting an attitude of superiority;
hearing voices that praise and extol; believing one has
unusual powers or is a well-known personality, or that one
has a divine mission, which is often seen in schizophrenia
and in manic psychosis
In a disorganized/excited psychosis, there is conceptual
disorganization, disorientation, and excitement.
Conceptual disorganization can be characterized by
giving answers that are irrelevant, or incoherent; drifting
off the subject; using neologisms; or repeating certain
words or phrases. Any psychotic disorder may exhibit
disorganization. Disorientation is not knowing where
one is, the season of the year, the calendar year, or one’s
own age and is common in psychoses associated with
dementias and in drug-induced states. Excitement is
expressing feelings without restraint; manifesting speech
that is hurried; exhibiting an elevated mood; an attitude
of superiority; dramatizing oneself or one’s symptoms;
78

manifesting loud and boisterous speech; exhibiting
overactivity or restlessness; and exhibiting excess of
speech. Excitement can be especially characteristic of
mania or schizophrenia.
Depressive psychosis is characterized by psychomotor
retardation, apathy, and anxious self-punishment
and blame. Psychomotor retardation and apathy are
manifested by slowed speech; indifference to one’s future;
fixed facial expression; slowed movements; deficiencies in
recent memory; manifesting blocking in speech; apathy
toward oneself or one’s problems; slovenly appearance;
low or whispered speech; and failure to answer questions.
It can be hard to distinguish from negative symptoms
of psychosis. Anxious self-punishment and blame is the
tendency to blame or condemn oneself; anxiety about
specific matters; apprehensiveness regarding vague
future events; an attitude of self-deprecation, manifesting
depressed mood; expressing feelings of guilt and remorse;
preoccupation with suicidal thoughts, unwanted ideas,
and specific fears; and feeling unworthy or sinful, seen
often in psychotic depression
In summary, the term “psychosis” can be considered
to be a set of symptoms in which a person’s mental
capacity, affective response, and capacity to recognize
reality, communicate, and relate to others is impaired.
This brief discussion of clusters of psychotic symptoms
does not constitute diagnostic criteria for any psychotic
disorder. It is given merely as a description of several
types of symptoms that can occur as a part of many
different types and causes of psychosis in order to give
the reader an overview of the nature of behavioral
disturbances associated with the various psychotic
illnesses.

THE THREE MAJOR
HYPOTHESES OF
PSYCHOSIS AND THEIR
NEUROTRANSMITTER
NETWORKS
The dopamine (DA) hypothesis of psychosis is well
known and has in fact become a classic, and one of
the most enduring ideas in psychopharmacology.
However, DA is not the only neurotransmitter linked
to psychosis. Increasing evidence implicates both
glutamate and serotonin neuronal networks as well in the
pathophysiology and treatment of some forms of psychosis,
not only schizophrenia, but psychoses associated with
Parkinson’s disease, with various forms of dementia, and
with numerous psychotomimetic drugs. Thus, there are


<<<PAGE 95>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Table 4-1 Pharmacological models link dopamine and serotonin receptor agonists and NMDA glutamate receptor antagonists to
psychosis symptoms

Psychostimulants
(cocaine, amphetamine)

Dissociative anesthetics
(PCP, ketamine)

Psychedelics (LSD,
psilocybin)

Proposed mechanism

Dopamine D2 agonist

NMDA antagonist

Serotonin 5HT2A agonist
(and to a lesser extent 5HT2C)

Main type of hallucinations

Auditory

Visual

Visual

Most frequently associated
delusions

Paranoid

Paranoid

Mystical

Insightfulness

No

No

Yes

4

D2, dopamine 2; PCP, phencyclidine NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate; LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; 5HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin).

Three Neurotransmitter Pathways Linked to Psychosis
Dopamine Theory
Hyperactive dopamine at D2 receptors in the mesolimbic pathway

Glutamate Theory
NMDA receptor hypofunction

Serotonin Theory
5HT2A receptor hyperfunction in the cortex

now three major neurotransmitter systems hypothetically
linked to psychosis (Figure 4-1 and Table 4-1). What
follows is a discussion of each of these three hypotheses
accompanied by an extensive presentation of the neuronal
pathways and receptors for the three neurotransmitter
networks for DA, glutamate, and serotonin.

THE CLASSIC DOPAMINE
HYPOTHESIS OF PSYCHOSIS
AND SCHIZOPHRENIA
If one had asked any mental health clinician or researcher
over the past 50 years what neurotransmitter was linked
to psychosis, the resounding answer would have been DA,
and specifically DA hyperactivity at D2 DA receptors in
the mesolimbic pathway. This so-called DA hypothesis
of psychosis makes sense because release of DA by
amphetamine causes a paranoid psychosis similar to the
psychosis in schizophrenia (see Table 4-1), and drugs
that block DA D2 receptors have been the mainstay of
treatment for essentially all forms of psychosis for over
50 years. Furthermore, this DA theory has proven so
powerful that some may still assume (wrongly) that all
positive symptoms of psychosis are caused by excessive

Figure 4-1 Neurotransmitter pathways linked to
psychosis. Psychosis has been theoretically linked
to three major neurotransmitter pathways. The
longstanding dopamine theory centers around the
concept of hyperactive dopamine 2 (D2) receptors
in the mesolimbic pathway. The glutamate theory
proposes that N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptors are hypoactive at critical synapses in the
prefrontal cortex, which could lead to downstream
hyperactivity in the mesolimbic dopamine pathway.
The serotonin theory posits that there is serotonergic
hyperactivity particularly at serotonin 2A (5HT2A)
receptors in the cortex, which also could result in
hyperactivity in the mesolimbic dopamine pathway.
It is likely that one or more of these three pathways is
involved in the development of psychosis.

DA in the mesolimbic pathway and that all treatments
must therefore block DA D2 receptors in this pathway. As
it turns out, however, there is much more to psychosis
than mesolimbic DA, and much more to the treatment
of psychosis than D2 antagonists, as will be discussed in
Chapter 5. Before reviewing the classic and the updated
DA hypothesis, not only of psychosis but of drugs that
treat psychosis, it is important to understand fully DA
neurotransmission, so we will begin with a discussion of
DA receptors and brain circuits.
The Dopamine Neurotransmitter Network

To understand the potential role of DA in schizophrenia,
we will first review how DA is synthesized, metabolized,
and regulated, then show the functions of DA
receptors, and finally show the localization of key DA
pathways in the brain.
Synthesis and Inactivation of Dopamine in
Dopaminergic Neurons

Dopaminergic neurons utilize the neurotransmitter DA,
which is synthesized in dopaminergic nerve terminals
from the amino acid tyrosine after it is taken up into the
neuron from the extracellular space and bloodstream by
79


<<<PAGE 96>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

a tyrosine pump, or transporter (Figure 4-2). Tyrosine
is converted into DA first by the rate-limiting enzyme
Dopamine is Produced
tyrosine
transporter

DDC

E

E

TYR

DOPA
TOH
VMAT2

DA (dopamine)
Figure 4-2 Dopamine synthesis. Tyrosine (TYR), a precursor
to dopamine, is taken up into dopamine nerve terminals via a
tyrosine transporter and converted into DOPA by the enzyme
tyrosine hydroxylase (TOH). DOPA is then converted into
dopamine by the enzyme DOPA decarboxylase (DDC). After
synthesis, dopamine is packaged into synaptic vesicles via the
vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT2) and stored there until
its release into the synapse during neurotransmission.

tyrosine hydroxylase (TOH) and then by the enzyme
DOPA decarboxylase (DDC) (Figure 4-2). DA is then
taken up into synaptic vesicles by a vesicular monoamine
transporter (VMAT2) and stored there until it is used
during neurotransmission. Excess DA that escapes
storage in synaptic vesicles can be destroyed within the
neuron by the enzymes monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A)
or monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) (Figure 4-3A).
In the striatum and some other brain regions, DA
terminals have a presynaptic transporter (reuptake
pump) called DAT (DA transporter), which is unique
for DA and which terminates DA’s synaptic action
by whisking it out of the synapse back into the
presynaptic nerve terminal where it can be re-stored
in synaptic vesicles for subsequent reuse in another
neurotransmission (Figure 4-3A). DATs are the principle
pathway of inactivation for DA at synapses where DATs
are present, with secondary inactivation extracellularly by
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT).
DATs are not in high density at the axon terminals of all
DA neurons (Figure 4-3B). For example, in the prefrontal
cortex, DATs are relatively sparse, and thus DA is inactivated
in these synapses by other mechanisms, principally COMT
(Figure 4-3B). When DATs are not present, DA can also
diffuse away from synapses where it is released until it
eventually reaches a neighboring norepinephrine (NE)
neuron and confronts its NE transporters (NETs) that then
inactivate this DA by transporting it into NE neurons as a
“false” substrate (Figure 4-3B).

Dopamine Action Is Terminated

E

E

dopamine
transporter
(DAT)

MAO A or B
destroys DA

MAO A or B
destroys DA

E

E

DA

A

Striatal dopamine terminal

norepinephrine
transporter
(NET)

COMT
destroys DA

B

DA

COMT
destroys DA

Cortical dopamine terminal

Figure 4-3 Dopamine’s action is terminated. Dopamine’s action can be terminated through multiple mechanisms. (A) Dopamine can
be transported out of the synaptic cleft and back into the presynaptic neuron via the dopamine transporter (DAT), where it may be
repackaged for future use. Alternatively, dopamine may be broken down extracellularly via the enzyme catechol-O-methyltransferase
(COMT). Other enzymes that break down dopamine are monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) and monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B), which
are present in mitochondria within the presynaptic neuron and in other cells such as glia. (B) In the prefrontal cortex, DATs are relatively
sparse; thus, the predominant method of dopamine inactivation is via MAO-A or MAO-B intracellularly, and COMT extracellularly.
Dopamine can also diffuse away from the synapses and be taken up by the norepinephrine transporter (NET) at neighboring neurons.

80


<<<PAGE 97>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

DA receptors are divided into two groups. The first
group is the D1-like receptors, including both D1 and D5
receptors. D1-like receptors are excitatory, and positively
linked to adenylate cyclase (Figure 4-4, left). The second
group is the D2-like receptors, including D2, D3, and D4
receptors. D2-like receptors are inhibitory and negatively
linked to adenylate cyclase (Figure 4-4, right). Thus,
the neurotransmitter DA can be either excitatory or

Dopamine Receptors

Receptors for DA are the key regulators of dopaminergic
neurotransmission (Figure 4-4). We have already
mentioned the DA transporter DAT and the vesicular
monoamine transporter VMAT2, which are both types
of receptors. A plethora of additional DA receptors exist,
including at least five pharmacological subtypes and
several more molecular isoforms (Figure 4-4). Currently,

Postsynaptic Dopamine Receptors
D1

D2

D3

D4

4

D5

D1-Like Receptors

D2-Like Receptors

DAT

D1

D5

Excitatory and
stimulate
postsynaptic
neuron

D2

D3

D4

Inhibit
postsynaptic
neuron

Figure 4-4 Postsynaptic dopamine receptors. There are two groups of postsynaptic dopamine receptors. D1-like receptors, which
include both D1 and D5 receptors, are excitatory and thus stimulate the postsynaptic neuron. D2-like receptors, which include D2, D3, and
D4, are inhibitory and thus inhibit the postsynaptic neuron.

Presynaptic Dopamine Receptors

D2

D3

Figure 4-5 Presynaptic dopamine
receptors. Dopamine 2 and 3 are also
located presynaptically, where, due to their
inhibitory actions, they act as autoreceptors
to inhibit further dopamine release. The D2
autoreceptor is less sensitive to dopamine
than the D3 autoreceptor and thus it takes a
higher concentration of synaptic dopamine
for the D2 autoreceptor to become activated
(left) than it does for the D3 autoreceptor to
become activated (right).

DAT

D1

D2

D3

D4

D5

D1

D2

D3

D4

D5

81


<<<PAGE 98>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

inhibitory, depending upon which DA receptor subtype
it binds.
All five DA receptors can be located postsynaptically
(Figure 4-4), but D2 and D3 receptors can also both be
located presynaptically, where, due to their inhibitory
actions, they act as autoreceptors to inhibit further DA
release (Figure 4-5). Note in Figure 4-5 that more DA

has accumulated in the synapse with a D2 presynaptic
autoreceptor (on the left) than in the synapse with
a D3 presynaptic autoreceptor (on the right). This is
because the D3 receptor is more sensitive to DA and
thus it takes a lesser concentration of synaptic DA to
activate the D3 receptor and turn off further DA release
compared to neurons having the D2 presynaptic receptor.
Figure 4-6 Presynaptic dopamine
autoreceptors. Presynaptic D2 and
D3 autoreceptors are “gatekeepers”
for dopamine. (A) When dopamine
autoreceptors are not bound by
dopamine (no dopamine in the
gatekeeper’s hand), the molecular gate
is open and allows dopamine release. (B)
When dopamine binds to the dopamine
autoreceptor (now the gatekeeper has
dopamine in his hand), the molecular
gate closes and prevents dopamine from
being released.

presynaptic
autoreceptor (D2 or D3)
“gatekeeper” - open

dopamine

A

presynaptic
autoreceptor (D2 or D3)
“gatekeeper” - closed

B

82


<<<PAGE 99>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Presynaptic D2/D3 receptors act as “gatekeepers” either
allowing DA release when they are not occupied by
DA (Figure 4-6A) or inhibiting DA release when DA
builds up in the synapse and occupies the gatekeeping
presynaptic autoreceptor (Figure 4-6B). Such receptors
are located either on the axon terminal (Figure 4-7) or
on the other end of the neuron in the somatodendritic
area of the DA neuron (Figure 4-8). In both cases, they
are considered presynaptic and occupancy of these D2
or D3 autoreceptors provides negative feedback input,
or a braking action upon the release of DA from the DA
neuron (Figures 4-7B and 4-8B).
Thus, DA neurons can be regulated quite differently
depending upon which DA receptors are present. This
is exemplified not only by synapses with D3 presynaptic
autoreceptors having their DA release regulated in a

different manner than synapses with D2 presynaptic
autoreceptors (Figure 4-5), but also when comparing
mesocortical DA neurons with mesolimbic and
nigrostriatal (mesostriatal) neurons side by side (Figure
4-9). Mesocortical DA neurons arising from the ventral
tegmental area (VTA) in the brainstem and projecting
to prefrontal cortex have either D2 or D3 autoreceptors
on their cell bodies in the VTA, but there are only
sparse D2/D3 receptors in the prefrontal cortex pre- or
postsynaptically (Figure 4-9A). Without autoreceptors
on axon terminals in the prefrontal cortex, DA release
is not shut off by this mechanism and thus is freer to
diffuse away from the synapse where it is released,
as shown by the large blue cloud of DA. Moreover, as
already mentioned, mesocortical DA neurons have few
if any DATs on their presynaptic nerve terminals in the

DA

Figure 4-7 Presynaptic dopamine
autoreceptors. Presynaptic D2 and
D3 autoreceptors can be located on
the axon terminal, as shown here.
When dopamine builds up in the
synapse (A), it is available to bind to
the autoreceptor, which then inhibits
dopamine release (B).

presynaptic
autoreceptor (D2 or D3)
A

B

83

4


<<<PAGE 100>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

somatodendritic
autoreceptor (D2 or D3)

Figure 4-8 Somatodendritic
dopamine autoreceptors. D2 and D3
autoreceptors can also be located in
the somatodendritic area, as shown
here. When dopamine binds to the
receptor here, it shuts off neuronal
impulse flow in the dopamine neuron
(see loss of lightning bolts in the
neuron in B), and this stops further
dopamine release.

A

B

prefrontal cortex. Without DATs to whisk synaptic DA
back into the presynaptic neuron, or D2/D3 presynaptic
autoreceptors to turn off DA release as synaptic DA
accumulates, this allows a larger diffusion radius of DA
away from presynaptic terminals (Figure 4-9A) compared
to terminals that have DATs and D2/D3 autoreceptors
present (Figure 4-9B – note the sizes of the blue clouds
in these figures). That is a good thing perhaps, since the
predominant postsynaptic receptor in the prefrontal
cortex is the D1 receptor, and the D1 receptor is the least
sensitive to DA and thus requires a higher concentration
of DA to be present to be activated compared to D2 or
D3 receptors. Greater diffusion of DA also means the
possibility of volume neurotransmission (see Chapter 1
and Figures 1-6 and 1-7) so that DA from one presynaptic
terminal can communicate with D1 receptors anywhere
within its diffusion radius in the prefrontal cortex and
84

thus beyond the synapse from where it was released. On
the other hand, mesostriatal DA neurons have either
presynaptic D2 or D3 receptors present, not only on the
cell bodies in the VTA and substantia nigra, but also on
presynaptic nerve terminals and postsynaptic sites in the
striatum (Figure 4-9B). Furthermore, DATs are present on
presynaptic nerve terminals in the striatum of these DA
neurons. As mentioned, neurons with D2 autoreceptors
have a wider diffusion radius compared to those with
D3 autoreceptors, providing a range of possibilities for
regulation of DA release in the striatum (Figure 4-9B).
Classic Dopamine Pathways and Key Brain Regions

The five classic DA pathways in the brain are shown in
Figure 4-10. They include the tuberoinfundibular DA
pathway, a thalamic DA pathway, the nigrostriatal DA
pathway, and most importantly for the DA hypothesis,


<<<PAGE 101>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

PFC
D1

D1

PFC

D1

D1

D1

striatum
D1

D1

D2

D3 D3

striatum

D3

D1

DAT

D2

D2

D2

D3

DAT

4

D3
D3
D3 D3

D2 D2

D3
D3
D3 D3

D2
D2

VTA

D2
D2

VTA and SN

mesocortical
A

D2 D2

B

mesostriatal
(mesolimbic and nigrostriatal)

Figure 4-9 Mesocortical vs. mesostriatal neurons. (A) Mesocortical neurons project from the ventral tegmental area (VTA) to the
prefrontal cortex (PFC). In the VTA, dopamine release is regulated by somatodendritic D2 and D3 autoreceptors. In the PFC, however,
there are few D2 or D3 presynaptic autoreceptors to inhibit dopamine release, as well as few dopamine transporters (DATs) to
remove dopamine from the synapse. Thus, dopamine is more freely able to diffuse away from the synapse (indicated by the large
blue cloud). Postsynaptically, the predominant dopamine receptor is D1, which is excitatory. (B) Dopamine release from mesolimbic
neurons (projecting from the VTA to the striatum) is regulated by somatodendritic D3 autoreceptors in the VTA and by presynaptic D3
autoreceptors and DATs in the striatum (left). Dopamine release from nigrostriatal neurons (projecting from the substantia nigra [SN] to
the striatum) is regulated by somatodendritic D2 autoreceptors in the SN and by presynaptic D2 autoreceptors and DATs in the striatum
(right). D2 autoreceptors are less sensitive to dopamine than D3 autoreceptors, thus allowing for a wider diffusion radius (indicated by
the comparative sizes of the blue clouds). Postsynaptically, D1, D2, and D3 receptors are all present in the striatum.

the mesocortical and the mesolimbic DA pathways.
Advances in neuroscience propose some more recent and
sophisticated ways to view these pathways in schizophrenia,
but first we will consider the classic approach.
Tuberoinfundibular Dopamine Pathway

The DA neurons that project from hypothalamus to anterior
pituitary gland are known as the tuberoinfundibular
DA pathway (Figure 4-11). Normally, these neurons
are tonically active and inhibit prolactin release. In the
postpartum state, however, the activity of these DA
neurons is decreased. Prolactin levels can therefore rise
during breast feeding so that lactation will occur. If the
functioning of tuberoinfundibular DA neurons is disrupted

by lesions or drugs, prolactin levels can also rise. Elevated
prolactin levels are associated with galactorrhea (breast
secretions), gynecomastia (enlarged breasts especially
in men), amenorrhea (loss of ovulation and menstrual
periods), and possibly other problems such as sexual
dysfunction. Such problems can occur after treatment
with many drugs for psychosis that block DA D2 receptors,
and will be discussed further in Chapter 5. In untreated
schizophrenia, the function of the tuberoinfundibular
pathway may be relatively preserved (Figure 4-11).
Thalamic Dopamine Pathway

Recently, a DA pathway that innervates the thalamus in
primates has been described. It arises from multiple sites,
85


<<<PAGE 102>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Classic Dopamine Pathways and Key Brain Regions

DLPFC

striatum
nucleus
accumbens

thalamus
substantia
nigra

a

b
e

c

hypothalamus

VMPFC

d

pituitary
tegmentum

Figure 4-10 Five dopamine pathways in the brain. (a) The nigrostriatal dopamine pathway, which projects from the substantia nigra
to the basal ganglia or striatum, is part of the extrapyramidal nervous system and controls motor function and movement. (b) The
mesolimbic dopamine pathway projects from the midbrain ventral tegmental area (VTA) to the nucleus accumbens, a part of the limbic
system of the brain thought to be involved in many behaviors such as pleasurable sensations, the powerful euphoria of drugs of abuse,
and delusions and hallucinations of psychosis. (c) The mesocortical dopamine pathway also projects from the midbrain VTA but sends
its axons to areas of the prefrontal cortex, where they may have a role in mediating cognitive symptoms (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
or DLPFC) and affective symptoms (ventromedial prefrontal cortex or VMPFC) of schizophrenia. (d) The tuberoinfundibular dopamine
pathway projects from the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary gland and controls prolactin secretion. (e) The fifth dopamine pathway
arises from multiple sites, including the periaqueductal gray, ventral mesencephalon, hypothalamic nuclei, and lateral parabrachial
nucleus, and projects to the thalamus. Its function is not currently well known.

Tuberoinfundibular Pathway

normal

NORMAL

86

Figure 4-11 Tuberoinfundibular dopamine pathway. The
tuberoinfundibular dopamine pathway from the hypothalamus to
the anterior pituitary gland regulates prolactin secretion into the
circulation. Dopamine inhibits prolactin secretion. In untreated
schizophrenia, activation of this pathway is believed to be
“normal.”


<<<PAGE 103>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

including the periaqueductal gray matter, the ventral
mesencephalon, from various hypothalamic nuclei, and
from the lateral parabrachial nucleus (Figure 4-10).
Its function is still under investigation, but may be
involved in sleep and arousal mechanisms by gating
information passing through the thalamus to the cortex
and other brain areas. There is no evidence at this
point for abnormal functioning of this DA pathway in
schizophrenia.
Nigrostriatal Dopamine Pathway

Another key DA pathway is the nigrostriatal DA pathway,
which projects from DA cell bodies in the brainstem
substantia nigra via axons terminating in the striatum
(Figure 4-12). Classically, the nigrostriatal DA pathway
has been considered to be part of the extrapyramidal
nervous system, and to control motor movements
via its connections with the thalamus and cortex in
cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) circuits or loops
(Figure 4-13A). A more sophisticated anatomical model
of how DA regulates CSTC loops and motor movements
in the striatum is shown in Figures 4-13B through Figure

Nigrostriatal Pathway

4-13F as the “direct” and “indirect” DA pathways. The
so-called direct pathway (shown in Figure 4-13B on
the left and in Figures 4-13C and 4-13E) is populated
with D1 dopamine receptors that are excitatory (Figure
4-13E; see also Figure 4-4, left) and projects directly from
the striatum to the globus pallidus interna to stimulate
movements (“go” pathway) (Figure 4-13C). The so-called
indirect pathway (shown in Figure 4-13B on the right
and in Figures 4-13D and 4-13F) is populated with D2
dopamine receptors that are inhibitory (Figure 4-13F;
see also Figure 4-4, right) and projects indirectly to the
globus pallidus interna via the globus pallidus externa
and subthalamic nucleus. Normally, this pathway blocks
motor movements (“stop” pathway) (see Figure 4-13D).
Dopamine inhibits this action at D2 receptors in the
indirect pathway (Figure 4-13F) and this says “don’t stop”
to the stop pathway, or “go more.” The bottom line is that
dopamine stimulates motor movements in both the direct
and indirect motor pathways. Synchronizing the outputs
of these pathways is thought to lead to the smooth
execution of motor movements.

Classic CSTC (Cortico-Striato-Thalamo-Cortical) Loop

C

normal

NORMAL

T

S
DA

SN
Figure 4-12 Nigrostriatal dopamine pathway. The nigrostriatal
dopamine pathway projects from the substantia nigra to
the basal ganglia or striatum. It is part of the extrapyramidal
nervous system and plays a key role in regulating movements.
When dopamine is deficient, it can cause parkinsonism with
tremor, rigidity, and akinesia/bradykinesia. When dopamine
is in excess, it can cause hyperkinetic movements such as tics
and dyskinesias. In untreated schizophrenia, activation of this
pathway is believed to be “normal.”

C = cortex
T = thalamus
S = striatum
SN = substantia nigra

Figure 4-13A Cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) loop. In
the most simple terms, the nigrostriatal dopamine pathway is
considered to control motor movements via its connections with
the thalamus and cortex in a circuit known as the cortico-striatothalamo-cortical loop.

87

4


<<<PAGE 104>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Dopamine Regulation of Direct (D1) and Indirect (D2) Pathways:
Stop and Go Signals for Motor Movement
motor output

+ glu

Cortex

-

GABA

Thalamus
+ glu

GABA
-

GABA
-

STN

GPi /SN r

GABA
-

direct pathway
“go”

GPe
D1
+
DA

DA

indirect pathway
“stop”

D2
-

Striatum
STN= subthalamic nucleus
SNr = substantia nigra reticulata
SNc= substantia nigra compacta
GPe = globus pallidus externa
GP i = globus pallidus interna
glu = glutamate
GABA = γ-aminobutyric acid
DA = dopamine
D1 = dopamine 1 receptor
D2 = dopamine 2 receptor

SN c

Figure 4-13B Direct and indirect dopamine pathways for motor control. Populated with excitatory D1 receptors, the direct pathway for
dopamine regulation of motor movements (left) projects from the striatum to the globus pallidus interna and results in the stimulation
of movement. The indirect pathway for dopamine regulation of motor movements (right) projects to the globus pallidus interna via
the globus pallidus externa and subthalamic nuclei. This pathway is populated with inhibitory D2 receptors and normally blocks motor
movements.

Although there is no evidence at this point
for abnormal functioning of this DA pathway in
schizophrenia (Figures 4-12 and 4-13), deficiencies of
DA in these motor pathways cause movement disorders
including Parkinson’s disease, characterized by rigidity,

88

akinesia/bradykinesia (i.e., lack of movement or slowing
of movement), and tremor. DA deficiency in the striatum
can hypothetically also be involved in the mechanism
that produces akathisia (a type of restlessness) and
dystonia (twisting movements especially of the face and


<<<PAGE 105>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Go - Direct Pathway Activated

Stop - Indirect Pathway Activated
STOP:
don’t go

GO

+ glu

Cortex

Cortex

-

GABA

Thalamus

Thalamus

4

+ glu
GABA
-

STN

GPi /SN r
activation of
direct pathway
“GO”

STN= subthalamic nucleus
SNr = substantia nigra reticulata
SNc = substantia nigra compacta
GPe = globus pallidus externa
GPi = globus pallidus interna
glu = glutamate
GABA = γ-aminobutyric acid

STN

GPi /SN r

GABA
-

GPe

GPe

Striatum

activation of
indirect pathway
“STOP”
“don’t go”

Striatum

SNc

Figure 4-13C Activation of the direct (go) dopamine
pathway. A γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neuron projecting
from the striatum to the globus pallidus interna is activated. The
released GABA inhibits activity of another GABAergic neuron
that projects to the thalamus. In the absence of GABA release in
the thalamus, a glutamatergic neuron is activated and releases
glutamate into the cortex, stimulating movement.

neck). These same movement disorders can be replicated
by drugs that block D2 DA receptors in this pathway,
causing drug-induced parkinsonism (sometimes called
by its better-known but much less accurate name
extrapyramidal symptoms or EPS). This will be discussed
in more detail in Chapter 5 on drugs for the treatment of
psychosis.
Not only can too little DA activity cause movement
disorders, so can too much. Thus, hyperactivity of
DA in the nigrostriatal pathway is thought to underlie
various hyperkinetic movement disorders such as chorea,
dyskinesias, and tics (in conditions such as Huntington’s
disease, Tourette syndrome, and others). Chronic
stimulation of D2 DA receptors in the nigrostriatal
pathway by treatment of Parkinson’s disease with
levodopa is hypothesized to underlie the emergence of
abnormal hyperkinetic and dyskinetic movements (called

STN= subthalamic nucleus
SNr = substantia nigra reticulata
SNc= substantia nigra compacta
GPe = globus pallidus externa
GP i = globus pallidus interna
glu = glutamate
GABA = γ-aminobutyric acid

SN c

Figure 4-13D Activation of the indirect (stop) dopamine
pathway. A γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neuron projecting from
the striatum to the globus pallidus externa is activated. The
released GABA inhibits activity of another GABAergic neuron
that projects to the subthalamic nucleus (STN). In the absence
of GABA release in the STN, a glutamatergic neuron is activated
and releases glutamate into the globus pallidus interna, which
in turn stimulates a GABAergic neuron to release GABA into
the thalamus. GABA then binds to a glutamatergic neuron,
inhibiting it from releasing glutamate into the cortex and thus
inhibiting movement.

levodopa-induced dyskinesias or LID). Chronic blockade
of these same D2 DA receptors in the nigrostriatal
pathway is hypothesized to cause another hyperkinetic
movement disorder known as tardive dyskinesia. Tardive
dyskinesia and its treatment will be discussed further in
Chapter 5 on drugs for psychosis.
The Mesolimbic Dopamine Pathway

The mesolimbic DA pathway projects from DA cell
bodies in the VTA of the brainstem (i.e., mesencephalon)
to the nucleus accumbens in the ventral striatum,
which is part of the limbic system (thus, mesolimbic)
(Figures 4-10 and 4-14 A–D). DA release from this
pathway is thought to have an important role in several

89


<<<PAGE 106>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

D1 Stimulation of Go Pathway

D2 Inhibition of Stop Pathway
Inhibition of stop
or “GO”

GO

+

+ glu

glu

Cortex

Cortex

Thalamus

Thalamus
GABA

GABA
-

STN

GPi /SN r

STN

GPi /SN r

GPe
D1 stimulation of
“GO” pathway “go more”
STN= subthalamic nucleus
SNr = substantia nigra reticulata
SNc= substantia nigra compacta
GPe = globus pallidus externa
GP i = globus pallidus interna
glu = glutamate
GABA = γ-aminobutyric acid
DA = dopamine
D1 = dopamine 1 receptor

+

DA

DA

STN= subthalamic nucleus
SNr = substantia nigra reticulata
SNc= substantia nigra compacta
GPe = globus pallidus externa
GP i = globus pallidus interna
glu = glutamate
GABA = γ-aminobutyric acid
DA = dopamine
D2 = dopamine 2 receptor

Striatum

SN c

Figure 4-13E Dopamine-1 receptor stimulation of the go
pathway. Dopamine released from the nigrostriatal pathway
binds to postsynaptic D1 receptors on a γ-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) neuron projecting to the globus pallidus interna. This
causes phasic activation of the direct (go) pathway, essentially
telling it to “go more.”

normal emotional behaviors, including motivation,
pleasure, and reward (Figure 4-14A). Although this may
be an oversimplification, the mesolimbic dopamine
pathway may in fact be the final common pathway
of all reward and reinforcement, including not only
normal reward (such as the pleasure of eating good
food, orgasm, listening to music) (Figure 4-14A), but
also emotions experienced when rewards are too high
(Figures 4-14B and C) or too low (Figure 4-14D). Too
much DA in this pathway classically is thought to cause
the positive symptoms of psychosis (Figure 4-14C) as
well as the artificial reward (drug-induced “high”) of
substance abuse (Figure 4-14B) (see also discussion
on drugs of abuse in Chapter 13). On the other hand,
too little DA in this pathway hypothetically causes the
symptoms of anhedonia, apathy, and lack of energy seen
in conditions such as unipolar and bipolar depression
and in the negative symptoms of schizophrenia (Figure
4-14D).
90

GPe
D2
-

Striatum
D2 inhibition of
“STOP” pathway “don’t stop,
so go more”

SN c

Figure 4-13F Dopamine-2 receptor inhibition of the stop
pathway. Dopamine released from the nigrostriatal pathway
binds to postsynaptic D2 receptors on a γ-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) neuron projecting to the globus pallidus externa. This
causes inhibition of the indirect (stop) pathway, thus instead
telling it to “go.”

The Classic Dopamine Hypothesis of the
Positive Symptoms of Psychosis: Mesolimbic
HyperDopaminergia

As mentioned above, hyperactivity of this mesolimbic
DA pathway (“hyperdopaminergia”) hypothetically
accounts for positive psychotic symptoms (that is,
delusions and hallucinations) as a final common pathway
for psychosis, whether those symptoms are part of the
illness of schizophrenia, of drug-induced psychosis, or
whether positive psychotic symptoms accompany mania,
depression, Parkinson’s disease, or dementia. Hyperactivity
of mesolimbic DA neurons may also play a role in causing
impulsive, agitated, aggressive, and hostile symptoms in
any of the illnesses associated with positive symptoms
of psychosis (Figure 4-15). Although mesolimbic
DA hyperactivity can be a direct pharmacological
consequence of psychostimulants such as cocaine and
methamphetamine, mesolimbic DA hyperactivity
in psychosis associated with schizophrenia, mania,


<<<PAGE 107>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Classic Mesolimbic Pathway
normal

HIGH

4
overactivation

B

drug-induced high

normal
HIGH

DA
neuron

A

C

motivation

positive
symptoms

reward

normal
LOW

Figure 4-14 Mesolimbic dopamine pathway. (A) The
mesolimbic dopamine pathway, which projects from the
ventral tegmental area (VTA) in the brainstem to the nucleus
accumbens in the ventral striatum, is involved in regulation of
motivation and reward. Classically, hyperactivity of this pathway
is associated with drug-induced highs (B) and is believed to
account for the positive symptoms of psychosis (C), while
hypoactivity is associated with symptoms of anhedonia, apathy,
and lack of energy as well as with the negative symptoms of
schizophrenia.

affective
symptoms
D
(SIGH)

anhedonia
lack of energy

negative
symptoms

apathy

91


<<<PAGE 108>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

The Classic Mesolimbic Dopamine Hypothesis of
Positive Symptoms of Schizophrenia

haircuts

impulsivity

agitation

mesolimbic overactivity =
positive symptoms of schizophrenia

*#%!

violence/
aggression

hostility

positive symptoms
Figure 4-15 Mesolimbic dopamine hypothesis. Hyperactivity of dopamine neurons in the mesolimbic dopamine pathway theoretically
mediates the positive symptoms of psychosis such as delusions and hallucinations. Mesolimbic overactivity may also be associated with
impulsivity, agitation, violence/aggression, and hostility.

depression, Parkinson’s disease, or Alzheimer disease
and other dementias may be the indirect consequence of
dysregulation in prefrontal circuits and their glutamate
and serotonin neurons as well as dopamine neurons.
These brain circuits are discussed in detail in the following
sections on glutamate and serotonin.
New Developments in the Dopamine Hypothesis of
Positive Symptoms of Psychosis in Schizophrenia

Classically, DA projections from the substantia nigra to
the dorsal striatum (Figure 4-12) have been considered
to regulate motor movements and to be in parallel with
pathways from the VTA to the ventral striatum (nucleus
accumbens) that regulate emotions (Figure 4-14A).
A simplistic notion is that there is a dorsal or “upper”
92

striatum for motor movements (the “neurologists’
striatum”) and a ventral or “lower” striatum for emotions
(the “psychiatrists’ striatum”) (Figure 4-16A). These
concepts have been derived largely from anatomical
and pharmacological studies in rodents combined
with drug studies in humans. Although heuristically
valuable, recent results from human neuroimaging
studies show that the idea of separate dedicated pathways
where anatomical differences correlate with function
(motor vs. emotion) may need to be modified. That is,
neuroimaging of DA activity in the striatum of living,
unmedicated patients with schizophrenia does not
show the expected hyperdopaminergia uniquely in the
ventral striatum. Instead, the hyperdopaminergia may be
especially present in an intermediate part of the striatum


<<<PAGE 109>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

called the associative striatum, which receives input from
the substantia nigra but not from the VTA (Figure 4-16B).
These findings suggest that a more sophisticated
formulation of DA pathways may be necessary in order
to understand the hyperdopaminergia of schizophrenia.
That is, hyperdopaminergia in projections not only
from the VTA but perhaps especially from the medial

and lateral substantia nigra may also be important in
mediating the positive symptoms of schizophrenia
(Figure 4-16B). These findings indicate a remarkable
development in thinking about the dorsal striatum and
nigrostriatal pathways as having emotional as well as
motor components. Compulsions and habits are also
theoretically localized to the dorsal striatum (discussed

Classic Mesolimbic Hyperdopaminergia
dorsal
striatum

4

dorsal
striatum

ventral
striatum

SN

ventral
striatum

SN

VTA

normal

VTA

schizophrenia
overactivation

A

New Concept:
Integrative Hub Mesostriatal Hyperdopaminergia
sensorimotor

sensorimotor

associative

associative
ventral

ventral

SN(L)
B

SN(M)

SN(L)
VTA

normal

SN(M)

VTA

schizophrenia

SN(L) substantia nigra lateral
SN(M) substantia nigra medial
VTA ventral tegmental area

Figure 4-16 Integrative hub mesostriatal hyperdopaminergia. (A) A classic understanding of striatal functioning has been that the
dorsal striatum regulates motor movement and the ventral striatum regulates emotions, with overactivity of dopamine in the ventral
striatum associated with the positive symptoms of schizophrenia. (B) Neuroimaging data in unmedicated patients with schizophrenia
suggest that dopaminergic activity may be unaltered in the ventral striatum, but may instead be overactive in an intermediate part of
the striatum called the associative striatum, which receives input from the substantia nigra rather than the ventral tegmental area (VTA).
Rather than separate nigrostriatal and mesolimbic projections, a better conception may be that of a mesostriatal pathway.

93


<<<PAGE 110>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Classic Mesocortical Pathway to DLPFC
normal

LOW

B

A

(SIGH)

negative
symptoms

cognitive
symptoms

Figure 4-17 Mesocortical pathway to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). The mesocortical dopamine pathway projects
from the ventral tegmental area (VTA) to the prefrontal cortex. Projections specifically to the DLPFC are associated with cognitive and
executive functioning (A), with hypoactivity in this pathway classically believed to be involved in the cognitive and some negative
symptoms of schizophrenia (B).

Classic Mesocortical Pathway to VMPFC
normal

LOW

A

B

(SIGH)

negative
symptoms

affective
symptoms

Figure 4-18 Mesocortical pathway to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC). The mesocortical dopamine pathway projects from
the ventral tegmental area (VTA) to the prefrontal cortex. Projections specifically to the VMPFC are associated with emotions and affect
(A), with hypoactivity in this pathway classically believed to be involved in the negative and affective symptoms of schizophrenia (B).

in Chapter 13). Thus, the dorsal striatum may not be all
motor and only the neurologists’ striatum! It may also
have an important role in emotional regulation. The
94

bottom line is that rather than thinking of the projections
from the midbrain to the striatum as parallel pathways
with separate and distinct functions (as in Figure


<<<PAGE 111>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

The Classic Mesocortical Dopamine Hypothesis of Cognitive, Negative,
and Affective Symptoms of Schizophrenia

cognitive
symptoms

4

(SIGH)

negative
symptoms

affective
symptoms
Figure 4-19 Mesocortical dopamine hypothesis. Hypoactivity of dopamine neurons in the mesocortical dopamine pathway
theoretically mediates the cognitive, negative, and affective symptoms of schizophrenia.

4-16A), the new notion from neuroimaging is that the
VTA–substantia nigra complex is instead an integrative
hub and its pathways can be thought of as mesostriatal
rather than nigrostriatal/mesolimbic (Figure 4-16B).
Hyperdopaminergia of schizophrenia in this sense is
mesostriatal rather than purely mesolimbic.
Corollary to the Classic Dopamine Hypothesis of
Schizophrenia: Mesocortical HypoDopaminergia and
the Cognitive, Negative, and Affective Symptoms of
Schizophrenia

Another DA pathway also arising from cell bodies
in the VTA but projecting to areas of the prefrontal
cortex is known as the mesocortical DA pathway
(Figures 4-17 through 4-19). Branches of this pathway
into the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex are hypothesized
to regulate cognition and executive functions (Figure
4-17), whereas branches of this pathway into the
ventromedial parts of prefrontal cortex are hypothesized
to regulate emotions and affect (Figure 4-18). The
exact role of the mesocortical DA pathway in mediating
symptoms of schizophrenia is still a matter of debate,
but many researchers believe that cognitive and some
negative symptoms of schizophrenia may be due to a
deficit of DA activity in mesocortical projections to the

dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Figure 4-17) whereas
affective and other negative symptoms of schizophrenia
may be due to a deficit of DA activity in mesocortical
projections to ventromedial prefrontal cortex (Figure
4-18). The behavioral deficit state suggested by negative
symptoms certainly implies underactivity or lack of
proper functioning of mesocortical DA projections,
and a leading theory is that this is the consequence of
neurodevelopmental abnormalities in the N-methyl-Daspartate (NMDA) glutamate system, as described in the
following section on glutamate.

THE GLUTAMATE HYPOTHESIS
OF PSYCHOSIS AND
SCHIZOPHRENIA
The glutamate theory of psychosis proposes that the
NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) subtype of glutamate
receptor is hypofunctional at critical synapses in the
prefrontal cortex (Table 4-1 and Figure 4-1). Disruption of
NMDA glutamate functioning can be hypothetically due to
the neurodevelopmental abnormalities in schizophrenia, to
the neurodegenerative abnormalities in Alzheimer disease
and other dementias, and to the NMDA receptor blocking
actions of drugs such as the dissociative anesthetics
95


<<<PAGE 112>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

ketamine and phencyclidine (PCP) (Figure 4-1 and Table
4-1). In order to understand how glutamate dysfunction
could lead to the positive, negative, and cognitive
symptoms of psychosis in various disorders, and also
how glutamate dysfunction might cause the downstream
hyperdopaminergia discussed in the previous section, we
will first review glutamate and its receptors and pathways.
The Glutamate Neurotransmitter Network

Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in
the central nervous system and is sometimes considered
to be the “master switch” of the brain, since it can
excite and turn on virtually all central nervous system
neurons. In recent years, glutamate has attained a key
theoretical role in the hypothesized pathophysiology
of schizophrenia, of positive symptoms of psychosis
in general, and also in a number of other psychiatric
disorders, including depression. It is also now a key target
of novel psychopharmacological agents for the treatment
of schizophrenia and depression. The synthesis,
metabolism, receptor regulation, and key pathways of
glutamate are therefore critical to the functioning of the
brain and will be reviewed here.
Glutamate Synthesis

Glutamate, or glutamic acid, is a neurotransmitter
that is an amino acid. Its predominant use is not as a

neurotransmitter, but as an amino acid building block for
protein biosynthesis. When used as a neurotransmitter,
it is synthesized from glutamine in glia, which also assist
in the recycling and regeneration of more glutamate
following glutamate release during neurotransmission.
When glutamate is released from synaptic vesicles of
glutamate neurons, it interacts with receptors in the
synapse and is then transported into neighboring glia
by a reuptake pump known as an excitatory amino acid
transporter (EAAT) (Figure 4-20A). The presynaptic
glutamate neuron and the postsynaptic site of glutamate
neurotransmission may also have EAATs (not shown in
the figures) but these EAATs do not appear to play as
important a role in glutamate recycling and regeneration
as the EAATs in glia (Figure 4-20A).
After reuptake into glia, glutamate is converted
into glutamine inside the glia by an enzyme known
as glutamine synthetase (arrow 3 in Figure 4-20B).
It is possible that glutamate is not simply reused but
rather converted into glutamine, to keep it in a pool for
neurotransmitter use, rather than being lost into the pool
for protein synthesis. Glutamine is released from glia by
reverse transport via a pump or transporter known as a
specific neutral amino acid transporter (SNAT, arrow 4
in Figure 4-20C). Glutamine may also be transported out
of glia by a second transporter known as a glial alanine–
serine–cysteine transporter or ASC-T (not shown). When

Glutamate Is Recycled and Regenerated: Part 1

glial cell

2
1

2

EAAT
GLU (glutamate)

96

glutamate

Figure 4-20A Glutamate is recycled and
regenerated, part 1. After release of glutamate
from the presynaptic neuron (1), it is taken up into
glial cells via the excitatory amino acid transporter
(EAAT) (2).


<<<PAGE 113>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Glutamate Is Recycled and Regenerated: Part 2

Figure 4-20B Glutamate is recycled and
regenerated, part 2. Once inside the glial cell,
glutamate is converted into glutamine by the
enzyme glutamine synthetase (3).

glial cell
glutamine
3

glutamine
synthetase

E

4

3

glutamate

Glutamate Is Recycled and Regenerated: Part 3

glutamine

SNAT
5

Figure 4-20C Glutamate is recycled and
regenerated, part 3. Glutamine is released from
glial cells by a specific glial neutral amino acid
transporter (SNAT) through the process of reverse
transport (4), and then taken up by SNATs on
glutamate neurons (5).

5

reversed
SNAT

4

glial cell

glutamine

glial SNATs and ASC-Ts operate in the inward direction,
they transport glutamine and other amino acids into
glia. Here, they are reversed so that glutamine can get
out of the glia and hop a ride into a neuron via a different
type of neuronal SNAT, operating inwardly in a reuptake
manner (arrow 5 in Figure 4-20C).
Once inside the neuron, glutamine is converted
back into glutamate for use as a neurotransmitter by
an enzyme in mitochondria called glutaminase (arrow
6 in Figure 4-20D). Glutamate is then transported into
synaptic vesicles via a vesicular glutamate transporter
(vGluT, arrow 7 in Figure 4-20D), where it is stored

for subsequent release during neurotransmission.
Once released, glutamate’s actions are stopped not by
enzymatic breakdown, as in other neurotransmitter
systems, but by removal by EAATs on neurons or glia, and
the whole cycle is started again (Figures 4-20A–D).
Synthesis of Glutamate Cotransmitters Glycine and
D-Serine

Glutamate systems are curious in that one of the
key receptors for glutamate requires a cotransmitter
in addition to glutamate in order to function. That
receptor is the NMDA receptor, described below, and
97


<<<PAGE 114>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Glutamate Is Recycled and Regenerated: Part 4

glutamine

Figure 4-20D Glutamate is recycled and
regenerated, part 4. Glutamine is converted
into glutamate within the presynaptic glutamate
neuron by the enzyme glutaminase (6) and
taken up into synaptic vesicles by the vesicular
glutamate transporter (vGluT), where it is stored
for future release.

6
E

glial cell

glutaminase
6

glutamate

7

vGluT
7

the cotransmitter is either the amino acid glycine
(Figure 4-21), or another amino acid, closely related to
glycine, known as D-serine (Figure 4-22).
Glycine is not known to be synthesized by glutamate
neurons, so glutamate neurons must get the glycine
they need for their NMDA receptors either from glycine
neurons or from glia (Figure 4-21). Glycine neurons
contribute only a small amount of glycine to glutamate
synapses, since much of the glycine they release is taken
back up into those neurons by a type of glycine reuptake
pump known as the type 2 glycine transporter (GlyT2)
(Figure 4-21).
Thus, neighboring glia are thought to be the source
of most of the glycine available for glutamate synapses.
Glycine itself can be taken up into glia as well as into
glutamate neurons from the synapse by a type 1 glycine
transporter (GlyT1) (Figure 4-21). Glycine can also
be taken up into glia by a glial SNAT (specific neutral
amino acid transporter). Glycine is not known to be
stored within synaptic vesicles of glia, but as we will
learn below, the companion neurotransmitter D-serine
is thought possibly to be stored within some type of
storage vesicle within glia. Glycine in the cytoplasm of
glia is nevertheless somehow available for release into
synapses, and it escapes from glial cells by riding outside
them and into the glutamate synapse on a reversed
GlyT1 transporter (Figure 4-21). Once outside, glycine
can get right back into the glia by an inwardly directed
GlyT1, which functions as a reuptake pump and is the
98

main mechanism responsible for terminating the action
of synaptic glycine (Figure 4-21). GlyT1 transporters
are probably also located on the glutamate neuron, but
any release or storage from the glutamate neuron is
not well characterized (Figure 4-21). Glycine can also
be synthesized from the amino acid L-serine, derived
from the extracellular space, bloodstream, and diet,
transported into glia by an L-serine transporter (LSER-T), and converted from L-serine into glycine by the
glial enzyme serine hydroxymethyl-transferase (SHMT)
(Figure 4-21). This enzyme works in both directions,
either converting L-serine into glycine, or glycine into
L-serine.
How is the cotransmitter D-serine produced? D-serine
is unusual in that it is a D-amino acid, whereas the 20
known essential amino acids are all L-amino acids,
including D-serine’s mirror image amino acid L-serine.
It just so happens that D-serine has high affinity for
the glycine site on NMDA receptors, and that glia are
equipped with an enzyme that can convert regular Lserine into the neurotransmitting amino acid D-serine by
means of an enzyme that can go back and forth between
D- and L-serine known as D-serine racemase (Figure
4-22). Thus, D-serine can be derived either from glycine
or from L-serine, both of which can be transported
into glia by their own transporters, and then glycine
converted to L-serine by the enzyme SHMT, and finally
L-serine converted into D-serine by the enzyme D-serine
racemase (Figure 4-22). Interestingly, the D-serine so


<<<PAGE 115>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

NMDA Receptor Cotransmitter Glycine Is Produced
glutamate
neuron

L-serine
L

glycine
neuron

L-SER-T

glial cell
L

GlyT1

SHMT

4

E

SNAT

GlyT2
reversed
GlyT1
(release)

GlyT1
(reuptake)

glycine

NMDA receptors

Figure 4-21 NMDA receptor cotransmitter glycine is produced. Glutamate’s actions at NMDA receptors are dependent in part upon
the presence of a cotransmitter, either glycine or D-serine. Glycine can be derived directly from dietary amino acids and transported into
glial cells either by a glycine transporter (GlyT1) or by a specific neutral amino acid transporter (SNAT). Glycine can also be produced
both in glycine neurons and in glial cells. Glycine neurons provide only a small amount of the glycine at glutamate synapses, because
most of the glycine released by glycine neurons is used only at glycine synapses and then taken back up into presynaptic glycine
neurons via the glycine 2 transporter (GlyT2) before much glycine can diffuse to glutamate synapses. Glycine produced by glial cells
plays a larger role at glutamate synapses. Glycine is produced in glial cells when the amino acid L-serine is taken up into glial cells via
the L-serine transporter (L-SER-T), and then converted into glycine by the enzyme serine hydroxymethyl-transferase (SHMT). Glycine from
glial cells is released into the glutamate synapse through reverse transport by GlyT1. Extracellular glycine is then transported back into
glial cells via GlyT1.

produced may be stored in some sort of vesicle in glia
for subsequent release on a reversed glial D-serine
transporter (D-SER-T) for neurotransmitting purposes
at glutamate synapses containing NMDA receptors.
D-serine’s actions are not only terminated by synaptic
reuptake via the inwardly acting glial D-SER-T, but also
by an enzyme D-amino acid oxidase (DAO) that converts
D-serine into inactive hydroxypyruvate (Figure 4-22).
Below, we will discuss how the brain makes an activator

of DAO, known not surprisingly as D-amino acid oxidase
activator or DAOA.
Glutamate Receptors

There are several types of glutamate receptors (Figure
4-23 and Table 4-2), including the neuronal presynaptic
reuptake pump (EAAT) and the vesicular transporter for
glutamate into synaptic vesicles (vGluT), both of which
are types of receptors. The general pharmacological
99


<<<PAGE 116>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

NMDA Receptor Cotransmitter D-Serine Is Produced
glutamate
neuron

GlyT1

SHMT

SNAT

L
D-serine racemase

L

L
D

L-SER-T

DAO
OH-pyruvate

D

glutamate
D

D-serine

L

L-serine
glycine

reversed
glial D-SER-T
(release)

D

D

glial D-SER-T
(reuptake)

D

Figure 4-22 NMDA receptor cotransmitter D-serine is produced. Glutamate requires the presence of either glycine or D-serine at
NMDA receptors in order to exert some of its effects there. In glial cells, the enzyme serine racemase converts L-serine into D-serine,
which is then released into the glutamate synapse via reverse transport on the glial D-serine transporter (glial D-SER-T). L-serine’s
presence in glial cells is a result of either its transport there via the L-serine transporter (L-SER-T) or its conversion into L-serine from
glycine via the enzyme serine hydroxymethyl-transferase (SHMT). Once D-serine is released into the synapse, it is taken back up into the
glial cell by a reuptake pump called D-SER-T. Excess D-serine within the glial cell can be destroyed by the enzyme D-amino acid oxidase
(DAO), which converts D-serine into hydroxypyruvate (OH-pyruvate).

properties of various transporters are discussed in Chapter
2. Shown also on the presynaptic neuron as well as the
postsynaptic neuron are metabotropic glutamate receptors
(Figure 4-23). Metabotropic glutamate receptors are those
glutamate receptors that are linked to G proteins. The
general pharmacological properties of G-protein-linked
receptors are also discussed in Chapter 2.
There are at least eight subtypes of metabotropic
glutamate receptors, organized into three separate
groups (Table 4-2). Research suggests that Group
II and Group III metabotropic receptors can occur
100

presynaptically, where they function as autoreceptors
to block glutamate release (Figures 4-23 and 4-24).
Drugs that stimulate these presynaptic autoreceptors as
agonists may therefore reduce glutamate release. Group I
metabotropic glutamate receptors on the other hand may
be located predominantly postsynaptically, where they
hypothetically interact with other postsynaptic glutamate
receptors to facilitate and strengthen responses mediated
by ligand-gated ion-channel receptors for glutamate
during excitatory glutamatergic neurotransmission
(Figure 4-23).


<<<PAGE 117>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Glutamate Receptors

vGluT

presynaptic
metabotropic
receptor

Figure 4-23 Glutamate receptors. Shown
here are receptors for glutamate that
regulate its neurotransmission. The excitatory
amino acid transporter (EAAT) exists
presynaptically and is responsible for clearing
excess glutamate out of the synapse. The
vesicular transporter for glutamate (vGluT)
transports glutamate into synaptic vesicles,
where it is stored until used in a future
neurotransmission. Metabotropic glutamate
receptors (linked to G proteins) can occur
either pre- or postsynaptically. Three types of
postsynaptic glutamate receptors are linked to
ion channels, and are known as ligand-gated
ion channels: N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptors, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4isoxazole-propionic acid (AMPA) receptors,
and kainate receptors, all named for the
agonists that bind to them.

EAAT

NMDA
receptor

AMPA
receptor

kainate postsynaptic
receptor metabotropic
receptor

NMDA (N-methyl-D-asparate), AMPA (α-amino3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid),
and kainate receptors for glutamate, named after the
agonists that selectively bind to them, are all members
of the ligand-gated ion-channel family of receptors
(Figure 4-23 and Table 4-2). These ligand-gated ion
channels are also known as ionotropic receptors and
also as ion-channel-linked receptors. The general
pharmacological properties of ligand-gated ion channels
are discussed in Chapter 3. They tend to be postsynaptic
and work together to modulate excitatory postsynaptic
neurotransmission triggered by glutamate. Specifically,
AMPA and kainate receptors may mediate fast, excitatory
neurotransmission, allowing sodium to enter the neuron
to depolarize it (Figure 4-25). NMDA receptors in the
resting state are normally blocked by magnesium,

which plugs its calcium channel (Figure 4-26). NMDA
receptors are an interesting type of “coincidence detector”
that can open to let calcium into the neuron to trigger
postsynaptic actions from glutamate neurotransmission
only when three things occur at the same time (Figures
4-26 and 4-27):
(1) glutamate occupies its binding site on the NMDA
receptor
(2) glycine or D-serine binds to its site on the NMDA
receptor
(3) depolarization occurs, allowing the magnesium plug
to be removed
Some of the many important signals by NMDA receptors
that are activated when NMDA calcium channels are
opened include long-term potentiation and synaptic
plasticity, as will be explained later in this chapter.
101

4


<<<PAGE 118>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Table 4-2 Glutamate receptors

Metabotropic
Group I

mGluR1
mGluR5

Group II

mGluR2
mGluR3

Group III

mGluR4
mGluR6
mGluR7
mGluR8

Ionotropic (ligand-gated ion channels; ion-channel-linked receptors)
Functional class

Gene family

Agonists

AMPA

GluR1

Glutamate

GluR2

AMPA

GluR3

Kainate

Antagonists

GluR4
Kainate

GluR5

Glutamate

GluR6

Kainate

GluR7
KA1
KA2
NMDA

NR1

Glutamate

NR2A

Aspartate

NR2B

NMDA

MK801

NR2C

Ketamine

NR2D

PCP (phencyclidine)

Key Glutamate Pathways in the Brain

Glutamate is a ubiquitous excitatory neurotransmitter
that seems to be able to excite nearly any neuron in the
brain. That is why it is sometimes called the “master
switch.” Nevertheless, there are about a half-dozen
specific glutamatergic pathways that are of particular
relevance to psychopharmacology and especially to the
pathophysiology of schizophrenia (Figure 4-28). They are:
(a) Cortico-brainstem
(b) Cortico-striatal
(c) Hippocampal-striatal
(d) Thalamo-cortical
(e) Cortico-thalamic
(f) Cortico-cortical (direct)
(g) Cortico-cortical (indirect)
102

(a) Cortico-brainstem glutamate pathways. A very
important descending glutamatergic pathway projects
from glutamatergic cortical pyramidal neurons
to brainstem neurotransmitter centers, including
the raphe for serotonin, the ventral tegmental area
(VTA) and substantia nigra for dopamine, and
the locus coeruleus for norepinephrine (pathway
a in Figure 4-28). This pathway is the corticobrainstem glutamate pathway, and is a key regulator
of neurotransmitter release. Direct innervation
of monoamine neurons in the brainstem by these
excitatory cortico-brainstem glutamate neurons
stimulates neurotransmitter release, whereas
indirect innervation of monoamine neurons by


<<<PAGE 119>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Figure 4-24 Metabotropic glutamate
autoreceptors. Groups II and III
metabotropic glutamate receptors can
exist presynaptically as autoreceptors to
regulate the release of glutamate. When
glutamate builds up in the synapse (A), it
is available to bind to the autoreceptor,
which then inhibits glutamate release (B).

4

A

mGluR type II/III
presynaptic
autoreceptor

B

mGluR type II/III
presynaptic
autoreceptor

103


<<<PAGE 120>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Na+

closed &
desensitized

K+

glutamate
AMPA, kainate
receptors

prolonged
agonist

agonist

desensitized

open
&
depolarized

resting

fast excitatory neurotransmission
Figure 4-25 Glutamate at AMPA and kainate receptors. When glutamate binds to AMPA and kainate receptors, this leads to
fast excitatory neurotransmission and membrane depolarization. Sustained binding of the agonist glutamate will lead to receptor
desensitization, causing the channel to close and be transiently unresponsive to agonist.
Na+

Ca++

Mg++

Mg++

glutamate
NMDA
receptors

glycine
depolarization
& other mechanisms

co-agonists

resting but blocked by Mg++

co-agonists open the channel,
but it is blocked by Mg++
- not depolarized

open
&
unblocked

Figure 4-26 Magnesium as a negative allosteric modulator. Magnesium is a negative allosteric modulator at NMDA glutamate
receptors. Opening of NMDA glutamate receptors requires the presence of both glutamate and glycine, each of which bind to a
different site on the receptor. When magnesium is also bound and the membrane is not depolarized, it prevents the effects of glutamate
and glycine and thus does not allow the ion channel to open. In order for the channel to open, depolarization must remove magnesium
while both glutamate and glycine are bound to their sites on the ligand-gated ion-channel complex.

these excitatory cortico-glutamate neurons via
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) interneurons in the
brainstem blocks neurotransmitter release.
(b) Cortico-striatal glutamate pathways. A second
descending glutamatergic output from cortical
pyramidal neurons projects to the striatal complex
(pathway b in Figure 4-28). This pathway is
known as the cortico-striatal glutamate pathway.
This descending glutamate pathway terminates
on GABA neurons destined for a relay station in
another part of the striatal complex called the
globus pallidus.
104

(c) Hippocampal-accumbens glutamate pathway.
Another key glutamate pathway projects from the
hippocampus to the nucleus accumbens and is
known as the hippocampal-accumbens glutamate
pathway (c in Figure 4-28). Specific theories link this
particular pathway to schizophrenia (see below). Like
the cortico-striatal glutamate pathway (b in Figure
4-28), the hippocampal glutamate projection to the
nucleus accumbens (c in Figure 4-28) also terminates
on GABA neurons there that in turn project to a relay
station in the globus pallidus.
(d) Thalamo-cortical glutamate pathway. The thalamocortical glutamate pathway (d in Figure 4-28) brings


<<<PAGE 121>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Na+

K+

Mg++

glycine

resting

resting but
blocked by Mg++

4
A

glutamate

glutamate

activated

activated

resting but
blocked by Mg++

Na+

Ca++

activated

depolarization
B

C

long-term
potentiation
Figure 4-27 Signal propagation via glutamate receptors. (A) On the left is an AMPA receptor with its sodium channel in the resting
state, allowing minimal sodium to enter the cell in exchange for potassium. On the right is an NMDA receptor in the resting state, with
magnesium blocking the calcium channel and glycine bound to its site. (B) When glutamate arrives, it binds to the AMPA receptor,
causing the sodium channel to open, thus increasing the flow of sodium into the dendrite and potassium out of the dendrite. This
causes the membrane to depolarize and triggers a postsynaptic nerve impulse. (C) Depolarization of the membrane removes
magnesium from the calcium channel. This, coupled with glutamate binding to the NMDA receptor in the presence of glycine, causes
the NMDA receptor to open and allow calcium influx. Calcium influx through NMDA receptors contributes to long-term potentiation, a
phenomenon that may be involved in long-term learning, synaptogenesis, and other neuronal functions.

information from the thalamus back into the cortex,
often to process sensory information.
(e) Cortico-thalamic glutamate pathway. A fifth glutamate
pathway, known as the cortico-thalamic glutamate
pathway, projects directly back to the thalamus, where
it may direct the manner in which neurons react to
sensory information (pathway e in Figure 4-28).
(f ) Direct cortico-cortical glutamate pathways.
Finally, a complex of many cortico-cortical
glutamate pathways is present within the cortex
(Figure 4-28, pathways f and g). On the one hand,
pyramidal neurons can excite each other within
the cerebral cortex via direct synaptic input from

their own neurotransmitter glutamate (f in Figure
4-28).
(g) Indirect cortico-cortical glutamate pathways. On
the other hand, one pyramidal neuron can inhibit
another via indirect input, namely via interneurons
that release GABA (g in Figure 4-28).
The NMDA Glutamate Hypofunction Hypothesis
of Psychosis: Faulty NMDA Neurotransmission
at Glutamate Synapses on GABA Interneurons in
Prefrontal Cortex

Although NMDA receptors and synapses are ubiquitous
throughout the brain, the NMDA glutamate hypofunction
105


<<<PAGE 122>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Key Glutamate Pathways

g

d
f

striatum
nucleus
accumbens

b

e

thalamus
a
c

brainstem
neurotransmitter
centers

Figure 4-28 Glutamate pathways in the brain. Although glutamate can have actions at virtually all neurons in the brain, there are key
glutamate pathways particularly relevant to schizophrenia. (a) The cortico-brainstem glutamate projection is a descending pathway
that projects from cortical pyramidal neurons in the prefrontal cortex to brainstem neurotransmitter centers (raphe nucleus, locus
coeruleus, ventral tegmental area, substantia nigra) and regulates neurotransmitter release. (b) Another descending glutamatergic
pathway projects from the prefrontal cortex to the striatal complex (cortico-striatal glutamate pathway). (c) There is also a glutamatergic
projection from the ventral hippocampus to the nucleus accumbens. (d) Thalamo-cortical glutamate pathways ascend from the thalamus
and innervate pyramidal neurons in the cortex. (e) Cortico-thalamic glutamate pathways descend from the prefrontal cortex to the
thalamus. (f) Intracortical pyramidal neurons can communicate directly with each other via the neurotransmitter glutamate; these
pathways are known as direct cortico-cortical glutamatergic pathways and are excitatory. (g) Intracortical pyramidal neurons can also
communicate via GABAergic interneurons; these indirect cortico-cortical glutamate pathways are therefore inhibitory.

theory of psychosis suggests that psychosis may be caused
by dysfunction of glutamate synapses at a specific site:
namely, at certain GABA interneurons in the prefrontal
cortex (see g in Figure 4-28 and Figures 4-29A, 4-29B,
and 4-29C). Dysfunction hypothetically can be caused
by neurodevelopmental problems in schizophrenia
(Figure 4-29B, box 1A), by drug toxicity in ketamine/
phencyclidine abuse (Figure 4-29B, box 1B), or by
neurodegenerative problems in dementia (Figure 4-29C).
First, interference with normal neurotransmission
at these sites between glutamate and GABA neurons
could hypothetically be due to neurodevelopmental
abnormalities genetically and environmentally
programmed in schizophrenia (compare Figure 4-29A,
box 1 with Figure 4-29B, box 1A). The loss of function
of these inhibitory GABA interneurons (Figure 4-29B,
box 2) causes glutamate neurons that they innervate
downstream to become “disinhibited” and thus
hyperactive (see Figure 4-29B, box 3). Other problems
with these GABA neurons in schizophrenia may be that
106

they also have deficits in the enzyme that makes their
own neurotransmitter GABA (namely, decreased activity
of GAD67 [glutamic acid decarboxylase]), causing a
compensatory increase in the postsynaptic amount
of the α2 subunit-containing GABAA receptors in the
postsynaptic axon initial segment of the pyramidal
neurons they innervate (Figure 4-29B, box 2; compare
with Figure 4-29A, box 2).
Both ketamine and phencyclidine (PCP) can cause
psychosis with some of the same clinical characteristics
as the psychosis of schizophrenia (Table 4-1). Both
agents also block NMDA receptors as antagonists at a
site inside the ion channel (Figure 4-30). The mechanism
of their psychotomimetic actions is hypothesized to be
blocking NMDA receptors at the same sites on GABA
interneurons as hypothesized for the neurodevelopmental
abnormalities in schizophrenia (compare Figure 4-29B,
boxes 1A and 1B). In the case of schizophrenia, the
NMDA hypofunction is hypothesized to be caused
neurodevelopmentally by genetic and environmental


<<<PAGE 123>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

4

1

Glu

2

GAD67

NMDA
receptor

GABA
α2
GABA R

3
Glu

GAT1
Figure 4-29A Hypothetical site of glutamate dysfunction in psychosis, part 1. Shown here is a close-up of intracortical pyramidal
neurons communicating via GABAergic interneurons. (1) Glutamate is released from an intracortical pyramidal neuron and binds to an
NMDA receptor on a GABAergic interneuron. (2) GABA is then released from the interneuron and binds to GABA receptors of the α2
subtype that are located on the axon of another glutamate pyramidal neuron. (3) This inhibits the pyramidal neuron, thus reducing the
release of cortical glutamate.

107


<<<PAGE 124>>>
1A

Glu

2
GAD67

α2
GABA R

3

neurodevelopmental
hypofunctional NMDA
receptor and synapse
in schizophrenia

1B

GABA

Glu

GAT1

Glu

ketamine
hypofunctional NMDA
receptor and synapse
after ketamine
Figure 4-29B Hypothetical site of glutamate dysfunction in psychosis, part 2. Shown here is a close-up of intracortical pyramidal
neurons communicating via GABAergic interneurons in the presence of hypofunctional NMDA receptors. (1) Glutamate is released from
an intracortical pyramidal neuron. However, the NMDA receptor that it would normally bind to is hypofunctional, preventing glutamate
from exerting its effects at the receptor. This could be due to neurodevelopmental abnormalities (1A) or to drug toxicity resulting from
ketamine or phencyclidine abuse (1B). (2) This prevents GABA release from the interneuron; thus, stimulation of α2 GABA receptors
on the axon of another glutamate neuron does not occur. (3) When GABA does not bind to the α2 GABA receptors on its axon, the
pyramidal neuron is no longer inhibited. Instead, it is disinhibited and overactive, releasing excessive glutamate into the cortex.

108


<<<PAGE 125>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

4

loss of cortical neurons
from neurodegeneration

3
Glu

plaque

tangle

stroke

Lewy
body

Figure 4-29C Hypothetical site of glutamate dysfunction in psychosis, part 3. Shown here is a close-up of intracortical pyramidal
neurons communicating via GABAergic interneurons in the presence of neurodegeneration associated with dementia. Not all patients
with dementia develop symptoms of psychosis. It may be that, in those that do, the neurodegeneration associated with the accumulation
of amyloid plaques, tau tangles, and/or Lewy bodies, as well as the damage caused by strokes, may destroy some glutamatergic
pyramidal neurons and GABAergic interneurons while leaving others intact, at least temporarily. The end result may be excessive
glutamate activity in the cortex, as in schizophrenia (see Figure 4-29B, box 1A) or in ketamine abuse (see Figure 4-29B, box 1B).

input (Figure 4-29B, box 1A), whereas in ketamine/PCP
psychosis, the NMDA hypofunction is hypothesized to be
caused by acute and reversible pharmacological actions
directly at NMDA receptors (Figure 4-29B, box 1B).

In neurodegenerative disorders that cause Alzheimer
disease and other types of dementia, the accumulation
of amyloid plaques, tau tangles, Lewy bodies, and/or
strokes progressively knocks out neurons as the disease
109


<<<PAGE 126>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

progresses (Figure 4-29C). Up to half of patients with
dementia may at some point in their clinical course
experience psychosis (see Chapter 12 for a more
extensive discussion on the behavioral symptoms of
dementia). Why do some dementia patients experience
psychosis and others not? One hypothesis is that
in patients with dementia-related psychosis, the
neurodegeneration has progressed in such a way as to
knock out some glutamatergic pyramidal neurons and
GABAergic interneurons in the prefrontal cortex while
leaving other glutamatergic pyramidal neurons intact,
at least temporarily (Figure 4-29C). This theoretically
creates the same dysconnectivity (Figure 4-29C),
but by a different mechanism, that occurs in both
schizophrenia (Figure 4-29B, box 1A) and in ketamine/
PCP psychosis (Figure 4-29B, box 1B). Hypothetically
this occurs in only some patients with dementia and
specifically only in those whose pattern of neuronal
degeneration leaves glutamate neurons that drive
dopamine neurons downstream intact. The significance

of preserving these particular glutamate neurons is
explained further below. Knocking out some neurons
while preserving some others could explain why only
certain patients develop psychosis as neurodegeneration
in dementia progresses.
Linking the NMDA Glutamate Hypofunction
Hypothesis of Psychosis to the Dopamine Hypothesis
of Psychosis

What are the consequences to dopamine activity of the
hypothetical dysconnectivity of glutamatergic pyramidal
neurons with these particular GABAergic interneurons
in schizophrenia, ketamine/PCP toxicity, and dementia
(Figures 4-29A, 4-29B, and 4-29C)? The short answer
is that it theoretically leads to the very same dopamine
hyperactivity already discussed above for the dopamine
hypothesis of psychosis.
Certain glutamate neurons directly innervate VTA/
mesostriatal dopamine neurons, and when they lose
their GABA inhibition from any cause they become

Site of Action of PCP and Ketamine: Bind to Open Channel
at PCP Site to Block NMDA Receptor

PCP site
(in the ion
channel)

A

ketamine
or PCP

B

Figure 4-30 Site of action of PCP and ketamine. The anesthetic ketamine binds as an antagonist to the open channel conformation of
the NMDA receptor. Specifically, it binds to a site within the calcium channel of this receptor, which is often termed the PCP site because
it is also where phencyclidine (PCP) binds as an antagonist.

110


<<<PAGE 127>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

hyperactive and stimulate too much dopamine release
from the mesostriatal projections of those dopamine
neurons (Figures 4-31 through 4-34). As discussed in the
previous section, neurodevelopmentally deficient NMDA
synapses (Figure 4-29B, box 1A) hypothetically cause this
downstream glutamate hyperactivity in schizophrenia
(Figures 4-31 and 4-32). In PCP/ketamine abuse, the
drug acting directly at these synapses (Figure 4-29B,
box 1B) causes the downstream glutamate hyperactivity
(Figure 4-33), and in dementia, neurodegeneration
knocks out cortical neurons (Figure 4-29C) to cause this
glutamate hyperactivity (Figure 4-34). In turn, glutamate
hyperactivity from any cause (Figures 4-31 through 4-34)
theoretically results in dopamine hyperactivity and the
positive symptoms of psychosis.
Hyperactive glutamate output from the prefrontal
cortex can hypothetically not only potentially explain
positive symptoms, but also negative symptoms in the
case of schizophrenia. When the cascade from NMDA
hypofunction to glutamate hyperactivity enhances
dopamine release (Figure 4-31), it hypothetically causes
positive symptoms of psychosis; however, there is
hypothetically a second population of glutamate neurons
that project to a different set of VTA neurons, namely,
those that are mesocortical rather than mesostriatal/
mesolimbic (Figure 4-35). This circuit actually inhibits
dopamine release, due to the presence of a key GABA
interneuron in VTA for mesocortical dopamine projections
to the prefrontal cortex that is hypothetically lacking
for mesostriatal/mesolimbic projection to the striatum
(compare Figures 4-31B and 4-35B). Hyperactivity of
these specific glutamate neurons innervating mesocortical
dopamine neurons in Figure 4-35B would lead to the
opposite effects of those discussed for the population of
glutamate neurons innervating mesostriatal dopamine
neurons: namely, reduced dopamine release, and this
hypothetically causes the negative, cognitive, and affective
symptoms of psychosis (Figure 4-35B).

THE SEROTONIN HYPOTHESIS
OF PSYCHOSIS AND
SCHIZOPHRENIA
The serotonin theory of psychosis proposes
that hyperactivity/imbalance of serotonin
(5-hydroxytryptamine, 5HT) activity, particularly at
serotonin 5HT2A receptors, can result in psychosis (Table
4-1 and Figure 4-1). Disruption of 5HT functioning, leading
to positive symptoms of psychosis, can be hypothetically
due to the neurodevelopmental abnormalities in
schizophrenia, to the neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s

disease as well as in Alzheimer disease and other dementias,
and to drugs such as LSD, mescaline, and psilocybin (Figure
4-1 and Table 4-1). Interestingly, psychoses associated
with serotonin imbalance tend to have more visual

DA
neuron

4

A

Psychosis in Schizophrenia
hypofunctional NMDA
glutamate synapse
in schizophrenia

normal

HIGH

B

direct innervation so
excitatory glu causes
DA hyperactivity

positive
symptoms

overactivation

Figure 4-31 NMDA receptor hypofunction and psychosis in
schizophrenia, part 1. (A) The cortical brainstem glutamate
projection communicates with the mesolimbic dopamine
pathway in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) to regulate
dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens. (B) If NMDA
receptors on cortical GABA interneurons are hypoactive,
then GABA release is inhibited and the cortical brainstem
pathway to the VTA will be overactivated, leading to excessive
release of glutamate in the VTA. This will lead to excessive
stimulation of the mesolimbic dopamine pathway and thus
excessive dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens. This is
the theoretical biological basis for the mesolimbic dopamine
hyperactivity thought to be associated with the positive
symptoms of psychosis.

111


<<<PAGE 128>>>
striatum
globus
pallidus

nucleus
accumbens

VTA

ventral
hippocampus
A

Psychosis in Schizophrenia

striatum
globus
pallidus

nucleus
accumbens

VTA

B

ventral
hypofunctional NMDA hippocampus
glutamate synapse

Figure 4-32 NMDA receptor hypofunction and psychosis in schizophrenia, part 2. Hypofunctional NMDA receptors at glutamatergic
synapses in the ventral hippocampus can also contribute to mesolimbic dopamine hyperactivity. (A) Glutamate released in the ventral
hippocampus binds to NMDA receptors on a GABAergic interneuron, stimulating the release of GABA. The GABA binds at receptors
on a pyramidal glutamate neuron that projects to the nucleus accumbens; this prevents excessive glutamate release there. The normal
release of glutamate in the nucleus accumbens allows for normal activation of a GABAergic neuron projecting to the globus pallidus,
which in turn allows for normal activation of a GABAergic neuron projecting to the ventral tegmental area (VTA). This leads to normal
activation of the mesolimbic dopamine pathway from the VTA to the nucleus accumbens. (B) If NMDA receptors on ventral hippocampal
GABA interneurons are hypoactive, then the glutamatergic pathway to the nucleus accumbens will be overactivated, leading to
excessive release of glutamate in the nucleus accumbens. This will lead to excessive stimulation of GABAergic neurons projecting to
the globus pallidus, which in turn will inhibit release of GABA from the globus pallidus into the VTA. This will lead to disinhibition of the
mesolimbic dopamine pathway and thus excessive dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens.

112


<<<PAGE 129>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

DA
neuron

DA
neuron

4
A

A

Psychosis in Ketamine/PCP
NMDA glutamate
receptor blocked by
ketamine/PCP

Psychosis in Dementia
normal

HIGH

plaque

tangle

stroke

Lewy
body

Neurodegeneration of
glutamate/GABA
normal
connections
HIGH

ketamine

visual hallucinations

B

direct innervation so
excitatory glu causes
DA hyperactivity

delusions and
auditory
hallucinations

positive
symptoms
B

overactivation

Figure 4-33 NMDA receptor blockade and psychosis in
ketamine abuse. (A) The cortical brainstem glutamate
projection communicates with the mesolimbic dopamine
pathway in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) to regulate
dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens. (B) If ketamine
blocks NMDA receptors on cortical GABA interneurons, then
GABA release is inhibited and the cortical brainstem pathway
to the VTA will be overactivated, leading to excessive release
of glutamate in the VTA. This will lead to excessive stimulation
of the mesolimbic dopamine pathway and thus excessive
dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens.

hallucinations, whereas those associated principally with
dopamine have more auditory hallucinations. In order
to understand how hyperactivity of serotonin at 5HT2A
receptors could lead to the positive symptoms of psychosis
in various disorders, we will first review serotonin and its
extensive set of receptors and pathways.

overactivation

positive
symptoms

Figure 4-34 Neurodegeneration and psychosis in
dementia. (A) The cortical brainstem glutamate projection
communicates with the mesolimbic dopamine pathway in the
ventral tegmental area (VTA) to regulate dopamine release
in the nucleus accumbens. (B) If neurodegeneration leads
to the destruction of some glutamatergic neurons and some
GABAergic interneurons, but not others, then this could lead to
excessive release of glutamate in various brain regions. In the
VTA, this could lead to excessive stimulation of the mesolimbic
dopamine pathway and thus excessive dopamine release in
the nucleus accumbens, resulting in delusions and auditory
hallucinations. In the visual cortex, excessive glutamatergic
activity could result in visual hallucinations.

The Serotonin Neurotransmitter Network

Serotonin, better known as 5HT (5-hydroxytryptamine),
is a monoamine neurotransmitter which regulates a brain
network that is one of the most targeted by psychotropic
113


<<<PAGE 130>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

serotonin neurotransmission is critical in order to grasp
some of the most important principles across the breadth
of psychopharmacology, from psychosis to mood and
beyond.

Mesocortical Pathway

Serotonin Synthesis and Termination of Action

A

Negative and Cognitive
Symptoms in Schizophrenia
hypofunctional NMDA
glutamate synapse in schizophrenia

normal

LOW

B

glutamate hyperactivity
causes key GABA interneurons
to inhibit DA release

(SIGH)

negative
symptoms

cognitive
symptoms

affective
symptoms

Figure 4-35 NMDA receptor hypofunction and negative
symptoms of schizophrenia. (A) The cortical brainstem
glutamate projection communicates with the mesocortical
dopamine pathway in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) via
GABAergic interneurons, thus regulating dopamine release in
the prefrontal cortex. (B) If NMDA receptors on cortical GABA
interneurons are hypoactive, then the cortical brainstem pathway
to the VTA will be overactivated, leading to excessive release
of glutamate in the VTA. This will lead to excessive stimulation
of the brainstem GABA interneurons, which in turn leads to
inhibition of mesocortical dopamine neurons. This reduces
dopamine release in the prefrontal cortex and is the theoretical
biological basis for the negative symptoms of psychosis.

drugs. For example, many if not most drugs that treat
psychosis and mood target, in one way or another, the
serotonin network. Thus, a thorough understanding of
114

Synthesis of 5HT begins with the amino acid tryptophan,
which is transported into the brain from the plasma to
serve as the 5HT precursor (Figure 4-36). Two synthetic
enzymes then convert tryptophan into serotonin: firstly,
tryptophan hydroxylase (TRY-OH) converts tryptophan into
5-hydroxytryptophan (5HTP), and then aromatic amino
acid decarboxylase (AAADC) converts 5HTP into 5HT
(Figure 4-36). After synthesis, 5HT is taken up into synaptic
vesicles by a vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT2)
and stored there until it is used during neurotransmission.
5HT action is terminated when it is enzymatically
destroyed by monoamine oxidase (MAO) and converted
into an inactive metabolite (Figure 4-37). Serotonergic
neurons themselves contain monoamine oxidase B
(MAO-B), but it has low affinity for 5HT, so 5HT is
only enzymatically degraded when its intracellular
concentrations are high. The 5HT neuron also has a
presynaptic transport pump for serotonin called the
serotonin transporter (SERT) that is unique for 5HT
and that terminates serotonin’s actions by pumping it
out of the synapse and back into the presynaptic nerve
terminal where it can be re-stored in synaptic vesicles
for subsequent use in another neurotransmission
(Figure 4-37). Unlike dopamine neurons, some of which
do not contain their dopamine transporter (DAT), all
5HT neurons are thought to contain SERTs. Also, there
are functional polymorphisms in the gene that codes for
SERT, which have become of intense interest since they
alter the amount of synaptic serotonin and may help
predict which patients are less likely to respond as well
as more likely to have side effects when given drugs for
depression that block SERT. This will be discussed in more
detail in Chapter 7 on treatments for mood disorders.
5HT Receptors: Overview

Serotonin has more than a dozen receptors, and at least
half of them have known clinical relevance (Figure 4-38).
Only a few 5HT receptors are located on the serotonin
neuron itself (5HT1A, 5HT1B/D, 5HT2B) (Figures 4-38
through 4-41), and their purpose is to regulate the
presynaptic serotonin neuron directly, especially its firing
and how it releases and stores its own serotonin. Just to
be confusing, these same receptors can also be located
postsynaptically, as can all known 5HT receptors. First,
we describe how those 5HT receptors that are presynaptic


<<<PAGE 131>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Serotonin Is Produced

Serotonin Is Destroyed

tryptophan
transporter

TRY-OH

AAADC

E

E

serotonin
transporter
(SERT)

E

5HTP

4

MAO-B destroys 5HT
at high concentrations

tryptophan
VMAT2

5HT (serotonin)

Figure 4-36 Serotonin is produced. Serotonin
(5-hydroxytryptamine [5HT]) is produced from enzymes after
the amino acid precursor tryptophan is transported into
the serotonin neuron. Once transported into the serotonin
neuron, tryptophan is converted by the enzyme tryptophan
hydroxylase (TRY-OH) into 5-hydroxytryptophan (5HTP), which
is then converted into 5HT by the enzyme aromatic amino
acid decarboxylase (AAADC). Serotonin is then taken up into
synaptic vesicles via the vesicular monoamine transporter
(VMAT2), where it stays until released by a neuronal impulse.

Figure 4-37 Serotonin’s action is terminated. Serotonin’s
(5HT) action is terminated enzymatically by monoamine
oxidase B (MAO-B) within the neuron when it is present in
high concentrations. These enzymes convert serotonin into an
inactive metabolite. There is also a presynaptic transport pump
selective for serotonin, called the serotonin transporter (SERT),
which clears serotonin out of the synapse and back into the
presynaptic neuron.

Serotonin Receptor Subtypes

1A
+

2B

7

+

6

+

5

1B/D

4

+

3

+

2C +
2B

regulate other
neurotransmitters
in downstream
circuits

+

2A +
1B/D

1A

Figure 4-38 Serotonin receptors. Presynaptic serotonin (5HT) receptors include 5HT1A, 5HT1B/D, and 5HT2B, all
of which act as autoreceptors. There are also numerous postsynaptic serotonin receptors, which regulate other
neurotransmitters in downstream circuits.

(located on the serotonin neuron itself) regulate
serotonin, and then we discuss how postsynaptic 5HT
receptors regulate essentially every other neurotransmitter
in a network of downstream brain circuits.

Presynaptic Receptors: Serotonin Regulating
Serotonin

As for all monoamine neurons, the serotonin neuron
has receptors both on its axon terminals (axon115


<<<PAGE 132>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

terminal autoreceptors) and on its dendrites and soma
(somatodendritic autoreceptors), both to help regulate
serotonin release (Figures 4-38 through 4-41). Both are

considered to be presynaptic. Whereas the dopamine
(earlier in this chapter and Figures 4-5 through 4-8)
and norepinephrine (Chapter 6 and Figures 6-14

5HT1A
somatodendritic
autoreceptor

1A

A

1A

B
Figure 4-39 Serotonin (5HT) 1A autoreceptors. (A) Presynaptic 5HT1A receptors are autoreceptors located on the cell body and
dendrites, and are therefore called somatodendritic autoreceptors. (B) When serotonin is released somatodendritically, it binds to these
5HT1A receptors and causes a shutdown of 5HT neuronal impulse flow, depicted here as decreased electrical activity and a reduction in
the release of 5HT from the synapse on the right.

116


<<<PAGE 133>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

through 6-16) neurons have the same receptors at both
ends, for the serotonin neuron, the axon-terminal
receptors (with 5HT1B/D pharmacology) (Figures 4-38

and 4-41) are different from the somatodendritic
receptors (with 5HT1A and 5HT2B pharmacology)
(Figures 4-38 through 4-40).

5HT2B
somatodendritic
autoreceptor

2B

4

A

2B

B
Figure 4-40 Serotonin (5HT) 2B autoreceptors. (A) Presynaptic 5HT2B receptors are autoreceptors located on the cell body and
dendrites, and are therefore called somatodendritic autoreceptors. (B) When 5HT is released somatodendritically, it binds to these 5HT2B
receptors and causes increased 5HT neuronal impulse flow, depicted here as increased electrical activity and increased release of 5HT
from the synapse on the right.

117


<<<PAGE 134>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Presynaptic 5HT1A Receptors

Located on the dendrites and cell bodies of serotonin
neurons in the midbrain raphe (Figure 4-39A), these
presynaptic somatodendritic 5HT1A receptors detect
serotonin released from dendrites. How serotonin is
released at the opposite end of the neuron from where
its classic presynaptic nerve terminals are located is

still not yet fully understood, but this appears to be
an important process for how the serotonin neuron
regulates release at the presynaptic end. When 5HT is
released somatodendritically, it activates these 5HT1A
autoreceptors and this causes a slowing of neuronal
impulse flow through the serotonin neuron and a
reduction of serotonin release from its axon terminal

5HT1B/D
axon terminal
autoreceptor
A

5HT1B/D
axon terminal
autoreceptor

B

Figure 4-41 Serotonin (5HT) 1B/D autoreceptors. Presynaptic 5HT1B/D receptors are autoreceptors located on the presynaptic axon
terminal. They act by detecting the presence of 5HT in the synapse and causing a shutdown of further 5HT release. When 5HT builds up
in the synapse (A), it is available to bind to the autoreceptor, which then inhibits serotonin release (B).

118


<<<PAGE 135>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

(Figure 4-39B). Downregulation and desensitization of
these presynaptic 5HT1A somatodendritic autoreceptors
are thought to be critical to the antidepressant actions of
drugs that block serotonin reuptake (discussed in Chapter
7 on treatments for mood disorders).
Presynaptic 5HT2B receptors

Recently, it has been discovered that the somatodendritic
area of 5HT neurons is regulated by a second receptor,
the 5HT2B receptor (Figure 4-40), which acts in opposition
to the 5HT1A receptor. That is, 5HT2B receptors activate
the serotonin neuron to cause more impulse flow and
increased serotonin release from presynaptic nerve
terminals. Thus, it appears at this point in time that the
5HT2B receptors are “feed forward” receptors whereas
5HT1A receptors are “negative feedback” receptors. It is
not yet clear which 5HT neurons in the midbrain raphe
contain 5HT1A receptors, which contain 5HT2B receptors,
and which contain both. Clearly, much more is yet to be
learned about 5HT2B receptors and the drugs that act
upon them. However, it already appears likely that the
balance between actions at presynaptic somatodendritic
5HT1A versus 5HT2B receptors is important in regulating
how much serotonin activity and serotonin release is
occurring at serotonin presynaptic nerve terminals
throughout the brain.
Presynaptic 5HT1B/D Receptors

Presynaptic 5HT receptors on the axon terminal have
the 5HT1B/D subtype and act as negative-feedback
autoreceptors to detect the presence of 5HT, causing
a shutdown of further 5HT release and 5HT neuronal
impulse flow (Figure 4-41). When 5HT is detected in the
synapse by presynaptic 5HT receptors on axon terminals,
it occurs via a 5HT1B/D receptor, which is also called a
terminal autoreceptor (Figure 4-41). In the case of the
5HT1B/D terminal autoreceptor, 5HT occupancy of this
receptor causes a blockade of 5HT release (Figure 4-41B).
Postsynaptic Serotonin Regulates Other
Neurotransmitters in Downstream Brain Circuits

It turns out that each neurotransmitter not only controls
its own synthesis and release from presynaptic sites;
each neurotransmitter also controls the actions of the
other neurotransmitters via postsynaptic actions and
networks of brain circuits. So, if every neurotransmitter
regulates every other neurotransmitter, it’s complicated!
No longer can we think of a neurotransmitter acting only
synaptically; neurotransmitters also act trans-synaptically
in brain circuits that both control other neurotransmitters
and are controlled by other neurotransmitters. So, how

are we supposed to figure out what is the net effect of a
drug acting at a receptor if these receptors are all over
the place and if they do different things at different
sites? Furthermore, how can we possibly understand
psychiatric illnesses involving serotonin if this same
neurotransmitter does quite different things in different
circuits and in different synapses?
The answer in part is to step back and appreciate the
wonderful complexity of the brain’s neurotransmitter
systems, and that we are only beginning to scratch
the surface of how these neurotransmitter systems
theoretically work as the substrates of normal
feelings and emotions as well as the symptoms of
mental illnesses. Here we will hazard a mere glimpse
of how neurotransmitters regulate each other’s
neurotransmission by acting through networks of
neurons communicating with each other, not only with
different neurotransmitters at different nodes in the
various neuronal networks, but with different receptor
subtypes for the same neurotransmitters at nodes or
connecting points within these neuronal networks.
Hypothetically, when neural networks are experiencing
inefficient information processing (i.e., one could
say they are “out of tune”), this in part mediates the
symptoms of mental illnesses. A corollary to this notion
is that when our drugs “tune” these neuronal networks
by their actions at specific receptor subtypes, they have
the potential for improving the efficiency of information
processing in these neuronal networks, thereby
reducing the symptoms of mental illnesses. Although
oversimplified and perhaps a bit naïvely reductionistic in
presentation, this discussion is the next step past the now
dated notion that mental illnesses and drugs that treat
them are simply “chemical imbalances” at synapses. In
considering the modern neurobiology of mental illnesses
and their treatments, one would be well advised to
remain humble about what we know and perhaps recall
how The Devil’s Dictionary (by Ambrose Bierce) defined
the mind in the nineteenth century:
MIND, n. A mysterious form of matter secreted by
the brain. Its chief activity consists in the endeavor
to ascertain its own nature, the futility of the attempt
being due to the fact that it has nothing but itself to
know itself with.
Constructing the 5HT Network

Serotonin, as do all neurotransmitters, interacts
downstream with other neurons and the
neurotransmitters these neurons release (Figures 4-42
and 4-43). Thus, what happens after serotonin is released
119

4


<<<PAGE 136>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

depends not only upon what receptor it interacts with
(see nine different serotonin receptors in Figure 4-42), but
also very much upon what neuron it is communicating
with and the neurotransmitter that neuron releases (see
interactions with glutamate and GABA neurons in Figure
4-42 and with glutamate, GABA, norepinephrine (NE),
dopamine (DA), histamine (HA), and acetylcholine (ACh)
in Figure 4-43). Note all the options that serotonin has
for control: it can excite or inhibit depending upon the

serotonin receptor subtype where it is interacting, and
upon whether the postsynaptic neuron itself releases
the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate or the
inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA. When serotonin has
neurotransmission simultaneously in both excitatory and
inhibitory situations, which predominates? The short
answer is that it seems to depend upon whether a specific
receptor is expressed in a specific location; the density
of that receptor, with response more likely with densely

5HT Receptors Regulate Glutamate Release
Directly and Indirectly Through GABA
2C +

4 +
5 6 +
7 +

GABA
1A -

2A +

SERT

2A +

Glu

-

5HT

GABA
1A -

5HT
Raphe

1A

-

+

SERT

PFC

Raphe

3

1B -

SERT

2A

+

PFC

-

Glu

-

-

1B -

Regulation of
downstream
release of DA,
NE, ACh, HA, 5HT

- inhibitory
+ excitatory

non-parvalbumin positive,
regular-spiking, latespiking, or bursting
GABA interneurons

Regulation of
downstream
release of DA,
NE, ACh, HA, 5HT
parvalbumin positive,
fast-spiking GABA
interneurons

Figure 4-42 Serotonin (5HT) regulates glutamate release directly and indirectly. Most 5HT receptor subtypes are postsynaptic
heteroreceptors and reside on the neurons that release any of a number of neurotransmitters; thus, serotonin (like all neurotransmitters)
can regulate downstream release of numerous neurotransmitters. Left: 5HT’s direct influence on glutamate pyramidal neurons can be
both excitatory (e.g., at 5HT2A, 5HT2C, 5HT4, 5HT6, and 5HT7 receptors) and inhibitory (at 5HT1A, 5HT5, and possibly postsynaptic 5HT1B
heteroreceptors). Glutamate neurons, in turn, synapse with the neurons of most other neurotransmitters to regulate their downstream
release. Right: Glutamate output can also be controlled indirectly by 5HT receptors on inhibitory GABAergic interneurons. With so many
ways to stimulate and to inhibit the glutamate neurons, and with some 5HT receptors having opposing actions on glutamate release due
to their presence on both glutamate neurons and GABA interneurons (e.g., 5HT2A), it seems that the coordinated actions of 5HT at its
various receptors may serve to “tune” glutamate output and keep it in balance. The net effects of 5HT upon glutamate release depend on
the regional and cellular expression patterns of 5HT receptor subtypes, the density of 5HT receptors, and the local concentration of 5HT.

120


<<<PAGE 137>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Figure 4-43 Serotonin (5HT) interacts in
a neuronal network to regulate all major
neurotransmitter systems. 5HT circuits
arise from discrete brainstem nuclei,
including the dorsal and median raphe
nuclei. These circuits project to a wide
range of cortical and subcortical brain areas,
including the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and
the loci for the cell bodies of neurons of
other neurotransmitters, such as the locus
coeruleus (LC) for norepinephrine, the
ventral tegmental area (VTA) for dopamine,
the tuberomammillary nucleus of the
hypothalamus (TMN) for histamine, and
the basal forebrain (BF) for acetylcholine.
Through these connections, the 5HT
network may both modulate itself and
directly and indirectly influence virtually
all other neurotransmitter networks. Thus,
it is not surprising that the 5HT network is
thought to regulate a variety of behaviors,
including mood, sleep, and appetite, or that
dysregulation of the 5HT network has been
implicated in many psychiatric disorders.

5HT Interacts in a Neuronal Network to Regulate
All Major Neurotransmitter Systems
PFC

= GABA

Glu
5HT

ACh
BF

HA
TMN

DA
VTA

NE

versus sparsely populated receptors; the sensitivity of a
receptor to serotonin; and the amount of release and the
firing rate of the serotonin neuron, with some receptors
more sensitive to low levels of serotonin than others.
Finally, it depends upon whether the interaction is direct
(e.g., serotonin directly acting at a glutamate neuron –
Figure 4-42, left – or a GABA neuron – Figure 4-42, right)
or indirect (e.g., serotonin indirectly acting at glutamate
neurons via a GABA neuron that itself innervates a
glutamate neuron – Figure 4-42, right). Norepinephrine,
dopamine, histamine, and acetylcholine can also receive
input directly from serotonin neurons, especially at their
cell bodies, or indirectly via glutamate and/or GABA
neurons as intermediaries (Figure 4-43). Thus, it can
readily be seen that a drug acting directly on serotonin
neurons and their receptors not only can affect serotonin
itself, but can have profound downstream effects on all
the other neurotransmitters. Which ones are affected, in
what priority, and at which sites are currently the subject
of intense investigation. However, these networks and
how they are organized can explain why a drug that acts

LC

first and directly at a particular receptor of a particular
neurotransmitter can have profound net effects on all
sorts of neurotransmitters. Understanding a bit about
neural networks can also be the foundation for beginning
to grasp why the frequent practice of giving drugs with
two or more mechanisms of action (or two different
agents with two or more different actions) can have either
additive/synergistic effects or canceling/antagonistic
effects. This is reflected in the corresponding effects on
drug efficacy and side effects.
5HT1A Receptors

5HT1A receptors can promote the release of other
neurotransmitters (Figure 4-44). 5HT1A receptors are
always inhibitory, but they are very frequently localized
upon postsynaptic GABA neurons, which means that the
net downstream effect in this case is actually excitatory
(Figure 4-44). For example, 5HT1A receptors are located
on GABA interneurons in the prefrontal cortex and these
GABA interneurons in turn act to inhibit neurotransmitter
release from glutamate neurons (see Figure 4-42B). 5HT1A
121

4


<<<PAGE 138>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

GABA Inhibiting Norepinephrine, Dopamine,
and Acetylcholine Release
Prefrontal Cortex

1A
GABA

GABA

5HT
Raphe

1A

NE

GABA

GABA

DA

1A
GABA

GABA

ACh
ACh
BF

DA
VTA

A

NE
LC

5HT1A Stimulation Increases Release of
Norepinephrine, Dopamine, and Acetylcholine
Prefrontal Cortex

1A

5HT

GABA

5HT
Raphe

1A

NE

5HT

GABA

1A

DA

5HT GABA

ACh

ACh
BF

B

122

BF = Basal Forebrain
VTA = Ventral Tegmental Area
LC = Locus Coeruleus

DA
VTA

NE
LC

Figure 4-44 Serotonin (5HT) 1A stimulation
indirectly increases release of other
neurotransmitters. (A) 5HT1A heteroreceptors
on GABA interneurons in the prefrontal
cortex can indirectly regulate the release
of norepinephrine (NE), dopamine (DA),
and acetylcholine (ACh). (B) Stimulation of
5HT1A receptors is inhibitory; thus, serotonin
binding at these receptors could reduce GABA
output and in turn disinhibit norepinephrine,
dopamine, and acetylcholine release.


<<<PAGE 139>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

5HT1B Presynaptic Regulation of NE, DA, HA,
and ACh in Prefrontal Cortex
Baseline Neurotransmitter Release

Prefrontal Cortex

Figure 4-45 Serotonin (5HT) 1B
stimulation decreases release of other
neurotransmitters. (A) 5HT1B receptors on the
presynaptic nerve terminals of norepinephrine
(NE), dopamine (DA), acetylcholine
(ACh), and histamine (HA) neurons can
theoretically regulate the release of these
neurotransmitters. (B) Stimulation of 5HT1B
heteroreceptors on ACh, HA, DA, and NE
neurons is inhibitory; thus, serotonin binding at
these receptors could potentially decrease the
release of these neurotransmitters.

5HT
1B
Raphe

4

NE
1B
DA
1B
HA

1B
ACh

A

ACh
BF

HA
TMN

DA
VTA

NE
LC

5HT1B Inhibits Neurotransmitter Release
Prefrontal Cortex

5HT

5HT
1B
Raphe
5HT
1B
5HT
1B

5HT
1B
BF = Basal Forebrain
TMN = Tuberomammillary Nucleus
VTA = Ventral Tegmental Area
LC = Locus Coeruleus

ACh
BF

HA
TMN

B

DA
VTA

NE
LC

123


<<<PAGE 140>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

4-46 Serotonin (5HT) 2A
5HT2A Receptors Regulate Glutamate Release – Figure
stimulation both promotes and inhibits
glutamate release. 5HT receptors are
But It’s Complicated
always excitatory, but depending on
2A

GABA

2A

2A

+

5HT
Glu

Prefrontal Cortex

Raphe

their localization can either stimulate
or inhibit glutamate release. (A) 5HT2A
receptors are located on glutamate
pyramidal neurons, and through
the stimulation of these receptors
can increase glutamate release. (B)
However, 5HT2A receptors are also
present on GABA interneurons and
when stimulated cause GABAergic
inhibition of glutamate. Thus, the net
effects of 5HT2A stimulation – or of
5HT2A antagonism – on glutamate
neurotransmission will depend
on multiple factors, including the
density of the receptors and the local
concentration of 5HT.

Regulation of downstream
release of DA, NE, ACh, HA

A

GABA

2A +

-

2A

5HT
Glu

Prefrontal Cortex

Raphe

non-parvalbumin positive,
regular-spiking, latespiking, or bursting
GABA interneurons

Opposite effect on downstream
release of DA, NE, ACh, HA

B

receptors located on other GABA interneurons also inhibit
neurotransmitter release from presynaptic terminals of
norepinephrine, dopamine, and acetylcholine neurons.
124

Shown in Figure 4-44A is the baseline condition where
a low tonic GABA release allows only a correspondingly
low baseline of norepinephrine, dopamine, and


<<<PAGE 141>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

acetylcholine release. However, when serotonin is released
at 5HT1A receptors localized on GABA interneurons
(Figure 4-44B), this receptor action inhibits the GABA
interneurons, reducing their inhibitory GABA release
and allowing an increase in the release of downstream
norepinephrine, dopamine, and acetylcholine. Thus,
serotonin action at these 5HT1A receptors facilitates
downstream norepinephrine, dopamine, and acetylcholine
release. As will be explained in subsequent chapters,
many psychotropic drugs that treat psychosis, mood, and
anxiety are 5HT1A agonists or partial agonists.
5HT1B Receptors

5HT1B receptors are inhibitory and can specifically
inhibit neurotransmitter release from norepinephrine,
dopamine, histamine, and acetylcholine neurons when
these receptors are localized upon presynaptic nerve
terminals of these neurons (Figure 4-45). When a
receptor for a neurotransmitter other than the one the
neuron uses as its own neurotransmitter is present, it is
called a “heteroreceptor” (literally, other receptor). In
the case of 5HT1B receptors present on non-serotonin
presynaptic nerve terminals, they are inhibitory and act to
prevent release of those other neurotransmitters (Figure
4-45A). At baseline, some amount of neurotransmitter is
shown being released from four different neurons in the
prefrontal cortex: norepinephrine, dopamine, histamine,
and acetylcholine (Figure 4-45A). However, when
serotonin is released upon their presynaptic inhibitory
5HT1B heteroreceptors, this reduces the release of these
four neurotransmitters (Figure 4-45B). Thus, serotonin
inhibits norepinephrine, dopamine, histamine, and
acetylcholine release at 5HT1B receptors. A few agents
known to be 5HT1B antagonists that may thus enhance
the release of these four neurotransmitters are used to
treat depression and are discussed in Chapter 7 on drug
treatments for mood disorders.
5HT2A Receptors

5HT2A receptors can both promote and inhibit the release
of other neurotransmitters. That is, although 5HT2A
receptors are always excitatory, the variability of their
location in the brain means that these receptors can both
facilitate and inhibit the release of various downstream
neurotransmitters. For example, when 5HT2A receptors
are localized on glutamate neurons, generally upon the
apical dendrites of glutamate neurons, they are excitatory,
leading to excitatory glutamate release on downstream
targets (Figure 4-46A). On the other hand, when 5HT2A
receptors are localized on GABA interneurons that
innervate glutamate neurons, excitatory 5HT2A input to

the GABA interneuron leads to GABA release, and this
GABA is inhibitory to the glutamate neuron it innervates,
with opposite effects on neurons downstream to glutamate
neurons (Figure 4-46B). Many drugs that treat psychosis
and mood have 5HT2A antagonist properties and will be
discussed extensively in Chapter 5 on drugs for psychosis
and in Chapter 7 on drugs for mood disorders. Additionally,
most hallucinogens have 5HT2A agonist properties and this
will be discussed in Chapter 13 on drug abuse.
5HT2C Receptors

5HT2C receptors generally inhibit the release of downstream
neurotransmitters. 5HT2C receptors are excitatory,
postsynaptic, and are mostly present upon GABA
interneurons (Figures 4-47A and 4-47B). This means that
5HT2C receptors have net inhibitory effects wherever their
GABA interneurons go. For example, when those GABA
interneurons with 5HT2C receptors on them innervate
downstream norepinephrine or dopamine neurons, the net
effect of 5HT is to inhibit norepinephrine and dopamine
release (compare baseline levels of norepinephrine and
dopamine in the prefrontal cortex in Figure 4-47A with
the levels of norepinephrine and dopamine after serotonin
release at 5HT2C receptors in Figure 4-47B). Agonists of
5HT2C receptors can treat obesity and antagonists of 5HT2C
receptors treat psychosis and mood disorders.
5HT3 Receptors

5HT3 receptors located in the brainstem chemoreceptor
trigger zone outside of the blood–brain barrier are well
known for their role in centrally mediated nausea and
vomiting. However, elsewhere in the central nervous
system, especially in the prefrontal cortex, 5HT3 receptors
are localized on a particular type of GABA interneuron
(specifically that with the properties of not binding to
a calcium dye called parvalbumin, and also having a
characteristic GABA interneuron firing pattern that is
regular-spiking, late-spiking, or bursting, see Figure
4-42, right). Just like 5HT2C receptors, 5HT3 receptors
are excitatory upon the GABA neurons they innervate,
meaning 5HT3 receptors also exert net inhibitory effects
wherever their GABA interneurons go.
5HT3 receptors specifically inhibit the release
of acetylcholine and norepinephrine at the cortical
level (Figure 4-48). That is, interneurons containing
5HT3 receptors terminate upon the nerve endings of
presynaptic acetylcholine and norepinephrine neurons
to inhibit them (see baseline state with a low level of
GABA release allowing a low level of acetylcholine
and norepinephrine release in Figure 4-48A).
Acetylcholine and norepinephrine release are reduced
125

4


<<<PAGE 142>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

DA release

NE release

prefrontal cortex
overactivation

NE
neuron

locus coeruleus

DA
neuron

VTA

GABA
interneurons

5HT2C
receptors

5HT
neuron

raphe

brainstem neurotransmitter centers
A
Figure 4-47A Serotonin (5HT) 2C stimulation, part 1. Excitatory 5HT2C receptors are mostly present on GABA interneurons. When
serotonin is absent, the GABA receptors are not stimulated, and thus downstream neurons, in this case norepinephrine (NE) and
dopamine (DA) neurons projecting to the prefrontal cortex, are active.

when GABA release is increased by serotonin exciting
the interneuron at excitatory 5HT3 receptors (Figure
4-48B). Thus, serotonin acting at 5HT3 receptors
inhibits both acetylcholine and norepinephrine release.
5HT3 antagonists, including some drugs that treat
depression, would be expected to have the opposite
effect, namely enhancing the release of acetylcholine and
norepinephrine (discussed further in Chapter 7).
126

One of the more important regulatory controls upon
excitatory glutamate output from the prefrontal cortex
is tonic inhibition by GABA interneurons receiving 5HT
input upon their 5HT3 receptors (Figure 4-49A). When
5HT input onto these 5HT3 receptors is increased, the
firing rate of the glutamatergic pyramidal neuron is
diminished (Figure 4-49B). Not only does this reduce
the excitatory effects of glutamate on a plethora of


<<<PAGE 143>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

prefrontal cortex
overactivation

NE
neuron

locus coeruleus

4

DA
neuron

VTA

GABA
interneurons

5HT2C
receptors

5HT

5HT

5HT
neuron

raphe

brainstem neurotransmitter centers
B
Figure 4-47B Serotonin (5HT) 2C stimulation, part 2. Serotonin binding at 5HT2C receptors on GABA
interneurons inhibits norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine (DA) release in the prefrontal cortex.

downstream sites it innervates, it also specifically
reduces the excitatory feedback loop of glutamate
upon serotonin neurons at the level of the midbrain
raphe (Figure 4-49B). So, not only does this circuit
show serotonin regulating glutamate (i.e., reducing
glutamate release by 5HT3 receptor actions at GABA
interneurons), it demonstrates one way in which

glutamate reciprocally regulates serotonin (i.e., in a
feedback loop that normally excites serotonin release
from glutamate actions on serotonin cell bodies in the
raphe, but now is diminished due to the inhibition of
glutamate release by serotonin). This is but one simple
example of reciprocal regulations of neurotransmitters
by each other.
127


<<<PAGE 144>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Baseline Neurotransmitter Release
5HT
3
+

GABA

GABA

5HT
-

5HT

Raphe

NE

3

Figure 4-48 Serotonin (5HT) 3 stimulation
inhibits norepinephrine and acetylcholine
release. Excitatory 5HT3 receptors located
on the terminals of GABA interneurons in the
prefrontal cortex can regulate the release of
norepinephrine (NE) and acetylcholine (ACh).
(A) At baseline, tonic GABA release allows for
a low level of NE and ACh release. (B) When
5HT is released, it binds to 5HT3 receptors on
GABAergic neurons, causing phasic release
Prefrontal of GABA onto noradrenergic and cholinergic
neurons, thus reducing the release of NE and
Cortex
ACh, respectively.

GABA

GABA

ACh

Basal
Forebrain

ACh

NE
Locus
Coeruleus

A

5HT3 Receptors Inhibit
Norepinephrine and Acetylcholine Release
5HT
3

+

GABA

GABA

5HT

-

Prefrontal
Cortex

5HT

Raphe
3

+

GABA

GABA

-

Basal
Forebrain

ACh
non-parvalbumin positive,
regular-spiking, latespiking, or bursting
GABA interneurons
5HT3 receptor stimulated

3

B

128

NE
Locus
Coeruleus


<<<PAGE 145>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

4-49 Serotonin (5HT)
Serotonin and Glutamate Regulate Each Other Figure
3 stimulation inhibits serotonin

GABA

3 +

-

5HT
Glu

+

Prefrontal Cortex

Raphe

non-parvalbumin positive,
regular-spiking, latespiking, or bursting
GABA interneurons

A

release. Excitatory 5HT3 receptors
located on the terminals of GABA
interneurons in the prefrontal
cortex can regulate the release of
glutamate, and glutamate in turn
can regulate release of serotonin.
(A) At baseline, low-level serotonin
release stimulates 5HT3 receptors on
GABA interneurons, which synapse
with pyramidal glutamate neurons.
Glutamate release downstream
regulates release of downstream
dopamine (DA), norepinephrine
(NE), acetylcholine (ACh), and
histamine (HA). Glutamate also
regulates 5HT release in the raphe.
(B) When concentrations of 5HT
are higher, the stimulation at 5HT3
receptors on GABA interneurons
increases GABA release. GABA, in
turn, inhibits glutamate pyramidal
neurons, reducing glutamate output.
Decreased release of excitatory
glutamate means that there may be
a resultant decrease in downstream
release of neurotransmitters,
including 5HT.

Regulation of downstream
release of DA, NE, ACh, HA

Serotonin Actions at 5HT3 Receptors
Reduces Its Own Release
GABA

3 +

-

5HT

+

Glu

Prefrontal Cortex

Raphe

3

5HT3 receptor stimulated

Regulation of downstream
release of DA, NE, ACh, HA

B

129

4


<<<PAGE 146>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT6 Receptors

5HT6 receptors are postsynaptic and may be key
regulators of the release of acetylcholine release and of
control of cognitive processes. Blocking this receptor
improves learning and memory in experimental animals,
so 5HT6 antagonists have been proposed as novel
pro-cognitive agents for the cognitive symptoms of
schizophrenia, Alzheimer disease, and other disorders.
5HT7 Receptors

5HT7 receptors are postsynaptic, excitatory, and
frequently localized on inhibitory GABA interneurons,
same as discussed above for the 5HT1A, 5HT2C, and 5HT3
receptors. Just like these other receptors localized on

GABA interneurons, 5HT7 receptors generally inhibit the
release of downstream neurotransmitters. 5HT7 receptors
specifically inhibit the release of glutamate at the cortical
level (Figure 4-50B). That is, cortical interneurons
containing 5HT7 receptors terminate on apical dendrites of
glutamatergic pyramidal neurons (see baseline state with
a normal level of glutamate release in the absence of 5HT7
receptor activation in Figure 4-50A). When serotonin binds
to 5HT7 receptors on these cortical GABA interneurons,
this inhibits glutamate output (Figure 4-50B).
5HT7 receptors also regulate serotonin release at the
level of the brainstem raphe (Figures 4-51A and 4-51B).
That is, a recurrent collateral from the serotonin neuron
loops backwards to innervate a GABA neuron that
Figure 4-50A Serotonin (5HT) 7
stimulation inhibits glutamate release, part
1. 5HT7 receptors are located on GABA
interneurons that synapse with glutamate
pyramidal neurons. In the absence of
serotonin, tonic GABA release results in
normal glutamate release downstream.

Baseline Glutamate Release

pyramidal
neuron
GABA neuron

5HT7
receptor

PFC

baseline
glutamate release

overactivation

5HT
neuron

raphe
A

130


<<<PAGE 147>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Figure 4-50B Serotonin (5HT) 7
stimulation inhibits glutamate release, part
2. When serotonin binds to 5HT7 receptors
on GABA interneurons, the phasic GABA
release leads to inhibition of glutamate
release.

5HT7 Inhibits Glutamate Release

pyramidal
neuron

GABA neuron

5HT7
receptor

4

PFC

reduced
glutamate release

overactivation

5HT
neuron

raphe
B

innervates the serotonin cell body. At baseline, serotonin
release is not affected by this inhibitory feedback system
(Figure 4-51A). However, when serotonin release
gets high, this activates serotonin release from the
recurrent collateral, stimulating the 5HT7 receptor there
(Figure 4-51B). This activates GABA release, which in turn
inhibits further serotonin release by its inhibitory actions
at the cell body of the serotonin neuron (Figure 4-51B).
5HT7 antagonists are used for the treatment of psychosis
and mood and are discussed in more detail in Chapter 7.
The Serotonin Hyperfunction Hypothesis of Psychosis

If the glare of the dopamine hypothesis blinded some
of us to the possibility of alternate explanations for
psychosis, it created a dilemma for patients with

psychosis secondary to Parkinson’s disease or Alzheimer
disease, since treatment with D2 blockers causes harm
to these patients, worsening movements in Parkinson’s
disease and increasing the risk of stroke and death in
Alzheimer disease. Until recently, dogma dictated that all
psychoses were due to excessive mesolimbic dopamine
and all treatments needed to block D2 receptors there.
While this characterization worked well for patients with
schizophrenia, it obviously was not ideal for patients with
psychosis in Parkinson’s disease or in dementia, since it
meant that the only available drugs for psychosis were
relatively contraindicated for them.
Although serotonin receptors and synapses are
ubiquitous throughout the brain, the serotonin
hyperfunction hypothesis of psychosis suggests that
131


<<<PAGE 148>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 4-51A Serotonin (5HT) 7
stimulation inhibits serotonin release,
part 1. Excitatory 5HT7 receptors
located on the terminals of GABA
interneurons in the raphe can regulate
serotonin release. When 5HT7 receptors
are not occupied, serotonin is released
into the prefrontal cortex (PFC).

Baseline Serotonin Release

baseline
5HT release

PFC

overactivation

5HT7
receptor

GABA neuron

5HT
neuron

raphe
A

psychosis may be caused by an imbalance in excitatory
5HT2A receptor stimulation of those glutamate pyramidal
neurons discussed above, which directly innervate VTA/
mesostriatal integrated hub dopamine neurons and
visual cortex neurons (Figures 4-52A–D and Figures
4-53 through 4-55). The hallucinogens LSD, mescaline,
and psilocybin, which are all powerful 5HT2A agonists,
132

have long been known to induce psychosis, dissociative
experiences, and especially visual hallucinations by
overstimulating prefrontal and visual cortex 5HT2A
receptors (compare Figure 4-52A and 4-52B; see also
Figure 4-53). These symptoms can be blocked by 5HT2A
antagonists, demonstrating that hallucinogens cause
psychosis by 5HT2A stimulation.


<<<PAGE 149>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

5HT7 Inhibits Serotonin Release

Figure 4-51B Serotonin (5HT) 7
stimulation inhibits serotonin release,
part 2. When serotonin binds to 5HT7
receptors that innervate GABA neurons
in the raphe nucleus, this causes the
release of inhibitory GABA, which then
turns off further serotonin release.

4

reduced
5HT release

PFC

overactivation

5HT7
receptor

GABA neuron

5HT
neuron

Stimulation of 5HT7 Receptors
in the Raphe Reduces
Serotonin Release

raphe
B

The next link in the serotonin hyperfunction
hypothesis of 5HT2A overstimulation causing psychosis
comes from work in Parkinson’s disease psychosis (PDP),
affecting up to half of Parkinson’s patients, especially
later in the disease. Postmortem examinations as well
as neuroimaging in living patients with PDP have
demonstrated not only loss of dopamine nerve terminals
in the motor striatum of the nigrostriatal pathway
that causes the classic motor symptoms of Parkinson’s
disease, but also loss of serotonin nerve terminals in
the prefrontal and visual cortex (Figure 4-52C). This

loss of serotonin and serotonin nerve terminals leads to
upregulation and too many 5HT2A receptors in the cortex,
perhaps a futile attempt to overcome serotonin loss
(Figure 4-52C). The overabundance of 5HT2A receptors
leads to an imbalance in their excitatory actions on
glutamate dendrites from the remaining serotonin in
the cortex, and consequently, the symptoms of psychosis
(Figures 4-52C and 4-54). Drugs with 5HT2A antagonist
actions can block these symptoms of PDP, as will be
explained in further detail in Chapter 5 on drugs for
psychosis. These observations support the serotonin
133


<<<PAGE 150>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Baseline
PFC

5HT2A
5HT2A
5HT2A

Visual
cortex

Striatum

VTA

SN

Raphe

Figure 4-52A Serotonin (5HT) 2A receptors and psychosis, baseline. Glutamatergic pyramidal neurons in the prefrontal cortex (PFC)
project to the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and to the visual cortex. Activity of the glutamatergic pyramidal neurons is regulated by
serotonergic neurons that project from the raphe nucleus as well as by GABA interneurons in the PFC. At baseline, when excitatory
5HT2A receptors are not stimulated and GABA neurotransmission is tonic, the glutamatergic neurons are not active.

hyperfunction hypothesis of psychosis by demonstrating
that PDP is related to serotonin hyperfunction at 5HT2A
receptors that results from the malfunctioning and
upregulation of 5HT2A receptors by the disease process of
Parkinson’s disease.
134

Psychosis in dementia and its link to serotonin
hyperfunction at 5HT2A receptors appears to be
different from what is happening with hallucinogen
psychosis or PDP, where there is postulated
overstimulation of 5HT2A receptors. In dementia-


<<<PAGE 151>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Hallucinogen Psychosis

PFC

1
hallucinogen
(LSD, psilocybin,
mescaline) stimulate
5HT2A receptors
and excitate glutamate
receptors

5HT2A
5HT2A
5HT2A

Visual
cortex

delusions and
auditory
hallucinations

visual hallucinations

Striatum

VTA

overactivation

SN

Raphe

2
5HT2A excitation of
glutamate by hallucinogens
causes mesolimbic DA
hyperactivity and psychosis
Figure 4-52B Serotonin (5HT) 2A receptors and psychosis, hallucinogens. Hallucinogens such as LSD, psilocybin, and mescaline are
5HT2A agonists. (1) When these agents stimulate 5HT2A receptors on glutamatergic pyramidal neurons in the prefrontal cortex (PFC),
this causes overactivation of the glutamate neuron. (2) The resultant release of glutamate into the ventral tegmental area (VTA) causes
hyperactivity of the mesolimbic dopamine (DA) pathway, resulting in delusions and auditory hallucinations. Excessive glutamate release
in the visual cortex can cause visual hallucinations.

related psychosis there is no consistent evidence
for upregulation of 5HT2A receptors like there is
in PDP. Instead, in dementia, the accumulation of

plaques, tangles, and Lewy bodies, as well as the
damage from strokes, hypothetically knocks out
cortical neurons and leads to a lack of inhibition of
135

4


<<<PAGE 152>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Parkinson's Disease Psychosis

PFC

5HT2A
5HT2A
5HT2A
5HT2A

3
Normal or even low
5HT release now overstimulates upregulated
5HT2A receptors

5HT2A
5HT2A

Visual
cortex
akinesia
rigidity
tremor

delusions and
auditory
hallucinations

Loss of
nigrostriatal DA
causes motor
symptoms

4
Upregulated
5HT2A receptors
cause glutamate excitation,
mesolimbic DA
hyperactivity, and
psychosis

2
Loss of raphe 5HT
causes upregulated
5HT2A receptors
in PFC

1

Striatum

VTA

SN

visual hallucinations

Raphe

Figure 4-52C Serotonin (5HT) 2A receptors and psychosis, Parkinson’s disease psychosis. (1) Loss of nigrostriatal dopamine neurons
causes the motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, such as akinesia, rigidity, and tremor. (2) Parkinson’s disease also causes loss of
serotonergic neurons that project from the raphe to the prefrontal cortex (PFC). (3) This leads to upregulation of 5HT2A receptors,
in which case normal or even low serotonin release can overstimulate these receptors, causing overactivation of the glutamatergic
pyramidal neuron. (4) Excessive glutamate release into the ventral tegmental area (VTA) causes hyperactivity of the mesolimbic
dopamine pathway, resulting in delusions and auditory hallucinations. Excessive glutamate release in the visual cortex can cause visual
hallucinations.

the surviving glutamate neurons (Figure 4-29C and
Figure 4-52D). If there is not enough GABA inhibition
to counter the normal 5HT2A stimulation coming to
surviving glutamate neurons projecting to the VTA/
136

mesostriatum integrated hub and to the visual cortex,
this enhanced output theoretically causes psychosis in
these dementia patients (Figure 4-52D and 4-55). It is
now known that selective 5HT2A antagonism reduces


<<<PAGE 153>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Psychosis in Dementia

plaque

tangle

stroke

Lewy
body

PFC

4
2 sustained 5HT2A
excitation no longer
balanced
by GABA inhibition
5HT2A
5HT2A
5HT2A

1 loss of normal GABA
inhibition by
neurodegeneration

Visual
cortex

delusions and
auditory
hallucinations

visual hallucinations

Striatum

3 imbalance between 5HT2A excitation
and GABA inhibition causes
glutamate excitation, mesolimbic
DA hyperactivity, and psychosis

VTA

SN

Raphe

Figure 4-52D Serotonin (5HT) 2A receptors and psychosis, dementia. (1) Accumulation of amyloid plaques, tau tangles, and/or Lewy
bodies, as well as the damage caused by strokes, may destroy some glutamatergic pyramidal neurons and GABAergic interneurons
while leaving others intact. The loss of GABA inhibition upsets the balance of control over glutamatergic pyramidal neurons. (2) When
the effects of stimulation of excitatory 5HT2A receptors are not countered by GABA inhibition, there is a net increase in glutamatergic
neurotransmission. (3) Excessive glutamate release into the ventral tegmental area (VTA) causes hyperactivity of the mesolimbic
dopamine pathway, resulting in delusions and auditory hallucinations. Excessive glutamate release in the visual cortex can cause visual
hallucinations.

137


<<<PAGE 154>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 4-53 Serotonin (5HT) 2A receptors
and psychosis, hallucinogens. (A) Shown
here is a cortico-brainstem glutamatergic
pathway projecting from the prefrontal
cortex to the ventral tegmental area (VTA),
and an indirect cortico-cortical glutamatergic
pathway in the visual cortex. Activity of
both pathways is regulated by serotonergic
neurons that project from the raphe nucleus
as well as by GABA interneurons in the
prefrontal cortex. At baseline, normal
stimulation of excitatory 5HT2A receptors
on the glutamate neurons is balanced by
tonic stimulation of GABA receptors on the
same neurons; the net effect is thus normal
activation of the glutamatergic neurons.
(B) Hallucinogens such as LSD, psilocybin,
and mescaline are 5HT2A agonists. When
these agents stimulate 5HT2A receptors on
glutamatergic pyramidal neurons in the
prefrontal cortex, this causes overactivation
of the glutamate neurons. Excessive
glutamate release into the VTA causes
hyperactivity of the mesolimbic dopamine
(DA) pathway, resulting in delusions and
auditory hallucinations. Excessive glutamate
release in the visual cortex can cause visual
hallucinations.

5HT2A
receptors

mesolimbic DA neuron

A

Hallucinogen Psychosis
stimulated
5HT2A receptors
by hallucinogen

normal

HIGH

visual hallucinations

delusions and
auditory
hallucinations

B
overactivation

138


<<<PAGE 155>>>
5HT2A
receptor
5HT2A
receptor

nigrostriatal DA neuron
mesolimbic DA neuron

4

A

Psychosis in Parkinson’s Disease
upregulated
5HT2A receptors

normal

HIGH

visual hallucinations

degeneration of
nigrostriatal DA
neuron

akinesia
rigidity
tremor

delusions and
auditory
hallucinations

degeneration of
raphe 5HT neuron
B
overactivation

Figure 4-54 Serotonin (5HT) 2A receptors and psychosis, Parkinson’s disease psychosis. (A) Shown here is a cortico-brainstem
glutamatergic pathway projecting from the prefrontal cortex to the ventral tegmental area (VTA), and an indirect cortico-cortical
glutamatergic pathway in the visual cortex. Activity of both pathways is regulated by serotonergic neurons that project from the raphe
nucleus as well as by GABA interneurons in the prefrontal cortex. At baseline, normal stimulation of excitatory 5HT2A receptors on the
glutamate neurons is balanced by tonic stimulation of GABA receptors on the same neurons; the net effect is thus normal activation
of the glutamatergic neurons. (B) Loss of nigrostriatal dopamine neurons causes the motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, such as
akinesia, rigidity, and tremor. Parkinson’s disease also causes loss of serotonergic neurons that project from the raphe to the prefrontal
cortex and to the visual cortex. This leads to upregulation of 5HT2A receptors on glutamatergic pyramidal neurons in the prefrontal
cortex, in which case normal or even low serotonin release can overstimulate these receptors. Excessive glutamate release into the VTA
causes hyperactivity of the mesolimbic dopamine (DA) pathway, resulting in delusions and auditory hallucinations. Excessive glutamate
release in the visual cortex can cause visual hallucinations.

139


<<<PAGE 156>>>
5HT2A
receptor

mesolimbic DA neuron

A

Psychosis in Dementia
normal

loss of GABA inhibition

normal 5HT2A
excitation
now out of balance

HIGH

delusions and
auditory
hallucinations

visual hallucinations

overactivation

B

plaque

tangle

stroke

Lewy
body

Figure 4-55 Serotonin (5HT) 2A receptors and psychosis, dementia. (A) Shown here is a cortico-brainstem glutamatergic pathway
projecting from the prefrontal cortex to the ventral tegmental area (VTA), and an indirect cortico-cortical glutamatergic pathway in
the visual cortex. Activity of both pathways is regulated by serotonergic neurons that project from the raphe nucleus as well as by
GABA interneurons in the prefrontal cortex. At baseline, normal stimulation of excitatory 5HT2A receptors on the glutamate neurons
is balanced by tonic stimulation of GABA receptors on the same neurons; the net effect is thus normal activation of the glutamatergic
neurons. (B) Accumulation of amyloid plaques, tau tangles, and/or Lewy bodies, as well as the damage caused by strokes, may destroy
some glutamatergic pyramidal neurons and GABA interneurons while leaving others intact. When the effects of stimulation of excitatory
5HT2A receptors are not countered by GABA inhibition, there is a net increase in glutamatergic neurotransmission. Excessive glutamate
release into the VTA causes hyperactivity of the mesolimbic dopamine pathway, resulting in delusions and auditory hallucinations.
Excessive glutamate release in the visual cortex can cause visual hallucinations.

140


<<<PAGE 157>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

the psychosis associated with dementia. Presumably
this is due to lowering the normal 5HT2A stimulation to
surviving glutamate neurons that have lost their GABA
inhibition by neurodegeneration. This hypothetically
could rebalance the output of the surviving glutamate
neurons so that 5HT2A antagonism and its reduction of
neuronal stimulation compensates for the loss of GABA
inhibition. 5HT2A antagonist treatment of dementiarelated psychosis will be discussed in further detail in
Chapter 5 and in Chapter 12 on the treatment of the
behavioral symptoms of dementia.
Linking the Psychosis Hypothesis of Serotonin
Hyperfunction at 5HT2A Receptors to the Dopamine
Hypothesis of Psychosis

What are the consequences to dopamine activity of the
hypothetical excessive or imbalanced 5HT2A stimulation
at glutamatergic pyramidal neurons? The short
answer is that it theoretically leads to the very same
dopamine hyperactivity already discussed above for the
dopamine hypothesis of psychosis and for the NMDA
hypofunction hypothesis of psychosis (Figures 4-52
through 4-55).
That is, when those glutamate neurons that directly
innervate VTA dopamine neurons lose either their
serotonin input due to neurodegeneration of serotonin
neurons in Parkinson’s disease or their GABA inhibition
from neurodegeneration of any cause, they become
hyperactive and stimulate too much dopamine release
from the mesostriatal projections of those dopamine
neurons (Figure 4-52 through 4-55), just as happens in
schizophrenia.
Summary and Conclusions Regarding Dopamine,
NMDA, and Serotonin Neurotransmission in Psychosis

In summary, there are three interconnected pathways
theoretically linked to hallucinations and delusions:
(1) Dopamine hyperactivity at D2 receptors in the
mesolimbic/mesostriatal pathway, which extends
from the VTA/mesostriatum integrated hub to the
ventral striatum
(2) NMDA receptor hypoactivity at GABAergic
interneurons with loss of GABAergic inhibition in the
prefrontal cortex
(3) Serotonin hyperactivity/imbalance at 5HT2A receptors
on glutamate neurons in the cerebral cortex
All three neuronal networks and neurotransmitters
are linked together, and both 5HT2A and NMDA receptor
actions can hypothetically result in hyperactivity of the
downstream mesolimbic dopamine pathway. Targeting

at any node in this dysfunctional psychosis circuit could
theoretically be therapeutic for psychosis of many causes.

SCHIZOPHRENIA AS THE
PROTOTYPICAL PSYCHOTIC
DISORDER
Schizophrenia is the prototypical psychotic disorder since
it is the most common and best known and expresses
prototypical psychotic symptoms. Schizophrenia affects
about 1% of the population anywhere in the world and
is one of the most devastating illnesses in medicine. Its
onset during adolescence and early adulthood coincides
with the years of life that should be the most dynamic
and formative. Instead, this illness has a chronic course,
with marked and lifelong functional disability, decreased
lifespan of 25 to 30 years, and an alarming mortality rate
that is three to four times that of the general population.
On top of all of this misfortune is the fact that 5% of
patients with schizophrenia complete suicide. Although
the treatments described in this book do improve
symptoms, they do not return most patients to normal
functioning, nor do they necessarily adequately reduce
the anguish that patients and their families feel from the
ravages of this illness.
Schizophrenia by definition is a disturbance that must
last for 6 months or longer, including at least one month
of positive symptoms (i.e., delusions, hallucinations,
disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic
behavior) or negative symptoms.
Positive symptoms are listed in Table 4-3 and shown
in Figure 4-56. These symptoms of schizophrenia are
often emphasized since they can be dramatic, can erupt
suddenly when a patient decompensates into a psychotic
episode (often called a psychotic “break,” as in break
from reality), and are the symptoms most effectively
treated by medications. Delusions are one type of positive
symptom, and these usually involve a misinterpretation
of perceptions or experiences. The most common
content of a delusion in schizophrenia is persecutory,
but may include a variety of other themes including
referential (i.e., erroneously thinking that something
refers to oneself), somatic, religious, or grandiose.
Hallucinations are also a type of positive symptom
(Table 4-3) and may occur in any sensory modality (e.g.,
auditory, visual, olfactory, gustatory, and tactile) but
auditory hallucinations are by far the most common and
characteristic hallucinations in schizophrenia. Positive
symptoms generally reflect an excess of normal functions,
and in addition to delusions and hallucinations may
141

4


<<<PAGE 158>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

also include distortions or exaggerations in language
and communication (disorganized speech) as well as in
behavioral monitoring (grossly disorganized or catatonic
or agitated behavior). Positive symptoms are well known
because they are dramatic, are often the cause of bringing
a patient to the attention of medical professionals and law
enforcement, and are the major target of drug treatments
for schizophrenia.
Negative symptoms of schizophrenia are listed in
Tables 4-4 and 4-5 and shown in Figure 4-56. Classically,
there are at least five types of negative symptoms all
starting with the letter A (Table 4-5):
alogia – dysfunction of communication; restrictions
in the fluency and productivity of thought and
speech
affective blunting or flattening – restrictions in the
range and intensity of emotional expression
asociality – reduced social drive and interaction
anhedonia – reduced ability to experience pleasure
avolition – reduced desire, motivation, or persistence;
restrictions in the initiation of goal-directed
behavior
Negative symptoms in schizophrenia commonly
are considered a reduction in normal functions, such
as blunted affect, emotional withdrawal, poor rapport,
passivity and apathetic social withdrawal, difficulty
in abstract thinking, stereotyped thinking, and lack of
spontaneity. Negative symptoms in schizophrenia are
associated with long periods of hospitalization and poor
social functioning. As will be discussed below, it can be

Table 4-3 Positive symptoms of psychosis and schizophrenia

Delusions
Hallucinations
Distortions or exaggerations in language and
communication
Disorganized speech
Disorganized behavior
Catatonic behavior
Agitation
Table 4-4 Negative symptoms of schizophrenia

Blunted affect
Emotional withdrawal
Poor rapport
Passivity
Apathetic social withdrawal
Difficulty in abstract thinking
Lack of spontaneity
Stereotyped thinking
Alogia: restrictions in fluency and productivity of
thought and speech
Avolition: restrictions in initiation of goal-directed
behavior
Anhedonia: lack of pleasure
Attentional impairment

Schizophrenia: The Phenotype

schizophrenia

...into symptoms

deconstruct the syndrome...

positive symptoms
-delusions
-hallucinations
negative symptoms
-apathy
-anhedonia
-cognitive blunting
-neuroleptic dysphoria

142

Figure 4-56 Positive and negative
symptoms. The syndrome of
schizophrenia consists of a mixture of
symptoms that are commonly divided
into two major categories, positive and
negative. Positive symptoms, such as
delusions and hallucinations, reflect
the development of the symptoms of
psychosis; they can be dramatic and
may reflect loss of touch with reality.
Negative symptoms reflect the loss of
normal functions and feelings, such as
losing interest in things and not being
able to experience pleasure.


<<<PAGE 159>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Table 4-5 What are negative symptoms?

Domain

Descriptive term

Translation

Dysfunction of
communication

Alogia

Poverty of speech; e.g., talks little, uses few words

Dysfunction of affect

Blunted affect

Reduced range of emotions (perception, experience, and
expression); e.g., feels numb or empty inside, recalls few emotional
experiences, good or bad

Dysfunction of
socialization

Asociality

Reduced social drive and interaction; e.g., little sexual interest, few
friends, little interest in spending time with (or little time spent with)
friends

Dysfunction of
capacity for pleasure

Anhedonia

Reduced ability to experience pleasure; e.g., finds previous hobbies or
interests unpleasurable

Dysfunction of
motivation

Avolition

Reduced desire, motivation, persistence; e.g., reduced ability to
undertake and complete everyday tasks; may have poor personal
hygiene

quite difficult to tell the difference between the negative
symptoms of schizophrenia, the cognitive symptoms
of schizophrenia, the affective/mood symptoms of
schizophrenia, particularly depression, and the side
effects of drugs that treat psychosis (discussed in
Chapter 5). Although formal rating scales can be used to
measure negative symptoms versus cognitive symptoms
versus affective symptoms for research studies, in
clinical practice it may be more practical to identify
and monitor mostly negative symptoms and to do this
quickly by observation alone (Figure 4-57) or by some
simple questioning (Figure 4-58). Negative symptoms
are not just part of the syndrome of schizophrenia;
they can also be part of a “prodrome” that begins with
subsyndromal symptoms that do not meet the full

diagnostic criteria of schizophrenia and occur before the
onset of the full syndrome of schizophrenia. Prodromal
negative symptoms are important to detect and monitor
over time in high-risk patients so that treatment can
be initiated at the first signs of psychosis. Negative
symptoms can also persist between psychotic episodes
once schizophrenia has begun and reduce social and
occupational functioning in the absence of positive
symptoms.
Beyond the Positive and Negative Symptoms of
Schizophrenia

Although not recognized formally as part of the
diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia, numerous studies
subcategorize the symptoms of this illness into five

Key Negative Symptoms Identified Solely on Observation

Reduced speech: Patient has restricted speech quantity, uses
few words and nonverbal responses. May also have impoverished
content of speech, when words convey little meaning*

Figure 4-57 Negative symptoms
identified by observation. Some
negative symptoms of schizophrenia
– such as reduced speech, poor
grooming, and limited eye contact – can
be identified solely by observing the
patient.

A

Poor grooming: Patient has poor grooming and hygiene, clothes are
dirty or stained, or subject has an odor*
B

Limited eye contact: Patient rarely makes eye contact with the
interviewer*
C

*symptoms are described for patients at the more severe end of the spectrum

143

4


<<<PAGE 160>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Key Negative Symptoms Identified with Some Questioning
Reduced emotional responsiveness: Patient exhibits
few emotions or changes in facial expression, and when questioned
can recall few occasions of emotional experience*
A

Figure 4-58 Negative symptoms
identified by questioning. Other
negative symptoms of schizophrenia can
be identified by simple questioning. For
example, brief questioning can reveal
the degree of emotional responsiveness,
interest level in hobbies or pursuing life
goals, and desire to initiate and maintain
social contacts.

(SIGH)

Reduced interest: Reduced interests and hobbies, little or nothing
stimulates interest, limited life goals and inability to proceed with them*
B

Reduced social drive: Patient has reduced desire to initiate social
contacts and may have few or no friends or close relationships*
C

*symptoms are described for patients at the more severe end of the spectrum

Match Each Symptom to Hypothetically
Malfunctioning Brain Circuits
mesocortical/
prefrontal cortex

mesolimbic

positive
symptoms
affective
symptoms

negative
symptoms

aggressive
symptoms

cognitive
symptoms

ventromedial
prefrontal cortex
orbitofrontal
cortex

nucleus accumbens
reward circuits

dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex

amygdala

dimensions: not just positive and negative symptoms,
but also cognitive symptoms, affective symptoms, and
aggressive symptoms (Figure 4-59). This is perhaps a
more sophisticated if complicated manner of describing
the symptoms of schizophrenia.
Cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia include impaired
attention and information processing, manifesting as
difficulties with verbal fluency (i.e., the ability to produce
spontaneous speech), problems with serial learning (of
a list of items or a sequence of events), and impairment
in vigilance for executive functioning (i.e., problems
with sustaining and focusing attention, concentrating,
144

Figure 4-59 Localization of symptom
domains. The different symptom
domains of schizophrenia may best be
subcategorized into five dimensions:
positive, negative, cognitive, affective,
and aggressive. Each of these symptom
domains may hypothetically be
mediated by unique brain regions.

prioritizing, and modulating behavior based upon social
cues). Important cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia
are listed in Table 4-6. Cognitive symptoms begin before
the onset of the first psychotic illness and manifest
as lower than expected IQ scores. IQ and cognition
then worsen during the prodrome before the onset of
full-blown psychosis, and then progressively worsen
throughout the course of schizophrenia. Cognitive
symptoms in schizophrenia do not include the same
symptoms commonly seen in dementia, such as shortterm memory disturbance; instead, cognitive symptoms
of schizophrenia emphasize “executive dysfunction,”


<<<PAGE 161>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Table 4-6 Cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia

Problems representing and maintaining goals
Problems allocating attentional resources
Problems focusing attention
Problems sustaining attention
Problems evaluating functions
Problems monitoring performance
Problems prioritizing
Problems modulating behavior based upon social
cues
Problems with serial learning
Impaired verbal fluency
Difficulty with problem solving

which includes problems representing and maintaining
goals, allocating attentional resources, evaluating and
monitoring performance, and utilizing these skills to
solve problems.
Affective symptoms are frequently associated with
schizophrenia, but this does not necessarily mean that
they fulfill the full diagnostic criteria for a comorbid
anxiety or affective disorder. Nevertheless, depressed
mood, anxious mood, guilt, tension, irritability, and worry
frequently accompany schizophrenia. These various
symptoms are also prominent features of major depressive
disorder, numerous anxiety disorders, psychotic
depression, bipolar disorder, schizoaffective disorder,
organic dementias, childhood psychotic disorders, and
treatment-resistant cases of depression, bipolar disorder,
and schizophrenia, among many others. Affective
symptoms of schizophrenia, particularly symptoms of
depressed mood, anhedonia, lack of motivation, and
lack of pleasure, can also be quite difficult to distinguish
from the negative symptoms of schizophrenia and from a
comorbid mood or anxiety disorder.
Wherever encountered, affective symptoms need
to be treated. In the case of schizophrenia, when
affective symptoms are not sufficiently improved by
traditional drugs for the positive symptoms of psychosis,
consideration can be given to adding drugs used to
treat anxiety and/or depression (e.g., selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors, SSRIs), not only to relieve the
current affective symptoms, but also to prevent suicide,
which is unfortunately very common in patients with
schizophrenia. There is no drug treatment for the
disorder of schizophrenia itself, only for the symptoms of

schizophrenia. Thus, whenever possible, consideration
should be given to treat the affective symptoms of
schizophrenia even if they do not reach full criteria for
a comorbid mood or anxiety disorder. Even though
affective symptoms in a patient with schizophrenia may
very well respond to drug treatments for depression or
anxiety, these same treatments are not very effective if at
all for true negative symptoms.
Aggressive symptoms, such as overt hostility,
assaultiveness and physical abuse, frank violence, verbally
abusive behaviors, sexually acting-out behaviors, selfinjurious behaviors including suicide, and arson and
other property damage can all occur in schizophrenia.
Aggression is different from agitation in that aggression
tends to refer to intentional harm, while agitation is
a more nonspecific and often nondirected state of
heightened psychomotor or verbal activity, accompanied
by an unpleasant state of tension and irritability. In
schizophrenia, both can occur alongside positive
symptoms, particularly when positive symptoms are
out of control, and both agitation and aggression often
improve when positive symptoms are reduced by drugs
that treat psychosis.
Both agitation and aggression can also occur in
patients with dementia but must be distinguished from
positive psychotic symptoms, since new treatments
are evolving for agitation in dementia that differ from
treatments for psychosis in dementia and these also
differ from treatments for psychosis in schizophrenia.
Treatments of agitation and aggression are discussed
in more detail in Chapter 5 on treatments for psychosis
and in Chapter 12 on treatments for the behavioral
symptoms of dementia. Aggressive symptoms can also
occur in numerous other disorders that exhibit problems
with impulse control such as bipolar disorder, childhood
psychosis, borderline personality disorder, antisocial
personality disorder, drug abuse, attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorders in children, and
many others.
For schizophrenia, the topic of violence – a type
of aggression – is controversial. The stereotype of
schizophrenia patients as frequent violent perpetrators
of mass shootings is an unfortunate exaggeration
contributing to the stigma of this illness. Most patients
with schizophrenia in fact are not violent, and patients
are more likely to be a victim of violence than a
perpetrator. However, some studies do suggest that
schizophrenia patients commit violence more often than
the general population, although the increased rate is

145

4


<<<PAGE 162>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

not large, and the violence is often linked to a lack of
adequate medication treatment as well as to concomitant
substance abuse.
Not surprisingly, schizophrenia patients who commit
violence often become involved in the criminal justice
system. This may be a sorry reflection of the lack of
adequate outpatient treatment as well as the lack of
short-term crisis and inpatient beds in the community
for treating patients with schizophrenia. It is a shocking
fact that in the United States we have “criminalized”
serious mental illnesses such as schizophrenia, since
our largest “mental health institutions” are now jails
and prisons. For example, the twin towers of the Los
Angeles County Jail, the New York City jail at Rikers
Island, and the Cook County Chicago jail are the largest
mental health facilities in the country. Up to a quarter
of the 2 million inmates in jails and prisons throughout
the country have serious mental illnesses. Although
patients with schizophrenia do get treatment in jail
and prison, this treatment is widely acknowledged to
be substandard in correctional environments and the
correctional environment itself is inherently countertherapeutic. Furthermore, when released, patients often
do not take medication, are homeless, and eventually
are re-arrested for another violent offense. In California,
the numbers of patients with serious mental illnesses
who are arrested for a felony and found incompetent to
stand trial because of their illness and who have had 15
or more prior arrests have been increasing; half of them
have not accessed reimbursable mental health services
including medication for the six months prior to their
arrest and half are in an unsheltered homeless condition.
Fortunately, innovative treatment programs modeled
on a successful program in Miami, Florida seek to
decriminalize the treatment of schizophrenia by diversion
programs sending patients to treatment with housing
rather than to jail and prison.
Nevertheless, once sent to jail, prison, or state forensic
hospitals, patients with schizophrenia can frequently
experience and cause violence. Some of this is due to the
fact that institutions have violent environments and some
of this is due to the fact that those with serious mental
illnesses who find themselves in institutions are a small
subset of all patients, specifically those most likely to
commit violence. If schizophrenia is roughly 1% of the
population, there are an estimated 400,000 patients with
this illness in the State of California, whose population
is about 40 million. If up to 200,000 individuals are
incarcerated in California and perhaps 25% of them (or

146

approximately 40,000 of them) have a serious mental
illness requiring treatment with drugs for psychosis,
this would mean that perhaps 10% of all patients with
schizophrenia in California are in prison or jail – again
probably those who are the most likely to engage in
violence when unmedicated and/or abusing drugs.
An even smaller subpopulation of patients with
schizophrenia are those who commit a violent felony
and are judged either incompetent to stand trial
or insane, and sent to one of the five state forensic
hospitals in California. This population is only a few
thousand patients, or perhaps only 1% of all patients
with schizophrenia in California. Unfortunately, they
are the most violent subset of schizophrenia patients:
not surprising, as a violent felony put them in the
state forensic hospital in the first place. Studies show
that violence in this setting is actually associated with
criminogenic risk, suggesting that it is the process of
criminalization from living in an institutional setting,
and not the positive symptoms of psychosis, that are
driving a lot of this violence. Once in the state forensic
hospitals they often continue to commit violent acts,
even when treated and medicated. But not all patients
with schizophrenia even in state forensic hospitals are
violent; only about a third of them commit a violent act
during hospitalization, usually a single event within the
first 120 days. Actually, about 3% of state forensic patients
(a few hundred at most or fewer than 1 per 100,000
patients with schizophrenia in California) commit about
40% of the violence within the state forensic hospital,
about half against staff and about half against other
patients. Thus, only a tiny fraction of patients with
schizophrenia commit a lot of violence, and the number
of patients with violence is frequently exaggerated by
media. Nevertheless, working in a state forensic hospital
can be very dangerous, as can living as a patient in these
settings. Treating violence in patients with schizophrenia
can be very important in state forensic hospitals, jails,
and prisons, as can preventing violence in these patients
when they leave these settings.
Rather than lumping all forms of violence together,
experts parse violence in institutionalized patients with
schizophrenia into three types: impulsive, predatory, and
psychotic (Figure 4-60). Psychotic violence, associated
with positive symptoms of psychosis, which typically
command hallucinations and/or delusions, is actually
the least common type of violence in institutional
settings, despite the fact that these patients have a
psychotic illness (Figure 4-60). This is presumably


<<<PAGE 163>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Organized - 29%
Planned behavior not typically associated with
frustration or response to immediate threat

Psychotic - 17%

Might not be accompanied by autonomic arousal

– typically command hallucinations and/or delusions

Associated with positive symptoms of psychosis

Planned with clear goals in mind
Also called predatory, instrumental, proactive,
or premeditated aggression

4

Impulsive - 54%
Characterized by high levels of autonomic arousal
Precipitated by provocation
Associated with negative emotions, such as anger or fear
Usually represents response to perceived stress
Also called reactive, affective, or hostile aggression
Figure 4-60 Three types of violence. There are at least three different types of violence: psychotic, impulsive, and
organized/psychopathic. Psychotic violence is associated with positive symptoms of psychosis. The most common
form of violence is impulsive; it is associated with autonomic arousal and often precipitated by stress, anger, or fear.
Organized or psychopathic violence is planned and is not accompanied by autonomic arousal.

because treatment in institutional settings is often
effective for positive symptoms. However, treating
positive symptoms does not quell all violence, since the
most common form of violence in institutional settings
is actually impulsive violence – often precipitated by
provocation as a response to stress and associated with
negative emotions such as anger or fear (Figure 4-60).
For these reasons, impulsive violence is also called
reactive, affective, or hostile aggression. The third
form of violence, also more common than psychotic
violence, is psychopathic or organized and is planned
behavior not typically associated with frustration or
response to immediate threat (Figure 4-60). If psychotic
violence and impulsive violence are “hot-blooded”
with emotional arousal, organized violence is “coldblooded” and not accompanied by autonomic arousal
as it is planned with clear goals in mind (Figure 4-60).
Organized violence is what is commonly seen in patients
with psychopathic or antisocial personalities and is
associated with criminogenic behaviors more than with

psychotic symptoms. Nevertheless, psychotic patients
in institutional settings can also have psychopathic
tendencies and commit organized violence, which may
require forms of confinement rather than drugs in
order to manage. Certain treatments, such as clozapine
or high doses of standard drugs for schizophrenia,
may also be useful for psychotic or impulsive violence
in patients with underlying psychotic disorders, but
behavioral interventions may be particularly helpful to
prevent violence linked to poor impulsivity associated
with violence (i.e., by reducing provocations from the
environment). Impulsive and organized violence in
schizophrenia are not as clearly related to dopamine
D2 overactivity as psychotic violence when positive
symptoms of schizophrenia are out of control, especially
in the small population of frequent aggressors. In
California state forensic hospitals, these frequent
aggressors that can be so difficult to manage have
an underlying psychotic illness, exhibit psychotic or
impulsive violence rather than organized violence, and
147


<<<PAGE 164>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

have a cognitive deficiency beyond that usually associated
with schizophrenia. Aggression and violence are
discussed in further detail in Chapter 13 on impulsivity
and compulsivity and are also differentiated from
agitation and from positive symptoms or psychosis in
dementia in Chapter 12.
What is the Cause of Schizophrenia?

What causes schizophrenia: nature (i.e., genetics)
or nurture (i.e., the environment or epigenetics)?
Is schizophrenia neurodevelopmental or
neurodegenerative? The modern answer indeed may be
“yes” in part to all of these.
Genetics and Schizophrenia

Modern theories of mental illness have long abandoned
the notion that single genes cause any of the major

mental illnesses (Figure 4-61). Genes do not code
directly for mental illnesses or for psychiatric symptoms,
behaviors, personalities, or temperaments. Instead,
genes code directly for proteins and epigenetic regulators
(see Figures 1-31 and 1-32). It is thought that the actions
of genes must “conspire” amongst themselves (Figure
4-62, upper left) and amongst environmental stressors
(Figure 4-62, upper right) in order to produce a mental
illness (Figure 4-62, bottom). Thus, current theories
state that inheriting many risk genes for a mental illness
sets the stage for a mental illness, but does not cause a
mental illness per se. More properly, individuals inherit
risk for mental illness, but they do not inherit mental
illness. Whether this risk evolves into a manifest mental
disorder is hypothesized to be dependent upon what
happens in the environment to an individual who has
risk genes.

Classic Theory:
Genes Cause Mental Illness

hypothetical mental
illness gene

abnormal gene
product causes
neuronal malfunction

mental illness

148

Figure 4-61 Classic theory of
inherited disease. According to the
classic theory of inherited disease, a
single abnormal gene can also cause
a mental illness. That is, an abnormal
gene would produce an abnormal
gene product, which, in turn, would
lead to neuronal malfunction that
directly causes a mental illness.
However, no such gene has been
identified, and there is no longer any
expectation that such a discovery
might be made. This is indicated
by the red cross-out sign over this
theory.


<<<PAGE 165>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Nature

Nurture
virus or toxin

cognition
neuroplasticity

abusive
childhood

neurotoxicity of
psychosis

!! # @
@ #
!!

obstetric
events

synaptogenesis
neurotransmitter
systems

a few hundred
risk genes

stress
vulnerability

multiple life
events

traumatic
experience
(e.g., combat)

bullying

4

cumulative
environmental
stress factors

polygenic risk score

abnormal
competitive
elimination of
synapses

dysconnectivity

abnormal LTP
abnormal synaptic
plasticity and
connectivity

hallucinations

marijuana

inadequate
synaptic
strength

delusions

dysregulation of
glutamate,
dopamine,
serotonin

thought
disorder

schizophrenia
Figure 4-62 The nature and nurture of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia may occur as the result of both genetic (nature) and epigenetic
(nurture) factors. That is, an individual with multiple genetic risk factors, combined with multiple stressors causing epigenetic changes,
may have abnormal information processing in the form of dysconnectivity, abnormal long-term potentiation (LTP), reduced synaptic
plasticity, inadequate synapse strength, dysregulated neurotransmission, and abnormal competitive elimination of synapses. The result
may be psychiatric symptoms such as hallucinations, delusions, and thought disorder.

Recent evidence suggests that a portfolio of a few
hundred specific genes – each with a small contribution
of less than 1% – may together confer risk for
schizophrenia (Table 4-7). The function of all of these
risk genes is not fully known, but may be to regulate such
key aspects of the brain as neurotransmitter systems,

synaptogenesis, neuroplasticity, neurodevelopment,
cognition, the neurotoxicity of psychosis, and stress
vulnerability, amongst other functions (Figure 4-62,
upper left). One way to deal with this complexity is to add
up all the abnormal genes any individual has amongst
the known few hundred risk genes, and compute what is
149


<<<PAGE 166>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

called a “polygenic risk score” suggesting how much risk
there might be for developing schizophrenia. Even with
this simplification, the known contribution of all risk
genes added together only confers a portion of the risk
for schizophrenia. What comprises the remaining risk?
In schizophrenia, it is various environmental stressors,
specifically, cannabis use, emotionally traumatic
experiences such as early childhood adversity, bullying,
obstetric events, sleep deprivation, being a migrant,
and others (Figure 4-62, upper right). For example, the
incidence of psychosis has been shown to be higher in
cities with a lot of migrants; in one such city, London, the
incidence of psychosis falls by one-third if migrants and
their children are excluded from the population studied.
Other studies show that there is a high correlation
between the frequency of cannabis use and the rate of
psychosis across European cities, and that if nobody
smoked high-potency cannabis, 12% of all cases of firstepisode psychosis across Europe would be prevented.
In particular cities, the estimated reduction in firstepisode psychosis would be 32% in London and 50% in
Amsterdam.
How does the environment unmask schizophrenia
in those who have genetic risk for it? The answer is that
the environment hypothetically puts a load on the neural
circuits where the risk genes are expressed and causes
these circuits to malfunction under pressure (Figure
4-62, bottom). Furthermore, these same stressors
can even cause normal genes to malfunction and
together all of this causes aberrant neuroplasticity and

synaptogenesis (Figure 4-62, bottom). How can that be?
Normal genes causing mental illness? Hypothetically,
yes, when environmental stressors (Figure 4-62,
upper right) cause various critical normal genes to be
expressed when they should be silenced, or silenced
when they should be expressed, in a process called
epigenetics (Figure 1-30). Some of the best evidence
that environmental stressors and normal genes are
also involved with abnormal genes in the causation
of schizophrenia is that only half of identical twins of
patients with schizophrenia also have schizophrenia.
Having identical genes is thus not enough to cause
schizophrenia and instead epigenetics is also in play,
such that the affected twin not only expresses some
abnormal genes that the unaffected co-twin might not
express, but also expresses some normal genes at the
wrong time or silences other normal genes at the wrong
time; together these factors may cause schizophrenia in
one co-twin but not the other.
In summary, mental illnesses such as schizophrenia
are now thought to be due not only to the summed
biological action of abnormal genes with flawed DNA
causing flaws in the structure and function of the proteins
and regulators they code (Figure 4–62, upper left), but
are also due to the environment, which plays upon both
abnormal genes and normal genes that make normal
functioning proteins and regulators but are activated or
silenced at the wrong times (Figure 4-62, upper right). In
other words, schizophrenia results from both nature and
nurture (Figure 4-62, bottom).

Table 4-7 Some candidate susceptibility risk genes involved in biological functions implicated in schizophrenia

Genes

Description

Glutamate neurotransmission and synaptic plasticity
GRIA1

Ionotropic glutamate receptor mediating fast synaptic neurotransmission

GRIN2A

Glutamate gated-ion-channel protein and key mediator of synaptic plasticity

GRM3

Encodes glutamate metabotropic receptor 3, one of the major excitatory neurotransmitter
receptors, extensively explored as a potential drug target in schizophrenia

Calcium channel and signaling
CACNA1C

Encodes an α1 subunit of voltage-sensitive calcium channels

CACNB2

One of the voltage-sensitive calcium channels

Neurogenesis
SOX2

Transcription factor essential for neurogenesis

SATB2

Essential for cognitive development and involved in long-term plasticity

150


<<<PAGE 167>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Schizophrenia: Problems with Neurodevelopment,
Neurodegeneration, or Both?

In the case of schizophrenia, two major questions always
arise:
(1) How does the scheming of nature and nurture lead
to the full onset of this illness around the time of
adolescence?
(2) What kind of neurobiological processes underlie this
disorder such that the results of nature and nurture
can appear to be neurodevelopmental at the onset of
schizophrenia yet neurodegenerative over the lifetime
course of this illness?
Both the neurodevelopmental and the
neurodegenerative theories of schizophrenia are
discussed next.
Neurodevelopment and Schizophrenia

Modern research findings strongly suggest that
something is amiss in the way the brain makes, retains,
and revises its synaptic connections in schizophrenia,
starting from birth. Telltale signs of this include
the cognitive deficits, lowering of IQ, oddness, and
social deficits of patients before the overt onset of a
psychotic break that signals the full diagnostic criteria
of schizophrenia. In order to grasp what might be
going wrong with neurodevelopment in schizophrenia,
it is important to first have an understanding of
normal neurodevelopment. An overview of normal
neurodevelopment is shown in Figure 4-63. After
conception, stem cells differentiate into immature
neurons. Only a minority of neurons that are formed are
selected for inclusion in the developing brain. The others
die off naturally in a process called apoptosis. It remains
a mystery why the brain makes so many more neurons
than it needs, and how it decides which neurons to select
for inclusion in the developing brain, but it is certainly
feasible that abnormalities in the process of neuronal
selection could be a factor in neurodevelopmental
disorders, from autism to intellectual disability (formerly
known as mental retardation) to schizophrenia on the
severe end of the spectrum, and ADHD (attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder) and dyslexia on the mild to
moderate end of the spectrum. At any rate, those neurons
that are selected migrate and then differentiate into
different types of neurons, after which synaptogenesis
(making of synaptic connections) occurs (Figure 4-63).
Most neurogenesis (i.e., birth of new neurons), neuronal
selection, and neuronal migration occur before birth,
although new neurons continue to form in some brain

areas throughout life. After birth, differentiation and
myelination of neurons as well as synaptogenesis also
continue throughout a lifetime. All along the way, not
just prenatally or even just in childhood but throughout
adult life, disruption of this neurodevelopmental process
(Figure 4-63) can hypothetically result in various
psychiatric symptoms and illnesses.
In the case of schizophrenia, the suspicion is that
the neurodevelopmental process of synaptogenesis
and brain restructuring has gone awry. Synapses are
normally formed at a furious rate between birth and age
6 (Figure 4-64). Although brain restructuring occurs
throughout life, it is most active during late childhood
and adolescence in a process known as competitive
elimination (Figures 4-63 and 4-64). Competitive
elimination and restructuring of synapses peak during
pubescence and adolescence, normally leaving only
about half to two-thirds of the synapses that were
present in childhood to survive into adulthood (Figures
4-63 and 4-64). Since the onset of positive symptoms
of psychosis (psychotic “breaks”) follows this critical
neurodevelopmental period of peak competitive
elimination and restructuring of synapses, it has thrown
suspicion on possible abnormalities in these processes as
underlying in part the onset of schizophrenia.
In order to understand how aberrant competitive
elimination could contribute to the onset and worsening
of schizophrenia, it is important to consider how the
brain decides which synapses to keep and which ones
to eliminate. Normally, when glutamate synapses are
active, their N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors
trigger an electrical phenomenon known as long-term
potentiation (LTP) (shown in Figure 4-65). With the
help of gene products that converge upon glutamate
synapses and receptors, ion channels, and the processes
of neuroplasticity and synaptogenesis, LTP normally
leads to structural and functional changes of the synapse
that make neurotransmission more efficient, sometimes
called “strengthening” of synapses (Figure 4-65, top).
This includes changes in synaptic structure such as an
increase in the number of AMPA (α-amino-3-hydroxy5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid) receptors for
glutamate. AMPA receptors are important for mediating
excitatory neurotransmission and depolarization at
glutamate synapses. Thus, more AMPA receptors can
mean a “strengthened” synapse. Synaptic connections
that are frequently used develop frequent LTP and
consequential robust neuroplastic influences, thus
strengthening them according to the old saying “nerves

151

4


<<<PAGE 168>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Overview of Neurodevelopment
ErbB4
NRG

immature
neurons

NRG
dysbinden
DISC1

RGS4
DAOA
NRG
AMPA

ErbB4
NRG

eliminated
DISC1

NRG
dysbinden
DISC1

DISC1

stem cell

eliminated

neurogenesis

conception

birth

selection

death

migration

conception

birth

differentiation and
myelination

conception

Synaptogenesis
(presynaptic;
axonal
growth &
connections)

birth

Synaptogenesis
(postsynaptic;
dendritic
arborization)

death

Competitive
elimination of
synapses
(loss of dendritic
arborization)

conception birth

6
16
years years

Figure 4-63 Overview of neurodevelopment. The process of brain development is shown here. After conception, stem cells
differentiate into immature neurons. Those that are selected migrate and then differentiate into different types of neurons, after
which synaptogenesis occurs. Most neurogenesis, neuronal selection, and neuronal migration occur before birth, although new
neurons can form in some brain areas even in adults. After birth, differentiation and myelination of neurons as well as synaptogenesis
continue throughout a lifetime. Brain restructuring also occurs throughout life, but is most active during childhood and adolescence
in a process known as competitive elimination. Key genes involved in the process of neurodevelopment include DISC1 (disrupted
in schizophrenia-1), ErbB4, neuregulin (NRG), dysbindin, regulator of G-protein signaling 4 (RGS4), D-amino acid oxidase activator
(DAOA), and genes for α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid (AMPA).
Figure 4-64 Synapse formation
by age. Synapses are formed at
a furious rate between birth and
age 6. Competitive elimination and
restructuring of synapses peaks
during pubescence and adolescence,
leaving about half to two-thirds of
the synapses present in childhood to
survive into adulthood.

Birth
152

Age 6

Age 14-60

death


<<<PAGE 169>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

that fire together wire together” (Figure 4-65, top).
However, if something is wrong with the genes that
regulate synaptic strengthening, it is possible that this
causes less effective use of these synapses, makes the
NMDA receptors hypoactive (Figure 4-29B), and leads

to ineffective LTP and fewer AMPA receptors trafficking
into the postsynaptic neuron (Figure 4-65, bottom).
Such a synapse would be “weak,” theoretically causing
inefficient information processing in its circuit and
possibly also causing symptoms of schizophrenia.

Neurodevelopmental Hypothesis of Schizophrenia: Key Susceptibility
Genes Causing Abnormal Synaptogenesis
4
glutamate

din

in
ysb

d

lin

gu

ure

ne

C1

synapse survives
competitive elimination

NMDA
receptor

DIS

AMPA
receptors

normal
synaptic strengthening
ep

m

ig

NMDA
receptor

en

ult

ip

et

ics

/fl

le

aw

fla

ed

we

d

en

ge

ne

vir
on

s

m

LTP

en

t

NMDA
receptor

AMPA
receptor

abnormal
synaptic strengthening
and dysconnectivity

weak synapse
competitively eliminated

Figure 4-65 Neurodevelopmental hypothesis of schizophrenia. Dysbindin, DISC1 (disrupted in schizophrenia-1), and neuregulin are
all involved in “strengthening” of glutamate synapses. Under normal circumstances, N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors in active
glutamate synapses trigger long-term potentiation (LTP), which leads to structural and functional changes of the synapse to make it
more efficient, or “strengthened.” In particular, this process leads to an increased number of α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors, which are important for mediating glutamatergic neurotransmission. Normal synaptic strengthening
means that the synapse will survive during competitive elimination. If the genes that regulate strengthening of glutamate synapses are
abnormal, combined with environmental insults, then this could cause hypofunctioning of NMDA receptors, with a resultant decrease
in LTP and fewer AMPA receptors. This abnormal synaptic strengthening and dysconnectivity would lead to weak synapses that would
not survive competitive elimination. This would theoretically lead to increased risk of developing schizophrenia, and these abnormal
synapses could mediate the symptoms of schizophrenia.

153


<<<PAGE 170>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Another important aspect of synaptic strength is
that this likely determines whether a given synapse
is eliminated or maintained. Specifically, “strong”
synapses with efficient NMDA neurotransmission
and many AMPA receptors survive, whereas “weak”
synapses with few AMPA receptors may be targets for
elimination (Figure 4-65). This normally shapes the
brain’s circuits so that the most critical synapses are not
only strengthened but also survive the ongoing selection
process, keeping the most efficient and most frequently
utilized synapses while eliminating inefficient and rarely
utilized synapses. However, if critical synapses are not
adequately strengthened in schizophrenia, it could lead to
their wrongful elimination, causing dysconnectivity that
disrupts information flow from circuits now deprived
of synaptic connections where communication needs
to be efficient (Figure 4-65). Sudden and catastrophic
competitive elimination of “weak” but critical
synapses during adolescence could even explain why
schizophrenia has onset at this time. If abnormalities in
genes converging upon the processes of neuroplasticity
and synaptogenesis lead to the lack of critical synapses
being strengthened, these critical synapses may be
mistakenly eliminated during adolescence, with
disastrous consequences, namely the onset of symptoms
of schizophrenia. This could explain why genetically
programmed dysconnectivity present from birth is
masked by the presence of many additional weak
connections prior to adolescence, acting with exuberance
to compensate for defective connectivity, and when that
compensation is destroyed by the normal competitive
elimination of synapses in adolescence, schizophrenia
emerges. Thus, aberrant neurodevelopment of both
not forming adequate synapses and competitively
and erroneously removing critical synapses during
adolescence may provide partial answers both to why
schizophrenia has its full catastrophic onset at this critical
stage of neurodevelopment, and why schizophrenia has
aspects of a neurodevelopmental disorder, especially
around the time of full onset of the disorder.
Neurodegeneration and Schizophrenia

Many patients with schizophrenia have a progressive,
downhill course, especially when available treatments
are not used consistently and there are long durations
of untreated psychosis (Figure 4-66). Such observations
have led to the notion that this illness may thus be
neurodegenerative in nature. If schizophrenia looks
as though it begins as aberrant neurodevelopment,

154

it can seemingly appear that as it progresses, it is
neurodegenerative. In other words, if the manner in
which synapses are made and revised dramatically
during adolescence potentially explains how the
full onset of schizophrenia can be conceptualized as
neurodevelopmental, then the manner in which synapses
are made and revised in a more methodical manner
throughout adult life could potentially explain how the
long-term course of schizophrenia can be conceptualized
as neurodegenerative.
As stated earlier, normally, almost half of the brain’s
synapses are eliminated in adolescence (Figure 4-64).
However, what is often not appreciated as well is that,
in adulthood, you may lose (and replace elsewhere)
about 7% of the synapses in your cortex every week!
You can imagine if this process in adulthood runs
amok over a long period of time that this could have
pervasive cumulative consequences on adult brain
development – or lack thereof – and be manifest as a
progressively declining clinical course and even brain
atrophy (Figure 4-66). That is, the strengthening or
weakening of synapses occurs not only when these
synapses first form, but continues throughout life
as a sort of ongoing remodeling in response to what
experiences the individual has, and thus how often
that synapse is used or neglected. The strengthening
or weakening of glutamate synapses in particular is an
example of “activity dependent” or “use dependent” or
“experience dependent” regulation of NMDA receptors
and functionality at glutamate synapses. The old saying
is, “use it or lose it.” In schizophrenia, it is possible that
abnormal synaptogenesis prevents normal synapses from
strengthening even if the patient is “using” that synapse.
It is also possible that the “wrong” synapses are “used”
and strengthened, while the critical synapses for full
functioning are not used and therefore lost along with
the function those connections would have provided,
yielding a progressive downhill course. Evidence is
accumulating that allowing the positive symptoms of
psychosis to persist unabated hastens the progressive
loss of brain tissue associated with recurrent episodes of
psychotic breaks (usually with repeated hospitalizations)
in schizophrenia (Figure 4-66).
Abnormalities in these continuing dynamics at NMDA
receptors and glutamate synapses in particular may
explain why the course of schizophrenia is progressive
and changes over time for most patients; namely,
from an asymptomatic period to a prodrome (maybe
due to laying down deficient synapses initially in the


<<<PAGE 171>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Course of Illness in Schizophrenia
Prodrome

100

Level of functioning (%)

90

Response

80
70
60

Chronic relapsing/residual symptoms

50

First episode

40

Progressive brain tissue loss

30

First
episode

20

Second
episode

Third
episode

Fourth
episode

25

27

29

4

Treatment resistance

10
0
20

21

22

23

24

26

28

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

Age (years)
Figure 4-66 Course of illness in schizophrenia. Although schizophrenia may begin as a neurodevelopmental disorder, its progressive
nature suggests that it may also be a neurodegenerative disorder. Strengthening and weakening of synapses occurs throughout the
lifetime. In schizophrenia, it is possible that abnormal synaptogenesis prevents normal synapses from strengthening even if they are
being “used,” and/or allows the “wrong” synapses to strengthen and be retained. There is evidence that recurrent episodes of psychotic
breaks are associated with progressive loss of brain tissue in schizophrenia and loss of treatment responsiveness.

young brain) to a first-break psychosis (when synaptic
remodeling dramatically accelerates and perhaps the
wrong synapses are eliminated) (Figure 4-66). One
powerful indication of a downhill course in schizophrenia
is what happens over time to treatment responsiveness
and to the brain’s structure. At the time of a first-break
psychosis, there is often robust treatment responsiveness
to medicines for psychosis, and the brain can appear
grossly normal (see first episode brain in Figure 4-66).
However, as the number of psychotic episodes mounts,
often due to medication discontinuation, this can often
be accompanied by declining treatment responsiveness
to medications for psychosis and progressive loss of
brain tissue observable on structural neuroimaging (see
second, third, and fourth episodes and accompanying
brain scans in Figure 4-66). Finally, the patient too often
can progress to a state of pervasive negative and cognitive
symptoms without recovery and with relative resistance
to treatment with drugs for psychosis and with even
more dramatic signs of brain degeneration observed with
neuroimaging.
The good news is that there is evidence that
reducing the period of untreated psychosis may slow
the progression of schizophrenia, and there is even hope
that presymptomatic or prodromal treatments prior to
the onset of full psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia
may some day prevent or slow the onset of the illness

altogether. In fact, there is an emerging concept in
psychopharmacology in general that treatments that
reduce symptoms can also be disease modifying.
Whether or not the same agents that treat the symptoms
of schizophrenia could also prevent the emergence of
schizophrenia when given to high-risk individuals who
are either presymptomatic or in a state with only mild
prodromal symptoms remains speculative. However, it
already seems quite clear that continuous treatment of
patients with schizophrenia once it has begun is now
the standard of care in treatment of schizophrenia in
order to maximize the chances of preventing or slowing
a deteriorating course, brain-tissue loss, a tripling of
suicide attempts, and treatment resistance with repetitive
relapses after the first episode.
Is the neurodevelopmental onset and
neurodegenerative progression of schizophrenia the
case for any psychotic illness? Fortunately not. As will
be briefly discussed in the following section of this
chapter, although schizophrenia is the commonest and
best known psychotic illness, it is not synonymous with
psychosis, but is just one of many causes of psychosis and
each has its own unique onset and course of illness. The
natural history and course of illness for schizophrenia
are not generally the same for every other psychotic
illness, although severe forms of bipolar psychosis
are sometimes lumped together with severe forms of
155


<<<PAGE 172>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

schizophrenia and referred to together as “serious mental
illness” or SMI. These forms of psychosis can all have
a dismal functional outcome, including homelessness,
premature death, and even confinement in the criminal
justice system. Schizophrenia affects approximately 1%
of the population, and in the United States there are
over 300,000 acute schizophrenic episodes annually.
Between 25% and 50% of schizophrenia patients attempt
suicide, and up to 10% eventually succeed, contributing
to a mortality rate eight times greater than that of the
general population. Life expectancy of a schizophrenia
patient may be 20 to 30 years shorter than the general
population, not only due to suicide, but also due to
premature cardiovascular disease. Accelerated mortality
from premature cardiovascular disease in schizophrenia
patients is caused by genetic and lifestyle factors, such as
smoking, unhealthy diet, and lack of exercise, leading to
obesity and diabetes, but also – sorrily – from treatment
with some antipsychotic drugs that themselves cause
an increased incidence of obesity and diabetes and thus
increased cardiac risk. In the United States, over 20% of
all social security benefit days are used for the care of
schizophrenia patients. The direct and indirect costs
of schizophrenia in the US alone are estimated to be in
the tens of billions of dollars every year. Many of these
costs in the US are borne by the criminal justice system
of courts, jails, prisons, and state and forensic hospitals
that provide housing and treatment for patients with
schizophrenia due to the lack of adequate outpatient
treatment or long-term hospitals, as has already been
discussed. This may be changing due to innovative
outpatient diversion programs that are beginning to
divert patients from the criminal justice system to
community housing and treatment, which is far less
expensive and possibly more humane and effective
than alternating homelessness and no treatment with
incarceration in a revolving-door fashion.

OTHER PSYCHOTIC ILLNESSES
Psychotic disorders have psychotic symptoms as their
defining features, but there are several other disorders
in which psychotic symptoms may be present but are
not necessary for the diagnosis. Those disorders that
require the presence of psychosis as a defining feature
of the diagnosis include schizophrenia, substance/
medication-induced (i.e., drug-induced) psychotic
disorder, schizophreniform disorder, schizoaffective
disorder, delusional disorder, brief psychotic disorder,
shared psychotic disorder, psychotic disorder due to
156

Table 4-8 Disorders in which psychosis is a defining feature

Schizophrenia
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorders
Schizophreniform disorder
Schizoaffective disorder
Delusional disorder
Brief psychotic disorder
Shared psychotic disorder
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition
Childhood psychotic disorder

Table 4-9 Disorders in which psychosis is an associated feature

Mania
Depression
Cognitive disorders
Alzheimer disease and other dementias
Parkinson’s disease

another medical condition, and childhood psychotic
disorder (Table 4-8). Disorders that may or may not have
psychotic symptoms as an associated feature include
mood disorders (both bipolar mania and many types of
depression), Parkinson’s disease (known as Parkinson’s
disease psychosis or PDP), and several cognitive disorders
such as Alzheimer disease and other forms of dementia
(Table 4-9).
Symptoms of schizophrenia are not necessarily unique
to schizophrenia. It is important to recognize that several
illnesses other than schizophrenia can share some of
the same five symptom dimensions described here for
schizophrenia and shown in Figure 4-59. Thus, numerous
disorders in addition to schizophrenia can have positive
symptoms (delusions and hallucinations), including
Parkinson’s disease, bipolar disorder, schizoaffective
disorder, psychotic depression, Alzheimer disease and
other organic dementias, childhood psychotic illnesses,
drug-induced psychoses, and others. Negative symptoms
can also occur in disorders other than schizophrenia,
especially mood disorders and dementias where
it can be difficult to distinguish between negative
symptoms such as reduced speech, poor eye contact,
diminished emotional responsiveness, reduction of
interest, and reduced social drive and the cognitive and
affective symptoms that occur in these other disorders.


<<<PAGE 173>>>
Chapter 4: Psychosis, Schizophrenia, and Neurotransmitter Networks

Schizophrenia is certainly not the only disorder with
cognitive symptoms. Autism, post-stroke (vascular or
multi-infarct) dementia, Alzheimer disease, and many
other organic dementias (Parkinsonian/Lewy body
dementia; frontotemporal/Pick’s dementia, etc.), and
mood disorders including major depression and bipolar
depression can also be associated with various forms of
cognitive dysfunction.
Mood-Related Psychosis, Psychotic Depression,
Psychotic Mania

Mood disorders, from unipolar depression to bipolar
disorder, can have symptoms of psychosis that accompany
their mood symptoms. We have already discussed how
schizophrenia can have symptoms of depressed mood,
anxious mood, guilt, tension, irritability, and worry.
Thus, schizophrenia can have affective symptoms and
mood disorders can have psychotic symptoms. The point
is, whenever psychotic symptoms are encountered, they
need to be treated, and whenever affective symptoms
are encountered, they too need to be treated, not only
to relieve the current affective symptoms, but to prevent
suicide, which is unfortunately common in patients with
schizophrenia.
Parkinson’s Disease Psychosis

Parkinson’s disease begins of course with prominent
motor symptoms. Motor symptoms are believed to
be caused by deposition of Lewy bodies containing
α-synuclein in the substantia nigra. However, Parkinson’s
disease progresses in over half the cases, especially in
those with concomitant dementia, to psychosis with
delusions and hallucinations, called Parkinson’s disease
psychosis (PDP). Several causes are proposed for PDP, the
most prominent theory being the accumulation of Lewy
bodies in the cerebral cortex as well as in serotonin cell
bodies in the midbrain raphe (Figures 4-52C and 4-54).
Psychosis in Parkinson’s disease is a big risk factor for
hospital admissions, for nursing-home placement, and for
mortality, with mortality after 3 years of about 40% for
Parkinson’s patients after onset of psychosis.
PDP is not simply schizophrenia in a Parkinson’s
patient. First, the hallucinations in PDP tend to be visual
rather than auditory (e.g., seeing people, animals).
Second, the delusions tend to be a particular type of
persecutory belief (e.g., the impression that someone,
particularly a loved one, is trying to harm, steal from,
or deceive), or jealousy (e.g., the impression that your
partner is cheating on you). Third, insight into the false
nature of these hallucinations and delusions is initially

retained, which is not characteristic of psychosis in
psychiatric disorders. PDP is conceptualized as an
imbalance in serotonin and dopamine with upregulation
of 5HT2A receptors and treatable with 5HT2A antagonists
(Figure 4-52C and Figure 4-54).
Dementia-Related Psychosis

As the world’s population ages, and without a known
disease-modifying target to prevent the relentless march
of dementia, the behavioral symptoms of dementia are
attaining more and more attention, as dementia patients
are surviving longer and as their dementia progresses.
Agitation and psychosis are particularly important,
common, and disabling behavioral symptoms of
dementia and can be difficult to distinguish from each
other in dementia. However, it is important to do so
whenever possible, as the neuronal pathways for these
different behaviors are also different, and so are their
evolving treatments. Agitation in dementia is discussed in
detail in Chapter 12 on dementia. In this chapter we have
only briefly covered psychosis in dementia. Although
we have discussed how psychosis is generally defined
as the presence of delusions and/or hallucinations,
it is delusions that are often more common in many
dementias, especially Alzheimer disease, where there
is a 5-year-period prevalence of delusions of over 50%.
However, in Lewy body dementia, patients often have the
same visual hallucinations and delusions characteristic
of PDP, not surprising since Lewy body deposition in the
cerebral cortex is thought to be a contributing cause of
psychosis in both conditions.
From a pharmacological point of view, it may matter
little what causes the disruption of brain pathways that
brings on the symptoms of psychosis. It may matter
far more where the pathways are disrupted and which
pathways are disrupted. That is, whether an amyloid
plaque, a tau tangle, a small stroke, or a Lewy body
disrupts the glutamate–GABA connections or the
serotonin–glutamate connections in the cerebral cortex,
it may not matter as long as the disruption leads to
downstream dopamine hyperactivity and the symptoms
of delusions and hallucinations (Figure 4-52D and 4-55).
When those same pathological conditions occur in other
pathways, presumably those patients do not experience
psychosis, but perhaps the other symptoms of dementia,
such as memory disturbances and agitation.
Alzheimer disease dementia patients may have a
serotonin component to their psychosis, since serotonin
in presubiculum of the cerebral cortex is reported

157

4


<<<PAGE 174>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

to be low in patients with psychotic compared with
nonpsychotic dementia. Furthermore, the C102 allele
of the 5HT2A receptor gene may also be associated with
psychosis in Alzheimer disease. In addition, Alzheimer
patients with psychosis have significantly more plaques
and tangles in the medial temporal-presubicular area
and middle frontal cortex and five times higher levels
of abnormal paired helical filament-tau protein in
entorhinal and temporal cortices. If these lesions disrupt
regulation of glutamate–GABA–serotonin–dopamine
circuits, they would be expected to be the cause of
psychosis (Figure 4-52D and 4-55).

SUMMARY
This chapter has provided a brief description of psychosis
and an extensive explanation of the three principal
theories of psychosis, namely those linked to dopamine,
glutamate, and serotonin (5HT). The major dopamine,
glutamate, and serotonin pathways in the brain have
all been described. Overactivity of the mesolimbic
dopamine system may mediate the positive symptoms of
psychosis and may be linked to hypofunctioning NMDA
glutamate receptors in parvalbumin-containing GABA
interneurons in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus
in some psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia.
Underactivity of the mesocortical dopamine system
may mediate the negative, cognitive, and affective
symptoms of schizophrenia and could also be linked to

158

hypofunctioning NMDA receptors at different GABA
interneurons. Imbalance in serotonin neurotransmission,
particularly excessive activity at 5HT2A receptors
in the cortex, may explain psychosis in Parkinson’s
disease. Imbalance between serotonin and GABA
neurotransmission at glutamate neurons in the cerebral
cortex due to neurodegenerative processes knocking
out GABA inhibition may lead to excessive excitation of
glutamate neurons by serotonin acting at 5HT2A receptors
and that can be relieved by 5HT2A antagonists.
The synthesis, metabolism, reuptake, and receptors
for dopamine, glutamate, and serotonin are all described
in this chapter. D2 receptors are targets for drugs that
treat psychosis, as are 5HT2A receptors specifically
for the psychosis associated with Parkinson’s disease
and with dementias. NMDA glutamate receptors
require interaction not only with the neurotransmitter
glutamate, but also with the cotransmitters glycine or
D-serine.
Dysconnectivity of NMDA-receptor-containing
synapses caused by genetic and environmental/
epigenetic influences is a major hypothesis for the cause
of schizophrenia, including its upstream glutamate
hyperactivity and NMDA receptor hypofunction, as well
as its downstream increases in mesolimbic dopamine
but decreases in mesocortical dopamine. A whole host of
susceptibility genes that regulate neuronal connectivity
and synapse formation may represent a hypothetical
central biological flaw in schizophrenia.


<<<PAGE 175>>>
5

Targeting Dopamine and Serotonin
Receptors for Psychosis, Mood, and
Beyond: So-Called “Antipsychotics”

Targeting Mesolimbic/Mesostriatal Dopamine D2
Receptors Causes Antipsychotic Actions 161
Targeting Dopamine D2 Receptors in Mesolimbic/
Mesostriatal and Mesocortical Pathways Causes
Secondary Negative Symptoms 162
Secondary Negative Symptoms Due to Targeting
Mesolimbic Dopamine D2 Receptors 162
Secondary Negative Symptoms Due to Targeting
Mesocortical Dopamine D2 Receptors 163
Targeting Tuberoinfundibular Dopamine D2
Receptors Causes Elevation of Prolactin 164
Targeting Nigrostriatal Dopamine D2 Receptors
Causes Motor Side Effects 165
Drug-Induced Parkinsonism 166
Drug-Induced Acute Dystonia 169
Akathisia 169
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome 169
Tardive Dyskinesia 170
Drugs Targeting Dopamine D2 Receptors:
So-Called First Generation or Conventional
“Antipsychotics” 179
Drugs Targeting Serotonin 2A Receptors with or
without Simultaneously Targeting Dopamine D2
Receptors 183
5HT2A Receptor Regulation of Dopamine Release in
Three Downstream Pathways 184
Drugs Targeting Serotonin 1A Receptors and
Dopamine D2 Receptors as Partial Agonists 189
D2 Partial Agonism 189
How Does D2 Partial Agonism Cause Fewer Motor
Side Effects than D2 Antagonism? 192
5HT1A Partial Agonism 193
Links between Receptor Binding Properties
of Drugs Used to Treat Psychosis and Other
Therapeutic Actions and Side Effects 195

This chapter explores drugs that target dopamine
receptors, serotonin receptors, or both, for the treatment
of psychosis, mania, and depression. It also explores
myriad additional neurotransmitter receptors that
these agents engage. The drugs covered in this chapter
have classically been called “antipsychotics,” but this
terminology is now considered out of date and confusing
since these same agents are used even more frequently for

Mania 195
Antidepressant Actions in Bipolar and Unipolar
Depression 195
Anxiolytic Actions 196
Agitation in Dementia 197
Sedative Hypnotic and Sedating Actions 197
Cardiometabolic Actions 198
Pharmacological Properties of Selected Individual
First-Generation D2 Antagonists 201
Chlorpromazine 201
Fluphenazine 202
Haloperidol 202
Sulpiride 202
Amisulpride 203
An Overview of the Pharmacological Properties
of Individual 5HT2A/ D2 Antagonists and D2/5HT1A
Partial Agonists: The Pines (Peens), Many Dones
and a Rone, Two Pips and a Rip 204
The Pines (Peens) 222
Many Dones and a Rone 234
Two Pips and a Rip 239
Selective 5HT2A Antagonist 240
The Others 240
Future Treatments for Schizophrenia 241
Roluperidone (MIN-101) 241
D3 Antagonists 241
Trace Amine Receptor Agonists and SEP363856 241
Cholinergic Agonists 242
A Few Other Ideas 242
Summary 242

mood disorders than for psychosis, yet are not classified
as “antidepressants.” As mentioned earlier, throughout
this textbook we strive to utilize modern neurosciencebased nomenclature, where drugs are named for their
pharmacological mechanism of action and not for
their clinical indication. Thus, drugs discussed in this
chapter have “antipsychotic action” but are not called
“antipsychotics”; they also have “antidepressant action”
159


<<<PAGE 176>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

but are not called “antidepressants.” Instead, this chapter
reviews one of the most extensively prescribed classes
of psychotropic agents in psychiatry today, namely,
those that target dopamine and serotonin receptors, and
that began as drugs for psychosis, and later extended
their use even more frequently as drugs for mania,
bipolar depression, and treatment-resistant unipolar
depression. On the horizon is the use of at least some of
these agents in PTSD (posttraumatic stress disorder),
agitation in dementia, and beyond. We discuss how the
pharmacological properties of these agents form not only
a single large class of many agents, but in many ways,
how each individual agent has binding properties that
render every agent unique from all the others. The reader
is referred to standard reference manuals and textbooks
for practical prescribing information because this chapter
on drugs for psychosis and mood emphasizes basic
pharmacological concepts of mechanism of action and

not practical issues such as how to prescribe these drugs
(for that information, see, for example, Stahl’s Essential
Psychopharmacology: the Prescriber’s Guide, which is a
companion to this textbook).
The pharmacological concepts developed here
should help the reader understand the rationale for
how to use each of the different agents, based first and
foremost upon their interactions with the dopamine and
serotonin receptor systems, and secondarily with other
neurotransmitter systems. Such interactions can often
explain both the therapeutic actions and the side effects
of the various drugs in this group. Understanding the
full range of receptor interactions for each individual
drug also sets the stage for differentiating one drug from
another, and thus for tailoring the selection of a drug
treatment by matching the pharmacological mechanisms
of a specific drug to the therapeutic and tolerability needs
of an individual patient.

Therapeutic Mechanisms of Drugs for Psychosis

D2
D2 antagonist

5HT2A

5HT2A

PA
T1A

5H

D2

D2

5HT2A/D2 antagonist

5HT2A antagonist

PA

D2/5HT1A partial agonist
Figure 5-1 Therapeutic mechanisms of drugs for psychosis. The first mechanism identified to treat psychosis was dopamine-2 (D2)
antagonism, and for several decades all available medications to treat psychosis were D2 antagonists. Today, there are many agents
available with additional mechanisms, including D2 antagonism combined with serotonin (5HT) 2A (5HT2A) antagonism, D2 partial
agonism (PA) combined with serotonin 1A (5HT1A) partial agonism, and 5HT2A antagonism alone.

160


<<<PAGE 177>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Mesolimbic/Mesostriatal Pathway Untreated Schizophrenia
normal

HIGH

positive
symptoms
A

Mesolimbic/Mesostriatal Pathway D2 Antagonist/Partial Agonist

5
normal

therapeutic

NORMAL

reduced positive
symptoms
(SIGH)

side effect

= D2 antagonist/
partial agonist
B

overactivation

secondary negative
symptoms
(apathy, anhedonia)

Figure 5-2 Mesolimbic/mesostriatal dopamine pathway and D2 antagonists. (A) In untreated schizophrenia, the mesolimbic/
mesostriatal dopamine pathway is hypothesized to be hyperactive, indicated here by the pathway appearing red as well as by the
excess dopamine in the synapse. This leads to positive symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations. (B) Administration of a D2
antagonist or partial agonist blocks dopamine from binding to the D2 receptor, which reduces hyperactivity in this pathway and thereby
reduces positive symptoms as well. However, because the mesolimbic/mesostriatal dopamine pathway also plays a role in regulating
motivation and reward, blockade of D2 receptors can cause secondary negative symptoms such as apathy and anhedonia.

TARGETING MESOLIMBIC/
MESOSTRIATAL DOPAMINE
D2 RECEPTORS CAUSES
ANTIPSYCHOTIC ACTIONS
How do the drugs approved for treating psychosis,
especially in schizophrenia, work? The earliest effective
treatments for schizophrenia and other psychotic
illnesses arose from serendipitous clinical observations
approximately 70 years ago, rather than from scientific
knowledge of the neurobiological basis of psychosis, or of
the mechanism of action of effective drugs that empirically
treated psychosis. Thus, the first truly effective drugs
for psychosis other than sedating tranquilizers were

discovered by accident in the 1950s when a drug with
antihistamine properties (chlorpromazine) was observed
to improve psychosis when this putative antihistamine was
tested in schizophrenia patients. Chlorpromazine indeed
has antihistaminic activity, but its therapeutic actions in
schizophrenia are not mediated by this property. Once
chlorpromazine was observed to be an effective drug
for treating psychosis out of proportion to its ability to
cause sedation, it was tested experimentally to uncover its
mechanism of antipsychotic action, which was identified
as dopamine D2 receptor antagonism (Figures 5-1 and 5-2).
Early in the testing process, chlorpromazine and other
drugs for psychosis of this era were all found to cause
“neurolepsis,” known as an extreme form of slowness
161


<<<PAGE 178>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

or absence of motor movements as well as behavioral
indifference in experimental animals. The original drugs
for psychosis in fact were first discovered largely by their
ability to produce this effect in experimental animals, and
thus sometimes drugs with antipsychotic properties are
called “neuroleptics.” A human counterpart of neurolepsis
is also caused by these drugs and is characterized by
psychomotor slowing, emotional quieting, and affective
indifference, sometimes also called “secondary” negative
symptoms because they mimic the primary negative
symptoms associated with the untreated illness itself
(see Figures 4-56 through 4-59 and Tables 4-4 and 4-5).
We know today that neurolepsis and secondary negative
symptoms are likely caused at least in part by blocking D2
receptors that normally mediate motivation and reward
(Figure 5-2B) as an undesired “cost of doing business”
in order to simultaneously block D2 receptors that are
thought to mediate the positive symptoms of psychosis
due to excessive release of dopamine (see Figure 5-2A).
By the 1970s it was widely recognized that the key
pharmacological property of all “neuroleptics” with
antipsychotic properties was their ability to block D2
receptors (Figure 5-1 and Figure 5-2B), specifically those
in the mesolimbic/mesostriatal dopamine pathway (Figure
5-2B; see also Figure 4-15). This pharmacological property
has been retained by many of the newer agents, some of
which add highly potent serotonin 2A (5HT2A) antagonism
and/or 5HT1A partial agonism to D2 antagonism, others
of which substitute D2 partial agonism for D2 antagonism,
and, most recently, still others which only have 5HT2A
antagonism and drop the D2 targeting entirely (Figure
5-1). The effects of serotonin-receptor-targeting of the
newer agents and of partial agonism are discussed in detail
below. Also explained in the following sections are how
targeting serotonin and dopamine receptors in various
brain circuits mediates not only therapeutic effects in
psychosis and other conditions, but also side effects. These
drugs are first classified into several general groups and
then each individual drug is discussed.

TARGETING DOPAMINE D2
RECEPTORS IN MESOLIMBIC/
MESOSTRIATAL AND
MESOCORTICAL PATHWAYS
CAUSES SECONDARY NEGATIVE
SYMPTOMS
Secondary Negative Symptoms Due to Targeting
Mesolimbic Dopamine D2 Receptors

Dopamine 2 (D2) receptors in the mesolimbic/mesostriatal
dopamine pathway are postulated not only to mediate the
162

positive symptoms of psychosis from excessive release
of dopamine in the pathway (see Figures 4-14, 4-15,
and 5-2A), but also to have a major role in regulating
motivation and reward (Figures 4-14 and 5-2B). In fact,
the nucleus accumbens, a major target of mesolimbic/
mesostriatal dopamine neurons in the ventral emotional
striatum, is widely considered to be the “pleasure center”
of the brain. The mesolimbic dopamine pathway to the
nucleus accumbens is often considered the final common
pathway of all reward and reinforcement (even if this is
an oversimplification), including not only normal reward
(such as the pleasure of eating good food, orgasm, listening
to music) but also the artificial reward of substance abuse
(see the discussion on drugs of abuse in Chapter 13).
If normal mesolimbic D2 receptor stimulation is
associated with the experience of pleasure (Figure 4-14)
and excessive mesolimbic D2 receptor stimulation is
associated with the positive symptoms of psychosis
(Figure 5-2A), D2 antagonism/partial agonism may not
only reduce the positive symptoms of schizophrenia,
but at the same time block reward mechanisms (both
shown in Figure 5-2B). When this happens, it can
leave patients feeling apathetic, anhedonic, and lacking
motivation, interest, or joy from social interactions,
a state very similar to that of negative symptoms of
schizophrenia. However, these negative symptoms are
caused by the drug, not the illness and thus are termed
“secondary” negative symptoms. When D2 blockers are
administered, as has already been mentioned above,
an adverse behavioral state can thus be simultaneously
produced by D2 antagonist/partial agonists, sometimes
called the “neuroleptic-induced deficit syndrome”
because it looks so much like the negative symptoms
produced by schizophrenia itself, and this is reminiscent
of “neurolepsis” in animals. The near shut-down of the
mesolimbic dopamine pathway, sometimes necessary
to improve the positive symptoms of psychosis (Figure
5-2A), may exact a heavy “cost of doing business” to the
patient by causing a worsening of anhedonia, apathy,
and other negative symptoms (Figure 5-2B). Worsening
negative symptoms with loss of pleasure caused by
treatment with drugs for psychosis is a plausible partial
explanation for the high incidence of smoking and
drug abuse in schizophrenia as patients may attempt
to overcome this anhedonia and lack of pleasurable
experiences. The emotional flattening and worsening of
negative symptoms may contribute to patients stopping
their given D2 blockers.
Treatment of negative symptoms includes reducing the
dose of the D2 blocker or switching to a D2 blocker that is
better tolerated; some adjunct medications can be helpful


<<<PAGE 179>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

in reducing negative symptoms, including drugs that treat
depression. Several other agents are in various stages of
development for negative symptoms and include 5HT2A
antagonists as well as dopamine 3 (D3) partial agonists, as
discussed below in the section on individual agents.

Secondary Negative Symptoms Due to Targeting
Mesocortical Dopamine D2 Receptors

Negative symptoms (Figure 5-3A) can also be
worsened by D2 antagonist/partial agonist actions in
the mesocortical dopamine pathway (Figure 5-3B).

normal

Mesocortical Pathway Untreated Schizophrenia

LOW

5

(SIGH)

negative
symptoms

affective
symptoms

A

Mesocortical Pathway D2 Antagonist/Partial Agonist

normal

symptoms
worsen

LOW

cognitive
symptoms

(SIGH)

negative
symptoms
symptoms
worsen
= D2 antagonist/
partial agonist

affective
symptoms

B

Figure 5-3 Mesocortical dopamine pathway and D2 antagonists. (A) In untreated schizophrenia, the mesocortical dopamine pathways
to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) are hypothesized to be hypoactive,
indicated here by the dotted outlines of the pathway. This hypoactivity is related to cognitive symptoms (in the DLPFC), negative
symptoms (in the DLPFC and VMPFC), and affective symptoms of schizophrenia (in the VMPFC). (B) Administration of a D2 antagonist or
partial agonist could further reduce activity in this pathway and thus potentially worsen these symptoms.

163


<<<PAGE 180>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Drugs for psychosis also block those D2 receptors
that are present in the mesocortical dopamine
pathway (Figure 5-3B) where dopamine is already
hypothetically deficient in schizophrenia (see Figures
4-17 through 4-19). This can cause or worsen not only
negative symptoms of schizophrenia, but also cognitive
and affective symptoms related to dopamine action
in the mesocortical dopamine pathway, even though
there is only a low density of D2 receptors in the cortex
(Figure 5-3B).

TARGETING
TUBEROINFUNDIBULAR
DOPAMINE D2 RECEPTORS
CAUSES ELEVATION OF
PROLACTIN
Dopamine 2 receptors in the tuberoinfundibular
dopamine pathway are also blocked when D2
antagonists are administered and this causes plasma
prolactin concentrations to rise, a condition called

Tuberoinfundibular Pathway Untreated Schizophrenia

normal

NORMAL

A

Tuberoinfundibular Pathway D2 Antagonist
normal

LOW

= pure D2 antagonist

prolactin
levels
rise

B
Figure 5-4 Tuberoinfundibular dopamine pathway and D2 antagonists. (A) The tuberoinfundibular dopamine pathway, which projects
from the hypothalamus to the pituitary gland, is theoretically “normal” in untreated schizophrenia. (B) D2 antagonists reduce activity in
this pathway by preventing dopamine from binding to D2 receptors. This causes prolactin levels to rise, which is associated with side
effects such as galactorrhea (breast secretions) and amenorrhea (irregular menstrual periods).

164


<<<PAGE 181>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

hyperprolactinemia (Figure 5-4). This can be
associated with a condition called gynecomastia,
or enlargement of the breasts, in men as well as
women, and another condition called galactorrhea
(i.e., breast secretions) and amenorrhea (i.e.,
irregular or lack of menstrual periods) in women.
Hyperprolactinemia may thus interfere with fertility,
especially in women. Hyperprolactinemia might lead
to more rapid demineralization of bones, especially in
postmenopausal women who are not taking estrogen
replacement therapy. Other possible problems
associated with elevated prolactin levels may include
sexual dysfunction and weight gain, although the role of
prolactin in causing such problems is not clear.

TARGETING NIGROSTRIATAL
DOPAMINE D2 RECEPTORS
CAUSES MOTOR SIDE EFFECTS
Motor side effects are caused by D2 antagonists/partial
agonists blocking D2 receptors in the nigrostriatal motor
pathway (Figure 5-5). When D2 receptors are blocked
acutely in the nigrostriatal pathway – the same pathway
that degenerates in Parkinson’s disease – this can cause
a condition known as drug-induced parkinsonism (DIP)
because it looks similar to Parkinson’s disease with
tremor, muscular rigidity, and slowing of movements
(bradykinesia) or loss of movement (akinesia) (Figure
5-5B). Often, any abnormal motor symptoms caused

5

Nigrostriatal Pathway - Untreated Schizophrenia

normal

NORMAL

A

Nigrostriatal Pathway - D2 Antagonist/Partial Agonist
normal

LOW

dystonia
= D2 antagonist/
partial agonist
B

DIP
drug-induced
parkinsonism
akathisia
Figure 5-5 Nigrostriatal dopamine pathway and D2 antagonists. (A) The nigrostriatal dopamine pathway is theoretically unaffected
in untreated schizophrenia. (B) Blockade of D2 receptors prevents dopamine from binding there and can cause motor side effects
such as drug-induced parkinsonism (tremor, muscle rigidity, slowing or loss of movement), akathisia (motor restlessness), and dystonia
(involuntary twisting and contractions).

165


<<<PAGE 182>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

by D2 receptor blockers are lumped together and called
collectively extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS), but EPS
is an old-fashioned and relatively imprecise term for
describing the motor side effects of D2 antagonists/
partial agonists. A practical consequence of lumping all
D2-blocker-induced movements together as EPS is to
miss the fact that different motor symptoms can have
different clinical manifestations and – importantly –
vastly different treatments. More precise terms than
EPS include not only DIP but also akathisia (motor
restlessness) and dystonia (involuntary twisting and
contractions), which can also be caused by the acute
administration of D2 antagonists/partial agonists and are
discussed below.
Yet another abnormal involuntary movement disorder
can be caused by the chronic blockade of D2 receptors
in the nigrostriatal dopamine pathway, namely tardive
dyskinesia (TD) (“tardive” because, unlike the other
motor symptoms caused by D2 blockade, these abnormal
involuntary movements are late and delayed in onset,
often after months to years of treatment) (Figure 5-6). TD
emerges only after chronic treatment with D2 blockers,
and can be irreversible. It consists of involuntary
continuous movements, often about the face and tongue,

such as constant chewing, tongue protrusions, facial
grimacing, but also limb movements that can be quick,
jerky, or choreiform (dancing). Unfortunately, DIP and
TD are often lumped together as EPS, leading to the
failure to differentiate one versus the other despite the
fact that they have essentially opposite pharmacologies
and vastly different treatments, as discussed below. Now
that treatments exist for both DIP and TD, it is more
important than ever to make this differentiation so that
proper treatment can be given. Inadequate relief of motor
side effects of D2 blockers is a major reason why patients
stop their medication.
Drug-Induced Parkinsonism

The most common side effect of drugs that target D2
receptors for psychosis is drug-induced parkinsonism,
explained above as the presence of tremor, muscular
rigidity, and slowing of movements (bradykinesia)
or loss of movement (akinesia). Classic treatment for
DIP is the use of “anticholinergics,” namely drugs that
block muscarinic cholinergic receptors, especially the
postsynaptic M1 receptor. This approach exploits the
normal reciprocal balance between dopamine and
acetylcholine in the striatum (Figure 5-7A). Dopamine

chronic
treatment

A

B

tardive
dyskinesia
Figure 5-6 Tardive dyskinesia. (A) Dopamine binds to D2 receptors in the nigrostriatal pathway. (B) Chronic blockade of D2 receptors
in the nigrostriatal dopamine pathway can cause upregulation of those receptors, which can lead to a hyperkinetic motor condition
known as tardive dyskinesia, characterized by facial and tongue movements (e.g., tongue protrusions, facial grimaces, chewing) as well
as quick, jerky limb movements.

166


<<<PAGE 183>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

neurons in the nigrostriatal motor pathway make
postsynaptic connections on cholinergic interneurons
(Figure 5-7A). Dopamine acting at D2 receptors
normally inhibits acetylcholine release from postsynaptic
nigrostriatal cholinergic neurons (Figure 5-7A). When
D2 blockers are given, dopamine can no longer suppress
acetylcholine release, thus disinhibiting acetylcholine
release from cholinergic neurons (see enhanced
acetylcholine release in Figure 5-7B). This in turn leads
to more excitation of postsynaptic muscarinic cholinergic
receptors on medium spiny GABAergic neurons, which
hypothetically leads in part to inhibition of movements
and to the symptoms of DIP (akinesia, bradykinesia,
rigidity, and tremor). However, when the enhanced
downstream release of acetylcholine is blocked by
anticholinergics at muscarinic cholinergic receptors,
this hypothetically restores in part the normal balance
between dopamine and acetylcholine in the striatum, and
DIP is reduced (Figure 5-7C).
Empirically, anticholinergics do work in clinical
practice to reduce DIP, especially the DIP caused by some
of the older D2 blockers that lack serotonergic actions. On

the other hand, there are many potential problems with
administering anticholinergics (such as the commonly
used benztropine); namely, peripheral side effects, such
as dry mouth, blurred vision, urinary retention, and
constipation, as well as central side effects including
drowsiness and cognitive dysfunction, such as problems
with memory, concentration, and slowing of cognitive
processing (Figure 5-8). To compound matters, many
drugs for psychosis themselves have anticholinergic
properties as will be discussed below for each individual
agent. Furthermore, many patients are on concomitant
psychotropic and nonpsychotropic medications that
have anticholinergic properties. Thus, the clinician
must be alert to the total anticholinergic burden for a
given patient and also be wary of the side effects that
can interfere with normal cognitive functioning and
can lead to life-threatening decrease in bowel motility
called paralytic ileus. On balance, today many patients
administered D2 blockers are overmedicated with total
anticholinergic burden. Alternatives to using these
agents should often be sought, such as use of a different
drug for psychosis that lacks anticholinergic properties,

= acetylcholine (ACh)
= dopamine (DA)

cholinergic
interneuron

M1 receptor

D2 receptor

ACh release
inhibited

DA inhibiting
ACh release
A

nigrostriatal DA neuron

striatum

Figure 5-7A Reciprocal relationship of dopamine and acetylcholine. Dopamine and acetylcholine have a reciprocal relationship in
the nigrostriatal dopamine pathway. Dopamine neurons here make postsynaptic connections with the dendrite of a cholinergic neuron.
Normally, dopamine binding at D2 receptors suppresses acetylcholine activity (no acetylcholine being released from the cholinergic
axon on the right).

167

5


<<<PAGE 184>>>
= D2 antagonist/
partial agonist

enhanced
ACh release

D2 blocker
reversing DA
inhibition

B

striatum

Figure 5-7B Dopamine, acetylcholine, and D2 antagonism. Since dopamine normally suppresses acetylcholine activity, removal of
dopamine inhibition causes an increase in acetylcholine activity. As shown here, if D2 receptors are blocked on the cholinergic dendrite
on the left, then acetylcholine release from the cholinergic axon on the right is enhanced. This is associated with the production of druginduced parkinsonism.

= anticholinergic

blockade of
enhanced ACh action
at M1 receptors

C

striatum

Figure 5-7C D2 antagonism and anticholinergic agents. One compensation for the overactivity that occurs when D2 receptors are
blocked is to block the muscarinic cholinergic receptors with an anticholinergic agent (M1 receptors being blocked by an anticholinergic
on the far right). This hypothetically restores in part the normal balance between dopamine and acetylcholine and can reduce symptoms
of drug-induced parkinsonism.

168


<<<PAGE 185>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

M1 Inserted
cholinergic neuron

ACh

LAXATIVE
constipation

E
E

P Q
P
Q
blurred
vision

cognitive
dysfunction

M1
receptor
dry mouth
drowsiness

Figure 5-8 Side effects of muscarinic cholinergic receptor blockade. Blockade of muscarinic cholinergic receptors can reduce druginduced parkinsonism, but can also induce side effects such as constipation, blurred vision, dry mouth, drowsiness, and cognitive
dysfunction (problems with memory and concentration, slowed cognitive processing).

or stopping anticholinergic medications, or use of
amantadine, which lacks anticholinergic properties but
can mitigate the symptoms of DIP.
Amantadine’s mechanism of action is thought to be
weak antagonism of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate)
glutamate receptors, possibly leading to downstream
changes in the activity of dopamine in both the direct
and indirect striatal motor pathways. No matter what its
actual mechanism of action, amantadine can be useful
for improving DIP and also has some evidence of being
useful in TD and levodopa-induced dyskinesias caused by
levodopa treatment of Parkinson’s disease.
Drug-Induced Acute Dystonia

Occasionally, exposure to D2 blockers, especially those
with neither serotonergic nor anticholinergic properties,
can cause a condition called dystonia, often upon first
exposure to the D2 blocker. Dystonia is intermittent
spasmodic or sustained involuntary contraction of the
muscles in the face, neck, trunk, pelvis, extremities,
or even the eyes. Drug-induced dystonias can be
frightening and severe; fortunately, administration of an
intramuscular injection of an anticholinergic is nearly
always effective within 20 minutes. The cause and the
treatment of this condition are other examples of the
clinical significance of the balance between dopamine
and acetylcholine in the motor striatum for the regulation
of movements (Figures 5-7A, 5-7B, and 5-7C).
Chronic treatment with D2 blockers can also cause
late-onset dystonia as a manifestation of tardive
dyskinesia, sometimes also called tardive dystonia. This
requires TD treatment, as anticholinergics rarely work for

this condition and can even make this form of dystonia
worse.
Akathisia

Akathisia is a syndrome of motor restlessness seen
commonly after treatment with D2 blockers. Akathisia
has both subjective and objective features. Subjectively,
there is a sense of inner restlessness, mental unease, or
dysphoria. Objectively, there are restless movements,
most typical being lower-limb movements such as
rocking from foot to foot, walking or marching in place
when standing, or pacing. Sometimes drug-induced
akathisia can be difficult to distinguish from the
agitation and repetitive restless movements that are
part of the underlying psychiatric disorder. Akathisia is
not particularly effectively treated with anticholinergic
medication, but instead is often more effectively treated
with either β-adrenergic blockers or benzodiazepines.
Serotonin 2A antagonists can also be helpful.
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome

A rare but potentially fatal complication can occur with
D2 receptor blockade, possibly due in part to D2 receptor
blockade specifically in the nigrostriatal motor pathway.
This is called the “neuroleptic malignant syndrome,”
associated with extreme muscular rigidity, high fevers,
coma, and even death. Some consider neuroleptic
malignant syndrome to be the most extreme form of
DIP; others theorize that this is a toxic complication
of D2 blocking drugs on cell membranes, including
muscle. It constitutes a medical emergency that requires
withdrawal of the D2 blocker, muscle-relaxing agents such
169

5


<<<PAGE 186>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

as dantrolene and dopamine agonists, as well as intensive
supportive medical treatment.
Tardive Dyskinesia
Pathophysiology

Overall, about 5% of patients maintained on D2
antagonists that have little or no serotonin receptor
action will develop TD every year (i.e., about 25% of
patients by 5 years), not a very encouraging prospect
for an illness starting in the early 20s and requiring
lifelong treatment. The risk of developing TD in elderly
subjects may be as high as 25% within the first year of
exposure to D2 antagonists. Estimates for the newer D2
drugs for psychosis that have serotonergic receptor action
are more difficult to obtain since many patients taking
them have taken the older drugs as well in the past.
Nevertheless, for those likely to have taken only newer
D2 antagonists/5HT2A antagonists or D2/5HT1A partial
agonists, the rate of TD may be about half the rate of the
older drugs. These newer agents may mitigate DIP as
well by the mechanisms discussed in detail below. Those
mechanisms are both 5HT2A antagonism and 5HT1A
partial agonism. Perhaps these mechanisms by which
they mitigate DIP serve also to mitigate the chances of
getting TD.
Who amongst all those who receive drugs for
psychosis will get TD and how does this happen? Some
evidence suggests that those who are most vulnerable
to having DIP with acute D2 blockade may also be
those who are the most vulnerable to getting TD with
chronic D2 blockade. One theory is that nigrostriatal
D2 receptors most sensitive to blockade trigger a form
of undesirable neuroplasticity called supersensitivity
in reaction to D2 receptor blockade (Figures 5-6). If D2
receptor blockade is removed early enough, TD may
reverse. This reversal is theoretically due to a “resetting”
of supersensitive D2 receptors by an appropriate return
to normal in the number or sensitivity of D2 receptors in
the nigrostriatal pathway once the antipsychotic drug that
had been blocking these receptors is removed. However,
after long-term treatment, sometimes the D2 receptors
apparently cannot reset back to normal, even when D2
blocking drugs are discontinued. This leads to TD that
is irreversible, persisting whether or not D2 blockers are
administered.
Interestingly, D2 receptors in the motor striatum
also appear to react in much the same way to chronic
stimulation by levodopa in Parkinson’s disease as they do
to chronic blockade by D2 antagonists/partial agonists in
170

schizophrenia. That is, chronic levodopa administration
in Parkinson’s disease can lead to levodopa-induced
dyskinesias that look very similar to TD, and may share a
similar pathophysiology of aberrant striatal plasticity and
abnormal neuronal “learning.” Perhaps the lesson here is
not to mess with your dopamine receptors in the motor
striatum or consequences may ensue!
A more detailed view of D2 antagonist/partial agonist
effects in the nigrostriatal dopamine system is shown in
Figures 5-9A, 5-9B, and 5-9C. This view was introduced
in Chapter 4 and illustrated in Figures 4-13B, 4-13C,
4-13D, 4-13E, and 4-13F. Some fibers of the nigrostriatal
dopamine pathway, particularly those projecting medially
to the associative striatum, may be hyperactive as part
of the limbic (emotional) system and contribute to the
positive symptoms of psychosis (see Figure 4-16B).
Other nigrostriatal dopamine projections, particularly
those projecting to the sensorimotor striatum, are part
of the extrapyramidal nervous system and control motor
movements and those are the nigrostriatal dopaminergic
neurons depicted in Figures 5-9A, 5-9B, and 5-9C.
Normally, dopamine acts at D2 receptors in the
indirect motor pathway, which is the receptor subtype
present in this pathway. The so-called indirect pathway
is also the pathway for “stop” actions (Figures 4-13F and
5-9A). Since D2 receptors are inhibitory, dopamine causes
inhibition of the stop pathway; a fancy way for dopamine
to say “go” in this pathway (Figures 4-13B and 5-9A).
Thus, dopamine at D2 receptors in the indirect pathway
triggers a “go” signal.
What happens when this action of dopamine is
blocked? When acute D2 antagonists/partial agonists
are administered, this blocks the ability of dopamine to
say “go” because these drugs inhibit dopamine’s action
in the “stop” pathway. Another way to say this is that D2
antagonists say “stop” in the indirect pathway (Figure
5-9B). If there is too much “stop,” this can result in DIP
(Figure 5-9B). In technical terms, when “stop” is not
inhibited by dopamine action at D2 receptors in the
indirect pathway because of the presence of a D2 blocker,
then movements are “stopped” – sometimes so much
so that the slow, rigid movements of DIP are produced
(Figure 5-9B).
If this situation is allowed to persist, D2 receptors in
the indirect pathway of the motor striatum hypothetically
react to the acute D2 receptor blockade shown in Figure
5-9B by “learning” to have TD when D2 blockade
becomes chronic (Figure 5-9C). The theoretical
mechanism for this is a proliferation of excess numbers


<<<PAGE 187>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

D2 Inhibition of Stop Pathway
Inhibition of stop
or “GO” normally

+

STN= subthalamic nucleus
SNr = substantia nigra reticulata
SNc= substantia nigra compacta
GPe = globus pallidus externa
GP i = globus pallidus interna
glu = glutamate
GABA = γ-aminobutyric acid
DA = dopamine
D2 = dopamine 2 receptor

glu

Cortex

Thalamus

5

GABA

STN

GP i /SNr

D2
GPe

DA

D2
-

Striatum

SN c

dopamine
inhibiting the
“STOP” pathway
makes you “GO”
normally

Figure 5-9A D2 receptor inhibition of the stop pathway. Dopamine released from the nigrostriatal pathway binds to postsynaptic D2
receptors on a γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neuron projecting to the globus pallidus externa. This causes inhibition of the indirect (stop)
pathway, thus instead telling it to “go.”

of D2 receptors in the indirect motor pathway (Figure
5-9C). Perhaps the dopamine system becomes engaged
in a futile attempt to overcome drug-induced blockade
by making more D2 receptors (Figure 5-9C). The result

is supersensitivity of the indirect pathway to dopamine.
It has been difficult to prove, but animal models and
positron emission tomography (PET) scans in patients
with schizophrenia do indeed suggest that chronic D2
171


<<<PAGE 188>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

D2 Blocker Activates “STOP” Pathway
and Causes Drug-Induced Parkinsonism
STOP:
don’t go

Cortex

GABA

Thalamus

+

glu

STN

GP i /SNr

D2 antagonist/
partial agonist

GABA

GPe

Striatum

D2 antagonist blocks
DA from inhibiting the
“stop” pathway makes you stop i.e. DIP

SN c

Figure 5-9B D2 receptor blockade activates the stop pathway. Dopamine released from the nigrostriatal pathway is blocked from
binding to postsynaptic D2 receptors on a γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neuron projecting to the globus pallidus externa. This prevents
inhibition of the indirect (stop) pathway; in other words, D2 antagonists activate the indirect (stop) pathway. Too much stop can result in
drug-induced parkinsonism.

blockade in the motor striatum causes upregulated,
supersensitive D2 receptors, and this happens to
the greatest extent in patients with TD. Whatever is
172

happening, it leads to the opposite situation (Figure
5-9C) to what was just described for acute blockade of D2
receptors (Figure 5-9B). Namely, instead of not enough


<<<PAGE 189>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Chronic D2 Blockade Causes Upregulation of D2 Receptors,
Enhanced Inhibition of “STOP” Pathway, and Tardive Dyskinesia
Major Inhibition of stop
or “GO” “GO” “GO”

+

glu

Cortex

5
Thalamus
GABA

STN

GP i /SNr

D2 antagonist/
partial agonist

upregulated supersensitive
D2 receptors

D2
GPe

D2
- DA

Striatum

upregulated D2 receptors
from chronic blockade
cause major inhibition of
the “stop” pathway
and tardive dyskinesia

SN c

Figure 5-9C Chronic D2 receptor blockade and overinhibition of the stop pathway. Dopamine released from the nigrostriatal pathway
is blocked from binding to postsynaptic D2 receptors on a γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neuron projecting to the globus pallidus
externa. Chronic blockade of these receptors can lead to their upregulation; the upregulated receptors may also be “supersensitive” to
dopamine. Dopamine can now exert its inhibitory effects in the indirect (stop) pathway, and in fact cause so much inhibition of the “stop”
signal that the “go” signal is overactive, leading to the hyperkinetic involuntary movements of tardive dyskinesia.

inhibition of stop signals from acute D2 blockade (Figure
5-9B), there is now too much inhibition of stop signals
from chronic D2 blockade (Figure 5-9C). The situation

has flipped from slow rigid movements of DIP (Figure
5-9B) to rapid hyperkinetic involuntary movements of
TD (Figure 5-9C).
173


<<<PAGE 190>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

What is the mechanism that causes the indirect
pathway to flip from too much stop to too much go? The
answer may be abnormal neuronal plasticity causing the
proliferation of too many and too sensitive D2 receptors
in the indirect pathway (Figure 5-9C). Now, all of a
sudden, instead of not enough dopamine at D2 receptors
(Figure 5-9B), there is too much dopamine at too many
D2 receptors (Figure 5-9C). The motor striatum translates
this into excessive inhibition of the “stop” signal; thus,
“not enough stop” and “too much go.” Therefore,
neuronal impulse traffic out of the striatum no longer
has an enforced speed limit, and thus, the involuntary
hyperkinetic movements of TD emerge.
The emergence of abnormal involuntary movements
of TD should be specifically monitored, using a
neurological examination and a rating scale such as
the AIMS (Abnormal Involuntary Movement scale)
periodically. Best practices are to monitor movements
in anyone taking any of these drugs, although it is
frequently not done, and especially not done in patients
being treated for depression, unfortunately. If anything,
patients with mood disorders may be at greater risk for
TD. Remember, these are the same drugs no matter in
whom they are used.
Treatment

If the brain has literally “learned” to have TD in
an aberrant attempt to compensate for chronic D2
blockade and this has resulted in unwanted dopamine
overstimulation in the indirect pathway, then TD would
seem to be a disorder ideally set up to respond to
interventions that lower dopamine neurotransmission.
How can this be done?
One way is to raise the dose of D2 antagonist to block
those numerous new upregulated and supersensitive D2
receptors. Although this might work short-term in some
patients, it is done at the expense of more immediate
side effects and the prospects of making TD even worse
down the road. Another treatment possibility is to stop
the offending D2 antagonist with the hope that the motor
system will readjust back to normal on its own and that
the movement disorder will reverse. Many patients who
do not have an underlying psychotic disorder may be
able to tolerate the discontinuation of their D2 antagonist/
partial agonist, but most patients with psychosis may
not be able to tolerate D2 antagonist/partial agonist
discontinuation. Furthermore, it does not seem that the
TD brain can “forget” its aberrant neuroplastic learning
very well, and only some patients – particularly those

174

who discontinue D2 blockade soon after the onset of their
TD movements – will likely enjoy reversal of their TD. In
fact, most patients experience an immediate worsening
of their movements when D2 blockade is eliminated,
due to the completely unblocked actions of dopamine in
the absence of any D2 antagonist therapy at all. Thus, D2
antagonist drug discontinuation is often not an option in
the treatment of TD.
Recent developments show that TD can now
be successfully treated by inhibiting the vesicular
monoamine transporter type 2 (VMAT2). Presynaptic
transporters for neurotransmitters released into the
synapse were discussed in Chapter 2 (see Table 2-3
and Figures 2-2A and 2-2B). These transporters are
localized on the presynaptic axon terminal and are well
known as “reuptake pumps” targeted by many drugs for
depression (Figures 2-2A and 2-2B; see also discussion of
monoamine reuptake blockers in Chapter 6 on drugs for
depression). Transporters also exist for neurotransmitters
that are inside neurons; these intraneuronal transporters
are located on synaptic vesicles and called vesicular
transporters. Several types of vesicular transporters
have been identified, including different ones for
GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid), glutamate, glycine,
acetylcholine, monoamines, and others (see Chapter 2
and Figures 2-2A and 2-2B). The specific transporter
known as VMAT2 is located on synaptic vesicles
inside dopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin, and
histamine neurons. VMAT2 acts to store intraneuronal
neurotransmitters until they are needed for release
during neurotransmission (Figure 5-10A). VMAT2 can
also transport certain drugs as “false” substrates, such
as amphetamine and “Ecstasy” (MDMA; 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine), and these false substrates can
compete with the “true” natural neurotransmitter and
block it from being transported. This is discussed in
further detail in Chapter 11 on stimulant treatment for
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and in Chapter
13 on substance abuse. Synaptic vesicles create low pH in
their lumens (interiors) with an energy-requiring proton
pump there (Chapter 2 and Figures 2-2A and 2-2B).
Low pH in turn serves as the driving force to sequester
neurotransmitter in synaptic vesicles.
There are actually two types of VMATs: VMAT1
localized on synaptic vesicles of neurons in both the
peripheral and central nervous system, and VMAT2,
located only on synaptic vesicles within central nervous
system neurons. There are also two known types of
VMAT inhibitors: reserpine, which irreversibly inhibits


<<<PAGE 191>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Storage of Dopamine by VMAT2

Dopamine Depletion by VMAT2 Inhibition

E

E

E

E

VMAT2

VMAT2

VMAT2

VMAT2
VMAT2

5

VMAT2

VMAT2 inhibitor

DA release

Figure 5-10A Vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) and
dopamine. The VMAT2 is an intraneuronal transporter located
on synaptic vesicles. VMAT2 takes intraneuronal monoamines,
including dopamine, up into the synaptic vesicles so that
they can be stored until they are needed for release during
neurotransmission.

both VMAT1 and VMAT2; and tetrabenazine-related
drugs, which reversibly inhibit only VMAT2. That is
why reserpine, but not tetrabenazine-related drugs, is
associated with frequent peripheral side effects, such as
orthostatic hypotension (reserpine was once used for
hypertension), stuffy nose, itching, and gastrointestinal
side effects. Although VMAT2 transports multiple
neurotransmitters into synaptic vesicles (dopamine,
norepinephrine, serotonin, and histamine),
tetrabenazine preferentially affects dopamine transport
at clinical doses (Figure 5-10B). When tetrabenazinerelated drugs block the transport of dopamine into
presynaptic vesicles, dopamine is rapidly degraded by
monoamine oxidase (MAO) within the presynaptic
neuron, leading to depletion of presynaptic dopamine
proportional to the degree of VMAT2 inhibition
(Figure 5-10B).
Tetrabenazine itself is actually an inactive prodrug
converted into four active dihydro metabolites by the
enzyme carbonyl reductase, and all four are inactivated
by CYP450 2D6 (Figure 5-11A). Most of the inhibition
of VMAT2 by tetrabenazine is ultimately done by the

DA depletion

Figure 5-10B Dopamine depletion by VMAT2
inhibition. Inhibition of VMAT2 prevents dopamine from being
taken up into synaptic vesicles. The intraneuronal dopamine is
therefore metabolized, leading to depletion of dopamine stores.

+β-dihydro enantiomer because it has the greatest
potency for VMAT2 of those metabolites that inhibit
VMAT2 (Figure 5-11A). Tetrabenazine is not approved
for the treatment of TD, but is approved for the treatment
of a related hyperkinetic movement disorder, namely,
the chorea of Huntington’s disease. Tetrabenazine’s
disadvantages are its short half-life and thus need for
three times a day dosing; its peak-dose side effects,
including sedation and drug-induced parkinsonism;
the need to do genetic testing for poor metabolizers
of CYP450 2D6 in order to go to higher doses; and the
risk of depression and even suicide when used to treat
Huntington’s disease.
A clever trick called deuteration has recently been
discovered that converts a drug that is a good substrate
for CYP450 2D6 into a poorer substrate for CYP450
2D6; this allows for a longer half-life, less frequent
dosing, and lower peak plasma levels. Deuteration is
the process of substituting some of the hydrogen atoms
in a drug with deuterium, also called heavy hydrogen.
Deuterium is a stable isotope of hydrogen with a nucleus
consisting of one proton and one neutron, which is
double the mass of the nucleus of ordinary hydrogen
that contains only one proton. This substitution causes
the drug to be a less favorable substrate for CYP450 2D6,
175


<<<PAGE 192>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

resulting in the predicted increased half-life, decreased
dosing frequency (twice rather than three times a day),
and reduced peak-dose side effects, all problems with
non-deuterated tetrabenazine mentioned above. For
commercial considerations, deuteration can also restart
the patent life of the non-deuterated drug, creating
incentives for drug development. Other advantages of
deuterated tetrabenazine, also called deutetrabenazine,
are specific regulatory approval for the treatment of TD
as well as Huntington’s disease, no longer needing to
do genetic testing in order to administer the full dose
range, and the lack of a suicide warning for treatment
of TD. Disadvantages include need for twice daily
administration and dosing with food.
The metabolites of deutetrabenazine (Figure 5-11B)
are the same as those of nondeuterated tetrabenazine
(Figure 5-11A). In addition to the +β-dihydro
enantiomer, both tetrabenazine and deutetrabenazine

have substantial concentrations of the –α- and the
–β-dihydro enantiomers, which carry additional receptor
actions, especially antagonism of 5HT7 receptors and to a
lesser extent antagonism of D2 receptors (Figures 5-11A
and 5-11B).
Another form of tetrabenazine is called valbenazine,
named because the amino acid valine is linked
to the +α enantiomer of tetrabenazine. When
swallowed, valbenazine is hydrolyzed into valine
and +α-tetrabenazine, which is rapidly converted by
carbonyl reductase to just the +α dihydro enantiomer
of tetrabenazine, the most selective and potent inhibitor
of VMAT2 amongst the four active enantiomers (Figure
5-11C). The slow hydrolysis of valbenazine results in a
long half-life and once-daily administration. Valbenazine
is approved for the treatment of TD, has no need for
genetic testing, no need for dosing with food, once-daily
dosing, and no suicide warning.
T7

5H

VMAT2

-α

D2

VMAT2

+ß
tetrabenazine

E

E
7
HT

5

carbonyl
reductase
tetrabenazine inactive prodrug

-ß

inactive metabolites

c2D6
VMAT2

D2

+α

VMAT2

dihydro active
metabolites
Figure 5-11A Tetrabenazine potency. Tetrabenazine is an inactive prodrug; its metabolism by carbonyl reductase results in four active
dihyro metabolites, all of which are converted into inactive metabolites by CYP450 2D6. Of the four active metabolites, the +β-dihydro
enantiomer has the greatest potency for VMAT2 and thus is responsible for most of tetrabenazine’s therapeutic effects. The other active
metabolites have additional receptor actions, as shown.

176


<<<PAGE 193>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

T7

D

5H

VMAT2

Deu -α

D2

D

D

Deu +ß

D

E

Deutetrabenazine

D

D

carbonyl
reductase

D

VMAT2

E
7
HT

5

Deu -ß

Deuterated
tetrabenazine inactive prodrug

D

inactive metabolites

c2D6

VMAT2

D2

D

Deu +α
D

VMAT2

dihydro
deuterated
active metabolites
Figure 5-11B Deutetrabenazine potency. Deuteration is the process of substituting some of the hydrogen atoms in a drug with
deuterium. Deuterium has one proton and one neutron and is thus double the mass of hydrogen. The substitution of deuterium for
hydrogen makes it a less favorable substrate for CYP450 2D6 (shown with the smaller c2D6 enzyme compared to Figure 5-11A). This
allows for a longer half-life, decreased dosing frequency, and reduced peak-dose side effects.

valine

valine

+α

tetrabenazine

E
hydrolysis

VMAT2

E
+α

tetrabenazine

carbonyl
reductase

+α

dihydro
tetrabenazine

E

inactive
metabolites

2D6

Figure 5-11C Valbenazine potency. Valbenazine is tetrabenazine with the amino acid valine linked to the +α enantiomer of
tetrabenazine. When swallowed, valbenazine is hydrolyzed into valine and +α tetrabenazine and then rapidly converted by carbonyl
reductase into +α-dihydrotetrabenazine. The slow hydrolysis results in a long half-life and once-daily dosing.

A more detailed explanation of the mechanism of
action of VMAT2 inhibition on TD is shown in Figures
5-12A through 5-12D within both the direct and indirect

pathways. The state of normal movements condition
is shown in Figure 5-12A, where dopamine at the
bottom left is enhancing “go” in the direct pathway at
177

5


<<<PAGE 194>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

D1 receptors and at the bottom right where dopamine is
inhibiting “stop” in the indirect pathway at D2 receptors.
The striatum regulates normal motor movements by
facilitating or diminishing dopamine release at the
direct and indirect pathways as it orchestrates the
smooth execution of movements and postures that
require muscles to go or to stop, often in sequence and in
changing ways over time (Figure 5-12A).
Figure 5-12B shows the situation when TD develops,
with the upregulation of D2 receptors on the bottom
right in the indirect pathway causing far too much
inhibition of stop, and thus the message “go, go, go,” with
the result being the hyperkinetic involuntary movements
of TD. This was also explained above and shown in
Figure 5-9C.
Figures 5-12C and 5-12D show the mechanism of
action of VMAT2 inhibition in TD. No matter what form

of tetrabenazine is chosen to block VMAT2 in order to
treat TD, it appears that a high degree, perhaps >90%,
of VMAT2 inhibition may often be required for the best
balance between efficacy for TD and tolerability. VMAT2
inhibition is a mechanism that reduces dopamine
stimulation without blocking D2 receptors. Thus, this
action reduces the overstimulation of D2 receptors in
the indirect pathway (bottom right in Figure 5-12C),
resulting in less inhibition of the stop signal there.
However, there is also a benefit of VMAT2 inhibition
in the direct pathway, where “go” signals are being
amplified normally by dopamine at D1 receptors (Figure
5-12A). Even though these D1 receptors and this direct
extrapyramidal pathway (Figure 5-12A) may not be the
site of pathology in TD (see Figures 5-9C and 5-12B),
they do drive “go” signals for movement normally
(Figure 5-12A), and thus lowering dopamine there by

Normal Regulation of Motor Movements by Dopamine:
Enhancing “Go” at D1 Receptors in the Direct Pathway
and Inhibiting “Stop” at D2 Receptors in the Indirect Pathway
motor output

+ glu

Cortex

-

GABA

Thalamus
+ glu

GABA
-

GABA
-

STN

GPi /SN r

GABA
-

direct pathway
“go”

GPe
D1
+
DA

enhancing
“go”

DA

Striatum

D2
-

inhibiting
“stop”

SN c

178

indirect pathway
“stop”

Figure 5-12A Normal regulation
of motor movements by
dopamine. Dopamine regulates motor
movements through both the direct
(go) and indirect (stop) pathways. In
the direct pathway (shown on the left),
dopamine released into the striatum
binds to D1 receptors on GABA neurons.
This stimulates GABA release, which
ultimately leads to glutamate release
in the cortex and thus enhances motor
output. In the indirect pathway (shown
on the right), dopamine released into
the striatum binds to D2 receptors on
GABA neurons. This inhibits GABA
release, thus inhibiting the “stop”
pathway, and therefore also enhancing
motor output.


<<<PAGE 195>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Figure 5-12B Upregulation of
dopamine 2 receptors in the indirect
pathway. Chronic blockade of D2
receptors can lead to their upregulation;
the upregulated receptors may also
be supersensitive to dopamine. In the
indirect (stop) pathway, this can lead
to so much inhibition of the “stop”
signal that the “go” signal is overactive,
leading to the hyperkinetic involuntary
movements of tardive dyskinesia.

Tardive Dyskinesia: Upregulated D2 Receptors in the
Indirect Pathway and Too Much “GO”

motor output

+ glu

Cortex

Thalamus

5

GABA
-

GABA
-

STN

GPi /SN r

D2

GPe
D1
+
DA

DA

D2
-

Striatum

too much inhibition
of “stop” causing
tardive dyskinesia

SN c

VMAT2 inhibition would be expected to lower the “go”
signals arising from the direct pathway (Figure 5-12D).
Combined with more “stop” signals from the indirect
pathway (Figure 5-12C), motor output to drive abnormal
involuntary hyperkinetic movements is therefore robustly
reduced by this combination of effects of dopamine
depletion in both pathways (Figures 5-12C and 5-12D).
So, it appears that VMAT2 inhibition “trims” the “go”
drives of dopamine in both direct and indirect motor
pathways (Figures 5-12C and 5-12D) to compensate for
the abnormal “learning” just in the indirect pathway
after chronic D2 receptor blockade (Figures 5-9C and
5-12B). Whether this will be disease modifying in the
long run, and reverse rather than only treat movements

symptomatically, must be determined by long-term
studies of VMAT2 inhibition in TD.

DRUGS TARGETING DOPAMINE
D2 RECEPTORS: SOCALLED FIRST GENERATION
OR CONVENTIONAL
“ANTIPSYCHOTICS”
A list of many of the earliest agents used to treat
psychosis is given in Table 5-1. Several of these remain
in clinical use today. Although not generally used first
line, conventional D2 antagonists are still used in patients
who do not respond to the newer drugs for psychosis and
179


<<<PAGE 196>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

VMAT2 Inhibition in the Indirect Pathway Causes Less
D2 Inhibition of “Stop,” so TD Movements are Stopped
motor output

Figure 5-12C VMAT2 inhibition in
the indirect (stop) pathway. VMAT2
inhibition reduces dopaminergic output;
thus, it can reduce the overstimulation
of inhibitory D2 receptors in the indirect
(stop) pathway. This disinhibits the
indirect (stop) pathway and therefore
can reduce the hyperkinetic movements
of tardive dyskinesia.

+ glu

Cortex

GABA
-

Thalamus
+ glu
GABA
-

STN

GPi /SN r

GABA
-

GPe
D1
+
DA

Striatum

SN c

VMAT2 inhibition in aberrant
indirect pathway reduces “go”

in patients requiring injections, both immediate-onset
and long-acting injections. Several of the first-generation
drugs for psychosis are available both orally and as
injections and many clinicians still have experience
with them, even preferring them in treatment-resistant
and difficult cases. Although these original drugs for
psychosis (Table 5-1) are often called “conventional,”
“classic,” or “first-generation” antipsychotics, we will
continue to refer to drugs as “having antipsychotic
actions” and not as “antipsychotics,” to reduce confusion,
since many of these same agents are used to treat many
other conditions, including bipolar mania, psychotic
mania, psychotic depression, Tourette syndrome,
180

and even for gastrointestinal problems including
gastroesophageal reflux, gastroparesis from diabetes,
and to prevent/treat nausea and vomiting including from
cancer chemotherapy. So, not just antipsychotic actions!
Modern nomenclature for the drugs in this group of
original agents for psychosis is “D2 antagonists” because
this is the common pharmacological mechanism for all
uses, not just for antipsychotic actions.
D2 antagonists have various other pharmacological
properties, including muscarinic cholinergic antagonism
(discussed above, see Figure 5-8), antihistaminic
actions (H1 antagonism), and α1-adrenergic antagonism
(Figure 5-13). These additional pharmacological


<<<PAGE 197>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

VMAT2 Inhibition in the Direct Pathway Causes Less
D1 Stimulation of “GO,” so TD Movements are Stopped

motor output

Figure 5-12D VMAT2 inhibition in the
direct (go) pathway. VMAT2 inhibition
reduces dopaminergic output; thus, it
can reduce activation of excitatory D1
receptors in the direct (go) pathway.
This inhibits the direct (go) pathway and
therefore can reduce the hyperkinetic
movements of tardive dyskinesia.

+ glu

Cortex

GABA
-

Thalamus
+ glu

5

GABA

GABA
-

-

STN

GPi /SN r

GABA
-

GPe
VMAT2 inhibited

D1

+
DA

Striatum

VMAT2 inhibition in normal
direct pathway also reduces “go”

SN c

properties are linked much more to side effects than to
therapeutic effects. Blockade of muscarinic cholinergic
receptors is associated with dry mouth, blurred vision,
and risk of paralytic ileus as discussed earlier (Figure
5-8); blocking H1 histamine receptors is associated with
weight gain and sedation (Figure 5-13A); and blockade
of α1-adrenergic receptors is associated with sedation
as well as cardiovascular side effects such as orthostatic
hypotension (Figure 5-13B). As many D2 antagonists
have all three actions, anticholinergic, antihistaminic,
and α1 antagonist, they can combine to contribute to
a great deal of sedation by simultaneously blocking
several of the neurotransmitters in the arousal pathway;
namely, acetylcholine, histamine, and norepinephrine
(Figure 5-14). Agents with particularly strong binding
at these three receptors (such as chlorpromazine) are
sometimes administered when sedation is needed on
top of antipsychotic action. However, even if sedation

is needed in some clinical situations, it is not always
desirable. Conventional D2 antagonists (Table 5-1) differ
in terms of their ability to block muscarinic, histaminic,
and α1-adrenergic receptors. For example, the popular
conventional antipsychotic haloperidol has relatively
little anticholinergic or antihistaminic binding activity.
Because of this, conventional D2 antagonists differ
somewhat in their side-effect profiles, even if they do not
differ overall in their therapeutic profiles. That is, some
D2 blockers are more sedating than others; some have
more ability to cause cardiovascular side effects than
others, some have more ability to cause DIP and other
movement disorders than others. Differing degrees of
muscarinic cholinergic blockade may explain why some
D2 antagonists have a lesser propensity to produce DIP
than others. That is, those D2 antagonists that are more
likely to cause DIP are generally the agents that have
only weak anticholinergic properties, whereas those D2
181


<<<PAGE 198>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 5-13 Blockade of histamine
1 and α1-adrenergic receptors. The
majority of D2 antagonists have
additional pharmacological properties;
the specific receptor profiles differ for
each agent and contribute to divergent
side-effect profiles. Many of the early
D2 antagonists also block H1 receptors
(A), which can contribute to weight gain
and drowsiness, and/or α1-adrenergic
receptors (B), which can contribute to
dizziness, drowsiness, and decreased
blood pressure.

H1 Inserted
histamine neuron

HA
250

weight gain

H1
receptor

drowsiness

A

α1 Inserted
norepinephrine
neuron

NE

dizziness
decreased
blood pressure

α1
receptor
drowsiness
B

Figure 5-14 Neurotransmitters of cortical
arousal. The neurotransmitters acetylcholine
(ACh), histamine (HA), and norepinephrine (NE)
are all involved in arousal pathways connecting
neurotransmitter centers with the thalamus (T),
hypothalamus (Hy), basal forebrain (BF), and cortex.
Thus, pharmacological actions at their receptors
could influence arousal. In particular, antagonism
of muscarinic M1, histamine H1, and α1-adrenergic
receptors are all associated with sedating effects.

Cortical Arousal

T

HA

BF

ACh

NE

Hy

alpha1 receptors
M1 receptors
H1 receptors

182


<<<PAGE 199>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Table 5-1 Earliest agents used to treat psychosis

Generic name

Trade name

Comment

Chlorpromazine

Thorazine

Low potency

Cyamemazine

Tercian

Popular in France;
not available in
the US

Flupenthixol

Depixol

Depot; not
available in the US

Fluphenazine

Prolixin

High potency;
depot

Haloperidol

Haldol

High potency;
depot

Loxapine

Loxitane

Mesoridazine

Serentil

Low potency;
QTc issues;
discontinued

Perphenazine

Trilafon

High potency

Pimozide

Orap

High potency;
Tourette syndrome;
QTc issues; second
line

Pipothiazine

Piportil

Depot; not
available in the US

Sulpiride

Dolmatil

Not available in
the US

Thioridazine

Mellaril

Low potency; QTc
issues;
second line

Thiothixene

Navane

High potency

Trifluoperazine

Stelazine

High potency

Zuclopenthixol

Clopixol

Depot; not
available in the US

blockers that cause DIP less frequently are the agents
that have stronger anticholinergic properties. These latter
agents have a sort of “inbuilt” anticholinergic property
that accompanies their D2 antagonist property. Although
DIP may occur less frequently with such agents, the
risk of constipation and potential for life-threatening
paralytic ileus is higher, especially when combined
with other drugs with anticholinergic properties, and
requires more monitoring of gastrointestinal status and
bowel movements. A few selected agents from the firstgeneration class of D2 antagonists are discussed in more
detail below.

DRUGS TARGETING SEROTONIN
2A RECEPTORS WITH OR
WITHOUT SIMULTANEOUSLY
TARGETING DOPAMINE D2
RECEPTORS
In an attempt to improve the efficacy and the tolerability
of the first-generation classic drugs for psychosis with
D2 antagonist properties, a newer class of drugs with
antipsychotic action combines D2 antagonism
with serotonin (5HT) 2A antagonism, so-called secondgeneration antipsychotics or atypical antipsychotics.
We will refer to them as 5HT2A antagonists/D2
antagonists with antipsychotic properties, and not as
“antipsychotics” or “atypical antipsychotics.” An even
newer class of drugs with antipsychotic properties
are agents with 5HT2A antagonism without any D2
antagonism. Some preclinical studies suggest that all
known 5HT2A antagonists may actually be inverse
agonists (see Chapter 2 and Figures 2-9 and 2-10) rather
than antagonists at 5HT2A receptors (Figure 5-15). Since
it is not clear what clinical distinction there is between
an inverse agonist (Chapter 2 and Figures 2-9 and 2-10)
and an antagonist (Figures 2-6 and 2-10) at 5HT2A
receptors, we will continue to refer to these agents using
the simpler term “antagonist.”
Antagonism of serotonin 5HT2A receptors appears
to improve both the efficacy and the side effects of D2
antagonism:
Schizophrenia. Clinical trials show that adding
selective 5HT2A antagonists to drugs with D2
antagonism/partial agonism may improve positive
symptoms of psychosis in schizophrenia. Also,
there is some indication that the more potent
a 5HT2A/D2 antagonist is for 5HT2A receptors
compared to potency for D2 receptors, the lower
the degree of D2 antagonism that may be necessary
to treat positive symptoms, and also the better
tolerated the drug might be. More research is
necessary on this possibility.
Parkinson’s disease psychosis and dementiarelated psychosis. Antagonism of serotonin 5HT2A
receptors alone appears to provide sufficient
antipsychotic action to be useful as monotherapy
for other causes of psychosis, such as Parkinson’s
disease psychosis and dementia-related psychosis,
allowing D2 antagonism and its side effects to be
avoided entirely.

183

5


<<<PAGE 200>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Where on the Agonist Spectrum Do Drugs for Psychosis Lie?
antagonist

partial
agonist
D2 partial agonists
for psychosis
D2 antagonist

D2 partial agonists
for Parkinson’s disease

full
agonist

5HT2A antagonist
inverse agonist

5HT1A partial agonists
neurotransmitters

inverse
agonist

Figure 5-15 Agonist spectrum for drugs to treat psychosis. Drugs used to treat psychosis may fall along a spectrum, with some having
actions closer to a silent antagonist and others having actions closer to a full agonist. For dopamine 2 (D2) binding, agents with too
much agonism may be psychotomimetic and thus not ideal for treating psychosis, but may be useful within Parkinson’s disease. D2
partial agonists that are closer to the antagonist end of the spectrum may be preferred for treating psychosis, as are D2 antagonists.
Many drugs used to treat psychosis are serotonin 5HT2A antagonists, either in conjunction with D2 binding or without D2 binding. Some
preclinical data suggest that they may actually be inverse agonists, but the clinical significance of this distinction is unclear. 5HT1A partial
agonism is also a common property of many drugs used to treat psychosis, in particular many D2 partial agonists.

Negative symptoms of psychosis in schizophrenia.
Clinical trials show that administering selective
5HT2A antagonists by themselves, or adding
selective 5HT2A antagonists to drugs with D2
antagonism/partial agonism, may improve negative
symptoms in schizophrenia.
Motor side effects. Adding 5HT2A antagonist actions
to D2 antagonism has also proven to lessen
unwanted motor side effects such as drug-induced
parkinsonism.
Hyperprolactinemia. Adding 5HT2A antagonist
actions to D2 antagonism lessens the elevation of
prolactin caused by D2 receptor blockade.
Why would adding 5HT2A antagonism improve side effects
of D2 blockade and enhance the antipsychotic efficacy of D2
blockade? The short answer may be that 5HT2A antagonism
opposes D2 antagonism in some pathways by causing more
dopamine release in these sites and thus reversing some
of the unwanted D2 antagonism that causes side effects.
On the other hand, because of the differing configuration
of other brain circuits, 5HT2A antagonism can enhance
the efficacy of D2 antagonism in another circuit and thus
improve positive symptoms. Let’s now explain this.
5HT2A Receptor Regulation of Dopamine Release in
Three Downstream Pathways

The key to understanding why adding 5HT2A antagonism
creates entirely new classes of drugs to treat psychosis
184

with reduced side-effect burden is to grasp the
pharmacology of 5HT2A receptors, where they are located,
and what happens to dopamine when 5HT2A receptors
are blocked. All 5HT2A receptors are postsynaptic and
excitatory. The 5HT2A receptors critical to this discussion
are the ones located on three separate populations of
cortical glutamatergic pyramidal neurons that are all
naturally stimulated by serotonin at their 5HT2A receptors
to release glutamate downstream. These three separate
populations of descending glutamate neurons regulate
three distinct dopamine pathways (Figure 5-16).
One population of glutamatergic pyramidal neurons
directly innervates mesolimbic/mesostriatal dopamine
neurons projecting to the emotional striatum that
mediates the positive symptoms of psychosis (Figure
5-16A). This very same pathway was discussed
extensively in Chapter 4 and illustrated in Figures
4-29A–C through 4-45. The glutamate neuron depicted
in Figure 5-16A is that same glutamate neuron in
the final common pathway of positive symptoms of
psychosis (Figures 4-29B, 4-52C, 4-52D, 4-54, and
4-55). Specifically, this neuron is the hypothetical final
common pathway downstream from all causes of positive
symptoms of psychosis, whether in schizophrenia
from hypofunctioning glutamate receptors on GABA
interneurons (Figure 4-29B), in dementia-related
psychosis from loss of these same GABA interneurons
(Figure 4-52D and Figure 4-55), in Parkinson’s disease


<<<PAGE 201>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

5HT2A
5HT

PFC

DA

Glu

SN m /VTA

emotional striatum

hallucinations

A

5HT2A
5HT

5
PFC

Glu

GABA

low DA

SN l

motor striatum
DIP

B

5HT2A

low DA

5HT

PFC

Glu

GABA

emotional blunting,
flattening of affect

VTA
C

lack of mental sharpness

Figure 5-16 5HT2A receptor regulation of downstream dopamine (DA) release. 5HT2A receptors, which are postsynaptic and excitatory,
are relevant to the treatment of psychosis because of their presence on three separate populations of descending glutamate neurons.
(A) 5HT2A receptors are located on descending glutamatergic pyramidal neurons that directly innervate mesolimbic/mesostriatal
dopamine neurons projecting to the emotional striatum. Excessive activity in this pathway can lead to the positive symptoms of
psychosis. (B) 5HT2A receptors are located on descending glutamatergic pyramidal neurons that indirectly innervate nigrostriatal
dopamine neurons via a GABAergic interneuron in the substantia nigra. Excessive stimulation of these 5HT2A receptors leads to a
reduction in dopamine release in the motor striatum and can cause side effects such as drug-induced parkinsonism. (C) 5HT2A receptors
are located on descending glutamatergic pyramidal neurons that indirectly innervate mesocortical dopamine neurons via a GABAergic
interneuron in the ventral tegmental area. Excessive stimulation of these 5HT2A receptors leads to a reduction in dopamine release in
the prefrontal cortex (PFC), which could lead to cognitive dysfunction as well as negative symptoms such as emotional blunting and
flattened affect. SNm, medial substantia nigra; VTA, ventral tegmental area; SNl, lateral substantia nigra.

185


<<<PAGE 202>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

psychosis from excessive actions of serotonin (Figure
4-52C and Figure 4-54), or in hallucinogen psychosis
from excessive stimulation of serotonin receptors (Figure
4-52B and Figure 4-53). In all cases, anything that
increases the activity of this population of glutamate
neurons will hypothetically lead to downstream release
of dopamine from mesolimbic/mesostriatal dopamine

neurons to cause the positive symptoms of psychosis
(Figure 5-16A).
The most common treatment of course is to block
excessive dopamine release at the end of this circuit,
namely at D2 receptors in the emotional striatum.
However, one can also reduce the excitatory tone
of serotonin at 5HT2A receptors at the beginning of

5HT2A

5HT2A antagonist

PFC

5HT2A antagonist

SN m /VTA

emotional striatum

A

decreased
positive
symptoms

5HT2A
5HT2A antagonist

PFC

SN l

motor striatum

reduction in DIP

B

5HT2A
5HT2A antagonist

PFC
emotional blunting,
flattening of affect

VTA
C

lack of mental sharpness

Figure 5-17 5HT2A receptor antagonism and downstream dopamine release. 5HT2A antagonism can modulate downstream dopamine
release via three key pathways. (A) 5HT2A antagonism reduces glutamatergic output from a descending neuron that directly innervates
mesolimbic/mesostriatal dopamine neurons. This in turn reduces dopamine output in the emotional striatum and can therefore decrease
the positive symptoms of psychosis. (B) 5HT2A antagonism reduces glutamatergic output in the substantia nigra, leading to reduced
activity of the GABA interneuron and therefore disinhibition of the nigrostriatal dopamine pathway. The increased dopamine release in
the motor striatum can reduce motor side effects caused by D2 antagonism because there is more dopamine to compete with the D2
antagonist. (C) 5HT2A antagonism reduces glutamatergic output in the ventral tegmental area, leading to reduced activity of the GABA
interneuron and therefore disinhibition of the mesocortical dopamine pathway. Increased dopamine release in the prefrontal cortex
(PFC) can potentially reduce cognitive and negative symptoms of psychosis. SNm, medial substantia nigra; VTA, ventral tegmental area;
SNl, lateral substantia nigra.

186


<<<PAGE 203>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

this circuit (Figure 5-17A, top left) by blocking them
here with a 5HT2A antagonist, using either an agent
having both D2 and 5HT2A antagonist properties
or an agent selective for just 5HT2A antagonist
properties (Figure 5-1). When this happens at the
specific glutamate neurons shown in Figure 5-16A,
this theoretically reduces release of dopamine in
the emotional striatum (Figure 5-17A, right) and
this in turn causes a mechanistically independent
antipsychotic action, different from direct D2 receptor
blocking.
In the case of schizophrenia being treated with
agents that have combined 5HT2A/D2 antagonism, any
simultaneous D2 antagonism would theoretically become
even more effective in treating positive symptoms of
psychosis. Clinical trials are in progress adding a selective
5HT2A antagonist to the other agents with antipsychotic
properties to determine if ramping up 5HT2A antagonism
will consistently improve positive symptoms of
psychosis or if it will allow reduction of dose, to lower
D2 antagonism, in order to improve side effects without
losing therapeutic effects. There are indeed suggestions
that drugs with very potent 5HT2A antagonism might
require less D2 antagonism to treat positive symptoms
of psychosis (see discussion of lumateperone, clozapine,
quetiapine, and others below).
In the case of psychosis in dementia or in Parkinson’s
disease, where D2 antagonism can cause problematic side
effects or even be dangerous, 5HT2A antagonist action
alone can produce a sufficiently robust antipsychotic
effect even in the absence of any D2 antagonism.
A second population of glutamatergic pyramidal
neurons indirectly innervate those nigrostriatal dopamine
neurons that project to the motor striatum and mediate
the motor side effects of D2 antagonism (Figure 5-16B).
This is a parallel pathway to the pathway just discussed
in Figure 5-16A, and involves a different population of
glutamate neurons that not only project to the substantia
nigra rather than to the ventral tegmental area (VTA)/
mesostriatum/integrative hub, but do so indirectly,
namely, first to a GABA interneuron in the substantia
nigra and then to the nigrostriatal dopamine motor
pathway (compare Figure 5-16A and B). This has the
effect of changing the polarity of upstream glutamate
release from stimulating dopamine release (Figure
5-16A) to inhibiting dopamine release downstream
(Figure 5-16B). Therefore, blocking 5HT2A receptors on
the specific glutamate neurons shown in Figure 5-16B
(upper left) leads to disinhibiting (i.e., increasing)
dopamine release downstream in the motor striatum

(Figure 5-17B, right). That is precisely what is needed
to reduce motor side effects! Namely, more dopamine
is available to compete with a D2 antagonist in the
motor striatum that otherwise would cause motor side
effects. And that is exactly what is observed with 5HT2A
antagonist/D2 antagonist drugs: i.e., fewer motor side
effects compared to D2 antagonists without 5HT2A
antagonism. This has indeed been repeatedly observed
for 5HT2A/D2 antagonists, and has reduced the need for
anticholinergic medication administration to treat motor
side effects compared to D2 antagonists without 5HT2A
antagonist actions (see Figure 5-1 and compare icons on
the top with the bottom left).
A third population of glutamatergic pyramidal
neurons indirectly innervate those mesocortical dopamine
neurons that project to the prefrontal cortex and mediate
in part the negative, cognitive, and affective symptoms of
schizophrenia (Figure 5-16C). This is yet another parallel
pathway to the pathways just discussed, and involves
yet different glutamate neurons that project indirectly
via a GABA interneuron to those dopamine neurons in
the VTA destined to innervate the prefrontal cortex. As
discussed above for the nigrostriatal pathway (Figure
5-16B), this arrangement in Figure 5-16B also has the
effect of upstream glutamate release leading to inhibiting
dopamine release downstream (see Figure 5-16C). Thus,
blocking 5HT2A receptors on these specific glutamate
neurons (Figure 5-17C, top left) will lead to disinhibiting
(i.e., increasing) dopamine release in the prefrontal
cortex (Figure 5-17C, top right). This is just what you
need to improve negative symptoms of schizophrenia,
and that is what has been observed in trials of 5HT2A
selective agents, either alone or augmenting other D2
antagonist and 5HT2A/D2 antagonist drugs. Increasing
dopamine release in the prefrontal cortex also has the
potential of improving cognitive and affective/depressive
symptoms (Figure 5-17C). This effect is not consistent
or robust across all 5HT2A/D2 antagonist drugs that treat
psychosis, in part because of different potencies of 5HT2A
antagonism compared to D2 antagonism, and because of
the presence of additional interfering pharmacological
properties in some agents, such as anticholinergic and
antihistaminic actions. A better approach may ultimately
prove to be adding a selective 5HT2A antagonist to drugs
with D2 antagonist action.
How Do 5HT2A Antagonist Actions Reduce
Hyperprolactinemia?

The pituitary lactotroph is responsible for secretion of
prolactin and both D2 receptors and 5HT2A receptors
187

5


<<<PAGE 204>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

are located on the membranes of these cells. Serotonin
and dopamine have reciprocal roles in the regulation of
prolactin secretion, with dopamine inhibiting prolactin
release via stimulation of D2 receptors (Figure 5-18A) and
serotonin promoting prolactin release via stimulation of
5HT2A receptors (Figure 5-18B). Thus, when D2 receptors
alone are blocked by D2 antagonism, dopamine can no
longer inhibit prolactin release, so prolactin levels rise
(Figure 5-18C). However, in the case of a drug that has

5HT2A
receptor

pituitary
lactotroph

prolactin

D2
receptor
dopamine
serotonin

A

serotonin
5HT2A
receptor

pituitary
lactotroph

prolactin

B

188

both D2 antagonism and 5HT2A antagonism, there is
simultaneous inhibition of 5HT2A receptors, so serotonin
can no longer stimulate prolactin release (Figure 5-18D).
This mitigates the hyperprolactinemia of D2 receptor
blockade. Although this is interesting theoretical
pharmacology, in practice, not all 5HT2A/D2 antagonists
reduce prolactin secretion to the same extent, and others
do not reduce prolactin elevations at all, possibly due to
other off-target receptor properties.
Figure 5-18A, B Dopamine and
serotonin regulate prolactin release,
part 1. (A) Dopamine binding at
inhibitory D2 receptors (red circle)
prevents prolactin release from
pituitary lactotroph cells in the pituitary
gland. (B) Serotonin (5HT) binding at
excitatory 5HT2A receptors (red circle)
stimulates prolactin release from
pituitary lactotroph cells in the pituitary
gland. Thus, dopamine and serotonin
have a reciprocal regulatory action on
prolactin release.


<<<PAGE 205>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Figure 5-18C, D Dopamine and
serotonin regulate prolactin release,
part 2. (C) D2 antagonism (red circle)
blocks dopamine’s inhibitory effect
on prolactin secretion from pituitary
lactotrophs. Thus, these drugs increase
prolactin levels. (D) As dopamine and
serotonin have reciprocal regulatory
roles in the control of prolactin
secretion, one cancels the other. Thus,
5HT2A antagonism reverses the ability
of D2 antagonism to increase prolactin
secretion.

pituitary
lactotroph

p

5

D2 antagonist

C

pituitary
lactotroph

5HT2A/D2 antagonist
D

DRUGS TARGETING SEROTONIN
1A RECEPTORS AND DOPAMINE
D2 RECEPTORS AS PARTIAL
AGONISTS
Another attempt to improve first-generation drugs for
psychosis with D2 antagonist properties substitutes D2
partial agonism for D2 antagonism, and adds serotonin
5HT1A partial agonism.

D2 Partial Agonism

Some antipsychotics act to stabilize dopamine
neurotransmission at D2 receptors in a state between
complete silent antagonism (see Chapter 2, Figures 2-6
and 2-10) and full stimulation/agonist action (Chapter
2, Figures 2-5 and 2-10). This intermediate position is
illustrated here in Figures 5-19 through 5-22 and is called
partial agonism. This was also discussed and illustrated
in Chapter 2 (see Figures 2-7 and 2-10).
189


<<<PAGE 206>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

full D2 antagonist:
deficiency of agonist

prolactin

antipsychotic

DIP

too cold

A

dopamine stimulant
excess of full agonist

too hot

psychosis

B

dopamine partial agonist
dopamine stabilizer:
balance between agonist and antagonist actions
just

right

C

prolactin

antipsychotic
DIP

Figure 5-19 Spectrum of dopamine neurotransmission. Simplified explanation of actions on dopamine. (A) Full D2 antagonists
bind to the D2 receptor in a manner that is “too cold”; that is, they have powerful antagonist actions while preventing agonist actions
and thus can reduce positive symptoms of psychosis but also cause drug-induced parkinsonism (DIP) and prolactin elevation. (B) D2
receptor agonists, such as dopamine itself, are “too hot” and can therefore lead to positive symptoms. (C) D2 partial agonists bind in an
intermediary manner to the D2 receptor and are therefore “just right,” with antipsychotic actions but without DIP or prolactin elevation.

190


<<<PAGE 207>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

An oversimplified explanation of partial agonist action
at the D2 receptor is illustrated in Figure 5-19. Namely,
D2 antagonist action is “too cold,” with antipsychotic
actions but elevated prolactin and motor symptoms such
as DIP (Figure 5-19A). On the other hand, maximally
stimulating full agonist actions of dopamine itself (or
amphetamine, which releases dopamine) are “too hot”
with positive symptoms of psychosis (Figure 5-19B).
Instead, a partial agonist binds in an intermediary
manner, hopefully “just right,” with antipsychotic
actions but lower DIP and lesser prolactin elevations
(Figure 5-19C). For this reason, partial agonists are
sometimes called “Goldilocks” drugs if they get the
balance “just right” between full agonism and complete
antagonism. However, as we shall see, this explanation is
an oversimplification; the balance is slightly different for

D2R
DA

each drug in the D2 partial agonist class and there is no
perfect “Goldilocks” solution.
A more sophisticated explanation is that partial
agonists have the intrinsic ability to bind to receptors
in a manner that causes signal transduction from
the receptor to be intermediate between full output
and no output (Figure 5-20). The naturally occurring
neurotransmitter generally functions as a full agonist,
and causes maximum signal transduction from the
receptor it occupies (volume blaring in Figure 5-20, top),
whereas antagonists essentially shut down all output
from the receptor they occupy and make them “silent”
in terms of communicating with downstream signal
transduction cascades (volume essentially turned off in
Figure 5-20, middle). By contrast, partial agonists (Figure
5-20, bottom) cause receptor output that is more than

receptor output

Figure 5-20 Dopamine receptor
output. Dopamine (DA) itself is a full
agonist and causes full receptor output
(top). D2 antagonists allow little if any
receptor output (middle). However, D2
partial agonists can partially activate
dopamine receptor output and cause a
stabilizing balance between stimulation
and blockade of dopamine receptors
(bottom).

D2 antagonist

D2 partial agonist

191

5


<<<PAGE 208>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

the silent antagonist (Figure 5-20, middle), but less than
the full agonist (Figure 5-20, top). Thus, many degrees of
partial agonism are possible between these two extremes.
Full agonists, silent antagonists, and partial agonists may
all cause different changes in receptor conformation that
lead to a corresponding range of signal transduction
output from the receptor (Figure 5-21).
Where on the agonist spectrum do D2 partial agonists
for psychosis lie? This is illustrated in Figure 5-15,
showing that the D2 partial agonists under discussion
here for the treatment of psychosis are very close to
the antagonist end of the spectrum, where all the D2
antagonists discussed so far lie (Figure 5-15). That is
because these D2 partial agonists for the treatment of
psychosis are “almost” antagonists with just a whiff of
intrinsic agonist activity. By contrast, other dopamine
partial agonists useful for the treatment of Parkinson’s
disease and classified as dopamine partial agonists lie

antagonist

very close to the agonist end of the spectrum (Figure
5-15). They are almost full agonists. Using these agents at
the full agonist end of the spectrum for the treatment of
psychosis would make the psychosis worse, just as using
agents at the other end of the spectrum near to antagonist
for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease would make
their motor movements worse. Thus, it is important not
to lump all partial agonists together and to understand
where on the spectrum a given agent lies in order to
understand its pharmacological mechanism of action
because very small changes in the amount of partial
agonism and placement on this spectrum (Figure 5-15)
can have profound clinical effects.
How Does D2 Partial Agonism Cause Fewer Motor Side
Effects than D2 Antagonism?

It seems that it takes only a very small amount of signal
transduction through D2 receptors in the striatum in

D2 partial agonist

full agonist

Figure 5-21 Agonist spectrum and receptor conformation. This figure shows an artist’s depiction of changes in receptor conformation
in response to full agonists versus antagonists versus partial agonists. With full agonists, the receptor conformation is such that there
is robust signal transduction through the G-protein-linked second-messenger system of D2 receptors (left). Antagonists, on the other
hand, bind to the D2 receptor in a manner that produces a receptor conformation that is not capable of any signal transduction (middle).
Partial agonists, such as a dopamine partial agonist, cause a receptor conformation such that there is an intermediate amount of signal
transduction (right). However, the partial agonist does not induce as much signal transduction (right) as a full agonist (left).

192


<<<PAGE 209>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

order for a D2 partial agonist to have reduced propensity
to cause motor side effects, especially drug-induced
parkinsonism. Thus, a very slight degree of agonism,
sometimes called “intrinsic activity,” can have a very
different set of clinical consequences compared to a fully
silent and completely blocked D2 receptor, which is what
D2 antagonists and 5HT2A/D2 antagonists do. D2 partial
agonists capable of treating psychosis lie very close to
antagonists on the agonist spectrum (Figure 5-15), as
more dopamine antagonism than agonist action is what is
needed for the treatment of psychosis.
What is so interesting is how very small movements
up and down the partial agonist spectrum (Figure
5-15) can have profound effects upon the clinical
properties. Just slightly too close to a pure agonist and
such agents may have reduced motor side effects and
prolactin elevations and be sufficiently activating to
improve negative symptoms but be too activating so
that there is lessened efficacy for positive symptoms,
or even worsening of positive symptoms, as well as
nausea and vomiting. Fairly extensive testing has been
made of several D2 partial agonists in schizophrenia and
three of these are approved. OPC4392 (structurally
and pharmacologically related to both aripiprazole
and brexpiprazole, which were tested later) turned
out to be too much of an agonist; it had relatively little
intrinsic activity and improved negative symptoms
of schizophrenia, with little in the way of motor side
effects, but its intrinsic activity was nevertheless too
great because this drug also activated and worsened
positive symptoms of schizophrenia, so it was never
marketed. Another D2 partial agonist, bifeprunox, is less
of an agonist than OPC4392 but turned out to be still too
much of an agonist since it caused nausea and vomiting;
although it did have some efficacy for positive symptoms
and did not cause motor side effects, it was less robust in
improving positive symptoms than other agents and also
had more gastrointestinal side effects, so the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) did not approve it. Next,
investigators threw another dart closer to the antagonist
end of the spectrum and it landed as aripiprazole (the
original “pip” – see below). This agent indeed improves
positive symptoms without severe motor side effects, but
does cause some akathisia and some clinicians question if
it is as efficacious as D2 antagonists for the most severely
psychotic patients, although this has never been proven.
Finally, two more D2 partial agonists have been approved:
a second “pip” called brexpiprazole and a “rip” called
cariprazine. Both are similar on the D2 partial agonist

spectrum to aripiprazole, have antipsychotic efficacy
and low motor side effects but some akathisia, and differ
mostly in secondary binding properties of receptors other
than the D2 receptor, as will be discussed in detail in the
section on individual drugs below.
How Does D2 Partial Agonist Action Reduce
Hyperprolactinemia?

The pituitary lactotrophs’ D2 receptors have proven to
be more sensitive to the intrinsic activity of D2 partial
agonists than the other dopamine pathways and targets.
Specifically, the three partial agonists in clinical use all
actually reduce prolactin levels, rather than raise them.
It is hypothesized that this is due to the D2 receptors on
the lactotrophs detecting these drugs more as agonists
than as antagonists, and thus these drugs shut down
prolactin secretion rather than stimulate it. In fact,
co-administration of one of the D2 partial agonists to a
patient who is experiencing hyperprolactinemia while
taking one of the D2 antagonists can actually reverse that
hyperprolactinemia.
5HT1A Partial Agonism

Why would adding 5HT1A partial agonism to D2 partial
agonism improve the side effects and enhance efficacy
for affective and negative symptoms compared to D2
blockade? There is a simple answer, easy to understand if
you have grasped the reason why 5HT2A antagonism does
much the same thing. That is, 5HT1A partial agonism,
especially if closer to full agonism than to antagonism
on the partial agonist spectrum (Figure 5-15), has
similar effects to those of 5HT2A antagonism. Just like
5HT2A antagonism shown in Figure 5-17, 5HT1A partial
agonism/full agonism also opposes D2 antagonism in
side-effect pathways by causing more dopamine release in
these sites, reversing some of the unwanted effects of D2
antagonism/partial agonism and improving negative and
affective symptoms (Figure 5-22).
How does this happen? 5HT1A receptors are always
inhibitory and they can be both presynaptic on serotonin
neurons and postsynaptic on many neurons, including
the same glutamatergic pyramidal neurons that have
5HT2A receptors (compare the glutamate neurons upper
left in both Figure 5-16A and 5-22A). One can think
of the situation as the pyramidal neuron having both
an accelerator (5HT2A receptors) and a brake (5HT1A
receptors). Taking your foot off the accelerator (5HT2A
antagonism) should have a similar effect as stepping
on the brake (5HT1A partial agonism), especially if they
are done at the same time. Thus, 5HT1A partial agonism
193

5


<<<PAGE 210>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT1A

5HT1A agonist

PFC

SN

motor striatum

reduction in DIP

A

improved negative,
cognitive, and
affective symptoms

5HT1A agonist

PFC
(SIGH)

B

VTA

Figure 5-22 5HT1A receptor partial agonism and downstream dopamine release. 5HT1A receptors are inhibitory and can be located
both presynaptically on serotonin neurons and postsynaptically on other neurons. (A) 5HT1A receptors are located on descending
glutamatergic pyramidal neurons that indirectly innervate nigrostriatal dopamine neurons via a GABAergic interneuron in the substantia
nigra (SN). Partial agonism of these 5HT1A receptors reduces glutamatergic output in the substantia nigra, leading to reduced activity
of the GABA interneuron and therefore disinhibition of the nigrostriatal dopamine pathway. The increased dopamine release in the
motor striatum can reduce motor side effects caused by D2 antagonism/partial agonism because there is more dopamine to compete
with the D2 binding agents. (B) 5HT1A receptors are located on descending glutamatergic pyramidal neurons that indirectly innervate
mesocortical dopamine neurons via a GABAergic interneuron in the ventral tegmental area (VTA). 5HT1A partial agonism reduces
glutamatergic output in the VTA, leading to reduced activity of the GABA interneuron and therefore disinhibition of the mesocortical
dopamine pathway. Increased dopamine release in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) can potentially reduce cognitive, negative, and affective
symptoms of psychosis.

has many of the same effects on dopamine release as
5HT2A antagonism. As will be discussed later, some
drugs used to treat psychosis and mood have both 5HT2A
antagonist and 5HT1A partial agonist properties, which
should theoretically enhance the actions on downstream
dopamine even further compared to either of these
mechanisms alone. So, just as explained above for
5HT2A antagonism, 5HT1A partial agonism opposes D2
antagonism/partial agonism in some pathways by causing
more dopamine release in these sites and thus reversing
some of the unwanted D2 antagonism/partial agonism
that causes motor side effects. There is less evidence
that 5HT1A partial agonism can enhance the efficacy
of D2 antagonism/partial agonism to improve positive
symptoms of psychosis. Let’s now explain how 5HT1A
194

partial agonism could potentially reduce motor side effects
and improve mood, affective, negative, and cognitive
symptoms by enhancing downstream release of dopamine.
5HT1A partial agonist has actions at glutamatergic
neurons indirectly innervating nigrostriatal dopamine
neurons projecting to the motor striatum (Figure 5-22A).

Recall that blocking 5HT2A receptors on these same
glutamate neurons disinhibits dopamine release to
reduce motor side effects (Figure 5-17B). That is exactly
what happens with 5HT1A partial agonism at these same
neurons, namely disinhibition of dopamine release and
improvement in motor side effects (Figure 5-22A). As
explained above, more dopamine release competes with
D2 blocking agents for the receptors in the motor striatum


<<<PAGE 211>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

to reverse motor side effects. Since D2 partial agonists
are also 5HT1A partial agonists, these two properties can
combine to reduce many motor side effects, although
akathisia can still commonly occur.
5HT1A partial agonist also has actions at glutamatergic
neurons indirectly innervating mesocortical
dopamine neurons projecting to the prefrontal cortex
(Figure 5-22B).

Recall that blocking 5HT2A receptors on these specific
glutamate neurons disinhibits dopamine release in
the prefrontal cortex (Figure 5-17C). This is just what
you need to improve negative, cognitive, and affective/
depressive symptoms. That is also what happens with
5HT1A partial agonism at these same neurons (Figure
5-22B). These clinical actions may be particularly robust
in bipolar and unipolar depression where these serotonin/
dopamine partial agonists are frequently used.

LINKS BETWEEN RECEPTOR
BINDING PROPERTIES OF
DRUGS USED TO TREAT
PSYCHOSIS AND OTHER
THERAPEUTIC ACTIONS AND
SIDE EFFECTS
So far in this chapter we have discussed the antipsychotic
mechanisms and side effects of drugs for psychosis that
are hypothetically linked to interactions at dopamine
D2, serotonin 5HT2A, and serotonin 5HT1A receptors.
The reality is that these same drugs bind to many other
neurotransmitter receptors, and are used for many other
therapeutic applications. In fact, many more prescriptions
for D2 blockers are written for indications other than
psychosis than are written for psychosis, a key reason
why they are not called “antipsychotics” here and in
international nomenclature. These additional receptor
actions are likely relevant to other therapeutic actions
and side effects (Figures 5-23 through 5-26). The entire
known panoply of receptors that are bound by drugs in
this class are discussed in the sections below.
Mania

Essentially all drugs with D2 antagonist/partial agonist
properties are effective in the treatment of acute bipolar
mania and in preventing recurrences of mania. Some
agents are better studied than others, and the therapeutic
effects in acute bipolar mania are present whether the
mania is psychotic or nonpsychotic. There is an old saying
about drugs that treat psychosis in schizophrenia: “you

get mania treatment for free.” That is, essentially any drug
that can treat the positive symptoms of psychosis can
probably also treat the symptoms of mania. That could be
because mania is thought to be due to excessive dopamine
release from mesolimbic/mesostriatal neurons, just as for
the positive symptoms of schizophrenia (Figures 4-15 and
4-16). Thus, it is not surprising that agents that reduce
dopamine overactivity in this pathway are effective when
the patient is in a manic state as well as in a psychotic
state. Further discussion of mania will follow in Chapter 6
and of treatments for mania in Chapter 7.
Antidepressant Actions in Bipolar and Unipolar
Depression

The most common use for 5HT2A/D2 antagonists
and D2/5HT1A partial agonists is not the treatment of
psychosis in schizophrenia or mania in bipolar disorder.
Rather, the treatment of unipolar major depressive
disorder and bipolar depression is where these agents are
most commonly prescribed and at lower doses, especially
the newer agents with fewer side effects but higher costs.
Almost all drugs treating psychosis have to be dosed so
that 80% or so of D2 receptors are blocked in the emotional
striatum, whereas the doses of these same drugs for
depression are lower and likely insufficient to robustly
block D2 receptors. So, how do they work in depression?
5HT2A antagonism and 5HT1A partial agonism, and the
resultant increase in dopamine release in the prefrontal
cortex, are thought to be potentially key antidepressant
mechanisms. Looking over the vast panoply of receptor
actions of the individual drugs in this class (see discussion
below and Figures 5-27 through 5-62), one can readily see
many additional potential antidepressant mechanisms.
These will be discussed and illustrated in detail in
Chapters 6 and 7 on mood disorders and their treatments;
here we will just mention several of those key mechanisms.
Binding properties accompanying D2 blockade that are
candidates for explaining antidepressant actions are shown
for all the individual D2 blockers in the many figures in the
sections that follow in this chapter and include:
monoamine reuptake blocking properties
α2 antagonism
D3 partial agonism
5HT2C antagonism
5HT3 antagonism
5HT7 antagonism
others including possibly 5HT1B/D antagonism
No two agents in this group have exactly the same
binding characteristics and maybe that explains in part

195

5


<<<PAGE 212>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Where on the Metabolic Highway Should
Psychopharmacologists Monitor Antipsychotics?
premature death and
loss of 20-30
RIP
years of normal
life span

metabolic
highway
>25

cardiovascular events

diabetes
monitor
antipsychotic
action

Figure 5-23 Monitoring on the
metabolic highway. Monitoring
for cardiometabolic side effects is
necessary for any patient taking
a medication to treat psychosis,
although risk can vary by individual
agent. First, increased appetite and
weight gain can lead to elevated
body mass index (BMI) and ultimately
obesity. Thus, weight and BMI should
be monitored here. Second, some
agents can cause insulin resistance
by an unknown mechanism; this can
be detected by measuring fasting
plasma triglyceride levels. Finally,
hyperinsulinemia may advance to
pancreatic β-cell failure, prediabetes,
and then diabetes. Diabetes increases
the risk for cardiovascular events and
premature death.

sugar

prediabetes
beta cell failure

insulin

adipose

liver

muscle
pancreas

insulin resistance

hyperinsulinemia

monitor
antipsychotic
action

obesity and
increased
BMI

H
O
C O C H
O
C O C H
O
C O C H
H

triglycerides

monitor
antipsychotic
action

increased
appetite
BEWARE:
cardiometabolic
risk ahead

weight gain

why some patients can have an antidepressant response
to one agent in this group and not another. Please see
the discussion of individual drugs below for which of
these actions are part of the mechanisms of those specific
drugs.
Anxiolytic Actions

A somewhat controversial use of drugs normally
used to treat psychosis is for the treatment of various
196

anxiety disorders. Some studies suggest efficacy of
these agents as monotherapy for generalized anxiety
disorder and to augment other agents for other anxiety
disorders. Another controversial use of these agents is for
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). It is possible that
the antihistamine and anticholinergic sedative properties
of some of these agents are calming in some patients
and responsible for anxiolytic/anti-PTSD action in them.
If so, why are these uses controversial? There are both


<<<PAGE 213>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Insulin Resistance / Elevated Triglycerides and Drugs for Psychosis:
Caused by Tissue Actions at an Unknown Receptor?

X

serotonindopamine
blocker

X

X

5
A

insulin
adipose
liver
skeletal
muscle

X

receptor X

X

X

B

Figure 5-24 Insulin resistance and elevated triglycerides: caused by tissue actions at an unknown receptor? Some drugs used to treat
psychosis may lead to insulin resistance and elevated triglycerides, independently of weight gain, although the mechanism is not yet
established. This figure depicts a hypothesized mechanism in which an agent binds to receptor X at adipose tissue, liver, and skeletal
muscle to cause insulin resistance.

positive and negative studies of efficacy for anxiety and
PTSD indications; also, given the side effects of many
agents used to treat psychosis, the risk:benefit ratio is not
necessarily favorable compared to alternative treatments
for anxiety and PTSD. A promising exception may be a
positive study of one of these agents (brexpiprazole) in
combination with a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
(SSRI), specifically sertraline. This is also mentioned in
Chapter 8 on anxiety and traumatic disorders.
Agitation in Dementia

Treating a problematic condition known as agitation in
patients with dementia is another controversial use of
drugs for psychosis because there is no clear efficacy

signal in most studies, and also because there is a
safety warning for cardiovascular complications and
deaths in elderly dementia patients taking these drugs.
Although there is promise for drugs acting by different
mechanisms and currently in testing (see Chapter 12 on
dementia), there are also positive results for agitation in
dementia for one agent that is in the class of drugs for
psychosis, namely brexpiprazole, and it may be that it
has a satisfactory risk:benefit profile. This is discussed in
further detail in Chapter 12 on dementia.
Sedative Hypnotic and Sedating Actions

A long debate exists as to whether sedation is a good or a
bad property for antipsychotic action. The answer seems
197


<<<PAGE 214>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

to be that sedation is both good and bad in the treatment
of psychosis. In some cases, particularly for short-term
treatment, sedation is a desired therapeutic effect,
especially early in treatment, during hospitalization,
and when patients are aggressive, agitated, or needing
sleep induction. In other cases, particularly for longterm treatment, sedation is generally a side effect to
be avoided because diminished arousal, sedation,
and somnolence can lead to cognitive impairment.
When cognition is impaired, functional outcomes are
compromised. The pharmacology of sedation is discussed
above and illustrated in Figures 5-8, 5-13, and 5-14 for
anticholinergic, antihistamine, and α1 antagonist actions.
Sedative hypnotics are discussed in Chapter 10 on sleep,
and aggression and violence are discussed in Chapter 13
on impulsivity.
Cardiometabolic Actions

Although all D2/5HT2A/5HT1A drugs for treating
psychosis share a class warning for causing weight gain
and risks for obesity, dyslipidemia, and hyperglycemia/
diabetes mellitus, there is actually a spectrum of risk
among the various agents:
high metabolic risk: clozapine, olanzapine
moderate metabolic risk: risperidone, paliperidone,
quetiapine, asenapine, iloperidone
low metabolic risk: lurasidone, cariprazine,
lumateperone, ziprasidone, pimavanserin,
aripiprazole, brexpiprazole
The “metabolic highway” shown schematically in
Figure 5-23 passes by weight gain, dyslipidemia, and
hyperglycemia/diabetes mellitus and ends with the sad
destination of premature death. The point of discussing
the metabolic highway is to monitor the patient along their
journey of taking one of the moderate- or high-risk agents,
and to intervene when possible to prevent predictable
adverse outcomes. The onramp to the metabolic highway
is increased appetite and weight gain, with progression
to obesity, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia with
increases in fasting triglyceride levels (Figure 5-23).
Ultimately, hyperinsulinemia advances to pancreatic β-cell
failure, prediabetes, and then diabetes. Once diabetes
is established, risk for cardiovascular events is further
increased, as is the risk of premature death (Figure 5-23).
The pharmacological mechanisms for what propels a
patient taking a drug with antipsychotic properties along
the metabolic highway to these risks and beyond are
only beginning to be understood. Increased weight gain
associated with some agents may be due to actions at the
198

H1 histamine receptor and the 5HT2C serotonin receptor.
When these receptors are blocked, particularly at the
same time, patients can experience weight gain. Since
weight gain can lead to obesity, and obesity to diabetes,
and diabetes to cardiac disease along the metabolic
highway (Figure 5-23), it seemed feasible at first that
weight gain might explain all the other cardiometabolic
complications associated with treatment with those
drugs used for psychosis that cause moderate or high
amounts of weight gain. This may be true, but only in
part, and perhaps mostly for those agents that have both
potent antihistamine properties as well as potent 5HT2C
antagonist properties; notably, clozapine, olanzapine,
and quetiapine, as well as the antidepressant mirtazapine
(discussed in Chapter 7).
However, it now appears that the cardiometabolic
risk cannot simply be explained by increased appetite
and weight gain, nor by antagonist actions at these
two receptors, even though they certainly do represent
the first steps down the slippery slope towards
cardiometabolic complications for some of the higher-risk
agents. However, many drugs that block one or another
of these two receptors do not have a great deal of appetite
or weight gain associated with use, and many other drugs
that cause weight gain lack actions at these two receptors.
It appears that there may be a second mechanism
acting to cause weight gain, dyslipidemia, and diabetes;
namely, immediate increase in insulin resistance.
This can be measured in part by elevation of fasting
triglyceride levels and cannot be explained by weight gain
alone, because this occurs prior to gaining significant
weight; it is as if there is an acute receptor-mediated
action of these drugs on insulin regulation. We still do not
know what that receptor might be, but it is hypothesized
as receptor “X” on the drug icon in Figure 5-24.
So, there appears to be a second mechanism of
metabolic dysfunction other than that which causes
increased appetite and weight gain of the H1/5HT2Cmediated mechanism. This outcome was unexpected
when these drugs were all developed, and some drugs
seem to have this second mechanism (high- and
moderate-risk agents) while others seem to lack it (lowrisk agents). To date, the mechanism of this increased
insulin resistance and elevation of fasting triglycerides
has been vigorously pursued but has not yet been
identified. The rapid elevation of fasting triglycerides
upon initiation of some D2/5HT2A antagonists, and the
rapid fall of fasting triglycerides upon discontinuation
of such drugs, is highly suggestive that an unknown


<<<PAGE 215>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

pharmacological mechanism causes these changes,
although this remains speculative. The hypothetical
actions of agents with this postulated receptor action are
shown in Figure 5-24, where adipose tissue, liver, and
skeletal muscle all develop insulin resistance in response
to administration of certain drugs (e.g., high-risk drugs
but not “metabolically friendly” low-risk drugs), at least
in certain patients. Whatever the mechanism of this
effect, it is clear that fasting plasma triglycerides and
insulin resistance can be elevated significantly in some
patients taking certain D2/5HT2A antagonists, that this
enhances cardiometabolic risk and moves such patients
along the metabolic highway (Figure 5–23), and that
this functions as another step down the slippery slope
towards the diabolical destination of cardiovascular
events and premature death. This does not happen
in all patients taking any D2/5HT2A antagonist, but
the development of this problem can be detected by
monitoring (Figure 5-25) and it can be managed when it
does occur (Figure 5-26).
Another rare but life-threatening cardiometabolic
problem is known to be associated with serotonin/
dopamine agents that treat psychosis: namely, an
association with the sudden occurrence of diabetic
ketoacidosis (DKA) or the related condition
hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome (HHS). The
mechanism of this complication is under intense
investigation, and is probably complex and multifactorial.
In some cases, it may be that patients with undiagnosed
insulin resistance, prediabetes, or diabetes, who are in a
state of compensated hyperinsulinemia on the metabolic
highway (Figure 5-23), when given certain serotonin/
dopamine antagonists, become decompensated because
of some unknown pharmacological action. Because
of the risk of DKA/HHS, it is important to know the
patient’s location along the metabolic highway prior to
prescribing drugs for psychosis, particularly if the patient
has hyperinsulinemia, prediabetes, or diabetes. It is
thus important to monitor (Figures 5-23 and 5-25) and
manage (Figure 5-26) these risk factors.
Specifically, there are at least three stops along the
metabolic highway where a psychopharmacologist should
monitor a patient taking a drug for psychosis (or using
these same drugs for other indications, particularly
depression) and manage their cardiometabolic risks
(Figure 5-23). This starts with monitoring weight,
body mass index, and fasting glucose to detect the
development of diabetes (Figures 5-23 and 5-25). It also
means getting a baseline of fasting triglyceride levels
and determining whether there is a family history of

Psychopharmacologist’s
Metabolic Monitoring Tool Kit

250

+

BMI chart

+

fasting glu

5

scale
fasting TGs

BP
FLOW CHART
John Doe
baseline

visit 1

visit 2

wt/BMI
fasting TGs
fasting glu
BP
Figure 5-25 Metabolic monitoring tool kit. The
psychopharmacologist’s metabolic monitoring tool kit includes
items for tracking four major parameters: weight/body mass
index (BMI), fasting triglycerides (TGs), fasting glucose (glu),
and blood pressure (BP). These items are simply a flowchart that
can appear at the beginning of a patient’s chart, with entries for
each visit.

diabetes. The second action to monitor is whether or
not these drugs are causing dyslipidemia and increased
insulin resistance by measuring fasting triglyceride levels
before and after starting a serotonin/dopamine agent
(Figure 5-25). If body mass index or fasting triglycerides
199


<<<PAGE 216>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Insulin Resistance:
What Can a Psychopharmacologist Do?
psychopharmacologist

no options

modest
chance
of
success

genes/aging
lifestyle/diet

Figure 5-26 Insulin resistance: what can a
psychopharmacologist do? Several factors
influence whether or not an individual
develops insulin resistance, some of which
are manageable by a psychopharmacologist
and some of which are not. Unmanageable
factors include genetic makeup and age,
while items that are modestly manageable
include lifestyle (e.g., diet, exercise, smoking).
Psychopharmacologists exert their greatest
influence on managing insulin resistance
through the selection of medication treatments
that either do or do not cause insulin resistance.

most
manageable
option

choice of
drug for
psychosis

insulin resistance

increase significantly, a switch to a different drug in this
class, especially a low-metabolic-risk drug, should be
considered. In patients who are obese, with dyslipidemia,
and either in a prediabetic or diabetic state, it is especially
important to monitor blood pressure, fasting glucose,
and waist circumference before and after initiating a
serotonin/dopamine agent. Best practices are to monitor
these parameters in anyone taking any of these drugs,
although it is frequently not done, especially not in
patients being treated for depression, unfortunately. Too
often these same patients are not monitored for other
side effects in this class either, such as tardive dyskinesia.
If there is one lesson to be learned about knowing the
pharmacology of drugs it is that the mechanism dictates
not only efficacy but also safety. Too often these drugs are
200

monitored one way when used for psychosis, frequently in
inpatient settings, and another way, much less rigorously,
when used for depression, often in outpatient settings.
Guess what? These are the same drugs no matter
where or in whom they are used.
In high-risk patients, it is especially important
to be vigilant for DKA/HHS, and possibly to reduce
that risk by maintaining the patient on a drug for
psychosis (or mood) with lower cardiometabolic risk.
In high-risk patients, especially those with pending
or actual pancreatic β-cell failure, as manifested by
hyperinsulinemia, prediabetes, or diabetes, fasting
glucose and other chemical and clinical parameters can
be monitored to detect early signs of rare but potentially
fatal DKA/HHS.


<<<PAGE 217>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

The psychopharmacologist’s metabolic toolkit is quite
simple (Figure 5-25). It involves a flow chart that tracks
perhaps as few as four parameters over time, especially
before and after switches from one agent to another, or
as new risk factors evolve. These four parameters are
weight (as body mass index), fasting triglycerides, fasting
glucose, and blood pressure.
The management of patients at risk for
cardiometabolic disease can be quite simple as
well, although patients who already have developed
dyslipidemia, hypertension, diabetes, and heart disease
will likely require management of these problems by a
medical specialist. However, the psychopharmacologist
is left with a very simple set of options for managing
patients with cardiometabolic risk who are prescribed
one of these drugs with any amount of metabolic risk
(Figure 5-26). The major factors that determine whether
a patient progresses along the metabolic highway to
premature death include:
those that are unmanageable (genetic makeup and age)
those that are modestly manageable (change in
lifestyle such as diet, exercise, and stopping
smoking)
those that are most manageable, namely the selection
of medication and perhaps switching from one
that is causing increased risk in a particular
patient, to one that monitoring demonstrates
reduces that risk
Other options for managing the metabolic syndrome
and dyslipidemia in patients taking serotonin/dopamine
antagonists is the promising possibility that co-therapy
with other agents may prevent weight gain and possibly
dyslipidemia. That is, the anti-diabetes drug metformin
has been shown in several studies to cause weight loss
after drug-induced weight gain and, perhaps even more
impressively, to reduce weight gain when starting a
high- or moderate-metabolic-risk agent. Less consistent
results have also been reported for the anticonvulsant
topiramate. A new agent on the horizon that can reduce
olanzapine-induced weight gain is the combination of the
μ-opioid antagonist samidorphan with olanzapine.

for individual discussion here. To characterize all the
receptor binding properties of all the various drugs
that treat psychosis, we show these properties both by
simplified icons and by binding strips that represent
all the known receptors that drug binds as one box per
receptor, in rank order from most potent on the far left
to least potent on the far right (see Figures 5-27 through
5-31 for some of the original D2 antagonists, and see
subsequent figures for the other drugs to treat psychosis).
Specifically, the pharmacological binding properties
of each drug can be represented as a row of semiquantitative and rank-order relative binding potencies at
numerous neurotransmitter receptors. These figures are
conceptual and not precisely quantitative, can differ from
one laboratory to another, species to species, method to
method, and the consensus values for binding properties
evolve over time. More potent binding (higher affinity) is
shown to the left of the value for the D2 receptor, which
is indicated by a vertical dotted line; less potent binding
(lower affinity) is shown to the right.
Drugs used to treat psychosis are arguably the most
complicated medicines in psychopharmacology, if
not indeed in all of medicine, and this method should
hopefully give the reader a rapid semi-quantitative grasp
of the individual pharmacological properties of two
dozen different drugs used to treat psychosis, and how
these compare to all the other drugs that treat psychosis,
and to do it in a glance.
Dopamine 2 antagonists/partial agonists are generally
dosed for antipsychotic action so that at least 60–80% of
D2 receptors are occupied. Thus, all receptors to the left
of D2 in the various figures of these drugs are occupied
at the level of 60% or more at antipsychotic dosing levels.
The receptors shown to the right of D2 in these individual
drug figures are occupied at a level of less than 60% at
antipsychotic dosing levels. Only those receptors that are
bound by a drug within an order of magnitude of potency
of D2 affinity are likely to have clinically relevant actions
at antipsychotic doses, and maybe no relevant actions at
lower doses such as doses used to treat depression.

PHARMACOLOGICAL
PROPERTIES OF SELECTED
INDIVIDUAL FIRST-GENERATION
D2 ANTAGONISTS

One of the very first agents with D2 antagonist properties
used to treat psychosis is chlorpromazine, in the chemical
class of phenothiazine. It was originally branded as
“Largactil” meaning it had a large number of actions, but
none of its actions were known to be linked to any specific
receptor at that time. Those “large actions” are shown in
Figure 5-27, and in addition to therapeutic D2 antagonism,
chlorpromazine has numerous receptor actions

The original D2 antagonists launched approximately
70 years ago are still used to treat psychosis and a few
of the most commonly prescribed agents are selected

Chlorpromazine

201

5


<<<PAGE 218>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

M1

M3
M4

5HT2A

M

5
H
1

α1

chlorpromazine
5HT2C

D1

α1

D3

+++ +++

D3

D4

5HT

7

5H

T6

D2

H1

D2

+++

+++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 5HT5A D5
+ +

5HT2A D4

5HT2C 5HT6 5HT7

M5

M1

M3

M4

D1

H2

+

M2 5HT1E 5HT1D α2

+

+

+

+

Figure 5-27 Chlorpromazine’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking
about the binding properties of chlorpromazine. In addition to the D2 receptor, chlorpromazine binds potently to α1-adrenergic
receptors, D3 receptors, and H1 receptors, and also has actions at numerous other receptors as shown. As with all agents discussed in
this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with technique and from one laboratory to another; they are constantly being revised and
updated.

associated with sedation (muscarinic, α1, and histamine
antagonism), as well as other side effects (see Figures 5-8
and 5-13). Chlorpromazine is often prescribed to exploit
its sedation in patients who do well with sedation,
particularly short-term orally or as a short-acting
intramuscular injection when needed to treat agitation or
a sudden worsening in psychosis, often administered on
top of another drug in the same class that is given daily.
Fluphenazine

This agent is another phenothiazine, although
more potent than chlorpromazine and less sedating
(Figure 5-28). It has both short-acting and long-acting
202

formulations for convenient use, and it is one of the agents
for which monitoring plasma drug levels may be useful.
Haloperidol

Haloperidol (Figure 5-29) is one of the most potent
D2 antagonists, and less sedating than some others. It
also has both short- and long-acting formulations for
convenient use and it, too, is one of the agents for which
monitoring plasma drug levels may be useful.
Sulpiride

Sulpiride (Figure 5-30) has D2 antagonist properties
and, as expected, generally causes motor side effects


<<<PAGE 219>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

5HT2A

H
1

α1

α2B

fluphenazine

α2C
D1

5

T6

5H

5H

T7

D2

D2

D3

5HT7

++++ ++++ +++

α1

D5

D5

5HT2A α2C

D4

H1

5HT6

D3

D4

D1

α2B

+++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ α2A 5HT1B 5HT1D M5 5HT1E H2 5HT1A 5HT2C
+ + + + + + + +

Figure 5-28 Fluphenazine’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of fluphenazine. Along with D2 antagonism, fluphenazine has potent actions at D3, 5HT7, and α1-adrenergic
receptors, and binds at numerous other receptors as well. As with all agents discussed in this chapter, binding properties vary greatly
with technique and from one laboratory to another; they are constantly being revised and updated.

and prolactin elevation at usual antipsychotic doses.
However, particularly at lower doses, it may be a bit
activating, and have efficacy for negative symptoms of
schizophrenia and for depression for unclear reasons.
Dopamine 3 antagonist/partial agonist actions in
depression are discussed in Chapter 7 on treatments
for mood disorders, and this is a candidate explanation
(see Figure 5-30). Sulpiride remains a popular option for
treating psychosis in countries outside the US such as the
UK, as it may be better tolerated than some of the other
original D2 agents.
Amisulpride

Amisulpride (Figure 5-31) is structurally related to
sulpiride (Figure 5-30) and was developed and marketed

outside the US. Some early preclinical data suggest that
it might be more selective for mesolimbic/mesostriatal
dopamine receptors than for nigrostriatal dopamine
receptors, and thus might have a lower propensity for
motor side effects at antipsychotic doses. There are reports
of amisulpride’s efficacy for the negative symptoms of
schizophrenia and for depression at doses lower than
those used to treat positive symptoms of psychosis.
Amisulpride has some D3 antagonist actions and some
weak 5HT7 antagonist actions, which may explain some of
its negative symptom and antidepressant actions (Figure
5-31). Antidepressant actions of D3 antagonism/partial
agonism and 5HT7 antagonism are discussed in Chapter 7.
The active isomer of amisulpride is in early clinical testing
for possible development in the US.

203


<<<PAGE 220>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT2A

α1

σ

haloperidol

D2

D4

D2

σ

+++ +++

D3

D3

α1

+++

+++ ++ 5HT2A D1 5HT1B α2C α2B M5
+ + + + + +

D4

5HT7

α2A

+

+

Figure 5-29 Haloperidol’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of haloperidol. Haloperidol binds potently to D2 receptors as well as to omega, D3, and α1-adrenergic receptors.
As with all agents discussed in this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with technique and from one laboratory to another; they are
constantly being revised and updated.

AN OVERVIEW OF THE
PHARMACOLOGICAL
PROPERTIES OF INDIVIDUAL
5HT2A/D2 ANTAGONISTS AND
D2/5HT1A PARTIAL AGONISTS:
THE PINES (PEENS), MANY
DONES AND A RONE, TWO PIPS
AND A RIP
We have established that D2 antagonist/partial agonist
properties can explain the antipsychotic efficacy for
positive symptoms as well as many side effects of drugs
204

used to treat psychosis. The 5HT2A antagonist and/or
5HT1A partial agonist properties can help to explain the
reduced propensity for motor side effects and prolactin
elevation and potential therapeutic enhancement of
positive, negative, depressive, and cognitive symptoms.
However, the contributions of these properties to each
individual agent used to treat psychosis are quite variable.
As mentioned above for the original D2 antagonists, we
also characterize all the receptor binding properties of the
D2/5HT2A/5HT1A drugs by binding strips that represent
all the known receptors that each drug binds to as one
box per receptor, in rank order from most potent on the
far left to least potent on the far right (see Figures 5-32


<<<PAGE 221>>>
Figure 5-30 Sulpiride’s pharmacological and
binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative
consensus of current thinking about the binding
properties of sulpiride. At usual antipsychotic
doses, sulpiride is a D2 antagonist and also has
D3 antagonist/partial agonist actions. As with
all agents discussed in this chapter, binding
properties vary greatly with technique and from
one laboratory to another; they are constantly
being revised and updated.

sulpiride

D2

D3

5

D3

D2

++ ++

Figure 5-31 Amisulpride’s pharmacological and
binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative
consensus of current thinking about the binding
properties of amisulpride. In addition to its
actions at D2 receptors, amisulpride has some
D3 antagonist actions and some weak 5HT7
antagonist actions. As with all agents discussed in
this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with
technique and from one laboratory to another;
they are constantly being revised and updated.

amisulpride

D2

D3

D2

+++

D3
5HT2B

+++ ++ 5HT7
+
205


<<<PAGE 222>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 5-32 5HT2A binding
by drugs used to treat
psychosis. Shown here is a visual
depiction of the binding profiles of
drugs used to treat psychosis. Each
colored box represents a different
binding property, with the size and
positioning of the box reflecting
the binding potency of the property
(i.e., size indicates potency relative
to a standard Ki scale, while position
reflects potency relative to the
other binding properties of that
drug). The vertical dotted line cuts
through the D2 receptor binding
box, with binding properties that
are more potent than D2 on the
left and those that are less potent
than D2 on the right. Interestingly,
D2 binding is not the most potent
property for any of the agents
shown here. (A) The “pines” (i.e.,
clozapine, olanzapine, quetiapine,
asenapine, and zotepine) all bind
much more potently to the 5HT2A
receptor than they do to the D2
receptor. (B) The “dones” and “rone”
(i.e., risperidone, paliperidone,
ziprasidone, iloperidone, lurasidone,
and lumateperone) also bind more
or as potently to the 5HT2A receptor
as they do to the D2 receptor.
(C) Aripiprazole and cariprazine
both bind more potently to the D2
receptor than to the 5HT2A receptor,
while brexpiprazole has similar
potency at both receptors.

5HT2A binding by pines
5HT2A

clozapine

5HT2A

olanzapine
5HT2A

quetiapine

5HT2A

asenapine
5HT2A

A

zotepine

5HT2A binding by dones and a rone
5HT2A

5HT2A

paliperidone

risperidone

5HT2A

ziprasidone
5HT2A

iloperidone

lurasidone

B

5HT2A

5HT2A

lumateperone

5HT2A binding by two pips and a rip
5HT2A

aripiprazole
5HT2A

brexpiprazole
5HT2A

cariprazine

C

206

more potent than D2

less potent than D2


<<<PAGE 223>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

5HT1A binding by pines
5HT1A

clozapine
olanzapine
5HT1A

quetiapine
5HT1A

asenapine
5HT1A

A

zotepine

5HT1A binding by dones and a rone
5HT1A

risperidone

5HT1A

paliperidone
5HT1A

ziprasidone
5HT1A

iloperidone
5HT1A

Figure 5-33 5HT1A binding
by drugs used to treat
psychosis. Shown here is a visual
depiction of the binding profiles
of drugs used to treat psychosis.
(A) Clozapine and quetiapine both
bind more potently to the 5HT1A
receptor than they do to the D2
receptor, while asenapine and
zotepine bind less potently to the
5HT1A receptor and olanzapine
does not bind to it at all. (B) All
of the “dones” (i.e., risperidone,
paliperidone, ziprasidone,
iloperidone, and lurasidone) bind to
the 5HT1A receptor with less potency
than they do to the D2 receptor;
lumateperone does not bind the
5HT1A receptor. (C) Aripiprazole,
brexpiprazole, and cariprazine
each have similar relative potency
for the D2 and 5HT1A receptors.
5HT1A binding is actually the most
potent property of brexpiprazole.
Description of graphic: Each
colored box represents a different
binding property, with the size and
positioning of the box reflecting
the binding potency of the property
(i.e., size indicates potency relative
to a standard Ki scale, while position
reflects potency relative to the other
binding properties of that drug).
The vertical dotted line cuts through
the D2 receptor binding box, with
binding properties that are more
potent than D2 on the left and those
that are less potent than D2 on the
right. Binding at 5HT2A (see Figure
5-32) is indicated by an orange
outline around the box.

lurasidone

B

lumateperone

5HT1A binding by two pips and a rip
5HT1A

aripiprazole
5HT1A

brexpiprazole
5HT1A

cariprazine

C

more potent than D2

less potent than D2

207

5


<<<PAGE 224>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Monoamine reuptake inhibition by pines

clozapine
olanzapine
NET

quetiapine

asenapine
NET

A

SERT

zotepine

Monoamine reuptake inhibition by dones and a rone

risperidone

paliperidone
NET

ziprasidone

iloperidone

lurasidone
SERT

B

lumateperone

Monoamine reuptake inhibition by two pips and a rip

aripiprazole

brexpiprazole

cariprazine

C

208

more potent than D2

less potent than D2

SERT

Figure 5-34 Monoamine
transporter binding by drugs
used to treat psychosis. Shown
here is a visual depiction of the
binding profiles of drugs used to
treat psychosis. (A) Of the “pines,”
quetiapine is the only one with
any relevant monoamine reuptake
inhibition. Specifically, it binds to
the norepinephrine transporter
(NET) with similar potency as it does
to the 5HT2A receptor, and greater
potency than to the D2 receptor.
(B) Ziprasidone binds to NET and
the serotonin transporter (SERT),
though with less potency than to the
D2 receptor. Lumateperone binds
to SERT with similar potency as to
the D2 receptor. (C) Aripiprazole,
brexpiprazole, and cariprazine do
not bind to any of the monoamine
transporters. Description of graphic:
Each colored box represents a
different binding property, with
the size and positioning of the box
reflecting the binding potency of the
property (i.e., size indicates potency
relative to a standard Ki scale, while
position reflects potency relative
to the other binding properties of
that drug). The vertical dotted line
cuts through the dopamine 2 (D2)
receptor binding box, with binding
properties that are more potent
than D2 on the left and those that
are less potent than D2 on the right.
Binding at 5HT2A (see Figure 5-32)
is indicated by an orange outline
around the box.


<<<PAGE 225>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Alpha2 binding by pines
α2C α2B

α2A

clozapine

α2C

α2B

α2A

olanzapine
α2C

α2A

α2B

quetiapine
α2B

α2A

α2C

asenapine
α2

A

zotepine

Alpha2 binding by dones and a rone
α2C

risperidone

α2B

α2C α2A

α2A

α2B

paliperidone
α2B

ziprasidone
α2C

α2A

α2B

iloperidone
α2C

α2A

α2C

α2A

Figure 5-35 Alpha-2 binding
by drugs used to treat
psychosis. Shown here is a visual
depiction of the binding profiles of
drugs used to treat psychosis. (A)
All of the “pines” (i.e., clozapine,
olanzapine, quetiapine, asenapine,
zotepine) bind to α2 receptors to
varying degrees. Clozapine and
quetiapine in particular bind to
some α2 receptor subtypes with
greater potency than they do to the
D2 receptor. (B) All of the “dones”
(i.e., risperidone, paliperidone,
ziprasidone, iloperidone,
lurasidone) bind to α2 receptors
to varying degrees. Risperidone
and paliperidone bind to the α2C
receptor with similar potency as to
the D2 receptor. Lumateperone does
not bind to any α2 receptors. (C)
Aripiprazole binds to α2 receptors
with less potency than it does to the
D2 receptor. Brexpiprazole binds
to α2C receptors, and cariprazine
has some affinity for α2A receptors.
Description of graphic: Each
colored box represents a different
binding property, with the size and
positioning of the box reflecting
the binding potency of the property
(i.e., size indicates potency relative
to a standard Ki scale, while position
reflects potency relative to the other
binding properties of that drug). The
vertical dotted line cuts through the
dopamine 2 (D2) receptor binding
box, with binding properties that
are more potent than D2 on the left
and those that are less potent than
D2 on the right. Binding at 5HT2A
(see Figure 5-32) is indicated by an
orange outline around the box.

lurasidone

B

lumateperone

Alpha2 binding by two pips and a rip
α2C

α2A α2B

aripiprazole
α2C

brexpiprazole
α2A

cariprazine

C

more potent than D2

less potent than D2

209

5


<<<PAGE 226>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

D3 binding by pines
D3

clozapine

D3

olanzapine
D3

quetiapine
D3

asenapine
D3

A

zotepine

D3 binding by dones and a rone
D3

D3

risperidone

paliperidone
D3

ziprasidone
D3

iloperidone
D3

lurasidone

B

lumateperone

D3 binding by two pips and a rip
D3

aripiprazole
D3

brexpiprazole
D3

cariprazine

C

210

more potent than D2

less potent than D2

Figure 5-36 D3 binding by drugs
used to treat psychosis. Shown here
is a visual depiction of the binding
profiles of drugs used to treat
psychosis. (A) All of the “pines” bind
to D3 receptors, but with varying
degrees of potency. (B) Likewise, all
of the “dones” bind to D3 receptors,
again with varying degrees of
potency. Lumateperone, however,
does not bind to D3 receptors at
all. (C) D3 receptor partial agonism
is actually the most potent binding
property of cariprazine. Aripiprazole
and brexpiprazole also bind to D3
receptors, less potently than they
do to D2 receptors. Description
of graphic: Each colored box
represents a different binding
property, with the size and
positioning of the box reflecting
the binding potency of the property
(i.e., size indicates potency relative
to a standard Ki scale, while position
reflects potency relative to the other
binding properties of that drug). The
vertical dotted line cuts through the
dopamine 2 (D2) receptor binding
box, with binding properties that
are more potent than D2 on the left
and those that are less potent than
D2 on the right. Binding at 5HT2A
(see Figure 5-32) is indicated by an
orange outline around the box.


<<<PAGE 227>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Figure 5-37 5HT2C binding
by drugs used to treat
psychosis. Shown here is a visual
depiction of the binding profiles of
drugs used to treat psychosis. (A)
All of the “pines” (i.e., clozapine,
olanzapine, quetiapine, asenapine,
zotepine) bind more potently to the
5HT2C receptor than they do to the
D2 receptor. (B) All of the “dones”
(i.e., risperidone, paliperidone,
ziprasidone, iloperidone, lurasidone)
as well as lumateperone have some
affinity for the 5HT2C receptor,
although only ziprasidone binds
with comparable potency as at
the D2 receptor. (C) Aripiprazole,
brexpiprazole, and cariprazine all
have relatively weak affinity for
the 5HT2C receptor. Description
of graphic: Each colored box
represents a different binding
property, with the size and
positioning of the box reflecting
the binding potency of the property
(i.e., size indicates potency relative
to a standard Ki scale, while position
reflects potency relative to the other
binding properties of that drug). The
vertical dotted line cuts through the
dopamine 2 (D2) receptor binding
box, with binding properties that
are more potent than D2 on the left
and those that are less potent than
D2 on the right. Binding at 5HT2A
(see Figure 5-32) is indicated by an
orange outline around the box.

5HT2C binding by pines
5HT2C

clozapine

5HT2C

olanzapine
5HT2C

quetiapine

5HT2C

asenapine
5HT2C

A

zotepine

5HT2C binding by dones and a rone
5HT2C

risperidone

paliperidone

5HT2C

5HT2C

ziprasidone
5HT2C

iloperidone
5HT2C

lurasidone
5HT2C

B

lumateperone

5HT2C binding by two pips and a rip
5HT2C

aripiprazole
5HT2C

brexpiprazole
5HT2C

cariprazine

C

more potent than D2

less potent than D2

211

5


<<<PAGE 228>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT3 binding by pines
5HT3

clozapine

5HT3

olanzapine
5HT3

quetiapine
5HT3

asenapine
5HT3

A

zotepine

5HT3 binding by dones and a rone

risperidone

paliperidone

ziprasidone

iloperidone

lurasidone

B

lumateperone

5HT3 binding by two pips and a rip
5HT3

aripiprazole

brexpiprazole

cariprazine

C

212

more potent than D2

less potent than D2

Figure 5-38 5HT3 binding by drugs
used to treat psychosis. Shown
here is a visual depiction of the
binding profiles of drugs used
to treat psychosis. (A) All of the
“pines” bind to 5HT3 with less
affinity than they have for the D2
receptor. (B) None of the “dones”
or “rone” have any binding activity
at 5HT3 receptors. (C) Aripiprazole
binds weakly to 5HT3 receptors.
Description of graphic: Each
colored box represents a different
binding property, with the size and
positioning of the box reflecting
the binding potency of the property
(i.e., size indicates potency relative
to a standard Ki scale, while position
reflects potency relative to the other
binding properties of that drug). The
vertical dotted line cuts through the
dopamine 2 (D2) receptor binding
box, with binding properties that
are more potent than D2 on the left
and those that are less potent than
D2 on the right. Binding at 5HT2A
(see Figure 5-32) is indicated by an
orange outline around the box.


<<<PAGE 229>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Figure 5-39 5HT6 and 5HT7
binding by drugs used to treat
psychosis. Shown here is a visual
depiction of the binding profiles
of drugs used to treat psychosis.
(A) Clozapine, quetiapine,
asenapine, and zotepine each
have greater or similar potency for
the 5HT7 receptor compared to
the D2 receptor, while clozapine,
olanzapine, asenapine, and zotepine
each have greater or similar potency
for the 5HT6 receptor compared to
the D2 receptor. (B) Risperidone,
paliperidone, ziprasidone, and
lurasidone all bind potently to the
5HT7 receptor. In fact, lurasidone has
greater affinity for the 5HT7 receptor
than for the D2 receptor. Ziprasidone
and iloperidone also bind to the
5HT6 receptor. (C) Aripiprazole,
brexpiprazole, and cariprazine all
bind to the 5HT7 receptor, though
none with more potency than for the
D2 receptor. Description of graphic:
Each colored box represents a
different binding property, with
the size and positioning of the box
reflecting the binding potency of the
property (i.e., size indicates potency
relative to a standard Ki scale, while
position reflects potency relative
to the other binding properties of
that drug). The vertical dotted line
cuts through the dopamine 2 (D2)
receptor binding box, with binding
properties that are more potent
than D2 on the left and those that
are less potent than D2 on the right.
Binding at 5HT2A (see Figure 5-32)
is indicated by an orange outline
around the box.

5HT6 and 5HT7 binding by pines
5HT6

5HT7

clozapine

5HT6

5HT7

olanzapine
5HT7

quetiapine

5HT6

5HT7 5HT6

asenapine
5HT6

A

5HT7

zotepine

5HT6 and 5HT7 binding by dones and a rone
5HT7

5HT7

risperidone

paliperidone
5HT7

5HT6

ziprasidone
5HT6

5HT7

iloperidone
5HT7

lurasidone

B

lumateperone

5HT6 and 5HT7 binding by two pips and a rip
5HT7

5HT6

aripiprazole
5HT7

5HT6

brexpiprazole
5HT7

cariprazine

C

more potent than D2

less potent than D2

213

5


<<<PAGE 230>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT1B/D binding by pines
5HT1B 5HT1D

clozapine
5HT1B 5HT1D

olanzapine
5HT1D

quetiapine
5HT1B

5HT1D

asenapine
5HT1B

A

5HT1D

zotepine

5HT1B/D binding by dones and a rone
5HT1B 5HT1D

risperidone

5HT1B

5HT1D

paliperidone
5HT1B

5HT1D

ziprasidone
5HT1D

5HT1B

iloperidone

lurasidone

B

lumateperone

5HT1 B/D binding by two pips and a rip
5HT1D

5HT1B

aripiprazole
5HT1B

brexpiprazole

cariprazine

C

214

more potent than D2

less potent than D2

Figure 5-40 5HT1B/D binding
by drugs used to treat
psychosis. Shown here is a visual
depiction of the binding profiles of
drugs used to treat psychosis. (A)
Clozapine, olanzapine, asenapine,
and zotepine all bind relatively
weakly to the 5HT1B and 5HT1D
receptors, while quetiapine binds
relatively weakly only to the
5HT1D receptor. (B) Risperidone,
paliperidone, ziprasidone, and
iloperidone all have some affinity
for the 5HT1B and 5HT1D receptors.
In particular, ziprasidone binds
with similar potency to these
two receptors as it does to the
D2 receptor. Lurasidone and
lumateperone do not bind to
5HT1B/D receptors. (C) Aripiprazole
and brexpiprazole each bind weakly
to the 5HT1B receptor; aripiprazole
also binds to the 5HT1D receptor.
Cariprazine does not bind to 5HT1B/D
receptors. Description of graphic:
Each colored box represents a
different binding property, with
the size and positioning of the box
reflecting the binding potency of the
property (i.e., size indicates potency
relative to a standard Ki scale, while
position reflects potency relative
to the other binding properties of
that drug). The vertical dotted line
cuts through the dopamine 2 (D2)
receptor binding box, with binding
properties that are more potent
than D2 on the left and those that
are less potent than D2 on the right.
Binding at 5HT2A (see Figure 5-32)
is indicated by an orange outline
around the box.


<<<PAGE 231>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Antihistamine/Anticholinergic binding by pines
M1 H1

M4

M3

clozapine

M2

H1

M1

M3

M2 M4

olanzapine
H1

M3

M1

M2

M4

quetiapine
H1
M1 M2

asenapine
H1

A

M1

M2

H2

zotepine

Antihistamine/Anticholinergic binding by dones and a rone
H1

risperidone

H1

paliperidone
H1

ziprasidone
H1

iloperidone

Figure 5-41 Antihistamine/
anticholinergic binding by drugs
used to treat psychosis. Shown here
is a visual depiction of the binding
profiles of drugs used to treat
psychosis. (A) Clozapine, olanzapine,
quetiapine, and zotepine all have
strong potency for histamine 1
receptors; clozapine, olanzapine,
and quetiapine also have strong
potency for muscarinic receptors.
Asenapine has some affinity for
histamine H1 receptors and weak
affinity for muscarinic receptors.
(B) None of the “dones” or “rones”
have anticholinergic properties.
Risperidone, paliperidone,
ziprasidone, and iloperidone all
have some potency for H1 receptors.
(C) Aripiprazole, brexpiprazole,
and cariprazine all bind at the H1
receptor with less potency than
they do to the D2 receptor, and do
not bind to muscarinic receptors.
Description of graphic: Each
colored box represents a different
binding property, with the size and
positioning of the box reflecting
the binding potency of the property
(i.e., size indicates potency relative
to a standard Ki scale, while position
reflects potency relative to the other
binding properties of that drug). The
vertical dotted line cuts through the
dopamine 2 (D2) receptor binding
box, with binding properties that
are more potent than D2 on the left
and those that are less potent than
D2 on the right. Binding at 5HT2A
(see Figure 5-32) is indicated by an
orange outline around the box.

lurasidone

B

lumateperone

Antihistamine/Anticholinergic binding by two pips and a rip
H1

aripiprazole
H1

brexpiprazole
H1

cariprazine

C

more potent than D2

less potent than D2

215

5


<<<PAGE 232>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Alpha1 binding by pines
α1A α1B

clozapine
α1B

α1A

olanzapine
α1A

α1B

quetiapine
α1B

α1A

asenapine
α1

A

zotepine

Alpha1 binding by dones and a rone
α1B

α1A

α1B

α1A

risperidone

paliperidone
α1B α1A

ziprasidone
α1

iloperidone
α1

lurasidone
α1

B

lumateperone

Alpha1 binding by two pips and a rip
α1A

α1B

aripiprazole
α1B

α1D

brexpiprazole
α1B

α1D α1A

cariprazine

C

216

more potent than D2

less potent than D2

α1A

Figure 5-42 Alpha-1 binding
by drugs used to treat
psychosis. Shown here is a visual
depiction of the binding profiles
of drugs used to treat psychosis.
(A) Clozapine, quetiapine, and
zotepine each have greater potency
for α1 receptors than for the D2
receptor, while asenapine binds with
similar potency to the α2 and the
D2 receptors. (B) All of the “dones”
(i.e., risperidone, paliperidone,
ziprasidone, iloperidone, lurasidone)
as well as lumateperone bind
to the α1 receptor. In particular,
paliperidone and iloperidone bind
with greater potency than they do
to the D2 receptor. (C) Aripiprazole,
brexpiprazole, and cariprazine each
have some binding potency at α1
receptors. Description of graphic:
Each colored box represents a
different binding property, with
the size and positioning of the box
reflecting the binding potency of the
property (i.e., size indicates potency
relative to a standard Ki scale, while
position reflects potency relative
to the other binding properties of
that drug). The vertical dotted line
cuts through the dopamine 2 (D2)
receptor binding box, with binding
properties that are more potent
than D2 on the left and those that
are less potent than D2 on the right.
Binding at 5HT2A (see Figure 5-32)
is indicated by an orange outline
around the box.


<<<PAGE 233>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

M1
A
T1
5H

5HT2A

M2

M3

M4
H
1
α
1A
α
1B

5HT2B

clozapine

α
2A

5HT2C

α
2B
α
2C

5

α1A

7

D4

5HT

5H

T6

D2

α1B

5HT2B

M1

+++ +++

+++

+++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++

H1

5HT2A 5HT6 5HT2C M4

α2C α2B

D4

M3

5HT7

M2

α2A

5HT1A D2

+

+

+

+

5HT3

D1

D3

+

+

+

5HT1B 5HT1E 5HT1D

+

+

+

Figure 5-43 Clozapine’s pharmacological icon and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking
about the binding properties of clozapine. In addition to 5HT2A/D2 antagonism, numerous other binding properties have been identified
for clozapine, most of which are more potent than its binding at the D2 receptor. It is unknown which of these contribute to clozapine’s
special efficacy or to its unique side effects. As with all agents discussed in this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with technique
and from one laboratory to another; they are constantly being revised and updated.

through 5-63). These pharmacological binding properties
are again represented as a row of semi-quantitative
and rank-order relative binding potencies at numerous
neurotransmitter receptors, with each figure highlighting
a specific receptor so the relative binding potencies of all
these drugs can be compared at a glance. More potent
binding (higher affinity) is shown to the left of the value
for the D2 receptor, which itself is indicated by a vertical
dotted line; less potent binding (lower affinity) is shown
to the right.
Determining whether all drugs for psychosis should
be in a single class, or a small number of classes, or
whether each drug should be treated uniquely, is a bit
like the famous quote of baseball great Yogi Berra, when

he was once asked if he and his son were a lot the same.
He paused, pondered for a bit, then answered, “Yes, but
our similarities are different.” The same could be said for
all these drugs used to treat psychosis (and mood, see
Chapter 7). In some ways they are a lot the same, but in
many ways their similarities are different!
So, how are they similar? Beginning with the relative
potencies of each of these agents for 5HT2A receptors
compared to D2 receptors, the reader can see at a glance
in Figure 5-32 that almost all agents show 5HT2A binding
to the left of D2 binding, meaning these drugs with 5HT2A
to the left all have higher affinity for 5HT2A receptors
than for D2 receptors and would be expected to bind
even more to 5HT2A receptors than to D2 receptors. The
217


<<<PAGE 234>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

M1

M3

5HT2A

H
1

α2C

5HT2B

5HT2C

olanzapine
D1

T6

D2

D4

5H
H1

+++

5HT2A
5HT6 5HT2B 5HT2C M1

D4

D2

D3

D3

D1

M3

α2C

+++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ α1A α2B 5HT3 M2
+ + + +

M4

5HT7 α2A

α1B 5HT1B 5HT1D

+

+

+

+

+

+

Figure 5-44 Olanzapine’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of olanzapine. Olanzapine binds at several receptors more potently than it does at the D2 receptor; in fact, it has
strongest potency for the H1 and 5HT2A receptors. Olanzapine’s 5HT2C antagonist properties may contribute to its efficacy for mood and
cognitive symptoms, although together with its H1 antihistamine properties they could also contribute to its propensity to cause weight
gain. As with all agents discussed in this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with technique and from one laboratory to another;
they are constantly being revised and updated.

exceptions are the D2 partial agonists, but these drugs
all show comparable potency for 5HT1A receptors and
D2 receptors (Figure 5-33). However, D2 antagonists
with potent 5HT2A properties generally do not have high
affinity for 5HT1A receptors (compare drugs in Figure
5-32 with the same drugs in Figure 5-33 for their 5HT2A
versus their 5HT1A properties). Maybe that does not
really matter. Recall that many of the same downstream
actions of 5HT2A antagonism are also caused by 5HT1A
partial agonism (see discussion above and Figures 5-17
218

and 5-22). Yet, no two drugs are exactly the same and it
can be expected that their clinical properties linked to
5HT2A and 5HT1A receptors may also differ, even though
essentially all drugs listed have 5HT2A antagonism,
5HT1A partial agonism, or both, at least to some degree.
One example of how drugs that all have potent 5HT2A
antagonist properties nevertheless differ from each other
is the observation that the greater the separation of 5HT2A
binding from D2 binding (i.e., the further 5HT2A is to
the left of D2), the less D2 receptor occupancy may be


<<<PAGE 235>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

M1
1A

T
5H
5HT2A

M3

M4
H
1

α
1A
α
1B

quetiapine

α
2A

5HT2B

α
2C

5HT2C

NET

1E

5HT

5
D1

5HT7

D2

H1*

5HT2B*

M3*

α1A

M1*

α1B

5HT2A*

NET* 5HT7*

5HT1E* 5HT2C* D1* M4* 5HT1A* α2C α2A*
+++ ++
++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++
+ + + + + + +

D2* 5HT1D* α2B*

5HT3* 5HT6*

M2*

D3*

5HT5*

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

* Binding primarily due to norquetiapine (a metabolite of quetiapine)

Figure 5-45 Quetiapine’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of quetiapine. Quetiapine does not actually have particularly potent binding at D2 receptors. Quetiapine’s
prominent H1 antagonist properties probably contribute to its ability to enhance sleep, and this may contribute as well to its ability to
improve sleep disturbances in bipolar and unipolar depression as well as in anxiety disorders. However, this property can also contribute
to daytime sedation, especially combined with M1 antimuscarinic and α1-adrenergic antagonist properties. A potentially important active
metabolite of quetiapine, norquetiapine, may contribute additional actions at receptors, as noted in the binding profile with an asterisk.
5HT1A partial agonist actions, norepinephrine transporter (NET) inhibition, and 5HT2C, α2, and 5HT7 antagonist actions may all contribute
to mood-improving properties of quetiapine. However, 5HT2C antagonist actions combined with H1 antagonist actions may contribute
to weight gain. As with all agents discussed in this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with technique and from one laboratory to
another; they are constantly being revised and updated.

needed for an antipsychotic effect, explaining why studies
show that those with the widest separation (namely,
lumateperone, quetiapine, and clozapine) also have the
lowest D2 occupancy at antipsychotic doses, in fact lower
than 60%. Perhaps all this discussion is just a fancy way
of saying that the drugs to treat psychosis are all the same
but their similarities are different.
If what is the same about these drugs is D2 binding
and some degree of binding to either 5HT2A or 5HT1A
receptors, that is where the similarities stop. These

various agents have many, many pharmacological
properties other than just dopamine and serotonin
receptor binding, and these additional pharmacological
properties are shown in the next nine figures (Figures
5-34 through 5-42). The first seven of these allow visual
comparisons of putative antidepressant mechanisms
mentioned above and that will be discussed in detail in
Chapter 7. For example, the various receptor properties
linked to postulated antidepressant actions are shown in
the following figures:
219


<<<PAGE 236>>>
Papa Bear
Mama Bear

M1
T
5H

M3

1A

M4

5HT2A

Baby Bear

H
1

M1

M3

A
T1
5H

α
1A
α
1B

M4

5HT2A

H
1

α
1A

α
2A

5HT2B

α
1B

α
2C

5HT2C

NET

1E

α
2A

5HT2B

NET

E

D1

H1

α
2C

5HT2C

5HT

5HT1

D1

D2

5HT7

5HT7

D2

800 mg

300 mg

50 mg

antipsychotic

antidepressant

hypnotic

Figure 5-46 Binding profile of quetiapine at different doses. The binding properties of quetiapine vary depending on the dose used.
At antipsychotic doses (i.e., up to 800 mg/day), quetiapine has a relatively wide binding profile, with actions at multiple serotonergic,
muscarinic, and α-adrenergic receptors. Histamine 1 receptor blockade is also present. At antidepressant doses (i.e., approximately
300 mg/day), the binding profile of quetiapine is more selective and includes norepinephrine reuptake inhibition, 5HT1A partial
agonism, and 5HT2A, α2, 5HT2C, and 5HT7 antagonism. At sedative hypnotic doses (i.e., 50 mg/day), the most prominent pharmacological
property of quetiapine is H1 antagonism.

5HT2A
5HT

H
1

1B

α
1A

α
1B

5HT

1D

α
2A

5HT2B

α
2B

asenapine
5HT2C

5H
T5

D1

5HT2C

5HT2A

5HT7

5HT6

++++ ++++ ++++ +++

D2

D3

D4

+++ +++ +++

D1

α1B

5HT5

5HT7

5H

T6

D2
D3

α1A

+++ +++ +++ +++

5HT1B

D4

H1

5HT2B

α2B

α2A

5HT1D

+++ +++ +++ +++ +++ +++

α2C 5HT1E 5HT1A

++ ++ ++

5HT3 M1

M2

+

+

+

Figure 5-47 Asenapine’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of asenapine. Asenapine has a complex binding profile, with potent binding at multiple serotonergic and
dopaminergic receptors, α1 and α2 receptors, and H1 histamine receptors. In particular, 5HT2C antagonist properties may contribute to
its efficacy for mood and cognitive symptoms, while 5HT7 antagonist properties may contribute to its efficacy for mood, cognitive, and
sleep symptoms. As with all agents discussed in this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with technique and from one laboratory to
another; they are constantly being revised and updated.


<<<PAGE 237>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

M1

5HT2A

H
1

α
1

5HT1B

zotepine
5HT2C

5
D1

5HT2A

+++

H1

D3

5HT2C

5HT6

α1

5HT7

5H

T6

D2
D4

D3

5HT7
D2

M1

D4

D1

5HT1B

+++ +++ +++ +++ +++ +++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 5HT1D M2
+ +

α2 5HT1A 5HT3

+

+

+

H2 NET

+

+

SERT 5HT1E

+

+

Figure 5-48 Zotepine’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of zotepine. Zotepine is a 5HT2C antagonist, an α2 antagonist, and a 5HT7 antagonist, suggesting potential
antidepressant effects. As with all agents discussed in this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with technique and from one
laboratory to another; they are constantly being revised and updated.

monoamine reuptake blocking properties (Figure
5-34)
α2 antagonism (Figure 5-35)
D3 partial antagonism/partial agonism (Figure 5-36)
5HT2C antagonism (Figure 5-37)
5HT3 antagonism (Figure 5-38)
5HT6 and 5HT7 antagonism (Figure 5-39)
5HT1B/D antagonism (Figure 5-40)
Also, the various receptor binding properties theoretically
linked to side effects are shown in these figures:
antihistamine and anticholinergic (Figure 5-41),

α1 antagonism (Figure 5-42).
The point of these figures showing all these binding
properties is to be able to see the differences amongst
these drugs as well as the similarities. Individual agents
have quite different mechanisms theoretically linked to
antidepressant actions that may help explain why some
are indicated for unipolar or bipolar depression and
others are not, and also why one patient’s depression may
respond to one drug in this group but not to another.
Another way to help the reader take this tour de force
through two dozen complicated drugs a bit more easily,
221


<<<PAGE 238>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT2A
α
1A

α
1B

α
2C

risperidone

5HT7

D2

5HT2A

D2

5HT7

α2C

α1A

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++ +++

D3

D4

D3
D4

α1B

H1

5HT2C 5HT1B 5HT2B 5HT1D α2B

α2A

+++ +++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 5HT5 D1 5HT1A
+ + +

Figure 5-49 Risperidone’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking
about the binding properties of risperidone. Alpha-2 antagonist properties may contribute to efficacy for depression, but this can be
diminished by simultaneous α1 antagonist properties, which can also contribute to orthostatic hypotension and sedation. As with all
agents discussed in this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with technique and from one laboratory to another; they are constantly
being revised and updated.

and for a bit of fun, is to organize all of them into three
whimsical groups:
the pines (peens)
many dones and a rone
two pips and a rip
The members of each of the three groups have already
been organized this way in Figures 5-32 through 5-42
and now we provide a brief description of each individual
222

agent clustered into each of these three groups to try to
make learning their distinctions easier and memorable.
The Pines (Peens)
Clozapine

Clozapine (Figure 5-43) is widely recognized as being
particularly effective when other drugs for psychosis
fail, and is thus the “gold standard” for efficacy in


<<<PAGE 239>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

α
1A
α
1B

5HT2A

paliperidone

α
2C

5

D2
D3

5HT7

α1B

++++

5HT2A

α1A

+++ +++

D3

5HT7

D2

+++

+++ +++

α2C

+++

H1

α2A

α2B

D1

5HT1B 5HT2C D4

5HT2B 5HT1D

++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++

5HT5 5HT1A

+

+

Figure 5-50 Paliperidone’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of paliperidone, the active metabolite of risperidone. Paliperidone shares many pharmacological properties
with risperidone. As with all agents discussed in this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with technique and from one laboratory to
another; they are constantly being revised and updated.

schizophrenia. Clozapine is also the only antipsychotic
that has been documented to reduce the risk of suicide
in schizophrenia and may have a particular niche in
treating aggression and violence in psychotic patients. It
is unknown what pharmacological property accounts for
this gold standard enhanced efficacy of clozapine, but it is
unlikely to be D2 antagonism since at therapeutic doses,
clozapine occupies fewer D2 receptors than the other
drugs that treat psychosis. Likely, it works by an unknown
but non-D2 mechanism. Patients treated with clozapine
may occasionally experience an “awakening” (in the
Oliver Sachs sense), characterized by a return to a nearnormal level of cognitive, interpersonal, and vocational

functioning, and not just significant improvement in
positive symptoms of psychosis, but this is unfortunately
rare. The fact that awakenings can be observed at all,
however, gives hope to the possibility that a state of
wellness might some day be achieved in schizophrenia by
the right mix of pharmacological mechanisms.
In terms of side effects, clozapine causes little in the
way of motor symptoms, does not seem to cause tardive
dyskinesia and may even be effective in treating tardive
dyskinesia, and also does not elevate prolactin. That’s
the good news. The bad news is that clozapine has some
unique side effects (Table 5-2), and prescribing clozapine
effectively means the ability to manage these side effects
223


<<<PAGE 240>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT2A

5H

α1B

T1

B

5HT1D

ziprasidone
C

5HT2

D2

5HT7

D3

5HT2A

++++

5HT1B

5HT2C

D2

5HT1D

5HT7

D3

α1B

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++

α1A 5HT1A 5HT2B NET

H1

α2B 5HT6

α2C

D1

α2A D4

+

+

5HT5 SERT 5HT1E

+

+

+

Figure 5-51 Ziprasidone’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of ziprasidone. This compound seems to lack the pharmacological actions associated with weight gain and
increased cardiometabolic risk such as increasing fasting plasma triglyceride levels or increasing insulin resistance. Ziprasidone also
lacks many of the pharmacological properties associated with significant sedation. As with all agents discussed in this chapter, binding
properties vary greatly with technique and from one laboratory to another; they are constantly being revised and updated.

if they arise. One life-threatening and occasionally fatal
complication of clozapine treatment is neutropenia,
requiring patients to have their blood counts monitored
for as long as they are treated.
Clozapine also has an increased risk of seizures,
especially at high doses (Table 5-2). It can be very
sedating, has an increased risk of myocarditis, and is
associated with the greatest degree of weight gain and
possibly the greatest cardiometabolic risk among the
drugs for psychosis. Clozapine can also cause excessive
salivation, which can be mitigated by pro-cholinergic
treatment or even by localized botulinum toxin injections
for severe cases. Thus, clozapine may have the greatest
efficacy but also the most side effects among the atypical
antipsychotics.
224

Table 5-2 Side effects of clozapine requiring expert management

Neutropenia
Constipation/paralytic ileus
Sedation, orthostasis, tachycardia
Sialorrhea
Seizures
Weight gain, dyslipidemia, hyperglycemia
Myocarditis, cardiomyopathy, interstitial nephritis
DRESS (drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic
symptoms), serositis


<<<PAGE 241>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

5H

T1

α1A

B

iloperidone

Figure 5-52 Iloperidone’s
pharmacological and binding
profile. This figure portrays a qualitative
consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of iloperidone.
Among the medications discussed here,
iloperidone has one of the simplest
pharmacological profiles and comes
closest to a serotonin dopamine
antagonist (SDA). Its other prominent
pharmacological property is potent α1
antagonism, which may be responsible
for the risk of orthostatic hypotension
but also may contribute to its low risk
of drug-induced parkinsonism (DIP). As
with all agents discussed in this chapter,
binding properties vary greatly with
technique and from one laboratory
to another; they are constantly being
revised and updated.

5
D2

α1

++++

5HT2A

D2

+++

+++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 5HT2C 5HT7 D1
+ + +

D3

H1

D4

5HT1D α2C 5HT6 5HT1A 5HT1B

Because of these side-effect risks, clozapine is not
considered to be a first-line treatment, but is used when
other antipsychotics fail. The mechanisms of clozapine’s
ability to cause neutropenia and myocarditis are entirely
unknown; its weight gain may be partially associated
with its potent blockade of both H1 histamine and 5HT2C
receptors (Figure 5-43). Sedation is probably linked to
clozapine’s potent antagonism of muscarinic M1, H1, and
α1-adrenergic receptors (Figures 5-8, 5-14, and 5-43).
Profound muscarinic blockade can also cause excessive
salivation, especially at higher doses, as well as severe
constipation that can lead to bowel obstruction, especially
if administered concomitantly with other anticholinergic
agents, such as benztropine, or other drugs for
psychosis with potent anticholinergic properties, such as
chlorpromazine.
Because of these side effects and the hassle of
arranging for blood counts, the use of clozapine is low
in clinical practice, and probably too low given the
great number of patients with inadequate responses to
the other drugs for psychosis. To reduce one logistical
and pragmatic barrier to clozapine use, a point-of-

α2A α2B

+

+

care blood-count-monitoring system is now available
with a finger stick rather than a blood draw and local
assay rather than sending away to a distant laboratory.
It is important not to lose the art of how to prescribe
clozapine and for whom, and how to mitigate and
manage side effects, as clozapine remains a powerful and
unfortunately underutilized therapeutic intervention for
many patients. Therapeutic drug monitoring of plasma
drug levels can be of great assistance in finding the
right dose of clozapine. This specific drug is a subject
all to itself and for this reason the author has co-written
a handbook on how to use clozapine that the reader
may wish to consult for details (Meyer and Stahl, The
Clozapine Handbook).
Olanzapine

Olanzapine (Figure 5-44) is an antagonist at both 5HT2A
and D2 receptors, and although not proven as effective
as clozapine for psychosis, it is widely considered (by
clinical experience rather than by definitive clinical
trials) to be the next most effective agent, with at least
a bit more efficacy than the others in this class except
225


<<<PAGE 242>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5H

Figure 5-53 Lurasidone’s
pharmacological and binding
profile. This figure portrays a qualitative
consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of lurasidone.
Lurasidone has a relatively simple
pharmacological profile. It binds most
potently to the D4 receptor, the effects
of which are not well understood,
and to the 5HT7 receptor, which
may contribute to efficacy for mood,
cognitive, and sleep symptoms. As with
all agents discussed in this chapter,
binding properties vary greatly with
technique and from one laboratory
to another; they are constantly being
revised and updated.

T1
A

5H

T2

A

lurasidone

5H

T7

D2
D4

D4

5HT7

++++ ++++

D2

5HT2A

5HT1A

+++

+++

+++ ++ ++ ++ ++

α2C D3

clozapine. It also has a higher risk for metabolic side
effects. Olanzapine tends to be used in higher doses than
originally studied and approved for marketing, especially
when guided by plasma drug levels, since clinical use
suggests that higher doses may have greater efficacy,
especially in patients who have not responded to other
drugs for psychosis or to olanzapine at lower doses.
Olanzapine is approved for schizophrenia and for
maintaining response in schizophrenia (age 13 or older),
for agitation associated with schizophrenia or with
bipolar mania (intramuscular), acute bipolar mania/
mixed mania and maintenance (age 13 or older), and in
combination with fluoxetine for both bipolar depression
and treatment-resistant unipolar depression (in the US).
226

α2A α1

5HT2C

+

Perhaps the 5HT2C antagonist properties, with weaker
α2 antagonist properties (see Figures 5-35 and 5-37
and also Figure 5-44), especially when combined with
the 5HT2C antagonist properties of the antidepressant
fluoxetine (see Chapter 7 on treatments for mood
disorders), may explain some aspects of olanzapine’s
apparent efficacy in unipolar and bipolar depression.
Olanzapine is available as an oral disintegrating tablet,
as an acute intramuscular injection, and as a long acting
4-week intramuscular depot. An inhaled formulation
for rapid onset use is in late clinical development. As
mentioned earlier, olanzapine is also in late-stage clinical
testing with the μ-opioid antagonist samidorphan to
mitigate weight gain and metabolic disturbances.


<<<PAGE 243>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Figure 5-54 Lumateperone’s
pharmacological and binding
profile. This figure portrays a qualitative
consensus of current thinking about the
binding properties of lumateperone.
Lumateperone has very high affinity
for the 5HT2A receptor and moderate
affinity for the D2, D1, and α1 receptor.
It also has moderate affinity for the
serotonin transporter. As with all agents
discussed in this chapter, binding
properties vary greatly with technique
and from one laboratory to another;
they are constantly being revised and
updated.

α1
5HT2A

lumateperone
SERT

D1

5

D2

5HT2A

++++

D2

D1

SERT

α1

++ ++ ++ ++

Quetiapine

Quetiapine (Figure 5-45) is an antagonist at both
serotonin 5HT2A and dopamine D2 receptors, but has
several differentiating pharmacological properties,
especially at different doses. The net pharmacological
actions of quetiapine are actually due to the combined
pharmacological actions not only of quetiapine
itself, but also of its active metabolite, norquetiapine
(Figure 5-45 adds together the net actions of quetiapine
and norquetiapine). Norquetiapine has unique
pharmacological properties compared to quetiapine,
especially norepinephrine transporter (NET) inhibition
(i.e., norepinephrine reuptake inhibition) (Figure 5-34),
but also, combined with the parent drug quetiapine,
it has 5HT7 (Figure 5-39), 5HT2C (Figure 5-37), and α2
antagonism (Figure 5-35), and 5HT1A partial agonist
actions (Figure 5-33), all of which may contribute
to quetiapine’s overall clinical profile, especially its
robust antidepressant effects. Thus, quetiapine has an
overall very complex set of binding properties to many
neurotransmitter receptors, many of which have higher
potency than to the D2 receptor, and this may account
for why this drug appears to be far more than simply a

5HT2C

+

drug for psychosis. In fact, like the others in this class,
quetiapine is far more often prescribed for indications
other than psychosis, including frequently as a hypnotic
for insomnia, a drug for depression, for anxiety, for
Parkinson’s disease psychosis, or as an adjunct for
psychosis with other 5HT2A/5HT1A/D2 drugs.
Different Drug at Different Doses?

The story of quetiapine dosing can be told as
Goldilocks and the three bears (Figure 5-46).
For psychosis, quetiapine is an 800 mg Papa Bear. For
depression, quetiapine is a 300 mg Mama Bear. For
insomnia, quetiapine is a 50 mg Baby Bear. Starting with
Baby Bear, only the most potent binding properties of
quetiapine to the far left in the strip at the bottom of
Figure 5-45 are relevant, especially H1 antihistamine
properties (see also Figure 5-41). Baby Bear doses are not
approved for use as a hypnotic, and this can be an option
with metabolic risks, so is not considered a first-line
option for sleep. At this dose, hypothetically there are
insufficient numbers of 5HT2C receptors or NETs blocked
for antidepressant efficacy; also, there is insufficient
occupancy of D2 receptors for antipsychotic efficacy.
227


<<<PAGE 244>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Normal

Psychosis

D2

D2 D2 D2

D2 D2

D2 D2

A

B

D2 presynaptic and
postsynaptic antagonist

D2 presynaptic agonist and
postsynaptic antagonist

D2 presynaptic
agonist

D2 presynaptic
antagonist

D2 postsynaptic
antagonist
D2 postsynaptic
antagonist
C

D

Figure 5-55 Pre- and postsynaptic dopamine 2 receptor binding. (A) D2 receptors are present both pre- and postsynaptically;
dopamine binding at these receptors is inhibitory. (B) In psychosis, dopamine synthesis and release are enhanced, leading to
excessive stimulation of postsynaptic D2 receptors. (C) Most D2 antagonists block both pre- and postsynaptic D2 receptors. Blockade
of presynaptic D2 receptors disinhibits presynaptic dopamine release, thus further enhancing dopamine release. Full blockade of
postsynaptic D2 receptors, however, can counter the effect of presynaptic D2 blockade. (D) Lumateperone is unusual among D2
antagonists in that it seems to be an antagonist at postsynaptic D2 receptors but a partial agonist at presynaptic D2 receptors. This would
mean that less postsynaptic D2 antagonism would be necessary to achieve an antipsychotic effect, because dopamine release would
already be diminished.

228


<<<PAGE 245>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

T
5H
1A

5HT2A

5H

H
1

T1

D

α
1A
α
1B

α
2A

5HT2B

α
2C

5

aripiprazole
C

T2

5H

D2

5HT7

D3

5HT2B

++++

D2

5HT1A

+++

+++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ α2B D4
+ +

D3

5HT7

α1A 5HT2C α1B

H1

α2C

5HT2A5HT1D

α2A

5HT6 5HT3 5HT1B

+

+

+

Figure 5-56 Aripiprazole’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of aripiprazole. Aripiprazole is a partial agonist at D2 receptors rather than an antagonist. Additional important
pharmacological properties that may contribute to its clinical profile include 5HT2A antagonist actions, 5HT1A partial agonist actions,
5HT7 antagonist actions, and 5HT2C antagonist actions. Aripiprazole lacks or has weak binding potency at receptors usually associated
with significant sedation. Aripiprazole also seems to lack the pharmacological actions associated with weight gain and increased
cardiometabolic risk, such as increasing fasting plasma triglyceride levels or increasing insulin resistance. As with all agents discussed in
this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with technique and from one laboratory to another; they are constantly being revised and
updated.

Mama Bear at 300 mg range has robust
antidepressant effects in depression by combining
several simultaneous known antidepressant mechanisms
discussed above. Thus, the combination of these
antidepressant mechanisms would enhance dopamine
and norepinephrine release (via norepinephrine

reuptake inhibition, 5HT1A partial agonism, and
5HT2A, α2, and 5HT2C antagonism) and serotonin
release (by 5HT7 antagonism) (see Chapter 7 for
explanation and illustrations for all these antidepressant
mechanisms). Especially when combined with selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)/serotonin–
229


<<<PAGE 246>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT1A

5HT2A

α
1B

α
2C

brexpiprazole

D2

5HT1A

α1B

D2

5HT2A

α2C

++++ ++++ ++++ ++++ ++++

D3

5HT2B

α1D

5HT7

α1A

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++ +++ ++ ++ ++ ++ D1
+

D4

5HT2C H1

5HT1B 5HT6

Figure 5-57 Brexpiprazole’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking
about the binding properties of brexpiprazole. Brexpiprazole is a partial agonist at D2 receptors rather than an antagonist, and
also binds potently to 5HT2A, 5HT1A, and α1 receptors. Brexpiprazole also seems to lack actions at receptors usually associated with
significant sedation, weight gain, and increased cardiometabolic risk, although it is too early to evaluate the clinical profile of this
medication. As with all agents discussed in this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with technique and from one laboratory to
another; they are constantly being revised and updated.

norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) there
would be triple monoamine actions of increasing
serotonin as well as norepinephrine and dopamine
while simultaneously treating symptoms of insomnia
and anxiety by antihistaminic action (Figure 5-45).
Quetiapine is approved both for bipolar depression and
as an augmenting agent to SSRIs/SNRIs in unipolar
depression that fails to respond sufficiently to those
agents (in the US).
230

Finally, Papa Bear is 800 mg quetiapine, which
completely saturates both H1 histamine and 5HT2A receptors
continuously in both cases, but has more inconsistent
occupancy above 60% for D2 receptors, especially between
doses. Quetiapine is approved both for schizophrenia/
schizophrenia maintenance (ages 13 and above) and
for mania/mixed mania and maintenance (ages 10 and
above). The pharmacology of quetiapine suggests why it
is used more often in depression and insomnia than in


<<<PAGE 247>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

T1A
5H

Figure 5-58 Cariprazine’s
pharmacological and binding
profile. This figure portrays a qualitative
consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of cariprazine.
Cariprazine has potent actions at D3,
5HT2B, D2, and 5HT1A receptors, with
relatively weaker affinity for 5HT2A and
H1 receptors. Cariprazine actually has
higher affinity for the D3 receptor than
dopamine does. As with all agents
discussed in this chapter, binding
properties vary greatly with technique
and from one laboratory to another;
they are constantly being revised and
updated.

α
1A

5HT2A

α
1B
α
1D

5HT2B

α
2A

cariprazine

5

D2

D3

D3

5HT2B

+++++ ++++

D2

++++

5HT1A

α1B

α2A

α1D

α1A

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

5HT2A H1

++ ++

5HT7 5HT2C

+

+

Figure 5-59 Pimavanserin’s
pharmacological and binding
profile. This figure portrays a qualitative
consensus of current thinking about the
binding properties of pimavanserin.
Pimavanserin is the only known drug
with proven antipsychotic efficacy
that does not bind to D2 receptors.
Instead, it has potent 5HT2A antagonism
(sometimes called inverse agonism)
with lesser 5HT2C antagonist actions. As
with all agents discussed in this chapter,
binding properties vary greatly with
technique and from one laboratory
to another; they are constantly being
revised and updated.

5HT2A

5HT2C

pimavanserin

5HT2A

++++

5HT2C

+++

231


<<<PAGE 248>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT2A

α1

sertindole
C

5HT2

5HT6

D2

5HT2A

++++

5HT2C

D2

5HT6

α1

+++

+++

+++

+++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++

D4

D1

5HT7 5HT1D 5HT1B

DAT 5HT1F 5HT1E α2B α2C 5HT1A M1

α2A

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Figure 5-60 Sertindole’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of sertindole. Potent antagonist actions at α1 receptors may account for some of sertindole’s side effects. As
with all agents discussed in this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with technique and from one laboratory to another; they are
constantly being revised and updated.

psychosis. Quetiapine causes virtually no motor side effects
nor prolactin elevations. However, quetiapine has at least
moderate risk for weight gain and metabolic disturbances.
Asenapine

Asenapine (Figure 5-47) has a chemical structure related
to the antidepressant mirtazapine and shares several
of mirtazapine’s pharmacological binding properties,
especially 5HT2A, 5HT2C, H1, and α2 antagonism, plus
many other properties that mirtazapine does not have,
especially D2 antagonism, as well as actions upon many
232

additional serotonin receptor subtypes (Figure 5-47).
This suggests that asenapine would have antidepressant
actions, but only antipsychotic/antimanic actions have
been proven. Asenapine is unusual in that it is given as
a sublingual formulation, because it is not absorbed if
it is swallowed. The surface area of the oral cavity for
oral absorption limits the size of the dose, so asenapine
is generally taken twice a day despite a long half-life.
Since asenapine is rapidly absorbed sublingually with
rapid peak drug levels, unlike other formulations that
simply dissolve rapidly in the mouth but are followed


<<<PAGE 249>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Figure 5-61 Perospirone’s
pharmacological and binding
profile. This figure portrays a qualitative
consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of perospirone.
5HT1A partial agonist actions may
contribute to efficacy for mood and
cognitive symptoms. As with all agents
discussed in this chapter, binding
properties vary greatly with technique
and from one laboratory to another;
they are constantly being revised and
updated.

5HT1A
5HT2A

perospirone

5

D2
D4

D4

D2

5HT2A

++++ ++++ ++++

5HT1A

α1

D1

+++ ++ ++

by delayed absorption (e.g., orally dissolving olanzapine
preparations), asenapine can be used as rapid-acting
oral PRN (as needed) antipsychotic to “top up” patients
without resorting to an injection. One side effect of
sublingual administration in some patients is oral
hypoesthesia; also, patients may not eat or drink for 10
minutes following sublingual administration to avoid the
drug being washed into the stomach where it will not be
absorbed. Asenapine can be sedating, especially upon
first dosing, and has a moderate propensity for weight
gain, metabolic disturbances, or motor side effects. It is
approved for schizophrenia/maintenance in adults and

α2

+

in the US for bipolar mania (ages 10 or older). It is also
available in a transdermal formulation.
Zotepine

Zotepine (Figure 5-48) is available in Japan and Europe,
but not the US. Zotepine has 5HT2A and D2 antagonist
properties and is not as popular as other drugs for
psychosis because it has to be administered three times a
day. There may be an elevated risk of seizures. Zotepine is
a 5HT2C antagonist, an α1 antagonist, a 5HT7 antagonist,
and a weak partial agonist of 5HT1A receptors as well
as a weak inhibitor of norepinephrine reuptake (NET),

233


<<<PAGE 250>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 5-62 Blonanserin’s
pharmacological and binding
profile. This figure portrays a
qualitative consensus of current
thinking about the binding properties
of blonanserin. Blonanserin has high
affinity for D3 receptors; in fact, it has
higher affinity for D3 receptors than
does dopamine itself. As with all agents
discussed in this chapter, binding
properties vary greatly with technique
and from one laboratory to another;
they are constantly being revised and
updated.

5HT2A

blonanserin

D2
D3

D3

D2

5HT2A

++++ ++++ ++++

suggesting potential antidepressant effects that have not
been well established yet in clinical trials.
Many Dones and a Rone
Risperidone

Risperidone (Figure 5-49) is the original “done” and
has a different chemical structure and a different
pharmacological profile than the pines (compare pines
and dones in Figure 5-32). Risperidone has favored
uses in schizophrenia/maintenance (age 13 and older)
and bipolar mania/maintenance (ages 10 and older).
Some prefer this agent for children and adolescents in
particular where it is also approved for treatment of
234

irritability associated with autistic disorder, including
symptoms of aggression towards others, deliberate
self-injury, tantrums, and quickly changing moods
(ages 5–16). Low-dose risperidone is occasionally used
“off-label” for the controversial – due to a “black box”
safety warning – treatment of agitation and psychosis
associated with dementia. This practice may lessen
as other drugs in the pipeline get approved for this
indication. Risperidone is available in long-term depot
injectable formulations lasting for 2 or 4 weeks and it can
be useful to monitor plasma drug levels of risperidone
and its active metabolite paliperidone, especially to
guide dosing for patients receiving long-term depot


<<<PAGE 251>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

Figure 5-63 Roluperidone’s
pharmacological and binding
profile. This figure portrays a qualitative
consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of roluperidone.
Still in clinical testing, roluperidone
is a 5HT2A antagonist with additional
σ2 antagonism. As with all agents
discussed in this chapter, binding
properties vary greatly with technique
and from one laboratory to another;
they are constantly being revised and
updated.

5HT2A

σ2

5

roluperidone

σ2

5HT2A

++++

++++

injections and who are treatment-resistant. There is also
an orally disintegrating tablet and liquid formulation of
risperidone.
Although risperidone does have somewhat reduced
motor side effects at lower doses, it raises prolactin levels
even at low doses. Risperidone has a moderate amount of
risk for weight gain and dyslipidemia. Weight gain can be
particularly a problem in children.
Paliperidone

Paliperidone, the active metabolite of risperidone, is also
known as 9-hydroxy-risperidone and like risperidone
has 5HT2A and D2 receptor antagonism (Figure 5-50).
One pharmacokinetic difference, however, between
risperidone and paliperidone is that paliperidone,
unlike risperidone, is not hepatically metabolized, but
its elimination is based upon urinary excretion and
thus it has few pharmacokinetic drug interactions.
Another pharmacokinetic difference is that the oral
form of paliperidone is provided in a sustained-release
oral formulation, which risperidone is not, and this
actually changes some of the clinical characteristics of
paliperidone compared to risperidone, a fact that is not

always well recognized and can lead to underdosing of
oral paliperidone. Oral sustained release means that
paliperidone only needs to be administered once a
day, whereas risperidone, especially when treatment
is initiated, and especially in children or the elderly,
may need to be given twice daily to avoid sedation and
orthostasis. Side effects of risperidone may be related in
part to the rapid rate of absorption and higher peak doses
with greater drug-level fluctuation leading to shorter
duration of action, properties that are eliminated by the
controlled release formulation of paliperidone.
Despite the similar receptor binding characteristics
of paliperidone and risperidone, paliperidone tends to
be more tolerable, with less sedation, less orthostasis,
and fewer motor side effects, although this is based upon
anecdotal clinical experience and not head-to-head clinical
studies. Paliperidone has moderate risk for weight gain and
metabolic problems. Paliperidone is approved specifically
for schizophrenia/maintenance (ages 12 and older).The
main advantage of paliperidone over risperidone is that
the long-acting injectable for paliperidone is easier to load,
easier to dose, and has both a 1-month and a 3-month
formulation, with studies in progress for a 6-month
235


<<<PAGE 252>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

TAAR1
bed nucleus stria terminalis

prefrontal cortex

dorsal raphe nucleus

hypothalamus
pituitary
amygdala
hippocampus

ventral tegmental area
Figure 5-64 Localization of trace amine-associated receptor type 1 (TAAR1). A new potential mechanism of antipsychotic action
is agonism of the trace amine-associated receptor type 1 (TAAR1). TAAR1 is widely expressed throughout the brain, including in
monoamine brainstem centers (dorsal raphe nucleus, ventral tegmental area) and in monoamine projection areas.

formulation. It can be useful to monitor plasma drug levels
to guide dosing, especially for patients receiving long-term
depot injections and who are treatment-resistant.
Ziprasidone

Ziprasidone (Figure 5-51) is a 5HT2A/D2 antagonist with
the major differentiating feature being that it has little or
no propensity for weight gain or metabolic disturbances.
However, it is short acting, requires more than once a day
dosing, and must be taken with food. Earlier concerns
about dangerous QTc prolongation by ziprasidone now
appear to be exaggerated. Unlike iloperidone, zotepine,
sertindole, and amisulpride, ziprasidone does not cause
dose-dependent QTc prolongation, and few drugs have
the potential to increase ziprasidone’s plasma levels.
Ziprasidone has an intramuscular dosage formulation for
rapid use in urgent circumstances. Ziprasidone is approved
in schizophrenia/maintenance and in bipolar mania/
maintenance.
Iloperidone

Iloperidone (Figure 5-52) also has 5HT2A/D2 antagonist
properties. Its most distinguishing clinical properties
include a very low level of motor side effects, low
level of dyslipidemia, and moderate level of weight
gain associated with its use. Its most distinguishing
pharmacological property is its potent α1 antagonism
(Figure 5-52). As discussed earlier in this chapter, α1
antagonism is generally associated with the potential for
236

orthostatic hypotension and sedation, especially if rapidly
dosed. Although iloperidone has an 18- to 33-hour
half-life that theoretically supports once daily dosing, it
is generally dosed twice daily and titrated over several
days when initiated in order to avoid both orthostasis and
sedation. Slow dosing can delay onset of antipsychotic
effects, so iloperidone is often used as a switch agent
in non-urgent situations. It is approved in the US for
schizophrenia/maintenance.
Lurasidone

Lurasidone is a 5HT2A/D2 antagonist (Figure 5-53)
approved for use in schizophrenia and much more
popular for use in bipolar depression. This compound
exhibits high affinity for both 5HT7 receptors (Figure
5-39) and 5HT2A receptors (Figure 5-32), moderate
affinity for 5HT1A (Figure 5-33) and α2 receptors (Figure
5-35), yet minimal affinity for H1 histamine and M1
cholinergic receptors (Figure 5-41), properties that may
explain some of lurasidone’s antidepressant profile, with
low risk of weight gain or metabolic dysfunction. Risk of
motor side effects or sedation are reduced if lurasidone
is dosed at night. Due perhaps to the synergism
amongst the several potential antidepressant properties
accompanied by good tolerability, especially lack of
weight gain, it is a highly effective agent for bipolar
depression (ages 10 and older) and one of the preferred
agents for this use in the countries where it is approved
for this use such as in the US. Lurasidone is approved


<<<PAGE 253>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

TAAR1
agonist
TYR

E

TYR

TYR

E
DOPA

E

TYR

DOPA

DA

TOH

E
DA

TOH

Gi
TAAR1
-arrestin

TAAR1

Gi

-arrestin

D2

D2
receptor
dimerization

5

receptor
dimerization

D2

Gi

D2

-arrestin

TAAR1

TAAR1

Gi

-arrestin

GSK-3

A

overstimulation
and psychosis

B

Figure 5-65 Agonism of trace amine-associated receptor type 1 (TAAR1). Trace amines are formed from amino acids when either
the tyrosine hydroxylase (TYR) step or the tryptophan hydroxylase (TOH) step is omitted during production of dopamine or serotonin,
respectively. (A) Dopamine is produced and packaged into synaptic vesicles, then released into the synapse. Dopamine binding at both
pre- and postsynaptic D2 receptors can either trigger the inhibitory G (Gi) protein signal transduction cascade or the β-arrestin 2 signal
transduction cascade. The β-arrestin 2 cascade leads to production of glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3); too much GSK-3 activation
may be associated with mania or psychosis. (B) When TAAR1 receptors are bound by an agonist, they translocate to the synaptic
membrane and couple with D2 receptors (heterodimerization). This biases the D2 receptor toward activating the Gi signal transduction
cascade instead of the β-arrestin cascade. Presynaptically, amplification of the Gi pathway leads to inhibition of the synthesis and release
of dopamine, which would be beneficial in cases of psychosis. Postsynaptically, amplification of the Gi pathway can lead to reduced
production of GSK-3.

worldwide for schizophrenia/maintenance (ages 10 and
higher) and because of its good tolerability it is often
preferred for the treatment of children.
A glutamate modulator D-cycloserine combined
with lurasidone, called NRX101 (Cyclurad), combines
antagonism of the glycine site of the NMDA receptor (see
Figures 4-21, 4-22, 4-26, 4-27) with lurasidone, for the
potential treatment of acute suicidal ideation and behavior,
as well as for bipolar depression, with early positive findings.
Lumateperone

Lumateperone (Figure 5-54) is a more recently approved
5HT2A/D2 antagonist for schizophrenia. It has very
high affinity for the 5HT2A receptor (Figure 5-32)

and moderate affinity for D2, D1 (Figure 5-54), and α1
receptors (Figure 5-42), and low affinity for histamine
H1 receptors (Figure 5-41). Unusually, lumateperone
also has moderate affinity for the serotonin transporter
(Figure 5-34). Early clinical experience suggests
efficacy for schizophrenia without dose titration
and good tolerability in terms of little or no weight
gain or metabolic disturbances. Two key points on
its mechanism of action include a wide separation
between its 5HT2A antagonist and its D2 antagonist
binding, perhaps explaining why it has antipsychotic
actions at doses that have relatively low occupancy of
D2 receptors, and maybe also why there are low D2-type
side effects (e.g., little or no drug-induced parkinsonism
237


<<<PAGE 254>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5H

Figure 5-66 SEP-363856’s
pharmacological and binding
profile. This figure portrays a
qualitative consensus of current
thinking about the binding
properties of SEP-363856. A
new potential mechanism of
antipsychotic action is agonism
of the trace amine-associated
receptor type 1 (TAAR1). SEP363856 is an agonist at TAAR1
receptors; it also has 5HT1D,
5HT1A, and 5HT7 receptor
binding properties. As with all
agents discussed in this chapter,
binding properties vary greatly
with technique and from one
laboratory to another; they are
constantly being revised and
updated.

T1
A

5H

T1D

TAAR1

5H
T7

SEP-363856

TAAR1 5HT1D
5HT1A 5HT7

5HT1A

5HT2A

M1

T1

5H
B

M3

5H

T1

M4

D

5HT2B

xanomeline
5HT2C

5HT1D

+++

238

M4

5HT2B M3

5HT2C 5HT1B 5HT1A

M1

++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++

5HT2A 5HT7 M2

+

+

+

5HT4

+

5HT1E D3

+

+

Figure 5-67 Xanomeline’s
pharmacological and binding
profile. This figure portrays a
qualitative consensus of current
thinking about the binding
properties of xanomeline.
Xanomeline is being studied
for its potential use in psychosis
because of its agonism at
central muscarinic cholinergic
receptors; specifically, the M4
and M1 receptors. Xanomeline
also binds to multiple serotonin
receptor subtypes. As with all
agents discussed in this chapter,
binding properties vary greatly
with technique and from one
laboratory to another; they are
constantly being revised and
updated.


<<<PAGE 255>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

or akathisia). The presence of moderate affinity for
serotonin reuptake inhibition suggests antidepressant
potential and indeed early studies in bipolar depression
show promising efficacy.
Although not yet clarified completely, preclinical
evidence suggests a novel mechanism of action of
lumateperone at D2 receptors. Recall that PET findings
show enhanced presynaptic dopamine synthesis and
release (Figures 4-15 and 4-16; also compare Figure
5-55A and B). Dopamine 2 blockers generally do not
discriminate between presynaptic D2 receptors and
postsynaptic D2 receptors (Figure 5-55C). When these
D2 blockers are administered, they block presynaptic D2
receptors, causing disinhibition of presynaptic dopamine
release, making things worse! Although that might
be the last thing you want in treating schizophrenia
psychosis, the solution is to so fully block the D2
receptors postsynaptically that this extra dopamine
release does not matter (Figure 5-55C). However, in
the case of lumateperone, preclinical evidence suggests
that it may have presynaptic agonist actions and
postsynaptic antagonist actions, a unique combination
of mechanisms. How this may occur as an action
potentially differentiating it from other D2 blocking
drugs for psychosis is suggested by preclinical data
showing potentially unique actions to reduce dopamine
synthesis by either presynaptic tyrosine hydroxylase and
other presynaptic protein phosphorylation or changes
in glutamate-mediated ionic currents (Figure 5-55D).
Whatever the mechanism, if presynaptic D2 agonism
is caused by lumateperone rather than presynaptic
antagonism characteristic of the other drugs in this class,
lumateperone would theoretically turn off dopamine
synthesis presynaptically to reduce the oversupply of
dopamine present in presynaptic dopamine synapses
in psychosis (Figure 5-55D). That would mean less
postsynaptic D2 antagonism would be necessary to have
an antipsychotic effect because dopamine release is
already diminished. If lumateperone can be proven to
have such a mechanism of presynaptic partial agonism
of D2 receptors, combined with its well-established
highly potent 5HT2A antagonism, this could account
for why lumateperone has antipsychotic efficacy in
schizophrenia with low amounts of postsynaptic D2
antagonism compared to most other drugs in this class
(and low amounts of motor and metabolic side effects).
Further investigations are needed to clarify this possible
explanation. Lumateperone is also in clinical trials for
bipolar depression.

Two Pips and a Rip
Aripiprazole

Aripiprazole is the original “pip” and is a D2/5HT1A partial
agonist (see Figure 5-56). Because of its D2 partial agonist
actions, aripiprazole has relatively low motor side effects,
mostly akathisia, and actually reduces prolactin rather
than elevating it. It has only moderate affinity for 5HT2A
receptors (Figure 5-32), but higher affinity for 5HT1A
receptors (Figure 5-33). Aripiprazole is effective in treating
schizophrenia/maintenance (age 13 and older) and also
agitation (intramuscular) and bipolar mania/maintenance
(ages 10 and older), and is also approved for use in various
other child and adolescent groups, including autismrelated irritability (ages 5 to 17) and Tourette syndrome
(ages 6 to 18). It is approved for adjunctive treatment
to SSRIs/SNRIs for major depressive disorder, and this
is by far its major use in clinical practice in the US. It is
not approved for bipolar depression but commonly used
off-label for that. How aripiprazole works in depression
compared to how it works in schizophrenia is of course
unknown, but its potent 5HT1A partial agonist (Figure
5-33) and 5HT2C and 5HT7 antagonist properties (Figures
5-37 and 5-39) are theoretical explanations for potential
antidepressant actions, as these would be active at the
low doses generally used to treat depression. Aripiprazole
lacks the pharmacological properties normally associated
with sedation, namely, muscarinic cholinergic and H1
histamine antagonist properties (Figure 5-41), and thus is
not generally sedating. A major differentiating feature of
aripiprazole is that it has, like ziprasidone and lurasidone,
little or no propensity for weight gain, although weight
gain can be a problem for some, including some children
and adolescents.
An intramuscular dosage formulation of aripiprazole
for short-term use is available as an orally disintegrating
tablet and a liquid formulation. One long-acting 4-week
injectable and another 4- to 6- to 8-week long-acting
injectable, the latter with a loading injection on the first
day not requiring continuing oral loading, are available.
These formulations are commonly used options for
assuring compliance, especially in early-onset psychosis
where aripiprazole’s favorable tolerability profile may be
particularly well received.
Brexpiprazole

The second “pip” is brexpiprazole (Figure 5-57). Just
as its name suggests, brexpiprazole is chemically and
pharmacologically related to aripiprazole. However, it
does differ pharmacologically from aripiprazole in that
239

5


<<<PAGE 256>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

it has more potent 5HT2A antagonism (Figure 5-32),
5HT1A partial agonism (Figure 5-33), and α1 antagonism
(Figure 5-42) relative to its D2 partial agonism (Figure
5-57) than aripiprazole (Figure 5-56), which should
theoretically reduce its propensity to cause motor side
effects and akathisia. There is some indication that
there may be reduced akathisia with brexpiprazole
compared to aripiprazole, but this has not been proven
in head-to-head trials. Like aripiprazole, brexpiprazole is
approved for the treatment of schizophrenia, but unlike
aripiprazole, is not indicated for the treatment of acute
bipolar mania.
Brexpiprazole (Figure 5-57) has 5HT1A partial
agonist (Figure 5-33) and relatively higher potency
for α1 (Figure 5-42) and α2 (Figure 5-35) binding than
aripiprazole. These properties could theoretically
contribute to antidepressant actions (mechanisms further
explained and illustrated in Chapter 7 on treatments for
mood disorders). Alpha-1 actions in particular could
theoretically help explain the efficacy brexpiprazole has
demonstrated in some of its potential novel indications.
Specifically, brexpiprazole is in late-stage clinical
development with positive studies for the treatment of
agitation in dementia (discussed further in Chapter 12 on
dementia). There are also promising preliminary data for
brexpiprazole when combined with the SSRI sertraline
for the treatment of PTSD.
Cariprazine

Cariprazine (Figure 5-58) is the “rip” of this group
and is another D2/5HT1A partial agonist approved
for schizophrenia and also for acute bipolar mania.
Cariprazine with its potent 5HT1A partial agonist
actions (Figure 5-33) despite lesser 5HT2A antagonism
(Figure 5-32) exhibits low incidence of drug-induced
parkinsonism, but some akathisia, which can be much
reduced by slow-dose titration. Cariprazine has two longto very long-lasting active metabolites with the novel
and interesting potential for development as a weekly
or biweekly or even monthly “oral depot,” which takes
longer to reach steady state but has less reduction in
plasma drug levels as a dose is skipped.
Cariprazine has proven to be a highly effective
and well-tolerated agent for the treatment of bipolar
depression in lower doses. Like lurasidone, which
is also approved for bipolar depression, cariprazine
has a very low propensity for weight gain or
metabolic disturbance. Like other drugs in this class,
cariprazine has both 5HT1A and α1 and α2 actions,
suggesting antidepressant efficacy, but it is the very
240

potent D3 partial agonist actions that are perhaps
the most distinguishing and novel pharmacological
characteristics. The role of D3 receptors is just now
being clarified in humans since preclinical studies
suggest therapeutic potential of D3 partial agonism
for cognition, mood, emotions, and reward/substance
abuse, as well as negative symptoms. In fact,
cariprazine has been shown to be superior to D2/5HT2A
antagonist treatment for the improvement of negative
symptoms in schizophrenia.
The mechanism of action of D3 partial agonism will be
illustrated and explained in further detail in Chapter 7 on
treatments for mood disorders. In brief, D3 antagonist/
partial agonist action may block key postsynaptic D3
receptors in limbic areas to reduce dopamine overactivity
in emotional striatum and key somatodendritic
presynaptic D3 receptors in the ventral tegmental area/
mesostriatal/integrative hub to increase dopamine release
in the prefrontal cortex and improve negative, affective,
and cognitive symptoms. For this reason, clinical
trials and clinical experience suggest robust efficacy of
cariprazine across the mood-disorder spectrum for all
mixtures of mania and depression, as will be illustrated
and described in Chapter 7.
Selective 5HT2A Antagonist
Pimavanserin

Pimavanserin (Figure 5-59) is the only known drug
with proven antipsychotic efficacy that does not have D2
antagonist/partial agonist actions. This agent has potent
5HT2A antagonist with lesser 5HT2C antagonist actions,
sometimes called inverse agonism, as explained earlier in
this chapter and as illustrated in Figure 5-15. The role if
any of 5HT2C antagonism in the treatment of psychosis is
not clear but 5HT2C antagonist actions would theoretically
improve dopamine release in both depression and
in the negative symptoms of schizophrenia. Indeed,
pimavanserin is in testing as an augmenting agent to
SSRIs/SNRIs, with some positive preliminary results in
major depressive disorder, and as an augmenting agent
to D2/5HT2A/5HT1A agents in negative symptoms of
schizophrenia, also with positive results from early trials.
It is approved for the treatment of psychosis in Parkinson’s
disease and in late-stage testing for psychosis in dementia.
The Others
Sertindole

Sertindole (Figure 5-60) is a 5HT2A/D2 receptor
antagonist originally approved in some European
countries, then withdrawn for further testing of its


<<<PAGE 257>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

cardiac safety and QTc-prolonging potential, and then
reintroduced into certain countries as a second-line
agent. It may be useful for some patients in whom other
antipsychotics have failed, and who can have close
monitoring of their cardiac status and drug interactions.
Perospirone

Perospirone (Figure 5-61) is another 5HT2A and D2
antagonist available in Asia to treat schizophrenia.
5HT1A partial agonist actions may contribute to its
efficacy and/or tolerability. Its ability to cause weight
gain, dyslipidemia, insulin resistance, and diabetes is
not well investigated. It is generally administered three
times a day, with more experience in the treatment of
schizophrenia than in the treatment of mania.
Blonanserin

Blonanserin (Figure 5-62) is also a 5HT2A/D2 antagonist,
available in Asia to treat schizophrenia, and is
administered twice a day. Blonanserin has the unique
property of higher affinity for the D3 receptor than
dopamine has for the D3 receptor (like cariprazine),
suggesting possible utility for the negative symptoms of
schizophrenia and for bipolar depression, but it is not yet
well studied in these indications.

FUTURE TREATMENTS FOR
SCHIZOPHRENIA
Roluperidone (MIN-101)

Roluperidone (Figure 5-63) is a 5HT2A antagonist with
additional σ2 antagonist actions, which is in study for
schizophrenia. Early studies suggest possibly efficacy for
negative symptoms, and trials are ongoing.
D3 Antagonists

In addition to cariprazine and blonanserin (both of
which are unique in their highly potent D3 antagonist/
partial agonist properties), other D3 antagonists/partial
agonists are in clinical trials. One is F17464, which has
higher selectivity for D3 than for D2 or 5HT1A receptors,
and which has shown efficacy in schizophrenia in early
studies.
Trace Amine Receptor Agonists and SEP-363856

An exciting new potential mechanism of antipsychotic
action is trace amine agonism specifically acting at the
trace amine-associated receptor type 1 (TAAR1). What
is a trace amine and why would targeting its receptors
have antipsychotic action? There are five principal trace

amines in humans and six human trace amine-associated
receptors, but the most important receptor is TAAR1
(Table 5-3). Trace amines are formed from amino acids
when the tyrosine hydroxylase (see Figure 4-2) step
is omitted or the tryptophan hydroxylase (see Figure
4-36) step is omitted. Trace amines have long been a
mystery as they are only present in trace amounts, are
not stored in synaptic vesicles, and are not released
upon nerve firing. The fact that TAAR1 receptors are
localized in monoamine brainstem centers and in
monoamine projection areas (Figure 5-64) has long
made psychopharmacologists think that trace amines
might be involved in regulating monoamine action
even though trace amines are not neurotransmitters in
their own right. Instead, trace amines have been called
“the rheostat of dopaminergic, glutamatergic, and
serotonergic neurotransmission,” maintaining central
neurotransmission within defined physiological limits.
The current hypothesized mechanism of antipsychotic
action for TAAR1 agonists is that they act tonically both
presynaptically and postsynaptically to prevent the
dopaminergic hyperactivity of psychosis and mania (Figures
4-15 and 4-16). Thus, TAAR1 agonists are potentially a
novel way to prevent dopamine overactivity at D2 receptors.
How do they do this? TAAR1 receptors theoretically
prevent dopamine overactivity after occupancy by
an agonist through translocation to the synaptic
membrane, where they couple with D2 receptors (called
heterodimerization), which makes the second-messenger
system decide to go with the inhibitory G (Gi) protein
Table 5-3 Trace amines and their receptors

Five principal trace amines in humans
β-Phenylethylamine (PEA)
p-Tyramine
Tryptamine
p-Octopamine
p-Synephrine
Six human trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs)
TAAR1 (main TAAR in humans)
TAAR2
TAAR5
TAAR6
TAAR8
TAAR9

241

5


<<<PAGE 258>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

signal transduction cascade rather than the β-arrestin 2
pathway (Figure 5-65A, B). TAAR1 receptors can be said
to “bias” D2 receptors away from β-arrestin 2 and towards
Gi-protein-regulated second messengering (Figure
5-65B).
Why does this matter? When heterodimerization
with TAAR1 happens to presynaptic D2 receptors,
the downstream consequences of the Gi pathway are
amplified and those include inhibiting the synthesis
and release of dopamine (presynaptic area of Figure
5-65B). That would be a good thing if dopamine is in
excess presynaptically, as it seems to be in psychosis and
in mania. When D2 receptor signaling postsynaptically
is also shunted away from the β-arrestin 2 pathway
to the Gi pathway by “biased” and heterodimerized
postsynaptic D2 receptors, this theoretically mitigates
the consequences of excessive signals through β-arrestin
to excessive GSK-3 (glycogen synthase kinase 3)
activation that results from postsynaptic D2 receptor
overstimulation (postsynaptic area of Figure 5-65B).
The bottom line of all this is that TAAR1 agonists may
enhance presynaptic D2 autoreceptors (thus turning off
dopamine synthesis and release) while simultaneously
reducing some of the unwanted downstream functions of
overly active postsynaptic D2 receptors (thus mitigating
the effects of excessive dopamine release in psychosis
and mania). Furthermore, TAAR1 agonism does both
pre- and postsynaptic actions without actually directly
pharmacologically blocking the D2 receptor! (Figure
5-65B).
SEP-363856 (Figure 5-66) is an example of a TAAR1
agonist with weak affinity for the TAAR1 receptor as well
as weaker affinities for the 5HT1D and 5HT7 receptors as
antagonist and for the 5HT1A receptor as agonist. This
drug surprisingly showed preclinical behavioral evidence
of efficacy serendipitously for psychosis, and only then
did its pharmacological and molecular mechanism of
action on TAAR1 receptors get discovered. Already, an
early study in patients with schizophrenia has confirmed
antipsychotic action with few side effects, and the drug
has been given breakthrough status by regulators. Further
trials are ongoing.
Cholinergic Agonists

Activation of central muscarinic cholinergic receptors,
either directly or by allosteric modulation, is under
investigation as a novel antipsychotic mechanism.
Preclinical and postmortem studies in patients with
schizophrenia suggest that central cholinergic receptor

242

alterations may be key to the pathophysiology of
schizophrenia. M4 receptor agonism may reduce
psychotic symptoms whereas M1 receptor agonism may
be most relevant to improving the cognitive deficits of
schizophrenia. Xanomeline (Figure 5-67), as an M4/M1
central agonist, decreases dopamine cell firing in the
ventral tegmental area. This would theoretically reduce
positive psychotic symptoms. Xanomeline also increases
extracellular levels of dopamine in the prefrontal cortex,
which theoretically would improve cognitive, negative,
and affective symptoms. Xanomeline combined with
tropsium, an anticholinergic that does not penetrate into
the brain and that blocks M2 and M3 activated side effects
in the periphery, has shown promising efficacy and
tolerability for the psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia
with improved side effects and is progressing as a
potential breakthrough into advanced clinical trials.
The known binding profile of xanomeline at muscarinic
cholinergic receptors as well as serotonin receptors is
shown in Figure 5-67.
A Few Other Ideas

Although several agents targeting glutamate
neurotransmission have been studied in
schizophrenia, most have not had consistently positive
or robust efficacy findings. A novel idea still being
pursued is to inhibit the enzyme DAO (D-amino acid
oxidase) as a way to boost glutamate function (see
Figure 4-22).
Another novel approach to blocking the effects
of hyperactive dopamine is to block the action of the
enzyme phosphodiesterase type 9/10; several potential
drugs are in clinical development. This mechanism
alters the second-messenger signal transduction cascade
of dopamine at D1 and D2 receptors and may have
downstream effects similar to blocking D2 receptors, and
do it more selectively in the dopamine neurons thought
to be hyperactive in schizophrenia.

SUMMARY
This chapter reviews drugs used to treat psychosis, but
has avoided the term “antipsychotics,” since these same
agents are used more frequently for other indications
such as unipolar and bipolar depression. Instead, the
hypothetical mechanism of “antipsychotic action” is
explored in detail. Specifically, this chapter reviews the
pharmacology of drugs that treat psychosis, including
those with predominantly D2 antagonist properties, those


<<<PAGE 259>>>
Chapter 5: Targeting for Psychosis

with 5HT2A antagonist/D2 antagonist properties, those
with D2/5HT1A partial agonist properties, and those with
5HT2A selective antagonist properties. These agents are
compared and contrasted across these various dopamine
and serotonin receptor subtypes and their receptor
actions linked to hypothetical therapeutic actions as
well as side effects. Multiple additional receptor binding
properties at other neurotransmitter receptor sites that
are hypothesized to be linked to additional clinical

actions of these agents, especially to their antidepressant
actions, are presented and discussed. Still other receptor
actions hypothetically linked to additional side effects
are also presented. The pharmacological and clinical
properties of two dozen specific drugs either marketed
or in late-stage clinical trials are discussed in detail,
including exciting new potential mechanisms of action
at trace amine-associated receptors and at muscarinic
cholinergic receptors.

5

243


<<<PAGE 260>>>
6

Mood Disorders and the
Neurotransmitter Networks
Norepinephrine and
γ-Aminobutyric Acid (GABA)

Description of Mood Disorders 244
Mood Spectrum 244
Distinguishing Unipolar Depression from Bipolar
Depression 249
Mixed Features: Are Mood Disorders
Progressive? 251
Neurobiology of Mood Disorders 252
Neurotransmitters 252

This chapter discusses disorders characterized by
abnormalities of mood: namely, depression, mania, or
mixtures of both. Included here are descriptions of a wide
variety of mood disorders that occur over a broad clinical
spectrum. Clinical descriptions and criteria for how to
diagnose disorders of mood will only be mentioned in
passing. The reader should consult standard reference
sources for this material. Also included in this chapter is
an analysis of how monoamine neurotransmitter systems
have long been hypothetically linked to the biological
basis of mood disorders. We will also cover more recent
advances in neurobiology that link mood disorders to
glutamate, GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid), neurotrophic
factors, neuroinflammation, and stress.
Mood disorders have many symptoms and
approaching them clinically involves first constructing
a diagnosis from a given patient’s symptom profile,
but then deconstructing that patient’s mood disorder
into its component symptoms so each symptom can be
individually targeted therapeutically. We will discuss
how to combine this clinical approach to diagnosis with a
neurobiological approach to treatment by first matching
every symptom to its hypothetically malfunctioning brain
circuit, regulated by one or more neurotransmitters. The
strategy is next to select drugs that target the specific
neurotransmitters in the specific symptomatic brain
circuits in a given patient. The goal is to improve the
efficiency of information processing in those brain
circuits and thereby reduce symptoms. Covering the
neurobiological basis of mood disorders in this chapter
sets the stage for understanding the mechanisms of

244

The Monoamine Hypothesis of Depression 264
The Monoamine Receptor Hypothesis and
Neurotrophic Factors 264
Beyond Monoamines: The Neuroplasticity and
Neuroprogression Hypothesis of Depression 266
Symptoms and Circuits in Mood Disorders 277
Symptom-Based Treatment Selections 279
Summary 282

action and how to select specific drug treatments in
Chapter 7.

DESCRIPTION OF MOOD
DISORDERS
Mood Spectrum

Disorders of mood are often called affective disorders,
since affect is the external display of mood, an emotion
that is, however, felt internally and called mood. Mood
disorders are not just about mood. The diagnosis of a
major depressive episode requires the presence of at
least five symptoms, only one of which is depressed
mood (Figure 6-1). Similarly, a manic episode requires
more than just an elevated, expansive, or irritable mood;
there must be at least three or four additional symptoms
(Figure 6-2).
Classically, the mood symptoms of mania and
depression are “poles” apart (Figures 6-3 through
6-6). This concept has generated the terms “unipolar”
depression (i.e., patients who experience just the down
or depressed pole) (Figures 6-3 and 6-4) and “bipolar”
(i.e., patients who at different times experience the up
pole, or mania (Figures 6-3 and 6-5) or hypomania
(Figures 6-3 and 6-6) and the down pole, i.e., depressed
pole (Figures 6-3, 6-5, and 6-6). Bipolar I patients
have full-blown manic episodes usually followed by
depressive episodes (Figure 6-5). Bipolar II disorder is
characterized by at least one hypomanic episode and
one major depressive episode (Figure 6-6). Depression
and mania may even occur simultaneously, which is


<<<PAGE 261>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

Symptom Dimensions of a Major Depressive Episode
depressed mood

apathy/
loss of interest
one of these required

sleep disturbances

psychomotor

fatigue

250
250

weight/
appetite
changes

or

four more
of these
required

guilt
suicidal
ideation
worthlessness

6

executive dysfunction

Figure 6-1 DSM-5 symptoms of a major depressive episode. According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
fifth edition (DSM-5), a major depressive episode consists of either depressed mood or loss of interest and at least four of the following:
weight/appetite changes, insomnia or hypersomnia, psychomotor agitation or retardation, fatigue, feelings of guilt or worthlessness,
executive dysfunction, and suicidal ideation.

Symptom Dimensions of a Manic Episode

symptoms necessary
for diagnosis

elevated/expansive
mood

inflated
selfesteem/
grandiosity

increased goal-directed
activity or
agitation

distractible/
concentration

irritable mood

risk
taking

decreased need for
sleep
plus
three or
more of
these
(four if
mood is
only
irritable)

and then I went there and then the next
place and so on and then over to there
and then the market and then a dog was
barking and then I saw a kitty and then
the dog started chasing the kitty and
then I went into the market and I
bought some cheese and some
salad and dressing and

more talkative
pressured speech

flight of ideas/
racing thoughts

Figure 6-2 DSM-5 symptoms of a manic episode. According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition
(DSM-5), a manic episode consists of either elevated/expansive mood or irritable mood. In addition, at least three of the following must
be present (four if mood is irritable): inflated self-esteem/grandiosity, increased goal-directed activity or agitation, risk taking, decreased
need for sleep, distractibility, pressured speech, and racing thoughts.

245


<<<PAGE 262>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

mania

hypomania

HYPOMANIA
mixed features
of mania

MIXED FEATURES OF MANIA

MIXED FEATURES OF DEPRESSION
mixed features
of depression

depression

Figure 6-3 Mood episodes. Mood symptoms exist along a spectrum, with the polar ends being pure mania or hypomania (”up” pole)
and pure depression (”down” pole). Patients can also experience mood episodes that include symptoms of both poles; such episodes
can be described as mania/hypomania with mixed features of depression or depression with mixed features of mania. A patient may
have any combination of these episodes over the course of illness; subsyndromal manic or depressive episodes also occur during the
course of illness, in which case there are not enough symptoms or the symptoms are not severe enough to meet the diagnostic criteria
for one of these episodes. Thus the presentation of mood disorders can vary widely.

Major Depressive Disorder
Single Episode or Recurrent Unipolar

HYPOMANIA
MIXED FEATURES OF MANIA

MIXED FEATURES OF DEPRESSION

single episode

recurrent

Figure 6-4 Major depressive disorder. Major depressive disorder is defined by the occurrence of at least a single major depressive
episode, although most patients will experience recurrent episodes.

246


<<<PAGE 263>>>
Bipolar I Disorder
Manic Episode +/– Major Depressive Episode

HYPOMANIA
MIXED FEATURES OF MANIA
manic

manic with
mixed
features

MIXED FEATURES OF DEPRESSION

depressive
(after
manic
episode)

6
Figure 6-5 Bipolar I disorder. Bipolar I disorder is defined as the occurrence of at least one manic episode. Patients with bipolar I
disorder typically experience major depressive episodes as well, although this is not necessary for the bipolar I diagnosis. It is also
common for patients to experience manic episodes with mixed features of depression.

Bipolar II Disorder
Major Depressive and Hypomanic Episodes

HYPOMANIA

Figure 6-6 Bipolar II disorder. Bipolar II disorder is defined as an illness course consisting of one or more major depressive episodes
and at least one hypomanic episode.

247


<<<PAGE 264>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

called a “mixed” mood state or, in DSM-5, “mixed
features” (Figure 6-7; Table 6-1). Introduction of the
mixed-features modifier has moved the field away from
considering depression and mania as distinct categories

and towards the concept that they are opposite ends
of a spectrum, with all degrees of mixtures in between
(Figure 6-7). Many real patients are neither purely
depressed nor purely manic, but some mixture of both,

Table 6-1 Mixed features (DSM-5) of manic, hypomanic, and major depressive episodes

Manic or hypomanic episode, with mixed features
Full criteria for manic or hypomanic episode
At least three of the following symptoms of depression:
Depressed mood
Loss of interest or pleasure
Psychomotor retardation
Fatigue or loss of energy
Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt
Recurrent thoughts of death or suicidal ideation/actions
Depressive episode, with mixed features
Full criteria for a major depressive episode
At least three of the following manic/hypomanic symptoms:
Elevated, expansive mood (e.g., feeling high, excited, or hyper)
Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity
More talkative than usual or feeling pressured to keep talking
Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing
Increase in energy or goal-directed activity
Increased or excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful consequences
Decreased need for sleep
(*Not included: psychomotor agitation)
(*Not included: irritability)
(*Not included: distractibility)

Mood Disorder Spectrums
depression

with mixed features

mania

with mixed features

Figure 6-7 Mood-disorder spectrums. Depressive symptoms and manic symptoms can occur as part of the
same episode; this is termed “mixed features” and can be defined as depression with mixed features, in which
depressive symptoms dominate, or as mania with mixed features, in which manic symptoms dominate. Thus
mood disorders are best understood as a spectrum, rather than as discrete categorial diagnoses.

248


<<<PAGE 265>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

with the specific mix of symptoms changing along
the mood spectrum over the course of illness. This
is similar to the evolution in the conceptualization
of schizophrenia versus bipolar disorder, where the
old dichotomous model (Figure 6-8) has been largely
replaced with a continuous disease model spectrum,
ranging from pure psychotic disorder to pure mood
disorder (Figure 6-9).

Distinguishing Unipolar Depression from Bipolar
Depression

Other than a history of a prior manic/hypomanic episode,
patients with unipolar depressive episodes (Figure 6-4)
are diagnosed using the same symptom criteria (Figure
6-1) as patients with bipolar depressive episodes (Figures
6-5 and 6-6). Despite similar symptoms, patients with

Schizophrenia and Bipolar Disorder
Dichotomous Disease Model

Schizoaffective
Disorder

Schizophrenia

Bipolar
Disorder

• psychosis

• psychosis

• mania

• chronic, unremitting

• mood disorder

• mood disorder

• poor outcome

• cyclical

• “even a trace of
schizophrenia
is schizophrenia”

• good outcome

Figure 6-8 Schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder: dichotomous disease
model. Schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder have been conceptualized
both as dichotomous disorders
and as belonging to a continuum.
In the dichotomous disease model,
schizophrenia consists of chronic,
unremitting psychosis, with poor
outcomes expected. Bipolar
disorder consists of cyclical manic
and other mood episodes and has
better expected outcomes than
schizophrenia. A third distinct disorder
is schizoaffective disorder, characterized
by both psychosis and a mood disorder.

• “even a trace of a
mood disturbance
is a mood disorder”

Schizophrenia and Bipolar Disorder
Continuum Disease Model

subs

sch

high

ano

izo

an

t

id

typ

risk

al

psyc
yndro
hosis
mal
prod
rom
d psy
e
chotic
disord
delusio
nal diso
er
rder
schizoph
reniform
disorder
brief psychotic diso
rder
schizophrenia
share

tic d

id

cho

par

ultra

oid

izo

psy

av

sch

epre

ssio

n

schizoaffective disorder

ion
ress
dep
ion
ress
tum
p
r
e
a
d
/
tp
ion
pos d mania depress
e
ic
mix
ton
ta
o
a
h
c
c lia
melan
disorder
e
iv
ct
l affe
seasona
ssion
pre
de
al
atypic
depression

mood disorder

Figure 6-9 Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder: continuum disease model. Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder have been
conceptualized both as dichotomous disorders and as belonging to a continuum. In the continuum disease model, schizophrenia
and mood disorders fall along a continuum in which psychosis, delusions, and paranoid avoidant behavior are on one extreme and
depression and other mood symptoms are on the other extreme. Falling in the middle are psychotic depression and schizoaffective
disorder.

249

6


<<<PAGE 266>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

unipolar versus bipolar depression have different longterm outcomes and should generally receive different
treatments. Unfortunately, missed diagnosis or delayed
diagnosis of bipolar depression is all too common.
Over a third of patients with unipolar depression are
eventually re-diagnosed as having bipolar disorder and
maybe as many as 60% of depressed patients with bipolar
II disorder are initially diagnosed as having unipolar
depression. In some cases, this is because the patient had
depressive episodes before they had manic or hypomanic
episodes, and a bipolar diagnosis could not be made. In
other cases, the diagnosis of a past manic or hypomanic
episode is missed because patients with bipolar disorder
often present in the depressed phase and past hypomania
is often pleasant for patients and may not be mentioned.
Why do you want to make an early accurate diagnosis
of bipolar disorder? Although unipolar versus bipolar
depression cannot be readily distinguished on the basis
of a patient’s current symptomatology, there are some
hints that can raise suspicion of a bipolar depressive
episode rather than a unipolar depressive episode (Figure
6-10). Missing the diagnosis of bipolar depression early

may lead to worse quality of life due to giving the wrong
treatment (for unipolar depression rather than for
bipolar depression) and this may be ineffective or even
dangerous. That is, delay of appropriate treatment in
bipolar depression can increase the risk of mood cycling,
relapse, and suicide, and even decrease the chances of
responding to appropriate bipolar treatments once they
are given later.
Thus, it is important to tell unipolar from bipolar
depression. Is there any way to do this when the patient
is in the depressed state other than to find a prior history
of mania/hypomania? The short answer is no. The long
answer is that there are certain clinical characteristics
that favor the likelihood of a bipolar depressive episode
instead of a unipolar depressive episode, and these factors
can be clues to the diagnosis of a bipolar depressive
episode when the past history of a manic/hypomanic
episode is unclear (Figure 6-10). Some additional tips
about how to determine whether a depressed patient
is unipolar or bipolar might be to ask two questions
(Table 6-2):
“Who’s your daddy?” and “Where’s your mama?”

Identifying Bipolar Depression

HYPOMANIA

BIPOLAR DEPRESSION
More:
Family history of bipolar disorder
Family history of substance abuse
Comorbid substance abuse
Suicide attempts
Early age of onset <25 years
Irritability
Psychotic symptoms
Mood reactivity
Restlessness
Psychomotor agitation (BPII)
Psychomotor retardation (BPI)
Shorter depressive episodes
More previous depressive episodes
Guilt
Melancholia

Figure 6-10 Identifying bipolar depression. Although all symptoms of a major depressive episode can occur in either
unipolar or bipolar depression, some factors can provide hints if not diagnostic certainty that the patient has a bipolar
spectrum disorder. These can include a family history of bipolar disorder, family history of substance abuse, comorbid
substance abuse, history of suicide attempts, earlier age of onset, and shorter but more frequent depressive episodes.
Some symptoms may also be more common as part of a bipolar illness, including irritability, psychotic symptoms, mood
reactivity, restlessness, psychomotor agitation or retardation, guilt, and melancholia.

250


<<<PAGE 267>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

Table 6-2 Is it unipolar or bipolar depression? Questions to ask

Who’s your daddy?
What is your family history of:
• mood disorder?
• psychiatric hospitalizations?
• suicide?
• anyone who took lithium, mood stabilizers, drugs
for psychosis or depression?
• anyone who received ECT?
These can be indications of a unipolar or bipolar
spectrum disorder in relatives.
Where’s your mama?
I need to get additional history about you from
someone close to you, such as your mother or your
spouse.
Patients may especially lack insight about their manic
symptoms and under-report them.

“Who’s your daddy?” means more precisely, “what is
your family history?” since a first-degree relative with a
bipolar spectrum disorder can give a strong hint that the
patient also has a bipolar spectrum disorder rather than
unipolar depression. Although the majority of patients
with bipolar depression do not have a family history of
bipolar disorder, when it is present, it is arguably the most
robust and reliable risk factor for bipolar depression.
Individuals with a first-degree relative with bipolar
disorder are at an 8–10-fold greater risk of developing
bipolar disorder compared to the general population.
The second question, “Where’s your mama?,” really
means “I need to get additional history from someone
else close to you,” since patients tend to under-report
their manic symptoms. The insight and observations of
an outside informant such as a mother or spouse who
can give past history might indeed prove to be quite
different from the one the patient is reporting, and thus
help establish a bipolar spectrum diagnosis that patients
themselves deny or do not perceive.
Mixed Features: Are Mood Disorders Progressive?

In addition to the importance of distinguishing unipolar
depression from bipolar depression, it is also very
important to look for mixed features in your depressed
patients, whether those patients have a unipolar or
bipolar illness. This is because there are big differences
in the outcome for patients if mixed features are present.

For one thing, there is evidence that unipolar depression
can progress to mixed features, mixed features progress
to bipolar disorder, and bipolar disorder progress to
treatment resistance (Figure 6-11). The presence of even
subthreshold manic symptoms is strongly associated with
conversion to bipolar disorder, with each manic symptom
increasing risk by 30%. We don’t know if we can halt this
march towards a bad outcome, but the best chance may
be early recognition and effective treatment that reduces
or eliminates all symptoms, whether manic or depressed,
and to do this as early in the course of illness as possible.
How many depressed patients have mixed features?
The estimates are about a quarter of all patients with
unipolar depression and a third of all patients with
bipolar I or II depression have subsyndromal symptoms
of mania. Estimates of mixed features in unipolar
depression in children and adolescents are even higher.
Compared to those with “pure” depression, those with
depression plus some manic symptoms may have a more
complex illness and less favorable course and outcome.
For example, mixed features may compound the already
high risk of suicide in depressed patients. Non-euphoric
manic symptoms such as psychomotor agitation,
impulsivity, irritability, and racing/crowded thoughts
combined with depressive symptoms are a recipe for
suicidality. Suicide rates are twice as high in bipolar
than in unipolar depression and up to 20 times higher
in bipolar disorder compared to the general population.
Sadly, up to a third of bipolar patients attempt suicide at
least once in their life, and 10–20% of them succeed.
What about those subsyndromal manic symptoms
and suicide? In the presence of mixed features there is a
fourfold increased risk of suicidality in both unipolar and
bipolar depression. Studies show specifically a worrisome
association of mixed episodes with suicide attempts, so it
is not only important to identify who has mixed features,
but also to treat appropriately. Treatment for mixed
features is discussed in Chapter 7 and surprisingly is NOT
the same as the treatment for unipolar depression without
mixed features. That is, neither unipolar nor bipolar
depression with mixed features are treated first-line with
standard monoamine reuptake inhibiting drugs used
widely in unipolar depression and discussed in Chapter 7,
but rather with serotonin/dopamine antagonists/partial
agonists used widely for the treatment of psychosis and
discussed in Chapter 5. Thus, it cannot be emphasized
too strongly that major depressive episodes need to
be correctly diagnosed as part of a unipolar or bipolar
illness and as having or lacking mixed features, and that

251

6


<<<PAGE 268>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Is Major Depressive Disorder Progressive?

HYPOMANIA
MIXED FEATURES OF MANIA

MIXED FEATURES OF DEPRESSION

recurrent unipolar
depression

mixed features

mania or
hypomania

treatment
resistance

Figure 6-11 Is major depressive disorder progressive? There is evidence that mood disorders may be progressive. Unipolar
depression with recurrent episodes may progress to depression with mixed features, which may ultimately progress to a bipolar
spectrum condition and finally treatment resistance.

the correct treatment be given (details of treatment of
mood disorders are given in Chapter 7). The hope is that
recognition and appropriate treatment of both unipolar
and bipolar depression – whether that depressive episode
has mixed features or not – will cause all symptoms to
remit for long periods of time and that this might prevent
progression to more difficult states (Figure 6-11). This is
not proven, but is a major hypothesis in the field at the
present time.

NEUROBIOLOGY OF MOOD
DISORDERS
Neurotransmitters

Dysfunctional neurotransmission in various brain
circuits is implicated in both the pathophysiology and
treatment of mood disorders. Classically, this has included
the monoamine neurotransmitters norepinephrine,
dopamine, and serotonin, and more recently the
neurotransmitters glutamate and GABA (γ-aminobutyric
acid) and their associated ion channels. Symptoms of
252

mood disorders are hypothesized to involve dysfunction of
various combinations of these neurotransmitters and ion
channels, and all known treatments for mood disorders
act upon one or more of them. We have extensively
discussed the dopamine system (Chapter 4; Figures 4-2
through 4-13), the serotonin system (Chapter 4; Figures
4-36 through 4-51), the glutamate system (Chapter 4;
Figures 4-20 through 4-28), and ion channels (Chapter
3; Figures 3-19 through 3-26). Here, we add two other
neurotransmitter systems: norepinephrine and GABA.
Before discussing how these various neurotransmitters
and ion channels are thought to be involved in mood
disorders, we will begin with a general discussion of
norepinephrine, GABA, and their receptors and pathways.
Norepinephrine

The noradrenergic neuron utilizes norepinephrine
(noradrenaline) as its neurotransmitter.
Norepinephrine is synthesized, or produced, from the
precursor amino acid tyrosine, which is transported
into the nervous system from the blood by means of


<<<PAGE 269>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

an active transport pump (Figure 6-12). Once inside
the neuron, tyrosine is acted upon by three enzymes
in sequence: first, tyrosine hydroxylase (TOH), the
rate-limiting and most important enzyme in the
regulation of norepinephrine (NE) synthesis. Tyrosine
hydroxylase converts the amino acid tyrosine into
DOPA. The second enzyme then acts, namely, DOPA
decarboxylase (DDC), which converts DOPA into
dopamine (DA). Dopamine itself is a neurotransmitter
in DA neurons as discussed in Chapter 4 and illustrated
in Figure 4-2. However, for NE neurons, DA is just
a precursor of NE. In fact, the third and final NE

synthetic enzyme, dopamine β-hydroxylase (DBH),
converts DA into NE. Norepinephrine is then stored
in synaptic packages called vesicles until released by a
nerve impulse (Figure 6-12).
Norepinephrine action is terminated by two principal
destructive or catabolic enzymes that turn NE into
inactive metabolites. The first is monoamine oxidase
(MAO) A or B, which is located in mitochondria in the
presynaptic neuron and elsewhere (Figure 6-13). The
second is catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), which
is thought to be located largely outside of the presynaptic
nerve terminal (Figure 6-13). The action of NE can be

Norepinephrine Is Produced
tyrosine
transporter

6

DDC

E
E

TYR

DOPA
TOH
VMAT2

E
DBH

NE (norepinephrine)
Figure 6-12 Norepinephrine is produced. Tyrosine (TYR), a precursor to norepinephrine (NE), is taken up into NE nerve terminals via a
tyrosine transporter and converted into DOPA by the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase (TOH). DOPA is then converted into dopamine (DA)
by the enzyme DOPA decarboxylase (DDC). Finally, DA is converted into NE by dopamine β-hydroxylase (DBH). After synthesis, NE is
packaged into synaptic vesicles via the vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) and stored there until its release into the synapse
during neurotransmission.

253


<<<PAGE 270>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

terminated not only by enzymes which destroy NE, but
also by a transport pump for NE that removes it from
acting in the synapse without destroying it (Figure 6-14).
In fact, such inactivated NE can be restored for reuse in
a later neurotransmitting nerve impulse. The transport
pump that terminates synaptic action of NE is sometimes
called the “NE transporter” or “NET” and sometimes the
“NE reuptake pump.” This NE reuptake pump is located
on the presynaptic noradrenergic nerve terminal as part
of the presynaptic machinery of the neuron, where it acts
as a vacuum cleaner whisking NE out of the synapse, off
the synaptic receptors, and stopping its synaptic actions.
Once inside the presynaptic nerve terminal, NE can either
be stored again for subsequent reuse when another nerve
impulse arrives, or it can be destroyed by NE-destroying
enzymes (Figure 6-13).
The noradrenergic neuron is regulated by a
multiplicity of receptors for NE (Figure 6-14). The
norepinephrine transporter is one type of receptor, as

is the vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2),
which transports NE in the cytoplasm of the presynaptic
neuron into storage vesicles (Figure 6-14). The VMAT2
transporter was extensively discussed in Chapter 5, as
the VMAT2 transporter in dopamine nerve terminals is
the target of treatments for tardive dyskinesia (Figures
5-10 through 5-12). Other NE receptors are classified
as α1, α2A, α2B, or α2C, or as β1, β2, or β3 (Figure 6-14).
All can be postsynaptic, but only α2 receptors can act
as presynaptic autoreceptors (Figures 6-14 through
6-16). Postsynaptic receptors convert their occupancy
by NE into physiological functions, and ultimately, into
changes in signal transduction and gene expression in the
postsynaptic neuron (Figure 6-14).
Presynaptic α2 receptors regulate NE release, so
they are called “autoreceptors” (Figures 6-14 and 6-15).
Presynaptic α2 autoreceptors are located both on the axon
terminal (i.e., terminal α2 receptors; Figures 6-14 and
6-15) and at the cell body (soma) and nearby dendrites;

Norepinephrine Action Is Terminated

E

norepinephrine
transporter
(NET)

MAO A or B
destroys NE

E
NE

COMT
destroys NE

Figure 6-13 Norepinephrine’s action is terminated. Norepinephrine’s action can be terminated through multiple mechanisms.
Norepinephrine can be transported out of the synaptic cleft and back into the presynaptic neuron via the norepinephrine transporter
(NET), where it may be repackaged for future use. Alternatively, norepinephrine may be broken down extracellularly via the enzyme
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). Other enzymes that break down norepinephrine are monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) and
monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B), which are present in mitochondria, both within the presynaptic neuron and in other cells, including
neurons and glia.

254


<<<PAGE 271>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

Norepinephrine Receptors

VMAT2

presynaptic
alpha-2
autoreceptor

6

norepinephrine
transporter
(NET)
alpha-1
receptor

postsynaptic
beta-1
beta-3
alpha-2B
receptor
receptor
receptor
beta-2
postsynaptic
postsynaptic
receptor
alpha-2A
alpha-2C
receptor
receptor

Figure 6-14 Norepinephrine receptors. Shown here are receptors for norepinephrine that regulate its neurotransmission. The
norepinephrine transporter (NET) exists presynaptically and is responsible for clearing excess norepinephrine out of the synapse. The
vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) takes norepinephrine up into synaptic vesicles and stores it for future neurotransmission.
There is also a presynaptic α2 autoreceptor, which regulates release of norepinephrine from the presynaptic neuron. In addition, there
are several postsynaptic receptors. These include α1, α2A, α2B, α2C, β1, β2, and β3 receptors.

thus, these latter α2 presynaptic receptors are called
somatodendritic α2 receptors (Figure 6-16). Presynaptic
α2 receptors are important because both the terminal
and the somatodendritic α2 receptors are autoreceptors.
That is, when presynaptic α2 receptors recognize NE, they
turn off further release of NE (Figures 6-14 and 6-15).
Thus, presynaptic α2 autoreceptors act as a brake for the
NE neuron, and also cause what is known as a negative
feedback regulatory signal. Stimulating this receptor (i.e.,
stepping on the brake) stops the neuron from firing. This
probably occurs physiologically to prevent over-firing
of the NE neuron, since it can shut itself off once the
firing rate gets too high and the autoreceptor becomes
stimulated. It is worthy to note that some drugs can not
only mimic the natural functioning of the NE neuron by

stimulating the presynaptic α2 neuron, but other drugs
that antagonize this same receptor will have the effect of
cutting the brake cable, thus enhancing release of NE.
GABA (γ-Aminobutyric Acid)

GABA is the principle inhibitory neurotransmitter in the
brain, and normally serves an important regulatory role
in reducing the activity of many neurons. Specifically,
GABA is produced, or synthesized, from the amino acid
glutamate (glutamic acid) via the actions of the enzyme
glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) (Figure 6-17). Once
formed in presynaptic neurons, GABA is transported
into synaptic vesicles by vesicular inhibitory amino acid
transporters (VIAATs), where it is stored until released
into the synapse during inhibitory neurotransmission
255


<<<PAGE 272>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

alpha-2
adrenergic
presynaptic
autoreceptor

NE
A

B

NE occupying alpha-2 adrenergic
presynaptic autoreceptor halts
release of NE

Figure 6-15 Alpha-2 receptors on axon terminal. Shown here are presynaptic α2-adrenergic autoreceptors located on the axon
terminal of the norepinephrine (NE) neuron. These autoreceptors are “gatekeepers” for norepinephrine. (A) When they are not bound
by norepinephrine, they are open, allowing norepinephrine release. (B) When norepinephrine binds to the gatekeeping receptors, they
close the molecular gate and prevent norepinephrine from being released.

256


<<<PAGE 273>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

somatodendritic
alpha-2
adrenergic
autoreceptor

A

6

NE occupying somatodendritic
alpha-2 adrenergic autoreceptor causes a
decrease in firing and a decrease of NE release
B

Figure 6-16 Somatodendritic α2 receptors. Shown here are presynaptic α2-adrenergic autoreceptors located in the somatodendritic
area of the norepinephrine neuron. (A) When they are not bound by norepinephrine, there is normal neuronal impulse flow, with
resultant release of norepinephrine. (B) When norepinephrine binds to these α2 receptors, it shuts off neuronal impulse flow (see loss of
lightning bolts in the neuron), and this stops further norepinephrine release.

257


<<<PAGE 274>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

(Figure 6-17). GABA’s synaptic actions are terminated by
the presynaptic GABA transporter (GAT), also known
as the GABA reuptake pump (Figure 6-18), analogous
to similar transporters for other neurotransmitters
discussed throughout this text. GABA action can also
be terminated by the enzyme GABA transaminase
(GABA-T), which converts GABA into an inactive
substance (Figure 6-18).
There are three major types of GABA receptors and
numerous subtypes of GABA receptors. The major types
are GABAA, GABAB, and GABAC receptors (Figure 6-19).
GABAA and GABAC receptors are both ligand-gated
ion channels, whereas GABAB receptors are linked to G
proteins and not to ion channels (Figure 6–19).

GABA Is Produced

GABAA Receptor Subtypes

GAD

The molecular structure of GABAA receptors is shown
in Figure 6-20. Each subunit of a GABAA receptor has
four transmembrane regions (Figure 6-20A). When
five subunits cluster together, they form an intact
GABAA receptor with a chloride channel in the center
(Figure 6-20B). There are many different subtypes of

glutamate

GABA

E
VIAAT

GABA

GABA Action Is Terminated

E

GABA-T
destroys GABA

GABA
transporter
(GAT)

GABA

258

Figure 6-17 Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
is produced. The amino acid glutamate, a
precursor to GABA, is converted to GABA by
the enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD).
After synthesis, GABA is transported into synaptic
vesicles via vesicular inhibitory amino acid
transporters (VIAATs) and stored until its release
into the synapse during neurotransmission.

Figure 6-18 Gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) action is terminated. GABA’s
action can be terminated through
multiple mechanisms. GABA can be
transported out of the synaptic cleft
and back into the presynaptic neuron
via the GABA transporter (GAT), where
it may be repackaged for future use.
Alternatively, once GABA has been
transported back into the cell, it may be
converted into an inactive substance
via the enzyme GABA transaminase
(GABA-T).


<<<PAGE 275>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

GABA Receptors

Figure 6-19 Gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA) receptors. Shown here
are receptors for GABA that regulate
its neurotransmission. These include
the GABA transporter (GAT) as well as
three major types of postsynaptic GABA
receptors: GABAA, GABAB, and GABAC.
GABAA and GABAC receptors are
ligand-gated ion channels; they are part
of a macromolecular complex that forms
an inhibitory chloride channel. GABAB
receptors are G-protein-linked receptors
that may be coupled with calcium or
potassium channels.

GABA
transporter
(GAT)
GABA

GABAA
receptor
complex

GABA B
receptor

GABAA receptors, depending upon which subunits are
present (Figure 6-20C). Subunits of GABAA receptors
are sometimes also called isoforms, and include α (with
six isoforms α1 to α6), β (with three isoforms β1 to β3), γ
(with three isoforms γ1 to γ3), δ, ε, π, θ, and ρ (with three
isoforms ρ1 to ρ3) (Figure 6-20C). What is important for
this discussion is that depending upon which subunits are
present, the functions of a GABAA receptor can vary quite
significantly. Thus, GABAA receptors can be classified by
the specific isoform subunits that they contain.
GABAA receptors can also be categorized into other
subtypes: those that are synaptic and hypothetically
mediate phasic neurotransmission, and those that
are extrasynaptic and hypothetically mediate tonic
neurotransmission (Figure 6-21). Other classification
systems are whether GABA receptors are sensitive to
the well-known benzodiazepines or insensitive to them.
Some of these classifications overlap, since GABAA

6

GABA C
receptor
complex

receptors containing a γ subunit tend to be synaptic, to
mediate phasic neurotransmission, and to be sensitive to
benzodiazepines. On the other hand, GABAA receptors
containing a δ subunit tend to be extrasynaptic, to
mediate tonic neurotransmission, and to be insensitive to
benzodiazepines.
Benzodiazepine-sensitive GABAA receptors have
several structural and functional features that make
them distinct from benzodiazepine-insensitive GABAA
receptors. For a GABAA receptor to be sensitive to
benzodiazepines, there must be two β units plus a γ unit
of either the γ2 or γ3 subtype, plus two α units of either
the α1, α2, or α3 subtype (Figure 6-20C). Benzodiazepines
appear to bind to the region of the receptor between
the γ2/γ3 subunit and the α1/α2/α3 subunit, one
benzodiazepine molecule per receptor complex (Figure
6-20C). GABA itself binds with two molecules of GABA
per receptor complex, to the GABA agonist sites in the

259


<<<PAGE 276>>>
Structure of GABAA Receptors
four transmembrane regions

make up one subunit

extracellular amino
acid chains

transmembrane
region

A

cytoplasmic loop

the chloride channel
is at the center

five substructures form the receptor complex

B

inhibition

Major Subtypes of GABAA Receptors
GABA
binding site

GABA
BZ
binding site
binding site

BZ
binding site

6

3

1

1

ß

ß

GABA
binding site
BZ
binding site

GABA
binding site

2

2

2

ß

4

neuroactive
steroids
-alcohol
-general
anesthetics

(

(1-6) (1-3)
1-3 or

)

2,

1

-sedative
-phasic inhibition

2, (

2,

3)

-anxiolytic
-phasic inhibition
-synaptic

(

4,

6)

-tonic inhibition
-extrasynaptic

C
Figure 6-20 Gamma-aminobutyric acid A (GABAA) receptors. (A) Shown here are the four transmembrane regions that make up one
subunit of a GABAA receptor. (B) There are five copies of these subunits in a fully constituted GABAA receptor, at the center of which is a
chloride channel. (C) Different types of subunits (also called isoforms or subtypes) can combine to form a GABAA receptor. These include
six different α isoforms, three different β isoforms, three different γ isoforms, δ, ε, π, θ, and three different ρ isoforms. The ultimate type
and function of each GABAA receptor subtype will depend on which subunits it contains. Benzodiazepine (BZ)-sensitive GABAA receptors
(middle two) contain two β units, plus either γ2 or γ3, plus two α (α1 through α3) subunits. They generally mediate phasic inhibition
triggered by peak concentrations of synaptically released GABA. Benzodiazepine-sensitive GABAA receptors containing α1 subunits are
involved in sleep (second from left), while those that contain α2 and/or α3 subunits are involved in anxiety (second from right). GABAA
receptors containing α4, α6, or δ subunits (far right) are benzodiazepine-insensitive, are located extrasynaptically, and regulate tonic
inhibition. They are bound by naturally occurring neuroactive steroids and possibly to alcohol and some general anesthetics.

260


<<<PAGE 277>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

regions of the receptor between the α and the β units,
sometimes also referred to as the GABA orthosteric site
(Figures 6-20C and 6-22).
Acting alone, GABA acting at its agonist sites can
increase the frequency of opening of the chloride channel
formed inside all its subunits (see Figure 6-20), but only
to a limited extent (compare Figure 6-22A and 6-22B).
Since the site for benzodiazepines is in a different
location from the agonist sites for GABA (see Figure
6-20C and 6-22D), the modulatory site is often called
allosteric (literally “other site”), and the agents that bind
there “allosteric modulators.” Since the modulation is
“positive” in the sense that it makes GABA more effective
at GABAA receptors, enhancing the frequency of opening
of inhibitory chloride channels (Figure 6-22D), the
action is called “positive allosteric modulation,” and
benzodiazepines are called GABAA positive allosteric
modulators (PAMs). Interestingly, GABA must be present
for the PAM to work (compare Figure 6-22C and 6-22D).
The actions of benzodiazepines at benzodiazepinesensitive GABAA receptors are essentially the actions

of an agonist at their positive allosteric sites, because
their actions can be reversed by the neutral antagonist
flumazenil (Figure 6-23), which is sometimes used to
reverse anesthesia with benzodiazepines or overdoses of
benzodiazepines.
As mentioned above, benzodiazepine-sensitive
GABAA receptor subtypes (with γ subunits and α1 to α3
subunits) are thought to be postsynaptic and to mediate
a type of inhibition at the postsynaptic neuron that is
phasic, occurring in bursts of inhibition that are triggered
by peak concentrations of synaptically released GABA
(Figure 6-21). Theoretically, benzodiazepines acting at
these receptors, particularly the α2/3 subtypes clustered
at postsynaptic GABA sites, should exert an anxiolytic
effect due to enhancement of phasic postsynaptic
inhibition. However, not all benzodiazepine-sensitive
GABAA receptors are the same. Notably, on the one
hand, those benzodiazepine-sensitive GABAA receptors
with α1 subunits may be most important for regulating
sleep and are the presumed targets of numerous sedative
hypnotic agents, including both benzodiazepine and

Figure 6-21 GABAA
mediation of tonic and phasic
inhibition. Benzodiazepine-sensitive
GABAA receptors (those that contain
γ and α1 through α3 subunits)
are postsynaptic receptors that
mediate phasic inhibition, which
glial cell
occurs in bursts triggered by peak
cholesterol
mitochondria concentrations of synaptically released
GABA. Benzodiazepine-insensitive
GABAA receptors (those containing
δ subunits and α4 or α6 subunits)
pregnenolone
are extrasynaptic and capture GABA
that diffuses away from the synapse
as well as neuroactive steroids that
are synthesized and released by glia.
These receptors mediate inhibition
neuroactive
steroid
that is tonic (i.e., mediated by ambient
levels of extracellular GABA that has
escaped from the synapse).

Two Types of GABAA Mediated Inhibition
GABA
neuron

GABA

GABAA
( 4, 6)

GABA A
(

1, 3)
postsynaptic

extrasynaptic

tonic
inhibition
phasic
inhibition

261

6


<<<PAGE 278>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

chloride
GABA A channel
binding site

Figure 6-22 Positive allosteric
modulation of GABA-A receptors. (A)
Benzodiazepine (BZ)-sensitive GABAA
receptors, like the one shown here,
consist of five subunits with a central
chloride channel and have binding
sites not only for GABA but also for
positive allosteric modulators (e.g.,
benzodiazepines). (B) When GABA
binds to its sites on the GABAA
receptor, it increases the frequency
of opening of the chloride channel
and thus allows more chloride to pass
through. (C) When a positive allosteric
modulator such as a benzodiazepine
binds to the GABAA receptor in the
absence of GABA, it has no effect
on the chloride channel. (D) When a
positive allosteric modulator such as a
benzodiazepine binds to the GABAA
receptor in the presence of GABA, it
causes the channel to open even more
frequently than when GABA alone is
present.

BZ
binding site

A

B

C

D

= GABA
= benzodiazepine

non-benzodiazepine PAMs of the GABAA receptor
(Figure 6-21C). The α1 subtype of GABAA receptors and
the drugs that bind to it are discussed further in Chapter
10 on disorders of sleep. Some of these agents (i.e.,
some Z drugs that also bind to benzodiazepine-sensitive
GABAA receptors; see Chapter 10) are selective for only
the α1 subtype of GABAA receptor. On the other hand,
benzodiazepine-sensitive GABAA receptors with α2 and/
or α3 subunits may be most important for regulating
anxiety and are the presumed targets of the anxiolytic and
262

sedative hypnotic benzodiazepines (discussed in Chapter
8 on anxiety and in Chapter 10) (Figure 6-20C). Currently
available benzodiazepines are nonselective for GABAA
receptors with different α subunits. Abnormal expression
of γ2, α2, or δ subunits have all been associated with
different types of epilepsy. Receptor subtype expression
can change in response to chronic benzodiazepine
administration and withdrawal, and could theoretically
be altered in patients with various psychiatric disorders,
including different subpopulations of depression.


<<<PAGE 279>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

Figure 6-23 Flumazenil. The
benzodiazepine receptor antagonist
flumazenil is able to reverse a full
agonist benzodiazepine acting at its
site on the GABAA receptor. This may
be helpful in reversing the sedative
effects of full agonist benzodiazepines
when administered for anesthetic
purposes or when taken in overdose
by a patient.

flumazenil

= GABA

6

= benzodiazepine
= flumazenil

Benzodiazepine-insensitive GABAA receptors are
those with α4, α6, γ1, or δ subunits (Figure 6-20C).
GABAA receptors with a δ subunit rather than a γ
subunit, plus either α4 or α6 subunits, do not bind to
benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepine-insensitive GABAA
receptors bind instead to the naturally occurring
neuroactive steroids, and possibly to alcohol and to
some general anesthetics (Figure 6-20C). The binding
site for these non-benzodiazepine modulators is located
between the α and the δ subunits, one site per receptor
complex (Figure 6-20C). Two molecules of GABA bind
per receptor complex of benzodiazepine-insensitive
GABAA receptors at the GABA agonist (orthosteric) sites
located between the α and the β subunits (Figure 6-20C),
just as they do at the benzodiazepine-sensitive GABAA
receptors.
As already mentioned, benzodiazepine-insensitive
GABAA receptor subtypes (with δ subunits and α4 or α6
subunits) are thought to be located extrasynaptically,
where they capture not only GABA that diffuses
away from the synapse, but also neuroactive steroids
synthesized and released by glia (Figure 6-21).
Extrasynaptic benzodiazepine-insensitive GABAA
receptors are thought to mediate a type of inhibition
at the postsynaptic neuron that is tonic, in contrast to
the phasic type of inhibition mediated by postsynaptic

benzodiazepine-sensitive GABAA receptors (Figure
6-21). Tonic inhibition may be regulated by the ambient
levels of extracellular GABA molecules that have escaped
presynaptic reuptake and enzymatic destruction and
persist between neurotransmissions and is boosted by
allosteric modulation at these sites.
Thus, tonic inhibition is thought to set the overall
tone and excitability of the postsynaptic neuron, and
to be important for certain regulatory events such
as the frequency of neuronal discharge in response
to excitatory inputs. Since neuroactive steroids have
antidepressant properties (see Chapter 7), this has led
to the proposal that some depressed patients may have
a lack of normal tonic inhibition, and thus too much
excitability in some brain circuits. Hypothetically this
could be calmed by neuroactive steroid administration,
causing more efficiency of information processing in
those brain circuits and reduction of the symptoms
of depression. It is possible that neuroactive steroids
could also have important anxiolytic actions. Why
would more tonic and supposedly sustained opening
of chloride channels be a good thing for depression? In
the case of postpartum depression, it may be potentially
explainable on the basis that pregnant women have high
circulating and presumably brain levels of neuroactive
steroids. When they deliver, there is a precipitous decline
263


<<<PAGE 280>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

in circulating neuroactive steroid levels, hypothetically
triggering the sudden onset of a major depressive episode
when tonic inhibition is lost. Restoring neuroactive
steroid levels – and tonic inhibition – for 60 hours of
intravenous infusion may be enough for the patient
to respond by reversing their depression and then
having some additional time to accommodate to the
lower levels of neuroactive steroids postpartum. This
is a reasonable but not yet proven theory. It may be a
bit more difficult to understand why positive allosteric
modulation by a neuroactive steroid would treat
other forms of depression, and treat quickly. However
neuroactive steroids exert their antidepressant effects,
clearly extrasynaptic benzodiazepine-insensitive GABAA
sites are the targets, because benzodiazepines acting at
the synaptic benzodiazepine-sensitive GABAA sites do
not have robust antidepressant action. It may be worth
noting that neuroactive steroids actually work at both
benzodiazepine-sensitive GABAA receptors as well as at
benzodiazepine-insensitive GABAA receptors. However,
their unique action is at the benzodiazepine-insensitive
sites and it is this action that is the focus of much interest
in how neuroactive steroids hypothetically mediate their
antidepressant actions.
The Monoamine Hypothesis of Depression

The classic theory about the biological etiology of
depression hypothesizes that depression is due to a
deficiency of monoamine neurotransmission. Mania
may be the opposite, due to an excess of monoamine
neurotransmission. This original conceptualization
was a rather simplistic “chemical imbalance” notion
that is now considered relatively unsophisticated
and based mainly on observations that certain drugs
that depleted monoamines could induce depression,
and that all effective drugs for depression in the past
acted by boosting one or more of three monoamine
neurotransmitters: norepinephrine, serotonin, or
dopamine. Thus, the idea was born that the “normal”
amount of monoamine neurotransmitters (Figure
6-24A) somehow became depleted by an unknown
disease process, stress, or drugs (Figure 6-24B), leading
to the symptoms of depression. Direct evidence for the
monoamine hypothesis is still largely lacking. A good
deal of effort was expended especially in the 1970s and
1980s to identify the theoretically predicted deficiencies
of monoamine neurotransmitters in depression and
excess in mania. This effort to date has unfortunately
yielded mixed results, prompting a search for better
explanations of the etiology of mood disorders in general
264

and of the potential link between monoamines and mood
disorders in particular.
The Monoamine Receptor Hypothesis and
Neurotrophic Factors

Because of these and other difficulties with the
monoamine hypothesis, the focus of hypotheses for
the etiology of mood disorders shifted next from the
monoamine neurotransmitters themselves to their
receptors and then to the downstream molecular events
that these receptors trigger, including the regulation of
gene expression and the production of growth factors.
Currently, there is also great interest in the influence
of nature (genes) and nurture (environment and
epigenetics) on brain circuits regulated by monoamines,
especially what happens when epigenetic changes from
stressful life experiences are combined with inheriting
various risk genes that can make an individual vulnerable
to those environmental stressors.
The neurotransmitter receptor hypothesis of
depression posits that an abnormality in the receptors
for monoamine neurotransmitters leads to depression
(Figure 6-24B). Thus, if depletion of monoamine
neurotransmitters is the central theme of the
monoamine hypothesis of depression (Figure 6-24B),
the neurotransmitter receptor hypothesis of depression
takes this theme one step further: namely, that the
depletion of neurotransmitter causes compensatory
upregulation of postsynaptic neurotransmitter receptors
(Figure 6-24C). Direct evidence for this hypothesis is
also generally lacking. However, postmortem studies
do consistently show increased numbers of serotonin
2 receptors in the frontal cortex of patients who die by
suicide. Also, some neuroimaging studies have identified
abnormalities in serotonin receptors of depressed
patients, but this approach has not yet been successful
in identifying consistent and replicable molecular
lesions in receptors for monoamines in depression.
Thus, there is no clear and convincing evidence that
monoamine deficiency accounts for depression: i.e.,
there is no “real” monoamine deficit. Likewise, there
is no clear and convincing evidence that abnormalities
in monoamine receptors account for depression
even though all the classic drugs to treat depression
raise monoamine levels. Although the monoamine
hypothesis is obviously an overly simplified notion about
mood disorders, it has been very valuable in focusing
attention upon the three monoamine neurotransmitters
norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin. This has led
to a much better understanding of the physiological


<<<PAGE 281>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

6-24 Monoamine receptor hypothesis
Monoamine Receptor Hypothesis of Depression Figure
of depression. (A) According to the classic

NE

5HT
DA

monoamine hypothesis of depression, when
there is a “normal” amount of monoamine
neurotransmitter activity, there is no depression
present. (B) The monoamine hypothesis of
depression posits that if the “normal” amount
of monoamine neurotransmitter activity
becomes reduced, depleted, or dysfunctional
for some reason, depression may ensue. (C) The
monoamine receptor hypothesis of depression
extends the classic monoamine hypothesis
of depression, positing that deficient activity
of monoamine neurotransmitters causes
upregulation of postsynaptic monoamine
neurotransmitter receptors, and that this leads to
depression.

normal state - no depression
A

6

depression - caused by
monoamine deficiency
B

receptors upregulate
due to lack of monoamines
C

265


<<<PAGE 282>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

functioning of these three neurotransmitters, and for a
while led to more and more pharmacological treatment
options for depression, with many therapeutic variants
upon the theme of monoamine targeting. These many
therapeutic approaches and drugs are discussed in detail
in Chapter 7.
Beyond Monoamines: The Neuroplasticity and
Neuroprogression Hypothesis of Depression

One of the hints that depression is not simply due to
deficient monoamines and that drugs for depression
simply restored those deficient monoamines is the
observation that the classic drugs for depression increased
monoamines almost immediately, yet the clinical
improvement in depression is delayed for weeks (Figure
6-25). This led to a search for molecular events that
correlated in time with the onset of clinical antidepressant
effects. Some of the earliest findings showed that delayed
downregulation of neurotransmitter receptors following
immediate elevation of monoamines after administration
of drugs for depression correlates in time with the onset
of clinical antidepressant effects (Figures 6-25 and 6-26).
Downregulation of neurotransmitter receptors also
correlates in time with the onset of tolerance to some of
the side effects of drugs used to treat depression.
Other molecular events that correlate with the timing
of onset of clinical antidepressant effects following

administration of drugs for depression include the
downstream synthesis of growth factors such as BDNF
(brain-derived neurotrophic factor) (Figure 6-27). One
notable current hypothesis is that stress, inflammation,
and other genetic and environmental factors (such as
early life adversity, the microbiome, and chronic medical
illnesses) lead to loss of growth factors (Figure 6-28) and
this leads in turn to neuroprogression, starting with lack
of synaptic maintenance and then loss of synapses and
dendritic arborization, and then ultimately leading to loss
of neurons themselves (Figure 6-29, left), at which point
neuroprogression becomes irreversible. The effect of the
loss of growth factors on maintaining synaptic integrity
and connectivity is shown in the microscopic inserts in
Figure 6-30 (see loss of dendritic spines indicating loss
of synapses on the right). Ominously, copious degrees of
synaptic and neuronal loss can be observed on structural
magnetic resonance imaging brain scans (Figure
6-30). Abnormal functional neuroimaging studies of
connectivity of brain circuits have also been reported in
depression.
The hypothetical neurobiology of neuroprogression
in depression is multifactorial (Figure 6-31). In addition
to possibly deficient production of growth factors
(Figures 6-27 through 6-29; 6-31), there is also the
longstanding theory of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis dysregulation in depression, and it, too,

amount of NT
receptor
sensitivity

clinical effect

Medication introduced
Figure 6-25 Time course of effects of drugs for depression. This figure depicts the different time courses for three effects of most drugs
used to treat depression – namely, clinical changes, neurotransmitter (NT) changes, and receptor-sensitivity changes. Specifically, the
amount of neurotransmitters changes relatively rapidly after a drug for depression is introduced. However, the clinical effect is delayed,
as is the desensitization, or downregulation, of neurotransmitter receptors. This temporal correlation of clinical effects with changes
in receptor sensitivity has given rise to the hypothesis that changes in neurotransmitter receptor sensitivity may actually mediate the
clinical effects of drugs used for depression. These clinical effects include not only antidepressant and anxiolytic actions but also the
development of tolerance to the acute side effects.

266


<<<PAGE 283>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

Neurotransmitter Receptor Hypothesis
of Antidepressant Action

E

E

6
A

B

Figure 6-26 Neurotransmitter receptor hypothesis of antidepressant action. Although drugs for depression cause an immediate
increase in monoamines, they do not have immediate therapeutic effects. This may be explained by the monoamine receptor hypothesis
of depression, which states that depression is caused by upregulation of monoamine receptors; thus, clinical antidepressant effects
would be related to downregulation of those receptors, as shown here. (A) When the monoamine reuptake pump is blocked, this causes
more neurotransmitter (in this case, norepinephrine) to accumulate in the synapse. (B) The increased availability of neurotransmitter
ultimately causes receptors to downregulate. The time course of receptor adaptation is consistent both with the delayed clinical effects
of drugs for depression and with development of tolerance to side effects.

Monoamine Signaling Increases BDNF Release, Which
Modifies Monoamine Innervation
monoamine

GE
2

synaptogenesis
PKA

CaMK

BDNF

CREB

neuroplasticity

Figure 6-27 Monoamine signaling and brainderived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) release. The
neuroprogression hypothesis of depression
states that depression may be caused by reduced
synthesis of proteins involved in neurogenesis and
synaptic plasticity. BDNF promotes the growth
and development of immature neurons, including
monoaminergic neurons, enhances the survival
and function of adult neurons, and helps maintain
synaptic connections. Because BDNF is important
for neuronal survival, decreased levels may
contribute to cell atrophy. In some cases, low levels
of BDNF may even cause cell loss. Monoamines
can increase the availability of BDNF by initiating
signal transduction cascades that lead to its release.
Thus, increased synaptic availability of monoamines
by reuptake inhibitors may lead to downstream
increases in neurotrophic factors, a molecular effect
that would correlate in timing with the clinical
effects.

cell
survival

neurogenesis

267


<<<PAGE 284>>>
chronic clinical
illness
sleep
stress

inflammation
early life adversity

microbiome

BDNF
gene

Figure 6-28 Genetic and environmental factors may
lead to loss of neurotrophic factors. Neurotrophic
factors such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF) play a role in the proper growth and
maintenance of neurons and neuronal connections.
Multiple environmental factors, including chronic
stress, inflammation, chronic illness, early life adversity,
changes in the microbiome, and altered sleep could
contribute to neuroprogression in depression by
causing epigenetic changes that turn the genes for
BDNF off, potentially reducing its production.

BDNF

BDNF

apoptosis

268

BDNF

Figure 6-29 Suppression of brainderived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
production. BDNF plays a role in the
proper growth and maintenance of
neurons and neuronal connections (right).
If the genes for BDNF are turned off (left),
the resultant decrease in BDNF could
compromise the brain’s ability to create and
maintain neurons and their connections.
This could lead to loss of synapses or even
whole neurons by apoptosis.


<<<PAGE 285>>>
coronal plane

coronal plane

6
normal

depression

Figure 6-30 Loss of dendritic spines in depression. Reduction in neurotrophic factors compromises the maintenance of synaptic
integrity and connectivity and can ultimately lead to synapse loss. This has been shown in structural magnetic resonance imaging
studies of hippocampal volume, in which patients with depression have fewer dendritic spines.

Symptomatic Brain Network

Vulnerability to relapse
Treatment resistance

inflammation

oxidative
stress

HPA
dysregulation

Neuroprogression

epigenetic
change

neurotrophic
dysregulation

Functional brain abnormalities

Damage to synapses
and neurons

Structural brain abnormalities
Cognitive decline
Figure 6-31 Neuroprogression in depression is multifactorial. Neuroprogression in depression may be related to multiple factors that
may themselves interact. Inflammation, oxidative stress, and dysregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis may all
contribute to neurotrophic dysregulation, which may lead to epigenetic changes, which may further exacerbate inflammation, oxidative
stress, and HPA axis dysfunction. All these factors may ultimately contribute to damage to synapses and neurons, which may lead to
both functional and structural brain abnormalities.

269


<<<PAGE 286>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

may contribute to neurodegeneration (Figures 6-31,
6-32A, and 6-32B). Neurons from the hippocampal area
and amygdala normally suppress the HPA axis (Figure
6-32A), so if stress causes hippocampal and amygdala
neurons to atrophy, with loss of their inhibitory input to
the hypothalamus, this could lead to overactivity of the
HPA axis (Figure 6-32B). In depression, abnormalities
of the HPA axis have long been reported, including
elevated glucocorticoid and insensitivity of the HPA axis
to feedback inhibition (Figure 6-32B). Some evidence
suggests that glucocorticoids at high levels could even be
toxic to neurons and contribute to their atrophy under
chronic stress (Figure 6-32B). Novel antidepressant
treatments are in testing that target CRF (corticotropinreleasing factor) receptors, vasopressin 1B receptors, and
glucocorticoid receptors (Figure 6-32B), in an attempt
to halt and even reverse these HPA abnormalities in
depression and other stress-related psychiatric illnesses.

Yet another factor potentially contributing to
neurodegeneration in at least a subset of patients with
depression is neuroinflammation (Figure 6-33). That
is, a number of conditions and factors contribute to
inflammation invading the central nervous system in
a number of psychiatric disorders, maybe especially
in depression (Figure 6-33). Those factors include not
only chronic stress, but also obesity, early life/childhood
adversity, disruption of the microbiome, and numerous
chronic inflammatory medical illnesses (Figure 6-33A).
In such patients, it is hypothesized that these factors
activate microglia in the brain to release proinflammatory
molecules (Figure 6-33B), which in turn attract immune
cells such as monocytes and macrophages into the brain
(Figure 6-33C) where they disrupt neurotransmission
(Figure 6-33D), cause oxidative chemical stress,
mitochondrial dysfunction, HPA-axis dysfunction,
reduction of neurotrophic factor availability, and

The Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA) Axis

hypothalamus

adrenal
gland

i

ort

coc

glu

corticotropinreleasing
factor

ds
coi
amygdala
hippocampus

ACTH

pituitary

Figure 6-32A Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. The normal stress response involves activation of the hypothalamus and a
resultant increase in corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), which in turn stimulates the release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
from the pituitary. ACTH causes glucocorticoid release from the adrenal gland, which feeds back to the hypothalamus and inhibits CRF
release, terminating the stress response. The amygdala and hippocampus also provide input to the hypothalamus, to suppress activation
of the HPA axis.

270


<<<PAGE 287>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

Hippocampal Atrophy and Hyperactive HPA in Depression

glucocorticoid
antagonist

CRF
antagonist

hypothalamus

corticotropinreleasing
factor

ids

co

co

glu
adrenal
gland

o
rtic

amygdala
hippocampus

6
pituitary

ACTH
vasopressin 1B
antagonist

Figure 6-32B Hippocampal atrophy and hyperactive HPA axis in depression. In situations of chronic stress, hyperactivity of the HPA
axis leads to excessive glucocorticoid release, which may eventually cause hippocampal atrophy. Because the hippocampus inhibits
the HPA axis, atrophy in this region may lead to chronic activation of the HPA axis, which may increase risk of developing a psychiatric
illness. Because the HPA axis is central to stress processing, it may be that novel targets for treating stress-induced disorders lie within
the axis. Mechanisms being examined include antagonism of glucocorticoid receptors, corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) receptors,
and vasopressin 1B receptors.

epigenetic changes to unwanted gene expression (Figure
6-31), leading ultimately to loss of synapses and death of
neurons (Figure 6-31 and 6-33D).
Another hypothesis for the neurobiological basis
at least for some patients with depression is that it is a
circadian rhythm disorder casing a phase delay in the
sleep–wakefulness cycle (Figure 6-34). The degree of this
phase delay correlates with the severity of depression.
Numerous physiological measurements of circadian
rhythms are also altered in depression, from flattening
of the daily body-temperature cycle, elevation of
cortisol secretion throughout the day, and also reducing
melatonin secretion that also normally peaks at night
and in the dark (Figure 6-35). Elevations of cortisol
secretion and abnormalities of the HPA axis in depression
are discussed above (Figures 6-32A and B). Other
circadian rhythms that may be disrupted in depression
include a reduction in BDNF and neurogenesis, also

discussed above, and these normally peak at night.
Desynchronization of biological processes can be so
pervasive in depression that it is possible to characterize
depression as fundamentally a circadian illness. It is
possible, at least for some patients, that depression is due
to a “broken” circadian clock. Numerous genes operate in
a circadian manner, sensitive to light–dark rhythms and
called clock genes. Abnormalities in various clock genes
have been linked to mood disorders and for these patients
with a circadian rhythm disorder (Figure 6-34), circadian
rhythm treatments such as bright light (Figure 6-36A),
melatonin (Figure 6-36B), phase advance, phase delay,
and even sleep deprivation can have therapeutic effects.
Not only do all of these various factors triggered by
neuroinflammation, stress, genetics, and the environment
(Figures 6-28, 6-30, 6-31, and 6-33) contribute to
synaptic dysfunction and structural brain abnormalities
with functional decline, theoretically they ultimately
271


<<<PAGE 288>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Microbiome

Chronic stress

Blood

Early life
childhood
adversity

Brain

Chronic
mental illness
monocyte
resting
microglia

Obesity
macrophage

A

Sleep

Genes

Blood

Brain
cytokines

monocyte

activated
microglia
macrophage

B
Figure 6-33 Neuroinflammation in depression. Neurodegeneration in depression could be related to the development of
neuroinflammation in some patients. (A) Chronic stress, obesity, early life adversity, disruption of the microbiome, chronic sleep issues,
and chronic inflammatory diseases may all contribute to the development of neuroinflammation. Shown here are immune factors in the
blood and resting microglia in the brain. (B) If microglia in the brain are activated due to chronic stress, obesity, etc., they can release
proinflammatory cytokines.

lead to at least three very unwanted clinical outcomes in
depression:
enduring cognitive decline
increased vulnerability for further episodes of depression
resistance to treatment with monoamine drugs for
depression
272

Major depressive episodes of course are named for their
mood symptom of sadness and depression, and indeed
sad mood has the strongest association with overall
impairment of functioning, but the second strongest
association with impaired overall functioning is cognitive
symptoms, perhaps a bit surprising for something


<<<PAGE 289>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

Blood

Brain

Blood

Brain

C

6

synaptic and
neuronal damage

D

Figure 6-33 (cont.) (C) Proinflammatory cytokines attract immune cells, such as monocytes and macrophages, into the brain. (D)
Monocytes and macrophages can disrupt neurotransmission, cause oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction, affect HPA-axis
function, reduce availability of neurotrophic factors, and lead to epigenetic changes, which ultimately can lead to synaptic loss and
neuronal death.

called a “mood disorder” and not a “cognitive disorder.”
Functional neuroimaging studies suggest that cognitive
decline may manifest in the need for more effortful
thinking because depressed patients show greater
activation of brain regions involved in cognitive control,
such as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and anterior
cingulate cortex. Hippocampal decline in depression
is discussed above and illustrated in Figure 6-30, and
is correlated with duration of untreated depression.

Depressed patients with smaller hippocampal volumes
have worse outcomes. A grim statistic is that memory
in depression worsens as a function of the number of
previous depressive episodes as though such episodes
are damaging to the brain and the damage is cumulative.
Interestingly, to support this haunting possibility is the
observation that cognitive dysfunction in depression may
be related to the number of past episodes of depression
and to the duration of those episodes, and not to the
273


<<<PAGE 290>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Depression Causes Phase Delay in the Circadian Rhythms
of Sleep-Wake Cycles
“phase delay”

Healthy Control

Depression
sleep
11 pm
7 am

7 am

sleep
11 pm

7 am

Cortisol (ng/ml)

Body Temperature
( C)

Physiological Measurements of Circadian Rhythms
Are Altered in Depression
37.2

Healthy Control

37.0
36.8

Depression

36.6
36.4
220
170
120
70
20

Melatonin (pg/ml)

Figure 6-34 Depression can cause
phase delay in circadian rhythms
of sleep/wake cycles. Circadian
rhythms describe events that occur
on a 24-hour cycle. Many biological
systems follow a circadian rhythm; in
particular, circadian rhythms are key to
the regulation of sleep/wake cycles. In
patients with depression, the circadian
rhythm is often “phase delayed,” which
means that because wakefulness is
not promoted in the morning, such
patients tend to sleep later. They also
have trouble falling asleep at night,
which further promotes feelings of
sleepiness during the day.

100

Figure 6-35 Physiological
measurements of circadian rhythms
are altered in some patients with
depression. Circadian rhythms
are evident in multiple biological
functions, including body temperature,
hormone levels, blood pressure,
metabolism, cellular regeneration,
sleep/wake cycles, and DNA
transcription and translation. The
internal coordination ordered by
the circadian rhythm is essential to
optimal health. In depression, there are
altered physiological measurements
of circadian rhythms, including less
fluctuation in body temperature over
the course of a 24-hour cycle, the same
pattern but elevated cortisol levels
over 24 hours, and the absence of a
spike in melatonin levels at night.

80
60
40
20

6 am

noon

6 pm

midnight

6 am

severity of the symptoms in a current episode, again
suggesting past damage. Cognitive symptoms are one of
the most – if not the most – common residual symptom
between depressive episodes once sadness and other
symptoms recover. Thus, cognitive symptoms can
endure longer than mood symptoms in major depressive
disorder.
How bad is the cognitive dysfunction? Some
estimate that it is about the same degree of impairment
as one has after a night of sleep deprivation, or after
being legally intoxicated with alcohol, or after taking
274

noon

a high dose of a benzodiazepine or antihistamine.
Can you imagine living all day long, every day, with
this degree of cognitive impairment? Cognitive
dysfunction of this degree is not specific for patients
with depression, but is very common across many
psychiatric disorders, from unipolar to bipolar
disorder, schizophrenia, anxiety/trauma/impulsive
disorders, ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder), and beyond. Targeting cognitive symptoms
with current treatments across psychiatric disorders
is therefore an important therapeutic strategy, and


<<<PAGE 291>>>
retinohypothalamic
tract
SCN

pineal
gland

6
Figure 6-36A The setting of circadian rhythms, part 1. Although various factors can affect the setting of circadian rhythms, light is the
most powerful synchronizer. When light enters through the eye it is translated via the retinohypothalamic tract to the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) within the hypothalamus. The SCN, in turn, signals the pineal gland to turn off melatonin production. For individuals with
depression who have dysregulation of circadian rhythms, bright-light therapy in the early morning may help to reset the circadian rhythm.
Figure 6-36B Melatonin and
circadian rhythms. During
darkness, there is no input from
the retinohypothalamic tract to
the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN)
within the hypothalamus. Thus,
signals the pineal gland
melatonin darkness
to produce melatonin. Melatonin,
in turn, can act on the SCN to reset
circadian rhythms. For individuals
with depression who have
dysregulated circadian rhythms,
melatonin in the early evening may
help to reset the circadian rhythm.

retinohypothalamic
tract
SCN

pineal
gland

275


<<<PAGE 292>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

a critical need for better drugs for cognition exists.
In the meantime, perhaps the best chance to prevent
adverse cognitive and functional outcomes in
depression is to treat early and completely, whenever
possible.
Changes in structural and functional outcomes in
depression in fact may be potentially reversible when
captured at the stage of loss of synapses without loss
of neurons, and that is what rapid-acting drugs for
depression, which act on glutamate and GABA systems,
hold promise for doing: namely, triggering the formation
of new synapses. These drugs are discussed in Chapter 7.
Here we will just mention that downstream improvement
in neuroplasticity may be possible for monoaminetargeting drugs when those drugs are effective. More
recently it has been discovered that improvements in
animal models of neuroplasticity can be observed after
boosting glutamatergic neurotransmission with novel
drugs for depression (Figure 6-37). It is possible that this

may also be occurring with the novel GABAergic drugs
currently being developed. If so, these newer agents have
the potential for rapid onset of an antidepressant effect
since their molecular effects (Figure 6-37) can reverse
synaptic loss and show new synapse formation within
minutes to hours (reversal of synapse loss is shown in
depression in Figure 6-30; see also Chapter 7). It is also
possible that agents targeting glutamate, GABA, and
other non-monoaminergic targets will hold promise for
treating patients who do not respond to monoaminergic
therapeutics. Restoration of neurotransmitterrelated signal transduction cascades by drugs of any
mechanism that can successfully treat depression can
also hypothetically increase BDNF and other trophic
factors and therefore potentially restore lost synapses.
In some brain areas, such as the hippocampus, not only
can synapses potentially be restored, but it is possible
that some lost neurons might even be replaced by
neurogenesis.

Downstream Improvement in Neuroplasticity
with Novel Drugs for Depression
Glutamate
regulation

Monoamine
regulation

DA

5HT

GABA
regulation

NE

Signaling cascades

MAPK

RSK

cAMP

PKC

Wnt/Frz

GSK-3

Activation of cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB)

Genes turned on

BDNF
BDNF

Increased
expression of
AMPA receptor
subunits

Downregulation
of NMDA
receptors

BDNF
BDNF

Increased
proteins
involved in
neuroplasticity

Increased neuroplasticity and restored neurotransmission

276

CaMK

Figure 6-37 Downstream effects on
neuroplasticity. In depression, there
may be a deficiency in downstream
signal transduction, leading to reduced
synthesis of proteins involved in
neurogenesis and synaptic plasticity,
such as brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF). Treatment with drugs
for depression, both traditional
monoamine reuptake inhibitors as well
as novel agents that affect glutamate
or GABA, can stimulate a variety
of signaling cascades. Each of the
signaling cascades depicted is capable
of activating cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB), which can elicit
the expression of numerous genes
involved in neuroplasticity, including
BDNF. Another form of synaptic
plasticity, long-term potentiation
(LTP), involves the strengthening of
synapses through the modulation of
glutamate receptors. The activation
of CREB increases the expression
of α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4isoxazole-propionic acid (AMPA)
receptor subunits and downregulates
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptors. Modifying the AMPA:NMDA
receptor ratio by increasing AMPA while
reducing NMDA input may restore
glutamate homeostasis and facilitate
neuroplasticity in the depressed brain.


<<<PAGE 293>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

psychiatric disorders. That strategy also involves rational
use of the available drugs that are known to target
the regulation of those same neurotransmitters, and,
therefore, to target improvement of the symptoms those
neurotransmitters regulate.
Let’s now explain how this strategy works. Each of
the nine symptoms listed for the diagnosis of a major
depressive episode can be mapped onto brain circuits
whose inefficient information processing theoretically
mediates these symptoms (compare Figure 6-1 and
Figure 6-38). Each of the symptoms listed for the
diagnosis of a manic episode can similarly be mapped
onto some of these same but also some different brain
circuits (compare Figure 6-2 and 6-39). Note the
innervation of these various brain areas by the three
monoamine neurotransmitter systems (Figure 6-40).
Glutamate and GABA are ubiquitous throughout
essentially every area of the brain. This pattern of
monoamine innervation provides the opportunity to
target various neurotransmitters in order to improve the
efficiency of information processing in these brain areas,
and thus, reduce symptoms. Each node in the networks
regulating psychiatric symptoms has neurotransmitters
distributed to it in a unique if partially overlapping
pattern that regulates each specific hypothetically
malfunctioning brain region (see Figures 6-38 through
6-40). Targeting each region with drugs which act on

SYMPTOMS AND CIRCUITS IN
MOOD DISORDERS
Currently, a major hypothesis in psychiatry is that
psychiatric symptoms are linked to inefficient
information processing in specific brain circuits, with
different circuits mediating different symptoms according
to an evolving understanding of the topographical
distribution of different functions across different brain
regions, sometimes called nodes, and across different
brain circuits, with connections forming networks. If
possibly reductionistic and oversimplified, the theoretical
notion is to associate specific nodes in the network with
specific psychiatric symptoms. Here we will discuss how
this idea might apply to doing this for the nine symptoms
of a major depressive episode (Figure 6-1) and the nine
symptoms of a manic episode (Figure 6-2).
Why do this if our information is still incomplete
and evolving about domains of psychopathology and the
circuits underlying them? It is because it helps us better
understand the presenting symptoms of our patients as
well as their symptoms that persist after treatment. The
goal of this approach is to have a strategy for relieving
all symptoms in order to get to complete remission, and
to do so as rationally as possible based upon how those
specific circuits are currently thought to be regulated
by neurotransmitters in normal functioning and in

Match Each Diagnostic Symptom for a Major Depressive
Episode to Hypothetically Malfunctioning Brain Circuits

concentration
interest/pleasure

pleasure
interests
fatigue/
energy

psychomotor
fatigue (physical)

psychomotor
fatigue (mental)

PFC

guilt
suicidality
worthlessness

S
NA

T

BF

Hy
C
NT

A

psychomotor

H

mood

Figure 6-38 Matching depression
symptoms to circuits. Alterations in
neuronal activity and in the efficiency
of information processing within
each of the brain regions shown here
can lead to symptoms of a major
depressive episode. Functionality in
each brain region is hypothetically
associated with a different constellation
of symptoms. PFC, prefrontal cortex;
BF, basal forebrain; S, striatum; NA,
nucleus accumbens; T, thalamus;
Hy, hypothalamus; A, amygdala;
H, hippocampus; NT, brainstem
neurotransmitter centers; SC, spinal
cord; C, cerebellum.

guilt
suicidality
worthlessness
mood

SC

fatigue (physical)

sleep
appetite

277

6


<<<PAGE 294>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Match Each Diagnostic Symptom for a Manic Episode
to Hypothetically Malfunctioning Brain Circuits

racing thoughts
grandiosity
distractibility
talkative/pressured speech

racing thoughts
goal-directed
grandiosity

PFC
decreased
sleep/arousal

motor/agitation
decreased sleep/arousal

S
NA

Figure 6-39 Matching mania
symptoms to circuits. Alterations
in neurotransmission within each of
the brain regions shown here can be
hypothetically linked to the various
symptoms of a manic episode.
Functionality in each brain region
may be associated with a different
constellation of symptoms. PFC,
prefrontal cortex; BF, basal forebrain;
S, striatum; NA, nucleus accumbens;
T, thalamus; Hy, hypothalamus; A,
amygdala; H, hippocampus; NT,
brainstem neurotransmitter centers; SC,
spinal cord; C, cerebellum.

T

BF

Hy
C

mood
risks
grandiosity
talkative/pressured speech
racing thoughts

NT

A
H

SC

mood
decreased sleep/arousal

the relevant neurotransmitters that regulate those brain
regions potentially leads to reduction of each individual
symptom. The idea is that whenever adjustment of
specific neurotransmitter-mediated neurotransmission
can enhance the efficiency of information processing
in the hypothetically malfunctioning circuits for each
specific symptom, it will relieve that symptom. If
successful, this targeting of neurotransmitters in specific
brain areas could even eliminate all symptoms and cause
a major depressive episode to go into remission.
Many of the mood-related symptoms of depression
can be categorized as having either too little positive
affect or too much negative affect (Figure 6-41). This
idea is linked to the fact that there are diffuse anatomic
connections of monoamines throughout the brain, with
diffuse dopamine dysfunction in this system driving
predominantly the reduction of positive affect, diffuse
serotonin dysfunction driving predominantly the increase
in negative affect, and norepinephrine dysfunction
being involved in both. Thus, reduced positive affect
includes such symptoms as depressed mood but also
loss of happiness, joy, interest, pleasure, alertness,
energy, enthusiasm, and self-confidence (Figure 6-41,
left). Enhancing dopamine function and possibly also
norepinephrine function may improve information
processing in the circuits mediating this cluster of
symptoms. On the other hand, increased negative affect
includes not only depressed mood but guilt, disgust,
278

fear, anxiety, hostility, irritability, and loneliness (Figure
6-41, right). Enhancing serotonin function, and possibly
also norepinephrine function, may improve information
processing in the circuits that hypothetically mediate this
cluster of symptoms. For patients with symptoms of both
clusters, they may require triple-action treatments that
boost all three of the monoamines.
The same general paradigm of neurotransmitter
regulation of the efficiency of information processing
in specific brain circuits can be applied to mania and to
mixed states as well as depression. Although a simplistic
notion is that the circuit problem in mania may be the
opposite of that for depression, namely too much in
mania versus too little neurotransmitter and neuronal
activity in depression, the reality is that you can have
manic and depressive symptoms at the same time,
and can traverse the entire mood spectrum from full
depression, with increasing amounts of mania, until
arriving at pure mania (Figure 6-7). A more sophisticated
and modern notion of mood disorder is that neuronal
transmission in inefficient brain circuits may be chaotic
and not just too high or too low. The illustrations drawn
in this chapter sometimes imply there is a single neuron
going from one node to another in the network (see for
example Figure 6-40), but the reality is that each node
in the network is connected by a vast bundle of neurons,
and not all of them are hypothetically functioning
the same way in a mood disorder. Some may have


<<<PAGE 295>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

PFC

S
NA

T

BF

Hy
C

A

NT

H
A

SC

Figure 6-40 Major monoamine projections. (A) Dopamine has
widespread ascending projections that originate predominantly
in the brainstem (particularly the ventral tegmental area and
substantia nigra) and extend via the hypothalamus to the prefrontal
cortex, basal forebrain, striatum, nucleus accumbens, and other
regions. Dopaminergic neurotransmission is associated with
movement, pleasure and reward, cognition, psychosis, and other
functions. In addition, there are direct projections from other
sites to the thalamus, creating the “thalamic dopamine system,”
which may be involved in arousal and sleep. (B) Norepinephrine
has both ascending and descending projections. Ascending
noradrenergic projections originate mainly in the locus coeruleus
of the brainstem; they extend to multiple brain regions, as shown
here, and regulate mood, arousal, cognition, and other functions.
Descending noradrenergic projections extend down the spinal
cord and regulate pain pathways. (C) Like norepinephrine,
serotonin has both ascending and descending projections.
Ascending serotonergic projections originate mainly in the raphe
nucleus in the brainstem and extend to many of the same regions
as noradrenergic projections. These ascending projections may
regulate mood, anxiety, sleep, and other functions. Descending
serotonergic projections extend down the brainstem and through
the spinal cord; they may regulate pain. PFC, prefrontal cortex; BF,
basal forebrain; S, striatum; NA, nucleus accumbens; T, thalamus;
Hy, hypothalamus; A, amygdala; H, hippocampus; NT, brainstem
neurotransmitter centers; SC, spinal cord; C, cerebellum.

6
PFC

S
NA

T

BF

Hy
C
NT

A
H

SC

next, but even within an episode over time. This situation
presents a challenge to find treatments that can stabilize
rather than simply increase or reduce neurotransmitter
action. Treatments for mood disorders are discussed in
detail in Chapter 7.

B

Symptom-Based Treatment Selections

PFC

S
NA

T

BF

Hy
C
NT

A
H

SC
C

neurotransmission that is perhaps up, others down,
others normal, and still others vacillating chaotically from
up to down in activity. No wonder a patient can appear to
have varying symptoms of concomitant mania during a
full depressive episode, not only from one episode to the

The neurobiologically informed psychopharmacologist
may opt for a symptom-based approach to selecting or
combining a series of drugs for treatment of depression,
mania, and mixed states (Figures 6-42 through 6-44).
This strategy leads to the construction of a portfolio of
multiple psychopharmacological mechanisms in order
to treat all residual symptoms of a mood disorder until
the patient achieves sustained remission. Specific drugs
and treatment choices are discussed in Chapter 7. Here
we cover the rationale for thinking in neurobiological
terms, namely, the anatomy of brain circuits regulating
specific symptoms (Figures 6-38 and 6-39) and the
neurotransmitters that regulate the circuits (Figure 6-40).
The purpose of this approach is to apply understanding
of how a given drug works on neurotransmitters, so a
clinician can make rational treatment choices. Using
this approach, those treatment choices are based upon
addressing those specific symptoms of a given patient
by targeting the unique collection of hypothetically
malfunctioning brain circuits. This “tailored” approach
279


<<<PAGE 296>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

normal
mood
reduced
positive affect

+++
+

increased
negative affect

-

+

----

NE
NE

ysfun

5HT

dy

n

tio

nc

DA d

NE

sfu

sfu

dy

nc

NE

DA

depressed mood
guilt/disgust
fear/anxiety
hostility
irritability
loneliness

tio

n

depressed mood
loss of happiness (joy)
loss of interest/pleasure
loss of energy/enthusiasm
decreased alertness
decreased self-confidence

ction

5HT

ction
ysfun

d

Figure 6-41 Positive and negative affect. Mood-related symptoms of depression can be characterized by their affective expression –
that is, whether they cause a reduction in positive affect or an increase in negative affect. Symptoms related to reduced positive affect
include depressed mood; loss of happiness, interest, or pleasure; loss of energy or enthusiasm; decreased alertness; and decreased selfconfidence. Reduced positive affect may be hypothetically related to dopaminergic dysfunction, with a possible role of noradrenergic
dysfunction as well. Symptoms associated with increased negative affect include depressed mood, guilt, disgust, fear, anxiety, hostility,
irritability, and loneliness. Increased negative affect may be linked hypothetically to serotonergic dysfunction and perhaps also
noradrenergic dysfunction.

6-42 Symptom-based
Symptom-Based Algorithm for Treating Depression Part One: Figure
algorithm for treating depression,

Deconstructing Most Common Residual Diagnostic Symptoms

major depressive
disorder
fatigue
concentration
psychomotor

sleep

depressed
mood
interest/
pleasure

suicidality

280

guilt/
worthlessness

appetite/
weight

part 1. Shown here is the diagnosis
of major depressive disorder
deconstructed into its symptoms
(as defined by the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
fifth edition [DSM-5]). Of these, sleep
disturbances, problems concentrating,
and fatigue are the most common
residual symptoms.


<<<PAGE 297>>>
Chapter 6: Mood Disorders

attempts to address the individual patient’s needs and
thereby provide relief of the specific symptoms of that
individual patient rather than treating all patients with a
given diagnosis the same.
How is this approach implemented? First, symptoms
are evaluated and a diagnosis constructed by putting them
all together, but then that diagnosis is deconstructed into

a list of specific symptoms that the individual patient
is experiencing (Figure 6-42). Next, these symptoms
are matched with the brain circuits that hypothetically
mediate these symptoms (Figure 6-43) and then with the
known neuropharmacological regulation of these circuits
by neurotransmitters (Figure 6-44). Finally, available
treatment options that target these neuropharmacological

Symptom-Based Algorithm for
Treating Depression Part Two:

Match Most Common Residual Symptoms to
Hypothetically Malfunctioning Brain Circuits
interests
fatigue/energy

fatigue (physical)

concentration
interest

Figure 6-43 Symptom-based
algorithm for treating depression,
part 2. In this figure the most
common residual symptoms of major
depression are linked to hypothetically
malfunctioning brain circuits. Insomnia
maybe linked to the hypothalamus
(Hy), problems concentrating to the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC),
reduced interest to the PFC and
nucleus accumbens (NA), and fatigue
to the PFC, striatum (S), NA, and spinal
cord (SC).

fatigue (mental)

6
PFC

S
NA

Hy

SC

insomnia
fatigue (physical)

Symptom-Based Algorithm for Treating Depression Part Three:
Target Regulatory Neurotransmitters with Selected Pharmacological Mechanisms

fatigue

NE/DA

concentration

NE/DA
sleep

Boost NE or DA

Figure 6-44 Symptom-based
algorithm for treating depression,
part 3. Residual symptoms of
depression can be linked to the
neurotransmitters that regulate them
and then, in turn, to pharmacological
mechanisms. Fatigue and
concentration are regulated in large
part by norepinephrine (NE) and
dopamine (DA), and therefore may be
treated by agents that boost NE and/
or DA. Sleep disturbance is regulated
by serotonin (5HT), γ-aminobutyric
acid (GABA), and histamine (HA) and
can be treated with agents that boost
GABA or block 5HT or HA.

5HT/GABA/
histamine

Boost GABA
Block 5HT, HA

281


<<<PAGE 298>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

mechanisms are chosen to eliminate symptoms one by one
(Figure 6-44). When symptoms persist despite treatment,
another treatment with a different mechanism is added
or switched. No evidence proves that this is a superior
approach, but it appeals not only to clinical intuition but
also to neurobiological reasoning as well as to the goal of
individualizing psychopharmacological treatment rather
than treating all patients with the same diagnosis the same
way in the hope that this will lead to a better outcome.
For example, for the symptoms of “problems
concentrating” and “fatigue,” this approach suggests
targeting both NE and DA (Figure 6-44). This can also
call for stopping the use of a serotonergic medication if
this is partially the cause of these symptoms. On the other
hand, for “insomnia,” this symptom is hypothetically
associated with an entirely different malfunctioning
circuit regulated by different neurotransmitters (Figure
6-43); therefore, the treatments for this symptom call for
a different approach, namely the use of agents that act
on the GABA system or that work to block rather than
boost the serotonin or histamine system (Figure 6-44). It
is possible that any of the symptoms shown in Figure 6-44
would respond to whatever drug is administered, but
this symptom-based approach can tailor the treatment
portfolio to each individual patient, possibly finding
a faster way of reducing specific symptoms with more
tolerable treatment selections for that patient than a
purely random approach.
The symptom-based approach for selecting treatments
for depression can also be applied to treating common
associated symptoms of depression that are not
components of the formal diagnostic criteria, such as
anxiety and pain. Sometimes it is said that for a good
clinician to get patients into remission, it requires targeting
at least a dozen of the nine symptoms of a mood disorder!
Fortunately, psychiatric drug treatments do not
respect psychiatric disorders. Treatments that target
pharmacological mechanisms in specific brain circuits do
so no matter what psychiatric disorder is associated with
the symptom linked to that circuit. Thus, symptoms of
one psychiatric disorder may be treatable with a proven
agent that is known to treat the same symptom in another
psychiatric disorder. For example, anxiety can be reduced
in patients with major depression who do not have a
full-criteria anxiety disorder with the same serotonin and
GABA mechanisms proven to work in anxiety disorders
(see Chapter 8 on anxiety disorders and their treatments).
Painful physical symptoms can be treated with serotonin–
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) and other

282

approaches (see Chapter 9 on chronic pain and its
treatment).
In conclusion, the symptom-based algorithm for
selecting and combining treatments of mood disorders,
and using them to build a portfolio of mechanisms until
each symptom of a mood disorder is abolished, is the
modern psychopharmacologist’s approach to mental
illnesses in general and to mood disorders in particular.
This approach follows contemporary notions of
neurobiological disease and drug mechanisms, with the
goal of treatment being sustained remission.

SUMMARY
This chapter has described the mood disorders across
a spectrum from depression to mania with many
mixed states in between. For prognostic and treatment
considerations, it is important not only to distinguish
unipolar depression from bipolar depression, but also to
detect mixed states of subsyndromal mania or depression
whenever they exist. Although mood disorders are indeed
disorders of mood, they are much more, and several
different symptoms in addition to a mood symptom are
required to make a diagnosis of a major depressive episode
or a manic episode. The classic monoamine hypothesis
of depression, suggesting that dysfunction of one or more
of the three monoamines dopamine, norepinephrine, or
serotonin, or their receptors, may be linked to symptoms
in major depression, has been updated and expanded
to include the notion of abnormalities in neurotrophic
factors, sleep, circadian rhythms, neuroinflammation,
stress, genes, and the environment in the complex etiology
of mood disorders. Also discussed is the troubling notion
that mood disorders may be progressive, especially
if not adequately treated. Finally, each symptom of
a mood disorder can be matched to a hypothetically
malfunctioning neuronal circuit. Targeting one or
more of the neurotransmitters in specific brain regions
may improve the efficiency of information processing
there and reduce the symptom caused by that area’s
malfunctioning. Other brain areas associated with the
symptoms of a manic episode can similarly be mapped
to various hypothetically malfunctioning brain circuits.
Understanding the localization of symptoms in circuits, as
well as the neurotransmitters that regulate these circuits
in different brain regions, can set the stage for choosing
and combining treatments for each individual symptom
of a mood disorder, with the goal being to reduce all
symptoms and lead to remission.


<<<PAGE 299>>>
7

Treatments for Mood Disorders:
So-Called “Antidepressants” and
“Mood Stabilizers”

Definitions of Clinical Effects of Treatment in
Depression 284
How Well Do Classic Monoamine Reuptake
Blockers Work in Unipolar Depression? 285
Redefining “Mood Stabilizers”: A Labile Label 288
Drugs for Unipolar Depression 289
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
(SSRIs) 289
Serotonin Partial Agonist Reuptake Inhibitors
(SPARIs) 296
Serotonin–Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors
(SNRIs) 298
Norepinephrine–Dopamine Reuptake Inhibitors
(NDRIs): Bupropion 303
Agomelatine 306
Mirtazapine 308
Serotonin Antagonist/Reuptake Inhibitors
(SARIs) 311
Vortioxetine 315
Neuroactive Steroids 320
Treatment Resistance in Unipolar
Depression 323

In this chapter, we will review pharmacological
concepts underlying the use of drugs used to treat
mood disorders, from depression, to mixed states,
to mania. These agents have classically been called
“antidepressants” and “mood stabilizers” but this
terminology is now considered out of date and confusing
since not all drugs classically called “antidepressants”
are used to treat all forms of depression – especially
not bipolar depression or depression with mixed
features. Furthermore, many of the classic so-called
“antidepressants” are also used to treat a whole range of
disorders from anxiety disorders, to eating disorders,
traumatic disorders, obsessive compulsive and impulsive
disorders, pain, and beyond. Finally, many of the drugs
used for psychosis and discussed extensively in Chapter
5 are used even more commonly to treat depression,
unipolar, bipolar, and mixed depression, as well as
mania, yet are not generally classed as “antidepressants”

Choosing Treatment for Treatment Resistance in
Depression on the Basis of Genetic Testing 323
Augmenting Strategies for Unipolar
Depression 325
Second-Line Monotherapies Used for TreatmentResistant Depression 333
Drugs for Bipolar Disorder Spectrum 338
Serotonin/Dopamine Blockers: Not Just for
Psychosis and Psychotic Mania 338
Lithium, the Classic “Antimanic” and “Mood
Stabilizer” 345
Anticonvulsants as “Mood Stabilizers” 346
Anticonvulsants with Proven Efficacy in Bipolar
Disorder 347
Combinations are the Standard for Treating Bipolar
Disorder 353
Future Treatments for Mood Disorders 353
Dextromethorphan–Bupropion and
Dextromethorphan–Quinidine 353
Dextromethadone 355
Hallucinogen-Assisted Psychotherapy 355
Summary 358

although they are certainly “drugs for depression.” To
eliminate confusion about how to discuss categories
of drugs, throughout this textbook we strive to utilize
modern neuroscience-based nomenclature, where drugs
are named for their pharmacological mechanism of
action and not for their clinical indication.
Thus, drugs discussed in this chapter have
“antidepressant action” but are not called
“antidepressants.” Other drugs have mood-stabilizing and
antimanic action but are not called “mood stabilizers.”
What is a “mood stabilizer”? Originally, a mood stabilizer
was a drug that treated mania and prevented recurrence
of mania, thus “stabilizing” the manic pole of bipolar
disorder. Others use this term for a drug that treats
depression and recurrence of depression in bipolar
disorder thus stabilizing the depressed pole of bipolar
disorder. Rather than use the term for stabilizing either
mania or depression, here we will use terms to describe

283


<<<PAGE 300>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

and categorize agents that treat bipolar disorder based
upon presumed mechanism of therapeutic action.
This chapter will review some of the most extensively
prescribed psychotropic agents in psychiatry today,
namely those that target neurotransmitter transporters,
receptors, and ion channels. The goal of this chapter is to
acquaint the reader with current and evolving ideas about
how the various drugs used to treat disorders of mood
work. We will explain the mechanisms of action of these
drugs by building upon general pharmacological concepts
introduced in earlier chapters. We will also discuss
concepts about how to use these drugs in clinical practice,
including strategies for what to do if initial treatments
fail and how to rationally combine one drug with another.
Finally, we will introduce the reader to several new agents
targeting mood disorders, which have recently been
approved or are in clinical development.
Our discussion of drugs for the treatment of mood
disorders in this chapter is at the conceptual level, and
not at the pragmatic level. The reader should consult
standard drug handbooks (such as the companion Stahl’s
Essential Psychopharmacology: the Prescriber’s Guide)
for details of doses, side effects, drug interactions, and
other issues relevant to the prescribing of these drugs in
clinical practice. Here we will discuss putting together a
“portfolio” of two or more mechanisms of action, often
requiring more than one drug, as a strategy for patients
who have not responded to single pharmacological
mechanisms. This treatment strategy for mood disorders
is very different than that for schizophrenia, discussed
in Chapter 5, where single antipsychotic drugs as
treatments are the rule and the expected improvement in

HYPOMANIA
MIXED FEATURES OF MANIA
response
MIXED FEATURES OF DEPRESSION
response
50%

medication treatment

284

symptomatology may be only 20% to 30% reduction of
symptoms, with few, if any, patients with schizophrenia
becoming truly asymptomatic. By contrast, in mood
disorders there is a greater chance to reach a genuine
state of sustained and asymptomatic remission and the
challenge for those who treat these patients is to help
them attain this best outcome whenever possible. That
is the reason for learning the mechanisms of action of
so many drugs, the complex biological rationale for
combining specific sets of drugs, and the practical tactics
for tailoring a unique drug treatment portfolio to fit the
needs of an individual patient.

DEFINITIONS OF CLINICAL
EFFECTS OF TREATMENT IN
DEPRESSION
For patients who have a major depressive episode,
unipolar, bipolar, or mixed, and who receive treatment
and improve to the level 50% reduction of symptoms
or more, this outcome is called a response (Figure 7-1).
This used to be the goal of treatment with drugs for
depression: namely, reduce symptoms substantially, and
by at least 50%. However, the paradigm for depression
treatment has shifted dramatically in recent years so
that now the goal is complete remission of symptoms
(Figure 7-2), and maintaining that level of improvement
so that the patient’s major depressive episode does not
relapse shortly after remission, nor does the patient have
a recurrent episode in the future (Figure 7-3). Given the
known limits to the efficacy of available drugs to treat
depression, especially when multiple treatment options
Figure 7-1 Response in
depression. When treatment of a
major depressive episode results in at
least 50% improvement in symptoms,
it is called a response. Such patients
are better but not well. Previously, this
was considered the goal of depression
treatment.


<<<PAGE 301>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Figure 7-2 Remission in
depression. When treatment of major
depressive episode results in removal
of essentially all symptoms, it is called
remission for the first several months
and then recovery if it is sustained
for longer than several months. Such
patients are not just better – they are
well. However, they are not cured, since
depression can still recur. Remission
and recovery are now the goals when
treating patients with depression.

HYPOMANIA
remission recovery
MIXED FEATURES OF MANIA
100%
MIXED FEATURES OF DEPRESSION

medication
treatment
time

acute
6-12 continuation maintenance
weeks 4-9 months 1 or more years
Figure 7-3 Relapse and recurrence
in depression. When depression
returns before there is a full remission
of symptoms or within the first
several months following remission of
symptoms, it is called a relapse. When
depression returns after a patient has
recovered, it is called a recurrence.

HYPOMANIA

relapse
recurrence
MIXED FEATURES OF MANIA

MIXED FEATURES OF DEPRESSION

medication
treatment
time

acute
6-12 continuation maintenance
weeks 4-9 months 1 or more years

are not deployed aggressively and early in the course
of this illness, the goal of sustained remission can be
difficult to reach. Unfortunately, remission is usually not
reached with the first agent chosen to treat depression.

HOW WELL DO CLASSIC
MONOAMINE REUPTAKE
BLOCKERS WORK IN UNIPOLAR
DEPRESSION?
The mechanism of action of drugs for unipolar
depression is predominantly inhibition of monoamine
reuptake as explained in detail in the following several
sections. Before tackling the mechanism, we can ask, how
well do they work? Real-world trials suggest that only a

third of patients with unipolar depression remit on their
first treatment with a drug from this class, and even after
about a year of total treatment with a sequence of four
different drugs for unipolar depression, each given for 12
weeks, only about two-thirds of patients with unipolar
depression ever achieve remission of their symptoms
(Figure 7-4).
If patients do not fully remit after treatment, what
are the most common symptoms that persist? The
answer is shown in Figure 7-5, and the symptoms
include insomnia, fatigue, multiple painful physical
complaints (even though these are not part of the formal
diagnostic criteria for depression), cognitive problems
including difficulty concentrating, and lack of interest or
motivation. Drugs for unipolar depression often appear
285

7


<<<PAGE 302>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

What Proportion of Unipolar Major Depressive Episodes Remit?

HYPOMANIA
MIXED FEATURES OF MANIA
33%
20%
6-7%

67% remission
after 4
6-7% treatments

Figure 7-4 Remission rates in unipolar
depression. Approximately one-third
of patients with unipolar depression
will remit during treatment with any
treatment initially. Unfortunately, for
those who fail to remit, the likelihood
of remission with another monotherapy
goes down with each successive trial.
Thus, after a year of treatment with four
sequential monotherapies taken for 12
weeks each, only two-thirds of patients
will have achieved remission.

MIXED FEATURES OF DEPRESSION

67%

47%

40%

33% nonremitters
after 4 treatments

3 months 3 months 3 months
treatment #1 treatment #2 treatment #3 treatment #4

What Are the Most Common Residual Symptoms in Nonremitters?

HYPOMANIA
MIXED FEATURES OF
MANIA
complete
remission 33%
residual OF DEPRESSION
MIXED FEATURES
symptoms 67%
least
common
most
common

Figure 7-5 Common residual
symptoms. In patients who do not
achieve remission, the most common
residual symptoms are insomnia,
fatigue, painful physical complaints,
problems concentrating, and lack of
interest. The least common residual
symptoms are depressed mood,
suicidal ideation, and psychomotor
retardation.

depressed mood
suicidal ideation
psychomotor
retardation
insomnia
fatigue/pain
concentration/
interest

treatment

to work better in improving depressed mood, suicidal
ideation, and psychomotor retardation (Figure 7-5).
Why should we care whether a patient is in remission
from major depression or has just a few persistent
symptoms? Part of the answer can be found in Chapter
6 in the discussion of neuroprogression from persisting
symptoms to loss of synapses, loss of neurons, and
treatment resistance (Figures 6-11, 6-28 through 6-33).
The other part of the answer can be found in Figure 7-6,
which illustrates the evolution of treatment resistance
over time, mostly because symptoms persist or return. On
the one hand, Figure 7-6 shows that if a drug for unipolar
depression gets your patient into remission, that patient
has a significantly lower relapse rate than if no treatment
286

was given at all. On the other hand, the bad news is that
there are still very frequent relapses in the remitters, and
these relapse rates are more frequent and come quicker
the more treatments the patient needs in order to get into
remission (Figure 7-6).
Data like these have galvanized researchers and
clinicians alike to treat patients to the point of remission of
all symptoms whenever possible, and to try to intervene as
early as possible in this illness of unipolar major depression,
not only to be merciful in trying to relieve current
suffering from all depressive symptoms, but also because
of the possibility that aggressive treatment may prevent
disease progression (see Chapter 6 and Figures 6-11, 6-28
through 6-33). The concept of disease progression in


<<<PAGE 303>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

What Proportion of Unipolar Major Depressive Episodes Relapse?
0%

after 1 treatment

0%

after 2 treatments

in remission
in remission

relapse
rate

not
in remission
60%

relapse
rate

33%
not
in remission

50%

67%

100%

100%
3
months

0%

6
months

12
months

after 3 treatments

3
months

0%

in remission

6
months

12
months

7

after 4 treatments

30%

relapse
rate

relapse
rate

in remission
50%
not
in remission

70%

100%

50%
not
in remission

70%

3
months

6
months

100%
3
months

6
months

12
months

12
months

Figure 7-6 Relapse rates. The rate of relapse of major depression is significantly less for patients who achieve remission. However,
there is still a risk of relapse even in remitters, and the likelihood increases with the number of treatments it takes to get the patient to
remit. Thus, the relapse rate for patients who do not remit ranges from 60% at 12 months after one treatment to 70% at 6 months after
four treatments. For those who do remit, the relapse rate ranges from only 33% at 12 months after one treatment all the way to 70% at
6 months after four treatments. In other words, the protective nature of remission virtually disappears once it takes four treatments to
achieve remission.

287


<<<PAGE 304>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

mood disorders is unproven and provocative, but makes
a good deal of sense intuitively to many clinicians and
investigators. The idea is that chronicity of a mood disorder,
relapses of a mood disorder, and development of treatment
resistance could all be reduced, with a better overall
outcome in patients with aggressive treatment that leads to
remission of all symptoms, thus potentially modifiying the
course of this illness.

REDEFINING “MOOD
STABILIZERS”: A LABILE LABEL
“There is no such thing as a mood stabilizer.”
– US FDA
What Is a “Mood Stabilizer”:
Mania-Minded Treatments

treat from above

HYPOMANIA

stabilize from above

MIXED FEATURES OF MANIA

“Long live the mood stabilizers.”
– Prescribers
What is a “mood stabilizer?” As mentioned above,
originally, a mood stabilizer was a drug that treated
mania and prevented recurrence of mania, thus
“stabilizing” the manic pole of bipolar disorder. More
recently, the concept of mood stabilizer has been defined
in a wide-ranging manner, from “something that acts
like lithium,” to “an anticonvulsant used to treat bipolar
disorder,” to “an antipsychotic used to treat bipolar
disorder,” to “stabilizing both mania and depression
in bipolar disorder.” Rather than using the term mood
stabilizers, regulatory authorities consider that there
are drugs that can treat any or all of four distinct phases
Figure 7-7 Mania-minded
treatments. Although the ideal
“mood stabilizer” would treat both
mania and bipolar depression while
also preventing episodes of either
pole, in reality different agents may
be efficacious for different phases of
bipolar disorder. Some agents may be
“mania-minded” and thus able to “treat
from above” and/or “stabilize from
above” – in other words, to reduce and/
or prevent symptoms of mania.

MIXED FEATURES OF DEPRESSION

What Is a “Mood Stabilizer”:
Depression-Minded Treatments

HYPOMANIA
MIXED FEATURES OF MANIA

MIXED FEATURES OF DEPRESSION
stabilize from below

treat from below

288

Figure 7-8 Depression-minded
treatments. Although the ideal
“mood stabilizer” would treat both
mania and bipolar depression while
also preventing episodes of either
pole, in reality different agents may
be efficacious for different phases of
bipolar disorder. Some agents may be
“depression-minded” and thus able
to “treat from below” and/or “stabilize
from below” – in other words, to reduce
and/or prevent symptoms of bipolar
depression.


<<<PAGE 305>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

of the illness (Figures 7-7 and 7-8). Thus, a drug can
be “mania-minded” and “treat from above” to reduce
symptoms of mania, and/or “stabilize from above” to
prevent relapse and recurrence of mania (Figure 7-7).
Furthermore, drugs can be “depression-minded” and
“treat from below” to reduce symptoms of bipolar
depression, and/or “stabilize from below” to prevent
relapse and recurrence of depression (Figure 7-8).
Not all drugs proven to work in bipolar disorder have
all four therapeutic actions. In this chapter, we will
discuss agents that have one or more of these actions in
bipolar disorder, but will not refer to any of these agents
as “mood stabilizers” but instead to their presumed
pharmacological mechanism of action.

DRUGS FOR UNIPOLAR
DEPRESSION
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs)

Rarely has a class of drugs transformed a field as
dramatically as the SSRIs have transformed clinical
psychopharmacology. Some estimate that SSRI
prescriptions in the US alone occur at the rate of 7
prescriptions per second: over 225 million a year.
Clinical indications for use of SSRIs range far beyond
unipolar major depressive disorder, to a number of
anxiety disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD), and also to
premenstrual dysphoric disorder, eating disorders, and

others. There are six principal agents in this group,
described below, and all share the common property of
serotonin reuptake inhibition; thus, they all belong to the
same drug class, known as SSRIs. However, each of these
six drugs also has additional unique pharmacological
properties that allow them to be distinguished from each
other. First, we will discuss what these six drugs share
in common, and then we will explore their distinctive
individual properties that allow sophisticated prescribers
to match specific drug profiles to individual patient
symptom profiles.
What the Six SSRIs Have in Common

All the six SSRIs have the same major pharmacological
feature in common: selective and potent inhibition of
serotonin reuptake, also known as inhibition of the
serotonin transporter (SERT). This simple concept is
shown in Figures 7-9 and 7-10. Although the action of
SSRIs at the presynaptic axon terminal has classically
been emphasized (Figure 7-10), it now appears that
events occurring at the somatodendritic end of the
serotonin neuron (near the cell body) may be more
important in explaining the therapeutic actions of
the SSRIs (Figures 7-11 through 7-15). That is, in the

SSRI Action

SSRI

SERT

Figure 7-9 Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Shown
here is an icon depicting the core feature of selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), namely serotonin reuptake inhibition.
Although the agents in this class have unique pharmacological
profiles, they all share the common property of serotonin
transporter (SERT) inhibition.

Figure 7-10 SSRI action. The serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SRI)
portion of the SSRI molecule is shown inserted into the serotonin
reuptake pump (the serotonin transporter, or SERT), blocking it,
and causing increased synaptic availability of serotonin.

289

7


<<<PAGE 306>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT1A
autoreceptor

1A

5HT postsynaptic
receptor
SERT

1A
1A

1A
1A

1A

1A

E
1A

1A

1A

Figure 7-11 Mechanism of action of
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), part 1. According to the
monoamine hypothesis of depression,
there is a relative deficiency of serotonin
(5HT) (see levels of 5HT both in the
synapse near the axon terminal [right]
and at somatodendritic areas [left].
According to the neurotransmitter
receptor hypothesis of depression,
the number of 5HT receptors is
upregulated, including presynaptic
5HT1A autoreceptors as well as
postsynaptic 5HT receptors.

1A
1A

1A
1A

Depressed state: low 5HT, upregulated receptors, low number
of signals in the neuron to release more 5HT
5HT1A
autoreceptor

1A

5HT postsynaptic
receptor
SERT

1A

1A

1A
1A

SSRI

1A
1A

E
1A

1A

1A

Figure 7-12 Mechanism of action of
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), part 2. When an SSRI is
administered, it immediately blocks the
serotonin reuptake pump or transporter
(SERT) (see icon of an SSRI blocking
SERT). However, this causes serotonin
(5HT) to increase initially only in the
somatodendritic area of the 5HT neuron
(left) and not very much in the areas of
the brain where the axons terminate
(right). When 5HT levels rise in the
somatodendritic area, this stimulates
nearby 5HT1A autoreceptors.

1A
1A
1A
1A

Antidepressant action: SSRI blocks 5HT reuptake both
at the dendrites and at the axon

depressed state, the monoamine hypothesis of depression
states that serotonin may be deficient, both at presynaptic
somatodendritic areas near the cell body (Figure 7-11,
left) and in the synapse itself, near the axon terminal
(Figure 7-11, right). The neurotransmitter receptor
hypothesis proposes that monoamine receptors may be
upregulated, as shown in Figure 7-11, representing the
depressed state before treatment. Neuronal firing rates
290

for this neuron may also be dysregulated in depression,
contributing to regional abnormalities in information
processing, and the development of specific symptoms,
depending upon the region affected, as discussed in
Chapter 6 and shown in Figure 6-38.
When an SSRI is given acutely, it is well known that
serotonin (5HT) rises due to blockade of SERT. What
is somewhat surprising, however, is that blocking the


<<<PAGE 307>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Figure 7-13 Mechanism of action of
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), part 3. The consequence of
increased serotonergic binding at
somatodendritic 5HT1A autoreceptors is
that they desensitize or downregulate
(red circle, compare to Figure 7-12).

1A
1A

E
1A
1A
1A

The increase in 5HT causes the autoreceptors to desensitize/downregulate

presynaptic SERT does not immediately lead to a great
deal of serotonin in many synapses. In fact, when SSRI
treatment is initiated, 5HT rises immediately at the
somatodendritic area located in the midbrain raphe
(Figure 7-12, left) due to blockade of SERTs there, rather
than in the areas of the brain where the axons terminate
(Figure 7-12, right).
The somatodendritic area of the serotonin neuron
is therefore where 5HT increases first (Figure 7-12,
left). Serotonin receptors in this brain area have 5HT1A
pharmacology, as discussed in Chapter 4 and illustrated
in Figure 4-39. When serotonin levels rise in the
somatodendritic area, this stimulates nearby 5HT1A
autoreceptors (also on the left in Figure 7-12). These
immediate pharmacological actions obviously cannot
explain the delayed therapeutic actions of the SSRIs.
However, these immediate actions may explain the
immediate side effects that are caused by the SSRIs when
treatment is initiated.
Over time, the increased 5HT levels acting at the
somatodendritic 5HT1A autoreceptors causes them to
downregulate and become desensitized (Figure 7-13,
left). This desensitization occurs because the increase
in serotonin is recognized by these presynaptic
5HT1A receptors, and this information is sent to the
cell nucleus of the serotonin neuron. The genome’s
reaction to this information is to issue instructions
that cause these same receptors to become desensitized
over time. The time course of this desensitization
correlates with the onset of therapeutic actions of the
SSRIs (Figure 6-25).

Once the 5HT1A somatodendritic autoreceptors are
desensitized, 5HT can no longer effectively turn off its
own release. Since 5HT is no longer inhibiting its own
release, the serotonin neuron is therefore disinhibited
(Figure 7-14). This results in a flurry of 5HT release from
axons and an increase in neuronal impulse flow (shown
as lightning in Figure 7-14 and release of serotonin from
the axon terminal on the right). This is just another
way of saying the serotonin release is “turned on” at the
axon terminals. The serotonin that now pours out of the
various projections of serotonin pathways in the brain
is what theoretically mediates the various therapeutic
actions of the SSRIs.
While the presynaptic somatodendritic 5HT1A
autoreceptors are desensitizing (Figure 7-13), 5HT is
building up in synapses (Figure 7-14), and causes the
postsynaptic 5HT receptors to desensitize as well (Figure
7-15, right). These various postsynaptic 5HT receptors in
turn send information to the cell nucleus of the postsynaptic
neuron that serotonin is targeting (on the far right of Figure
7-15). The reaction of the genome in the postsynaptic
neuron is also to issue instructions to downregulate or
desensitize some of these receptors as well. The time course
of this desensitization correlates with the onset of tolerance
to the side effects of the SSRIs (Figure 7-15).
This theory thus suggests a pharmacological cascading
mechanism whereby the SSRIs exert their therapeutic
actions: namely, powerful but delayed disinhibition of
serotonin release in key pathways throughout the brain.
Furthermore, side effects are hypothetically caused by
the acute actions of serotonin at undesirable receptors in

291

7


<<<PAGE 308>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

1A

1A

E
1A
1A
1A

The downregulation of the autoreceptors causes the neuron to
release more 5HT at the axon

1A

1A

E

Figure 7-14 Mechanism of action
of selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs), part 4. Once the
somatodendritic 5HT1A receptors
downregulate, there is no longer
inhibition of impulse flow in the
serotonin (5HT) neuron. Thus, neuronal
impulse flow is turned on. The
consequence of this is release of 5HT
in the axon terminal (red circle). This
increase is delayed compared with the
increase of 5HT in the somatodendritic
areas of the 5HT neuron; the delay
is the result of the time it takes for
somatodendritic 5HT to downregulate
the 5HT1A autoreceptors and turn
on neuronal impulse flow in the
5HT neuron. This delay may explain
why SSRIs do not relieve depression
immediately. It is also the reason why
the mechanism of action of SSRIs
may be linked to increasing neuronal
impulse flow in 5HT neurons, with 5HT
levels increasing at axon terminals
before an SSRI can exert its therapeutic
effects.

1A

Figure 7-15 Mechanism of action of
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), part 5. Finally, once the SSRIs
have blocked the reuptake pump (or
serotonin transporter [SERT]), increased
somatodendritic serotonin (5HT),
desensitized somatodendritic 5HT1A
autoreceptors, turned on neuronal
impulse flow, and increased release
of 5HT from axon terminals, the final
step may be the desensitization of
postsynaptic 5HT receptors (red circle).
This desensitization may mediate the
reduction of side effects of SSRIs as
tolerance develops.

1A
1A

The increase of 5HT at the axon causes the postsynaptic receptors to
desensitize/downregulate, reducing side effects

undesirable pathways. Finally, side effects may attenuate
over time by desensitization of the very receptors that
mediate them.
Unique Properties of Each SSRI: The Not-So-Selective
Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors

Although the six SSRIs clearly share the same mechanism
of action, individual patients often react very differently
292

to one SSRI versus another. This is not generally observed
in large clinical trials where mean group differences
between two SSRIs either in efficacy or side effects are
very difficult to document. Rather, such differences are
seen by prescribers treating patients one at a time, with
some patients experiencing a therapeutic response to one
SSRI and not another, and other patients tolerating one
SSRI and not another.


<<<PAGE 309>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

If blockade of SERT explains the shared clinical and
pharmacological actions of SSRIs, what explains their
differences? Although there is no generally accepted
explanation that accounts for the commonly observed
clinical phenomena of different efficacy and tolerability
of various SSRIs in individual patients, it makes sense to
consider those unique pharmacological characteristics
of the six SSRIs that are not shared with each other as
candidates to explain the broad range of individual
patient reactions to different SSRIs (Figures 7-16 through
7-21). Each SSRI has secondary pharmacological actions
other than SERT blockade, and no two SSRIs have
identical secondary pharmacological characteristics.
Whether these secondary binding profiles can account for
the differences in efficacy and tolerability in individual
patients remains to be proven. However, it does lead to
provocative hypothesis generation and gives a rational
basis for psychopharmacologists trying more than one of
these agents rather than thinking “they are all the same.”
Sometimes only an empiric trial of different SSRIs will
lead to the best match of drug to an individual patient.
Fluoxetine: An SSRI with 5HT2C Antagonist Properties

In addition to serotonin reuptake inhibition, fluoxetine
also has 5HT2C antagonist actions that may explain
many of its unique clinical properties (Figure 7-16).
5HT2C antagonism may contribute to its antidepressant
actions and also to its efficacy in other disorders,
especially in eating disorders. Other drugs for unipolar

fluoxetine
5HT2C

NET

SERT
SERT

Figure 7-16 Fluoxetine. In addition to serotonin reuptake
inhibition, fluoxetine has norepinephrine reuptake inhibition
(NRI) and serotonin 2C antagonist actions (5HT2C). 5HT2C
antagonism can lead to disinhibition of norepinephrine and
dopamine; this action may be responsible for fluoxetine’s
activating effects. NRI may be clinically relevant only at very high
doses.

depression with 5HT2C antagonist properties include
trazodone, mirtazapine, agomelatine, and some tricyclic
antidepressants, and these will be described below.
Finally, two serotonin 2A/dopamine 2 antagonists,
quetiapine (Figure 5-45) and olanzapine (Figure 5-44),
also have potent 5HT2C antagonist properties. Both
agents are used to treat psychosis (see Chapter 5) but are
also approved for augmenting other drugs for unipolar
depression, treatment-resistant unipolar depression,
and bipolar depression. Blocking serotonin action at
5HT2C receptors disinhibits (i.e., enhances) release of
both norepinephrine and dopamine, actions theoretically
beneficial for the treatment of depression (see Chapter
6 and Figure 6-24B and also the discussion below on
agomelatine).
The good news about 5HT2C antagonism may be
that it is generally activating, and the reason why
many patients, even from the first dose, detect an
energizing and fatigue-reducing effect of fluoxetine, with
improvement in concentration and attention as well. This
mechanism is perhaps best matched to depressed patients
with reduced positive affect (Figure 6-41), hypersomnia,
psychomotor retardation, apathy, and fatigue. Fluoxetine
is also approved in some countries in combination with
olanzapine for treatment-resistant unipolar depression
and for bipolar depression. Since olanzapine also has
5HT2C antagonist actions (Figure 5-44), it may be that
adding the 5HT2C antagonist actions of olanzapine to
those of fluoxetine could theoretically lead to further
enhanced dopamine and norepinephrine release in
the cortex to mediate the antidepressant actions of this
combination. 5HT2C antagonism may also contribute
to the anti-bulimia effect of higher doses of fluoxetine,
the only SSRI approved for the treatment of this eating
disorder. The bad news could be that 5HT2C antagonist
actions of fluoxetine may contribute to this agent being
sometimes less well matched to patients with agitation,
insomnia, and anxiety, who may experience unwanted
activation and even a panic attack if given an agent that
further activates them.
Fluoxetine also has weak norepinephrine reuptake
blocking properties (Figure 7-16), which may become
clinically relevant at very high doses. Fluoxetine has
a long half-life (2–3 days), and its active metabolite
an even longer half-life (2 weeks). The long halflife is advantageous in that it seems to reduce the
withdrawal reactions that are characteristic of sudden
discontinuation of some SSRIs, but it also means that
it takes a long time to clear the drug and its active

293

7


<<<PAGE 310>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

metabolite after discontinuing fluoxetine, and prior
to starting other agents such as a monoamine oxidase
(MAO) inhibitor. Fluoxetine is not only available as a
once-daily formulation, but also as a once-weekly oral
dosage formulation.
Sertraline: An SSRI with Dopamine Transporter (DAT)
Inhibition and σ1 Binding

This SSRI has two candidate mechanisms that
distinguish it: dopamine transporter (DAT) inhibition
and σ1 receptor binding (Figure 7-17). The DAT
inhibitory actions are controversial since they are
weaker than the SERT inhibitory actions, thus leading
some experts to suggest that there is not sufficient
DAT occupancy by sertraline to be clinically relevant.
However, as will be discussed later in the section on
norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitors (NDRIs),
it is not clear that high degrees of DAT occupancy
are necessary or even desirable in order to contribute
to antidepressant actions. That is, perhaps only a
small amount of DAT inhibition is sufficient to cause
improvement in energy, motivation, and concentration,
especially when added to another action such as SERT
inhibition. In fact, high-impact DAT inhibition is the
property of reinforcing stimulants, including cocaine
and methamphetamine, and would not generally be
desired in a drug for depression (see discussion of DAT
inhibitors in Chapter 11 on ADHD and Chapter 13 on
impulsivity, compulsivity, and addiction).

sertraline

Anecdotally, clinicians have observed the mild and
desirable activating actions of sertraline in some patients
with “atypical depression,” improving symptoms of
hypersomnia, low energy, and mood reactivity. A favorite
combination of some clinicians for depressed patients is
to add bupropion to sertraline (i.e., Wellbutrin to Zoloft,
sometimes called “Well-oft”), adding together the weak
DAT inhibitory properties of each agent. Clinicians have
also observed the overactivation of some patients with
panic disorder by sertraline, thus requiring slower dose
titration in some patients with anxiety symptoms. All of
these actions of sertraline are consistent with weak DAT
inhibitory actions contributing to its clinical portfolio of
actions.
The σ1 actions of sertraline are not well understood,
but might contribute to its anxiolytic effects and
especially to its effects in psychotic and delusional
depression, where sertraline may have advantageous
therapeutic effects compared to some other SSRIs.
Paroxetine: An SSRI with Muscarinic Anticholinergic and
Norepinephrine Transporter (NET) Inhibitory Actions

This SSRI tends to be more calming, even sedating, early
in treatment compared to the more activating actions of
both fluoxetine and sertraline discussed above. Perhaps
the mild anticholinergic actions of paroxetine contribute
to this clinical profile (Figure 7-18). Paroxetine also
has weak norepinephrine transporter (NET) inhibitory
properties, which could contribute to its efficacy in
depression, especially at high doses. The advantages of

paroxetine
DAT

M1

NET

SERT
SERT

SERT
SERT

NOS

Figure 7-17 Sertraline. Sertraline has dopamine transporter
(DAT) inhibition and σ1 receptor binding in addition to serotonin
reuptake inhibition (SRI). The clinical relevance of sertraline’s
DAT inhibition is unknown, although it may improve energy,
motivation, and concentration. Its sigma properties may
contribute to anxiolytic actions and may also be helpful in
patients with psychotic depression.

294

Figure 7-18 Paroxetine. In addition to serotonin reuptake
inhibition, paroxetine has mild anticholinergic actions
(M1), which can be calming or possibly sedating; weak
norepinephrine transporter (NET) inhibition, which may
contribute to further antidepressant actions; and inhibition of
the enzyme nitric oxide synthase (NOS), which may contribute to
sexual dysfunction.


<<<PAGE 311>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

dual serotonin plus norepinephrine reuptake inhibiting
properties, or SNRI actions, are discussed below in the
section on SNRIs. It is possible that weak to moderate
NET inhibition of paroxetine may contribute importantly
to its antidepressant actions.
Paroxetine also inhibits the enzyme nitric oxide
synthase, which could theoretically contribute to
sexual dysfunction, especially in men. Paroxetine
is also notorious for causing withdrawal reactions
upon sudden discontinuation, with symptoms such
as akathisia, restlessness, gastrointestinal symptoms,
dizziness, and tingling, especially when suddenly
discontinued from long-term high-dose treatment. This
is possibly due not only to SERT inhibition properties,
since all SSRIs can cause discontinuation reactions,
but also to anticholinergic rebound when paroxetine
is rapidly discontinued. Paroxetine is available in a
controlled-release formulation, which may mitigate
some of its side effects, including discontinuation
reactions.
Fluvoxamine: An SSRI with σ1 Receptor Binding
Properties

This SSRI was among the first to be launched for the
treatment of depression worldwide, but was never
officially approved for depression in the US, so it has been
considered more of an agent for the treatment of OCD
in the US. Like sertraline, fluvoxamine binds at σ1 sites,
but this action is more potent for fluvoxamine than for
sertraline (Figure 7-19). The physiological function of
σ1 sites is still a mystery, and thus sometimes called the
“sigma enigma,” but has been linked both to anxiety and
psychosis. Preclinical studies suggest that fluvoxamine

may be an agonist at σ1 receptors, and that this property
may contribute an additional pharmacological action
to help explain fluvoxamine’s well-known anxiolytic
properties. Fluvoxamine also has shown therapeutic
activity in both psychotic and delusional depression,
where it, like sertraline, may have advantages over other
SSRIs.
Fluvoxamine is now available as a controlled-release
formulation, which makes once-daily administration
possible, unlike immediate-release fluvoxamine, whose
shorter half-life often requires twice-daily administration.
In addition, recent trials of controlled-release
fluvoxamine show impressive remission rates in both
OCD and social anxiety disorder, as well as possibly less
peak-dose sedation.
Citalopram: An SSRI with a “Good” and a “Bad”
Enantiomer

This SSRI is comprised of two enantiomers, R and S,
which are mirror images of each other (Figure 7-20).
The mixture of these enantiomers is known as racemic
citalopram, or commonly just as citalopram, and has
mild antihistamine properties that reside in the R
enantiomer. Racemic citalopram is generally one of
the better-tolerated SSRIs, and has favorable findings
in the treatment of depression in the elderly, but has a
somewhat inconsistent therapeutic action at the lowest
dose, often requiring dose increase to optimize treatment.
citalopram: R+S citalopram

fluvoxamine
S
ram
lop

cita

1H

R
rpo
lat
i

ma

c

SERT

Figure 7-19 Fluvoxamine. Fluvoxamine’s secondary properties
include actions at σ1 receptors, which may be anxiolytic as well
as beneficial for psychotic depression.

Figure 7-20 Citalopram. Citalopram consists of two
enantiomers, R and S. Some pharmacological evidence suggests
that the R enantiomer may be pharmacologically active at SERTs
in a manner that does not inhibit SERTs but actually interferes
with the ability of the active S enantiomer to inhibit SERTs. The R
enantiomer also has weak antihistamine properties.

295

7


<<<PAGE 312>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

vilazodone

escitalopram

5HT1A

S-citalopram

SERT

SERT
SERT

Figure 7-21 Escitalopram The R and S enantiomers of
citalopram are mirror images of each other but have slightly
different clinical properties. The R enantiomer is the one with
weak antihistamine properties; the R and S enantiomers may
also differ in their effects at the serotonin transporter. The S
enantiomer of citalopram has been developed and marketed as
escitalopram.

However, dose increase is limited due to the potential
of QTc prolongation at higher doses. These findings all
suggest that it is not favorable for citalopram to contain
the R enantiomer. In fact, some pharmacological evidence
suggests that the R enantiomer may be pharmacologically
active at SERTs in a manner that does not inhibit SERTs
but actually interferes with the ability of the active S
enantiomer to inhibit SERTs. This could lead to reduced
SERT inhibition, reduced synaptic 5HT, and possibly
reduced net therapeutic actions, especially at low doses.
Escitalopram: The Quintessential SSRI

The solution to improving the properties of racemic
citalopram is to remove the unwanted R enantiomer.
The resulting drug is known as escitalopram, as it
is comprised of only the pure active S enantiomer
(Figure 7-21). This maneuver appears to remove the
antihistaminic properties and there are no higher dose
restrictions to avoid QTc prolongation. In addition,
removal of the potentially interfering R enantiomer
makes the lowest dose of escitalopram more predictably
efficacious. Escitalopram is therefore the SSRI for which
pure SERT inhibition is most likely to explain almost all
of its pharmacological actions. Escitalopram is considered
perhaps the best-tolerated SSRI, with the fewest
cytochrome P450 (CYP450)-mediated drug interactions.
Serotonin Partial Agonist Reuptake Inhibitors (SPARIs)

Vilazodone combines SERT inhibition with 5HT1A
partial agonism. For this reason, vilazodone is called
296

Figure 7-22 Vilazodone. Vilazodone is a partial agonist at the
serotonin 1A receptor and also inhibits serotonin reuptake; thus,
it is referred to as a serotonin partial agonist reuptake inhibitor
(SPARI).

a SPARI (serotonin partial agonist reuptake inhibitor)
(Figure 7-22). The combination of serotonin reuptake
inhibition with 5HT1A partial agonism has long
been known by clinicians to enhance the unipolar
antidepressant properties and tolerability of SSRIs/SNRIs
in some patients (e.g., adding the 5HT1A partial agonist
buspirone [Chapter 8 on anxiety]; the serotonin 1A/
dopamine 2 partial agonists aripiprazole, brexpiprazole,
or cariprazine [Chapter 5]; or the serotonin/dopamine
antagonist with 5HT1A partial agonist properties,
quetiapine). With vilazodone this combination
mechanism is achieved with only one drug, avoiding drug
interactions and various off-target receptor actions that
may be undesired with the other drugs listed.
In animal models, adding 5HT1A partial agonism to
SSRIs causes more immediate and robust elevations of
brain 5HT levels than SSRIs do alone. This is thought to
be due to the fact that 5HT1A partial agonists are a type of
“artificial serotonin,” selective especially for presynaptic
somatodendritic 5HT1A autoreceptors, and that 5HT1A
partial agonist action occurs immediately after the drug
is given (Figure 7-23). Thus, 5HT1A immediate partial
agonist actions are theoretically additive or synergistic
with simultaneous SERT inhibition (Figure 7-23) since
this leads to faster and more robust actions at 5HT1A
somatodendritic autoreceptors (Figure 7-24) than with
SERT inhibition alone (Figure 7-12), including their
downregulation (Figure 7-25). This hypothetically


<<<PAGE 313>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

5HT1A
autoreceptor

1A

SERT
SPARI

1A

Figure 7-23 Mechanism of action
of serotonin partial agonist reuptake
inhibitors (SPARIs), part 1. When a
SPARI is administered, about half of
serotonin transporters (SERTs) and half
of serotonin 1A (5HT1A) receptors are
occupied immediately.

1A

1A
1A

1A

1A

E
1A

1A

1A

1A
1A
1A
1A
1A
2A
2C
3
6
7

1A
1A

1A
1A

SPARI action: first, about half of SERTs and half of 5HT1A receptors are
occupied immediately
Figure 7-24 Mechanism of action
of serotonin partial agonist reuptake
inhibitors (SPARIs), part 2. Blockade of
the serotonin transporter (SERT) causes
serotonin to increase initially in the
somatodendritic area of the serotonin
neuron (left).

1A
1A

1A
1A

1A

1A

E
1A

1A

1A

1A
1A
1A
1A
1A
2A
2C
3
6
7

1A
1A
1A
1A

SPARI action: second, 5HT increases at 5HT1A somatodendritic
receptors on the left

causes faster and more robust elevation of synaptic 5HT
(Figure 7-26) than possible with SSRIs alone (Figure 7-14).
In addition, 5HT1A partial agonism with vilazodone’s
SPARI mechanism occurs immediately at postsynaptic
5HT1A receptors (Figure 7-26), with actions at these
receptors that are thus faster and with a different type of
stimulation compared to the delayed full agonist actions of

serotonin itself when increased by SERT inhibition alone
(Figure 7-14). The downstream actions of 5HT1A receptors
that lead to enhanced dopamine release (Figure 7-27) may
be hypothetically responsible for enhanced antidepressant
and precognitive effects (see Chapter 5 and Figure 5-22).
The addition of 5HT1A partial agonist actions to SERT
inhibition may also account for the observed reduction
297

7


<<<PAGE 314>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 7-25 Mechanism of action
of serotonin partial agonist reuptake
inhibitors (SPARIs), part 3. The
consequence of serotonin increasing
in the somatodendritic area of the
serotonin (5HT) neuron is that the
somatodendritic 5HT1A autoreceptors
desensitize or downregulate (red circle).

1A
1A

1A
1A
1A
1A
1A
2A
2C
3
6
7

E
1A

1A
1A

SPARI action: third, 5HT actions on the left cause 5HT1A autoreceptors
to desensitize/downregulate
Figure 7-26 Mechanism of action
of serotonin partial agonist reuptake
inhibitors (SPARIs), part 4. Once
the somatodendritic receptors
downregulate, there is no longer
inhibition of impulse flow in the
serotonin (5HT) neuron. Thus, neuronal
impulse flow is turned on. The
consequence of this is release of 5HT in
the axon terminal (red circle).

1A
1A

E
1A

1A
1A
1A
1A
1A
2A
2C
3
6
7

1A
1A

SPARI action: fourth, neuronal firing and serotonin release are disinhibited at
the synapse on the right

in sexual dysfunction and the relative lack of weight gain
seen in patients treated with vilazodone.
Serotonin–Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors (SNRIs)

SNRIs combine the robust SERT inhibition of the SSRIs
with various degrees of inhibition of the norepinephrine
transporter (NET) (Figures 7-28 through 7-32).
298

Theoretically, there should be some therapeutic advantage
of adding NET inhibition to SERT inhibition, since one
mechanism may add efficacy to the other mechanism by
widening the reach of these drugs to both the serotonin
and the norepinephrine monoamine neurotransmitter
systems throughout more brain regions (see Chapter 6
and Figures 6-38 and 6-40). A practical indication that


<<<PAGE 315>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

1A

5HT1A
autoreceptor
SERT
SPARI

1A

1A

1A

1A
1A
1A
1A
2A
2C
3
6
7

DA

1A

Figure 7-27 Mechanism of action
of serotonin partial agonist reuptake
inhibitors (SPARIs), part 5. Finally,
once the SPARIs have blocked the
serotonin transporter (SERT), increased
somatodendritic serotonin (5HT),
desensitized somatodendritic 5HT1A
autoreceptors, turned on neuronal
impulse flow, and increased release
of 5HT from axon terminals, the final
step (shown here, red circle) may be
the desensitization of postsynaptic 5HT
receptors. This timeframe correlates
with antidepressant action. In addition,
the addition of 5HT1A partial agonism
may lead to downstream enhancement
of dopamine (DA) release, which may
mitigate sexual dysfunction.

1A

SPARI action: finally, antidepressant actions begin, and downstream enhancement
of DA release may mitigate sexual dysfunction

SERT

SERT

venlafaxine

CYP
2D6

SERT

SERT

desvenlafaxine

NET

7

NET

Figure 7-28 Venlafaxine and desvenlafaxine. Venlafaxine inhibits both the serotonin transporter (SERT) and the norepinephrine
transporter (NET), thus combining two therapeutic mechanisms in one agent. Venlafaxine’s serotonergic actions are present at
low doses, while its noradrenergic actions are progressively enhanced as dose increases. Venlafaxine is converted to its active
metabolite, desvenlafaxine, by CYP450 2D6. Like venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine inhibits reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine, but
its NET actions are greater relative to its SERT actions compared to venlafaxine. Venlafaxine administration usually results in plasma
levels of venlafaxine that are about half those of desvenlafaxine; however, this can vary depending on genetic polymorphisms of
CYP450 2D6 and if patients are taking drugs that are inhibitors or inducers of CYP450 2D6. Thus, the degree of NET inhibition with
venlafaxine administration may be unpredictable. Desvenlafaxine has now been developed as a separate drug. It has relatively greater
norepinephrine reuptake inhibition than venlafaxine but is still more potent at the SERT.

duloxetine

SERT
SERT

NET
Figure 7-29 Duloxetine. Duloxetine inhibits both the serotonin
transporter (SERT) and the norepinephrine transporter (NET).
Its noradrenergic actions may contribute to efficacy for painful
physical symptoms.

dual monoamine mechanisms may lead to more efficacy is
the finding that the SNRI venlafaxine frequently seems to
have greater unipolar antidepressant efficacy as the dose
increases, theoretically due to recruiting more and more
NET inhibition as the dose is raised (i.e., the noradrenergic
“boost”). Clinicians and experts currently debate whether
remission rates are higher with SNRIs compared to SSRIs
or whether SNRIs are more helpful in depressed patients
who fail to respond to SSRIs than are other options. One
area where SNRIs have established clear efficacy but SSRIs
have not is in the treatment of pain.
NET Inhibition Increases Dopamine in the Prefrontal
Cortex

Although SNRIs are commonly called “dual action”
serotonin–norepinephrine agents, they actually have
299


<<<PAGE 316>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

milnacipran: R+S milnacipran

S-milnacipran
(levo)

SERT
SERT

NET

TRES

levomilnacipran: S-milnacipran

S-milnacipran
(levo)

R-milnacipran
(dextro)

SERT
SERT

TEN

NET

Figure 7-30 Milnacipran. Milnacipran inhibits both the
serotonin transporter (SERT) and the norepinephrine transporter
(NET) but is a more potent inhibitor of NET than SERT. Its robust
NET inhibition may contribute to efficacy for painful physical
symptoms. Milnacipran consists of two enantiomers: S (levo)
and R (dextro), with S as the more active enantiomer.

Figure 7-31 Levomilnacipran. The R and S enantiomers of
milnacipran are mirror images of each other; the S enantiomer
is the active enantiomer. The S enantiomer of milnacipran has
been developed and marketed as levomilnacipran.

SNRI Action

Figure 7-32 SNRI actions. The acute dual actions of the serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are shown. Both the
serotonin reuptake inhibitor portion of the SNRI molecule (left panel) and the norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor portion of the SNRI
molecule (right panel) are inserted into their respective reuptake pumps. Consequently, both pumps are blocked, and synaptic serotonin
and norepinephrine are increased.

300


<<<PAGE 317>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

a third action on dopamine (DA) in the prefrontal
cortex, but not elsewhere in the brain. Thus, they are
not “full” triple action agents since they do not inhibit
the DA transporter (DAT) except at doses beyond the
clinical range, but SNRIs can perhaps be considered to
have “two-and-a-half actions,” and not just two. That is,
SNRIs not only boost serotonin and norepinephrine (NE)
throughout the brain (Figure 7-32), but they also boost
DA specifically in the prefrontal cortex (Figure 7-33).
This third mechanism of boosting DA in an important
area of the brain associated with several symptoms of
depression should add another theoretical advantage to
the pharmacology of SNRIs and to their efficacy in the
treatment of major depression.
How does NET inhibition boost DA in the prefrontal
cortex? The answer is illustrated in Figure 7-33. In
the prefrontal cortex, SERTs and NETs are present
in abundance on serotonin and NE nerve terminals,
respectively, but there are very few DATs on DA nerve
terminals in this part of the brain (Figure 7-33, see also
Chapter 4 and Figure 4-9A). The consequence of this
lack of DATs in the prefrontal cortex is that once DA is
released there, it is free to cruise away from the synapse
(Figure 7-33A). The diffusion radius of DA is thus wider
(Figure 7-33A) than the diffusion radius of NE in the
prefrontal cortex (Figure 7-33B) since there are NETs
at the NE synapse (Figure 7-33B) but no DAT at the DA
synapse (Figure 7-33A). This arrangement may enhance
the regulatory importance of DA in the prefrontal cortex
functioning, since DA in this part of the brain can
interact with DA receptors not only at its own synapse,
but at a distance, perhaps enhancing the ability of DA to
regulate cognition in an entire area within its diffusion
radius, not just at a single synapse.
Dopamine action is therefore not terminated by DAT
in the prefrontal cortex to any significant extent, but by
two other mechanisms. That is, DA diffuses away from
the DA synapse until it either encounters the enzyme
COMT (catechol-O-methyltransferase), which degrades
it (see Chapter 4 and Figure 4-3) or until it encounters
a NET, which transports it into the NE neuron (Figure
7-33A). NETs in fact have a greater affinity for DA than
they do for NE, so they will pump DA as well as NE into
NE nerve terminals, halting the action of either.
What is interesting is to see what happens when there
is NET inhibition in the prefrontal cortex. As expected,
NET inhibition enhances synaptic NE levels and increases
the diffusion radius of NE (Figure 7-33B). Somewhat
surprising may be that NET inhibition also enhances
DA levels and increases DA’s diffusion radius (Figure

Normal DA Release in PFC:
No DAT, Diffuses to NET
NE
neuron

NET

“normal”
DA diffusion
NET Blocked in PFC:
NE increases

DA
neuron
A

“normal”
NE diffusion

NET block
increases NE
diffusion

7

B

NET Blocked in PFC:
DA increases
NE
neuron

“normal”
DA diffusion
DA
neuron

NET block
increases
DA diffusion
C

Figure 7-33 Norepinephrine transporter blockade and
dopamine in the prefrontal cortex. (A) Although there are
abundant serotonin transporters (SERTs) and norepinephrine
transporters (NETs) in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), there are very
few dopamine transporters (DATs). This means that dopamine
(DA) can diffuse away from the synapse and therefore exert its
actions within a larger radius. Dopamine’s actions are terminated
at norepinephrine (NE) axon terminals, because DA is taken up
by NETs. (B) NET blockade in the PFC leads to an increase in
synaptic NE, thus increasing NE’s diffusion radius. (C) Because
NET takes up DA as well as NE, NET blockade also leads to an
increase in synaptic DA, further increasing its diffusion radius.
Thus, agents that block NET increase NE throughout the brain
and both NE and DA in the PFC.

301


<<<PAGE 318>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

7-33C). The bottom line is that NET inhibition increases
both NE and DA in the prefrontal cortex. Thus, SNRIs
have two-and-a-half mechanisms: boosting serotonin
throughout the brain, boosting NE throughout the brain,
and boosting DA in the prefrontal cortex (but not in other
DA projection areas).
Venlafaxine

Depending upon the dose, venlafaxine has different
degrees of inhibition of serotonin reuptake (most potent
and robust even at low doses) versus NE reuptake
(moderate potency and robust only at higher doses)
(Figure 7-28). However, there are no significant actions
on other receptors. It remains controversial whether
venlafaxine or other SNRIs have greater efficacy in
unipolar major depression than SSRIs, either in terms
of enhanced remission rates, more robust sustained
remission over long-term treatment, or greater efficacy
for treatment-resistant unipolar depression, but this does
seem plausible given two mechanisms and the boosting
of two monoamines. Venlafaxine is approved and widely
used for several anxiety disorders as well. Adding
NET inhibition likely accounts for two side effects of
venlafaxine in some patients: sweating and elevated blood
pressure.
Venlafaxine is available as an extended-release
formulation, which not only allows for once-daily
administration but also significantly reduces side
effects, especially nausea. In contrast to several other
psychotropic drugs available in controlled-release
formulations, extended-release venlafaxine is a
considerable improvement over the immediate-release
formulation, which has fallen into little or no use because
of unacceptable nausea and other side effects, especially
when immediate-release venlafaxine is started or when
it is stopped. However, venlafaxine even in controlledrelease formulation can cause withdrawal reactions,
sometimes quite bothersome, especially after sudden
discontinuation from high-dose long-term treatment.
Nevertheless, the controlled-release formulation is highly
preferred because of enhanced tolerability.
Desvenlafaxine

Venlafaxine is a substrate for CYP450 2D6, which
converts it to an active metabolite desvenlafaxine (Figure
7-28). Desvenlafaxine has greater NET inhibition relative
to SERT inhibition compared to venlafaxine. Normally,
after venlafaxine administration, the plasma levels of
venlafaxine are about half of those for desvenlafaxine.
However, this is highly variable, depending upon whether
302

the patient is taking another drug that is a CYP450 2D6
inhibitor, which shifts the plasma levels towards more
venlafaxine and less desvenlafaxine, also reducing the
relative amount of NET inhibition. Variability in plasma
levels of venlafaxine versus desvenlafaxine is also due
to genetic polymorphisms for CYP450 2D6, such that
poor metabolizers will shift the ratio of these two drugs
towards more parent venlafaxine and away from the
active metabolite desvenlafaxine, and thus reduce the
relative amount of NET inhibition. As a result of these
considerations, it can be somewhat unpredictable
how much NET inhibition a given dose of venlafaxine
will have in a given patient at a given time, whereas
this is more predictable for desvenlafaxine. Expert
clinicians have learned to solve this problem with skilled
dose titration of venlafaxine, but the development of
desvenlafaxine as a separate drug may also solve this
problem, with less need for dose titration and more
consistent NET inhibition at a given dose across all
patients.
Duloxetine

This SNRI, characterized pharmacologically by slightly
more potent SERT than NET inhibition (Figure 7-29), has
transformed how we think about depression and pain.
Classic teaching was that depression caused pain that was
psychic (as in “I feel your pain”) and not somatic (as in
“ouch”), and that psychic pain was secondary to emotional
suffering in depression; therefore, it was thought,
anything that made depression better would make psychic
pain better nonspecifically. Somatic pain was thus not
thought to be caused by depression, although depression
could supposedly make it worse, and classically somatic
pain was not treated with drugs for depression.
Studies with duloxetine have changed all this. Not
only does this SNRI relieve unipolar depression in the
absence of pain, but it also relieves pain in the absence
of depression. All sorts of pain are improved by this
SNRI, from diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain, to
fibromyalgia, to chronic musculoskeletal pain such
as that associated with osteoarthritis and low back
problems, and more. These findings of the efficacy
of duloxetine for multiple pain syndromes have also
validated that painful physical (somatic) symptoms
are a legitimate set of symptoms that accompany
depression and are not just a form of emotional pain.
The use of SNRIs such as duloxetine in pain syndromes
is discussed in Chapter 9. So, duloxetine has established
efficacy not only in unipolar depression and in chronic
pain, but also in patients with chronic painful physical


<<<PAGE 319>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

symptoms of unipolar depression. Painful physical
symptoms are frequently ignored or missed by patients
and clinicians alike in the setting of unipolar major
depression, and until recently, the link of these symptoms
to major depression was not well appreciated, in part
because painful physical symptoms are not included
in the list of symptoms for the formal diagnostic
criteria for depression (see Chapter 6 and Figure 6-1).
Nevertheless, it is now widely appreciated that painful
physical symptoms are frequently associated with a
major depressive episode, and are also one of the leading
residual symptoms after initial treatment with drugs for
depression (Figure 7-5). It appears that the dual SNRI
actions of duloxetine and other SNRIs are superior to
the selective serotonergic actions of SSRIs for treatment
of conditions such as neuropathic pain of diabetes and
chronic painful physical symptoms associated with
depression. The role of NET inhibition seems to be
critical for the treatment not only of painful conditions
without depression, but also for painful physical
symptoms associated with depression. Duloxetine
has also shown efficacy in the treatment of cognitive
symptoms of depression that are prominent in geriatric
depression, possibly exploiting the pro-noradrenergic and
pro-dopaminergic consequences of NET inhibition in the
prefrontal cortex (see Figure 7-33).
Duloxetine can be given once a day, but this is usually
only a good idea after the patient has had a chance to
become tolerant to it after initiating it at twice-daily
dosing, especially during titration to higher doses.
Duloxetine may have a lower incidence of hypertension
and milder withdrawal reactions than venlafaxine.
Milnacipran

Milnacipran is the first SNRI marketed in Japan and many
European countries such as France, where it is currently
marketed as a drug for unipolar depression. In the US,
milnacipran is not approved for unipolar depression,
but is approved for fibromyalgia. Interestingly, it is the
other way around in Europe: milnacipran is approved for
unipolar depression but not approved for the treatment
of fibromyalgia. Milnacipran is a bit different from other
SNRIs in that it is a relatively more potent NET than
SERT inhibitor (Figure 7-30), whereas the others are
more potent SERT than NET inhibitors (Figures 7-28
and 7-29). This unique pharmacological profile may
explain milnacipran’s somewhat different clinical profile
compared to other SNRIs. Since noradrenergic actions
may be equally or more important for treatment of painrelated conditions compared to serotonergic actions, the

robust NET inhibition of milnacipran suggests that it may
be particularly useful in chronic pain related conditions,
not just fibromyalgia where it is approved, but possibly
as well for the painful physical symptoms associated with
unipolar depression and chronic neuropathic pain.
Milnacipran’s potent NET inhibition also suggests
a potentially favorable pharmacological profile for the
treatment of cognitive symptoms, including cognitive
symptoms of unipolar depression as well as cognitive
symptoms frequently associated with fibromyalgia,
sometimes called “fibro-fog.” Other clinical observations
possibly linked to milnacipran’s robust NET inhibition
are that it can be more energizing and activating than
other SNRIs. Common residual symptoms after treatment
with an SSRI include not only cognitive symptoms, but
also fatigue, lack of energy, and lack of interest, among
other symptoms (Figure 7-5). NET inhibition may be
related to observations that milnacipran may cause
more sweating and urinary hesitancy than some other
SNRIs. For patients with urinary hesitancy, generally
due theoretically to robust pro-noradrenergic actions at
bladder α1 receptors, an α1 antagonist can reduce these
symptoms. Milnacipran must generally be given twice
daily due to its shorter half-life.
Levomilnacipran

Milnacipran is actually a racemic mixture of two
enantiomers (Figure 7-30). The S or levo enantiomer
is the active enantiomer (Figure 7-31) and has been
independently developed for unipolar major depressive
disorder in the US, where it is mostly available. Like
racemic milnacipran, levomilnacipran has greater NET
inhibition than SERT inhibition and may target fatigue
and lack of energy as potential clinical advantages. Also,
it is dosed in a controlled-release formulation, so, unlike
racemic milnacipran, can be given only once a day.
Norepinephrine–Dopamine Reuptake Inhibitors
(NDRIs): Bupropion

For many years, the mechanism of action of bupropion
has been unclear and still remains somewhat
controversial. Bupropion itself only has weak reuptake
blocking properties for dopamine (DAT inhibition),
and for norepinephrine (NET inhibition) (Figures 7-34
and 7-35). No other specific or potent pharmacological
actions have been consistently identified for this
agent. Bupropion’s actions both as a drug for unipolar
depression and upon norepinephrine and dopamine
neurotransmission, however, have always appeared to be
more powerful than these weak properties could explain,
303

7


<<<PAGE 320>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

NDRI
DAT

NET

Figure 7-34 Norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitor
(NDRI). The prototypical norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibitor (NDRI) is bupropion. Bupropion has weak blocking
properties for the dopamine transporter (DAT) and for the
norepinephrine transporter (NET). Its antidepressant actions may
be explained in part by the more potent inhibitory properties of
its metabolites.

leading to proposals that bupropion acts rather vaguely as
an adrenergic modulator of some type.
Bupropion is metabolized to a number of active
metabolites, some of which are not only more potent
NET inhibitors than bupropion itself and equally potent
DAT inhibitors, but are also concentrated in the brain. In
some ways, therefore, bupropion is both an active drug
and a precursor for other active drugs (i.e., a prodrug
for multiple active metabolites). The most potent of
these is the + enantiomer of the 6-hydroxy metabolite of
bupropion, also known as radafaxine.
Can the net effects of bupropion on NETs (Figure 7-36A
and 7-36B) and DATs (Figure 7-36C) account for its clinical
actions in depressed patients at therapeutic doses? If one
believes that 90% transporter occupancy of DATs and
NETs are required for drugs for antidepressant actions,
the answer would be “no.” Human positron emission
tomography (PET) scans suggest that as little as 10–15%
and perhaps no more than 20–30% of striatal DATs may
be occupied at therapeutic doses of bupropion. NET
occupancy would be expected to be in this same range. Is
this enough to explain bupropion’s antidepressant actions?

NDRI Action

Figure 7-35 NDRI actions. The norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor portion of the NDRI molecule (left panel) and the dopamine reuptake
inhibitor portion of the NDRI molecule (right panel) are inserted into their respective reuptake pumps. Consequently, both pumps are
blocked, and synaptic norepinephrine and dopamine are increased.

304


<<<PAGE 321>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

NDRI action in prefrontal cortex: NET blockade increases NE and DA
“normal”
NE diffusion
NE
neuron

“normal”
DA diffusion

NET blockade
increases NE
diffusion

NET blockade
increases
DA
neuron DA diffusion
B

A

NDRI action in striatum:
DAT blockade increases DA
DAT blockade
increases
DA diffusion

7

“normal”
DA diffusion

DA
neuron
DAT

C

Figure 7-36 NDRI actions in prefrontal cortex and striatum. Norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitors (NDRIs) block the
transporters for both norepinephrine (NETs) and dopamine (DATs). (A) NET blockade in the prefrontal cortex leads to an increase in
synaptic norepinephrine (NE), thus increasing NE’s diffusion radius. (B) Because the prefrontal cortex lacks DATs, and NETs transport
dopamine (DA) as well as NE, NET blockade also leads to an increase in synaptic DA in the prefrontal cortex, further increasing DA’s
diffusion radius. Thus, despite the absence of DAT in the prefrontal cortex, NDRIs still increase DA there. (C) DAT is present in the
striatum, and thus DAT inhibition increases DA diffusion there.

Whereas it is clear from many research studies that
SSRIs must be dosed to occupy a substantial fraction of
SERTs, perhaps up to 80% or 90% of these transporters, in
order to be effective drugs for depressions, this is far less
clear for NET or DAT occupancy, particularly in the case
of drugs with an additional pharmacological mechanism
that may be synergistic with NET or DAT inhibition.
That is, when most SNRIs are given in doses that occupy
80–90% of SERTs, substantially fewer NETs are occupied,
yet there is evidence of both additional therapeutic
actions and NE-mediated side effects of these agents with
perhaps as little as 50% NET occupancy.

Furthermore, there appears to be such a thing as
“too much DAT occupancy.” That is, when 50% or more
of DATs are occupied rapidly and briefly, this can lead
to unwanted clinical actions, such as euphoria and
reinforcement (see discussion of the mysterious DATs
in Chapter 11 on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
[ADHD] treatment). In fact, rapid, short-lasting, and
high degrees of DAT occupancy are the pharmacological
characteristics of abusable stimulants such as cocaine
(discussed in Chapter 13 on drug abuse and reward).
When 50% or more of DATs are occupied more slowly
and in a more long-lasting manner, especially with

305


<<<PAGE 322>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Agomelatine

Agomelatine (Figure 7-37) is approved to treat unipolar
depression in many countries outside of the US. It has
agonist actions at melatonin 1 (MT1) and melatonin
2 (MT2) receptors and antagonist actions at 5HT2C
receptors (Figure 7-37). As discussed above in the section

agomelatine

B

T2

306

symptoms of reduced positive affect following treatment
with an SSRI or an SNRI, or who develop these symptoms
as a side effect of an SSRI or SNRI, frequently benefit from
switching to bupropion or from augmenting their SSRI
or SNRI treatment with bupropion. The combination
of bupropion with an SSRI or an SNRI has a theoretical
rationale as a strategy for covering the entire symptom
portfolio from symptoms of reduced positive affect to
symptoms of increased negative affect (Figure 6-41).
Bupropion combined with the μ-opioid antagonist
naltrexone is approved for the treatment of obesity and
mentioned in Chapter 13 on impulsivity/compulsivity
syndromes. Bupropion combined with the NMDA (Nmethyl-D-aspartate) antagonist dextromethorphan is in
late-stage clinical trials both for depression (mentioned
below) and for agitation in Alzheimer disease (discussed
in Chapter 12 on dementia).

5H

controlled-release formulations, DAT inhibitors are less
abusable and more useful for ADHD (see Chapter 11).
The issue to be considered here is whether a low level
of slow-onset and long-lasting DAT occupancy is the
desirable solution for the DAT mechanism to be useful
as a drug for unipolar depression: thus, not too much or
too fast DAT inhibition and therefore abusable; not too
little DAT inhibition and therefore ineffective; but just
enough DAT inhibition with slow enough onset and long
enough duration of action to make it an effective drug for
unipolar depression.
The fact that bupropion is not known to be
particularly abusable, is not a scheduled substance, yet
is proven effective for treating nicotine addiction, is
consistent with the possibility that it is occupying DATs
in the striatum and nucleus accumbens in a manner
sufficient to mitigate craving but not sufficient to
cause abuse (Figure 7-36C). This use of bupropion for
smoking cessation is discussed further in Chapter 13 on
drug abuse and reward. Perhaps this low level of DAT
occupancy (Figure 7-36C) is also how bupropion works in
unipolar depression, combined with an equally low action
on NETs (Figure 7-36A and 7-36B).
Bupropion was originally marketed only in the
US as an immediate-release dosage formulation for
three-times-daily administration as a drug for unipolar
depression. Development of a twice-daily formulation
(bupropion SR) and then a once-daily formulation
(bupropion XL) have not only reduced the frequency
of seizures at peak plasma drug levels, but have also
increased convenience and enhanced compliance as well.
Thus, the use of immediate-release bupropion is all but
abandoned in favor of once-daily administration.
Bupropion is generally activating or even stimulating.
Bupropion does not appear to cause the bothersome sexual
dysfunction that frequently occurs with many drugs for
unipolar depression that act by SERT inhibition, probably
because bupropion lacks a significant serotonergic
component to its mechanism of action. Thus, bupropion
has proven to be a useful drug for unipolar depression not
only for patients who cannot tolerate the serotonergic side
effects of SSRIs, but also for patients whose depression
does not respond to serotonergic boosting by SSRIs.
Consistent with its pharmacological profile, bupropion
is especially targeted at the symptoms of the “dopamine
deficiency syndrome” and “reduced positive affect” (see
Figure 6-41), including improvement in the symptoms
of loss of happiness, joy, interest, pleasure, energy,
enthusiasm, alertness, and self-confidence. Almost every
active clinician knows that patients who have residual

5H

T2

C

MT1

MT2

Figure 7-37 Agomelatine. Endogenous melatonin is secreted
by the pineal gland and mainly acts in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus to regulate circadian rhythms. There are three types
of receptors for melatonin: 1 and 2 (MT1 and MT2), which are
both involved in sleep, and 3, which is actually the enzyme
NRH–quinine oxidoreductase 2 and not thought to be involved
in sleep physiology. Agomelatine is not only a melatonin 1
and 2 receptor agonist, but is also a 5HT2C and 5HT2B receptor
antagonist, and is available to treat depression in countries
outside of the US.


<<<PAGE 323>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Agomelatine Releases Norepinephrine and Dopamine in the Frontal Cortex
350

agomelatine
vehicle

DA change from Basal (%)

NE change from Basal (%)

250

200

150
100

300
250
200
150
100

0

60

120

180

0

time (min)

60

120

180

time (min)

DA release

NE release

prefrontal cortex
overactivation

NE
neuron

locus coeruleus

VTA

DA
neuron

7

GABA
interneurons
5HT2C

agomelatine

agomelatine

5HT
neuron

raphe

brainstem neurotransmitter centers
Figure 7-38 Agomelatine releases norepinephrine and dopamine in the prefrontal cortex. Normally, serotonin binding at 5HT2C
receptors on γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) interneurons in the brainstem inhibits norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine (DA) release in the
prefrontal cortex. When a 5HT2C antagonist such as agomelatine binds to 5HT2C receptors on GABA interneurons (bottom red circle), it
prevents serotonin (5HT) from binding there and thus prevents inhibition of NE and DA release in the prefrontal cortex; in other words, it
disinhibits their release (top red circles).

on fluoxetine, 5HT2C antagonist actions are a property
of several drugs used to treat unipolar depression
(agomelatine, fluoxetine, trazodone, mirtazapine,
some tricyclic antidepressants) and bipolar depression
(olanzapine and quetiapine). 5HT2C receptors are
located in the midbrain raphe and prefrontal cortex
where they regulate the release of dopamine and
norepinephrine, an action thought to improve depressive
symptoms (see Figure 7-38). 5HT2C receptors are also

localized in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the
hypothalamus, the brain’s “pacemaker,” where they
interact with melatonin receptors also located there
(Figure 7-39). Light is detected by the retina during
the day, and this information travels to the SCN via the
retinohypothalamic tract (Figure 7-39; see also Chapter
6 and Figures 6-36A and 6-36B), which normally
synchronizes many circadian rhythms downstream from
the SCN. For example, both melatonin receptors and
307


<<<PAGE 324>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT2C receptors fluctuate in a circadian manner in the
SCN, with high receptor expression at night/dark and low
receptor expression in the day/light. That makes sense
since melatonin is only secreted at night in the dark (see
Chapter 6 and Figures 6-35 and 6-36B). In some patients
with unipolar depression, however, circadian rhythms
are “out of synch,” including low melatonin secretion at
night among numerous other changes. Theoretically,
agomelatine, by stimulating melatonin receptors in the
SCN and simultaneously blocking 5HT2C receptors there

as well, appears to resynchronize circadian rhythms,
reverse the phase delay of depression, and thereby exert
an antidepressant effect (Figure 7-39).
Mirtazapine

Mirtazapine (Figure 7-40) is marketed worldwide and, unlike
almost every other drug for unipolar depression, it
does not block any monoamine transporter. Instead,
mirtazapine is a multifunctional drug with five principal
mechanisms of action: 5HT2A, 5HT2C, 5HT3, α2-adrenergic,

NE

DA

agomelatine
VTA LC

retinohypothalamic
tract
SCN

pineal
gland

Healthy Control
Depression
sleep
11 pm 7 am

7 am

sleep
11 pm 7 am

Figure 7-39 Agomelatine may resynchronize circadian rhythms. Agomelatine, which acts as an agonist at melatonin 1 and 2 receptors,
may resynchronize circadian rhythms by acting as “substitute melatonin.” Thus, even in the absence of melatonin production in the
pineal gland, agomelatine can stimulate melatonin 1 and 2 receptors in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) to reset circadian rhythms.
5HT2C receptors are also present in the SCN and blocked by agomelatine. In addition, by blocking 5HT2C receptors in the ventral
tegmental area (VTA) and locus coeruleus (LC), agomelatine promotes dopamine (DA) and norepinephrine (NE) release in the prefrontal
cortex.
α
1

α
2A

α
2A

H
1

H
1

mirtazapine
(NaSSA)

5HT2A

2C

2C

5HT

T3
5H

T3

5HT

5H

308

mianserin
mianserin

5HT2A

Figure 7-40 Mirtazapine and
mianserin. Mirtazapine’s primary
therapeutic action is α2 antagonism.
It also blocks three serotonin (5HT)
receptors: 5HT2A, 5HT2C, and 5HT3.
Finally, it blocks histamine 1 (H1)
receptors. Mianserin has a similar
binding profile to mirtazapine, the only
difference being additional effects at α1
receptors. NaSSA: noradrenergic and
specific serotonergic antidepressant.


<<<PAGE 325>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

and H1 histamine antagonism. Two other α2 antagonists
are marketed as drugs for depression in some countries
(but not the US), namely mianserin (worldwide except US)
and setiptiline (Japan). Unlike mirtazapine, mianserin also
has potent α1 antagonist properties, which tend to mitigate
its ability to enhance serotonergic neurotransmission so
that this drug enhances predominantly noradrenergic
neurotransmission, yet with associated 5HT2A, 5HT2C,
5HT3, and H1 antagonist properties (Figure 7-40).
Clinical consequences of blocking H1 receptors
have been discussed in Chapter 5 and illustrated in
Figure 5-13A, showing that H1 antagonist actions are
associated with sedation and weight gain. 5HT2A antagonist
properties also have been discussed in Chapter 5 and
illustrated in Figures 5-16 and 5-17, showing increases in
downstream release of dopamine in the prefrontal cortex,
potentially associated with antidepressant actions. 5HT2A
antagonism also improves sleep, especially slow-wave sleep,
which can be helpful in many depressed patients. 5HT2C
antagonist actions were just explained in the preceding
section and illustrated in Figure 7-38, showing enhanced
release of norepinephrine and dopamine in the prefrontal
cortex, which would theoretically improve depression.
Here we explain the other actions of mirtazapine, notably
α2 antagonist actions and 5HT3 antagonist actions. Some
other drugs for unipolar depression also have potent α2
antagonist actions (Figure 5-35), including brexpiprazole
(Figure 5-57) and quetiapine (Figure 5-45). Some other
drugs for bipolar depression also have α2 antagonist
actions, including quetiapine (Figure 5-45) and lurasidone
(Figure 5-53). Another agent for treatment of unipolar
depression that has potent 5HT3 antagonist properties is
vortioxetine, discussed below.
Alpha-2 Antagonist Action

Alpha-2 antagonism is another way to enhance the
release of monoamines and exert an antidepressant
action in unipolar depression. Recall that norepinephrine
turns off its own release by interacting with presynaptic
α2 autoreceptors on noradrenergic neurons (discussed in
Chapter 6 and illustrated in Figures 6-14 through 6-16;
see also Figure 7-41A and B on the right). Therefore,
when an α2 antagonist is administered, norepinephrine
can no longer turn off its own release and noradrenergic
neurons are thus disinhibited from their axon terminals,
such as those in the raphe and in the cortex as shown in
Figure 7-41C on the right.
The general principle of serotonin turning off
serotonin release at serotonin 5HT1B autoreceptors
(Figure 4-41 and Figure 7-41A compared to 7-41B on

the left) has already been discussed and is illustrated
again here. However, there are also α2 “hetero” receptors
on serotonin neurons (Figure 7-41A, B, C on the left).
There are many cases where neurotransmitter release is
controlled not only by their “own” autoreceptor, but also
by presynaptic receptors for “another” neurotransmitter
at heteroreceptors (Figure 7-41A; see also Figure 4-45
and discussion of presynaptic 5HT1B heteroreceptors on
norepinephrine, dopamine, histamine, and acetylcholine
neurons). The same phenomenon is shown in Figure
7-41B where not only is serotonin turning off serotonin
release at its own 5HT1B presynaptic autoreceptor on
the left hand part of the serotonin neuron, but also
norepinephrine migrating from a norepinephrine
terminal is turning off serotonin release via an α2
presynaptic heteroreceptor on the right hand part of the
serotonin neuron. Norepinephrine is also turning off its
own release via an α2 presynaptic receptor (Figure 7-41B
on the right at the norepinephrine neuron). This sets up
the situation whereby an α2 antagonist can have a dual
effect, facilitating the release of both norepinephrine and
serotonin (Figure 7-41C). Not only does α2 antagonism
disinhibit norepinephrine release (Figure 7-41C on the
right), it also disinhibits serotonin release (Figure 7-41C
on the left). Thus, α2 antagonism causes dual 5HT–NE
action. This is something like the same net outcome as
an SNRI but by an entirely different mechanism. Rather
than blocking serotonin and norepinephrine presynaptic
transporters, α2 antagonism “cuts the brake cable” of
noradrenergic inhibition (NE stepping on the brake to
prevent 5HT and NE release shown in Figure 7-41B is
blocked in Figure 7-41C).
These two mechanisms, monoamine transport
blockade and α2 antagonism, are synergistic, so
that blocking them simultaneously gives a much
more powerful disinhibitory signal to these two
neurotransmitters than if only one mechanism is blocked.
For this reason, the α2 antagonist mirtazapine is often
combined with SNRIs for treatment of cases that do
not respond to an SNRI alone. This combination of
mirtazapine with an SNRI is sometimes called “California
rocket fuel” because of the potentially powerful drugs
for depression blasting the patient out of the depths of
depression.
5HT3 Antagonist Action

The 5HT3 receptors best known to clinicians are perhaps
those localized in the chemoreceptor trigger zone of the
brainstem, where they mediate nausea and vomiting,
especially in response to cancer chemotherapy, and
309

7


<<<PAGE 326>>>
5HT neuron

5HT1
B/D

NE neuron

α2

α2

A

5HT1
B/D

α2

α2

B

= α2 antagonist

5HT1
B/D

α2

α2

C

Figure 7-41 Alpha-2 antagonism increases serotonin and norepinephrine release in raphe and cortex. (A) On the left, a serotonergic
neuron is shown with 5HT1B/D autoreceptors and α2-adrenergic heteroreceptors. On the right, a noradrenergic neuron is shown with
presynaptic α2 autoreceptors. (B) 5HT1B/D autoreceptors and α2-adrenergic heteroreceptors on serotonergic neurons both function as
“brakes” to shut off serotonin release when bound by their respective neurotransmitters (left). Likewise, when norepinephrine binds
to α2 autoreceptors on the norepinephrine neuron, this shuts off further norepinephrine release (right). (C) Alpha-2 antagonists “cut
the serotonin brake cable” when they block α2 presynaptic heteroreceptors, thus leading to enhanced serotonin release (left). Alpha-2
antagonists also “cut the norepinephrine brake cable” by blocking presynaptic α2 autoreceptors, leading to enhanced norepinephrine
release (right).


<<<PAGE 327>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

also those localized in the gastrointestinal tract itself,
where they mediate nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea/
bowel motility when stimulated by serotonin, including
when stimulated by serotonin that is a side effect of
peripherally increased serotonin by SSRIs/SNRIs.
Blocking these 5HT3 receptors can therefore protect
against chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
as well as against serotonin-induced gastrointestinal
side effects that can accompany agents that increase
serotonin.
More important to the mechanism of action of central
5HT3 antagonists such as mirtazapine and vortioxetine
in the treatment of unipolar depression are the 5HT3
receptors in the brain that regulate the release of
various neurotransmitters downstream in some brain
circuits that mediate the symptoms of depression. 5HT3
receptors in the brain are usually localized on GABA
(γ-aminobutyric acid) interneurons, and they are always
excitatory. This means that when serotonin stimulates a
5HT3 receptor, it causes GABA to inhibit whatever neuron
is downstream from it. This was shown for 5HT3–GABA
interactions at glutamate neurons (Figure 4-49) and
at acetylcholine and norepinephrine neurons (Figure
4-48). 5HT3 antagonism is a powerful disinhibitor of
glutamate release (Figure 7-42) and of acetylcholine and
norepinephrine (Figure 7-43), actions that theoretically
release neurotransmitters downstream to have
antidepressant action.
Serotonin Antagonist/Reuptake Inhibitors (SARIs)

The prototype drug that blocks serotonin 2A and 2C
receptors as well as serotonin reuptake is trazodone,
classified as a serotonin antagonist/reuptake inhibitor
(SARI) (Figure 7-44). Nefazodone is another SARI with
robust 5HT2A antagonist actions and weaker 5HT2C
antagonism and SERT inhibition, but is no longer
commonly used because of rare liver toxicity (Figure
7-44). Trazodone is a very interesting agent, since it acts
like two different drugs, depending upon the dose and
the formulation. We discussed a very similar situation in
Chapter 5 for quetiapine (Figure 5-46).
A more complete picture of trazodone’s binding
properties has emerged from recent studies (Figures 7-44
and 7-45) and reflects that it is a serotonin antagonist
not just at 5HT2A and 5HT2C receptors, but also at 5HT1D,
5HT2B, and 5HT7 receptors. In addition, trazodone has
potent antagonist properties at α1B, α1A, α2C, and α2B
receptors, H1 histamine receptors, and agonist actions at
5HT1A receptors (Figure 7-45). Because of these various
pharmacological actions occur with varying potencies,

it means that trazodone will act predominantly via its
highest-affinity receptor interactions at low doses, and
will recruit its lower-affinity receptor actions at higher
doses.
Different Drug at Different Doses and at Different
Delivery Rates?

Trazodone is famous for its effectiveness and utility at
low doses as a hypnotic (Figure 7-46). That is, doses of
trazodone lower than those effective for antidepressant
action are quite frequently used for insomnia. Hypnotic
doses engage the receptors for which trazodone has
the highest affinity and, amongst these, blockade is
hypothetically linked to hypnotic actions (i.e., 5HT2A,
α1 subtypes, and H1). Blocking 5HT2A receptors
enhances slow-wave sleep, and blocking α1 subtypes
and H1 receptors interferes with monoamine arousal
mechanisms (discussed in Chapter 5 and illustrated in
Figures 5-13 and 5-14). The best way to deliver a hypnotic
is with a standard oral formulation that is immediate in
onset, peaks quickly, and is out of the system by morning.
Since insomnia is one of the most frequent residual
symptoms of depression after treatment with an SSRI/
SNRI (discussed earlier in this chapter and illustrated in
Figure 7-5), addition of a hypnotic is often necessary in
treating patients with a major depressive episode. Not
only can addition of a hypnotic potentially relieve the
insomnia itself, it may also increase remission rates due
to improvement of other symptoms such as loss of energy
and depressed mood (Figure 7-5). Thus, the ability of low
doses of trazodone to improve sleep in depressed patients
has led to its popular use at low doses as an augmenting
option for residual insomnia that persists after treatment
with SSRIs/SNRIs.
The original oral formulation of trazodone used for
depression was short in duration, required multiple daily
doses higher than hypnotic doses (Figure 7-47), and was
associated with peak dose sedation after daytime doses,
not an ideal profile for a drug for unipolar depression.
Although trazodone’s antidepressant actions at higher
doses are undisputed as well as its lack of causing sexual
dysfunction or weight gain, the presence of daytime
sedation makes using trazodone at antidepressant doses
in the standard oral formulation difficult in clinical
practice. However, a once-daily controlled-release
formulation with higher doses of trazodone is available
for use in depression, which blunts peak plasma drug
levels to reduce daytime sedation. These higher doses
recruit additional known antidepressant receptor actions,
including serotonin reuptake inhibition (Figures 7-10
311

7


<<<PAGE 328>>>
Serotonin at 5HT3 Receptors Regulates Glutamate
Release and Downstream Neurotransmitters
GABA

3+

-

5HT
Glu

Prefrontal Cortex

Raphe

+
3

non-parvalbumin positive,
regular spiking, late
spiking or bursting
GABA interneuron
inhibitory

Regulation of downstream
release of DA, NE, ACh, HA

excitatory
5HT3 receptor

5HT3 Antagonists Disinhibit Glutamate Release and Enhance the Release
of Downstream Neurotransmitters to Improve Depression
GABA

3 +

-

5HT3
antagonist
5HT
Glu

Prefrontal Cortex

Raphe

Regulation of downstream
release of DA, NE, ACh, HA
Figure 7-42 5HT3 receptors regulate glutamate and downstream neurotransmitters. Serotonin (5HT) binding at 5HT3 receptors on
GABA interneurons is stimulatory; thus, it increases GABA release. GABA, in turn, inhibits glutamate pyramidal neurons, reducing
glutamate output. Decreased release of excitatory glutamate means that there may be a resultant decrease in downstream release of
neurotransmitters, since pyramidal neurons synapse with the neurons of most other neurotransmitters. Antagonism at the 5HT3 receptor
removes GABA inhibition and thus disinhibits pyramidal neurons. The increase in glutamate neurotransmission may in turn increase the
downstream release of neurotransmitters.


<<<PAGE 329>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

5HT3 Receptors Cause Inhibition of Norepinephrine and
Acetylcholine Release
5HT
3
+

GABA

5HT

Raphe

GABA inhibits
NE release
Prefrontal
Cortex

5HT

inhibition of NE release

3

+

GABA
GABA inhibits
ACh release

-

+
3

inhibition of ACh release

non-parvalbumin positive,
regular spiking, late
spiking or bursting
GABA interneuron

ACh

Basal
Forebrain

inhibitory
excitatory
5HT3 receptor

NE
Locus
Coeruleus

7

5HT3 Antagonists Enhance Norepinephrine and
Acetylcholine Release

3
+

5HT

Raphe

GABA
5HT3
antagonist

Prefrontal
Cortex

NE release

3

+
GABA
5HT3
antagonist

ACh release

ACh

Basal
Forebrain

NE
Locus
Coeruleus

Figure 7-43 5HT3 receptors regulate norepinephrine and acetylcholine release. When serotonin (5HT) is released, it binds to
5HT3 receptors on GABAergic neurons, which release GABA onto noradrenergic and cholinergic neurons, thus reducing release of
norepinephrine (NE) and acetylcholine (ACh), respectively. Antagonism at the 5HT3 receptor removes GABA inhibition and disinhibits
noradrenergic and cholinergic neurons, leading to release of norepinephrine and acetylcholine.

313


<<<PAGE 330>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

α
1

α
2

α
1

T
5H
1A

5H

T

H
1

T2

A

5HT1D

NE

SERT

trazodone
mianserin

SERT

mianserin
nefazodone
2A

2B

5HT

5HT

C

T2

T2

5HT7

5H

C

5H

Figure 7-44 Serotonin antagonist/reuptake inhibitors (SARIs). Shown here are icons for two serotonin antagonist/reuptake inhibitors
(SARIs): trazodone and nefazodone. These agents have a dual action, but the two mechanisms are different from the dual action of
the serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). The SARIs act by potent blockade of serotonin 2A (5HT2A) receptors as well
as dose-dependent blockade of serotonin 2C (5HT2C) receptors and the serotonin transporter (SERT). SARIs also block α1-adrenergic
receptors. Trazodone has the unique properties of histamine 1 (H1) receptor antagonism and antagonism at multiple additional
serotonin receptors.

target affinity Ki (nM)

1000

higher affinity

lower affinity

800
600
400
200

e)

1
on
-s

ch

sig

m

a

(n

aN

tiv

D

2
D

T1
B

el
ec

ne
an

5H

t)
ra

3

l(

D

2B
ph

a

T7
al

5H

RT

2C

T2
C
5H

SE

H

1

al
ph
a

1A

B

T1
A

a
ph
al

5H

5H
T2

T1
D

1B

5H

al
ph
a

5H

T2
A

0

Figure 7-45 Trazodone affinity for different receptors. Trazodone has binding affinity for numerous receptor subtypes, but the potency
varies. Thus, at low doses, trazodone may act predominantly via its highest-affinity receptor actions, with other properties becoming
relevant only at higher doses.

through 7-15) and antagonist action at 5HT1D, 5HT2C,
5HT7, and α2 receptors, as well as 5HT1A agonist actions.
The bottom line is that there are numerous potential
mechanisms to cause monoamine neurotransmitter
release and antidepressant actions at higher doses.
Furthermore, with first-dose hypnotic actions, trazodone
can exert its antidepressant actions with rapid onset and
enhanced tolerability for some side effects compared
to SSRIs/SNRIs. That is, SSRIs/SNRIs raise serotonin
314

levels to act at all serotonin receptors, stimulating 5HT1A
receptors for therapeutic actions while concomitantly
stimulating 5HT2A receptors and 5HT2C receptors that
theoretically cause the side effects of SSRIs including
sexual dysfunction, insomnia, and activation/anxiety
(Figure 7-48A). However, trazodone blocks the actions of
serotonin at 5HT2A and 5HT2C receptors, accounting for
its profile of lack of sexual dysfunction and reduction of
anxiety and insomnia.


<<<PAGE 331>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Trazodone for Depression:
Serotonin Antagonist/
Reuptake Inhibitor (SARI)
α
1

Trazodone for Insomnia:
Multifunctional Neurotransmitter
Antagonist

α
2

A
T1
5H

5H

α1

H
1

T2

A

5HT1D

trazodone
mianserin

H1

SERT

5HT2A

B
HT2

5HT7

5H

T2
C

5

Figure 7-46 Trazodone at different doses. (Left)
High doses that recruit saturation of the
serotonin transporter (i.e., 150–600 mg) are
required for trazodone to have therapeutic
actions in depression. At this high dose,
trazodone is a multifunctional serotonergic
agent with antagonist actions at 5HT2A and
5HT2C receptors as well as additional serotonin
receptors. Trazodone is also an α1 and histamine
1 (H1) antagonist at these doses. (Right) At lower
doses of trazodone (i.e., 25–150 mg), it does
not saturate the serotonin transporter; it does,
however, retain antagonist actions at 5HT2A, α1,
and H1 receptors, with corresponding efficacy for
insomnia.

dose for depression
(150-600 mg)

dose for insomnia
(25-150 mg)

Figure 7-47 Trazodone IR versus XR
given once nightly. Shown here are
steady-state estimates of the plasma
trazodone levels from the hypnotic dosing
of 50, 75, or 100 mg once nightly of
trazodone immediate release (IR). Peak
drug concentrations are reached rapidly
with a similarly rapid fall off overnight.
The minimum levels estimated for
antidepressant actions of trazodone are
reached transiently, if at all, by hypnotic
dosing. By contrast, 300 mg of trazodone
extended release (XR) given once
nightly generates plasma levels that rise
slowly and never fall below minimum
antidepressant concentrations. Peak levels
of trazodone XR at 300 mg are about the
same as the peak levels of trazodone IR
at 100 mg.

Trazodone IR vs. XR Given Once Nightly
2.2
2
1.8
1.6
1.4

300 mg XR qhs

mg/L

1.2
1

100 mg IR qhs

minimum
antidepressant
concentration

0.8
0.65
0.5
0.3

75 mg IR qhs
50 mg IR qhs

0.1
0
23:30

4:00

8:00

12:00

16:00

20:00

23:30

hours

Vortioxetine

Vortioxetine is a drug approved for treating unipolar
depression and which causes SERT inhibition as well as
having antagonist actions at 5HT3 and 5HT7 receptors,
with agonist actions at 5HT1A receptors and weak
partial agonist to antagonist actions at 5HT1B/D receptors
(Figure 7-49). This unique blend of pharmacological
actions leads to downstream release of many different
neurotransmitters as will be explained here, and these
actions hypothetically lead to antidepressant effects
in unipolar depression, characterized by robust pro-

cognitive actions, especially improving processing speed.
The importance of cognitive symptoms in unipolar
depression is discussed in Chapter 6 as the possible
clinical consequence of loss of neurotrophic factors,
synapses, and neurons (Figures 6-27 through 6-31).
What is cognitive processing speed and what could
be the mechanism by which vortioxetine improves this
more than other antidepressants? “Cognition” is not a
single, simple brain function and “cognitive dysfunction”
is not a single, simple symptom. Cognitive impairment
that can be measured as part of the symptom profile
315

7


<<<PAGE 332>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

SSRI Action

SARI Action at 5HT Synapses
SARI

SSRI

5HT2A

5HT1A

5HT2C

5HT2A

5HT1A

antidepressant

antidepressant

sexual dysfunction
insomnia
anxiety

sexual dysfunction
insomnia
anxiety

A

5HT2C

B

Figure 7-48 SSRI vs. SARI. (A) Inhibition of the serotonin transporter (SERT) by a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) at
the presynaptic neuron increases serotonin at all receptors, with 5HT1A-mediated antidepressant actions but also 5HT2A- and 5HT2Cmediated sexual dysfunction, insomnia, and anxiety. (B) SERT inhibition by a serotonin 2A antagonist/reuptake inhibitor (SARI) at the
presynaptic neuron increases serotonin at 5HT1A receptors, where it leads to antidepressant actions. However, SARI action also blocks
serotonin actions at 5HT2A and 5HT2C receptors, thus failing to cause sexual dysfunction, insomnia, or anxiety. In fact, these blocking
actions at 5HT2A and 5HT2C receptors can improve insomnia and anxiety, and theoretically can exert antidepressant actions of their own.

of a psychiatric disorder, and that can be targeted
for improvement with drug treatment, is the type
of cognition most relevant to psychopharmacology.
Intellectual impairments as measured by IQ are not
particularly amenable to improvement with drug
treatment and, other than with schizophrenia, are not
generally associated with psychiatric disorders treated
in psychopharmacology. On the other hand, “problems
concentrating” and “difficulty paying attention” are
seen in many psychiatric disorders and are treatable
in a range of conditions, including mood disorders
(Chapter 6), anxiety disorders (Chapter 8), schizophrenia
and psychotic disorders (Chapter 4), ADHD (Chapter
11), sleep disorders (Chapter 10), and beyond. Such
cognitive symptoms are a great example of a domain of
psychopathology that cuts across many, many psychiatric
disorders and implies that the same circuits and neuronal
networks are impaired across all these various disorders.
It also implies that the same treatments may work to
316

improve cognition across all these various disorders.
“Memory difficulties” are the hallmark of dementia
and discussed in Chapter 12. “Memory difficulties” in
mood disorders are discussed in Chapter 6 and may be
a component of chronic depression and PTSD, when
loss of synapses and neurons in a major node in the
neuronal network of memory, namely the hippocampus,
occurs. If early loss of neurotrophic factors in mood
disorders hypothetically causes potentially reversible loss
of synapses, it is important to treat cognitive symptoms
in depression soon after they emerge so effective
treatments for depression can trigger the release of
growth factors and restore synaptogenesis (Figures 6-27
through 6-31), before neurons are lost and the changes
become irreversible. Thus, recognizing and targeting
cognitive symptoms is becoming more important as new
treatments emerge.
But how can we recognize and monitor cognitive
symptoms in psychopharmacology? A simple if


<<<PAGE 333>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

vortioxetine
T
5H
1A

5H

T1B

5HT1D

SERT

T3

5HT7

5H

Figure 7-49 Vortioxetine. Vortioxetine is a serotonin reuptake
inhibitor and also has actions at several serotonin receptors,
including 5HT1A, 5HT1B, 5HT1D, 5HT3, and 5HT7.

somewhat whimsical way to categorize cognitive
dysfunction and to understand the role of improving
individual domains of cognition applicable to
psychopharmacology is illustrated in Figure 7-50 as the
“Fab Four” of cognition. Remember the original Fab
Four, the Beatles? Each musician can represent one of the
Fab Four of cognition as well. John, arguably the leader,
wanted all the attention, so he represents “attention,”
which some also refer to as concentration. Paul, perhaps
the brains of the operation and the writer of many of
the songs, is “executive function,” also called “problem
solving.” The quiet culture carrier of the group, George,
represents memory, of which there are many kinds,
short-term, long-term, verbal, and more. And finally, the
drummer, Ringo, represents processing speed, or pace.
You can imagine if any of these four is out of synch with
the other three, the music would be a disaster. All four
can potentially be compromised in psychiatric disorders.
It turns out that for depression, a test that measures a bit
of all these dimensions of cognition, but arguably most
prominently measures processing speed, is the DSST
(digital symbol substitution test). When processing speed
is slowed, just like an offbeat drummer in a band, overall
cognitive functioning can also feel like a disaster for a
depressed patient, lagging in cognitive performance,
with mental effort now becoming exhausting and
work productivity greatly reduced, all causing great
frustration. This simple, quick DSST can be useful in

7
Figure 7-50 The “Fab Four” of cognition. Cognition is not
a single, simple brain function. Rather, there are four major
cognitive domains, represented here by the four members
of the Beatles: attention or concentration (John), executive
function or problem solving (Paul), memory (George), and
processing speed (Ringo). All four domains work in concert to
keep cognition playing at its best; if any one of these domains
dysfunctions, then cognitive impairment can occur.

calibrating the objective decline in cognitive performance
of patients with subjective cognitive complaints, and in
tracking their improvement on treatment. Vortioxetine
improves cognition better than other antidepressants in
unipolar major depression, as demonstrated by superior
performance on the DSST measuring processing speed.
How does vortioxetine work as an antidepressant and
specifically how does it exert its superior pro-cognitive
effects?
SERT Inhibition and 5HT1A Agonism

To begin, vortioxetine is a SERT inhibitor and a 5HT1A
agonist, thus combining the actions already discussed
for SSRIs (Figures 7-10 through 7-15) and for combining
SERT inhibition with 5HT1A agonists (see Chapter 5 and
Figures 7-23 through 7-27). These mechanisms alone
are sufficient for antidepressant action since they raise
both serotonin levels (SERT inhibition) and the pro317


<<<PAGE 334>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT neuron

5HT1B/D
axon terminal
autoreceptor

SSRI
SERT
5HT1B/D
antagonist

A

B

C

Figure 7-51 SERT inhibition and 5HT1B/D presynaptic antagonism. (A) 5HT1B/D autoreceptors and serotonin transporters (SERTs) are
both present on the axon terminal of a serotonin (5HT) neuron. (B) When SERT is inhibited, synaptic availability of serotonin is increased.
However, serotonin binding at the 5HT1B/D receptor prevents further serotonin release. (C) When both SERTs and the 5HT1B/D receptors
are blocked, increased synaptic serotonin via SERT inhibition is combined with ongoing serotonin release via 5HT1B/D antagonism,
further increasing the availability of serotonin in the synapse.

cognitive neurotransmitter dopamine, acetylcholine,
and norepinephrine levels (5HT1A agonism) (see also
discussion in Chapter 4, Figure 4-44).

this enhances the release of the antidepressant and procognitive neurotransmitters dopamine, norepinephrine,
histamine, and acetylcholine (Figure 7-52B).

SERT Inhibition and 5HT1B/D Presynaptic Antagonism

SERT Inhibition and 5HT3 Antagonism

An additional receptor action that theoretically
raises serotonin levels even further than by SERT
inhibition alone is inhibition of the 5HT1B/D presynaptic
autoreceptor (Figure 7-51). That is, when SERT is
inhibited, the amount of synaptic serotonin that
accumulates is blunted because the build-up of serotonin
stimulates presynaptic 5HT1B/D autoreceptors, and this
turns off further serotonin release (compare Figure
7-51A and B). However, when 5HT1B/D presynaptic
autoreceptors are simultaneously inhibited, negative
feedback to serotonin release cannot occur, so serotonin
release increases even more (Figure 7-51C).

Another mechanism whereby 5HT3 antagonists enhance
the release of the pro-cognitive neurotransmitters
acetylcholine, dopamine, and norepinephrine is
illustrated in the earlier discussion of 5HT3- antagonism
(Figure 7-43) and is one of the most potent of
vortioxetine’s several pharmacological actions.

5HT1B Partial Agonism/Antagonism at
Heteroreceptors

Another putative mechanism of antidepressant and
pro-cognitive actions of vortioxetine is antagonist/partial
agonist actions on 5HT1B receptors located on presynaptic
nerve terminals of acetylcholine, dopamine, histamine,
and norepinephrine neurons in the prefrontal cortex.
These receptors were discussed earlier in Chapter 4 and
illustrated in Figure 4-45, showing how serotonin acting
at these receptors inhibits the release of acetylcholine,
histamine, dopamine, and norepinephrine. These
receptors are shown again in Figure 7-52A and when
they are blocked by a 5HT1B partial agonist/antagonist,
318

SERT Inhibition and 5HT7 Antagonism

Serotonin inhibits its own release by actions at 5HT7
receptors (compare Figures 7-53A and 7-53B). Thus,
antagonism at 5HT7 receptors enhances serotonin release,
especially in the presence of SERT inhibition (Figure
7-53C). Blocking 5HT7 receptors on GABA neurons in
the brainstem raphe prevents the downstream inhibition
of serotonin release by GABA, especially in the presence
of SERT inhibition, and leads instead to increased
downstream release of serotonin (Figure 7-53C).
5HT7 receptors also regulate glutamate release
downstream in the prefrontal cortex (Figure 7-54A).
Blocking these 5HT7 receptors on GABA interneurons
enhances the release of glutamate and of downstream
monoamine neurotransmitters (compare Figures 7-54A
and 7-54B), which may have both antidepressant and
pro-cognitive actions. Indeed, in experimental animals,
selective 5HT7 antagonists do have pro-cognitive and
antidepressant actions. Also, numerous agents with


<<<PAGE 335>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

5HT1B Heteroreceptor Regulation of NE, DA, HA,
and ACh in Prefrontal Cortex
Baseline Neurotransmitter Release

Prefrontal Cortex

5HT
1B
Raphe

Figure 7-52 5HT1B heteroreceptors
regulate neurotransmitter release. (A)
5HT1B receptors on the presynaptic
nerve terminals of norepinephrine
(NE), dopamine (DA), acetylcholine
(ACh), and histamine (HA) neurons can
theoretically regulate the release of these
neurotransmitters. Serotonin (5HT) acting
at these receptors would be inhibitory.
(B) Antagonism or partial agonism of
5HT1B heteroreceptors on ACh, HA, DA,
and NE neurons would prevent serotonin
from exerting its inhibitory effects, thus
potentially increasing the release of these
neurotransmitters.

NE
1B
DA
1B
HA

1B
ACh

A

ACh
BF

HA
TMN

DA
VTA

NE

7

LC

5HT1B Antagonist/Partial Agonist Enhances Neurotransmitter Release
Prefrontal Cortex

5HT
1B
Raphe

5HT1B
antagonist/
partial agonist
1B
5HT1B
antagonist/
partial agonist

1B

5HT1B
antagonist/
partial agonist
1B
BF = Basal Forebrain
TMN = Tuberomammillary Nucleus
VTA = Ventral Tegmental Area
LC = Locus Coeruleus

5HT1B
antagonist/
partial agonist

ACh
BF

HA
TMN

B

5HT7 antagonism are effective drugs for depression and
possibly for improving cognition, including not only
vortioxetine, but also trazodone (Figures 7-44 and 7-45),
quetiapine, brexpiprazole, aripiprazole, and lurasidone
(see Chapter 5 and Figure 5-39).

DA
VTA

NE
LC

Putting it all together, vortioxetine’s pharmacological
mechanism of action is multimodal, with numerous
synergistic mechanisms not only leading to the release of
serotonin and to potentiating the release of serotonin (i.e.,
via SERT, 5HT1B/D presynaptic, and 5HT7 blockade), but
319


<<<PAGE 336>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 7-53A 5HT7 receptors regulate
serotonin release, part 1. 5HT7
receptors are located on GABA
interneurons in the raphe nucleus. At
baseline, when these receptors are not
bound, serotonin is released into the
prefrontal cortex.

Baseline Serotonin Release

baseline
5HT release

PFC

overactivation

5HT7
receptor

GABA neuron

5HT
neuron

raphe

also leading to the release of four further antidepressant
and pro-cognitive neurotransmitters, namely dopamine,
norepinephrine, acetylcholine, and histamine (i.e., via
5HT1A agonism, 5HT1B heteroreceptor partial agonism/
antagonism, and 5HT3 antagonism). This unique
combination of mechanisms may account for the unique
pro-cognitive actions of vortioxetine in unipolar major
depression.
320

Neuroactive Steroids

Another rapid-onset mood treatment is the neuroactive
steroid brexanolone, a cyclodextrin-based intravenous
formulation of the naturally occurring neuroactive
steroid allopregnanolone (Figure 7-55). Administered
by a 60-hour intravenous infusion for postpartum
depression, brexanolone has a rapid-onset and sustained
antidepressant effect. As briefly mentioned in Chapter 6,


<<<PAGE 337>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

5HT7 Inhibits Serotonin Release

Figure 7-53B 5HT7 receptors
regulate serotonin release, part
2. When serotonin binds to 5HT7
receptors on GABA interneurons in
the raphe nucleus, this stimulates
GABA release. GABA in turn inhibits
serotonin release in the prefrontal
cortex.

reduced
5HT release

PFC

overactivation

7

5HT7
receptor

GABA neuron

5HT
neuron

Stimulation of 5HT7 Receptors
in the Raphe Reduces
Serotonin Release

raphe

pregnant women have high circulating and presumably
brain levels of naturally occurring allopregnanolone.
After delivery of the baby, there is a precipitous decline
in circulating and presumably brain levels of neuroactive
steroids, hypothetically triggering the sudden onset of a
major depressive episode in vulnerable women. Rapidly
restoring neuroactive steroid levels over a 60-hour period
of continuous intravenous infusion with brexanolone
rapidly reverses depression, and the 60-hour duration of
administration seems to provide the time necessary for
postpartum patients to accommodate to their lower levels

of neuroactive steroids without relapsing, following the
infusion.
Neuroactive steroids bind to GABAA receptors at
a specific allosteric site called the neuroactive steroid
site, which enhances the inhibitory action of GABA
at GABAA receptors (Figure 7-56; see also discussion
in Chapter 6 and Figures 6-20 and 6-21). Neuroactive
steroids target the benzodiazepine-sensitive GABAA
receptors, just like benzodiazepines (Figure 7-56A)
but also the benzodiazepine-insensitive GABAA
receptors, unlike benzodiazepines (Figure 7-56B).
321


<<<PAGE 338>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

7-53C 5HT7 receptors
5HT7 Antagonist Enhances Serotonin Release Figure
regulate serotonin release,

part 3. Antagonism at
5HT7 receptors on GABA
interneurons in the raphe
nucleus turns off GABA release.
This prevents the downstream
inhibition of serotonin release
by GABA, thus increasing
serotonin in the prefrontal
cortex.

increased
5HT release

PFC

overactivation

5HT7
antagonist

GABA neuron

5HT
neuron

raphe

Certain general anesthetics (e.g., propofol, etomidate,
alphaxolone, alfadalone) also bind at the same sites as
neuroactive steroids, but are dosed much higher. Since
benzodiazepines do not have antidepressant actions, it is
the targeting of the benzodiazepine-insensitive GABAA
receptors (Figure 7-56B) that is thought to be the primary
mechanism of antidepressant action of neuroactive
steroids.
The benzodiazepine-insensitive GABAA receptors
are extrasynaptic and mediate tonic inhibition (see
discussion in Chapter 6 and Figure 6-20). The way in
which engaging their allosteric neuroactive steroid sites
results in a rapid and possibly enduring treatment for
major depression is unknown. Hints as to why boosting
GABA action may be effective for a novel approach to
322

the treatment of depression come from observations that
GABA levels are reduced in the plasma, spinal fluid, and
brains of depressed patients; GABA interneurons are
reduced in brains of depressed patients; and mRNA levels
for the specific GABAA receptor subunits that encode the
benzodiazepine-insensitive GABAA receptor subtypes are
also deficient in brains of depressed patients who died
by suicide. Perhaps neuroactive steroids compensate for
these GABA-related defects and this is how they mediate
their rapid-onset antidepressant actions.
SAGE-217 (Figure 7-57) is a synthetic orally active
allopregnanolone analogue in clinical testing as a rapidonset antidepressant for major depressive disorder, with
some promising preliminary results.


<<<PAGE 339>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Figure 7-54A 5HT7 receptors
regulate glutamate release, part
1. 5HT7 receptors are located on
GABA interneurons in the prefrontal
cortex, which themselves synapse
with glutamate neurons. At baseline,
when these receptors are not bound,
glutamate is released.

Baseline Glutamate Release

pyramidal
neuron
GABA neuron

5HT7
receptor

PFC

baseline
glutamate release

overactivation

7
5HT
neuron

raphe

TREATMENT RESISTANCE IN
UNIPOLAR DEPRESSION
Choosing Treatment for Treatment Resistance in
Depression on the Basis of Genetic Testing

Genetic testing has the potential of assisting the selection
of psychotropic drug treatment for depression, especially
when several first-line treatments have failed to work
or to be tolerated. Genotyping has already entered other
specialties in medicine, and is poised to enter mental
health practice. In the not-too-distant future, experts
foresee that most patients will have their entire genomes
entered as part of their permanent electronic medical

records. In the meantime, it is possible to obtain from
various laboratories genetic variants for a number of
genes that regulate drug metabolism (pharmacokinetic
genes) and that hypothetically regulate efficacy and
side effects of drugs in depression (pharmacodynamic
genes). For example, several genetic forms of numerous
cytochrome P450 (CYP450) drug metabolizing enzymes
can be obtained to predict high or low levels of drug, and
therefore lack of efficacy (low drug levels) or side effects
(high drug levels). These findings can also be coupled
with phenotyping, namely obtaining the actual plasma
drug level itself. CYP450 genotypes and the actual plasma
drug levels together can thus potentially help explain side
effects and lack of therapeutic effects in some patients.
323


<<<PAGE 340>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 7-54B 5HT7 receptors regulate
glutamate release, part 2. Antagonism
at 5HT7 receptors on GABA interneurons
in the prefrontal cortex turns off GABA
release. This prevents inhibition of
glutamate release by GABA, thus
increasing glutamate downstream.

5HT7 Antagonist Enhances Glutamate Release

pyramidal
neuron
GABA neuron

5HT7
antagonist
PFC

enhanced
glutamate release

overactivation

5HT
neuron

raphe

O

CH2OH

CH2OH

CH2OH

O

O

O

OH

O

OH
OH

OH

H
H

OH
O
OH

dextrin

OH
OH

H

HO
H

allopregnanolone

Figure 7-55 Brexanolone. Brexanolone is a cyclodextrin-based intravenous formulation of the naturally occurring neuroactive steroid
allopregnanolone.

324


<<<PAGE 341>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

chloride
channel

GABA
binding site

α
ß

ß
α

chloride
channel

GABA
binding site

benzodiazepine and
neuroactive steroid
binding site

neuroactive steroid
binding site

ß

α4,6

γ

ß

α4,6

= GABA
= benzodiazepine

= neuroactive steroid
A

B

Figure 7-56 Neuroactive steroid binding site on GABAA neurons. Neuroactive steroids bind to GABAA receptors at a specific allosteric
site called the neuroactive steroid site to enhance the inhibitory action of GABA at these receptors. Neuroactive steroids bind to both
benzodiazepine-sensitive (A) and benzodiazepine-insensitive (B) GABAA receptors.

Neuroactive Steroid

allopregnanolone analogue
SAGE-217

whether the patient is “biased” towards responding or
not, tolerating or not, and, along with past treatment
response, help the clinician make a future treatment
recommendation that has a higher chance of success
but is not guaranteed to be effective and tolerated. Some
call this process the “weight of the evidence” and others
“equipoise,” where the genetic information will enrich the
prescribing decision, but not necessarily dictate a single
compelling choice. Genetic testing makes the prescriber
think about, and develop feasible neurobiologically based
hypotheses for, the next choices in treatment, rather than
mere random selection from amongst treatments that
have not yet been attempted.
Augmenting Strategies for Unipolar Depression

Figure 7-57 SAGE-217. SAGE-217 is a synthetic orally active
allopregnanolone analogue in clinical testing as a rapid onset
antidepressant for major depressive disorder.

Treatment responses are not “all or none” phenomena,
and genetic markers in psychopharmacology will, in
all likelihood, explain a greater or lesser likelihood of
response, nonresponse, or side effects, but will not tell
a clinician with certainty what drug to prescribe for a
specific individual to guarantee a clinical response or
avoid a side effect. So far, and for the foreseeable future,
in the practice of psychopharmacology, the information
obtained from pharmacogenomics will likely tell

As discussed above and illustrated in Figures 7-4 and
7-6, there are diminishing returns of efficacy for unipolar
depression, the more drugs for depression that are tried.
This has led to earlier use of antidepressant combinations
for patients who do not respond well to a single agent, in
an attempt to add together synergistic mechanisms that
could help the patient attain remission.
Serotonin/Dopamine Antagonists/Partial Agonists as
Augmenting Agents for Treatment-Resistant Unipolar
Depression

Serotonin/dopamine blocking agents originally developed
for psychosis are now some of the most common
adjunctive treatments to SSRIs/SNRIs in patients with
unipolar depression who fail to respond adequately to one
325

7


<<<PAGE 342>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

or more trials of the various first-line monoamine agents
discussed so far in this chapter.
Olanzapine–Fluoxetine Combination

Dopamine 2 (D2) antagonist actions likely account for
olanzapine’s approval in schizophrenia, bipolar mania,
and bipolar maintenance. 5HT2A antagonist actions
likely account for some of olanzapine’s ability to improve
symptoms of depression (5HT2A actions on mood are
discussed in Chapter 5 and illustrated in Figure 5-17C).
However, the fact that olanzapine works much better for
unipolar (or bipolar) depression when combined with
fluoxetine suggests that not only are serotonin reuptake
blocking properties a component of the antidepressant
effect of olanzapine–fluoxetine combination therapy,
but also 5HT2C antagonist actions (Figure 7-38). Both
olanzapine and fluoxetine are 5HT2C antagonists, and, in
combination, the net 5HT2C antagonism is greater than
with either drug alone. So, this olanzapine–fluoxetine
combination for depression could be considered a potent
SERT/5HT2C inhibitor. Although highly efficacious for
treatment-resistant unipolar depression (Table 7-1),
the combination of olanzapine with fluoxetine is often
associated with unacceptable weight gain and metabolic
disturbances. Olanzapine–fluoxetine combination is also
approved for bipolar depression and is discussed in the
section on bipolar depression below.
Quetiapine

Quetiapine (see Chapter 5 and Figure 5-45) is approved
for schizophrenia, acute bipolar mania, and bipolar
maintenance, likely due to its D2 antagonist actions.

Its efficacy as an augmenting agent to SSRIs/SNRIs for
depression is likely linked to the combined actions of
quetiapine and its active metabolite norquetiapine at both
5HT2C receptors (Figure 7-38) and at the norepinephrine
transporter (NET) (Figure 5-34; also described in Chapter
5 and illustrated in Figure 5-45). In addition, quetiapine
acts at other candidate receptors for antidepressant
efficacy including as an antagonist at 5HT2A (Chapter 5
and Figure 5-17C), 5HT7 (Figure 7-53C) and α2A receptors
(Figure 5-35), as well as an agonist at 5HT1A receptors
(Chapter 5 and Figure 5-22). All of these receptor actions
are hypothetically associated with antidepressant efficacy
and, added together, could make a theoretically powerful
synergy of antidepressant mechanisms (Table 7-1).
However, quetiapine can cause a great deal of sedation
and moderate weight gain and metabolic disturbance due
to its other receptor actions. Quetiapine is also approved
for bipolar depression and discussed in the section on
bipolar depression below.
Aripiprazole

This D2/5HT1A partial agonist (Chapter 5 and Figure
5-56) is approved for schizophrenia, acute bipolar
mania, and bipolar maintenance and is one of the most
extensively prescribed augmenting agents to SSRIs/
SNRIs in unipolar major depression (in the US) (Table
7-1). It likely acts in schizophrenia and bipolar mania
as a D2 partial agonist, whereas its prominent 5HT1A
partial agonist actions (Chapter 5 and Figure 5-22)
likely contribute to its antidepressant actions. Secondary
properties with potential antidepressant action may
also be contributory including D3, 5HT7, 5HT2C, and α2

Table 7-1 Serotonin/dopamine blockers for bipolar spectrum

Evidence of
efficacy in
mixed features

FDA-approved for
bipolar depression

Aripiprazole
Asenapine

Yes, MMX

FDA-approved
for bipolar
mania

FDA-approved
for bipolar
maintenance

FDA-approved for
major depressive
disorder

Yes

Yes

Yes (adjunct)

Yes

Yes

Brexpiprazole

Yes (adjunct)

Cariprazine

Yes, MMX, DMX

Yes

Lurasidone

Yes, DMX*

Yes

Olanzapine

Yes, MMX

Yes (with fluoxetine)

Yes

Yes

Yes (with fluoxetine)

Quetiapine

Yes, MMX

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes (adjunct)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Risperidone
Ziprasidone

Yes, MMX

MMX, mania with mixed features; DMX, depression with mixed features.
*unipolar and bipolar depression.

326

Yes


<<<PAGE 343>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

antagonist actions. Aripiprazole is generally well tolerated
with little weight gain but some patients experience
akathisia. Aripiprazole is not approved for the treatment
of bipolar depression.
Brexpiprazole

Another D2/5HT1A partial agonist (see Chapter 5 and
Figure 5-57) is approved for schizophrenia and also
for adjunctive treatment in unipolar depression (Table
7-1). Brexpiprazole is not approved for the treatment of
bipolar depression. As mentioned earlier in discussion
of brexpiprazole for psychosis in Chapter 5, there is
some indication of reduced akathisia with brexpiprazole
compared to aripiprazole, but this has not been proven
in head-to-head trials. Reduced akathisia would be
consistent with the binding profile of enhanced 5HT2A
(Chapter 5, Figure 5-17B), 5HT1A (Chapter 5, Figure

α1

receptor

5-22A), and α1 (Figure 7-58A) binding of brexpiprazole
compared to aripiprazole (compare the binding strips of
aripiprazole in Figure 5-56 and brexpiprazole in Figure
5-57). As can be seen in these figures, brexpiprazole
also has more potent α2 antagonist, 5HT7 antagonist,
and D3 partial agonist binding than aripiprazole. These
various differences in receptor binding profiles could
theoretically contribute to different mechanisms of
therapeutic action and side effects for brexpiprazole
compared to aripiprazole.
Alpha-1 antagonist actions have been discussed
in Chapter 5 and illustrated in Figure 5-13B showing
how α1 antagonism, particularly in the thalamus, could
contribute to sedation when coupled with simultaneous
blockade of muscarinic cholinergic and histamine
receptors in the reticular activating arousal system
(Chapter 5, Figures 5-13A and 5-8). However, particularly

α1

antagonist

PFC

7

SN

motor striatum

reduction in DIP

A

α1

receptor

α1

antagonist

PFC

improved mood,
affective symptoms,
and cognitive symptoms
(SIGH)

B

VTA

Figure 7-58 Alpha-1 antagonism and downstream dopamine release. Alpha-1 antagonism can modulate downstream dopamine
release via two key pathways. (A) Alpha-1 antagonism decreases glutamatergic output in the substantia nigra (SN), leading to reduced
activity of the GABA interneuron and therefore disinhibition of the nigrostriatal dopamine pathway. The increased dopamine release
in the motor striatum can reduce motor side effects caused by D2 antagonism because there is more dopamine to compete with the
D2 antagonist. (B) Alpha-1 antagonism reduces glutamatergic output in the ventral tegmental area (VTA), leading to reduced activity of
the GABA interneuron and therefore disinhibition of the mesocortical dopamine pathway. Increased dopamine release in the prefrontal
cortex (PFC) can potentially improve mood and reduce affective and cognitive symptoms.

327


<<<PAGE 344>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

without simultaneous muscarinic and histaminic
antagonism, α1 antagonist action in the prefrontal cortex
could hypothetically also contribute both to the reduced
motor side effects and to the known antidepressant
effects seen with potent α1 antagonists, particularly those
with simultaneous 5HT2A antagonist properties. Alpha-1
antagonist actions of brexpiprazole could also potentially
contribute to its evidence of efficacy for agitation in
Alzheimer disease and in PTSD (as augmentation of
sertraline).
How does this happen and what circuits regulate
α1 antagonist action? The answer is that the reader is
already familiar with the circuitry to explain the actions
of α1 antagonists, since it is the same circuitry already
discussed for 5HT2A receptors and illustrated in Chapter
5 in Figures 5-16 and 5-17. It is now known that α1
receptors (illustrated here in Figure 7-58) are colocalized
on the same pyramidal neurons with 5HT2A receptors
(discussed in Chapter 5 and illustrated in Figures 5-16
and 5-17). Since both α1 receptors and 5HT2A receptors
are excitatory and postsynaptic, norepinephrine
and serotonin acting together exert a more powerful
excitatory control of prefrontal cortex function through
their simultaneous action than either neurotransmitter
acting alone.
Furthermore, the actions of an α1 antagonist would
be expected to have the same functional effects as a
5HT2A antagonist, the two actions acting together to have
a more powerful downstream inhibitory control of the
prefrontal cortex output than blockade of either receptor
alone. Figure 7-58A shows the α1 receptors on those
specific pyramidal neurons projecting to the substantia
nigra (same pyramidal neurons and circuitry as shown
in Chapter 5, Figure 5-17B). When this glutamatergic
neuron is inhibited by an α1 antagonist, its innervation of
the substantia nigra reduces GABA tone there, allowing
disinhibition of dopamine release into the motor striatum
and reduction of drug-induced parkinsonism (Figure
7-58A; just as shown in Chapter 5 and Figure 5-17B).
Thus, drug-induced parkinsonism caused by D2 blockers
will be maximally reduced by those D2 blockers that have
both 5HT2A and α1 antagonist actions. Indeed, the lowest
frequency and severity of drug-induced parkinsonism
induced by dopamine blockers is for those that also
have robust α1 and 5HT2A antagonist actions, namely,
brexpiprazole, quetiapine, clozapine, and iloperidone.
Synergy of α1 antagonism with 5HT2A antagonism
can theoretically also enhance antidepressant action, this
time in the circuit of pyramidal neurons innervating the
ventral tegmental area dopamine neurons that project
328

to the prefrontal cortex (Figure 7-58B and Chapter 5,
Figure 5-17C). What this means is that α1 antagonists
would theoretically have the same effect as 5HT2A
antagonists in this circuit, and the two working together
would exert a more powerful control of the prefrontal
cortex and its downstream projections, to further
facilitate dopamine release in the prefrontal cortex and
to cause antidepressant action. In fact, this synergy is
likely to be an important component of the mechanism
of antidepressant action for those agents that are both
α1 and 5HT2A antagonists, including brexpiprazole,
quetiapine, and trazodone. The enhancement
of dopamine release in the prefrontal cortex by
simultaneous α1 and 5HT2A blockade may theoretically
contribute as well to improving “top-down” control of
agitation in Alzheimer disease and PTSD symptoms,
which are seen in ongoing studies of brexpiprazole.
Cariprazine

Carpirazine (Chapter 5 and Figure 5-58) is a D3/D2/5HT1A
partial agonist as well as a 5HT2A/α1/α2 antagonist,
approved for the treatment of acute bipolar mania and
bipolar depression; it also has evidence of efficacy as
an adjunct to SSRI/SNRIs in unipolar depression (Table
7-1). Cariprazine’s antidepressant mechanism of action
is discussed below in the section on treating bipolar
depression.
Ketamine

Observations that the intravenous infusion of
subanesthetic doses of ketamine could rapidly improve
depression in patients inadequately responsive to
monoamine-targeting drugs has set forth a bit of a
revolution in the treatment of depression. Ketamine is
an approved anesthetic but used off-label for treatmentresistant depression. Whereas serotonin/dopamine
blockers tend to be used after just one or two failures of
an SSRI/SNRI, ketamine tends to be given to patients
with multiple failures on various drugs for depression.
Intravenous ketamine is a racemic mixture of R- and
S-ketamine, each with overlapping binding properties
at the NMDA subtype of glutamate receptor, its putative
mechanism of antidepressant action, and at the σ1
receptor (Figure 7-59). Actions at other sites, including
μ-opioid and other neurotransmitter sites, are proposed
but disputed, especially the possibility that ketamine’s
antidepressant actions may be linked in some way to
μ-opioid as well as NMDA action. Thus, a debate exists
as to how ketamine exerts its rapid-onset antidepressant
effects, but NMDA antagonism – specifically at the


<<<PAGE 345>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

ketamine: R+S ketamine

σ

NMDA

ADMN

S-ketamine

R-ketamine

σ

NMDA

σ

NMDA

σ

+

+

+

+

7

Figure 7-59 Ketamine. Ketamine is used off-label and is being studied for its potential therapeutic utility in treatment-resistant
depression. Ketamine is an NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor antagonist, with additional weak actions at σ1 receptors, the
norepinephrine transporter (NET), μ-opioid receptors, and the serotonin transporter (SERT). Ketamine consists of two enantiomers, R and S.

open-channel phencyclidine (PCP) site (see discussion in
Chapter 4 and Figure 4-30) – is the leading hypothesized
target for explaining ketamine’s antidepressant
effects. What is unique about ketamine infusions is
the rapid, almost immediate onset of antidepressant
effects, sometimes accompanied by specific antisuicidal ideation effects, in patients who seem to have
“nonmonoaminergic” depressions since they have failed
numerous standard monoamine-targeted antidepressant
therapies. Unfortunately, the antidepressant effects of
ketamine are usually not long lasting, but generally fade
over a few days. In some cases, the antidepressant effects
can be re-triggered by repeated infusions over time, or
enhanced by monoaminergic antidepressant treatments
following infusions.
Most interesting perhaps is the possibility that
ketamine causes immediate improvement in neuronal
plasticity as its downstream mechanism of immediately
improving depression. Loss of neurotrophic factors in
depression is discussed in Chapter 6 and illustrated in
Figures 6-27 through 6-33). Recall that the neurotrophic
hypothesis of depression and antidepressant response

is based on evidence that deficiencies in neurotrophic
factors such as BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor)
and possibly other growth factors such as VEGF (vascular
endothelial growth factor) occur with chronic stress
and major depression and that when monoaminergic
drugs for depression are effective, they restore these
growth factors, but with a delay of weeks after drug
administration. On the other hand, when monoaminergic
drugs for depression are not effective, it is assumed that
for unknown reasons monoamines cannot restore the
necessary growth factors. Loss of BDNF and VEGF are
both linked to neuronal atrophy in brain regions such as
the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus in chronic stress
models in animals as well as in unipolar major depressive
disorder. Chronic stress and depression are also thought
to decrease the receptors for BDNF and VEGF, namely
TRKB (tyrosine kinase 2) and FLK1 (fetal liver kinase
1), respectively. Ketamine increases both of these growth
factors.
So, how does ketamine induce its rapid antidepressant
response and rapid reversal of synaptic atrophy in
depression? This is thought to occur because ketamine
329


<<<PAGE 346>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 7-60 Mechanism of action of
ketamine. Shown here are two cortical
glutamatergic pyramidal neurons and
a GABAergic interneuron. (1) If an Nmethyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor on
a GABAergic interneuron is blocked by
ketamine, this prevents the excitatory
actions of glutamate (Glu) there. Thus,
the GABA neuron is inactivated and
does not release GABA (indicated by
the dotted outline of the neuron). (2)
GABA binding at the second cortical
glutamatergic pyramidal neuron
normally inhibits glutamate release;
thus, the absence of GABA there means
that the neuron is disinhibited and
glutamate release is increased.

1

Glu

2
Glu

NMDA
receptor and synapse
blocked by subanesthetic
infusion of ketamine

burst of Glu release
from upstream NMDA
antagonism

causes an immediate burst of downstream glutamate
release after blocking NMDA receptors (discussed
in Chapter 4 and illustrated in Figure 4-33; see also
Figure 7-60). Ketamine’s actions at NMDA receptors
are not unlike what is hypothesized to occur due
to neurodevelopmental abnormalities at NMDA
synapses in schizophrenia (also discussed in Chapter
4 and illustrated in Figures 4-29B and 4-31 through
4-33). This is not surprising given that ketamine can
produce a schizophrenia-like syndrome in humans
especially at high doses and acute drug administration
(Figure 4-33). However, when infused over time and at
subanesthetic doses in the study of depressed patients,
ketamine does not induce psychosis, but is thought
to produce downstream release in glutamate (Figure
7-60). Glutamate that is released in this burst stimulates
330

AMPA receptors while ketamine is blocking NMDA
receptors (Figures 7-61 and 7-62). One hypothesis for
why ketamine has antidepressant actions proposes that
this stimulation of AMPA receptors first activates the
ERK, AKT signal transduction cascade (Figures 7-61A).
This then triggers the mTOR (mammalian target of
rapamycin) pathway (Figures 7-61) and that causes the
expression of synaptic proteins, leading to an increased
density of dendritic spines (Figures 7-61B). Dendritic
spine proliferation indicating new synaptogenesis
can be seen within minutes to hours after ketamine is
administered in animals. Hypothetically, it is this increase
in dendritic spines and synaptogenesis that causes the
rapid-onset antidepressant effect. Another hypothesis
for why ketamine has antidepressant actions proposes
that the stimulation of AMPA receptors from the burst


<<<PAGE 347>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Figure 7-61 Ketamine, AMPA
receptors, and mTOR. Glutamate
activity heavily modulates synaptic
potentiation; this is specifically
modulated through NMDA
(N-methyl-D-aspartate) and AMPA
(α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4isoxazole-propionic acid) receptors.
Ketamine is an NMDA receptor
antagonist; however, its rapid
antidepressant effects may also be
related to indirect effects on AMPA
receptor signaling. (A) One hypothesis
is that blockade of the NMDA receptor
leads to rapid activation of AMPA,
which triggers the ERK, AKT signal
transduction cascade, which then
triggers the mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) pathway. (B) This
in turn would lead to rapid AMPAmediated synaptic potentiation and
increase in dendritic spine formation.
Traditional antidepressants also
cause synaptic potentiation; however,
they do so via downstream changes
in intracellular signaling. This may
therefore explain the difference
in onset of antidepressant action
between ketamine and traditional
antidepressants.

burst of Glu release
from upstream NMDA
antagonism

Glu

AMPA
receptor
stimulated
by Glu

NMDA
receptor
blocked by
ketamine

ERK, AKT
mTOR
A

7

Glu
AMPA
receptor

NMDA
receptor
blocked by
ketamine

dendritic spine
formation

dendritic spine
formation

ERK, AKT
mTOR
B

of glutamate release (Figure 7-62A) activates another
signal transduction pathway, namely voltage-sensitive
calcium channels, which allow calcium influx that in
turn activates BDNF and VEGF release to induce synaptic
formation (Figure 7-62B). Thus, ketamine hypothetically
reverses the atrophy caused by depression, and does this
within minutes.

Esketamine

The S enantiomer of ketamine is approved for treatmentresistant depression in an intranasal formulation for
administration, and is called esketamine (Figure 7-63).
The exact pharmacology of R- versus S-ketamine and
their active metabolites is still being determined in terms
of neurotrophic actions. However, esketamine is indeed
331


<<<PAGE 348>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 7-62 Ketamine, AMPA
receptors, and BDNF/VEGF
release. Glutamate activity heavily
modulates synaptic potentiation; this
is specifically modulated through
NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate)
and AMPA (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid)
receptors. Ketamine is an NMDA
receptor antagonist; however, its
rapid antidepressant effects may
also be related to indirect effects
on AMPA receptor signaling. (A) A
second hypothesis is that blockade
of the NMDA receptor leads to rapid
activation of AMPA, which activates
voltage-sensitive calcium channels
(VSCCs) to allow calcium influx. (B) This
in turn would lead to activation of brainderived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
and VEGF (vascular endothelial growth
factor) release, which bind to TRKB and
FLK1 receptors, respectively, triggering
cascades that induce dendritic spine
formation.

TRKB
FLK1
vesicle with
VEGF
vesicle with
BDNF
Ca++
Glu
AMPA
receptor
VSCC
NMDA
receptor
blocked by
ketamine

A

BDNF VEGF

PLC /PI3K
AKT

dendritic
spine
formation

B

active as an acute rapid-onset antidepressant, and it is
administered intranasally and rapidly, so that longer
intravenous infusions are not necessary. After twiceweekly initiation, esketamine can be given intranasally
in weekly or biweekly dosing as an augmenting agent
to standard drugs for depression. A long-term study for
up to a year of esketamine nasal spray plus a switch to
an oral monoamine antidepressant not previously tried,
showed sustained improvements in depression and
acceptable safety.
Other Drug Combinations for Treatment-Resistant
Depression

Other options to augment monoamine treatments for
unipolar depression include agents that do not have
robust antidepressant actions as monotherapies but
can improve the action of the monoamine treatments
332

(e.g., lithium, buspirone, and thyroid), as well as the
very popular and often effective strategy of combining
two monoamine drugs, each approved for unipolar
depression, to create pharmacological synergy. However,
none of these strategies are specifically approved.
Lithium

Lithium is discussed below as a treatment for mania, but
has been used as well for unipolar depressed patients who
fail to respond to treatment. Lithium augmentation of
monoamine reuptake inhibitors, particularly the classic
tricyclic antidepressants also discussed below, has been
used in the past to boost treatment response in unipolar
depression. As augmentation for treatment-resistant
unipolar depression, lithium is administered in doses
lower than those used for mania, but it has fallen out of
favor in recent years.


<<<PAGE 349>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

esketamine
NMDA

known abilities to regulate neuronal organization,
arborization, and synapse formation may have the
downstream consequence of boosting monoamine
neurotransmitters, and this may account for how thyroid
hormones enhance antidepressant action in some patients.
Augmentation of treatments for either unipolar or bipolar
depression with thyroid hormones has also fallen out of
favor in recent years.
Triple-Action Combo: SSRI/SNRI + NDRI

σ

S-ketamine

NMDA

σ

+

+

Figure 7-63 Esketamine. The R and S enantiomers of ketamine
are mirror images of each other; the exact pharmacology of the
R and S enantiomers and their active metabolites is still being
determined. The S enantiomer of ketamine has been developed
and marketed as esketamine.

Buspirone

Buspirone is a 5HT1A partial agonist, so putting it
together with an SSRI/SNRI is very much similar to the
use of vilazodone (Figure 7-22 through Figure 7-27)
or vortioxetine (Figure 7-49) discussed above. Indeed,
most of the serotonin/dopamine agents used to augment
monoamine antidepressants have 5HT1A properties (e.g.,
quetiapine, aripiprazole, brexpiprazole, and cariprazine).
Administering drugs that have 5HT1A agonist actions is a
favored approach for augmenting SSRI/SNRIs, but using
buspirone for this is less common today than using other
agents with 5HT1A properties.
Thyroid Hormones

Thyroid hormones act by binding to nuclear ligand
receptors to form a nuclear ligand-activated transcription
factor. Abnormalities in thyroid hormone levels have
long been associated with depression, and various forms
and doses of thyroid hormones have for many years been
utilized as augmenting agents to drugs for depression
either to boost their efficacy in patients with inadequate
response or to speed up their onset of action. Thyroid’s

If boosting one neurotransmitter is good, and two is
better, maybe three boosted neurotransmitters is best
(Figures 7-64). Triple action (i.e, serotonin, dopamine,
and norepinephrine) drugs for depression therapy with
modulation of all three monoamines would be predicted
to occur by combining either an SSRI with an NDRI or
combining an SNRI with an NDRI, providing even more
noradrenergic and dopaminergic action (Figure 7-64).
These are perhaps some of the most popular combinations
of two drugs for depression utilized in the US.
California Rocket Fuel: SNRI plus Mirtazapine

This potentially powerful combination exploits the
pharmacological synergy attained by adding the enhanced
serotonin and norepinephrine release from inhibition of both
serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake by an SNRI to the
disinhibition of both serotonin and norepinephrine release
by the α2 antagonist actions of mirtazapine (Figure 7-65). It
is even possible that additional pro-dopaminergic actions
result from the combination of norepinephrine reuptake
blockade in the prefrontal cortex due to SNRIs with 5HT2C
actions of mirtazapine disinhibiting dopamine release. This
combination can provide very powerful antidepressant action
for some patients with unipolar major depressive episodes.
Arousal Combos

The frequent complaints of residual fatigue; loss of
energy, motivation, and sex drive; and problems
concentrating/problems with alertness may be
approached by combining either a stimulant (dopamine
transport inhibitor or DAT inhibitor) with an SNRI,
or modafinil (another DAT inhibitor) with an SNRI
(Figure 7-66), to recruit triple monoamine action and
especially enhancement of dopamine.
Second-Line Monotherapies Used for TreatmentResistant Depression
Tricyclic Antidepressants

The tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) (Table 7-2;
Figure 7-67) were so-named because their chemical
333

7


<<<PAGE 350>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Triple-Action Combos
SSRI + NDRI
= SSRI

5HT

NE

DA

single boost

single boost

single boost

= NDRI

SERT

NET

DAT

SSRI

NDRI

NDRI

A

SNRI + NDRI
= SNRI

5HT

NE

DA

single boost

double boost

single boost

= NDRI

B

SERT

NET

SNRI

NDRI

DAT
SNRI

NDRI

Figure 7-64 Triple-action combo: SSRI/SNRI plus NDRI. (A) Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) plus a norepinephrine–
dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI) leads to a single boost for serotonin (5HT), norepinephrine (NE), and dopamine (DA). (B) Serotonin–
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) plus a norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI) leads to a single boost for
serotonin (5HT), a double boost for norepinephrine (NE), and a single boost for dopamine (DA).

California Rocket Fuel
SNRI + mirtazapine
= SNRI

5HT

= mirtazapine

SNRI

quadruple 5HT
boost 5HT 2C

quadruple
boost
α2

SERT

DA

NE

SNRI

5HT
2C

α2 2A

5HT
2A

mirtazapine

mirtazapine

NET
mirtazapine

double boost

5HT 5HT
2A 2C
Figure 7-65 California rocket fuel: SNRI plus mirtazapine. Combining a serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) with
mirtazapine is a combination that has a great degree of theoretical synergy: serotonin (5HT) is quadruple-boosted (with reuptake
blockade, α2 antagonism, 5HT2A antagonism, and 5HT2C antagonism), norepinephrine (NE) is quadruple-boosted (with reuptake
blockade, α2 antagonism, 5HT2A antagonism, and 5HT2C antagonism), and there may even be a double boost of dopamine (DA) (with
5HT2A and 5HT2C antagonism).

334


<<<PAGE 351>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Arousal Combos
SNRI + stimulant
= SNRI

5HT

NE

DA

single boost

double boost

single boost

= stimulant

SERT

NET

SNRI

SNRI

A

DAT
stimulant

stimulant

SNRI + modafinil
= SNRI

5HT

NE

DA

single boost

single boost

single boost

= modafinil

SERT
B

NET
SNRI

SNRI

DAT

7

modafinil

Figure 7-66 Arousal combo: SNRI plus stimulant/modafinil. (A) Serotonin (5HT) and dopamine (DA) are single-boosted and
norepinephrine (NE) is double-boosted when a serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) is combined with a stimulant. (B)
Serotonin (5HT) and norepinephrine (NE) are single-boosted by the serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) while dopamine
(DA) is single-boosted by modafinil.

Table 7-2 Some tricyclic antidepressants still in use

Generic name

Trade name

Clomipramine

Anafranil

Imipramine

Tofranil

Amitriptyline

Elavil; Endep; Tryptizol;
Laroxyl

Nortriptyline

Pamelor; Aventyl

Protriptyline

Vivactil

Maprotiline

Ludiomil

Amoxapine

Asendin

Doxepin

Sinequan; Adapin

Desipramine

Norpramin; Pertofran

Trimipramine

Surmontil

Dothiepin

Prothiaden

Lofepramine

Deprimyl; Gamanil

Tianeptine

Coaxil; Stablon

structure contains three rings. The TCAs were
synthesized about the same time that other threeringed phenothiazine molecules were shown to be
effective tranquilizers for schizophrenia (i.e., the early
D2 antagonist drugs such as chlorpromazine) but were
a disappointment when tested as drugs for psychosis.
However, during testing for schizophrenia, they were
serendipitously discovered to be effective in unipolar
depression. Tricyclic antidepressants are not merely drugs
for depression since one of them (clomipramine) has
anti-obsessive–compulsive disorder; many of them have
anti-panic effects at antidepressant doses and efficacy for
neuropathic and low back pain at low doses.
Long after their antidepressant properties were
observed, the TCAs were discovered to block the reuptake
pumps for norepinephrine (i.e., NET), or for both
norepinephrine and serotonin (i.e., SERT) (see Figure
7-67A). Some tricyclics have equal or greater potency for
SERT inhibition (e.g., clomipramine); others are more
selective for NET inhibition (e.g., desipramine, maprotiline,
335


<<<PAGE 352>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

TCA
H1

sodium channel
blocker
Na+

α1

SERT

NET

M1
A

H1

sodium channel
blocker
Na+

α1

NET

M1
B

H1

sodium channel
blocker
Na+

α1

nortriptyline, protriptyline) (Figure 7-67B). Most, however,
block both serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake to
some extent (Figure 7-67A). In addition, some TCAs have
antagonist actions at 5HT2A and 5HT2C receptors, which
could contribute to the therapeutic profile of those tricyclics
that have such pharmacological actions (Figure 7-67C).
The major limitation to the TCAs has never been their
efficacy: these are quite effective agents. The problem
with drugs in this class is the fact that all of them share
at least four other unwanted pharmacological actions,
namely, blockade of muscarinic cholinergic receptors, H1
histamine receptors, α1-adrenergic receptors, and voltagesensitive sodium channels (Figure 7-67). As already
discussed, blockade of H1 receptors causes sedation and
may cause weight gain (see Chapter 5 and Figure 5-13A).
Blockade of muscarinic cholinergic receptors, also known
as anticholinergic actions, causes dry mouth, blurred
vision, urinary retention, and constipation (Figure 5-8).
Blockade of α1-adrenergic receptors may be therapeutic
but also causes orthostatic hypotension and dizziness
(Figure 5-13B). Tricyclic antidepressants also weakly
block voltage-sensitive sodium channels in the heart
and brain at therapeutic doses; in overdose, this action
is thought to be the cause of coma and seizures due to
central nervous system actions, and cardiac arrhythmias
and cardiac arrest and death due to peripheral cardiac
actions (Figure 7-68). The lethal dose of a TCA is only
about a 30-day supply of drug. For this reason, it has
been said that each time you are giving the patient a
1-month’s prescription for a TCA, you are handing them a
loaded gun. Obviously, this is often not a good idea in the
treatment of a disorder associated with so much suicide;
thus, TCAs have largely fallen out of favor except for
patients who fail to respond to the various first-line drugs
for depression discussed up to this point in this chapter.
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)

SERT

5HT2A
C

T2

5H

M1

NET

C
Figure 7-67 Icons of tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). All
tricyclic antidepressants block reuptake of norepinephrine
and are antagonists at histamine 1 (H1), α1-adrenergic, and
muscarinic cholinergic receptors; they also block voltagesensitive sodium channels (A, B, and C). Some TCAs are also
potent inhibitors of the serotonin reuptake pump (A, C), and
some may additionally be antagonists at serotonin 2A and 2C
receptors (C).

336

The first clinically effective drugs for depression ever
discovered were inhibitors of the enzyme monoamine
oxidase (MAO). They were found by accident when an
anti-tuberculosis drug was observed to help depression
that coexisted in some of the patients who had
tuberculosis. This anti-tuberculosis drug, iproniazid, was
eventually found to work in depression by inhibiting the
enzyme MAO. However, inhibition of MAO was unrelated
to its anti-tubercular actions. Although best known as
powerful drugs to treat depression, the monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) are also highly effective
therapeutic agents for certain anxiety disorders such
as panic disorder and social anxiety disorder. MAOIs


<<<PAGE 353>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Figure 7-68 Tricyclic antidepressants
and overdose. Tricyclic
antidepressants block voltagesensitive sodium channels in the brain
(top) and heart (bottom). In overdose,
this action can lead to coma, seizures,
arrhythmia, and even death.

Overdose

H1

coma
sodium
channel

seizures

H1

arrhythmia
sodium
channel

are barely prescribed any more today. Only about one
in every 3,000 to 5,000 prescriptions for a drug to treat
depression is a MAOI and only a few hundred experts
prescribe MAOIs out of the hundreds of thousands
who prescribe other drugs for depression in the US.
Prescribing MAOIs is beginning to become a lost art
in psychopharmacology as many familiar with them
learned to use MAOIs before the 1990s when SSRIs were
introduced and largely replaced MAOIs. Most of these
prescribers of MAOIs are now retiring from practice.
Nevertheless, MAOIs are a most powerful drug class
for unipolar depression and those who prescribe them
have seen many patients who respond to nothing else
get better on MAOIs. The reader who is an advanced
psychopharmacologist should gain familiarity and
experience with these agents so that patients who still
need them can get them. The reader is referred to specific
reviews on MAOIs including some of the author, to help
navigate dietary restrictions and drug interactions.
The MAOIs phenelzine, tranylcypromine,
isocarboxazid, and selegiline are all irreversible enzyme

death

7

inhibitors, and thus enzyme activity returns only after
new enzyme is synthesized about 2–3 weeks later.
Amphetamine is also a weak but reversible MAOI; some
MAOIs have properties related to amphetamine. For
example, tranylcypromine has a chemical structure
modeled on amphetamine, and thus in addition to MAOI
properties, it also has amphetamine-like dopaminereleasing properties. The MAOI selegiline itself does not
have amphetamine-like properties, but is metabolized
to both l-amphetamine and l-methamphetamine. Thus,
there is a close mechanistic link between some MAOIs and
additional amphetamine-like dopamine-releasing actions.
MAO Subtypes

MAO exists in two subtypes, A and B. The A form
preferentially metabolizes the monoamines most closely
linked to depression (i.e., serotonin and norepinephrine)
whereas the B form preferentially metabolizes trace
amines such as phenethylamine (see Chapter 5 and
Figures 5-64 through 5-66 for further discussion on
trace amines). Both MAO-A and MAO-B metabolize
337


<<<PAGE 354>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

dopamine and tyramine, another trace amine. Both
MAO-A and MAO-B are in the brain. Noradrenergic
neurons (Figure 6-13) and dopaminergic neurons (Figure
4-3) are thought to contain both MAO-A and MAO-B,
with MAO-A activity perhaps predominant, whereas
serotonergic neurons are thought to contain only MAO-B
(Figure 4-37). MAO-A is the major form of this enzyme
outside of the brain, with the exception of platelets and
lymphocytes, which have MAO-B.
Brain MAO-A must be substantially inhibited
for antidepressant efficacy to occur (Figure 7-69).
This is not surprising, since this is the form of
MAO that preferentially metabolizes serotonin and
norepinephrine, two of the three monoamines linked
to depression and to antidepressant actions, both of
which demonstrate increased brain levels after MAO-A
inhibition (Figure 7-69). MAO-A, along with MAO-B,
also metabolizes dopamine, but inhibition of MAO-A
alone does not appear to lead to robust increases in
brain dopamine levels since MAO-B can still metabolize
dopamine (Figure 7-69).
Inhibition of MAO-B is not effective as an
antidepressant, as there is no direct effect on either
serotonin or norepinephrine metabolism, and little
or no dopamine accumulates due to the continued
action of MAO-A (Figure 7-70). What therefore is the
therapeutic value of MAO-B inhibition? When this
enzyme is selectively inhibited, it can boost the action
of concomitantly administered levodopa in Parkinson’s
disease and reduce on/off motor fluctuations. Three
MAO-B inhibitors selegiline, rasagiline, and safinamide
are approved for use in patients with Parkinson’s disease,
but are not effective at selective MAO-B doses for the
treatment of depression.
When MAO-B is inhibited simultaneously with
MAO-A, there is robust elevation of dopamine as well as
serotonin and norepinephrine (Figure 7-71). This would
theoretically provide the most powerful antidepressant
efficacy across the range of depressive symptoms, from
diminished positive affect to increased negative affect
(see Figure 6-41). Thus, MAO-A plus MAO-B inhibition
is one of the few therapeutic strategies available to
increase dopamine in depression, and therefore to treat
refractory symptoms of diminished positive affect.
The Dietary Tyramine Interaction

One of the biggest barriers to using MAOIs has
traditionally been the concern that a patient taking
a MAOI may develop a hypertensive crisis after
ingesting tyramine in the diet, classically from cheese.
338

Normally, the release of norepinephrine by tyramine
is inconsequential because MAO-A safely destroys this
released norepinephrine. However, tyramine in the
presence of MAO-A inhibition can elevate blood pressure
because norepinephrine is not safely destroyed. Every
prescriber of MAOIs should counsel patients taking the
classic MAOIs about diet and keep up to date with the
tyramine content of foods their patients wish to eat.
Drug–Drug Interactions for MAOIs

While MAOIs are famous for their tyramine reactions,
drug–drug interactions are potentially more important
clinically. Drug–drug interactions may not only be
more common than dietary interactions with tyramine,
but some drug interactions can be dangerous or even
lethal. Drug interactions with MAOIs are often poorly
understood by many practitioners. Since most candidates
for MAOI treatment will require treatment with many
concomitant drugs over time, including treatment
for coughs and colds and for pain, this can prevent
psychopharmacologists from prescribing a MAOI if they
do not know which drugs are safe to give and which
ones must be avoided. There are two general types of
potentially dangerous drug interactions with MAOIs for a
practitioner to understand and avoid: those that can raise
blood pressure by sympathomimetic actions and those
that can cause a potentially fatal serotonin syndrome by
serotonin reuptake inhibition. Every prescriber of MAOIs
should counsel patients taking the classic MAOIs about
drug interactions and keep up to date with the latest
warnings about drug interactions of MAOIs with drugs
their patients are concomitantly prescribed. Several
reviews on these details are available, including some of
the author’s, and are referenced at the end of the book.

DRUGS FOR BIPOLAR DISORDER
SPECTRUM
Serotonin/Dopamine Blockers: Not Just for Psychosis
and Psychotic Mania

When D2 blockers were approved for schizophrenia,
it was not surprising that these agents would work for
psychotic symptoms associated with mania, since the
D2 antagonist actions predict efficacy for psychosis
in general (discussed in Chapter 5). However, it was
somewhat surprising when these dopamine/serotonin
blockers proved effective for the core nonpsychotic
symptoms of mania (Figure 6-2) and for maintenance
treatment to prevent the recurrence of mania. These latter
actions are similar to the antimanic therapeutic actions of


<<<PAGE 355>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

MAO-A Is Inhibited
Antidepressant Action
5HT neuron

5HT neuron

B

B

MAO-B destroys 5HT only
at high concentrations

MAO-A

5HT boosted to
high concentrations

MAO-B destroys 5HT only
at high concentrations

inhibition

A
B

A

MAO-A
destroys 5HT

B
MAO-B
destroys 5HT
only at high
concentrations

MAO-B
destroys 5HT
only at high
concentrations
NE neuron

NE neuron

NE boosted to
high concentrations

A

A

7

MAO-A
inhibition

A
B

A

MAO-A
destroys NE

MAO-B
destroys NE
only at high
concentrations

MAO-B
destroys 5HT
only at high
concentrations

DA neuron

DA neuron

A
MAO-A
destroys DA

MAO-A
inhibition

DA boosted
moderately

A
MAO-A
destroys DA

A
B

MAO-A
destroys NE

B

MAO-A
destroys DA
MAO-B
destroys DA

A
B

MAO-A
destroys DA
MAO-B
destroys DA

Figure 7-69 Monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) inhibition. The enzyme MAO-A metabolizes serotonin (5HT) and norepinephrine (NE) as
well as dopamine (DA) (left panels). Monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) also metabolizes DA, but it metabolizes 5HT and NE only at high
concentrations (left panels). This means that MAO-A inhibition increases 5HT, NE, and DA (right panels) but that the increase in DA is not
as great as that of 5HT and NE because MAO-B can continue to destroy DA (bottom right panel). Inhibition of MAO-A is an efficacious
antidepressant strategy.

339


<<<PAGE 356>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

MAO-B Is Inhibited
No Antidepressant Action
5HT neuron

5HT neuron

B

B

MAO-B destroys 5HT only
at high concentrations

MAO-B
inhibition

A
B

A

MAO-A
destroys 5HT

B

MAO-B
destroys 5HT
only at high
concentrations

MAO-A
destroys 5HT
MAO-B
inhibition
irrelevant

NE neuron

NE neuron

A

A
MAO-B
inhibition

A
B

A

MAO-A
destroys NE

MAO-B
destroys NE
only at high
concentrations

MAO-B
inhibition
irrelevant

DA neuron

DA neuron

A
MAO-A
destroys DA

MAO-B
inhibition

DA boosted
moderately

A
MAO-A
destroys DA

A
B

MAO-A
destroys NE

B

MAO-A
destroys DA
MAO-B
destroys DA

A
B

MAO-A
destroys DA
MAO-B
destroys DA

Figure 7-70 Monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) inhibition. Selective inhibitors of MAO-B do not have antidepressant efficacy. This is
because MAO-B metabolizes serotonin (5HT) and norepinephrine (NE) only at high concentrations (top two left panels). Since MAO-B’s
role in destroying 5HT and NE is small, its inhibition is not likely to be relevant to the concentrations of these neurotransmitters (top
two right panels). Selective inhibition of MAO-B also has somewhat limited effects on dopamine (DA) concentrations, because MAO-A
continues to destroy DA. However, inhibition of MAO-B does increase DA to some extent, which can be therapeutic in other disease
states, such as Parkinson’s disease.

340


<<<PAGE 357>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

MAO-A and MAO-B Are Inhibited
Robust Antidepressant Action
Including Dopamine Action
5HT neuron

5HT neuron

B

5HT boosted to very
high concentrations

B

MAO-B destroys 5HT only
at high concentrations

MAO-A+B
inhibition

A
B

A

MAO-A
destroys 5HT

B

MAO-B
destroys 5HT
only at high
concentrations
NE neuron

NE neuron

A

A

NE boosted to very
high concentrations

7

MAO-A+B
inhibition

A
B

A

MAO-A
destroys NE

B

MAO-B
destroys NE
only at high
concentrations
DA neuron

DA neuron

A
MAO-A
destroys DA

MAO-A+B
inhibition

DA boosted to very
high concentrations

A
MAO-A
destroys DA

A
B

MAO-A
destroys DA

A
B

MAO-B
destroys DA
Figure 7-71 Combined inhibition of monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) and monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B). Combined inhibition of
MAO-A and MAO-B may have robust antidepressant actions owing to increases not only in serotonin (5HT) and norepinephrine (NE) but
also dopamine (DA). Inhibition of both MAO-A, which metabolizes 5HT, NE, and DA, and MAO-B, which metabolizes primarily DA (left
panels), leads to greater increases in each of these neurotransmitters than inhibition of either enzyme alone (right panels).

341


<<<PAGE 358>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

lithium and various anticonvulsant ion channel blockers
that act by very different mechanisms (described below).
More surprising yet is that some of these same serotonin/
dopamine antagonists/partial agonists are effective for
bipolar depression, albeit by mechanisms likely distinct
from D2 antagonism/partial agonism. The questions
that arise are how serotonin 2/dopamine 2 antagonists
and dopamine 2/serotonin 1A partial agonists work in
both the manic and depressed poles of bipolar disorder.
More recently, some of these same serotonin/dopamine
drugs have evidence of efficacy in unipolar depression
as augmenting agents to SSRIs/SNRIs when there is
inadequate response, as discussed above. Furthermore,
some of these same serotonin/dopamine drugs now
have additional evidence of efficacy in unipolar and
bipolar depression with mixed features of mania. Do they
work by the same mechanisms across the entire bipolar
spectrum (Figure 6-7)? Is this a class effect of these drugs
or do specific drugs work in some but not all parts of the
bipolar spectrum?
Putative Pharmacological Mechanism of Serotonin/
Dopamine Antagonists/Partial Agonists in Mania

The short answer to the question of how serotonin/
dopamine blockers work in mania is that we do not
really know. On the one hand, PET scans of patients
with mania show the same excessive presynaptic
dopamine levels and release in mesostriatal dopamine
neurons in acute bipolar mania as for acute psychosis in
schizophrenia, described extensively in Chapter 4 and
illustrated in Figures 4-15, 4-16, and Figure 5-2. Thus,
blocking the excessive dopamine at D2 receptors should
have as much of an antimanic effect in bipolar mania as
it has an antipsychotic effect in schizophrenia. Indeed,
acute bipolar mania is treated with serotonin/dopamine
blockers in much the same manner as acute psychosis is
treated in schizophrenia, including dosing and expected
onset of action within minutes to hours. However, not all
agents in the serotonin/dopamine blocker class approved
to treat schizophrenia are also approved to treat acute
bipolar mania, and not all of those approved for acute
bipolar mania are approved for bipolar maintenance (see
Table 7-1). Differences in receptor binding profiles could
explain why some agents are approved in mania and
others not; commercial considerations could also explain
why some agents are not approved in mania. To enhance
antimanic response and to prevent relapse into another
episode of mania, lithium and valproate are commonly
used in conjunction with those dopamine/serotonin

342

blockers approved for the treatment of mania, but this is
not done for the treatment of schizophrenia, as lithium
and valproate do not clearly augment the efficacy of
serotonin/dopamine blockers in schizophrenia.
Serotonin/Dopamine Antagonists/Partial Agonists
across the Depression Spectrum: Bipolar Depression,
Depression with Mixed Features, and as Adjuncts to
SSRIs/SNRIs in Unipolar Major Depression

The serotonin/dopamine antagonists/partial agonists
have proven to be quite versatile therapeutics: from
schizophrenia, to mania, to adjuncts for SSRIs/SNRIs in
unipolar depression, as we have discussed in this chapter
so far. Here we consider the extension of therapeutic use
of at least some of the agents in this class to the treatment
of bipolar depression and the closely related state of
major depressive episodes with mixed features of mania.
A major paradigm shift is afoot in the treatment of
bipolar depression and depression with mixed features.
We used to ask: “Don’t we treat all forms of depression
with so-called antidepressants, drugs that inhibit the
reuptake of monoamines?” Although most patients with
depression, including those with bipolar depression and
depression with mixed features, do receive monoamine
reuptake inhibiting drugs, the modern answer to
this question is increasingly becoming a resounding
“No!!” Practice guidelines and US FDA approvals are
moving away from the treatment of bipolar depression
or depression with mixed features with the standard
monoamine reuptake inhibiting agents that are so
commonly used for the treatment of unipolar depression.
Reuptake inhibitors are increasingly reserved to treat
patients with unipolar depression only if they do not
have mixed features, and patients with bipolar depression
only as second-line agents to augment other agents. Best
practice is evolving for bipolar depression or depression
with mixed features, so now first-line treatment is one of
the specifically approved serotonin/dopamine blockers,
not a monoamine reuptake inhibitor. However, there
is plenty of controversy over this recommendation, as
many prescribers and some experts still advocate for
monoamine reuptake inhibitors in some patients with
bipolar depression. But more and more studies are
showing failure of the monoamine reuptake inhibiting
drugs to work consistently in bipolar depression or in
mixed features, and, furthermore, monoamine reuptake
inhibitors can induce intolerable activating side effects
and even manic episodes and suicidality in patients
with bipolar/mixed depression. Other studies do show


<<<PAGE 359>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

some benefits of monoamine reuptake blockers in
bipolar depression, and in fact fluoxetine combined with
olanzapine is approved for bipolar depression (Table
7-1). However, no agent at all is approved for depression
with mixed features. The studies that do exist suggest
poor responses of mixed features to the well-known
monoamine reuptake inhibitors and an expanding
evidence base for the use of certain serotonin/dopamine
blockers, particularly those already approved for bipolar
depression, as the preferred treatment for mixed features
as well (see Table 7-1).
We do not know whether any and all drugs with
serotonin/dopamine blocking properties that are
normally used to treat psychosis would be effective
for bipolar depression, as some have not been
studied and others have failed in clinical trials; nor
are we certain of the antidepressant mechanism of
action of those that are approved. However, each of
the serotonin/dopamine agents now approved to
treat bipolar depression was originally developed to
treat psychosis, and their proposed mechanism of
antidepressant therapeutic action in bipolar depression
and depression with mixed features is presented in the
following sections.
Olanzapine–Fluoxetine

As previously mentioned, olanzapine–fluoxetine
combination (Figures 5-44 and 7-16) is approved for
schizophrenia, bipolar mania, treatment-resistant
unipolar depression, and bipolar depression. Post hoc
analyses of mania with mixed features of depression
also suggest efficacy of olanzapine for mania with mixed
features of depression, although the counterpart to this
condition at the other end of the spectrum, depression
with mixed features of mania (Figures 6-3 through 6-7),
has not been studied (Table 7-1).
5HT2A antagonist actions combined with 5HT2C
antagonism are likely candidates to be linked to
antidepressant action in bipolar depression (“treatment
from below”; see Figure 7-8). D2 antagonism could
theoretically help keep the lid on treatment from below so
it doesn’t spill over into activation and mania.
Quetiapine

As previously mentioned, quetiapine (Figure 5-45) is
approved for schizophrenia, bipolar mania, and for
augmentation of SSRIs/SNRIs in treatment-resistant
unipolar depression. It is also approved in bipolar
depression. Like olanzapine, post hoc analyses of

quetiapine treatment of mania with mixed features of
depression also suggest efficacy, although depression with
mixed features of mania has not been studied (Table 7-1).
5HT2A antagonist actions combined with 5HT2C and α2
antagonism, as well as agonist actions at 5HT1A receptors,
are likely candidates to be linked to antidepressant
action in bipolar depression (treatment from below).
Like olanzapine, D2 antagonism by quetiapine could
theoretically help keep the lid on treatment from below so
it doesn’t spill over into activation and mania.
Lurasidone

Although approved for the treatment of schizophrenia,
lurasidone (Figure 5-53) was never tested nor approved
for the treatment of mania (Table 7-1). Lurasidone has
several hypothetical antidepressant receptor binding
properties: blockade of 5HT2A (Figure 5-17C), 5HT7
(7-53C), and α2 receptors (Figure 7-41), with agonist
actions at 5HT1A receptors (Figure 5-22). It is one of
the only agents to show on post hoc analysis of bipolar
depression that those with bipolar depression and mixed
features respond as well to lurasidone as patients with
bipolar depression without mixed features. Perhaps more
importantly, lurasidone is the only agent to be studied
in a large, randomized multicenter trial of unipolar
depression with mixed features and to demonstrate
robust antidepressant efficacy in this group without
induction of mania. Lurasidone is prescribed for bipolar
depression and for mixed features at doses lower than
those generally used for the treatment of psychosis in
schizophrenia, and is generally well tolerated with little
propensity for weight gain or metabolic disturbances and
is one of the most widely prescribed agents for bipolar
depression.
Cariprazine

Cariprazine (Figure 5-58) is a D3/D2/5HT1A partial
agonist approved for the treatment of acute bipolar mania
and for bipolar depression, with ongoing trials as an
adjunct to SSRI/SNRIs in unipolar depression (Table 7-1).
Cariprazine has 5HT1A partial agonist actions as well as
α1 (Figure 7-58) and α2 (Figure 7-41) antagonist actions,
each with potential antidepressant mechanisms. What
sets cariprazine apart from other agents in this group of
serotonin/dopamine antagonists/partial agonists is its
unique highly potent action at D3 dopamine receptors as
a partial agonist. Cariprazine is the most potent of any
available agent and much more potent than dopamine
itself for the D3 receptor. How is D3 antagonism/partial

343

7


<<<PAGE 360>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Three orders of
magnitude higher
affinity than DA

Two orders of
magnitude higher
affinity than DA

One order of
magnitude higher
affinity than DA

One order of
Two orders of
magnitude lower magnitude lower
affinity than DA
affinity than DA

Three orders of
magnitude lower
affinity than DA

DA
binding
affinity for D3
(Ki=60nm)

Cariprazine
binding affinity
for D3
(0.09nM)

Blonanserin
binding affinity
for D3
(0.28nM)

Brexpiprazole
binding affinity
for D3
(1.1nM)

Iloperidone
binding affinity
for D3
(10.5nM)

Clozapine
binding affinity
for D3
(304.6nM)

Asenapine
binding affinity
for D3
(1.8nM)

Lurasidone
binding affinity
for D3
(15.7nM)

Quetiapine
binding affinity
for D3
(800nM)

Paliperidone
binding affinity
for D3
(2.6nM)

Aripiprazole
binding affinity
for D3
(17.7nM)

Ziprasidone
binding affinity
for D3
(7.3nM)

Olanzapine
binding affinity
for D3
(39.5nM)

Risperidone
binding affinity
for D3
(8.0nM)

Figure 7-72 Dopamine 3 binding affinity: dopamine versus serotonin/dopamine antagonists/partial agonists. Dopamine 3
antagonism/partial agonism may confer therapeutic benefit in bipolar depression with or without mixed features. Although many
agents may bind to the D3 receptor, only two – cariprazine and blonanserin – have multiple orders of magnitude higher affinity for the D3
receptor than does dopamine (DA) itself, thus allowing them to compete successfully with dopamine for receptor occupancy.

agonism linked to therapeutic efficacy in bipolar
depression with or without mixed features?
We extensively discussed drugs that are antagonists
or partial agonists at D2 receptors in Chapter 5 and how
they are used for psychotic illnesses. The same agents
also act at D3 receptors, but at clinical doses only two of
them – cariprazine and blonanserin (Chapter 5, Figure
5-62) – can highly successfully compete with dopamine
itself for the D3 receptor (Figure 7-72). That is, in the
brain, drugs compete with dopamine itself for the D3
receptor and only those drugs with an affinity for the D3
receptor significantly higher than dopamine’s affinity
for the D3 receptor will actually block the D3 receptor.
Several agents have somewhat higher affinity for the D3
receptor than dopamine, and may have some net effect
blocking the D3 receptor, but cariprazine clearly has
the most potent action at the D3 receptor and would be
expected to block D3 receptors substantially at clinical
dosing (Figure 7-72).
344

What happens when you block a D3 receptor? Recall
that dopamine has five receptor subtypes (see discussion
in Chapter 4 and Figure 4-5) in two different groups
(Figure 4-4). D3 receptors can be presynaptic and
postsynaptic (Figures 4-4 through 4-9). Postsynaptic
blockade of D3 receptors in limbic regions may contribute
to antipsychotic actions but it is the presynaptic actions of
D3 antagonism/partial agonism in the ventral tegmental
area (VTA) that are of most interest for explaining
cariprazine’s antidepressant actions (Figure 7-73).
So, what is the consequence of blocking D3 receptors in
the VTA and why might this contribute to antidepressant
actions of cariprazine? Recall also that dopamine
input to the cortex is thought to be deficient in mood,
motivation, and cognitive symptoms of depression and
also in the negative symptoms of schizophrenia, due
in part to hypothetically deficient dopamine release
from mesocortical dopamine neurons. These neurons
are depicted in Figure 7-73A and show D3 presynaptic


<<<PAGE 361>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Mesocortical Dopamine Pathway
D1

D3 antagonist/
partial agonist

D1

D3

(SIGH)

A

negative
symptoms

(SIGH)

affective
symptoms

B

negative
symptoms

affective
symptoms

Figure 7-73 Dopamine 3 antagonism/partial agonism in the ventral tegmental area (VTA). (A) Presynaptic D3 receptors detect
dopamine and inhibit further dopamine release. These receptors are present in the VTA but not in the prefrontal cortex. There are,
however, postsynaptic D2 receptors in the prefrontal cortex, which are stimulated by dopamine. Shown here is the mesocortical
dopamine pathway, with stimulation of D3 receptors resulting in reduced dopamine release in the prefrontal cortex. Low levels of
dopamine in the prefrontal cortex is hypothesized to contribute to depressed mood, reduced motivation, and cognitive symptoms, all of
which occur in mood disorders, as well as to negative symptoms in schizophrenia. (B) Antagonism/partial agonism of D3 receptors in the
VTA can increase dopamine release in the prefrontal cortex. Because there are no D3 receptors in the prefrontal cortex, D3 antagonists/
partial agonists have no effect there. Dopamine is free to stimulate D1 receptors, hypothetically improving symptoms of depression.

autoreceptors in the VTA on dopamine cell bodies for a
population of mesocortical neurons. The function of these
D3 receptors is to detect dopamine and inhibit further
dopamine release (Figure 7-73A). However, these same
neurons projecting to the prefrontal cortex do not have
presynaptic autoreceptors on their axon terminals (see
Chapter 4 discussion and Figure 4-9; see also Figure 7-73).
D3 antagonists will have no effect in the prefrontal cortex
since there are few D3 receptors there. In Chapter 4 we
discussed how most of the dopamine receptors in prefrontal
cortex are postsynaptic and D1 (Figure 4-9). What this
means is that when D3 antagonists/partial agonists act
in the VTA to block them, this disinhibits the dopamine
neurons projecting to prefrontal cortex and they release
dopamine onto D1 receptors (Figure 7-73B). This action
hypothetically improves symptoms of depression and is one
explanation for why cariprazine has antidepressant actions,
and also why it has more robust improvement of negative
symptoms of schizophrenia than other drugs for psychosis.
Improvement in energy, motivation, and “brightening”
are observed after D3 antagonism in patients with both
mood disorders and schizophrenia, and animal models
demonstrate precognitive actions and also improvements in
substance abuse.

Cariprazine is approved for acute bipolar mania and
for acute bipolar depression (Table 7-1). Post hoc analyses
show significant clinical improvement both in mania
with mixed features of depression and bipolar depression
with mixed features of mania. Studies as adjunctive
treatment for patients with unipolar depression on
SSRIs/SNRIs have early indications of efficacy reported.
Thus, cariprazine has some of the most robust and
wide-ranging efficacy known across the entire bipolar
spectrum (Figure 6-7).
Lithium, the Classic “Antimanic” and “Mood
Stabilizer”

Bipolar mania has classically been treated with lithium
for more than 50 years. Lithium is an ion whose
mechanism of action is not certain. Candidates for its
mechanism of action are various signal transduction sites
beyond neurotransmitter receptors (Figure 7-74). This
includes second messengers such as the phosphatidyl
inositol system, where lithium inhibits the enzyme
inositol monophosphatase; modulation of G proteins;
and, most recently, regulation of gene expression for
growth factors and neuronal plasticity by interaction
with downstream signal transduction cascades, including
345

7


<<<PAGE 362>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Possible Mechanism of Lithium Action on Downstream
Signal Transduction Cascades
neurotrophin

NT1

GE

NT

++

++

Figure 7-74 Lithium’s mechanism
of action. Although lithium is
the oldest treatment for bipolar
disorder, its mechanism of action
is still not well understood. Several
possible mechanisms exist and
are shown here. Lithium may work
by affecting signal transduction,
perhaps through its inhibition of
second-messenger enzymes such as
inositol monophosphatase (right), by
modulation of G proteins (middle), or
by interaction at various sites within
downstream signal transduction
cascades, including glycogen
synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) (left).

2
P

GSK-3

= lithium

promotes neuroprotection
long-term plasticity
antimanic / mood stabilizer

inhibition of GSK-3 (glycogen synthase kinase 3) and
protein kinase C (Figure 7-74).
However lithium works, it is proven effective in manic
episodes, and in maintenance of recurrence, especially
for manic episodes and, perhaps to a lesser extent, for
depressive episodes. Lithium is well established to help
prevent suicide in patients with mood disorders. It is
also used to treat depressive episodes in bipolar disorder
and as an augmenting agent to drugs for depression
in treatment-resistant unipolar depression, but is not
formally approved for these uses.
A number of factors have led to an unfortunate
decline in the use of lithium in recent years, including
the entry of multiple new treatment options into the
therapeutic armamentarium for bipolar disorder, the
side effects of lithium, and the monitoring burden that is
part of prescribing lithium. The modern use of lithium
by experts departs from its classic use as a high-dose
monotherapy for euphoric mania, with lithium often
utilized now as one member of a portfolio of treatments,
often allowing once-daily administration and at lower
doses when combined with other mood stabilizers.
Well-known side effects of lithium include
gastrointestinal symptoms such as dyspepsia, nausea,
vomiting, and diarrhea, as well as weight gain, hair
loss, acne, tremor, sedation, decreased cognition, and
incoordination. There are also potential long-term
346

adverse effects upon the thyroid and kidney. Lithium has
a narrow therapeutic window, requiring monitoring of
plasma drug levels.
Anticonvulsants as “Mood Stabilizers”

Based upon theories that mania may “kindle” further
episodes of mania, a logical parallel with seizure disorders
was drawn, since seizures can “kindle” more seizures.
Several anticonvulsants (Table 7-3) are categorized on the
basis of whether they are “mania-minded,” i.e., treat from
above and stabilize from above (Figure 7-7); “depressionminded,” i.e., treat from below and stabilize from below
(Figure 7-8); or both. Because the known anticonvulsants
carbamazepine and valproate proved effective in treating
the manic phase of bipolar disorder, this has led to the
idea that any anticonvulsant would be a mood stabilizer,
especially for mania. However, this has not proven to be
the case (Table 7-3) since anticonvulsants do not all act
by the same pharmacological mechanisms, as discussed
below. These agents for mania or bipolar depression are
better classified for their pharmacological mechanism of
action at ion channels rather than as “mood stabilizers”
or “anticonvulsants.” Numerous mood stabilizers that
are also anticonvulsants are discussed below, including
not only those with proven efficacy in different phases of
bipolar disorder, but also those with dubious efficacy in
bipolar disorder (Table 7-3).


<<<PAGE 363>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Table 7-3 Anticonvulsant mood stabilizers

Agent

Putative clinical actions
Epilepsy

Mania-minded

Depression-minded

Treat from
above

Stabilize
from above

Treat from
below

Stabilize from
below

Valproate

++++

++++

++

+

+/−

Carbamazepine

++++

++++

++

+

+/−

Lamotrigine

++++

+/−

++++

+++

++++

Oxcarbazepine/licarbazepine

++++

++

+

+/−

+/−

Riluzole

+

+

+/−

Topiramate

++++

+/−

+/−

Gabapentin

++++

+/−

+/−

Pregabalin

++++

+/−

+/−

Anticonvulsants with Proven Efficacy in Bipolar Disorder
Valproic Acid (Valproate, Sodium Valproate)

As for all anticonvulsants, the exact mechanism of action
of valproic acid (also, sodium valproate, valproate) is
uncertain; however, even less may be known about the
mechanism of valproate than for other anticonvulsants.
Various hypotheses are discussed here, and summarized in
Figures 7-75 through 7-78. At least three possibilities exist
for how valproic acid works: inhibiting voltage-sensitive
sodium channels (Figure 7-76), boosting the actions of the
neurotransmitter GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) (Figure
7-77), and regulating downstream signal transduction
cascades (Figure 7-78). It is not known whether these
actions explain the mood-stabilizing actions, the
anticonvulsant actions, the anti-migraine actions, or the
side effects of valproic acid. Obviously, this simple molecule
has multiple and complex clinical effects, and research
is trying to determine which of the various possibilities
explain the “mood-stabilizing” antimanic effects of valproic
acid so that new agents with more efficacy and fewer
side effects can be developed by targeting the relevant
pharmacological mechanism for bipolar disorder.
One hypothesis to explain mood-stabilizing antimanic
actions is the possibility that valproate acts to diminish
excessive neurotransmission by diminishing the flow of
ions through voltage-sensitive sodium channels (VSSCs)
(Figure 7-76). VSSCs are discussed in Chapter 3 and
illustrated in Figures 3-19 through 3-21. No specific
molecular site of action for valproate has been identified,
but it is possible that valproate may change the sensitivity
of sodium channels by altering phosphorylation of

7

valproic acid

Na+
++
Ca

Glu
GABA
Figure 7-75 Valproic acid. Shown here is an icon of the
pharmacological actions of valproic acid, an anticonvulsant
used in the treatment of bipolar disorder. Valproic acid (also
valproate) may work by interfering with voltage-sensitive sodium
channels, enhancing the inhibitory actions of γ-aminobutyric
acid (GABA), and regulating downstream signal transduction
cascades, although which of these actions may be related to
mood stabilization is not clear. Valproate may also interact with
other ion channels, such as voltage-sensitive calcium channels,
and also indirectly block glutamate (Glu) actions.

347


<<<PAGE 364>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Possible Sites of Action of Valproate on VSSCs
= valproate

P

P

2

2
4
P0

GE

GE

Figure 7-76 Possible sites of action of valproate on voltage-sensitive sodium channels (VSSCs). Valproate may exert antimanic
effects by changing the sensitivity of VSSCs, perhaps by directly binding to channel subunits or inhibiting phosphorylating enzymes
that regulate the sensitivity of these ion channels. Inhibition of VSSCs would lead to reduced sodium influx and, in turn, potentially to
reduced glutamate excitatory neurotransmission, which is a possible mechanism for mania efficacy.

7-77 Possible sites of action of valproate on
Possible Sites of Action of Valproate on GABA Figure
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Valproate’s antimanic effects
may be due to enhancement of GABA neurotransmission,
perhaps by inhibiting GABA reuptake, enhancing GABA
release, or interfering with the metabolism of GABA by
GABA-T (GABA transaminase).

GABA neuron

= valproate

?

?
?

E
GABA

348

GABA-T

inactive
substance


<<<PAGE 365>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

sodium channels, either by binding directly to the VSSC
or its regulatory units, or by inhibiting phosphorylating
enzymes (Figure 7-76). If less sodium is able to pass into
neurons, this may lead to diminished release of glutamate
and therefore less excitatory neurotransmission, but
this is only a theory. There may be additional effects of
valproate on other voltage-sensitive ion channels, but
these are poorly characterized and may relate to side
effects as well as to therapeutic effects.
Another idea is that valproate enhances the actions
of GABA, either by increasing its release, decreasing its
reuptake, or slowing its metabolic inactivation (Figure
7-77). The direct site of action of valproate that causes the
enhancement of GABA remains unknown, but there is good
evidence that the downstream effect of valproate ultimately
does result in more GABA activity, and thus more inhibitory
neurotransmission, possibly explaining antimanic actions.
Finally, a number of downstream actions on complex
signal transduction cascades have been described (Figure
7-78). Like lithium, valproate may inhibit GSK-3, but it may
also target many other downstream sites, from blockade
of phosphokinase C (PKC) and MARCKS (myristoylated
alanine-rich C kinase substrate), to activating various
signals that promote neuroprotection and long-term

plasticity such as ERK (extracellular signal-regulated
kinase) kinase, BCL2 (cytoprotective protein B-cell
lymphoma/leukemia-2 gene), GAP43 (growth associated
protein 43), and others (Figure 7-78). The effects of these
signal transduction cascades are only now being clarified,
and which of these possible effects of valproate might be
relevant to mood-stabilizing actions are not yet understood.
Valproate is proven effective for the acute manic phase
of bipolar disorder, and is commonly used long-term to
prevent recurrence of mania, although its prophylactic
effects have not been as well established as its acute
effects in mania (Table 7-3). Antidepressant actions of
valproate have also not been well established, nor has it
been shown to convincingly stabilize against recurrent
depressive episodes, but there may be some efficacy for
the depressed phase of bipolar disorder in some patients.
Some experts believe valproic acid is more effective than
lithium for rapid cycling and mixed episodes of mania.
In reality, such episodes are very difficult to treat, and
combinations of two or more mood stabilizers, including
lithium plus valproate plus serotonin/dopamine blockers,
are usually in order. For optimum efficacy, it may be
ideal to push the dose of valproate, but no drug works
if your patient refuses to take it, and valproic acid often

Possible Sites of Action of Valproate on Downstream
Signal Transduction Cascades
neurotrophin

NT1

GE

Ras/Raf/MEK

2

P

ERK
activation

GSK-3
= valproate

Figure 7-78 Possible sites of action
of valproate on downstream signal
transduction cascades. Valproate
has been shown to have multiple
downstream effects on signal
transduction cascades, which may
be involved in its antimanic effects.
Valproate inhibits glycogen synthase
kinase 3 (GSK-3), phosphokinase C
(PKC), and myristoylated alaninerich C kinase substrate (MARCKS).
In addition, valproate activates
signals that promote neuroprotection
and long-term plasticity, such as
extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK), cytoprotective protein B-cell
lymphoma/leukemia-2 gene (BCL2),
and growth associated protein 43
(GAP43).

PKC
promotes neuroprotection
long-term plasticity
antimanic / mood stabilizer
MARCKS
BCL2
activation

GAP43
activation

neuronal genome

349

7


<<<PAGE 366>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

has unacceptable side effects such as hair loss, weight
gain, and sedation. Certain problems can be avoided by
lowering the dose, but this will generally lower efficacy,
and thus there may be the requirement to combine
valproate with other mood stabilizers, especially when
valproate is given in lower doses. Some side effects may
be related more to chronicity of exposure rather than
to dose and thus may not be avoidable by reducing the
dose. This includes warnings for bone marrow, liver,
pancreatic, and fetal toxicities such as neural-tube
defects, as well as concerns about weight gain, metabolic
complications, and possible risk of amenorrhea and
polycystic ovaries in women of child-bearing potential. A
syndrome of menstrual disturbances, polycystic ovaries,
hyperandrogenism, obesity, and insulin resistance may be
associated with valproic acid therapy in such women.
Carbamazepine

Carbamazepine (Figure 7-79) was actually the first to
be shown to be effective in the manic phase of bipolar
disorder, but did not receive US FDA approval until
recently as a once-daily controlled-release formulation.
Although carbamazepine and valproate both act
effectively on the manic phase of bipolar disorder (Table

carbamazepine
Ca ++

7-3), they appear to have different pharmacological
mechanisms of action, including different side-effect
profiles. Thus, carbamazepine is hypothesized to act by
blocking voltage-sensitive sodium channels (VSSCs)
(Figure 7-80), perhaps at a site within the channel itself,
also known as the α subunit of VSSCs. As mentioned
earlier, VSSCs are discussed in Chapter 3 and illustrated
in Figures 3-19 through 3-21. The hypothesized action
of carbamazepine upon the α subunit of VSSCs (Figure
7-80) is different from the hypothesized actions of
valproate on these sodium channels (Figure 7-76), but
may be similar to how the anticonvulsants oxcarbazepine
and its active metabolite eslicarbazepine also act.
Although both carbamazepine and valproate are
anticonvulsants and both treat mania from above, there
are differences between these two “anticonvulsants”
beyond their presumed pharmacological mechanisms
of therapeutic action in mania. For example, valproate
is proven effective in migraine, but carbamazepine is
proven effective in neuropathic pain. Furthermore,
carbamazepine has a different side-effect profile
than valproate, including more profound immediate
suppressant effects upon the bone marrow, requiring
initial monitoring of blood counts (blood counts
including platelets should also be periodically monitored
on valproate), and notable induction of the cytochrome
P450 enzyme 3A4. Both carbamazepine and valproate are
sedating and can cause fetal toxicity such as neural-tube
defects.
Lamotrigine

K+

GABA
Na+ channel
unit
Figure 7-79 Carbamazepine. Shown here is an icon of the
pharmacological actions of carbamazepine, an anticonvulsant
used in the treatment of bipolar disorder. Carbamazepine may
work by binding to the α subunit of voltage-sensitive sodium
channels (VSSCs) and could perhaps have actions at other ion
channels for calcium and potassium. By interfering with voltagesensitive channels, carbamazepine may enhance the inhibitory
actions of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

350

Lamotrigine (Figure 7-81) is approved as a “mood
stabilizer” for entirely different clinical indications
than the anticonvulsant mood stabilizers valproate and
carbamazepine, making the point that anticonvulsants
do not all have the same therapeutic actions in bipolar
disorder. Lamotrigine is not approved to treat mania
or depression in bipolar disorder, but is approved to
prevent recurrence of both mania and depression in
bipolar disorder. There are many curious things about
lamotrigine as a “mood stabilizer.” First, the US FDA
has not approved its use for acute bipolar depression,
yet most experts believe that lamotrigine is effective for
bipolar depression. A second interesting thing about
lamotrigine is that even though it has some overlapping
mechanistic actions with carbamazepine, namely binding
to the open-channel conformation of VSSCs (Figure
7-82), lamotrigine is not approved for bipolar mania.
Perhaps lamotrigine’s pharmacological actions are not
potent enough at sodium channels, or perhaps the long


<<<PAGE 367>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Figure 7-80 Binding site of
carbamazepine. Carbamazepine
is believed to bind to a site
located within the open-channel
conformation of the voltagesensitive sodium channel (VSSC) α
subunit.

7
carbamazepine

lamotrigine
Ca++
K

+

Possible Sites of Action of Lamotrigine
on Glutamate Release
glutamate
neuron

Na+channel
unit

Glu

Figure 7-81 Lamotrigine. Shown here is an icon of the
pharmacological actions of lamotrigine, an anticonvulsant used
in the treatment of bipolar disorder. Lamotrigine may work by
blocking the alpha subunit of voltage-sensitive sodium channels
(VSSCs) and could perhaps also have actions at other ion channels
for calcium and potassium. Lamotrigine is also thought to reduce
the release of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate.

lamotrigine
lamotrigine
Figure 7-82 Possible site of action of lamotrigine on glutamate
release. It is possible that lamotrigine reduces glutamate
release through its blockade of voltage-sensitive sodium
channels (VSSCs). Alternatively, lamotrigine may have this effect
via an additional synaptic action that has not yet been identified.

351


<<<PAGE 368>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

titration period required when starting lamotrigine
makes it difficult to show any useful effectiveness for
mania, which generally requires treatment with drugs
that can work quickly. A third aspect of lamotrigine
is that it is generally well tolerated, with one glaring
exception: a propensity to cause rashes, including (rarely)
the life-threatening Stevens Johnson syndrome (toxic
epidermal necrolysis). Rashes caused by lamotrigine
can be minimized by very slow up-titration of the drug
during initiation of therapy, avoiding or managing drug
interactions, such as those with valproate that raise
lamotrigine levels, and by understanding how to identify
and manage serious rashes, including being able to
distinguish them from benign rashes (see discussion of
lamotrigine in Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology: the
Prescriber’s Guide). Finally, lamotrigine seems to have
some unique aspects to its mechanism of action (Figure
7-82), namely to reduce the release of the excitatory
neurotransmitter glutamate. It is not clear whether this
action is secondary to blocking the activation of VSSCs
(Figure 7-82) or to some additional synaptic action.
Reducing excitatory glutamatergic neurotransmission,
especially if excessive during bipolar depression, may be
a unique mechanism of action of lamotrigine and explain
why it has such a different clinical profile as a treatment
from below and a stabilizer from below for bipolar
depression.
Anticonvulsants with Uncertain or Doubtful Efficacy in
Bipolar Disorder
Oxcarbazepine/Eslicarbazepine

Oxcarbazepine is structurally related to carbamazepine,
but is not a metabolite of carbamazepine. Oxcarbazepine
is actually not the active form of the drug, but a prodrug
that is immediately converted into a 10-hydroxy
derivative, also called the monohydroxy derivative,
and most recently has been named licarbazepine. The
active form of licarbazepine is the S enantiomer, known
as eslicarbazepine. Thus, oxcarbazepine really works
via conversion to eslicarbazepine, which is itself now
available as an anticonvulsant.
Oxcarbazepine has a presumed mechanism of
anticonvulsant action the same as that for carbamazepine,
namely, binding to the open-channel conformation of the
VSSC at a site within the channel itself on the α subunit
(as in Figure 7-80). However, oxcarbazepine seems to
have some important differences from carbamazepine,
including being less sedating, having less bone marrow
toxicity, and also having less CYP450 3A4 interactions,
352

making it a more tolerable agent that is easier to dose. On
the other hand, oxcarbazepine has never been proven to
work in acute bipolar mania or depression. Nevertheless,
because of a similar postulated mechanism of action
but a better tolerability profile, oxcarbazepine and more
recently eslicarbazepine have been utilized “off-label” by
many clinicians especially for the manic phase of bipolar
disorder.
Topiramate

Topiramate is another compound approved as an
anticonvulsant and for migraine, and recently, in
combination with bupropion, for weight loss in obesity.
Topiramate has been tested in bipolar disorder, but
with ambiguous results (Table 7-3). It does seem to be
associated with weight loss and is sometimes given as an
adjunct to drugs for psychosis or to mood stabilizers that
cause weight gain, but can cause unacceptable sedation
in some patients. Topiramate is also being tested in
various substance abuse disorders, including stimulant
abuse and alcoholism. However, topiramate is not clearly
effective as a mood stabilizer, either from evidence-based
randomized controlled trials (which are not consistently
positive) or from clinical practice.
Gabapentin and Pregabalin

These anticonvulsants seem to have little or no action as
mood stabilizers, yet are robust treatments for various
pain conditions, from neuropathic pain to fibromyalgia,
and for various anxiety disorders, and are discussed in
more detail in Chapter 8 on anxiety and Chapter 9 on
pain.
Calcium Channel Blockers (L-Type)

There are several types of calcium channels, not
only the N or P/Q channels linked to secretion of
neurotransmitters, targeted by α2δ ligands and discussed
in Chapter 3 (see Figures 3-23 and 3-24), but also L
channels localized on vascular smooth muscle and
which are targeted by various antihypertensive and
antiarrhythmic drugs, commonly called “calcium channel
blockers.” L-type channels are located on neurons where
their function is still being debated, and some anecdotal
evidence suggests that calcium channel blockers,
especially dihydropyridine-type calcium channel blockers,
may be useful for some patients with bipolar disorder.
Riluzole

This agent has anticonvulsant actions in preclinical
models, but was developed to slow the progression


<<<PAGE 369>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s
disease). Theoretically, riluzole binds to VSSCs and
prevents glutamate release, in an action similar to that
postulated for lamotrigine (see Figure 7-82). The idea is
that diminishing glutamate release in ALS would prevent
the postulated excitotoxicity that may be causing death
of motor neurons in ALS. Excessive glutamate activity
may be occurring not only in ALS, but also in bipolar
depression, although this is not necessarily so severe as to
cause widespread neuronal loss.

remission of symptoms: treat from above and stabilize
from above (Figure 7-7) and treat from below and
stabilize from below (Figure 7-8).

FUTURE TREATMENTS FOR
MOOD DISORDERS
Dextromethorphan–Bupropion and
Dextromethorphan–Quinidine

As discussed above, one of the most interesting
developments in the treatment of resistant unipolar
depression in recent years has been the observation that
infusions of subanesthetic doses of ketamine or intranasal
administration of esketamine can exert an immediate
antidepressant effect and can often immediately reduce
suicidal thoughts. Since the effects are often not sustained
for more than a few days, investigators have searched for
oral ketamine-like agents that could have rapid onset,
sustained efficacy, greater ease of administration, and better
tolerability in patients with treatment-resistant illness.
Several such possibilities are in development, namely
various NMDA antagonists with additional pharmacological
properties. One agent combines the NMDA antagonist
dextromethorphan with the CYP450 2D6 inhibitor and
NDRI bupropion (also known as AXS-05), and the other

Combinations are the Standard for Treating Bipolar
Disorder

Given the disappointing number of patients who
attain satisfactory response in bipolar disorder from
monotherapy, it is more the rule than the exception
that bipolar patients receive combination treatments.
Although first-line treatment may be one of the
serotonin/dopamine agents, if this fails to adequately
control mania, another treatment for mania such as
valproate or lithium may be added (Figure 7-83). On
the other hand, if serotonin/dopamine agents fail to
adequately control depression, lamotrigine may be added
or, controversially, a monoamine reuptake inhibitor
(Figure 7-83). The goal is four treatments for fullest

Combos for Bipolar Disorder
Evidence-Based Bipolar Combos for Mania

+
5HT/DA blocker-lithium
combo

5HT/DA blocker

lithium

+
5HT/DA blockervalproate combo

valproate

5HT/DA blocker

Practice-Based Bipolar Combos for Depression

Figure 7-83 Bipolar disorder
combinations. Most patients
with bipolar disorder will require
treatment with two or more agents.
The combinations with the most
evidence for mania include addition
of a serotonin/dopamine antagonist
to either lithium or valproate.
Combinations that are not well
studied in controlled trials but that
have some practice-based evidence
for depression include a serotonin/
dopamine antagonist plus lamotrigine.
Although controversial, some clinicians
add a monoamine reuptake inhibitor to
a serotonin/dopamine antagonist for
bipolar depression.

+
5HT/DA blockerLamictal combo

Lamictal/
lamotrigine

5HT/DA blocker

Careful Combo

+
5HT/DA blockerLamictal combo

5HT/DA blocker

+
Lamictal/
lamotrigine

monoamine
reuptake
blocker

353

7


<<<PAGE 370>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

combines dextromethorphan with the CYP450 2D6
inhibitor quinidine (Figure 7-84). The latter combination
has already been approved to treat pathological laughing
and crying in pseudobulbar affect. A newer version of the
latter combination has deuterated the dextromethorphan
molecule and altered the dose of quinidine (Figure 7-85).
Deuteration extends the half-life of a compound and allows
re-patenting for commercial development (deuteration of
tetrabenazine was previously discussed in Chapter 5 in the
section on treatment of tardive dyskinesia and illustrated in
Figure 5-11B). Although it is clear that dextromethorphan
has clinically relevant affinity for the NMDA receptor,
other binding properties are less well characterized,
including σ1 receptor binding, SERT inhibition, and weak
μ-opioid binding (Figure 7-84). As for all NMDA receptor
antagonists studied for treatment-resistant depression, it is
unclear which subtypes of NMDA receptor are engaged by
dextromethorphan, which are most important, and what
the role of σ1 or μ-opioid binding is in rapid antidepressant
action.
Dextromethorphan is rapidly metabolized by
CYP450 2D6 making it difficult to achieve therapeutic
blood levels following oral administration without

concomitant administration of a CYP450 2D6 inhibitor.
Each combination product adds a 2D6 inhibitor
(Figure 7-84). Quinidine is a 2D6 inhibitor at doses
below its cardiovascular actions, and bupropion is
not only an NDRI (Figures 7-34 and 7-35) but also
a 2D6 inhibitor. For bupropion, as discussed above
and illustrated in Figures 7-34 and 7-35, in addition
to 2D6 inhibition there is the monoamine-associated
antidepressant mechanism of NRDIs (Figure 7-84)
with the potential for synergy with the NMDA
antagonist mechanism of dextromethorphan. Both
combination products are in trials for treatmentresistant depression with some promising initial results,
especially for dextromethorphan–bupropion, which
has been awarded breakthrough therapy status by the
US FDA for major depressive disorder and fast-track
designation for treatment-resistant depression. Both
combination products are also in trials for agitation
in Alzheimer disease and show some promising initial
results, especially for dextromethorphan–bupropion,
wh ich was given fast-track designation by the FDA.
Dextromethorphan–bupropion treatment of agitation in
dementia is discussed further in Chapter 12 on dementia.

dextromethorphan
(DXM)

Figure 7-84 Dextromethorphan–
bupropion and dextromethorphan–
quinidine. Dextromethorphan is a
weak N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor antagonist, with stronger
binding affinity for the serotonin
transporter (SERT) and σ1 receptors. It
is rapidly metabolized by CYP450 2D6,
making it difficult to achieve therapeutic
blood levels without concomitant
administration of a CYP450 2D6
inhibitor. Dextromethorphan is being
studied in combination with the
norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibitor (NDRI) bupropion, which
also inhibits CYP450 2D6, and in
combination with the CYP450 2D6
inhibitor quinidine.

NMDA
α1D
σ1

SERT

SERT

++

+

σ1 NMDA α1D

+

+

+

+

quinidine

bupropion

DAT
2D6

2D6
NET

NDRI

354

quinidine


<<<PAGE 371>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

formulation of dextromethorphan in
deuterated dextromethorphan deuterated
combination with quinidine is in development.
Deuteration extends the half-life of dextromethorphan,
(Deu-DXM)
which in turn affects the required dose of quinidine.
Figure 7-85 Deuterated dextromethorphan. A

NMDA

α1D

σ1

Deu-DXM

SERT

++

σ1

+

SERT

NMDA

α1D

+

+

Dextromethadone

Methadone is a racemic mixture of dextro- and
levomethadone and is given orally as a μ-opioid
agonist for medication-assisted treatment of opioid use
disorder. The μ-opioid activity resides mostly in the levo
enantiomer, and the dextro enantiomer has relatively
more potent NMDA antagonist activity, without as
potent μ-opioid agonist activity. The dextro enantiomer
(Figure 7-86) is in clinical development as a rapid-onset
treatment of major depression with some promising
early clinical results. Just as for all NMDA antagonists
for treatment-resistant depression (i.e., ketamine,
esketamine, and dextromethorphan), the relative
importance of NMDA antagonism, the specific NMDA
receptors targeted, and the downstream consequences
of NMDA antagonism are just now being clarified,
including the potential differences amongst these
various NMDA antagonists. Furthermore, the additional
binding properties of each of these agents, including

7

dextromethadone, are less well characterized, such as σ1
receptor binding, SERT inhibition, and weak μ-opioid
binding (Figure 7-86). It is possible that these agents
do not act simply as NMDA antagonists, but that some
degree of μ-opioid agonist activity may shepherd dimers
of NMDA and μ receptors by exploiting their natural
oppositional actions, to create a greater NMDA effect in
the presence of μ stimulation than in the absence of it.
This is the subject of much further research as the field
attempts to clarify the mechanism of rapid antidepressant
response associated with NMDA antagonism, and which
portfolio of receptor actions is optimal.
Hallucinogen-Assisted Psychotherapy

Psychotherapy has traditionally competed with
psychopharmacology. More recently, psychotherapy
and psychopharmacology have come to be seen as
complementary and most good mental health prescribers
also practice psychotherapy. It has long been recognized
355


<<<PAGE 372>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

dextromethadone

MDMA

3,4-methylene-dioxymethamphetamine

NMDA

2A

T
5H
VMAT

σ

SERT
SERT

µ

δ

µ

++

5HT
2A NMDA

+

+

δ

SERT

+

+

σ

+

Figure 7-86 Dextromethadone. Methadone consists of two
enantiomers, dextro and levo. The levo enantiomer is a potent
μ-opioid receptor agonist, while the dextro enantiomer has less
potent μ-opioid agonism and is also an antagonist at N-methylD-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. The dextro enantiomer of
methadone, dextromethadone, is in clinical development as a
rapid-onset treatment for major depressive disorder.

that using both psychotherapy and medication can be
synergistic for many patients in terms of therapeutic
efficacy and favorable long-term outcomes, perhaps
by sharing some common neurobiological links since
both can change brain circuits. Preclinical research
increasingly documents psychotherapy as a form
of learning which can induce epigenetic changes in
brain circuits, which can enhance the efficiency of
information processing in malfunctioning neurons to
improve symptoms in psychiatric disorders, just like
drugs. A recent clinical exploitation of the combination
of psychotherapy with psychopharmacology is a

356

Figure 7-87 3,4-Methylene-dioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA). MDMA is an amphetamine derivative. Amphetamine
is a norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI) with
additional inhibition of VMAT2 causing enhanced dopamine
release. MDMA is a serotonin inhibitor, with additional
inhibition of VMAT2 causing enhanced serotonin release.
MDMA is intesting for PTSD, anxiety, and treatment-resistant
depression.

resurrection in the use of hallucinogens to induce a
state of dissociation in which the patient may be more
amenable to psychotherapeutic input. One idea is to
provide more insight and clarity to underlying suppressed
memories. Another idea is to use psychotherapy-guided
re-experiencing of memories, coupled with techniques to
interfere with reconsolidation of traumatic memories so
they are “forgotten.” Animal studies show that memories
are initially consolidated into relatively permanent
memory files, but become labile when reactivated, and
if not reconsolidated after having or modifying that
memory, it can theoretically be erased. That is the goal
of some types of hallucinogen-assisted psychotherapies:
to prevent the reconsolidation of painful traumatic
memories. Numerous agents have been tested in this
paradigm of dissociation-assisted psychotherapy, from
ketamine to the hallucinogens MDMA and psilocybin,
described below.
3,4-Methylene-dioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)

3,4-Methylene-dioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)
(Figure 7-87) is an amphetamine derivative that
transforms amphetamine itself from being predominantly
a norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitor with


<<<PAGE 373>>>
Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

psilocybin

4-phosphoryloxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine
T
5H
2A
5HT2

B

5HT2A 5HT2B

+++

++

5HT1E 5HT6 5HT7

+

+

+

E

dephosphorylation

psilocin

N,N-dimethyltryptamine DMT

2A

T
5H

7

5HT7

5HT2B

5HT7

5HT2B

+++

+++

5HT2A
5HT
5HT1D 1E 5HT2C 5HT6 5HT5 5HT1B 5HT1A

++

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Figure 7-88 Psilocybin. The hallucinogen psilocybin is predominantly a 5HT2A agonist, with actions at some additional serotonin
receptors. It is rapidly converted by dephosphorylation to its active metabolite, psilocin. Psilocybin is being studied in depression,
anxiety, and PTSD.

vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) inhibition
causing enhanced dopamine release (see Chapter 11
and Figures 11-30 through 11-32) into a more powerful
serotonin reuptake inhibitor with VMAT2 inhibition
causing enhanced serotonin release as well. The released

serotonin is free to act at all serotonin receptors but
seems to have profound actions in stimulating the 5HT2A
receptor, not unlike other hallucinogens.
The reason MDMA may be helpful in psychotherapy is
that it can produce feelings of increased energy, pleasure,

357


<<<PAGE 374>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

and emotional warmth, and it can promote trust and
closeness but cause distortions and hallucinations of
sensory and time perception. MDMA, also known as
“Ecstasy” or “Molly” (slang for Molecular), was once
popular in the nightclub scene and at “raves” (all-night
dance parties). Its agonist actions at 5HT2A receptors
may be responsible for the spike in body temperature
that can occur after taking MDMA, with organ damage
and even death, especially when dancing all night and
when dehydrated. MDMA obtained on the street is often
contaminated with “bath salts” (synthetic cathinones),
methamphetamine, dextromethorphan, ketamine, and/
or cocaine, and is often taken along with marijuana and
alcohol. Pure MDMA is obviously what is studied in
hallucinogen-assisted psychotherapy. MDMA is in testing
for PTSD, anxiety and existential distress in terminally
ill patients, social anxiety in autism, treatment refractory
depression, substance abuse, and more.
Psilocybin

Psilocybin (4-phosphoryloxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine)
(Figure 7-88), also known as an hallucinogen in “magic
mushrooms,” has a structure similar to LSD (lysergic
acid diethylamide) and has been used and abused for its
ability to cause hallucinogenic, psychedelic, and euphoric
“trips.” Psilocybin is rapidly converted to its active
metabolite psilocin (N,N-dimethyltryptamine or DMT)
by dephosphorylation. Both agents bind to a number of
serotonin receptor subtypes (5HT1A, 5HT2A, 5HT2C, and
others), but the hallucinogenic actions of both agents
are linked most closely with agonist actions on 5HT2A

358

receptors (Figure 7-88), since 5HT2A antagonists (but not
selective dopamine D2 antagonists) reverse the effects of
psilocybin in humans. Hallucinogen-mediated 5HT2Astimulated psychosis was discussed in Chapter 4 as one
of the three major theories of psychosis and illustrated
in Figure 4-52B. Psilocybin has been designated a
breakthrough therapy by the US FDA for treatment of
depression. Psilocybin is also being widely investigated
for anxiety and existential distress in terminally ill
patients, substance abuse, PTSD, and several other
conditions.

SUMMARY
In this extensive chapter, we have summarized the
pharmacological mechanisms of actions of the many
agents used to treat unipolar major depression, especially
those acting on monoamine systems. More recently
introduced have been agents working outside the
monoamine system, namely on glutamate and GABA
neurotransmission. Combining drugs for treatment
resistance in unipolar depression is also discussed. Not
only is the treatment of unipolar depression presented,
but this is compared and contrasted with the treatment
of bipolar disorder, from mania, to bipolar depression, to
depression with mixed features. The specific agents for
these conditions, which are mostly different from those for
the treatment of unipolar depression, are discussed. Many
of these same agents are used in the treatment of psychosis
and that use is discussed in Chapter 5. A brief synopsis of
future treatments for mood disorders is also presented.


<<<PAGE 375>>>
8

Anxiety, Trauma,
and Treatment

Symptom Dimensions in Anxiety Disorders 359
When Is Anxiety an Anxiety Disorder? 359
Overlapping Symptoms of Major Depression and
Anxiety Disorders 360
Overlapping Symptoms of Different Anxiety
Disorders 362
The Amygdala and the Neurobiology of Fear 364
Cortico-Striato-Thalamo-Cortical (CSTC) Loops and
the Neurobiology of Worry 365
Benzodiazepines as Drugs for Anxiety 366
Alpha-2-Delta Ligands as Anxiolytics 366

This chapter will provide a brief overview of anxiety
disorders, traumatic disorders, and their symptoms and
their treatments. Included here are descriptions of how
the symptoms of anxiety disorders overlap with each
other, and also with the symptoms of major depressive
disorder and with the symptoms of trauma and stressrelated disorders. Clinical descriptions and formal
diagnostic criteria are mentioned here only in passing.
The reader should consult standard reference sources
for this material. The discussion here will emphasize
how the functioning of various brain circuits and
neurotransmitters – especially those centered on the
amygdala – impact our understanding of the symptoms
of fear, worry, and traumatic memories.
The goal of this chapter is to acquaint the reader
with ideas about the clinical and biological aspects of
anxiety/traumatic symptoms in order to understand
the mechanisms of action of the various treatments.
Many of the psychopharmacological treatments are
extensively discussed in other chapters. For details
of mechanisms of the many agents used to treat
anxiety that are also used to treat unipolar depression
(monoamine reuptake inhibitors), the reader is referred
to Chapter 7 on mood disorders and their treatments;
for those agents used to treat anxiety and traumatic
disorders that are also used to treat chronic pain
(i.e., certain ion-channel-inhibiting anticonvulsants),
the reader is referred to Chapter 9 on chronic pain

Serotonin and Anxiety 368
Noradrenergic Hyperactivity in Anxiety 370
Fear Conditioning versus Fear Extinction 370
Novel Approaches to the Treatment of Anxiety
Disorders 374
Treatments for Anxiety Disorder Subtypes 377
Generalized Anxiety Disorder 377
Panic Disorder 377
Social Anxiety Disorder 377
PTSD 377
Summary 378

and its treatment. Although all psychiatric disorders
can benefit from psychotherapy, anxiety/traumatic
disorders may be especially effectively treated with
psychotherapy. In many cases, psychotherapy for
anxiety disorders can be even more effective than drug
treatment or can enhance the efficacy of anxiolytic
agents. Novel psychotherapies aiming to prevent or
reverse fear conditioning and fear reconsolidation
are mentioned briefly here but for more details of
psychotherapy for anxiety, the reader is referred
to general psychiatry and clinical psychology texts
as well as to books by the author that cover both
psychopharmacology and psychotherapy (see reference
list). The discussion of anxiety and its disorders in
this chapter emphasizes the neurobiology of anxiety
and the mechanism of action of drugs for anxiety.
The reader should consult standard drug handbooks
(such as Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology: the
Prescriber’s Guide) for details of doses, side effects,
drug interactions, and other issues relevant to the
prescribing of these drugs in clinical practice.

SYMPTOM DIMENSIONS IN
ANXIETY DISORDERS
When Is Anxiety an Anxiety Disorder?

Anxiety is a normal emotion under circumstances of
threat and is thought to be part of the evolutionary “fight

359


<<<PAGE 376>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

or flight” reaction of survival. Whereas it may be normal
or even adaptive to be anxious when a saber-tooth tiger
(or its modern-day equivalent) is attacking, there are
many circumstances in which the presence of anxiety is
maladaptive or excessive and constitutes a psychiatric
disorder. The idea of anxiety as a psychiatric disorder is
evolving rapidly, and is characterized by the concept of
core symptoms of excessive fear and worry (symptoms
at the center of anxiety disorders in Figure 8-1),
compared to major depression, which is characterized
by core symptoms of depressed mood or loss of interest
(symptoms at the center of major depressive disorder
in Figure 8-1). Some disorders associated with the
symptoms of anxiety such as obsessive–compulsive
disorder (OCD) are no longer classified as anxiety
disorders in some diagnostic manuals, and here OCD is
discussed in Chapter 13 on impulsive and compulsive
disorders. Other disorders associated with the symptoms
of anxiety such as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
are also no longer classified as anxiety disorders in
certain diagnostic manuals, but are discussed here in
this chapter.
Anxiety disorders have considerable symptom
overlap with major depression (see those symptoms
surrounding core features shown in Figure 8-1),
particularly sleep disturbance, problems concentrating,
and fatigue and psychomotor/arousal symptoms. Each
anxiety disorder also has a great deal of symptom
overlap with other anxiety disorders (Figures 8-2
through 8-5; see also Figure 13-30). Anxiety disorders
are also extensively comorbid, not only with major
depression, but also with each other, since many
patients qualify over time for a second or even third
concomitant anxiety disorder (Figures 8-2 through
8-5). Finally, anxiety disorders are frequently comorbid
with many other conditions such as substance abuse,

attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), bipolar
disorder, pain disorders, sleep disorders, and more.
So, what is an anxiety disorder? These disorders
all seem to maintain the core features of some form
of anxiety or fear coupled with some form of worry,
but their natural history over time shows them to
morph from one into another, to evolve into full
syndrome expression of anxiety-disorder symptoms
(Figure 8-1) and then to recede into subsyndromal levels
of symptoms, only to reappear again as the original
anxiety disorder, a different anxiety disorder (Figures
8-2 through 8-5), or major depression (Figure 8-1). If
anxiety disorders all share core symptoms of fear and
worry (Figures 8-1 and 8-6) – and as we shall see later
in this chapter, are all basically treated with the same
drugs, including many of the same drugs that treat major
depression – the question now arises as to what the
difference is between one anxiety disorder and another.
Also, one could ask what the difference is between major
depression and anxiety disorders. Are all these entities
really different disorders or are they instead different
aspects of the same illness?
Overlapping Symptoms of Major Depression and
Anxiety Disorders

Although the core symptoms of major depression
(depressed mood or loss of interest) differ from the
core symptoms of anxiety disorders (fear and worry),
there is a great deal of overlap with the other symptoms
considered diagnostic for both a major depression
episode and for several different anxiety disorders (Figure
8-1). These overlapping symptoms include problems with
sleep, concentration, and fatigue as well as psychomotor/
arousal symptoms (Figure 8-1). It is thus easy to see
how the gain or loss of just a few additional symptoms
can morph a major depressive episode into an anxiety

Overlap of Major Depressive Disorder and Anxiety Disorders
fatigue
concentration

sleep

depressed
mood interest/
pleasure

suicidality

concentration

guilt/
worthlessness

sleep

arousal

anxiety

appetite/
weight

major depressive
disorder

360

fatigue
psychomotor

worry

panic attacks
phobic
avoidance

irritability

muscle
tension

compulsions

anxiety disorders

Figure 8-1 Overlap of major
depressive disorder and anxiety
disorders. Although the core
symptoms of anxiety disorders
(anxiety and worry) differ from the core
symptoms of major depression (loss of
interest and depressed mood), there
is considerable overlap among the
rest of the symptoms associated with
these disorders (compare the “anxiety
disorders” puzzle on the right to the
“major depressive disorder” puzzle on
the left). For example, fatigue, sleep
difficulties, problems concentrating,
and psychomotor/arousal symptoms
are common to both types of disorders.


<<<PAGE 377>>>
Chapter 8: Anxiety, Trauma, and Treatment

generalized
anxiety
disorder
fatigue
concentration

sleep

arousal

Figure 8-2 Generalized anxiety
disorder. The symptoms typically
associated with generalized anxiety
disorder are shown here. These include
the core symptoms of generalized
anxiety and worry as well as increased
arousal, fatigue, difficulty concentrating,
sleep problems, irritability, and muscle
tension. Many of these symptoms,
including the core symptoms, are
present in other anxiety disorders as
well.

generalized
anxiety/
generalized
fear
worry

irritability

muscle
tension

Figure 8-3 Panic disorder. The
characteristic symptoms of panic
disorder are shown here and include
the core symptoms of anticipatory
anxiety as well as worry about panic
attacks; associated symptoms are the
unexpected panic attacks themselves
and phobic avoidance or other
behavioral changes associated with
concern over panic attacks.

panic
disorder

anticipatory
worry
anxiety/ about panic
fear
attacks

8

unexpected
panic attacks
phobic
avoidance/
behavioral
change

disorder (Figure 8-1) or one anxiety disorder into another
(Figures 8-2 through 8-5).
From a therapeutic point of view, it may matter
little what the specific diagnosis is across this spectrum
of disorders (Figures 8-1 through 8-5). That is,
psychopharmacological treatments may not be much
different for a patient who currently qualifies for a
major depressive episode plus the symptom of anxiety
(but not an anxiety disorder) versus a patient who
currently qualifies for a major depressive episode plus
a comorbid anxiety disorder. Although it can be useful
to make specific diagnoses for following patients over
time and for documenting the evolution of symptoms,

the emphasis from a psychopharmacological point
of view is increasingly to take a symptom-based
therapeutic strategy for patients with any of these
disorders because the brain is not organized according
to the DSM, but according to brain circuits with
topographical localization of function. That is, specific
treatments can be tailored to the individual patient
by deconstructing whatever disorder the patient has
into a list of the specific symptoms a given patient
is experiencing (see Figures 8-2 through 8-5). These
symptoms are then matched to hypothetically
malfunctioning brain circuits, regulated by specific
neurotransmitters, in order to rationally select and
361


<<<PAGE 378>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

social anxiety
disorder

fatigue
concentration

arousal
social/
performance
anxiety/
fear

sleep

worry
about
exposure

Figure 8-4 Social anxiety disorder.
Symptoms of social anxiety disorder,
shown here, include the core
symptoms of anxiety or fear over social
performance plus worry about social
exposure. Associated symptoms are
panic attacks that are predictable and
expected in certain social situations
as well as phobic avoidance of those
situations.

expected
panic attacks
phobic
avoidance/
behavioral
change

PTSD

arousal
anxiety/
reexperiencing

Figure 8-5 Posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD). The characteristic
symptoms of PTSD are shown here.
These include the core symptoms of
anxiety while the traumatic event is
being re-experienced as well as worry
about having the other symptoms of
PTSD, such as increased arousal and
startle responses, sleep difficulties
including nightmares, and avoidance
behaviors. PTSD is now categorized as
a stress-related disorder rather than as
an anxiety disorder, and is considered a
disorder of hyperarousal.

worry

sleep
avoidance

combine psychopharmacological treatments to
eliminate symptoms by increasing the efficiency of
information processing in the malfunctioning brain
circuits, and thereby get the patient into remission.
This was discussed extensively in Chapter 6 on mood
disorders and illustrated in Figures 6-42 through 6-44.
Overlapping Symptoms of Different Anxiety Disorders

Although there are different diagnostic criteria for
different anxiety disorders (Figures 8-2 through 8-5),
these are constantly changing and many do not even
consider OCD or PTSD to be anxiety disorders any longer
(OCD is discussed in Chapter 13 on impulsivity). All
anxiety disorders have overlapping symptoms of anxiety/
362

fear coupled with worry (Figure 8-6). Remarkable
progress has been made in understanding the circuitry
underlying the core symptom of anxiety/fear based upon
an explosion of neurobiological research on the amygdala
(Figures 8-7 through 8-14). The links between the
amygdala, fear circuits, and treatments for the symptom
of anxiety/fear across the spectrum of anxiety, trauma,
and stress disorders are discussed throughout the rest of
this chapter.
Worry is the second core symptom shared across
the spectrum of anxiety disorders (Figure 8-7). This
symptom is hypothetically linked to the functioning
of cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical(CSTC) loops. The
links between the CSTC “worry loops” and treatments


<<<PAGE 379>>>
Chapter 8: Anxiety, Trauma, and Treatment

Figure 8-6 Anxiety: the phenotype.
Anxiety can be deconstructed, or broken
down, into the two core symptoms of
fear and worry. These symptoms are
present in all anxiety disorders, although
what triggers them may differ from one
disorder to the next.

Anxiety: The Phenotype

deconstruct the syndrome...

anxiety

fear
- panic
- phobia

...into symptoms

worry
- anxious misery
- apprehensive
expectation
- obsessions

Associate Symptoms of Anxiety with Brain Regions
and Circuits That Regulate Them
amygdala-centered
circuit
fear
- panic
- phobia

cortico-striatothalamo-cortical
circuit

Figure 8-7 Linking anxiety symptoms
to circuits. Anxiety and fear symptoms
(e.g., panic, phobias) are regulated
by an amygdala-centered circuit.
Worry, on the other hand, is regulated
by a cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical
(CSTC) circuit. These circuits may be
involved in all anxiety disorders, with
the different phenotypes reflecting not
unique circuitry but rather divergent
malfunctioning within those circuits.

worry
- anxious misery
- apprehensive
expectation
- obsessions

for the symptom of worry across the spectrum of
anxiety disorders are discussed later in this chapter
(see also Figures 8-15 through 8-20). We shall see
that what differentiates one anxiety disorder from
another may not be the anatomical localization or the
neurotransmitters regulating fear and worry in each of
these disorders (Figures 8-6 and 8-7), but the specific
nature of malfunctioning within these same circuits
in various anxiety disorders. That is, in generalized

anxiety disorder, malfunctioning in the amygdala and
CSTC worry loops may be hypothetically persistent,
and unremitting, yet not severe (Figure 8-2), whereas
malfunctioning may be theoretically intermittent
but catastrophic in an unexpected manner for panic
disorder (Figure 8-3) or in an expected manner for
social anxiety (Figure 8-4). Circuit malfunctioning may
be traumatic in origin and conditioned in PTSD (Figure
8-5).
363

8


<<<PAGE 380>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

THE AMYGDALA AND THE
NEUROBIOLOGY OF FEAR
The amygdala, an almond-shaped brain center located
near the hippocampus, has important anatomical
connections that allow it to integrate sensory and
cognitive information, and then determine whether there
will be a fear response. Specifically, the affect or feeling of
fear may be regulated via the reciprocal connections the
amygdala shares with key areas of prefrontal cortex that
regulate emotions, namely the orbitofrontal cortex and the
anterior cingulate cortex (Figure 8-8). However, fear is not
just a feeling. The fear response can also include motor
responses. Depending upon the circumstances and one’s
temperament, those motor responses could be fight, flight,
or freezing in place. Motor responses of fear are regulated
in part by connections between the amygdala and the
periaqueductal gray area of the brainstem (Figure 8-9).
There are also endocrine reactions that accompany
fear, in part due to connections between the amygdala
and the hypothalamus, causing changes in the HPA
(hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal) axis, and thus of
cortisol levels. A quick boost of cortisol may enhance
survival when encountering a real, but short-term,

threat. However, chronic and persistent activation of this
aspect of the fear response can lead to increased medical
comorbidity, including increased rates of coronary artery
disease, type 2 diabetes, and stroke (Figure 8-10), and
also potentially to hippocampal atrophy, as discussed in
Chapter 6 and shown in Figure 6-30. Breathing can also
change during a fear response, regulated in part by the
connections between the amygdala and the parabrachial
nucleus in the brainstem (Figure 8-11). An adaptive
response to fear is to accelerate respiratory rate when
having a fight/flight reaction to enhance survival, but, in
excess, this can lead to unwanted symptoms of shortness
of breath, exacerbation of asthma, or a false sense of
being smothered (Figure 8-11), all symptoms common
during anxiety, and especially during attacks of anxiety
such as panic attacks.
The autonomic nervous system is attuned to fear,
and is able to trigger responses from the cardiovascular
system, such as increased pulse and blood pressure for
fight/flight reactions and survival during real threats.
These autonomic and cardiovascular responses are
mediated by connections between the amygdala and the
locus coeruleus, home of the noradrenergic cell bodies
(Figure 8-12; noradrenergic neurons are discussed in

Avoidance
Affect of Fear

PAG

ACC

amygdala
amygdala

fear response

OFC

overactivation
overactivation

fight/flight
or
freeze

fear
Figure 8-8 Affect of fear. Feelings of fear are regulated by
reciprocal connections between the amygdala and the anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) and the amygdala and the orbitofrontal
cortex (OFC). Specifically, it may be that overactivation of these
circuits produces feelings of fear.

364

motor responses
periaqueductal gray

Figure 8-9 Motor responses of fear. Feelings of fear may be
expressed through behaviors such as avoidance, which is partly
regulated by reciprocal connections between the amygdala
and the periaqueductal gray (PAG). Avoidance in this sense is a
motor response and may be analogous to freezing under threat.
Other motor responses are to fight or to run away (flight) in
order to survive threats from the environment.


<<<PAGE 381>>>
Chapter 8: Anxiety, Trauma, and Treatment

Endocrine Output of Fear

Breathing Output

hypothalamus

amygdala

PBN

fear response
overactivation

endocrine
hypothalamus
cortisol
coronary artery disease
type 2 diabetes
stroke

Figure 8-10 Endocrine output of fear. The fear response may
be characterized in part by endocrine effects such as increases
in cortisol, which occur because of amygdala activation of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Prolonged HPA
activation and cortisol release can have significant health
implications, such as increased risk of coronary artery disease,
type 2 diabetes, and stroke.

Chapter 6 and noradrenergic pathways and neurons
are illustrated in Figures 6-12 through 6-16). When
autonomic responses are repetitive, inappropriately or
chronically triggered as part of an anxiety disorder, this
can lead to increases in atherosclerosis, cardiac ischemia,
hypertension, myocardial infarction, and even sudden
death (Figure 8-12). “Scared to death” may not always be
an exaggeration or a figure of speech! Finally, anxiety can
be triggered internally from traumatic memories stored
in the hippocampus and activated by connections with
the amygdala (Figure 8-13), especially in conditions such
as PTSD.
The processing of the fear response is regulated
by the numerous neuronal connections flowing into
and out of the amygdala. Each connection utilizes
specific neurotransmitters acting at specific receptors
(Figure 8-14). What is known about these connections
is not only that several neurotransmitters are involved
in the production of symptoms of anxiety at the level of
the amygdala, but that numerous anxiolytic drugs have
actions upon these specific neurotransmitter systems to
relieve the symptoms of anxiety and fear (Figure 8-14).
The known neurobiological regulators of the amygdala

amygdala

fear response

overactivation

respiratory
parabrachial nucleus
respiratory rate
shortness of breath
asthma

Figure 8-11 Breathing output. Changes in respiration may
occur during a fear response; these changes are regulated by
activation of the parabrachial nucleus (PBN) via the amygdala.
Inappropriate or excessive activation of the PBN can lead not
only to increases in the rate of respiration but also to symptoms
such as shortness of breath, exacerbation of asthma, or a sense
of being smothered.

include the neurotransmitters GABA, serotonin, and
norepinephrine, and the voltage-gated calcium channels.
Not surprisingly, known anxiolytics act upon these same
neurotransmitters hypothetically in order to mediate
their therapeutic actions.

CORTICO-STRIATO-THALAMOCORTICAL (CSTC) LOOPS
AND THE NEUROBIOLOGY OF
WORRY
The second core symptom of anxiety disorders, namely,
worry, hypothetically involves another unique circuit
(Figure 8-15). Worry, which can include anxious misery,
apprehensive expectations, catastrophic thinking, and
obsessions, is hypothetically linked to CSTC feedback
loops from the prefrontal cortex (Figure 8-15 and Figure
8-16). Some experts theorize that similar CSTC feedback
loops regulate the related symptoms of ruminations,
obsessions, and delusions, all of these symptoms being
types of recurrent thoughts. Several neurotransmitters
and regulators are known to modulate these circuits,
including serotonin, GABA, dopamine, norepinephrine,
365

8


<<<PAGE 382>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Autonomic Output of Fear

The Hippocampus:
An Internal Fearmonger

LC

amygdala

fear response

overactivation

cardiovascular
locus coeruleus
atherosclerosis
cardiac ischemia
BP
HR variability
MI
sudden death

Figure 8-12 Autonomic output of fear. Autonomic responses
are typically associated with feelings of fear. These include
increases in heart rate (HR) and blood pressure (BP), which are
regulated by reciprocal connections between the amygdala
and the locus coeruleus (LC). Long-term activation of this circuit
may lead to increased risk of atherosclerosis, cardiac ischemia,
change in BP, decreased HR variability, myocardial infarction
(MI), or even sudden death.

glutamate, and voltage-gated ion channels (Figure
8-15), greatly overlapping with many of the same
neurotransmitters and regulators known to modulate the
amygdala (Figure 8-14).

BENZODIAZEPINES AS DRUGS
FOR ANXIETY
A simplified notion of how benzodiazepines might
modulate excessive output from the amygdala during
fear responses in anxiety disorders is shown in Figure
8-18. Excessive amygdala activity (shown in Figures
8-8 through Figure 8-12 and in Figure 8-17A) is
theoretically reduced by benzodiazepines. These agents
enhance phasic inhibition of GABA (γ-aminobutyric
acid) by positive allosteric modulation of postsynaptic
GABAA receptors (see Chapter 6 for explanation of
positive allosteric modulation by benzodiazepines at
GABAA receptors and Figures 6-20 through 6-23). The
anxiolytic actions of benzodiazepines are hypothetically
at GABAA receptors localized within the amygdala, where
366

amygdala
hippocampus
Figure 8-13 The hippocampus and re-experiencing. Anxiety
can be triggered not only by an external stimulus but also by
an individual’s memories. Traumatic memories stored in the
hippocampus can activate the amygdala, causing the amygdala,
in turn, to activate other brain regions and generate a fear
response. This is termed re-experiencing and is a particular
feature of posttraumatic stress disorder.

benzodiazepines hypothetically blunt fear-associated
outputs, thereby reducing the symptom of fear (Figure
8-17B). Benzodiazepines interacting at subtypes of
GABAA receptors are discussed in Chapter 6 and
illustrated in Figures 6-19 through 6-23. Benzodiazepines
also theoretically modulate excessive output from
worry loops (Figure 8-18A) by enhancing the actions of
inhibitory interneurons in CSTC circuits (Figure 8-18B),
thereby reducing the symptom of worry.

ALPHA-2-DELTA LIGANDS AS
ANXIOLYTICS
We have discussed voltage-sensitive calcium channels
(VSCCs) in Chapter 3 and have illustrated presynaptic N
and P/Q subtypes of VSCCs and their role in excitatory
neurotransmitter release (see Figures 3-18 and 3-22
through 3-24). Gabapentin and pregabalin, also known
as α2δ ligands since they bind to the α2δ subunit of
presynaptic N and P/Q VSCCs, block the release of
excitatory neurotransmitters such as glutamate that occurs
when neurotransmission is excessive, as postulated in
the amygdala to cause fear (Figure 8-17A) and in CSTC
circuits to cause worry (Figure 8-18A). Hypothetically, α2δ
ligands bind to open, overly active VSCCs in the amygdala
(Figure 8-17C) to reduce fear, and in CSTC circuits (Figure
8-18C) to reduce worry. The α2δ ligands pregabalin and


<<<PAGE 383>>>
Chapter 8: Anxiety, Trauma, and Treatment

Associate Symptoms with Brain Regions, Circuits, and
Neurotransmitters That Regulate Them
5HT

GABA
glutamate

amygdala-centered
circuit

CRF/HPA

fear
- panic
- phobia

Figure 8-14 Linking anxiety symptoms
to circuits to neurotransmitters.
Symptoms of anxiety/fear are
associated with malfunctioning of
amygdala-centered circuits; the
neurotransmitters that regulate these
circuits include serotonin (5HT),
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), glutamate,
corticotropin releasing factor (CRF), and
norepinephrine (NE), among others. In
addition, voltage-gated ion channels
are involved in neurotransmission
within these circuits.

NE
voltage-gated
ion channels

Associate Symptoms with Brain Regions, Circuits, and
Neurotransmitters That Regulate Them
5HT

GABA
DA

cortico-striatothalamo-cortical circuit
“worry loop”

Figure 8-15 Linking worry symptoms
to circuits to neurotransmitters.
Symptoms of worry, such as anxious
misery, apprehensive expectations,
catastrophic thinking, and obsessions,
are associated with malfunctioning of
cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical loops,
which are regulated by serotonin (5HT),
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), dopamine
(DA), norepinephrine (NE), glutamate,
and voltage-gated ion channels.

NE

8

worry
- anxious misery
- apprehensive
expectation
- obsessions

glutamate
voltage-gated
ion channels

Affect of Fear
Worry/Obsessions

$

Figure 8-16 Worry/obsessions
circuit. Shown here is a cortico-striatothalamo-cortical loop originating and
ending in the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC). Overactivation of this
circuit may lead to worry or obsessions.

DLPFC

worry
thalamus

striatum

overactivation

367


<<<PAGE 384>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Hyperactive Amygdala and Fear

PAG hypothalamus
ACC
LC

A

PBN

amygdala

OFC

areas of overactivation

FEAR
Therapeutic Actions of Alpha-2-Delta Ligands

Therapeutic Actions of Benzodiazepines

α 2 δ action

B

areas of
normalized
activation

areas of
normalized
GABA action activation

GABA
neuron

FEAR

C

α 2 δ action

FEAR

=

Figure 8-17 Potential therapeutic
actions of medications on anxiety/
fear. (A) Pathological anxiety/fear
may be caused by overactivation of
amygdala circuits. (B) GABAergic
agents such as benzodiazepines may
alleviate anxiety/fear by enhancing
phasic inhibitory actions at postsynaptic
GABAA receptors within the amygdala.
(C) Agents that bind to the α2δ subunit
of presynaptic N and P/Q voltagesensitive calcium channels can block
the excessive release of glutamate in
the amygdala and thereby reduce the
symptoms of anxiety. (D) The amygdala
receives input from serotonergic
neurons, which can have an inhibitory
effect on some of its outputs. Thus,
serotonergic agents may alleviate
anxiety/fear by enhancing serotonin
input to the amygdala.

2 ligand

Therapeutic Actions of Serotonergic Agents

5HT
neuron
areas of
normalized
activation
5HT action
D

FEAR

gabapentin have demonstrated anxiolytic actions in social
anxiety disorder and panic disorder, are approved for
the treatment of anxiety in some countries, and are also
proven to be effective for the treatment of epilepsy and
certain pain conditions, including neuropathic pain and
fibromyalgia. The actions of α2δ ligands on VSCCs are
discussed and illustrated in Chapter 9 on pain. Alpha-2delta ligands clearly have different mechanisms of action
compared to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) or benzodiazepines, and thus can be useful for
patients who do not do well on SSRIs/SNRIs (serotonin–
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors) or benzodiazepines.
Also, α2δ ligands can be useful to combine with SSRIs/
SNRIs or benzodiazepines in patients who are partial
responders and are not in remission.

SEROTONIN AND ANXIETY
Since the symptoms, circuits, and neurotransmitters linked
to anxiety disorders overlap extensively with those for
major depressive disorder (Figure 8-1), it is not surprising
that many drugs developed as drugs for depression have
368

proven to be effective treatments for anxiety disorders.
Indeed, the leading treatments
for anxiety disorders today are increasingly drugs
originally developed as drugs for depression. Serotonin is a
key neurotransmitter that innervates the amygdala as well
as all the elements of CSTC circuits, namely, the prefrontal
cortex, striatum, and thalamus, and thus is poised to
regulate both the symptoms of fear and worry (serotonin
pathways are discussed in Chapters 5 and 6 and illustrated
in Figure 6-40). Most of the drugs for depression that
can increase serotonin output by blocking the serotonin
transporter (SERT) are also effective in reducing symptoms
of anxiety and fear in one or another of the anxiety/trauma
disorders illustrated in Figures 8-2 through 8-5, namely,
generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, social anxiety
disorder, and PTSD (and also OCD in Figure 13-30).
Such agents include the well-known SSRIs (in Chapter
7, with their mechanism of action illustrated in Figures
7-11 through 7-15), as well as the SNRIs (serotonin–
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors; also discussed in
Chapter 7, with their mechanism of action illustrated in
Figure 7-32 and Figures 7-11 through 7-15).


<<<PAGE 385>>>
Chapter 8: Anxiety, Trauma, and Treatment

Hyperactive CSTC
Circuits
Affect of
Fear and Worry
worry

A

Therapeutic Actions of
Benzodiazepines

Therapeutic Actions of
Alpha-2-Delta Ligands
worry

worry

GABA
neuron

B

C

2

8

action

Therapeutic Actions of
Serotonergic Agents

worry

D

5HT
neuron

Figure 8-18 Potential therapeutic actions of medications on worry. (A) Pathological worry may be caused by overactivation of corticostriato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) circuits. (B) GABAergic agents such as benzodiazepines may alleviate worry by enhancing the actions of
inhibitory GABA interneurons within the prefrontal cortex. (C) Agents that bind to the α2δ subunit of presynaptic N and P/Q voltagesensitive calcium channels can block the excessive release of glutamate in CSTC circuits and thereby reduce the symptoms of worry. (D)
The prefrontal cortex, striatum, and thalamus receive input from serotonergic neurons, which can have an inhibitory effect on output.
Thus, serotonergic agents may alleviate worry by enhancing serotonin (5HT) input within CSTC circuits.

369


<<<PAGE 386>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

A serotonin 1A (5HT1A) partial agonist, buspirone, is
recognized as a drug for generalized anxiety disorder, but
not for treatment of the other anxiety/trauma disorder
subtypes. 5HT1A partial agonists as augmenting agents
to drugs for depressions are mentioned also in Chapter
7, as are drugs for depression that combine 5HT1A
partial agonism with serotonin reuptake inhibition (i.e.,
serotonin partial agonist reuptake inhibitors [SPARIs]
and vilazodone, see Figures 7-23 through 7-27), which
should theoretically have anxiolytic actions as well as
antidepressant action. The 5HT1A partial agonist properties
of numerous drugs for psychosis are also discussed in
Chapter 5 and illustrated in Figures 5-22 and 5-23, and
the downstream actions of 5HT1A receptor stimulation are
discussed in Chapter 4 and illustrated in Figure 4-44.
The potential anxiolytic actions of buspirone
could theoretically be due to 5HT1A partial agonist
actions at both presynaptic and postsynaptic 5HT1A
receptors (Figures 7-23 through 7-27), actions at both
sites resulting in enhanced serotonergic activity in
projections to the amygdala (Figure 8-17D), prefrontal
cortex, striatum, and thalamus (Figure 8-18D), and thus
reduce fear and worry, as well as other symptoms of
both generalized anxiety disorder and major depression
(Figure 8-1). SSRIs and SNRIs theoretically do the same
thing (Figures 8-17D and 8-18D). Since the onset of
anxiolytic action for buspirone is delayed, just as it is
for drugs for depressions, this has led to the belief that
5HT1A agonists exert their therapeutic effects by virtue
of adaptive neuronal events and receptor events (Figures
7-10 through 7-15 and Figures 7-23 through 7-27), rather
than simply by the acute occupancy of 5HT1A receptors.
In this way, the presumed mechanism of action of
5HT1A partial agonists is analogous to the use of various
drugs for depression, including SSRIs and SNRIs. These
actions are quite different in timing from the use of
benzodiazepines for anxiety – since benzodiazepines act
acutely by occupancy of benzodiazepine receptors and
not with a delay due to adaptation of the receptors.

NORADRENERGIC
HYPERACTIVITY IN ANXIETY
Norepinephrine is another neurotransmitter with
important regulatory input to the amygdala (Figure
8-19A) and to the prefrontal cortex and thalamus in
CSTC circuits (Figure 8-20A). Excessive noradrenergic
output from the locus coeruleus can result not only
in numerous peripheral manifestations of autonomic
overdrive, as discussed above and as illustrated in
370

Figures 8-8 through 8-12, but also can trigger numerous
central symptoms of anxiety and fear, such as nightmares,
hyperarousal states, flashbacks, and panic attacks
(Figure 8-19A). Excessive noradrenergic activity can
also reduce the efficiency of information processing
in the prefrontal cortex and thus in CSTC circuits, and
theoretically cause worry (Figure 8-20A). Hypothetically,
these symptoms may be mediated in part by excessive
noradrenergic input onto α1- and β1-adrenergic
postsynaptic receptors in the amygdala (Figure 8-19A)
or prefrontal cortex (Figure 8-20A). Symptoms of
hyperarousal like nightmares can be reduced in some
patients with α1-adrenergic blockers such as prazocin
(Figure 8-19B), and symptoms of fear (Figure 8-19C) and
worry (Figure 8-20B) can be reduced by norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors (also called norepinephrine
transporter [NET] inhibitors). The clinical effects of NET
inhibitors can be confusing because symptoms of anxiety
can actually be made transiently worse immediately
following initiation of an SNRI or selective NET inhibitor,
when noradrenergic activity is initially increased but the
postsynaptic receptors have not yet adapted. However,
these same NET inhibitory actions, if sustained over
time, will downregulate and desensitize postsynaptic
norepinephrine receptors such as β1 receptors, and
hypothetically lead to the delayed reduction in symptoms
of fear and worry long term (Figure 8-20B).

FEAR CONDITIONING VERSUS
FEAR EXTINCTION
Fear conditioning is a concept as old as Pavlov’s dogs. If
an aversive stimulus such as footshock is coupled with
a neutral stimulus such as a bell, the animal learns to
associate the two, and will develop fear when it hears a
bell. In humans, fear can be “learned” during stressful
experiences associated with emotional trauma, and is
influenced by an individual’s genetic predisposition as
well as by an individual’s prior exposure to environmental
stressors that can cause stress sensitization of brain
circuits (e.g., child abuse; see Chapter 6 and Figures
6-28 and 6-33). Often, fearful situations are managed
successfully and then forgotten. Some fears are crucial
for survival, such as appropriately fearing dangerous
situations, and thus the mechanism of learned fear,
called fear conditioning, has been extremely well
conserved across species, including humans. However,
other fears that are “learned” and, if not “forgotten,” may
hypothetically progress to anxiety disorders or a major
depressive episode. This is a big problem since almost


<<<PAGE 387>>>
Chapter 8: Anxiety, Trauma, and Treatment

Noradrenergic Hyperactivity in Anxiety,
Fear, and Autonomic Hyperarousal

locus
coeruleus

ß1 receptor

NE

amygdala

1 receptor

fear/panic attacks
tremor
sweating
tachycardia
hyperarousal
nightmares

A

Therapeutic Actions of Alpha-1 Antagonists
on Nightmares and Hyperarousal

Therapeutic Actions of NET Inhibitors
on Anxiety, Fear, and Hyperarousal
NET inhibitor

8

locus
coeruleus

locus
coeruleus

ß1 receptor

NE

NE
1 blocker

downregulated
ß1 receptors

1 receptor

amygdala

1 receptor

amygdala

fear/panic attacks
tremor
sweating
tachycardia
hyperarousal
nightmares
B

fear/panic attacks
tremor
sweating
tachycardia
hyperarousal
nightmares
C

Figure 8-19 Noradrenergic hyperactivity in anxiety/fear. (A) Norepinephrine provides input not only to the amygdala but also to many
regions to which the amygdala projects; thus it plays an important role in the fear response. Noradrenergic hyperactivation can lead
to anxiety, panic attacks, tremors, sweating, tachycardia, hyperarousal, and nightmares. Alpha-1 and β1-adrenergic receptors may be
specifically involved in these reactions. (B) Noradrenergic hyperactivity may be blocked by the administration of α1-adrenergic antagonists,
which can lead to the alleviation of anxiety and other stress-related symptoms. (C) Noradrenergic hyperactivity may also be blocked by the
administration of a norepinephrine transporter (NET) inhibitor, which can have the downstream effect of downregulating β1-adrenergic
receptors. Reduced stimulation via β1-adrenergic receptors could therefore lead to the alleviation of anxiety and stress-related symptoms.

371


<<<PAGE 388>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Affect of Fear

Hyperactive CSTC Circuits and Worry
worry

A

Delayed Therapeutic Actions of
NET Inhibitors
worry

B

locus
coeruleus

NE
neuron

Figure 8-20 Noradrenergic hyperactivity in worry. (A)
Pathological worry may be caused by overactivation of corticostriato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) circuits. Specifically, excessive
noradrenergic activity within these circuits can reduce the
efficiency of information processing and theoretically cause
worry. (B) Noradrenergic hyperactivity in CSTC circuits may be
blocked by the administration of a norepinephrine transporter
(NET) inhibitor, which can have the downstream effect of
downregulating β1-adrenergic receptors. Reduced stimulation
via β1-adrenergic receptors could therefore lead to the
alleviation of worry.

30% of the population will develop an anxiety disorder,
due in large part to stressful environments, including
exposure to fearful events during normal activities in
twenty-first-century society, but in particular during
early life, if experiencing abuse or adversity as a child,
and during war and natural disasters, and abusive
relationships, as an adult.
Repetition of a sensory experience associated with
an earlier exposure to a fearful event, such as hearing

372

or seeing an explosion, smelling burning rubber, seeing
a picture of a wounded civilian, seeing or hearing
flood waters, can trigger traumatic re-experiencing
and generalized hyperarousal and fear in emotionally
traumatized patients with PTSD. Panic associated with
social situations will “teach” the patient to panic in social
situations in social anxiety disorder. Panic randomly
associated with an attack that happens to occur in a
crowd, on a bridge, or in shopping centers will also
trigger another panic attack when the same environment
is encountered in panic disorder. These and other
symptoms of anxiety disorders are all forms of learning
known as fear conditioning (Figure 8-21).
The amygdala is theoretically involved in
“remembering” the various stimuli associated with a
given fearful situation. Hypothetically, the amygdala does
this by increasing the efficiency of neurotransmission at
glutamatergic synapses in the lateral amygdala as sensory
input about those stimuli comes in from the thalamus
or sensory cortex (Figure 8-21). This input is then
relayed to the central amygdala, where fear conditioning
also improves the efficiency of neurotransmission at
another glutamate synapse there (Figure 8-21). Both
synapses are hypothetically restructured and potentially
permanent learning is embedded into this circuit by
NMDA receptors, triggering long-term potentiation
and synaptic plasticity so that subsequent input from
the sensory cortex and thalamus is very efficiently
processed to trigger the same fear response caused by the
original experience, since output occurs from the central
amygdala every time there is the re-experiencing of the
same sensory input associated with the original fearful
event (Figure 8-21; see also Figures 8-8 through 8-13).
Input to the lateral amygdala is modulated by the
prefrontal cortex, especially the ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (VMPFC), and by the hippocampus. If the
VMPFC is unable to suppress the fear response before
it arrives at the level of the amygdala, fear conditioning
is thought to proceed. The hippocampus hypothetically
“remembers” the context of the fear conditioning, and
makes sure fear is triggered when the fearful stimulus
and all its associated stimuli are encountered again.
Most contemporary psychopharmacological treatments
for anxiety and fear act by suppressing the fear output
from the amygdala (see Figure 8-17) and therefore are
not cures since the fundamental neuronal learning
underlying fear conditioning in these patients remains in
place. On the other hand, psychotherapeutic approaches
perhaps enhanced by drugs targeting the “unlearning”


<<<PAGE 389>>>
Chapter 8: Anxiety, Trauma, and Treatment

Fear Conditioning vs. Fear Extinction
VMPFC
VMPFC

hippocampus

hippocampus

sensory cortex
thalamus
lateral
amygdala
intercalated
cell mass
central
amygdala

no fear response
ion

ing

= glutamate

fea

rc

on

dit

= GABA

8

fear
conditioning

fear
extinction
fear extinction
renewal

fear response!!!

no fear response

Figure 8-21 Fear conditioning versus fear extinction. When an individual encounters a stressful or fearful experience, the sensory
input is relayed to the amygdala, where it is integrated with input from the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) and hippocampus,
so that a fear response can be either generated or suppressed. The amygdala may “remember” stimuli associated with that experience
by increasing the efficiency of glutamate neurotransmission, so that on future exposure to stimuli, a fear response is more efficiently
triggered. If this is not countered by input from the VMPFC to suppress the fear response, fear conditioning proceeds. Fear conditioning
is not readily reversed, but it can be inhibited through new learning. This new learning is termed fear extinction and is the progressive
reduction of the response to a feared stimulus that is repeatedly presented without adverse consequences. Thus the VMPFC and
hippocampus learn a new context for the feared stimulus and send input to the amygdala to suppress the fear response. The “memory”
of the conditioned fear is still present, however.

373


<<<PAGE 390>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

of fear conditioning provide hope for a more long-lasting
solution to symptoms of anxiety.
Novel Approaches to the Treatment of Anxiety
Disorders

Once fear conditioning is in place, it can be very
difficult to reverse. Nevertheless, there may be two ways
to neutralize fear conditioning: either by facilitating
a process called extinction or by blocking a process
called reconsolidation. Research on extinction and
reconsolidation are leading the way in order to find
novel, more robust, and more long-lasting treatments
for anxiety symptoms, especially in patients who do
not respond to standard treatment with serotonergic,
benzodiazepine, and α2δ drug therapies or to standard
psychotherapies such as exposure treatment or cognitive
behavioral therapy. Preventing or minimizing “stress” –
especially early life adversity in young children, and
chronic stress and catastrophic stress in adults – is also
under investigation but difficult to implement.
Fear Extinction

Fear extinction is the progressive reduction of the
response to a feared stimulus, and occurs when the
stimulus is repeatedly presented without any adverse
consequence. When fear extinction occurs, it appears
that the original fear conditioning is not really “forgotten”
even though the fear response can be profoundly reduced
over time by the active process of fear extinction. Rather
than reversing the synaptic changes described above for
fear conditioning, leading theories propose that a new
form of learning with additional synaptic changes in the
amygdala occurs during fear extinction. These changes
hypothetically suppress symptoms of anxiety and fear by
inhibiting the original learning but not by removing it
(Figure 8-21). Specifically, if activation of the amygdala
by the VMPFC occurs again and again without any fear
being triggered, such as during exposure therapy, the
hippocampus hypothetically begins to “remember”
this new context in which the feared stimulus did not
have any adverse consequences and fear is no longer
activated (Figure 8-21). Over time, the original stimulus
no longer activates fear due to this process of progressive
desensitization called fear extinction. Such fear extinction
hypothetically occurs when inputs from the VMPFC
and hippocampus now “learn” to activate glutamatergic
neurons in the lateral amygdala that synapse upon
inhibitory GABAergic interneurons, located within the
intercalated cell mass of the amygdala (Figure 8-21).
According to this theory, such an action sets up a gate
374

within the central amygdala, with fear output occurring
if the fear-conditioning circuit predominates, and no
fear output occurring if the fear-extinction circuit
predominates.
Modern research thus suggests that fear extinction
theoretically predominates over fear conditioning when
synaptic strengthening and long-term potentiation in the
new circuit are able to produce an inhibitory GABAergic
drive that can overcome the excitatory glutamatergic
drive produced by the pre-existing fear-conditioning
circuitry (Figure 8-21). When fear extinction exists
simultaneously with fear conditioning, memory for both
are present, but the output hypothetically depends upon
which system is “stronger” and “better-remembered,”
and which has the most robust synaptic efficiency.
These factors will hypothetically determine which gate
will open, the one with the fear response or the one
that keeps the fear response in check. Unfortunately,
over time, fear conditioning in experimental models
and in clinical practice may have the upper hand over
fear extinction. Fear extinction appears to be more
labile than fear conditioning, and tends to reverse over
time. Also, fear conditioning can return if the old fear is
presented in a context different from the one “learned”
to suppress the fear during fear extinction, a process
termed “renewal.”
Therapeutic Facilitation of Fear Extinction

A novel treatment approach to reducing anxiety
symptoms is to facilitate fear extinction with a
combination of psychotherapy and drugs directed
at facilitating synapse formation. This approach
contrasts with how current effective anxiolytic drugs
act, namely by pharmacologically suppressing the
fear response (Figures 8-17 through 8-20). Among
currently effective psychotherapies for anxiety used in
clinical practice today, cognitive behavioral therapies
that employ exposure techniques and that require
the patient to confront the fear-inducing stimuli in a
safe environment may come closest to facilitating fear
extinction, hypothetically because when these therapies
are effective, they are able to trigger the learning of fear
extinction in the amygdala (Figure 8-21). Unfortunately,
because the hippocampus “remembers” the context of
this extinction, such therapies are often context-specific
and do not always generalize once the patient is outside
the safe therapeutic environment of a therapist’s office,
and thus fear and worry may be “renewed” in the real
world. Current psychotherapy research is investigating
how contextual cues can be used to strengthen extinction


<<<PAGE 391>>>
Chapter 8: Anxiety, Trauma, and Treatment

learning so that the therapeutic learning generalizes
to other environments. Current psychopharmacology
research is investigating how specific drugs might also
strengthen extinction learning by pharmacologically
strengthening the synapses on the fear-extinction side
of the amygdala gate disproportionately to the synapses
on the fear-conditioned side of the amygdala gate. How
could this be done?
Based on successful animal experiments of
extinction learning, one idea shown in Figure 8-22 is to
pharmacologically boost N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor activation at the very time when a patient
receives systematic exposure to feared stimuli during
cognitive behavioral therapy sessions. The idea is that
as psychotherapy progresses, learning occurs, because
glutamate release is provoked in the lateral amygdala
and in the intercalated cell mass at inhibitory GABA
neurons by the psychotherapy. If NMDA receptors at
these two glutamate synapses could be pharmacologically
boosted to trigger disproportionately robust long-term
potentiation and synaptic plasticity, timed to occur at the
exact time this learning and therapy is taking place and
thus exactly when these synapses are selectively activated,
it could theoretically result in the predominance of the
extinction pathway over the conditioned pathway. Animal

fear

studies support this possibility and early clinical studies
are encouraging but not always robust or consistent, to
date. In the meantime, prudent psychopharmacologists
are increasingly leveraging their current anxiolytic drug
portfolio with concomitant psychotherapy, since many
patients already receive enhanced therapeutic benefit
from this combination.
Blocking Fear Conditioning and Fear Memories

Blocking either consolidation or reconsolidation of fear
memories is another approach to developing novel
treatments for anxiety symptoms. When fear is first
conditioned, that memory is said to be “consolidated”
via a molecular process that some have thought was
essentially permanent. Hints at the mechanism of the
initial consolidation of fear conditioning come from
observations that both β blockers and opioids can
potentially mitigate the conditioning of the original
traumatic memory, even in humans, and some studies
show that these agents can potentially reduce the chances
of getting PTSD after a traumatic injury (Figure 8-23).
This therapeutic approach is to treat the acutely exposed
patient immediately after a traumatic experience in order
to block the initial fear from ever becoming conditioned
or consolidated.

extin

ction

glial
cell

Glu
glycine

LTP

enhancing NMDA
action

Figure 8-22 Facilitating fear
extinction with NMDA receptor
activation. Strengthening of synapses
involved in fear extinction could help
enhance the development of fearextinction learning in the amygdala
and reduce symptoms of anxiety
disorders. Administration of an agent
that enhances N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) action while an individual
is receiving exposure therapy could
increase the efficiency of glutamate
(Glu) neurotransmission at synapses
involved in fear extinction. If this leads
to long-term potentiation (LTP) and
synaptic plasticity while the synapses
are activated by exposure therapy,
it could result in structural changes
in the amygdala associated with the
fear-extinction pathway and thus
the predominance of the extinction
pathway over the conditioned pathway.

no fear response

no fear response
375

8


<<<PAGE 392>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Beta Blockers and Opiates Prevent Fear Conditioning
and Reconsolidation of Fear
ß1 blocker

fear
conditioning

traumatic
experience

VMPFC
hippocampus

opiates
ß1 blocker

ß1 blocker

reconsolidation

traumatic
experience
retrieved

Figure 8-23 Blocking fear conditioning
and reconsolidation. When fear is
first conditioned, the memory is said
to be “consolidated” via a molecular
process that once was thought to be
permanent. However, there is some
research to suggest that administration
of either β-adrenergic blockers or
opiates can potentially mitigate the
conditioning of the original traumatic
memory. Furthermore, research also
now shows that even when emotional
memories have been consolidated
as fear conditioning, they can
change when they are retrieved.
Reconsolidation is the state in which
reactivation of a consolidated fear
memory makes it labile. This requires
protein synthesis to keep the memory
intact and, like fear conditioning, may
also be disrupted by β blockers.

no fear response

locus coeruleus

Although, classically, emotional memories that have
already been “fear conditioned” were thought to last
forever, recent animal experiments show that emotional
memories can in fact be weakened or even erased at
the time they are re-experienced. Current theories
now suggest that at the time emotional memories are
re-experienced, they are in a labile state capable of
being modified, and then, once the re-experiencing
of the emotion and any modification of it is complete,
the memory is restored or “reconsolidated” with those
modifications. Reconsolidation is the state in which
reactivation of a consolidated fear memory makes
it labile, and requires protein synthesis to keep the
memory intact.
If emotional memories consolidated as fear
conditioning are not permanent, as animal

376

experiments suggest, and can change when they are
retrieved, the idea is to use both psychotherapeutic
and psychopharmacological approaches to block
reconsolidation of the fear memory. Blocking
reconsolidation would hypothetically allow the patient to
“forget” their emotional memory.
Early studies of β blockers suggest that they may
also disrupt reconsolidation of fear memories as
well as formation of fear conditioning (Figure 8-23).
More recently, hallucinogens, dissociatives, and
entactogens such as psilocybin, MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine), and ketamine have been
employed in an attempt to block reconsolidation of
activated memories during psychotherapy sessions.
These are discussed in more detail in Chapter 13 on
substance abuse; psilocybin and MDMA are discussed


<<<PAGE 393>>>
Chapter 8: Anxiety, Trauma, and Treatment

briefly in Chapter 7 and illustrated in Figures 7-87 and
7-88. Ketamine is more extensively discussed in Chapter
7 as well. Future research is trying to determine how
to use psychotherapy to provoke emotional memories
and reactivate them by producing a state where a
pharmacological agent such as a hallucinogen producing
a dissociative state, including ketamine as well as
psilocybin or MDMA, could be administered to disrupt
reconsolidation of these emotional memories and thereby
relieve symptoms of anxiety, trauma, re-experiencing
and other emotional memories of PTSD and anxiety
disorders, and existential distress in terminally ill patients.
These are early days in terms of applying this concept
in clinical settings, but this notion supports the growing
idea that psychotherapy and psychopharmacology can be
synergistic. Much more needs to be learned as to how to
exploit this theoretical synergy.

TREATMENTS FOR ANXIETY
DISORDER SUBTYPES
Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Psychopharmacological treatments for generalized
anxiety disorder overlap greatly with those for
other anxiety disorders and depression and include
SSRIs, SNRIs, benzodiazepines, buspirone, and α2δ
ligands such as pregabalin and gabapentin. While
benzodiazepines should not be prescribed to a patient
with generalized anxiety disorder who is abusing other
substances, particularly alcohol, benzodiazepines can
be useful in patients who are not substance abusers
for short terms when initiating an SSRI or SNRI, since
these serotonergic agents are often activating, difficult
to tolerate early in dosing, and have a delayed onset
of action. In other patients, benzodiazepines can be
useful to “top up” an SSRI or SNRI for patients who
have experienced only partial relief of symptoms and
have stabilized on SSRI/SNRI therapy. Benzodiazepines
can also be useful for occasional intermittent use when
symptoms surge and sudden relief is needed. Alpha-2delta ligands are a good alternative to benzodiazepines
in some patients. These ligands are approved for the
treatment of anxiety in Europe and other countries
but not in the US, yet can be useful “off-label” as
augmenting agents.
Other “off-label” treatments for anxiety can
include mirtazapine, trazodone, vilazodone, tricyclic
antidepressants, or even sedating antihistamines such as
hydroxyzine.

Panic Disorder

Panic attacks occur in many conditions, not just panic
disorder, and panic disorder is frequently comorbid with
the other anxiety disorders and with major depression.
It is thus not surprising that contemporary treatments
for panic disorder overlap significantly with those for
the other anxiety disorders and with those for major
depression. Treatments include SSRIs and SNRIs, as
well as benzodiazepines, and α2δ ligands. “Off-label”
treatments of panic attacks in anxiety disorders can also
include mirtazapine and trazodone. The monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), discussed in Chapter 7, are
much neglected in psychopharmacology in general and
for the treatment of treatment-resistant panic disorder in
particular. However, MAOIs can have powerful efficacy
in panic and should be considered when other agents
fail. Cognitive behavioral psychotherapy is both an
alternative or an augmentation to psychopharmacological
approaches, and can help modify cognitive distortions,
and, through exposure, diminish phobic avoidance
behaviors.
Social Anxiety Disorder

The treatment options for this anxiety disorder are
very similar to those for panic disorder with a few
noteworthy differences. The SSRIs and SNRIs and α2δ
ligands are certainly useful treatments, but the utility
of benzodiazepine is not as widely accepted as it might
be for generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder.
There is also less evidence for the utility of older drugs for
depression for use in social anxiety disorder. Beta blockers,
sometimes with benzodiazepines, can be useful for some
patients with very discrete types of social anxiety, such
as performance anxiety. One drug that is (unfortunately)
quite effective but obviously should not be used is alcohol
for the treatment of social anxiety symptoms. Many
patients of course are aware of this and abuse alcohol
before they seek safer and more effective treatment.
Cognitive behavioral psychotherapy can be a powerful
intervention, sometimes better than drugs for certain
patients, and often helpful in combination with drugs.
PTSD

Although some treatments such as certain SSRIs are
approved for PTSD, psychopharmacological treatments
for PTSD are not as effective as these same treatments are
in anxiety disorders. Also, PTSD is so highly comorbid
that many of the psychopharmacological treatments
are more effectively aimed at comorbidities such as

377

8


<<<PAGE 394>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

depression, insomnia, substance abuse, and pain, than
at core symptoms of PTSD. SSRIs often leave the patient
with residual symptoms, including sleep problems. Thus,
most patients with PTSD do not take monotherapy.
Benzodiazepines are to be used with caution, not only
because of limited evidence from clinical trials for
efficacy in PTSD, but also because many PTSD patients
abuse alcohol and other substances. A unique treatment
for PTSD is the administration of α1 antagonists at night
to prevent nightmares. Much more effective medication
treatments for PTSD are greatly needed. Much of the
advance in treatment of PTSD has been in using drugs
to treat comorbidities and psychotherapies to treat core
symptoms. Exposure therapy is perhaps most effective
among psychotherapies, but many forms of cognitive
behavioral therapy are being investigated and used in
clinical practice, depending upon the training of the
therapist and the specific needs of the individual. Use
of techniques to block reconsolidation of emotional
memories with the combination of psychotherapy and
drugs (especially MDMA) are in testing now for PTSD.
Brexpiprazole, discussed in Chapter 5 as a drug for
psychosis, is in testing along with the SSRI sertraline for
PTSD, with promising initial findings.

378

SUMMARY
Anxiety/trauma disorders have core features of fear and
worry that cut across the entire spectrum of anxiety
disorder subtypes, from generalized anxiety disorder to
panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, and posttraumatic
stress disorder. The amygdala hypothetically plays a
central role in the fear response in these conditions,
and cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) circuits are
thought to play a key role in mediating the symptom
of worry. Numerous neurotransmitters are involved in
regulating the circuits that underlie the anxiety disorders.
Serotonin, norepinephrine, α2δ ligands and GABA are
all key modulators of the hypothetical fear and worry
circuits. Known effective drug treatments all target these
neurotransmitters. The concept of opposing actions of
fear conditioning versus fear extinction within amygdala
circuits hypothetically is linked to the production and
maintenance of symptoms in anxiety disorder and
provides a substrate for potential novel therapeutics
combining psychotherapy and drugs. The concept of
disruption of the reconsolidation of fear memories is
undergoing testing at this time as a novel therapeutic
approach to anxiety symptoms.


<<<PAGE 395>>>
9

Chronic Pain and
Its Treatment

What is Pain? 379
“Normal” Pain and the Activation of Nociceptive
Nerve Fibers 381
Nociceptive Pathway to the Spinal Cord 381
Nociceptive Pathway from the Spinal Cord to the
Brain 382
Neuropathic Pain 382
Peripheral Mechanisms in Neuropathic Pain 382
Central Mechanisms in Neuropathic Pain 382
The Spectrum of Mood and Anxiety Disorders with
Pain Disorders 387

This chapter will provide a brief overview of chronic pain
conditions associated with different psychiatric disorders
and treated with psychotropic drugs. Included here are
discussions of the symptomatic and pathophysiological
overlap between disorders with pain and many other
disorders treated in psychopharmacology, especially
depression and anxiety. Clinical descriptions and formal
criteria for how to diagnose painful conditions are only
mentioned here in passing. The reader should consult
standard reference sources for this material. The discussion
here will emphasize how discoveries about the functioning
of various brain circuits and neurotransmitters – especially
those acting upon the central processing of pain – have
impacted our understanding of the pathophysiology and
treatment of many painful conditions that may occur
with or without various psychiatric disorders. The goal
of this chapter is to acquaint the reader with ideas about
the clinical and biological aspects of the symptom of
pain, how it can hypothetically be caused by alterations
of pain processing within the central nervous system,
how it can be associated with many of the symptoms of
depression and anxiety, and finally, how it can be treated
with several of the same agents that can treat depression
and anxiety. The discussion in this chapter is at the
conceptual level, and not at the pragmatic level. The reader
should consult standard drug handbooks (such as Stahl’s
Essential Psychopharmacology: the Prescriber’s Guide) for
details of doses, side effects, drug interactions, and other
issues relevant to the prescribing of these drugs in clinical
practice.

Fibromyalgia 387
Decreased Gray Matter in Chronic Pain
Syndromes? 387
Descending Spinal Synapses in the Dorsal Horn
and the Treatment of Chronic Pain 390
Targeting Sensitized Circuits in Chronic Pain
Conditions 395
Targeting Ancillary Symptoms in
Fibromyalgia 399
Summary 400

WHAT IS PAIN?
No experience rivals pain for its ability to capture our
attention, focus our actions, and cause suffering (see
Table 9-1 for some useful definitions regarding pain). The
powerful experience of pain, especially acute pain, can
serve a vital function – to make us aware of damage to
our bodies, and to rest the injured part until it has healed.
When acute pain is peripheral in origin (i.e., originating
outside of the central nervous system) but continues as
chronic pain, it can cause changes in central nervous
system pain mechanisms that enhance or perpetuate the
original peripheral pain. For example, osteoarthritis, low
back pain, and diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain all
begin as peripheral pain, but over time these conditions
can trigger central pain mechanisms that amplify
peripheral pain and generate additional pain centrally.
This may explain why research has recently shown that
chronic pain conditions of peripheral origin can be
successfully targeted for relief by psychotropic drugs that
work on central pain mechanisms.
Many other chronic pain conditions may start
centrally and never have a peripheral causation to the
pain, especially conditions associated with multiple
unexplained painful physical symptoms such as
depression, anxiety, and fibromyalgia. Because these
centrally mediated pain conditions are associated
with emotional symptoms, that type of pain has until
recently often not been considered “real” but rather
a nonspecific outcome of unresolved psychological
379


<<<PAGE 396>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Table 9-1 Pain: some useful definitions

Pain

An unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential
tissue damage, or described in terms of such damage

Acute pain

Pain that is of short duration and resolves; usually directly related to the resolution or
healing of tissue damage

Chronic pain

Pain that persists for longer than would be expected; an artificial threshold for chronicity
(e.g., 1 month) is not appropriate

Neuropathic pain

Pain that arises from damage to, or dysfunction of, any part of the peripheral or central
nervous system

Nociception

The process by which noxious stimuli produce activity in the sensory pathways that convey
“painful” information

Allodynia

Pain caused by a stimulus that does not normally provoke pain

Hyperalgesia

An increased response to a stimulus that is not normally painful

Analgesia

Any process that reduces the sensation of pain, while not affecting normal touch

Local anesthesia

Blockade of all sensation (innocuous and painful) from a local area

Noxious stimulus

Stimulus that inflicts damage, or would potentially inflict damage, on tissues of the body

Primary afferent
neuron (PAN)

The first neuron in the somatosensory pathway; detects mechanical, thermal, or chemical
stimuli at its peripheral terminals and transmits action potentials to its central terminals in
the spinal cord; all PANs have a cell body in the dorsal root ganglion

Nociceptor

A primary afferent (sensory) neuron that is only activated by a noxious stimulus

Nociception

The process by which a nociceptor detects a noxious stimulus and generates a signal
(action potentials) that is propagated towards higher centers in the nociceptive pathway

Dorsal root ganglion
(DRG)

Contains the cell bodies of PANs; proteins, including transmitters, receptors, and structural
proteins, are synthesized here and transported to peripheral and central terminals

Interneuron

Neuron with its cell body, axon, and dendrites within the spinal cord; can be excitatory
(e.g., containing glutamate) or inhibitory (e.g., containing GABA)

Projection neurons

Neuron in the dorsal horn that receives input from PANs and/or interneurons, and
projects up the spinal cord to higher processing centers

Spinothalamic tract

Tract of neurons that project from the spinal cord to the thalmus

Spinobulbar tracts

Several different tracts of neurons that project from the spinal cord to brainstem nuclei

Somatosensory cortex

Region of the cerebral cortex that receives input mainly from cutaneous sensory nerves;
the cortex is topographically arranged, with adjacent areas receiving input from adjacent
body areas; stimulation of the somatosensory cortex creates sensations from the body
part that projects to it

conflicts that would improve when the associated
psychiatric condition improved, and therefore that this
type of pain did not need to be targeted specifically for
treatment. Today, however, many painful conditions
without identifiable peripheral lesions that were once
linked only to psychiatric disorders are now hypothesized
to be forms of chronic neuropathic pain syndromes and
can be treated with the same agents that successfully treat
neuropathic pain syndromes that are not associated with
psychiatric disorders. These treatments include the SNRIs
380

(serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, discussed
in Chapter 7 on treatment for mood disorders [Figures
7-28 through 7-33]) and the α2δ ligands (anticonvulsants
that block voltage-gated calcium channels or VSCCs,
discussed in Chapter 8 on anxiety disorders [Figures
8-17 and 8-18]). Additional psychotropic agents acting
centrally at various other sites are also used to treat a
variety of chronic pain conditions and will be mentioned
below. Many additional drugs are being tested as
potential novel pain treatments as well.


<<<PAGE 397>>>
Chapter 9: Chronic Pain and Its Treatment

Since pain is clearly associated with some psychiatric
disorders, and psychotropic drugs that treat various
psychiatric conditions are also effective for a wide
variety of pain conditions, the detection, quantification,
and treatment of pain are rapidly becoming
standardized parts of a psychiatric evaluation. Modern
psychopharmacologists increasingly consider pain to be a
psychiatric “vital sign,” thus requiring routine evaluation
and symptomatic treatment. In fact, elimination of pain
is increasingly recognized as necessary in order to have
full symptomatic remission not only of chronic pain
conditions, but also of many psychiatric disorders.
“Normal” Pain and the Activation of Nociceptive
Nerve Fibers

The nociceptive pain pathway is the series of neurons
that begins with detection of a noxious stimulus and ends
with the subjective perception of pain. This so-called
“nociceptive pathway” starts from the periphery, enters
the spinal cord, and projects to the brain (Figure 9-1).
It is important to understand the processes by which
incoming information can be modulated to increase or
decrease the perception of pain associated with a given
stimulus because these processes can explain not only
why maladaptive pain states arise but also why drugs that
work in psychiatric conditions such as depression and
anxiety can also be effective in reducing pain.
Nociceptive Pathway to the Spinal Cord

Primary afferent neurons detect sensory inputs
including pain (Figure 9-1). They have their cell bodies
in the dorsal root ganglion located along the spinal
column outside the central nervous system and thus
are considered peripheral and not central neurons
periphery

primary afferent
neurons

dorsal root
ganglion

(Figure 9-1). Nociception begins with transduction – the
process by which specialized membrane proteins located
on the peripheral projections of these neurons detect a
stimulus and generate a voltage change at their peripheral
neuronal membranes. A sufficiently strong stimulus will
lower the voltage at the membrane (i.e., depolarize the
membrane) enough to activate voltage-sensitive sodium
channels (VSSCs) and trigger an action potential that will
be propagated along the length of the axon to the central
terminals of the neuron in the spinal cord (Figure 9-1).
VSSCs are introduced in Chapter 3 and illustrated in
Figures 3-19 and 3-20. Nociceptive impulse flow from
primary afferent neurons into the central nervous system
can be reduced or stopped when VSSCs are blocked
by peripherally administered local anesthetics such as
lidocaine.
The specific response characteristics of primary
afferent neurons are determined by the specific
receptors and channels expressed by that neuron in the
periphery (Figure 9-1). For example, primary afferent
neurons that express a stretch-activated ion channel are
mechanosensitive; those that express the vanillinoid
receptor 1 (VR1) ion channel are activated by capsaicin,
the pungent ingredient in chili peppers, and also by
noxious heat, leading to the burning sensation that both
these stimuli evoke. These functional response properties
are used to classify primary afferent neurons into three
types: Aβ-, Aδ-, and C-fiber neurons (Figure 9-1).
Aβ fibers detect small movements, light touch, hair
movement, and vibrations; C-fiber peripheral terminals
are bare nerve endings that are only activated by noxious
mechanical, thermal, or chemical stimuli; Aδ fibers fall
somewhere in between, sensing noxious mechanical
stimuli and sub-noxious thermal stimuli (Figure 9-1).
spinal cord

non-noxious
mechanical stimulus

to higher
centers

Aß fiber
dorsal
horn

noxious
mechanical stimulus
PN

noxious heat
and chemical stimuli

C fiber

dorsal root
projection
neurons

gray matter
white matter

Figure 9-1 Activation of nociceptive
nerve fibers. Detection of a noxious
stimulus occurs at the peripheral
terminals of primary afferent neurons and
leads to generation of action potentials
that propagate along the axon to the
central terminals. Aβ fibers respond only
to non-noxious stimuli, Aδ fibers respond
to noxious mechanical stimuli and subnoxious thermal stimuli, and C fibers
respond only to noxious mechanical,
heat, and chemical stimuli. Primary
afferent neurons have their cell bodies
in the dorsal root ganglion and send
terminals into that spinal cord segment
as well as sending less dense collaterals
up the spinal cord for a short distance.
Primary afferent neurons synapse onto
several different classes of dorsal horn
projection neurons (PN), which project
via different tracts to higher centers.

381

9


<<<PAGE 398>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Nociceptive input and pain can thus be caused by
activating primary afferent neurons peripherally, such as
from a sprained ankle or a tooth extraction. Nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can reduce painful
input from these primary afferent neurons, presumably
via their peripheral actions. Opiates can also reduce such
pain, but from central actions as explained below.
Nociceptive Pathway from the Spinal Cord to the Brain

The central terminals of peripheral nociceptive
neurons synapse in the dorsal horn of the spinal
cord onto the next cells in the pathway – dorsal
horn neurons, which receive input from many
primary afferent neurons and then project to higher
centers (Figures 9-2 and 9-3). For this reason, they
are sometimes also called dorsal horn projection
neurons (PN in Figures 9-1 through 9-3). Dorsal horn
neurons are thus the first neurons of the nociceptive
pathway that are located entirely within the central
nervous system and thus a key site for modulation
of nociceptive neuronal activity as it comes into
the central nervous system. A vast number of
neurotransmitters have been identified in the dorsal
horn, some of which are shown in Figure 9-2.
Neurotransmitters in the dorsal horn are synthesized
not only by primary afferent neurons, but also by the
other neurons in the dorsal horn, including descending
neurons and various interneurons (Figure 9-2). Some
neurotransmitter systems in the dorsal horn are
successfully targeted by known pain-relieving drugs,
especially opiates, serotonin and norepinephrine boosting
SNRIs, and α2δ ligands acting at VSCCs. All of the
neurotransmitter systems acting in the dorsal horn are
potential targets for novel pain-relieving drugs (Figure
9-2) and a plethora of such novel agents is currently in
clinical and preclinical development.
There are several classes of dorsal horn neurons: some
receive input directly from primary sensory neurons,
some are interneurons, and some project up the spinal
cord to higher centers (Figure 9-3). There are several
different tracts in which these projection neurons can
ascend, which can be crudely divided into two functions:
the sensory/discriminatory pathway and the emotional/
motivational pathway (Figure 9-3).
In the sensory/discriminatory pathway, dorsal horn
neurons ascend in the spinothalamic tract; then, thalamic
neurons project to the primary somatosensory cortex
(Figure 9-3). This particular pain pathway is thought to
convey the precise location of the nociceptive stimulus
382

and its intensity. In the emotional/motivational pathway,
other dorsal horn neurons project to brainstem nuclei,
and from there to limbic regions (Figure 9-3). This
second pain pathway is thought to convey the affective
component that nociceptive stimuli evoke. Only when
these two aspects of sensory discrimination and emotions
come together and the final, subjective perception of pain
is created, can we use the word “pain” to describe the
modality (see “ouch” in Figure 9-3). Before this point, we
are simply discussing activity in neural pathways, which
should be described as noxious-evoked or nociceptive
neuronal activity but not necessarily as pain.

NEUROPATHIC PAIN
The term neuropathic pain describes pain that arises from
damage to, or dysfunction of, any part of the peripheral
or central nervous system, whereas “normal” pain
(so-called nociceptive pain just discussed in the section
above) is caused by activation of nociceptive nerve fibers.
Peripheral Mechanisms in Neuropathic Pain

Normal transduction and conduction in peripheral
afferent neurons can be hijacked in certain neuropathic
pain states to maintain nociceptive signaling in the
absence of a relevant noxious stimulus. Neuronal
damage by disease or trauma can alter electrical activity
of neurons, allow cross-talk between neurons, and
initiate inflammatory processes to cause “peripheral
sensitization.” In this chapter, we will not emphasize
peripheral sensitization disorders and mechanisms, but
rather central sensitization disorders and mechanisms.
Central Mechanisms in Neuropathic Pain

At each major relay point in the pain pathway
(Figure 9-3), the nociceptive pain signal is susceptible to
modulation by endogenous processes to either dampen
down the signal or to amplify it. This happens not only
peripherally at primary afferent neurons, as has just been
discussed, but also at central neurons in the dorsal horn
of the spinal cord as well as in numerous brain regions.
The events in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord are better
understood than those in brain regions of nociceptive
pathways, but pain processing in the brain may be the
key to understanding the generation and amplification
of pain centrally in disorders of chronic peripheral
pain, such as osteoarthritis, low back pain, and diabetic
peripheral neuropathic pain, as well as painful physical
symptoms in affective and anxiety disorders and in
fibromyalgia.


<<<PAGE 399>>>
Chapter 9: Chronic Pain and Its Treatment

Multiple Neurotransmitters Modulate Pain Processing
in the Spinal Cord
descending
neurons

dorsal horn
projection neuron

to higher
centers

primary afferent neuron

interneuron

T3

VIP

VIPR

somato
statin

SR

CGRP

CGRP-R

Sub P
NKA
NKB

NK1

CCK
opioid

PN

,2,3
,B

R

9

NM

DA

PA

AM

-R

BA A

GA

,B
CCK-A

B
A,

BA

glu

5HT

2

5H

2

GABA

GA

5HT
1/B/D

3

5HT
opioid
opioid
5HT NE

glycine

NO

GABA

Figure 9-2 Multiple neurotransmitters modulate pain processing in the spinal cord. There are many neurotransmitters and their
corresponding receptors in the dorsal horn. Neurotransmitters in the dorsal horn may be released by primary afferent neurons, by
descending regulatory neurons, by dorsal horn projection neurons (PN), and by interneurons. Neurotransmitters present in the dorsal
horn that have been best studied in terms of pain transmission include substance P (NK1, 2, and 3 receptors), endorphins (μ-opioid
receptors), norepinephrine (α2 adrenoceptors), and serotonin (5HT1B/D and 5HT3 receptors). Several other neurotransmitters are also
represented, including vasopressin inhibitory protein (VIP) and its receptor VIPR; somatostatin and its receptor SR; calcitonin G-related
peptide (CGRP) and its receptors CGRP-R; GABA and its receptors GABAA and GABAB; glutamate and its receptors AMPA-R (α-amino-3hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptor) and NMDA-R (N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor); nitric oxide (NO); cholecystokinin
(CCK) and its receptors CCK-A and CCK-B; and glycine and its receptor NMDA-R.

383


<<<PAGE 400>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

somatosensory
cortex

thalamus

subjective
experience
of pain
PN

limbic
structures
spinothalamic
tract

brainstem

spinobulbar
tract

“Segmental” central sensitization is a process
thought to be caused when plastic changes occur
in the dorsal horn, classically in conditions such as
phantom pain after limb amputation. Specifically,
this type of neuronal plasticity in the dorsal horn is
called activity-dependent or use-dependent because
it requires constant firing of the pain pathway in the
dorsal horn. The consequence of this constant input of
pain is eventually to cause exaggerated (hyperalgesic)
or prolonged responses to any noxious input – a
phenomenon sometimes called “wind-up” – as well as
painful responses to normally innocuous inputs (called
allodynia). Phosphorylation of key membrane receptors
and channels in the dorsal horn appears to increase
synaptic efficiency and thus to trip a master switch
opening the gate to the pain pathway and turning on
central sensitization, which acts to amplify or create
the perception of pain even if there is no pain input
actually coming from the periphery. The gate can also
close, as conceptualized in the classic “gate theory” of
pain, in order to explain how innocuous stimulation
(e.g., acupuncture, vibration, rubbing) away from the
site of an injury can close the pain gate and reduce the
perception of the injury pain.
In segmental central sensitization, a definite
peripheral injury (Figure 9-4A) is combined with
central sensitization at the spinal cord segment receiving
nociceptive input from the damaged area of the body
(Figure 9-4B). Segmental central sensitization syndromes
are thus “mixed” states where the insult of central
segmental changes (Figure 9-4B) are added to peripheral
injuries such as low back pain, diabetic peripheral

384

OUCH!

Figure 9-3 From nociception
to pain. Dorsal horn neurons in
the spinothalamic tract project
to the thalamus and then to the
primary somatosensory cortex.
This pathway carries information
about the intensity and location
of the painful stimuli and is
termed the sensory/discriminatory
pathway. Neurons ascending in
the spinobulbar tract project to
brainstem nuclei and then to both
the thalamus and limbic structures.
These pathways convey the
emotional and motivational aspects
of the pain experience. Only when
information from the sensory/
discriminatory (thalamocortical)
and emotional/motivational
(limbic) pathways combine is the
human subjective experience of
pain formed (“ouch”).

neuropathic pain, and painful cutaneous eruptions of
herpes zoster (shingles) (Figure 9-4A).
“Suprasegmental” central sensitization is hypothesized
to be linked to plastic changes that occur in brain sites
within the nociceptive pathway, especially the thalamus
and cortex, in the presence of known peripheral causes
(Figure 9-5A) or even in the absence of identifiable
triggering events (Figure 9-5B). In the case of peripherally
activated suprasegmental central sensitization, it is as
though the brain “learns” from its experience of pain,
and decides not only to keep the process going, but also
to enhance it and make it permanent. In the case of pain
that originates centrally without peripheral input, it is as
though the brain has figured out how to spontaneously
activate its pain pathways. Interrupting this process of
sensitized brain pathways for pain and getting the central
nervous system to “forget” its molecular memories
may be one of the greatest therapeutic opportunities in
psychopharmacology today, not only because this may
be a therapeutic strategy for various chronic neuropathic
pain conditions as discussed here, but also because it
may be a viable approach to treating the hypothesized
molecular changes that may underlie disease progression
in a wide variety of disorders, from schizophrenia,
to stress-induced anxiety and affective disorders,
to addictive disorders. Conditions hypothesized to
be caused by suprasegmental central sensitization
syndromes of pain originating in the brain without
peripheral pain input include fibromyalgia, the syndrome
of chronic widespread pain, and painful physical
symptoms of depression and anxiety disorders, especially
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (Figure 9-5B).


<<<PAGE 401>>>
Chapter 9: Chronic Pain and Its Treatment

Onset of Acute Pain from Painful Peripheral Conditions

OUCH!

joint affected by
osteoarthritis
diabetic peripheral
neuropathic pain

Figure 9-4 Acute pain and
development of segmental central
sensitization. (A) When peripheral
injury occurs, nociceptive impulse
flow from primary afferent neurons is
transmitted via dorsal horn neurons
to higher brain centers, where it can
ultimately be interpreted as pain
(represented by the “ouch”). (B) In
some cases, injury or disease directly
affecting the nervous system may
result in plastic changes that lead to
sensitization within the central nervous
system, such that the experience
of pain continues even after tissue
damage is resolved. Impulses may be
generated at abnormal locations either
spontaneously or via mechanical forces.
At the level of the spinal cord, this
process is termed segmental central
sensitization. This mechanism underlies
conditions such as diabetic peripheral
neuropathic pain and shingles.

low back pain

A

shingles

Development of Segmental Central Sensitization and Increased Pain

OUCH!
9

joint affected by
osteoarthritis
diabetic peripheral
neuropathic pain
segmental central
sensitization
B

low back pain

shingles

385


<<<PAGE 402>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Chronic Pain with Suprasegmental Central Sensitization
from Peripheral Injury

OUCH!
suprasegmental
central sensitization

joint affected by
osteoarthritis
diabetic peripheral
neuropathic pain

low back pain

A

shingles

Suprasegmental Central Sensitization Originating in the Brain

OUCH!

fibromyalgia

chronic widespread
pain

B

painful physical symptoms
of depression/anxiety

Figure 9-5 Suprasegmental central sensitization. Plastic changes in brain sites within the nociceptive pathway, especially the thalamus
and cortex, can cause sensitization. This process within the brain is termed suprasegmental central sensitization. This can occur following
peripheral injury (A) or even in the absence of identifiable triggering events (B). This mechanism is believed to underlie conditions such
as fibromyalgia, chronic widespread pain, and painful symptoms in depression and anxiety disorders.

386


<<<PAGE 403>>>
Chapter 9: Chronic Pain and Its Treatment

The Spectrum of Mood and Anxiety Disorders with
Pain Disorders

Fibromyalgia

Fibromyalgia has emerged as a diagnosable and treatable
pain syndrome, with tenderness but no structural
pathology in muscles, ligaments, or joints. Fibromyalgia
is recognized as a chronic, widespread pain syndrome
associated with fatigue and nonrestorative sleep. It is
diagnosed based on the number of body areas in which
the patient experiences pain (widespread pain index, or
WPI) combined with the severity of associated symptoms
(fatigue, waking unrefreshed, cognitive symptoms, and
other somatic symptoms) (Figure 9-7). It is the second
most common diagnosis in rheumatology clinics, and
may affect 2–4% of the general population. Although
symptoms of fibromyalgia are chronic and debilitating,
they are not necessarily progressive. There is no known
cause and there is no known pathology identifiable in the
muscles or joints. This syndrome can be deconstructed
into its component symptoms (Figure 9-8), and then
matched with hypothetically malfunctioning brain
circuits (Figure 9-9).

A large group of overlapping disorders can have
emotional symptoms, painful physical symptoms,
or both (Figure 9-6). Although pain in the absence
of emotional symptoms has long been seen as a
neurological disorder, and pain in the presence of
emotional symptoms as a psychiatric disorder, it is
now clear that pain is a symptom that can be mapped
onto inefficient information processing within the pain
circuit, and is largely considered the same symptom with
the same treatments, whether occurring by itself or as
part of any number of syndromes (Figure 9-6). Thus,
pain (Figure 9-6, right) can occur not only by itself,
but also concomitantly with the emotional symptoms
of depressed mood and anxiety (Figure 9-6, left), and
with the physical symptoms of fatigue, insomnia,
and problems concentrating (Figure 9-6, middle). No
matter whether pain occurs by itself or with additional
concomitant emotional or physical symptoms, or in the
presence of full syndromal psychiatric disorders such as
major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder,
or PTSD (Figure 9-6, left), it must be treated and the
treatments are the same across the spectrum (Figure 9-6),
namely SNRIs and α2δ ligands as will be explained below.

Decreased Gray Matter in Chronic Pain Syndromes?

Some very troubling preliminary reports suggest that
chronic pain may even “shrink the brain” in the DLPFC
(dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) (Figure 9-9) and thereby

The Spectrum from Mood and Anxiety Disorders to Chronic
Neuropathic Pain Syndromes
anxiety and
mood disorders

mixed
anxiety
disorder
subtypes

PTSD

$
worry

fatigue
Z

Z

Z

sleep

cognition

mood/anxiety

fibromyalgia
shingles
diabetic peripheral
neuropathic pain

general
anxiety
disorder
major
depressive
disorder

chronic neuropathic
pain syndromes

painful physical symptoms
of depression/anxiety
chronic widespread
pain

osteoarthritis

low back pain

pain

Figure 9-6 The spectrum from mood and anxiety disorders to chronic neuropathic pain syndromes. Pain, though not a formal
diagnostic feature of depression or anxiety disorders, is nonetheless frequently present in patients with these disorders. Similarly,
depressed mood, anxiety, and other symptoms identified as part of depression and anxiety disorders are now recognized as being
common in pain disorders.

387

9


<<<PAGE 404>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 9-7 Widespread pain index
(WPI). Fibromyalgia is a chronic
widespread pain syndrome, formerly
diagnosed based on the number
of body areas in which the patient
experiences pain (widespread pain
index, or WPI) combined with the
severity of associated symptoms
(fatigue, waking unrefreshed, cognitive
symptoms, and other somatic
symptoms.

Widespread Pain Index (WPI)
for Diagnosis of Fibromyalgia
jaw

neck
shoulder
girdle
upper back

upper
arm

chest

lower
arm

abdomen

lower back
upper
leg
hip (buttock)
lower
leg

Figure 9-8 Symptoms of
fibromyalgia. In addition to pain as a
central feature of fibromyalgia, many
patients experience fatigue, anxiety,
depression, disturbed sleep, and
problems concentrating.

fibromyalgia

fatigue
concentration
pain

anxiety

sleep
depression

contribute to cognitive dysfunction in certain pain states
such as fibromyalgia (Figure 9-8) and low back pain.
Brain atrophy is discussed in relationship to stress and
anxiety disorders in Chapter 6 and illustrated in Figure
6-30. It would not be surprising if stressful conditions
that cause pain, as well as pain that causes distress, may
388

all be involved in causing brain atrophy and/or cognitive
dysfunction in fibromyalgia and other chronic pain states.
Chronic back pain, for example, has also been reported
to be associated with decreased prefrontal and thalamic
gray-matter density (Figure 9-10). Some experts have
hypothesized that in fibromyalgia and other chronic


<<<PAGE 405>>>
Chapter 9: Chronic Pain and Its Treatment

Match Each Symptom of Fibromyalgia
to Hypothetically Malfunctioning Brain Circuits
psychomotor
fatigue (physical)
-“fibro-fog”
- problems concentrating
- lack of interest/pleasure

pleasure
interests
fatigue/
energy

pain

psychomotor
fatigue (mental)
pain

PFC

S
NA

T

BF

Hy
C
NT

A
H

SC

mood
depressed mood
anxiety

fatigue (physical)
pain

sleep
appetite

Gray-matter loss in chronic pain

Figure 9-9 Symptom-based algorithm
for fibromyalgia. A symptom-based
approach to treatment selection for
fibromyalgia follows the theory that
each of a patient’s symptoms can
be matched with malfunctioning
brain circuits and neurotransmitters
that hypothetically mediate those
symptoms; this information is then
used to select a corresponding
pharmacological mechanism for
treatment. Pain is linked to transmission
of information via the thalamus (T),
while physical fatigue is linked to
the striatum (S) and spinal cord (SC).
Problems concentrating and lack of
interest (termed “fibro-fog”) as well
as mental fatigue are linked to the
prefrontal cortex (PFC), specifically the
dorsolateral PFC. Fatigue, low energy,
and lack of interest may all also be
related to the nucleus accumbens (NA).
Disturbances in sleep and appetite are
associated with the hypothalamus (Hy),
depressed mood with the amygdala (A)
and orbital frontal cortex, and anxiety
with the amygdala.

Figure 9-10 Gray-matter loss in chronic
pain. Research suggests that chronic pain,
like anxiety and stress-related disorders,
may lead to brain atrophy. Specifically, there
are data showing gray-matter loss in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), the
thalamus, and the temporal cortex in patients
with chronic pain conditions.

DLPFC

9
thalamus

temporal
cortex

neuropathic pain syndromes, the persistent perception
of pain could lead to overuse of DLPFC neurons,
excitotoxic cell death in this brain region, and reduction

of the cortico-thalamic “brake” on nociceptive pathways.
Such an outcome could cause not only increased pain
perception, but diminished executive functioning,
389


<<<PAGE 406>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

sometimes called “fibro-fog” in fibromyalgia. In Chapter
6 we discussed how stress-related HPA (hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal) axis abnormalities in CRF–ACTH–
cortisol regulation may be linked to hippocampal atrophy
(see Figure 6-32), possibly linked to reduced availability
of growth factors (Figures 6-27 and 6-29). Alterations in
growth factors may be linked to the reports of reduction
in gray-matter volume in chronic pain syndromes
(fibromyalgia and low back pain), but in different
brain regions (DLPFC, temporal cortex, and thalamus)
(Figure 9-10) than reported for depression (Figure 6-30).
Gray matter may actually be increased in other brain
regions in chronic pain.
Although still preliminary, these findings suggest
a possible structural consequence to suprasegmental
central sensitization (Figure 9-10), not unlike that
suspected for depression and stress (Figure 6-30).
Abnormal pain processing, exaggerated pain responses,
and perpetual pain could hypothetically be linked to
deficiencies in the DLPFC circuit and its regulation
by dopamine, and provide a potential explanation
for the cognitive difficulties associated with chronic
pain, especially fibro-fog in fibromyalgia (Figure 9-8).
Thalamic abnormalities could hypothetically be linked
to problems sleeping as well as nonrestorative sleep seen
in chronic pain syndromes (Figure 9-8). Thus, chronic
pain syndromes not only cause pain, but also problems
with fatigue, mental concentration, sleep, depression,
and anxiety (Figure 9-8). Structural brain abnormalities
associated with inefficient information processing in
brain areas that mediate these symptoms (Figure 9-9)
may explain why these various symptoms (Figure 9-8) are
frequently associated with chronic pain syndromes.

DESCENDING SPINAL SYNAPSES
IN THE DORSAL HORN AND THE
TREATMENT OF CHRONIC PAIN
The periaqueductal gray is the site of origin and
regulation of much of the descending inhibition that
projects down the spinal cord to the dorsal horn
(Figure 9-2). The periaqueductal gray is discussed in
relationship to its connections with the amygdala and
the motor component of the fear response in Chapter
8 and illustrated in Figure 8-9. The periaqueductal
gray also integrates inputs from nociceptive pathways
and limbic structures such as the amygdala and limbic
cortex, and sends outputs to brainstem nuclei and
the rostroventromedial medulla to drive descending
inhibitory pathways. Some of these descending pathways
390

release endorphins, which act via mostly presynaptic
μ-opioid receptors to inhibit neurotransmission from
nociceptive primary afferent neurons (Figure 9-2). Spinal
μ-opioid receptors are one target of opioid analgesics;
so are μ-opioid receptors in the periaqueductal gray
itself (Figure 9-11). Interestingly, since Aβ fibers (Figure
9-1) do not express μ-opioid receptors, this may explain
why opioid analgesics spare normal sensory input.
Enkephalins, which also act via δ-opioid receptors, are
also antinociceptive, whereas dynorphins, acting at
κ-opioid receptors, can be either anti- or pronociceptive.
It is also interesting that opiates in general are no more
effective for chronic neuropathic pain states than SNRIs
or α2δ ligands, but in many cases, such as in fibromyalgia,
opiates are not proven to be effective at all.
Two other important descending inhibitory pathways
are also shown in Figure 9-2. One is the descending spinal
norepinephrine pathway (Figure 9-12A), which originates
in the locus coeruleus, and especially from noradrenergic
cell bodies in the lower (caudal) parts of the brainstem
neurotransmitter center (lateral tegmental norepinephrine
cell system). The other important descending pathway
is the descending spinal serotonergic pathway (Figure
9-13A), which originates in the nucleus raphe magnus of
the rostroventromedial medulla and especially the lower
(caudal) serotonin nuclei (raphe magnus, raphe pallidus,
and raphe obscuris). Descending noradrenergic neurons
inhibit neurotransmitter release from primary afferents
directly via inhibitory α2 adrenoceptors (Figure 9-2),
explaining why direct-acting α2 agonists such as clonidine
can be useful in relieving pain in some patients. Serotonin
inhibits primary afferent terminals via postsynaptic
5HT1B/D receptors (Figure 9-2). These inhibitory receptors
are G-protein-coupled, and indirectly influence ion
channels to hyperpolarize the nerve terminal and inhibit
nociceptive neurotransmitter release. However, serotonin
is also a major transmitter in descending facilitation
pathways to the spinal cord. Serotonin released onto some
primary afferent neuron terminals in certain areas of
the dorsal horn acts predominantly via excitatory 5HT3
receptors to enhance neurotransmitter release from these
primary afferent neurons (Figure 9-2). The combination
of both inhibitory and facilitatory actions of serotonin
may explain why SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors), with actions that increase only serotonin
levels, are not consistently useful in the treatment of
pain, whereas SNRIs, with actions on both serotonin and
norepinephrine, are now proven to be effective in various
neuropathic pain states, including diabetic peripheral
neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia.


<<<PAGE 407>>>
Chapter 9: Chronic Pain and Its Treatment

Acute Nociceptive Pain

OUCH!

descending
opioid
projections

sprain
broken bone
dental extraction

periaqueductal
gray

A

Anatomic Site of Action of Opioids

OUCH!

9

opioid

opioid
B

sprain
broken bone
dental extraction

Figure 9-11 Acute nociceptive pain and opioids. The periaqueductal gray integrates inputs from nociceptive pathways and limbic
structures and sends outputs to drive descending inhibitory pathways, including descending opioid projections. (A) Shown here is
nociceptive input from a peripheral injury being transmitted to the brain and interpreted as pain. The descending opioid projection is
not activated and thus is not inhibiting the nociceptive input. (B) Endogenous opioid release in the descending opioid projection, or
exogenous administration of an opioid, can cause inhibition of nociceptive neurotransmission in the dorsal horn or in the periaqueductal
gray and thus prevent or reduce the experience of pain.

391


<<<PAGE 408>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Descending NE Inhibition of Pain

back
pain

stomach
pain

muscle/
joint
pain
descending
NE
projections

normal
NE release

back posture
muscle/joint movement

A

digestion

Deficient NE Inhibition Leads to Pain

back
pain

stomach
pain

muscle/
joint
pain

deficient
NE release

B

back posture
muscle/joint movement

digestion

Figure 9-12A, B Descending noradrenergic neurons and pain. (A) The descending spinal norepinephrine (NE) pathway originates
in the locus coeruleus. Descending NE neurons inhibit neurotransmitter release from primary afferent neurons via presynaptic α2
adrenoceptors, and inhibit activity of dorsal horn neurons via postsynaptic α2 adrenoceptors. This suppresses bodily input (e.g.,
regarding muscles/joints or digestion) from reaching the brain and thus prevents it from being interpreted as painful. (B) If descending
NE inhibition is deficient, then it may not be sufficient to mask irrelevant nociceptive input, potentially leading to perception of pain
from input that is normally ignored. This may be a contributing factor for painful somatic symptoms in fibromyalgia, depression, irritable
bowel syndrome, and anxiety disorders.

392


<<<PAGE 409>>>
Chapter 9: Chronic Pain and Its Treatment

SNRI Action Boosts NE Inhibition of Pain

back
pain

stomach
pain

muscle/
joint
pain
descending
NE
projections

= SNRI
SNRI
boosts NE

back posture

C

digestion

muscle/joint movement

Figure 9-12C Enhancement of descending noradrenergic inhibition. A serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) can
increase noradrenergic neurotransmission in the descending spinal pathway to the dorsal horn, and thus may enhance inhibition of
bodily input so that it does not reach the brain and get interpreted as pain.

Descending inhibition, mostly via serotonin and
noradrenergic pathways, is normally active at rest and
is thought to act physiologically to mask perception
of irrelevant nociceptive input (e.g., from digestion,
joint movement, etc.) (Figures 9-12A and 9-13A).
One hypothesis for why patients with depression or
fibromyalgia or related chronic pain disorders perceive
pain when there is no obvious sign of peripheral
trauma is that descending inhibition may not be acting
adequately to mask irrelevant nociceptive input. This
leads to the perception of pain from what is actually
normal input that is ordinarily ignored (Figures 9-12B
and 9-13B). If this descending monoaminergic inhibition
is enhanced with an SNRI, irrelevant nociceptive inputs
from joints, muscles, and the back in fibromyalgia and
depression, and from digestion and the gastrointestinal
tract in irritable bowel syndrome, depression, and anxiety
disorders, are hypothetically once again ignored and
thus are no longer perceived as painful (Figures 9-12C
and 9-13C). SNRIs include duloxetine, milnacipran,
levomilnacipran, venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, and some
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). SNRIs and TCAs are
discussed extensively in Chapter 7.

Descending inhibition is also activated during severe
injury by incoming nociceptive input, and in dangerous
“conflict” situations via limbic structures, causing the
release of endogenous opioid peptides (Figure 9-11B),
serotonin (Figure 9-13A), and norepinephrine (Figure
9-12A). When this happens, this reduces not only the
release of nociceptive neurotransmitters in the dorsal
horn (Figure 9-2) but also the transmission of nociceptive
impulses up the spinal cord into the brain (Figure 9-3),
thereby reducing the perception of pain, dulling it to
allow escape from the situation without the injury
compromising physical performance in the short run
(reduction of “ouch” in Figure 9-3). On return to safety,
descending facilitation replaces the inhibition to redress
the balance, increase awareness of the injury, and force
rest of the injured part (lots of “ouch” in Figure 9-3).
The power of this system can be seen in humans
persevering through severe injury on the sports
field and on the battle field. The placebo effect may
also involve endogenous opioid release from these
descending inhibitory neurons (Figure 9-11B), since
activation of a placebo response to pain is reversible by
the μ-opioid antagonist naloxone. These are adaptive
393

9


<<<PAGE 410>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Descending 5HT Inhibition of Pain

back
pain

stomach
pain

muscle/
joint
pain
descending
5HT
projections

normal
5HT release

back posture
muscle/joint movement

A

digestion

Deficient 5HT Inhibition Leads to Pain

back
pain

stomach
pain

muscle/
joint
pain

deficient
5HT release

back posture
muscle/joint movement

B

digestion

Figure 9-13A, B Descending serotonergic neurons and pain. (A) The descending spinal serotonin (5HT) pathway originates in the
raphe nucleus. Descending serotonergic (5HT) neurons directly inhibit activity of dorsal horn neurons, predominantly via 5HT1B/D
receptors. This suppresses bodily input (e.g., regarding muscles/joints or digestion) from reaching the brain and thus prevents it from
being interpreted as painful. (B) If descending 5HT inhibition is deficient, it may not be sufficient to mask irrelevant nociceptive input,
potentially leading to perception of pain from input that is normally ignored. This may be a contributing factor for painful somatic
symptoms in fibromyalgia, depression, irritable bowel syndrome, and anxiety disorders.

394


<<<PAGE 411>>>
Chapter 9: Chronic Pain and Its Treatment

SNRI Action Boosts 5HT Inhibition of Pain

back
pain

stomach
pain

muscle/
joint
pain
descending
5HT
projections

= SNRI
SNRI
boosts 5HT

back posture

digestion

muscle/joint movement

C
Figure 9-13C Enhancement of descending serotonergic inhibition. A serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) can increase
serotonergic neurotransmission in the descending spinal pathway to the dorsal horn, and thus may enhance inhibition of bodily input
so that it does not reach the brain and get interpreted as pain. However, the noradrenergic effects of SNRIs may be more relevant to
suppression of nociceptive input.

changes within the pain pathways that facilitate
survival and enhance function for the individual.
However, maladaptive changes can also hijack these
same mechanisms to inappropriately maintain pain
without relevant tissue injury, as may occur in various
forms of neuropathic pain, ranging from diabetes to
fibromyalgia and beyond.

TARGETING SENSITIZED
CIRCUITS IN CHRONIC PAIN
CONDITIONS
Chronic pain perpetuated as a marker of an irreversible
sensitization process within the central nervous system
has already been discussed as a disorder triggered by
progressive molecular changes due to abnormal neuronal
activity within the pain pathway, sometimes called
central sensitization. When this occurs at the spinal
or segmental level, it is likely linked to the multiple
different neurotransmitters released there, with each
neurotransmitter’s release mechanism requiring presynaptic
depolarization and activation of N-type and P/Q-type

voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCCs; Figure 9-14),
which is often coupled to the release of glutamate, but also
to aspartate, substance P (SP), calcitonin-gene-related
peptide (CGRP), and other neurotransmitters (Figure 9-2).
When this occurs at suprasegmental levels in the thalamus
and cortex, it is likely linked to release mostly of glutamate
via the same N-type and P/Q-type VSCCs (Figures 9-14
and 9-15). The idea is that low release of neurotransmitter
creates no pain response because there is insufficient
neurotransmitter release to stimulate the postsynaptic
receptors (Figure 9-14A). However, normal amounts of
neurotransmitter release cause a full nociceptive pain
response and acute pain (Figure 9-14B). Hypothetically,
in states of central sensitization, there is excessive
and unnecessary ongoing nociceptive activity causing
neuropathic pain (Figure 9-15A). Blocking VSCCs with the
α2δ ligands gabapentin or pregabalin (Figures 9-15B and
9-16) inhibits release of various neurotransmitters in the
dorsal horn (Figures 9-2, 9-15B, and 9-17A) or in thalamus
and cortex (Figures 9-15B and 9-17B) and has indeed
proven to be an effective treatment for various disorders
causing neuropathic pain. Gabapentin and pregabalin
395

9


<<<PAGE 412>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Subthreshold Pain Response

N
Q
P/

N
P/Q

no pain

A

Full Nociceptive Activity

N
P/Q

N
P/Q

B

acute pain

Figure 9-14 Activity-dependent nociception in pain pathways, part 1: acute pain. The degree of nociceptive neuronal activity in pain
pathways determines whether one experiences acute pain. An action potential on a presynaptic neuron triggers sodium influx, which
in turn leads to calcium influx, and ultimately release of neurotransmitter. (A) In some cases, the action potential generated at the
presynaptic neuron causes minimal neurotransmitter release; thus the postsynaptic neuron is not notably stimulated and the nociceptive
input does not reach the brain (in other words, there is no pain). (B) In other cases, a stronger action potential at the presynaptic neuron
may cause voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCCs) to remain open longer, allowing more neurotransmitter release and more
stimulation of the postsynaptic neuron. Thus, the nociceptive input is transmitted to the brain and acute pain occurs.

396


<<<PAGE 413>>>
Chapter 9: Chronic Pain and Its Treatment

Central Sensitization and
Excessive Nociceptive Activity

N
P/Q

N
Q
P/

dorsal horn, thalamus,
or cortex

A

Relief of Painful Excessive Nociceptive
Activity in Central Sensitization

neuropathic pain
= alpha-2delta ligand

N
Q
P/

N
P/Q

9

B

neuropathic pain

Figure 9-15 Activity-dependent nociception in pain pathways, part 2: neuropathic pain. The degree of nociceptive neuronal activity
in pain pathways determines whether one experiences acute pain. An action potential on a presynaptic neuron triggers sodium
influx, which in turn leads to calcium influx, and ultimately release of neurotransmitter. (A) Strong or repetitive action potentials can
cause prolonged opening of calcium channels, which may lead to excessive release of neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft, and
consequently to excessive stimulation of postsynaptic neurons. Ultimately this may induce molecular, synaptic, and structural changes,
including sprouting, which are the theoretical substrates for central sensitization syndromes. In other words, this can lead to neuropathic
pain. (B) Alpha-2-delta ligands such as gabapentin or pregabalin bind to the α2δ subunit of voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCCs),
changing their conformation to reduce calcium influx and therefore reduce excessive stimulation of postsynaptic receptors.

397


<<<PAGE 414>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

gabapentin

Figure 9-16 Gabapentin and
pregabalin. Shown here are icons
of the pharmacological actions of
gabapentin and pregabalin. These
agents bind to the α2δ subunit of
voltage-sensitive calcium channels
(VSCCs).

pregabalin

VSCC
2 site

OUCH!

VSCC
2 site

Figure 9-17 Anatomic actions of α2δ
ligands. (A) Alpha-2-delta ligands
may bind to voltage-sensitive calcium
channels in the dorsal horn to reduce
excitatory neurotransmission and
alleviate pain. (B) Alpha-2-delta ligands
may also bind to voltage-sensitive
calcium channels in the thalamus
and cortex to reduce excitatory
neurotransmission and alleviate pain.

OUCH!

(Figure 9-16) may more selectively bind the “open-channel”
conformation of VSCCs (Figures 9-17 and 9-18), and thus
be particularly effective in blocking those channels that are
the most active, with a “use-dependent” form of inhibition
398

(Figures 9-17B and 9-18B). This molecular action predicts
more affinity for centrally sensitized VSCCs that are actively
conducting neuronal impulses within the pain pathway.
Thus, they have a selective action on those VSCCs causing


<<<PAGE 415>>>
Chapter 9: Chronic Pain and Its Treatment

Molecular Action of Alpha-2-Delta Ligands
A. Open conformation of VSCC
inside the cell

ß

N
P/Q

outside the cell
++
Ca

B. Alpha-2-delta ligand binding to open
conformation and inhibiting VSCC

ß

N
P/Q

C. Closed conformation of VSCC

ß

N
P/Q
2

Figure 9-18 Binding of α2δ ligands. (A) Calcium influx occurs
when voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCCs) are in the
open-channel conformation. (B) Alpha-2-delta ligands such as
gabapentin and pregabalin have greatest affinity for the openchannel conformation and thus block those channels that are
most active. (C) When VSCCs are in the closed conformation
α2δ ligands do not bind and thus do not disrupt normal
neurotransmission.

neuropathic pain, ignoring other VSCCs that are not open,
and thus not interfering with normal neurotransmission in
central neurons uninvolved in mediating the pathological
pain state.
Treatment of pain, including neuropathic pain
conditions, may be less costly when you “pay” for it

in advance, or at least early in the game. The hope is
that early treatment of pain could interfere with the
development of chronic persistent painful conditions
by blocking the ability of painful experiences to imprint
themselves upon the central nervous system by not
allowing triggering of central sensitization. Thus, the
mechanisms whereby symptomatic suffering of chronic
neuropathic pain is relieved, such as with SNRIs or α2δ
ligands, may also be the same mechanisms that could
prevent disease progression to chronic persistent pain
states. This notion calls for aggressive treatment of
painful symptoms in these conditions that theoretically
have their origin within the central nervous system, thus
“intercepting” the central sensitization process before
it is durably imprinted into angry circuits. Thus, major
depression and anxiety disorders and fibromyalgia can
all be treated with SNRIs and/or α2δ ligands to eliminate
painful physical symptoms and thereby improve the
chances of reaching full symptomatic remission. The
opportunity to prevent permanent pain syndromes
or progressive worsening of pain is one reason why
pain is increasingly being considered a psychiatric
“vital sign” that must be assessed routinely in the
evaluation and treatment of psychiatric disorders by
psychopharmacologists. Future testing of agents capable
of reducing pain should be done to determine whether
eliminating painful symptoms early in the course of
psychiatric and functional somatic illnesses will improve
outcomes, including preventing symptomatic relapses,
the development of treatment resistance or even brain
atrophy from stress in pain states (Figure 9-9), and
hippocampal atrophy from stress in anxiety and affective
disorders (Figure 6-30). Pre-emptively treating pain
before it occurs, or at least rescuing centrally mediated
and sensitizing pain by intercepting such pain before it
becomes permanent, may be some of the most promising
therapeutic applications of dual reuptake inhibitors and
α2δ ligands and deserves careful clinical evaluation.

TARGETING ANCILLARY
SYMPTOMS IN FIBROMYALGIA
We have repeatedly mentioned the proven usefulness
of the α2δ ligands gabapentin and pregabalin and
the SNRIs duloxetine, milnacipran, venlafaxine, and
desvenlafaxine for treating the painful symptoms of
fibromyalgia, yet these two classes have not been studied
extensively in combination. Nevertheless, they are
frequently used together in clinical practice on an empiric
basis and anecdotally have been shown to give additive
399

9


<<<PAGE 416>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

improvement in relieving pain. Each class of drug may
also help different ancillary symptoms in fibromyalgia,
so the combination of α2δ ligands with SNRIs may lead to
broader symptom relief than using either alone, although
both are effective for pain in fibromyalgia. That is, α2δ
ligands may reduce symptoms of anxiety in fibromyalgia
(see discussion of α2δ ligands in anxiety in Chapter 8 and
illustrated in Figures 8-17C and 8-18C) and for improving
the slow-wave sleep disorder of fibromyalgia (sleep
disorders and their treatment are discussed in further
detail in Chapter 10). SNRIs can be useful in reducing
symptoms of depression and anxiety in fibromyalgia
(see Chapter 7 on treatment for mood disorders) and
for treating fatigue as well as the cognitive symptoms
associated with fibromyalgia, sometimes also called fibrofog (see Figures 9-8 and 9-9). Problems with executive
functioning in a wide variety of clinical conditions are
generally linked to inefficient information processing
in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) where
dopamine neurotransmission is important in regulating
brain circuits (see Chapter 4 on cognition in schizophrenia
and Figure 4-17). This concept of dopaminergic
regulation of cognition in the DLPFC and the role of
boosting dopamine neurotransmission to improve
executive dysfunction is also discussed in Chapter 11
on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Since SNRIs
increase dopamine concentrations in the DLPFC (see
Figure 7-33C), SNRI agents can also potentially improve
symptoms of fibro-fog in fibromyalgia patients. This
may be particularly so for the SNRIs milnacipran and
levomilnacipran, which have potent norepinephrine
reuptake binding properties at all clinically effective doses
(Figures 7-30 and 7-31), or for higher doses of the SNRIs
duloxetine (Figure 7-29), venlafaxine, and desvenlafaxine
(Figure 7-28), which act to increase norepinephrine
reuptake blocking properties of these agents and thus act
to increase concentrations of dopamine in the DLPFC
(Figure 7-33C). Other strategies for improving fibro-fog
in fibromyalgia patients include the same ones used to
treat cognitive dysfunction in depression, and include
modafinil, armodafinil, selective norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitors (NRIs) such as atomoxetine, norepinephrine–
dopamine reuptake inhibitors (NDRIs) such as bupropion,
and with caution, stimulants. SNRIs, sometimes
augmented with modafinil, stimulants, or bupropion can
also be useful for symptoms of physical fatigue as well as
mental fatigue in fibromyalgia patients.
Second-line treatments for pain in fibromyalgia
can include sedating drugs for depression including

400

mirtazapine and tricyclic antidepressants, as well as
the tricyclic muscle relaxant cyclobenzapine. Other
sleep aids such as benzodiazepines, hypnotics, and
trazodone can be helpful in relieving sleep disturbance
in fibromyalgia. Evidence is also accumulating for the
efficacy of γ-hydroxybutyrate (GHB or sodium oxybate)
in fibromyalgia (use with extreme caution because of
diversion and abuse potential). GHB is approved for
narcolepsy, enhances slow-wave sleep, and is discussed
in Chapter 10 on sleep (see Figures 10-67 and 10-68). In
heroic cases the use of GHB by experts for the treatment
of severe and treatment-resistant cases of fibromyalgia
may be justified. A number of anticonvulsants other than
the α2δ ligands (Figure 9-16) are also used second-line for
chronic neuropathic pain states, including fibromyalgia.
These agents are thought to target voltage-gated sodium
channels rather than voltage-gated calcium channels
and thus seem to have a different mechanism of action
than α2δ ligands and may be effective in patients with
inadequate response to α2δ ligands.

SUMMARY
This chapter has defined pain, and has explained
the processing of nociceptive neuronal activity into
the perception of pain by pathways that lead to the
spinal cord, and then up the spinal cord to the brain.
Neuropathic pain is discussed extensively, including
both peripheral and central mechanisms, and the
concept of central sensitization. The key role of
descending inhibitory pathways that reduce the activity
of nociceptive pain neurons with the release of serotonin
and norepinephrine is explained, and shown to be
the basis for the actions of serotonin–norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) as agents that reduce the
perception of pain in conditions ranging from major
depression to fibromyalgia to diabetic peripheral
neuropathic pain, low back pain, osteoarthritis, and
related conditions. The critical role of voltage-sensitive
calcium channels (VSCCs) is also explained, providing
the basis for the actions of α2δ ligands as agents that
also reduce the perception of pain in diabetic peripheral
neuropathic pain, fibromyalgia, painful physical
symptoms of depression and anxiety disorders, shingles,
and other neuropathic pain conditions. Finally, the
spectrum of conditions from affective disorders to
chronic neuropathic pain disorders is introduced, with
emphasis on the condition of fibromyalgia and its newly
evolving psychopharmacological treatments.


<<<PAGE 417>>>
10

Disorders of Sleep and
Wakefulness and Their
Treatment: Neurotransmitter
Networks for Histamine
and Orexin

Neurobiology of Sleep and Wakefulness 402
The Arousal Spectrum 402
Histamine 402
Orexins/Hypocretins 406
Pathways of Arousal and Sleep for the Sleep/Wake
Cycle 408
Ultradian Cycles 413
Neurotransmitters and the Ultradian Sleep
Cycle 414
Why Do We Sleep? Can’t I Sleep When I Die? 414
Insomnia 418
What Is Insomnia? 418
Diagnosis and Comorbidities 418
Treating Insomnia: Drugs with Hypnotic
Actions 421
Benzodiazepines (GABAA Positive Allosteric
Modulators) 421
Z Drugs (GABAA Positive Allosteric Modulators) 422
Dual Orexin Receptor Antagonists (DORAs) 423

This chapter will provide a brief overview of the
psychopharmacology of disorders of sleep and wakefulness.
Included here are short discussions of the symptoms,
diagnostic criteria, and treatments for disorders that cause
insomnia, excessive daytime sleepiness, or both. Clinical
descriptions and formal criteria for how to diagnose sleep
disorders are mentioned here only in passing. The reader
should consult standard reference sources for this material.
The discussion here will emphasize the links between
various brain circuits and their neurotransmitters with
disorders that cause insomnia or sleepiness. The goal of
this chapter is to acquaint the reader with ideas about the
clinical and biological aspects of sleep and wakefulness,
how various disorders can alter sleep and wakefulness, and
how many new and evolving treatments can resolve the
symptoms of insomnia and sleepiness.
The detection, assessment, and treatment of sleep/
wake disorders are rapidly becoming standardized parts of
a psychiatric evaluation. Modern psychopharmacologists
increasingly consider sleep to be a psychiatric “vital

Serotonergic Hypnotics 424
Histamine 1 Antagonists as Hypnotics 425
Anticonvulsants as Hypnotics 426
Hypnotic Actions and Pharmacokinetics: Your Sleep
Is at the Mercy of Your Drug Levels! 426
Behavioral Treatments of Insomnia 430
Excessive Daytime Sleepiness 430
What Is Sleepiness? 430
Causes of Hypersomnia 431
Circadian Rhythm Disorders 435
Wake-Promoting Agents and Treatment of
Excessive Daytime Sleepiness 440
Caffeine 440
Amphetamine and Methylphenidate 441
Modafinil/Armodafinil 442
Solriamfetol, a Wake-Promoting NDRI 444
Pitolisant, H3 Presynaptic Antagonist 444
Sodium Oxybate and Narcolepsy/Cataplexy 446
Summary 448

sign,” thus requiring routine evaluation and symptomatic
treatment whenever encountered. This is similar to
the earlier discussion in Chapter 9, where pain is also
increasingly being considered as another psychiatric
“vital sign.” That is, disorders of sleep (and pain) are so
important, so pervasive, and cut across so many psychiatric
conditions that the elimination of these symptoms – no
matter what psychiatric disorder may be present – is
increasingly recognized as necessary in order to achieve
full symptomatic and functional remission for the patient.
Many of the treatments discussed in this chapter
are covered in previous chapters. For details of
mechanisms of insomnia treatments that are also used
for the treatment of depression, the reader is referred
to Chapter 7; for those insomnia treatments that are
benzodiazepines, the reader is also referred to Chapter
7. For various hypersomnia treatments, especially
stimulants, the reader is referred to Chapter 11 on
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and to
Chapter 13 on impulsivity, compulsivity, and addiction
401


<<<PAGE 418>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

for additional information. The discussion in this chapter
is at the conceptual level, and not at the pragmatic level.
The reader should consult standard drug handbooks
(such as Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology: the
Prescriber’s Guide) for details of doses, side effects, drug
interactions, and other issues relevant to the prescribing
of these drugs in clinical practice.

NEUROBIOLOGY OF SLEEP AND
WAKEFULNESS

the ascending reticular activating system, because they
are known to work together to regulate arousal. This
was discussed in Chapter 5 and illustrated for histamine,
dopamine, and norepinephrine in Figure 5-14. This same
ascending neurotransmitter system is blocked at several
sites by many agents that cause sedation (see Chapter 5
and Figures 5-8 and 5-13). Figure 10-1 also shows that
excessive arousal can extend past insomnia to panic,
hallucinations, and all the way to frank psychosis (far
right-hand side of the spectrum).

The Arousal Spectrum

Histamine

Although many experts approach insomnia and sleepiness
by emphasizing the separate and distinct disorders that
cause them, many pragmatic psychopharmacologists
approach insomnia or excessive daytime sleepiness as
important symptoms that cut across many conditions and
that occur along a spectrum from deficient arousal to
excessive arousal (Figure 10-1). In this conceptualization,
an awake, alert, creative, and problem-solving person has
the right balance between too much and too little arousal
(baseline brain functioning in the middle of the spectrum
in Figure 10-1). As arousal increases beyond normal,
during the day there is hypervigilance (Figure 10-1); if
this increased arousal occurs at night, there is insomnia
(Figure 10-1, overactivation of the brain). From a
treatment perspective, insomnia can be conceptualized as
a disorder of excessive arousal, with drugs having hypnotic
actions moving the patient from too much arousal to sleep
(specific drugs with hypnotic actions discussed below).
On the other hand, as arousal diminishes, symptoms
crescendo from mere inattentiveness to more severe forms
of cognitive disturbances until the patient has excessive
daytime sleepiness with sleep attacks (Figure 10-1,
hypoactivation of the brain). From a treatment perspective,
sleepiness can be conceptualized as a disorder of deficient
arousal, with wake-promoting agents moving the patient
from too little arousal to awake with normal alertness
(specific wake-promoting agents are discussed below).
Note in Figure 10-1 that cognitive disturbance
is the product of both too little as well as too much
arousal, consistent with the need for cortical pyramidal
neurons to be optimally “tuned,” with too much activity
making them just as out of tune as too little. Note also
in Figure 10-1 that the arousal spectrum is linked to
the actions of several neurotransmitters that will be
explained in detail in the following paragraphs (i.e.,
histamine, orexin, dopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin,
acetylcholine, and γ-aminobutyric acid [GABA]). Several
of these neurotransmitter circuits as a group are called

Histamine is one of the key neurotransmitters regulating
wakefulness, and is the ultimate target of many wakepromoting drugs (via enhancement of histamine release)
and sleep-promoting drugs (antihistamines that block
histamine at H1 receptors). Histamine is produced
from the amino acid histidine, which is taken up into
histamine neurons and converted into histamine by
the enzyme histidine decarboxylase (Figure 10-2).
Histamine’s action is terminated by two enzymes
working in sequence: histamine N-methyltransferase,
which converts histamine to N-methylhistamine, and
monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B), which converts Nmethylhistamine into N-MIAA (N-methylindoleacetic
acid), an inactive substance (Figure 10-3). Additional
enzymes such as diamine oxidase can also terminate
histamine action outside the brain. Note that there is no
apparent reuptake pump for histamine. Thus, histamine
is likely to diffuse widely away from its synapse, just like
dopamine does in the prefrontal cortex.
There are a number of histamine receptors
(Figures 10-4 through 10-7). The postsynaptic histamine
1 (H1) receptor is best known (Figure 10-5) because it is
the target of “antihistamines” (i.e., H1 antagonists) (see
below). When histamine itself acts at H1 receptors, it
activates a G-protein-linked second-messenger system
that activates phosphatidylinositol, and the transcription
factor cFOS, and results in wakefulness, normal alertness,
and pro-cognitive actions (Figure 10-5). When these H1
receptors are blocked in the brain, this interferes with the
wake-promoting actions of histamine, and thus can cause
sedation, drowsiness, or sleep (see below).
Histamine 2 (H2) receptors, best known for their
actions in gastric acid secretion and the target of a
number of anti-ulcer drugs, also exist in the brain
(Figure 10-6). These postsynaptic receptors also activate
a G-protein second-messenger system with cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), phosphokinase A
(PKA), and the gene product CREB. The function of H2

402


<<<PAGE 419>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Arousal Spectrum of Sleep and Wakefulness

$

inattentive

awake
alert
hypervigilant/
creative
problem solving
insomnia

cognitive dysfunction
(understimulation)

excessive daytime
sleepiness/
drowsiness/
sedation

cognitive dysfunction
(overstimulation)

panic/fear
HA
DA

asleep

ACh
5HT

NE

deficient arousal

hallucinations/
psychosis

excessive arousal
overactivation
normal
baseline
hypoactivation

10

Figure 10-1 Arousal spectrum of sleep and wakefulness. One’s state of arousal is more complicated than simply being “awake” or
“asleep.” Rather, arousal exists as if on a dimmer switch, with many phases along the spectrum. Where on the spectrum one lies is
influenced by several key neurotransmitters: histamine (HA), dopamine (DA), norepinephrine (NE), serotonin (5HT), and acetylcholine
(ACh) (all shown) as well as GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) and orexin (not shown). When there is good balance between too much and
too little arousal – depicted by the gray (baseline) color of the brain – one is awake, alert, and able to function well. As the dial shifts to
the right there is too much arousal, which may cause hypervigilance and consequently insomnia at night. As arousal further increases
this can cause cognitive dysfunction, panic, and in extreme cases perhaps even hallucinations. On the other hand, as arousal diminishes
individuals may experience inattentiveness, cognitive dysfunction, sleepiness, and ultimately sleep.

receptors in brain is still being clarified, but apparently is
not linked directly to wakefulness.
A third histamine receptor is present in brain,
namely the H3 receptor (Figure 10-7). Histamine H3
receptors are presynaptic (Figure 10-7A) and function as
autoreceptors (Figure 10-7B). That is, when histamine

binds to these receptors, it turns off further release of
histamine (Figure 10-7B). One novel approach to new
wake-promoting and pro-cognitive drugs is to block
these receptors, thus facilitating the release of histamine,
allowing histamine to act at H1 receptors to produce the
desired effects (see below).
403


<<<PAGE 420>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Histamine Is Produced

Histamine Action Is Terminated

histidine
transporter

N-MIAA
(inactive)

E

MAO-B

HA
HIS

E

HA

E

HDC
HA
NMT

HA (histamine)
Figure 10-2 Histamine is produced. Histidine (HIS), a precursor
to histamine, is taken up into histamine nerve terminals
via a histidine transporter and converted into histamine by
the enzyme histidine decarboxylase (HDC). After synthesis,
histamine (HA) is packaged into synaptic vesicles and stored
until its release into the synapse during neurotransmission.

Me

Me

N-methyl
histamine

Figure 10-3 Histamine’s action is terminated. Histamine
can be broken down intracellularly by two enzymes.
Histamine N-methyltransferase (HA NMT) converts histamine
into N-methylhistamine, which is then converted by
monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) into the inactive substance
N-methylindoleacetic acid (N-MIAA). Note that there is no
apparent reuptake transporter for histamine; thus, histamine that
is released into the synapse can diffuse widely.

Histamine Receptors

H3
autoreceptor

glu

HA

H1

H2
NMDA
receptor

polyamine site
(allosteric
modulator
site)

Figure 10-4 Histamine receptors. Shown here are receptors for histamine that regulate its neurotransmission. Histamine 1 and histamine
2 receptors are postsynaptic, while histamine 3 receptors are presynaptic autoreceptors. There is also a binding site for histamine on
glutamatergic NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors – it can act at the polyamine site, which is an allosteric modulatory site.

404


<<<PAGE 421>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

HA

HA

H1

H2

GE
PI

cFOS

CREB

GE
cAMP
PKA

other
CNS actions
Figure 10-6 Histamine 2 receptors. Histamine 2 (H2) receptors
are present both in the body and in the brain. When histamine
binds to postsynaptic H2 receptors it activates a G-proteinlinked second-messenger system with cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP), phosphokinase A (PKA), and the gene
product CREB. The function of H2 receptors in the brain is not
yet elucidated but does not appear to be directly linked to
wakefulness.

awake
pro-cognitive
alert
Figure 10-5 Histamine 1 receptors. When histamine binds
to postsynaptic histamine 1 (H1) receptors, it activates a
G-protein-linked second-messenger system that activates
phosphatidylinositol (PI) and the transcription factor cFOS. This
results in wakefulness and normal alertness.

10

H3
autoreceptor

H3 binding by HA
inhibits HA release

HA

A

B

Figure 10-7 Histamine 3
receptors. Histamine 3 (H3) receptors
are presynaptic autoreceptors and
function as gatekeepers for histamine.
(A) When H3 receptors are not bound
by histamine, the molecular gate is
open and allows histamine release.
(B) When histamine binds to the H3
receptor, the molecular gate closes
and prevents histamine from being
released.

405


<<<PAGE 422>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

There is a fourth type of histamine receptor, H4,
but these are not known to occur in the brain. Finally,
histamine acts also at NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate)
receptors (Figure 10-4). Interestingly, when histamine
diffuses away from its synapse to a glutamate synapse
containing NMDA receptors, it can act at an allosteric
modulatory site called the polyamine site, to alter the
actions of glutamate at NMDA receptors (Figure 10-4).
The role of histamine and function of this action are not
well clarified.
Histamine neurons all arise from a single small area
of the hypothalamus known as the tuberomammillary
nucleus (TMN) (Figure 10-8), which regulates arousal.
Thus, histamine plays an important role in arousal,
wakefulness, and sleep. The TMN is a small bilateral
nucleus that provides histaminergic input to most brain
regions and to the spinal cord (Figure 10-8).
Orexins/Hypocretins

These are peptide neurotransmitters with two names
because two different groups of scientists simultaneously

discovered them, and named them differently. One
group reported the discovery of neurotransmitters in the
lateral hypothalamus that were oddly similar to the gut
hormone secretin, a member of the incretin family, so
they named it “hypocretin” to stand for a hypothalamic
member of the incretin family. At the same time, another
group reported the discovery of the “orexins” to reflect
the orexigenic (appetite-simulating) activity of these
neurotransmitter peptides. Soon it was realized that these
were the same neurotransmitters: excitatory neuropeptides
with approximately 50% sequence identity produced by
cleavage of a single precursor protein to form orexin A
with 33 amino acids and orexin B with 28 amino acids.
This nomenclature can certainly be confusing but many
now recognize the history of the discovery of hypocretin by
using “hypocretin” to refer to the gene or genetic products
and “orexins” to refer to the peptide neurotransmitters
themselves. The use of both terms remains a practical
necessity because “HCRT” is the standard gene symbol in
databases and “OX” is used to refer to the pharmacology of
the peptide system by international societies.

Figure 10-8 Histamine projections
and wakefulness. In the brain,
histamine is produced solely by
cells in the tuberomamillary nucleus
(TMN) of the hypothalamus. From
the TMN, histaminergic neurons
project to most brain regions; those
relevant for wakefulness include
the prefrontal cortex, the basal
forebrain, the thalamus, and brainstem
neurotransmitter centers, as well as the
ventrolateral preoptic area and lateral
hypothalamus.

The Wake Circuit: Histamine

thalamus
basal
forebrain
VLPO
TMN

LH

VTA
RN LC

PPT/
LDT

LC: locus coeruleus
LH: lateral hypothalamus
PPT/LDT: pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei
RN: raphe nuclei
TMN: tuberomammillary nucleus
VLPO: ventrolateral preoptic area
VTA: ventral tegmental area

406

histamine


<<<PAGE 423>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Orexin/hypocretin neurons are localized exclusively
in certain hypothalamic areas (lateral hypothalamic
area, perifornical area, and posterior hypothalamus)
(Figure 10-9). These hypothalamic neurons degenerate
in a condition called narcolepsy, characterized by the
inability to stabilize wakefulness and thus sleep attacks
in the daytime. Loss of these neurons causes the inability
of orexin to be produced and released downstream on
wake-promoting neurotransmitter centers and thus lack
of stabilizing wakefulness. Treatment of narcolepsy is
discussed below.
Orexin/hypocretin neurons in the hypothalamus make
two neurotransmitters: orexin A and orexin B, which are
released from their neuronal projections all over the brain
(Figures 10-9 and 10-10), but especially in the monoamine
neurotransmitter centers in the brainstem (Figure 10-9).
The postsynaptic actions of the orexins are mediated by
two receptors called orexin 1 and orexin 2 (Figure 10-11).
Orexin A is capable of interacting with both receptors,
whereas the neurotransmitter orexin B binds selectively to
the orexin 2 receptor (Figure 10-11). The binding of orexin
A to the orexin 1 receptor leads to increased intracellular
calcium as well as activation of the sodium/calcium
exchanger (Figure 10-11). The binding of orexin A or B

to orexin 2 receptors leads to increased expression of Nmethyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors as well
as inactivation of G-protein-regulated inwardly rectifying
potassium (GIRK) channels (Figure 10-11).
In addition to their role in stabilizing wakefulness,
orexins also are thought to regulate feeding behavior,
reward, and other behaviors (Figure 10-12). During
periods of wakefulness, orexin/hypocretin neurons
are active and fire with tonic frequency to maintain
arousal, but when presented with a stimulus – either
external, such as an escapable stressor, or internal, such
as elevated blood CO2 levels – orexin neurons exhibit a
more rapid phasic burst firing pattern (Figure 10-12).
This excitement of hypocretin/orexin neurons leads to
increased activation not only of orexin but of all the other
brain areas that orexin stimulates, hypothetically leading
in turn to execution of appropriate behavioral responses
such as attainment of reward or the avoidance of potential
danger. In this way, the hypocretin/orexin system not only
mediates wakefulness, but also allows for the facilitation
of goal-directed, motivated behaviors, including increased
food intake in response to hunger (Figure 10-12).
Orexin 1 receptors are highly expressed in the
noradrenergic locus coeruleus, whereas orexin 2

The Wake Circuit: Orexin

Figure 10-9 Orexin/hypocretin
projections and wakefulness. The
neurotransmitter orexin (also called
hypocretin) is made by cells located
in the hypothalamus, specifically
in the lateral hypothalamic area as
well as the perifornical and posterior
hypothalamus. From the hypothalamus,
orexinergic neurons project to various
brain areas, including the hypothalamic
tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN),
the basal forebrain, the thalamus, and
brainstem neurotransmitter centers.

thalamus
basal
forebrain
VLPO
TMN

LH

VTA
RN LC

PPT/
LDT

LC: locus coeruleus
LH: lateral hypothalamus
PPT/LDT: pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei
RN: raphe nuclei
TMN: tuberomammillary nucleus
VLPO: ventrolateral preoptic area
VTA: ventral tegmental area

orexin/hypocretin

407

10


<<<PAGE 424>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Orexin/Hypocretin Projections
Wakefulness

norepinephrine

Attention

serotonin

raphe
LC

histamine

TMN

basal
forebrain

Figure 10-10 Orexin/hypocretin
projections interact with arousal
neurotransmitters. Orexin/hypocretin is
released widely in the brain, interacting with
all the arousal neurotransmitters to stabilize
wakefulness and regulate attention.
Orexin is also involved in other behaviors,
including feeding, motivation, and reward.
LH/PH, lateral hypothalamus/posterior
hypothalamus; PPT/LDT, pedunculopontine
and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei; LC,
locus coeruleus; TMN, tuberomammillary
nucleus; PFC, prefrontal cortex; VTA, ventral
tegmental area; NAc, nucleus accumbens.

PFC
glutamate

acetylcholine

PPT/LDT

thalamus

LH/PH
orexin/
hypocretin

NAc

VTA
dopamine

striatum
GABA

Feeding

Motivation

Reward

receptors are highly expressed in the histaminergic
tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN). It is believed that
the effect of orexin/hypocretins on wakefulness is
largely mediated by activation of the TMN histaminergic
neurons that express orexin 2 receptors. However,
orexin receptors and orexin projections to all the arousal
neurotransmitter centers make orexins ideally situated
to regulate wakefulness indirectly by effects on the
multitude of arousal neurotransmitters (see Figures 10-13
through 10-16). Thus, orexins may be not so much arousal
neurotransmitters themselves to cause wakefulness, but
rather serve to stabilize wakefulness by interacting with
all the arousal neurotransmitters (Figures 10-10 and
10-13 through 10-16). For example, orexin’s actions to
maintain wakefulness and attention may be mediated
by stimulation of acetylcholine from the basal forebrain
and the pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental
(PPT/LDT) nuclei (Figure 10-13); dopamine release
from the ventral tegmental area (VTA) (Figure 10-14);
norepinephrine release from the locus coeruleus (LC)
(Figure 10-15); serotonin release from the raphe nuclei
(RN) (Figure 10-16) and histamine release from the
tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN) (Figure 10-8). Wow!
408

When circadian drives, homeostatic drives, and
darkness all act together at the end of the day and in
the dark, orexin levels are low, wakefulness is no longer
stabilized, and sleep is promoted from the ventrolateral
preoptic area (VLPO) with GABA (γ-aminobutryric
acid) neurotransmission enhanced (Figure 10-17), thus
inhibiting all the wake-promoting neurotransmitter
centers (Figures 10-8, 10-13 through 10-16).
Pathways of Arousal and Sleep for the Sleep/Wake
Cycle

We have indicated that a multitude of neurotransmitters
are involved in the regulation of arousal and have
illustrated their pathways in Figures 10-8, 10-9, and 1013 through 10-17. This regulation results in a daily cycle
of sleep and wakefulness mediated by two opposing
drives: the homeostatic sleep drive and the circadian
wake drive (Figure 10-18). The homeostatic sleep drive
accumulates throughout periods of wakefulness and
light and is opposed by the circadian wake drive.
The longer an individual is awake, the greater the
homeostatic drive to sleep. The homeostatic sleep drive
is dependent upon the accumulation of adenosine, which


<<<PAGE 425>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Figure 10-11 Orexin/hypocretin
receptors. Orexin/hypocretin neurons
make two neurotransmitters: orexin A
and orexin B. Orexin neurotransmission
is mediated by two types of
postsynaptic G-protein-coupled
receptors, orexin 1 (OX1R) and orexin
2 (OX2R). Orexin A is capable of
interacting with both OX1R and OX2R,
whereas orexin B binds selectively to
OX2R. Binding of orexin A to OX1R
leads to increased intracellular calcium
as well as activation of the sodium/
calcium exchanger. Binding of orexin
A and B to OX2R leads to increased
expression of NMDA (N-methyl-Daspartate) glutamate receptors as well
as inactivation of G-protein-regulated
inward rectifying potassium channels
(GIRK). OX1R are particularly expressed
in the noradrenergic locus coeruleus
whereas OX2R are highly expressed in
the histaminergic tuberomammillary
nucleus (TMN).

from hypothalamus
(LH/PH)

B

B
B

A
A

Na +

orexin A

orexin B

A

B

Ca++

A

A

B

G

OX2R

G

OX2R

OX1R

GIRK

G

Ca++

NMDA

10

awake

increases as the person tires with fatigue throughout
the day, and ultimately leads to the disinhibition of the
ventrolateral preoptic (VLPO) nucleus and the release of
GABA in the sleep circuit (Figure 10-17), facilitating onset
of sleep.
The circadian wake drive, mediated by light acting
upon the suprachiasmatic nucleus, stimulates the
release of orexin as part of the wake circuit to stabilize

wakefulness by enhancing the release of several other
wake-promoting neurotransmitters. During periods of
light, histamine is released from the tuberomammillary
nucleus onto neurons throughout the cortex and in the
ventrolateral preoptic area, inhibiting the release of GABA
(Figure 10-8). Histamine from the tuberomammillary
nucleus also stimulates the release of orexin from the
lateral hypothalamus as well as the perifornical area and
409


<<<PAGE 426>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Tonic Firing of
Hypocretin/Orexin
Neurons to Promote
Wakefulness

Phasic Burst Firing of
Hypocretin/Orexin
Neurons

STIMULUS

ADAPTIVE BEHAVIOR

Hunger

Increased food intake

Drug withdrawal

Drug seeking

Cold

Peripheral thermogenesis

Elevated
blood CO2

Increased respiration

Escapable stress

Hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal axis activation

Emotional/motivational
stimulus

Promotion of attention,
cognition, and learning

Figure 10-13 Acetylcholine
projections and wakefulness. Release
of acetylcholine from the basal
forebrain into cortical areas and from
the pedunculopontine and laterodorsal
tegmental nuclei (PPT/LDT) onto
the thalamus are associated with
wakefulness. Orexin/hypocretin may
thus stabilize wakefulness through its
regulation of acetylcholine (and other
arousal neurotransmitters).

The Wake Circuit: Acetylcholine

thalamus
basal
forebrain
VLPO
TMN

VTA
RN LC

PPT/
LDT

acetylcholine
LC: locus coeruleus
PPT/LDT: pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei
RN: raphe nuclei
TMN: tuberomammillary nucleus
VLPO: ventrolateral preoptic area
VTA: ventral tegmental area

410

Figure 10-12 Orexin/hypocretin
regulation of adaptive behavior.
During periods of wakefulness,
orexin/hypocretin neurons fire
with tonic frequency to maintain
arousal. When presented with a
stimulus, whether internal (e.g.,
hunger) or external (e.g., an
escapable stressor), orexin neurons
exhibit a phasic pattern of firing,
which leads not only to increased
orexin neurotransmission but
also to increased activation in
brain areas that orexin stimulates.
Thus orexin not only mediates
wakefulness but also allows for
the facilitation of goal-directed
behaviors.


<<<PAGE 427>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Figure 10-14 Dopamine projections
and wakefulness. Release of dopamine
from the ventral tegmental area (VTA)
into cortical areas is associated with
wakefulness. Orexin/hypocretin may
thus stabilize wakefulness through its
regulation of dopamine (and other
arousal neurotransmitters).

The Wake Circuit: Dopamine

thalamus
basal
forebrain
VLPO

VTA
RN LC

TMN

PPT/
LDT

dopamine
LC: locus coeruleus
PPT/LDT: pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei
RN: raphe nuclei
TMN: tuberomammillary nucleus
VLPO: ventrolateral preoptic area
VTA: ventral tegmental area

The Wake Circuit: Norepinephrine

Figure 10-15 Norepinephrine
projections and wakefulness. Release
of norepinephrine from the locus
coeruleus (LC) into cortical areas
is associated with wakefulness.
Orexin/hypocretin may thus stabilize
wakefulness through its regulation of
norepinephrine (and other arousal
neurotransmitters).

10
thalamus
basal
forebrain
VLPO
TMN

VTA
RN LC

PPT/
LDT

norepinephrine
LC: locus coeruleus
PPT/LDT: pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei
RN: raphe nuclei
TMN: tuberomammillary nucleus
VLPO: ventrolateral preoptic area
VTA: ventral tegmental area

411


<<<PAGE 428>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 10-16 Serotonin projections
and wakefulness. Release of serotonin
from the raphe nucleus (RN) onto
the basal forebrain and the thalamus
is associated with wakefulness.
Orexin/hypocretin may thus stabilize
wakefulness through its regulation
of serotonin (and other arousal
neurotransmitters).

The Wake Circuit: Serotonin

thalamus
basal
forebrain
VLPO

VTA
RN LC

TMN

PPT/
LDT

serotonin
LC: locus coeruleus
PPT/LDT: pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei
RN: raphe nuclei
TMN: tuberomammillary nucleus
VLPO: ventrolateral preoptic area
VTA: ventral tegmental area
Figure 10-17 GABA projections and
sleep. GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) is
released from the ventrolateral preoptic
nucleus (VLPO) of the hypothalamus
onto the tuberomammillary nucleus
(TMN), the lateral hypothalamus
(LH), the basal forebrain, and
neurotransmitter centers. By inhibiting
activity in these wake-promoting brain
regions, GABA can induce sleep.

The Sleep Circuit

thalamus
basal
forebrain
VLPO

LH

TMN

VTA
RN LC

PPT/
LDT

LC: locus coeruleus
LH: lateral hypothalamus
PPT/LDT: pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei
RN: raphe nuclei
TMN: tuberomammillary nucleus
VLPO: ventrolateral preoptic area
VTA: ventral tegmental area

412

GABA


<<<PAGE 429>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Processes Regulating Sleep
ultradian
(sleep cycle)

awake
REM
stage 1
stage 2
stage 3
stage 4

homeostatic
(sleep drive)
circadian
(wake drive)
7 am

11 pm

sleep
7 am

11 pm

sleep
7 am

Figure 10-18 Processes regulating sleep. The sleep/wake cycle is mediated by two opposing drives: homeostatic sleep drive
and circadian wake drive. The circadian wake drive is a result of input (light, melatonin, activity) to the suprachiasmatic nucleus of
the hypothalamus, which stimulates the release of orexin to stabilize wakefulness. Homeostatic sleep drive is dependent on the
accumulation of adenosine, which increases the longer one is awake and decreases with sleep. Accumulated adenosine leads to
disinhibition of the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus and thus the release of GABA in the tuberomammillary nucleus to inhibit wakefulness.
As the day progresses, circadian wake drive diminishes and homeostatic sleep drive increases until a tipping point is reached. Sleep
itself consists of multiple phases that recur in a cyclical manner; this process is known as the ultradian cycle and depicted at the top of
this figure.

the posterior hypothalamus. Then, orexin has a number of
knock-on effects:
• Orexin induces the release of acetylcholine from
the basal forebrain in cortical areas and from the
pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei
onto the thalamus (Figure 10-13)
• Orexin also causes the release of dopamine from the
ventral tegmental area onto cortical areas (Figure 10-14)
• Orexin stimulates the release of norepinephrine from
the locus coeruleus onto cortical areas (Figure 10-15)
• Finally, orexin also instigates the release of serotonin
from the raphe nuclei onto both the basal forebrain
and the thalamus (Figure 10-16)
Then, as light fades, norepinephrine from the locus
coeruleus and serotonin from the raphe nuclei build
up and are released onto neurons in the lateral
hypothalamus, causing negative feedback inhibiting
the release of orexin. Without orexin, wakefulness is no
longer stabilized, and the VLPO and GABA take charge
and suppress all the arousal neurotransmitters (Figure
10-17). Thus, sleep is facilitated and melatonin is secreted
at night in the dark. Then the cycle repeats itself as

rest restores homeostatic sleep drive and light initiates
wakefulness neurotransmitters.
Ultradian Cycles

In addition to the daily sleep/wake cycle (Figure 10-18),
there is also an ultradian sleep cycle (see inset of Figure
10-18; this cycle occurs faster [ultra] than a day [dian]
and is thus called ultradian). A complete ultradian sleep
cycle (non-REM [rapid eye movement] and REM) lasts
approximately 90 minutes and occurs four to five times a
night (Figure 10-18, inset). Stages 1 and 2 of sleep make
up non-REM sleep, whereas stages 3 and 4 of the sleep
cycle are part of deeper, slow-wave sleep. During the
normal sleep period, the duration of non-REM sleep is
gradually reduced during the night while the duration
of REM sleep is increased. REM sleep is characterized
by faster activity on an electroencephalogram (EEG) –
similar to that seen during periods of wakefulness – as
well as distinct eye movements, and peripheral muscle
paralysis and loss of muscle tone called atonia. It is during
REM sleep that dreaming occurs, and positron emission
tomography (PET) studies have shown activation of
413

10


<<<PAGE 430>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

the thalamus, the visual cortex, and limbic regions
accompanied by reduced metabolism in other regions,
such as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the parietal
cortex during REM sleep. In contrast, there is overall
reduced brain activity during non-REM sleep.
Neurotransmitters and the Ultradian Sleep Cycle

Neurotransmitters (Figures 10-8, 10-9, and 10-13 through
10-17) not only have a role in regulating the daily sleep/
wake cycle (Figure 10-18), but also in regulating the
various phases of sleep with the ultradian sleep cycle
(see inset of Figure 10-18). Thus, neurotransmitters
fluctuate not only on a circadian (24-hour) basis, but also
throughout the various phases of the sleep cycle every
night (Figures 10-19 through 10-22). Not surprisingly,
GABA is “on” all night, rising steadily during the first few
hours of sleep, plateaus, and then steadily declines before
one wakens (Figure 10-19). Also, not surprisingly, the
pattern for orexin is exactly the opposite: namely, orexin
levels steadily decrease during the first few hours of sleep,
plateau, and then steadily increase before one wakens
(Figure 10-20). The pattern of the other neurotransmitters
is sleep-phase dependent (Figures 10-21 and 10-22). That
is, acetylcholine levels fluctuate throughout the sleep
cycle, reaching their lowest levels during stage 4 sleep and
peaking during REM sleep, tracing the ups and downs
between stage 4 and REM every cycle (Figure 10-21). On
the other hand, dopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin, and
histamine levels demonstrate a different trend. They all

act together to peak during stage 2 sleep and are at their
lowest during REM sleep (Figure 10-22).
Why Do We Sleep? Can’t I Sleep When I Die?

There is still much debate over the purpose of sleep.
Some propose that sleep is essential for synaptic growth,
while others argue that sleep is necessary for synaptic
pruning (Figure 10-23). Regardless of which hypothesis –
or some combination of both – is more accurate, it has
become increasingly evident that disturbances of the
sleep/wake cycle have a detrimental effect on a myriad
of physiological and psychiatric functions. Aside from
the economic costs of sleep/wake disorders, the risk of
cardiometabolic disease, cancer, mental illness, and overall
poorer quality of life are all increased when the sleep/wake
cycle is disturbed (Figure 10-23). Disturbances in the
sleep/wake cycle can have profound effects on cognitive
functioning, including impairments in attention, memory
deficits, and an inability to process new information
(Figure 10-24). In fact, 24 hours of sleep deprivation or
chronic short sleep duration (i.e., 4–5 hours per night)
results in cognitive impairments equivalent to those
seen when legally intoxicated with alcohol. Both REM
and non-REM sleep appear to be essential for optimal
cognitive functioning, with REM sleep modulating
affective memory consolidation and non-REM sleep being
critical for declarative and procedural memory. At the
neurobiological level, there is evidence that disruption of
the sleep/wake cycle impairs hippocampal neurogenesis,
Figure 10-19 GABA levels throughout
the sleep cycle. Neurotransmitter
levels fluctuate throughout the sleep
cycle. GABA levels rise steadily during
the first couple of hours of sleep,
plateau, and then steadily decline
before one wakes.

Neurotransmitter Levels Throughout the
Sleep Cycle: GABA
Awake
REM

Stage 1

REM

REM

REM

Stage 2

Stage 3

Stage 4
0

1

2

3

4

5

Time of Sleep (hrs)

414

6

7

8


<<<PAGE 431>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Figure 10-20 Orexin/hypocretin levels
throughout the sleep cycle.
Neurotransmitter levels fluctuate
throughout the sleep cycle. Orexin/
hypocretin levels drop rapidly during
the first hour of sleep, plateau, and then
steadily rise before one wakes.

Neurotransmitter Levels Throughout the
Sleep Cycle: Orexin/Hypocretin
Awake
REM

Stage 1

REM

REM

REM

Stage 2

Stage 3

Stage 4
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Time of Sleep (hrs)
Figure 10-21 Acetylcholine levels
throughout the sleep cycle.
Neurotransmitter levels fluctuate
throughout the sleep cycle.
Acetylcholine levels are sleep-phase
dependent: they are lowest during
stage 4 sleep and at their peak during
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep.

Neurotransmitter Levels Throughout the
Sleep Cycle: Acetylcholine
Awake
REM

Stage 1

REM

REM

REM

Stage 2

Stage 3

10

Stage 4
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Time of Sleep (hrs)

which may partly explain the behavioral effects of sleep/
wake cycle disturbances on cognition.
In recent years, much interest in the relationship
between sleep and cardiometabolic issues such as type 2
diabetes and obesity has been expressed (Figure 10-25).
Although much remains unknown, an impaired sleep/
wake cycle has been shown to disrupt the circulating
levels of both the anorectic (appetite-inhibiting)

hormone leptin and the orexigenic (appetite-stimulating)
hormone ghrelin (Figure 10-25). These changes lead to
dysfunctional insulin, glucose, and lipid metabolism;
in turn, this may increase the risk of obesity, type 2
diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. Additionally, an
altered sleep/wake cycle has been shown to disturb the
natural fluctuations in gut microbiota, perhaps further
promoting glucose intolerance and obesity.
415


<<<PAGE 432>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Neurotransmitter Levels Throughout the Sleep Cycle:
Dopamine, Norepinephrine, Serotonin, and Histamine
Awake
REM

Stage 1

REM

REM

REM

Figure 10-22 Monoamine levels
throughout the sleep cycle.
Neurotransmitter levels fluctuate
throughout the sleep cycle.
The monoamines dopamine,
norepinephrine, serotonin, and
histamine are at their lowest levels
during rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep and peak during Stage 2
sleep.

Stage 2

Stage 3

Stage 4
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Time of Sleep (hrs)

Epidemiology and Costs of Sleep/Wake Disorders

Psychiatric disorders, e.g.
Depression
Anxiety

Immunity

Neurological disorders, e.g.
Alzheimer disease
Chronic pain

The purpose of sleep
Synaptic potentiation or synaptic pruning?

$

Economic costs, e.g.
Sickness absence
Lost productivity
Vehicular/mechanical accidents

250

416

Cardiometabolic
disorders, e.g.
Diabetes
Heart disease
Stroke

HPA
Axis

Cancer

Endocrine dysfunction

Figure 10-23 Costs of sleep/
wake disorders. Disturbances in
the sleep/wake cycle can have
profound influences on both
physical and mental health. From
a neuropathological perspective,
disruption in sleep may affect
synaptic potentiation and/or
synaptic pruning. Chronically
disturbed sleep can increase
the risk of mental illness,
cardiometabolic disorders, and
cancer, as well as disrupt immune
and endocrine function. HPA Axis:
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis.


<<<PAGE 433>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Sleep and Cognition

Figure 10-24 Sleep and
cognition. Disturbances in the sleep/
wake cycle have been shown to impair
hippocampal neurogenesis, which may
partially explain the profound effects of
sleep deprivation on cognitive functioning,
including impairments in attention, memory
deficits, and an inability to process new
information.

Sleep/wake cycle
disturbance

Impaired hippocampal
neurogenesis

Cognitive dysfunction

Figure 10-25 Sleep and
obesity. Disturbances in the sleep/wake
cycle can decrease circulating levels of the
appetite-inhibiting hormone leptin and
increase circulating levels of the appetitestimulating hormone ghrelin, as well as
contribute to gut microbiota dysbiosis.
These changes may lead to increased risk of
obesity, type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular
disease.

Sleep and Obesity
L
Decreased leptin

10
G
Impaired
sleep/wake
cycle

G

G

Increased ghrelin
Increased risk of obesity,
type 2 diabetes, and
cardiovascular disease

Gut microbiota
dysbiosis

417


<<<PAGE 434>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

INSOMNIA
What Is Insomnia?

One way to conceptualize insomnia is being hyperaroused
at night (Figure 10-26). It is not well established why
some of those with insomnia have hyperarousal at night
or how it is mediated, but the most recent evidence from
human neuroimaging studies suggests that in insomnia
there is not so much an inability of the brain to switch on
sleep-related circuits from the VLPO (shown in Figure
10-17) but instead, the inability to switch off arousalrelated circuits (shown in Figures 10-8, 10-9, 10-13
through 10-16). Some patients with insomnia at night
are also hyperaroused and even anxious in the daytime
and despite poor sleep do not necessarily feel sleepy in
the daytime. Whatever causes this hyperarousal, whether
it is cortical hyperactivity keeping the wake-promoting
arousal neurotransmitters from dimming at night, or
even an excess of wake-stabilizing orexin keeping them
awake, is still under active investigation.
Diagnosis and Comorbidities

Approximately 40 million individuals in the United
States suffer from chronic insomnia, and an additional 20

million suffer from episodic insomnia. However, as many
as 70% of individuals with insomnia may not report it
to their clinician. Many conditions are associated with
insomnia, including improper sleep hygiene; medical
illness; other sleep/wake disorders, including circadian
rhythm disorders, restless legs syndrome, and sleep
apnea; effects from medications or substances of abuse;
and psychiatric disorders (Figure 10-27). Insomnia
may be self-perpetuating in that repeated episodes of
wakefulness in bed may become associated with anxiety
and sleeplessness. Several biological factors have been
associated with insomnia, including increased activation
of the autonomic nervous system, abnormal glucose
metabolism, decreased GABA levels, reduced nocturnal
melatonin secretion, systemic inflammation, and reduced
brain volume (Figure 10-28). There are also several
genetic factors that have been linked to an increased risk
for insomnia (Figure 10-28). Insomnia may be a risk
factor for, or a prodromal symptom of, various psychiatric
disorders, including depression, anxiety, and substance
use disorders (Figure 10-29). Additionally, insomnia
due to psychiatric illness, especially depression, may be
more likely to persist than insomnia due to other causes.
Conversely, patients with depression who complain

Insomnia: Excessive Nighttime Arousal

awake
alert
creative
problem solving

deficient arousal

418

insomnia

excessive arousal

Figure 10-26 Insomnia: excessive
nighttime arousal? Insomnia is
conceptualized as being related
to hyperarousal at night. Recent
neuroimaging data suggest that
insomnia is the result of an inability
to switch off arousal-related circuits,
rather than an inability to switch on
sleep-related circuits. Some patients
with insomnia experience hyperarousal
during the day as well.


<<<PAGE 435>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Conditions Associated with Insomnia
Medical Conditions

Substance Abuse

Psychiatric Conditions

Behavioral/
Psychological Causes

Figure 10-27 Conditions associated with
insomnia. Numerous conditions are associated
with insomnia, including medical conditions,
psychiatric disorders, other sleep/wake disorders,
and substance use. Insomnia may also be related to
medication side effects.

(SIGH)

Medication Side Effects

Sleep/Wake Disorders

Figure 10-28 Biology of insomnia.
Numerous neuroanatomical,
neurobiological, and autonomic
abnormalities have been
associated with insomnia. There
are also several genetic factors that
have been linked to an increased
risk for insomnia.

Biology of Insomnia
Neuroanatomical Abnormalities
Reduced gray matter in left orbitofrontal
cortex and hippocampus
GABA

Neurobiological Abnormalities

Decreased GABA levels in occipital and anterior cingulate cortices
Reduced nocturnal melatonin secretion
melatonin
Increased glucose metabolism
Attenuated sleep-related reduction in glucose metabolism
BDNF
in wake-promoting regions
Decreased serum BDNF

Autonomic Nervous System Abnormalities
Heart rate elevations and variability
Increased metabolic rate
Increased body temp
HPA axis activation
Increased NE

10

HPA
Axis

Systemic Inflammation

IL-6

Genetic Factors
CLOCK gene polymorphisms
GABA-A receptor gene polymorphisms
Serotonin reuptake transporter (SERT) gene polymorphisms
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) gene polymorphisms
Epigenetic modifications affecting genes involved
in the response to stress

419


<<<PAGE 436>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Insomnia and Psychiatric Illness

3-5 years

2x more likely to develop anxiety

JUNE

Insomnia
4x more likely to develop depression

7x more likely to develop
substance use disorders
Figure 10-29 Insomnia and psychiatric illness. Individuals with insomnia are at increased risk of developing anxiety, depression, and
substance use disorders. Whether this reflects insomnia as a risk factor or as a prodromal symptom is unknown.

of insomnia (approximately 70% of individuals with
depression) show worse treatment response, increased
depressive episodes, and a worse overall long-term
outcome.
Insomnia has traditionally been categorized as
either “secondary” (i.e., a symptom of a psychiatric
or medical illness) or “primary” (i.e., neither
associated with a psychiatric or medical illness nor
a result of substance abuse or withdrawal) (Figure
10-30). However, it is now more fully understood
that insomnia is often a comorbidity rather than
a symptom of psychiatric and medical illnesses.
The most recent revised DSM-5 diagnostic criteria
for insomnia seek to do away with the concepts
of secondary and primary insomnia and instead
recognize the intricate two-way, perpetuating
relationship between insomnia and psychiatric
and medical conditions (Figure 10-30). Patients

420

with insomnia often complain of poor sleep quality
or duration, difficulty falling asleep, nighttime
awakenings, or wake times that are earlier than
desired (Figure 10-31). Many patients also report poor
restoration from their sleep and thus daytime fatigue,
cognitive impairments, and mood disturbances.
Polysomnography is not generally indicated for the
diagnosis of insomnia but may be useful for ruling out
narcolepsy, restless legs syndrome (RLS), or obstructive
sleep apnea (OSA). Although subjective measures of sleep
duration often do not correlate with objective measures,
subjective assessments of sleep are nevertheless
important since complaints of short sleep duration are
strongly associated with persistent insomnia and can be
quite difficult to treat (Figure 10-31). Thus, insomnia
can be treated both as a subjective symptom and as an
objective disorder of arousal for best outcomes as well as
patient satisfaction.


<<<PAGE 437>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

DSM-5 Diagnostic
Criteria for Insomnia
Old Diagnostic Criteria: “Secondary Insomnia”

psychiatric illness

insomnia

New Diagnostic Criteria: Insomnia as a Comorbidity

psychiatric illness

insomnia
Figure 10-30 DSM-5 criteria for insomnia. Insomnia has
previously been conceptualized as primary (not related to
another condition) or secondary (a symptom of another
condition). However, insomnia may more often be comorbid
with rather than a symptom of another disorder, a concept that
is recognized in the DSM-5.

Diagnosing Insomnia

insomnia
Suggested criteria for defining insomnia:
Average sleep latency > 30 min
Wakefulness after sleep onset (WASO) > 30 min
Sleep efficiency < 85%
Total sleep time < 6.5 hours
Figure 10-31 Suggested criteria for identifying insomnia. Most
often, insomnia is diagnosed using subjective measures. This
may reflect difficulty falling asleep (sleep latency), wakefulness
after sleep onset, poor quality of sleep, and overall reduced
duration of sleep.

TREATING INSOMNIA: DRUGS
WITH HYPNOTIC ACTIONS
Agents that treat insomnia come in two categories. The
first are drugs that reduce brain activation by enhancing
sleep drive via activation of GABA in the hypothalamic
sleep center (VLPO illustrated in Figure 10-17). All
drugs in this category are positive allosteric modulators
(PAMs) of GABAA receptors (GABAA PAMs), i.e., the
benzodiazepines and the “Z drugs”.
If insomnia is too much arousal drive rather than not
enough sleep drive, one wonders if enhancing the sleep
drive with the popular benzodiazepine and Z drugs is the
best way to go for the treatment of insomnia. Thus, one
can also treat insomnia by reducing arousal; drugs that
do this form the second category of agents for insomnia.
Arousal can be reduced by many mechanisms with
drugs from this category: namely, by blocking orexins
(with dual orexin receptor antagonists or DORAs), by
blocking histamine (with H1 antagonists), by blocking
serotonin (with 5HT2A antagonists), and by blocking
norepinephrine (with α1 antagonists). No matter what
strategy is taken to treat insomnia, the idea is to shift
one’s abnormal and unwanted arousal state at bedtime
from hyperactive to asleep (Figure 10-32).
Benzodiazepines (GABAA Positive Allosteric
Modulators)

There are at least five benzodiazepines approved
specifically for insomnia in the US (Figure 10-33),
although there are several others approved in different
countries. Various benzodiazepines approved for the
treatment of anxiety disorders are also frequently used to
treat insomnia. Use of benzodiazepines for the treatment
of anxiety is discussed in Chapter 8 on anxiety disorders.
The mechanism of action of benzodiazepines at GABAA
receptors as positive allosteric modulators (PAMs) is
discussed in Chapter 6 and illustrated in Figures 6-17
through 6-23. These drugs presumably act to treat
insomnia by facilitating GABA neurotransmission in
inhibitory sleep circuits arising from the hypothalamic
VLPO (Figure 10-17).
Benzodiazepines bind to only some GABAA receptors.
GABAA receptors are classified by the specific isoform
subunits that they contain, by their sensitivity or
insensitivity to benzodiazepines, by whether they mediate
tonic or phasic inhibitory neurotransmission, and by
whether they are synaptic or extrasynaptic (see Chapter 6
and Figures 6-17 through 6-23). Benzodiazepines,

421

10


<<<PAGE 438>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 10-32 Promoting sleep. To
treat insomnia, one can administer
medications that enhance the
sleep drive, such as the GABAergic
benzodiazepines or Z drugs.
Alternatively, one can administer
medications that reduce arousal
by inhibiting neurotransmission
involved in wakefulness; notably,
with antagonists at orexin, histamine,
serotonin, or norepinephrine receptors.

Promoting Sleep
To Promote Sleep
Enhance
GABA
Inhibit
hypocretin/orexin
acetylcholine
dopamine

insomnia

norepinephrine
serotonin
histamine

asleep

deficient arousal

as well as the related Z drugs discussed below, target
those GABAA receptors that contain a γ subunit, are
localized in postsynaptic areas, and mediate phasic
inhibitory neurotransmission. For a GABAA receptor
to be sensitive to benzodiazepines or to a Z drug, there
must be two β units plus a γ unit of either the γ2 or γ3
subtype, plus two α units of either the α1, α2, or α3 subtype
(see Chapter 6 and Figure 6-20C). Benzodiazepines
and Z drugs bind to a molecular site on the GABAA
receptor that is different from where GABA itself binds
(thus allosteric or “other site”). Currently available
benzodiazepines are nonselective for GABAA receptors
with different α subunits (Figure 10-33). As discussed in
Chapter 6, GABAA receptors containing a δ subunit are
extrasynaptic, mediate tonic neurotransmission, and are
insensitive to benzodiazepines and Z drugs.
Because benzodiazepines can cause long-term
problems such as loss of efficacy over time (tolerance)
and withdrawal effects, including rebound insomnia in
some patients that is worse than their original insomnia,
they are generally considered second-line agents for use
as hypnotic drugs. However, when first-line hypnotic
agents (either Z drugs or blockers of various other
neurotransmitter receptors) fail to work, benzodiazepines
still have a place in the treatment of insomnia,
422

excessive arousal

particularly for severe and treatment-resistant insomnia
associated with various psychiatric and medical illnesses.
Z Drugs (GABAA Positive Allosteric Modulators)

Another group of GABAA positive allosteric modulating
drugs, sometimes called “Z drugs” (because they all
start with the letter Z: zaleplon, zolpidem, zopiclone),
are also prescribed for their hypnotic effects (Figure 1034). There is debate as to whether Z drugs bind to an
allosteric site different from that of benzodiazepines,
or whether they bind to the same site but perhaps in
a different molecular manner that might produce less
tolerance and dependence. Whether or not Z-drug
binding differs from benzodiazepine binding at the
allosteric site of so-called benzodiazepine-sensitive
GABAA receptors, some Z drugs do bind selectively to α1
subunits of benzodiazepine-sensitive GABAA receptors
(e.g., zaleplon and zolpidem) (Figure 10-34). By contrast,
benzodiazepines (and zopiclone/eszopiclone) bind to
four α subunits (α1, α2, α3, and α5) (Figures 10-33 and
10-34). The functional significance of α1 selectivity is not
yet proven, but may contribute to lower risk of tolerance
and dependence. The α1 subtype is known to be critical
for producing sedation and thus is targeted by every
effective GABAA PAM hypnotic, both benzodiazepines


<<<PAGE 439>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Benzo Hypnotics
2-6
days

2-5
days
α5

α1
α3

α2

α5

α1
α3

α2

flurazepam (Dalmane)

Dual Orexin Receptor Antagonists (DORAs)

quazepam (Doral)

1-2
hours
α5

α1
α2

α3

triazolam (Halcion)

12-30
hours

4-20
hours
α5

α1
α2

α3

estazolam (ProSom)

α5

α1
α2

patients who have middle insomnia. For zopiclone, there
is a racemic mixture of both R- and S-zopiclone, available
outside the US, and the single S enantiomer, eszopiclone,
available in the US (Figure 10-34). Clinically meaningful
differences between the active enantiomer and the
racemic mixture are debated.

α3

temazepam (Restoril)

Figure 10-33 Benzodiazepine hypnotics. Five benzodiazepines
that are approved in the United States for insomnia are shown
here. These include flurazepam and quazepam, which have
ultra-long half-lives; triazolam, which has an ultra-short half-life;
and estazolam and temazepam, which have moderate half-lives.
These benzodiazepines are nonselective for GABAA receptors
with different α subunits.

and Z drugs. The α1 subtype is also linked to daytime
sedation, anticonvulsant actions, and possibly to amnesia.
Adaptations of this receptor with chronic hypnotic
treatments that target it are thought to lead to tolerance
and withdrawal. The α2 receptor and α3 receptor subtypes
are linked to anti-anxiety, muscle relaxant, and alcoholpotentiating actions. Finally, the α5 subtype, mostly in
the hippocampus, may be linked to cognition and other
functions.
Multiple versions for two of the Z drugs, zolpidem
and zopiclone, are available for clinical use. For zolpidem,
a controlled-release formulation known as zolpidem
CR (Figure 10-34) extends the duration of action of
zolpidem immediate release from about 2–4 hours to
a more optimized duration of 6–8 hours, improving
sleep maintenance. An alternative dosage formulation of
zolpidem for sublingual administration with faster onset
and given at a fraction of the usual nighttime dose is
also available for middle-of-the-night administration for

Orexins/hypocretins, their receptors, and their pathways
have been discussed above and are illustrated in Figures
10-9 through 10-12. Pharmacological blockade of orexin
receptors has hypnotic actions but not by enhancing
inhibitory GABA action in the sleep-promoting center
(VLPO) as do the benzodiazepines and Z drugs (Figure
10-17). Instead, dual orexin receptor antagonists
(DORAs) (at both orexin 1 and 2 receptors) block the
wake-stabilizing effects of the orexins, especially at orexin
2 receptors (Figures 10-35, 10-36). DORAs inhibit the
ability of naturally occurring orexins from promoting
the release of other wake-promoting neurotransmitters
such as histamine, acetylcholine, norepinephrine,
dopamine, and serotonin (as shown in Figure 10-37).
After administration of a DORA, arousal is no longer
enhanced and wakefulness is no longer stabilized by
orexins, and the patient goes to sleep. Both suvorexant
and lemborexant (Figure 10-35) improve not only the
initiation but also the maintenance of sleep and do so
without the side effects expected of a benzodiazepine
or Z-drug hypnotic, namely lacking dependence,
withdrawal, rebound, unsteady gait, falls, confusion,
amnesia, or respiratory depression.
Both suvorexant and lemborexant (Figure 10-35) are
reversible inhibitors, which means that as endogenous
orexins build up in the morning, the inhibitory action
of the DORAs are reversed. Thus, at night, DORAs have
more effect since there is a higher ratio of drug to orexin.
As daylight begins, orexin levels rise just as DORA levels
are falling, and there is less drug relative to the amount
of orexin present, (i.e., lower ratio of drug to orexin).
When a threshold of blockade of orexin receptors is
no longer present, the patient awakens. Suvorexant
has comparable affinity for orexin 1 and orexin 2
receptors, and lemborexant has higher affinity for orexin
2 receptors than orexin 1 receptors (Figure 10-35).
Lemborexant reportedly exhibits much faster association
and dissociation kinetics at orexin 2 receptors than
suvorexant. The clinical significance of this is uncertain
but may imply a faster reversibility of lemborexant
than suvorexant in the morning as endogenous orexin
levels rise to compete for binding at orexin receptors.
423

10


<<<PAGE 440>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 10-34 Z drugs: GABAA positive
allosteric modulators (PAMs). Several
Z drugs are shown here. These include
racemic zopiclone (not available
in the United States), eszopiclone,
zaleplon, zolpidem, and zolpidem CR.
Zaleplon, zolpidem, and zolpidem
CR are selective for GABAA receptors
that contain the α1 subunit; however,
it does not appear that zopiclone or
eszopiclone have this same selectivity.

GABA A PAMs - “Z Drugs”

12
9

12
9

3
6

α1

12
9

3

α5

α1

α3

α2

6

α5
α2

α1

α3

R,S-zopiclone
(Stilnox - not in US)

α5
α3

α2

eszopiclone
(Lunesta)

12
9

12
9

3
6

12
3

9

6

α1

3
6

α1

α1

zaleplon
(Sonata)

zolpidem
(Ambien)

zolpidem CR
(Ambien CR)
OX1

OX1

R

R

suvorexant

lemborexant

OX2R

OX2R

Other DORAs (such as daridorexant) and also selective
orexin 2 and selective orexin 1 antagonists are currently
in development as well. Competition of endogenous
neurotransmitter with drug for the same receptor is
a concept also discussed in Chapter 7 regarding D3
antagonists/partial agonists and dopamine itself at the D3
receptor (see Figure 7-72).
Serotonergic Hypnotics

One of the most popular hypnotics is the 5HT2A/ α1/H1
antagonist trazodone (Figure 7-46), even though this
agent is not specifically approved for the treatment of
424

3

6

Figure 10-35 Orexin receptor antagonists. The
dual orexin receptor antagonists suvorexant and
lemborexant are shown here. Suvorexant has
comparable affinity for orexin 1 (OX1R) and orexin
2 (OX2R) receptors, while lemborexant has higher
affinity for OX2R than for OX1R.

insomnia (see Chapter 7 for discussion of trazodone’s use
in depression and Figures 7-45 through 7-47). Trazodone,
like the DORAs, is another agent that works to reduce
arousal in insomnia rather than by enhancing sleep drive.
Trazodone’s hypnotic mechanism is via blockade of the
arousal neurotransmitters serotonin, norepinephrine,
and histamine (Figure 7-46). Blockade of α1-adrenergic
and H1 histaminergic pathways is discussed as a side
effect of some drugs for psychosis in Chapter 5 and
illustrated in Figures 5-13 and 5-14. Indeed, one does
not want blockade of all these arousal neurotransmitters
in the daytime. However, when α1 blockade is combined


<<<PAGE 441>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

from hypothalamus
(LH/PH)

B

B
B

A
A

DORA

DORA

G

OX2R

OX1R

GIRK

G

sleep, which can correlate with restorative sleep and even
improvement in daytime pain and fatigue.
Trazodone was initially studied for depression at high
doses that also block serotonin reuptake (Figure 7-45),
and given in a short-acting immediate-release
formulation two or three times a day. Although effective
as an antidepressant, it also caused daytime sedation. It
was serendipitously discovered that lowering the dose
of immediate-release trazodone and giving it at night
made for a very effective hypnotic, which wore off before
morning, and thus a new hypnotic agent was born and
has continued to be the most commonly prescribed
agent for sleep in the world. In order for trazodone to
have optimum antidepressant actions, the dose has to be
increased, and for it to be tolerated, it has to be given in a
once-daily controlled-release formulation that generates
blood levels above those needed for antidepressant action
yet below those needed for sedative hypnotic action
(Figure 7-47). Trazodone has not been associated with
tolerance, withdrawal, dependence, or rebound.
Histamine 1 Antagonists as Hypnotics

Ca++
NMDA

asleep
Figure 10-36 Blockade of orexin receptors. Orexin
neurotransmission is mediated by two types of postsynaptic
G-protein-coupled receptors, orexin 1 (OX1R) and orexin 2
(OX2R). OX1R are particularly expressed in the noradrenergic
locus coeruleus whereas OX2R are highly expressed in the
histaminergic tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN). Blockade of
orexin receptors by dual orexin receptor antagonists (DORAs)
prevents the excitatory effects of orexin neurotransmitters. In
particular, blockade of OX2R leads to decreased expression
of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) glutamate receptors and
prevents inactivation of G-protein-regulated inward rectifying
potassium channels (GIRK). LH/PH: lateral hypothalamus/
posterior hypothalamus.

with H1 blockade (described below and illustrated in
Figures 10-38 through 10-40), and these actions are
further combined with 5HT2A antagonism, a powerful
hypnotic effect results. 5HT2A antagonism (Figures 7-45
and 7-46) specifically enhances slow-wave sleep/deep

It is widely appreciated that antihistamines are sedating.
Antihistamines are popular as over-the-counter sleep aids
(especially those containing diphenhydramine/Benadryl
or doxylamine) (Figure 10-38). Because antihistamines
have been widely used for many years not only as
hypnotic agents but also for the treatment of allergies,
there is the common misperception that the properties
of classic agents such as diphenhydramine apply to any
drug with antihistaminic properties. This includes the
idea that all antihistamines have “anticholinergic” side
effects such as blurred vision, constipation, memory
problems, dry mouth; that they cause next-day hangover
effects when used as hypnotics at night; that tolerance
develops to their hypnotic actions; and that they cause
weight gain. It now seems that some of these ideas about
antihistamines are due to the fact that most agents with
potent antihistamine properties have anticholinergic
actions as well (Figures 10-38 and 10-39). This applies
not only to antihistamines used for allergy, but also to
drugs approved for use in psychosis (e.g., chlorpromazine
Figure 5-27 and quetiapine Figure 5-45) and depression
(such as doxepin Figure 10-39 and other tricyclic
antidepressants Figure 7-67) but also used at low doses as
hypnotic agents.
The tricyclic antidepressant doxepin is an interesting
case because of its very high affinity for the H1 receptor.
At low to very low doses, far lower than needed for the
treatment of depression, it is a relatively selective H1
425

10


<<<PAGE 442>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Hypothetical Actions
of DORAs
Wakefulness

norepinephrine

= DORA

serotonin

raphe
LC

histamine

TMN

basal
forebrain

PFC
glutamate

acetylcholine

PPT/LDT

LH/PH

What Is Diphenhydramine’s (Benadryl’s)
Mechanism as a Hypnotic?

thalamus

H1 antagonists have only been anecdotally associated
with tolerance, but not with withdrawal, dependence, or
rebound.
Anticonvulsants as Hypnotics

M1

H
1

diphenhydramine

Figure 10-38 Diphenhydramine. Diphenhydramine is a
histamine 1 (H1) receptor antagonist commonly used as a
hypnotic. However, this agent is not selective for H1 receptors
and thus can also have additional effects. Specifically,
diphenhydramine is also a muscarinic 1 (M1) receptor antagonist
and thus can have anticholinergic effects (blurred vision,
constipation, memory problems, dry mouth).

antagonist (Figure 10-39), without either unwanted
anticholinergic properties, or the serotonin and
norepinephrine reuptake blocking properties that make
it a drug for depression at high doses (Figure 10-39). In
fact, doxepin is so selective at low doses that it is even
being used in trace doses as a PET ligand to label central
nervous system H1 receptors selectively. At clinical doses
much smaller than those necessary for its antidepressant
actions, doxepin occupies a substantial number of central
nervous system H1 receptors (Figures 10-39 and 10-40)
and has proven hypnotic actions. Blocking one of the
most important arousal neurotransmitters histamine and
its actions at H1 receptors is clearly an effective way to
induce sleep.
426

Figure 10-37 Hypothetical actions
of dual orexin receptor antagonists
(DORAs). By blocking orexin receptors,
and particularly orexin 2 receptors,
DORAs prevent orexin from promoting
the release of other wake-promoting
neurotransmitters.

Anticonvulsants are not approved for the treatment of
insomnia but some are prescribed off-label in order to
promote sleep, especially gabapentin and pregabalin. The
mechanism of action of these agents as open-channel,
N and P/Q voltage-gated ion-channel inhibitors, also
called α2δ ligands, is explained in Chapter 9 on pain and
illustrated in Figures 9-15 through 9-18. These α2δ ligands
are approved not only for pain and epilepsy, but in some
countries for anxiety, and their anxiolytic actions are
explained in Chapter 8 on anxiety and illustrated in Figures
8-17 and 8-18. Although not particularly sedating, the α2δ
ligands pregabalin and gabapentin can enhance slow-wave
sleep, restorative sleep, and assist in the improvement of
pain.
Hypnotic Actions and Pharmacokinetics: Your Sleep Is
at the Mercy of Your Drug Levels!

So far in this chapter, we have discussed the
pharmacodynamic properties of drugs to treat insomnia;
that is, their pharmacological mechanism of action. Many
areas of psychopharmacology involve drugs classified
by their immediate molecular actions, but that have
important delayed molecular events that are more clearly
linked to their therapeutic effects, which are also often
delayed. This is not so for drugs with hypnotic actions. For
sleep-inducing agents, their immediate pharmacological


<<<PAGE 443>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

What Is the Mechanism of Doxepin as a Hypnotic?

H1
α1

Na+

doxepin

Figure 10-39 Doxepin. Doxepin
is a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA)
that, at antidepressant doses (150–
300 mg/day), inhibits serotonin
and norepinephrine reuptake
and is an antagonist at histamine
1 (H1), muscarinic 1 (M1), and α1adrenergic receptors. At low doses
(1–6 mg/day), however, doxepin is
quite selective for H1 receptors and
thus may be used as a hypnotic.

SERT

NET

M1

antidepressant dose (150-300 mg)

hypnotic dose (1-6 mg)

Figure 10-40 Histamine 1
antagonism. (A) When histamine
(HA) binds to postsynaptic
histamine 1 (H1) receptors, it
activates a G-protein-linked
second-messenger system that
activates phosphatidyl inositol
(PI) and the transcription factor
cFOS. This results in wakefulness
and normal alertness. (B) H1
antagonists prevent activation of
this second messenger and thus
can cause sleepiness.

H1
antagonist

HA

H1

H1

GE
PI

HA

GE
cFOS

A

PI

cFOS

10

B

asleep
awake
pro-cognitive
alert

action causes their immediate therapeutic actions. In
fact, your sleep induction is theoretically at the “mercy”
of your drug being above a critical threshold of receptor
occupancy! For GABAA drugs, that threshold based on
preclinical studies is around 25–30% receptor occupancy
(Figure 10-41A). For DORAs, it is around 65% (Figure

10-41A). For antagonists of serotonin and histamine,
the threshold is not as well investigated but is likely to be
around 80% for a single receptor blocked, or less if more
than one receptor is simultaneously blocked. Whatever
the exact thresholds, the concept is clear: as soon as a
hypnotic drug rises above its sleep-inducing threshold,
427


<<<PAGE 444>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

you go to sleep, and as soon as the drug falls below this
threshold, you awaken. In practice, these effects may not
be immediate, and being near the threshold may mean
sleepiness but not sleep. Nevertheless, this is an important
concept because it is not so much the pharmacokinetic
half-life that is important for a hypnotic drug (i.e., how
long until half the drug is gone), it is its duration of time
above the sleep threshold. These concepts are illustrated
in Figure 10-41A–D; the ideal profile for a hypnotic is
shown in Figure 10-41A: neither too short a time above
the threshold nor too long a time, but “just right”: the
Goldilocks solution. In Figure 10-41B and 10-41C, the

concept of too long a half-life, but more importantly too
long above the threshold, is shown: “too hot” and the
result is next-day residual effects. Finally, the concept
of too short a half-life, but more importantly not long
enough above the threshold, is shown (Figure 10-41D):
“too cold” and the result is early morning awakenings
before the desired time of rising. These same concepts of
a drug needing to pierce a threshold, and sustain its level
above that threshold to be effective, apply to another area
of psychopharmacology: namely, the use of stimulants for
the treatment of ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder). This will be discussed in Chapter 11 on ADHD.

The Goldilocks Solution:
The Ideal Hypnotic Agent

5

4

sleep maintenance

drug
concentration 3

sleep
onset

no hangover

2

serotonin histamine antagonist
threshold (80%)

1

DORA threshold (65%)
GABAA threshold (25%)
0

24

48

72

96

120

144

hours (taken nightly)
duration above threshold: 8 hours
examples: eszopiclone (Lunesta)
zolpidem CR (Ambien CR)
low-dose trazodone (Desyrel)
low-dose doxepin antihistamines
survorexant (Belsomra)
lemborexant (Dayvigo)

A

Way Too Hot:

Ultralong Half-Life Hypnotics Can
Cause Drug Accumulation (Toxicity)
night day

toxicity

5

4

drug
concentration 3
2

relevant threshold

1

0

24

48

72

96

120

144

hours (taken nightly)
B

428

duration above threshold: 24-150 hours
examples: flurazepam (Dalmane)
quazepam (Doral)

Figure 10-41A, B Pharmacokinetics
of hypnotics, part 1. (A) For GABAA
medications, the critical threshold
of receptor occupancy for onset of
hypnotic effects is 25–30%, for dual
orexin receptor antagonists (DORAs)
it is 65%, and for serotonin and
histamine antagonists it is thought to
be 80%. Both the onset to achieving
the threshold, and the duration of
time above the sleep threshold,
are important for efficacy. The ideal
hypnotic agent would have a duration
above the threshold of approximately
8 hours. (B) Hypnotics with ultra-long
half-lives (greater than 24 hours; for
example, flurazepam and quazepam)
can cause drug accumulation with
chronic use. This can result in too long
a duration of time above the sleep
threshold, and can cause impairment
that has been associated with increased
risk of falls, particularly in the elderly.


<<<PAGE 445>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Figure 10-41C, D Pharmacokinetics
of hypnotics, part 2. (C) For hypnotics
with moderately long half-lives (15–30
hours), receptor occupancies above the
sleep threshold may not wear off until
after the individual needs to awaken,
potentially leading to “hangover”
effects (sedation, memory problems).
(D) For hypnotics with ultra-short halflives (1–3 hours), receptor occupancies
above the sleep threshold may not
last long enough, causing loss of sleep
maintenance.

Still Too Hot:

Moderately Long Half-Life Hypnotics
Do Not Wear Off Until After
Time to Awaken (Hangover)
5

4

drug
concentration 3

hangover, levels high after
time to awaken

2

relevant threshold

1

0

24

48

hours (taken nightly)

72

96

120

144

duration above threshold: 15-30 hours
examples: estazolam (ProSom)
temazepam (Restoril)
most TCAs
mirtazapine (Remeron)
chlorpromazine (Thorazine)

C

Too Cold:

Short Half-Life Hypnotics Wear Off
Before Time to Awaken
(Loss of Sleep Maintenance)
5

4

drug
concentration 3

loss of sleep maintenance
low levels before time
to awaken

2

relevant threshold

1

0

24

48

hours (taken nightly)
D

72

10

96
120
144
half-lives: 1-3 hours
examples: triazolam (Halcion)
zaleplon (Sonata)
zolpidem (Ambien)
melatonin
ramelteon (Rozerem)

The reason these concepts are important to the
prescriber is not so much the precision of the estimates
of thresholds, as these may vary from patient to
patient. Instead, these concepts inform the prescriber
about what to do to get the Goldilocks solution for
individual patients. If the patient is not falling asleep
quickly enough, theoretically the patient does not reach
threshold fast enough, so either give the drug earlier in

the evening, or don’t take with food (food can delay the
absorption of some agents), or raise the dose, or change
the mechanism. If the patient is not sleeping long enough
(Figure 10-41D), theoretically threshold levels are lost too
early, so either raise the dose or switch to a drug with a
longer duration of action above the threshold (generally,
this would be drugs with a longer pharmacokinetic
half-life; see Figures 10-41A and 10-41C). If the patient
429


<<<PAGE 446>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

is groggy in the morning, theoretically drug levels are
continuing near or above threshold levels when it is time
to arise, so lower the dose, give the drug earlier in the
evening, or switch to an agent with a shorter duration
of action (generally, this would be drugs with a shorter
pharmacokinetic half-life; see Figures 10-41A and
10-41D).
One last word on how all this applies to the DORAs.
Recall that inhibition of the GABAA receptor, serotonin
receptor, noradrenergic receptor, and histamine receptor
are not effectively competitive. There is no known
endogenous ligand linked to the sleep/wake cycle that
acts at the GABA PAM site that could compete cyclically
with Z-drug hypnotics and benzodiazepines. Endogenous
levels of the neurotransmitters serotonin, norepinephrine,
and histamine are not likely to be in the range to reverse
antagonist binding by hypnotic drugs. However, the
affinity of orexin A for orexin 1 and 2 receptors is in
the same range as the affinity of the DORAs suvorexant
and lemborexant for these very same receptors. What
this means is that during the middle of the night, when
orexin levels are low, a given concentration of DORA will
have a greater blockade of orexin receptors than later
in the night and morning, when orexin levels rise and
compete with DORAs for orexin receptors and reverse
their blockade just as DORA levels are falling. How this
applies in practice could depend upon whether orexin
levels are abnormally high in certain cases of insomnia
or comorbid conditions, in which case a higher dose of
a DORA would be necessary. Also, a higher dose of a
DORA would possibly be what is needed if the patient
experiences early morning awakenings. On the other
hand, a lower dose of a DORA may be needed if the
patient experiences carryover effects the next morning,
something that has been noted sometimes in clinical
practice. With the variables of both drug levels and
orexin levels determining net receptor blockade and
thus duration of time above the threshold for sleep, the
pharmacokinetic half-lives of DORAs are not particularly
clinically relevant. There are no head-to-head studies
to definitively demonstrate potential advantages of
lemborexant versus suvorexant. However, the binding
characteristics (affinities for orexin 1 and 2 receptors,
association/dissociation kinetics, plasma drug levels and
thus orexin receptor blockade for the first 8 hours after
ingestion, and especially during the critical early morning
hours) are sufficiently different between lemborexant
and suvorexant to suggest that if a given patient does not

430

respond optimally to one of these agents, the other might
be better. Neither agent is associated with tolerance,
withdrawal, dependence, or rebound.
Behavioral Treatments of Insomnia

Good sleep hygiene (Figure 10-42) may allow a patient
with insomnia to avoid medication treatment altogether.
Other treatments for insomnia that avoid medication
use include relaxation training, stimulus control therapy,
sleep restriction therapy, intensive sleep retraining,
and cognitive behavioral therapy (Figure 10-43). These
various interventions have been shown to have beneficial
effects on several sleep parameters, including sleep
efficiency and sleep quality, and can be very effective,
and thus should often be considered before the use of
hypnotic agents. In addition, behavioral approaches can
be useful adjunctive treatments with hypnotic agents for
patients who do not respond adequately to drugs alone.

EXCESSIVE DAYTIME
SLEEPINESS
What Is Sleepiness?

The most common cause of sleepiness (Figure 10-44) is
sleep deprivation and the treatment is sleep. However,
there are also many other causes of sleepiness that require
evaluation and specific treatment. These other causes of
excessive daytime sleepiness are hypersomnias including
narcolepsy (Figures 10-45 through 10-48), various
medical disorders including obstructive sleep apnea
(Figures 10-45 and 10-49), circadian rhythm disorders
(Figures 10-45 and 10-50 through 10-55), and others
(Figure 10-45). Although society often devalues sleep and
can often imply that only wimps complain of sleepiness,
it is clear that excessive daytime sleepiness is not benign,
and in fact can even be lethal. That is, loss of sleep causes
performance decrements equivalent to that of legal
levels of intoxication with alcohol, and not surprisingly
therefore, traffic accidents and fatalities. Thus, sleepiness
is important to assess even though patients often do not
complain about it when they have it. Comprehensive
assessment of patients with sleepiness requires that
additional information is obtained from the patient’s
partner, particularly the bed partner. Most conditions
can be evaluated by patient and partner interviews,
but sometimes augmented with subjective ratings of
sleepiness such as the Epworth Sleepiness Scale, as well
as objective evaluations of sleepiness such as overnight


<<<PAGE 447>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Sleep Hygiene
sleep time

wake time

no stimulants
before bed

Figure 10-42 Sleep hygiene.
Good sleep hygiene involves
using the bed exclusively for sleep
as opposed to activities such as
reading or watching television;
avoiding stimulants such as
alcohol, caffeine, and nicotine as
well as strenuous exercise before
bed; limiting time spent awake
in bed (if not asleep within 20
minutes, one should get up and
return to bed when sleepy); not
watching the clock; adopting
regular sleep habits; and avoiding
light at night.

activity

dark room

cool environment
bright light

no disturbances

Non-pharmacological Treatments
for Insomnia
RELAXATION TRAINING
Aimed to reduce somatic tension and intrusive thoughts that
interfere with sleep
STIMULUS CONTROL THERAPY
Get out of bed if not sleepy; use bed only for sleeping;
no napping
SLEEP RESTRICTION THERAPY
Limit time spent in bed to produce mild sleep deprivation;
results in more consolidated sleep
INTENSIVE SLEEP RETRAINING
25-hour sleep deprivation period in which the patient is given
50 sleep onset trials but awoken following 3 minutes of sleep
COGNITIVE BEHAVIORAL THERAPY
Reduce negative attitudes and misconceptions about sleep

Figure 10-43 Non-pharmacological treatments for
insomnia. Non-pharmacological treatment options for patients
with insomnia include relaxation training, stimulus control
therapy, sleep restriction therapy, intensive sleep retraining, and
cognitive behavioral therapy.

polysomnograms, plus next-day multiple sleep-latency
testing and/or maintenance of wakefulness testing.
Causes of Hypersomnia

Hypersomnia is present in as much as 6% of the
population. As many as 25% of individuals with
hypersomnia may have a mood disorder. In treating
various causes of hypersomnia, it is important to first
eliminate and treat secondary causes of hypersomnia
(Figure 10-45), such as obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
(Figure 10-49), psychiatric illnesses, and medication side
effects. This can be accomplished by first conducting
a full clinical interview and collecting data from a
sleep/wake diary. If necessary, this information can be
supplemented with 1–2 weeks’ worth of actigraphy, a
polysomnogram (sleep EEG), and administering the
Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT). One of the most
common secondary causes of hypersomnia is OSA
(Figure 10-49). Approximately one out of 15 adults suffer
with moderate OSA, and as many as 75% of individuals
with insomnia have a sleep-related breathing disorder.

431

10


<<<PAGE 448>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Excessive Daytime Sleepiness:
Deficient Daytime Arousal?

awake
alert
creative
problem solving

excessive daytime
sleepiness

deficient arousal

excessive arousal

Hypersomnia
Central Disorders of Hypersomnolence
- Idiopathic hypersomnia
- Recurrent hypersomnia
- Narcolepsy with cataplexy
- Narcolepsy without cataplexy

Other Causes of Hypersomnia
- Medical conditions

- Medication side effects

- Substance abuse

- Psychiatric conditions

depression

Figure 10-45 Conditions associated with hypersomnia. Central
disorders of hypersomnia include idiopathic hypersomnia,
recurrent hypersomnia, and narcolepsy with or without
cataplexy. Other causes of hypersomnia can include medical
conditions, medication side effects, substance abuse, and
psychiatric conditions.

432

Figure 10-44 Excessive daytime
sleepiness: deficient daytime arousal?
Excessive daytime sleepiness is
conceptualized as being related to
hypoarousal during the day and is a
symptom not only of sleep deprivation
but also of narcolepsy, obstructive
sleep apnea, and circadian rhythm
disorders.

So, OSA can cause insomnia at night and hypersomnia in
the day. Having OSA can nearly double general medical
expenses, mainly due to the association of OSA with
cardiovascular disease. Features of OSA include episodes
of complete (apnea) or partial (hypopnea) upper airway
obstruction that result in decreased blood oxygen
saturation; these episodes are terminated by arousal.
There are also several disorders of hypersomnia
that are thought to arise as a primary consequence
of neuropathology in the sleep/wake circuitry of the
brain (Figures 10-45 through 10-47). Such disorders
are known as “central disorders of hypersomnolence”
and include idiopathic hypersomnia (Figure 10-46),
recurrent hypersomnia, and narcolepsy (Figure 1047). With the exception of narcolepsy with cataplexy
due to a profound loss of orexin/hypocretin neurons
in the lateral hypothalamus (Figure 10-48), the
underlying neuropathology of the central disorders of
hypersomnolence is largely unknown.
Idiopathic hypersomnia (Figure 10-46) is
characterized by either long or normal sleep duration
accompanied by constant excessive daytime sleepiness,
short sleep-onset latency, and complaints of nonrefreshing sleep. Patients with idiopathic hypersomnia
may also report sleep drunkenness and somnolence
following sleep, as well as memory and attention deficits,


<<<PAGE 449>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Idiopathic Hypersomnia

Figure 10-46 Idiopathic hypersomnia.
Idiopathic hypersomnia is a central
disorder of hypersomnolence – that is,
it is thought to arise as a consequence
of neuropathology in the sleep/wake
circuitry of the brain. It is characterized
by either long or normal sleep duration
accompanied by excessive daytime
sleepiness and complaints of nonrefreshing sleep.

*YAWN*

Excessive daytime sleepiness

Idiopathic hypersomnia

Long (>10 hr) or
normal sleep duration

Non-refreshing sleep
Figure 10-47 Narcolepsy.
Narcolepsy is a central disorder
of hypersomnolence – that is, it is
thought to arise as a consequence
of neuropathology in the sleep/
wake circuitry of the brain. It
is characterized by excessive
daytime sleepiness, intrusion of
sleep during wake times, and
abnormal rapid eye movement
(REM), including sleep-onset REM
periods. Narcolepsy can occur
with or without cataplexy (loss of
muscle tone triggered by emotion).

Narcolepsy
*YAWN*

Excessive daytime sleepiness

With or without cataplexy

Narcolepsy

ZZ

Z

Abnormal REM manifestations

Intrusion of sleep during wake times

433

10


<<<PAGE 450>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Neurobiology of Narcolepsy with Cataplexy

Figure 10-48 Neurobiology of
narcolepsy with cataplexy. In
addition to its role in wakefulness
and motivated behaviors, orexin is
also involved in stabilizing motor
movements, allowing normal
movement in the day (when orexin
levels are high) and facilitating
inhibition of motor movements
at night (when orexin levels are
low). When orexin levels are low
due to the degeneration of orexin
neurons, this allows intrusion
of motor inhibition and loss of
muscle tone during wakefulness, a
condition known as cataplexy.

thalamus
basal
forebrain

VLPO

LH

TMN

VTA
RN

PPT/
LDT

LC

Obstructive Sleep Apnea

ZZ

Clinical Features

Z

Pathophysiology

• Loud snoring
• Partial/full collapse of upper airway
• Obesity
• Narrowing may occur at different levels
• Hypertension
• Muscle tone, airway reflexes
• Neck >17"
• Metabolic abnormalities in frontal
• Enlarged tonsils
lobe white matter and hippocampus
• Loss of interest
• Excessive daytime sleepiness
• Fatigue
• Depression
434

Figure 10-49 Obstructive sleep apnea. Obstructive
sleep apnea is a common cause of hypersomnia. It
is characterized by episodes of complete (apnea)
or partial (hypopnea) upper airway obstruction that
results in decreased blood oxygen saturation.


<<<PAGE 451>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

digestive system problems, depression, and anxiety. The
diagnosis of idiopathic hypersomnia includes excessive
daytime sleepiness lasting at least 3 months; short sleep
latency, and fewer than two periods of REM occurring at
the onset of sleep (SOREMPs; sleep onset REM periods)
on polysomnographic investigation. Cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) levels of histamine may be low; however, CSF
orexin levels are not typically affected.
Narcolepsy (Figure 10-47) is characterized by
excessive daytime sleepiness, the intrusion of sleep
during periods of wakefulness, and abnormal REM
sleep, including SOREMPs. Cataplexy, or loss of muscle
tone triggered by emotions, may also be present (Figure
10-48). Hypnagogic hallucinations, which are present
upon waking, are also often present. As mentioned, a
clear neuropathological substrate has been identified
for narcolepsy with cataplexy, namely profound loss of
orexin neurons in the lateral hypothalamus. We have
discussed extensively above how orexin neurons are
involved in stabilizing wakefulness through stimulating
release of wake-promoting neurotransmitters (serotonin,
norepinephrine, dopamine, acetylcholine, and
histamine). Thus, it is not surprising that when orexin
neurons are lost in narcolepsy, wakefulness is no longer
stabilized and patients have intrusion of sleep during
periods of wakefulness.
Orexin also stabilizes motor movements, allowing
normal movement in the day when orexin levels are high
and facilitating inhibition of motor movements at night,
especially during REM sleep, when orexin levels are low.
When orexin levels are low in the daytime due to loss of
orexin neurons (Figure 10-48), this destabilizes motor
movements during the daytime, allowing intrusions
of motor inhibition and loss of muscle tone, known as
cataplexy, during periods of wakefulness.
For those suspected of having narcolepsy or narcolepsy
with cataplexy, a CSF orexin level of <110 pg/mL is
diagnostic for narcolepsy; however, orexin levels are
often within the normal range in narcolepsy, especially
without cataplexy, as well as in idiopathic and recurrent
hypersomnia. Even in the absence of low orexin levels,
patients with narcolepsy with or without cataplexy
demonstrate ≥2 SOREMPs on the MSLT or 1 SOREMP on
polysomnographic investigation as well as a short sleep
latency (≤8 minutes) on the MSLT; thus, these measures
are also considered diagnostic for narcolepsy. Additionally,
the majority (90%) of patients with narcolepsy,
particularly those with cataplexy, are positive for the HLA
DQB1-0602 polymorphism compared to only 20% of the
general population.

Circadian Rhythm Disorders

Circadian rhythm disorders (Figure 10-50) arise when
there is dyssynchrony between your internal circadian
clock and external cues that signal “daytime” and
“nighttime.” This dyssynchrony leads to difficulty
maintaining a sleep/wake cycle within the typical 24-hour
period. There are several circadian rhythm disorders,
including shift work disorder (Figure 10-51), advanced
sleep phase disorder (Figure 10-52), delayed sleep phase
disorder (Figure 10-53), and non-24-hour sleep–wake
disorder (Figure 10-54).
Shift work is defined as work occurring between
6 pm and 7 am (outside the standard daytime working
hours). Shift workers include those who work night
shifts, evening shifts, or rotating shifts, and they make
up approximately 15–25% of the workforce in the
United States. Shift workers’ sleep/wake schedules
are often out of sync with their endogenous circadian
rhythms, and many (but not all) individuals who work
non-standard or rotating schedules develop shift work
disorder (SWD). In fact, it is estimated that as many
as 10–32% of shift workers develop SWD and as many
as 9.1% of shift workers develop a severe form of the
disorder. Younger age and a natural biological clock
aligned more to “eveningness” may provide some
protection from the development of SWD. However, for
those who do develop SWD, there may be physical and
psychiatric consequences that extend far beyond sleep/
wake disturbances, such as excessive sleepiness during
the work shift and insomnia during periods of sleep.
Individuals with SWD have a dramatically increased
risk of cardiometabolic issues, cancer, gastrointestinal
diseases, and mood disorders.
Advanced sleep phase disorder (ASPD) (Figure 1052) patients go to bed earlier and awaken earlier than
desired, often by 6 hours outside of the typical sleep/
wake cycle even though they have adequate total sleep
time and quality of sleep. Polymorphisms in the PER2
gene (an essential component of the molecular clock)
have been associated with ASPD; in fact, there is an
autosomal-dominant form of the disorder called familial
advanced sleep phase syndrome (FASPS) in which a PER2
mutation is present. In addition to ruling out other sleep/
wake disorders, such as insomnia, diagnosing ASPD may
include the use of a sleep diary and/or actigraphy for at
least a week and the administration of the Morningness–
Eveningness Questionnaire (MEQ). Normal elderly
people often have a mild or moderate form of ASPD.
In delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPD) (Figure
10-53), individuals are unable to fall asleep until early
435

10


<<<PAGE 452>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Circadian Rhythm Disorders
Circadian Rhythm Disorders:
• Persistent or recurring patterns of sleep disturbance
primarily attributed to circadian disruption and
circadian misalignment

Figure 10-50 Circadian rhythm
disorders. Circadian rhythm disorders
occur when the internal circadian clock
is out of sync with external cues that
signal daytime and nighttime. Shift
work disorder, advanced sleep phase
disorder, delayed sleep phase disorder,
and non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder
are all circadian rhythm disorders.

• Circadian-related sleep disruption resulting in insomnia,
excessive daytime sleepiness, or both
• Sleep disturbance that is associated with impairment in
social, occupational, or other areas of function

Delayed Sleep
Phase Disorder

Advanced Sleep
Phase Disorder

Shift Work Disorder
Non-24

Shift Work Disorder

Z

Z

Z

• Insomnia or excessive sleepiness temporarily associated with a recurring work

schedule that overlaps with the usual time for sleep

• Symptoms associated with shift work schedule are present for at least 1 month
• Sleep log or actigraphy monitoring (with sleep diaries) for at least 7 days demonstrates

disturbed sleep (insomnia) and circadian and sleep-time misalignment

• Sleep disturbance is not due to another current sleep disorder, medical disorder,

mental disorder, substance use disorder, or medication use

436

Figure 10-51 Shift work disorder.
Shift work is defined as work occurring
between the hours of 6pm and 7am.
Shift workers’ sleep/wake schedules are
often out of sync with their endogenous
circadian rhythms. Some shift workers
therefore develop shift work disorder,
in which insomnia or excessive
sleepiness is temporarily associated
with their recurring work schedule that
overlaps with the usual time for sleep.


<<<PAGE 453>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Advanced Sleep Phase Disorder
Typical Sleep/Wake Schedule

Advanced Sleep Phase Disorder

12am

12am

Bedtime
9pm

3am
Waketime
6am

6pm

3pm

9am

9pm

3am
Waketime

Bedtime
6pm

6am

3pm

12pm

9am
12pm

Delayed Sleep Phase Disorder
Typical Sleep/Wake Schedule

Delayed Sleep Phase Disorder

12am

12am

Bedtime
9pm

Figure 10-52 Advanced sleep
phase disorder. Patients with
advanced sleep phase disorder
become sleepy and thus go to bed
earlier than desired and also wake
up earlier than desired. These
individuals have adequate total
sleep time and quality of sleep.

3am
Waketime
6am

6pm

3pm

9am
12pm

9pm

3am
Bedtime

6pm

3pm
Waketime

Figure 10-53 Delayed sleep
phase disorder. Patients with
delayed sleep phase disorder are
unable to fall asleep until the early
morning hours and have difficulty
waking until late morning/early
afternoon. These individuals have
adequate total sleep time and
quality of sleep; however, the
shifted sleep schedule can often
interfere with activities of daily
functioning.

6am

9am
12pm

Non-24-Hour Sleep−Wake Disorder
SCN

Figure 10-54 Non-24-hour
sleep–wake disorder. Individuals
who are visually impaired are
unable to entrain the internal
circadian clock with light acting
on the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN) via the retinohypothalamic
tract. This free-running internal
clock can cause non-24-hour
sleep–wake disorder, characterized
by irregular sleep/wake patterns
and potentially both insomnia and
excessive daytime sleepiness.

retinohypothalamic
tract

437

10


<<<PAGE 454>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Resetting Circadian Rhythms
Offset Circadian Rhythm in
Advanced Sleep Disorder

Offset Circadian Rhythm in
Delayed Sleep Disorder

12am
9pm

12am
3am

9pm

Waketime

Bedtime
6pm

6am

3pm

9am

3am

Bedtime

Adjustment using
pharmacological
and/or nonpharmacological
treatment

6pm

Figure 10-55 Resetting circadian
rhythms. Circadian treatments, such as
bright light and melatonergic agents,
can be used to reset circadian rhythms
in both advanced and delayed sleep
phase disorders. For advanced sleep
phase disorder, early evening bright
light and early morning melatonin can
be useful. For delayed sleep phase
disorder, morning bright light and
evening melatonin can be useful.

6am

3pm

9am

Waketime 12pm

12pm

Desired Sleep/Wake Schedule
Bedtime

12am

9pm

3am

Waketime
6pm

6am

3pm

9am
12pm

Bright Light Therapy

morning hours and awaken in the late morning/early
afternoon. DSPD is the most common of the circadian
rhythm disorders and has been associated with
polymorphisms in the CLOCK gene (another essential
element of the molecular clock). Similarly to advanced
sleep phase disorder (ASPD), sleep duration and quality
of sleep are normal; however, the shift in the sleep/wake
schedule interferes with daily functioning. Many normal
teens have a mild to moderate form of ASPD, as do many
patients with depression.
Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder (Figure 10-54)
is a circadian rhythm disorder that primarily affects
individuals who are blind. Those who are visually
impaired lack the ability to entrain the internal circadian
clock with light acting on the suprachiasmatic nucleus via
the retinohypothalamic tract. This free-running internal
clock leads to irregular sleep/wake patterns that may
cause both insomnia and excessive daytime sleepiness.
Circadian Treatments

Figure 10-56 Bright light therapy. Bright light therapy is
a circadian treatment. Morning bright light can be used for
patients with delayed sleep phase disorders and may also be
beneficial for patients with shift work sleep disorder. Bright light
therapy is also used as a treatment for depression.

438

Circadian treatments can be helpful in resetting the offset
circadian rhythms of both advanced sleep phase disorder
and delayed sleep phase disorder (Figure 10-55). This
includes both bright light (Figure 10-56) and melatonergic
agents (Figure 10-57). These same circadian treatments
can be used adjunctively to drugs for depression in the


<<<PAGE 455>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

treatment of mood disorders or adjunctively to modafinil/
armodafinil for shift work disorder.
Morning light and evening melatonin can help
depression, delayed sleep phase disorder, and shift work
disorder. On the other hand, early evening light and
early morning melatonin can help advanced sleep phase
disorder. Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder benefits from
synchronization of circadian rhythms by the powerful
melatonergic agent tasimelteon (Figure 10-57). These
various circadian treatments can also be beneficial in
resetting the biological clock in normal elderly people
(morning melatonin and evening light) and normal teens
(morning light and evening melatonin). Parents have
long recognized the benefits of letting in early morning
sunlight by opening the shades to get hibernating teens
up and going in time for school.
Melatonergic Hypnotics

Melatonin is the neurotransmitter secreted by the pineal
gland, and acts especially in the suprachiasmatic nucleus
to regulate circadian rhythms (discussed in Chapter 6
and illustrated in Figures 6-34 to 6-36). Melatonin shifts
circadian rhythms, especially in those with phase delay
when taken at the desired appropriate bedtime, not only

for depressed patients, those who have delayed phase sleep
disorder, and many normal teenagers, but also for many
experiencing jet lag from travel-induced shifts in circadian
rhythms. In all cases, melatonin can facilitate sleep onset.
Melatonin acts at three different sites, not only
melatonin 1 (MT1) and melatonin 2 (MT2) receptors, but
also at a third site, sometimes called the melatonin 3 site,
which is now known to be the enzyme NRH–quinone
oxidoreductase 2, and which is probably not involved in
sleep physiology (Figure 10-57). MT1-mediated inhibition
of neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) could
help to promote sleep by decreasing the wake-promoting
actions of the circadian “clock” or “pacemaker” that
functions there, perhaps by attenuating the SCN’s alerting
signals, allowing sleep signals to predominate, and thus
inducing sleep. Phase shifting and circadian rhythm
effects of the normal sleep/wake cycle are thought to
be primarily mediated by MT2 receptors, which entrain
these signals in the SCN.
Ramelteon is a MT1/MT2 agonist marketed for
insomnia, and tasimelteon, another MT1/MT2 agonist,
is marketed for non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder
(Figure 10-57). These agents improve sleep onset,
sometimes better when used for several days in a row.

Melatonergic Agents

ramelteon
tasimelteon

melatonin
MT3

MT1

MT2

MT1

5HT2B

5HT2C

agomelatine

MT1

MT2

Figure 10-57 Melatonergic
agents. Endogenous melatonin is
secreted by the pineal gland and
mainly acts in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus to regulate circadian
rhythms. There are three types
of receptors for melatonin: MT1
and MT2, which are both involved
in sleep, and MT3, which is
actually the enzyme NRH–quinine
oxidoreductase 2 and not thought
to be involved in sleep physiology.
There are several different agents
that act at melatonin receptors.
Melatonin itself, available over
the counter, acts at MT1 and MT2
receptors as well as at the MT3 site.
Both ramelteon and tasimelteon
are MT1 and MT2 receptor agonists
and seem to provide sleep onset
though not necessarily sleep
maintenance. Agomelatine is
not only a MT1 and MT2 receptor
agonist, but is also a serotonin
5HT2C and 5HT2B receptor
antagonist and is available as an
antidepressant outside the US.

MT2

439

10


<<<PAGE 456>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

They are not known to help sleep maintenance, but will
induce natural sleep in those subjects who suffer mostly
from initial insomnia. The actions of tasimelteon at MT2
receptors are thought to underlie its effectiveness at
retraining the circadian clock.

WAKE-PROMOTING AGENTS
AND TREATMENT OF EXCESSIVE
DAYTIME SLEEPINESS
Why treat sleepiness? If the most common cause of
sleepiness is sleep deprivation can’t we treat sleepiness
with sleep and not with drugs? The short answer is
unfortunately not. Here we will discuss the treatment
of excessive daytime sleepiness with various wakepromoting agents such as caffeine, stimulants, modafinil/
armodafinil, and others, as well as some newer agents,
including an NDRI (norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibitor) and an H3 antagonist. Non-pharmacological
treatments are also presented.
If disorders characterized by excessive daytime
sleepiness can be conceptualized as deficient daytime
arousal (Figure 10-44), then wake-promoting treatments
can be seen as agents that increase brain activation and
arousal (Figure 10-58). There are a number of ways to do
this, but most involve enhancing the release of wakepromoting neurotransmitters, especially dopamine and
histamine.

Caffeine

Caffeine is the world’s most widely consumed
psychoactive drug. How does it work? The answer is that
it is an antagonist of the neurotransmitter adenosine
(Figure 10-59). Adenosine was first mentioned in
this chapter as the chemical known to be linked to
the homeostatic sleep drive (illustrated in Figure 1018). Since adenosine accumulates as you get tired, it
essentially is taking account of your homeostatic drive
and some say that adenosine acts as the “accountant” or
“bean counter” of fatigue, documenting and quantitating
the homeostatic drive for sleep. Interestingly, one way
to make a deposit into this homeostatic account to
reduce this drive and diminish fatigue is with a coffee
bean! That is, caffeine, from coffee or other sources, is
wake-promoting, reduces fatigue, and diminishes the
homeostatic sleep drive. How does it do this? Caffeine is
an antagonist of adenosine and thus can block some of
the effects of adenosine buildup, both molecularly and
behaviorally (Figure 10-59).
Native dopamine 2 (D2) receptors bind dopamine
with high affinity (Figure 10-59A) but in the presence of
adenosine, D2 receptors can couple (i.e., heterodimerize)
with adenosine receptors, reducing the affinity of the D2
receptor for dopamine (Figure 10-59B). However, caffeine
blocks adenosine binding to the adenosine receptor and
restores the affinity of the D2 receptor for dopamine even

Promoting Wakefulness
To Promote Wakefulness
awake
alert
creative
problem solving

Inhibit
GABA
Enhance
hypocretin/orexin
acetylcholine
dopamine
norepinephrine
serotonin
histamine

excessive daytime
sleepiness

deficient arousal

440

excessive arousal

Figure 10-58 Promoting
wakefulness. To treat excessive
daytime sleepiness, one can administer
medications that promote arousal by
enhancing neurotransmission involved
in wakefulness; most notably, by
enhancing dopamine and histamine
neurotransmission.


<<<PAGE 457>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Mechanism of Action of Caffeine:
DA Actions at D2 Receptors

Adenosine and Endogenous
Purines Reduce DA Binding

Figure 10-59 Caffeine. Caffeine is
an antagonist at purine receptors,
and in particular adenosine receptors.
(A) These receptors are functionally
coupled with certain postsynaptic
dopamine (DA) receptors, such
as dopamine D2 receptors, at
which dopamine binds and has a
stimulatory effect. (B) When adenosine
binds to its receptors, this causes
reduced sensitivity of D2 receptors. (C)
Antagonism of adenosine receptors
by caffeine prevents adenosine from
binding there, and thus can enhance
dopaminergic actions.

adenosine

purine
receptor

D2
receptor

+

B

A

Caffeine Antagonizes Adenosine Binding
and Enhances DA Actions

caffeine

C

+
+

10

+

in the presence of adenosine (Figure 10-59C). When
caffeine does this, dopamine action is enhanced and this
is wake-promoting and reduces fatigue (Figure 10-59C).
Amphetamine and Methylphenidate

Wake promotion from enhancing the wake-promoting
neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine is
classically done with amphetamines and methylphenidate
(Figure 10-60). Because this is activating, wakepromoting, and fatigue-reducing, the effects of
amphetamines and methylphenidate are stimulating,
and these drugs have classically been called stimulants.
Here we will refer to these agents by their properties as

norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitors and, in
the case of the amphetamines, as dopamine releasers and
competitive VMAT2 inhibitors as well. VMAT2 inhibition
was discussed in Chapter 5 and illustrated in Figures
5-10A and 5-10B. Norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibition as an antidepressant mechanism was discussed
in Chapter 7 and illustrated in Figures 7-34 through 7-36.
D-amphetamine, DL-amphetamine, and methylphenidate
are all approved for use specifically as wake-promoting
agents in the treatment of narcolepsy, but not in
obstructive sleep apnea or shift work disorder, although
often used “off-label” for these indications. Many
formulations of both amphetamine and methylphenidate
441


<<<PAGE 458>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Amphetamine and Methylphenidate
amphetamine
methylphenidate

Figure 10-60 Amphetamine and methylphenidate. Amphetamine and methylphenidate are both norepinephrine (left) and dopamine
(right) reuptake inhibitors; amphetamine has the additional property of inhibition of the vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2),
which can lead to dopamine release. Enhancing these neurotransmitters in sleep/wake circuitry (far right) can be wake-promoting and
fatigue-reducing; thus, they are both approved for excessive daytime sleepiness in narcolepsy and used off-label in other conditions
associated with hypersomnia.

are now available for the treatment of ADHD and are
reviewed in detail in Chapter 11 (see Figures 11-9, 11-10,
11-33, 11-35, and 11-36) and in Chapter 13 on substance
abuse (see Figure 13-8).
Amphetamine and methylphenidate can be dosed to
treat sleepiness in narcolepsy in order to enhance the
synaptic availability of the wake-promoting and arousal
neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine and
thereby improve wakefulness in narcolepsy without
causing significant reinforcement (Figure 10-60).
Nevertheless, amphetamine and methylphenidate
are controlled substances because of high abuse and
diversion potential, as well as the possibility of inducing
psychosis, mania, high blood pressure, and other side
effects, especially at doses higher than those used to treat
sleepiness or ADHD (discussed in Chapters 11 and 13).
However, they are highly effective agents to promote
wakefulness in narcolepsy.
Modafinil/Armodafinil
Mechanism of Action

Racemic modafinil and its R enantiomer armodafinil
(Figure 10-61) are wake-promoting agents not only
442

approved for the treatment of narcolepsy, but also as
adjunctive treatments for obstructive sleep apnea and
for shift work disorder. These agents are thought to act
predominantly as inhibitors of the dopamine transporter
(DAT) or dopamine (DA) reuptake pump (Figure
10-62). Although modafinil is a weak DAT inhibitor,
the concentrations of the drug achieved after oral
dosing are quite high, and sufficient to have substantial
actions on DATs. In fact, the pharmacokinetics of
modafinil suggest that this drug acts via a slow rise in
plasma levels, sustained plasma levels for 6–8 hours,
and incomplete occupancy of DAT, all properties that
could be ideal for enhancing tonic dopamine activity
to promote wakefulness (Figure 10-63) rather than
phasic dopamine activity to promote reinforcement
and abuse (see Chapter 11 on ADHD and Figures 11-9,
11-10, 11-33, 11-35, and 11-36 as well as Chapter 13 on
substance abuse and Figure 13-8). Once dopamine release
is activated by modafinil, and the cortex is aroused, this
can apparently lead to downstream release of histamine
from the tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN) and then
further activation of the lateral hypothalamus with
orexin release to stabilize wakefulness (Figure 10-63).


<<<PAGE 459>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Figure 10-61 Modafinil and
armodafinil. Modafinil consists of two
enantiomers, R and S; the R enantiomer
has been developed and marketed
as armodafinil. Both modafinil
and armodafinil are thought to act
predominantly as inhibitors of the
dopamine transporter (DAT).

T
DA

TA
D

R modafinil

However, the activation of the lateral hypothalamus
and release of orexin do not appear to be necessary for
the action of modafinil, since modafinil still promotes
wakefulness in patients who have loss of hypothalamic
orexin neurons in narcolepsy. The activation of TMN
and lateral hypothalamic neurons may be secondary and
downstream actions resulting from modafinil’s effects on
dopamine neurons.
A related wake-promoting agent is the R enantiomer
of modafinil, called armodafinil (Figure 10-61).
Armodafinil has a later time to peak levels, a longer
half-life, and higher plasma drug levels 6–14 hours
after oral administration than racemic modafinil.
The pharmacokinetic properties of armodafinil could
theoretically improve the clinical profile of modafinil,
with greater activation of phasic dopamine firing,
possibly eliminating the need for a second daily dose, as
is often required with racemic modafinil.
Narcolepsy

Modafinil/armodafinil are effective treatments of
sleepiness in narcolepsy, although possibly not as
powerful as amphetamine and methylphenidate.
However, head-to-head trials have not been conducted.
Furthermore, the abuse potential of modafinil/
armodafinil is much reduced compared to amphetamine
and methylphenidate, and the side effects are not as
severe. In addition, both modafinil and armodafinil
are approved for treatment of two additional disorders

S modafinil

for which amphetamine and methylphenidate are
not approved, namely, for shift work disorder and as
adjunctive treatment for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).
Obstructive Sleep Apnea

First-line treatment for OSA (Figure 10-49) is continuous
positive airway pressure (CPAP) (Figure 10-64). Although
CPAP treatment is quite effective and has been shown
to reduce hospitalization rates and healthcare costs,
adherence rates are poor (54%). For patients who find
CPAP intolerable, there are other treatment options that
may be considered, including bilevel positive airway
pressure (BPAP), auto-titrating positive airway pressure
(APAP), oral appliances designed to stabilize the jaw
and/or tongue during sleep, and various surgeries aimed
at correcting physical attributes that may contribute to
OSA. Additionally, several behavioral interventions may
be useful for ameliorating OSA; these include weight
loss (to a BMI <25), exercise, the avoidance of alcohol
and sedatives at bedtime, and positional therapy (i.e.,
the use of a backpack or other object that prevents the
patient from sleeping on their back). Modafinil and
armodafinil are approved specifically as adjuncts to
standard treatment of underlying airway obstruction,
which is frequently inadequate to treat the hypersomnia
associated with OSA. Given the low adherence rates to
CPAP, modafinil/armodafinil are sometimes used “offlabel” for OSA as monotherapies for patients who do not
tolerate CPAP.
443

10


<<<PAGE 460>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Mechanism of Action of
Modafinil/Armodafinil

DA reuptake
pump

modafinil

DA

when needing to function during the daytime when
sleepy. Exposure to light alters circadian rhythms and
suppresses melatonin release. Treatment with 10,000
lux, bright, blue light for 30 minutes a day may be used
to reset circadian rhythms (Figure 10-56). Importantly,
the administration of bright light therapy must be
appropriately timed in accordance with the patient’s
circadian phase of melatonin secretion, with light
administration occurring approximately 8 hours after
evening melatonin secretion (possibly amplified by
oral dosing with a melatonin agent, Figure 10-57) or
in accordance with a predetermined bright light phase
response curve. One form of bright light therapy, dawn
simulation therapy, applies a slow, incremental light
signal at the end of the sleep cycle. Data show that
performance, alertness, and mood during the night shift
can be improved in shift workers using bright light reentrainment of circadian rhythms.
Solriamfetol, a Wake-Promoting NDRI

+
+
+
+
increase in tonic firing,
downstream increase in HA
and activation of wake-related
circuits
Figure 10-62 Mechanism of action of modafinil/
armodafinil. Modafinil and armodafinil bind with weak affinity
for the dopamine transporter (DAT); however, their plasma
levels are high and this compensates for the low binding.
Increased synaptic dopamine (DA) following blockade of DAT
leads to increased tonic firing and downstream effects on
neurotransmitters involved in wakefulness, including histamine
(HA) and orexin/hypocretin.

Shift Work Disorder

Shift work disorder (Figure 10-51) can be tricky to
treat, especially if the patient has an ever-evolving and
unstable shift work schedule. Suffice it to say, shift
workers are frequently sleepy, but still must work,
drive, and function. Modafinil/armodafinil can make
a big difference in an individual’s ability to function
with alertness when suffering from shift work disorder.
Supplementing modafinil/armodafinil with circadian
rhythm adjunctive therapy is often helpful (Figure
10-55). This includes trying to reset the biological
clock with morning light (Figure 10-56), especially
444

Solriamfetol is a recently approved agent for daytime
sleepiness, both in patients with narcolepsy and as an
adjunct to mechanical treatments for airway obstruction
in patients with OSA. It works by norepinephrine and
dopamine reuptake inhibition (see Chapter 7 and Figures
7-34 through 7-36), and seems to be more potent than
bupropion in this aspect, and less potent but more tolerable
and less abusable than amphetamines or methylphenidate.
Its short half-life is consistent with morning dosing wearing
off in time for sleep.
Pitolisant, H3 Presynaptic Antagonist

Pitolisant (Figure 10-65) is a drug with a novel
mechanism for improving wakefulness in narcolepsy
by blocking the normal action of presynaptic H3
autoreceptors (Figure 10-66A,B) to inhibit histamine
release. Inhibiting the presynaptic H3 receptor causes
the disinhibition (that is, the release) of presynaptic
histamine (Figure 10-66C), and this is wake-promoting.
Pitolisant, a presynaptic H3 autoreceptor antagonist
(Figures 10-65 and 10-66C), is approved for the treatment
of narcolepsy, and there are anecdotal observations that
it may be effective in cataplexy as well. Pitolisant is not a
controlled substance and has no known abuse potential
and is in testing for improving excessive daytime
sleepiness in OSA. Pitolisant can be overly activating,
causing anxiety or insomnia. Studies suggest it may
be about as effective as modafinil but perhaps not as
effective as amphetamine/methylphenidate for improving
excessive daytime sleepiness.


<<<PAGE 461>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Figure 10-63 Modafinil/armodafinil
in wake circuits. Blockade of the
dopamine transporter (DAT) by
modafinil/armodafinil leads to
increased tonic dopaminergic
firing and downstream effects on
wake-promoting neurotransmitters.
Specifically, cortical release of
wake-promoting neurotransmitters is
increased, which leads to downstream
release of histamine from the
tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN)
and further activation of the lateral
hypothalamus (LH), with corresponding
orexin release that stabilizes
wakefulness.

Modafinil/Armodafinil

thalamus
basal
forebrain
VLPO

LH

PPT/
LDT

VTA

TMN
RN

LC

GABA
hypocretin/orexin
acetylcholine

modafinil/armodafinil

dopamine
norepinephrine
histamine

Treating Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Oral Appliances
CPAP
nosemask

airflow

Figure 10-64 Treating obstructive
sleep apnea. First-line treatment
for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is
continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP). Other treatment options
are also available, including oral
appliances and surgical interventions.
Medications can be used as adjuncts
to treat excessive daytime sleepiness
associated with OSA.

expiratory
resistance

10
Surgical Intervention

mouth is
unobstructed

445


<<<PAGE 462>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Sodium Oxybate and Narcolepsy/Cataplexy

Sodium oxybate (Figure 10-67) is also known as
γ-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), and acts as a full agonist
at GHB receptors and a partial agonist at GABAB
receptors (Figure 10-68). As a GABAB partial agonist,
sodium oxybate acts as an antagonist when GABA
levels are elevated and as an agonist when GABA

H
3

levels are low. GHB is actually a natural product
present in the brain with its own GHB receptors
upon which it acts (Figure 10-68). GHB is formed
from the neurotransmitter GABA. It is hypothesized
that sodium oxybate increases slow-wave sleep
and improves cataplexy via these actions at GABAB
receptors.

Figure 10-65 Pitolisant.
Pitolisant is an antagonist
at presynaptic histamine
3 (H3) autoreceptors.
It is approved for the
treatment of excessive
daytime sleepiness in
patients with narcolepsy.

H

B

gamma
hydroxybutyrate

pitolisant

Figure 10-67 Sodium
oxybate. Sodium
oxybate, also known as
γ-hydroxybutyrate (GHB),
acts as a full agonist at
GHB receptors and as a
partial agonist at GABAB
receptors. It is approved
for use both in cataplexy
and for excessive
sleepiness, and appears
to enhance slow-wave
sleep.

H3
autoreceptor

HA

A

H3
autoreceptor

pitolisant
disinhibits HA
release
B

446

C

Figure 10-66 Mechanism of action of
pitolisant. Histamine 3 (H3) receptors
are presynaptic autoreceptors and
function as gatekeepers for histamine
(HA). (A) When H3 receptors are not
bound by histamine, the molecular gate
is open and allows histamine release.
(B) When histamine binds to the H3
receptor, the molecular gate closes
and prevents histamine from being
released. (C) When pitolisant blocks the
H3 receptor, this disinhibits, or turns on,
the release of histamine.


<<<PAGE 463>>>
Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Mechanism of Action of
Sodium Oxybate (Xyrem, GHB)

GHB
(sodium
oxybate)

GABA

GABA A
receptor
complex

Figure 10-68 Mechanism of
action of sodium oxybate. Sodium
oxybate binds as a full agonist to
γ-hydroxybutyrate (GHB) receptors and
as a partial agonist at GABAB receptors.
Its actions at GABAB receptors are
presumed to be responsible for its
clinical effects of improving slow-wave
sleep and reducing cataplexy. As a
partial agonist, sodium oxybate causes
less stimulation of GABAB receptors
than GABA itself, but more than in the
absence of GABA. Thus, it can reduce
GABAB stimulation when GABA levels
are high, and increase it when GABA
levels are low.

GABA B
receptor

GHB
receptor
10

cataplexy
slow-wave sleep
excessive daytime sleepiness
Sodium oxybate is approved for use in both cataplexy
and excessive sleepiness, and it appears to enhance slowwave sleep and reduce hypnagogic hallucinations and sleep
paralysis. Thus, rather than improving wake-promoting
neurotransmitters as every other treatment for excessive
daytime sleepiness does, sodium oxybate supposedly
makes you sleep so well at night with slow-wave sleep
restoration that you are not sleepy in the daytime.

Because of its abuse potential and colorful history, it
is scheduled as a controlled substance and its supplies
are tightly regulated through a central pharmacy in the
US. It has been labeled a “date rape” drug by the press as
it can be used with alcohol for this purpose, “knocking
someone out” and causing amnesia for the time while
involuntarily intoxicated. Because it profoundly
increases slow-wave sleep and the growth hormone
447


<<<PAGE 464>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

surge that accompanies slow-wave sleep, it was also
used (abused) by athletes as a performance-enhancing
drug, especially in the 1980s when it was sold over the
counter in health food stores. GHB is used in some
European countries as a treatment for alcoholism.
Due to the observed enhancement of slow-wave sleep,
GHB has been successfully tested in fibromyalgia (see
Chapter 9 for discussion of pain syndromes such as
fibromyalgia) and is occasionally used “off-label” to
treat refractory cases.

SUMMARY
The neurobiology of wakefulness is linked to an arousal
system that utilizes the five neurotransmitters histamine,
dopamine, norepinephrine, acetylcholine, and serotonin
and the wake-stabilizing neurotransmitters orexins
as components of the ascending reticular activating
system. Sleep and wakefulness are also regulated by a

448

hypothalamic sleep/wake switch, with wake-promoter
neurons in the tuberomamillary nucleus that utilize
histamine as neurotransmitter, and sleep-promoter
neurons in the ventolateral preoptic nucleus that utilize
GABA as neurotransmitter. The synthesis, metabolism,
receptors, and pathways for the neurotransmitter
histamine and orexin are reviewed in this chapter.
Insomnia and its treatments are reviewed, as are the
mechanisms of action of several classic hypnotic agents
including the benzodiazepines and the popular “Z drugs,”
which act as positive allosteric modulators (PAMs) for
GABAA receptors. Other hypnotics reviewed include
trazodone, melatonergic hypnotics, and antihistamines,
as well as the novel dual orexin receptor antagonists
(DORAs). Excessive daytime sleepiness is also described
as are the mechanisms of action of the wake-promoting
drugs modafinil, caffeine, and stimulants. The actions of
γ-hydroxybutyrate (GHB) plus a number of novel sleepand wake-promoting drugs are also reviewed.


<<<PAGE 465>>>
11

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder and Its Treatment

Symptoms and Circuits: ADHD as a Disorder of the
Prefrontal Cortex 449
ADHD as a Disorder of Inefficient “Tuning”
of the Prefrontal Cortex by Dopamine and
Norepinephrine 454
Neurodevelopment and ADHD 463

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is
not just a disorder of “attention,” nor does it have to
include “hyperactivity.” Paradigm shifts are altering the
landscape for treatment options across the full range of
ADHD symptoms, from inattention to impulsivity to
hyperactivity, as well as across all the waking hours and
across the whole lifespan, from young children through
adulthood. This chapter will provide an overview of the
psychopharmacology of ADHD, including only short
discussions of the symptoms of ADHD. The mechanism
of action of treatments classically called stimulants
and nonstimulants for ADHD will be emphasized.
Information on the full clinical descriptions and formal
criteria for how to diagnose and rate ADHD and its
symptoms should be obtained by consulting standard
reference sources. The discussion here will emphasize
the links between various brain circuits and their
neurotransmitters with the various symptoms and
comorbidities of ADHD and how these are linked to
effective psychopharmacological treatments. The goal of
this chapter is to acquaint the reader with ideas about the
clinical and biological aspects of attention, impulsivity,
and hyperactivity. For details of doses, side effects, drug
interactions, and other issues relevant to the prescribing
of drugs for ADHD in clinical practice, the reader
should consult standard drug handbooks (such as Stahl’s
Essential Psychopharmacology: the Prescriber’s Guide).

SYMPTOMS AND CIRCUITS:
ADHD AS A DISORDER OF THE
PREFRONTAL CORTEX
ADHD is noted for a trio of symptoms: inattention,
hyperactivity, and impulsivity (Figure 11-1). It is
currently hypothesized that all these symptoms arise

Treatments for ADHD 466
Which Symptoms Should Be Treated First? 466
Stimulant Treatment of ADHD 467
Noradrenergic Treatment of ADHD 480
Future Treatments for ADHD 484
Summary 485

from inefficient information processing in various
circuits involving the prefrontal cortex (Figures 11-2
through 11-8). Specifically, the prominent symptom
of “inattention” in ADHD can also be described more
precisely as “executive dysfunction” and the inability
to sustain attention long enough to solve problems.
Executive dysfunction is hypothetically linked to
inefficient information processing in the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) (Figures 11-2, 11-3, and
11-7). The DLPFC is activated by a cognitive task known
as the n-back test which can be monitored in living
patients doing it while in a functional brain scanner
(shown in Figure 11-3). Having difficulty in efficiently
activating this part of the brain cuts across many
psychiatric disorders that share the symptom of executive
dysfunction, not just ADHD but also schizophrenia
(discussed in Chapter 4), major depression (discussed
in Chapter 6), mania (discussed in Chapter 6), anxiety
(discussed in Chapter 8), pain (Chapter 9), and disorders
of sleep and wakefulness (discussed in Chapter 10).
One can see how inefficient information processing
in this particular DLPFC circuit, especially when put
under a cognitive “load,” can be associated with the
same symptom of executive dysfunction and difficulty
in sustaining attention and solving problems in many
different psychiatric disorders. This is why diagnosis in
psychiatry is now progressively moving from describing
categorical syndromes that mix together many symptoms
to make a diagnosis (as in the DSM and ICD), towards
characterizing single symptom dimensions or domains
such as executive dysfunction that cut across many
psychiatric disorders. The emphasis on symptoms rather
than diagnosis is the trend in much of neurobiological
research, with the goal of finding better correlates with
neuroimaging, biomarkers, and genetics.
449


<<<PAGE 466>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

11-1 Symptoms of
ADHD: Deconstruct the Syndrome into Diagnostic Symptoms Figure
ADHD. There are three major

categories of symptoms
associated with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD):
inattention, hyperactivity, and
impulsivity. Inattention itself can
be divided into difficulty with
selective attention and difficulty
with sustained attention and
problem solving.

ADHD

inattentive symptoms
selective
attention

hyperactive symptoms

sustained attention
problem solving

impulsive symptoms

ADHD: Core Symptoms Hypothetically Linked to
Malfunctioning Prefrontal Cortex
dACC

DLPFC

selective
attention

hyperactive symptoms

sustained attention
problem solving

impulsive symptoms

prefrontal motor
cortex
Another dimension of executive dysfunction in ADHD
is selective inattention, or not being able to focus, and
thus differs from problems with sustaining attention
described above. The symptom of problems focusing/
selective inattention is hypothetically linked to inefficient
information processing in a different brain area, namely
the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) (Figures
450

Figure 11-2 Matching ADHD
symptoms to circuits. Problems with
selective attention are believed to
be linked to inefficient information
processing in the dorsal anterior
cingulate cortex (dACC), while problems
with sustained attention are linked to
inefficient information processing in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC).
Hyperactivity may be modulated by the
prefrontal motor cortex and impulsivity
by the orbital frontal cortex.

orbitofrontal
cortex
11-2, 11-4, and 11-7). The dACC can be activated
by tests of selective attention, such as the Stroop test
(explained in Figure 11-4). ADHD patients may either
fail to activate the dACC when they should be focusing
their attention, or they may activate this part of the brain
very inefficiently and only with great effort and easy
fatiguability.


<<<PAGE 467>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

Assessing Sustained Attention and Problem Solving
with the N-Back Test
N-back test
1
2
4

3
2

1
3
4

1
2

1

3
4

2

3
4

inattentive

Figure 11-3 Sustained attention
and problem solving: the nback test. Sustained attention is
hypothetically modulated by a
cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical loop
that involves the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC) projecting to the
striatal complex. Inefficient activation
of the DLPFC can lead to difficulty
following through or finishing tasks,
disorganization, and trouble sustaining
mental effort. Tasks such as the n-back
test are used to measure sustained
attention and problem-solving abilities.
In the 0-back variant of the n-back test,
a participant looks at a number on the
screen, and presses a button to indicate
which number it is. In the 1-back
variant, a participant only looks at the
first number; when the second number
appears the participant is supposed
to press a button corresponding to
the first number. Higher “n” values are
correlated with increased difficulty in
the test.

overactivation
normal
baseline
hypoactivation

Assessing Selective Attention with the Stroop Task
The
Stroop Task

Blue
Red
Orange
Red
Green
Green

inattentive

Figure 11-4 Selective attention: the
Stroop task. Selective attention is
hypothetically modulated by a corticostriato-thalamo-cortical loop arising
from the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex
(dACC) and projecting to the striatal
complex, then the thalamus, and back
to the dACC. Inefficient activation of
dACC can result in symptoms such as
paying little attention to detail, making
careless mistakes, not listening, losing
things, being distracted, and forgetting
things. An example of a test that
involves selective attention, and thus
should activate the dACC, is the Stroop
task. The Stroop task requires the
participants to name the color in which
a word is written, instead of saying the
word itself. For example, if the word
“blue” is written in orange, then the
correct answer is “orange,” while “blue”
is the incorrect choice.

overactivation
normal
baseline
hypoactivation

451

11


<<<PAGE 468>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Impulsivity Is Modulated by the Orbitofrontal Cortex
I know it!

Figure 11-5 Impulsivity. Impulsivity
is associated with a cortico-striatothalamo-cortical loop that involves the
orbital frontal cortex (OFC), the striatal
complex, and the thalamus. Examples of
impulsive symptoms in ADHD include
talking excessively, blurting things out,
not waiting one’s turn, and interrupting.

impulsivity

overactivation
normal
baseline
hypoactivation

11-6 Hyperactivity. Motor
Motor Hyperactivity Is Modulated by the Prefrontal Cortex Figure
activity, such as hyperactivity and

psychomotor agitation or retardation,
can be modulated by a corticostriato-thalamo-cortical loop from the
prefrontal motor cortex to the putamen
(lateral striatum) to the thalamus and
back to the prefrontal motor cortex.
Common symptoms of hyperactivity in
children with ADHD include fidgeting,
leaving one’s seat, running/climbing,
being constantly on the go, and having
trouble playing quietly.

hyperactivity

overactivation
normal
baseline
hypoactivation

452


<<<PAGE 469>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

ADHD Core Symptoms:

Regional Problems of PFC “Tuning”

OFC

limbic

DLPFC

motor

dACC

Figure 11-7 ADHD core symptoms:
regional problems of PFC tuning. The
symptoms of ADHD may occur because
patients do not activate prefrontal
cortical areas appropriately in response
to cognitive tasks. Alterations within
the orbital frontal cortex (OFC) are
hypothesized to lead to problems with
impulsivity or hyperactivity. Inadequate
tuning of the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC) or the dorsal anterior
cingulate cortex (dACC) can respectively
lead to sustained or selective attention
symptoms.

cognitive

interrupt
blurt out
not waiting turn

fidget
leave seat
climb

does not finish
disorganized
avoids sustained effort

does not listen
distracted
forgetful
careless

impulsivity

hyperactivity

problems of
sustained attention
& problem solving

problems of
selective attention

ADHD Comorbid Symptoms:
Additional Problems in the PFC

Figure 11-8 ADHD and comorbid
symptoms. Inadequate tuning of the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC)
may be associated with comorbid
symptoms often seen in patients with
ADHD, such as symptoms of conduct
disorder or oppositional defiant
disorder, as well as mood instability and
anxiety.

VMPFC

limbic

11

steal a car
cruelty
pick a fight

mood instability
mania
anxiety

temper tantrums
argumentative
disobedient
aggressive

conduct disorder

bipolar/anxiety
spectrum

oppositional
defiant disorder
453


<<<PAGE 470>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Other areas of prefrontal cortex that are hypothetically
functioning inefficiently in ADHD are the orbital frontal
cortex (OFC), linked to symptoms of impulsivity (Figures
11-2, 11-5, and 11–7), and the supplementary motor
area, linked to symptoms of motor hyperactivity (Figures
11-2, 11-6, and 11–7). The OFC is hypothetically linked
to a wide variety of symptoms that cut across several
psychiatric conditions, including impulsivity in ADHD
(Figures 11-2, 11-5, and 11-7), impulsivity and violence
in schizophrenia (discussed in Chapter 4), suicidality in
depression (discussed in Chapter 6), impulsivity in
mania (discussed in Chapter 6), and impulsivity/
compulsivity in substance abuse and related disorders
(discussed in Chapter 13). Impulsive symptoms in
other psychiatric conditions commonly comorbid with
ADHD are also hypothetically related to the OFC such
as conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, and
bipolar disorder (Figure 11-8). See Chapter 13 for further
discussion of impulsivity and compulsivity in a variety of

psychiatric disorders including substance abuse, eating
disorders, obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD), and
others.

ADHD AS A DISORDER OF
INEFFICIENT “TUNING”
OF THE PREFRONTAL
CORTEX BY DOPAMINE AND
NOREPINEPHRINE
Hypothetically, ADHD patients do not activate prefrontal
cortex areas appropriately in response to cognitive
tasks of attention and problem solving (executive
functioning) (Figures 11-7 through 11-21). This could
be due to the observed neurodevelopmental delays
in prefrontal cortical synaptic connections in ADHD
(see Figures 11-22 and 11-23), causing inefficient
“tuning” of information processing in prefrontal circuits
regulated by norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine (DA)

Baseline NE and DA Neuronal Firing Is Tonic
PFC
NE
neuron

DA
neuron

VMAT2

VMAT2

NET

NE

α2B

α 2C

+

α2A

α1

D1
D3

+

+

+

+

+

D3

NE/DA
firing
tonic firing

454

DA

D1

+

D1

+

+

+

+

+

D1
D3
D3

Figure 11-9 Baseline norepinephrine
and dopamine tonic firing. Modulation
of prefrontal cortical function, and
therefore regulation of attention and
behavior, rely on the optimum release
of norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine
(DA). Under normal conditions,
NE and DA in the prefrontal cortex
(PFC) stimulate a few receptors on
postsynaptic neurons, allowing for
optimal signal transmission and
neuronal firing. At modest levels,
NE can improve prefrontal cortical
functioning by stimulating postsynaptic
α2A receptors. Similarly, modest levels
of DA will stimulate dopamine 1 and 3
(D1 and D3) receptors and be beneficial
to prefrontal cortical functioning. In the
case of both the NE and DA systems,
moderation is certainly key.


<<<PAGE 471>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

Salience Provokes Phasic DA Neuronal
Firing in Reward Centers
Nucleus Accumbens
DA
neuron

VMAT2

D1
D3
D3

D2

D2

D1

+ + + +

D3

+ + + +

D3

+ + ++

NE/DA
firing
tonic firing with burst of phasic firing
Figure 11-10 Salience-provoked phasic dopamine
firing. While tonic firing, as seen in the prefrontal cortex, is
often preferred in neuronal systems, a little bit of phasic firing
of dopamine (DA) neurons in the nucleus accumbens can be
a good thing. Phasic firing will lead to bursts of DA release
and when this happens in a controlled manner it can reinforce
learning and reward conditioning, which can provide the
motivation to pursue naturally rewarding experiences (e.g.,
education, career development, etc.). When this system is out
of bounds, however, it can induce uncontrolled DA firing that
reinforces the reward of taking drugs of abuse, for example, in
which case the reward circuitry can be hijacked, and impulses
are followed by the development of uncontrolled compulsions
to seek drugs.

neurotransmission (Figure 11-9 and Figure 11-10).
This is the same arousal network that was discussed in
Chapter 10 on sleep and illustrated in Figures 10-1 and
10-44.
If the firing of NE neurons innervating the prefrontal
cortex is too low in ADHD (Figures 11-11 and 11-12),
there would be inadequate “tonic” NE stimulation setting
the baseline “tone” of noradrenergic neurotransmission

too low. Low NE tone hypothetically contributes
to the cognitive dysfunction in ADHD (Figure 1111) and preferentially stimulates the most sensitive
noradrenergic receptors on postsynaptic neurons
(Figure 11-12). Increasing NE levels modestly would
hypothetically improve prefrontal cortical function by
stimulating the more sensitive postsynaptic α2A receptors
(Figure 11-12) but increasing NE too high – as may
occur in stressful situations or in various comorbid
conditions such as anxiety, substance abuse, and mania
– could lead to impaired working memory when the
less sensitive α1 and β1 receptors are also recruited
(Figures 11-13 to 11-15). Thus, NE neurotransmission
must occur within a “sweet spot” of neither too high nor
too low (Figure 11-15) in order to optimize cognitive
functioning.
Similarly, if the firing of DA neurons innervating the
prefrontal cortex is also too low in ADHD, there would
hypothetically be inadequate “tonic” DA stimulation,
setting the baseline “tone” of the DA synapse too low
at rest (Figures 11-11 and 11-12). Low release of DA
preferentially stimulates the most sensitive DA receptors
on postsynaptic neurons (i.e., D3 receptors; Figure 11-9;
see also Chapter 4 and Figure 4-9) but inadequately
stimulates the less sensitive D1 receptors (Figures
11-11, 11-12, 11-15, and 11-16), and this would cause
inadequate downstream neuronal signaling and cognitive
dysfunction. Increasing DA levels modestly would
hypothetically improve prefrontal cortical function in
part by first boosting tonic signaling at D3 receptors, then
at moderately sensitive D2 receptors, and finally at the
least sensitive D1 receptors (Figures 11-9, 11-11 through
11-13, 11-15, and 11–16; see also Chapter 4 and Figure
4-9).
Dopamine neurons also exhibit bursts of firing called
phasic DA stimulation (Figure 11-10), with a flurry of
dopamine release that recruits all three DA receptor
subtypes. Phasic DA release is thought to reinforce
learning and reward conditioning, providing the
motivation to pursue naturally rewarding experiences.
The DA system is adaptively programmed to fire
in a phasic manner when there are pertinent and
notable sensory inputs such as those associated with
education, recognition, career development, enriching
social and family connections, etc. Enhancing phasic
DA signaling modestly so that cognitive tasks can be
performed efficiently is hypothetically the therapeutic
goal in treatment of ADHD. However, when the phasic
DA system is overly activated by stress or comorbid

455

11


<<<PAGE 472>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Cognitive Function in ADHD:
Is It Deficient?

I know it!

inattentive

impulsive

$
hyperactive

inattentive

awake
alert
hypervigilant/
creative
problem solving
insomnia

cognitive dysfunction
(understimulation)

excessive daytime
sleepiness/
drowsiness/
sedation

cognitive dysfunction
(overstimulation)

panic/fear
HA
DA

asleep

ACh
5HT

NE

deficient arousal

hallucinations/
psychosis

excessive arousal
overactivation
normal
baseline
hypoactivation

NE/DA
firing
low tonic firing
Figure 11-11 Cognitive function in ADHD: is it deficient? Arousal exists as if on a dimmer switch, with many phases along the
spectrum. Where on the spectrum one lies is influenced by several key wake-promoting neurotransmitters, including histamine (HA),
dopamine (DA), norepinephrine (NE), serotonin (5HT), and acetylcholine (ACh). When neurotransmission is balanced, one is awake,
alert, and able to function well. Alterations in the functioning of these key neurotransmitters, whether too much or too little, can cause
cognitive dysfunction. Cognitive dysfunction in ADHD may be a result of low tonic noradrenergic and dopaminergic firing.

conditions such as anxiety, substance abuse, or mania,
it worsens cognitive functioning with too much arousal
(Figures 11-13 through 11-16). The phasic DA system
can even be hijacked by drugs, and induce uncontrolled
DA firing, reinforcing the reward of drugs, leading to
compulsive drug abuse (discussed extensively in Chapter
13). Therefore, moderate, but not high or low, levels of D1
456

receptor stimulation is what is thought to be beneficial to
set the optimal tone and to optimize prefrontal cortical
functioning (Figures 11-15 and 11-16). Postsynaptic D1
receptors predominate in the prefrontal cortex and the
best functional outcome is when they are “tuned” and
neither understimulated nor overstimulated (Figures
11-15 and 11-16).


<<<PAGE 473>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

Figure 11-12 ADHD and deficient
arousal. Besides being a key player in
the arousal pathways, the prefrontal
cortex (PFC) is also the main brain area
where imbalances in norepinephrine
(NE) and dopamine (DA) systems
hypothetically occur in ADHD. Deficient
signaling in prefrontal cortical NE and
DA pathways is reflected by reduced
stimulation of postsynaptic receptors.
Specifically, D1 receptors, which are
relevant to cognitive functioning, are
not very sensitive to dopamine; thus,
they are not stimulated when DA
levels are low. Increasing levels of NE
and DA would hypothetically improve
prefrontal cortical functioning through
increased stimulation of postsynaptic
α2A receptors and increased stimulation
of D1 receptors.

ADHD and Deficient Arousal:
Weak NE and DA Signals
PFC
NE
neuron

DA
neuron

VMAT2

VMAT2

NET

NE

α2B

α 2C

α2A

α1

DA

D1

+

In the prefrontal cortex, α2A and D1 receptors are
often located on the spines of cortical pyramidal
neurons, and can thus gate incoming signals (Figures
11-17 through 11-21). Alpha-2A receptors are linked to
the molecule cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
via the inhibitory G protein (Gi) (Figure 11-17). D1
receptors, on the other hand, are linked to the cAMP
signaling system via the stimulatory G protein (Gs)
(Figure 11-17). In either case, the cAMP molecule links
the receptors to the hyperpolarization-activated cyclic
nucleotide-gated (HCN) cation channels. An open
channel will lead to a low membrane resistance, thus
shunting inputs out of the spine. In the presence of
an open channel, the signal leaks out and is therefore
lost. However, when these channels are closed, the
incoming signal survives and can be directed down
the neuron to strengthen the network connectivity of
similar neurons and lead to the appropriate signal and
response.
When NE, or a noradrenergic agonist, binds to an α2A
receptor, the activated Gi-linked system inhibits cAMP,
thereby closing the HCN channel (Figure 11-18). Closure
of the channel allows the signal to go through the spine

D1

D1

D1

+

and down the neuron, thereby strengthening network
connectivity with similar neurons (Figure 11-18). So,
in general, in the prefrontal cortex, stimulation of α2A
receptors strengthens an incoming signal.
By contrast, stimulation of D1 receptors leads to
weakening of the signal (Figure 11-19). That is, when
DA, or a DA agonist, binds to a D1 receptor, the activated
Gs-linked system will lead to increased stimulation – or
opening – of HCN channels. The opening of the HCN
channels, especially if excessive, will lead to leakage of
the signal, thereby shunting any input out of the spine.
So, excessive stimulation of D1 receptors will, in contrast
to stimulation of α2A receptors, result in the dissipation
and/or weakening of a signal. The mechanism of action
of α2A (Figure 11-18) and D1 receptors (Figure 11-19)
explains in general why moderate stimulation of both
types of receptors (Figure 11-17) is preferred in order to
strengthen the signal-to-noise ratio in prefrontal cortical
neurons (see Figure 11-20).
What happens following concurrent stimulation of
α2A and D1 receptors by NE and DA, respectively (Figure
11-20)? While the exact localization and density of α2A
and D1 receptors within various cortical areas are still
457

11


<<<PAGE 474>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Cognitive Function in ADHD:
Is It Excessive?

substance
abuse

$

$
inattentive

awake
alert
hypervigilant/
creative
insomnia
problem solving

cognitive dysfunction
(understimulation)

bipolar

anxiety

cognitive dysfunction
(overstimulation)

excessive daytime
sleepiness/
drowsiness/
sedation

panic/fear
HA
DA

asleep

ACh
5HT

NE

deficient arousal

hallucinations/
psychosis

excessive arousal
overactivation
normal
baseline
hypoactivation

Figure 11-13 Cognitive function in ADHD: is it excessive? Arousal exists as if on a dimmer switch, with many phases along the
spectrum. Where on the spectrum one lies is influenced by several key wake-promoting neurotransmitters, including histamine (HA),
dopamine (DA), norepinephrine (NE), serotonin (5HT), and acetylcholine (ACh). When neurotransmission is balanced, one is awake,
alert, and able to function well. Alterations in the functioning of these key neurotransmitters, whether too much or too little, can cause
cognitive dysfunction. Increasing norepinephrine or dopamine too high could lead to excessive stimulation of postsynaptic receptors
and cause cognitive dysfunction.

under intense investigation, it is possible to imagine the
same pyramidal neuron receiving NE input from the
locus coeruleus (LC) on one spine and DA input from
the ventral tegmental area (VTA) on another spine. If
the systems are properly “tuned,” D1 receptor stimulation
can reduce the noise and α2A receptor stimulation can
increase the signal to result in proper prefrontal cortex
functioning (Figure 11-20). Theoretically, this will result
458

in adequate guided attention (Figures 11-15, 11-16),
focus on a specific task, and adequate control of emotions
and impulses.
What happens, however, when there is low release
of both DA and NE and thus low stimulation of both
D1 and α2A receptors on the spines of these pyramidal
neurons (Figure 11-21)? Deficient DA and NE input
will theoretically lead to increased noise and decreased


<<<PAGE 475>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

Figure 11-14 ADHD and excessive arousal. When
norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine (DA) neurotransmission
in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) are optimally tuned, modest
stimulation of postsynaptic α2A receptors and D1 receptors
allows for efficient cognitive functioning. If NE or DA
neurotransmission is excessive, as in situations of stress or
comorbid conditions such as anxiety or substance abuse,
this can lead to overstimulation of postsynaptic receptors
and consequently to cognitive dysfunction as well as
other symptoms. Specifically, excessive noradrenergic
neurotransmission can lead to impaired working memory
due to stimulation of α1 (and β1) receptors. Excessive
dopaminergic neurotransmission can lead to overstimulation
of D1 receptors in the prefrontal cortex.

ADHD and Excessive Arousal:
Impact of Stress and Comorbidities
PFC
NE
neuron

DA
neuron
stress

α2B

α 2C

α2A

α1

D1

D1

D1

+

+

++
++

+

+

+

++ ++
++ ++

+

+

+

+

++
++

+

+

++
++

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+ +

alcohol abuse/
impulsivity

D1

++ ++
++ ++
++ ++
++ ++

inattention/
anxiety from
problems
excessive arousal
concentrating
from excessive arousal

pyramidal cell function

Tuning Cortical Pyramidal Neurons in ADHD

optimal D1, α2A activity

D1, α 2A too low

D1, α2A too high;
α1 stimulation recruited

Figure 11-15 ADHD and maladaptive
signal-to-noise ratios. In order for the
prefrontal cortex to work properly,
moderate stimulation of α2A receptors
by norepinephrine (NE) and of D1
receptors by dopamine (DA) is
required. In theory, the role of NE is
to increase the incoming signal by
allowing for increased connectivity
of the prefrontal networks, while the
role of DA is to decrease the noise by
preventing inappropriate connections
from taking place. At the top of the
inverted U-shaped curve depicted
here, stimulation of both α2A and D1
receptors is moderate and pyramidal
cell function is optimal. If stimulation
at α2A and D1 receptors is too low (left
side), all incoming signals are the same,
making it difficult for a person to focus
on one single task (unguided attention).
If stimulation is too high (right side),
incoming signals get jumbled as
additional receptors are recruited,
resulting in the misdirection of attention.

459

11


<<<PAGE 476>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Cognitive Performance

Functional Output of Cortical Dopamine

activity
optimal

D1, α 2A
dopamine
receptor
activity too
low

D1, α 2A
dopamine
receptor
activity too
high

cognitive symptoms

Neurotransmitter Levels (PFC)
Figure 11-16 Functional output of cortical dopamine. In order for the prefrontal cortex (PFC) to work properly and for cognitive
performance to be optimized, moderate stimulation of α2A receptors by norepinephrine (NE) and D1 receptors by dopamine (DA) is
required. If stimulation at α2A and D1 receptors is either too low or too high, cognitive dysfunction can occur.

Signal Distribution in a Dendritic Spine

signal lost/
leaks out

NE

cAMP

α 2A

D1
cAMP

surviving
signal
strength

460

signal lost/
leaks out

DA

Figure 11-17 Signal distribution in
a dendritic spine. The location of α2A
and D1 receptors on dendritic spines
of cortical pyramidal neurons in the
prefrontal cortex allows them to gate
incoming signals. Both α2A and D1
receptors are linked to the molecule
cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP). The effects on cAMP from
norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine
(DA) binding at their respective
receptors are opposite (inhibitory
in the case of NE and excitatory in
the case of DA). In either case, the
cAMP molecule links the receptors
to the hyperpolarization-activated
cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) cation
channels. When HCN channels are
open, incoming signals leak out before
they can be passed along. However,
incoming
information when these channels are closed, the
incoming signal survives and can be
directed down the neuron.


<<<PAGE 477>>>
11-18 Norepinephrine
NE Actions at Alpha -2A Receptors Strengthen Signal Figure
actions at α receptors strengthen
2A

the incoming signal. Alpha-2A
receptors are linked to cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) via an inhibitor
G protein (Gi). When NE occupies
these α2A receptors, the activated
Gi-linked system inhibits cAMP and
the hyperpolarization-activated cyclic
nucleotide-gated (HCN) channel is
closed, preventing loss of the incoming
signal.

NE
cAMP

α 2A

incoming
information

cAMP

strengthened
signal

DA Actions at D1 Receptors Weaken Signal

cAMP

Figure 11-19 Dopamine actions at
D1 receptors weaken the incoming
signal. D1 receptors are linked to cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
via a stimulatory G protein (Gs). When
dopamine (DA) occupies these D1
receptors, the activated Gs-linked
system activates cAMP leading to
opening of hyperpolarization-activated
cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels.
The opening of HCN channels,
especially if excessive, will lead to loss
of the incoming signal before it can be
passed along.

incoming
information

11

D1
cAMP

DA

weakened or
lost signal

461


<<<PAGE 478>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

How DA and NE Hypothetically “Tune” the PFC:
Signal Increased and Noise Reduced

noise
normal DA
release

normal NE
release

LC

Figure 11-20 Dopamine and
norepinephrine “tune” the prefrontal
cortex (PFC). The same pyramidal
neuron may receive norepinephrine
(NE) input from the locus coeruleus
(LC) on one spine and dopamine (DA)
input from the ventral tegmental area
(VTA) on another spine. When properly
“tuned,” D1 receptor stimulation will
reduce the noise while α2A receptor
stimulation will increase the signal,
resulting in appropriate prefrontal
cortical functioning, guided attention,
focus on a specific task, and control of
emotions and impulses.

signal

VTA

noise reduced

signal increased

How DA and NE Hypothetically “Tune” the PFC:
Low NE and Low DA: ADHD with Signals
Reduced and Noise Increased

noise
low DA
release

low NE
release

signal

VTA

noise increased signal reduced

462

LC

Figure 11-21 Dopamine and
norepinephrine improperly “tune” the
prefrontal cortex (PFC) in ADHD. The
same pyramidal neuron may receive
norepinephrine (NE) input from the
locus coeruleus (LC) on one spine and
dopamine (DA) input from the ventral
tegmental area (VTA) on another spine.
Deficient DA input will theoretically
lead to increased noise, while deficient
NE input will cause a decrease in the
incoming signal. Hypothetically, this
improper tuning of the PFC by DA
and NE can lead to hyperactivity, or
inattention, or both.


<<<PAGE 479>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

signal, respectively, thus preventing a coherent signal
from being sent (Figure 11-21). Hypothetically, this
could cause hyperactivity, inattention, impulsivity, or
some combination of symptoms, depending upon the
localization of the mis-tuned pyramidal neuron in
the prefrontal cortex (see Figures 11-3 through 11-8).
Furthermore, if one neurotransmitter is low while the
other is high, then a person could be exhibiting a whole
different set of symptoms. By knowing both the levels of
DA and NE neurotransmission and the specific area of
the possible disturbances, it may one day be possible to
predict the degree and type of symptoms from which a
patient is ailing. With this in mind, Figures 11-7 and 11-8
show how pyramidal neurons in different brain areas may
be responsible for the different symptom presentations in
ADHD.

NEURODEVELOPMENT AND
ADHD
ADHD is traditionally considered a childhood disorder,
but the concept of ADHD has evolved to be considered
childhood in onset but often persisting into adulthood. In
fact, most psychiatric disorders have onset in childhood and
young adult years and then persist into adulthood (Figures
11-22 and 11-23). The reason for this may be that childhood
and young-adult development is when the brain is
undergoing critical maturation (Figure 11-22A and 11-23).
Brain development is directed by both genetic and
environmental influences (discussed for psychotic
disorders in Chapter 4 and illustrated in Figures 4-61
and 4-62). ADHD has one of the strongest genetic
components in psychiatry at about 75%. Multiple genes
are implicated in ADHD and the genetic causation
is complex and multifactorial, as it is in any mental
disorder. A unifying formulation of ADHD is that it
is caused by delayed maturation of prefrontal cortex
circuitry that manifests in ADHD symptoms at least
by age 12. Synapses rapidly increase in the prefrontal
cortex by age 6, and then up to half of them are rapidly
eliminated by adolescence (Figure 11-22A; see also
Chapter 4 and Figures 4-63 and 4-64). The timing of
onset of ADHD suggests that the formation of synapses
and, perhaps more importantly, the selection of synapses
for removal in the prefrontal cortex during childhood
may contribute to the onset and lifelong pathophysiology
of this condition (Figures 11-22 and 11-23). Those who

are able to compensate for these prefrontal cortical
abnormalities by new synapse formation after age 12 and
into early adulthood may be the ones who “grow out of
their ADHD” and why the prevalence of ADHD in adults
is only half that in children and adolescents.
What causes these problems in the circuits of the
prefrontal cortex in ADHD? Currently, leading hypotheses
propose that neurodevelopmental abnormalities
occur in the circuits of the prefrontal cortex in ADHD
(Figures 11-2 through 11-8). Many of the ideas about
the neurodevelopmental basis of schizophrenia, such
as abnormal synapse formation and abnormal synaptic
neurotransmission, serve as a conceptual framework
and neurobiological model for ADHD as well, and are
discussed in Chapter 4. The impact of neurodevelopment
on the specific symptom patterns of ADHD is shown
in Figure 11-24. Inattentive symptoms can exist but
are not easily identified in preschool children with
ADHD, perhaps because they do not have a sufficiently
mature prefrontal cortex to manifest this symptom
in a manner that is abnormal compared to normal
development. Preschool ADHD and its treatment are a
current controversial concept in the field because most
studies of stimulants involve children over the age of
6. Once inattention becomes a prominent symptom of
ADHD, it remains so over the life cycle (Figure 11-24).
However, impulsivity and hyperactivity decline notably
by adolescence and early adulthood, while recognized
comorbidities skyrocket in frequency as ADHD patients
enter adulthood (Figure 11-24).
The diagnostic criteria most recently changed from
requiring onset prior to age 7 in the past diagnostic
schemes of DSM-IV, now to onset prior to age 12 in DSM5. There is even debate as to whether or not there is such
a thing as adult-onset ADHD (or at least recognized first
as an adult with unclear onset). The prevalence of ADHD
in adults may be only about half of that in children, but
it is not recognized nearly as often as it is in children,
possibly because it is much harder to diagnose and its
symptoms are very often not treated. Whereas half of
all children or adolescents with ADHD are thought to
be diagnosed and treated, less than one in five adults
with ADHD is thought to be diagnosed and treated. The
reasons for this are multiple, starting with the diagnostic
requirement that ADHD symptoms must begin by age 12.
Adults often have difficulty making accurate retrospective
diagnoses, especially if the condition was not identified

463

11


<<<PAGE 480>>>
Synaptogenesis in Prefrontal Cortex and the Development
of Executive Functions

Age 6

age at which
inattentive
symptoms of
ADHD become
noticeable

number of synapses in PFC

Age 14-60
planning skills emerge;
ability to sustain
attention on one
task but not
perseverate;
recognition memory;
formation of
abstract concepts

Birth

executive
functioning
emerges

working
memory
emerges

attending to one task
while ignoring
irrelevant stimuli;
cognitive flexibility and
inhibition; verbal
memory performance

preschool: little ability
to sustain attention
on task; easily
distracted by
irrelevant stimuli

newborn

1

rapid expansion
of executive
functions

5

10

15

20

40

60

80

100

years
A

Most Psychiatric Disorders Have Onset in
Child and Young-Adult Years During Cortical Development
14
12
10

percent

8
6
4
2
0
0-3
B

7-9

13-15

25-27

age at onset (years)

Figure 11-22 Cortical development and ADHD. Synaptogenesis in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) might be responsible for altered
connections that could prime the brain for ADHD. Specifically, executive function develops throughout adolescence. (A) At 1 year of
age, working memory emerges. Around 3–4 years of age, children do not yet have the capability to sustain attention for long periods
of time, and can be easily distracted. By age 6–7, this changes; attention can be sustained and planning can take place. This age is also
characterized by “synaptic pruning,” a process during which overproduced or “weak” synapses are “weeded out,” thus allowing for the
child’s cognitive intelligence to mature. Errors in this process could hypothetically affect the further development of executive function
and be one of the causes of ADHD. This timeline also represents when symptoms of ADHD often become noticeable, which is around
the age of 6. (B) Most psychiatric disorders have onset in childhood and young-adult years and then persist into adulthood, coinciding
with critical cortical development.

464


<<<PAGE 481>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

Developmental Course of Brain Maturation

Sensorimotor Cortex
Amygdala
Striatum
Hippocampus
Prefrontal Cortex
0

5

10

15

20

25

age (years)

relative incidence

Median Age at Onset of Psychiatric Disorders
Across Development

Anxiety
Disorders
Schizophrenia
ADHD/
Conduct

0

5

Mood
Disorders

Substance
Abuse

10

15

20

25

age (years)
Figure 11-23 Developmental course of brain maturation and onset of psychiatric disorders. The developmental course of brain
development is such that the sensorimotor cortex and limbic brain regions develop first, and the prefrontal cortex develops later. In
ADHD, this same pattern is observed; however, cortical development is delayed. This may account for the childhood onset of ADHD and
why, although ADHD may continue into adulthood, its onset does not occur in adulthood. In contrast, other disorders can also begin in
childhood but are typically diagnosed later than ADHD, with onset continuing into adulthood.

and treated as a child. Furthermore, many experts now
question whether it is appropriate to exclude from the
diagnosis of ADHD those adults whose ADHD symptoms
started after age 12, so-called late-onset ADHD. Some
cases may even have onset up to the age of 45. Do these

patients have ADHD? Or is their executive dysfunction
a symptom of a comorbid disorder such as depression,
anxiety, or sleep disorder? The point is to screen for
cognitive symptoms and to treat them, whether part of an
ADHD disorder or a comorbidity.
465

11


<<<PAGE 482>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Impact of Development on ADHD
inattention

impulsivity

subthreshold

hyperactivity

comorbidity recognized

preschool

school age

adolescence

- behavioral
disturbances

- behavioral
disturbances
- academic
problems
- difficulty with
social interactions
- self-esteem issues

- academic
- academic
- occupational
problems
failure
failure
- difficulty with
- occupational
- self-esteem
social interactions
difficulties
issues
- self-esteem issues - self-esteem
- relationship
- legal issues,
issues
problems
smoking and injury - substance abuse - injury/accidents
- injury/accidents - substance abuse

TREATMENTS FOR ADHD
Which Symptoms Should Be Treated First?

It can be helpful in managing ADHD to prioritize which
symptoms to target first with psychopharmacological
treatments, even at the expense of delaying treatment
for a while for some conditions, or even making some
of these comorbid conditions transiently worse if other
symptoms are targeted for improvement first (Figure
11-25). Although there are no definitive studies on this
approach, clinical experience from many experts suggests
that, in complex cases, it can be very difficult to make
any therapeutic progress if the patient continues to abuse
alcohol or stimulants; thus, substance abuse problems
must often be managed top line (Figure 11-25). Treating
ADHD may also have to await improvement from mood
and anxiety disorder treatments, with ADHD cognitive
symptoms seen as more of a fine-tune adjustment to a
patient’s overall symptom portfolio (Figure 11-25).
There are problems, however, with this approach of
setting priorities of which symptoms and disorders to
treat first. For example, many children are treated for
their ADHD first, and without adequately evaluating
possible comorbidities until patients fail to respond
robustly to stimulant treatment. In adults, it can be so
466

college age

Figure 11-24 Impact of development
on ADHD. Consistent with our
understanding of neurodevelopment,
the evolution of symptoms in ADHD
shows that inattention is generally not
identified in preschool but becomes
prevalent as the patient ages and
continues into adulthood. Hyperactivity
and impulsivity are key symptoms in
childhood but are less likely to manifest
overtly in adulthood, although they may
simply be expressed differently. The
rates of comorbidities increase over
time; this could be due to the fact that
the comorbidities were overlooked in
children with ADHD or that they truly
develop later, consistent with data
showing later onset of other psychiatric
disorders compared to ADHD.

adulthood

difficult to treat substance abuse, mood disorders, and
anxiety disorders that the focus of therapeutic attention
never gets to ADHD, and certainly not to nicotine
dependence. That is, ADHD can be considered a mere
afterthought in adults to be addressed if cognitive
symptoms do not remit once the primary focus of
therapeutic intervention, namely the mood or anxiety
disorder, is treated. It is interesting that ADHD is not
often the focus of treatment in adults unless it presents
with no comorbid conditions. Since lack of comorbidity
in adults with ADHD is rare, this may explain why the
majority of adults with ADHD are not treated.
The modern, sophisticated psychopharmacologist
keeps a high index of suspicion for the presence of
ADHD in mood, anxiety, and substance abuse disorders
especially in adults, always aiming for complete
symptomatic remission in patients under treatment.
In practice, this means exploring the use of ADHD
treatments as augmenting agents to first-line treatments
of mood, anxiety, and substance abuse disorders, rather
than the other way around. It also means that longterm management of ADHD is eventually to address
the treatment of nicotine dependence in ADHD once
cognitive symptoms are under control (Figure 11-25).
Adults and adolescents with ADHD smoke as frequently


<<<PAGE 483>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

Figure 11-25 ADHD and
comorbidities: what should be treated
first? In a patient with ADHD and
comorbid disorders, it is imperative
to treat all disorders appropriately,
and in terms of highest degree of
impairment. This might mean that
in one patient it is necessary to first
stabilize the alcohol abuse, while
in another patient the symptoms
of ADHD might be more impairing
than the underlying anxiety disorder.
Additionally, some medications
used to treat these disorders could
exacerbate the comorbid ailment.
Thus, care needs to be taken when
choosing the appropriate treatment. An
individualized treatment plan should
be established for each patient based
on his/her symptomatic portfolio.

alcohol/stimulant/
substance abuse

mood
disorders

or
de

ro

ft

re
a

anxiety
disorders
tm

en

t

ADHD

nicotine
dependence

treatment in
adults often
ends here

treatment in
children/adolescents
often begins here

as adults and adolescents with schizophrenia, about twice
the rate of the normal population in the US. This may be
due to the fact that nicotine subjectively improves ADHD
symptoms, especially in patients who are not treated
for their ADHD. Nicotine enhances dopamine release
and enhances arousal, so it is not surprising that it may
be subjectively effective for ADHD symptoms. Nicotine
dependence and psychopharmacological treatments for
smoking cessation are discussed in more detail in Chapter
13 on impulsivity, compulsivity, and addiction.
Stimulant Treatment of ADHD
General Principles

As discussed above and as illustrated in Figures 11-11 and
11-12, when both DA and NE are too low, the strength
of signal output in the prefrontal cortex is also too low,
thus leading to reduced signal and increased noise
(Figure 11-26A; see also Figures 11-15, 11-16, and 11-21).
Behaviorally, this could translate into a person not being
able to sit in his/her seat and focus, and to fidget and shift
attention, respectively (Figure 11-26A). In order to treat
these symptoms, it is necessary to increase signal strength
output by dialing up the release of both DA and NE until
they reach the optimal levels (Figure 11-26B). This can

be done both by norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake
blocking stimulants and by some noradrenergic agents as
discussed below. Strengthening prefrontal cortical output
is hypothesized to be beneficial in restoring a patient’s
ability to tease out important signals from unimportant
ones, and to manage to sit still and focus.
What if NE and DA signals are excessive? Excessive as
well as deficient activation of NE and DA in the prefrontal
cortex can lead to ADHD, as discussed above, namely
by increasing the noise and decreasing the signal (see
Figures 11-13 through 11-16). The theory is that at first,
and in some patients, the added stress of suffering from
ADHD plus other stressors from the environment can
even further dial up the noise and reduce the signal,
resulting at first in high NE and DA release, causing
reduced signals and inefficient information processing
(Figure 11-27A). As stress becomes chronic, however, NE
and DA levels eventually plummet due to depletion over
time, but with no relief in terms of poor signal output
(Figure 11-27B). Ultimately the appropriate treatment
is to increase NE and DA concentrations to allow for
normalization of behavior (Figure 11-27C, noise is
reduced and signal is increased).

467

11


<<<PAGE 484>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Importance of NE and DA Levels in PFC in ADHD

noise

signal

fidget /
shift attention

PFC strength of output

PFC

PFC strength of output

ADHD: Hypothetically Low Signals
and/or High Noise in PFC

NE concentration

DA concentration

NE low - signal reduced

sit in seat /
focus

DA low - noise increased

Figure 11-26 The importance of
norepinephrine and dopamine levels
in the prefrontal cortex in ADHD. (A)
When both norepinephrine (NE) and
dopamine (DA) are too low (on the left
side of the inverted U-shaped curve),
the strength of output in the prefrontal
cortex (PFC) is too low, leading to
reduced signal and increased noise. The
inability to sit still and focus, together
with fidgeting and shifting attention,
are often clinical manifestations of this
imbalanced signal-to-noise ratio. (B)
In order to treat these symptoms, it is
necessary to increase strength output
by dialing up the concentrations of both
NE and DA until they reach the optimal
dose (top of the inverted U-shaped
curve).

A

noise

fidget /
shift attention
B

signal

sit in seat /
focus

NE concentration

DA concentration

NE optimized - signal increased
DA optimized - noise reduced

Experienced clinicians are well aware that such
patients with too much DA and NE (represented in
Figure 11-27A), too little DA and NE (represented in
Figure 11-27B), or a combination of these in different
pathways, can be very difficult to treat. For example, in
children, the combination of tics generally representing
hypothetically excessive DA activation in the motor
striatum, and requiring DA blockade for treatment,
can be very difficult to manage simultaneously in
patients with ADHD who have hypothetically deficient
DA activation in the cortex, requiring DA-enhancing
stimulants. Stimulants may help the ADHD symptoms
but worsen the tics. Children and adolescents who have
conduct disorder, oppositional disorders, intermittent
explosive disorder, disruptive behavioral disorder,
psychotic disorders and/or bipolar mania, or mixed
conditions (theoretically associated with excessive DA
activation in some prefrontal circuits) (Figure 11-8),
who are unlucky enough to have comorbid ADHD
(theoretically associated with deficient DA activation in
different prefrontal circuits) (Figure 11-7), are among the
most challenging patients for clinicians.
468

PFC strength of output

PFC

PFC strength of output

Treatment: Increase NE, Increase DA

Thus, conditions associated with hypothetically
excessive DA activation suggest treatment with dopamine
blocking agents (see Chapter 5), yet comorbid ADHD
suggests treatment with a stimulant. Can dopamine
blockers and stimulants be combined? In fact, in heroic
cases, stimulants can be combined with serotonin–
dopamine antagonists. The rationale for this combination
exploits the fact that serotonin–dopamine blockers
hypothetically release DA in the prefrontal cortex, to
stimulate postsynaptic D1 receptors there (see Figure
5-17C), while simultaneously blocking D2 receptors in
limbic areas, to reduce DA activity at D2 receptors there.
Such an approach is controversial and best left to experts
for difficult patients who fail to improve adequately on
monotherapies. This mechanism of action of dopamine–
serotonin blockers and their actions in different areas of
the brain are discussed in detail in Chapter 5.
For patients with ADHD and anxiety, it can be difficult
or even self-defeating to try to improve the ADHD
with stimulant treatment, only to cause the anxiety to
worsen. For patients with ADHD and substance abuse, it
makes little sense to give stimulants to drug abusers in


<<<PAGE 485>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

Effects of Chronic Stress in ADHD
ADHD and Stress: Hypothetically Low
Signals and/or High Noise in PFC

A

signal

fidget /
shift attention

NE concentration

PFC strength of output

noise

PFC strength of output

At first, high NE and DA
PFC

DA concentration

NE high - signal reduced
DA high - noise increased

sit in seat /
focus

Chronic Stress

noise

B

signal

fidget /
shift attention

NE concentration

PFC strength of output

PFC

PFC strength of output

Eventually, NE and DA depletion

Figure 11-27 Chronic stress in
ADHD. Excessive activation of
norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine
(DA) in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) can
lead to ADHD by increasing the noise
and decreasing the signal. (A) At first,
the added stress of suffering from the
disorder can further dial up the noise
and reduce the signal (high NE and DA
concentration leading to decreased
output). (B) As chronic stress sets in,
NE and DA levels plummet (low NE
and DA concentration also leading to
decreased output), but with no relief in
terms of signal output. (C) Treatments
that increase NE and DA concentrations
may reduce symptoms by increasing
strength output (noise is reduced and
signal is increased).

DA concentration

NE low - signal reduced
DA low - noise increased

sit in seat /
focus

noise

C

fidget /
shift attention

signal

sit in seat /
focus

NE concentration

PFC strength of output

PFC

PFC strength of output

Treatment: Increase NE, Increase DA

DA concentration

NE optimized - signal increased
DA optimized - noise reduced

order to treat their ADHD. In these cases, augmenting
antidepressant or anxiolytic therapies with a tonic
activator of DA and/or NE systems, such as a longlasting norepinephrine transport (NET) inhibitor or an
α2A-adrenergic agonist, rather than a stimulant, can be
an effective long-term approach for comorbid anxiety,
depression, or substance abuse with ADHD. Some
studies of NET inhibitors report improvement in both
ADHD and anxiety symptoms, and other studies report
improvement in both ADHD and heavy drinking.
Methylphenidate

The mechanism of action of the so-called stimulants
– perhaps better designated as norepinephrine and
dopamine reuptake blockers – is shown in Figures 11-28
through Figure 11-37. Oral administration of clinically
approved doses of the stimulant methylphenidate blocks

the transporters both for NE and DA (NETs and DATs,
respectively) (Figures 11-28 and 11-29A–C). Normally,
DA is released (arrow 1 in Figure 11-29A), and then
taken back up into the dopaminergic neuron by DATs
(arrows 2 in Figure 11-29A), and finally stored in the
synaptic vesicle by VMATs (arrows 3 in Figure 11-29A).
Methylphenidate blocks DATs and NETs allosterically,
stopping the reuptake of DA via DATs (Figure 11-29B)
and NE via NETs (Figure 11-29C), with no actions on
VMAT2 (Figures 11-29B and 11-29C). Methylphenidate
blocks NETs and DATs in much the same way as reuptake
blockers used to treat depression (see discussion in
Chapter 7 and Figure 7-36), namely by binding to NETs
and DATs at sites distinct from where monoamines bind
NETs and DATs, i.e., allosterically. Thus, methylphenidate
stops the reuptake pumps so that no methylphenidate is

469

11


<<<PAGE 486>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

transported into the presynaptic neuron (Figure 11-29B
and 11-29C).
Methylphenidate has a D- and an L-isomer (Figure
11-28), with the D-isomer being much more potent
than the L-isomer on both NET and DAT binding.

Methylphenidate is also available as the single enantiomer
D-methylphenidate, in both immediate-release and
controlled-release preparations. A listing of the wide range
of D,L-methylphenidate preparations is shown in Table 111, and those for D-methylphenidate shown in Table 11-2.

Table 11-1 D,L-Methylphenidate formulations

Formulation

Brand names

Duration

Dosing

Approval

Immediate-release
tablet

Ritalin

Early peak, 3–4-hr
duration

Second dose at
lunch

Ages 6 to 12 and
adults

Immediate-release
oral solution

Methylin

Early peak, 3–4-hr
duration

Second dose at
lunch

Ages 6 to 12

Extended-release
tablet

Ritalin SR
Methylin ER
Metadate ER

Early peak, 3–8-hr
duration

Lunch dosing
may be needed

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release
tablet

Concerta

Small early peak, 12-hr
duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release
chewable tablet

QuilliChew ER

Peak at 5 hr, 8-hr duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release
capsule

Metadate CD

Strong early peak,
8-hr duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 to 17

Extended-release
capsule

Ritalin LA

Two strong peaks (early
and at 4 hrs), 6–8-hr
duration

Once daily in the
morning

Age 6 to 12

Extended-release
capsule

Aptensio XR

Up to 12-hr duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release oral
suspension

Quillivant XR

Peak at 5 hr, 12-hr
duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release
transdermal patch

Daytrana

One peak at 7–10 hrs, 12hr duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 to 17

Orally disintegrating
tablet

Cotempla XR-ODT

12-hr duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 to 17

Extended-release
capsule

Jornay PM

Initial absorption delayed
by 10 hrs, single peak at
14 hrs

Once daily in the
evening

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release
capsule

Adhansia XR

Two peaks (at 1.5 and 12
hrs)

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 and older

Table 11-2 D-Methylphenidate formulations

Formulation

Brand Names

Duration

Dosing

Approval

Immediate-release
tablet

Focalin

Early peak, 4–6-hr
duration

Second dose at lunch

Ages 6 to 17

Extended-release
capsule

Focalin XR

Two peaks (after 1.5 and
6.5 hrs), 8–10-hr duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 to 17
and adults

470


<<<PAGE 487>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

Figure 11-28 D,L-methylphenidate. Methylphenidate consists
of two enantiomers, D and L; both racemic D,L-methylphenidate
and D-methylphenidate are available as therapeutic options.
D,L-methylphenidate and D-methylphenidate both block the
norepinephrine transporter (NET) and the dopamine transporter
(DAT). D-methylphenidate has greater potency for both
transporters than does the L enantiomer.

D,L-Methylphenidate

NET

TEN

DAT

TAD

L-methylphenidate

D-methylphenidate

Regulation of the Transport and
Availability of Synaptic DA

3

VMAT
3

Figure 11-29A Regulation of
transport and availability of synaptic
dopamine. The regulation of synaptic
dopamine (DA) is dependent upon
proper functioning of two transporters,
namely the dopamine transporter
(DAT) and the vesicular monoamine
transporter (VMAT). After DA is released
(1) it can act at postsynaptic receptors
or it can be transported back into the
terminal via DATs (2). Once inside the
terminal, DA is “encapsulated” into
vesicles via VMAT (3). These DAfilled vesicles can then merge with
the membrane and lead to more DA
release. This finely tuned machinery
ensures that DA levels never reach
toxic levels in the synapse or in the DA
terminal. By “engulfing” DA into vesicles
it is possible for the DA neuron to
ensure the viability of DA.

2
3

11
2
1

dopamine (DA)

A

2

1 = release of DA
2 = DAT transport of DA
3 = VMAT transport of DA

471


<<<PAGE 488>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Mechanism of Action of Methylphenidate

Mechanism of Action of Methylphenidate

DA neuron

NE neuron

B

methylphenidate

Figure 11-29B Mechanism of action of methylphenidate at
dopamine neurons. Methylphenidate blocks the reuptake of
dopamine (DA) into the terminal by binding at an allosteric
site (i.e., different than the DA binding site). Methylphenidate
basically stops the transporter, preventing DA reuptake and thus
leading to increased synaptic availability of DA.

Amphetamine

Oral administration of clinically approved doses of the
stimulant amphetamine, like methylphenidate, also
blocks the transporters both for NE and DA (NETs
and DATs), but in a different manner (Figures 11-30
through 11-32). Unlike methylphenidate and reuptake
blocking drugs used for depression, amphetamine is
a competitive inhibitor and pseudosubstrate for NETs
and DATs (Figure 11-32, top left), binding at the same
site that the monoamines bind to the transporters, thus
inhibiting NE and DA reuptake (Figure 11-32, top left).
At the doses of amphetamine used for the treatment of
ADHD, the clinical differences between the actions of
amphetamine versus methylphenidate can be relatively
small. However, at the high doses of amphetamine
used by stimulant addicts, additional pharmacological
actions of amphetamine are triggered. Following
competitive inhibition of DATs (Figure 11-32, top left)
amphetamine is actually transported as a hitch-hiker
into the presynaptic DA terminal, an action not shared
by methylphenidate or reuptake blocking drugs used
for depression (Figure 11-32, top left). Once there in
sufficient quantities, such as occurs at doses taken for
abuse, amphetamine is also a competitive inhibitor of

472

C

methylphenidate

Figure 11-29C Mechanism of action of methylphenidate
at norepinephrine neurons. Methylphenidate blocks the
reuptake of norepinephrine (NE) into the terminal by binding
at an allosteric site (i.e., different than the NE binding site).
Methylphenidate basically stops the transporter, preventing NE
reuptake and thus leading to increased synaptic availability of
NE.

the vesicular transporter (VMAT2) for both DA and NE
(Figure 11-32, top right). Once amphetamine hitchhikes another ride into synaptic vesicles, it displaces
DA there, causing a flood of DA release (Figure 11-32,
bottom left). As DA accumulates in the cytoplasm of
the presynaptic neuron, it causes the DATs to reverse
directions, spilling intracellular DA into the synapse,
and also opening presynaptic channels to further
release DA in a flood into the synapse (Figure 1132, bottom right). These pharmacological actions of
high-dose amphetamine are not linked to therapeutic
action in ADHD but to reinforcement, reward, and
euphoria in amphetamine abuse. Actions of highdose amphetamine, methamphetamine, and cocaine
(another inhibitor of DATs), given orally in immediaterelease formulations, or intranasally, intravenously, or
smoked, are discussed further in Chapter 13 on drug
abuse.
Amphetamine has a D- and an L-isomer (Figure
11-30). The D-isomer of amphetamine is more potent
than the L-isomer for DAT binding, but D- and Lamphetamine isomers are more equally potent in
their actions on NET binding. Thus, D-amphetamine
preparations will have relatively more action on DATs


<<<PAGE 489>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

at lower therapeutic doses utilized for the treatment of
ADHD. D-amphetamine also comes in a formulation
linked to the amino acid lysine (lisdexamfetamine; Figure
11-31) which is not absorbed until slowly cleaved into
active D-amphetamine in the stomach, and slowly, rather
than rapidly, absorbed. A listing of the wide range of D,L
amphetamine preparations is shown in Table 11-3, and
those for D-amphetamine shown in Table 11-4.

D,L-Amphetamine

NET

TEN

The Mysterious DAT
DAT

TAD
TAMV

VMAT

L-amphetamine

D-amphetamine

Figure 11-30 D,L-amphetamine. Amphetamine consists of
two enantiomers, D and L; both racemic D,L-amphetamine
and D-amphetamine are available as therapeutic options.
D,L-amphetamine and D-amphetamine are both competitive
inhibitors at norepinephrine transporters (NETs), dopamine
transporters (DATs), and vesicular monoamine transporters
(VMATs). D-amphetamine has greater potency for DAT binding
than does the L enantiomer, while the D and L enantiomers are
equipotent for NET binding.

Lisdexamfetamine

NET
VMAT

DAT

lysine

D-amphetamine
Figure 11-31 Lisdexamfetamine. Lisdexamfetamine is the
prodrug of D-amphetamine, linked to the amino acid lysine. It is
only centrally active as D-amphetamine once it has been cleaved
in the stomach into the active compounds D-amphetamine plus
free L-lysine.

than NETs; mixed salts of both D- and L-amphetamine
will have relatively more action on NETs than Damphetamine but overall still more action on DATs than
NETs (Figure 11-33). These pharmacological mechanisms
of action of the stimulants come into play particularly

Targeting the dopamine transporter (DAT) is not like
targeting any other site in psychopharmacology. There
are at least three parts to solving the mystery of why
there are so many different outcomes from targeting the
same DAT, simply depending upon how you zero in on
it. Targeting DATs can result in immediate therapeutic
actions (in ADHD and daytime sleepiness), delayed
therapeutic actions (in depression), immediate abuse
(euphoria, high), and delayed addiction, all depending
upon how the DAT is engaged: how fast, how long, and
how much. Understanding the neurobiology of DATs and
dopamine will not only unravel this mystery and solve the
riddle of the curious properties of this site, but empower
the prescriber to best engage this target for best outcomes
for whatever clinical application is intended.
First, we have discussed how engaging monoamine
neurotransmitter transporters leads to delayed
therapeutic actions in depression hypothetically linked
to downstream molecular events such as neurotrophic
factor production (discussed in Chapter 6 and illustrated
in Figure 6-27 and in Chapter 7 and Figure 7-62). The
immediate rise in dopamine levels (often accompanied
by increasing norepinephrine levels from simultaneously
blocking the NET) are not linked to antidepressant
effects. Instead, DATs (and NETs) must be engaged
at therapeutic levels more or less continuously, round
the clock, so synaptic levels of neurotransmitter are
sufficiently robust and sustained to trigger delayed
downstream molecular events, usually taking a few
weeks. Likely, these therapeutic actions may be linked to
improvement of tonic dopamine neurotransmission that
is theoretically deficient in depression.
Second, engaging this same DAT can produce
immediate onset of therapeutic effects in ADHD and
in daytime sleepiness by attaining occupancy levels
above a critical threshold, with therapeutic action that is
immediately terminated as soon as DAT occupancy falls
below this threshold (Figure 11-34A). This notion of a
threshold for immediate therapeutic action onset and

473

11


<<<PAGE 490>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Mechanism of Action of Amphetamine:
The Yin and the Yang

3

2

VMAT

3

2
1 = competitive inhibition
2 = DAT transport of
amphetamine

4

1

3 = VMAT transport of
amphetamine

4
4
4

6
4

5

4

4 = amphetamine
displacement
of dopamine

5 = high DA opens channel
and spills out
6 = high DA reverse
transports DA out

5

6

Figure 11-32 Mechanism of action of amphetamine at dopamine (DA) neurons. Amphetamine is a competitive inhibitor at the
dopamine transporter (DAT), thus blocking DA from binding (1). This is unlike methylphenidate’s actions at DATs and NETs, which are
not competitive. Additionally, since amphetamine is also a competitive inhibitor of VMAT (a property that methylphenidate lacks) it is
actually taken into the DA terminal via DATs (2), where it can then be packaged into vesicles (3). At high levels, amphetamine will lead to
the displacement of DA from the vesicles into the terminal (4). Furthermore, once a critical threshold of DA has been reached, DA will be
expelled from the terminal via two mechanisms: the opening of channels to allow for a massive dumping of DA into the synapse (5) and
the reversal of DATs (6). This fast release of DA will lead to the euphoric effect experienced after amphetamine use. Amphetamine has
these same actions at noradrenergic neurons.

offset is also seen in another area of psychopharmacology,
namely, for treatments of insomnia discussed in Chapter
10 and illustrated in Figure 10-41A. A similar idea is
illustrated here, with a minimum threshold for ADHD
therapeutic action, probably around 50–60% DAT
occupancy (Figure 11-34).
This property of DAT targeting for ADHD above a
critical threshold is so prominent that it has spawned
an entire industry of technologies in an attempt to
474

capture the best way to attain, sustain, and drop below
the threshold in just the exact manner desired. There are
over two dozen versions of the two stimulant molecules
methylphenidate and amphetamine now available for
clinical use (Tables 11-1 through 11-4) and several
more in development. Each version tries to capture the
ideal drug delivery for the ideal DAT occupancy for a
given patient type (e.g., Figure 11-34B). That usually
takes the form of rapidly getting above threshold levels


<<<PAGE 491>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

Table 11-3 D,L-Amphetamine formulations

Formulation

Brand names

Duration

Dosing

Approval

Immediate-release
tablet

Adderall

4–6 hrs

Second dose at
lunch

Ages 3 and older

Immediate-release
tablet

Evekeo

6 hrs

Second dose at
lunch

Ages 3 and older

Extended-release
orally disintegrating
tablets

Adzenys XR-ODT

8–12 hrs, peak at
5 hrs

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release
oral suspension

Dyanavel XR

10–12 hrs, peak at
4 hrs

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 to 17

Extended-release
capsule

Adderall XR

8–12 hrs, peak at
6–8 hrs

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release
capsule

Mydayis

Up to 16 hrs

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 13 and older

Extended-release
oral suspension

Adzenys ER

Not published

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 and older

Table 11-4 D-Amphetamine formulations

Formulation

Brand names

Duration

Dosing

Approval

Immediate-release
tablet

Zenzedi

4–5 hrs

Second dose at lunch

Ages 3 to 16

Immediate-release
oral solution

ProCentra (previously
Liquadd)

4–6 hrs

Second dose at lunch

Ages 3 to 16

Extended-release
capsule

Dexedrine

6–8 hrs

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 to 16

Lisdexamfetamine
dimesylate capsule

Vyvanse

Up to 12 hrs, peak at
3.5 hrs

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 to 17 and
adults

upon awakening in the morning, staying at this DAT
occupancy level for as long as needed for a productive
day, yet getting below threshold levels in time for bed.
And to do this with once-daily dosing. Doing this too
late means morning symptoms (Figure 11-34B); having
it last too short a time means late afternoon and evening
symptoms (Figure 11-34B); having this last too long
a time means late afternoon and evening side effects
and insomnia (Figure 11-34C). There is also a rebound
phenomenon, in which evening serum levels drop too
early and hyperactivity and insomnia ensue. Just as
was discussed for hypnotic actions, the goal is not “too
hot” (too long, too high, too fast), not “too cold” (too
low, too short) but “just right” (Figure 11-34A), the
ideal “Goldilocks” solution, more a goal than a perfectly
executed reality.

There is no “one size fits all” profile of stimulant
delivery that fits every patient every day and no single
technology that is ideal for all patients. For that reason,
it can be prudent to search among the many options
available for the best fit for an individual patient (see
Tables 11-1 through 11-4). Do you want the effect to
last 6 hours or 16 hours? Do you want greater or lesser
effect in the evening hours before bedtime? Morning
can be difficult for many with ADHD, so do you want
rapid morning onset or even waking up with drug
above threshold? All of these are currently attainable
from available formulations (Tables 11-1 through 11-4).
Different patients have different responses, and the
same patient may wish different responses on different
days to fit a flexible lifestyle. And all this because of the
mysterious DAT and its threshold for therapeutic efficacy
475

11


<<<PAGE 492>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

“Slow-Dose” Stimulants Amplify Tonic NE and DA Signals
nucleus accumbens

PFC

NE
neuron

DA
neuron

VMAT2

DA
neuron

VMAT2

VMAT2
NET

D >> L methylphenidate
D = L amphetamine

NE

α2A

D1

+

+

+
+
+

DA

DA

DAT

D >> L methylphenidate
D > L amphetamine

D1 D2

+
+
+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

slow-dose stimulants
OROS - methylphenidate, LA - methylphenidate, XR - D-methylphenidate, transdermal methylphenidate
D-amphetamine spansules, XR - D,L mixed amphetamine salts, prodrug D-amphetamine (lisdexamfetamine)
Figure 11-33 Slow-dose stimulants amplify tonic norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine (DA) signals. Hypothetically, whether a drug
has abuse potential depends on how it affects the DA pathway. In other words, the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties
of stimulants affect their therapeutic as well as their potential abuse profiles. Extended-release formulations of oral stimulants, the
transdermal methylphenidate patch, and the prodrug lisdexamfetamine are all considered “slow-dose” stimulants and may amplify tonic
NE and DA signals, presumed to be low in ADHD. These agents block the norepinephrine transporters (NETs) in the prefrontal cortex
and the DA transporters (DATs) in the nucleus accumbens. Hypothetically, the “slow-dose” stimulants occupy NETs in the prefrontal
cortex (PFC) with slow enough onset, and for long enough duration, that they enhance tonic NE and DA signaling via α2A and D1
postsynaptic receptors, respectively, but they do not occupy DATs quickly or extensively enough in the nucleus accumbens to increase
phasic signaling via D2 receptors. The latter hypothetically suggests reduced abuse potential.

in ADHD (and excessive daytime sleepiness). Likely
these therapeutic actions may be linked to judicious
and controlled enhancement of phasic dopamine
neurotransmission, along with a boost in tonic dopamine
neurotransmission, both of which may be theoretically
somewhat deficient in ADHD and sleepiness.
One last piece of the puzzle. How can the DAT target
that is therapeutic immediately for ADHD and sleepiness
and with a delay for depression lead to problematic drug
abuse rather than therapeutic use? This only makes sense
if you are aware that the DAT functions very differently
depending upon how fast, how completely, and how long
you engage it (compare Figures 11-35 pulsatile action
with Figure 11-33 sustained action). That is, rapid and
high degrees of DAT occupancy cause euphoria and lead
to abuse and addiction (Figure 11-35; see also Chapter 13
476

and Figure 13-7). In fact, the more rapidly and completely
the DATs are blocked, the more reinforcing and abusable
a drug will be. This applies not only to methylphenidate,
modafinil, and amphetamine as DAT blockers, but also
to methamphetamine and cocaine that are also DAT
blockers. Oral ingestion can get a DAT inhibitor to the
brain, but not as fast as snorting nasally, and not as fast as
intravenously, and certainly not as fast as smoking. High
dosing especially by these other routes of administration
provides complete, catastrophic, and sudden blockade
of DATs. The rapid build-up of synaptic dopamine
(Figure 11-35) is nothing like what is seen with more
gradual, sustained, and lower levels of DAT occupancy
(Figure 11-33). In fact, dopamine levels can build up so
high that the DATs can actually be reversed to transport
dopamine out of the presynaptic terminal to add to the


<<<PAGE 493>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

rapid
morning
onset

drug
concentration

offset in
time for sleep

A

0

24

48

72

Figure 11-34 Dopamine transporter (DAT) occupancy
levels and therapeutic effects. The therapeutic
effects of DAT blockade are dependent upon
attaining occupancy levels above a critical therapeutic
threshold, with therapeutic action terminated as
threshold for
soon as occupancy falls below this threshold. The
ADHD therapeutic
critical threshold of receptor occupancy for onset of
effect
therapeutic actions in ADHD is likely between 50%
and 60%. Both the onset to achieving the threshold,
and the duration of time above the threshold, are
important for efficacy and tolerability. (A) Ideally,
onset of achieving therapeutic DAT occupancy
would be immediately upon waking, with levels
maintained within the critical threshold throughout
the day and dropping below the threshold in time
for sleep. (B) Delayed onset of DAT blockade in the
critical threshold can lead to morning symptoms,
while inadequate duration of DAT blockade can cause
evening symptoms. (C) If DAT blockade remains within
the critical threshold for too long, this can result in
evening side effects, notably insomnia.

hours (taken daily)
delayed
morning
onsetmorning
symptoms

too soon offset; late afternoon
and evening symptoms

drug
concentration

threshold for
ADHD therapeutic
effect

B

0

24

48

72

hours (taken daily)

too offset; late,
insomnia

drug
concentration

threshold for
ADHD therapeutic
effect

11

C

0

24

48

72

hours (taken daily)

477


<<<PAGE 494>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Pulsatile Stimulants Amplify Tonic
and Phasic NE and DA Signals
nucleus accumbens

PFC

NE
neuron

DA
neuron

amphetamine

DA
neuron

DAT

NET

methylphenidate

NE

α1

α2A α2A α 1

DA

D1 D1

D1

++ ++
++ ++

+

+

++
++

+

+

+

+

+

++
++

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

++
++

amphetamine

+

+

+

+

+

+

D1

++ ++
++ ++
++ ++
++ ++

methylphenidate

D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2
+ +
+ +
+ +

++ ++ ++ ++
++ ++ ++ ++
++ ++ ++ ++
++ ++ ++ ++

++ ++ ++ ++
+ + ++ ++ ++ ++

pulsatile stimulants
oral immediate-release, intravenous, intranasal, smoked, D-amphetamine,
D,L amphetamine salts, methylphenidate, D-methylphenidate, cocaine,
methamphetamine
Figure 11-35 Pulsatile stimulants amplify tonic and phasic norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine (DA) signals. Hypothetically, whether
a drug has abuse potential depends on how it affects the DA pathway. In other words, the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic
properties of stimulants affect their therapeutic as well as their potential abuse profiles. Immediate-release oral stimulants – similarly to
intravenous, smoked, or snorted stimulants (which are considered pulsatile stimulants) – lead to a rapid increase in NE and DA levels
through blockade of the norepinephrine transporters (NETs) in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and the DA transporters (DATs) in the nucleus
accumbens. Rapidly amplifying the phasic neuronal firing of DA in the nucleus accumbens is associated with euphoria and abuse. The
abuse potential of immediate-release formulations of methylphenidate and amphetamine may be due to increased phasic as well as
tonic DA signaling.

massive release of dopamine from sudden, complete,
and catastrophic DAT blockade (discussed earlier in this
chapter and illustrated in Figure 11-32, bottom right).
So, understanding how a more gentle and prudent
administration of DAT inhibition can be therapeutic
whereas the same drug can be disastrous can allow
the best judicious administration of a DAT inhibitor.
Be careful, and don’t mess incorrectly with your DAT!
Mystery solved.
Slow-Release Versus Fast-Release Stimulants

Based upon now having solved the mystery of the DAT,
many drug delivery systems are not only designed to
control how much DAT inhibition there is, and for how
478

long, but also how quickly the DAT is inhibited, all to
maximize therapeutic effects in ADHD and minimize
abuse and side effects (Figure 11-36 and Tables 111 through 11-4). The goal is to enhance phasic DA
neurotransmission with low to moderate, continuous
drug delivery (Figure 11-36, top), trying to increase
mostly tonic DA firing and only judiciously to increase
phasic DA firing, recognizing that this may be playing
a bit with fire. In order not to get burned, as happens
with pulsatile drug delivery in drug abuse situations
(see Figure 11-36, bottom), to achieve prudent and
therapeutic improvement of tonic and phasic DA
neurotransmission without disastrous increases in
phasic DA neurotransmission, leading to abuse and


<<<PAGE 495>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

Pulsatile vs. Slow/Sustained Drug Delivery:
Implications for Stimulants

drug
concentration
time

dose

DA
firing
A

time

drug
concentration

dose

dose

dose

dose

time

DA
firing
B

addiction, sustained delivery is what is wanted. Thus,
controlled-release preparations for stimulants result
in slowly rising, constant, steady-state levels of the
drug (Figures 11-33, 11-34A; 11-35, top). Under those
circumstances the firing pattern of DA will theoretically
be mostly tonic, regular, and not at the mercy of
fluctuating levels of DA. Some pulsatile firing is fine,
especially when involved in reinforcing learning and
salience (Figure 11-10). However, as seen in Figures
11-15 and 11-16, DA stimulation follows an inverted
U-shaped curve, such that somewhat excessive DA
will mimic the actions of DA in stress (Figure 11-14)
and, at much higher doses, mimic drug abuse (Figure
11-36B). Thus, pulsatile drug administration that
causes immediate release of DA, unlike controlledrelease preparations, could potentially lead to the highly
reinforcing pleasurable effects of drug abuse, especially
at high enough doses and rapid enough administration.
For this reason, using immediate-release stimulants,
especially in adolescents and adults, is increasingly being
avoided.
Just as importantly, the “slow-dose” stimulants,
shown in Figure 11-33, optimize the rate, the amount,
and the length of time that a stimulant occupies not only
DATs for therapeutic use in ADHD, but also exploits the
slow-dose occupancy of NETs for therapeutic actions
in ADHD. Best pharmacological use of stimulants in

Figure 11-36 Pulsatile versus slow and
sustained drug delivery. The difference
between stimulants as treatments and
stimulants as drugs of abuse lies less in
their mechanism of action and more in
the route of administration and dose,
and thus the onset and duration of
dopamine transporter (DAT) blockade.
(A) When using stimulants to treat a
patient it may be preferable to obtain a
slow-rising, constant, steady-state level
of the drug. Under those circumstances
the firing pattern of DA will be tonic,
regular, and not at the mercy of
fluctuating levels of DA. (B) While
some pulsatile firing can be beneficial,
especially when involved in reinforcing
learning and salience, higher doses of
DA will mimic the actions of DA in stress
and mimic drug abuse at the highest
doses. Unlike a constant administration
of DA, pulsatile administration of DA
may lead to the highly reinforcing
pleasurable effects of drugs of abuse
and lead to compulsive use and
addiction.

time

ADHD (and sleepiness) targets both NETs and DATs
rather than raising the dose to get predominantly DAT
effects, many of which will be unwanted. Optimization
for ADHD means not only targeting DATs, but also
targeting NETs to occupy enough of these NETs in the
prefrontal cortex at a slow enough onset and a long
enough duration of action to enhance tonic NE signaling
there via α2A receptors (see discussion in Chapter 7 and
Figure 7-33 for how NET inhibition leads to enhanced
NE action). NET inhibition can also increase tonic DA
signaling in the prefrontal cortex via D1 receptors, as
explained in Chapter 7 and illustrated in Figure 7-33.
This allows good therapeutic effects in ADHD while
occupying carefully a lower number of mysterious DAT
targets, especially in the nucleus accumbens, so as not to
increase phasic signaling there via D2 receptors (Figures
11-35 and 11-36).
In summary, it appears that ADHD patients have
their therapeutic improvement by stimulants at the
mercy of how quickly, how much, and how long
stimulants occupy NETs and DATs. When this is done
in an ideal manner with slow onset, robust but subsaturating levels of transporter blockade, together with
a long duration of action before declining and wearing
off, the patient ideally benefits with improved ADHD
symptoms, hours of relief, and no euphoria (Figures
11-34 and 11-36).
479

11


<<<PAGE 496>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Noradrenergic Treatment of ADHD
Atomoxetine

Atomoxetine (Figure 11-37) is a selective norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor (NRI). Sometimes called NET
inhibitors, the selective NRIs have known antidepressant
properties (discussed in Chapter 7). In terms of their
mechanism of therapeutic action in ADHD, it is the same
as just discussed for stimulants acting at the NETs here
in Chapter 11, and as previously discussed for drugs used
to treat depression in Chapter 7 and illustrated in Figure
7-33. Blocking NETs in the prefrontal cortex increases

Comparing the Molecular Actions of
Atomoxetine and Bupropion
DAT

NDRIs
NET

NE
neuron

DA
neuron

NRIs
NET

Figure 11-37 Comparing the molecular actions of atomoxetine
and bupropion. Atomoxetine is a selective norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor (NRI), while bupropion is a norepinephrine–
dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI). Both agents block the
norepinephrine transporters (NETs) in the prefrontal cortex,
which leads to an increase in both norepinephrine (NE) and
dopamine (DA) there (because NETs also transport dopamine).
NDRIs also block the dopamine transporters (DATs), which
are not present in the prefrontal cortex but are present in the
nucleus accumbens.

480

both DA and NE in the prefrontal cortex (Figure 11-38)
and is why NET inhibitors are thought to work in ADHD.
However, since there are few NE neurons and NETs in
nucleus accumbens, inhibiting NET does not lead to an
increase in either NE or DA there (Figure 11-38) and is
why NET inhibitors are thought not to have reinforcing,
abuse, or addiction potential.
Bupropion is a weak NRI and also a weak DAT
inhibitor known as a norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibitor (NDRI), and was previously discussed as a
treatment for depression in Chapter 7 and illustrated
in Figures 7-34 through 7-36; see also Figure 11-37).
Several tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) have notable
NRI actions, such as desipramine and nortriptyline. All of
these agents with NRI properties have been utilized in the
treatment of ADHD, with varying amounts of success, but
only atomoxetine is well-investigated and approved for
this use in children and adults.
Atomoxetine’s hypothetical actions in ADHD patients
with stress and comorbidity states, presumably linked
to excessive and phasic DA and NE release, are shown
conceptually by comparing the untreated states in Figures
11-11 and 11-12 with the changes that theoretically follow
chronic treatment with atomoxetine in Figure 11-39. That
is, ADHD linked to conditions that are associated with
chronic stress and comorbidities is theoretically caused
by overly active NE and DA circuits in the prefrontal
cortex, resulting in an excess of phasic NE and DA
activity (Figure 11-13). When slow onset, long duration,
and essentially perpetual NET inhibition occurs in the
prefrontal cortex due to atomoxetine, this theoretically
restores tonic postsynaptic D1 and α2A-adrenergic
signaling, downregulates phasic NE and DA actions, and
desensitizes postsynaptic NE and DA receptors (Figure
11-39). The possible consequence of this is to reduce
stress as ADHD symptoms are improved. If so, decreases
in ADHD symptoms could potentially be accompanied
by decreases in anxiety, depression, and heavy drinking.
Unlike stimulant use, where the therapeutic actions are
at the mercy of plasma drug levels and momentary NET/
DAT occupancies, actions from long-term NRI actions
give 24-hour symptom relief, in much the same manner
as do SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) and
SNRIs (serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors)
for the treatment of depression and anxiety. Selective
NRIs generally have smaller effect sizes for reducing
ADHD symptoms than stimulants in short-term trials,
especially in patients without comorbidity. However,
NRIs are not necessarily inferior in ADHD patients who


<<<PAGE 497>>>
Atomoxetine in ADHD with Weak
Prefrontal NE and DA Signals
nucleus accumbens - no action

prefrontal cortex
NE
neuron

DA
neuron

VMAT2

DA
neuron

VMAT2

VMAT2

NET

atomoxetine
DA

NE

α2A

D1

+

+

DA

DAT

Figure 11-38 Atomoxetine in
ADHD with weak prefrontal
norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine
(DA) signals. Through its blockade of
norepinephrine transporters (NETs),
atomoxetine causes NE and DA levels
to increase in the prefrontal cortex,
where inactivation of both of these
neurotransmitters is largely due to
NETs (on the left). At the same time,
the relative lack of NETs in the nucleus
accumbens prevents atomoxetine from
increasing NE or DA levels in that brain
area, thus reducing the risk of abuse (on
the right). Other NET inhibitors would
be expected to have the same effects.

D1 D2
+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

NET inhibitors
atomoxetine (NRI), reboxetine (NRI), bupropion (NDRI), venlafaxine (SNRI),
duloxetine (SNRI), desvenlafaxine (SNRI), milnacipran (SNRI),
desipramine (TCA), nortriptyline (TCA)

Chronic Treatment with Atomoxetine in ADHD
with Excessive Prefrontal NE and DA Signals
prefrontal cortex
excessive NE and DA signals

stress

stress

Alpha-2A-Adrenergic Agonists

ADHD anxiety substance
abuse

chronic treatment with atomoxetine
NE
neuron

DA
neuron

VMAT2

VMAT2
NET

atomoxetine
DA

NE

α2A

D1

+

+
+

+

+

+

+

+

have not been previously treated with stimulants, nor in
ADHD patients who have been treated long term (more
than 8–11 weeks). NRIs may actually be preferred to
stimulants in patients with complex comorbidities, side
effects, or lack of response to stimulants.

RESPONSE
Figure 11-39 Chronic treatment with atomoxetine in ADHD
with excessive signals. ADHD linked to conditions that are
associated with chronic stress and comorbidities is theoretically
caused by overly active NE and DA circuits. Continuous
blockade of NETs could restore tonic postsynaptic D1 and α2Aadrenergic signaling, downregulate phasic NE and DA actions,
and desensitize postsynaptic NE and DA receptors.

Norepinephrine receptors are discussed in Chapter 6
and illustrated in Figures 6-14 through 6-16. There are
numerous subtypes of α-adrenergic receptors, from
presynaptic autoreceptors, generally of the α2A subtype
(Figure 6-14) to postsynaptic α2A, α2B, α2C, and α1
subtypes α1A, α1B, and α1D (Figures 6-14 through 6-16).
Alpha-2A receptors are widely distributed throughout the
central nervous system, with high levels in the cortex and
locus coeruleus. These receptors are thought to be the
primary mediators of the effects of NE in the prefrontal
cortex, regulating symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity,
and impulsivity in ADHD. Alpha-2B receptors are in high
concentrations in the thalamus and may be important
in mediating sedating actions of NE, while α2C receptors
are densest in striatum. Alpha-1 receptors generally have
opposing actions to α2 receptors, with α2 mechanisms
predominating when NE release is low or moderate
(i.e., for normal attention), but with α1 mechanisms
predominating at NE synapses when NE release is
high (e.g., associated with stress and comorbidity) and
contributing to cognitive impairment. Thus, selective
NRIs at low doses will first increase activity at α2A
481

11


<<<PAGE 498>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

postsynaptic receptors to enhance cognitive performance,
but at high doses may swamp the synapse with too
much NE and cause sedation, cognitive impairment,
or both. Patients with these responses to selective NRIs
may benefit from lowering the dose. Alpha-2-adrenergic
receptors are present in high concentrations in the
prefrontal cortex, but only in low concentrations in the
nucleus accumbens.
There are two direct-acting agonists for α2 receptors
used to treat ADHD, guanfacine (Figure 11-40) and
clonidine (Figure 11-41). Guanfacine is relatively
more selective for α2A receptors (Figure 11-40). It has
been formulated into a controlled-release product,
guanfacine ER, that allows once-daily administration,
and lower peak-dose side effects than immediate-release
guanfacine. Only the controlled-release version of
guanfacine is approved for treatment of ADHD. Clonidine
is a relatively nonselective agonist at α2 receptors, with
actions on α2A, α2B, and α2C receptors (Figure 11-41). In
addition, clonidine has actions on imidazoline receptors,
thought to be responsible for some of clonidine’s sedating
and hypotensive actions (Figure 11-41). Although the
actions of clonidine at α2A receptors exhibit therapeutic
potential for ADHD, its actions at other receptors may
increase side effects. Clonidine is approved for the
treatment of hypertension, but only the controlledrelease version of clonidine is approved for treatment of

ADHD. Both clonidine and guanfacine, especially in the
controlled-release formulations, are used “off-label” for
the treatment of conduct disorder, oppositional defiant
disorder, and Tourette syndrome. Unlike clonidine,
guanfacine is 15–60 times more selective for α2A receptors
than for α2B and α2C receptors. Additionally, guanfacine
is 10 times weaker than clonidine at inducing sedation
and lowering blood pressure, yet it is 25 times more
potent in enhancing prefrontal cortical function. The
therapeutic benefits of both clonidine and guanfacine are
hypothetically related to direct effects on postsynaptic
receptors in the prefrontal cortex, which lead to the
strengthening of network inputs, and to behavioral
improvements, as seen in Figures 11-42 and 11-43.
Who are the best candidates for monotherapy with
an α2 agonist? Hypothetically, the symptoms of ADHD
could be caused in some patients by NE levels being low
in the prefrontal cortex, without additional impairments
in DA neurotransmission (Figure 11-43A). This would
lead to scrambled signals lost within the background
noise, which could be seen behaviorally as hyperactivity,
impulsivity, and inattention (Figure 11-43A). In this
instance, treatment with a selective α2A agonist would
lead to an increased signal via direct stimulation of

Clonidine

Guanfacine
α 2A

α 2B
α 2C

α 2A

imidazoline

Figure 11-40 Guanfacine. Guanfacine is a selective α2A
receptor agonist. Specifically, guanfacine is 15–60 times more
selective for α2A receptors than for α2B and α2C receptors.

482

Figure 11-41 Clonidine. Clonidine is an α2 receptor agonist.
It is nonselective and thus binds to α2A, α2B, and α2C receptors.
Clonidine also binds to imidazoline receptors, which contributes
to its sedating and hypotensive effects.


<<<PAGE 499>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

11-42 Mechanism of action
The Mechanism of Action of Clonidine and Guanfacine Figure
of clonidine and guanfacine. Alphaand How They Affect the Three Alpha-2 Receptors 2-adrenergic receptors are present in

high concentrations in the prefrontal
cortex, but only in low concentrations
in the nucleus accumbens. There are
three types of α2 receptors: α2A, α2B,
and α2C. The most prevalent subtype in
the prefrontal cortex is the α2A receptor.
Alpha-2B receptors are mainly located
in the thalamus and are associated with
sedative effects. Alpha-2C receptors
are located in the locus coeruleus, with
few in the prefrontal cortex. Besides
being associated with hypotensive
effects, they also have sedative actions.
In ADHD, clonidine and guanfacine – by
stimulating postsynaptic receptors – can
increase NE signaling to normal levels.
The lack of action at postsynaptic DA
receptors parallels their lack of abuse
potential.

prefrontal cortex
NE
neuron

α 2B

DA
neuron

sedation
hypotension
NET

sedation

α2C
DA

guanfacine

clonidine
α2A

sedation
hypotension

imidazoline
receptor

α2A

D1

D2

+

+

+

+
+
+

Effects of an Alpha-2A Agonist in ADHD

noise

signal

DA concentration

NE low - signal reduced
DA optimized - noise reduced

sit still
behave
pay attention

hyperactivity
impulsivity
inattention

NE concentration

PFC strength of output

VMPFC

PFC strength of output

ADHD: Hypothetically Low Signals
Due to Low NE

Figure 11-43 Effects of an α2A
agonist in ADHD. (A) The symptoms
of ADHD could hypothetically be
due to low norepinephrine (NE)
levels in the prefrontal cortex (PFC),
without additional impairments in
dopamine (DA) neurotransmission.
The resulting scrambled signals may
manifest as hyperactivity, impulsivity,
and inattention. (B) Treatment with a
selective α2A agonist would lead to
increased signal via direct stimulation
of postsynaptic receptors, resulting in
an increased ability to sit still and focus.
VMPFC: ventromedial prefrontal cortex.

A

noise

hyperactivity
impulsivity
inattention

signal

sit still
behave
pay attention

NE concentration

PFC strength of output

VMPFC

PFC strength of output

Treatment with Alpha-2A Agonist

11

DA concentration

NE optimized - signal enhanced
DA optimized - noise reduced

B

483


<<<PAGE 500>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

postsynaptic receptors, and this would translate into the
patient being able to focus, sit still, and behave adequately
(Figure 11-43B). There is currently no way to identify
these patients in advance, other than by an empiric trial
of guanfacine ER.
Patients suffering from ADHD and oppositional
symptoms can be argumentative, disobedient, aggressive,
and exhibit temper tantrums (Figures 11-8 and 11-44A).
These behaviors are hypothetically linked to very low
levels of NE and low levels of DA in the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex (VMPFC), thus leading to much
reduced signal and increased noise (Figure 11-44A).
While treatment with a stimulant will improve the
situation by reducing the noise, it would not solve
any strong hypothetical NE deficiencies (Figure 1144B), therefore only partially improving behavior.

Augmenting a stimulant with an α2A agonist (Figure
11-44C) could hypothetically solve the problem by
optimizing the levels of NE, thus enhancing the signal,
in the presence of an already optimized DA output.
Behaviorally, this could hypothetically result in a patient
cooperating and behaving appropriately. Guanfacine
ER has been approved as an augmenting agent for
patients inadequately responsive to stimulants, and
may be especially helpful in patients with oppositional
symptoms.
Future Treatments for ADHD

There are ever-evolving new technologies for drug
delivery of amphetamine and methylphenidate and more
of these are in development, partly because they allow
customization of the duration of desired therapeutic

How to Treat ADHD and Oppositional Symptoms

noise

signal

behave
cooperate

temper tantrums
argumentative
disobedient
aggressive
A

NE concentration

PFC strength of output

VMPFC

PFC strength of output

ADHD and Oppositional Symptoms:
Hypothetically Very Low Signals in VMPFC

DA concentration

NE very low - signal much reduced
DA low - noise increased

signal

behave
cooperate

temper tantrums
argumentative
disobedient
aggressive
B

NE concentration

PFC strength of output

noise

PFC strength of output

Treatment: Stimulant
VMPFC

DA concentration

NE still low - signal still reduced
DA optimized - noise reduced

noise

temper tantrums
argumentative
disobedient
aggressive
C

484

signal

behave
cooperate

NE concentration

PFC strength of output

VMPFC

PFC strength of output

Treatment: Augment
Stimulant with Alpha-2A Agonist

DA concentration

NE optimized - signal increased
DA optimized - noise reduced

Figure 11-44 How to treat ADHD and
oppositional symptoms. Argumentative,
disobedient, and aggressive behaviors
are often seen in patients suffering from
ADHD and oppositional symptoms. (A)
These behaviors could theoretically be
due to very low levels of norepinephrine
(NE) and low levels of dopamine (DA)
in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(VMPFC), leading to much reduced
signal and increased noise. (B) While
treatment with a stimulant may
reduce the noise, it will not solve the
strong NE deficiencies, therefore only
partially improving behavior. (C) The
augmentation of a stimulant with an
α2A agonist could optimize the levels
of NE, thus enhancing the signal in the
presence of an already optimized DA
output.


<<<PAGE 501>>>
Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

The DAT inhibitor mazindol, once approved for
appetite suppression, is in testing and so is a triple (5HT–
NE–DA) reuptake inhibitor centanafadine.

Viloxazine ER

SUMMARY
5HT2B
NET
5HT2C

Figure 11-45 Viloxazine ER. Viloxazine is an inhibitor of
the norepinephrine transporter (NET) and also has actions at
serotonin 2B (5HT2B) and 5HT2C receptors. A controlled-release
formulation is in late-stage clinical development for ADHD.

action, and partially because they are patentable and
commercializable. One newer aspect of controlled-release
formulations is the potential to make them in a matrix
that resists attempts to powderize for inhaling, snorting,
smoking, or injecting.
A selective NRI called viloxazine (Figure 11-45),
once marketed abroad for the treatment of depression
but never marketed in the US, has been repurposed in a
controlled-release formulation for use in ADHD, and is
now in late-stage clinical development for ADHD.

ADHD has core symptoms of inattentiveness, impulsivity,
and hyperactivity, linked theoretically to specific
malfunctioning neuronal circuits in the prefrontal
cortex. ADHD can also be conceptualized as a disorder
of dysregulation of norepinephrine and dopamine in
the prefrontal cortex, including some patients with
deficient norepinephrine and dopamine and others with
excessive norepinephrine and dopamine. Treatments
theoretically return patients to normal efficiency of
information processing in prefrontal circuits. There are
differences between children and adults with ADHD,
and special considerations exist for how to treat these
two populations. The mechanisms of action, both in
terms of pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics,
for stimulant treatments of ADHD are discussed in
detail. The goal is to amplify tonic but not phasic
norepinephrine and dopamine actions in ADHD by
controlling the rate of stimulant drug delivery, the degree
of transporter occupancy, and the duration of transporter
occupancy. Theoretical mechanisms of action of selective
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors such as atomoxetine
and their possible advantages in adults with chronic
stress and comorbidities are discussed. Actions of α2Aadrenergic agonists are also presented.

11

485


<<<PAGE 502>>>
12

Dementia: Causes,
Symptomatic Treatments,
and the Neurotransmitter
Network Acetylcholine

Dementia: Diagnosis and Causes 487
What Is Dementia? 487
What Is Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)? 487
Four Major Causes of Dementia 488
Pursuit of Disease-Modifying Therapies by Targeting
Aβ in Alzheimer Disease 496
The Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis 496
Current Status of the Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis
and Treatments Targeting Aβ 499
Diagnosing Alzheimer Disease Before It Is Too
Late 499
Presymptomatic Stage 1 499
MCI Stage 2 500
Dementia Stage 3 502
Overview of Symptomatic Treatments for
Dementia 503
Targeting Acetylcholine for the Symptomatic
Treatment of Memory and Cognition in Alzheimer
Disease 505
Acetylcholine: Synthesis, Metabolism, Receptors, and
Pathways 505
Symptomatic Treatment of Memory and
Cognition in Alzheimer Disease by Inhibiting
Acetylcholinesterase 509

This chapter will provide a brief overview of the various
causes of dementia and their pathologies, including the
most recent diagnostic criteria, and how biomarkers are
beginning to be integrated into clinical practice, especially
for Alzheimer disease (AD). Full clinical and pathological
descriptions and formal criteria for how to diagnose
the numerous known dementias should be obtained by
consulting standard reference sources. The discussion
here will emphasize how various pathological mechanisms
in different dementias disrupt brain circuits and their
neurotransmitters. We will also show how disruption
of these brain circuits is linked to various symptoms of
dementia, and how drugs targeting these brain circuits
and their neurotransmitters lead to symptomatic
improvement, emphasizing memory, psychosis, and
agitation. The goal of this chapter is to acquaint the
486

Targeting Glutamate for the Symptomatic Treatment
of Memory and Cognition in Alzheimer Disease 515
Memantine 516
Targeting the Behavioral Symptoms of Dementia 521
Defining Agitation and Psychosis in Alzheimer
Disease 521
Pharmacological Treatment of Psychosis and Agitation
in Dementia 523
Targeting Serotonin for the Symptomatic Treatment
of Dementia-Related Psychosis 524
Neuronal Networks of Agitation in Alzheimer
Disease 528
Targeting Multimodal Neurotransmitters
(Norepinephrine, Serotonin, and Dopamine) for the
Symptomatic Treatment of Agitation in Alzheimer
Disease 530
Targeting Glutamate for the Symptomatic Treatment
of Agitation in Alzheimer Disease 533
Treating Depression in Dementia 534
Pseudobulbar Affect (Pathological Laughing and
Crying) 535
Apathy 536
Other Treatments for the Behavioral Symptoms of
Dementia 537
Summary 537

reader with ideas about the clinical and biological aspects
of dementia and its current management with various
approved drugs as well as novel agents on the horizon.
Although hopes have faded for the early development of
disease-modifying treatments that could slow, halt, or
reverse the pathological processes underlying dementia,
several new treatments improve behavioral symptoms
of dementia such as psychosis and agitation, which are
becoming more problematic as the number of patients
with dementia explodes. Thus, the emphasis here is on
the biological basis of symptoms of dementia and of their
relief by psychopharmacological agents, as well as the
mechanism of action of drugs that treat these symptoms.
For details of doses, side effects, drug interactions,
and other issues relevant to the prescribing of these
drugs in clinical practice, the reader should consult


<<<PAGE 503>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

standard drug handbooks (such as Stahl’s Essential
Psychopharmacology: the Prescriber’s Guide).

DEMENTIA: DIAGNOSIS AND
CAUSES
What Is Dementia?

Instead, MCI represents only mild cognitive decline
that does not (yet) significantly affect the ability to
carry out activities of daily living. Not all patients with
MCI will go on to develop dementia. In fact, there is
great debate about what MCI is versus “normal aging.”
Table 12-1 All-cause dementia diagnosis

The term “dementia” describes cognitive and
neuropsychiatric symptoms severe enough to interfere
with the ability to perform usual activities, causing
definite decline from previous levels of functioning (Table
12-1). These symptoms include cognitive dysfunction,
memory loss, reasoning impairment, visual spatial
impairment, language and communication issues, and
behavioral symptoms such as psychosis and agitation
(Table 12-1).
What Is Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)?

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is often confused
with dementia and is often a precursor of dementia but
MCI itself is not dementia (Figure 12-1 and Table 12-2).

All-cause dementia
• Cognitive/neurospsychiatric symptoms that
interfere with ability to perform usual activities
• Decline from previous levels of functioning
• Not attributable to delirium or a major psychiatric
disorder
• Cognitive impairment diagnosed through
neuropsychological testing or patient informant
• Cognitive impairment involves two of the
following:
oo Impaired ability to acquire/retain new information
oo Reasoning impairment
oo Visuospatial impairment
oo Changes in personality or behavior

Mild Cognitive Impairment

15-20% of
individuals age 65+
have MCI

Figure 12-1 Mild cognitive impairment
(MCI). Many older adults have
subjective memory complaints. A subset
of those adults has mild cognitive
impairment (MCI), which denotes the
presence of mild cognitive decline
that does not significantly affect the
ability to carry out activities of daily
living and does not meet the threshold
for dementia. Although MCI is evident
in the early, prodromal stages of
Alzheimer disease (AD), not all patients
with MCI will go on to develop AD. In
fact, many individuals with cognitive
impairment may actually have a
psychiatric disorder (e.g., depression)
or a sleep disorder. Within 3 years,
approximately 35% of individuals with
MCI develop AD.

JUNE

3 years

35% of individuals
with MCI develop AD

12

487


<<<PAGE 504>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Hopefully, the study of biomarkers and neuroimaging
will be able to settle this in the future. From a purely
clinical perspective, over half of elderly residents living
in the community have four common subjective memory
complaints (SMCs). Compared to their functioning of
5 or 10 years ago, they experience diminished ability
(1) to remember names, (2) to find the correct word,
(3) to remember where objects are located, and (4) to
concentrate. When such complaints occur in the absence
of overt dementia, depression, anxiety disorder, sleep/
wake disorder, pain disorder, or ADHD (attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder), they are called MCI by many
experts. Others reserve the term MCI only for those
in the earliest stages of AD (“predementia AD,” “MCI
due to AD,” or “prodromal AD”), but at this time it is
not possible to determine those with SMCs who are
destined to progress to AD and those who are not. Thus,
MCI tends to be used as a general term encompassing
all causes of subjective memory complaints. Attempts
are being made to use biomarkers to distinguish those
with normal aging from those with reversible conditions
such as depression, from those destined to progress to
AD or another dementia. On clinical grounds alone and
without biomarkers, studies show that between 6% and
15% of MCI patients convert to a diagnosis of dementia
every year; after 5 years about half meet the criteria
for dementia; after 10 years or autopsy, up to 80% will
prove to have AD. Thus, MCI is not always a prodrome of
dementia, but it often is. Reversible and treatable causes

of MCI should be pursued vigorously, properly diagnosed,
and treated whenever possible.
Four Major Causes of Dementia

Over 35 million individuals worldwide have some form
of dementia and this number is growing rapidly. There
are numerous causes of dementia with many different
pathological origins, but these all have both overlapping
as well as distinctive clinical characteristics (Table 12-2)
and neuroimaging findings (Table 12-3). The four major
causes are AD, vascular dementia, Lewy body dementias
(LBD), and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) (Table 12-2
and Table 12-3).
Alzheimer Disease (AD)

Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common cause of
dementia and arguably the most devastating age-related
disorder, with profound consequences to patients, family
members, caregivers, and the economy. An estimated
5.4 million Americans currently have AD and, in the
absence of any disease-modifying treatment, cases
will more than double to 14 million by 2050. The three
pathological hallmarks of AD seen in the brain at autopsy
are: (1) amyloid-beta (Aβ), aggregated into plaques; (2)
neurofibrillary tangles composed of hyperphosphorylated
tau protein; and (3) substantial neuronal cell loss
(Figure 12-2). The loss of neurons is often so profound
that it can be seen with the naked eye upon postmortem
examination of the brain (Figure 12-3).

Table 12-2 Differential diagnosis: clinical presentation

Mild cognitive
impairment (MCI)

Alzheimer disease
(AD)

Vascular dementia

Lewy body
dementias (LBD)

Frontotemporal
degeneration (FTD)

Reduced speed of
mental processing
and choice reaction
times
Benign
forgetfulness that is
mild, inconsistent,
and not associated
with functional
impairment

Short-term
memory loss
Impaired executive
function
Difficulty with
activities of daily
living
Time and spatial
disorientation
Language
impairment,
personality
changes

Impaired abstraction,
mental flexibility,
processing speed,
and working memory
Verbal memory is
better preserved
Slower cognitive
decline
Dementia occurs
within several months
of a stroke

Visual hallucinations
Spontaneous
parkinsonism
Cognitive fluctuations
Visuospatial, attention,
and executive function
deficits are worse
Memory impairment is
not as severe
Earlier presentation
of psychosis and
personality changes
Rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep
disturbances

Progressive
behavioral and
personality changes
that impair social
conduct (apathy,
disinhibition, etc.)
Language
impairment
Possibly preserved
episodic memory

488


<<<PAGE 505>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

Table 12-3 Differential diagnosis: neural imaging

Alzheimer
disease (AD)

Vascular dementia

Lewy body
dementias (LBD)

Frontotemporal
degeneration (FTD)

MRI

Medial temporal
lobe atrophy

Medial temporal lobe atrophy;
white matter abnormalities

Medial temporal lobe
atrophy

Medial temporal
lobe atrophy

FDG PET

Temporo-parietal
cortices

Fronto-subcortical networks

Parieto-occipital and
temporo-parietal cortices

Frontotemporal
cortices

Alzheimer Disease Pathology

Figure 12-2 Alzheimer disease
pathology. Two of the major pathological
hallmarks seen in the Alzheimer disease
brain at autopsy are plaques composed of
Aβ and neurofibrillary tangles composed
of hyperphosphorylated tau protein.

plaque

tangle

Alzheimer Disease Pathology:
Neuronal Death
Healthy brain

AD brain

Figure 12-3 Alzheimer disease
pathology: neuronal death. The third
major pathological hallmark seen in
the Alzheimer disease (AD) brain at
autopsy is neuronal cell loss; it is often
so profound that it can be seen with the
naked eye on postmortem examination.
Loss of neurons occurs in limbic and
cortical regions and profoundly affects
cholinergic neurons, although other
neurotransmitter systems are also
impacted.

12

489


<<<PAGE 506>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

FDG PET

decreasing
glucose
metabolism

normal

MCI

Alzheimer disease

Figure 12-4 FDG PET. In living brains, neuronal loss in Alzheimer disease can be detected using 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron
emission tomography (FDG PET), which measures glucose metabolism in the brain. In the normal brain, glucose metabolism is robust. In mild
cognitive impairment (MCI), reductions in glucose metabolism are evident in more posterior brain regions such as the temporo-parietal cortex.
In Alzheimer disease (AD), glucose hypometabolism in posterior regions becomes even more evident. The FDG PET abnormalities seen in
patients with AD are believed to reflect accumulating neurodegeneration. FDG PET results can be informative but are not diagnostic for AD.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging

A

Figure 12-5 Magnetic resonance
imaging. In living brains, neuronal
loss in Alzheimer disease (AD) can be
detected using magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), particularly in the medial
temporal lobes; changes that have been
seen include hippocampal atrophy (A),
ventricular enlargement (B), and loss of
cortical thickness (C). MRI results can
be informative but are not diagnostic
for AD.

B

hippocampal atrophy

ventricular enlargement

C

loss of cortical thickness

Neuronal loss in AD can be detected in living
patients by measuring brain glucose utilization, using
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG
PET) (Figure 12-4). The brains of normal, healthy controls
show robust glucose metabolism throughout the brain, but
in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) there can be reduction
490

in brain glucose metabolism in more posterior brain
regions such as temporo-parietal cortex (Figure 12-4).
As the disease progresses to full-blown AD, brain glucose
hypometabolism in posterior areas becomes more and
more evident on FDG PET (Figure 12-4). The worsening of
glucose metabolism with the progression of AD is believed


<<<PAGE 507>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

to reflect accumulating neurodegeneration, especially in
key brain areas such as temporo-parietal cortices.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can also detect loss
of neurons in living patients with AD, particularly in the
medial temporal lobes (Figure 12-5). Even patients with
mild AD may have 20–30% loss of entorhinal cortex volume,
15–25% loss of hippocampal volume, as well as ventricular

enlargement (Figure 12-5). By the time a patient begins to
exhibit even mild signs of dementia due to AD, damage to
the brain may already be extensive and irreversible.
Vascular Dementia

Vascular dementia is the second most common form
of dementia and accounts for about 20% of dementia
cases (Figure 12-6). Vascular dementia is essentially a

Vascular Dementia

FDG PET

Vascular
Dementia

Alzheimer’s
Disease

decreasing
glucose
metabolism

MRI

12
Increasing severity of white-matter hyperintensities in Vascular
vascular D
dementia
ementia
Figure 12-6 Vascular dementia. Vascular dementia is a neurological manifestation of cardiovascular disease, with decreased
cerebral blood flow attributable to myriad pathologies including atherosclerosis, arteriosclerosis, infarcts, white-matter changes,
and microbleeds, as well as deposition of Aβ into cerebral blood vessels. Vascular dementia and Alzheimer disease (AD) frequently
overlap. In “pure” vascular dementia, the pattern of hypoperfusion on FDG PET is different than that for AD, with hypometabolism in
the sensorimotor and subcortical areas and a relative sparing of the association cortex. On MRI, patients with vascular dementia show
increasing severity of white-matter hyperintensities.

491


<<<PAGE 508>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

12-7 Alzheimer disease/vascular dementia
Alzheimer Disease/Vascular Dementia Comorbidity Figure
comorbidity. A large portion of individuals with Alzheimer

disease have comorbid vascular dementia pathology. This
is hypothesized to occur due to a dynamic relationship
between Aβ metabolism and cerebral vasculature integrity.
That is, the deposition of Aβ into cerebral blood vessels
hypothetically increases risk for vascular dementia;
conversely, loss of integrity and increased permeability of
the blood–brain barrier hypothetically increases production
or decreases clearance of Aβ.

Increased production/decreased
clearance of A

Loss of cerebral
blood-vessel integrity

Lewy Bodies and Lewy Neurites

neurological manifestation of cardiovascular disease,
with decreased cerebral blood flow attributable to
atherosclerosis, infarcts, white-matter changes, and
microbleeds, as well as deposition of Aβ into cerebral blood
vessels (Figure 12-6). In fact, approximately 30% of elderly
individuals who have a stroke will experience post-stroke
cognitive impairment and/or dementia. Many of the risk
factors associated with peripheral cardiovascular disease
(e.g., hypertension, smoking, heart disease, high cholesterol,
diabetes) are also linked with vascular dementia.
Vascular dementia and AD frequently overlap.
Relatively “pure” vascular dementia cases show a different
pattern of hypoperfusion (diminished blood flow) on
FDG PET than AD (Figure 12-6). In vascular dementia,
FDG PET indicates hypometabolism in sensorimotor and
subcortical areas, with relative sparing of the association
cortex whereas – as mentioned above – in AD, FDG-PET
scans show reduction in brain glucose metabolism in
more posterior brain regions such as the temporo-parietal
cortex (Figures 12-4 and 12-6).
A large portion of individuals with AD, however, also
have comorbid vascular dementia pathology, and this
overlap may occur in part due to a dynamic relationship
between Aβ metabolism and cerebral vasculature
integrity (Figure 12-7). That is, deposition of Aβ into
cerebral blood vessels hypothetically increases the risk
for vascular dementia and, conversely, loss of integrity
and increased permeability of the blood–brain barrier
hypothetically increases production or reduces clearance
of Aβ from the brain (Figure 12-7).
492

Lewy bodies

Lewy neurites

Figure 12-8 Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites. The pathology of
both dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson’s disease
dementia (PDD) includes the abnormal accumulation of a
protein called α-synuclein. These aggregates form Lewy bodies
and Lewy neurites, which are observable upon histopathological
staining. In addition to α-synuclein, Lewy bodies and Lewy
neurites may also contain various other proteins, such as
neurofilaments, parkin, and ubiquitin.

Lewy Body Dementias (LBD)

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and the related
Parkinson’s disease dementia (PDD) are collectively
known as Lewy body dementias (LBD), and account
for about 10–15% of all cases of dementia. However,
only an estimated 20% of LBD patients have “pure” LBD
since approximately 80% of LBD patients will also have
pathological features of other dementias, especially AD


<<<PAGE 509>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

pathology. DLB and PDD share pathological links to the
abnormal accumulation of a protein called α-synuclein,
and thus both are also called “synucleinopathies.” In LBD,
for unknown reasons, α-synuclein proteins aggregate to
form oligomers, eventually turning into “Lewy bodies”
and Lewy neurites, as neurons degenerate (Figure 12-8).
The diagnostic criteria for the diagnosis of probable
DLB and for possible DLB are given in Table 12-4.
In terms of PDD, the majority (~80%) of patients
with Parkinson’s disease (PD) will develop cognitive
dysfunction from one cause or another as the disease
progresses, with the average time from diagnosis of PD
to onset of dementia being 10 years. PDD is associated
with increased morbidity and death ultimately occurring,
on average, 4 years after PDD onset. As with AD, the
harbinger of dementia in PD is often MCI. Symptoms
of PDD include impairments in memory (including
recognition), executive dysfunction, deficits in attention,
and altered visual perception. The pathological basis for
PDD is hypothesized to be neuronal degeneration and
atrophy occurring in the thalamus, caudate nucleus,
and hippocampus, as Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites
accumulate there (Figure 12-9). Lewy body pathology
is also often found in neocortical areas; however, the

Table 12-4 Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB): diagnosis

Presence of Dementia
core features
• Fluctuating attention and concentration
• Recurrent well-formed visual hallucinations
• Spontaneous parkinsonism
suggestive clinical features
• Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder
• Severe neuroleptic sensitivity
• Low dopamine transporters uptake in basal
ganglia on SPECT or PET
supportive clinical features
• Repeated falls
• Transient loss of consciousness
• Hallucinations in other sensory modalities
• Severe autonomic dysfunction
• Depression
• Delusions
• Syncope
factors that make dlb diagnosis less likely
• Presence of cerebrovascular disease
• Presence of any other physical illness or brain
disorder that may account in part or in total for the
clinical picture
• Parkinsonism appears for the first time at a stage
of severe dementia

Parkinson’s Disease Dementia

neocortex

caudate nucleus

Figure 12-9 Parkinson’s disease dementia. The
pathological basis for Parkinson’s disease
dementia (PDD) is hypothesized to be neuronal
degeneration and atrophy occurring in the
thalamus, caudate nucleus, and hippocampus.
Lewy body pathology is also often found in
neocortical areas; however, the severity of
dementia in Parkinson’s disease correlates with
the severity of α-synuclein (as well as amyloid and
tau) pathology in limbic regions.

12

thalamus

hippocampus
493


<<<PAGE 510>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

severity of α-synuclein (as well as amyloid and tau)
pathology in limbic regions correlates with the severity
of dementia in PDD. There is much debate over whether
DLB and PDD are actually the same disease with
slightly different clinical expression and progression,
or two distinct diseases (Figure 12-10). Certainly, PDD
and DLB share many pathophysiological and clinical
characteristics, and the differential diagnosis between
DLB and PDD relies mainly on when there is onset of
motor symptoms versus when there is onset of dementia.
That is, if motor symptoms precede dementia by 1 year or
more, the diagnosis is PDD; however, if dementia occurs
at the same time or precedes the onset of parkinsonism,
the diagnosis is DLB. Many argue that this “1-year rule” is
arbitrary and offers little in terms of treatment guidance.
Although AD and PD have historically been viewed as
two distinct entities, the overlap between the disorders
has increasingly been recognized. As many as 70% of
patients with AD eventually show extrapyramidal and
parkinsonian symptoms, and Lewy bodies are seen in
~30% of patients with AD. Likewise, ~50% of patients
with PD develop dementia and often have Alzheimer-type
Differential Diagnosis: Dementia with Lewy
Bodies vs. Parkinson’s Disease Dementia

Motor symptoms precede dementia
by at least 1 year

PDD

Dementia occurs at the same
time or precedes motor symptoms
by up to 1 year

DLB

Figure 12-10 Dementia with Lewy bodies versus Parkinson’s
disease dementia. Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and
Parkinson’s disease dementia (PDD) share many pathophysiological
and clinical characteristics. The differential diagnosis relies mainly on
the onset of motor symptoms versus the onset of dementia. If motor
symptoms precede dementia by 1 year or more, the diagnosis is
PDD. If dementia occurs at the same time or precedes the onset of
parkinsonism, the diagnosis is DLB. Many argue that this “1-year
rule” is arbitrary and offers little in terms of treatment guidance.

494

pathology. DLB shares many neuropsychiatric features
with AD as well as many motor features (albeit often less
severe) with PD. Due to this overlap in pathology and
clinical presentation, some now propose that AD and PD
may lie on opposite ends of a spectrum, with DLB falling
somewhere between AD and PD (Figure 12-11). It has
been proposed that an individual’s neuropsychiatric and
physical clinical presentation may be a result of the unique
combination of pathological proteins present in the brain
as well as the particular brain regions most affected (i.e.,
more or less AD pathology plus more or less PD pathology
combined with a cortical versus subcortical abundance of
pathology determines where they land on the spectrum.)
Frontotemporal Dementia

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is about as common as
LBD, with a worldwide prevalence of 3–26% in individuals
aged 65 years and older and an average age of onset of 50–
65 years. FTD (Figure 12-12) is divided into four subtypes:
a behavioral variant (bvFTD) (Table 12-5), and three
primary progressive aphasia variants (Figure 12-12). The
behavioral variant, bvFTD, the most common of the FTD
subtypes, usually presents with gradual and progressive
personality changes (such as disinhibition, apathy, and
loss of sympathy and empathy), hyperorality, perseverative
or compulsive behaviors, and, eventually, cognitive deficits
with a general sparing of visuospatial abilities. Patients
with bvFTD are often unaware of their inappropriate
behaviors, and contrary to patients with AD, do not
typically have rapid memory loss and may do fairly well
in memory tasks if provided cues. Pathologically, bvFTD
is characterized by frontal and anterior temporal cortex
atrophy, particularly the prefrontal cortex, insula, anterior
cingulate, striatum, and thalamus, with the non-dominant
hemisphere typically more affected. The diagnosis of
FTD can be somewhat complex as clinical presentation
and pathology often overlap with those of several other
dementias, and many patients exhibit parkinsonian-like
features. FTD can often be differentiated from AD by the
absence of AD biomarkers.
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is an
umbrella term describing a group of different disorders
with varying clinical presentations, genetics, and
pathophysiology. We have already mentioned that
aggregation of phosphorylated tau into neurofibrillary
tangles is a hallmark feature of AD (Figure 12-2).
Mutations in the gene coding for the tau protein
(microtubule-associated protein tau; MAPT) is actually
not associated with AD but with several forms of FTLD
that may have aggregation and progression of tau
pathology (Figure 12-13).


<<<PAGE 511>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

Parkinson's Disease-Alzheimer Disease
Spectrum Hypothesis
AD

DLB

PD

Lewy Body Pathology and Motor Dysfunction

A /Tau Pathology and Memory Deficits

A

NFT

Figure 12-11 Parkinson’s disease–
Alzheimer disease spectrum
hypothesis. There are clinical and
pathological overlaps between
Parkinson’s disease (PD) and Alzheimer
disease (AD). As many as 70% of
patients with AD eventually show
extrapyramidal and parkinsonian
symptoms, and Lewy bodies are seen
in approximately 30% of patients with
AD. Likewise, approximately half of
patients with PD develop dementia and
often have Alzheimer-type pathology.
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)
shares many neuropsychiatric features
with AD as well as many motor features
(albeit often less severe) with PD. Due
to this overlap in pathology and clinical
presentation, some now propose
that AD and PD may lie on opposite
ends of a spectrum, with DLB falling
somewhere between AD and PD. It
has been proposed that an individual’s
clinical presentation may be a result of
the unique combination of pathological
proteins present in the brain as well
as the particular brain regions most
affected.

Lewy body

neurofibrillary tangle

Frontotemporal Dementia
Table 12-5 Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD)
FTD

bvFTD

Clinical presentation

Primary Progressive Aphasias

svPPA

nfvPPA

IvPPA

Progressive personality changes:
• disinhibition
• apathy
• loss of sympathy/empathy
Hyperorality
Perseverative/compulsive behaviors
Cognitive deficits
Cued memory and visuospatial abilities spared
Pathological presentation

Figure 12-12 Frontotemporal dementia. Frontotemporal
dementia (FTD) is divided into four subtypes: behavioral variant
FTD (bvFTD) and three primary progressive aphasias (semantic
variant primary progressive aphasia [svPPA], non-fluent variant
primary progressive aphasia [nfvPPA]), and logopenic variant
primary progressive aphasia [lvPPA]); bvFTD is the most
common subtype. The diagnosis of FTD can be somewhat
complex as clinical presentation and pathology often overlap
with that of other dementias. FTD can often be differentiated
from Alzheimer disease (AD) by the absence of AD biomarkers.

Atrophy in:
• prefrontal cortex
• insula
• anterior cingulate
• striatum
• thalamus
Non-dominant hemisphere more affected

Mixed Dementia

clinical practice (Figure 12-14). Postmortem analyses
indeed reveal that most dementia patients exhibit mixed
pathology, comprising various combinations of abnormal
protein aggregates plus vascular changes (Figure 12-14).
If each dementia were not complicated enough,
combinations of dementia in a single individual

As can be seen from our discussion so far, many
individuals present with the clinical, neuroimaging, and
pathological characteristics of more than one dementia
(i.e., “mixed dementia”), making distinctions amongst
the various causes of dementia often very difficult in

12

495


<<<PAGE 512>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

compound the complexity of diagnosis and eventually
will compound the complexity of treatment. For
example, in one study of community-dwelling adults,
56% of dementia patients were diagnosed with multiple

Microtubule-Associated Protein Tau (MAPT)
Mutations in MAPT gene

Altered ratio of tau 3R and 4R isoforms

underlying pathologies (AD in combination with either
LBD, cerebrovascular injuries, or both). After adjusting
for age, individuals with multiple diagnoses were deemed
to be nearly three times more likely to develop dementia
as those with a single underlying pathology. In another
study, 59–68% of patients with AD neuropathology also
displayed Lewy body pathology or vascular brain injury.
Differential diagnosis of the various dementias during life
will become more important when specific treatments for
specific forms of dementia become available. However,
most patients will have more than one cause of dementia
and ultimately may require more than one type of
treatment.

3R tau (three micr otubulebinding domains)

PURSUIT OF DISEASEMODIFYING THERAPIES BY
TARGETING Aß IN ALZHEIMER
DISEASE

4R tau (four
microtubulebinding domains)

The Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis

microtubule

Figure 12-13 Microtubule-associated protein tau. Mutations
in the gene coding for the tau protein (microtubule-associated
protein tau; MAPT) are associated with several forms of
frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Typically, these mutations
change the ratio of tau 3R and 4R isoforms, leading to an
accumulation of pathological tau.

According to this hypothesis, Alzheimer disease (AD) is
caused by the accumulation of toxic Aβ, which form into
plaques, hyperphosphorylation of tau, neurofibrillary
tangle formation, synaptic dysfunction, and ultimately
neuron loss with memory loss and dementia (Figure 1215). This notion is somewhat analogous to how abnormal
deposition of cholesterol in blood vessels is thought to
cause atherosclerosis. A corollary to the amyloid cascade

Mixed Dementia
No pathology

Non-AD pathology only

AD pathology only

Vascular pathology only

AD + Non-AD pathology

Non-AD + Vascular pathology

AD + Vascular pathology

AD + Non-AD + Vascular pathology

1%1% 3%
5%

8%
8%

47%
27%

496

Figure 12-14 Mixed dementia. Dementias
with only one type of pathology are likely the
exception rather than the rule. Postmortem
pathological analyses reveal that most patients
with dementia have mixed pathology, comprising
various combinations of abnormal protein
aggregates and vascular changes.


<<<PAGE 513>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

hypothesis is that if the cascade could be blocked and
Aβ prevented from forming, aggregating, and creating
plaques and tangles, AD would be prevented, halted, or
even reversed.
Aβ is formed when a precursor protein (amyloid
precursor protein or APP) is cut by enzymes into
smaller peptides (Figures 12-16 and 12-17). There
are two enzymatic cleavage pathways by which APP
may be processed: the non-amyloidogenic and the
amyloidogenic pathways. In the non-amyloidogenic
pathway, APP is cleaved by the enzyme α-secretase
directly in the portion of APP where Aβ sits; thus,
processing of APP by α-secretase thereby precludes
production of Aβ. In the amyloidogenic pathway, APP
is first cleaved by β-secretase and then by γ-secretase
(Figure 12-16). Gamma-secretase cuts APP into several
Aβ peptides, ranging from 38 to 43 amino acids long
(Figure 12-17). The Aβ40 isoform is the most common
form; however, the Aβ42 isoform is more prone to
aggregation into oligomers and is considered the more
toxic form of Aβ peptides. The Aβ43 isoform is relatively
rare but is thought to be even more prone to aggregation
than Aβ42. The Aβ-processing enzymes α-, β-, and
γ-secretase have all been the targets of novel potential
treatments for AD in the hopes that by preventing the
processing of APP into amyloidogenic peptides, this
would prevent AD (Table 12-6). Unfortunately, to date,
these therapeutic approaches have been ineffective,
unsafe, or both.

Table 12-6 Potential disease-modifying treatments for
Alzheimer disease

Agents targeting Aß pathology
Anti-amyloid antibodies
Active Aβ immunization
ß-secretase inhibitors
γ-secretase inhibitors
α-secretase promoters
Aβ aggregation inhibitors
Agents targeting tau pathology
Anti-tau antibodies
Active tau immunization
Tau aggregation inhibitors
Microtubule stabilizers
Tau phosphorylation inhibitors

Mutations in several genes associated with AD lead
to increased processing of APP via the amyloidogenic
pathway, supporting the amyloid cascade hypothesis.
Another genetic factor related to Aβ processing that
is linked to AD is the gene (called APOE) for a protein
called apolipoprotein E (ApoE), which transports the
cholesterol needed by neurons for synapse development,
dendrite formation, long-term potentiation, and axonal
guidance. ApoE protein is also hypothesized to have an
intricate relationship with Aβ metabolism, aggregation,
and deposition in the brain. There are several forms of
the APOE gene (Figure 12-18). Inheritance of even one
copy of the APOE4 gene results in a threefold increase in

The Importance of Early Detection
increased
production/
reduced
degradation of
amyloid beta

hyperphosphorylation
of tau
P

P

P
P

P

P

P

Intervene here?

P
P

plaque
formation

P

P

P

synaptic
dysfunction
and neuron
loss

NFT
formation

memory loss/
cognitive deficits

Figure 12-15 Importance of early
detection. Alzheimer disease is
hypothesized to be caused by increased
production and/or reduced degradation
of Aβ leading to plaque formation,
hyperphosphorylation of tau, and
neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) formation,
synaptic dysfunction, and ultimately
neuronal cell loss that presents with
memory loss and cognitive deficits.
Intervention at the stage of obvious
memory loss and cognitive decline may
be too late, as neurodegeneration has
already occurred. If intervention were
possible much earlier, then perhaps
the cascade of toxic events could be
avoided.

Too late for
intervention

497

12


<<<PAGE 514>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Amyloid Precursor Protein
COOH

NH2

Non-amyloidogenic pathway
COOH

NH2

Figure 12-16 Amyloid precursor
protein. The Aβ peptide is cut from
a larger protein called the amyloid
precursor protein (APP). There are two
cleavage pathways by which APP may
be processed: the non-amyloidogenic
and the amyloidogenic pathways. In
the non-amyloidogenic pathway, APP is
cleaved by an enzyme termed α-secretase
directly in the portion of APP where Aβ
sits; processing of APP by α-secretase
thereby precludes production of Aβ. In
the amyloidogenic pathway, APP is first
cleaved by β-secretase at the amino (NH2)
border of Aβ and then by γ-secretase.

-secretase

Amyloidogenic pathway

COOH

NH2
-secretase
-secretase

Amyloid-Beta Isoforms

-secretase

40
42

43

498

Most common isoform
Less prone to aggregation

Less common isoform
More prone to aggregation
Rare isoform
Most prone to aggregation

Figure 12-17 Aβ isoforms. Gamma-secretase cuts
APP into several Aβ peptides, ranging from 38 to
43 amino acids long. The Aβ40 isoform is the most
common form; however, the Aβ42 isoform is more
prone to aggregation into oligomers. The Aβ43
isoform is relatively rare but is thought to be even
more prone to aggregation than the Aβ42 isoform.


<<<PAGE 515>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

the risk of developing AD; inheritance of two copies of
APOE4 leads to a tenfold increased AD risk. Conversely,
the APOE2 gene appears to offer some protection from AD
whereas the APOE3 gene (the most common form of the
APOE gene) conveys a risk that falls between APOE2 and
APOE4. Approximately 15% of individuals in the general
population carry the APOE4 allele (Figure 12-18). However,
amongst individuals with AD, 44% carry the APOE4 allele.
Current Status of the Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis
and Treatments Targeting Aß

The amyloid cascade hypothesis has dominated thinking
about the pathogenesis of AD for over 30 years, and
has led to a several-decades-long pursuit of treatments
targeting Aβ in the hope that this would prevent, halt, or
even reverse AD. Although numerous drugs have been
developed that successfully engage Aβ-related targets,
none has (yet) been shown to have therapeutic benefit in

Apolipoprotein E

8%

15%

77%

Figure 12-18 Apolipoprotein E. Of the genetic factors that
contribute to the risk of developing Alzheimer disease (AD), the
gene for apolipoprotein E (ApoE) appears to have the greatest
influence. ApoE is a protein that transports the cholesterol
needed by neurons for synapse development, dendrite
formation, long-term potentiation, and axonal guidance. ApoE
is also hypothesized to affect Aβ metabolism, aggregation,
and deposition in the brain. Inheritance of even one copy of
the APOE4 allele results in a threefold increase in the risk of
developing AD; inheritance of two copies of APOE4 leads
to a tenfold increased risk of developing AD. Approximately
15% of individuals in the general population carry the APOE4
allele; however, among individuals with AD, 44% carry the
APOE4 allele. Conversely, the APOE2 allele appears to offer
some protection from AD, whereas the APOE3 allele (the most
common form of the APOE gene) conveys a risk that falls
between APOE2 and APOE4.

AD (Table 12-6). Given the many failures of treatments
that target Aβ in AD, not all experts are convinced any
more that the amyloid cascade hypothesis is correct. An
alternate theory is that Aβ formation is an epiphenomenon
in AD that occurs simultaneously alongside
neurodegeneration and thus is only a “tombstone” serving
as a marker of neuronal death, but is not the cause of
neurodegeneration. Just as eliminating all tombstones
will not halt people from dying, eliminating Aβ will not
necessarily prevent neurons from degenerating in AD.
On the other hand, remaining proponents of the
amyloid cascade hypothesis claim that previous anti-Aβ
clinical trials have failed not because the hypothesis is
wrong, but because the subjects enrolled in such trials
have progressed too far in terms of irreversible damage
to the brain (Figure 12-15). The many negative trials of
Aβ-targeting therapies have all enrolled patients with
clinically diagnosable AD or MCI and supporters of
the amyloid cascade hypothesis theorize that once the
amyloid cascade is set into motion, the detrimental effects
(including oxidative stress, inflammation, the formation
of neurofibrillary tangles, and synaptic dysfunction)
may become a self-perpetuating cycle of destruction
whereby further Aβ accumulation becomes irrelevant
(Figure 12-15). Accordingly, these proponents believe
that anti-Aβ therapies must be initiated at the earliest
sign of Aβ accumulation possible – before the amyloid
cascade is irreversibly set into motion and consequently
before clinical signs of AD or even MCI are evident. Thus,
for successful future treatment, there is the need to be
able to diagnose AD in the asymptomatic stage. To that
end, a great deal of research has focused on diagnosing
AD not only long before death but also long before
neurodegeneration sets in. Thus, AD is now conceptualized
as occurring in three stages: presymptomatic, MCI, and
dementia stages (Figure 12-19).

DIAGNOSING ALZHEIMER
DISEASE BEFORE IT IS TOO LATE
Presymptomatic Stage 1

The presymptomatic stage 1 of AD (Figure 12-19) is also
called asymptomatic amyloidosis. The neurodegenerative
process in AD appears to start silently as Aβ accumulates in
the brain. Aβ is detectable at the presymptomatic stage of
AD using PET scans and radioactive neuroimaging tracers
that label Aβ plaques (Figure 12-20). It is rarely detected in
the brains of individuals under the age of 50 and although
most cognitively normal healthy elderly people show no
499

12


<<<PAGE 516>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Three Stages of Alzheimer Disease
amyloid PET
CSF Aβ

amyloidosis

100%

asymptomatic

FDG PET

1. presymptomatic
CSF tau
MRI

cognitive function

neurodegeneration

2. MCI

episodic memory
no dementia

3. dementia
0%

actual disease
onset (amyloidosis)

apparent
neurodegeneration
and actual
symptom onset

current diagnosis
made and
symptomatic
treatments given

Figure 12-19 The three stages of Alzheimer disease. Stage 1 of Alzheimer disease (AD) is called presymptomatic or asymptomatic
amyloidosis. During stage 1, cognition is intact despite elevated levels of Aβ in the brain as evidenced by both positive Aβ positron
emission tomography (PET) and reduced levels of Aβ toxic peptides in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). In the second stage, clinical signs of
cognitive impairment in the form of episodic memory deficits begin to manifest. The onset of clinical symptoms in stage 2 appears to be
correlated with neurodegeneration, as evidenced by elevated CSF tau, brain glucose hypometabolism on fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography (FDG PET) scans, and volume loss in key brain regions on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans. During stage
3 of AD (dementia), cognitive deficits can be severe. Currently, treatment of AD symptoms does not typically begin until stage 3, long
after the actual disease onset.

evidence of Aβ deposition (Figure 12-20A), about a quarter
of cognitively normal elderly controls are Aβ positive
(Figure 12-20B and Figure 12-21), and are thus considered
to have presymptomatic AD. Seeing Aβ on a PET scan
may mean that the fuse is already lit for the development
of AD even if there are no symptoms yet. Cerebrospinal
500

fluid (CSF) levels of Aβ are also low at this stage of the
illness because Aβ is being deposited in the brain instead of
leaving the brain (Figure 12-19).
MCI Stage 2

The second stage of AD is called “predementia AD,” or
“MCI due to AD,” or even “prodromal AD.” These patients


<<<PAGE 517>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

A. Normal controls, no amyloid

B. Normal controls, amyloid moderately positive

increasing
amyloid

C. MCI amyloid negative

Figure 12-20 Aβ PET imaging. Positron emission
tomography (PET) using Aβ tracers can be used to
detect the presence of Aβ during the progression
of Alzheimer disease (AD). (A) In most cognitively
normal controls, Aβ PET imaging shows the absence
of Aβ. (B) Individuals who are cognitively normal but
have moderate accumulation of Aβ are likely in the
presymptomatic first stage of AD. (C) Although mild
cognitive impairment (MCI) is often present in the
prodromal second stage of AD, not all patients with
MCI have brain Aβ deposition. In such cases, the clinical
presence of cognitive impairments is likely attributable
to a cause other than AD. (D) Unfortunately, MCI is
often a harbinger of impending AD. In these cases, Aβ
deposition accompanies cognitive impairments. (E) Both
Aβ accumulation and clinical symptoms of MCI worsen
as AD progresses. (F) In the third and final stage of AD,
when full-blown dementia is clinically evident, a large
accumulation of brain Aβ can readily be seen.

D. MCI amyloid moderately positive

increasing
amyloid

E. MCI more severe

F. Alzheimer Disease

increasing
amyloid

12

501


<<<PAGE 518>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

have progressed from asymptomatic amyloidosis and
stage 1 AD to stage 2 AD by manifesting both the clinical
symptoms of MCI and the signs of neurodegeneration.
Neurodegeneration is demonstrated by the presence of
elevated tau protein levels in CSF, by atrophy on MRI
or by the presence of neurofilament light (NfL) in CSF
or possibly plasma. Tau is a microtubule-associated
binding protein and, in its nonpathological form,
binds to and stabilizes microtubules within axonal
projections (Figure 12-22A). Synaptic vesicles carrying
neurotransmitters are normally transported along these
microtubules to the synapse (Figure 12-22A). When
hyperphosphorylated, tau is no longer able to bind
microtubules, so microtubules become destabilized
and synaptic dysfunction results (Figure 12-22B).
Hyperphosphorylated tau also forms paired helical
filaments which aggregate into neurofibrillary tangles
(NFTs), one of the hallmarks of AD (Figure 12-22C).
As neurodegeneration and neuronal loss progresses,
tau levels rise in CSF. Neuroimaging can also show
neurodegeneration on MRI (Figure 12-5) or FDG PET
(Figure 12-4). Hypometabolic FDG PET in MCI subjects
predicts progression to dementia of up to 80–90% within
1–1.5 years.
Stage 2 AD now is symptomatic with MCI, but not all
MCI patients have measurable amyloidosis (Figure 1220C, D, and E). All MCI patients are presumed therefore
not to be on a trajectory towards AD. In fact, about half
of patients with MCI show no evidence of Aβ deposition

(Figure 12-20C), and presumably have a cause of their
mild cognitive symptoms other than AD, including
depression or another dementia-causing disorder
(Table 12-2). The other half of MCI patients do indeed
show either moderate (Figure 12-20D) or severe Aβ
deposition (Figure 12-20E) and almost 100% of patients
with clinically probable AD (stage 3 AD with dementia)
show heavy Aβ deposition (Figure 12-20F). About half
of Aβ-positive MCI patients progress to dementia within
a year, and 80% may progress to dementia within 3
years. However, it is really neurodegeneration and not
amyloidosis that is thought to drive stage 1 AD to stage
2 with MCI symptoms, as well as to drive stage 2 AD to
stage 3 dementia.
Dementia Stage 3

The final stage of AD is dementia (Figure 12-19). To
diagnose probable AD by clinical criteria, the patient
must first meet the diagnostic criteria for all-cause
dementia (see Table 12-1). In addition, the patient must
have a dementia which is insidious in onset with clearly
demonstrated worsening of cognition over time, and
either an amnestic (problems with learning and recall)
or a non-amnestic presentation (language, visuospatial,
or executive dysfunction). Probable AD with evidence
of the Alzheimer pathophysiological process includes
clearly positive biomarker evidence either of brain Aβ
deposition/amyloidosis (Figure 12-20), or of downstream
neuronal degeneration (Figures 12-4 and 12-5).

Does the Presence of
Mean Alzheimer
Disease Is Inevitable?

Age 50-60

Age 60-70

Age 70-80

Age 80-90

<5%

10%

25%

>50%

Percentage of Individuals with

502

in the Brain

Figure 12-21 Aβ and risk of Alzheimer
disease. Not all individuals with Aβ
detectable in the brain have Alzheimer
disease. Although the presence of
Aβ has been associated with slightly
poorer cognitive performance,
approximately 25–35% of individuals
with Aβ accumulation in the brain
perform within normal limits on tests of
cognition. Some hypothesize that such
individuals may be in the preclinical or
prodromal phases of dementia and will
inevitably develop dementia should
they live long enough.


<<<PAGE 519>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

Figure 12-22 Alzheimer disease
pathology: tangles. Tau is a microtubuleassociated binding protein. (A) In its nonpathological form, it binds to and stabilizes
microtubules within axonal projections. It
is along these microtubules that synaptic
vesicles carrying neurotransmitters are
transported to the synapse. (B) When
tau is hyperphosphorylated, it is no
longer able to bind microtubules, which
causes destabilization of microtubules
and leads to synaptic dysfunction. (C)
Hyperphosphorylated tau also forms paired
helical filaments, which then aggregate into
neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs).

NFT

OVERVIEW OF SYMPTOMATIC
TREATMENTS FOR DEMENTIA
The first approved treatments for AD target the
symptoms of cognitive and memory decline, but do not
halt the relentless march of neurodegeneration. They
are symptomatic treatments, but not disease-modifying
treatments. As hopes fade for early development of
treatments that can prevent, halt, or reverse AD, new
drug development has pivoted back to treating the
symptoms of dementia to improve the suffering of
patients and to reduce the burden of their caregivers
as the number of people who have dementia explodes.
These treatments target neurotransmitters in different
brain circuits that hypothetically regulate the different
symptoms in dementia (Figure 12-23). This treatment
approach is based upon the notion that different
symptoms in dementia arise from different anatomical
sites of neurodegeneration no matter what the cause of
that neurodegeneration (Figure 12-23). This is the same
concept developed throughout this book that behavioral

symptoms in psychiatric disorders are topographically
localized to hypothetically malfunctioning brain circuits,
whether in psychosis, depression, mania, anxiety,
sleep, pain, ADHD, or dementia. Furthermore, this
point of view incorporates the possibility that the same
symptom can appear in many different disorders if
the same circuit is malfunctioning. Thus, for example,
psychotic symptoms can appear in dementia as well as
schizophrenia, hypothetically because the same circuit
malfunctions in both conditions. Specifically, psychotic
symptoms seem to be related to pathology in the
neocortex, and like all symptoms in dementia (e.g. visual
versus auditory hallucinations, delusions, disturbances in
memory and cognition, agitation; Figure 12-23) each is
likely to reflect damage to unique cortical areas.
Treatment strategies for symptoms in dementia
likewise arise from this notion that each symptom
is hypothetically regulated by a unique network or
circuit of neurons. Each network connects specific
glutamate, GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid), serotonin, and
dopamine neurons at nodes (synapses) between these
503

12


<<<PAGE 520>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Circuits of Treatable Symptoms in Dementia
memory network

psychosis network

agitation network

dextromethorphan+
bupropion
pimavanserin

AChE

cortex

cortex

cortex

brexpiprazole

memantine

memory output
A

agitation output

psychosis output
B

C

Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
and NMDA antagonist
memantine for
memory

5HT2A antagonist
pimavanserin for
psychosis

plaque

tangle

NMDA antagonist DXM
and multifunctional
1, 2, D2, 5HT1A, 5HT2A
brexpiprazole for
agitation

stroke

Figure 12-23 Circuits of treatable symptoms in dementia. Treatment of dementia is currently symptomatic rather than disease-modifying.
There are three main treatable symptoms in dementia: memory problems, psychosis, and agitation. Treatment strategies for each of these
symptoms arise from the notion that each symptom is hypothetically regulated by a unique network or circuit of neurons. Each network
connects specific glutamate, GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid), serotonin, and dopamine neurons at nodes (synapses) between these different
neurons that can influence not only the neuron being directly innervated but the entire network, via downstream effects set in motion at the
node. (A) Acetylcholine and glutamate can be targeted by acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors and the NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate)
antagonist memantine, respectively, to improve cognition in the memory network. (B) Psychosis can be targeted at the serotonin node
as well as the dopamine node of the psychosis network. In particular, the 5HT2A antagonist pimavanserin is approved to treat psychosis
in Parkinson’s disease. (C) Multimodal neurotransmitters (norepinephrine, serotonin, dopamine, and glutamate) can be targeted in the
agitation network to improve the symptom of agitation in dementia. The NMDA antagonist dextromethorphan (DXM) in combination with
bupropion and the multimodal agent brexpiprazole are both being studied for their use in agitation associated with dementia.

different neurons that can influence not only the neuron
being directly innervated but the entire network, via
downstream effects set in motion at the node. Nodes are
the sites of potential therapeutic action by targeting them
with drugs acting on the neurotransmitters normally
working at that node. Thus, acetylcholine and glutamate
504

can be targeted at different nodes to improve cognition
in the memory network (Figure 12-23A). Similarly,
we now know that psychosis can be therapeutically
targeted at the serotonin node as well as the dopamine
node of the psychosis network, since both are mutually


<<<PAGE 521>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

connected in the same neuronal network (see discussion
in Chapter 4 and Figure 12-23B). Finally, multimodal
neurotransmitters (norepinephrine, serotonin, dopamine,
and glutamate) can be targeted in the agitation network
to improve the symptom of agitation in dementia (Figure
12-23C). This strategy explains why treatment of the
behavioral symptoms of dementia, particularly psychosis
and agitation, have made notable progress recently, with
several new drugs on the horizon.

TARGETING ACETYLCHOLINE
FOR THE SYMPTOMATIC
TREATMENT OF MEMORY AND
COGNITION IN ALZHEIMER
DISEASE
Degeneration of cholinergic neurons is thought to
underlie in part some of the earliest symptoms of
memory disturbance as MCI progresses to dementia in
AD. Before discussing how targeting this hypothetical
deficiency in acetylcholine neurotransmission underlies
the symptomatic improvement in memory and cognition
by various approved drugs for AD, it is important to
understand acetylcholine neurotransmission, receptors,
and brain circuits.

25). As will be discussed below, some cholinesterase
inhibitors specifically inhibit AChE, whereas others
inhibit both enzymes. It is AChE that is thought to be the
key enzyme for inactivating ACh at cholinergic synapses
(Figure 12-25), although BuChE can take on this activity
if ACh diffuses to nearby glia. AChE is also present in
the gut, skeletal muscle, red blood cells, lymphocytes,
and platelets. BuChE is also present in the gut, plasma,
skeletal muscle, placenta, and liver. BuChE may be
present in some specific neurons, and it may also be
present in Aβ plaques.
ACh released from central nervous system neurons is
destroyed too quickly and too completely by AChE to be
available for transport back into the presynaptic neuron;
however, the choline that is formed by the breakdown
of ACh is readily transported back into the presynaptic
cholinergic nerve terminal by a transporter similar to
the transporters for other neurotransmitters already
discussed earlier in relationship to norepinephrine,
dopamine, and serotonin neurons. Once back in the
presynaptic nerve terminal, it can be recycled into new

Acetylcholine Is Produced

Acetylcholine: Synthesis, Metabolism, Receptors, and
Pathways

Acetylcholine is formed in cholinergic neurons from
two precursors: choline and acetyl coenzyme A (AcCoA)
(Figure 12-24). Choline is derived from dietary and
intraneuronal sources, and AcCoA is made from
glucose in the mitochondria of the neuron. These two
substrates interact with the synthetic enzyme choline
acetyltransferase (ChAT) to produce the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine (ACh). ACh’s actions are terminated by one
of two enzymes, either acetylcholinesterase (AChE) or
butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE), sometimes also called
“pseudocholinesterase” or “nonspecific cholinesterase”
(Figure 12-25). Both enzymes convert ACh into choline,
which is then transported back into the presynaptic
cholinergic neuron for resynthesis into ACh (Figure
12-25). Although both AChE and BuChE can metabolize
ACh, they are quite different in that they are encoded
by separate genes and have different tissue distributions
and substrate patterns. There may be different clinical
effects of inhibiting these two enzymes as well. High
levels of AChE are present in brain, especially in neurons
that receive ACh input (Figure 12-25). BuChE is also
present in brain, especially in glial cells (Figure 12-

glucose

ChAT

choline

AcCoA

ACh

12
ACh (acetylcholine)
Figure 12-24 Acetylcholine is produced. Acetylcholine (ACh)
is formed when two precursors – choline and acetyl coenzyme
A (AcCoA) – interact with the enzyme choline acetyltransferase
(ChAT). Choline is derived from dietary and intraneuronal
sources and AcCoA is made from glucose in the mitochondria of
the neuron.

505


<<<PAGE 522>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 12-25 Acetylcholine’s action is
terminated. Acetylcholine’s action can
be terminated by two different enzymes:
acetylcholinesterase (AChE), which is
present both intra- and extracellularly,
and butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE),
which is particularly present in glial cells.
Both enzymes convert acetylcholine
into choline, which is then transported
out of the synaptic cleft and back into
the presynaptic neuron via the choline
transporter. Once inside the presynaptic
neuron, choline can be recycled into
acetylcholine and then packaged into
vesicles by the vesicular acetylcholine
transporter (VAChT).

Acetylcholine Action Is Terminated

glial cell
inactive

AChE

VAChT

choline
transporter
BuChE

ACh

Muscarinic Acetylcholine Receptors
at Cholinergic Synapses
AChE
choline

ACh synthesis (see Figure 12-25). Once synthesized
in the presynaptic neuron, ACh is stored in synaptic
vesicles after being transported into these vesicles by the
vesicular transporter for ACh (VAChT), analogous to the
vesicular transporters for the monoamines and other
neurotransmitters.
There are numerous receptors for ACh (Figures 12-26
through 12-29). The major subtypes are nicotinic and
muscarinic subtypes of cholinergic receptors. Classically,
muscarinic receptors are stimulated by the mushroom
alkaloid muscarine and nicotinic receptors by the tobacco
alkaloid nicotine. Nicotinic receptors are all ligand-gated,
rapid-onset, and excitatory ion channels blocked by
curare. Muscarinic receptors, by contrast, are G-proteinlinked, can be excitatory or inhibitory, and many are
blocked by atropine, scopolamine, and other well-known
so-called “anticholinergics” discussed throughout this
text. Both nicotinic and muscarinic receptors have been
further subdivided into numerous receptor subtypes.
Muscarinic receptors have five subtypes, M1, M2, M3,
M4, and M5 (Figure 12-26). M1, M3, and M5 receptors
are stimulatory to downstream second messengering,
and are also postsynaptic at cholinergic synapses
506

presynaptic M4
receptor

presynaptic M2
receptor

M3

M1
receptor
+

M5
+

M4
+

Figure 12-26 Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. Muscarinic
acetylcholine receptors are G-protein-linked and can be either
excitatory or inhibitory. M1, M3, and M5 receptors are excitatory
postsynaptic receptors and stimulate downstream second
messenging. M2 and M4 receptors are inhibitory presynaptic
autoreceptors, preventing further release of acetylcholine. M4
receptors are also thought to exist as inhibitory postsynaptic
receptors.


<<<PAGE 523>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

(Figure 12-26). M2 and M4 receptors are inhibitory to
downstream second messengering and are presynaptic,
serving as autoreceptors, inhibiting the further release
of acetylcholine once it builds up in the synapse (Figure
12-26). M4 receptors are thought to be also postsynaptic
in some brain areas (Figure 12-26).
The M1 receptor is thought to be key to memory
function in the hippocampus and neocortex, where it
may facilitate dopamine release, whereas the M4 receptor
is thought to be involved in regulating the ventral
tegmental dopamine neurons to inhibit dopamine release
in the mesolimbic pathway and reduce psychosis. In
Chapter 5, we briefly mentioned that preclinical and
postmortem studies in patients with schizophrenia
suggest that central cholinergic alterations may be key to
the pathophysiology of both cognition and the positive
symptoms of schizophrenia with M4 receptor agonism
reducing psychosis and with M1 receptor agonism
improving cognition. Xanomeline (see Chapter 5 and
Figure 5-67), as an M4/M1 agonist, decreases dopamine
cell firing in the ventral tegmental area in preclinical
studies and improves positive symptoms of psychosis
in early clinical studies of schizophrenia. This same
drug or others working by similar mechanisms could

theoretically reduce psychotic and cognitive symptoms
in AD. Muscarinic M2 and M4 receptors can also be
present on non-cholinergic neurons that release other
neurotransmitters such as GABA and glutamate (Figure
12-27). When ACh diffuses away from its synapse to
occupy these presynaptic heteroreceptors, it can block
the release of the neurotransmitter there (e.g., GABA or
glutamate) (see Figure 12-27).
A number of nicotinic receptor subtypes also exist in
the brain, with different subtypes outside of the brain in
skeletal muscle and ganglia. Two of the most important
central nervouse system nicotinic cholinergic receptors
are the subtype with all α7 subunits, and the subtype with
α4 and β2 subunits (Figure 12-28). The α4β2 subtype is
postsynaptic and plays an important role in regulating
dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens. It is thought
to be a primary target of nicotine in cigarettes, and to
contribute to the reinforcing and addicting properties
of tobacco. The α4β2 subtypes of nicotinic cholinergic
receptors are discussed in further detail in Chapter 13 on
drug abuse.
Alpha-7 nicotinic cholinergic receptors can be either
presynaptic or postsynaptic (Figures 12-28 and 12-29).
When they are postsynaptic, they may be important

Presynaptic Muscarinic Heteroreceptors Inhibit
GABA and Glutamate Release

GABA
neuron

Glu
neuron

ACh
neuron

M2

M2

M4

ACh
Figure 12-27 Presynaptic muscarinic heteroreceptors. M2 and M4 receptors can also be present presynaptically on non-cholinergic
neurons such as GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) and glutamate (Glu) neurons. When acetylcholine (ACh) diffuses away from the synapse
and occupies these receptors, it can block the release of the neurotransmitter there.

507

12


<<<PAGE 524>>>
Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors
at Cholinergic Synapses

Figure 12-28 Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Acetylcholine
neurotransmission can be regulated by ligand-gated excitatory
ion channels known as nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, shown
here. There are multiple subtypes of these receptors, defined by
the subunits they contain. Two of the most important are those that
contain all α7 subunits and those that contain α4 and β2 subunits.
Alpha-7 receptors can exist presynaptically, where they facilitate
acetylcholine release, or postsynaptically, where they are important
for regulating cognitive function in the prefrontal cortex. The α4β2
receptors are postsynaptic and regulate release of dopamine in the
nucleus accumbens.

7

ACh

7

4ß2

Presynaptic Nicotinic Heteroreceptors Facilitate
Dopamine and Glutamate Release
DA
neuron

7

DA

Glu
neuron

ACh
neuron

7

ACh

Glu

Figure 12-29 Presynaptic nicotinic heteroreceptors. Acetylcholine (ACh) that diffuses away from the synapse can bind to presynaptic
α7 nicotinic receptors on dopamine (DA) and glutamate (Glu) neurons, where it stimulates release of these neurotransmitters.


<<<PAGE 525>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

mediators of cognitive functioning in the prefrontal
cortex. When they are presynaptic and on cholinergic
neurons, they appear to mediate a “feed-forward”
release process where ACh can facilitate its own release
by occupying presynaptic α7 nicotinic receptors (Figure
12-28). Furthermore, α7 nicotinic receptors are present
on neurons that release other neurotransmitters, such as
dopamine and glutamate neurons (Figure 12-29). When
ACh diffuses away from its synapse to occupy these
presynaptic heteroreceptors, it facilitates the release of the
neurotransmitter there (e.g., dopamine or glutamate) (see
Figure 12-29).
Just as described in earlier chapters for other ligandgated ion channels such as the GABAA receptor (in
Chapter 6 on mood disorders; see Figures 6-20 and 6-21;
see also Chapter 7 drugs for depression; Figure 7-56) and
the NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor (see Chapter
4 on psychosis and Figure 4-30; and Chapter 10 on sleep
and Figure 10-4), it appears that ligand-gated nicotinic
cholinergic receptors are also regulated by allosteric
modulators (Figure 12-30). Muscarinic receptors may
also be modulated by positive allosteric modulators (not
shown). Positive allosteric modulators (PAMs) have been
well characterized for nicotinic receptors in brain; indeed,
the cholinesterase inhibitor galantamine used in AD has
a second therapeutic mechanism as a PAM for nicotinic
receptors as described for this agent below.
The principle cholinergic pathways are illustrated in
Figures 12-31 and 12-32. Cell bodies of some cholinergic
pathways arise from the brainstem and project to many
brain regions, including the prefrontal cortex, basal
forebrain, thalamus, hypothalamus, amygdala, and
hippocampus (Figure 12-31). Other cholinergic pathways
have their cell bodies in the basal forebrain, project to the
prefrontal cortex, amygdala, and hippocampus, and are
thought to be particularly important for memory (Figure
12-32). Additional cholinergic fibers in the basal ganglia
are not illustrated.
Symptomatic Treatment of Memory and Cognition in
Alzheimer Disease by Inhibiting Acetylcholinesterase

It is well established that cholinergic dysfunction
accompanies age-related cognitive decline, hypothetically
due to the early loss of cholinergic neurons from
the nucleus basalis (compare Figure 12-33A normal
cognition and 12-33B mild cognitive impairment).
At this early stage of memory decline, cholinergic
innervation is lost, but cholinergic postsynaptic targets
remain (Figure 12-33B), so that stimulating postsynaptic

Allosteric Modulation of Nicotinic Receptors
Ca++

ACh

allosteric
modulator

Figure 12-30 Allosteric modulation of nicotinic
receptors. Nicotinic receptors can be regulated by allosteric
modulators. These ligand-gated ion channels control the flow
of calcium into the neuron (top panel). When acetylcholine is
bound to these receptors, it allows calcium to pass into the
neuron (middle panel). A positive allosteric modulator bound
in the presence of acetylcholine increases the frequency of
opening of the channel and thus can allow for more calcium to
pass into the neuron (bottom panel).

cholinergic receptors by increasing ACh levels with
acetylcholinesterase inhibition can hypothetically restore
some of the lost function of degenerated cholinergic
neurons (Figure 12-33C; effective cholinergic treatment
of cognition in early AD). This model is analogous to
Parkinson’s disease treatment with levodopa restoring
some of the lost function of degenerated dopamine
neurons. However, as AD progresses from MCI and early
dementia to later stages of dementia, there is progressive
loss of neocortical and hippocampal neurons. In the

509

12


<<<PAGE 526>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Cholinergic Projections from Brainstem

PFC

S
NA

T

BF

Hy
C
NT

A
H

SC

Figure 12-31 Cholinergic projections from the brainstem. The
cell bodies of some cholinergic neurons are found in the
brainstem and project to many different brain regions, including
the basal forebrain (BF), prefrontal cortex (PFC), thalamus (T),
hypothalamus (Hy), amygdala (A), and hippocampus (H).

Cholinergic Projections from Basal Forebrain

functioning by stopping the destruction of ACh. This
can be readily accomplished by inhibiting the enzyme
acetylcholinesterase (Figure 12-23A and Figure 12-25).
Inhibition of acetylcholinesterase causes the build-up of
ACh because ACh’s action can no longer be as efficiently
terminated. Enhanced availability of ACh is proven to
impact cognitive and memory symptoms in AD patients,
sometimes enhancing memory, but more often helping
to retain current levels of memory function and thus
slowing the decline in memory.
Donepezil

Donepezil is a reversible, long-acting, selective inhibitor
of AChE without inhibition of BuChE (Figure 12-34).
Donepezil inhibits AChE in pre- and postsynaptic
cholinergic neurons, and in other areas of the central
nervous system outside of cholinergic neurons where
this enzyme is widespread (Figure 12-34A). Its central
nervous system actions boost the availability of ACh at
the remaining sites normally innervated by cholinergic
neurons, but which are now suffering from a deficiency of
ACh as presynaptic cholinergic neurons die off (Figures
12-33B and 12-33C). Donepezil also inhibits AChE in
the periphery, where its actions in the gastrointestinal
(GI) tract can produce GI side effects (Figure 12-34B).
Donepezil is easy to dose, has mostly GI side effects, and
these are mostly transient.
Rivastigmine

PFC

S
NA

T

BF
Hy
C
NT

A
H

SC

Figure 12-32 Cholinergic projections from the basal
forebrain. The cell bodies of some cholinergic neurons are
found in the basal forebrain (BF) and project to the prefrontal
cortex (PFC), amygdala (A), and hippocampus (H). These
projections may be particularly important for memory.

process, receptor targets of cholinergic therapies are
also lost and symptomatic pro-cholinergic treatment
with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors begins to lose its
effectiveness (Figure 12-33D; progression of AD and loss
of cholinergic treatment effectiveness).
Nevertheless, the most successful approach to
the intermediate-term treatment of cognitive and
memory symptoms in AD is to boost cholinergic
510

Rivastigmine is “pseudoirreversible” (which means it
reverses itself over hours), intermediate-acting, not only
selective for AChE over BuChE, but perhaps for AChE in
the cortex and hippocampus over AChE in other areas
of brain (Figure 12-35A). Rivastigmine also inhibits
BuChE within glia, which may contribute somewhat
to the enhancement of ACh levels within the central
nervous system (Figure 12-35A). Inhibition of BuChE
within glia may be even more important in patients
with AD as they develop gliosis when cortical neurons
die, because these glia contain BuChE, and inhibition
of this increased enzyme activity may have a favorable
action on increasing the availability of ACh to remaining
cholinergic receptors via this second mechanism (Figure
12-35B). Rivastigmine appears to have comparable safety
and efficacy to donepezil, although it may have more
GI side effects when given orally, perhaps due to its
pharmacokinetic profile, and perhaps due to inhibition of
both AChE and BuChE in the periphery (Figure 12-35C).
However, there is now a transdermal formulation of
rivastigmine available that greatly reduces the peripheral


<<<PAGE 527>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

12

Figure 12-33A, B Degeneration of cholinergic projections from the basal forebrain: impact on memory. (A) Cholinergic projections
from the basal forebrain to the neocortex and to the hippocampus are thought to be particularly important for memory. (B) Accumulation
of plaques and tangles in the brain can lead to neurodegeneration that may particularly affect these cholinergic projections and thus
lead to memory loss. In early stages, although cholinergic innervation is lost, cholinergic postsynaptic targets remain.

511


<<<PAGE 528>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 12-33C, D Degeneration of cholinergic projections from the basal forebrain: impact of cholinergic treatment. (C) In early
stages of Alzheimer disease, although cholinergic innervation from the basal forebrain is lost, cholinergic postsynaptic targets remain.
It is therefore possible to potentially improve memory by increasing acetylcholine levels in the hippocampus and neocortex. This can
be achieved with agents that block the metabolism of acetylcholine, such as acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors. (D) As Alzheimer
disease progresses, loss of neurons in the neocortex and hippocampus means that the receptor targets for acetylcholine are also lost,
and thus AChE inhibitors lose their effectiveness.

512


<<<PAGE 529>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

Donepezil Actions: CNS
central
acetylcholine
neuron
glial cell

donepezil

Figure 12-34 Donepezil actions. Donepezil is a
reversible inhibitor of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase
(AChE), which is present both in the central nervous
system (CNS) and peripherally. (A) Central cholinergic
neurons are important for regulation of memory; thus,
in the CNS, the boost of acetylcholine (ACh) caused
by AChE blockade contributes to improved cognitive
functioning. (B) Peripheral cholinergic neurons in the gut
are involved in gastrointestinal effects; thus the boost in
peripheral acetylcholine caused by AChE blockade may
contribute to gastrointestinal side effects.

D
AChE

BuChE

ACh

donepezil

D
AChE

!
A

Donepezil Actions: Peripheral
peripheral
acetylcholine
neuron

donepezil

D
AChE

donepezil

12

ACh

D
AChE

BuChE

gut
B

D

513


<<<PAGE 530>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

side effects of oral rivastigmine, probably by optimizing
drug delivery, and reducing peak drug concentrations.

inhibition of AChE (Figure 12-36A) could be enhanced
when joined by the second action of galantamine at
nicotinic receptors (Figure 12-36B). Thus, raising ACh
levels at nicotinic cholinergic receptors by AChE inhibition
could be boosted by the positive allosteric modulating
actions of galantamine (Figure 12-36B). However, it has
not been proven that this theoretically advantageous
second action as a nicotinic positive allosteric modulator
(PAM) translates into clinical advantages.

Galantamine

Galantamine is a very interesting cholinesterase
inhibitor found in snowdrops and daffodils! It has a dual
mechanism of action, matching AChE inhibition (Figure
12-36A) with positive allosteric modulation of nicotinic
cholinergic receptors (Figure 12-36B). Theoretically, the

Rivastigmine Actions: CNS
central
acetylcholine
neuron
glial cell

R
R

R
AChE

rivastigmine

R
BuChE

R

ACh

R

!
514

AChE rivastigmine

Figure 12-35A Rivastigmine
actions, part one. Rivastigmine is a
pseudoirreversible inhibitor (it reverses
itself over hours) of the enzymes
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and
butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE), which
are present both in the central nervous
system (CNS) and peripherally. Central
cholinergic neurons are important for
regulation of memory; thus, in the CNS,
the boost of acetylcholine caused by
AChE blockade contributes to improved
cognitive functioning. In particular,
rivastigmine appears to be somewhat
selective for AChE in the cortex and
hippocampus – two regions important
for memory – over other areas of the
brain. Rivastigmine’s blockade of BuChE
in glia may also contribute to enhanced
acetylcholine levels.


<<<PAGE 531>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

Rivastigmine Actions: Gliosis
central
acetylcholine
neuron
glial cell

glial cell

Figure 12-35B Rivastigmine actions,
part two. Rivastigmine inhibits the
enzymes acetylcholinesterase (AChE)
and butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE),
which are present both in the central
nervous system (CNS) and peripherally.
Inhibition of BuChE may be more
important in later stages of disease,
because as more cholinergic neurons
die and gliosis occurs, BuChE activity
increases.

R
R

R

R
AChE

R

rivastigmine

R

BuChE

BuChE

R
gliosis

R

AChE rivastigmine

R

R

R

R

BuChE

BuChE

glial cell

TARGETING GLUTAMATE FOR
THE SYMPTOMATIC TREATMENT
OF MEMORY AND COGNITION
IN ALZHEIMER DISEASE
Cholinergic dysfunction of course is not the
only problem in AD, and there is progressive
neurodegeneration of both cholinergic and
glutamatergic circuits as patients transition from MCI
to AD. Glutamate has been hypothesized to be released
in excess once AD develops (see Figure 4-52D and
discussion in Chapter 4; see also Figure 12-23A, left),
perhaps in part triggered by neurotoxic Aβ plaques

glial cell

and neurofibrillary tangles that release glutamate from
normal inhibition by GABA as GABA interneurons
degenerate (see Chapter 4 and Figure 4-52D and also
compare Figures 12-37A, 12-37B, and12-37C). That
is, in the resting state, glutamate is normally quiet,
and the NMDA receptor is physiologically blocked
by magnesium ions (Figure 12-37A). When normal
excitatory neurotransmission comes along, a flurry of
glutamate is released (Figure 12-37B). The postsynaptic
NMDA receptor is a “coincidence detector” and allows
inflow of ions if three things happen at the same
time: neuronal depolarization, often from activation

515

12


<<<PAGE 532>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Rivastigmine Actions: Peripheral
peripheral
acetylcholine
neuron

R
R

AChE rivastigmine

R

R

R

ACh

R

BuChE
R

R

gut

AChE

R

R

Figure 12-35C Rivastigmine actions, part three. Rivastigmine
inhibits the enzymes acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and
butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE), which are present both in the
central nervous system (CNS) and peripherally. Peripheral
cholinergic neurons in the gut are involved in gastrointestinal
effects; thus the boost in peripheral acetylcholine caused by
AChE and BuChE blockade may contribute to gastrointestinal
side effects.

of nearby AMPA (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl4-isoxazole-propionic acid) receptors; glutamate
occupying its binding site on the NMDA receptor;
and the cotransmitter glycine occupying its site on the
NMDA receptor (Figure 12-37B). If plaques and tangles
cause a steady “leak” of glutamate (see Chapter 4 and
Figure 4-52D), this would theoretically interfere with
the fine-tuning of glutamate neurotransmission, and
possibly interfere with memory and learning, but not
necessarily be damaging to neurons (Figure 12-37C).
Hypothetically, as AD progresses, glutamate release
could be increased to a level that is tonically bombarding
the postsynaptic receptor, eventually killing off dendrites
and then killing off full neurons due to excitotoxic cell
death (Figure 12-23A and Figure 12-37C).
Memantine

The rationale for the use of memantine (Figure 12-38),
a type of NMDA antagonist, is to reduce abnormal
516

activation of glutamate neurotransmission and thus
interfere with the pathophysiology of AD, improve
cognitive function, and slow the rate of decline over
time (Figure 12-23A and Figure 12-37D). Blocking
NMDA receptors chronically would hypothetically
interfere with memory formation and neuroplasticity.
So what do you do to decrease the excessive and
sustained but low level of excitotoxic activation of
NMDA receptors, yet not interfere with learning,
memory, and neuroplasticity, and without inducing a
schizophrenia-like state?
The answer seems to be that you interfere with
NMDA-mediated glutamatergic neurotransmission with
a weak (low-affinity) NMDA antagonist that works at the
same site, plugging the ion channel where the magnesium
ion normally blocks this channel at rest (Figure 12-37D).
That is, memantine is an uncompetitive open-channel
NMDA receptor antagonist with low to moderate affinity,
voltage dependence, and fast blocking and unblocking
kinetics. That is a fancy way of saying that it only blocks
the ion channel of the NMDA receptor when it is open.
This is why it is called an open-channel antagonist and
why it is dependent upon voltage: namely, to open the
channel. It is also a fancy way of saying that memantine
blocks the open channel quickly, but is readily and
quickly reversible if a barrage of glutamate comes along
from normal neurotransmission (Figure 12-37E).
This concept is illustrated in Figures 12-37C, 12-37D,
and 12-37E. First, the hypothetical state of the glutamate
neuron during Alzheimer excitotoxicity is illustrated
in Figure 12-37C. Here, steady, tonic, and excessive
amounts of glutamate are continuously released in a
manner that interferes with the normal resting state of
the glutamate neuron (Figure 12-37C), and in a manner
that interferes with established memory functions,
new learning, and normal neuronal plasticity in AD.
Eventually, this leads to the activation of intracellular
enzymes that produce toxic free radicals that damage
the membranes of the postsynaptic dendrite and
eventually destroy the entire neuron (Figure 12-37C).
When memantine is given, it blocks this tonic glutamate
release from having downstream effects, hypothetically
returning the glutamate neuron to a new resting state,
despite the continuous release of glutamate (Figure 1237D). Theoretically, this stops the excessive glutamate
from interfering with the resting glutamate neuron’s
physiological activity, therefore improving memory; it
also theoretically stops the excessive glutamate from
causing neurotoxicity, therefore slowing the rate of


<<<PAGE 533>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

Figure 12-36A Galantamine actions,
part one. Galantamine is an inhibitor
of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase
(AChE). Central cholinergic neurons are
important for regulation of memory,
and thus, in the central nervous system,
the boost of acetylcholine caused by
AChE blockade contributes to improved
cognitive functioning.

Galantamine Actions
central
acetylcholine
neuron
glial cell

G
AChE

galantamine
BuChE

Ca++
ACh

G
AChE

galantamine

!
12

neuronal death and also the associated cognitive decline
that causes the progression in AD (Figure 12-37D).
However, at the same time, memantine is not so
powerful a blocker of NMDA receptors that it stops
all neurotransmission at glutamate synapses (Figure

12-37E). That is, when a phasic burst of glutamate
is transiently released during normal glutamatergic
neurotransmission, this causes a depolarization that
is capable of reversing the memantine block, until the
depolarization goes away (Figure 12-37E). For this
517


<<<PAGE 534>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Galantamine Actions:
Nicotinic Allosteric Modulation
central
acetylcholine
neuron
glial cell

G
AChE

Figure 12-36B Galantamine actions,
part two. Galantamine is unique among
cholinesterase inhibitors in that it is
also a positive allosteric modulator
(PAM) at nicotinic cholinergic receptors,
which means it can boost the effects
of acetylcholine at these receptors.
Galantamine’s second action as a PAM
at nicotinic receptors could theoretically
enhance its primary action as a
cholinesterase inhibitor.

galantamine

G

BuChE

Ca++
ACh

positive allosteric
modulation

G
AChE

galantamine

G

!
reason, memantine does not have the psychotomimetic
actions of other more powerful NMDA antagonists
such as phencyclidine (PCP) and ketamine, and does
not shut down new learning or the ability of normal
neurotransmission to occur when necessary (Figure
12-37E). The blockade of NMDA receptors by memantine
can be seen as a kind of “artificial magnesium,” more
effective than physiological blockade by magnesium,
which is overwhelmed by excitotoxic glutamate release,
but less effective than PCP or ketamine so that the
518

glutamate system is not entirely shut down. Sort of like
having your cake and eating it, too.
Memantine also has σ binding properties and weak
5HT3 antagonist properties (Figure 12-38), but it is not
clear what these contribute to the actions of this agent in
AD. Since its mechanism of action in AD is so different
from cholinesterase inhibition, memantine is usually
given concomitantly with a cholinesterase inhibitor to
exploit the potential of both of these approaches and to
get additive results in patients.


<<<PAGE 535>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

12-37A Glutamatergic
Glutamatergic Neurotransmission in AD: Figure
neurotransmission in Alzheimer disease,
part 1. In the resting state (absence
Part 1 - Resting State
of glutamate binding), the NMDA (Nmethyl-D-aspartate) receptor is blocked
by magnesium.

glutamate
neuron

Glu
Mg++

Ca++

NMDA
receptor

12-37B Glutamatergic
Glutamatergic Neurotransmission in AD: Figure
neurotransmission in Alzheimer disease,
part 2. With normal neurotransmission,
Part 2 - Normal Neurotransmission

glutamate is released and binds to the
NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor.
If the neuron is depolarized and glycine
is simultaneously bound to the NMDA
receptor, the channel opens and allows ion
influx. This results in long-term potentiation.

glutamate
neuron

Ca++
depolarization

Glu

glycine

12

long-term potentiation
neuroplasticity
memory

learning

519


<<<PAGE 536>>>
Glutamatergic Neurotransmission in AD:
Part 3 - Alzheimer Excitotoxicity

glutamate
neuron

Figure 12-37C Glutamatergic
neurotransmission in Alzheimer disease,
part 3. Neurodegeneration caused
by plaques and tangles could cause a
steady leak of glutamate and result in
excessive calcium influx in postsynaptic
neurons, which in the short term may
cause memory problems and in the long
term may cause accumulation of free
radicals and thus destruction of neurons.

memory problems

free radical

Glutamatergic Neurotransmission in AD:
Part 4 - Memantine and New Resting State in
Alzheimer Disease
glutamate
neuron

memantine

memory problems

520

free radical

Figure 12-37D Glutamatergic
neurotransmission in Alzheimer disease,
part 4. Memantine is a noncompetitive,
low-affinity NMDA (N-methyl-Daspartate) receptor antagonist that
binds to the magnesium site when the
channel is open. Memantine thus blocks
the downstream effects of excessive
tonic glutamate release by “plugging”
the NMDA ion channel, which may
improve memory and prevent neuronal
death due to glutamate excitotoxicity.


<<<PAGE 537>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

Glutamatergic Neurotransmission in AD: neurotransmission in Alzheimer disease,
part 5. Because memantine has low
affinity, when there is a phasic burst of
Part 5 - Normal Neurotransmission
glutamate and depolarization occurs,
Figure 12-37E Glutamatergic

this is enough to remove memantine
from the ion channel and thus allow
normal neurotransmission. This
means that memantine does not have
psychotomimetic effects or interfere with
normal new learning.

glutamate
neuron

long-term potentiation
neuroplasticity
learning
memory

TARGETING THE BEHAVIORAL
SYMPTOMS OF DEMENTIA
Dementia is often seen as fundamentally a disorder of
memory and cognition, but there are many important
behavioral symptoms associated with dementia as well
(Figure 12-39), each potentially regulated by separate
neuronal networks (Figure 12-23). The prevalence of
specific behavioral symptoms of dementia pooled from
a large number of studies in AD is shown in Table 12-7.
Treatment of dementia-related psychosis, agitation,
depression, and apathy are all discussed here.

Defining Agitation and Psychosis in Alzheimer Disease

Perhaps no symptom of dementia raises alarm as much as
agitation, especially when it turns into physical aggression
with behaviors such as slamming doors, throwing
objects, kicking, screaming, pushing, scratching, biting,
wandering, intruding upon others, fidgeting, restlessness,
pacing, refusing medications, refusing help with activities
of daily living, and sexually inappropriate behavior
(Table 12-8).

521

12


<<<PAGE 538>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Table 12-7 Prevalence of specific behavioral and
psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD)

memantine

Mg++
T3

5H

Figure 12-38 Memantine. Memantine is a noncompetitive, lowaffinity NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor antagonist that
binds to the magnesium site when the channel is open. It also
has σ binding properties and weak 5HT3 antagonist properties.
(SIGH)

apathy

#*@!

disinhibition

anxiety

sleep

depression
psychosis
agitation/
aggression
Figure 12-39 Behavioral symptoms in dementia. Patients with
dementia can exhibit many symptoms in addition to cognitive
and memory impairment, each of which is potentially regulated
by separate neuronal networks.

Agitation is defined for clinical and research
purposes by the Agitation Definition Work Group of the
International Psychogeriatric Association as:
• occurring in patients with a cognitive impairment or
dementia syndrome
• exhibiting behavior consistent with emotional distress
522

Symptom

Percentage

Apathy

49

Depression

42

Aggression

40

Sleep disorder

39

Anxiety

39

Irritability

36

Appetite disorder

34

Aberrant motor behavior

32

Delusions

31

Disinhibition

17

Hallucinations

16

Euphoria

7

Estimates of prevalence are pooled from 48 studies of BPSD in Alzheimer
disease, using the Neuropsychiatric Inventory.
Data are from Zhao et al. 2016.

• manifesting excessive motor activity, verbal
aggression, or physical aggression
• evidencing behaviors that cause excess disability and
are not solely attributable to another disorder
In contrast, dementia-related psychosis as discussed
above is defined by
• delusions or hallucinations occurring after the onset
of cognitive decline
• persisting for at least one month
• not better explained by delirium or some other mental
illness
Whereas psychosis and agitation can be rather readily
distinguished from memory decline in AD, agitation
and psychosis can easily be confused with each other.
However, these two symptom domains of agitation and
psychosis hypothetically arise from entirely separate
malfunctioning neuronal networks in dementia (compare
Figure 12-23B, C) and are giving rise to entirely separate
treatments. Given that the new treatments on the horizon
for psychosis and for agitation have distinct mechanisms
that target these neuronal networks individually and
differently, it is more important than ever to be able
to distinguish agitation from psychosis in dementia.
Furthermore, psychotic symptoms such as intrusive
hallucinations and/or paranoid delusions can precipitate
agitation or lead to aggressive behavior. Thus, some
dementia patients will have both agitation and psychosis
and require treatment for both.


<<<PAGE 539>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

Table 12-8 Assessing agitation

Cohen–Mansfield agitation inventory (CMAI)
Physical/aggressive

Physical/non-aggressive

Hitting

Pacing, aimless wandering

Kicking

Inappropriate dress/disrobing

Grabbing

Trying to get to a different place

Pushing

Intentional falling

Throwing things

Eating/drinking inappropriate substances

Biting

Handling things inappropriately

Scratching

Hiding things

Spitting

Hoarding things

Hurting self or others

Performing repetitive mannerisms

Destroying property

General restlessness

Making physical sexual advances
Verbal/aggressive

Verbal/non-aggressive

Screaming

Repetitive sentences or questions

Making verbal sexual advances

Strange noises

Cursing or verbal aggression

Complaining
Negativism
Constant unwarranted request for attention

Before using medications at all to treat agitation or
psychosis in dementia, reversible precipitants particularly
of agitation should be managed non-pharmacologically
(Table 12-9):
• pain
• nicotine withdrawal
• medication side effects
• undiagnosed medical and neurological illnesses
• provocative environments that are either too
stimulating or not stimulating enough

PHARMACOLOGICAL
TREATMENT OF PSYCHOSIS
AND AGITATION IN DEMENTIA
There is no pharmacological treatment for either
psychosis or agitation in dementia yet approved although
several agents are in late-stage trials. Up until now,
psychosis versus agitation in dementia have not been
differentiated particularly well clinically because they
either remained untreated or were both nonspecifically
and quite controversially treated with unapproved

dopamine receptor blocking agents normally used to
treat schizophrenia. No topic in the care of the behavioral
symptoms of dementia has been more contentious than
Table 12-9 Non-pharmacological options for behavioral
symptoms in dementia

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Address unmet needs (hunger, pain, thirst, boredom)
Identify/modify environmental stressors
Identify/modify daily routine stressors
Caregiver support/training
Behavior modification
Group/individual therapy
Problem solving
Distraction
Provide outlets for pent-up energy (exercise,
activities)
Avoid behavior triggers
Increase social engagement
Relaxation techniques
Reminiscence therapy
Music therapy
Aromatherapy
Pet therapy

523

12


<<<PAGE 540>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

the current management of agitation and psychosis
in dementia, especially when it comes to the use of
dopamine D2 receptor blocking drugs.
Why are dopamine D2 receptor blocking drugs
controversial? This is due to many factors, including
the potential for these drugs to act as “chemical
straightjackets” and over-tranquilize patients. There
are also major safety concerns and a “black box”
warning, specifically about cardiovascular events such
as stroke and death from using these drugs. Mortality
risks may be due to stroke, thromboembolism, falls,
cardiac complications of QT interval prolongations, and
pneumonia, especially when sedated from drugs that
increase the risk of aspiration (e.g., anticholinergics,
sedative hypnotics, benzodiazepines, opioids, and
alcohol).
On the other hand, efficacy of some dopamine
receptor blockers coming from small trials or anecdotal
observations from clinical practice often find greater
efficacy than that reported in controlled trials that have
high placebo response rates. Another consideration in
the real world is that there are also risks of non-treatment
of agitation, aggression, and psychosis in dementia,
including the risks of early institutionalization and the
dangers of such behaviors to the patient and others
around them. Therefore, after careful consideration of
the risks and the benefits to an individual dementia
patient, some are treated cautiously “off-label” with
dopamine blocking drugs, especially risperidone,
olanzapine, and aripiprazole, as well as haloperidol, but
not quetiapine or others (see Chapter 5 for extensive
discussion of drugs for psychosis as well as each of these
individual drugs).
The dilemma caused by necessity to treat yet the
presence of a “black box” safety warning against the
use of dopamine blockers has triggered the search for
drugs proven effective for the treatment of psychosis and
agitation, which have an adequate safety profile. Clinical
trials are proceeding with several new therapeutic agents
on the horizon that separately and more specifically
target either the psychosis network (e.g., with the 5HT2A
antagonist pimavanserin) or the agitation network (with
multimodal glutamate and monoamine agents such as
brexpiprazole and dextromethorphan–bupropion). Thus,
it is more important than ever to distinguish agitation
from psychosis because treatments are directed to
entirely different brain networks, with novel treatments
for psychosis not proven effective for agitation and vice
versa.

524

Targeting Serotonin for the Symptomatic Treatment of
Dementia-Related Psychosis

Prevalence estimates for psychosis range from 10%
for FTD to 75% for dementia with Lewy bodies (Table
12-10). In the US, it is estimated that over 2 million
people suffer from dementia-related psychosis. Visual
hallucinations are a prominent feature of psychosis in
all forms of dementia, especially in dementia with Lewy
bodies and Parkinson’s disease dementia (Table 12-10 and
Figures 12-40 and 12-41). Delusions are also observed in
all forms of dementia, especially in AD (Figure 12-40),
with the most common delusions being paranoid (e.g.,
theft or spousal infidelity) and misidentifications, though
the latter is sometimes considered a type of memory
deficit rather than psychosis. Psychosis in Parkinson’s
disease often heralds the emergence of dementia and
vice versa. Up to 50–70% of patients with Parkinson’s
disease dementia report hallucinations compared to
only 10% of patients with Parkinson’s disease but no
dementia (Figure 12-41 and Table 12-10). Approximately
85% of patients with Parkinson’s disease psychosis
Psychosis in AD vs. LBD

Alzheimer Disease

Delusions more common
(especially persecutory
and misidentification)

Hallucinations more common
(especially visual)
Lewy Body Dementias
Figure 12-40 Psychosis in Alzheimer disease versus Lewy
body dementias. In Alzheimer disease (AD), delusions are
more common than hallucinations, and particularly delusions
of persecution or misinformation. In Lewy body dementias
(LBD), hallucinations are more common, particularly visual
hallucinations.


<<<PAGE 541>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

Table 12-10 Prevalence ranges (%) for psychosis, delusions, and hallucinations in Alzheimer disease, vascular dementia, dementia
with Lewy bodies, Parkinson’s disease dementia, and frontotemporal dementia

Alzheimer
disease

Vascular
dementia

Dementia with
Lewy bodies

Parkinson’s
disease dementia

Frontotemporal
dementia

Overall psychosis
prevalence

30

15

75

50

10

Delusions prevalence

10–39

14–27

40–57

28–50

2.3–6

Hallucinations prevalence

11–17

5–14

55–78

32–63

1.2–13

Type of Hallucinations Observed in
Patients with PD Psychosis

Visual 62.5%
Auditory 45%
Tactile 22.5%

PD with no
psychosis

Olfactory 2.5%

hallucinations

Minor* 45%
Visual + Auditory + Tactile + Olfactory 2.5%

delusions
hallucinations
+ delusions

* Minor hallucinations include passage
hallucinations and sense of presence

Figure 12-41 Psychosis in Parkinson’s disease. Psychosis is commonly associated with Parkinson’s disease (PD), and the presence of
psychosis often heralds the emergence of dementia (and vice versa). The hallucinations reported by patients with PD are most often
visual; however, other types of hallucinations may also be experienced.

experience hallucinations only, with 7.5% experiencing
hallucinations and delusions and 7.5% experiencing
delusions only (Figure 12-41). The severity of psychosis
and the specific symptoms manifested also vary across
the spectrum of dementias (Figures 12-40 and 12-41).
The frequency of psychosis also varies across the time
course and natural history of dementia, with psychosis
being more frequently observed in patients with more
advanced dementia. Psychotic symptoms in any form
of dementia seem to be related to pathology in the
neocortex, and like all symptoms in dementia, specific
symptoms such as auditory versus visual hallucinations,
versus delusions, are likely to reflect damage to specific
cortical areas (Figures 12-23B and 12-42A through 12-

42C). Dementia-related psychosis has consistently been
associated with greater caregiver burden and more rapid
progression to severe dementia, institutionalization,
and death. Some questions that arise in understanding
dementia-related psychosis include: How could so many
different forms of dementia all have psychosis (Table 1210) when their causes are so different? Also, why doesn’t
every patient with dementia have psychosis?
The answers to these questions may be found by
grasping an understanding of the hypothetical brain
circuits that mediate psychosis in dementia (Figures
12-23B and 12-42B; see also discussion on psychosis in
Chapter 4 and illustrated in Figures 4-34, 4-52D, and
4-55). Psychosis is theoretically a symptom derived
525

12


<<<PAGE 542>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

from inefficient information processing in a different
brain circuit from that which theoretically processes
memory (compare Figures 12-23A and 12-42A). When
the destructive process of any given dementia invades
the psychosis network that regulates rational thinking
and processing of sensory input (Figure 12-42A), the
outcome is hypothetically psychosis (Figure 12-42B; see
also Chapter 4 and Figures 4-34, 4-52D, and 4-55). From
what we know about the psychosis network, delusions
and hallucinations seem to be regulated by a neuronal
network that connects glutamate, GABA, serotonin,
and dopamine neurons (compare Figures 12-42A and
12-42B). The sites of connections/synapses between these
different neurons are considered to be “nodes” in this
network, where their neurotransmitters act to regulate
the entire interconnected brain circuit of psychosis
(Figure 12-42A). In dementia, the accumulation of
Aβ plaques, tau tangles, Lewy bodies, and/or strokes
in the cortical node connecting GABA and glutamate,
hypothetically can knock out critical regulatory neurons,
especially inhibitory GABA interneurons, causing
glutamate hyperactivity and consequential downstream
dopamine hyperactivity and psychosis (Figure 12-42B).

Why do some dementia patients experience psychosis
and not others? One hypothesis is that in patients with
dementia-related psychosis, neurodegeneration has
progressed in such a way as to knock out regulatory
neurons, not only in the memory pathway (Figure
12-33B) but also in the psychosis pathway (Figure 1242B). In other dementia patients without psychosis, the
neurodegeneration has not (yet) knocked out the neurons
regulating the psychosis network.
Although any node in the psychosis network is a
theoretical site for therapeutic action, at the present
time, there is no effective way to attack the psychosis
network with GABA or glutamate agents. Although
blocking dopamine receptors often has antipsychotic
effects in patients with dementia-related psychosis,
these agents increase stroke and death, so they are
not approved for the treatment of dementia-related
psychosis.
Then, how can we quell the hyperactivity in the
psychosis network in dementia? The answer is to block
the normal excitatory input of serotonin in this network
at 5HT2A receptors with the selective agent pimavanserin
(Figure 12-42C; see Chapter 5 for further discussion of

The Psychosis Network: Serotonin,
Glutamate, and Dopamine Nodes
serotonin
node
5HT2A receptor glutamate
node

prefrontal cortex

visual cortex

dopamine
node
striatum
glutamate
node
raphe

526

VTA

Figure 12-42A The psychosis network
at baseline. The symptoms of psychosis
seem to be mediated by communication
at synapses (nodes) between glutamate,
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), serotonin,
and dopamine neurons. Glutamate
neurons in the prefrontal cortex project
to the ventral tegmental area (VTA)
where they connect with dopamine
neurons (glutamate node). Those
dopamine neurons then project to the
striatum. Serotonin neurons in the raphe
nucleus project to the prefrontal cortex,
where they connect with glutamate
neurons (serotonin node). Glutamate
neurons project from the prefrontal
cortex to the visual cortex where they
connect with other glutamate neurons
(glutamate node).


<<<PAGE 543>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

Figure 12-42B The psychosis network
in dementia. (1) Accumulation of
Aβ plaques, tau tangles, and/or
Lewy bodies, as well as the damage
caused by strokes, may destroy some
glutamatergic pyramidal neurons
and GABAergic interneurons while
leaving others intact. The loss of GABA
inhibition upsets the balance of control
over glutamatergic pyramidal neurons,
at least temporarily. When the effects
of stimulation of excitatory 5HT2A
receptors are not countered by GABA
inhibition, there is a net increase in
glutamatergic neurotransmission. (2)
Excessive glutamate release in the visual
cortex can cause visual hallucinations.
(3) Excessive glutamate release into
the ventral tegmental area (VTA)
causes hyperactivity of the mesolimbic
dopamine pathway, resulting in
delusions and auditory hallucinations.

Treatment of Dementia-Related Psychosis

pimavanserin

1

2
3

prefrontal cortex

visual cortex

pimavanserin
5

striatum

raphe

VTA

Figure 12-42C The psychosis network
in dementia with treatment. (1)
Accumulation of Aβ plaques, tau
tangles, and/or Lewy bodies, as well
as the damage caused by strokes, may
destroy some glutamatergic pyramidal
neurons and GABAergic interneurons
while leaving others intact. The loss of
GABA inhibition upsets the balance of
control over glutamatergic pyramidal
neurons, at least temporarily. (2) When
the 5HT2A antagonist pimavanserin
binds to 5HT2A receptors on glutamate
neurons in the prefrontal cortex, this
compensates for the loss of GABA
inhibition due to neurodegeneration
of glutamate and GABA neurons.
(3) Normalization of glutamate
neurotransmission downstream in
the visual cortex leads to reduction in
visual hallucinations. (4) Normalization
of glutamate neurotransmission
downstream in the ventral tegmental
area (VTA) leads to (5) normalization
of dopamine neurotransmission and
reduction in delusions and auditory
hallucinations.

4

pimavanserin in psychosis and Figures 5-16, 5-17, and
5-59). In dementia-related psychosis, pimavanserin
hypothetically reduces overactivity in the psychosis
network caused by plaques, tangles, Lewy bodies, or
strokes, presumably by lowering the normal 5HT2A
stimulation to surviving glutamate neurons that have
lost their GABA inhibition by neurodegeneration. This

hypothetically rebalances the output of the surviving
glutamate neurons so that 5HT2A antagonism and its
reduction of neuronal stimulation compensates for
the loss of GABA inhibition. The 5HT2A antagonist
pimavanserin is approved for the treatment of Parkinson’s
disease psychosis and there are positive trials of this agent
in dementia-related psychosis of all causes.

527

12


<<<PAGE 544>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

response (Figure 12-45A). Similarly, intact top-down
cortical inhibition also filters out emotional input so that it
does not generate an emotional response (Figure 12-46A).
In AD patients, sensory, emotional, and motor areas
of the cortex tend to survive while top-down inhibitor
neocortical neurons degenerate, keeping the ability to
express motor and emotional output intact but not the
ability to inhibit it (Figures 12-45B and 12-46B). Thus,
when top-down inhibitory drive is destroyed, sensory
input is able to break out of the thalamus and into
the cortex and to provoke thoughtless reflexive motor
agitation (Figure 12-45B). Without top-down inhibitory
drive, emotional input also triggers lots of bottom-up
trouble from the limbic instigator, the amygdala (Figure
12-46B). That is, when emotional input is unfiltered
by the thalamus, it can set off the amygdala to deliver
bottom-up limbic fervor (Figure 12-46B). Specifically,
amygdala output to the ventral tegmental area activates
dopamine release in the mesolimbic pathway, worsening
the thalamic filter and sparking emotions (Figure 1246B). Amygdala output to the locus coeruleus elicits
norepinephrine release in the cortex mobilizing arousal
and emotions (Figure 12-46B). Finally, amygdala
output directly to cortex sets off emotional and affective
agitation (Figure 12-46B).

Neuronal Networks of Agitation in Alzheimer Disease

A simple model for the circuitry of agitation in AD
is that there is an imbalance in “top-down” cortical
inhibition with “bottom-up” limbic and emotional drives
(Figures 12-43 and 12-44). Indeed, this simple model
has been implicated in a wide range of related symptoms
across multiple disorders, such as the psychomotor
agitation of psychosis (discussed in Chapter 4), mania
and mixed features (discussed in Chapter 6), disorders
of impulsivity such as ADHD (discussed in Chapter
10), and many impulsive–compulsive syndromes such
as obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD), gambling,
substance abuse, and even violence (discussed in
Chapter 13). In AD, neurodegeneration destroys the
neurons responsible for top-down inhibition and this is
what is thought to allow bottom-up drives to proceed
unabated and thus allow the overt manifestations of
agitation.
A more sophisticated model of agitation in AD
hypothesizes a deficiency in thalamic filtering of sensory
input due to loss of top-down cortical inhibition that
results in the motor and emotional outputs of agitation
(Figures 12-45A, 12-45B, 12-46A, and 12-46B). Normal
top-down cortical inhibition filters out sensory input so
it does not generate a reflexive and thoughtless motor

top-down
brake from
cortical areas

STOP

top-down
brake from
cortical areas

GO

STOP

bottom-up
drive from
limbic areas

B

GO

top-down
brake from
cortical areas
bottom-up
drive from
limbic areas

STOP

GO

A

528

C

bottom-up
drive from
limbic areas

Figure 12-43 Agitation in Alzheimer
disease. (A) “Top-down” cortical
inhibition and “bottom-up” limbic drive
is in balance. (B) Normal activation of
top-down circuitry inhibits the more
impulsive bottom-up drive from limbic
regions, preventing inappropriate
behavior symptoms. (C) In Alzheimer
disease, neurodegeneration may lead
to insufficient top-down inhibition of
bottom-up limbic drive, with resulting
behavioral symptoms.


<<<PAGE 545>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

12-44 Agitation/impulsivity
The Agitation/Impulsivity Network: Top-Down Brakes Figure
network. Bottom-up sensory and
input from the amygdala,
Balance Bottom-Up Sensory and Emotional Drives emotional
thalamus, and striatum is relayed to

the cortex. Top-down cortical inhibition
balances the bottom-up input, resulting
in appropriate motor and emotional
output.

cortex
motor and
emotional
output

GO

STOP

STOP

STOP

GO

motor and
emotional
output

GO

amygdala

striatum

thalamus
12-45A Top-down inhibition
Top-Down Inhibition Prevents Overstimulation of the Figure
prevents overstimulation of agitation
network: motor output. (1) TopAgitation Network: Motor Output
down cortical inhibition occurs when

glutamate neurons in the cortex
release glutamate in the striatum. (2)
This stimulates GABA release in the
thalamus, which filters out sensory input.
(3) Thus, thalamic output directly to the
cortex and (4) via the amygdala does
not generate a reflexive motor response.

top-down inhibition

agitation
cortex
4

3

12

1

+ + +

amygdala

striatum

2

+
+
+

thalamus

sensory input

529


<<<PAGE 546>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Neurodegeneration in Dementia Compromises
Top-Down Inhibition: Motor Output

top-down inhibition

Figure 12-45B Neurodegeneration
in dementia compromises topdown inhibition: motor output. (1)
Accumulation of Aβ plaques and tau
tangles destroys glutamate neurons
projecting to the striatum and thus
reduces top-down cortical inhibition.
(2) GABA input into the thalamus is
insufficient and sensory input is not
adequately filtered. (3) Excessive
thalamic output directly to the cortex
and (4) via the amygdala generates a
reflexive motor response.

agitation
cortex

4

3
1

2

striatum

amygdala

+
+
+

thalamus

Up until now, treatments of agitation in AD have not
been particularly effective, including dopamine receptor
blockers already mentioned. In the absence of any
approved agents, first-line pharmacological treatment
of agitation and aggression in dementia is actually
considered by many experts to be therapy with selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin–
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), which can
help some patients. Second-line treatments that may help
avoid use of dopamine receptor blocking drugs include
β blockers, carbamazepine, and perhaps gabapentin and
pregabalin, but not valproate, topiramate, oxcarbazepine,
or benzodiazepines. Unfortunately, in addition to
not causing robust efficacy, many of these agents are
associated with significant side effects including sedation,
unsteady gait, diarrhea, and weakness. Carbamazepine has
perhaps shown the greatest efficacy amongst unapproved
drugs so far in treating neuropsychiatric symptoms of
dementia but has significant side-effect risks and may
interact with other medications commonly prescribed to
elderly patients. Cholinesterase inhibitors have little if any
benefit for most of the behavioral symptoms of dementia
except in patients with Lewy body dementias.
530

sensory input

Targeting Multimodal Neurotransmitters
(Norepinephrine, Serotonin, and Dopamine) for the
Symptomatic Treatment of Agitation in Alzheimer
Disease

Brexpiprazole is a serotonin–dopamine–norepinephrine
antagonist/partial agonist discussed in Chapter 5 as
one of the drugs approved to treat psychosis (Figure
5-57) and in Chapter 7 as one of the drugs to augment
SSRIs/SNRI to treat unipolar major depression. This
agent combines several simultaneous mechanisms to
quell the excessive activity of the agitation network in
AD: namely by its well-known dopamine D2 partial
agonist actions combined with 5HT1A partial agonist
and 5HT2A antagonist actions, as well as by its relatively
unique additional actions blocking both α1- and α2adrenergic receptors (Figure 5-57 and Figure 12-47).
Despite brexpiprazole having a warning for increased
mortality in dementia-related psychosis, using this
agent for agitation in AD and in doses lower than those
generally used to treat psychosis in schizophrenia may
provide a greater safety margin, especially since it is
the hypothetical synergy of its five actions that leads to
therapeutic efficacy in agitation of AD (Figure 12-47).


<<<PAGE 547>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

Top-Down Inhibition Prevents Overstimulation of Agitation
Network: Emotional Output

top-down inhibition

+
+

agitation
cortex

Figure 12-46A Top-down inhibition
prevents overstimulation of agitation
network: emotional output. (1)
Top-down cortical inhibition occurs
when glutamate neurons in the cortex
release glutamate in the striatum. (2)
This stimulates GABA release in the
thalamus, which filters out emotional
input. (3) Thus, thalamic output to
the amygdala leads to (4) controlled
output to the locus coeruleus (LC)
and cortex and does not generate a
reflexive emotional response. Controlled
output to the ventral tegmental area
(VTA) likewise leads to (5) controlled
dopamine output from the VTA to the
striatum.

1
4

4

4

+ + +

5

+

+

LC

VTA
amygdala

striatum

2

+

3

+
+

emotional
input

thalamus

Neurodegeneration in Dementia Compromises
Top-Down Inhibition: Emotional Output

top-down inhibition

+
+

agitation
cortex

6

1

Figure 12-46B Neurodegeneration
in dementia compromises top-down
inhibition: emotional output. (1)
Accumulation of Aβ plaques and tau
tangles destroys glutamate neurons
projecting to the striatum and thus reduces
top-down cortical inhibition. (2) GABA
input into the thalamus is insufficient
and emotional input is not adequately
filtered. (3) Excessive thalamic output
to the amygdala leads to (4) excessive
output to the locus coeruleus (LC), cortex,
and ventral tegmental area (VTA). (5)
Dopamine is released from VTA into the
striatum, further reducing the thalamic filter
and contributing to a reflexive emotional
response. (6) Norepinephrine is released
from the LC to the cortex, contributing to a
reflexive emotional response.

4

4

4

5

+

12

+

LC

VTA
amygdala

2

striatum

+

3

+
+

thalamus

emotional
input

531


<<<PAGE 548>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Specifically, by reducing dopamine output from the
ventral tegmental area (VTA) triggered by amygdala
activation, this would lead to improving the thalamic
filtering of emotional input (shown in Figure 12-46B).

Also, the multimodal actions of brexpiprazole have
several points of interaction to quell excessive cortical
output from surviving pyramidal neurons that drive
motor and emotional agitation (Figure 12-47). Blocking

Multimodal Monoamine Treatment
Reduces Agitation in Alzheimer Disease

5HT1A

NE pathway
from LC

5HT2A

NMDA
2

1B

brexpiprazole

2

Glu pathway
from amygdala

2C

NMDA

Glu pathway
from thalamus

1

D2

NE pathway
from LC
5HT2A

NE pathway
from LC
5HT pathway
from raphe

= 2 antagonism
agitation

= 1 antagonism

5HT1A

+

= 5HT2A antagonism
5HT pathway
from raphe

+

= 5HT1A partial agonism

agitation

Figure 12-47 Multimodal monoamine treatment for agitation. Brexpiprazole has multiple pharmacological mechanisms that may
hypothetically work synergistically to reduce agitation. Blocking activation by norepinephrine (NE) from locus coeruleus (LC) output at
α2c and α1 postsynaptic receptors on dendrites of pyramidal neurons should reduce arousal and emotional responses. Blocking normal
serotonin excitation by antagonist actions at 5HT2A receptors and enhancing normal serotonin inhibition by partial agonist actions at
5HT1A receptors should also combine to reduce limbic drives to motor and emotional outputs of agitation.

532


<<<PAGE 549>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

activation by norepinephrine from locus coeruleus
output at α2c and α1 postsynaptic receptors on dendrites
of pyramidal neurons should reduce arousal and
emotional responses (Figure 12-47); blocking normal
serotonin excitation by antagonist actions at 5HT2A
receptors and enhancing normal serotonin inhibition
by partial agonist actions at 5HT1A receptors should also
combine to reduce limbic drives to motor and emotional
outputs of agitation (Figure 12-47). Brexpiprazole is
approved for use in schizophrenia and depression, and is
in late-stage clinical testing for agitation in AD.
Targeting Glutamate for the Symptomatic Treatment
of Agitation in Alzheimer Disease

Excessive glutamate output in memory circuits has
already been discussed (Figures 12-37A, 12-37B, and 1237C; see also Figure 4-52D and discussion in Chapter 4).
Although the NMDA glutamate antagonist memantine
has proven effective in symptomatic treatment of
cognition/memory in AD, it has not been systematically
tested in agitation of AD. Furthermore, the widespread
use of memantine does not suggest any anecdotal
evidence for efficacy in agitation, perhaps because it is
a relatively weak blocker of NMDA receptors, with low
potency.

More robust blockade of NMDA receptors is
attained by dextromethorphan, discussed in Chapter
7 on drugs for depression and illustrated in Figure
7-84. As mentioned in Chapter 7 there are multiple
forms of dextromethorphan in testing, including
a deuterated derivative as well as combinations of
dextromethorphan with one or another of two different
CYP450 2D6 inhibitors, either bupropion or quinidine.
The formulation of dextromethorphan with the CYP450
2D6 inhibitor and norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibitor (NDRI) bupropion (also known as AXS-05;
Figure 7-84) has promising results in major depressive
disorder and treatment-resistant depression (discussed
in Chapter 7 on treatment of mood disorders) and in
agitation of AD (mentioned here and illustrated in
Figure 12-48). Although there are several potential
therapeutic mechanisms of dextromethorphan
combinations, it is likely that NMDA antagonist
action is how this drug works to quell agitation in AD.
Hypothetically dextromethorphan–bupropion blocks
the excessive excitatory glutamate output from the
agitation network that leads to motor (Figure 12-45B)
and emotional agitation (Figure 12-46B) by blocking
NMDA receptors in cortex, thalamus, amygdala, ventral
tegmental area, and locus coeruleus (Figure 12-48).

NMDA Antagonism Reduces Agitation in Alzheimer Disease

top-down inhibition

agitation

Figure 12-48 NMDA antagonist
treatment for agitation. The NMDA
antagonist dextromethorphan (DXM), in
combination with the norepinephrine–
dopamine reuptake inhibitor
(NDRI) bupropion, is in testing as a
treatment for agitation. Hypothetically,
dextromethorphan–bupropion blocks
the excessive excitatory glutamate
output from the agitation network
that leads to motor and emotional
agitation by blocking NMDA receptors
in the cortex, thalamus, amygdala,
ventral tegmental area (VTA), and locus
coeruleus (LC).

cortex

12

LC

VTA
striatum

amygdala

DXM

=

NMDA antagonism
NDRI

thalamus

sensory and
emotional
input

533


<<<PAGE 550>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Dextromethorphan combined with quinidine is
approved for the treatment of pseudobulbar affect,
and dextromethorphan and derivates combined with
either bupropion or quinidine are in late-stage testing
for major depressive disorder, for treatment-resistant
depression, and for agitation in AD.
Treating Depression in Dementia

A well-established association exists between depression
and dementia; however, the exact nature of this
intricate relationship is not fully understood (Figure
12-49). Individuals with major depressive disorder
often complain of memory problems (so-called
pseudodementia when it occurs in the elderly), which can
sometimes be reversed with antidepressant treatment,
but depression may also be an untreatable prodromal
symptom of, or risk factor for, inevitable dementia
(Figure 12-49). In fact, a history of major depressive
disorder is associated with a twofold increase in the risk
for developing dementia, particularly vascular dementia,
whereas major depressive disorder with an onset in later
life may signify a prodromal sign of AD. Additionally,
symptoms of depression are seen in at least 50% of
individuals diagnosed with dementia, and should be
addressed whenever feasible.

Depression as a risk
factor for dementia?

Depression

Dementia

Depression as a prodromal
symptom of dementia?

Depression Dementia

Dementia

Depression and dementia
sharing common risk factors/
neurobiological bases?

534

Dementia

Depression

Cognitive impairment as
a feature of depression?

Depression as a reaction
to cognitive decline?

Given that symptoms of depression can significantly
impact quality of life for patients with dementia and
may actually exacerbate cognitive decline, addressing
depressive symptoms using non-pharmacological (Table
12-9) and/or pharmacological means (Figure 12-50)
should be a priority. Psychosocial interventions are always
worth trying as treatments for depression in dementia,
but the usual drugs for depression discussed in Chapter
7 are often not effective in depression associated with
dementia, perhaps because the neural circuits these drugs
act upon may have degenerated. Further complicating
the treatment of depression in dementia are the potential
depression-exacerbating effects of medications for somatic
ailments common in the elderly population, as well as the
potential interactions of such medications with standard
antidepressants. In terms of pharmacological management
of major depressive disorder in patients with dementia,
SSRIs including sertraline, citalopram, escitalopram,
and fluoxetine have shown some limited efficacy (see
Chapter 7 for discussion of these and other drugs for
depression). In general, long-term antidepressant
treatment has been associated with a lower risk of
dementia, improved cognition, and a slower rate of decline
in elderly patients with dementia. Data are somewhat

Depression

Depression
Risk
factors

Dementia

Figure 12-49 Hypothetical associations
between depression and dementia. It
is well established that an association
exists between depression and
dementia; however, the exact nature
of this intricate relationship is not fully
understood.


<<<PAGE 551>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

inconclusive in terms of their efficacy in treating major
depressive disorder in dementia; however, SSRIs (e.g.,
citalopram but has QT prolongation; escitalopram may
have similar efficacy without QT prolongation) may
have some additional applicability towards ameliorating
agitation and inappropriate behaviors in patients with
dementia. Although considered relatively tolerable, SSRIs
may be associated with increased falls and osteoporosis,
and they may have interactions with other medications.
Additionally, SSRIs may worsen some symptoms of
Parkinson’s disease such as restless leg syndrome, periodic
limb movements, and REM sleep behavior disorders.
Therefore, if a trial of an SSRI (or any other antidepressant
medication) is deemed necessary, the lowest effective dose
should be used and continuous monitoring should be
exercised.
Another agent for treating depression in dementia
is trazodone, which blocks the serotonin transporter at
antidepressant doses (see Chapter 7 and Figures 7-44
and 7-45). Trazodone also has serotonin 2A and 2C,
H1 histamine and α1-adrenergic antagonist properties
(Figures 7-44 and 7-45), which can make it very sedating.
At low doses, trazodone does not adequately block
serotonin reuptake but retains its other properties (Figure
7-46). Because trazodone has a relatively short half-life

Treating Depression

May be ineffective because...

Pharmacological
Interventions

(6–8 hours), if dosed only once daily at night, particularly
at low doses, it can improve sleep without having daytime
effects. The utility of trazodone in treating secondary
behavioral symptoms in patients with dementia may lie
more in its ability to improve sleep rather than depression.
Trazodone may also improve other behavioral symptoms
of dementia especially in FTD but not particularly in AD.
Vortioxetine (Chapter 7 and Figure 7-49) in particular
may improve cognitive function in depression, especially
processing speed (Figure 7-50) as can some SNRIs like
duloxetine (Figure 7-29) in the elderly with depression.
However, these pro-cognitive effects have not been
demonstrated specifically in dementia patients who have
depression.
Pseudobulbar Affect (Pathological Laughing and
Crying)

Pseudobulbar affect (PBA) is an emotional expression
disorder, characterized by uncontrolled crying or
laughing that may be disproportionate or inappropriate
to the social context. It is often mistaken for a mood
disorder but is actually a disorder of the expression of
affect, which is inconsistent or disproportionate to mood.
PBA can accompany a variety of neurodegenerative
diseases such as AD and various other dementias,

Figure 12-50 Treating depression in
patients with dementia. The treatment
of depression in elderly patients with
dementia may be complicated by the
fact that the neural circuits acted on
by pharmacological interventions for
depression may have degenerated.
Although psychosocial interventions
are an appropriate option, they may be
difficult to implement for cognitively
impaired individuals.

acting on neural circuits which
may be degenerated

12

Psychosocial
Interventions

striving to change cognitive
functioning in cognitively
impaired individual

535


<<<PAGE 552>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, as well as
traumatic brain injury, and others hypothetically due to
disruption of emotional expression networks (top-down
inhibition; see Figures 12-44 and 12-46B). PBA can be
treated with the combination of dextromethorphan and
quinidine (see Figure 7-84), presumably due to actions
on NMDA glutamate and σ receptors. Dextromethorphan
combined with either quinidine or bupropion is discussed
as a possible treatment for resistant depression in Chapter
7 (Figures 7-84 and 7-85), and above, in this chapter, as
a possible treatment for agitation in AD (Figure 12-48).
Serotonergic agents such as SSRIs can also be used “offlabel” for PBA symptoms in some patients.
Apathy

Apathy, characterized as diminished motivation and
reduced goal-directed behavior, accompanied by
decreased emotional responsiveness, affects approximately
90% of patients with dementia across the disease course.
Apathy is indeed one of the most persistent and frequent
secondary behavioral symptoms of dementia and has
been shown to predict disease-worsening and add
tremendously to caregiver burden. Given the current
conceptual status of apathy as a mix of cognitive and

mood symptoms, there have been challenges in defining
apathy, since it is not only a symptom of dementia, but
also a symptom of schizophrenia (see Chapter 4 on
schizophrenia for discussion of negative symptoms), and
of major depressive episodes, both unipolar and bipolar
(see Chapter 6 on depression for discussion of lack of
motivation and lack of interest).
The ABC (Affective/emotional, Behavioral, Cognitive)
model of apathy categorizes three types of apathy, which
can hypothetically be linked to deficits in different brain
regions, as well as their connections to reward centers in
the basal ganglia (Figure 12-51). Another subtyping is:
• lack of initiative
• lack of interest
• emotional blunting
But no matter how characterized, there is a consensus
that lack of motivation is at the core of apathy. Lack of
motivation is associated with
• lack of goal-directed behavior (either spontaneous or
in reaction to the environment)
• lack of goal-directed cognitive activity, frequently
manifested as loss of interest
• lack of spontaneous or reactive emotional expression,
often characterized as emotional blunting

Hypothesized Neurocircuitry and
Treatment of Apathy
Cognitive apathy
• Dysfunction in DLPFC
• Loss of motivation to participate in
goal-directed behavior
• Loss of interest in events
• Difficulty planning and executing behaviors

Behavioral apathy
• Dysfunction in motor areas and DMPFC
• Deficits in initiating and maintaining
motor movement

Basal ganglia

(SIGH)

Affective apathy
• Dysfunction in VMPFC and OFC
• Inability to use emotional context to guide behavior
• Emotional blunting
• Altered social interactions

536

Figure 12-51 Hypothesized
neurocircuitry and treatment of
apathy. The ABC (Affective/emotional,
Behavioral, Cognitive) model of apathy
categorizes three types of apathy, which
can hypothetically be linked to deficits
in different brain regions, as well as
their connections to reward centers in
the basal ganglia. DLPFC, dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex; DMPFC, dorsomedial
prefrontal cortex; VMPFC, ventromedial
prefrontal cortex; OFC, orbital frontal
cortex.


<<<PAGE 553>>>
Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

These various descriptions all integrate the notion
of lack of spontaneous behaviors and emotions with
diminished reactivity to the environment, often the
opposite to what is observed in agitation (see Table 12-8).
The clinical presentation of apathy often differs
among various types of dementias; for instance, affective
apathy is more common in the behavioral variant of FTD
compared to AD. Both dopaminergic and cholinergic
neurotransmitter systems seem to be involved in the
various types of apathy; potential treatments, therefore,
include dopamine agonists such as bupropion, levodopa,
and stimulants, as well as cholinesterase inhibitors, but
none is approved for this use and none is particularly
robust in efficacy.
A primary reason why drugs used for depression
do not work well in apathy of dementia is that apathy
is not depression. That is, guilt, worthlessness, and
hopelessness, the symptom hallmarks of depression
(see Chapter 6 and Figure 6-1), are typically not
present in patients with apathy in dementia. When
use of medications for apathy in dementia is needed,
cholinesterase inhibitors may be effective in some
patients and are a first-line consideration in AD, but
might work better for prevention of these symptoms than
for their treatment once they have emerged. Also, FTD
patients may be more likely to benefit from SSRIs (e.g.,
citalopram or escitalopram) or SNRIs.
Other Treatments for the Behavioral Symptoms of
Dementia

As mentioned earlier and shown in Table 12-9,
there are several non-pharmacological options for
treating neuropsychiatric symptoms in patients with
dementia, and given the risks associated with many
pharmacological treatments, the lack of approval of
many agents, and their relative lack of efficacy, nonpharmacological interventions should always be
considered first-line. This will also be the case even
if pimavanserin is approved for psychosis in all-cause
dementia and if brexpiprazole and dextromethorphan–
bupropion are approved for agitation in AD.
It is particularly important to keep in mind that
physical pain, infection, or local irritation can be

the underlying cause for many secondary behavioral
symptoms in patients with dementia. Just as with
household pets or small children, a patient with dementia
may not be able to express or describe the physical pain
they are experiencing; thus it is up to astute clinicians and
caregivers to identify and treat causes of pain that may be
leading to neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as agitation
and depression, in patients with dementia. If pain is
contributing to behavioral symptoms, psychotropic
medications may have little effect whereas alleviating the
source of the pain may be quite effective. For instance,
treatment with simple acetaminophen (paracetamol)
can sometimes ameliorate agitation. Similarly, other
modifiable sources of behavioral symptoms (e.g.,
boredom, excess stimulation, etc.) should be recognized
and addressed.

SUMMARY
The most common dementia is Alzheimer disease (AD),
and the leading theory for its etiology is the amyloid
cascade hypothesis. Other dementias including vascular
dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, Parkinson’s
disease dementia, and frontotemporal dementia are
also discussed as well, as are their differing pathologies,
clinical presentations, and neuroimaging findings.
New diagnostic criteria define three stages of AD:
asymptomatic, mild cognitive impairment, and
dementia. Major research efforts have recently pivoted
away from attempting to find disease-modifying
treatments that could halt or even reverse the course
of this illness by interfering with Aβ accumulation in
the brain because many such treatments have failed
over the past 30 years. Leading treatments for AD
today include symptomatic treatment of memory and
cognition with the cholinesterase inhibitors, based upon
the cholinergic hypothesis of amnesia, and memantine,
an NMDA antagonist, based upon the glutamate
hypothesis of cognitive decline. Novel treatments
on the threshold of approval include the 5HT2A
antagonist pimavanserin for symptomatic treatment
of dementia-related psychosis, and both brexpiprazole
and dextromethorphan–bupropion for symptomatic
treatment of agitation in AD.

537

12


<<<PAGE 554>>>
13

Impulsivity, Compulsivity,
and Addiction

What Are Impulsivity and Compulsivity? 538
Neurocircuitry and the Impulsive–Compulsive
Disorders 539
The Dopamine Theory of Addiction: The
Mesolimbic Dopamine Circuit as the Final Common
Pathway of Reward 542
Substance Addictions 544
Stimulants 544
Nicotine 547
Alcohol 553
Sedative Hypnotics 556
Gamma-Hydroxybutyrate (GHB) 559
Opiates or Opioids? 559

Impulsivity and compulsivity are symptoms that cut
across many psychiatric disorders. Some conditions
with impulsivity as a prominent feature have already
been discussed, including mania (Chapter 4); attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD; Chapter 11),
and agitation in dementia (Chapter 12). Several other
disorders in which impulsivity and/or compulsivity are
core features are discussed in this chapter. Full clinical
descriptions and formal criteria for how to diagnose
the numerous known diagnostic entities discussed
here should be obtained by consulting standard
diagnostic and reference sources. Here we emphasize
what is known or hypothesized about the brain circuits
and neurotransmitters mediating impulsivity and
compulsivity, and how engaging neurotransmitters at
various nodes in impulsivity/compulsivity networks can
result in successful psychopharmacological treatments.

WHAT ARE IMPULSIVITY AND
COMPULSIVITY?
Impulsivity can be defined as a predisposition towards
rapid, unplanned reactions to internal or external stimuli,
with diminished regard for the negative consequences of
these reactions. In contrast, compulsivity is defined as the
performance of repetitive and dysfunctionally impairing
behavior that has no adaptive function. Compulsive
538

Cannabis 563
Hallucinogens 567
Empathogens 569
Dissociatives 569
Abuse Your Way to Abstinence? 571
“Therapeutic” Dissociation, Hallucinations, and
Empathy? 574
Behavioral Addictions 575
Binge Eating Disorder 575
Other Behavioral Addictions 575
Obsessive–Compulsive and Related Disorders 576
Impulse Control Disorders 577
Summary 578

behavior is performed in a habitual or stereotypical fashion,
either according to rigid rules or as a means of avoiding
perceived negative consequences. These two symptom
constructs can perhaps be best differentiated by how they
both fail to control responses: impulsivity as the inability
to stop initiating actions, and compulsivity as the inability
to terminate ongoing actions. These constructs have
thus been viewed historically as diametrically opposed,
with impulsivity being associated with risk seeking and
compulsivity with harm avoidance. Currently the emphasis
is on the fact that both share different forms of cognitive
inflexibility leading to a profound feeling of lack of control.
More precisely, impulsivity is action without
forethought; the lack of reflection on the consequences
of one’s behavior; the inability to postpone reward with
preference for immediate reward over more beneficial
but delayed reward; a failure of motor inhibition, often
choosing risky behavior; or (less scientifically) lacking the
will power not to give in to temptations and provocative
stimuli from the environment. On the other hand,
compulsivity is action inappropriate to the situation but
which nevertheless persists, and which often results
in undesirable consequences. In fact, compulsions are
characterized by the curious inability to adapt behavior
after negative feedback.
Habits are a type of compulsion, and can be seen as
responses triggered by environmental stimuli, regardless


<<<PAGE 555>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

of the current desirability of the consequences of that
response. Whereas goal-directed behavior is mediated by
knowledge of and desire for its consequences, habits are
controlled by external stimuli through stimulus–response
associations that are stamped into brain circuits through
behavioral repetition and formed after considerable
training, can be automatically triggered by stimuli, and
are defined by their insensitivity to their outcomes.
Given that goal-directed actions are relatively cognitively
demanding, for daily routines, it can be adaptive to rely
on habits that can be performed with minimal conscious
awareness. However, habits can also represent severely
maladaptive perseveration of behaviors as components of
various impulsive–compulsive disorders (see Table 13-1).
Another way to look at addiction is as a habit much
like the behavior of a Pavlovian dog! That is, drug seeking
and drug taking behaviors can be viewed as conditioned
responses to the conditioned stimuli of being around
people or places or items associated with drugs, or having
craving and withdrawal. When addicted, drug seeking
and taking are automatic, thoughtless, conditioned
responses that occur in an almost reflexive fashion to
conditioned stimuli, just as Pavlov’s dogs developed
mouth-watering in response to a bell associated with
food. When such stimulus–response conditioning runs
amok in addiction, it does not perform an adaptive
purpose of sparing cognitive efforts from doing routine
tasks. Instead, the “habit” of drug addiction has become
a perverse form of learning, almost as though one has
learned how to have a psychiatric disorder!

NEUROCIRCUITRY AND THE
IMPULSIVE–COMPULSIVE
DISORDERS
Impulsivity and compulsivity are thought to be mediated
by neuroanatomically and neurochemically distinct, but
in many ways parallel, components of cortico-subcortical
circuitry (Figures 13-1 and 13-2). When these networks
are dysfunctional, they hypothetically result in “lack
of control” of thoughts and behaviors. Simply put,
impulsivity and compulsivity are both symptoms that
result from the brain having a hard time saying “no.”
Why can’t impulses and compulsions be stopped
in various psychiatric disorders? An over-simplified
explanation was discussed in Chapter 12 and illustrated
in Figures 12-43 and 12-44, showing either too much
“bottom-up” limbic emotional drive or too little “topdown” cortical inhibition of these drives. In Alzheimer
disease, for example, impulsivity resulting in agitation

is thought to be due principally to neurodegeneration
of top-down controls (see Chapter 12 and Figures
12-45B and 12-46B). In ADHD, impulsivity,
especially motor impulsivity, is thought to be due to
neurodevelopmentally delayed or absent top-down
Table 13-1 Impulsive–compulsive disorders

Substance addictions
Cannabis
Nicotine
Alcohol
Opioids
Stimulants
Hallucinogens
Empathogens
Dissociatives
Behavioral addictions
Binge eating disorder
Gambling disorder
Internet gaming disorder
Obsessive–compulsive related disorders
Obsessive–compulsive disorder
Body dysmorphic disorder
Trichotillomania
Skin picking
Hoarding
Shopping
Hypochondriasis
Somatization
Impulse control disorders
Agitation in Alzheimer disease
Motor and behavioral impulsivity in ADHD
Mood disorders
Provocative behaviors in mania
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
Pyromania
Kleptomania
Paraphilias
Hypersexual disorder
Autism spectrum disorders
Tourette syndrome and tic disorders
Stereotyped movement disorders
Borderline personality disorder
Self harm and parasuicidal behaviors
Conduct disorder
Antisocial personality disorder
Oppositional defiant disorder
Intermittent explosive disorder
Aggression and violence:
impulsive
psychotic
psychopathic

13

539


<<<PAGE 556>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Impulsivity and Reward

Compulsivity and Motor Response Inhibition

dorsal

ventral

Figure 13-1 Circuitry of impulsivity and reward. The “bottomup” circuit that drives impulsivity is a loop with projections
from the ventral striatum to the thalamus, from the thalamus to
the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) and the anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC), and from the VMPFC/ACC back to the
ventral striatum. This circuit is usually modulated “top-down”
from the prefrontal cortex. If this top-down response inhibition
system is inadequate or is overcome by activity from the ventral
striatum, impulsive behaviors may result.

Figure 13-2 Circuitry of compulsivity and motor response
inhibition. The “bottom-up” circuit that drives compulsivity
is a loop with projections from the dorsal striatum to the
thalamus, from the thalamus to the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC),
and from the OFC back to the dorsal striatum. This habit circuit
can be modulated “top-down” from the OFC. If this top-down
response inhibition system is inadequate or is overcome by
activity from the dorsal striatum, compulsive behaviors may
result.

cortical controls (see Chapter 11 and Figures 11-17
through 11-21). In a wide variety of other disorders
discussed below, the problem may lie anywhere within
two parallel cortico-striatal circuits, namely at two
striatal nodes (one impulsive and the other compulsive),
which drive these behaviors, or at two corresponding
prefrontal cortical nodes, which restrain them (Figures
13-1 and 13-2). Overlap between these two parallel
networks exists such that a problem in the impulsive
circuit can end up as a problem in the compulsive circuit
and vice versa, leading to the concept of “impulsive–
compulsive disorders,” all of which have this symptom
domain as one of their core features. Such psychiatric
conditions incorporate a wide range of disorders, from
obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) to addictions, and
far beyond (Table 13-1). Although there are many other
important symptom domains in these various conditions
that distinguish one from another, all can be associated
with disordered impulsivity and/or compulsivity, and
this is the shared domain of their psychopathology that
is discussed here.
Neuroanatomically, impulsivity is thus seen as
regulated by an action–outcome ventrally dependent
learning system (Figure 13-1) whereas compulsivity

is hypothesized to be controlled by a habit system
that is dorsal (Figure 13-2). That is, many behaviors
start out as impulses mediated by the ventral loop,
which reacts to reward and motivation (Figure 131). Over time, however, the locus of control for these
behaviors migrates dorsally (Figure 13-2) due to a
cascade of neuroadaptations and neuroplasticity that
engage a dorsal “habit system” by means of which an
impulsive act eventually becomes compulsive (Figures
13-2 and 13-3). This naturally occurring process can
have adaptive value in everyday life, freeing the brain
to spend its efforts on novel, cognitively demanding
activities. However, when it runs hypothetically amok in
a myriad of psychiatric disorders (Table 13-1), the goal
is to stop or reverse this spiral of information from the
impulsive neuronal loop to the compulsive “habit” loop.
Unfortunately, there are relatively few highly effective
treatments for impulsive–compulsive disorders today.
We have discussed effective treatments for ADHD in
Chapter 11 and for agitation in Alzheimer disease in
Chapter 12. Here we review the hypothetically shared
neurobiology of many other impulsive–compulsive
disorders and discuss what treatments are available for
some of these conditions.

540


<<<PAGE 557>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

mania

ADHD
impulsive
violence

intermittent
explosive
disorder

kleptomania

borderline
personality
disorder

ventral
striatum

ACC
VMPFC

antisocial
behavior

thalamus

pyromania

IMPULSIVITY
drug addiction
gambling

autism
spectrum

obesity/
binge eating

COMPULSIVITY

hypersexual

Tourette
syndrome
OFC

body
dysmorphic
disorder

dorsal
striatum

paraphilias
internet

skin
picking

thalamus
gambling

trichotillomania
OCD
somatization

hypochondriasis

compulsive
shopping

Figure 13-3 Impulsive–compulsive disorder construct. Impulsivity and compulsivity are seen in a wide variety of psychiatric disorders.
Impulsivity can be thought of as the inability to stop the initiation of actions and involves a brain circuit centered on the ventral striatum
and linked to the thalamus, to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC), and to the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). Compulsivity can
be thought of as the inability to terminate ongoing actions and hypothetically involves a brain circuit centered on the dorsal striatum
and linked to the thalamus and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC). Impulsive acts such as drug use, gambling, and over-eating can eventually
become compulsive due to neuroplastic changes that engage the dorsal habit system and theoretically cause impulses in the ventral
loop to migrate to the dorsal loop.

541

13


<<<PAGE 558>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

The Dopamine Theory of Addiction: The Mesolimbic
Dopamine Circuit as the Final Common Pathway of
Reward

A leading theory of addiction for over 40 years has
been the dopamine theory, proposing that the final
common pathway of reinforcement and reward in
the brain for anything pleasurable is the mesolimbic
dopamine pathway (Figure 13-4). This theory is a bit
of an oversimplification and perhaps most applicable
to drugs that cause the greatest effects upon dopamine
release, especially stimulants and nicotine, but less so
for marijuana and opioids. The mesolimbic dopamine
pathway is familiar to readers as it is the same brain

circuit discussed in Chapter 4 on psychosis and
hypothesized to be overly active in psychosis, mediating
the positive symptoms of schizophrenia and also
motivation and reward (see Figures 4-14 through 4-16).
Some even consider the mesolimbic dopamine pathway
to be the “pathway of hedonic pleasure” of the brain
and dopamine to be the “neurotransmitter of hedonic
pleasure.” According to this notion, there are many
natural ways to trigger your mesolimbic dopamine
neurons to release dopamine, ranging from intellectual
accomplishments, to athletic victories, to enjoying a
good symphony, to experiencing an orgasm. These are
sometimes called “natural highs” (Figure 13-4).

Reward: DA mesolimbic pathway

nucleus
accumbens

VTA

YES!

YES!

Natural Highs

Substance-Induced Highs

Behaviorally Induced Highs
Figure 13-4 Dopamine is central to reward. Dopamine (DA), and specifically the mesolimbic pathway from the ventral tegmental area
(VTA) to the nucleus accumbens, has long been recognized as a major player in the regulation of reinforcement and reward. Naturally
rewarding activities, such as achieving major accomplishments, can cause fast and robust increases in DA in the mesolimbic pathway.
Drugs of abuse also cause DA release in the mesolimbic pathway, and can often increase DA in a manner that is more explosive and
pleasurable than that which occurs naturally.

542


<<<PAGE 559>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

The inputs to the mesolimbic pathway that mediate
these natural highs include a most incredible “pharmacy”
of naturally occurring substances, ranging from the
brain’s own morphine/heroin (endorphins), to the
brain’s own marijuana (anandamide), to the brain’s own
nicotine (acetylcholine), to the brain’s own cocaine and

amphetamine (dopamine itself) (Figure 13-5). Thus, the
idea formed that all drugs of abuse – as well as many
maladaptive behaviors such as gambling, binge eating,
using the internet – have a final common pathway of
causing pleasure. This happens by provoking dopamine
release in the mesolimbic pathway in a manner often

Neurotransmitter Regulation of Mesolimbic Reward
nucleus
accumbens
endocannabinoid

lu

G
GABA
DA

PFC
amygdala
hippocampus

T
5H

in

ph

r
do

en

raphe
PPT/LDT
arcuate
nucleus
VTA

endocannabinoid

5HT

ACh

endocannabinoid

hin

orp

end

GABA

ACh GABA

Glu

endocannabinoid

Figure 13-5 Neurotransmitter regulation of mesolimbic reward. The mesolimbic dopamine pathway is modulated by many naturally
occurring substances in the brain in order to deliver normal reinforcement to adaptive behaviors (such as eating, drinking, sex) and thus
to produce “natural highs,” such as feelings of joy or accomplishment. These neurotransmitter inputs to the reward system include the
brain’s own morphine/heroin (endorphins), the brain’s own cannabis/marijuana (endocannabinoids such as anandamide), the brain’s
own nicotine (acetylcholine [ACh]), and the brain’s own cocaine/amphetamine (dopamine [DA] itself), among others. The numerous
psychotropic drugs of abuse that occur in nature bypass the brain’s own neurotransmitters and directly stimulate the brain’s receptors
in the reward system, causing dopamine release and a consequent “artificial high.” Thus, alcohol, opioids, stimulants, marijuana,
benzodiazepines, sedative hypnotics, hallucinogens, and nicotine all affect this mesolimbic dopaminergic system.

543

13


<<<PAGE 560>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

more explosive and pleasurable than that which occurs
naturally. In this formulation, drugs bypass the brain’s
own neurotransmitters and directly stimulate the
brain’s own receptors for these same drugs, causing
dopamine to be released. Since the brain already uses
neurotransmitters that resemble drugs of abuse, it is not
necessary to earn your reward naturally since you can
get a much more intense reward in the short run and
upon demand from a drug of abuse than you can from
a natural high with the brain’s natural system. However,
unlike a natural high, a drug-induced reward can start
the diabolical cascade of neuroadaptation into habit
formation.

SUBSTANCE ADDICTIONS
Addiction is a horrible disease. What starts out as fun
and increased dopamine release in the ventral striatum
with enhanced anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) activity
and reward ends up with the locus of control in the habit
circuit as a mindless, automatic, and powerful compulsive
drive to obtain drugs that is basically irresistible. Since
it is not presently known what treatment mechanisms
might suppress the wicked habit circuit that has
commandeered behavioral control in the addict,
treatments for addiction are few and far between and
often not very effective. What is needed are treatments
capable of wresting control back from the habit circuit
and returning it to voluntary control, perhaps by
neuroplasticity reverse-migrating control from dorsal
back to ventral, where things began before addiction was
present.
Once addicted, the brain is no longer rewarded
principally by the drug itself, but as well by anticipation
of the drug and its reward. This generates compulsive
drug-seeking behaviors which are themselves rewarding.
That is, some studies suggest that dopamine neurons
terminating in the ventral striatum (Figure 13-1) actually
stop responding to the primary reinforcer (i.e., taking the
drug, eating the food, doing the gambling) and instead
dopamine neurons terminating in the dorsal striatum
(Figure 13-2) begin to respond to the conditioned stimuli
(i.e., handling the heroin syringe, feeling the crack pipe
in your hand, entering the casino) before the drug is even
taken! Since drug seeking and drug taking become the
main motivational drives when addicted, this explains
why the addicted subject is aroused and motivated when
seeking to procure drugs, but is withdrawn and apathetic
when exposed to non-drug-related activities. When drug
abuse reaches this stage of compulsivity, it is clearly a
544

maladaptive perseveration of behavior – a habit and a
Pavlovian conditioned response, and not any longer being
simply naughty or giving in to temptation.
Stimulants

Stimulants as therapeutic agents have been discussed
in Chapter 11 covering the treatment of ADHD. For
optimized treatment of ADHD, stimulant dosing is
carefully controlled to deliver constant drug levels
within a defined therapeutic range (see Chapter 11 and
Figure 11-34). Theoretically, this amplifies tonic release
of dopamine (Figure 11-33) to optimize pro-cognitive
ADHD therapeutic effects. On the other hand, these
very same stimulants can also be used as drugs of abuse
by changing the dose and the route of administration
to amplify phasic dopamine stimulation and thus their
reinforcing effects (Figure 11-35). Although therapeutic
actions of stimulants are thought to be directed at the
prefrontal cortex to enhance both norepinephrine and
dopamine neurotransmission there, at moderate levels
of dopamine transporter (DAT) and norepinephrine
transporter (NET) occupancy (Figure 11-26), the
reinforcing effects and abuse of stimulants occur when
DATs in the mesolimbic reward circuit are suddenly
blasted and massively blocked (Figure 13-6).
The speed with which a stimulant enters the brain
dictates the degree of the subjective “high” (Figure 137). This was also discussed in Chapter 11 as one of the
properties of the “mysterious DAT.” This sensitivity of
the DAT to the way in which it is engaged likely explains
why stimulants when abused are often not ingested orally
but instead are smoked, inhaled, snorted, or injected so
they can enter the brain in a sudden explosive manner,
to maximize their reinforcing nature. Oral absorption
reduces reinforcing properties of stimulants because
speed of entry to the brain is considerably slowed by the
process of gastrointestinal absorption. Cocaine is not even
active orally so users have learned over the years to take it
intranasally so that drug rapidly enters the brain directly,
bypassing the liver, and thus can have a more rapid
onset than even with intravenous administration. The
most rapid and robust way to deliver drugs to the brain
is to smoke those that are compatible with this route
of administration, as this avoids first-pass metabolism
through the liver and is somewhat akin to giving the
drug by intra-arterial/intra-carotid bolus via immediate
absorption across the massive surface area of the lung.
The faster the drug’s entry into brain, the stronger are its
reinforcing effects (Figure 13-7), probably because this


<<<PAGE 561>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

Stimulant Actions on the Mesolimbic Dopamine Circuit
nucleus
accumbens
endocannabinoid

G
lu
GABA
DA

PFC
amygdala
hippocampus

T

o
nd

n

hi

rp

5H

e

stimulants

YES!

substance-induced
high

raphe
PPT/LDT
arcuate
nucleus
VTA

endocannabinoid

5HT

ACh

endocannabinoid

hin

orp

end

GABA

ACh GABA

Glu

endocannabinoid

Figure 13-6 Stimulant actions on the mesolimbic dopamine circuit. The reinforcing effects and abuse potential of stimulants occurs
when dopamine transporters (DATs) in the mesolimbic reward circuit are blocked, causing a phasic increase in dopamine (DA) in the
nucleus accumbens.

form of drug delivery triggers phasic dopamine firing,
the type associated with reward (see Chapter 11 for
discussion and Figure 11-35).
Amphetamine, methamphetamine, and cocaine are all
inhibitors of the DAT and the NET. Cocaine also inhibits
the serotonin transporter (SERT) and is also a local
anesthetic, which Freud himself exploited to help dull
the pain of his tongue cancer. He may have also exploited
the second property of the drug, which is to produce
euphoria, reduce fatigue, and create a sense of mental
acuity due to inhibition of dopamine reuptake at the DAT,
at least for a while, until drug-induced reward is replaced
by drug-induced compulsivity.
High doses of stimulants can cause tremor, emotional
lability, restlessness, irritability, panic, and repetitive,

stereotyped behavior. At even higher repetitive doses,
stimulants can induce paranoia and hallucinations
resembling schizophrenia (see Chapter 4 and Figures
4-14 through 4-16) as well as hypertension, tachycardia,
ventricular irritability, hyperthermia, and respiratory
depression. In overdose, stimulants can cause acute
heart failure, stroke, and seizures. Over time, stimulant
abuse can be progressive (Figure 13-8). Initial doses
of stimulants that cause pleasurable phasic dopamine
firing (Figure 13-8A) give leave to reward conditioning
and addiction with chronic use, causing craving between
stimulant doses and residual tonic dopamine firing with
a lack of pleasurable phasic dopamine firing (Figure 138B). Now addicted, higher and higher doses of stimulants
are needed in order to achieve the pleasurable highs of
545

13


<<<PAGE 562>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Dopamine, Pharmacokinetics, and Reinforcing Effects
Cocaine (IV)
120
DAT blockade
Self-reported high

100

% of Peak

80

60

40

20

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Time (minutes)
Figure 13-7 Dopamine, pharmacokinetics, and reinforcing effects. Acute drug use causes dopamine release in the striatum. However,
the reinforcing effects of the drug are largely determined not only by the presence of dopamine, but also by the rate at which dopamine
increases in the brain, which in turn is dictated by the speed at which the drug enters and leaves the brain. This is likely because abrupt
and large increases in dopamine (such as those caused by drugs of abuse) mimic the phasic dopamine firing associated with conveying
information about reward and saliency. As shown here, the self-reported high associated with intravenous (IV) cocaine use correlates
with both the rate and extent of dopamine transporter (DAT) blockade. The rate of drug uptake is subject to the route of administration,
with intravenous administration and inhalation producing the fastest drug uptake, followed by snorting. In addition, different drugs of
abuse have different “reward values” (i.e., different rates at which they increase dopamine) based on their individual mechanisms of
action.

phasic dopamine firing (Figure 13-8C). Unfortunately,
the higher the high, the lower the low, and between
stimulant doses, the individual experiences not only the
absence of a high, but also withdrawal symptoms such as
sleepiness and anhedonia (Figure 13-8D). The effort to
combat withdrawal coupled with habit formation leads
to compulsive use and ultimately dangerous behavior
in order to secure drug supplies (Figure 13-8E). Finally,
there may be enduring if not irreversible changes in
dopamine neurons, including long-lasting depletions of
dopamine levels and axonal degeneration, a state that
clinically and pathologically is appropriately called “burnout” (Figure 13-8F).
546

Atypical Stimulants

“Bath salts” are a form of stimulant. Their name derives
from efforts to disguise these abusable stimulants
as common Epsom salts used in baths, with similar
packaging as white or colorful powders, granules, or
crystal forms but quite different chemically! Bath salts
are often labelled “not for human consumption” in a
further attempt to be mistaken for Epsom salts and thus
circumventing drug prohibition laws.
Bath salts, however, are not for bathing, but are
synthetic stimulants that commonly include the active
ingredient methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV) and
may also contain mephedrone or methylone. They are


<<<PAGE 563>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

Progression of Stimulant Abuse

amphetamine
cocaine

cocaine

amphetamine

amphetamine

cocaine
postsynaptic
A

fun

B

craving
“where’s my
dopamine?”

C

reverse
tolerance/
addicted
“brainwashed”

D

anhedonia
sleepiness
withdrawal

E

compulsive
use
marathon sex
paranoia
HIV
violence

F

enduring
cognitive loss
“burn-out”

DA
firing

time
Figure 13-8 Progression of stimulant abuse. (A) Initial doses of stimulants such as methamphetamine and cocaine cause pleasurable
phasic dopamine firing. (B) With chronic use, reward conditioning causes craving between stimulant doses and residual tonic dopamine
firing with a lack of pleasurable phasic dopamine firing. (C) In this addicted state, higher and higher doses of stimulants are needed
in order to achieve the pleasurable highs of phasic dopamine firing. (D) Unfortunately, the higher the high, the lower the low, and
between stimulant doses, the individual experiences not only the absence of a high, but also withdrawal symptoms such as sleepiness
and anhedonia. (E) The effort to combat withdrawal can lead to compulsive use and impulsive, dangerous behavior in order to secure
the stimulant. (F) Finally, there may be enduring if not irreversible changes in dopamine neurons, including long-lasting depletions of
dopamine levels and axonal degeneration, a state that clinically and pathologically is appropriately called “burn-out.”

also called “plant food” and like other stimulants can
have reinforcing effects but also cause agitation, paranoia,
hallucinations, suicidality, and chest pain.
Some would consider inhalants as atypical types of
stimulants since they are thought to be direct releasers
of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens. Inhaling fumes
– called “huffing” – of substances such as toluene found
in paint thinner, felt-tip markers, glue, various aerosol
sprays, and even freon found in air conditioners, can
cause a feeling similar to alcohol intoxication, with
dizziness, lightheadedness, and disinhibition; it can also
cause impaired judgment and possibly hallucinations.
Long-term huffing can cause depression, weight loss,
and brain damage. Huffing can also be dangerous in the
short term, as it can cause sudden death due to cardiac
arrest, aspiration, or suffocation. Freon in particular can
cause these effects and can also freeze the lungs, making
it extremely dangerous. Substances that are huffed do not
show up on drug tests.

Treatment of Stimulant Addiction

Unfortunately, there are currently no approved drug
treatments for stimulant addicts, as many dopaminelinked and serotonin-linked therapeutics have failed. In
the future, there may be a cocaine vaccine that removes
the drug before it reaches the brain so there are no more
reinforcing effects that accompany drug ingestion.
Nicotine

How common is smoking in clinical psychopharmacology
practices? Some estimates are that more than half of all
cigarettes are consumed by patients with a concurrent
psychiatric disorder, and that smoking is the most
common comorbidity among seriously mentally ill
patients. Other estimates are that about 16–20% of the
general population (in the US) smoke, about 25% of
people who regularly see general physicians smoke,
but that 40–50% of patients in a psychopharmacology
practice smoke, including 60–85% of patients

547

13


<<<PAGE 564>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

with ADHD, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder.
Unfortunately, histories of current smoking are often not
carefully taken or recorded as one of the diagnoses for
smokers in mental health practices and only about 10%
of smokers report being offered treatment pro-actively by
psychopharmacologists and other clinicians even though
somewhat effective treatments are available.
Nicotine acts directly upon nicotinic cholinergic
receptors in mesolimbic reward circuits to release
dopamine (Figure 13-9). Cholinergic neurons and the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) are discussed
in Chapter 12 and illustrated in Figures 12-24 through
12-32. Nicotinic receptors are specifically illustrated in
Figure 12-28. There are several subtypes of nicotinic
receptors present in brain. The α7 nicotinic receptor on
postsynaptic prefrontal cortex neurons may be linked
to the pro-cognitive and mentally alerting actions of
nicotine, but not to addictive actions. It is the α4β2
subtype discussed here and illustrated in Figure 13-9
that is thought to be most relevant to smoking and
nicotine addiction. That is, nicotine’s actions at α4β2
nicotinic postsynaptic receptors directly on dopamine
neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) are those
that are theoretically linked to addiction (Figure 13-9).
Nicotine also indirectly activates dopamine release from
the VTA by activating nicotinic presynaptic receptors
on glutamate neurons, causing glutamate release, which
in turn causes dopamine release (Figure 13-9). Nicotine
also appears to desensitize α4β2 postsynaptic receptors
on inhibitory GABAergic interneurons in the VTA,
indirectly leading to dopamine release in the nucleus
accumbens by disinhibiting dopaminergic mesolimbic
neurons (Figure 13-9).
The α4β2 nicotinic receptors adapt to the chronic
intermittent pulsatile delivery of nicotine in a way
that leads to addiction (Figure 13-10). Initially these
receptors in the resting state are opened by delivery of
nicotine, which in turns leads to dopamine release and
reinforcement, pleasure, and reward (Figure 13-10A). By
the time the cigarette is finished, these receptors become
desensitized, so that they cannot function temporarily,
and thus cannot react either to acetylcholine or nicotine
(Figure 13-10A). In terms of obtaining any further
reward, you might as well stop smoking at this point. An
interesting question to ask is: how long does it take for
the nicotinic receptors to desensitize? The answer seems
to be: about as long as it takes to inhale all the puffs of
a standard cigarette and burn it down to a butt. Thus, it
is probably not an accident that cigarettes are the length

548

that they are. Shorter does not maximize the pleasure.
Longer is a waste since by then the receptors are all
desensitized anyway (Figure 13-10A).
The problem for the smoker is that when the
receptors resensitize to their resting state, this initiates
craving and withdrawal due to the lack of release of
further dopamine (Figure 13-10A). Another interesting
question is: how long does it take to resensitize nicotinic
receptors? The answer seems to be: about the length
of time that smokers take between cigarettes. For the
average one-pack-per-day smoker, awake for 16 hours,
that would be about 45 minutes, possibly explaining
why there are 20 cigarettes in a pack (i.e., enough for an
average smoker to keep his or her nicotinic receptors
completely desensitized all day long).
Putting nicotinic receptors out of business by
desensitizing them causes neurons to attempt to
overcome this lack of functioning receptors by
upregulating the number of receptors (Figure 13-10B).
That, however, is futile, since nicotine just desensitizes
all of them the next time a cigarette is smoked (Figure
13-10C). Furthermore, this upregulation is self-defeating
because it serves to amplify the craving that occurs when
the extra receptors are resensitizing to their resting state
(Figure 13-10C).
From a receptor point of view, at first the goal of
smoking is to desensitize all nicotinic α4β2 receptors and
get the maximum dopamine release. Eventually, however,
the goal is mostly to prevent craving. Positron emission
tomography (PET) scans of α4β2 nicotinic receptors in
human smokers confirm that nicotinic receptors are
exposed to just about enough nicotine for just about long
enough from each cigarette to accomplish this. Craving
seems to be initiated at the first sign of nicotinic receptor
resensitization. Thus, the bad thing about receptor
resensitization is craving. The good thing from an addicted
smoker’s point of view is that as the receptors resensitize,
they are available to release more dopamine and cause
pleasure or suppress craving and withdrawal again.
Treatment of Nicotine Addiction

Treating nicotine dependence is not easy. There is
evidence that nicotine addiction begins with the first
cigarette, with the first dose showing signs of lasting
a month in experimental animals (e.g., activation of
the anterior cingulate cortex for this long after a single
dose). Craving begins within a month of repeated
administration. Perhaps even more troublesome is the
finding that the “diabolical learning” of dorsal to ventral


<<<PAGE 565>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

Detail of Nicotine Actions
PFC
Glu neuron

PPT/LDT
ACh neuron

VTA

nicotine
indirectly
activates DA
release

nicotine directly
activates DA
release
VTA
DA neuron

α 4ß2

α7

Glu

DA

nicotine
desensitizes

GABA
interneuron

GABA
ACh
nicotine
Figure 13-9 Actions of nicotine. Nicotine directly causes dopamine (DA) release in the nucleus accumbens by binding to α4β2 nicotinic
postsynaptic receptors on dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA). In addition, nicotine binds to α7 nicotinic presynaptic
receptors on glutamate (Glu) neurons in the VTA, stimulating glutamate release that in turn leads to dopamine release in the nucleus
accumbens. Nicotine also seems to desensitize α4β2 postsynaptic receptors on GABA interneurons in the VTA; the reduction of GABA
neurotransmission disinhibits mesolimbic dopamine neurons and thus is a third mechanism for enhancing dopamine release in the
nucleus accumbens.

549

13


<<<PAGE 566>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Reinforcement and α4ß2 Nicotinic Receptors
cigarette
finished

cigarette

resting

open
- DA releases

desensitized

initiation of craving

A

Adaptation of α 4ß2 Nicotinic Receptors
upregulated

chronically
desensitized
B

Addiction and α 4ß2
cigarette
finished

cigarette

upregulated,
resting

C

open,
DA release

desensitized

enhanced craving
drug-seeking behavior
impulsive choices
reward sensitivity

Figure 13-10 Reinforcement and α4β2 nicotinic receptors. (A) In the resting state α4β2 nicotinic receptors are closed (left). Nicotine
administration, as by smoking a cigarette, causes the receptor to open, which in turn leads to dopamine release (middle). Longterm stimulation of these receptors leads to their desensitization, such that they temporarily can no longer react to nicotine (or
to acetylcholine); this occurs in approximately the same length of time it takes to finish a single cigarette (right). As the receptors
resensitize (return to resting state), they initiate craving and withdrawal due to the lack of release of further dopamine. (B) With
chronic desensitization, α4β2 receptors upregulate to compensate. (C) If one continues smoking, however, the repeated administration
of nicotine continues to lead to desensitization of all of these α4β2 receptors and thus the upregulation does no good. In fact, the
upregulation can lead to amplified craving as the extra receptors resensitize to their resting state.

550


<<<PAGE 567>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

migration of control from impulsive to compulsive
circuits may be very, very long-lasting once exposure to
nicotine is stopped. Some evidence even suggests that
these changes last a lifetime, with a form of “molecular
memory” to nicotine, even in long-term abstinent former
smokers. One of the first successful agents proven to be
effective for treating nicotine addiction is nicotine itself,
but in a route of administration other than smoking:
gums, lozenges, nasal sprays, inhalers, and transdermal
patches. Delivering nicotine by these other routes does
not attain the high levels nor the pulsatile blasts that are
delivered to the brain by smoking, so they are not very
reinforcing, just as discussed for delivery of stimulants
above and illustrated in Figure 13-7. However, these
alternative forms of nicotine delivery can help to reduce
craving due to a steady amount of nicotine that is
delivered and presumably desensitizing an important
number of resensitizing and craving nicotinic receptors.
Another treatment for nicotine dependence is
varenicline, a selective α4β2 nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor partial agonist (Figures 13-11 and 13-12).
Figure 13-11 contrasts the effects of nicotinic partial
agonists (NPAs) with nicotinic full agonists and with
nicotinic antagonists on the cation channel associated
with nicotinic cholinergic receptors. Nicotinic full
agonists include acetylcholine, which is very short-acting,
and nicotine, which is very long-acting. They open the
channel fully and frequently (Figure 13-11, left). By
contrast, nicotinic antagonists stabilize the channel in
the closed state, but do not desensitize these receptors
(Figure 13-11, right). NPAs stabilize nicotinic receptors in

an intermediate state that is not desensitized and where
the channel opens less frequently than with a full agonist,
but more frequently than with an antagonist (Figure 1311, middle).
How addicting is tobacco and how well do NPAs
work to achieve cessation of smoking? About two-thirds
of smokers want to quit, one-third try, but only 2–3%
succeed long term. Of all the substances of abuse, some
surveys show that tobacco has the highest probability of
making you dependent when you have tried a substance
at least once. It could be argued, therefore, that nicotine
might be the most addicting substance known. The good
news is that the NPA varenicline triples or quadruples
the 1-month, 6-month, and 1-year quit rates compared to
placebo; the bad news is that this means only about 10%
of smokers who have taken varenicline are still abstinent
a year later. Many of these patients are prescribed
varenicline for only 12 weeks, which might be far too
short a period of time for maximal effectiveness.
Another approach to the treatment of smoking
cessation is to try to reduce the craving that occurs
during abstinence by boosting dopamine with the
norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI)
bupropion (see Chapter 7 and Figures 7-34 through
7-36). The idea is to give back some of the dopamine
downstream to the craving postsynaptic D2 receptors
in the nucleus accumbens while they are readjusting to
the lack of getting their dopamine “fix” from the recent
withdrawal of nicotine (Figure 13-13). Thus, while
smoking, dopamine is happily released in the nucleus
accumbens because of the actions of nicotine on α4β2

Molecular Actions of a Nicotinic Partial Agonist (NPA)
acetylcholine

nicotinic full agonist:
channel frequently open

nicotinic
partial agonist

nicotinic partial agonist (NPA):
stabilizes channel in less
frequently open state,
not desensitized

nicotinic antagonist

Figure 13-11 Molecular actions of
a nicotinic partial agonist (NPA). Full
agonists at α4β2 receptors, such as
acetylcholine and nicotine, cause the
channels to open frequently (left). In
contrast, antagonists at these receptors
stabilize them in a closed state, such
that they do not become desensitized
(right). Nicotinic partial agonists
(NPAs) stabilize the channels in an
intermediate state, causing them to
open less frequently than a full agonist
but more frequently than an antagonist
(middle).

nicotinic antagonist:
stabilizes channel in closed
state, not desensitized

13

551


<<<PAGE 568>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Varenicline Actions on Reward Circuits

PFC
Glu neuron

PPT/LDT
ACh neuron

VTA

varenicline

VTA
DA neuron

α 4ß2

α7

Glu

DA

varenicline

GABA
interneuron

GABA
ACh
varenicline
Figure 13-12 Varenicline actions on reward circuits. Varenicline is a nicotinic partial agonist (NPA) selective for the α4β2 receptor
subtype. When varenicline binds to α4β2 nicotinic receptors – located on dopamine (DA) neurons, glutamate (Glu) neurons, and GABA
interneurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) – it stabilizes the channels in an intermediate state, with less frequent opening than
would occur if nicotine were bound, but more frequent than if a nicotinic antagonist were bound. Thus, it can reduce the dopaminergic
reward that would occur if a patient did smoke (by competing with nicotine) but also reduce withdrawal symptoms by stimulating at
least some neurotransmission.

552


<<<PAGE 569>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

receptors on the VTA dopamine neuron (shown in
Figure 13-13A). During smoking cessation, resensitized
nicotinic receptors no longer receiving nicotine are
craving due to an absence of dopamine release in the
nucleus accumbens (where is my dopamine?) (Figure
13-13B). When the NDRI bupropion is administered,
theoretically a bit of dopamine is now released in the
nucleus accumbens, making the craving less but usually
not eliminating it (Figure 13-13C). How effective is
bupropion in smoking cessation? Quit rates for bupropion
are about half that of the NPA varenicline. Quit rates for
nicotine in alternative routes of administration such as
transdermal patches are similar to those of bupropion.
Novel approaches to treating nicotine addiction include
the investigation of nicotine vaccines and other directacting nicotinic cholinergic agents.

Alcohol

The famous artist Vincent van Gogh reportedly drank
ruinously, some speculating that he self-medicated his
bipolar disorder this way, a notion reinforced by his
explanation, “If the storm within gets too loud, I take
a glass too much to stun myself.” Alcohol may stun
but it does not treat psychiatric disorders adaptively
long term. Unfortunately, many alcoholics who have
comorbid psychiatric disorders continue to selfmedicate with alcohol rather than seeking treatment
with a more appropriate psychopharmacological agent.
In addition to frequent comorbidity with psychiatric
disorders, it is estimated that 85% of alcoholics also
smoke. Many alcoholics abuse additional drugs as well,
including benzodiazepines, marijuana, opioids, and
others.

Mechanism of Action of Bupropion in Smoking Cessation
ACh
neuron

ACh
DA
neuron

DA

nicotine

A

ACh
neuron

Figure 13-13 Mechanism of action of
bupropion in smoking cessation. (A)
A regular smoker delivers reliable
nicotine (circle), releasing dopamine
(DA) in the limbic area at frequent
intervals, which is rewarding to the
limbic dopamine D2 receptors on the
right. (B) However, during attempts
at smoking cessation, dopamine will
be cut off when nicotine no longer
releases it from the mesolimbic
neurons. This upsets the postsynaptic
D2 limbic receptors and leads to
craving and what some call a “nicotine
fit.” (C) A therapeutic approach to
diminishing craving during the early
stages of smoking cessation is to
deliver a bit of dopamine itself by
blocking dopamine reuptake directly
at the nerve terminal with bupropion.
Although not as powerful as nicotine,
it does take the edge off and can make
abstinence more tolerable.

where's my
dopamine??

DA
neuron

B

ACh
neuron

DA
neuron

NDRI

13
C

553


<<<PAGE 570>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

13-15). Non-benzodiazepine-sensitive GABAA receptors
containing δ subunits are discussed in Chapter 7 and
illustrated in Figure 7-56. Alcohol also hypothetically
acts at presynaptic metabotropic glutamate receptors
(mGluRs) and presynaptic voltage-sensitive calcium
channels (VSCCs) to inhibit glutamate release (Figure
13-15). mGluRs are introduced in Chapter 4 and
illustrated in Figures 4-23 and 4-24. VSCCs and their
role in glutamate release are introduced in Chapter 3 and
illustrated in Figures 3-22 through 3-24. Alcohol may also
reduce the actions of glutamate at postsynaptic NMDA

Although we are still struggling to understand how
alcohol actually exerts its psychotropic actions, an overly
simplified view of alcohol’s mechanism of action is that
it enhances inhibition at GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid)
synapses and reduces excitation at glutamate synapses.
Alcohol actions at GABA synapses hypothetically
enhance GABA release via blocking presynaptic GABAB
receptors and also by positively allosterically modulating
postsynaptic GABAA receptors, especially those
containing δ subunits that are responsive to neuroactive
steroids but not to benzodiazepines (Figures 13-14 and

Possible Binding Sites for Sedative Hypnotic Drugs
chloride
channel

GABA
binding site

α

ß
γ

α

ß

benzodiazepine
binding site

barbiturate
binding site

A

benzodiazepine receptors: α1, α2, α3, α5 subtypes
chloride
channel

GABA
binding site

neuroactive steroid binding site
? alcohol binding site
general anesthetics

ß

α4,6

ß

B

554

benzodiazepine receptors:

α4,6

subtypes (α4, α6)

Figure 13-14 Binding sites for
sedative hypnotic drugs. (A)
Benzodiazepines and barbiturates
both act as positive allosteric
modulators at GABAA receptors, but
at different binding sites from each
other. Benzodiazepines do not act
at all GABAA receptors; rather, they
are selective for the α1, α2, α3, and α5
subtypes of receptors that also contain
γ but not δ subunits. (B) General
anesthetics, alcohol, and neuroactive
steroids may bind to other types of
GABAA receptors, particularly those
containing δ subunits.


<<<PAGE 571>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

Detail of Alcohol Actions in the VTA

arcuate
nucleus
opioid
neuron

PFC
Glu neuron

VTA

alcohol

alcohol

alcohol
VTA
DA neuron

GABA
interneuron

ß endorphin

GABA A receptor

Glu

GABA B receptor

GABA

NMDA receptor

DA

mGluR receptor

μ-opioid receptor
VSCC
alcohol

Figure 13-15 Actions of alcohol in the ventral tegmental area (VTA). Alcohol hypothetically enhances inhibition at GABA synapses by
binding at both GABAA and GABAB receptors, and hypothetically reduces excitation at glutamate synapses by acting at postsynaptic
metabotropic glutamate (mGluR) receptors and presynaptic voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCCs). Alcohol may also reduce the
actions of glutamate at postsynaptic NMDA receptors and postsynaptic mGluR receptors. In addition, alcohol’s reinforcing effects may
be mediated by actions at opioid synapses within the VTA. Stimulation of μ-opioid receptors there causes dopamine release in the
nucleus accumbens. Alcohol may either directly act upon μ receptors or cause release of endogenous opioids such as enkephalin.

555

13


<<<PAGE 572>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

(N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors and at postsynaptic
mGluR receptors (Figure 13-15).
Alcohol’s reinforcing effects are theoretically mediated
not only by its effects at GABA and glutamate synapses,
causing downstream dopamine release in the mesolimbic
pathway, but also by actions at opioid synapses within
mesolimbic reward circuitry (Figure 13-15). Opioid
neurons arise in the arcuate nucleus and project to the
VTA, synapsing on both glutamate and GABA neurons.
The net result of alcohol actions on opioid synapses is
thought to be the release of dopamine in the nucleus
acccumbens (Figure 13-15). Alcohol may do this by either
directly acting upon μ-opioid receptors or by releasing
endogenous opioids such as β-endorphin.
Treatment of Alcoholism

The actions of alcohol on opioid synapses create the
rationale for blocking μ-opioid receptors with antagonists
such as naltrexone or nalmefene (Figure 13-16).
Naltrexone and nalmefene (approved outside the US)
are μ-opioid antagonists that hypothetically block the
euphoria and “high” of heavy drinking. This theory is
supported by clinical trials that show that naltrexone
given either orally or by a 30-day-long acting injection
reduces days of heavy drinking (defined as five or more
drinks per day for a man and four or more for a woman)
and also increases the chances of attaining complete
abstinence from alcohol. If you drink when you take an
opioid antagonist, the opioids released by alcohol do not
lead to pleasure, so why bother drinking? Some patients
may also say, why bother taking the opioid antagonist,
of course, and relapse back into drinking alcohol.
Thus, a long-acting injection may be preferable but,
unfortunately, hardly any of this is prescribed.
Acamprosate is a derivative of the amino acid
taurine and interacts with both the glutamate system
to inhibit it, and with the GABA system to enhance it,
a bit like a form of “artificial alcohol” (compare Figure
13-15 with Figure 13-17). Thus, when alcohol is taken
chronically and then withdrawn, the adaptive changes
that it hypothetically causes in both the glutamate
system and the GABA system create a state of glutamate
overexcitement and even excitotoxicity as well as GABA
deficiency. To the extent that acamprosate can substitute
for alcohol in patients during withdrawal, the actions of
acamprosate mitigate the glutamate hyperactivity and
the GABA deficiency (Figure 13-17). This occurs because
acamprosate appears to have direct blocking actions on
certain glutamate receptors, particularly mGluR receptors

556

(specifically mGlu5 and perhaps mGlu2). One way or
another, acamprosate apparently reduces the glutamate
release associated with alcohol withdrawal (Figure 1317). Actions, if any, at NMDA receptors may be indirect,
as are actions at GABA systems, both of which may be
secondary downstream effects from acamprosate’s actions
on mGluR receptors (Figure 13-17). Although approved,
acamprosate is not prescribed very often.
Disulfiram is the classic drug for treating alcoholism.
It is an irreversible inhibitor of the liver enzyme aldehyde
dehydrogenase that normally metabolizes alcohol.
When alcohol is ingested in the presence of disulfiram,
alcohol’s metabolism is inhibited and the result is the
build-up of toxic levels of acetaldehyde. This creates an
aversive experience with flushing, nausea, vomiting,
and hypotension, hopefully conditioning the patient to
a negative rather than positive response to drinking.
Obviously, compliance is a problem with this agent, and
its aversive reactions are occasionally dangerous. Use of
disulfiram was greater in the past and is not prescribed
very often today.
Unapproved agents that may be effective in treating
alcoholism include the anticonvulsant topiramate and
the 5HT3 antagonist ondansetron. Several other agents
are used “off-label,” especially in Europe. The subject of
how to treat alcohol abuse and dependence is obviously
complex, and any psychopharmacological treatment
for alcoholism is more effective when integrated with
appropriate psychopharmacological treatment of
comorbid psychiatric disorders, as well as with structured
therapies such as 12-step programs, a topic which is
beyond the scope of this text.
Sedative Hypnotics

Sedative hypnotics include barbiturates and related agents
such as ethchlorvynol and ethinamate, chloral hydrate
and derivatives, and piperidinedione derivatives such as
glutethimide and methyprylon. Experts often include
alcohol, benzodiazepines, (discussed in Chapter 8), and
Z-drug hypnotics (discussed in Chapter 10) in this class
as well. The mechanism of action of sedative hypnotics
is basically thought to be the same as those described in
Chapter 7 (on drugs for depression), Chapter 8 (on drugs
for anxiety), and Chapter 10 (on drugs for insomnia) and
illustrated in Figure 13-14, namely as positive allosteric
modulators (PAMs) of either benzodiazepine-sensitive
(Figure 13-14A) or benzodiazepine-insensitive (Figure
13-14B) GABAA receptors, or both. Barbiturates are
much less safe in overdose than benzodiazepines, cause


<<<PAGE 573>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

Actions of μ-Opioid Antagonists Reducing
the Reward of Drinking
arcuate
nucleus
opioid
neuron

PFC
Glu neuron

VTA

nalmefene/
naltrexone

nalmefene/
naltrexone
VTA
DA neuron

GABA
interneuron

ß endorphin

GABA A receptor

Glu

GABA B receptor

GABA

NMDA receptor

DA

mGluR receptor

μ -opioid receptor
VSCC

μ -opioid antagonist

Figure 13-16 Actions of μ-opioid antagonists in the ventral tegmental area (VTA). Opioid neurons form synapses in the VTA with
GABAergic interneurons and with presynaptic nerve terminals of glutamate (Glu) neurons. Alcohol either acts directly upon μ-opioid
receptors or causes release of endogenous opioids such as enkephalin; in either case, the result is increased dopamine (DA) release
to the nucleus accumbens. Mu-opioid receptor antagonists such as naltrexone or nalmefene block the pleasurable effects of alcohol
mediated by μ-opioid receptors.

13

557


<<<PAGE 574>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Actions of Acamprosate: Reducing Excessive Glutamate Release
to Relieve Alcohol Withdrawal
arcuate
nucleus
opioid
neuron

PFC
Glu neuron

VTA

acamprosate
VTA
DA neuron

GABA
interneuron

ß endorphin

GABA A receptor

Glu

GABA B receptor

GABA

NMDA receptor

DA

mGluR receptor

μ -opioid receptor
VSCC
acamprosate

Figure 13-17 Actions of acamprosate in the ventral tegmental area (VTA). When alcohol is taken chronically and then withdrawn, the
adaptive changes that it causes in both the glutamate system and the GABA system create a state of glutamate overexcitation as well
as GABA deficiency. Acamprosate seems to reduce the glutamate release associated with alcohol withdrawal, presumably by blocking
metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs).

558


<<<PAGE 575>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

dependence more frequently, are abused more frequently,
and produce much more dangerous withdrawal reactions.
Because of this they are rarely prescribed today as
sedative hypnotics or anxiolytics.
Gamma-Hydroxybutyrate (GHB)

This agent is discussed in Chapter 10 as a treatment
for narcolepsy/cataplexy. It is sometimes also abused
by individuals wanting to get high or by predators to
intoxicate their dates (GHB is one of the “date rape”
drugs; see further discussion in Chapter 10). The
mechanism of action of GHB is as an agonist at its own
GHB receptors and at GABAB receptors (illustrated in
Figure 10-68).
Opiates or Opioids?

While subtle, the distinction between opioids and opiates
is significant. An opiate is a drug naturally derived from
the flowering opium poppy plant. Examples of opiates
include heroin and its derivatives morphine and codeine.
On the other hand, the term opioid is a broader term that
includes opiates and refers to any substance, natural or
synthetic, that binds to the brain’s opioid receptors – the
parts of the brain responsible for controlling pain, reward,
and addictive behaviors. Some examples of synthetic
opioids include the prescription painkillers hydrocodone
(Vicodin) and oxycodone (OxyContin), as well as fentanyl
and methadone.
Endogenous Opioid Neurotransmitter System

There are three parallel opioid systems, each with its
own neurotransmitter and receptor. Neurons that release
β-endorphin – sometimes referred to as the “brain’s own

morphine” – synapse with postsynaptic sites containing
μ-opioid receptors; neurons that release enkephalin
synapse with postsynaptic δ-opioid receptors; neurons
that release dynorphin synapse with postsynaptic
κ-opioid receptors (Figure 13-18). All three opioid
peptides are derived from precursor proteins called
pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), proenkephalin, and
prodynorphin, respectively (Figure 13-18). Parts of these
precursor proteins are cleaved off to form endorphins
or enkephalins or dynorphins, then stored in opioid
neurons, to be released during neurotransmission to
mediate endogenous opioid actions.
Opioid Addiction

Although illicit opioids derived from poppies have been
known for their addictive properties for centuries, it has
taken a recent sobering epidemic of opioid abuse with
devastating effects on contemporary lives and society
for us to recognize the powerful destructive potential
of oral opioids prescribed legally for pain relief. Recent
surveys suggest that the US consumes 85% of the world’s
legal and illegal supply of opioids. In the US every year,
over 60 million people fill at least one prescription for
an opioid, 20% of them use their opioids in a manner
that was not prescribed, another 20% report sharing
pills, and over 2 million become iatrogenically addicted.
As the need for higher and higher dosing exceeds the
pills that can be obtained from prescribers or from the
street, many patients resort to the more affordable street
heroin inhaled or injected to “chase the dragon” of opioid
addiction. Street supplies of heroin are increasingly
laced with fentanyl which is 100 times more potent
than morphine. Fentanyl derivatives like the elephant

Endogenous Opioid Neurotransmitters

E
POMC

E

E

proenkephalin
enkephalin

ß -endorphin

μ

δ

dynorphin

prodynorphin

к

Figure 13-18 Endogenous opioid
neurotransmitters. Endogenous
opioids are peptides derived from
precursor proteins called POMC (proopiomelanocortin), proenkephalin, and
prodynorphin. Parts of these precursor
proteins are cleaved off to form
endorphins, enkephalins, or dynorphin,
which are then stored in opioid neurons
and released during neurotransmission
to mediate reinforcement and pleasure.
Neurons that release endorphin
synapse with sites containing
μ-opioid receptors, those that release
enkephalin synapse with sites
containing δ-opioid receptors, and
those that release dynorphin synapse
with sites containing κ-opioid receptors.

13

559


<<<PAGE 576>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

tranquilizer carfentanil are 10,000 times more potent
than morphine. In fact, fentanyl and derivatives are so
powerful that they are unable to be reversed by opioid
antagonists such as naloxone, and thus an estimated
one-third of 60,000 annual US overdose deaths from
opioids are caused by fentanyl and derivatives. A very
sad outcome from what may have started as legitimate
treatment of acute pain.
This recent epidemic of opioid addiction has
also dashed the fallacy that oral controlled-release
formulations reduce addiction liability. The ongoing
and sweeping contagion triggered by oral painrelieving opioids of all types has taught us, somewhat
surprisingly, that opioids may not be highly effective
analgesics in the long run, but only in the short run,
losing their analgesic effectiveness within days to weeks
as tolerance, dependence, and addiction take hold.
Thus, prescription opioids are being increasingly limited
in amount and in time, both to reduce dependence in
patients with pain and to prevent diversion of their
opioids to others.
At and above pain-relieving doses, opioids induce
euphoria, a powerful reinforcing property. There is less
dopamine release with opioids than with stimulants in the
mesolimbic pleasure center, but certainly not less pleasure,
so it is not entirely clear how the “high” of opioids is fully
mediated. Likely, the impulsive ventral circuit begins
its pleasurable reinforcing work early in the use of an
opioid. Opioids induce a very intense but brief euphoria,
sometimes called a “rush,” followed by a profound sense
of tranquility, which may last several hours, followed in
turn by drowsiness (“nodding”), mood swings, mental
clouding, apathy, and slowed motor movements. In
overdose, these same opioids act as depressants of
respiration, and can also induce coma. The acute actions
of opioids other than fentanyl and derivatives can be
reversed by synthetic opioid antagonists, such as naloxone,
which compete as antagonists at μ-opioid receptors if
given soon enough and in sufficient dosage. The opioid
antagonists can also precipitate a withdrawal syndrome in
opioid-dependent persons.
When taken chronically, opioids readily cause
both tolerance and dependence because adaptation of
opioid receptors occurs quite readily. This adaptation
hypothetically correlates with the migration of behavioral
control from ventral circuits to dorsal habit circuits.
The first sign of this is the need of the patient to take a
higher and higher dose of opioid in order to relieve pain
or to induce the desired euphoria. Eventually, there may

560

be little room between the dose that causes euphoria
and that which produces toxic effects of an overdose.
Another sign that dependence has occurred and that
opioid receptors have adapted is the development of a
withdrawal syndrome once the chronically administered
opioid wears off. The opioid withdrawal syndrome is
characterized by the patient feeling dysphoria, craving
another dose of opioid, being irritable, and having signs
of autonomic hyperactivity such as tachycardia, tremor,
and sweating. Pilo-erection (“goose-bumps”) is often
associated with opioid withdrawal, especially when the
drug is stopped suddenly (“cold turkey”). This is so
subjectively horrible that the opioid abuser will often stop
at nothing in order to get another dose of opioid to relieve
symptoms of withdrawal. Thus, what may have begun as
a quest for pain relief or euphoria may end up as a quest
to avoid withdrawal.
Treatment of Opioid Addiction

Treatment of opioid addiction begins with managing
withdrawal. Running out of money and drug supply
as well as being incarcerated can be forms of forced
withdrawal, but a gentler version is to reduce or even
avoid withdrawal symptoms. One way to do this is
to substitute a prescribed opioid at known dose and
avoid intravenous administration. There are two
options: methadone or buprenorphine. Methadone is
a full agonist at μ-opioid receptors and can suppress
withdrawal symptoms completely given orally and
usually administered daily at a clinic. Buprenorphine
is a μ-opioid partial agonist that has less powerful
agonist effects, yet can suppress withdrawal symptoms
especially when mild withdrawal has already begun after
stopping abused opioids. Buprenorphine is administered
sublingually as it is not well absorbed if swallowed. It
can also be prescribed in a several-day supply and taken
as an outpatient instead of returning daily to a clinic.
Buprenorphine is usually combined with naloxone.
Naloxone is not absorbed orally or sublingually, yet
prevents intravenous abuse, since naloxone is active
by injection. The injection of the combination of
buprenorphine and naloxone results in no high and
may even precipitate withdrawal, so prevents diversion
for intravenous abuse of the sublingual preparation.
Buprenorphine can also be administered as an
implantable 6-month formulation or as a 1-month depot
injection.
Although tapering off methadone or buprenorphine
directly to a state of opioid abstinence is theoretically


<<<PAGE 577>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

possible, it is rarely successful long term. Of those
opioid addicts who enter residential rehabilitation and
treatment for 30–90 days off all drugs, some analyses
suggest relapse back into opioid abuse as high as
60–80% within a month and 90–95% by 3 months.
The drive to reinstitute street opioids coming from the
addict’s habit circuit – especially if re-exposed to the
environmental cues linked to previous opioid abuse
such as the people, places, and paraphernalia associated
with prior opioid abuse – is akin to putting oneself in
the situation where bells for Pavlov’s dogs are ringing
loud and clear. Involuntary, mindless, and powerful
habit drives then take over reflexively, bypassing
voluntary will power, no longer able to suppress
drug seeking and drug taking. This outcome results
whether the opioid addict is trying to stop methadone,
buprenorphine, or street opioids.
How can this dismal outcome be avoided? First of
all, it is important to recognize that the intensity and
duration of withdrawal from most drugs including
opioids are linked to drug half-life, with short-half-life
full agonists such as morphine or heroin producing
much more intense and short-lasting withdrawal
symptoms than either long-acting methadone, which
has a less intense but much longer duration withdrawal,
or buprenorphine, the withdrawal of which is both less
intense and shorter (Figure 13-19). Second of all, the

intensity but not the duration of withdrawal of both
methadone (Figure 13-20) and buprenorphine (Figure
13-21) can be reduced by the addition of an α2A agonist.
Both clonidine and lofexidine are α2-adrenergic agonists
that reduce signs of autonomic hyperactivity during
withdrawal and aid in the detoxification process. And
finally, in an attempt to enhance successful long-term
abstinence, opioid addicts may be transitioned not
to abstinence but to maintenance on a long-acting
injectable opioid antagonist like naltrexone. In the short
run, naltrexone shortens the withdrawal time of an α2
agonist administered either with methadone (Figure
13-20) or with buprenorphine (Figure 13-21). The
advantages of giving naltrexone long term are having
the drug present at therapeutic levels all day long, in
contrast to administering naltrexone orally (Figure 1322). Furthermore, with naltrexone monthly injections
the opioid-abstinent person now only has to make a
decision to take medication once every 30 days instead
of 30 times in 30 days. Even better, an impulsive patient
cannot readily stop his/her injectable naltrexone in order
to relapse.
Agonist substitution treatments like methadone
or buprenorphine – often called medication-assisted
therapy (MAT) – are most successful in the setting
of a structured maintenance treatment program that
includes random urine drug screening and intensive

Comparative Severity and Duration
of Opioid Withdrawal

Severity of Withdrawal

morphine

Figure 13-19 Comparative severity
and duration of opioid withdrawal.
Following abrupt discontinuation,
the time to onset of peak withdrawal
symptoms and the duration of
symptoms are dependent on the
half-life of the drug involved. With
morphine (and heroin) withdrawal,
symptoms peak within 36–72 hours
and last for 7–10 days. With methadone
withdrawal, symptoms are less
severe and peak at 72–96 hours, but
can last for 14 days or more. With
buprenorphine withdrawal, symptoms
peak after a few days and are less
severe than with morphine/heroin;
the duration of symptoms is similar to
morphine/heroin.

methadone

buprenorphine

0

5

10

13

15

Days since opioid

561


<<<PAGE 578>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Severity of Withdrawal

Severity and Duration of Withdrawal
After Methadone Discontinuation

abrupt
discontinuation
of methadone

Figure 13-20 Severity and duration
of withdrawal after methadone
discontinuation. With abrupt
discontinuation of methadone,
withdrawal symptoms peak at 72–96
hours but can last for 14 days or more.
The intensity, but not the duration,
of withdrawal symptoms can be
reduced by adding an α2-adrenergic
agonist such as lofexidine or clonidine.
Specifically, these agents can relieve
autonomic symptoms. Adding both an
α2-adrenergic agonist and a μ-opioid
receptor antagonist such as naltrexone
can reduce the severity as well as the
duration of withdrawal symptoms.

lofexidine alone

lofexidine+
naltrexone
0

5

10

15

Days since last methadone dose

Severity of Withdrawal

Severity and Duration of Withdrawal
After Buprenorphine Discontinuation

abrupt discontinuation
of buprenorphine

Figure 13-21 Severity and duration
of withdrawal after buprenorphine
discontinuation. With abrupt
discontinuation of buprenorphine,
withdrawal symptoms peak at around
72 hours and last for about a week.
The intensity, but not the duration,
of withdrawal symptoms can be
reduced by adding an α2-adrenergic
agonist such as lofexidine or clonidine.
Specifically, these agents can relieve
autonomic symptoms. Adding both an
α2-adrenergic agonist and a μ-opioid
receptor antagonist such as naltrexone
can reduce the severity as well as the
duration of withdrawal symptoms.

lofexidine alone

lofexidine+
naltrexone
0

3

5

7

Days since last buprenorphine dose

psychological, medical, and vocational services. The
same is true for those on long-acting naltrexone
injections. Unfortunately, only a minority of opioid
addicts enter treatment, only a minority of those in
treatment receive MAT, and almost none of them
562

receive injectable naltrexone. Whether this is because of
philosophical differences of various treatment facilities,
economic incentives, or therapeutic nihilism is unknown
but it seems that the currently available best treatments
are insufficiently prescribed.


<<<PAGE 579>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

Figure 13-22 Naltrexone formulations.
The μ-opioid receptor antagonist
naltrexone is available in both an oral
formulation and as a once-monthly
intramuscular (IM) injection. With
oral naltrexone, one experiences
fluctuating, dose-dependent plasma
concentrations. In addition, one must
decide daily whether or not to continue
treatment. With the monthly injection,
one experiences increased and
consistent plasma concentrations and
only has to make the decision to take
medication once every 30 days.

Naltrexone Mean Plasma Levels (ng/mL)

Naltrexone: Oral vs. Long-Acting Injectable
30
naltrexone 380 mg
IM injection

25

oral naltrexone 50 mg

20
15
10
5
0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Time (Days)

Cannabis

You can indeed get stoned without inhaling (see
endocannabinoids released in Figure 13-5)! The brain
makes its own cannabis-like neurotransmitters –
anandamide and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG)
(Figures 13-23 and 13-24). So does the body. These
neurotransmitters and their receptors cannabinoid 1
and 2 (CB1 and CB2) make up the “endocannabinoid”
system – the endogenous cannabinoid system (Figure
13-23). In the brain, release of classic neurotransmitters
can stimulate the synthesis of endocannabinoids from
precursors stored in postsynaptic lipid membranes
(Figure 13-24A). Upon release of these endocannabinoids
into the synapse, they travel retrograde to presynaptic
CB1 receptors and “talk back” to the presynaptic
neuron where they can inhibit the release of the
classic neurotransmitter (Figure 13-24B). Retrograde
neurotransmission was introduced in Chapter 1 and
illustrated in Figure 1-5. Both CB1 receptors and CB2
receptors are localized in brain, with CB1 receptors
present in greater density. Both receptors bind both
endocannabinoids, 2-AG with high efficacy and
anandamide with low efficacy (Figure 13-23). CB2
receptors are also in the periphery, mostly on immune
cells, and also bind the same two endocannabinoids
(Figure 13-23).
Cannabis is a mixture of hundreds of chemicals and
over 100 alkaloid cannabinoids. The most important of
these are tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol
(CBD) (Figure 13-25). THC interacts with CB1 and
CB2 receptors and has psychoactive properties. CBD
is an isomer of THC and relatively inactive at CB1

and CB2 receptors (Figure 13-25). CBD does not have
psychoactive properties and its mechanism of action
is really unknown (Figure 13-25). Cannabis comes
in various mixtures of THC and CBD (Figure 13-26).
Higher CBD content has a lower risk of hallucinations,
delusions, and memory impairment (Figure 13-26).
Pure CBD might even be antipsychotic and anxiolytic
(Figure 13-26). Over time, cannabis has become more
potent in terms of more THC and less CBD, with
resultant higher risk of hallucinations, delusions,
anxiety, and memory impairment (Figure 13-26). It
is not currently possible to identify in advance those
vulnerable to psychosis or to the precipitation of
schizophrenia by cannabis. Nevertheless, an influential
recent study concluded that if nobody smoked highpotency cannabis, 12% of all cases of first-episode
psychosis across Europe would be prevented, rising to
32% in London and 50% in Amsterdam. Cannabis can
also exacerbate psychosis in patients who already have a
psychotic illness.
In usual intoxicating doses for most persons
without risk for psychosis, cannabis produces a sense
of well-being, relaxation, a sense of friendliness, a
loss of temporal awareness, including confusing the
past with the present, slowing of thought processes,
impairment of short-term memory, and a feeling of
achieving special insights. At high doses, cannabis
can induce panic, toxic delirium as well as psychosis,
especially in the vulnerable. One complication of longterm cannabis use is the “amotivational syndrome” in
frequent users. This syndrome is seen predominantly
in heavy daily cannabis users and is characterized
563

13


<<<PAGE 580>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

The Endocannabinoid System: Receptors and Ligands
central and peripheral
neuron terminals

CB1

2-AG:
high-efficacy
agonist

immune cells

CB1

CB2

anandamide:
low-efficacy
agonist

2-AG:
high-efficacy
agonist

CB2

anandamide:
very low-efficacy
agonist

CB = cannabinoid
2-AG = 2-arachidonoylglycerol
anandamide
Figure 13-23 The endocannabinoid system: receptors and ligands. There are two main types of cannabinoid (CB) receptors.
CB1 receptors are the most abundant and are present at neuron terminals throughout the central and peripheral nervous systems.
CB2 receptors are not expressed as widely in the brain, although they are present in glial cells and in the brainstem. Instead, CB2
receptors are primarily found in immune cells, where they modulate cell migration and cytokine release. Of the multiple endogenous
cannabinoids, the best understood are anandamide and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG). Anandamide is a low-efficacy agonist at CB1
receptors and a very low-efficacy agonist at CB2 receptors. 2-AG is a high-efficacy agonist at both CB1 and CB2 receptors.

by the emergence of decreased drive and ambition,
thus “amotivational.” It is also associated with other
socially and occupationally impairing symptoms,
including a shortened attention span, poor judgment,
easy distractibility, impaired communication
skills, introversion, and diminished effectiveness
in interpersonal situations. Personal habits may
deteriorate, and there may be a loss of insight, and even
feelings of depersonalization.
Recent years have led to a search for potential
therapeutic uses of cannabis in general and for THC
and CBD in particular. The problem with “medical
marijuana” is that it is not a prescription option that can
be developed according to the standards of prescription
medication. Those standards require consistent, pure,
well-defined chemical formulation of the therapeutic
564

agent whereas medical marijuana is an unprocessed
plant containing 500 chemicals with 100+ cannabinoids.
Prescription drugs require a consistent, well-defined
pharmacokinetic profile, and safety and efficacy data
from double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized
clinical trials, as well as warnings for all potential side
effects. However, medical marijuana contains compounds
that vary from plant to plant, with residual impurities
such as pesticides and fungal contaminants, and dosing
which is not well regulated. Even so, there have been a
myriad of studies of medical marijuana, and these have
been recently reviewed by a panel of experts who report
various benefits and risks for which there is a range
of evidence, from substantial evidence, to moderate
evidence, to limited evidence (Table 13-2), to insufficient
evidence (Table 13-3).


<<<PAGE 581>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

The Endocannabinoid System: Retrograde Neurotransmission

CB1

CB1

endocannabinoid
released

retrograde
neurotransmission

classic
neurotransmission

A

B

Figure 13-24 The endocannabinoid system: retrograde neurotransmission. (A) Precursors to the endocannabinoids are stored
in the lipid membrane of the postsynaptic neuron. When that neuron is activated, either via depolarization or the presence of a
neurotransmitter binding to a G-protein-coupled receptor, this triggers an enzymatic reaction to form and release the endocannabinoid.
(B) The endocannabinoid then binds to a presynaptic cannabinoid receptor, causing the inhibition of neurotransmitter release. This form
of neurotransmission is known as retrograde neurotransmission.

Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) vs. Cannabidiol (CBD)
THC

CBD

H

OH

O

H

isomer of THC

H

H
O

O
H
psychoactive
anxiogenic

NOT psychoactive
anxiolytic
anticonvulsant

Potential Therapeutic Properties?
• Anti-inflammatory
• Euphoria
• “Opiate type pain relief”

Potential Therapeutic Properties?
• Neuropathic pain relief
• Anti-inflammatory
• Patient-specific

Figure 13-25
Tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) vs. cannabidiol
(CBD). There are two
well-known and relatively
well-studied exogenous
cannabinoids: (1)
tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC), which is considered
psychoactive and binds
as a partial agonist at
CB1 and CB2 receptors,
causing inhibition of
neurotransmitter release;
and (2) cannabidiol (CBD),
which is not considered
psychoactive and for
which the binding at CB
receptors is not entirely
clear, although it does
seem to interact with
other neurotransmitter
systems, such as the
serotonin system.

13

565


<<<PAGE 582>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Table 13-2 Areas where there is a range of benefits and risks of cannabis

Associated with benefits to:

Associated with risk of:

Substantial
evidence

Chronic pain
Chemotherapy-induced nausea
Spasticity in multiple sclerosis
(patient-reported)

Respiratory symptoms
Motor vehicle crashes
Lower birth weight
Psychosis

Moderate evidence

Sleep in obstructive sleep
apnea, fibromyalgia, chronic
pain, and multiple sclerosis
Airway dynamics
Forced vital capacity
Cognition in psychosis

Overdose injuries in pediatric population
Impaired learning, memory, and attention
Increased (hypo)mania in bipolar disorder
Depressive disorders
Suicidality and suicide completion
Social anxiety disorder
Development of substance use disorder for other substances

Limited evidence

Increasing appetite/decreasing
weight loss in HIV/AIDS
Spasticity in multiple sclerosis
(clinician-reported)
Tourette syndrome
Anxiety
PTSD

Testicular cancer
Acute myocardial infarction
Ischemic stroke of subarachnoid hemorrhage
Prediabetes
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Pregnancy complications
Infant admission to neonatal intensive care
Impaired academic achievement
Increased unemployment
Impaired social functioning
Increased positive symptoms in schizophrenia
Bipolar disorder
Anxiety disorders (other than social anxiety disorder)
Increased severity of PTSD symptoms

THC vs. CBD: Psychiatric Effects

Cannabis with
Low CBD Content

Cannabis with
High CBD Content

Psychosis symptoms

Higher risk of hallucinations
and delusions

Lower risk of hallucinations
and delusions

Psychotic disorder

Earlier age of onset

Later age of onset

Cognition

Higher risk of acute
memory impairment

Lower risk of acute
memory impairment

Anxiety

Anxiogenic
Increased amygdalar activity

CBD Alone

Possible antipsychotic
effects

Anxiolytic
Reduced amygdalar activity

Figure 13-26 THC vs. CBD: psychiatric effects. Each strain of cannabis may contain a different combination of the 60–100 known
cannabinoids. Cannabis with THC and low CBD content may carry higher risk of psychotic symptoms, memory impairment, and anxiety.
Cannabis with THC and high CBD content may have lower risk of psychotic symptoms, memory impairment, and anxiety. Pure CBD has
been studied for its potential use as an antipsychotic agent or anxiolytic.

566


<<<PAGE 583>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

Table 13-3 Areas where there is insufficient evidence for benefits or risks of cannabis

Insufficient evidence

Associated with benefits to:

Associated with risk of:

Dementia
Intraocular pressure associated
with glaucoma
Depression in chronic pain or
multiple sclerosis
Cancer
Anorexia nervosa
Irritable bowel syndrome
Epilepsy
Spasticity in spinal cord injury
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Huntington's disease
Parkinson’s disease
Dystonia
Addiction
Psychosis

Lung, head, and neck cancers
Esophageal cancer
Prostate and cervical cancer
Certain leukemias
Asthma
Liver fibrosis or hepatic disease in individuals with
Hepatitis C
Adverse immune cell response
Adverse effects on immune status in HIV
Oral human papilloma virus
All-cause mortality
Occupational accidents/injuries
Death from overdose
Later outcomes to offspring (e.g., sudden infant
death syndrome, academic achievement, later
substance abuse)
Worsening of negative symptoms in schizophrenia

Table 13-4 Approved uses for THC and CBD

Active ingredient

Formulation

Approval(s)

Schedule

Dronabinol

Synthetic THC

Oral capsule or
solution

Chemo-induced nausea and vomiting
(US)
Appetite boost in AIDS wasting
syndrome (US)

III

Nabilone

Synthetic THC
analogue

Oral capsule

Chemo-induced nausea and vomiting
(US)

II (due to its
potency)

Nabiximols

Purified ~1:1 THC
and CBD

Spray

Spasticity caused by multiple sclerosis
(UK, Canada, Europe, Australia, New
Zealand, Israel)
Pain in multiple sclerosis and in cancer
(Canada, Israel)

N/A

Epidiolex

CBD purified from
marijuana

Oral solution

Seizures associated with two rare and
severe forms of epilepsy, Lennox–
Gastaut syndrome and Dravet
syndrome, in patients 2 years of age
and older (US)

Not a controlled
substance

However, both pure THC and pure CBD have been
FDA approved according to traditional drug standards
for various indications (Table 13-4). Whether some of
those areas where some degree of benefit and safety
has been described for cannabis (see Table 13-2)
will eventually lead to formal FDA approval of pure
compounds for any of those indications is currently
under investigation.

Hallucinogens

It can be a challenge to categorize the various
substances that cause not only occasional
hallucinations, but more commonly, non-ordinary
psychological states and altered states of consciousness.
The terminology for these substances is ever evolving
and more descriptive than scientific. Here we will use
the category hallucinogen to imply three classes of
567

13


<<<PAGE 584>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

agents that act, at least in part, as agonists at 5HT2A
receptors (Figure 13-27). These are:
• tryptamines (such as psilocybin)
• ergolines (such as lysergic acid diethylamide [LSD])
• phenethylamines (such as mescaline)
Hallucinogens are not selective for 5HT2A receptors
alone, and their actions at other serotonin receptor
subtypes may contribute to their mind-altering
states (see Chapter 7 and Figure 7-88). Psilocybin
(4-diphosphoryloxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine) is
a prototypical hallucinogen that is derived from
hallucinogenic mushrooms. It is both an active drug
and a prodrug for another hallucinogen called psilocin
(N,N-dimethyltryptamine or DMT). Together, psilocybin,
psilocin, and the other tryptamines, ergolines, and
phenethylamines in this category act not only at 5HT2A
receptors, but also at 5HT2B, 5HT7, 5HT1D, 5HT1E, 5HT2C,
5HT6, and even more serotonin receptor subtypes
(see Figure 7-88). Some evidence suggests that 5HT2A
antagonists, but not D2 dopamine antagonists, can reverse
the action of hallucinogens in humans, supporting the
predominant mechanism of action of hallucinogens as
being agonists at 5HT2A receptors (Figure 13-27).
Hallucinogens can produce incredible tolerance,
sometimes after a single dose. Desensitization of
5HT2A receptors is hypothesized to underlie this rapid
clinical and pharmacological tolerance. Another unique
dimension of hallucinogen use is the production of
“flashbacks,” namely the spontaneous recurrence of
some of the symptoms of intoxication that lasts from
a few seconds to several hours but in the absence of
recent administration of the hallucinogen, mostly
reported with LSD. This occurs days to months after
the last drug experience, and can apparently be
precipitated by a number of environmental stimuli. The
psychopharmacological mechanism underlying flashbacks
is unknown but its phenomenology suggests the
possibility of a neurochemical adaptation of the serotonin
system and its receptors, related to reverse tolerance
that is incredibly long-lasting. Alternatively, flashbacks
could be a form of emotional conditioning embedded in
the amygdala and then triggered when a later emotional
experience that one has when one is not taking a
hallucinogen nevertheless reminds one of experiences
that occurred when intoxicated with a hallucinogen. This
could precipitate a whole cascade of feelings that occurred
while intoxicated with a hallucinogen. This is analogous to
the types of re-experiencing flashbacks that occur without
drugs in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder
568

Mechanism of Hallucinogens
at 5HT2A Receptors
5HT neuron

psilocybin
LSD

5HT2A

5HT2A

mescaline

5HT2A

Figure 13-27 Mechanism of hallucinogens at 5HT2A
receptors. The primary action of hallucinogenic drugs such as
psilocybin, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), and mescaline is
agonism at 5HT2A receptors. These hallucinogens may have
additional actions at other serotonin receptors.

(PTSD) and is why hallucinogenic and empathogenic
drugs are now being cautiously used for therapeutic
purposes in PTSD (see below).
The state of hallucinogenic intoxication, sometimes
called a “trip,” is associated with changes in sensory
experiences, including visual illusions and sometimes
hallucinations. Actually, hallucinogens often don’t cause
hallucinations (the apparent perception of something
that is not actually present), but are much more likely
to cause illusions (distortions of sensory experiences
that are present). These experiences are produced with
a clear level of consciousness and a lack of confusion
and may be both psychedelic and psychotomimetic.
Psychedelic is the term for the subjective experience that,


<<<PAGE 585>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

due to heightened sensory awareness, one’s mind is being
expanded or that one is in union with mankind or the
universe and having some sort of a religious experience.
Psychotomimetic means that the experience mimics a
state of psychosis, but the resemblance between a trip and
psychosis is superficial at best. The stimulants cocaine
and amphetamine (see discussion in Chapter 4 and also
the discussion above for stimulants in this chapter) and
the club drug phencyclidine (PCP; discussed in Chapter
4 and also below) much more genuinely mimic psychosis
than do hallucinogens. Instead, hallucinogen intoxication
includes visual illusions; visual “trails,” where the image
smears into streaks of its image as it moves across a
visual trail; macropsia and micropsia; emotional and
mood lability; subjective slowing of time; the sense that
colors are heard and sounds are seen; intensification of
sound perception; depersonalization and derealization;
yet retaining a state of full wakefulness and alertness.
Other changes may include impaired judgment, fear of
losing one’s mind, anxiety, nausea, tachycardia, increased
blood pressure, and increased body temperature. Not
surprisingly, hallucinogen intoxication can cause what
is perceived as a panic attack, often called a “bad trip.”
As intoxication escalates, one can experience an acute
confusional state called delirium, where the abuser
is disoriented and agitated. This can evolve further
uncommonly into frank psychosis with delusions and
paranoia.
Empathogens

Another category of psychoactive drug is called
an empathogen or an entactogen. Empathogens
produce an altered state of consciousness described
as experiences of emotional communion, oneness,
relatedness, emotional openness – that is, empathy
or sympathy. The prototype empathogen is MDMA
(3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine). MDMA is
a synthetic amphetamine derivative that acts more
selectively on serotonin transporters (SERTs) than upon
dopamine transporters (DATs) and norepinephrine
transporters (NETs), whereas amphetamine itself acts
more selectively on DATs and NETs than on SERTs.
Amphetamine’s primary actions on both dopamine and
norepinephrine synapses are explained in Chapter 11 and
illustrated in Figure 11-32.
For its more important serotonin actions, MDMA
targets the SERT as a competitive inhibitor and
pseudosubstrate (Figure 13-28, upper left), binding at the
same site where serotonin binds to this transporter, thus

inhibiting serotonin reuptake (Figure 13-28, upper left).
At psychoactive doses, following competitive inhibition
of the SERT (Figure 13-28, upper left), MDMA is actually
transported as a hitch-hiker into the presynaptic serotonin
terminal. Once there in sufficient quantities, MDMA is
also a competitive inhibitor of the vesicular monoamine
transporter (VMAT) for serotonin (Figure 12-28, upper
right). Once MDMA hitch-hikes another ride into
synaptic vesicles, it displaces the serotonin there, causing
serotonin release from synaptic vesicles into the cytoplasm
presynaptically (Figure 12-28, lower left) and then from the
presynaptic cytoplasm into the synapse to act at serotonin
receptors (Figure 12-28, lower right). Once in the synapse,
the serotonin can play upon any serotonin receptors that
are there, but the evidence suggests that this is mostly upon
5HT2A receptors, just like the hallucinogens. However,
given that the clinical state after MDMA differs somewhat
from the clinical state after hallucinogens, the pattern
of action at serotonin receptors likely differs somewhat.
Both human and animal studies show that MDMA actions
can be blocked by selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), supporting the notion that MDMA gets into the
presynaptic neuron to release serotonin aboard the SERT.
Although there is certainly overlap between the
experiences of the so-called hallucinogen psilocybin
and the so-called empathogen MDMA, some of the
differences are more culturally bound than scientific.
The subjective effects of MDMA emphasized by users
include a sense of well-being, elevated mood, euphoria,
a feeling of closeness with others, and increased
sociability. MDMA can produce a complex subjective
state, sometimes referred to as “Ecstasy,” which is
also what users call MDMA itself. It is also called
“Molly,” presumably slang for “molecular.” MDMA
was initially popular in the nightclub scene and at
all-night dance parties (“raves”) where dehydration
and overheating from too much dancing in enclosed
spaces led to some deaths from hyperthermia. Some
MDMA users report experiencing visual hallucinations,
pseudo-hallucinations/illusions, synesthesia, facilitated
recollections or imagination, and altered perception
of time and space. Others who take MDMA can have
unpleasant mania-like experiences, anxious derealization,
thought disorders, or fears of loss of thought and body
control.
Dissociatives

Dissociatives are the NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate)
receptor antagonists phencyclidine (PCP) and ketamine.

569

13


<<<PAGE 586>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Mechanism of MDMA at Serotonin Synapses
serotonin
MDMA

3

2

VMAT

3

2
1 = competitive inhibition
2 = SERT transport of
MDMA

4

1

3 = VMAT transport of
MDMA

4
4
4

6
4

5

4

4 = MDMA
displacement
of serotonin

5 = high 5HT opens channel
and spills out
6 = high 5HT reverse
transports 5HT out

5

6

Figure 13-28 Mechanism of MDMA at serotonin synapses. MDMA is a synthetic amphetamine derivative that acts more selectively
on the serotonin transporter (SERT) than on the dopamine transporter (DAT). MDMA is a competitive inhibitor and pseudosubstrate at
SERTs, thus both blocking serotonin from binding (1) and itself being taken up into the serotonin terminal via SERTs (2). MDMA is also
a competitive inhibitor of vesicular monoamine transporters (VMATs) and can be packaged into vesicles (3). At high levels, MDMA will
lead to the displacement of serotonin from the vesicles into the terminal (4). Furthermore, once a critical threshold of serotonin has been
reached, serotonin will be expelled from the terminal via two mechanisms: the opening of channels to allow for a massive dumping of
serotonin into the synapse (5) and the reversal of SERTs (6).

Both act at the same site on NMDA receptors (discussed
in Chapter 4 and illustrated in Figures 4-1, 4-29B,
4-30 through 4-33, and Table 4-1). These agents were
both originally developed as anesthetics because they
cause a dissociative state characterized by catalepsy,
amnesia, and analgesia. In this state patients experience
distorted perceptions of sight and sound, and feelings
of detachment – dissociation – from their environment.
Signals from the brain to the conscious mind and to the
body seem to be blocked. If deep enough for surgery

570

or painful procedures, this is considered a form of
anesthesia called dissociative anesthesia in which the
patient does not necessarily lose consciousness. The
patient, however, does experience a sense of conscious
dissociation in which they are disconnected from the
environment and from their body and they experience
a lack of continuity between thoughts, memories,
surroundings, actions, and identity. This dissociative state
can be associated with hallucinations, feelings of sensory
deprivation, and a dream-like state or trance.


<<<PAGE 587>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

At higher doses, PCP and ketamine have general
depressant effects and produce sedation, respiratory
depression, analgesia, anesthesia, and ataxia, as well
as cognitive and memory impairment and amnesia.
PCP proved to be totally unacceptable for use as an
anesthetic because it induces a powerful and unique
psychotomimetic/hallucinatory experience very similar
to schizophrenia, often when emerging from a state of
anesthesia (see Chapter 4 and Figures 4-1, 4-30 through
4-33, and Table 4-1).
The NMDA receptor hypoactivity that is caused
by PCP has thus become a model for the same
neurotransmitter abnormalities postulated to underlie
schizophrenia. PCP also causes intense analgesia,
amnesia, delirium, stimulant as well as depressant
actions, staggering gait, slurred speech, and a unique
form of nystagmus (i.e., vertical nystagmus). Higher
degrees of intoxication of PCP can cause catatonia
(excitement alternating with stupor and catalepsy),
hallucinations, delusions, paranoia, disorientation, and
lack of judgment. Overdose can include coma, extremely
high temperature, seizures, and muscle breakdown
(rhabdomyolysis).
PCP’s structurally related and mechanism-related
analogue ketamine is still used as a dissociative
anesthetic, especially in children, and causes far less
of the psychotomimetic/hallucinatory experience than
that seen after PCP administration. It is also used in
veterinary medicine as an animal tranquilizer. Some
people abuse ketamine, one of the “club drugs” that is
sometimes called “special K.” At subanesthetic doses,
dissociatives alter many of the same cognitive and
perceptual processes affected by other hallucinogenic
drugs such as mescaline, LSD, and psilocybin; hence they
are also considered hallucinogenic and psychedelic.
However, hallucinations are far less common with
ketamine at the subanesthetic doses used to treat
depression, and at these doses the most significant
subjective differences between dissociatives and the
hallucinogens (such as LSD, psilocybin, and mescaline)
are the dissociative effects of ketamine,
including: depersonalization, the feeling of being unreal,
disconnected from one’s self, or unable to control one’s
actions; and derealization, the feeling that the outside
world is unreal or that one is dreaming.
Given as a subanesthetic infusion or as a nasal spray,
ketamine and its enantiomer esketamine are discussed as
breakthrough rapid-onset novel therapies for treatmentresistant depression in Chapter 7 and illustrated in

Figures 7-59 to 7-63. These agents are also in trials for
rapidly eliminating suicidal thoughts and some studies
pairing ketamine/esketamine with psychotherapy
sessions for various conditions have also begun to appear.
The feelings of dissociation can hypothetically be used to
shape psychotherapeutic outcomes as discussed below.
Abuse Your Way to Abstinence?

Essentially all of our current treatments for substance
addiction target the “liking” and “wanting” of drugs, i.e.,
the first phase of addiction driven by impulsively seeking
reward (Figure 13-29A). They all do this by blocking
acute receptor actions (i.e., of nicotine, alcohol, or
opioids; there are no approved treatments for stimulants).
However, none of the currently approved treatments for
substance abuse are able to block the migration of control
from ventral to dorsal (Figures 13-1 and 13-2) and from
impulsivity to compulsivity (Figure 13-29A). This is
because we do not know the mechanism of this neuronal
adaptation, so we cannot (yet) block it.
Even more importantly, addicted patients are not
often treated during the impulsivity phase when they
are still developing addiction and when receptor
blocking actions of drugs might be most useful to
prevent stimulus-response conditioning. Instead, those
with substance addiction almost always seek treatment
during the compulsivity phase of their illness, once
stimulus-response conditioning has already occurred
and the habit circuit is firmly in control. Unfortunately,
we are currently unable to reverse this phenomenon
pharmacologically, but only by long-term abstinence,
hoping for reversal of stimulus-response conditioning
over time. Staying abstinent long enough for this to occur
while in the grips of addiction is the problem for any
effective treatment, of course.
On the other hand, there are anecdotal reports that
combining psychopharmacological treatments that can
block the drug of abuse with extinction of the reward by
further abusing that drug can facilitate reversal of the
drug habit. What?? How can further abuse of a drug lead
to non-abuse of the drug? This novel concept comes from
observations that when addicted patients are becoming
abstinent, they often have “slips” and “cheat” along the
way. They “fall off the wagon” – or any number of other
expressions for re-using again – because the nature of
recovery is to relapse. If you are a horseback rider you are
likely familiar with the expression “you are not a rider
until you have fallen off a horse seven times.” That is
because the nature of riding – unfortunately – is to fall,

571

13


<<<PAGE 588>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Maladaptations of the Reward Pathway Can Shift
Behavior from Normal to Impulsive to Compulsive
Normal

Impulsivity

Compulsivity

Salient Stimulus

Salient Stimulus

Stimulus

Favorable
Outcome

Outcome

Pleasurable Reward

Pleasurable Reward

Knowing &
Anticipating

Binge

“Liking”

“Wanting”

Absence

Opioids

Dopamine

Learning

Pleasurable Reward

Habits

Anticipation

Figure 13-29A Maladaptations of the reward pathway. Left: Under normal conditions, if a salient stimulus causes a favorable outcome
this behavior will be encoded as a pleasurable reward. The learning of this pleasurable reward is called “liking” and is an opioiddependent process. The knowledge and anticipation of this pleasurable reward is called “wanting” and is a dopamine-dependent
process. Center: An increase in “wanting” is thought to underlie impulsivity, such that the drive for the pleasurable reward outweighs the
outcome and the behavior is repeated without forethought. Repetition of the impulsive behavior doesn’t happen all the time, and the
absence of the behavior can lead to a stronger desire, or anticipation, for the reward. It is this cycle of binge–abstinence–anticipation that
can lead to compulsivity. Right: When a behavior becomes compulsive, the reward no longer matters and the behavior is strictly driven
by the stimulus. It is through this mechanism that habits develop.

Reversing Habit Learning and the Potential of
Long-Acting Injectable Naltrexone
Normal

Impulsivity

Compulsivity

Salient Stimulus

Salient Stimulus

Stimulus

Favorable
Outcome

Outcome

Pleasurable Reward

Pleasurable Reward

Knowing &
Anticipating

Binge

“Liking”

“Wanting”

Absence

Opioids

Dopamine

Learning

Administration of the long-acting
injectable naltrexone may in fact
enhance this process of habit extinction

Habits

Anticipation

Figure 13-29B Reversing habit learning. Since drug abuse is a form of learned behavior, it is theoretically possible to induce
pharmacological extinction. In the case of alcohol or opioid dependence, this can theoretically be achieved by administering a μ-opioid
antagonist at the same time that alcohol or opioid use occurs (rather than during abstinence). This prevents any enjoyment or euphoria
associated with taking the substance. If this approach is successful short term and repeated over and again, it begins the process of
extinction or habit reversal. Eventually, the conditioned response of consuming alcohol or taking an opioid in response to conditioned
stimuli (withdrawal and environmental cues) becomes extinguished. Theoretically, the brain is “relearning” to disassociate alcohol or
opioid use from past triggers and control returns to circuits of voluntary actions and away from involuntary habit circuits.

572


<<<PAGE 589>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

especially when you are learning. Similarly, the nature of
recovery is to relapse, and indeed maybe seven times or
more before becoming truly abstinent. The novel concept
explained here takes advantage of this inevitability of
multiple relapses to reverse the habit circuit by learning
that relapse is no longer rewarding.
Drink Your Way to Sobriety

This idea uses the brain’s own mechanisms of
neuroplasticity, learning, and migration of control
in the impulsive–compulsive circuitry to induce
pharmacological extinction. Since drug abuse is a form
of learned behavior, patients with alcoholism experience
enhanced reinforcement (via the opioid system) when
they drink (discussed above and illustrated in Figures 1315 and 13-16 ). Contrary to earlier beliefs, detoxification
and alcohol deprivation do not stop alcohol craving, but
instead increase subsequent alcohol drinking. Recovered
alcoholics will often mention that many years following
their last drink they still get a burst of craving just driving
past their favorite bar, a vestige of their incompletely
extinguished alcohol habit.
So, the idea is to give alcohol to an active alcoholic
and have the patient experience the lack of enjoyment,
the lack of euphoria, and the loss of craving that drinking
normally produces and that heavy drinking in particular
produces. The program involves taking an oral opioid
antagonist (e.g., naltrexone or nalmefene) approximately
1 hour prior to consuming alcohol. When the alcohol
no longer produces the desired effects because of the
opioid antagonist, the alcohol is no longer reinforcing.
If this approach is successful short term, and repeated
over and again, it begins the process of extinction. The
patient slowly learns that they cannot “drink over” their
opioid antagonist and drinking is no longer rewarding.
Or at least the reward is greatly blunted and the habit of
alcohol consumption eventually becomes at least partially
extinguished, making eventual abstinence easier to attain,
at least in theory. Blocking the reinforcing properties
of alcohol weakens the mindless automatic responses
to cues in the environment to drink. The theory goes
that if drinking is not reinforcing, drinking will abate.
Rather like the conditioned Pavlovian dog whose mouth
waters at the sound of the bell, but when food is no longer
associated with the bell, sooner or later the involuntary
mouth-watering is extinguished and the bell now causes
no mouth-watering.
Sometimes called the Sinclair method and
championed at first in Scandinavia, this therapeutic
intervention for alcoholism has been tested in many

clinical studies with good reported success. Interesting
here is the observation that opioid antagonists are
particularly effective when paired with drinking, but
relatively ineffective when given during abstinence.
This fits with the notion that to reverse the “habit” of
drinking, extinction learning must take place where the
reward of abusing alcohol is unpaired with taking alcohol
(Figure 13-29B). This can also be done when attempting
(and failing) to “drink over” a long-acting injection of
naltrexone. Unfortunately, very little opioid antagonist
therapy is prescribed for alcohol use disorder. One reason
for this might be that opioid antagonist treatment is most
effective in reducing heavy drinking, and not necessarily
as effective in promoting complete abstinence.
Inject Your Way to Heroin Abstinence

Scandinavian and other investigators have also noted
that individuals with opioid use disorder act similarly
to those with alcohol use disorder in response to opioid
antagonist treatment. That is, individuals dependent
on opioids who attempt to “inject over” long-acting
naltrexone with an illicit street opioid find that the opioid
is no longer reinforcing. The more times one tries but
fails to get high, the faster they develop extinction of their
habit, learning that injections are associated with reward
(Figure 13-29B). The learned behavior of reinforcement
from opioids is now slowly reversed as the act of injecting
an opioid is not rewarding. Eventually, the conditioned
response of taking an opioid in response to conditioned
stimuli (withdrawal and environmental cues) becomes
extinguished (Figure 13-29B). Theoretically, the brain is
“relearning” to disassociate opioid use from past triggers
and control returns to circuits of voluntary actions and
away from involuntary habit circuits. Unfortunately, very
little opioid antagonist treatment is prescribed for opioid
addicts.
Smoke Your Way to Quitting

This same phenomenon of “cheating” assisting the
development of abstinence due to behavioral and
pharmacological extinction has been seen in smoking
cessation treatment as well. Many smokers who take
treatments to stop smoking nevertheless simultaneously
smoke. Thus, such patients “smoke over” their nicotine
patch or bupropion and are able to quell craving and
allow their habit to perpetuate in the face of treatment.
However, with the nicotinic partial agonist varenicline,
they cannot “smoke over” this treatment since it has
higher affinity for nicotinic receptors than nicotine itself
and the result is a lack of reinforcement from the cheating
573

13


<<<PAGE 590>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

while taking varenicline. If smoking on varenicline is no
longer reinforcing and this is repeated again and again, as
for alcohol and opioids, smoking becomes extinguished
as a conditioned response as the brain “unlearns” the
habit of smoking (Figure 13-29B).
“Therapeutic” Dissociation, Hallucinations, and
Empathy?

The ability of dissociative agents, hallucinogens, and
empathogens to produce mystical-like experiences has
been utilized within ancient cultures and indigenous
populations for religious and healing purposes for
centuries. In the modern era, these same agents are
starting to be used in a process called “dissociationassisted psychotherapy” to produce these same
experiences in a controlled setting with a psychotherapist.
The idea is that mystical states with feelings of oceanic
boundlessness, internal unity, external unity, sacredness,
“noetic” insights, transcendence of time and space, deeply
felt positive mood, and ineffability can be guided with
psychotherapy to potentially “heal” some of the most
treatment-resistant disorders in psychiatry.
These are early days for this approach, and the
parameters that might lead to successful outcome are still
being defined. Some of the variables are “set,” “setting,”
and “cast.” That is, what is the “mind-set” of the patient;
what is the “setting” or environment, including sounds
of the room where this experience occurs; and who are
the “cast,” including therapist and any others that are
present. Preparation variables to be clarified include
having established a trusting relationship between
the patient and therapist in advance, explaining to the
patient what to expect, and selection of drug, dose, and
accompanying psychotherapy. Few of these variables are
well established yet. Most of these approaches to date
have used ketamine, psilocybin, or MDMA to induce
the dissociative or mystical-like psychological state in
a therapist’s office, while conducting psychotherapy for
up to several hours. Psychotherapies studied include
nondirectedness/self-directedness, mindfulness-based
behavioral modification, motivational enhancement
therapy, and others.
Ketamine-Assisted Psychotherapy

Use of ketamine and esketamine without psychotherapy
for treatment-resistant depression has been discussed
in Chapter 7 and illustrated in Figures 7-59 to 7-62.
Investigators are now evaluating subanesthetic infusions
of ketamine for treating the craving and abuse of a wide
range of substances including cocaine, nicotine, and
574

alcohol, with some success. One of the ideas behind the
use of ketamine is to promote prefrontal neural plasticity
(see Figures 7-61 and 7-62) to reverse drug-related
ventral to dorsal migration of neuronal control discussed
extensively in this chapter (see Figure 13-29A), and to
facilitate this with guidance from a psychotherapist.
Psilocybin-Assisted Psychotherapy

Originally utilized for the treatment of anxiety related
to late-stage cancer, psilocybin use has been expanded
to the treatment of other resistant anxiety disorders
and notably to treatment-resistant depression, with
some promising preliminary results. Psilocybin is also
under investigation in OCD, pain, various addictions,
sexual dysfunction, cluster headaches, mild traumatic
brain injury, and many more conditions. It is not known
whether the psychological state induced by psilocybin
or the pharmacology of psilocybin is responsible for any
therapeutic effects, or whether the differences between
these variables and those induced by either ketamine
or MDMA play a role in which patients, with which
disorders, might respond. Any role of 5HT2A receptors
in triggering potentially favorable neuroplastic changes
analogous to those seen with ketamine remains to be
determined.
MDMA-Assisted Psychotherapy

The idea here is that an empathic state induced by
MDMA may be even better than a mystical state induced
by psilocybin or a dissociative state induced by ketamine,
in that it renders the patient more amenable to exploring
painful memories. MDMA has been mostly studied in
PTSD, attempting to reduce traumatic memories and the
symptoms they trigger. First-line treatment of PTSD is
exposure therapy (fear extinction), but there are many
patients for whom repeated exposure to the traumatic
memory is either unsuccessful or too painful. Extinction
of fearful memories was discussed in Chapter 8 on
anxiety disorders and illustrated in Figures 8-21 and 8-22.
MDMA can potentially provide a safe psychological state
where there can be self-directed exploration of painful
traumatic memories in the presence of a therapist, in
order to contextualize them and thus reduce them. In
Chapter 8, the process of reconsolidation of traumatic
memories was also discussed and illustrated in Figure
8-21 and 8-22. In this formulation, emotional memories
are thought to be amenable to weakening or even
erasure at the time they are re-experienced. The notion
is that re-experiencing the traumatic memory in a safe
psychological state induced by MDMA, and accompanied


<<<PAGE 591>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

by a trusted and experienced therapist, can facilitate
the blocking or weakening of reconsolidation of painful
emotional memories.

BEHAVIORAL ADDICTIONS
Binge Eating Disorder

Can you become addicted to food? Can your brain
circuits make you eat it? Although “food addiction” is not
yet accepted as a formal diagnosis, binge eating disorder
(BED) is now a formal DSM diagnosis. When external
stimuli are triggers for maladaptive eating habits that are
performed despite apparent satiety and adverse health
consequences, this defines a compulsion and a habit, with
the formation of aberrant eating behaviors in a manner
that parallels drug addiction. Compulsive eating in BED
and bulimia can be mirrored by compulsive rejection of
food as in anorexia nervosa. BED is characterized by loss
of control for eating, much as substance abuse has loss of
control over seeking and taking a substance. For formal
diagnostic criteria and clinical descriptions of BED as
well as differentiation from the related disorder bulimia
nervosa, the reader is referred to standard reference
books. Here, we address the construct of BED as falling
within the category of an impulsive–compulsive disorder.
Briefly, BED is defined as having recurrent episodes
of binge eating, with binges being eaten in a discrete
period of time, an amount of food larger than most people
would eat in a similar amount of time under similar
circumstances. What was once perhaps pleasurable eating
to satisfy hunger and appetite has now become mindless,
compulsive eating, out of control, and associated with
marked distress. Not everyone with BED is obese and not
everyone with obesity has BED even though about half
of people with BED are obese. BED is the most common
eating disorder but is commonly undiagnosed. Many
clinicians do not inquire about this even if the patient
is obese, perhaps because of fear that asking will be
taken as offensive by the patient. It is a reality that most
BED patients coming to a healthcare professional have a
comorbid psychiatric condition, and are usually seeking
treatment for that rather than for binge eating. In fact,
80% of patients with BED meet the criteria for a mood
disorder, anxiety disorder, other substance abuse disorder,
or ADHD. One thing for a clinician to remember is to ask
about binge eating in patients with any of these conditions
because treatment is available and the long-term
complications of obesity are serious (discussed in Chapter
5 on drugs for psychosis). In fact, the D-amphetamine

precursor lisdexamfetamine discussed in Chapter 11 on
ADHD and illustrated in Figure 11-31 is the only currently
approved treatment for BED.
Several agents with limited efficacy and side effects
used off-label include topiramate, several drugs used
to treat depression, and naltrexone. BED is another
condition that belongs in the addictive disorders group
and amongst the impulsive–compulsive disorders as
it, too, is hypothesized to be linked to abnormalities in
cortical striatal circuitry where impulsivity (Figure 13-1)
leads to compulsivity (Figure 13-2). The mechanism
of D-amphetamine reversing binge eating symptoms
may not be due to suppressing appetite since appetite
no longer really drives binge eating disorder when it
becomes compulsive. Instead, it is known that stimulants
induce neuroplasticity particularly in the striatum.
Hypothetically, promotion of striatal neuroplasticity
could help reverse food-related behaviors that have
had their control migrate from ventral to dorsal control
when impulsive eating became compulsive. As for most
impulsive–compulsive disorders, most studies adding
various psychotherapies to drug treatment of BED report
enhancement of efficacy.
Other Behavioral Addictions

Although behaviors such as gambling and too much
internet gaming have many parallels to BED and to
substance abuse disorders, these are not yet generally
recognized formally as behavioral “addictions.” Internet
addiction can involve an inability to stop the behavior,
tolerance, withdrawal, and relief when reinitiating
the behavior. Many experts believe gambling disorder
should be classified along with drug addiction and
BED as a nonsubstance abuse/behavioral addiction
disorder. Gambling disorder is characterized by repeated
unsuccessful efforts to stop despite adverse consequences,
tolerance (gambling higher and higher dollar amounts),
psychological withdrawal when not gambling, and relief
when reinitiating gambling. Gambling has been observed
after treatment with dopamine agonists and partial
agonists, suggesting that stimulating the mesolimbic
dopamine reward system can induce gambling in some
patients. The neurobiology and treatment of other
behavioral disorders listed in Table 13-1 are all under
investigation as possible impulsive to compulsive and
thus ventral to dorsal shifts of control of the abnormal
or undesired behavior. The hope is that therapies useful
for one of the impulsive–compulsive disorders might be
helpful across the spectrum of other disorders in this group.

575

13


<<<PAGE 592>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

why some diagnostic systems no longer categorize OCD
as an anxiety disorder.
The compulsive habits provoked by environmental
stimuli in OCD are hypothetically the same
phenomenon within the same neurocircuits as
described throughout this chapter for addiction. So, are
OCD patients addicted to their obsessions and to their
compulsions? Certainly, that is one way to look at OCD
symptoms. OCD patients have demonstrated lack of
efficient information processing in their orbitofrontal
cortex (Figure 13-2) and lack of cognitive flexibility, and
thus cannot inhibit their compulsive responses/habits.
Just like drug addicts. Such hypothesized habit learning
in OCD – called addiction when applied to drugs,
gambling, and binge eating – can be reduced or reversed
in OCD with exposure and response prevention,
involving graded exposure to anxiety-provoking stimuli/
situations, and prevention of the associated avoidance
compulsions. This type of cognitive behavioral therapy
is thought to have its therapeutic effect by breaking
the pattern of compulsive avoidance that confers
dominant control to the external environment (such
that the sight of a door elicits checking) and also
maintains inappropriate anxiety. Instead of considering
compulsions as behavioral reactions to abnormal
obsessions, the reverse may be true: obsessions in OCD
may in fact be post hoc rationalizations of otherwise
inexplicable compulsive urges. Unfortunately, this
same type of cognitive behavioral therapy has often
proven less effective in drug and behavioral addictions.
If successful, cognitive behavioral therapy reverses

OBSESSIVE–COMPULSIVE AND
RELATED DISORDERS
Obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) was once
classified as an anxiety disorder (Figure 13-30) but is now
placed in its own category by some diagnostic systems
such as the DSM-5. In OCD, many patients experience
an intense urge to perform stereotypic, ritualistic acts
despite having full insight into how senseless and
excessive these behaviors are, and having no real desire
for the outcome of these actions. The most common types
of compulsions are checking and cleaning. For OCD,
a general propensity towards habit may be expressed
solely as avoidance, deriving from the comorbid anxiety
reported. In the context of high anxiety, superstitious
avoidance responses may offer relief, which reinforces the
behavior. Stress and anxiety may enhance the formation
of habits, whether positively or negatively motivated.
However, as the habit becomes progressively compulsive,
the experience of relief may no longer be the driving force
and instead the behavior comes under external control
as a conditioned response. Excessive inflexible behaviors
are often thought to be carried out in order to neutralize
anxiety or distress evoked by particular obsessions.
Paradoxically, although OCD patients feel compelled to
perform these behaviors, they are often aware that they
are more disruptive than helpful. So why do they do
them? Rather than conceptualizing compulsive behaviors
as goal-directed to reduce anxiety (Figure 13-30), these
rituals might be better understood as habits provoked
mindlessly from a stimulus in the environment. This is

Figure 13-30 Obsessive–compulsive
disorder (OCD). The symptoms
typically associated with OCD are
shown here and include obsessions
that are intrusive and unwanted and
that cause marked anxiety or distress,
as well as compulsions that are
aimed at preventing or suppressing
the distress related to the obsessive
thoughts. Compulsions can be
repetitive behaviors (e.g., handwashing, checking) or mental acts (e.g.,
praying, counting).

OCD

anxiety/
fear about
obsessions/
compulsions

worry/
obsession

compulsions

576


<<<PAGE 593>>>
Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

habits in OCD as it therapeutically helps to migrate the
neurocircuit of control of OCD behaviors from dorsal
back to ventral, where it belongs. Some other form of
doing this same thing may be the key to developing
robust treatments for addictions, most of which
have little or no highly effective therapeutic drugs or
interventions.
First-line drug treatment of OCD today is one of
the SSRIs, although their efficacy is modest and half of
patients treated with these agents show poor responses.
Behavioral treatments such as exposure therapy with
response prevention often have greater efficacy than
serotonergic treatments. It seems as if serotonergic
therapies suppress abnormal neurocircuitry, whereas
exposure therapy may actually reverse abnormal
neurocircuitry because symptoms continue to be
improved after stopping exposure therapy but not after
stopping SSRIs. Although second-line treatments with
one of the tricyclic antidepressants with serotonergic
properties, clomipramine, with serotonin–norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) or with monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAOIs) are all worthy of consideration,
the best pharmacological option for a patient who
has failed several SSRIs is often to consider very high
doses with an SSRI or augmentation of an SSRI with a
serotonin–dopamine blocker. The mechanisms of action
of all of these agents are covered in detail in Chapter 5
and 7. Augmentation of an SSRI with a benzodiazepine,
lithium, or buspirone can also be considered. Repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) is an approved
treatment for OCD. Experimental treatments for OCD
include deep brain stimulation, or even stereotactic
ablation of the impulsive–compulsive pathways shown in
Figures 13-1 and 13-2, for the most resistant of cases.
Conditions related to OCD may respond somewhat
to SSRIs, including hoarding, compulsive shopping,
skin picking, and body dysmorphic disorder, but not
especially trichotillomania (compulsive hair pulling).
No agent is officially approved for any of these
conditions (Table 13-1). Body dysmorphic disorder
for example is preoccupation with perceived defects or
flaws in appearance that cause repetitive behavior like
looking in the mirror, grooming, reassurance seeking.
Preoccupation with health, body function, and pain exist
in hypochondriasis and somatization disorders and some
experts consider these types of obsessions. It is clear that
more robust treatments with a different mechanism of
action are needed for the group of obsessive–compulsive
related disorders.

IMPULSE CONTROL DISORDERS
A large variety of disorders that have lack of control
of impulsivity are listed in Table 13-1. How many
of these disorders can be conceptualized within the
impulsive–compulsive spectrum, with abnormalities of
cortico-striatal circuitry, remains to be shown, but the
descriptive parallels between the impulsive symptoms of
these various and sundry conditions gives face validity
to this notion. Since the impulsivity of none of these
conditions has an approved treatment, we are left with
the hope that interventions that work in one of the
impulsive–compulsive disorders may be effective across
the spectrum of disorders that share this same dimension
of psychopathology. However, this remains to be proven
and has the risk of oversimplifying some very complex
and very different disorders (Table 13-1). One general
principle being tested and that may apply across the
waterfront of these many and varied disorders is that
interventions that can stop the frequent repetition of
short-term rewarding impulsive behaviors may hopefully
act to prevent converting them into long-term habits that
lead to poor functional outcomes.
Aggression and violence have long been controversial
issues in psychiatry. Experts categorize violence as
psychotic, impulsive, or psychopathic, with the most
common being impulsive (Figure 13-31). Perhaps
somewhat surprisingly, the least frequent type of
violent act is one due to cold, calculated psychopathy.
Psychopathic violence seems to be the most lethal and
the least responsive to treatment. Approximately 20%
of violent acts are of the psychotic variety and require
standard if not aggressive treatment for the underlying
psychotic illness. The most frequent type of violent
act is impulsive, especially in institutional settings and
especially in patients with underlying psychotic illnesses
(Figure 13-31).
Each type of aggression may be attributable to
dysfunction in distinct neural circuits, with impulsive
violence being linked to the same problems of balancing
top-down inhibition with bottom-up emotional drives,
as discussed in Chapter 12 on agitation in dementia
and illustrated in Figures 12-43 and 12-44. Impulsive
violence can occur in psychotic disorders of many types,
including drug-induced psychosis, schizophrenia, and
bipolar mania, as well as in borderline personality
disorder and other impulsive–compulsive disorders
(Table 13-1). Treatment of the underlying condition,
often with drugs for psychosis (discussed in Chapter 5),

577

13


<<<PAGE 594>>>
STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

The Heterogeneity of Violence
Psychotic - 20%
Psychopathic - 17%

Impulsive - 63%

Figure 13-31 Heterogeneity of violence. Violence is
categorized as psychotic, impulsive, or psychopathic. The
most common form is impulsive and the least common is
psychopathic. Approximately 20% of violent acts are of the
psychotic variety.

can be helpful. Aggression and violence in such disorders
can be considered examples of the imbalance between
top-down “stop” signals, and bottom-up drives and “go”
signals, as already discussed in dementia (Figures 12-43
and 12-44) and in several other impulsive–compulsive
disorders (Table 13-1). Impulsive aggression can be
considered a type of addictive behavior when it becomes
increasingly compulsive, rather than manipulative
and planned, and a habit that must be extinguished
with behavioral interventions rather than with purely
psychopharmacological approaches

SUMMARY
We have discussed the current conceptualization
of impulsivity and compulsivity as dimensions of
psychopathology that cut across many psychiatric
disorders. Rewarding behaviors and addiction to drugs
hypothetically share the same underlying circuitry. These

578

disorders are characterized at first by impulsivity –
defined as behaviors that are difficult to prevent because
short-term reward is chosen over long-term gain. Such
impulsivity is hypothetically mapped onto a prefrontal
ventral striatal reward circuit. Impulsivity can transition
to compulsivity – defined as an originally rewarding
behavior becoming a habit that is difficult to stop because
it reduces tension and withdrawal effects. Compulsivity
is hypothetically mapped onto a prefrontal dorsal
motor response inhibition circuit. Failure of the balance
between top-down inhibition and bottom-up drives is
the common underlying neurobiological mechanism of
impulsivity and its transition to compulsivity.
Both drugs and behaviors can be associated with
impulsivity/compulsivity and are dimensions of
psychopathology for a wide range of drug addictions
and psychiatric disorders. The chapter discusses the
psychopharmacology of reward and the brain circuitry
that regulates reward. We have attempted to explain
the psychopharmacological mechanisms of actions of
various drugs of abuse, from nicotine to alcohol, and
also opioids, stimulants, sedative hypnotics, cannabis,
hallucinogens, empathogens, and dissociative drugs.
In the case of nicotine and alcohol, various novel
psychopharmacological treatments are discussed,
including the α4β2 selective nicotine partial agonist (NPA)
varenicline for smoking cessation, opioid replacement
therapies for opioid addiction, and opioid antagonists for
both alcohol and opioid addiction. Use of habit extinction
in treatment of addiction is explored as is the evolving
use of dissociative/hallucinogen-assisted psychotherapy
for treatment-resistant conditions. Binge eating disorder
is discussed as the prototypical behavioral addiction,
and its treatment with stimulants. Impulsive violence is
mentioned as a possible form of impulsive–compulsive
disorder as well.


<<<PAGE 595>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References
General References: Specialty
Textbooks
Brunton LL (ed.) (2018) Goodman and Gilman’s The
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 13th edition. New
York, NY: McGraw Medical.
Schatzberg AF, Nemeroff CB (eds.) (2017) Textbook of
Psychopharmacology, 5th edition. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Publishing.

General References:Textbooks
in the Stahl’s Essential
Psychopharmacology Series
Cummings M, Stahl SM (2021) Management of Complex,
Treatment-Resistant Psychiatric Disorders. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Goldberg J, Stahl SM (2021) Practical Psychopharmacology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kalali A, Kwentus J, Preskorn S, Stahl SM (eds.) (2012)
Essential CNS Drug Development. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Marazzitti D, Stahl SM (2019) Evil, Terrorism and Psychiatry.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Moutier C, Pisani A, Stahl SM (2021) Stahl’s Handbooks:
Suicide Prevention Handbook. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Pappagallo M, Smith H, Stahl SM (2012) Essential Pain
Pharmacology: the Prescribers Guide. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Reis de Oliveira I, Schwartz T, Stahl SM. (2014) Integrating
Psychotherapy and Psychopharmacology. New York, NY:
Routledge Press.
Silberstein SD, Marmura MJ, Hsiangkuo Y, Stahl SM
(2016) Essential Neuropharmacology: the Prescribers
Guide, 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Stahl SM, Mignon L (2009) Stahl’s Illustrated: Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Stahl SM, Mignon L (2010) Stahl’s Illustrated: Antipsychotics,
2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl SM, Grady MM (2010) Stahl’s Illustrated: Anxiety and
PTSD. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl SM (2011) Essential Psychopharmacology Case Studies.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl SM (2018) Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology: the
Prescribers Guide Children and Adolescents. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Stahl SM (2019) Stahl’s Self-Assessment Examination in
Psychiatry: Multiple Choice Questions for Clinicians, 3rd
edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl SM (2021) Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology: the
Prescribers Guide, 7th edition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Stahl SM, Davis RL (2011) Best Practices for Medical Educators,
2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl SM, Grady MM (2012) Stahl’s Illustrated: Substance Use
and Impulsive Disorders. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Stahl SM, Moore BA (eds.) (2013) Anxiety Disorders: a
Concise Guide and Casebook for Psychopharmacology and
Psychotherapy Integration. New York, NY: Routledge Press.
Stahl SM, Morrissette DA (2014) Stahl’s Illustrated: Violence:
Neural Circuits, Genetics and Treatment. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Stahl SM, Morrissette DA (2016) Stahl’s Illustrated: Sleep and
Wake Disorders, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl SM, Morrissette DA (2018) Stahl’s Illustrated: Dementia.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press..
Stahl SM, Schwartz T (2016) Case Studies: Stahl’s Essential
Psychopharmacology, Volume 2. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Stahl SM (2009) Stahl’s Illustrated: Antidepressants.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Stein DJ, Lerer B, Stahl SM (eds.) (2012) Essential Evidence
Based Psychopharmacolgy, 2nd edition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Stahl SM (2009) Stahl’s Ilustrated: Mood Stabilizers.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Warburton KD, Stahl SM (2016) Violence in Psychiatry.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Stahl SM (2009) Stahl’s Illustrated: Chronic Pain and
Fibromyalgia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Warburton KD, Stahl SM (2021) Decriminalizing Mental
Illness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
579


<<<PAGE 596>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Chapters 1–3 (Basic Neuroscience):
Textbooks

Beaulier JM, Gainetdinov RR (2011) The physiology, signaling
and pharmacology of dopamine receptors. Pharmacol Rev
63: 182–217.

Byrne JH, Roberts JL (eds.) (2004) From Molecules to
Networds: An Introduction to Cellular and Molecular
Neuroscience. New York, NY: Elsevier.

Belmer A, Quentin E, Diaz SL, et al. (2018) Positive regulation
of raphe serotonin neurons by serotonin 2B receptors.
Neuropsychopharmacology 42: 1623–32.

Charney DS, Buxbaum JD, Sklar P, Nestler EJ (2018) Charney
and Nestler’s Neurbiology of Mental Illness, 5th edition. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Calabresi P, Picconi B, Tozzi A, Ghiglieri V, Di Fillippo M
(2014) Direct and indirect pathways of basal ganglia: a
critical reappraisal. Nature Neurosci 17: 1022–30.

Iversen LL, Iversen SD, Bloom FE, Roth RH (2009)
Introduction to Neuropsychopharmacology. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.

Cathala A, Devroye C, Drutel G, et al. (2019) Serotonin 2B
receptors in the rat dorsal raphe nucleus exert a GABAmediated tonic inhibitor control on serotonin neurons. Exp
Neurol 311: 57–66.

Meyer JS, Quenzer LF (2019) Psychopharmacology: Drugs, the
Brain, and Behavior, 3rd edition. New York, NY: Sinauer
Associates, Oxford University Press.
Nestler EJ, Kenny PJ, Russo SJ, Schaefer A (2020) Molecular
Neuropharmacology: A Foundation for Clinical
Neuroscience, 4th edition. New York, NY: McGraw Medical.
Purves D, Augustine GJ, Fitzpatrick D, et al. (2018)
Neuroscience, 6th edition. New York, NY: Sinauer
Associates, Oxford University Press.

De Bartolomeis A, Fiore G, Iasevoli F (2005) Dopamine
glutamate interaction and antipsychotics mechanism of
action: implication for new pharmacologic strategies in
psychosis. Curr Pharmaceut Design 11: 3561–94.
DeLong MR, Wichmann T (2007) Circuits and Ciruit
disorders of the basal ganglia. Arch Neurol 64: 20–4.
Fink KB, Gothert M (2007) 5HT receptor regulation of
neurotransmitter release. Pharmacol Rev 59: 360–417.

Squire LR, Berg D, Bloom FE, et al. (eds.) (2012) Fundamental
Neuroscience, 4th edition. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Hansen KB, Yi F, Perszyk RE, et al (2018) Structure, function
and allosteric modulation of NMDA receptors. J Gen
Physiol 150: 1081–105.

Chapters 4 (Psychosis,
Schizophrenia, and the
Neurotransmitter Networks
Dopamine, Serotonin, and
Glutamate) and 5 (Targeting
Dopamine and Serotonin Receptors
for Psychosis, Mood, and Beyond:
So-called “Antipsychotics”)

Homayoun H, Moghaddam B (2007) NMDA receptor
hypofunction produces opposite effects on prefrontal
cortex interneurons and pyramidal neurons. J Neurosci 27:
11496–500.

Neuronal Networks – Serotonin, Dopamine,
and Glutamate: Selected References
Alex KD, Pehak EA (2007) Pharmacological mechanisms of
serotoninergic regulation of dopamine neurotransmission.
Pharmacol Ther 113: 296–320.
Amargos-Bosch M, Bortolozzi A, Buig MV, et al. (2004)
Co-expression and in vivo interaction of serotonin 1A and
serotonin 2A receptors in pyramidal neurons of prefrontal
cortex. Cerbral Cortex 14: 281–99.
Baez MV, Cercata MC, Jerusalinsky DA (2018) NMDA receptor
subunits change after synaptic plasticity induction and
learning and memory acquisition. Neural Plast, doi.
org/10,1155/2018/5093048.
580

Nicoll RA (2017) A brief history of long-term potentiation.
Neuron 93: 281–99.
Paoletti P, Neyton J (2007) NMDA receptor subunits: function
and pharmacology. Curr Opin Pharmacol 7: 39–47.
Scheefhals N, MacGillavry HD (2018) Functional organization
of postsynaptic glutamate receptors. Mol Cell Neurosci 91:
82–94.
Sokoloff P, Le Foil B (2017) The dopamine D3 receptor: a
quarter century later. Eur J Neurosci 45: 2–19.
Stahl SM (2017) Dazzled by the dominions of dopamine:
clinical roles of D3, D2, and D1 receptors. CNS Spectrums
22: 305–11.

Dopamine, Serotonin, and Glutamate
Theories of Psychosis, Including
Schizophrenia, Parkinson’s Disease
Psychosis, and Dementia-Related Psychosis
Aghajanian GK, Marek GJ (2000) Serotonin model of
schizophrenia: emerging role of glutamate mechanisms.
Brain Res Rev 31: 302–12.


<<<PAGE 597>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Bloomfield MAP, Morgan CJA, Egerton A, et al. (2014)
Dopaminergic function in cannabis users and its
relationship to cannabis-induced psychotic symptoms. Biol
Psychiatry 75: 470–8.

Paz RD, Tardito S, Atzori M (2008) Glutamatergic dysfunction
in schizophrenia: from basic neuroscience to clinical
psychopharmacology. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 18:
773–86.

Brugger SP, Anelescu I, Abi-Dargham A, et al. (2020)
Heterogeneity and striatal dopamine function in
schizophrenia: meta analysis of variance. Biol Psychiatry
67: 215–24.

Stahl SM (2016) Parkinson’s disease psychosis as a serotonin–
dopamine imbalance syndrome. CNS Spectrums 21: 355–9.

Bubenikova-Valesova V, Horacek J, Vrajova M, et al. (2008)
Models of schizophrenia in humans and animals based on
inhibition of NMDA receptors. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 32:
1014–23.
Demjaha A, Murray RM, McGuire PK (2012) Dopamine
synthesis capacity in patients with treatment resistant
schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry 169: 1203–10.
Driesen N, McCarthy G, Bhagwagar Z, et al (2013) The
impact of NMDA receptor blockade on human working
memory-related prefrontal function and connectivity.
Neuropsychopharmacol 38: 2613–22.
Egerton A, Chaddock CA, Winton-Brown TT, et al. (2013)
Presynaptic striatal dopamine dysfunction in people at
ultra high risk for psychosis: findings in a second cohort.
Biol Psychiatry 74: 106–12.
Gellings Lowe N, Rapagnani MP, Mattei C, Stahl SM
(2012)The psychopharmacology of hallucinations: ironic
insights into mechanisms of action. In The Neuroscience of
Hallucinations, Jardri R, Thomas P, Cachia A and Pins D.
(eds.), Berlin: Springer, 471–92.
Howes OD, Bose SK, Turkheimer F, et al. (2011) Dopamine
synthsis capacity before onset of psychosis: a prospective
18F-DOPA PET imaging study. Am J Psychiatry 169:
1311–17.
Howes OD, Montgomery AJ, Asselin MC, et al. (2009)
Elevated striatal dopamine function linked to
prodromal signs of schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 66:
13–20.
Juahar S, Nour MM, Veronese M, et al. (2017) A test of
the transdiagnostic dopamine hypothesis of psychosis
using positron emission tomographic imaging in bipolar
affective disorder and schizophrenia. JAMA Psychiatry 74:
1206–13.
Lodge DJ, Grace AA (2011) Hippocampal dysregulation of
dopamine system function and the pathophysiology of
schizophrenia. Trends Pharmacol Sci 32: 507–13.

Stahl SM (2018) Beyond the dopamine hypothesis of
schizophrenia to three neural networks of psychosis:
dopamine, serotonin, and glutamate. CNS Spectrums 23:
187–91.
Weinstein JJ, Chohan MO, Slifstein M, et al. (2017) Pathwayspecific dopamine abnormalities in schizophrenia. Biol
Psychiatry 81: 31–42.

General Schizophrenia: Selected and
Recent References
Alphs LD, Summerfelt A, Lann H, Muller RJ (1989) The
Negative Symptom Assessment: A new instrument
to assess negative symptoms of schizophrenia.
Psychopharmacol Bull 25: 159–63.
Arango C, Rapado-Castro M, Reig S, et al. (2012) Progressive
brain changes in children and adolescents with firstepisode psychosis. Arch Gen Psychiatry 69: 16–26.
Cruz DA, Weawver CL, Lovallo EM, Melchitzky DS, Lewis
DA. (2009) Selective alterations in postsynaptic markers
of chandelier cell inputs to cortical pyramidal neurons in
subjects with schizophrenia. Neuropsychopharmacology 34:
2112–24.
Dragt S, Nieman DH, Schultze-Lutter F, et al. (2012)
Cannabis use and age at onset of symptoms in subjects at
clinical high risk for psychosis. Acta Psychiatr Scand 125:
45–53.
Eisenberg DP, Berman KF (2010) Executive function, neural
circuitry, and genetic mechanisms in schizophrenia.
Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 258–77.
Foti DJ, Kotov R, Guey LT, Bromet EJ (2010) Cannabis use and
the course of schizophrenia: 10-year follow-up after first
hospitalization. Am J Psychiatry 167: 987–93.
Fusar-Poli P, Bonoldi I, Yung AR, et al. (2012) Predicting
psychosis: meta-analysis of transition outcomes in individuals
at high clinical risk. Arch Gen Psychiatry 69: 220–9.

McCutcheon RA, Abi-Dargham A, Howes OD (2019)
Schizophrenia, dopamine and the striatum: from biology
to symptoms. Trends Neurosci 42: 205–20.

Goff DC, Zeng B, Ardelani BA, et al. (2018) Association of
hippocampal atrophy with duration of untreated psychosis
and molecular biomarkers during initial antipsychotic
treatment of first episode psychosis. JAMA Psychiatry 75:
370–8.

Mizrahi R, Kenk M, Suridjan I, et al (2014) Stress induced
dopamine response in subjects at clinical high risk for
schizophrenia with and without concurrent cannabis use.
Neuropsychopharmacology 39: 1479–89.

Henry LP, Amminger GP, Harris MG, et al. (2010) The
EPPIC follow up study of first episode psychosis: longer
term clinical and functional outcome 7 years after index
admission. J Clin Psychiatry 71: 716–28.
581


<<<PAGE 598>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Kane JM, Robinson DG, Schooler NR, et al. (2016)
Comprehensive versus usual community care for firstepisode psychosis: 2-year outcomes from the NIMH RAISE
early treatment program. Am J Psychiatry 173: 362–72.
Kendler KS, Ohlsson H, Sundquist J, et al. (2019) Prediction
of onset of substance induced psychotic disorder and
its progression to schizophrenia in a Swedish National
Sample. Am J Psychiatry 176: 711–19.
Large M, Sharma S, Compton MT, Slade T, Nielssen O (2011)
Cannabis use and earlier onset of psychosis. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 68: 555–61.
Lieberman JA, Small SA, Girgis RR (2019) Early detection and
preventive intervention in schizophrenia: from fantasy to
reality. Am J Psychiatry 176: 794–810.
Mechelli A, Riecher-Rossler A, Meisenzahl EM, et al. (2011)
Neuroanatomical abnormalities that predate the onset of
psychosis. Arch Gen Psychiatry 68: 489–95.
Morrissette DA, Stahl SM (2014) Treating the violent patient
with psychosis or impulsivity utilizing antipsychotic
polypharmacy and high-dose monotherapy. CNS Spectrums
19: 439–48.
Stahl SM (2014) Deconstructing violence as a medical
syndrome: mapping psychotic, impulsive, and predatory
subtypes to malfunctioning brain circuits. CNS Spectrums
19: 357–65.
Stahl SM (2015) Is impulsive violence an addiction? The habit
hypothesis. CNS Spectrums 20: 165–9.
Stahl SM, Morrissette DA, Cummings M (2014) California
State Hospital Violence Assessment and Treatment (CalVAT) guidelines. CNS Spectrums 19: 449–65.
Wykes T, Huddy V, Cellard C, McGurk SR, Czobar P (2011) A
meta-analysis of cognitive remediation for schizophrenia:
methodology and effect sizes. Am J Psychiatry 168: 472–85.

Tardive Dyskinesia and Treatments
Artukoglu BB, Li F, Szejko N, et al. (2020) Pharmacologic
treatment of tardive dyskinesia: a meta analysis and
systematic review. J Clin Psychiatry 81: e1–11.
Bhidayasin R, Jitkretsandakul O, Friedman JH (2018)
Updating the recommendations for treatment of tardive
syndromes: a systematic review of new evidence and
practical treatment algorithm. J Neurol Sci 389: 67–75.
Carbon M, Kane JM, Leucht S, et al. (2018) Tardive dyskinesia
risk with first- and second-generation antipsychotics in
comparative randomized controlled trials: a meta analysis.
World Psychiatry 173: 330–40.
Citrome L (2017) Valbenazine for tardive dyskinesia: a
systematic review of the efficacy and safety profile for this
newly approved novel medication – what is the number
needed to treat, number needed to harm and likelihood to
582

be helped or harmed? Int J Clin Practice, doi.org 10.1111/
ijcp.12964.
Citrome L (2017) Deutetrabenazine for tardive dyskinesia: a
systematic review of the efficacy and safety profile for this
newly approved novel medication – what is the number
needed to treat, number needed to harm and likelihood to
be helped or harmed? Int J Clin Practice, doi.org 10.1111/
ijcp.13030.
Jacobsen FM (2015) Second generation antipsychotics and
tardive syndromes in affective illness: a public health
problem with neuropsychiatric consequences. Am J Public
Health 105: e10–16.
Niemann N, Jankovic J (2018) Treatment of tardive dyskinesia:
a general overview with focus on the vesicular monoamine
transporter 2 inhibitors. Drugs 78: 525–41.
Stahl SM (2017) Neuronal traffic signals in tardive dyskinesia:
not enough “stop” in the motor striatum. CNS Spectrums
22: 427–34.
Stahl SM (2018) Mechanism of action of vesicular monoamine
transporter 2 (VMAT2) inhibitors in tardive dyskinesia:
reducing dopamine leads to less “go” and more “stop” from
the motor striatum for robust therapeutic effects. CNS
Spectrums 23: 1–6.
Stahl SM (2018) Comparing pharmacological mechanism
of action for the vesicular monoamine transporter 2
(VMAT2) inhibitors valbenazine and deutetrabenazine in
treating tardive dyskinesia: does one have advantages over
the other? CNS Spectrums 23: 239–47.
Woods SW, Morgenstern H, Saksa JR, et al. (2010) Incidence
of tardive dyskinesia with atypical versus conventional
antipsychotic medications: a prospective cohort study. J
Clin Psychiatry 71: 463–74.

Long-Acting Injectables
Brissos S, Veguilla MR, Taylor D, et al. (2014) The role of longacting injectable antipsychotics in schizophrenia: a critical
appraisal. Ther Adv Psychopharmacol 4: 198–219.
Kishimoto T, Nitto M, Borenstein M, et al. (2013) Long acting
injectable versus oral antipsychotics in schizophrenia:
a systematic review and meta analysis of mirror image
studies. J Clin Psychiatry 74: 957–65.
MacEwan JP, Kamat SA, Duffy RA, et al. (2016) Hospital
readmission rates among patients with schizophrenia
treated with long acting injectables or oral antipsychotics.
Psychiatr Serv 67: 1183–8.
Meyer JM (2013) Understanding depot antipsychotics: an
illustrated guide to kinetics. CNS Spectrums 18: 58–68.
Meyer JM (2017) Converting oral to long acting injectable
antipsychotics: a guide for the perplexed. CNS Spectrums
22: 17–27.


<<<PAGE 599>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Stahl SM (2014) Long-acting injectable antipsychotics: shall
the last be first? CNS Spectrums 19: 3–5.

randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Am J
Psychiatry 171: 160–8.

Tiihonen J, Haukka J, Taylor M, et al. (2011) A nationwide
cohort study of oral and depot antipsychotics after first
hospitalization for schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry 168:
603–9.

Loebel A, Cucchiaro J, Silva R, et al. (2014) Lurasidone as
adjunctive therapy with lithium or valproate for the
treatment of bipolar I depression: a randomized, double
blind, placebo-controlled study. Am J Psychiatry 171:
169–77.

Serotonin Dopamine Drugs for Psychosis
and Mood: Updates and Newer Drugs
Berry MD, Gainetdinov RR, Hoener MC, et al. (2017)
Pharmacology of human trace amine-associated receptors:
therapeutic opportunities and challenges. Pharmacol Ther
180: 161–80.
Brannan S (2020) KarXT (a new mechanism antipsychotic
based on xanomeline) is superior to placebo in patients
with schizophrenia: phase 2 clinical trial results. Abstract,
American Society of Clinical Psychopharmacology Annual
Meeting.
Citrome L (2015) Brexpiprazole for schizophrenia and as
adjunct for major depressive disorder: a systematic review
of the efficacy and safety profile for the newly approved
antipsychotic – what is the number needed to treat,
number needed to harm and likelihood to be helped or
harmed? Int J Clin Pract 69: 978–97.
Correll CU, Davis RE, Weingart M, et al. (2020)
Efficacy and safety of lumateperone for treatment
of schizophrenia: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Psychaitry 77: 349–58.
Dedic N, Jones PG, Hopkins SC, et al. (2019) SEP363856: a
novel psychotropic agent with unique non D2 receptor
mechanism of actions. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 371: 1–14.
Earley W, Burgess MV, Rekeda L, et al. (2019) Cariprazine
treatment of bipolar depression: a randomized doubleblind placebo-controlled phase 3 study, Am J Psychiatry
176: 439–48.
Gainetdinov RR, Hoener MC, Berry MD (2018) Trace amines
and their receptors. Pharmacol Rev 70: 549–620.
Koblan KS, Kent J, Hopkins SC, Krystal JH, et al. (2020)
A non-D2-receptor-binding drug for the treatment of
schizophrenia. New Engl J Med 382: 1407–506.

TD and Its Treatment
Lieberman JA, Davis RE, Correll CU, et al. (2016) ITI007 for the treatment of schizophrenia: a 4-week
randomized, double-blind, controlled trial. Biol
Psychiatry 79: 952–6.
Loebel A, Cucchiaro J, Silva R, et al. (2014) Lurasidone
monotherapy in the treatment of bipolar I depression: a

Marder SR, Davis JM, Couinard G (1997) The effects of
risperidone on the five dimensions of schizophrenia
derived by factor analysis: combined results of the north
American trials. J Clin Psychiatry 58: 538–46.
McIntyre RS, Suppes T, Early W, Patel M, Stahl SM (2020)
Cariprazine efficacy in bipolar I depression with and
without concurrent manic symptoms: post hoc analysis
of three randomized, placebo-controlled studies. CNS
Spectrums 25: 502–10.
Meyer JM, Cummings MA, Proctor G, Stahl SM (2016)
Psychopharmacology of persistent violence and aggression.
Psychiatr Clin N Am 39: 541–56.
Meyer JM, Stahl SM (2020) Stahl’s Handbooks: the
Clozapine Handbook. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Nemeth G, Laszlovszky I, Czoboar P, et al. (2017) Cariprazine
versus risperidone monotherapy for treatment of
predominant negative symptoms in patients with
schizophrenia: a randomized double-blind controlled trial.
Lancet 389: 1103–13.
Pei Y, Asif-Malik A, Canales JJ (2016) Trace amines and
the trace amine-associated receptor 1: pharmacology,
neurochemistry and clinical implications. Front Neurosci
10: 148.
Perkins DO, Gu H, Boteva K, Lieberman JA (2005)
Relationship between duration of untreated psychosis
and outcome in first episode schizophrenia: a critical
review and meta-analysis. Am J Psychiatry 162:
1785–804.
Roth BL. Ki determinations, receptor binding profiles,
agonist and/or antagonist functional data, HERG data,
MDR1 data, etc. as appropriate was generously provided
by the National Institute of Mental Health’s Psychoactive
Drug Screening Program, Contract # HHSN-271–200800025-C (NIMH PDSP). The NIMH PDSP is directed
by Bryan L. Roth MD, PhD at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill and Project Officer Jamie Driscol
at NIMH, Bethesda MD, USA. For experimental details
please refer to the PDSP website http://pdsp.med.unc.edu/
Schwartz MD, Canales JJ, Zucci R, et al. (2018) Trace amine
associated receptor 1: a multimodal therapeutic target for
neuropsychiatric diseases. Expert Opin Ther Targets 22:
513–26.

583


<<<PAGE 600>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Shekar A, Potter WZ, Lightfoot J, et al. (2008) Seletive
muscarinic receptor agonist xanomeline as a novel
treatment approach for schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry 165:
1033–9.
Snyder GL, Vanover KE, Zhu H, et al. (2014) Functional profile
of a novel modulator of serotonin, dopamine and glutamate
neurotransmission. Psychopharmacology 232: 605–21.
Stahl SM (2013) Classifying psychotropic drugs by mode
of action and not by target disorder. CNS Spectrums 18:
113–17.
Stahl SM (2013) Role of α1 adrenergic antagonism in
the mechanism of action of iloperidone: reducing
extrapyramidal symptoms. CNS Spectrums 18: 285–8.
Stahl SM (2014) Clozapine: is now the time for more clinicians
to adopt this orphan? CNS Spectrums 19: 279–81.
Stahl SM (2016) Mechanism of action of brexpiprazole:
comparison with aripiprazole. CNS Spectrums 21: 1–6.
Stahl SM (2016) Mechanism of action of cariprazine. CNS
Spectrums 21: 123–7.
Stahl SM (2016) Mechanism of action of pimavanserin in
Parkinson’s disease psychosis: targeting serotonin 5HT2A
and 5HT2C receptors. CNS Spectums 21: 271–5.
Stahl SM (2017) Drugs for psychosis and mood: unique
actions at D3, D2, and D1 dopamine receptor subtypes. CNS
Spectrums 22: 375–84.
Stahl SM, Cucchiaro J, Sinonelli D, et al. (2013) Effectiveness
of lurasidone for patients with schizophrenia following 6
weeks of acute treatment with lurasidone, olanazapine, or
placebo: a 6-month, open-label study. J Clin Psychiatry 74:
507–15.
Stahl SM, Laredo SA, Morrissette DA (2020) Cariprazine as a
treatment across the bipolar I spectrum from depression
to mania: mechanism of action and review of clinical data.
Ther Adv Psychopharmacol 10: 1–11.
Stahl SM, Morrissette DA, Citrome L, et al. (2013) “Metaguidelines” for the management of patients with
schizophrenia. CNS Spectrums 18: 150–62.
Suppes T, Silva R, Cuccharino J, et al. (2016) Lurasidone for
the treatment of major depressive disorder with mixed
features: a randomized, double blind placebo controlled
study. Am J Psychiatry 173: 400–7.
Tarazi F, Stahl SM (2012) Iloperidone, asenapine and
lurasidone: a primer on their current status. Expert Opin
Pharmacother 13: 1911–22.
Thase ME, Youakim JM, Skuban A, et al. (2015) Efficacy and
safety of adjunctive brexpiprazole 2 mg in major depressive
disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 76: 1224–31.
Zhang L, Hendrick JP (2018) The presynaptic D2 partial
agonist lumateperone acts as a postsynaptic D2 antagonist.
Matters: doi: 10.19185/matters.201712000006.
584

Chapters 6 (Mood Disorders) and
7 (Treatment of Mood Disorders),
including Norepinephrine and GABA
Neuronal Networks – Norepinephrine,
GABA, and Neuroactive Steroids: Selected
References
Alvarez LD, Pecci A, Estrin DA (2019) In searach of GABA
A receptor’s neurosteroid binding sites. J Med Chem 62:
5250–60.
Belelli D, Hogenkamp D, Gee KW, et al. (2020) Realising the
therapeutic potential of neuroactive steroid modulators of
the GABA A receptor. Neurobiol Stress 12: 100207.
Botella GM, Salitur FG, Harrison BL, et al. (2017) Neuroactive
steroids. 2. 3α-hydroxy-3β-methyl-21-(4-cyano-1Hpyrazol-1ʹ-yl)-19-nor-5β-pregnan-20-one (SAGE 217):
a clinical next generation neuroactive steroid positive
allosteric modulator of the GABA A receptor. J Med Chem
60: 7810–19.
Chen ZW, Bracomonies JR, Budelier MM, et al. (2019)
Multiple functional neurosteroid binding sites on GABA A
receptors. PLOS Biol 17: e3000157; doi.org/10.137/journal.
pbio.3000157.
Gordon JL, Girdler SS, Meltzer-Brody SE, et al. (2015)
Ovarian hormone fluctuation, neurosteroids and HPA
axis dysregulation in perimenopausal depression: a novel
heuristic model. Am J Psychiatry 172: 227–36.
Gunduz-Bruce H, Silber C, Kaul I, et al. (2019) Trial of SAGE
217 in patients with major depressive disorder. New Engl J
Med 381: 903–11.
Luscher B, Mohler H (2019) Brexanolone, a neurosteroid
antidepressant, vindicates the GABAergic deficit
hypothesis of depression and may foster reliance.
F1000Research 8: 751.
Marek GJ, Aghajanian GK (1996) Alpha 1B-adrenoceptormediated excitation of piriform cortical interneurons. Eur J
Pharmacol 305: 95–100.
Marek GJ, Aghajanian GK (1999) 5HT2A receptor or alpha
1-adrenoceptor activation induces excitatory postsynaptic
currents in layer V pyramidal cells of the medial prefrontal
cortex. Eur J Pharmacol 367: 197–206.
Meltzer-Brody S, Kanes SJ (2020) Allopregnanolone in
postpartum depression: role in pathophysiology and
treatment. Neurobiol Stress 12: 100212.
Pieribone VA, Nicholas AP, Dagerlind A, et al. (1994)
Distribution of alpha 1 adrenoceptors in rat brain revealed
by in situ hybridization experiments utilizing subtype
specific probes. J Neurosci 14: 4252–68.


<<<PAGE 601>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Price DT, Lefkowitz RJ, Caron MG, et al. (1994) Localization
of mRNA for three distinct alpha1 adrenergic receptor
sybtypes in human tissues: implications for human alpha
adrenergic physiology. Mol Pharmacol 45: 171–5.

Roy A, Gorodetsky E, Yuan Q, Goldman D, Enoch MA
(2010) Interaction of FKBP5, a stress-related gene, with
childhood trauma increases the risk for attempting suicide.
Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 1674–83.

Ramos BP, Arnsten AFT (2007) Adrenergic pharmacology and
cognition: focus on the prefrontal cortex. Pharmacol Ther
113: 523–36.

Semkovska M, Quinlivan L, Ogrady T, et al. (2019) Cognitive
function following a major depressive episode: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry 6: 851–61.

Santana N, Mengod G, Artigas F (2013) Expression of
alpha1 adrenergic receptors in rat prefrontal cortex:
cellular colocalization with 5HT2A receptors. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol 16: 1139–51.

Stahl SM (2017) Psychiatric pharmacogenomics: how to
integrate into clinical practice. CNS Spectrums 22: 1–4.

Zorumski CF, Paul SM, Covey DF, et al. (2019) Neurosteroids
as novel antidepressants and anxiolytics: GABA A receptors
and beyond. Neurobiol Stress 11: 100196.

Mood Disorders – Depression, Bipolar
Disorder: Selected and Recent References
Bergink V, Bouvy PF, Vervoort JSP, et al. (2012) Prevention of
postpartum psychosis and mania in women at high risk.
Am J Psychiatry 169: 609–16.
Bogdan R, Williamson DE, Hariri AR. (2012)
Mineralocorticoid receptor Iso/Val (rs5522) genotype
moderates the association between previous childhood
emotional neglect and amygdala reactivity. Am J Psychiatry
169: 515–22.
Brites D, Fernandes A (2015) Neuroinflammation and
depression: microglia activion, extracellular microvesicles
and micro RNA dysregulation. Front Cell Neurosci 9: 476.
Fiedorowicz JG, Endicott J, Leon AC, et al. (2011)
Subthreshold hypomanic symptoms in progression from
unipolar major depression to bipolar disorder. Am J
Psychiatry 168: 40–8.
Goldberg JF, Perlis RH, Bowden CL, et al. (2009) Manic
symptoms during depressive episodes in 1,380 patients
with bipolar disorder: findings from the STEP-BD. Am J
Psychiatry 166: 173–81.
McIntyre RS, Anderson N, Baune BT, et al. (2019) Expert
consensus on screening assessment of cognition in
psychiatry. CNS Spectrums 24: 154–62.
Price JL, Drevets WC (2010) Neurocircuitry of mood
disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 192–216.
Rao U, Chen LA, Bidesi AS, et al. (2010) Hippocampal changes
associated with early-life adversity and vulnerability to
depression. Biol Psychiatry 67: 357–64.
Roiser JP, Elliott R, Sahakian BJ (2012) Cognitive mechanisms
of treatment in depression. Neuropsychopharmacology 37:
117–36.
Roiser JP, Sahakian BJ (2013) Hot and cold cognition in
depression. CNS Spectrums 18: 139–49.

Stahl SM (2017) Mixed-up about how to diagnose and
treat mixed features in major depressive episodes. CNS
Spectrums 22: 111–15.
Stahl SM, Morrissette DA (2017) Does a “whiff ” of mania
in a major depressive episode shift treatment from a
classical antidepressant to an atypical/second-generation
antipsychotic? Bipolar Disord 19: 595–6.
Stahl SM, Morrissette DA (2019) Mixed mood states: baffled,
bewildered, befuddled and bemused.Bipolar Disord 21: 560–1.
Stahl SM, Morrissette DA, Faedda G, et al. (2017) Guidelines
for the recognition and management of mixed depression.
CNS Spectrums 22: 203–19.
Yatham LN, Liddle PF, Sossi V, et al. (2012) Positron emission
tomography study of the effects of tryptophan depletion
on brain serotonin2 receptors in subjects recently remitted
from major depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 69: 601–9.

Serotonin Dopamine Drugs for
Mood
See above references for Chapters 4 and 5
Ketamine/Esketamine and NMDA Antagonists
(Dextromethorphan, Dextromethadone)
Aan het Rot M, Collins KA, Murrough JW, et al. (2010) Safety
and efficacy of repeated dose intravenous ketamine for
treatment resistant depression. Biol Psychiatry 67: 139–45.
Abdallah CG, DeFeyter HM, Averill LA, et al. (2018)
The effects of ketamine on prefrontal glutamate
neurotransmission in healthy and depressed subjects.
Neuropsychopharmacology 43: 2154–60.
Anderson A, Iosifescu DV, Macobsen M, et al. (2019) Efficacy
and safety of AXS-05, an oral NMDA receptor antagonist
with multimodal activity, in major depressive disorder:
results of a phase 2, double blind active controlled trial.
Abstract, American Society of Clincal Psychopharmacology
Annual Meeting.
Deyama S, Bang E, Wohleb ES, et al. (2019) Role of neuronal VEGF
signaling in the prefrontal cortex in the rapid antidepressant
effects of ketamine. Am J Psychiatry 176: 388-400.

585


<<<PAGE 602>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

DiazGranados N, Ibrahim LA, Brutsche NE, et al. (2010)
Rapid resolution of suicidal ideation after a single infusion
of an N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist in patients with
treatment-resistant depressive disorder. J Clin Psychiatry
71: 1605–11.
Duman RS, Voleti B (2012) Signaling pathways underlying
the pathophysiology and treatment of depression: novel
mechanisms for rapid-acting agents. Trends Neurosci 35:
47–56.
Dwyer JM, Duman RS (2013) Activation of mammalian target
of rapamycin and synaptogenesis: role in the actions of
rapid acting antidepressants. Biol Psychiatry 73: 1189–98.
Fu DJ, Ionescu DF, Li X, et al. (2020) Esketamine nasal spray
for rapid reduction of major depressive disorder symptoms
in patients who have active suicidal ideation with intent:
double blind randomized study (ASPIRE K). J Clin
Psychiatry 61: doi.org/10.4088/JCP.19m13191.
Hanania T, Manfredi P, Inturrisi C, et al. (2020) The NMDA
antagonist dextromethadone acutely improves depressive
like behavior in the forced swim test performance of rats.
AA Rev Public Health 34: 119–38.
Hasler G (2020) Toward specific ways to combine ketamine
and psychotherapy in treating depression. CNS Spectrums
25: 445–7.
Ibrahim L, Diaz Granados N, Franco-Chaves J (2012) Course
of improvement in depressive symptoms to a single
intravenous infusion of ketamine vs. add-on riluzole:
results from a 4-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1526–33.
Li N, Lee, Lin RJ, et al. (2010) mTor-dependent synapse
formation underlies the rapid antidepressant effects of
NMDA antgonists. Science 329: 959–64.
Monteggia LM, Gideons E, Kavalali EG (2013) The role
of eukaryotic elongation factor 2 kinase in rapid
antidepressant action of ketamine. Biol Psychiatry 73:
1199–203.
Mosa-Sava RN, Murdock MH, Parekh PK, et al. (2019)
Sustained rescue of prefrontal circuit dysfunction by
antidepressant induced spine formation. Science 364: doi:
10.1126/Science.aat80732019.
Murrough JW, Perez AM, Pillemer S, et al. (2013) Rapid and
longer-term antidepressant effects of repeated ketamine
infusions in treatment resistant major depression. Biol
Psychiatry 74: 250–6.
O’Gorman C, Iosifescu DV, Jones A, et al. (2018) Clinical
development of AXS-05 for treatment resistant depression
and agitation associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Abstract,
American Society of Clinical Psychopharmacology Annual
Meeting.
O’Gorman C, Jones A, Iosifescu DV, et al. (2020) Efficacy
and safety of AXS-05, an oral NMDA receptor antagonist
586

with multimodal activity in major depressive disorder:
results from the GEMINI phase 3, double blind placebocontrolled trial. Abstract, American Society of Clinical
Psychopharmacology Annual Meeting.
Phillips JL, Norris S, Talbot J, et al. (2019) Single, repeated and
maintenance ketamine infusions for treatment resistant
depression: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry
176: 401–9.
Price RB, Nock MK, Charney DS, Mathew SJ (2009) Effects
of intravenous ketamine on explicit and implicit measures
of suicidality in treatment-resistant depression. Biol
Psychiatry 66: 522–6.
Salvadore G, Cornwell BR, Sambataro F, et al.
(2010) Anterior cingulate desynchronization and
functional connectivity with the amygdala during a
working memory task predict rapid antidepressant
response to ketamine. Neuropsychopharmacology 35:
1415–22.
Stahl SM (2013) Mechanism of action of ketamine. CNS
Spectrums 18: 171–4.
Stahl SM (2013) Mechanism of action of dextromethorphan/
quinidine: comparison with ketamine. CNS Spectrums 18:
225–7.
Stahl SM (2016) Dextromethorphan–quinidine-responsive
pseudobulbar affect (PBA): psychopharmacological model
for wide-ranging disorders of emotional expression? CNS
Spectrums 21: 419–23.
Stahl SM (2019) Mechanism of action of dextromethorphan/
bupropion: a novel NMDA antagonist with multimodal
activity. CNS Spectrums 24: 461–6.
Wajs E, Aluisio L, Holder R, et al. (2020) Esketamine nasal
spray plus oral antidepressant in patients with treatment
resistant depression: assessment of long term safety in a
phase 3 open label study (SUSTAIN2). J Clin Psychiatry 81:
19m12891.
Williams NR, Heifets B, Blasey C, et al. (2018) Attenuation
of antidepressant effects of ketamine by opioid receptor
antagonism. Am J Psychiatry 175: 1205–15
Zarate Jr. CA, Brutsche NE, Ibrahim L (2012) Replication of
ketamine’s antidepressant efficacy in bipolar depression:
a randomized controlled add-on trial. Biol Psychiatry 71:
939–46.

Mood Disorder Treatments: Updates and
Other Newer Drugs
Alvarez E, Perez V, Dragheim M, Loft H, Artigas F (2012)
A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, active
reference study of Lu AA21004 in patients with major
depressive disorder. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 15:
589–600.


<<<PAGE 603>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

BALANCE investigators and collaborators, et al. (2010)
Lithium plus valproate combination therapy versus
monotherapy for relapse prevention in bipolar I disorder
(BALANCE): a randomized open-label trial. Lancet 375:
385–95.
Baldessarini RJ, Tondo L, Vazquez GH (2019) Pharmacological
treatment of adult bipolar disorder. Mol Psychiatry 24:
198–217.
Bang-Andersen B, Ruhland T, Jorgensen M, et al. (2011)
Discovery of 1-[2-(2,4-dimethylphenylsulfanyl)phenyl]
piperazine (LuAA21004): a novel multimodal compound
for the treatment of major depressive disorder. J Med Chem
54: 3206–21.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Day CMG, et al.
(2018) Psilocybin with psychological support for
treatment-resistant depression: six month follow up.
Psychopharmacology 235: 399–408.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Rucker J, et al. (2016)
Psilocybin with psychological support for treatment
resistant depression: an open label feasibility study. Lancet
Psychiatry 3: 619–27.
Carhart-Harris RL, Goodwin GM (2017) The therapeutic
potential of psychedelic drugs: past, present and future,
Neuropsychopharmacology 42: 2105–13.
Carhart-Harris RL, Leech R, Williams TM, et al. (2012)
Implications for psychedelic assisted psychotherapy:
a functional magnetic resonance imaging study
with psilocybin. Br J Psychiatry: doi:10.1192/bjp.
bp.111.103309.
Chiu CT, Chuan DM (2010) Molecular actions and therapeutic
potential of lithium in preclinical and clinical studies of
CNS disorders. Pharmacol Ther 128: 281–304.
Cipriani A, Pretty H, Hawton K, Geddes JR (2005) Lithium in
the prevention of suicidal behavior and all-cause mortality
in patients with mood disorders: a systematic review of
randomized trials. Am J Psychiatry 162: 1805–19.
Frye MA, Grunze H, Suppes T, et al. (2007) A placebocontrolled evaluation of adjunctive modafinil in the
treatment of bipolar depression. Am J Psychiatry 164:
1242–9.
Grady M, Stahl SM (2012) Practical guide for prescribing
MAOI: Debunking myths and removing barriers. CNS
Spectrums 17: 2–10.
Mork A, Pehrson A, Brennum LT, et al. (2012)
Pharmacological effects of Lu AA21004: a novel
multimodal compound for the treatment of major
depressive disorder. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 340: 666–75.
Pasquali L, Busceti CL, Fulceri F, Paparelli A, Fornai F (2010)
Intracellular pathways underlying the effects of lithium.
Behav Pharmacol 21: 473–92.

Perlis RH, Ostacher MJ, Goldberg JF, et al. (2010) Transition
to mania during treatment of bipolar depression.
Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 2545–52.
Pompili M, Vazquez GH, Forte A, Morrissette DA, Stahl
SM (2020) Pharmacological treatment of mixed
states. Psychiatr Clin N Am 43: 157–86. doi:10.1016/j.
psc.2019.10.015
Schwartz TL, Siddiqui US, Stahl SM (2011) Vilazodone: a
brief pharmacologic and clinical review of the novel SPARI
(serotonin partial agonist and reuptake inhibitor). Ther
Adv Psychopharmacol 1: 81–7.
Settimo L, Taylor D (2018) Evaluating the dose-dependent
mechanism of action of trazodone by estimation of
occupancies for different brain neurotransmitter targets. J
Psychopharmacol 32: 960104.
Stahl SM (2009) Mechanism of action of trazodone: a
multifunctional drug. CNS Spectrums 14: 536–46.
Stahl SM (2012) Psychotherapy as an epigenetic “drug”:
psychiatric therapeutics target symptoms linked to
malfunctioning brain circuits with psychotherapy as well
as with drugs. J Clin Pharm Ther 37: 249–53.
Stahl SM (2014) Mechanism of action of the SPARI
vilazodone: (serotonin partial agonist reuptake inhibitor).
CNS Spectrums 19: 105–9.
Stahl SM (2014) Mechanism of action of agomelatine:
a novel antidepressant exploiting synergy between
monoaminergic and melatonergic properties. CNS
Spectrums 19: 207–12.
Stahl SM (2015) Modes and nodes explain the mechanism
of action of vortioxetine, a multimodal agent (MMA):
enhancing serotonin release by combining serotonin
(5HT) transporter inhibition with actions at 5HT receptors
(5HT1A, 5HT1B, 5HT1D, 5HT7 receptors). CNS Spectrums
20: 93–7.
Stahl SM (2015) Modes and nodes explain the mechanism of
action of vortioxetine, multimodal agent (MMA): actions
at serotonin receptors may enhance downstream release of
four pro-cognitive neurotransmitters. CNS Spectrums 20:
515–19.
Stahl SM, Fava M, Trivedi M (2010) Agomelatine in the
treatment of major depressive disorder: an 8 week,
multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin
Psychiatry 71: 616–26.
Undurraga J, Baldessarini RJ, Valenti M, et al. (2012) Bipolar
depression: clinical correlates of receiving antidepressants.
J Affect Disord 139: 89–93.
Zajecka J, Schatzberg A, Stahl SM, et al. (2010) Efficacy and
safety of agomelatine in the treatment of major depressive
disorder: a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial. J Clin Psychopharmacol 30: 135–44.

587


<<<PAGE 604>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Chapter 8 (Anxiety and Trauma)
Anxiety Disorders: Psychopharmacology
and Psychotherapy
Batelaan NM, Van Balkom AJLM, Stein DJ (2010) Evidencebased pharmacotherapy of panic disorder: an update. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol 15: 403–15.
De Oliveira IR, Schwartz T, Stahl SM (eds.) (2014) Integrating
Psychotherapy and Psychopharmacology. New York, NY:
Routledge Press.
Etkin A, Prater KE, Hoeft F, et al. (2010) Failure of anterior
cingulate activation and connectivity with the amygdala
during implicit regulation of emotional processing in
generalized anxiety disorder. Am J Psychiatry 167: 545–54.
Monk S, Nelson EE, McClure EB, et al. (2006) Ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex activation and attentional bias in
response to angry faces in adolescents with generalized
anxiety disorder. Am J Psychiatry 163: 1091–7.
Otto MW, Basden SL, Leyro TM, McHugh K, Hofmann
SG (2007) Clinical perspectives on the combination of
D-cycloserine and cognitive behavioral therapy for the
treatment of anxiety disorders. CNS Spectrums 12: 59–61.
Otto MW, Tolin DF, Simon NM, et al. (2010) Efficacy of Dcycloserine for enhancing response to cognitive-behavior
therapy for panic disorder. Biol Psychiatry 67: 365–70.
Stahl SM (2010) Stahl’s Illustrated: Anxiety and PTSD.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl SM (2012) Psychotherapy as an epigenetic “drug”:
psychiatric therapeutics target symptoms linked to
malfunctioning brain circuits with psychotherapy as well
as with drugs. J Clin Pharm Ther 37: 249–53.
Stahl SM, Moore BA (eds.) (2013) Anxiey Disorders: A Guide
for Integrating Psychopharmacology and Psychotherapy.
New York, NY: Routledge Press.

Stress/Early Life Adversity
Chen Y, Baram TZ (2016) Toward understanding how early life
stress reprograms cognitive and emotional brain networks.
Neuropsychopharm Rev 41: 187–296.
Hanson JL, Nacewicz BM, Suggerer MJ, et al. (2015)
Behavioral problems after early life stress: contributions
of the hippocampus and amygdala. Biol Psychiatry 77:
314–23.
Kundakavic M, Champagne FA (2015) Early life
experience, epigenetics and the developing brain.
Neuropsychopharmacol Rev 40: 141–53.
Marusak HA, Martin K, Etkin A, et al. (2015) Childhood trauma
exposure disrupts the automatic regulation of emotional
processing. Neuropsychopharmacology 40: 1250–8.
588

McEwen BS, Nasca C, Gray JD (2016) Stress effects on
neuronal structure: hippocampus, amygdala and prefrontal
cortex. Neuropsychopharm Rev 41: 3–23.
McLaughlin KA, Sheridan MA, Gold AL, et al. (2016)
Maltreatment exposure, brain structure and
fear conditioning in children and adolescents.
Neuropsychopharmacology 41: 1956–65.
Teicher MH, Anderson CM, Ohashi K, et al. (2014) Childhood
maltreatment: altered network centrality of cingulate
precuneus, temporal pole and insula. Biol Psychiatry 76:
297–305.
Tyrka AR, Burgers DE, Philip NS (2013) The neurobiological
correlates of childhood adversity and implications for
treatment. Acta Psychiatr Scand 138: 434–47.
Zhang JY, Liu TH, He Y, et al. (2019) Chronic stress remodels
synapses in an amygdala circuit-specific manner. Biol
Psychiatry 85: 189–201.

Fear Conditioning/Fear Extinction/
Reconsolidation/Circuitry
Anderson KC, Insel TR (2006) The promise of extinction
research for the prevention and treatment of anxiety
disorders. Biol Psychiatry 60: 319–21.
Barad M, Gean PW, Lutz B. (2006) The role of the amygdala
in the extinction of conditioned fear. Biol Psychiatry 60:
322–8.
Bonin RP, De Koninck Y (2015) Reconsolidation and the
regulation of plasticity: moving beyond memory. Trends
Neurosci 38: 336–44.
Dejean C, Courtin J, Rozeaske RR, et al. (2015) Neuronal
circuits for fear expression and recovery: recent advances
and potential therapeutic strategies. Biol Psychiatry 78:
298–306.
Feduccia AA, Mithoefer MC (2018) MDMA-assisted
psychotherapy for PTSD: are memory reconsolidation
and fear extinction underlying mechanisms. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 84: 221–8.
Fox AS, Oler JA, Tromp DPM, et al. (2015) Extending the
amygdala in theories of threat processing. Trends Neurosci
38: 319–29.
Giustino RF, Seemann JR, Acca GM, et al. (2017) Beta
adrenoceptor blockade in the basolateral amygdala, but
not the medial prefrontal cortex, rescues the immediate
extinction deficit. Neuropsychopharmacol 42: 2537–44.
Graham BM, Milad MR (2011) The study of fear extinction:
implications for anxiety disorder. Am J Psychiatry 168:
1255–65.
Hartley CA, Phelps EA (2010) Changing fear:
the neurocircuitry of emotion regulation.
Neuropsychopharmacol Rev 35: 136–46.


<<<PAGE 605>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Haubrich J, Crestani AP, Cassini LF, et al. (2015)
Reconsolidation allows fear memory to be updated to a
less aversive level through the incorporation of appetitive
information. Neuropsychopharmacology 40: 315–26.
Hermans D, Craske MG, Mineka S, Lovibond PF (2006)
Extinction in human fear conditioning. Biol Psychiatry 60:
361–8.
Holbrook TL, Galarneau ME, Dye JL, et al. (2010) Morphine
use after combat injury in Iraq and post traumatic stress
disorder. New Engl J Med 362: 110–17.
Keding TJ, Herringa RJ (2015) Abnormal structure of fear
circuitry in pediatric post traumatic stress disorder.
Neuropsychopharmacology 40: 537–45.
Krabbe S, Grundemann J, Luthi A (2018) Amygdala inhibitory
circuits regulate associative fear conditioning. Biol
Psychiatry 83: 800–9.
Kroes MCW, Tona KD, den Ouden HEM, et al. (2016)
How administration of the beta blocker propranolol
before extinction can prevent the return of fear.
Neuropsychopharmacology 41: 1569–78.
Kwapis JL, Wood MA (2014) Epigenetic mechanisms in fear
conditioning: implications for treating post traumatic
stress disorder. Trends Neurosci 37: 706–19.
Lin HC, Mao SC, Su CL, et al. (2010) Alterations of excitatory
transmission in the lateral amygdala during expression and
extinction of fear memory. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 13:
335–45.
Linnman C, Zeidan MA, Furtak SC, et al. (2012) Resting
amygdala and medial prefrontal metabolism predicts
functional activation of the fear extinction circuit. Am J
Psychiatry 169: 415–23.
Mahan AL, Ressler KJ (2012) Fear conditioning, synaptic
plasticity and the amygdala: implications for post
traumatic stress disorder. Trends Neurosci 35: 24–35.
Mithoefer MC, Wagner MT, Mithoefer AT, et
al. (2011) The safety and efficacy of {+/−}
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine-assisted
psychotherapy in subjects with chronic, treatment-resistant
posttraumatic stress disorder: the first randomized
controlled pilot study. J Psychopharmacol 25: 439–52.
Myers KM, Carlezon WA Jr. (2012) D-Cycloserine effects on
extinction of conditioned responses to drug-related cues.
Biol Psychiatry 71: 947–55.
Onur OA, Schlaepfer TE, Kukolja J, et al. (2010) The N-methylD-aspartate receptor co-agonist D-cycloserine facilitates
declarative learning and hippocampal activity in humans.
Biol Psychiatry 67: 1205–11.
Otis JM, Werner CR, Muelier D (2015) Noradrenergic
regulation of fear and drug-associated memory
reconsolidation. Neuropsychopharmacology 40: 793–803.

Ressler KJ (2020) Translating across circuits and genetics
toward progress in fear- and anxiety-related disorders. Am
J Psychiatry 177: 214–22.
Sandkuher J, Lee J (2013) How to erase memory traces of pain
and fear. Trends Neurosci 36: 343–52.
Schwabe L, Nader K, Pruessner JC (2011) Reconsolidation of
human memory: brain mechanisms and clinical relevance.
Biol Psychiatry 76: 274–80.
Schwabe L, Nader K, Wold OT (2012) Neural signature of
reconsolidation impairments by propranolol in humans.
Biol Psychiatry 71: 380–6.
Shin LM, Liberzon I (2010) The neurocircuitry of fear, stress
and anxiety disorders. Neuropsychopharmacol Rev 35:
169–91.
Soeter M, Kindt M (2012) Stimulation of the noradrenergic
system during memory formation impairs extinction
learning but not the disruption of reconsolidation.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1204–15.
Stern CAJ, Gazarini L, Takahashi RN, et al. (2012)
On disruption of fear memory by reconsolidation
blockade: evidence from cannabidiol treatment.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 2132–42.
Tamminga CA (2006) The anatomy of fear extinction. Am J
Psychiatry 163: 961.
Tronson NC, Corcoran KA, Jovasevic V, et al. (2011) Fear
conditioning and extinction: emotional states encoded
by distinct signaling pathways. Trends Neurosci 35:
145–55.

PTSD
Aupperle RL, Allard CB, Grimes EM, et al. (2012) Dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex activation during emotional anticipation
and neuropsychological performance in posttraumatic
stress disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 69: 360–71.
Bonne O, Vythilingam M, Inagaki M, et al. (2008) Reduced
posterior hippocampal volume in posttraumatic stress
disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 69: 1087–91.
De Kleine RA, Hendriks GJ, Kusters WJC, Broekman TG,
van Minnen A (2012) A randomized placebo-controlled
trial of D-cycloserine to enhance exposure therapy
for posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry 71:
962–8.
Feduccia AA, Mithoefer MC (2018) MDMA-assisted
psychotherapy for PTSD: are memory reconsolidation
and fear extinction underlying mechanisms. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 84: 221–8.
Ipser JC, Stein DJ (2012) Evidence-based pharmacotherapy
of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol 15: 825–40.

589


<<<PAGE 606>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Jovanovic T, Ressler KJ (2010) How the neurocircuitry and
genetics of fear inhibition may inform our understanding
of PTSD. Am J Psychiatry 167: 648–62.
Mercer KB, Orcutt HK, Quinn JF, et al. (2012) Acute and
posttraumatic stress symptoms in a prospective gene X
environment study of a university campus shooting. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 69: 89–97.
Mithoefer MC, Wagner MT, Mithoefer AT, et
al. (2011) The safety and efficacy of {+/−}
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine-assisted
psychotherapy in subjects with chronic, treatment-resistant
posttraumatic stress disorder: the first randomized
controlled pilot study. J Psychopharmacol 25: 439–52.
Orr SP, Milad MR, Metzger LJ (2006) Effects of beta blockade,
PTSD diagnosis, and explicit threat on the extinction
and retention of an aversively conditioned response. Biol
Psychol 732: 262–71.
Perusini JN, Meyer EM, Long VA, et al. (2016) Induction and
expression of fear sensitization caused by acute traumatic
stress. Neuropsychopharm Rev 41: 45–57.
Raskind MA, Peskind ER, Hoff DJ (2007) A parallel
group placebo controlled study of prazosin for trauma
nightmares and sleep disturbance in combat veterans with
post-traumatic stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry 61: 928–34.
Rauch SL, Shin LM, Phelps EA. (2006) Neurocircuitry models
of posttraumatic stress disorder and extinction: human
neuroimaging research – past, present and future. Biol
Psychiatry 60: 376–82.
Reist C, Streja E, Tang CC, et al. (2020) Prazocin for treatment
of post traumatic stress disorder: a systematic review
and met analysis. CNS Spectrums: doi.org/10.1017/
S1092852920001121.
Sandweiss DA, Slymen DJ, Leardmann CA, et al. (2011)
Preinjury psychiatric status, injury severity, and
postdeployment posttraumatic stress disorder. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 68: 496–504.
Sauve W, Stahl SM (2019) Psychopharmacological and
neuromodulation treatment of PTSD. In Treating PTSD in
Military Personnel, 2nd edition, Moore BA and Penk WE
(eds.), Guilford Press: 155–72.
Shin LM, Bush G, Milad MR, et al. (2011) exaggerated
activation of dorsal anterior cingulate cortex during
cognitive interference: a monozygotic twin study of
posttraumatic stress disorder. Am J Psychiatry 168: 979–85.
Stein MB, McAllister TW (2009) Exploring the convergence
of posttraumatic stress disorder and mild traumatic brain
injury. Am J Psychiatry 166: 768–76.
Vaiva G, Ducrocq F, Jezequel K, et al. (2003) Immediate
treatment with propranolol decreases postraumatic stress
disorder two months after trauma. Biol Psychiatry 54:
947–9.
590

van Zuiden M, Geuze E, Willemen HLD, et al. (2011) Preexisting high glucocorticoid receptor number predicting
development of posttraumatic stress symptoms after
military deployment. Am J Psychiatry 168: 89–96.

Chapter 9 (Pain)
Apkarian AV, Sosa Y, Sonty S, et al. (2004) Chronic back pain
is associated with decreased prefrontal and thalamic gray
matter density. J Neurosci 24: 10410–15.
Bar KJ, Wagner G, Koschke M, et al. (2007) Increased
prefrontal activation during pain perception in major
depression. Biol Psychiatry 62: 1281–7.
Benarroch EE (2007) Sodium channels and pain. Neurology
68: 233–6.
Brandt MR, Beyer CE, Stahl SM (2012) TRPV1 antagonists
and chronic pain: beyond thermal perception.
Pharmaceuticals 5: 114–32.
Davies A, Hendrich J, Van Minh AT, et al. (2007) Functional
biology of the alpha 2 beta subunits of voltage gated
calcium channels. Trends Pharmacol Sci 28: 220–8.
Descalzi G, Ikegami D, Ushijima T, et al. (2015) Epigenetic
mechanisms of chronic pain Trends Neurosci 38: 237–46.
Dooley DJ, Taylor CP, Donevan S, Feltner D (2007) Ca2+
Channel alpha 2 beta ligands: novel modulators of
neurotransmission. Trends Pharmacol Sci 28: 75–82.
Farrar JT (2006) Ion channels as therapeutic targets in
neuropathic pain. J Pain 7 (Suppl 1): S38–47.
Gellings-Lowe N, Stahl SM (2012) Antidepressants in pain, anxiety
and depression. In Pain Comorbidities, Giamberardino MA and
Jensen TS (eds.), Washington, DC: IASP Press, 409–23.
Gracely RH, Petzke F, Wolf JM, Clauw DJ (2002) Functional
magnetic resonance imaging evidence of augmented
pain processing in fibromyalgia. Arthritis Rheum 46:
1222–343.
Khoutorsky A, Price TJ (2018) Translational control
mechanism in persistent pain. Trends Neuosci 41: 100–14.
Luo C, Kuner T, Kuner R (2014) Synaptic plasticity in
pathological pain. Trends Neurosci 37: 343–55.
McLean SA, Williams DA, Stein PK, et al. (2006) Cerebrospinal
fluid corticotropin-releasing factor concentration is
associated with pain but not fatigue symptoms in patients
with fibromyalgia. Neuropsychopharmacology 31: 2776–82.
Nickel FT, Seifert F, Lanz S, Maihofner C (2012) Mechanisms
of neuropathic pain. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 22: 81–91.
Norman E, Potvin S, Gaumond I, et al. (2011) Pain inhibition
is deficient in chronic widespread pain but normal in
major depressive disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 72: 219–24.
Ogawa K, Tateno A, Arakawa R, et al. (2014) Occupancy
of serotonin transporter by tramadol: a positron


<<<PAGE 607>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

emission tomography study with 11C-DSDB. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol 17: 845–50.
Stahl SM (2009) Fibromyalgia: pathways and neurotransmitters.
Hum Psychopharmacol 24: S11–17.
Stahl SM, Eisenach JC, Taylor CP, et al. (2013) The diverse
therapeutic actions of pregabalin: is a single mechanism
responsible for several pharmacologic activities. Trends
Pharmacol Sci 34: 332–9.
Wall PD, Melzack R (eds.) (1999) Textbook of Pain, 4th edition.
London: Harcourt Publishers Limited.
Williams DA, Gracely RH (2006) Functional magnetic
resonance imaging findings in fibromyalgia. Arthritis Res
Ther 8: 224–32.

Chapter 10 (Sleep/Wake Disorders
and Their Treatment Including
Histamine and Orexin)
Histamine
Broderick M, Masri T (2011) Histamine H3 receptor (H3R)
antagonists and inverse agonists in the treatment of sleep
disorders. Curr Pharm Design 17: 1426–9.
Kotanska M, Kuker KJ, Szcaepanska K, et al. (2018) The
histamine H3 receptor inverse agonist pitolisant reduces
body weight in obese mice. Arch Pharmacol 391: 875–81.
Nomura H, Mizuta H, Norimoto H, et al. (2019) Central
histamine boosts perirhinal cortex activity and restores
forgotten object memories. Biol Psychiatry 86: 230–9.
Romig A, Vitran G, Giudice TL, et al. (2018) Profile of
pitolisant in the management of narcolepsy: design,
development and place in therapy. Drug Des Devel Ther 12:
2665–75.
Schwartz JC (2011) The histamine H3 receptor: from discovery
to clinical trials with pitolisant. Br J Pharmacol 163:
713–21.
Szakacs Z, Dauvilliers Y, Mikhaulov V, et al. (2017) Safety
and efficacy of pitolisant on cataplexy in patients with
narcolepsy: a randomized, double-blind placebo controlled
trial. Lancet Neurol 16: 200–7.

Orexin
Bennett T, Bray D, Neville MW (2014) Suvorexant, a dual
orexin receptor antagonist for the management of
insomnia. PT 39: 264–6.
Bettica P, Squassante L, Groeger JA, et al. (2012) Differential
effects of a dual orexin receptor antagonist (SB-649868) and
zolpidem on sleep initiation and consolidation, SWS, REM
sleep, and EEG power spectra in a model of situational
insomnia. Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1224–33.

Beuckmann CT, Suzuki M, Ueno T, et al. (2017) In vitro and
in silico characterization of lemborexant (E2006), a novel
dual orexin receptor antagonist. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 362:
287–95.
Beuckmann CT, Ueno T, Nakagawa M, et al. (2019) Preclinical
in vivo characterization of lemborexant (E2006) a novel
dual orexin receptor antagonist for sleep/wake regulation.
Sleep: doi 10.1093/sleep/zsz076.
Bonnavion P, de Lecea L (2010) Hypocretins in the control
of sleep and wakefulness. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 10:
174–9.
Bourgin P, Zeitzer JM, Mignot E (2008) CSF hypocretin-1
assessment in sleep and neurological disorders. Lancet
Neurol 7: 649–62.
Brisbare-Roch C, Dingemanse J, Koberstein R, et al. (2007)
Promotion of sleep by targeting the orexin system in rats,
dogs and humans. Nat Med 13: 150–5.
Cao M, Guilleminault C (2011) Hypocretin and its emerging
role as a target for treatment of sleep disorders. Curr Neurol
Neurosci Rep 11: 227–34.
Citrome L (2014) Suvorexant for insomnia: a systematic
review of the efficacy and safety profile for this newly
approved hypnotic – what is the number needed to treat,
number needed to harm and likelihood to be helped or
harmed? Int J Clin Pract 68: 1429–41.
Coleman PJ, Schreier JD, Cox CD, et al. (2012) Discovery
of [(2R, 5R)-5-{[(5‐fluoropyridin‐2‐yl)oxy]methyl}‐2methylpiperidin‐1‐yl] [5-methyl-2-(pyrimidin-2-yl)phenyl]
methanone (MK-6096): a dual orexin receptor antagonist
with potent sleep-promoting properties. Chem Med 7,
415–24.
Dauvilliers Y, Abril B, Mas E, et al. (2009) Normalization
of hypocretin-1 in narcolepsy after intravenous
immunoglobulin treatment. Neurology 73: 1333–4.
de Lecea L, Huerta R (2015) Hypocretin (orexin) regulation of
sleep-to-wake transitions. Front Pharmacol 5: 1–7.
DiFabio R, Pellacani A, Faedo S (2011) Discovery process
and pharmacological characterization of a novel dual
orexin 1 and orexin 2 receptor antagonist useful for
treatment of sleep disorders. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 21:
5562–7.
Dubey AK, Handu SS, Mediratta PK (2015) Suvorexant:
the first orexin receptor antagonist to treat insomnia. J
Pharmacol Pharmacother 6: 118–21.
Equihua AC, De la Herran-Arita AK, Drucker-Colin R (2013)
Orexin receptor antagonists as therapeutic agents for
insomnia. Front Pharmacol 4: 1–10.
Gentile TA, Simmons SJ, Watson MN, et al. (2018) Effects
of suvorexant, a dual orexin hypocretin receptor
antagonist on impulsive behavior associated with cocaine.
Neuropsychopharmacology 43: 1001–9.
591


<<<PAGE 608>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Gotter AL, Winrow CJ, Brunner J, et al. (2013) The duration
of sleep promoting efficacy by dual orexin receptor
antagonists is dependent upon receptor occupancy
threshold. BMC Neurosci 14: 90.

Stahl SM (2016) Mechanism of action of suvorexant. CNS
Spectrums 21: 215–18.

Griebel G, Decobert M, Jacquet A, et al. (2012) Awakening
properties of newly discovered highly selective H3
receptor antagonists in rats. Behav Brain Res 232:
416–20.

Steiner MA, Lecourt H, Strasser DS, Brisbare-Roch C, Jenck
F (2011) Differential effects of the dual orexin receptor
antagonist almorexant and the GABAA-α1 receptor
modulator zolpidem, alone or combined with ethanol, on
motor performance in the rat. Neuropsychopharmacology
36: 848–56.

Herring WJ, Connor KM, Ivgy-May N, et al. (2016) Suvorexant
in patients with insomnia: results from two 3-month
randomized controlled clinical trials. Biol Psychiatry 79:
136–48.

Vermeeren A, Jongen S, Murphy P, et al. (2019) On the
road driving performance the morning after bedtime
administration of lemborexant in healthy adult and elderly
volunteers. Sleep: doi: 10.1093.sleep/zsy260.

Hoever P, Dorffner G, Benes H, et al. (2012) Orexin receptor
antagonism, a new sleep-enabling paradigm: a proof-ofconcept clinical trial. Clin Pharmacol Ther 91: 975–85.

Willie JT, Chemelli RM, Sinton CM, et al. (2003) Distinct
narcolepsy syndromes in orexin recepter-2 and orexin null
mice: molecular genetic dissection of non-REM and REM
sleep regulatory processes. Neuron 38: 715–30.

Hoyer D, Jacobson LH (2013) Orexin in sleep, addiction, and
more: is the perfect insomnia drug at hand? Neuropeptides
47: 477–88.
Jones BE, Hassani OK (2013) The role of Hcrt/Orx and
MCH neurons in sleep–wake state regulation. Sleep 36:
1769–72.
Krystal AD, Benca RM, Kilduff TS (2013) Understanding the
sleep–wake cycle: sleep, insomnia, and the orexin system. J
Clin Psychiatry 74 (Suppl 1): 3–20.
Mahler SV, Moorman DE, Smith RJ, et al. (2014) Motivational
activation: a unifying hypothesis of orexin/hypocretin
function. Nat Neurosci 17: 1298–303.
Michelson D, Snyder E, Paradis E, et al. (2014) Safety and
efficacy of suvorexant during 1-year treatment of insomnia
with subsequent abrupt treatment discontinuation: a phase
3 randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Lancet Neurol 13: 461–71.
Nixon JP, Mavanji V, Butterick TA, et al. (2015) Sleep
disorders, obesity, and aging: the role of orexin. Aging Res
Rev 20: 63–73.
Rosenberg R, Murphy P, Zammit G, et al. (2019) Comparison
of lemborexant with placebo and zolpidem tartrate
extended release for the treatment of older adults with
insomnia disorder: a phase 3 randomized clinical trial.
JAMA Network Open 2: e1918254

Winrow CJ, Gotter AL, Cox CD, et al. (2012) Pharmacological
characterization of MK-6096: a dual orexin receptor
antagonist for insomnia. Neuropharmacology 62: 978–87.
Yeoh JW, Campbell EJ, James MH, et al. (2014) Orexin
antagonists for neuropsychiatric disease: progress and
potential pitfalls. Front Neurosci 8: 1–12.

Sleep/General/Disorders/Insomia/Restless
Legs
Abadie P, Rioux P, Scatton B, et al. (1996) Central
benzodiazepine receptor occupancy by zolpidem in the
human brain as assessed by positron emission tomography.
Science 295: 35–44.
Allen RP, Burchell BJ, MacDonald B, et al. (2009) Validation
of the self-completed Cambridge–Hopkins questionnaire
(CH-RLSq) for ascertainment of restless legs syndrome
(RLS) in a population survey. Sleep Med 10: 1079–100.
Bastien CH, Vallieres A, Morin CM (2001) Validation of
the Insomnia Severity Index as an outcome measure for
insomnia research. Sleep Med 2: 297–307.
Bonnet MH, Burton GG, Arand DL (2014) Physiological and
medical findings in insomnia: implications for diagnosis
and care. Sleep Med Rev 18: 95–8.

Ruoff C, Cao M, Guilleminault C (2011) Hypocretin
antagonists in insomnia treatment and beyond. Curr
Pharm Design 17: 1476–82.

Burke RA, Faulkner MA (2011) Gabapentin enacarbil for the
treatment of restless legs syndrome (RLS). Expert Opin
Pharmacother 12: 2905–14.

Sakurai T, Mieda M (2011) Connectomics of orexinproducing neurons: interface of systems of emotion,
energy homeostasis and arousal. Trends Pharmacol Sci 32:
451–62.

Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF III, Monk TH, et al. (1989) The
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: a new instrument for
psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res 28:
193–213.

Scammel TE, Winrow CJ (2011) Orexin receptors:
pharmacology and therapeutic opportunities. Annu Rev
Pharmacol Toxicol 51: 243–66.

Cappuccio FP, D’Elia L, Strazzullo P, et al. (2010) Sleep
duration and all-cause mortality: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of prospective studies. Sleep 33: 585–92.

592


<<<PAGE 609>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Chahine LM, Chemali ZN (2006) Restless legs syndrome: a
review. CNS Spectrums 11: 511–20.
Dawson GR, Collinson N, Atack JR (2005) Development of
subtype selective GABAA modulators. CNS Spectrums 10:
21–7.
De Lecea L, Winkelman JW (2020) Sleep and neuropsychiatric
illness. Neuropsychopharmacol Rev 45: 1–216.
Drover DR (2004) Comparative pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of short-acting hypnosedatives –
zaleplon, zolpidem and zopiclone. Clin Pharmacokinet 43:
227–38.
Durmer JS, Dinges DF (2005) Neurocognitive consequences of
sleep deprivation. Semin Neurol 25: 117–29.
Espana RA, Scammell TE (2011) Sleep neurobiology from a
clinical perspective. Sleep 34: 845–58.
Fava M, McCall WV, Krystal A, et al. (2006) Eszopiclone
co-administered with fluoxetine in patients with insomnia
coexisting with major depressive disorder. Biol Psychiatry
59: 1052–60.
Freedom T (2011) Sleep-related movement disorders. Dis Mon
57: 438-47.
Frenette E (2011) Restless legs syndrome in children: a review
and update on pharmacological options. Curr Pharm
Design 17: 1436–42.
Garcia-Borreguero D, Allen R, Kohnen R, et al. (2010) Loss
of response during long-term treatment of restless legs
syndrome: guidelines approved by the International
Restless Legs Syndrome Study Group for use in clinical
trials. Sleep Med 11: 956–9.
Green CB, Takahashi JS, Bass J (2008) The meter of
metabolism. Cell 134: 728–42.

Nofzinger EA, Buysse DJ, Germain A, et al. (2004) Functional
neuroimaging evidence for hyperarousal in insomnia. Am J
Psychiatry 161: 2126–9.
Nutt D, Stahl SM (2010) Searching for perfect sleep: the
continuing evolution of GABAA receptor modulators as
hypnotics. J Psychopharmacol 24: 1601–2.
Orzel-Gryglewska J (2010) Consequences of sleep deprivation.
Int J Occup Med Environ Health 23: 95–114.
Palma JA, Urrestarazu E, Iriarte J (2013) Sleep loss as a risk
factor for neurologic disorders: a review. Sleep Med 14:
229–36.
Parthasarathy S, Vasquez MM, Halonen M, et al. (2015)
Persistent insomnia is associated with mortality risk. Am J
Med 128: 268–75.
Pinto Jr LR, Alves RC, Caixeta E, et al. (2010) New
guidelines for diagnosis and treatment of insomnia. Arq
Neuropsiquiatr 68: 666–75.
Plante DT (2017) Sleep propensity in psychiatric
hypersomnolence: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of multiple sleep latency findings. Sleep Med Rev 31: 48–57.
Reeve K, Bailes B. (2010) Insomnia in adults: etiology and
management. JNP 6: 53–60.
Richey SM, Krystal AD (2011) Pharmacological advances in
the treatment of insomnia. Curr Pharm Design 17: 1471–5.
Roth T, Roehrs T (2000) Sleep organization and regulation.
Neurology 54 (Suppl 1): S2–7.
Sahar S, Sassone-Corsi P (2009) Metabolism and cancer: the
circadian clock connection. Nature 9: 886–96.
Schutte-Rodin S, Broch L, Buysse D, et al. (2008) Clinical
guideline for the evaluation and management of chronic
insomnia in adults. J Clin Sleep Med 4: 487–504.

Harris J, Lack L, Kemo K, et al. (2012) A randomized
controlled trial of intensive sleep retraining (ISR): a brief
conditioning treatment for chronic insomnia. Sleep 35:
49–60.

Sehgal A, Mignot E (2011) Genetics of sleep and sleep
disorders. Cell 146: 194–207.

Hening W, Walters AS, Allen RP, et al. (2004) Impact,
diagnosis and treatment of restless legs syndrome (RLS) in
a primary care population: the REST (RLS Epidemiology,
Symptoms, and Treatment) Primary Care Study. Sleep Med
5: 237–46.

Thorpe AJ, Clair A, Hochman S, et al. (2011) Possible sites
of therapeutic action in restless legs syndrome: focus on
dopamine and α2δ ligands. Eur Neurol 66: 18–29.

Koffel EA, Koffel JB, Gehrman PR (2015) A meta-analysis of
group cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia. Sleep Med
Rev 19: 6–16.
Krystal AD, Walsh JK, Laska E, et al. (2003) Sustained efficacy
of eszopiclone over 6 months of nightly treatment: results
of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study in
adults with chronic insomnia. Sleep 26: 793–9.
Morin CM, Benca R (2012) Chronic insomnia. Lancet 379:
1129–41.

Tafti M (2009) Genetic aspects of normal and disturbed sleep.
Sleep Med 10: S17–21.

Vgontzas AN, Fernadez-Mendoza J, Bixler EO, et al. (2012)
Persistent insomnia: the role of objective short sleep
duration. Sleep 35: 61–8.
Wu JC, Gillin JC, Buchsbaum MS, et al. (2006) Frontal lobe
metabolic decreases with sleep deprivation not totally
reversed by recovery sleep. Neuropsychopharmacology 31:
2783–92.
Zeitzer JM, Morales-Villagran A, Maidment NT (2006)
Extracellular adenosine in the human brain during sleep
and sleep deprivation: an in vivo microdialysis study. Sleep
29: 455–61.

593


<<<PAGE 610>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Wake Disorders/Sleepiness/OSA/
Narcolepsy/Circadian/Shift Work

Carocci A, Catalano A, Sinicropi MS (2014) Melatonergic
drugs in development. Clin Pharmacol Adv Applications 6:
127–37.

Abad VC, Guilleminault C (2011) Pharmacological treatment
of obstructive sleep apnea. Curr Pharm Design 17: 1418–25.

Cauter EV, Plat L, Scharf MB, et al. (1997) Simultaneous
stimulation of slow-wave sleep and growth hormone
secretion by gamma-hydroxybutyrate in normal young
men. J Clin Invest 100: 745–53.

Adenuga O, Attarian H (2014) Treatment of disorders of
hypersomnolence. Curr Treat Options Neurol 16: 302.
Ahmed I, Thorpy M (2010) Clinical features, diagnosis and
treatment of narcolepsy. Clin Chest Med 31: 371–81.
Aloia MS, Arnedt JT, Davis JD, Riggs RL, Byrd D (2004)
Neuropsychological sequelae of obstructive sleep apnea–
hypopnea syndrome: a critical review. J Int Neuropsychol
Soc 10: 772–85.
Arallanes-Licea E, Caldelas I, De Ita-Perez D, et al. (2014)
The circadian timing system: a recent addition in the
physiological mechanisms underlying pathological and
aging processes. Aging Dis 5: 406–18.
Artioli P, Lorenzi C, Priovano A, et al. (2007) How do
genes exert their role? Period 3 gene variants and
possible influences on mood disorder phenotypes. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol 17: 587–94.
Aurora RN, Chowdhuri S, Ramar K, et al. (2012) The
treatment of central sleep apnea syndromes in adults:
practice parameters with an evidence-based literature
review and meta-analyses. Sleep 35: 17–40.
Banerjee S, Wang Y, Solt LA, et al. (2014) Pharmacological
targeting of the mammalian clock regulates sleep
architecture and emotional behaviour. Nat Commun 5: 5759.
Barger LK, Ogeil RP, Drake CL, et al. (2012) Validation of a
questionnaire to screen for shift work disorder. Sleep 35:
1693–703.
Benedetti F, Serretti A, Colombo C, et al. (2003) Influence
of CLOCK gene polymorphisms on circadian mood
fluctuation and illness recurrence in bipolar depression.
Am J Med Genet B, Neuropsychiatr Genet 123 : 23–6.
Black JE, Hull SG, Tiller J, et al. (2010) The long-term
tolerability and efficacy of armodafinil in patients with
excessive sleepiness associated with treated obstructive
sleep apnea, shift work disorder, or narcolepsy: an openlabel extension study. J Clin Sleep Med 6: 458–66.
Bogan RK (2010) Armodafinil in the treatment of excessive
sleepiness. Expert Opin Pharmacother 11: 993–1002.
Bonacci JM, Venci JV, Ghandi MA (2015) Tasimelteon
(HetliozTM): a new melatonin receptor agonist for the
treatment of non-24 sleep-wake disorder. J Pharm Pract
28: 473–8.
Brancaccio M, Enoki R, Mazuki CN, et al. (2014) Networkmediated encoding of circadian time: the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) from genes to neurons to circuits, and back.
J Neurosci 34: 15192–9.

594

Cermakian N, Lange T, Golombek D, et al. (2013) Crosstalk
between the circadian clock circuitry and the immune
system. Chronobiol Int 30: 870–88.
Cirelli C (2009) The genetic and molecular regulation of sleep:
from fruit flies to humans. Nat Rev Neurosci 10: 549–60.
Colwell CS (2011) Linking neural activity and molecular
oscillators in the SCN. Nat Rev Neurosci 12: 553–69.
Cook H et al. (2003) A 12-month, open-label, multicenter
extension trial of orally administered sodium oxybate for
the treatment of narcolepsy. Sleep 26: 31–5.
Crowley SJ, Lee C, Tseng CY, et al. (2004) Complete or partial
circadian re-entrainment improves performance, alertness,
and mood during night-shift work. Sleep 27: 1077–87.
Czeisler CA, Walsh JK, Roth T, et al. (2005) Modafinil for
excessive sleepiness associated with shift-work sleep
disorder. New Engl J Med 353: 476–86.
Dallaspezia S, Benedetti F (2011) Chronobiological therapy for
mood disorders. Expert Rev Neurother 11: 961–70.
Darwish M, Bond M, Ezzet F (2012) Armodafinil in patients
with excessive sleepiness associated with shift work
disorder: a pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic model
for predicting and comparing their concentration-effect
relationships. J Clin Pharmacol 52: 1328–42.
Darwish M, Kirby M, D’Andrea DM, et al. (2010)
Pharmacokinetics of armodafinil and modafinil after
single and multiple doses in patients with excessive
sleepiness associated with treated obstructive sleep apnea:
a randomized, open-label, crossover study. Clin Ther 32:
2074–87.
Dauvilliers Y, Tafti M (2006) Molecular genetics and treatment
of narcolepsy. Ann Med 38: 252–62.
De la Herran-Arita AK, Garcia-Garcia F (2014) Narcolepsy as
an immune-mediated disease. Sleep Disord 2014: 792687.
Dinges DF, Weaver TE (2003) Effects of modafinil on
sustained attention performance and quality of life in OSA
patients with residual sleepiness while being treated with
CPAP. Sleep Med 4: 393–402.
Dresler M, Spoormaker VI, Beitinger P, et al. (2014)
Neuroscience-driven discovery and development of sleep
therapeutics. Pharmacol Ther 141: 300–34.
Eckel-Mahan KL, Patel VR, de Mateo S, et al. (2013)
Reprogramming of the circadian clock by nutritional
challenge. Cell 155: 1464–78.


<<<PAGE 611>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Ellis CM, Monk C, Simmons A, et al. (1999) Functional
magnetic resonance imaging neuroactivation studies
in normal subjects and subjects with the narcoleptic
syndrome. Actions of modafinil. J Sleep Res 8: 85–93.

Krakow B, Ulibarri VA (2013) Prevalence of sleep breathing
complaints reported by treatment-seeking chronic insomnia
disorder patients on presentation to a sleep medical center: a
preliminary report. Sleep Breath 17: 317–22.

Epstein LJ, Kristo D, Strollo PJ, et al. (2009) Clinical guideline
for the evaluation, management and long-term care of
obstructive sleep apnea in adults. J Clin Sleep Med 5: 263–76.

Kripke DE, Nievergelt CM, Joo E, et al. (2009) Circadian
polymorphisms associated with affective disorders. J
Circadian Rhythms 27: 2.

Erman MK, Seiden DJ, Yang R, et al. (2011) Efficacy and
tolerability of armodafinil: effect on clinical condition
late in the shift and overall functioning of patients with
excessive sleepiness associated with shift work disorder.
J Occup Environ Med 53: 1460–5.

Krystal AD, Harsh JR, Yang R et al. (2010) A double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of armodafinil for excessive
sleepiness in patients with treated obstructive sleep apnea
and comorbid depression. J Clin Psychiatry 71: 32–40.

Froy O (2010) Metabolism and circadian rhythms:
implications for obesity. Endocr Rev 31: 1–24.

Lallukka T, Kaikkonen R, Harkanen T, et al. (2014) Sleep and
sickness absence: a nationally representative register-based
follow-up study. Sleep 37: 1413–25.

Golombek DA, Casiraghi LP, Agostino PV, et al. (2013) The times
they are a-changing: effects of circadian desynchronization
on physiology and disease. J Physiol Paris 107: 310–22.

Landrigan CP, Rothschild JM, Cronin JW, et al. (2004) Effect of
reducing interns work hours on serious medical errors in
intensive care units. New Engl J Med 351: 1838–48.

Guo X, Zheng L, Wang J, et al. (2013) Epidemiological
evidence for the link between sleep duration and high
blood pressure: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Sleep Med 14: 324–32.

Larson-Prior LJ, Ju Y, Galvin JE (2014) Cortical–subcortical
interactions in hypersomnia disorders: mechanisms
underlying cognitive and behavioral aspects of the sleep–
wake cycle. Front Neurol 5: 1–13.

Hampp G, Ripperger JA, Houben T, et al. (2008) Regulation
of monoamine oxidase A by circadian-clock components
implies influence on mood. Curr Biol 18: 678–83.

Laudon M, Frydman-Marom A (2014) Therapeutic effects
of melatonin receptor agonists on sleep and comorbid
disorders. Int J Mol Sci 15: 15924–50.

Harrison EM, Gorman MR (2012) Changing the waveform
of circadian rhythms: considerations for shift-work. Front
Neurol 3: 1–7.

Liira J, Verbeek JH, Costa G, et al. (2014) Pharmacological
interventions for sleepiness and sleep disturbances caused
by shift work. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8: CD009776.

Hart CL, Haney M, Vosburg SK, et al. (2006) Modafinil attentuates
disruptions in cognitive performance during simulated nightshift work. Neuropsychopharmacology 31: 1526–36.

Lim DC, Veasey SC (2010) Neural injury in sleep apnea. Curr
Neurol Neurosci Rep 10: 47–52.

He B, Peng H, Zhao Y, et al. (2011) Modafinil treatment
prevents REM sleep deprivation-induced brain function
impairment by increasing MMP-9 expression. Brain Res
1426: 38–42.
Hirai N, Nishino S (2011) Recent advances in the treatment of
narcolepsy. Curr Treat Options Neurol 13: 437–57.
Horne JA, Ostberg O (1976) A self-assessment questionnaire
to determine morningness–eveningness in human
circadian rhythms. Int J Chronobiol 4: 97–100.
Johansson C, Willeit M, Smedh C, et al. (2003) Circadian
clock-related polymorphisms in seasonal affective
disorder and their relevance to diurnal preference.
Neuropsychopharmacology 28: 734–9.

Liu Y, Wheaton AG, Chapman DP, et al. (2013) Sleep duration
and chronic disease among US adults age 45 years and
older: evidence from the 2010 behavioral risk factor
surveillance system. Sleep 36: 1421–7.
Madras BK, Xie Z, Lin Z, et al. (2006) Modafinil occupies
dopamine and norepinephrine transporters in vivo and
modulates the transporters and trace amine activity in
vitro. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 319: 561–9.
Makris AP, Rush CR, Frederich RC, Kelly TH (2004) Wakepromoting agents with different mechanisms of action:
comparison of effects of modafinil and amphetamine
on food intake and cardiovascular activity. Appetite 42:
185–95.

Khalsa SB, Jewett ME, Cajochen C, et al. (2003) A phase
response curve to single bright light pulses in human
subjects. J Physiol 549(pt 3): 945–52.

Mansour HA, Wood J, Logue T, et al. (2006) Association
of eight circadian genes with bipolar I disorder,
schizoaffective disorder and schizophrenia. Genes Brain
Behav 5: 150–7.

Knudsen S, Biering-Sorensen B, Kornum BR, et al. (2012)
Early IVIg treatment has no effect on post-H1N1
narcolepsy phenotype or hypocretin deficiency. Neurology
79: 102–3.

Masri S, Kinouchi K, Sassone-Corsi P (2015) Circadian clocks,
epigenetics, and cancer. Curr Opin Oncol 27: 50–6.

Martin JL, Hakim AD (2011) Wrist actigraphy. Chest 139:
1514–27.

595


<<<PAGE 612>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Mignot EJM (2012) A practical guide to the therapy of
narcolepsy and hypersomnia syndromes. Neurotherapeutics
9: 739–52.
Miletic V, Relja M (2011) Restless legs syndrome. Coll Antropol
35: 1339–47.
Morgenthaler TI, Kapur VK, Brown T, et al. (2007) Practice
parameters for the treatment of narcolepsy and other
hypersomnias of central origin. Sleep 30: 1705–11.
Morgenthaler TI, Lee-Chiong T, Alessi C, et al. (2007) Practice
parameters for the clinical evaluation and treatment of
circadian rhythm sleep disorders. Sleep 30: 1445–59.
Morrissette DA (2013) Twisting the night away: a review of the
neurobiology, genetics, diagnosis, and treatment of shift
work disorder. CNS Spectrums 18 (Suppl 1): 45–53.
Niervergelt CM, Kripke DF, Barrett TB, et al. (2006) Suggestive
evidence for association of circadian genes PERIOD3
and ARNTL with bipolar disorder. Am J Med Genet B,
Neuropsychiatr Genet 141: 234–41.
Norman D, Haberman PB, Valladares EM (2012) Medical
consequences and associations with untreated sleep-related
breathing disorders and outcomes of treatments. J Calif
Dent Assoc 40: 141–9.
O’Donoghue FJ, Wellard RM, Rochford PD, et al. (2012)
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy and neurocognitive
dysfunction in obstructive sleep apnea before and after
CPAP treatment. Sleep 35: 41–8.
Ohayon MM (2012) Determining the level of sleepiness in the
American population and its correlates. J Psychiatr Res 46:
422–7.
Oosterman JE, Kalsbeek A, la Fleur SE, et al. (2015) Impact
of nutrition on circadian rhythmicity. Am J Physiol Regul
Integr Comp Physiol 308: R337–50.
Pail G, Huf W, Pjrek E, et al. (2011) Bright-light therapy in
the treatment of mood disorders. Neuropsychobiology 64:
152–62.
Palagini L, Biber K, Riemann D (2014) The genetics of
insomnia: evidence for epigenetic mechanisms? Sleep Med
Rev 18: 225–35.
Partonen T, Treutlein J, Alpman A, et al. (2007) Three
circadian clock genes Per2, Arntl, and Npas2 contribute to
winter depression. Ann Med 39: 229–38.
Pigeon WR, Pinquart M, Conner K (2012) Meta-analysis of
sleep disturbance and suicidal thoughts and behaviors. J
Clin Psychiatry 73: e1160–7.
Qureshi IA, Mehler MF (2014) Epigenetics of sleep and
chronobiology. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 14: 432.
Rogers RR (2012) Past, present, and future use of oral
appliance therapies in sleep-related breathing disorders. J
Calif Dent Assoc 40: 151–7.

596

Sangal RB, Thomas L, Mitler MM (1992) Maintenance
of wakefulness test and multiple sleep latency test.
Measurement of different abilities in patients with sleep
disorders. Chest 101: 898–902.
Saper CB, Lu J, Chou TC, Gooley J (2005) The hypothalamic
integrator for circadian rhythms. Trends Neurosci 3: 152–7.
Saper CB, Scammell TE, Lu J (2005) Hypothalamic regulation
of sleep and circadian rhythms. Nature 437: 1257–63.
Schwartz JRL, Nelson MT, Schwartz ER, Hughes RJ (2004)
Effects of modafinil on wakefulness and executive
function in patients with narcolepsy experiencing late-day
sleepiness. Clin Neuropharmacol 27: 74–9.
Severino G, Manchia M, Contu P, et al. (2009) Association study
in a Sardinian sample between bipolar disorder and the
nuclear receptor REV-ERBalpha gene, a critical component
of the circadian clock system. Bipolar Disord 11: 215–20.
Soria V, Martinez-Amoros E, Escaramis G, et al. (2010)
Differential association of circadian genes with mood
disorders: CRY1 and NPAS2 are associated with unipolar
major depression and CLOCK and VIP with bipolar
disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 1279–89.
Stahl SM (2014) Mechanism of action of tasimelteon in non24 sleep–wake syndrome: treatment for a circadian rhythm
disorder in blind patients. CNS Spectrums 19: 475–87.
Stippig A, Hubers U, Emerich M (2015) Apps in sleep
medicine. Sleep Breath 19: 411–17.
Tafti M, Dauvilliers Y, Overeem S (2007) Narcolepsy and
familial advanced sleep-phase syndrome: molecular
genetics of sleep disorders. Curr Opin Genet Dev 17:
222–7.
Tahara Y, Shibata S (2014) Chrono-biology, chronopharmacology, and chrononutrition. J Pharmacol Sci 124:
320–35.
Takahashi S, Hong HK, McDearmon EL (2008) The genetic of
mammalian circadian order and disorder: implications for
physiology and disease. Nat Rev Genet 9: 764–75.
Takao T, Tachikawa H, Kawanishi Y, et al. (2007) CLOCK
gene T3111C polymorphism is associated with
Japanese schizophrenics: a preliminary study. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol 17: 273–6.
Tarasiuk A, Reuveni H (2013) The economic impact of
obstructive sleep apnea. Curr Opin Pulm Med 19:
639–44.
Thaiss CA, Zeevi D, Levy M, et al. (2014) Transkingdom
control of microbiota diurnal oscillations promotes
metabolic homeostasis. Cell 159: 514–29.
Thomas RJ, Kwong K (2006) Modafinil activates cortical
and subcortical sites in the sleep-deprived state. Sleep 29:
1471–81.


<<<PAGE 613>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Thomas RJ, Rosen BR, Stern CE, Weiss JW, Kwong KK (2005)
Functional imaging of working memory in obstructive
sleep-disordered breathing. J Appl Physiol 98: 2226–34.
Thorpy MJ, Dauvilliers Y (2015) Clinical and practical
consideration in the pharmacologic management of
narcolepsy. Sleep Med 16: 9–18.
Trotti LM, Saini P, Bliwise DL, et al. (2015) Clarithromycin in
gamma-aminobutyric acid-related hypersomnolence: a
randomized, crossover trial. Ann Neurol 78: 454–65.
Trotti LM, Saini P, Freeman AA, et al. (2013) Improvement
in daytime sleepiness with clarithromycin in patients
with GABA-related hypersomnia: clinical experience. J
Psychopharmacol 28: 697–702.
Van Someren EJ, Riemersma-Van Der Lek RF (2007) Live
to the rhythm, slave to the rhythm. Sleep Med Rev 11:
465–84.
Wulff K, Gatti S, Wettstein JG, Foster RG (2010) Sleep
and circadian rhythm disruption in psychiatric and
neurodegenerative disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 11: 589–99.
Zaharna M, Dimitriu A, Guilleminault C (2010) Expert
opinion on pharmacotherapy of narcolepsy. Expert Opin
Pharmacother 11: 1633–45.
Zawilska JB, Skene DJ, Arendt J. (2009) Physiology and
pharmacology of melatonin in relation to biological
rhythms. Pharmacol Rep 61: 383–410.

Chapter 11 (Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder)
Arnsten AFT (2006) Fundamentals of attention deficit/
hyperactivity disorder: circuits and pathways. J Clin
Psychiatry 67 (Suppl 8): 7–12.
Arnsten AFT (2006) Stimulants: therapeutic actions in ADHD.
Neuropsychopharmacology 31: 2376–83.
Arnsten AFT (2009) Stress signaling pathways that impair
prefrontal cortex structure and function. Nat Rev Neurosci
10: 410–22.
Arnsten AFT, Li BM (2005) Neurobiology of executive
functions: catecholamine influences on prefrontal cortical
functions. Biol Psychiatry 57: 1377–84.
Avery RA, Franowicz JS, Phil M, et al. (2000) The alpha 2a
adrenoceptor agonist, guanfacine, increases regional
cerebral blood flow in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of
monkeys performing a spatial working memory task.
Neuropsychopharmacology 23: 240–9.
Berridge CW, Devilbiss DM, Andrzejewski ME, et al. (2006)
Methylphenidate preferentially increases catecholamine
neurotransmission within the prefrontal cortex at low
doses that enhance cognitive function. Biol Psychiatry 60:
1111–20.

Berridge CW, Shumsky JS, Andrzejewski ME, et al. (2012)
Differential sensitivity to psychostimulants across
prefrontal cognitive tasks: differential involvement of
noradrenergic α1- and α2-receptors. Biol Psychiatry 71:
467–73.
Biederman J (2004) Impact of comorbidity in adults with
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 65
(Suppl 3): 3–7.
Biederman J, Petty CR, Fried R, et al. (2007) Stability of
executive function deficits into young adult years: a
prospective longitudinal follow-up study of grown up
males with ADHD. Acta Psychiatr Scand 116: 129–36.
Clerkin SM, Schulz KP, Halperin JM (2009) Guanfacine
potentiates the activation of prefrontal cortex evoked by
warning signals. Biol Psychiatry 66: 307–12.
Cortese S, Adamo N, Del Giovane C, et al. (2018) Comparative
efficacy and tolerability of medications for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder in children, adolescents, and adults:
a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet
Psychiatry 5: 727–38.
Easton N, Shah YB, Marshall FH, Fone KC, Marsden CA
(2006) Guanfacine produces differential effects in frontal
cortex compared with striatum: assessed by phMRI BOLD
contrast. Psychopharmacology 189: 369–85.
Faraone SV, Biederman J, Spencer T (2006) Diagnosing adult
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: are late onset
and subthreshold diagnoses valid? Am J Psychiatry 163:
1720–9.
Franke B, Nucgekubu G, Asherson P, et al. (2018) Live fast,
die young? A review on the developmental trajectories of
ADHD across the lifespan. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 28:
1059–88.
Fusar-Poli P, Rubia K, Rossi G, Sartori G, Balottin U (2012)
Striatal dopamine transporter alterations in ADHD:
pathophysiology or adaptation to psychostimulants? a
meta-analysis. Am J Psychiatry 169: 264–72.
Grady M, Stahl SM (2012) A horse of a different color: how
formulation influences medication effects. CNS Spectrums
17: 63–9.
Hannestad J, Gallezot JD, Planeta-Wilson B, et al. (2010)
Clinically relevant doses of methylphenidate significantly
occupy norepinephrine transporters in humans in vivo.
Biol Psychiatry 68: 854–60.
Jakala P, Riekkinen M, Sirvio J, et al. (1999) Guanfacine, but
not clonidine, improves planning and working memory
performance in humans. Neuropsychopharmacology 20:
460–70.
Johnson K, Liranso T, Saylor K, et al. (2020) A phase II double
blind placebo controlled efficacy and safety study of SPN812 (extended release vilaxazine) in children with ADHD. J
Atten Disord 24: 348–58.
597


<<<PAGE 614>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Kessler RC, Adler L, Barkley R (2006) The prevalence and
correlates of adult ADHD in the United States: results
from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Am J
Psychiatry 163: 716–23.
Kessler RC, Green JG, Adler LA, et al. (2010) Structure and
diagnosis of adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Arch Gen Psychiatry 67: 1168–78.
Kollins SH, McClernon JM, Fuemmeler BF (2005) Association
between smoking and attention deficit/hyperactivity
disorder symptoms in a population based sample of young
adults. Arch Gen Psychiatry 62: 1142–7.

Stahl SM (2009) Norepinephrine and dopamine regulate
signals and noise in the prefrontal cortex. J Clin Psychiatry
70: 617–18.
Stahl SM (2010) Mechanism of action of stimulants in
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Clin Psychiatry
71: 12–13.
Stahl SM (2010) Mechanism of action of α2A-adrenergic
agonists in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder with
or without oppositional symptoms. J Clin Psychiatry 71:
223–24.

Madras BK, Miller GM, Fischman AJ (2005) The dopamine
transporter and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Biol Psychiatry 57: 1397–409.

Steere JC, Arnsten AFT (1997) The alpha 2A noradrenergic
receptor agonist guanfacine improves visual object
discrimination reversal performance in aged rhesus
monkeys. Behav Neurosci 111: 883–91.

Matthijssen AFM, Dietrich A, Bierens M, et al. (2019)
Continued benefits of methylphenidate in ADHD after 2
years in clinical practice: a randomized placebo-controlled
discontinuation study. Am J Psychiatry 176: 754–62.

Surman CBH, Biederman J, Spencer T (2011) Deficient
emotional self regulation and adult attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder: a family risk analysis. Am J
Psychiatry 168: 617–23.

Mattingly G, Anderson RH (2016) Optimizing outcomes of
ADHD treatment: from clinical targets to novel delivery
systems. CNS Spectrums 21: 48–58.

Swanson J, Baler RD, Volkow ND (2011) Understanding
the effects of stimulant medications on cognition in
individuals with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: a
decade of progress. Neuropsychopharmacology 36: 207–26.

Pinder RM, Brogden RN, Speight TM, et al. (1977) Voloxazine:
a review of its pharmacological properties and therapeutic
efficacy in depressive illness. Drugs 13: 401–21.
Pingault JB, Tremblay RE, Vitaro F, et al. (2011) Childhood
trajectories of inattention and hyperactivity and prediction
of educational attainment in early adulthood: a 16-year
longitudinal population-based study. Am J Psychiatry 168:
1164–70.
Seidman LJ, Valera EM, Makris N, et al. (2006) Dorsolateral
prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex volumetric
abnormalities in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder identified by magnetic resonance imaging. Biol
Psychiatry 60: 1071–80.
Shaw P, Stringaris A, Nigg J, et al. (2014) Emotion
dysregulation in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Am J Psychiatry 171: 276–93.
Spencer TJ, Biederman J, Madras BK, et al. (2005) In vivo
neuroreceptor imaging in attention deficit/hyperactivity
disorder: a focus on the dopamine transporter. Biol
Psychiatry 57: 1293–300.
Spencer TJ, Bonab AA, Dougherty DD, et al. (2012)
Understanding the central pharmacokinetics of spheroidal
oral drug absorption system (SODAS) dexmethylphenidate:
a positron emission tomography study of dopamine
transporter receptor occupancy measured with C-11
altropane. J Clin Psychiatry 73: 346–52.
Stahl SM (2009) The prefrontal cortex is out of tune in
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Clin Psychiatry
70: 950–1.

598

Turgay A, Goodman DW, Asherson P, et al. (2012) Lifespan
persistance of ADHD: the lift transition model and its
application. J Clin Psychiatry 73: 192–201.
Turner DC, Clark L, Dowson J, Robbins TW, Sahakian BJ
(2004) Modafinil improves cognition and response
inhibition in adult attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Biol Psychiatry 55: 1031–40.
Turner DC, Robbins TW, Clark L, et al. (2003) Cognitive
enhancing effects of modafinil in healthy volunteers.
Psychopharmacology 165: 260–9.
Vaughan BS, March JS, Kratochvil CJ (2012) The evidencebased pharmacological treatment of pediatric ADHD. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol 15: 27–39.
Volkow ND, Wong GJ, Kollins SH, et al. (2009) Evaluating
dopamine reward pathway in ADHD: Clinical implications.
JAMA 302: 1084–91.
Wang M, Ramos BP, Paspalas CD, et al. (2007) α2AAdrenoceptors strengthen working memory networks
by inhibiting cAMP-HCN channel signaling in prefrontal
cortex. Cell 129: 397–410.
Wigal T, Brams M, Gasior M, et al. (2010) Randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study of the
efficacy and safety of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate in
adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: novel
findings using a simulated adult workplace environment
design. Behav Brain Funct 6: 34–48.
Wilens TE (2007) Lisdexamfetamine for ADHD. Curr
Psychiatry 6: 96–105.


<<<PAGE 615>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Yang L, Cao Q, Shuai L (2012) Comparative study of
OROS-MPH and atomoxetine on executive function
improvement in ADHD: a randomized controlled trial. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol 15: 15–16.
Zang YF, Jin Z, Weng XC, et al. (2005) Functional MRI in
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: evidence for
hypofrontality. Brain Dev 27: 544–50.

Aridi YS, Walker JL, Wright ORL (2017) The association
between the Mediterranean dietary pattern and cognitive
health: a systematic review. Nutrients 9: E674.
Ballard C, Khan Z, Clack H, et al. (2011) Nonpharmacological
treatment of Alzheimer disease. Can J Psychiatry 56:
589–95.

Zuvekas SH, Vitiello B (2012) Stimulant medication use in
children: a 12-year perspective. Am J Psychiatry 169: 160–6.

Buchman AS, Boyle PA, Yu L, et al. (2012) Total daily physical
activity and the risk of AD and cognitive decline in older
adults. Neurology 78: 1323–9.

Chapter 12 (Dementia) and
Acetylcholine

Burmester B, Leathem J, Merrick P (2016) Subjective cognitive
complaints and objective cognitive function in aging:
a systematic review and meta-analysis of recent crosssectional findings. Neuropsychol Rev 26: 376–93.

Neuronal Networks: Acetylcholine
Bacher I, Rabin R, Woznica A, Sacvco KA, George TP (2010)
Nicotinic receptor mechanisms in neuropsychiatric disorders:
therapeutic implications. Prim Psychiatry 17: 35–41.
Fryer AD, Christopoulos A, Nathanson NM (eds.) (2012)
Muscarinic Receptors. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Geldmacher DS, Provenano G, McRae T, et al. (2003)
Donepezil is associated with delayed nursing home
placement in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J Am
Geriatr Soc 51: 937–44.
Grothe M, Heinsen H, Teipel SF (2012) Atrophy of the
cholinergic basal forebrain over the adult age range and in
early states of Alzheimer’s disease. Biol Psychiatry 71: 805–13.
Hasselmo ME, Sarter M (2011) Nodes and models of
forebrain cholinergic neuromodulation of cognition.
Neuropsychopharmacology 36: 52–73.
Lane RM, Potkin SG, Enz A (2006) Targeting
acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase in
dementia. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 9: 101–24.
Ohta Y, Darwish M, Hishikawa N, et al. (2017) Therapeutic
effects of drug switching between acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Geriatr
Gerontol Int 17: 1843–8.
Pepeu G, Giovannini M (2017) The fate of the brain
cholinergic neurons in neurodegenerative diseases. Brain
Res 1670: 173–84.
Tariot PN, Farlow MR, Grossberg GT, et al. (2004) Memantine
treatment in patients with moderate to severe Alzheimer’s
disease already receiving donepezil. JAMA 291: 317–24.

Diet/Exercise/Genetics/Aging
Anastasiou CA, Yannakoulia M, Kosmidis MH, et al. (2017)
Mediterranean diet and cognitive health: initial results
from the Hellenic Longitudinal Investigation of ageing and
diet. PLOS ONE 12: e0182048.

Cederholm T (2017) Fish consumption and omega-3 fatty acid
supplementation for prevention or treatment of cognitive
decline, dementia or Alzheimer’s disease in older adults:
any news? Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 20: 104–9.
Cepoiu-Martin M, Tam-Tham H, Patten S, et al. (2016)
Predictors of long-term care placement in persons with
dementia: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Int J
Geriatr Psychiatry 31: 1151–71.
Ercoli L, Siddarth P, Huang SC, et al. (2006) Perceived loss of
memory ability and cerebral metabolic decline in persons
with the apolipoprotein E-IV genetic risk for Alzheimer
disease. Arch Gen Psychiatry 63: 442–8.
Gu Y, Brickman AM, Stern Y, et al. (2015) Mediterranean
diet and brain structure in a multiethnic elderly cohort.
Neurology 85: 1744–51.
Hardman RJ, Kennedy G, Macpherson H, et al. (2016) Adherence
to a Mediterranean-style diet and effects on cognition in
adults: a qualitative evaluation and systematic review of
longitudinal and prospective trials. Front Nutr 3: 1–13.
Hinz FI, Geschwind DH (2017) Molecular genetics of
neurodegenerative dementias. Cold Spring Harb Perspect
Biol 9: a023705.
Knight A, Bryan J, Murphy K (2016) Is the Mediterranean
diet a feasible approach to preserving cognitive function
and reducing risk of dementia for older adults in Western
countries? New insights and future directions. Ageing Res
Rev 25: 85–101.
Kullmann S, Heni M, Hallschmid M, et al. (2016) Brain insulin
resistance at the crossroads of metabolic and cognitive
disorders in humans. Physiol Rev 96: 1169–209.
Larson EB, Wang L, Bowen JD, et al. (2006) Exercise is
associated with reduced risk for incident dementia among
persons 65 years of age and older. Ann Intern Med 144:
73–81.
Lee HS, Park SW, Park YJ (2016) Effects of physical activity
programs on the improvement of dementia symptom: a
meta-analysis. Biomed Res Int 2016: 2920146.

599


<<<PAGE 616>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Lee SH, Zabolotny JM, Huang H, et al. (2016) Insulin in the
nervous system and the mind: functions in metabolism,
memory, and mood. Mol Metab 5: 589–601.
Li Y, Sekine T, Funayama M, et al. (2014) Clinicogenetic study
of GBA mutations in patients with familial Parkinson’s
disease. Neurobiol Aging 35: 935.e3–8.
Lim SY, Kim EJ, Kim A, et al. (2016) Nutritional factors
affecting mental health. Clin Nutr Res 5: 143–52.
Marcason W (2015) What are the components of the MIND
diet? J Acad Nutr Diet 115: 1744.
Matsuzaki T, Sasaki K, Tanizaki Y, et al. (2010) Insulin
resistance is associated with the pathology of Alzheimer
disease. Neurology 75: 764–70.
Ngandu T, Lehtisalo J, Solomon A, et al. (2015) A 2 year
multidomain intervention of diet, exercise, cognitive
training, and vascular risk monitoring versus control to
prevent cognitive decline in at-risk elderly people (FINGER):
a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 385: 2255–63.
O’Donnell CA, Browne S, Pierce M, et al. (2015) Reducing
dementia risk by targeting modifiable risk factors in midlife: study protocol for the Innovative Midlife Intervention
for Dementia Deterrence (In-MINDD) randomized
controlled feasibility trial. Pilot Feasibility Stud 1: 40.
Olszewska DA, Lonergan R, Fallon EM, et al. (2016) Genetics of
frontotemporal dementia. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 16: 107.
Petersson SD, Philippou E (2016) Mediterranean diet,
cognitive function, and dementia: a systematic review of
the evidence. Adv Nutr 7: 889–904.
Qosa H, Mohamed LA, Batarseh YS, et al. (2015) Extra-virgin
olive oil attenuates amyloid-β and tau pathologies in the
brains of TgSwD1 mice. J Nutr Biochem 26: 1479–90.
Rigacci S (2015) Olive oil phenols as promising multitargeting agents against Alzheimer’s disease. Adv Exp Med
Biol 863: 1–20.
Rosenberg RN, Lambracht-Washington D, Yu G, et al. (2016)
Genomics of Alzheimer disease: a review. JAMA Neurol 73:
867–74.
Schellenberg GD, Montine TJ (2012) The genetics and
neuropathology of Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol
124: 305–23.
Valenzuela MJ, Matthews FE, Brayne C, et al. for the Medical
Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study
(2012) Multiple biological pathways link cognitive
lifestyle to protection from dementia. Biol Psychiatry 71:
783–91.
Yang T, Sun Y, Lu Z, et al. (2017) The impact of
cerebrovascular aging on vascular cognitive impairment
and dementia. Ageing Res Rev 34: 15–29.
Zillox LA, Chadrasekaran K, Kwan JY, et al. (2016) Diabetes
and cognitive impairment. Curr Diab Rep 16: 1–11.
600

Alzheimer Disease/Vascular Dementia/
Dementia with Lewy Bodies/Parkinson’s
Disease Dementia/Frontotemporal
Dementia/Other Dementias/General
Dementia
Annus A, Csati A, Vecsei L (2016) Prion diseases: new
considerations. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 150: 125–32.
Arai T (2014) Significance and limitation of the pathological
classification of TDP-43 proteinopathy. Neuropathology 34:
578–88.
Arendt T, Steiler JT, Holzer M (2016) Tau and tauopathies.
Brain Res Bull 126: 238–92.
Asken BM, Sullan MJ, Snyder AR, et al. (2016) Factors
influencing clinical correlates of chronic traumatic
encephalopathy (CTE): a review. Neuropsychol Rev 26:
340–63.
Atri A (2016) Imaging of neurodegenerative cognitive and
behavioral disorders: practical considerations for dementia
clinical practice. Handb Clin Neurol 136: 971–84.
Azizi SA, Azizi SA (2018) Synucleinopathies in
neurodegenerative diseases: accomplices, an inside job and
selective vulnerability. Neurosci Lett 672: 150–2.
Ballard C, Mobley W, Hardy J, Williams G, Corbett A (2016)
Dementia in Down’s syndrome. Lancet Neurol 15: 622–36.
Ballard C, Ziabreva I, Perry R, et al. (2006) Differences in
neuropathologic characteristics across the Lewy body
dementia spectrum. Neurology 67: 1931–4.
Benskey MJ, Perez RG, Manfredsson FP (2016) The
contribution of alpha synuclein to neuronal survival
and function: implications for Parkinson’s disease. J
Neurochemistry 137: 331–59.
Bonifacio G, Zamboni G (2016) Brain imaging in dementia.
Postgrad Med J 92: 333–40.
Boxer AL, Yu JT, Golbe LI, et al. (2017) Advances in
progressive supranuclear palsy: new diagnostic criteria,
biomarkers, and therapeutic approaches. Lancet Neurol
166: 552–63.
Braak H, Del Tredici K, Rub U, et al. (2003) Staging of brain
pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol
Aging 24: 197–211.
Burchell JT, Panegyres PK (2016) Prion diseases:
immunotargets and therapy. ImmunoTargets Ther 5: 57–68.
Cheung CY, Ikram MK, Chen C, et al. (2017) Imaging retina to
study dementia and stroke. Prog Brain Retinal Eye Res 57:
89–107.
Chutinet A, Rost NS (2014) White matter disease as a
biomarker for long-term cerebrovascular disease and
dementia. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med 16: 292.


<<<PAGE 617>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Dugger BN, Dickson DW (2017) Pathology of
neurodegenerative diseases. Cold Springs Harb Perspect
Biol 9: a028035.

Ince PG, Perry EK, Morris CM (1998) Dementia with Lewy
bodies: a distinct non-Alzheimer dementia syndrome?
Brain Pathol 8: 299–324.

Eddy CM, Parkinson EG, Rickards HE (2016) Changes in
mental state and behavior in Huntington’s disease. Lancet
Psychiatry 3: 1079–86.

Jellinger KA (2018) Dementia with Lewy bodies and
Parkinson’s disease-dementia: current concepts and
controversies. J Neural Transm 125: 615–50.

Emre M (2007) Treatment of dementia associated with
Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 13 (Suppl
3): S457–61.

Jena A, Renjen PN, Taneja S, et al. (2015) Integrated (18)
F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography
magnetic resonance imaging ([18]F-FDG PET/MRI), a
multimodality approach for comprehensive evaluation
of dementia patients: a pictorial essay. Indian J Radiol
Imaging 25: 342–52.

Eusebio A, Koric L, Felician O, et al. (2016) Progressive
supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration:
diagnostic challenges and clinicopathological
considerations. Rev Neurol (Paris) 172: 488–502.
Foo H, Mak E, Yong TT (2017) Progression of subcortical
atrophy in mild Parkinson’s disease and its impact on
cognition. Eur J Neurol 24: 341–8.
Ford AH (2016) Preventing delirium in dementia: managing
risk factors. Maturitas 92: 35–40.
Galvin JE (2015) Improving the clinical detection of Lewy
body dementia with the Lewy Body Composite Risk Score.
Alzheimers Dement (Amst) 1: 316–24.
Giri M, Zhang M, Lu Y (2016) Genes associated with
Alzheimer’s disease: an overview and current status. Clin
Interv Aging 11: 665–81.
Goetz CG, Emre M, Dubois B (2008) Parkinson’s disease
dementia: definitions, guidelines, and research
perspectives in diagnosis. Ann Neurol 64 (Suppl 2):
S81–92.
Goodman RA, Lochner KA, Thambisetty M, et al. (2017)
Prevalence of dementia subtypes in United States Medicare
fee-for-service beneficiaries, 2011-2013. Alzheimers
Dement 13: 28–37.
Gordon E, Rohrer JD, Fox NC (2016) Advances in
neuroimaging in frontotemporal dementia. J Neurochem
138 (Suppl 1): 193–210.
Gray SL, Hanlon JT (2016) Anticholinergic medication use
and dementia: latest evidence and clinical implications.
Ther Adv Drug Saf 7: 217–24.
Harper L, Barkhof F, Scheltens P, et al. (2014) An algorithmic
approach to structural imaging in dementia. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry 85: 692–8.
Hasegawa M, Nonaka T, Masuda-Suzukake M (2017) Prionlike mechanisms and potential therapeutic targets in
neurodegenerative disorders. Pharmacol Ther 172: 22–33.
Hithersay R, Hamburg S, Knight B, et al. (2017) Cognitive
decline and dementia in Down syndrome. Curr Opin
Psychiatry 30: 102–7.
Huey ED, Putnam KT, Grafman J (2006) A systematic
review of neurotransmitter deficits and treatments in
frontotemporal dementia. Neurology 66: 17–22.

Jennings LA, Palimaru A, Corona MG, et al. (2017) Patient
and caregiver goals for dementia care. Qual Life Res 26:
685–93.
Johnson BP, Westlake KP (2018) Link between Parkinson
disease and rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder
with dream enactment: possible implications for early
rehabilitation. Arch Phys Med Rehab 99: 410–15.
Kapasi A, DeCarli C, Schneider JA (2017) Impact of multiple
pathologies on the threshold for clinically overt dementia.
Acta Neuropathol 134: 171–86.
Karantzoulis S, Galvin JE (2011) Distinguishing Alzheimer’s
disease from other major forms of dementia. Expert Rev
Neurother 11: 1579–91.
Kertesz A, Munoz DG (2002) Frontotemporal dementia. Med
Clin North Am 86: 501–18.
Knopman DS, Kramer JH, Boeve BF, et al. (2008) Development
of methodology for conducting clinical trials in
frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Brain 131 (Pt 11):
2957–68.
Kobylecki C, Jones M, Thompson JC, et al. (2015) Cognitivebehavioural features of progressive supranuclear palsy
syndrome overlap with frontotemporal dementia. J Neurol
262: 916–22.
Kolb HC, Andres JI (2017) Tau positron emission tomography
imaging. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 9: a023721.
Koronyo Y, Biggs D, Barron E, et al. (2017) Retinal amyloid
pathology and proof-of-concept imaging trial in
Alzheimer’s disease. JCI Insight 2: 93621.
Landin-Romero R, Tan R, Hodges HR, et al. (2016) An update
on semantic dementia: genetics, imaging, and pathology.
Alz Res Ther 8: 52.
Levy RH, Collins C (2007) Risk and predictability of
drug interactions in the elderly. Int Rev Neurobiol 81:
235–51.
Ling H (2016) Clinical approach to progressive supranuclear
palsy. J Mov Disord 9: 3–13.
Lippmann S, Perugula ML (2016) Delirium or dementia?
Innov Clin Neurosci 13: 56–7.
601


<<<PAGE 618>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Liscic RM, Srulijes K, Groger A, et al. (2013) Differentiation
of progressive supranuclear palsy: clinical, imaging and
laboratory tools. Acta Neurol Scand 127: 361–70.
Llorens F, Karch A, Golanska E, et al. (2017) Cerebrospinal
fluid biomarker-based diagnosis of sporadic Creutzfeldt–
Jakob disease: a validation study for previously established
cutoffs. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 43: 71–80.
Mackenzie IR, Neumann M (2016) Molecular neuropathology
of frontotemporal dementia: insights into disease
mechanisms from postmortem studies. J Neurochem 138
(Suppl 1): 54–70.
Mackenzie IR, Munoz DG, Kusaka H, et al. (2011) Distinct
subtypes of FTLD-FUS. Acta Neuropathol 121: 207–18.
Maloney B, Lahiri DK (2016) Epigenetics of dementia:
understanding the disease as a transformation rather than
a state. Lancet Neurol 15: 760–74.
McCarter S, St Louis EK, Boeve BF (2016) Sleep disturbances in
frontotemporal dementia. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 16: 85.
McCleery J, Cohen DA, Sharpley AL (2016)
Pharmacotherapies for sleep disturbances in dementia
(review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11: CD009178.
McGirt MJ, Woodworth G, Coon AL, et al. (2005) Diagnosis,
treatment, and analysis of long-term outcomes in
idiopathic normal-pressure hydrocephalus. Neurosurgery
57: 699–705.
McKeith IG, Dickson DW, Lowe J, et al. (2005) Diagnosis and
management of dementia with Lewy bodies: third report of
the DLB consortium. Neurology 65: 1863–72.
Meyer PT, Frings L, Rucker G, et al. (2017) 18F-FDG PET in
Parkinsonism: differential diagnosis and evaluation of
cognitive impairment. J Nucl Med 58: 1888–98.
Michel J-P (2016) Is it possible to delay or prevent age-related
cognitive decline? Korean J Fam Med 37: 263–6.
Mioshi E, Flanagan E, Knopman D (2017) Detecting change
with the CDR-FTLD: differences between FTLD and AD
dementia. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 32: 977–82.
Mioshi E, Hsieh S, Savage S, et al. (2010) Clinical staging and
disease progression in frontotemporal dementia. Neurology
74: 1591–7.
Montenigro PH, Baugh CM, Daneshvar DH, et al. (2014)
Clinical subtypes of chronic traumatic encephalopathy:
literature review and proposed research diagnostic criteria
for traumatic encephalopathy syndrome. Alz Res Ther 6: 68.
Nalbandian A, Donkervoort S, Dec E, et al. (2011) The
multiple faces of valosin-containing protein-associated
diseases: inclusion body myopathy with Paget’s disease of
bone, frontotemporal dementia, and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. J Mol Neurosci 45: 522–31.
Noe E, Marder K, Bell KL, et al. (2004) Comparison of
dementia with Lewy bodies to Alzheimer’s disease and
602

Parkinson’s disease with dementia. Movement Disorders
19: 60–7.
Pandya SY, Clem MA, Silva LM, et al. (2016) Does mild
cognitive impairment always lead to dementia? A review. J
Neurol Sci 369: 58–62.
Paoli RA, Botturi A, Ciammola A, et al. (2017) Neuropsychiatric
burden in Huntington’s disease. Brain Sci 7: 67.
Park HK, Park KH, Yoon B, et al. (2017) Clinical characteristics
of parkinsonism in frontotemporal dementia according to
subtypes. J Neurol Sci 372: 51–6.
Purandare N, Burns A, Morris J, et al. (2012) Association of
cerebral emboli with accelerated cognitive deterioration
in Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia. Am J
Psychiatry 169: 300–8.
Ransohoff RM (2016) How neuroinflammation contributes to
neurodegeneration. Science 353: 777–83.
Raz L, Knoefel J, Bhaskar K (2016) The neuropathology and
cerebrovascular mechanisms of dementia. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 36: 179–86.
Roalf D, Moberg MJ, Turetsky BI, et al. (2017) A quantitative metaanalysis of olfactory dysfunction in mild cognitive impairment.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 88: 226–32.
Sachdeva A, Chandra M, Choudhary M, et al. (2016) Alcoholrelated dementia and neurocognitive impairment: a review
study. Int J High Risk Behav Addict 5: e27976.
Sarro L, Tosakulwong N, Schwarz CG, et al. (2017) An
investigation of cerebrovascular lesions in dementia with
Lewy bodies compared to Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers
Dement 13: 257–66.
Schott JM, Warren JD, Barhof F, et al. (2011) Suspected early
dementia. BMJ 343: d5568.
Schroek JL, Ford J, Conway EL, et al. (2016) Review of safety
and efficacy of sleep medicines in older adults. Clin Ther
38: 2340–72.
Schwartz M, Deczkowska A (2016) Neurological disease as
a failure of brain-immune crosstalk: the multiple faces of
neuroinflammation. Trends Immunol 37: 668–79.
Stahl SM (2017) Does treating hearing loss prevent or slow
the progress of dementia? Hearing is not all in the ears, but
who’s listening? CNS Spectrums 22: 247–50.
Takada LT, Kim MO, Cleveland RW, et al. (2017) Genetic
prion disease: experience of a rapidly progressive
dementia center in the United States and a review of the
literature. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 174:
36–69.
Tartaglia MC, Rosen JH, Miller BL (2011) Neuroimaging in
dementia. Neurotherapeutics 8: 82–92.
Thomas AJ, Attems J, Colloby SJ, et al. (2017) Autopsy
validation of 123I-FP-CIT dopaminergic neuroimaging for
the diagnosis of DLB. Neurology 88: 1–8.


<<<PAGE 619>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Thomas AJ, Taylor JP, McKeith I, et al. (2017) Development of
assessment toolkits for improving the diagnosis of Lewy
body dementias: feasibility study within the DIAMOND
Lewy study. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 32: 1280–304.
Todd TW, Petrucelli L (2016) Insights into the pathogenic
mechanisms of chromosome 9 open reading frame 72
(C9orf72) repeat expansions. J Neurochem 138 (Suppl 1):
145–62.
Togo T, Isojima D, Akatsu H, et al. (2005) Clinical features of
argyrophilic grain disease: a retrospective survey of cases
with neuropsychiatric symptoms. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry
13: 1083–91.
Tsai RM, Boxer AL (2016) Therapy and clinical trials in
frontotemporal dementia: past, present, and future. J
Neurochem 138 (Suppl 1): 211–21.
Tyebi S, Hannan AJ (2017) Synaptopathic mechanisms
of neurodegeneration and dementia: insights from
Huntington’s disease. Prog Neurobiol 153: 18–45.
Weishaupt JH, Hyman T, Dikic I (2016) Common
molecular pathways in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and
frontotemporal dementia. Trends Mol Med 22: 769–83.
Wenning GK, Tison F, Seppi K, et al. (2004) Development and
validation of the Unified Multiple System Atrophy Rating
Scale (UMSARS). Mov Disord 19: 1391–402.
Williams DR, Holton JL, Strand C, et al. (2007) Pathological
tau burden and distribution distinguishes progressive
supranuclear palsy-parkinsonism from Richardson’s
syndrome. Brain 130 (Pt 6): 1566–76.
Wimo A, Guerchet M, Ali GC, et al. (2017) The worldwide
costs of dementia 2015 and comparisons with 2010.
Alzheimers Dement 13: 1–7.

Bronzuoli MR, Iacomino A, Steardo L, et al. (2016) Targeting
neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease. J Inflamm Res
9: 199–208.
Cardenas-Aguayo M. del C, Silva-Lucero, M. del C, CortesOrtiz M, et al. (2014) Physiological role of amyloid beta in
neural cells: the cellular trophic activity. In Neurochemistry,
Heinbockel T (ed.) InTech Open Access Publisher,
doi:10.5772/57398.
Chakraborty A, de Wit NM, van der Flier WM, et al. (2017)
The blood brain barrier in Alzheimer’s disease. Vasc
Pharmacol 89: 12–18.
Chetelat G, Villemagne VL, Villain N, et al. (2012) Accelerated
cortical atrophy in cognitively normal elderly with high
β-amyloid deposition. Neurology 78: 477–84.
Citron M (2004) β-Secretase inhibition for the treatment
of Alzheimer’s disease: promise and challenge. Trends
Pharmacol Services 25: 92–7.
Clark CM, Schneider JA, Bedell BJ, et al. (2011) Use of
florbetapir-PET for imaging β-amyloid pathology. JAMA
305: 275–83.
Cummings JL (2011) Biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease drug
development. Alzheimers Dement 7: e13–44.
Cummings J (2011) Alzheimer’s disease: clinical trials and
the amyloid hypothesis. Ann Acad Med Singapore 40:
304–6.
Deutsch SI, Rosse RB, Deutsch LH (2006) Faulty regulation
of tau phosphorylation by the reelin signal transduction
pathway is a potential mechanism of pathogenesis
and therapeutic target in Alzheimer’s disease. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol 16: 547–51.

Xu Y, Yang J, Shang H (2016) Meta-analysis of risk factors for
Parkinson’s disease dementia. Transl Neurodegen 5: 1–8.

Dickerson BC, Stoub TR, Shah RC, et al. (2011) Alzheimersignature MRI biomarker predicts AD dementia in
cognitively normal adults. Neurology 76: 1395–402.

Yang L, Yan J, Jin X, et al. (2016) Screening for dementia
in older adults: comparison of Mini-Mental State
Examination, Min-Cog, Clock Drawing Test and AD8.
PLOS ONE 11: e0168949.

Ewers M, Sperling RA, Klunk WE, Weiner MW, Hampel H
(2011) Neuroimaging markers for the prediction and early
diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease dementia. Trends Neurosci
34: 430–42.

Yang W, Yu S (2017) Synucleinopathies: common features and
hippocampal manifestations. Cell Mol Life Sci 74: 8466–80.

Fajardo VA, Fajardo VA, LeBlanc PJ, et al. (2018)
Examining the relationship between trace lithium in
drinking water and the rising rates of age-adjusted
Alzheimer’s disease mortality in Texas. J Alzheimers Dis
61: 425–34.

Dementia/Memory/Cognition/Amyloid/
Alzheimer
Albert MS, DeKosky ST, Dickson D, et al. (2011) The diagnosis
of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease:
recommendations from the National Institute on Aging
and Alzheimer’s Association Workgroup. Alzheimers
Dement 7: 270–9.
Arbor SC, LaFontaine M, Cumbay M (2016) Amyloid-beta
Alzheimer targets: protein processing, lipid rafts, and
amyloid-beta pores. Yale J Biol Med 89: 5–21.

Fleisher AS, Chen K, Liu X, et al. (2011) Using positron
emission tomography and florbetapir F 18 to image
amyloid in patients with mild cognitive impairment
or dementia due to Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol 68:
1404–11.
Forster S, Grimmer T, Miederer I, et al. (2012) Regional
expansion of hypometabolism in Alzheimer’s disease
follows amyloid deposition with temporal delay. Biol
Psychiatry 71: 792–7.
603


<<<PAGE 620>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Gehres SW, Rocha A, Leuzy A, et al. (2016) Cognitive
intervention as an early nonpharmacological strategy in
Alzheimer’s disease: a translational perspective. Front
Aging Neurosci 8: 1–4.
Gitlin LN, Hodgson NA (2016) Who should assess the needs
of and care for a dementia patient’s caregiver? AMA J Ethics
18: 1171–81.
Godyn J, Jonczyk J, Panek D, et al. (2016) Therapeutic
strategies for Alzheimer’s disease in clinical trials.
Pharmacol Rep 68: 127–38.
Gomar JJ, Bobes-Bascaran MT, Conejero-Goldberg C, et al.
(2011) Utility of combinations of biomarkers, cognitive
markers, and risk factors to predict conversion from mild
cognitive impairment to Alzheimer disease in patients in
the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 68: 961–9.
Grimmer T, Tholen S, Yousefi BH, et al (2010) Progression of
cerebral amyloid load is associated with the apolipoprotein E
ε4 genotype in Alzheimer’s disease. Biol Psychiatry 68: 879–84.
Gurnani AS, Gavett BE (2017) The differential effects of
Alzheimer’s disease and Lewy body pathology on cognitive
performance: a meta-analysis. Neuropsychol Rev 27: 1–17.
Harrison JR, Owen MJ (2016) Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid
hypothesis on trial. Br J Psychiatry 208: 1–3.
Herukka SK, Simonsen AH, Andreasen N, et al. (2017)
Recommendations for CSF AD biomarkers in the diagnostic
evaluation of MCI. Alzheimers Dement 13: 285–95.
Jack CR Jr., Albsert MS, Knopman DS, et al. (2011)
Introduction to the recommendations from the National
Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer’s Association
Workgroup on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s
disease. Alzheimers Dement 7: 257–62.
Jack CR Jr., Lowe VJ, Weigand SD, et al. (2009) Serial PIB and
MRI in normal, mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s
disease: implications for sequence of pathological events in
Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 132: 1355–65.
Jonsson T, Atwal JK, Steinberg S, et al. (2012) A mutation in
APP protects against Alzheimer’s disease and age-related
cognitive decline. Nature 488: 96–9.
Kokjohn TA, Maarouf CL, Roher AE (2012) Is Alzheimer’s
disease amyloidosis a result of a repair mechanism gone
astray? Alzheimers Dement 8: 574–83.
Kovari E, Herrmann FR, Hof PR, et al. (2013) The relationship
between cerebral amyloid angiopathy and cortical
microinfarcts in brain ageing and Alzheimer’s disease.
Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 39: 498–509.
Li Y, Li Y, Li X, et al. (2017) Head injury as a risk factor for
dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of 32 observational studies. PLOS ONE 12:
e0169650.

604

Lieberman A, Deep A, Shi J, et al. (2018) Downward finger
displacement distinguishes Parkinson disease dementia
from Alzheimer disease. Int J Neurosci 128: 151–4.
Lim JK, Li QX, He Z, et al. (2016) The eye as a biomarker for
Alzheimer’s disease. Front Neurosci 10: 1–14.
MacLeod R, Hillert EK, Cameron RT, et al. (2015) The role
and therapeutic targeting of α-, β-, and γ-secretase in
Alzheimer’s disease. Future Sci OA 1: FS011.
Mallik A, Drzezga A, Minoshima S (2017) Clinical amyloid
imaging. Semin Nucl Med 47: 31–43.
Marciani DJ (2015) Alzheimer’s disease vaccine development:
a new strategy focusing on immune modulation. J
Neuroimmunol 287: 54–63.
McKhann GM, Knopman DS, Chertkow H (2011) The
diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease:
recommendations from the National Institute on Aging
and the Alzheimer’s Association Workgroup. Alzheimers
Dement 7: 263–9.
Mendiola-Precoma J, Berumen LC, Padilla K, et al. (2016)
Therapies for prevention and treatment of Alzheimer’s
disease. BioMed Res Int 2016: 2589276.
Panza F, Solfrizzi V, Seripa D, et al. (2016) Tau-centric
targets and drugs in clinical development for the
treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. BioMed Res Int 2016:
3245935.
Pascoal TA, Mathotaarachchi S, Shin M, et al. (2017)
Synergistic interaction between amyloid and tau predicts
the progression to dementia. Alzheimers Dement 13:
644–53.
Rabinovici GD, Rosen HJ, Alkalay A, et al. (2011) Amyloid vs.
FDG-PET in the differential diagnosis of AD and FTLD.
Neurology 77: 2034–42.
Rapp MA, Schnaider-Beeri M, Grossman HT, et al. (2006)
Increased hippocampal plaques and tangles in patients
with Alzheimer disease with a lifetime history of major
depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 63: 161–7.
Reisberg B, Doody R, Stöffle A, et al. (2003) Memantine in
moderate-to-severe Alzheimer’s disease. New Engl J Med
348: 1333–41.
Ritter AR, Leger GC, Miller JB, et al. (2017)
Neuropsychological testing in pathologically verified
Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia.
Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 31: 187–91.
Rodrigue KM, Kennedy KM, Devous MD Sr., et al. (2012)
Β-Amyloid burden in healthy aging. Regional distribution
and cognitive consequences. Neurology 78: 387–95.
Ruthirakuhan M, Herrmann N, Seuridjan I, et al. (2016)
Beyond immunotherapy: new approaches for disease
modifying treatments for early Alzheimer’s disease. Expert
Opin Pharmacother 17: 2417–29.


<<<PAGE 621>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Sabbagh MN, Schauble B, Anand K, et al. (2017) Histopathology
and florbetaben PET in patients incorrectly diagnosed with
Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 56: 441–6.

Wishart HA, Saykin AJ, McAllister TW, et al. (2006) Regional
brain atrophy in cognitively intact adults with a single
APOE ε4 allele. Neurology 67: 1221–4.

Scheinin NM, Aalto S, Kaprio J, et al. (2011) Early detection of
Alzheimer disease. Neurology 77: 453–60.

Wolk DA, Grachev ID, Buckley C, et al. (2011) Association
between in vivo fluorine 18-labeled flutemetamol
amyloid positron emission tomography imaging and in
vivo cerebral cortical histopathology. Arch Neurol 68:
1398–403.

Sharma N, Singh AN (2016) Exploring biomarkers for
Alzheimer’s disease. J Clin Diag Res 10: KE01–06.
Simonsen AH, Herukka SK, Andreasen N, et al. (2017)
Recommendations for CSF AD biomarkers in the
diagnostic evaluation of dementia. Alzheimers Dement 13:
285–95.
Sperling RA, Aisen PS, Beckett LA, et al. (2011) Toward
defining the preclinical stages of Alzheimer’s disease:
recommendations from the National Institute on Aging
and the Alzheimer’s Association Workgroup. Alzheimers
Dement 7: 280–92.
Spies PE, Claasen JA, Peer PG, et al. (2013) A prediction
model to calculate probability of Alzheimer’s disease using
cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers. Alzheimers Dement 9:
262–8.
Spies PE, Verbeek MM, van Groen T, et al. (2012) Reviewing
reasons for the decreased CSF Abeta42 concentration in
Alzheimer disease. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) 17: 2024–34.
Spira AP, Gottesman RF (2017) Sleep disturbance: an
emerging opportunity for Alzheimer’s disease prevention?
Int Psychogeriatr 29: 529–31.
Tarawneh R, Holtzman DM (2012) The clinical problem
of symptomatic Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive
impairment. Cold Spring Harbor Perspect Med 2: a006148.
Tariot PN, Aisen PS (2009) Can lithium or valproate untie
tangles in Alzheimer’s disease? J Clin Psychiatry 70: 919–21.
Uzun S, Kozumplik O, Folnegovic-Smalc V (2011) Alzheimer’s
dementia: current data review. Coll Antropol 35: 1333–7.
Venkataraman A, Kalk N, Sewell G, et al. (2017) Alcohol and
Alzheimer’s disease: does alcohol dependence contribute
to beta-amyloid deposition, neuroinflammation and
neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease? Alcohol
Alcoholism 52: 151–8.
Villemagne VL, Doré V, Bourgeat P, et al. (2017) Aβ-amyloid
and tau imaging in dementia. Semin Nucl Med 47: 75–88.
Wagner M, Wolf S, Reischies FM, et al. (2012) Biomarker
validation of a cued recall memory deficit in prodromal
Alzheimer disease. Neurology 78: 379–86.
Weintraub S, Wicklund AH, Salmon DP (2012) The
neuropsychological profile of Alzheimer disease. Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 :a006171.
Williams MM, Xiong C, Morris JC, Galvin JE (2006) Survival
and mortality differences between dementia with Lewy
bodies vs. Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 67: 1935–41.

Yaffe K, Tocco M, Petersen RC, et al. (2012) The epidemiology
of Alzheimer’s disease: laying the foundation for drug
design, conduct, and analysis of clinical trials. Alzheimers
Dement 8: 237–42.
Yan R (2016) Stepping closer to treating Alzheimer’s disease
patients with BACE1 inhibitor drugs. Transl Neurodegen
5: 13.
Yeh HL, Tsai SJ (2008) Lithium may be useful in the
prevention of Alzheimer’s disease in individuals at risk of
presenile familial Alzheimer’s disease. Med Hypotheses 71:
948–51.

Behavioral Symptoms of Dementia
Alexopoulos GS (2003) Role of executive function in late life
depression. J Clin Psychiatry 64 (Suppl 14): 18–23.
Ballard C, Oyebode F (1995) Psychotic symptoms in patients
with dementia. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 10: 743–52.
Ballard C, Neill D, O’Brien J, et al. (2000) Anxiety, depression
and psychosis in vascular dementia: prevalence and
associations. J Affect Disord 59: 97–106.
Bao AM, Meynen G, Swaab DF (2008) The stress system in
depression and neurodegeneration: focus on the human
hypothalamus. Brain Res Rev 57: 531–53.
Barnes DE, Yaffe K, Byers AL, et al. (2012) Midlife vs. late-life
depressive symptoms and risk of dementia. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 6: 493–8.
Bassetti CL, Bargiotas P (2018) REM sleep behavior disorder.
Front Neurol Neurosci 41: 104–16.
Bennett S, Thomas AJ (2014) Depression and dementia: cause,
consequence or coincidence? Maturita 79:184–90.
Buoli M, Serati M, Caldiroli A, et al. (2017) Pharmacological
management of psychiatric symptoms in frontotemporal
dementia: a systematic review. J Geriatr Psychiatry 30:
162–9.
Burns A, Jacoby R, Levy R (1990) Psychiatric phenomena
in Alzheimer’s disease. II: disorders of perception. Br J
Psychiatry 157: 76–81, 92–4.
Canevelli M, Valleta M, Trebbastoni A, et al. (2016)
Sundowning in dementia: clinical relevance,
pathophysiological determinants, and therapeutic
approaches. Front Med (Lausanne) 3: 73.

605


<<<PAGE 622>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Caraci F, Copani A, Nicoletti F, et al. (2010) Depression and
Alzheimer’s disease: neurobiological links and common
pharmacological targets. Eur J Pharmacol 626: 64–71.

Garay RP, Grossberg GT (2017) AVP-786 for the treatment of
agitation in dementia of the Alzheimer’s type. Expert Opin
Invest Drugs 26: 121–32.

Cohen-Mansfield J, Billig N (1986) Agitated behaviors in the
elderly. I. A conceptual review. J Am Geriatr Soc 34: 711–21.

Geerlings MI, den Hijer T, Koudstaal PJ, et al. (2008) History
of depression, depressive symptoms, and medial temporal
lobe atrophy and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology
70: 1258–64.

Corcoran C, Wong ML, O’Keane V (2004) Bupropion in the
management of apathy. J Psychopharm 18: 133–5.
Cummings J, Kohegyi E, Mergel V, et al. (2018) Efficacy and
safety of flexibly dosed brexpiprazole for the treatment
of agitation in Alzheimer type dementia: a randomized,
double blind fixed dose 12 week placebo controlled global
clinical trial. Abstract for the American Association of
Geriatric Psychiatry, Honolulu, Hawaii.
Cummings JL, Lyketsos CG, Peskind ER, et al. (2015) Effect of
dextromethorphan–quinidine on agitation in patients with
Alzheimer’s disease dementia: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA 314: 1242–54.
Dennis M, Shine L, John A, et al. (2017) Risk of adverse
outcomes for older people with dementia prescribed
antipsychotic medication: a population based e-cohort
study. Neurol Ther 6: 57–77.
Ducharme S, Price BH, Dickerson BC (2018) Apathy: a
neurocircuitry model based on frontotemporal dementia. J
Neural Neurosurg Psychiatry 89: 389–96.
Evan C, Weintraub D (2010) Case for and against specificity of
depression in Alzheimer’s disease. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci
64: 358–66.
Farina N, Morrell L, Banerjee S (2017) What is the therapeutic
value of antidepressants in dementia? A narrative review.
Geriatr Psychiatry 32: 32–49.
Fernandez-Matarrubia M, Matias-Guiu JA, Cabrera-Martin
MN, et al. (2018) Different apathy clinical profile and neural
correlates in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia
and Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 33: 141–50.
Fernandez-Matarrubia M, Matias-Guiu JA, Moreno-Ramos T,
et al. (2016) Validation of the Lille’s Apathy Rating Scale in
very mild to moderate dementia. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry
24: 517–27.
Ford AH, Almeida OP (2017) Management of depression in
patients with dementia: is pharmacological treatment
justified? Drugs Aging 34: 89–95.
Fraker J, Kales HC, Blazek M (2014) The role of the
occupational therapist in the management of
neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia in clinical
settings. Occup Ther Health Care 28: 4–20.
Frakey LL, Salloway S, Buelow M, Malloy P (2012) A
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of
modafinil for the treatment of apathy in individuals with
mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease. J Clin Psychiatry 73:
796–801.

606

Gessing LV, Sondergard L, Forman JL, et al. (2009)
Antidepressants and dementia. J Affect Disord 117: 24–9.
Goldman JG, Holden S (2014) Treatment of psychosis and
dementia in Parkinson’s disease. Curr Treat Options Neurol
16: 281.
Goodarzi Z, Mele B, Guo S, et al. (2016) Guidelines for
dementia or Parkinson’s disease with depression or anxiety:
a systematic review. BMC Neurol 16(1): 244.
Grossberg G, Kohegyi E, Amatniek J, et al. (2018) Efficacy
and safety of fixed dose brexpiprazole for the treatment
of agitation in Alzheimer type dementia: a randomized,
double blind fixed dose 12-week placebo controlled global
clinical trial. Abstract for the American Association of
Geriatric Psychiatry, Honolulu, Hawaii.
Hacksell U, Burstein ES, McFarland K, et al. (2014) On the
discovery and development of pimavanserin: a novel drug
candidate for Parkinson’s disease. Neurochem Res 39:
2008–17.
Hongiston K, Hallikainen I, Seldander T, et al. (2018) Quality
of life in relation to neuropsychiatric symptoms in
Alzheimer’s disease: 5-year prospective ALSOVA cohort
study. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 33: 47–57.
Jack Jr. CR, Wiste HJ, Weigland SD, et al. (2017) Defining
imaging biomarker cut point for brain aging and
Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 13: 205–16.
Johnson DK, Watts AS, Chapin BA, et al. (2011)
Neuropsychiatric profiles in dementia. Alzheimer Dis Assoc
Disord 25: 326–32.
Kales, HC, Kim HM, Zivin K, et al. (2012) Risk of mortality
among individual antipsychotics in patients with dementia.
Am J Psychiatry 169: 71–9.
Kales HC, Lyketsos CG, Miller EM, et al. (2019) Management
of behavioral and psychological symptoms in people with
Alzheimer’s disease: an international Delphi consensus. Int
Psychogeriatr 31: 83–90.
Kok RM, Reynolds CF (2017) Management of depression in
older adults: a review. JAMA 317: 2114–22.
Kong EH (2005) Agitation in dementia: concept clarification. J
Adv Nurs 52: 526–36.
Kumfor F, Zhen A, Hodges JR, et al. (2018) Apathy in
Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia:
distinct clinical profiles and neural correlates. Cortex 103:
350–9.


<<<PAGE 623>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Lanctot KL, Amatniek J, Ancoli-Israel S, et al. (2017)
Neuropsychiatric signs and symptoms of Alzheimer’s
disease: new treatment paradigms. Alzheimers Dement
(NY) 3: 440–9.
Lee GJ, Lu PH, Hua X, et al. (2012) Depressive symptoms
in mild cognitive impairment predict greater atrophy in
Alzheimer’s disease-related regions. Biol Psychiatry 71:
814–21.
Leroi I, Voulgari A, Breitner JC, et al. (2003) The epidemiology
of psychosis in dementia. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 11:
83–91.
Lochhead JD, Nelson MA, Maguire GA (2016) The treatment
of behavioral disturbances and psychosis associated with
dementia. Psychiatr Pol 50: 311–22.
Lopez OL, Becker JT, Sweet RA, et al. (2003) Psychiatric
symptoms vary with the severity of dementia in probable
Alzheimer’s disease. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 15:
346–53.
Lyketsos CG, Carillo MC, Ryan JM, et al. (2011)
Neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease.
Alzheimers Dement 7: 532–9.
Lyketsos CG, Lopez O, Jones B, et al. (2002) Prevalence
of neuropsychiatric symptoms in dementia and mild
cognitive impairment: results from the cardiovascular
health study. JAMA 288: 1475–83.
Lyketsos CG, Steinberg M, Tschanz JT, et al. (2000) Mental and
behavioral disturbances in dementia: findings from the
Cache County Study on memory in aging. Am J Psychiatry
157: 704–7.
Macfarlane S, O’Connor D (2016) Managing behavioural
and psychological symptoms in dementia. Aust Prescr 39:
123–5.
Marin RS, Fogel BS, Hawkins J, et al. (1995) Apathy: a
treatable symptom. J Neuropsychiatry 7: 23–30.
Maust DT, Kim HM, Seyfried LS, et al. (2015) Antipsychotics,
other psychotropics, and the risk of death in patients with
dementia: number needed to harm. JAMA Psychiatry 72:
438–45.
Moraros J, Nwankwo C, Patten SB, et al. (2017) The
association of antidepressant drug usage with cognitive
impairment or dementia, including Alzheimer disease: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Depress Anxiety 34:
217–26.
Mossello E, Boncinelli M, Caleri V, et al. (2008) Is
antidepressant treatment associated with reduced cognitive
decline in Alzheimer’s disease? Dement Geriatr Cogn
Disord 25: 372–9.
Norgaard A, Jensen-Dahm C, Gasse C, et al. (2017)
Psychotropic polypharmacy in patients with dementia:
prevalence and predictors. J Alz Dis 56: 707–16.

O’Gorman C (2020) Advance 1 phase 2/3 trial of AXS-05 in
Alzheimer’s disease agitation, personal communication.
Porsteinsson AP, Antonsdottir IM (2017) An update on the
advancements in the treatment of agitation in Alzheimer’s
disease. Expert Opin Pharmacother 18: 611–20.
Preuss UW, Wong JW, Koller G (2016) Treatment of behavioral
and psychological symptoms of dementia: a systematic
review. Psychiatr Pol 50: 679–715.
Rosenberg PB, Nowrangi MA, Lyketsos CG (2015)
Neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease: what
might be associated brain circuits? Mol Aspects Med 43–44:
25–37.
Sadowsky CH, Galvin JE (2012) Guidelines for the
management of cognitive and behavioral problems in
dementia. J Am Board Fam Med 25: 350–66.
Schneider LS, Dagerman KS, Insel P (2005) Risk of death with
atypical antipsychotic drug treatment for dementia. JAMA
294: 1935–43.
Siever LJ (2008) Neurobiology of aggression and violence. Am
J Psychiatry 165: 429–42.
Sink KM, Holden KF, Yaffe K (2005) Pharmacological
treatment of neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia.
JAMA 293: 596–608.
Stahl SM (2016) Parkinson’s disease psychosis as a serotonindopamine imbalance syndrome. CNS Spectrums 21: 271–5.
Stahl SM (2016) Mechanism of action of pimavanserin in
Parkinson’s disease psychosis: targeting serotonin 5HT2A
and 5HT2C receptors. CNS Spectrums 21: 271–5.
Stahl SM (2018) New hope for Alzheimer’s dementia as
prospects for disease modification fade: symptomatic
treatments for agitation and psychosis. CNS Spectrums 23:
291–7.
Stahl SM, Morrissette DA, Cummings M, et al. (2014)
California State Hospital violence assessment and treatment
(Cal-VAT) guidelines. CNS Spectrums 19: 449–65.
Torrisi M, Cacciola A, Marra A, et al. (2017) Inappropriate
behaviors and hypersexuality in individuals with dementia:
an overview of a neglected issue. Geriatr Gerontol Int 17:
865–74.
Tsuno N, Homma A (2009) What is the association between
depression and Alzheimer’s disease? Exp Rev Neurother 9:
1667–76.
Van der Linde RM, Dening T, Stephan BC, et al. (2016)
Longitudinal course of behavioural and psychological
symptoms of dementia: systematic review. Br J Psychiatry
209: 366–77.
Van der Spek K, Gerritsen DL, Smallbrugge M, et al. (2016)
Only 10% of the psychotropic drug use for neuropsychiatric
symptoms in patients with dementia is fully appropriate:
the PROPER I-study. Int Psychogeriatr 28: 1589–95.
607


<<<PAGE 624>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Vigen CLP, Mack WJ, Keefe RSE, et al. (2011) Cognitive
effects of atypical antipsychotic medications in patients
with Alzheimer’s disease: outcomes from CATIE-AD. Am J
Psychiatry 168: 831–9.
Volicer L, Citrome L, Volavka J (2017) Measurement of
agitation and aggression in adult and aged neuropsychiatric
patients: review of definitions and frequently used
measurement scales. CNS Spectrums 22: 407–14.
Wisniewski T, Drummond E (2016) Developing therapeutic
vaccines against Alzheimer’s disease. Expert Rev Vaccines
15: 401–15.
Wuwongse S, Chang RC, Law AC (2010) The putative
neurodegenerative links between depression and
Alzheimer’s disease. Prog Neurobiol 92: 362–75.
Zhang Y, Cai J, An L, et al. (2017) Does music therapy enhance
behavioral and cognitive function in elderly dementia
patients? A systematic review and metaanalysis.Ageing Res
Rev 35: 1–11.

Chapter 13 (Impulsivity,
Compulsivity, and Addiction)
OCD
Bloch MH, Wasylink S, Landeros A, et al. (2012) Effects of
ketamine in treatment refractory obsessive compulsive
disorder. Biol Psychiatry 72: 964–70.
Chamberlain SR, Menzies L, Hampshire A, et al. (2008)
Orbitofrontal dysfunction in patients with obsessivecompulsive disorder and their unaffected relatives. Science
321: 421–2.
Dougherty DD, Brennan BP, Stewart SE, et al. (2018)
Neuroscientifically informed formulation and treatment
planning for patients with obsessive compulsive disorder: a
review. JAMA Psychiatry 75: 1081–7.
Fineberg NA, Potenza MN, Chamberlain SR, et al. (2010)
Probing compulsive and impulsive behaviors, from
animal models to endophenotypes: a narrative review.
Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 591–604.
Gillan CM, Papmeyer M, Morein-Zamir S, et al. (2011)
Disruption in the balance between goal-directed behavior
and habit learning in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Am J
Psychiatry 168: 719–26.
Greenberg BD, Malone DA, Friehs GM, et al. (2006) Three year
outcomes in deep brain stimulation for highly resistant
obsessive–compulsive disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology
31: 2384–93.
Greenberg BD, Rauch SL, Haber SN (2010) Invasive circuitrybased neurotherapeutics: stereotactic ablation and deep brain
stimulation for OCD. Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 317–36.

608

Greeven A, van Balkom AJLM, van Rood YR, van
Oppen P, Spinhoven P (2006) The boundary between
hypochondriasis and obsessive–compulsive disorder:
a cross-sectional study from the Netherlands. J Clin
Psychiatry 67: 1682–9.
Kisely S, Hall K, Siskind D, et al. (2014) Deep brain stimulation
for obsessive compulsive disorder: a systematic review and
meta analysis. Psychol Med 44: 3533–42.
Menzies L, Chamberlain SR, Laird AR, et al. (2008) Integrating
evidence from neuroimaging and neuropsychological
studies of obsessive–compulsive disorder: the orbitofronto-striatal model revisited. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 32:
525–49.
Milad MR, Rauch SL (2012) Obsessive–compulsive disorder:
beyond segregated cortico-striatal pathways. Trends Cogn
Sci 16: 43–51.
Rasmussen SA, Noren G, Greenberg BD (2018) Gamma
ventral capsulotomy in intractable obsessive–compulsive
disorder. Biol Psychiatry 84: 355–64.
Richter MA, de Jesus DR, Hoppenbrouwers S, et al.
(2012) Evidence for cortical inhibitory and excitatory
dysfunction in obsessive compulsive disorder.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1144–51.
Wilhelm S, Buhlmann U, Tolin DF (2008) Augmentation
of behavior therapy with D-cycloserine for obsessive
compulsive disorder. Am J Psychiatry 165: 335–41.
Yin D, Zhang C, Lv Q, et al. (2018) Dissociable frontostriatal
connectivity: mechanism and predictor of the clinical
efficacy of capsulotomy in obsessive compulsive disorder.
Biol Psychiatry 84: 926–36.

Substance Abuse: General
Bedi G (2018) 3, 4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine as a
psychiatric treatment. JAMA Psychiatry 75: 419–20.
Clark L, Robbins TW, Ersche KD, Sahakian BJ (2006)
Reflection impulsivity in current and former substance
users. Biol Psychiatry 60: 515–22.
Dalley JW, Everitt BJ (2009) Dopamine receptors in the
learning, memory and drug reward circuitry. Semin Cell
Dev Biol 20: 403–10.
Ersche KD, Turton AJ, Pradhan S, Bullmore ET, Robbins TW
(2010) Drug addiction endophenotypes: impulsive versus
sensation-seeking personality traits. Biol Psychiatry 68:
770–3.
Field M, Marhe R, Franken I (2014) The clinical relevance of
attentional bias in substance use disorders. CNS Spectrums
19: 225–30.
Haber SN, Knutson B (2010) The reward circuit:
linking primate anatomy and human imaging.
Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 4–26.


<<<PAGE 625>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Koob GF, Le Moal M (2008) Addiction and the brain
antireward system. Ann Rev Psychol 59: 29–53.
Koob GF, Volkow ND (2010) Neurocircuitry of addiction.
Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 217–38.
Mandyam CD, Koob GF (2012) The addicted brain craves
new neurons: putative role for adult-born progenitors in
promoting recovery. Trends Neurosci 35: 250–60.
Nestler EJ (2005) Is there a common molecular pathway for
addiction? Nat Neurosci 11: 1445–9.
Nutt DJ, Hughes AL, Erritzoe D, et al. (2015) The dopamine
theory of addiction: 40 years of highs and lows. Nat Rev
Neurosci 16: 305–22.
Schneider S, Peters J, Bromberg U, et al. (2012) Risk taking
and the adolescent reward system: a potential common
link to substance abuse. Am J Psychiatry 169: 39–46.
Solway A, Gu X, Montague PR (2017) Forgetting to be
addicted: reconsolidation and the disconnection of things
past. Biol Psychiatry 82: 774–5

DeWitte P, Littleton J, Parot P, Koob G (2005) Neuroprotective
and abstinence-promoting effects of acamprosate.
Elucidating the mechanism of action. CNS Drugs 6:
517–37.
Garbutt JC, Kranzler HR, O’Malley SS, et al. (2005) Efficacy
and tolerability of long-acting injectable naltrexone for
alcohol dependence. A randomized controlled trial. JAMA
293: 1617–25.
Kiefer F, Wiedemann K (2004) Combined therapy: what does
acamprosate and naltrexone combination tell us? Alcohol
Alcohol 39: 542–7.
Kiefer F, Jahn H, Tarnaske T, et al. (2003) Comparing and
combining naltrexone and acamprosate in relapse
prevention of alcoholism. Arch Gen Psychiatry 60: 92–9.
Mann K, Bladstrom A, Torup T, et al. (2013) Extending the
treatment options in alcohol dependence: a randomized
controlled study of as-needed nalmefene. Biol Psychiatry
73: 706–13.

Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Fowler JS, Tomasi D, Telang F (2011)
Addiction: beyond dopamine reward circuitry. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 108: 15037–42.

Martinez D, Gil R, Slifstein M, et al. (2005) Alcohol
dependence is associated with blunted dopamine
transmission in the ventral striatum. Biol Psychiatry 58:
779–86.

Substance Abuse: Alcohol

Mason BJ (2003) Acamprosate and naltrexone treatment
for alcohol dependence: an evidence-based risk-benefits
assessment. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 13: 469–75.

Anton RF, O’Malley SS, Ciraulo DA, et al. (2006) Combined
pharmacotherapies and behavioral interventions for
alcohol dependence. The combine study: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 295: 2003–17.
Anton RF, Pettinati H, Zweben A, et al. (2004) A multi site
dose ranging study of nalmefene in the treatment of
alcohol dependence. J Clin Psychopharmacol 24: 421–8.
Braus DH, Schumann G, Machulla HJ, Bares R, Mann K (2005)
Correlation of stable elevations in striatal μ-opioid receptor
availability in detoxified alcoholic patients with alcohol
craving. A positron emission tomography study using carbon
11-labeled carfentanil. Arch Gen Psychiatry 62: 57–64.
Crevecoeur D, Cousins SJ, Denering L, et al. (2018)
Effectiveness of extended release naltrexone to reduce
alcohol cravings and use behaviors during treatment and at
follow-up. J Subst Abuse Treat 85: 105–8.
Dahchour A, DeWitte P (2003) Effects of acamprosate on
excitatory amino acids during multiple ethanol withdrawal
periods. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 3: 465–70.
Dakwar E, Levin F, Hart CL, et al. (2020) A single ketamine
infusion combined with motivational enhancement
therapy for alcohol use disorder: a randomized
midazolam controlled pilot study. Am J Psychiatry 172:
125–33.
DeWitte P (2004) Imbalance between neuroexcitatory and
neuroinhibitory amino acids causes craving for ethanol.
Addict Behav 29: 1325–39.

Mason BJ (2005) Acamprosate in the treatment of alcohol
dependence. Expert Opin Pharmacother 6: 2103–15.
Mason BJ, Goodman AM, Chabac S, Lehert P (2006) Effect of
oral acamprosate on abstinence in patients with alcohol
dependence in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial: the
role of patient motivation. J Psychiatr Res 40: 382–92.
Netzeband JG, Gruol DL (1995) Modulatory effects of acute
ethanol on metabotropic glutamate responses in cultured
Purkinje neurons. Brain Res 688: 105–13.
O’Brien CO (2015) In treating alcohol use disorders, why
not use evidence-based treatment? Am J Psychiatry 172:
305–7.
Palpacuer C, Duprez R, Huneau A, et al. (2017)
Pharmacologically controlled drinking in the treatment
of alcohol dependence or alcohol use disorders: a
systematic review with direct and network meta analyses
on nalmefene, naltrexone, acamprosate, baclofen and
topiramate. Addiction 113: 220–37.
Petrakis IL, Poling J, Levinson C (2005) Naltrexone and
disulfiram in patients with alcohol dependence and
comorbid psychiatric disorders. Biol Psychiatry 57:
1128–37.
Pettinati HM, O’Brien CP, Rabinowitz AR (2006) The status
of naltrexone in the treatment of alcohol dependence.
Specific effects on heavy drinking. J Clin Psychopharmacol
26: 610–25.
609


<<<PAGE 626>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Roozen HG, de Waart R, van der Windt DAW, et al. (2005) A
systematic review of the effectiveness of naltrexone in the
maintenance treatment of opioid and alcohol dependence.
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 16: 311–23.
Smith-Bernardin S, Rowe C, Behar E, et al. (2018) Low
threshold extended release naltrexone for high utilizers
of public services with severe alcohol use disorder: a pilot
study. J Subst Abuse Treat 85: 109–15.
Soyka M (2014) Nalmefene for the treatment of alcohol
dependence: a current update. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol
17: 675–84.
Van Amsterdam J, van den Brink W (2013) Reduced risk
drinking as a viable treatment goal in problematic alcohol
use and alcohol dependence. J Psychopharmacol 27:
987–97.
Wiers CE, Stelzel C, Gladwin TE, et al. (2015) Effects of
cognitive bias modification training on neural alcohol cue
reactivity in alcohol dependence. Am J Psychiatry 172:
334–43.

Substance Abuse: Cannabis
Black N, Stockings E, Campbell G, et al. (2019) Cannabinoids
for the treatment of mental disorders and symptoms of
mental disorders: a systematic review and meta analysis.
Lancet Psychiatry 6: 995–1010.
Haney M, Hill MN (2018) Cannabis and cannabinoids:
from synapse to society. Neuropsychopharm Rev 43:
1–212.
Hindley G, Beck K, Borgan B (2020) Psychiatric symptoms
caused by cannabis constituents: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry 7: 344–53.
Hines LA, Freeman TP, Gage SH, et al. (2020) Association of
high potency cannabis use with mental and substance use
in adolescence. JAMA Psychiatry 77: 1044–51.
Hurd YL, Spriggs S, Alishayev J, et al. (2019) Cannabidiol for
the reduction of cue-induced craving and anxiety in drug
abstinent individuals with heroin use disorder: a double
blind randomized placebo controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry
176: 911–22.
James S (2020) A Clinician’s Guide to Cannabinoid Science.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kovacs FE, Knop T, Urbanski MJ, et al. (2012) Exogenous
and endogenous cannabinoids suppress inhibitory
neurotransmission in the human neocortex.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1104–14.
Mason BJ, Crean R, Goodell V, et al. (2012) A proof-of-concept
randomized controlled study of gabapentin: effects on
cannabis use, withdrawal and executive function deficits
in cannabis-dependent adults. Neuropsychopharmacology
37: 1689–98.

610

Nugent SM, Morasco BJ, O’Neil ME, et al. (2017) The effects of
cannabis among adults with chronic pain and an overview
of general harms: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med 167:
319–31.

Substance Abuse: Nicotine
Akkus F, Ametamey SM, Treyer V, et al. (2013) Market global
reduction in mGlutR5 receptor binding in smokers and
ex smokers determined by 11C-ABP688 positron emission
tomography. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 10: 737–42.
Akkus F, Treyer V, Johayem A, et al. (2016) Association of
long-term nicotine abstinence with normal metabotropic
glutamate receptor 5 binding. Biol Psychiatry 79: 474–80.
Crunelle CL, Miller ML, Booij J, van den Rink W (2010) The
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor partial agonist varenicline
and the treatment of drug dependence: a review. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol 20: 69–79.
Culbertson CS, Bramen J, Cohen MS (2011) Effect of bupropion
treatment on brain activation induced by cigarette-related
cues in smokers. Arch Gen Psychiatry 68: 505–15.
Evins AE, Culhane MA, Alpert JE, et al. (2008) A controlled
trial of bupropion added to nicotine patch and behavioral
therapy for smoking cessation in adults with unipolar
depressive disorders. J Clin Psychopharmacol 28: 660–6.
Franklin T, Wang Z, Suh JJ, et al. (2011) Effects of varenicline
on smoking cue-triggered neural and craving responses.
Arch Gen Psychiatry 68: 516–26.
King DP, Paciga S, Pickering E, et al. (2012) Smoking
cessation pharmacogenetics: analysis of varenicline
and bupropion in placebo-controlled clinical trials.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 641–50.
Lotipour S, Mandelkern M, Alvarez-Estrada M, Brody AL
(2012) A single administration of low-dose varenicline
saturates α4β2* nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the
human brain. Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1738–48.
Steinberg MB, Greenhaus S, Schmelzer AC, et al. (2009)
Triple-combination pharmacotherapy for medically ill
smokers. A randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 150: 447–54.

Substance Abuse: Opioids
Bell J, Strang J (2020) Medication treatment of opioid use
disorder. Biol Psychiatry 87: 82–8.
Chutuape MA, Jasinski DR, Finerhood MI, Stitzer ML (2001)
One-, three-, and six-month outcomes after brief inpatient
opioid detoxification. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 27: 19–44.
Davids E, Gastpar M (2004) Buprenorphine in the treatment of
opioid dependence. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 14: 209–16.
Elkader A, Sproule B (2005) Buprenorphine: clinical
pharmacokinetics in the treatment of opioid dependence.
Clin Pharmacokinet 44: 661–80.


<<<PAGE 627>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Han B, Compton WM, Blanco C, et al. (2017) Prescription
opioid use, misuse and use disorders in US adults: 2015
national survey on drug use and health. Ann Intern Med
167: 293–301.
Johansson J, Hirvonen J, Lovro Z, et al. (2019) Intranasal
naloxone rapidly occupies brain mu opioid receptors
in human subjects. Neuropsychopharmacology 44:
1667–73.
Kowalczyk WJ, Phillips KA, Jobes ML, et al. (2015) Clonidine
maintenance prolongs opioid abstinence and decouples
stress from craving in daily life: a randomized controlled
trial with ecological momentary assessment. Am J
Psychiatry 172: 760–7.
Krupitsky E, Nunes EV, Ling W, et al. (2011) Injectable
extended-release naltrexone for opioid dependence: a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter randomized
trial. Lancet 377: 1506–13.
Lee JD, Nunes EV, Novo P, et al. (2018) Comparative
effectiveness of extended-release naltrexone versus
buprenorphine–naloxone for opioid relapse prevention
(X:BOT): a multicentre, open label, randomized controlled
trial. Lancet 391: 309–18.
Marquet P (2002) Pharmacology of high-dose
buprenorphine. In Buprenorphine Therapy of Opiate
Addiction, Kintz P and Marquet P (eds.), Totawa, NJ:
Humana Press, 1–11.
National Institute on Drug Abuse. Drugs, brains, and behavior.
www.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/soa_2014.pdf.
Accessed January 2018.

Sullivan MA, Bisage A, Bavlicova M, et al. (2019) A
randomized trial comparing extended release injectable
suspension and oral naltrexone, both combined with
behavioral therapy, for the treatment of opioid use
disorder. Am J Psychiatry 176: 129–37.
Tanum L, Solli KK, Latif ZE, et al. (2017) Effectiveness
of injectable extended-release naltrexone vs. daily
buprenorphine–naloxone for opioid dependence: a
randomized clinical noninferiority trial. JAMA Psychiatry
74: 1197–205.
Tiihonen J, Krupitsky E, Verbitskaya E, et al. (2012)
Naltrexone implant for the treatment of polydrug
dependence: a randomized controlled trial. Am J
Psychiatry 169: 531–6.
Volkow ND (2014) America’s addiction to opioids: Heroin and
prescription drug abuse. Presented at the Senate Caucus
on International Narcotics Control. https://archives.
drugabuse.gov/testimonies/2014/americas-addiction-toopioids-heroin-prescription-drug-abuse.
Volkow ND, Frieden TR, Hyde PS, Cha SS (2014) Medicationassisted therapies: tackling the opioid-overdose epidemic.
N Engl J Med 370: 2063–6.
World Health Organization (2009) Guidelines for the
Psychosocially Assisted Pharmacological Treatment of
Opioid Dependence. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Substance Abuse: Stimulants

Patel B, Koston TR (2019) Keeping up with clinical advances:
opioid use disorder. CNS Spectrums 24: 17–23.

Bauman MH, Ayestas MA Jr., Partilla JS, et al. (2012) The
designer methcathinone analogs, mephedrone and
methylone, are substrates for monoamine transporters in
brain tissue. Neuropsychopharmacology 37, 1192–203.

Saanijoki T, Tuominen L, Tuulari JJ et al. (2018) Opioid
release after high intensity interval training in
healthy human subjects. Neuropsychopharmacology 43:
246–54.

Bradberry CW (2002) Dose-dependent effect of ethanol
on extracellular dopamine in mesolimbic striatum of
awake rhesus monkeys: comparison with cocaine across
individuals. Psychopharmacology 165: 67–76.

Smyth BP, Barry J, Keenan E, Ducray K (2010) Lapse and
relapse following inpatient treatment of opiate dependence.
Ir Med J 103: 176–9.

Collins GT, Narasimhan D, Cunningham AR, et al. (2012)
Long-lasting effects of a PEGylated mutant cocaine esterase
(CocE) on the reinforcing and discriminative stimulus
effects of cocaine in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology 37:
1092–103.

Spagnolo PA, Kimes A, Schwandt ML, et al. (2019)
Striatal dopamine release in response to morphine: a
11C-raclopride positron emission tomography study in
healthy men. Biol Psychiatry 86: 356–64.
Stahl SM (2018) Antagonist treatment is just as effective as
replacement therapy for opioid addition but neither is used
often enough. CNS Spectrums 23: 113–16.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Key substance use and mental health indicators in the
United States: results from the 2016 National Survey
on Drug Use and Health. www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/
default/files/NSDUH-FFR1-2016/NSDUH-FFR1-2016.
htm#opioid1. Accessed January 2018.

Dakwar E, Nunes EV, Hart CL, et al. (2019) A single ketamine
infusion combined with mindfulness based behavioral
modification to treat cocaine dependence: a randomized
clinical trial. Am J Psychiatry 176: 923–30.
Ersche KD, Bullmore ET, Craig KJ, et al. (2010) Influence of
compulsivity of drug abuse on dopaminergic modulation
of attentional bias in stimulant dependence. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 67: 632–44.
Ersche KD, Jones PS, Williams GB, et al. (2012) Abnormal
brain structure implicated in stimulant drug addiction.
Science 335: 601–4.
611


<<<PAGE 628>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Ferris MJ, Calipari ES, Mateo Y, et al. (2012) Cocaine
self-administration produces pharmacodynamic
tolerance: differential effects on the potency of dopamine
transporter blockers, releasers, and methylphenidate.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1708–16.

Selzer J (2006) Buprenorphine: reflections of an addictions
psychiatrist. J Clin Psychiatry 67: 1466–7.

Hart CL, Marvin CB, Silver R, Smith EE (2012) Is cognitive
functioning impaired in methamphetamine users? A
critical review. Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 586–608.

Wee S, Hicks MJ, De BP, et al. (2012) Novel cocaine vaccine
linked to a disrupted adenovirus gene transfer vector
blocks cocaine psychostimulant and reinforcing effects.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1083–91.

Heinz A, Reimold M, Wrase J, et al. (2005) Stimulant actions
in rodents: implications for attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder treatment and potential substance abuse. Biol
Psychiatry 57: 1391–6.
Leyton M, Boileau I, Benkelfat C, et al. (2002) Amphetamineinduced increases in extracellular dopamine, drug wanting,
and novelty seeking: a PET/[11 C]raclopride study in
healthy men. Neuropsychopharmacology 27: 1027–35.
Lindsey KP, Wilcox KM, Votaw JR, et al. (2004) Effect
of dopamine transporter inhibitors on cocaine selfadministration in rhesus monkeys: relationship to
transporter occupancy determined by positron emission
tomography neuroimaging. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 309:
959–69.
Little KY, Krolewski DM, Zhang L, Cassin BJ (2003) Loss of
striatal vesicular monoamine transporter protein (VMAT2)
in human cocaine users. Am J Psychiatry 160: 47–55.
Livni E, Parasrampuria DA, Fischman AJ (2006) PET study
examining pharmacokinetics, detection and likeability, and
dopamine transporter receptor occupancy of short- and
long-acting oral methylphenidate. Am J Psychiatry 163:
387–95.
Martinez D, Narendran R, Foltin RW, et al. (2007)
Amphetamine-induced dopamine release: markedly
blunted in cocaine dependence and predictive of the choice
to self-administer cocaine. Am J Psychiatry 164: 622–9.
Narendran R, Lopresti BJ, Martinez D, et al. (2012) In vivo
evidence for low striatal vesicular monoamine transporter
2 (VMAT2) availability in cocaine abusers. Am J Psychiatry
169: 55–63.
Overtoom CCE, Bekker EM, van der Molen MW, et al. (2009)
Methylphenidate restores link between stop-signal sensory
impact and successful stopping in adults with attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry 65: 614–19.
Peng, XO, Xi ZX, Li X, et al. (2010) Is slow-onset long-acting
monoamine transport blockade to cocaine as methadone
is to heroin? Implication for anti-addiction medications.
Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 2564–78.
Santos MD, Salery M, Forget B, et al. (2017) Rapid
synaptogenesis in the nucleus accumbens is induced by a
single cocaine administration and stabilized by mitogenactivated protein kinase interacting kinase-1 activity. Biol
Psychiatry 82: 806–18.

612

Spencer TJ, Biederman J, Ciccone PE, et al. (2006) Stimulant
medications: how to minimize their reinforcing effects?
Am J Psychiatry 163: 359–61.

Substance Abuse: Hallucinogens,
Entactogens, Dissociatives
Brawley P, Dufield JC (1972) The pharmacology of
hallucinogens. Pharmacol Rev 34: 31–66.
Carhart-Harris RL, Goodwin GM (2017) The therapeutic
potential of psychedelic drugs: past, present and future.
Neuropsychopharmacology 42: 2105–13.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Day CMG, et al.
(2018) Psilocybin with psychological support for
treatment-resistant depression: six month follow up.
Psychopharmacology 235: 399–408.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Rucker J, et al. (2016)
Psilocybin with psychological support for treatmentresistant depression: an open label feasibility study. Lancet
Psychiatry 3: 619–27.
Carhart-Harris RL, Erritzoe D, Williams T, et al. (2012)
Neural correlates of the psychedelic state as determined
by fMRI studies with psilocybin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
109: 2138–43.
Carhart-Harris RL, Leech R, Williams TM, et al. (2012)
Implications for psychedelic assisted psychotherapy:
a functional magnetic resonance imaging study with
psilocybin. Br J Psychiatry 200: 238–44.
DiIorio CR, Watkins TJ, Dietrich MS (2012) Evidence for
chronically altered serotonin function in the cerebral
cortex of female 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
polydrug users. Arch Gen Psychiatry 69: 399–409.
Erritzoe D, Frokjaer VG, Holst KK, et al. (2011) In
vivo imaging of cerebral serotonin transporter
and serotonin 2a receptor binding in
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA or
“Ecstasy”) and hallucinogen users. Arch Gen Psychiatry
68: 562–76.
Fantegrossi WE, Murnane KS, Reissig CJ (2008) The
behavioral pharmacology of hallucinogens. Biochem
Pharmacol 25: 17–33.
Feduccia AA, Mithoefer MC (2018) MDMA-assisted
psychotherapy for PTSD: are memory reconsolidation
and fear extinction underlying mechanisms. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 84: 221–8.


<<<PAGE 629>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Liechti ME (2017) Modern clinical research on LSD.
Neuropsychopharmacology 42: 2114–27.
Madsen MK, Fisher PM, Burmester D, et al. (2019)
Psychedelic effects of psilocybin correlate with serotonin
2A receptor occupancy and plasma psilocin levels.
Neuropsychopharmacology 44: 1328–34.
Mithoefer MC, Wagner MT, Mithoefer AT, et
al. (2011) The safety and efficacy of {+/−}
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine-assisted
psychotherapy in subjects with chronic, treatmentresistant posttraumatic stress disorder: the first
randomized controlled pilot study. J Psychopharmacol 25:
439–52.
Passie T, Halpern JH, Stichtenoth DO, et al. (2008) The
pharmacology of lysergic acid diethylamide: a review. CNS
Neurosci Ther 14: 295–314.
Pitts EG, Minerva AR, Chandler EB, et al. (2017)
3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine increases affiliative
behaviors in squirrel moneys in a serotonin 2A receptor
dependent manner. Neuropsychopharmacology 42:
1962–71.
Quednow BB, Komeer M, Geyer MA, et al. (2012) Psilocybin
induced deficits in autonomic and controlled inhibition
are attenuated by ketanserin in healthy human volunteers.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 630–40.
Schmid Y, Enzler F, Gasser P, et al. (2015) Acute effects
of lysergic acid diethylamine in healthy subjects. Biol
Psychiatry 78: 544–53.
Titeler M, Lyon RA, Gleenon RA (1988) Radioligand binding
evidence implicates the brain 5HT2 receptor as a site of
action for LSD and phenylisopropylamine hallucinogens.
Psychopharmacology 94: 213–16.
Urban NBL, Girgis RR, Talbot PS, et al. (2012) Sustained
recreational use of Ecstasy is associated with altered pre
and postsynaptic markers of serotonin transmission in
neocortical areas: a PET study with [11C]DASB and [11C]
MDL 100907. Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1465–73.

Binge Eating/Gambling
Balodis IM, Kober H, Worhunsky PD, et al. (2012) Diminished
frontostriatal activity during processing of monetary
rewards and losses in pathological gambling. Biol
Psychiatry 71: 749–57.
Gearhardt AN, Yokum S, Orr PT, et al. (2011) Neural
correlates of food addiction. Arch Gen Psychiatry 68:
808–16.
Grant JE, Kim SW, Hartman BK (2008) A double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of the opiate antagonist
naltrexone in the treatment of pathological gambling urges.
J Clin Psychiatry 69: 783–9.

Lawrence AJ, Luty J, Bogdan NA, Sahakian BJ, Clark L (2009)
Impulsivity and response inhibition in alcohol dependence
and problem gambling. Psychopharmacology 207: 163–72.
Lobo DSS, Kennedy JL (2006) The genetics of gambling and
behavioral addictions. CNS Spectrums 11: 931–9.
McElroy SL, Hudson JI, Capece JA, et al. (2007) Topiramate
for the treatment of binge eating disorder associated with
obesity: a placebo-controlled study. Biol Psychiatry 61:
1039–48.
Miedl SF, Peters J, Buchel C (2012) Altered neural reward
representations in pathological gamblers revealed by
delay and probability discounting. Arch Gen Psychiatry 69:
177–86.
Salamone JD, Correa M, Mingote S, Weber SM (2002) Nucleus
accumbens dopamine and the regulation of effort in
food-seeking behavior: implications for studies of natural
motivation, psychiatry, and drug abuse. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 305: 1–8.
Van Holst RJ, Veltman DJ, Buchel C, van den Brink W,
Goudriaan AE. (2012) Distorted expectancy coding in
problem gambling: is the addictive in the anticipation? Biol
Psychiatry 71: 741–8.
Zack M, Poulos CX (2007) A D1 antagonist enhances the
rewarding and priming effects of a gambling episode in
pathological gamblers. Neuropsychopharmacology 32:
1678–86.

Impulsivity/Compulsivity
Berlin HA, Rolls ET, Iversen SD (2005) Borderline personality
disorder, impulsivity, and the orbitofrontal cortex. Am J
Psychiatry 162: 2360–73.
Chamberlain SR, del Campo N, Dowson J, et al. (2007)
Atomoxetine improved response inhibition in adults with
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry 62:
977–84.
Chamberlain SR, Muller U, Blackwell AD, et al. (2006)
Neurochemical modulation of response inhibition and
probabilistic learning in humans. Science 311: 861–3.
Chamberlain SR, Robbins TW, Winder-Rhodes S, et al. (2011)
Translational approaches to frontostriatal dysfunction
in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder using a
computerized neuropsychological battery. Biol Psychiatry
69: 1192–203.
Dalley JW, Everitt BJ, Robbins TW (2011) Impulsivity,
compulsivity, and top-down cognitive control. Neuron 69:
680–94.
Dalley JW, Mar AC, Economidou D, Robbins TW (2008)
Neurobehavioral mechanisms of impulsivity: frontostriatal systems and functional neurochemistry. Pharmacol
Biochem Behav 90: 250–60.

613


<<<PAGE 630>>>
Suggested Reading and Selected References

Fineberg NA, Chamberlain SR, Goudriaan AR (2014)
New developments in human neurocognition: clinical,
genetic, and brain imaging correlates of impulsivity and
compulsivity. CNS Spectrums 19: 69–89.
Lodge DJ, Grace AA (2006) The hippocampus modulates
dopamine neuron responsivity by regulating the intensity
of phasic neuron activation. Neuropsychopharmacology 31:
1356–61.
Robbins TW, Gillan CM, Smith DG, de Wit S, Ersche KD
(2012) Neurocognitive endophenotypes of impulsivity and
compulsivity: towards dimensional psychiatry. Trends Cogn
Sci 16: 81–91.

614

Shaw P, Gilliam M, Liverpool M, et al. (2011) Cortical
development in typically developing children with
symptoms of hyperactivity and impulsivity: support for
a dimensional view of attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder. Am J Psychiatry 168: 143–51.
Sugam JA, Day JJ, Wightman RM, Carelki RM (2012) Phasic
nucleus accumbens dopamine encodes risk-based
decision-making behavior. Biol Psychiatry 71: 199–205.
Weathers JD, Stringaris AR, Deveney CM, et al. (2012) A
development study of the neural circuitry mediating
motor inhibition in bipolar disorder. Am J Psychiatry 16:
633–41.


<<<PAGE 631>>>
Index
5HT. See serotonin
ABC model of apathy, 536
abstinence, 571–4
acamprosate, 556
acetyl coenzyme A, 505
acetylcholine, 5, 505–10
dopamine and, 166
acetylcholinesterase, 505
acetylcholinesterase inhibition, 509–18
action potential, 67, 73
active site, 45, 46
acute pain, 379, 380
addiction, 476, 539
behavioral, 575
dopamine theory of, 542–3
substance addictions, 544–75
adenosine, 440
ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder), 34, 449, 485, 539
comorbidities, 466, 480
neurodevelopment, 463–5
oppositional symptoms, 484
prefrontal cortex tuning, 454–63
symptoms and circuits, 449–53
treatments, future, 484
treatments, NET inhibitors, 480–4
treatments, stimulants, 467–79
treatments, symptoms and, 466–7
advanced sleep phase disorder, 435, 437
affective blunting, 142
affective disorders, 244
affective symptoms, 95
positive and negative, 278, 280, 306
schizophrenia, 145
aggression, 145–7, 521, 577–8
agitation, 145, 521–3
dementia, 145, 157, 197
glutamate target, 533
neuronal networks of, 528–30
treatment, 523–4
treatment, multimodal monoamine,
530–2
agomelatine, 306–8
agonist spectrum, 37, 43, 45, 56–62, 184,
192
agonists, 57, 58
full, 37–41, 56, 192
inverse, 42, 44–5, 61, 62, 240
no agonist, 37
partial. See partial agonists

AIMS (Abnormal Involuntary Movement
scale), 174
akathisia, 166, 169
alcohol, 377, 553–6
abstinence, 573
co-addictions, 553
treatment of alcoholism, 556
alcohol abuse, 378
allodynia, 380
allopregnanolone, 320, 322
allosteric modulation, 64–6, 261, 262
alogia, 142
alpha-1 antagonism, 216, 225, 236, 327–8
alpha-2 adrenergic agonists, 481–4
alpha-2 antagonism, 309
alpha-2 autoreceptors, 254, 256, 258
alpha-2-delta ligands, 366, 377, 380
pain alleviation, 398
SNRI combinations, 399
alpha pore, 69, 70
alpha-synuclein, 493, 494
alternative splicing, 26
Alzheimer disease, 487–90, See also
dementia
agitation in, 521–4, 528–33
delusions in, 157
dementia stage 3, 502
early detection, importance of, 497
impulsivity, 539
MCI stage 2, 500–2
memory and cognition treatment,
509–18
Parkinson’s disease comorbidity, 494
pathology, 488
presymptomatic stage, 499–501
psychosis in, 521–4
targeting amyloid, 496–9
vascular dementia comorbidity, 492
amantadine, 169
amisulpride, 205
amotivational syndrome, 563
AMPA receptors, 101, 104, 330, 331
amphetamine, 337, 356, 441–2, 472–6,
569
ADHD, 484
formulations, 475
isomers, 472
amygdala, fear and, 364–5, 372, 374
amyloid cascade hypothesis, 496–9
amyloid plaques. See beta-amyloid
amyloid precursor protein, 497–8

amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 353
analgesia, 380
anatomical basis of neurotransmission,
1–5
anesthesia, dissociative, 570
anhedonia, 142, 162
antagonists, 41–3, 57, 58, 60, 62
alpha-1, 216, 225, 236, 327–8
alpha-2, 309
silent, 41, 42, 45, 192
anticholinergics, 166, 168, 215, 294
anticonvulsants
doubtful efficacy in bipolar disorder,
352–3
insomnia treatment, 426
mood stabilizers, 346
proven efficacy in bipolar disorder,
347–51
antidepressant actions, 195–234, 267, 283
antihistamines, 161, 215, 295, 425–6
antipsychotic actions, 161–2, 242
antipsychotics. See drugs targeting
serotonin receptors, drugs targeting
dopamine D2 receptors
anxiety, 78, 145, 359
OCD and, 576
anxiety disorders, 196, 378
ADHD and, 468
comorbidity, 360
core symptoms, 360
definition, 360
major depression and, 360–2
MAOIs, 336
noradrenergic hyperactivity in, 370–2
overlapping symptoms of different,
362–3
pain disorders and, 387
psychotherapy, 359
serotonin and, 368–70
treatment of, 377–8, 421
anxiety phenotype, 363
anxiolytic actions, 196, 366
apathy, 78, 536–7
APOE4 gene, 497
aripiprazole, 192, 229, 239, 326
armodafinil, 442–4
arousal, 457, 459
arousal spectrum, 402
asenapine, 220, 232
asociality, 142
asymptomatic amyloidosis, 499–501
615


<<<PAGE 632>>>
Index

atomoxetine, 480–1
auditory hallucinations, 113
autoreceptors
alpha-2, 254, 256, 258
monoamine, 8
avolition, 142
axoaxonic synapses, 1, 3
axodendritic synapses, 1, 3
axosomatic synapses, 1, 3
barbiturates, 556
bath salts, 546
BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic
factor), 266, 268, 329
behavioral addictions, 575
behavioral variant FTD, 494
benzodiazepine-insensitive GABAA
receptors, 263–4
benzodiazepines, 321, 366, 377
caution with, 378
insomnia treatment, 421–2
benzodiazepine-sensitive GABAA
receptors, 259–62
beta-amyloid, 488, 496–8, 502
detection, 499, 501
beta blockers, 375, 376
beta subunits, 68
bifeprunox, 192
binge-eating disorder, 575
bipolar depression, 244
drug treatment, 236, 240
family history of, 250
first-line treatment, 342
identifying, 250
missed or delayed diagnosis, 250
schizophrenia and, 249
suicide rates, 251
versus unipolar, 249–51
bipolar disorder
anticonvulsants with proven efficacy,
347–51
anticonvulsants with uncertain
efficacy, 352–3
bipolar I, 247
bipolar II, 244, 247
combination treatments, 353
drug treatment, 338–58
blocking fear conditioning, 375–7
blonanserin, 234, 241
brexanolone, 320
brexpiprazole, 192, 197, 230, 239, 327–8,
378, 530–2
bright light therapy, 438, 440, 444
buprenorphine, 560, 561, 562
bupropion, 306–8, 353–4, 480, 533
nicotine addiction, 551
sertraline combination, 294

616

buspirone, 333, 370
butyrylcholinesterase, 505, 510
caffeine, 440–1
calcium channel blockers (L-type), 352
cannabidiol (CBD), 563, 565, 567
cannabis, 150, 563–7
benefits and risks, 564
side effects, 563
therapeutic uses, 564
carbamazepine, 350, 530
cardiometabolic risk, 196, 224
cardiometabolism, 198–201, 415
cardiovascular disease, 156, 415, 432,
492, 524
carfentanil, 560
cariprazine, 192, 231, 240, 328, 343–5
cataplexy, 434, 435, 446
catechol-O-methyltransferase, 253
central disorders of hypersomnolence, 432
central pain, 379
central sensitization, 395
chemical neurotransmission, 1, 28
anatomical versus, 1–5
epigenetics, 23–6
ion channels and, 73–6
mood disorders, 252–64
principles of, 5–9
signal transduction cascades, 9–23,
28, 53
triggering gene expression, 18
ultradian sleep cycle, 414–16
chemotherapy, side effects, 309
child abuse, 370
chlorpromazine, 161, 181, 201, 202
choline, 505
cholinergic agonists, 242
cholinergic pathways, 509
chromatin, 23
chronic back pain, 388
chronic pain, 379–400
decreased gray matter, 387–90
duloxetine treatment, 302–3
milnacipran treatment, 303
targeting sensitized circuits, 395–9
treatment, 390–400
circadian rhythm disorders, 430, 435–8
depression, 271–5
circadian rhythms, 307, 308
setting of, 275
circadian treatments, 438–40
circadian wake drive, 409, 412
citalopram, 295–6
classic neurotransmission, 6
clock genes, 271
clomipramine, 335
clonidine, 390, 482–3, 561

closed state, 63
clozapine, 217, 222–5
cocaine, 544, 545
codeine, 559
cognition, Fab Four of, 317
cognitive behavioral therapy, 374, 377, 576
cognitive dysfunction
ADHD, 455, 456, 458
Alzheimer disease, 509–18
chronic pain, 388
depression, 273
fibromyalgia, 390, 400
Parkinson’s disease, 493
sleep disorders, 402
sleep disturbance and, 414, 417
vortioxetine treatment, 315–17
cognitive symptoms, schizophrenia, 95,
144, 157
competitive elimination, 151, 154
compulsivity, 538–9, 571, 578
impulsive–compulsive disorders,
539–43, 575
OCD, 295, 360, 576–7
conceptual disorganization, 78
conditioned responses, 539
conditioned stimuli, 539, 544
consolidation, 375
constitutive activity, 37, 57
continuous positive airway pressure, 443
controlled substance, 447
cortico-brainstem glutamate pathways, 102
cortico-cortical glutamate pathways, 105
cortico-striatal glutamate pathways, 104
cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC)
loops, 87, 362, 365–9
cortico-thalamic glutamate pathway, 105
CREB system, 15
criminogenic behavior, 146, 147
cytochrome P450 (CYP450), 49–50, 323
daridorexant, 424
DAT transporter. See dopamine
transporters (DATs)
date rape drugs, 447, 559
delayed sleep phase disorder, 435, 437
delirium, 569
delusions, 77, 141, 524
Alzheimer disease, 157
dementia, 521
Parkinson’s disease psychosis, 157
dementia, 486, 537, See also Alzheimer
disease
agitation in, 145, 157, 197
apathy in, 536–7
behavioral symptoms of, 521, 537
definition, 487
depression in, 534–5


<<<PAGE 633>>>
Index

major causes of, 488–96
psychosis in, 110, 134, 157, 521–3
psychosis in, treatment, 523–7
symptomatic treatments, 503–5
dendrites, 2
depression, 145, See also bipolar
depression, unipolar depression
affective symptoms, 278, 280
circadian rhythm disorder in, 271–5
clinical effects of treatment, 284–5
dementia and, 534–5
drug side effects, 200
drug treatment, 229, 239
insomnia and, 418
major depressive disorder. See major
depressive disorder
major depressive episode. See major
depressive episode
mixed features of, 251
monoamine hypothesis of, 264–5, 290
monoamine receptor hypothesis of,
264–6, 267, 290
mood stabilizer treatment, 288
neuroplasticity and neuroprogression
hypothesis of, 266–76
serotonin or dopamine blockers in, 342
symptom-based algorithm treatment,
280
time course of effects of drugs, 266
depression with mixed features, 248, 342
depressive psychosis, 78, 157
descending spinal norepinephrine
pathway, 390, 392
descending spinal serotonergic pathway,
390, 394
desensitization, 63, 64
desvenlafaxine, 299, 302
deuteration, 175, 177, 354
dextromethadone, 355–8
dextromethorphan, 306, 353–4, 533, 536
diabetes, 198, 199, 415
diabetic ketoacidosis, 199, 200
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-5)
ADHD, 463
insomnia, 420
major depressive episode, 245
manic episode, 245
mixed features, 248
dietary tyramine interaction, 338
diphenhydramine, 426
direct (go) dopamine pathway, 89, 90
disorganized/excited psychosis, 78
disorientation, 78
dissociation-assisted psychotherapy, 574
dissociative anesthesia, 570
dissociatives, 569–71
disulfiram, 556

DNA methylation, 24
donepezil, 510
DOPA decarboxylase, 253
dopamine, 5
acetylcholine and, 166
conversion to norepinephrine, 253
increase in prefrontal cortex, 299–302
inefficient tuning of PFC by, 454–63
projections, 279
release, 5HT2A regulation, 184–8
synthesis, 79, 80
volume neurotransmission, 8
dopamine β-hydroxylase, 253
dopamine blockers, 468
adverse effects, 524
bipolar disorder spectrum, 338–45
dopamine D1 receptors
drugs targeting, 204–41
dopamine D2 receptors. See also drugs
targeting dopamine D2 receptors
pre- and postsynaptic, 228
dopamine D3 receptors, 343–5
drugs targeting, 210, 240, 241
dopamine deficiency syndrome, 306
dopamine hypothesis of psychosis,
79–95, 110–14, 141
dopamine neurotransmitter network,
79–91
classic pathways and key brain
regions, 84
mesolimbic pathway, 89, 542–3
nigrostriatal pathway, 87–9
thalamic pathway, 85
tuberoinfundibular pathway, 85
dopamine receptors, 81–5
dopamine theory of addiction, 542–3
dopamine transporters (DATs), 31, 80
ADHD treatment, 473–9
inhibition, 294, 333
dopaminergic neurons, 79
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC),
450, 451
dorsal horn neurons, 382–4
dorsal horn, descending spinal synapses
in, 390–5
dorsal root ganglia, 380, 381
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, 387, 400,
449
doxepin, 425, 427
drug abuse, 447, 539
DAT occupancy and, 476, 479
reversal of habit, 571–4
stimulants, 544–7
drug-induced dystonia, 166, 169
drug-induced parkinsonism, 165, 166–9,
181
drugs targeting dopamine D1 receptors,
204–41

drugs targeting dopamine D2 receptors,
159, 242
agitation in dementia, 197
antidepressant actions, 195–234
anxiolytic actions, 196
cardiometabolic actions, 198–201
first generation, 179–82, 201–3
individual properties, 204–41
mesocortical, 163
mesolimbic/mesostriatal, 161–3
nigrostriatal, 165–81
partial agonists, 189–92, 204–41
serotonin 2A and, 182–8
tuberoinfundibular, 164
drugs targeting dopamine D3 receptors,
210, 240, 241
drugs targeting serotonin receptors, 159,
243
1A receptors, 192–5, 207
1B and 1D receptors, 214
2A receptors, 182–8
2C receptor, 211
3 receptor, 212
6 and 7 receptors, 213
agitation in dementia, 197
antidepressant actions, 195–234
anxiolytic actions, 196
cardiometabolic actions, 198–201
individual properties, 204–41
DSST (digital symbol substitution test), 317
dual orexin receptor antagonists
(DORAs), 423–4, 430
duloxetine, 299, 302–3, 535
dynorphins, 390
dyslipidemia, 198
dystonia, drug-induced, 166, 169
eating disorders, 293, 575
Ecstasy, 358, 569
empathogens, 569
endocannabinoids, 6, 563, 564
enkephalins, 390
entactogens, 569
enzyme inhibitors, 45
irreversible, 46
reversible, 47
enzymes, 45–50
activity, 45
epigenetics, 23–6
Epworth Sleepiness Scale, 430
escitalopram, 296
esketamine, 331, 353, 571
eslicarbazepine, 352
euphoria, 560
excessive daytime sleepiness. See
hypersomnia
excitation–secretion coupling, 6, 8–9,
73, 75
617


<<<PAGE 634>>>
Index

excitatory amino acid transporter, 96, 99
excitement, 78
executive dysfunction, 144, 449–50
exposure therapy, 374, 378, 574, 576, 577
extinction
fear, 373, 374–5, 574
pharmacological, 573
extrapyramidal symptoms, 166
F17464, 241
FDG PET, 490, 492, 502
fear, 363–6
neurobiology of, 364–5
noradrenergic hyperactivity, 371
fear conditioning, 370–4
blocking, 375–7
fear extinction, 373, 374–5, 574
fentanyl, 559
fibro-fog, 390, 400
fibromyalgia, 303, 387–9
cognitive dysfunction, 388, 400
targeting ancillary symptoms,
399–400
treatment, 448
fight or flight response, 359, 364
first messengers, 11, 13
flashbacks, 568
flumazenil, 263
fluoxetine, 293–4
olanzapine combination, 293, 326,
343
fluphenazine, 202, 203
fluvoxamine, 295
forensic hospitals, 146, 147, 156
frontotemporal dementias, 494–6
frontotemporal lobar degeneration, 494
full agonists, 37–41, 56, 192
G protein, 14
G-protein-linked receptors, 36–45, 50
agonist spectrum, 37, 43, 45
agonists, 37–41
antagonists, 41–3
inverse agonists, 42, 44–5
no agonist, 37
partial agonists, 41, 43–4
structure and function, 36
G-protein-linked systems, 11, 12, 13
GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid), 5, 257–64,
349
action termination, 258
synthesis, 255
GABA interneurons
5HT receptors on, 121, 125, 130
prefrontal cortex, 105–10
GABA receptors, 258–64
GABAA, 321, 366, 421–3
GABAA receptor subtypes, 258–61
618

GABAA, benzodiazepine-insensitive,
263–4
GABAA, benzodiazepine-sensitive,
259–62
GABA transaminase (GABA-T), 258
GABA transporter (GAT), 34, 258
GABAergic drugs, 276
gabapentin, 352, 366, 395, 426
galanthamine, 514
gambling disorder, 575
gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), 400,
446–8, 559
gene activation, 18, 19, 24, 25
gene expression
epigenetics, 23–6
molecular mechanism, 18–23
neurotransmission triggering, 18
phosphoprotein triggering cascades,
15–18
gene silencing, 24, 25
generalized anxiety disorder, 361, 377
genetic testing, 323–5
genetics
ADHD, 463
schizophrenia, 148–50
genotyping, 50
ghrelin, 415
glucose metabolism, 490
glutamate, 5, 96
agitation in Alzheimer disease, 533
Alzheimer disease target, 515–18
key pathways in the brain, 102
synthesis, 96–7
synthesis of GABA from, 255
glutamate hypothesis of psychosis,
95–114
glutamate neurotransmitter network,
96–106
glutamate receptors, 99–105
ionotropic, 54
metabotropic, 100, 103
NMDA. See NMDA glutamate
receptors
glutamate transporters, 34
glutamic acid decarboxylase, 255
glycine transporters, 34
glycine, synthesis, 97–9
Goldilocks solution, 43, 60, 191, 227,
428
grandiose expansiveness, 78
gray matter, chronic pain, 387–90
GSK-3 (glycogen synthase kinase), 48
guanfacine, 482–3
habit circuit, 544, 561, 571, 572
habits, 538, 539, 576
hallucinations, 77, 113, 141, 435, 568
dementia, 521

Parkinson’s disease psychosis, 157
visual, 113, 524
hallucinogen-assisted psychotherapy,
355–8, 376
hallucinogens, 135, 138, 567–9
haloperidol, 181, 202, 204
heroin, 559, 561, 573
heteroreceptors, 125
hippocampal-accumbens glutamate
pathway, 104
hippocampus, 372, 374
histamine, 35, 402–6, 409
histamine 1 antagonism, 425–6, 427
histamine receptors, 406
histones, methylation, 23
homeostatic sleep drive, 408, 412
hormone-linked systems, 11, 12
hostile belligerence, 78
HPA (hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal)
axis, 266, 270
human genome, 18
Huntington’s disease, 28, 175
hydrocodone (Vicodin), 559
hyperactivity, 452, 454, 463
hyperalgesia, 380
hyperarousal, 418
hyperdopaminergia, 90, 92, 93
hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome,
199, 200
hyperprolactinemia, 165, 187, 192
hypersomnia, 402, 430–40
causes of, 431–5
treatment of, 440–8
hypervigilance, 402
hypnotic actions, 311
insomnia treatment, 421–30
hypnotics, sedative, 556
hypocretins, 406–11
hypodopaminergia, 95
hypomania, 248
hypothalamic neurons, 407
idiopathic hypersomnia, 432, 433
illusions, 568
iloperidone, 225, 236
immediate early genes, 19, 20
impulse control disorders, 577–8
impulsive–compulsive disorders, 539
binge eating, 575
neurocircuitry of, 539–43
impulsive violence, 147, 577
impulsivity, 452, 454, 463, 538–9, 571, 578
inactivation state, 61, 63
inattention, 449, 450, 451, 463
indirect (stop) dopamine pathway, 89, 90
inhalants, 547
inherited disease, classic theory of, 148
insomnia, 311, 402, 418–20


<<<PAGE 635>>>
Index

behavioral treatments, 430
diagnosis and comorbidities, 418–20
treatment, 421–31
insulin resistance, 197, 198, 200
internet addiction, 575
interneurons, 380
inverse agonists, 42, 44–5, 61, 62, 240
ion-channel-linked systems, 11, 12
ion channels, 76
ligand-gated. See ligand-gated ion
channels
neurotransmission and, 73–6
voltage-sensitive. See voltage-sensitive
ion channels
ionotropic glutamate receptors, 54
iproniazid, 336
irreversible enzyme inhibitors, 46
kainate receptors, 101, 104
ketamine, 106, 328–32, 353, 376, 569–71
ketamine-assisted psychotherapy, 574
kinase, third messenger, 14, 16
lamotrigine, 350–1
late genes, 20, 22
lemborexant, 423
leptin, 415
leucine zippers, 19, 20, 21
levodopa, 170
levomilnacipran, 300, 303
Lewy bodies, 157
Lewy body dementias, 492–5
licarbazepine, 352
ligand-gated ion channels, 51–66, 76
agonist spectrum, 56–62
allosteric modulation, 64–6
different states of, 61–4
gatekeeper, 52
pentameric subtypes, 53
structure and function, 53
tetrameric subtypes, 54–5
lisdexamfetamine, 473, 575
lithium, 48, 332, 345–6
local anesthesia, 380
lofexidine, 561
long-term potentiation, 151
LSD, 358, 568
lumateperone, 227, 237–9
lurasidone, 226, 236, 343
magic mushrooms, 358
magnesium, 104
magnetic resonance imaging, 491
major depressive disorder, 246, 252
anxiety disorder and, 360–2
core symptoms, 360
major depressive episode, 248, 277
symptoms and circuits, 277

mania
anticonvulsant treatment, 346
carbamazepine treatment, 350
drug treatment, 195
lithium treatment, 345
mixed features of, 248, 251
mood stabilizer treatment, 288
serotonin and dopamine blockers in,
338, 342
valproate treatment, 349
manic episodes, 245, 277, 278
MAOIs. See monoamine oxidase
inhibitors
mazindol, 485
MDMA, 356, 376, 378, 569–71
assisted psychotherapy, 574
MDPV, 546
medication-assisted therapy, 561
melatonergic agents, 439, 440
melatonin, 275, 439, 440
melatonin receptors, 306
memantine, 520, 521–4, 533
memory difficulties, 316
Alzheimer disease, 509–18
memory, traumatic, 356, 366, 375,
574
mesocortical dopamine pathway, 95
mesocortical hypodopaminergia, 95
mesolimbic dopamine pathway, 89,
542–3
mesolimbic hyperdopaminergia, 90
mesostriatal hyperdopaminergia, 93
messenger RNA (mRNA), 26
metabolic highway, 198, 199, 201
metabolic monitoring, 196, 199
metabolic toolkit, 201
metabotropic glutamate receptors, 100,
103
metformin, 201
methadone, 355, 559, 560, 561, 562
methylation, 23, 24
methylphenidate, 441–2, 469–72, 484
formulations, 470
mianserin, 309
microRNA (miRNA), 27
migrants, 150
mild cognitive impairment, 487, 490,
493, 500–2
milnacipran, 300, 303
mirtazapine, 232, 308–13, 333
mixed dementia, 495
mixed features, 248, 251–2
modafinil, 333, 442–4
Molly, 358, 569
monoamine autoreceptors, 8
monoamine hypothesis of depression,
264–5, 290
monoamine oxidase (MAO), 253

monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs),
336–7, 377
bipolar depression, 342
dietary tyramine interaction, 338
drug–drug interactions, 338
subtypes, 337–41
monoamine projections, 279
monoamine receptor hypothesis of
depression, 264–6, 267, 290
monoamine transporters, 30, 31–4, 208
unipolar depression, 285–8
mood disorders, 244, 282, See also mania,
depression
description of, 244–52
future treatments for, 353–8
mixed features of, 248, 251–2
neurobiology of, 252–76
pain disorders and, 387
symptom-based treatments, 279–82
symptoms and circuits in, 277–82
mood episodes, 246
mood related psychosis, 157
mood spectrum, 244–9
mood-stabilizers, 288, 345–6
mood-stabilizing action, 283
morphine, 559, 561
motivation, lack of, 536
motor disturbances, 78
motor side effects, 165–81
partial agonists, 192
mu-opioid receptors, 390, 556
multimodal monoamines, 530–2
Multiple Sleep Latency Test, 431
muscarinic receptors, 506–7
nalmefene, 556, 573
naloxone, 560
naltrexone, 306, 556, 561, 563, 573, 575
NAMs (negative allosteric modulators),
64–6
narcolepsy, 407, 430, 433, 435, 443, 444,
446
nausea and vomiting, 309
n-back test, 449, 451
nefazodone, 311
negative affect, 278, 280
negative feedback regulatory signal, 255
negative symptoms, 95, 142–4, 156
secondary, 162–3
NET transporters. See norepinephrine
transporters (NETs)
neuroactive steroids, 320–5
neurobiology
mood disorders, 252–76
sleep and wakefulness, 402–15
neurodevelopment, 151, 152
ADHD, 463–5
schizophrenia, 151–3
619


<<<PAGE 636>>>
Index

neurofibrillary tangles, 488, 502, 503
neuroinflammation, 270
neuroleptic-induced deficit syndrome,
162
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 169
neuroleptics, 162
neuronal cell loss, 488, 490, 491
neurons, 1, 2
general structure, 2
neuropathic pain, 380, 382–90, See also
fibromyalgia
central mechanisms, 382–6
peripheral mechanisms, 382
neuropathic pain syndromes, 380
neuropeptides, 35
neuroplasticity and neuroprogression
hypothesis of depression, 266–76
neurotransmission, 1, See also chemical
neurotransmission
anatomical basis of, 1–5
neurotransmitters, 5–6
enzymes as. See enzymes
psychosis pathways, 79
transporters. See transporters
neurotrophic factors, loss of, 266, 268
neurotrophin-linked systems, 11, 12
neutropenia, 224
NGF (nerve growth factor), 6
nicotine, 63, 466, 547–53
alternative forms of delivery, 551
treatment of addiction, 548–53
nicotinic receptors, 506, 507–9, 548
nigrostriatal dopamine pathway, 87–9
nitric oxide, 6
nitric oxide synthase, 295
NMDA antagonism, 328, 330, 355
NMDA glutamate hypofunction
hypothesis of psychosis, 105–14
NMDA glutamate receptors, 97–101, 104
histamine at, 406
hypofunction, 111, 114
NMDA receptor activation, 375
nociception, 380, 381
pain pathways, 396
nociceptive nerve fibers, activation, 381
nociceptive pathway, 381
from the spinal cord to the brain,
382–4
to the spinal cord, 381–2
non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder, 437,
438
non-REM sleep, 413, 414
noradrenaline. See norepinephrine
noradrenergic hyperactivity, 370–2
norepinephrine, 5, 252–6, 370
action termination, 253
inefficient tuning of prefrontal cortex
by, 454–63
620

projections, 279
synthesis, 252
norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibitors (NDRIs), 303–6, 333
norepinephrine receptors, 254–6, 258
norepinephrine transporters (NETs),
31, 254
norepinephrine transporter (NET)
inhibition, 294, 298–303, 370
ADHD, 480–4
norquetiapine, 227
NRX101, 237
NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs), 382
nucleosomes, 23
nucleus accumbens, 162
obesity, 198, 415, 575
obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD),
295, 360, 576–7
obstructive sleep apnea, 430, 431, 434,
443
olanzapine, 218, 225
fluoxetine combination, 293, 326, 343
ondansetron, 556
OPC4392, 193
open state, 63
opiates, 559
opioid use disorder, 355
opioids, 375, 390, 556, 559
abstinence, 573
addiction, 559–60
addiction, treatment of, 560–2
endogenous neurotransmitter system,
559
orbital frontal cortex, 454
orexin, 409, 435
dual orexin receptor antagonists,
423–4, 430
orexin receptors, 407
orexins, 406–11
oxcarbazepine, 352
oxycodone (OxyContin), 559
pain, 379–84, See also chronic pain
definition, 380
in dementia, 537
mood and anxiety disorders and, 387
paliperidone, 223, 235
PAMs (positive allosteric modulators),
64–6, 421–3
panic attacks, 361, 377, 569
panic disorder, 361, 372, 377
paralytic ileus, 167, 183
paranoid psychosis, 78
parkinsonism, drug-induced, 165, 166–9,
181
Parkinson’s disease, 338

Alzheimer disease comorbidity, 494
cognitive dysfunction, 493
Parkinson’s disease dementia, 492–5
Parkinson’s disease psychosis, 78, 133,
136, 139, 157, 524
paroxetine, 294, 295
partial agonists, 41, 43–4, 57–61, 189–95,
204–41
Pavlov’s dogs, 370
pentameric ligand-gated ion channels, 53
perceptual distortions, 78
periaqueductal gray, 390
peripheral pain, 379
perospirone, 233, 241
PET scans
beta-amyloid, 499, 501
FDG PET, 490, 492, 502
pharmacodynamics, 49
pharmacokinetics, 49
hypnotic actions, 426–30
pharmacological extinction, 573
phasic dopamine system, 455
phasic inhibition, 259
phencyclidine, 106, 569–71
phosphatase, third messenger, 15, 16
phosphoprotein cascades, 15–18
phosphoprotein messenger, 13–15
pimavanserin, 231, 240, 526
pitolisant, 444
plasma membrane transporters, 30
polygenic risk score, 150
polysomnography, 420, 431
positive affect, 278, 280, 306
positive symptoms, 90, 141, 156
psychosis, 92–3
postsynaptic dopamine receptors, 81
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
360, 362
drug treatment, 196
fear conditioning, 372
treatments for, 377, 568, 574
prazocin, 370
predementia AD, 500–2
prefrontal cortex
disorder of the, 449–53, 463
dopamine neurotransmission, 8
dorsolateral, 387, 400, 449
GABA interneurons, 105–10
increased dopamine in, 299–302
inefficient tuning of, 454–63
ventromedial, 372, 374
pregabalin, 352, 366, 395, 426
presymptomatic stage of Alzheimer
disease, 499–501
presynaptic dopamine receptors, 81, 82
primary afferent neurons, 380, 381
primary transcript, 26
prisons, 146, 156


<<<PAGE 637>>>
Index

processing speed, 317
prodromal negative symptoms, 143
proinflammatory molecules, 270
projection neurons, 380
prolactin levels, 164, 187, 193
pseudobulbar affect, 535
psilocin, 568
psilocybin, 358, 376, 568, 569
assisted psychotherapy,
psychedelic experience, 568
psychiatric vital sign, 381, 399, 401
psychic pain, 302
psychomotor retardation, 78
psychopathic violence, 147, 577
psychosis, 77, 158, See also schizophrenia
cannabis and, 563
dementia, prevalence in, 521
dementia-related, 110, 134, 157, 521–3
dementia-related, treatment of, 523–7
depressive, 78, 157
dopamine hypothesis of, 79–95,
110–14, 141
drug treatment. See drugs targeting
serotonin receptors, drugs targeting
dopamine D2 receptors
glutamate hypothesis of, 95–114
mood-related, 157
neurotransmitter pathways, 79
other psychotic disorders, 156–8
paranoid, 78
Parkinson’s disease. See Parkinson’s
disease psychosis
positive symptoms of, 90, 92–3
serotonin hyperfunction hypothesis
of, 131–41
serotonin hypothesis of, 111–41
symptoms of, 77–8
psychotherapy
anxiety disorders, 359
cognitive behavioral therapy, 374,
377, 576
dissociation-assisted, 574
hallucinogen-assisted, 355–8, 376
ketamine-assisted, 574
MDMA-assisted, 574
psilocybin-assisted, 574
PTSD, 378
psychotic violence, 146, 577
psychotomimetic experience, 569
psychotropic drugs
enzymes as targets of, 45–50
G-protein-linked receptors as targets,
36–45, 50
ion channels as targets of, 51–76
molecular targets, 29
nomenclature, 29
transporters as targets, 29–35, 50

PTSD. See posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD)
quetiapine, 219, 220, 227–32, 326, 343
quinidine, 353–4, 534, 536
radafaxine, 304
ramelteon, 439
rasagiline, 338
rashes, 352
receptor tyrosine kinases, 48
reconsolidation, 374, 375, 376, 574
recurrence in depression, 284
reduced positive affect, 280, 306
relapse, 571
in depression, 284, 286
REM sleep, 413, 414, 435
remission in depression, 284, 286
repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation (rTMS), 577
reserpine, 174
response in depression, 284
resting state, 57, 61, 63
retrograde neurotransmission, 6–7
reuptake pumps, 174, See also
transporters
reversible enzyme inhibitors, 47
reward, 542, 544
reward conditioning, 545
reward pathway, 572
rheostat analogy, 43
ribosomal RNA (rRNA), 27
riluzole, 352
risperidone, 222, 234, 235
rivastigmine, 510–16
RNA, 26–7
RNA interference, 26
roluperidone, 235, 241
safinamide, 338
SAGE-217, 322
salivation, excessive, 224
samidorphan, 201
schizoaffective disorder, 249
schizophrenia, 141, 156, See also
psychosis
affective symptoms, 95, 145
aggressive symptoms, 145–7
bipolar disorder and, 249
cognitive symptoms, 95, 144, 157
dopamine hypothesis of psychosis in,
92–5
drug treatment. See drugs targeting
serotonin receptors, drugs targeting
dopamine D2 receptors
future drug treatment, 241–2
genetics and, 148–50
life expectancy, 156

nature and nurture of, 149
negative symptoms, 95, 142–4, 156
neurodegeneration and, 154–6
neurodevelopment and, 151–3
NMDA receptor hypofunction, 111, 114
positive symptoms, 141, 156
positive symptoms of psychosis in, 92–3
second messenger
forming, 11–14
to phosphoprotein cascades, 15–18
to phosphoprotein messenger, 13–15
secondary negative symptoms, 162–3
sedation, 197, 202
sedative hypnotics, 556
segmental central sensitization, 384
selegiline, 337, 338
SEP-363856, 242
serine, synthesis, 97–9
serious mental illness (SMI), 156
serotonergic hypnotics, 424–5
serotonin, 5, 113
anxiety and, 368–70
dementia-related psychosis, 524–7
neuronal network, 121
projections, 279
synthesis and termination of action,
114–15
serotonin antagonist/reuptake inhibitors
(SARIs), 311–16
serotonin blockers
bipolar disorder spectrum, 338–45
serotonin hyperfunction hypothesis of
psychosis, 131–41
serotonin hypothesis of psychosis,
111–41
serotonin network, 113–33
constructing, 119–21
serotonin partial agonist reuptake
inhibitor (SPARI), 296–9
serotonin receptors. See also drugs
targeting serotonin receptors
5HT1A, 116, 118, 121, 296–9, 317
5HT1B, 125, 318
5HT1B/D, 118, 119, 318
5HT2A, 125
5HT2A, dopamine release regulation,
184–8
5HT2A, hyperactivity/imbalance,
111–41
5HT2B, 117, 119
5HT2C, 125, 293–4
5HT3, 125–9, 309–13, 318
5HT6, 130
5HT7, 130–3, 318–24
overview, 114
serotonin transporters (SERTs), 31, 33
inhibition of, 289, 296, 317, 318–24
sertindole, 232, 240
621


<<<PAGE 638>>>
Index

sertraline, 294, 378
setiptiline, 309
shift work disorder, 435, 436, 444
sigma-1 binding, 294, 295
signal propagation, 74
signal transduction cascades, 9–23, 28,
53
four important types of, 11, 12
second messenger, forming, 11–14
second messenger, to phosphoprotein
cascades, 15–18
second messenger, to phosphoprotein
messenger, 13–15
time course, 11
silent antagonists, 41, 42, 45, 192
Sinclair method, 573
SLC1 gene family, 31, 35
SLC17 gene family, 31, 35
SLC18 gene family, 31, 35
SLC32 gene family, 31, 35
SLC6 gene family, 30, 31–5
sleep
neurobiology of, 402–15
purpose of, 414–15
REM and non-REM, 413, 414, 435
sleepiness, 430–4
sleep/wake cycle, 412–13
disturbance of, 414, 416
small interfering RNA (siRNA), 27
small nuclear RNA (snRNA), 27
smoking, 476, See also nicotine
cessation, 306, 573
snare proteins, 73
SNRIs (serotonin–norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors), 298–303
α2δ ligand combinations, 399
anxiety disorders, 368
arousal combo, 333
mirtazapine combination, 333
pain treatment, 380
triple action combo, 333
social anxiety disorder, 362, 372, 377
sodium oxybate, 446–8
sodium potassium ATPase (sodium
pump), 32, 33
sodium valproate, 347–50
solriamfetol, 444
soma, 2
somatic pain, 302
somatosensory cortex, 380
specific neutral amino acid transporters
(SNATs), 96
spinobulbar tracts, 380
spinothalamic tract, 380
SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors), 289–96
anxiety disorders, 368

622

clinical uses of, 289
common features of six drugs, 289–92
depression in dementia, 534
OCD, 577
triple-action combo, 333
unique properties of six drugs, 292–3
stabilizers. See partial agonists
steroids, neuroactive, 320–5
Stevens Johnson syndrome, 352
stigma, 145
stimulants, 467–79, 544–7
atypical, 546
slow release vs. fast release, 478–9
targeting DATs, 473–8
treatment of addiction, 547
stimulus-response conditioning, 571
strengthening, synapse, 151, 154
stress, ADHD, 467, 469, 480
stroke, 492, 524
Stroop test, 450, 451
subjective memory complaints, 487, 488
sublingual formulation, 232
substance addictions, 544–75
substrates, 45, 46
suicide, 145, 156
clozapine treatment, 223
depressed patients, 251
mixed feature patients, 251
prevention, 346
suicide inhibitors, 46
sulpiride, 202, 205
supersensitivity, 170, 171
suprachiasmatic nucleus, 275, 307
suprasegmental central sensitization,
384, 390
suvorexant, 423
synapses, 1, 3
enlarged, 5
synaptic neurotransmission, 4
synaptogenesis, 151, 154
tardive dyskinesia (TD), 166
pathophysiology, 170–4
treatment, 174–81
tasimelteon, 439
tau protein, 488, 494, 502, 503
tetrabenazine, 175–6
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), 563, 565,
567
tetrameric ligand-gated ion channels,
54–5
thalamic dopamine pathway, 85
thalamo-cortical glutamate pathway, 104
third-messenger kinase, 14, 16
third-messenger phosphatase, 15, 16
thyroid, 333
tonic inhibition, 259, 263

topiramate, 201, 352, 556, 575
trace amines, 241–38
tradozone, 311–15, 424–5
transduction, 381
transfer RNA (tRNA), 27
transporters, 29–35, 50
classification and structure, 29–31
histamine and neuropeptides, 35
monoamine, 30, 31–4, 208
SLC1 gene family, 31
vesicular, 32, 35
tranylcypromine, 337
traumatic memories, 356, 366, 375, 574
trazodone, 535
treatment responsiveness, 155
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), 333–7
triglyceride levels, 197, 198, 199
tryptophan, 114
tuberoinfundibular dopamine pathway,
85
tuberomammillary nucleus, 406, 408
type 2 diabetes, 415
tyramine, 338
tyrosine, 80, 252
tyrosine hydroxylase, 253
ultradian sleep cycle, 413–16
unipolar depression, 34, 244
augmenting strategies for, 325–35
drugs for, 289–325
monoamine reuptake blockers, 285–8
or bipolar, 249–51
second-line monotherapies, 333–8
treatment resistance in, 323–38
valbenazine, 177
valproic acid (valproate), 347–50
varenicline, 551, 552, 573
vascular dementia, 491–2, 534
VEGF (vascular endothelial growth
factor), 329
venlafaxine, 299, 302
ventromedial prefrontal cortex, 372, 374
vesicular transporter for glutamate, 99
vesicular transporters, 31, 32, 35
VIAATs (vesicular inhibitory amino acid
transporters), 255
vilazodone, 296–9
viloxazine, 485
violence, 145–7, 575, 577–8
visual hallucinations, 113, 524
vital sign, 381, 399, 401
VMAT1, 174
VMAT2 inhibition, 174–81
VMAT2 transporter, 31, 81, 254
VMATs (vesicular monoamine
transporters), 35


<<<PAGE 639>>>
Index

voltage-sensitive calcium channels
(VSCCs), 70–3, 366, 395
voltage-sensitive ion channels, 66–73, 76
structure and function, 66
voltage-sensitive sodium channels
(VSSCs), 67–70, 347, 350, 351, 381
volume neurotransmission, 6–9
vortioxetine, 311, 315–20, 535

wake-promoting agents, 440–8
wakefulness, neurobiology of, 402–15
weight gain, 198, 224
widespread pain index (WPI), 387
withdrawal syndrome, 546, 560
worry, 362, 363
neurobiology of, 365–9
noradrenergic hyperactivity, 372

xanomeline, 242
Z drugs, 425–6
ziprasidone, 224, 236
zolpidem, 423
zopiclone, 423
zotepine, 221, 233

623


<<<PAGE 640>>>
