<<<PAGE 34>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

22

for thiamine deficiency, and IV fluids for fluid and
electrolyte imbalance.
3. Symptomatic measures: As many patients are
agitated, emergency psychiatric treatment may
be needed. Small doses of benzodiazepines(lorazepam or diazepam) or antipsychotics (haloperidol or risperidone) may be given either orally or
parenterally. Maintenance treatment can continue
till recovery occurs, usually within a week’s time.
There is an increased risk of stroke in elderly
patients with dementia with prescription of
atypical antipsychotics such as olanzapine and
risperidone.
4. Supportive medical and nursing care.

DEMENTIA
Dementia is a chronic organic mental disorder, characterised by the following main clinical features:
1. Impairment of intellectual functions,
2. Impairment of memory (predominantly of recent
memory, especially in early stages),
3. Deterioration of personality with lack of personal
care.

Impairment of all these functions occurs globally,
causing interference with day-to-day activities and
interpersonal relationships. There is impairment of
judgement and impulse control, and also impairment
of abstract thinking. There is however usually no impairment of consciousness (unlike in delirium; Table
3.3). The course of dementia is usually progressive
though some forms of dementia can be reversible.
Additional features may also be present. These
include:
1. Emotional lability (marked variation in emotional
expression).
2. Catastrophic reaction (when confronted with an
assignment which is beyond the residual intellectual capacity, patient may go into a sudden rage).
3. Thought abnormalities, e.g. perseveration, delusions.
4. Urinary and faecal incontinence may develop in
later stages.
5. Disorientation in time; disorientation in place and
person may also develop in later stages.
6. Neurological signs may or may not be present,
depending on the underlying cause.

Table 3.3: A Comparison of Delirium and Dementia
Features
1. Onset
2. Course
3. Clinical features
a. Consciousness
b. Orientation
c. Memory

d. Comprehension
e. Sleep-wake cycle
f. Attention and concentration
g. Diurnal variation
h. Perception
i. Other features

Delirium

Dementia

Usually acute
Usually recover in 1 week;
may take up to 1 month

Usually insidious
Usually protracted, although may be reversible
in some cases

Clouded
Grossly disturbed
Immediate retention and
recall disturbed
Recent memory disturbed

Usually normal
Usually normal; disturbed only in late stages
Immediate retention and recall normal
Recent memory disturbed
Remote memory disturbed only in late stages
Impaired only in late stages
Usually normal
Usually normal
Usually absent

Impaired
Grossly disturbed
Grossly disturbed
Marked; sundowning may
be present
Visual illusions and
Hallucinations may occur
hallucinations very common
Asterixis; multifocal myoclonus Catastrophic reaction; perseveration




<<<PAGE 38>>>

26

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

i. Fluctuating cognitive impairment over weeks or
months, with involvement of memory and higher
cortical functions (such as language, visuo-spatial
ability, praxis and reasoning). Lucid intervals can
be present in between fluctuations.
ii. Recurrent and detailed visual hallucinations.
iii. Spontaneous extrapyramidal or parkinsonian
symptoms such as rigidity and tremors.
iv. Neuroleptic sensitivity syndrome, characterised by
a marked sensitivity to the effects of typical doses
of antipsychotic drugs (resulting in severe extrapyramidal side-effects with use of antipsychotics).
Other clinical features may include repeated falls,
autonomic dysfunction (e.g. orthostatic hypotension), urinary incontinence, delusions and depressive
features. Although Lewy bodies (intra-cytoplasmic
inclusion bodies) are also present in Parkinson’s
disease, the occurrence of Lewy bodies in Lewy body
dementia is more widespread. A PET (Positron Emission Tomography) or SPECT (Single Photon Emission
Computerised Tomography) scan of brain may show
low dopamine transporter uptake in basal ganglia.
Antipsychotic medication should be avoided (or
used with extreme caution and in low doses) in patients
with Lewy body dementia.

Management
Basic Investigations
The diagnostic tests are of great importance in finding the cause, or to exclude all other causes before
diagnosing Alzheimer’s dementia.
The list of investigations could include complete
blood count, urinalysis, blood glucose, serum electrolytes, renal function tests, thyroid function tests, serum
B12 and folate levels, serological tests for syphilis,
arterial pO2 and pCO2, X-ray chest, ECG, X-ray skull,
EEG, lumbar puncture, CT scan/MRI scan of brain,
neuropsychological tests, and drug screens.

Treatment of the Underlying Cause,
if Treatable
Some underlying causes of dementia are treatable
(reversible dementias), for example, treatment of

hypertension in multi-infarct dementia, thyroxin
replacement in hypothyroid dementia, shunting in
hydrocephalic dementia, levodopa in parkinsonism,
and removal of the toxic agent in toxic dementias.
Early treatment can prevent further deterioration of
dementia.

Symptomatic Management
1. Environmental manipulation and focus on coping
skills to reduce stress in day-to-day activities.
2. Treatment of medical complications, if any.
3. Care of food and hygiene
4. Supportive care for the patient and family/carers.
5. Anxiety symptoms can be treated with low dose of
a short-acting benzodiazepine (such as Lorazepam
and Oxazepam), though care should be taken to
prevent benzodiazepine dependence/misuse.
6. Depression can be treated with low doses of
SSRIs such as Citalopram or Sertraline as these
antidepressants have low anticholinergic activity
and have a safer cardiac profile. Agents with high
anticholinergic activity can cause confusion or
even frank delirium.
7. Psychotic symptoms and disruptive behaviours
can be treated with low doses of antipsychotics.
Haloperidol and Risperidone have usually been
preferred as they are less sedating and have low
cardiac toxicity, though Risperidone can cause
postural hypotension. Recently, the use of antipsychotics in treatment of behavioural symptoms
in dementia has decreased markedly due to
possible association of antipsychotic use with
increased mortality. Antipsychotics should
also be avoided if Lewy body dementia is
suspected.
8. Short-term hospitalisation may be needed for
emergent symptoms whilst a longer term hospitalisation or respite placement may be necessary
in later stages.
9. Specific drug treatment such as cholinesterase
inhibitors (e.g. donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine) in moderate Alzheimer’s disease, or
memantine (NMDA antagonist) in moderate to
severe Alzheimer’s disease, can be helpful.




<<<PAGE 41>>>

Organic (Including Symptomatic) Mental Disorders

ORGANIC CATATONIC DISORDER
According to the ICD-10, the following features
are required for the diagnosis of organic catatonic
disorder, in addition to the general guidelines for the
diagnosis of other organic mental disorders, described
earlier:
1. Stupor (diminution or complete absence of spontaneous movement with partial or complete mutism,
negativism, and rigid posturing);
2. Excitement (gross hypermotility with or without
a tendency to assaultiveness);
3. Mixed (shifting rapidly and unpredictably from
hypo- to hyperactivity).
The presence of other catatonic symptoms and
signs increases the confidence in the diagnosis. The
catatonic symptoms and signs are described in detail
in Chapter 5.

29

earlier. It is important to rule out any major disturbance
of consciousness, orientation, memory, or mood.
The delusions are variable and the type depends on
the underlying aetiology. The most common delusions
are persecutory in nature. Hallucinations (visual more
often than auditory) may accompany the delusions.
Schneiderian first rank symptoms (SFRS) are usually
not seen the organic delusional disorder (in contrast
to schizophrenia).

Diagnosis
Organic delusional disorder secondary to amphetamine use may be difficult to differentiate from paranoid schizophrenia. The differentiating points are an
acute onset, history of amphetamine use prior to the
onset, predominant visual hallucinations which may
be fleeting, absence of formal thought disorder and a
more ‘appropriate’ affect.

Aetiology

Aetiology

The aetiology and management of organic catatonic
disorder is described in detail in Chapter 19.

1. Drugs: Amphetamines, hallucinogens, cannabis,
disulfiram
2. Complex partial seizures (e.g. temporal lobe
epilepsy)
3. Huntington’s chorea (initial stages), Parkinson’s
disease, Wilson’s disease, and idiopathic basal
ganglia calcification
4. Right parietal lobe lesions, especially vascular
lesions
5. Lesions involving limbic system (e.g. tumours)
6. Spinocerebellar degeneration
7. Cerebral malaria
8. Herpes simplex encephalitis
9. Nutritional deficiencies (Vitamin B12, iron)
10. Demyelinating disorders (such as multiple sclerosis, metachromatic leukodystrophy)

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause, if amenable to
treatment.
2. Symptomatic treatment with low dose of a shortacting benzodiazepine (e.g. Lorazepam), or electroconvulsive therapy (if needed). Antipsychotics
should usually be avoided as they can make
catatonic features worse; however small doses
of atypical antipsychotics such as Risperidone,
Olanzapine, Aripiprazole or Quetiapine can be
used with care.

ORGANIC DELUSIONAL
(SCHIZOPHRENIA-LIKE) DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of predominant
delusions caused by an underlying organic cause is
required for the diagnosis of organic delusional disorder, in addition to the general guidelines for the
diagnosis of other organic mental disorders, described

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause such as removal
of toxic agent in amphetamine psychosis.
2. Symptomatic management with a low dose of an
antipsychotic medication (such as Risperidone, Haloperidol, Olanzapine, or Quetiapine) may be needed.




<<<PAGE 91>>>

Mood Disorders

iii. Bipolar depression
There is recent evidence that quetiapine has antidepressant efficacy in bipolar depression.
iv. Maintenance or prophylactic treatment in bipolar
disorder
Recent evidence shows that several atypical antipsychotics such as olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole
can be successfully used in the maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder.

Other Mood Stabilisers
The other mood stabilisers which are used in the treatment of bipolar mood disorders include:
1. Sodium valproate
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium.
• The dose range is usually 1000-3000 mg/day (the
therapeutic blood levels are 50-125 mg/ml).
• It has a faster onset of action than lithium, therefore, it can be used in acute treatment of mania
effectively.
2. Carbamazepine and Oxcarbazepine
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium and valproate.
• Particularly effective when EEG is abnormal
(although this is not necessary for the use of carbamazepine).
• The dose range of carbamazepine is 600-1600 mg/
day (the therapeutic blood levels are 4-12 mg/ml).
• The use of carbamazepine in treatment of bipolar
disorder has recently declined, partly due to its
potential for drug interactions.
• Oxcarbazepine has a narrow evidence base and its
use in bipolar disorder is quite recent.
3. Benzodiazepines
Lorazepam (IV and orally) and clonazepam are used
for the treatment of manic episode alone rarely; however, they have been used more often as adjuvants to
antipsychotics.

79

4. Lamotrigine is particularly effective for bipolar
depression and is recommended by several guidelines.
5. T3 and T4 as adjuncts for the treatment of rapid cycling mood disorder and resistant depression.

Other Treatments
Psychosurgery is an extremely rarely used method
of treatment and is resorted to only in exceptional
circumstances.
In depressive episode, which is either chronic or
persistently recurrent with a limited or absent response
to other modes of treatment, one of the following
procedures may very rarely be performed:
i. Stereotactic subcaudate tractotomy, or
ii. Stereotactic limbic leucotomy.
In carefully selected patients, the results are
reported to be satisfactory. However, in the current
day and age, psychosurgery is hardly ever considered
in routine clinical practice.

Psychosocial Treatment
Although somatic treatment appears to be the primary
mode of management in major mood disorders, psychosocial treatment is often helpful. These indications
include:
i. As an adjunct to somatic treatment.
ii. In mild to moderate cases of depression.
iii. Certain selected cases.
These methods include (see Chapter 18 for details):

Cognitive Behaviour Therapy
Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) aims at correcting depressive negative cognitions (ideations) such
as hopelessness, worthlessness, helplessness and pessimistic ideas, and replacing them by new cognitive
and behavioural responses.
CBT is useful in mild to moderate, non-bipolar
depression and can be used with or without somatic
treatment.

Interpersonal Therapy
Interpersonal therapy (IPT) attempts to recognise
and explore interpersonal stressors, role disputes and




<<<PAGE 99>>>

Other Psychotic Disorders

4. Sudden onset of symptoms.
5. Presence of affective symptoms, confusion, perplexity and/or disorientation in clinical picture.
6. Short duration of symptoms.
7. First episode.

Treatment
1. Antipsychotics are the mainstay of treatment,
and are used to control agitation and psychotic
features. Usually lower doses of antipsychotics
are needed.
However, in the initial stages the patient may not
take oral medication. In such cases, parenteral
administration of antipsychotics (with or without
benzodiazepines such as lorazepam or diazepam)
may be needed.
The first use of parenteral antipsychotics in an
antipsychotic-naive patient should be carefully
considered, as there is a higher risk of neuroleptic
malignant syndrome (NMS) in these patients.
Long-term use of antipsychotics should be preferably avoided in these patients (see Chapter 15 for
further details).
2. ECT may be needed in cases with marked agitation
and emotional turmoil, as well as in cases where
there is a danger to self and/or others.
3. Antidepressants may be rarely needed as adjuvants
in some cases with associated depression.
4. Psychotherapy and other psychological interventions may be needed in cases with associated
stress, as well as for psychoeducation for the
patient and family. Engagement with psychological treatment is usually after the acute episode is
under control and the patient can communicate
his/her fears and anxieties.

SCHIZOAFFECTIVE DISORDER
This is a disorder which lies on the borderland between
schizophrenia and mood disorders. In this disorder,
the symptoms of schizophrenia and mood disorders
are prominently present within the same episode. The
symptoms of both disorders may be present simultaneously or may follow within few days of each other.

87

There are three types described:
1. Schizoaffective disorder, manic (or bipolar) type.
2. Schizoaffective disorder, depressed type.
3. Schizoaffective disorder, mixed type.
The course is usually episodic (particularly in
manic subtype), although a chronic course in some
patients has been described (parti cularly in the
depressed subtype). The prognosis is better than
that in schizophrenia but is worse than that in mood
disorders.
The treatment is with mood stabilisers (such as
lithium or valproate), antipsychotics, antidepressants
and/or ECT, depending on the predominant symptomatology.

CAPGRAS’ SYNDROME
(THE DELUSION OF DOUBLES)
Capgras’ syndrome is a syndrome that is closely
related to delusional disorders and is characterised
by a delusional conviction that other persons in the
environment are not their real selves but are their
own doubles.
It is one of the several delusional misidentification
syndromes, of which there are four types described:
1. Typical Capgras’ syndrome (Illusion des sosies):
Here the patient sees a familiar person as a
complete stranger who is imposing on him as a
familiar person.
2. Illusion de Fregoli: The patient falsely identifies
stranger(s) as familiar person(s).
3. Syndrome of subjective doubles: The patient’s own
self is perceived as being replaced by a double.
4. Intermetamorphosis: Here the patient’s misidentification is complete and the patient misidentifies not only the ‘external appearance’ (as in
the previous three types) but also the complete
personality.
The syndrome is commonly seen in psychotic
conditions with delusional symptomatology, such as
paranoid schizophrenia (most frequently), delusional
disorders and organic delusional disorder.
The treatment consists of adequately treating the
underlying disorder.




<<<PAGE 149>>>

Sleep Disorders

each individual contraction lasts for a few seconds and
is repeated at an interval of 20-60sec. during a long
sleep-period, partial or complete awakenings occur
many times in one night sleep.
The patient is usually not aware of the myoclonus
and usually complains of non-restorative sleep or of
frequent awakenings. The myoclonus is observed, if
at all, by the bed partner. This is commonly seen in
middle-aged and elderly people. Due to night-time
insomnia, daytime hypersomnia can occur and, at
times, may be the only presenting symptom.
‘Restless Legs’ Syndrome (Ekbom syndrome)
RLS is a condition in which the person experiences,
during waking, an extremely uncomfortable feeling
in the leg muscles. Sometimes, it may resemble painful creeping sensations deep inside the calf muscles.
Classically, these abnormal sensations occur while
sitting or lying down and cause an irresistible urge to
move the legs. Moving about or standing provides
immediate, temporary relief. This is often associated
with periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD) during night sleep. Daily, regular exercises can lead to
marked improvement in certain cases.
Treatment
1. A thorough medical and psychiatric assessment.
2. Polysomnography (see Table 11.1) may be needed
in some patients to reach a diagnosis.
3. Treatment of the underlying physical and/or psychiatric disorder, if present.
4. Withdrawal of current medications, if any.
5. Relaxation techniques before sleep time and education regarding sleep hygiene (see Table 11.3).
Sleep hygiene consists of general guidelines for
promoting good sleep. In itself, it is not a treatment
for insomnia.
6. Psychotherapy, if indicated.
7. Benzodiazepines may be used, either alone, e.g.
in primary insomnia, or may be used with the
treatment of underlying physical or psychiatric
disorder(s). The use of benzodiazepines should
only be for short-term periods, not more than for
4-6 weeks at one time.

137
Table 11.3: Sleep Hygiene

Some basic components of sleep hygiene are:
1. Regular, daily physical exercises (preferably not in
the evening).
2. Minimise daytime napping.
3. Avoid fluid intake and heavy meals just before bedtime.
4. Avoid caffeine intake (e.g. tea, coffee, cola drinks)
before sleeping hours.
5. Avoid regular use of alcohol (especially avoid use of
alcohol as a hypnotic for promoting sleep).
6. Avoid reading or watching television while in bed.
7. Sleep in a dark, quiet, and comfortable environment.
8. Regular times for going to sleep and waking-up
9. Try relaxation techniques

If the difficulty in initiating sleep is the main
symptom, then a benzodiazepine with shorter halflife should be used, such as temazepam, oxazepam
or lorazepam.
If the difficulty in maintaining sleep is the
predominant symptom, then a longer acting benzodiazepine, such as nitrazepam, flurazepam or
even diazepam, should be used (see Chapter 15
for details).
Physicians should be careful to avoid benzodiazepine abuse or dependence in patients presenting with insomnia. Non-benzodiazepine hypnotics
(e.g. zopiclone, zolpidem, zalpelon and trazodone)
are useful alternatives (see Chapter 15).
8. L-tryptophan, an amino-acid present in many
vegetables, is an apparently non-dependence producing hypnotic. The usual dose is 0.5g at night
time.

Hypersomnia
Hypersomnia is also known as Disorder of excessive
somnolence (DOES). Hypersomnia means one or
more of the following:
1. Excessive day time sleepiness.
2. ‘Sleep attacks’ during day time (falling asleep
unintentionally).




<<<PAGE 161>>>

Behavioural Syndromes Associated with Psychological Disturbances and Physiological Factors

2. Behaviour modification techniques.
3. Individual psychotherapy, usually cognitive
behaviour therapy.
4. Group therapy.

Post-cardiac Surgery Delirium
This is a condition similar to ICU (Intensive care unit)
syndrome. A fairly common disorder, its onset typically occurs after 24-48 hours of surgery. The patients,
who develop post-surgery delirium, can sometimes
be the ones who are most fearful before the surgery.
Many causes have been attributed for delirium,
which include:
1. Cardiac status.
2. Presence of preoperative, subclinical organic brain
disease.
3. Restrictive environment of the ICU/CCU, with
isolation.
4. Electrolyte imbalance.
5. Preoperative anxiety, fearfulness, depression or
denial.
Probably the condition is aetiologically multifactorial and should be treated as a type of delirium
(see Chapter 4).

Treatment
1. Preoperative measures.
i. Allaying the anxiety and fears of the patient.
ii. Treatment of depression, if present.
iii. Easy access to clocks and windows in ICU/
CCU, to keep the patient oriented in time.
iv. Allowing a family member to stay near the
patient.
2. Treatment of delirium as described in Chapter 4.
Since delirium can be life threatening, as patients
can take out IV lines, catheters or other ‘life-lines’ and
can jump down from balcony or window, urgent treatment is often needed. Small doses of benzodiazepines
(such as Diazepam or Lorazepam) or antipsychotics
(such as Haloperidol or Risperidone) can be used
orally or parenterally. Later the patient can be switched
to low dose oral haloperidol or risperidone till recovery from delirium occurs.

149

Anticholinergic medication should not routinely
be added to antipsychotics, as it may actually worsen
the delirium. However, it may be needed if there
are any significant extrapyramidal adverse effects
present.

PSYCHIATRY IN MEDICINE
About one-third to two-third of medical outpatients
may have primary or associated psychiatric disorders.
If minor psychological and social problems are also
taken into consideration, this number would be even
larger. Since these patients may benefit from a psychiatric referral, psychiatrists are becoming increasingly
involved in treatment of medical and surgical patients.
In fact a whole new branch of consultation-liaison
psychiatry has sprung up in the last few decades.
Consultation-liaison psychiatry is an area of clinical psychiatry which includes diagnostic, therapeutic,
teaching and research activities of psychiatrists in the
non-psychiatric parts of the hospital.
The common reasons for a psychiatric referral
include:
1. Suicidal attempt, ideation or threat.
2. Grossly ‘abnormal’ behaviour disturbing the
inpatient setting.
3. Presence of disorders related to alcohol or substance abuse/dependence such as severe withdrawal symptoms.
4. Organic brain syndromes.
5. Psychosomatic disorders.
6. Psychological reaction to medical illness.
7. Uncertain diagnosis (No medical illness can be
found despite the presence of significant symptoms).
8. Manipulative or difficult or hostile patient.
9. Psychiatric side-effects of drugs.
10. Patient is unable to manage his or her own affairs.
11. Presence of severe primary psychiatric disorder(s).
A large number of medical illnesses can present
with psychiatric symptomatology. It is important to
keep in mind the possibility of a secondary mental
disorder, i.e. a psychiatric disorder which is caused




<<<PAGE 191>>>

Psychopharmacology

179

Contd...
Category and
Side Effect
3. Acute Dystonia

Probable Cause
—do—

Maximum with
(For example)
—do—

4. Rabbit Syndrome —do—
—do—
(Peri-oral tremor)
Dopaminergic (D2) Not known
5. Tardive
Dyskinesia (late receptor
onset oro-facial
super-sensitivity
dyskinesia)
Not known
Probably
6. Neuroleptic
haloperidol
Malignant
Syndrome
(Fever, EPS,
High CPK,
catatonic
symptoms and
autonomic
dysfunction)
C. Other Central Nervous System Effects
1. Seizures
Decreased seizure
Clozapine
threshold
Chlorpromazine
(High doses)
2. Sedation
Histaminergic
—do—
blockade

3. Depression or
Decreased catecho- Not known
Pseudolamine levels in
depression
brain
D. Metabolic and Endocrine Side Effects
1. Weight gain
H1 blockade
Almost all
antipsychotics esp.
Clozapine and
Olanzapine
2. Diabetes
Not known
Clozapine
Olanzapine
3. Galactorrhoea
Increased Prolactin Haloperidol
Risperidone
with/without
released due to
amenorrhoea
dopaminergic blockade in hypothalamus

Minimum with
(For example)
—do—

—do—
Clozapine

Not known

Management
Antiparkinsonian
medication; Rule out
hypercalcaemia
Antiparkinsonian
medication
Treatment unsatisfactory,
though several drugs are
available. Prevention
best.
Bromocriptine, Dantrolene, Baclofen, General
supportive care. Add-on
lorazepam, Occasionally
ECT

Trifluoperazine

Decrease dose. Change
to a safer antipsychotic

Haloperidol
Aripiprazole

This side effect may be
beneficial. Otherwise
decrease dose. Change
drug. Give single dose
only at night
Decrease dose. Change
drug. Occasionally antidepressants or ECT.

SDAs
(e.g. Ziprasidone)

Aripiprazole
Haloperidol

Change drug. Dietary
control. Exercises.

Ziprasidone
Aripiprazole
Aripiprazole
Quetiapine

Change drug. Dietary
control.
None. Change drug.

Contd...




<<<PAGE 206>>>

194

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Cyclic Ethers
An example is paraldehyde. It is not used commonly
as it is not very effective and is also dependence
producing.
Others
Antipsychotics (such as thioridazine, flupentixol,
olanzapine, quetiapine) and antidepressants (such as
doxepine) have sometimes been used for the treatment
of severe, intractable anxiety. However, antipsychotics
are not the drugs of first choice and should be used
with extreme discretion (with balancing of risks and
benefits) when all other drugs have failed to benefit.
Antidepressants (such as SSRIs, SNRIs and Mirtazapine) have recently emerged as treatments of choice
in several anxiety disorders including generalised
anxiety disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, panic
disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder. There is
some data to support that smaller starting doses are
better as anxiety symptoms may worsen initially in
treatment.
Beta (β) Blockers
An example is propranolol which is particularly effective in treatment of peripheral somatic manifestations
of anxiety. It is also helpful in treatment of anticipatory anxiety and situational anxiety. Propranolol can
be used either alone or along with benzodiazepines.
β-blockers are not treatments of first choice in the
treatment of psychic or psychological manifestations
of anxiety.
Propranolol is contraindicated in patients with
bronchial asthma and cardiac conditions. It should be
used with caution in patients of age 40 and above. The
usual dose is 40-240 mg/day, administered in divided
doses.

Benzodiazepines
Since the discovery of chlordiazepoxide in 1957 by
Sternbach, benzodiazepines have replaced other antianxiety drugs and hypnotics though SSRIs are now
gradually becoming drugs of first choice in management of anxiety disorders.
The benzodiazepines can be classified according
to their elimination half-lives (Table 15.9).

Indications
The indications for use of benzodiazepines include
the following:
1. Generalised anxiety disorder; adjustment disorder
with anxious mood (Short-term use)
2. Panic disorder, agoraphobia, and school phobia (particularly alprazolam and clonazepam;
short-term use, along with antidepressants)
3. Agitated depression (short-term use, along with
antidepressants, for first 1-2 weeks)
4. Short-term treatment of insomnia
5. Stage 4 NREM-sleep disorders such as enuresis,
somnambulism (diazepam reduces duration of
Stage 4 NREM-sleep)
6. Nightmares (diazepam also reduces the REMsleep duration).
7. Pre-medication in anaesthesia (intravenous
lorazepam, midazolam, or diazepam)
8. Anticonvulsant use (drugs of choice for status epilepticus, myoclonic seizures and certain infantile
spasms)
9. To produce skeletal muscle relaxation (e.g. in
tetanus, cerebral palsy)
10. Treatment of alcohol and other drug withdrawal
syndromes
11. For minor surgical, endoscopic or obstetric procedures
12. Acute mania (lorazepam, usually with lithium or
atypical antipsychotics).
13. Antipsychotic-induced akathisia
14. Emergency management of acute psycho ses
(IV lorazepam, along with parenteral antipsychotics).
15. Narcoanalysis or abreaction (IV diazepam)
Whenever administered, benzodiazepines should
not be ordinarily used for more than 2-4 weeks at a
time; otherwise risk of dependence is quite high and
tolerance occurs.
Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of action of benzodiazepines is
not clear. The discovery of the benzodiazepine receptors in 1977 shed some light on the mode of action
(Fig. 15.1).




<<<PAGE 207>>>

Psychopharmacology

195

Table 15.9: Classification and Properties of Benzodiazepines
Class and Drug

Elimination
Half-life
(Hours)

I. Very Short Acting Drugs
1. Midazolam
2-5 hours
2. Triazolam

2-5 hours

Usual
Hypnotic
Dose (mg
HS/Nocte)

Oral Dose
(mg/day)

Parenteral
Dose (mg)

Active
Metabolites

Other Comments

___

___

___

___

0.125-0.25 ___
mg

___

α-hydroxytriazolam

Used for
anaesthesia
Rapid oral absorption; Marketed as
hypnotic

α-hydroxyalprazolam
___

II. Short Acting Drugs
1. Alprazolam
6-20 hours

___

0.5-6.0 mg ___

2. Estazolam
3. Loprazolam

8-24 hours
6-12 hours

1-2 mg
1-2 mg

1-2 mg
___

___
___

4. Lormetazepam
5. Lorazepam

10-12 hours 0.5-1.5 mg
10-20 hours 0.5-2.0 mg

___

___

2-6 mg

2-4 mg

6. Oxazepam

5-15 hours

15-120 mg ___

7. Temazepam

10-20 hours 10-20 mg

III. Long Acting Drugs
1. Chlorazepate
30-100
hours

15-30 mg

7.5-30 mg

Piperazine
N-oxide
Lorazepam
None
None

10-20 mg

___

Oxazepam

7.5-60 mg

___

Nordiazepam

2. Chlordiazepoxide

25-48 hours 10-25 mg

3. Clonazepam

20-40 hours ___

15-100 mg 50-100 mg Desmethyldemoxepam
___
0.5-20 mg 2-5 mg

4. Diazepam

14-90 hours 2-10 mg

2-30 mg

2-20 mg

Nordiazepam

5. Flurazepam

30-100
hours

15-60 mg

___

6. Halazepam
7. Nitrazepam

30-60 hours 20-40 mg
20-60 hours 5-10 mg

Desmethylhydroxy-ethylflurazepam
Nordiazepam
Nordiazepam

15-30 mg

40-160 mg ___
___
5-20 mg

___
___
___
___
High dependence
potential
Slow oral
absorption
Slow oral
absorption
Hydrolysed to
active form in
stomach
Erratic absorption
after IM injection
Also used in treatment of epilepsy
Erratic absorption
after IM injection
Marketed as a
hypnotic
___
Marketed as a
hypnotic
Contd...




<<<PAGE 240>>>

228

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Marked excitement can occur during a
panic attack but violent behaviour does not
usually occur.
8. Impulsive violent behaviour.
i. Borderline personality disorder.
ii. Intermittent explosive disorder.
9. Reactive psychosis.

Management
The patient is examined according to the guidelines
suggested earlier in this chapter. The physician,
psychiatrist or another mental health professional,
examining an excited patient, must demonstrate an
attitude of empathy but at the same time must be firm
and should exude confidence.
The measures which can be adopted to handle
excited or violent behaviour include:
1. Reassurance: In case of emergency, it rarely works
alone but must be tried first.
2. Sedation: Diazepam 5-10 mg parenterally slowly
(or lorazepam 1-2 mg parenterally slowly) can be
given. In the presence of psychosis, haloperidol
2-10 mg parenterally (with or without 5-10 mg
diazepam or 50 mg of promethazine) can be given.
It is really important to exercise care in administering parenteral antipsychotics to any patient,
but particularly one who is treatment (antipsychotic) naïve. Oral antipsychotics are preferable to
parenteral antipsychotic in routine clinical practice.
3. Restraint: Restraint should always be used as a last
resort, but when needed, it should not be delayed.
Restraint should always be done in a humane way,
after taking (preferably) written consent from the
attendant relatives/carers. A second opinion from
another mental health professional is helpful.
Restraint is usually followed by compulsory
hospitalisation and parenteral medication. It is
rarely ever necessary to continue restraint for more
than a few hours and restraint should be removed
at the earliest possible time.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is not a treatment
for excitement or violence per se. When used, there
should be a clear indication for the use of ECT, which
should be clearly recorded in the case notes.

Other Psychiatric Emergencies
The list of possible psychiatric emergencies is
long. A few psychiatric emergencies are listed below,
some of which have already been discussed in the
book.
1. Severe depression (Chapter 6): Apart from
presenting as a suicide/suicidal attempt and/or
agitation, the depressed patient may come to
casualty because of a refusal to eat and drink,
leading to dehydration or because of refusal to take
medication (for example, secondary to hopelessness).
2. Hyperventilation syndrome (Chapter 8).
3. Side effects of psychotropic medication, e.g. acute
dystonia (promptly relieved by promethazine
25-50 mg parenterally), akathisia, neuroleptic
malignant syndrome (Chapter 15).
4. Psychiatric complications of medical and surgical
diseases, procedures and medication (e.g. ICU
syndrome, hypomania caused by steroids).
5. Severe insomnia (Chapter 11).
6. Pseudo seizures (conversion and/or dissociation
hysteria) (Chapter 8).
7. Anorexia nervosa (usually presenting with dehydration and/or cachexia) (Chapter 12).
8. Battered child syndrome or child abuse.
9. Grief and bereavement (Chapter 12).
10. Psychosocial crises (e.g. marital conflict, occupational and financial difficulties).
11. Drug or alcohol use disorders (Chapter 4).
12. Panic disorder (Chapter 8).
13. Acute psychosis (Chapter 7).
Psychiatric patients, especially when excited or
emotionally disturbed, often arouse anxiety in the
treating physicians as well as other patients in the
casualty. So, it is necessary to have an ‘emergency
psychiatry room’ or ‘psychiatric holding area’ near
the casualty, where the patients can be interviewed
and treated.
An ideal place for treating psychiatric emergencies
is a separate ‘psychiatric intensive care unit’ (PICU)
or ‘crisis intervention centre’ (CIC) attached to a
psychiatric unit in a general hospital or to a psychiatric
hospital or nursing home.




<<<PAGE 269>>>

Index
Kleptomania 119
Klismaphilia 126
Koro 110, 111
Korsakoff’s
psychosis 38, 39
syndrome 27
Kurt Schneider 54

L
LAAM 44, 45
La-belle-indifférence 103
Lack of
rapport 57
sexual enjoyment disorder 126
Lamotrigine 79, 188
Larks 140
Latah 110, 111
Late paraphrenia 61
Latency phase 212
Latent schizophrenia 59
Leaden paralysis 81
Learned behaviour 214
Learning disability 155
Legal and ethical issues in psychiatry 229
Lethal catatonia 59
Leucotomy 203
Lewy body dementia 25
Licensing authority 232
Life chart 7
Limbic system 203
Lithium 78, 188
Long-sleepers 134
Loosening of associations 55, 58, 59, 62
Lorazepam 26, 29, 87, 149, 228
Loss of ego boundaries 57, 65
Loxapine 66
LSD use disorder 49
L-thyroxin 227
L-tryptophan 137
Lucid intervals 26
Lunatic 232

M
Made
feeling 55, 56
impulses 55, 56
volition 55, 56
Maintenance therapy 44
Major depression 105
Male
anorgasmia 128
erectile disorder 127
orgasmic disorder 128

Malignant syndrome 228
Malingering 119
Mania 61, 70, 80, 227
Manic
depressive psychosis 73
episode 30, 69
stupor 70
Mannerisms 57-59, 164
MAOIs 81, 82
Marchiafava-Bignami disease 40
Marijuana 46
Marital therapy 217
Masked depression 80, 105, 106
MCI code of medical ethics, 2002 234
McNaughten rule 229
Medical
emergency 221
interview 5
Medicolegal aspects 224
Megavitamin therapy 67
Memantine 25, 26
Memory disturbances 203
Menstrual and obstetric history 9
Mental
and behavioural disorders in ICD-10
3
disorders 19
Health
Act, 1987 232, 233
Authorities 232
retardation 153, 155, 162, 164
status examination 10, 11, 222
Mentally ill
person 232
prisoner 232
Metabolic syndrome 63
Methadone 44
maintenance 44
Methylphenidate 167
Michigan alcoholism screening test 37
Migraine 28
Mild cognitive disorder 32
Milieu therapy 68
Mini mental state examination 13
Minimal brain dysfunction 166
Minoxidyl 132
Mirror-gazing 58
Mirtazapine 30
Misconceptions about suicide 224
Mixed
affective 61, 73
episode 73
anxiety depressive disorder 80

257
Monosymptomatic hypochondriacal
psychosis 84, 85
Mood 12, 69
disorders 69, 76
stabiliser 30
stabilising drugs 185
Morbid grief 151
Motor activity 11
Multi-axial classification 4
Multifocal myoclonus 20
Multi-infarct dementia 25
Multiple personality disorder 102
Munchausen syndrome 119
Muslim Marriages Act 230
Mutism 56, 59, 225, 171

N
Naloxone 44, 227
challenge test 44
Naltrexone 42, 44, 132
Narcolepsy 138
Narcotic
anonymous 45
antagonists 44
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
(Amendment) Act, 2001 233
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act (NDPSA), 1985 233
National
Crime Records Bureau 222
Health Policy 235, 237
Mental Health
Advisory Group 237
Programme 235
Trust Act 161
NDRI 52
Necrophilia 126
Negative
reinforcement 215
symptom 57, 58, 60-61
Neurasthenia 109
Neuroleptic
malignant syndrome 228
sensitivity syndrome 26
Neurosis 89
Neurotic
depression 82
traits 9
Nicotine 52
replacement therapy 52
Night terrors 140
Nightmares 140
Nitrazepam 137


