<<<PAGE 151>>>

Sleep Disorders

from 30 seconds to a few minutes and may cause
significant distress.
Not all symptoms of the tetrad are present in one
person. The other associated symptoms are fugue
states, blackouts and blurring of vision. Polysomnography helps in making a diagnosis in doubtful cases,
showing a decreased REM latency.
The treatment consists of forced naps at regular times in the day, stimulant medication (such as
amphetamines) or modafinil in some patients, and/
or antidepressants (particularly when cataplexy is a
prominent symptom).
2. Sleep Apnoea
This condition is characterised by presence of repeated
episodes of apnoea during sleep. In this context,
apnoea is defined as the cessation of airflow at the nostrils (and mouth) for 10 seconds or longer. The apnoea
can be of central type, obstructive type or mixed type.
It is commoner in elderly and obese (Pickwickian
syndrome). Typically, there are 5 or more apnoeic
episodes per hour of sleep and the total number of
apnoeic episodes exceeds 30 during one night’s
sleep. In severe cases, the number of episodes may
be in hundreds. The patients are usually not aware of
the occurrence of apnoea. Instead, they complain of
an inability to stay awake in the day time and nonrestorative sleep at night. The bed partner may report
of loud snoring, restless sleep or of periodic absences
of breathing.
The diagnosis can be established in doubtful cases
using polysomnography, with the respiratory tracings
included. Sleep apnoea can be a dangerous condition.
It can cause cardiac arrhythmias, pulmonary and systemic hypertension, and death.
The treatment consists of avoidance of alcohol
and depressant medications, use of stimulants such
as caffeine, regular exercises, losing excess weight,
teaching correct sleeping posture, and corrective procedures for obstructive sleep apnoea (e.g. mechanical
tongue retaining device). Very severe obstructive sleep
apnoea may necessitate tracheostomy (functional only
at night), CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure)
through nasal mesh, or even pharyngoplasty.

139

3. Kleine-Levin Syndrome
This is a rare syndrome characterised by:
1. Hypersomnia (always present), occurring recurrently for long periods of time.
2. Hyperphagia (usually present), with a voracious
appetite.
3. Hypersexuality (associated at times), consisting of
sexual disinhibition, masturbatory activity, exhibitionism, and/or inappropriate sexual advances.
The associated features include apathy, irritable
behaviour, confusion, social withdrawal, bizarre
behaviour, psychotic symptoms (such as delusions
and hallucinations), and disorientation. One or more
of these symptoms may occur during the episode.
EEG abnormalities, usually showing intermittent nonspecific slowing, are common but are not diagnostic.
A typical episode lasts for one to several weeks,
followed usually by a complete remission. The
common age of onset is the second decade of life.
Apparently this disorder has a finite course with a large
majority of patients recovering completely before the
fifth decade of life. The disorder is almost always seen
in males.
No specific treatment is available but Lithium and
occasionally Carbamazepine have been reported to be
successful.
Treatment
1. A thorough physical and psychiatric assessment.
2. Treatment of the underlying cause is the most
important method.
3. Associated or underlying insomnia should be
looked for and treated.
4. Withdrawal of current medication causing hypersomnia, especially depressant medication.
5. Benzodiazepines at night may paradoxi cally
decrease hypersomnia by correcting night time
insomnia.

Disorders of Sleep-wake Schedule
These are characterised by a disturbance in the timing
of sleep. The person with this disorder is not able to
sleep when he wishes to, although at other times he
is able to sleep adequately. This is due to a mismatch


