<<<PAGE 27>>>

Psychiatric History and Examination

The answers may be overly concrete or abstract.
The appropriateness of answers is judged. Concretisation of responses or inappropriate answers may occur
in schizophrenia.

Insight
Insight is the degree of awareness and understanding
that the patient has regarding his illness.
Ask the patient’s attitude towards his present state;
whether there is an illness or not; if yes, which kind of
illness (physical, psychiatric or both); is any treatment
needed; is there hope for recovery; what is the cause of
illness. Depending on the patient’s responses, insight
can be graded on a six-point scale (Table 2.3).

Judgement
Judgement is the ability to assess a situation correctly
and act appropriately within that situation. Both social
and test judgement are assessed.
i. Social judgement is observed during the hospital
stay and during the interview session. It includes
an evaluation of ‘personal judgement’.
ii. Test judgement is assessed by asking the patient
what he would do in certain test situations, such
as ‘a house on fire’, or ‘a man lying on the road’,
or ‘a sealed, stamped, addressed envelope lying
on a street’.
Judgement is rated as Good/Intact/Normal or Poor/
Impaired/Abnormal.

INVESTIGATIONS
After a detailed history and examination, investigations (laboratory tests, diagnostic standardised
interviews, family interviews, and/or psychological
tests) are carried out based on the diagnostic and
aetiological possibilities. Some of these investigations
are described briefly in Table 2.4.

FORMULATION
After a comprehensive psychiatric assessment, a
diagnostic formulation summarises the detailed posi-

15

Table 2.3: Clinical Rating of Insight
Insight is rated on a 6-point scale from one to six.
1. Complete denial of illness.
2. Slight awareness of being sick and needing help, but
denying it at the same time.
3. Awareness of being sick, but it is attributed to external or physical factors.
4. Awareness of being sick, due to something unknown
in self.
5. Intellectual Insight: Awareness of being ill and that
the symptoms/failures in social adjustment are due
to own particular irrational feelings/thoughts; yet
does not apply this knowledge to the current/future
experiences.
6. True Emotional Insight: It is different from intellectual insight in that the awareness leads to significant
basic changes in the future behaviour.

Table 2.4: Some Investigations in Psychiatry
I. Biological Investigations
Medical Screen
Some of the following tests may be useful in screening for the medical disorders causing the psychiatric
symptoms. Some examples of indications are stated in
front of the tests (these examples are not intended to be
comprehensive).
Haemoglobin: Routine screen.
Total and differential leucocyte counts: Routine screen,
Treatment with antipsychotics (e.g. clozapine), lithium,
carbamazepine.
Mean Corpuscular Volume (MCV): Alcohol dependence
(increased).
Urinalysis: Routine screen; Drug screening.
Peripheral smear: Anaemia.
Renal function tests: Treatment with lithium.
Liver function tests: Treatment with carbamazepine,
valproate, benzodiazepines. Alcohol dependence.
Serum electrolytes: Dehydration, SIADH, Treatment with
carbamazepine, antipsychotics, lithium.
Blood glucose: Routine screen (age>35 years), treatment
with antipsychotics
Contd...




<<<PAGE 28>>>

16

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Contd...
Thyroid function tests: Refractory depression, rapid
cycling mood disorder. Treatment with lithium, carbamazepine.
Electrocardiogram (ECG): Age>35 years, Treatment with
lithium, antidepressants, ECT, antipsychotics.
HIV testing: Intravenous drug users, suggestive sexual
history, AIDS dementia.
VDRL: Suggestive sexual history.
Chest X-ray: Age>35 years, Treatment with ECT.
Skull X-ray: History of head Injury.
Serum CK: Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (markedly
increased levels).
Toxicology Screen
Useful when substance use is suspected; for example,
alcohol, cocaine, opiates, cannabis, phencyclidine,
benzodiazepines, barbiturates; remember that certain
medications can cause false positive results (for example,
quetiapine for methadone).
Drug Levels
Drug levels are indicated to test for therapeutic blood
levels, for toxic blood levels, and for testing drug
compliance. Examples are lithium (0.6-1.0 meq/L),
carbamazepine (4-12 mg/ml), valproate (50-100 mg/
ml), haloperidol (8-18 ng/ml), tricyclic antidepressants
(nortriptyline 50-150 ng/ml; imipramine 200-250 ng/
ml), benzodiazepines, barbiturates and clozapine (350500 μg/L).
Electrophysiological Tests
EEG (Electroencephalogram): Seizures, dementia, pseudoseizures vs. seizures, episodic abnormal behaviour.
BEAM (Brain electrical activity mapping): Provides
topographic imaging of EEG data.
Video-Telemetry EEG: Pseudoseizures vs. seizures.
Evoked potentials (e.g. p300): Research tool.
Polysomnography/Sleep studies: Sleep disorders, seizures (occurring in sleep). The various components in
sleep studies include EEG, ECG, EOG, EMG, airflow
measurement, penile tumescence, oxygen saturation,
body temperature, GSR (Galvanic skin response), and
body movement.
Holter ECG: Panic disorder.

Brain Imaging Tests (Cranial)
Computed Tomography (CT) Scan: Dementia, delirium,
seizures, first episode psychosis.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scan: Dementia.
Higher resolution than CT scan.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Scan: Research tool
for study of brain function and physiology.
Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)
Scan: Research tool.
Magnetic Resonance (MR) Angiography: Research tool
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS): Research tool
Neuroendocrine Tests
Dexamethasone Suppression Test (DST): Research tool
in depression (response to antidepressants or ECT). If
plasma cortisol is >5 mg/100 ml following administration of dexamethasone (1 mg, given at 11 PM the night
before and plasma cortisol taken at 4 PM and 11 PM
the next day), it indicates non-suppression.
TRH Stimulation Test: Lithium-induced hypothyroidism,
refractory depression. If the serum TSH is >35 mIU/ml
(following 500 mg of TRH given IV), the test is positive.
Serum Prolactin Levels: Seizures vs. pseudoseizures,
galactorrhoea with antipsychotics.
Serum 17-hydroxycorticosteroid: Organic mood (depression) disorder.
Serum Melatonin Levels: Seasonal mood disorders.
Biochemical Tests
5-HIAA: Research tool (depression, suicidal and/or
aggressive behaviour).
MHPG: Research tool (depression).
Platelet MAO: Research tool (depression).
Catecholamine levels: Organic anxiety disorder (e.g.
pheochromocytoma).
Genetic Tests
Cytogenetic work-up is useful in some cases of mental
retardation.
Sexual Disorder Investigations
Papaverine test: Male erectile disorder (intracavernosal
injection of papaverine is sometimes used to differentiate
organic from non-organic male erectile disorder).
Nocturnal penile tumescence: Male erectile disorder.
Contd...




<<<PAGE 44>>>

32

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

5. Cerebral neoplasms, especially in frontal lobe (frontal lobe syndromes) and parietal lobe (see Table 3.7).
6. Cerebrovascular disease.
7. Psychoactive drugs (rarely).

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause, if treatable.
2. Symptomatic treatment, with lithium or carbamazepine for aggressive behaviour and impulse

dyscontrol, and/or antipsychotics (occasionally)
for violent behaviour may be needed.

MISCELLANEOUS ORGANIC
MENTAL DISORDERS
Other organic mental disorders described in ICD-10
include organic dissociative disorder, organic emotionally labile (asthenic) disorder, and mild cognitive
disorder.




<<<PAGE 52>>>

40

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

and mammillary bodies. The changes are also seen
in periventricular and periaqueductal grey matter,
cerebellum and parts of brain stem.
The underlying cause is believed to be usually
severe untreated thiamine deficiency secondary to
chronic alcohol use.
Marchiafava-Bignami disease
This is a rare disorder characterised by disorientation,
epilepsy, ataxia, dysarthria, hallucinations, spastic
limb paralysis, and deterioration of personality and
intellectual functioning. There is a widespread demyelination of corpus callosum, optic tracts and cerebellar peduncles. The cause is probably an alcohol-related
nutritional deficiency.

Other Complications
These include:
i. Alcoholic dementia.
ii. Cerebellar degeneration.
iii. Peripheral neuropathy.
iv. Central pontine myelinosis.

Treatment
Before starting any treatment, it is important to follow
these steps:
i. Ruling out (or diagnosing) any physical disorder.
ii. Ruling out (or diagnosing) any psychiatric disorder
and/or co-morbid substance use disorder.
iii. Assessment of motivation for treatment.
iv. Assessment of social support system.
v. Assessment of personality characteristics of the
patient.
vi. Assessment of current and past social, interpersonal and occupational functioning.
The treatment can be broadly divided into two
categories which are often interlinked. These are
detoxification and treatment of alcohol dependence.

Detoxification
Detoxification is the treatment of alcohol withdrawal
symptoms, i.e. symptoms produced by the removal of
the ‘toxin’ (alcohol). The best way to stop alcohol (or
any other drug of dependence) is to stop it suddenly

unless the risks of acute discontinuation are felt to be
high by the treating team. This decision is often based
on several factors including chronicity of alcohol
dependence, daily amount consumed, past history of
alcohol withdrawal complications, level of general
health and the patient’s wishes.
The usual duration of uncomplicated withdrawal
syndrome is 7-14 days. The aim of detoxification is
symptomatic management of emergent withdrawal
symptoms.
The drugs of choice for detoxification are usually
benzodiazepines. Chlordiazepoxide (80-200 mg/day in
divided doses) and diazepam (40-80 mg/day in divided
doses) are the most frequently used benzodiazepines.
The higher limit of the normal dose range is used in
delirium tremens.
A typical dose of Chlordiazepoxide in moderate
alcohol dependence is 20 mg QID (four times a day)
on day 1, 15 mg QID on day 2, 10 mg QID on day 3,
5 mg QID on day 4, 5 mg BD on day 5 and none on
day 6. However, in more severe dependence, higher
doses are needed for longer periods (up to 10 days).
These drugs are used in a standardised protocol, with
the dosage steadily decreasing everyday before being
stopped, usually on the tenth day. Clormethiazole (1-2
g/day) and carbamazepine (600-1600 mg/day) are
experimental drugs and should not be used routinely
for detoxification.
In addition, vitamins should also be administered.
In patients suffering from (or likely to suffer from)
delirium tremens, peripheral neuropathy, WernickeKorsakoff syndrome, and/or with other signs of vitamin B deficiency (especially thiamine and nicotinic
acid), a preparation of vitamin B containing 100 mg
of thiamine (vitamin B1) should be administered
parenterally, twice everyday for 3-5 days. This should
be followed by oral administration of vitamin B1 for
at least 6 months.
Care of hydration is another important step; it is
extremely important not to administer 5% dextrose
(or any carbohydrate) in delirium tremens (or even in
uncomplicated alcohol withdrawal syndrome) without
thiamine.




<<<PAGE 54>>>

42

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Fig. 4.1: Disulfiram: Mode of Action

The contraindications of disulfiram use are first
trimester of pregnancy, coronary artery disease, liver
failure, chronic renal failure, peripheral neuropathy,
muscle disease and psychotic symptoms presently or
in the past.
In selected patients (such as an older age group,
good motivation, good social support, absent underlying psychopathology and good treatment concordance), the response can be dramatic. In addition to
oral preparations, subcutaneous disulfiram implants
are also now available. However, they provide unpredictable blood levels of disulfiram.
Other deterrent agents
1. Citrated calcium carbimide (CCC): The mechanism of action is similar to disulfiram but onset of
action occurs within 1 hour and is reversible. The
usual dosage is 100 mg/d in two divided doses.
2. Metronidazole.
3. Animal charcoal, a fungus (Coprinus atramentarius), sulfonylureas and certain cephalosporins
also cause a disulfiram like action.
v. Anti-craving agents
Acamprosate, naltrexone and SSRIs (such as fluoxetine) are among the medications tried as anti-craving
agents in alcohol dependence.

Acamprosate (the Ca++ salt of N-acetyl-homotaurinate)
interacts with NMDA receptor-mediated glutamatergic neurotransmission in the various brain regions
and reduces Ca++ fluxes through voltage-operated
channels.
Naltrexone (oral opioid receptor antagonist) probably interferes with alcohol-induced reinforcement
by blocking opioid receptors. Fluoxetine (and other
SSRIs) have been occasionally used as anti-craving
agents in their usual antidepressant doses.
vi. Other medications
A variety of other medicines such as benzodiazepines, antidepressants, antipsychotics, lithium,
carbamazepine, and even narcotics have been tried.
These should be used only if there is a special indication for their use (for example, antidepressants for
underlying depression).
vii. Psychosocial rehabilitation
Rehabilitation is an integral part of the multi-modal
treatment of alcohol dependence.

OPIOID USE DISORDERS
Dried exudate obtained from unripe seed capsules of
Papaver somniferum has been used and abused for




<<<PAGE 91>>>

Mood Disorders

iii. Bipolar depression
There is recent evidence that quetiapine has antidepressant efficacy in bipolar depression.
iv. Maintenance or prophylactic treatment in bipolar
disorder
Recent evidence shows that several atypical antipsychotics such as olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole
can be successfully used in the maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder.

Other Mood Stabilisers
The other mood stabilisers which are used in the treatment of bipolar mood disorders include:
1. Sodium valproate
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium.
• The dose range is usually 1000-3000 mg/day (the
therapeutic blood levels are 50-125 mg/ml).
• It has a faster onset of action than lithium, therefore, it can be used in acute treatment of mania
effectively.
2. Carbamazepine and Oxcarbazepine
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium and valproate.
• Particularly effective when EEG is abnormal
(although this is not necessary for the use of carbamazepine).
• The dose range of carbamazepine is 600-1600 mg/
day (the therapeutic blood levels are 4-12 mg/ml).
• The use of carbamazepine in treatment of bipolar
disorder has recently declined, partly due to its
potential for drug interactions.
• Oxcarbazepine has a narrow evidence base and its
use in bipolar disorder is quite recent.
3. Benzodiazepines
Lorazepam (IV and orally) and clonazepam are used
for the treatment of manic episode alone rarely; however, they have been used more often as adjuvants to
antipsychotics.

79

4. Lamotrigine is particularly effective for bipolar
depression and is recommended by several guidelines.
5. T3 and T4 as adjuncts for the treatment of rapid cycling mood disorder and resistant depression.

Other Treatments
Psychosurgery is an extremely rarely used method
of treatment and is resorted to only in exceptional
circumstances.
In depressive episode, which is either chronic or
persistently recurrent with a limited or absent response
to other modes of treatment, one of the following
procedures may very rarely be performed:
i. Stereotactic subcaudate tractotomy, or
ii. Stereotactic limbic leucotomy.
In carefully selected patients, the results are
reported to be satisfactory. However, in the current
day and age, psychosurgery is hardly ever considered
in routine clinical practice.

Psychosocial Treatment
Although somatic treatment appears to be the primary
mode of management in major mood disorders, psychosocial treatment is often helpful. These indications
include:
i. As an adjunct to somatic treatment.
ii. In mild to moderate cases of depression.
iii. Certain selected cases.
These methods include (see Chapter 18 for details):

Cognitive Behaviour Therapy
Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) aims at correcting depressive negative cognitions (ideations) such
as hopelessness, worthlessness, helplessness and pessimistic ideas, and replacing them by new cognitive
and behavioural responses.
CBT is useful in mild to moderate, non-bipolar
depression and can be used with or without somatic
treatment.

Interpersonal Therapy
Interpersonal therapy (IPT) attempts to recognise
and explore interpersonal stressors, role disputes and




<<<PAGE 180>>>

168

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The treatment of conduct disorder is usually difficult. The most frequent mode of management is
placement in a corrective institution, often after the
child has had legal difficulties. Behavioural, educational and psychotherapeutic measures are usually
employed for the behaviour modification.
Drug treatment may be needed in presence of
epilepsy (anticonvulsants), hyperactivity (stimulant
medication), impulse control disorder and episodic
aggressive behaviour (lithium, carbamazepine), and
psychotic symptoms (antipsychotics).

i. Simple motor tics: These may include eyeblinking, grimacing, shrugging of shoulders,
tongue protrusion.
ii. Complex motor tics: These are facial gestures,
stamping, jumping, hitting self, squatting, twirling, echokinesis (repetition of observed acts),
copropraxia (obscene acts).
Motor tics are often the earliest to appear, beginning in the head region and then progressing downwards. These are later followed by the vocal tics.

TIC DISORDERS

The vocal tics in Tourette’s disorder can also be simple
or complex.
i. Simple vocal tics: Simple vocal tics include
coughing, barking, throat-clearing, sniffing, and
clicking.
ii. Complex vocal tics: These include some very
characteristic, though not always present,
symptoms of Tourette syndrome; for example,
echolalia (repetition of heard phrases), palilalia
(repetition of heard words), coprolalia (use of
obscene words), and mental coprolalia (thinking
of obscene words).
Obsessions and Compulsions are often the associated symptoms. These are usually the last symptoms
to appear.

Tic disorders are characterised by the presence of
tics. Tic is an abnormal involuntary movement (AIM)
which occurs suddenly, repetitively, rapidly and is
purposeless in nature. It is of two types:
1. Motor tic, characterised by repetitive motor movements.
2. Vocal tic, characterised by repetitive vocalisations.
Tic disorders can be either transient or chronic.
Transient tic disorders are more common in boys
and can occur in 5-20% of children. Tics are easily
worsened by stressful life situations, fatigue and/or
use stimulants such as caffeine and nicotine. A vast
majority of these disappear by adulthood.
A special type of chronic tic disorder is Gilles de
la Tourette’s syndrome or Tourette’s disorder.

Tourette’s Disorder
Tourette’s disorder is typically characterised by:
1. Multiple motor tics.
2. Multiple vocal tics.
3. Duration of more than 1 year.
4. Onset usually before 11 years of age and almost
always before 21 years of age.
The disorder is usually more common (about three
times) in males and has a prevalence rate of about 0.5
per 1000 people.

Motor Tics
The motor tics in Tourette’s disorder can be simple
or complex.

Vocal Tics

Aetiology
The aetiology of Tourette syndrome is not known but
the presence of learning difficulties, neurological soft
signs, hyperactivity, abnormal EEG record, abnormal
evoked potentials, and abnormal CT Brain findings in
some patients, point towards a biological basis.
There is some evidence to suggest that Tourette
syndrome may be inherited as autosomal dominant
disorder with variable penetrance.

Treatment
Pharmacotherapy is usually the preferred mode of
treatment though there is lack of clear evidence of
efficacy. Antipsychotics are often helpful in small
doses and several drugs have been tried including
haloperidol, risperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole,




<<<PAGE 197>>>

Psychopharmacology

It is essential to continue the antidepressant for a
period of further 6 months after reaching remission, in
the first episode of depressive disorder (and for longer
duration in subsequent episodes) to prevent recurrence of symptoms. It is important to prescribe the
antidepressant in the same dose as used for treatment
unless there are adverse effects requiring a decrease
in dose.
Only when adequate doses (150-300 mg
imipramine equivalent) have been administered for
an adequate period (at least 6 weeks) without a clinical response then the drug can be called ineffective
for that patient. Another drug, usually from a different
class or group, or ECT may then be used.

Side Effects and Toxicity
The common side effects of antidepressants with their
management are summarised in Table 15.7.
TCAs are dangerous in overdose; amitriptyline
and dosulepin (dotheipin) are particularly cardiotoxic
whilst lofepramine is the safest amongst TCAs. Clinical features of overdose include agitation, delirium,
paralytic ileus, urinary retention, coma, respiratory
depression, seizures, hyperpyrexia, cardiac arrhythmias, conduction defects, mydriasis, and death. The
lethal dose of imipramine is 1-2 g. (40-80 tabs. of
25 mg imipramine equivalence).
The treatment options in overdose include gastric
lavage/induction of vomiting, activated charcoal for
adsorption, cardio-respiratory resuscitation, treatment
of seizures (if they occur), general supportive care
and symptomatic management. Quinidine-like drugs
are contraindicated whilst antiarrhythmics such as
lignocaine can be helpful. Physostigmine 0.5 mg
IV/IM bolus repeated to a total of 3-4 mg/day may
be used under careful supervision. Coma often reverts
in less than 24 hours, although toxicity lasts for
5-6 days.
Co-prescription of serotonergic drugs (such as
SSRIs) with other serotonergic agents and especially
MAOIs can lead to serotonin syndrome. It is characterised by a classic triad of mental status changes,
neuromuscular abnormalities and autonomic hyper-

185

activity. These include anxiety, agitation, confusion,
clonus (e.g. ankle clonus, ocular clonus), hyperreflexia, myoclonus, rigidity, increased heart rate, tremor,
flushing, hyperthermia and excessive sweating. Death
can occur in severe serotonin syndrome.
Treatment includes discontinuation of the offending drug(s), supportive management and (sometimes)
use of serotonin and histamine antagonist cyproheptadine.

Refractory Depression
About 20-35% of patients do not respond to the
antidepressant therapy. The chief reasons for this
non-response include:
1. Poor drug concordance.
2. Inadequate dosage.
3. Insufficient treatment duration.
4. Low plasma antidepressant levels.
5. Incorrect diagnosis.
Even when these important reasons are excluded,
there still remains a group (15-20%) of depressed
patients who are non-responders or poor-responders.
Such patients should receive a trial of another antidepressant preferably from a different group (e.g. SNRI)
for adequate duration. In case the patient still does not
respond, the treatment of choice of refractory depression is electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), though other
treatment choices (such as lithium augmentation) are
also available.

MOOD STABILISING DRUGS
(DRUGS USED IN PROPHYLAXIS
OF BIPOLAR DISORDER)
These drugs are usually effective in treatment of mania and therefore the word antimanic is often used to
describe them. But as they are effective in preventing
mood swings in bipolar disorder, the better term is
mood-stabilising agent or a prophylactic agent. The
most commonly used mood-stabilising agents include
lithium, valproate, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine,
though there are several other experimental mood
stabilisers such as oxcarbazepine.




<<<PAGE 200>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

188
Contd...
Category and
Side Effect
2. Severe hepatic
necrosis (rare)
3. Hyperpyrexia

4. Bleeding

5. Hyponatraemia

Probable Cause

Maximum with
(For example)

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Toxic or
Hypersensitive
Interaction with
tricyclics or
meperidine
Decreased
platelet serotonin

Iproniazid

Tranylcypromine

Not known

Not known

SSRIs

Not known

SSRIs
SNRIs

Not known;
Probably MAOIs

Stop/change drug. Supportive
care; Death rate high.
Stop drug. Keep a gap of
1 week between imipramine
and MAOI. Supportive care.
Change drug. Do not coprescribe other drugs that
increase risk of bleeding;
Gastro-protective drugs such
as PPIs can decrease risk
to some extent in high-risk
patients
Risk higher in elderly; Avoid
co-prescribing other drugs
that cause hyponatraemia
(such as diuretics); monitor
closely

Probably SIADH

Recently, several atypical antipsychotics such as
olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole have been
added to list of drugs used in maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder. In addition, other antipsychotics
such as risperidone (and the others mentioned above)
are also used as antimanic agents.
Lamotrigine and Quetiapine (and its metabolite
norquetiapine) appear to have particular efficacy for
treatment of bipolar depression. There is a risk of skin
rash with lamotrigine particularly early in treatment
and the risk appears higher with faster escalation of
dose as well as with co-prescription of valproate. It is
therefore important to increase the dose of lamotrigine
very gradually as suggested in the summary of product
characteristics (SPC) and the dose prescribed depends
on other co-prescribed drugs (such as carbamazepine
and valproate).

LITHIUM
Lithium (Li) is an element (Atomic number 3 and
Atomic weight 7) which is the smallest alkali ion.

The element was discovered in 1817 by Arfuedson.
Since then, it has been used for treatment of gout and
for salt replacement in cardiac disease, but its use was
restricted due to fatal toxicity.
It was rediscovered in 1949 by John Cade, for use
in treatment of mania but its potential went unrecognised as it was discovered in Australia. Mogen Schou
in 1957, had to rediscover it yet again before it became
popular as a treatment of mania.

Indications
Although lithium salts are used in treatment of a
myriad of psychiatric and non-psychiatric disorders,
the established indications are only the following
ones:
1. Treatment of acute mania
2. Prophylaxis of bipolar mood disorder.
In addition, the following may also constitute
possible clinical indications of lithium use:
3. Treatment of schizo-affective disorder
4. Prophylaxis of unipolar mood disorder
5. Treatment of cyclothymia




<<<PAGE 203>>>

Psychopharmacology

Contraindications of Lithium Use
1. Presence of clear evidence of cardiac, renal, thyroid or neurological dysfunction
2. Presence of blood dyscrasia
3. During pregnancy and lactation
4. Concomitant administration of thiazide diuretics,
tetracyclines or anaesthetics
ACE inhibitors (such as captopril), Angiotensin
II receptor antagonists (such as losartan), NSAIDs
(nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) and COX-2
inhibitors (such as celecoxib) can increase the risk of
lithium toxicity in an unpredictable manner, especially
in elderly.

VALPROATE
Valproate and lithium have been widely used as
first line drugs for treatment of mania as well as for
prophylaxis of bipolar mood disorder.
Valproic acid was first synthesised by Burton
and used as an organic solvent. In 1963, Meunier
serendipitously discovered the antiepileptic properties of valproic acid, while Lambert reported in 1966
that valpromide (a valproic acid analogue) might be
effective as an antimanic. It was approved by the US
FDA as an antiepileptic drug for absence seizures in
1978 and for the treatment of acute mania (and for
migraine headache prophylaxis) in 1996.
Although its mechanism of action is not clearly
understood, it increases GABA though other nonGABAergic mechanisms have been proposed.
The term valproate is often used to denote all
commercial preparations, since the common entity
in blood is valproic acid. The following preparations
of valproate are available in India:
i. Valproate sodium
ii. Divalproex (Enteric-coated stable coordination
compound composed of sodium valproate and
valproic acid in a 1:1 molar relationship)
iii. Chrono preparations (Enteric-coated compound
composed of sodium valproate and valproic acid
in a 3:2 ratio).

191

It is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral
administration. The peak plasma levels are reached
at 1-4 hours after a single oral dose. The half-life of
valproate is 8-17 hours.
The usual dose of valproate is 1000-3000 mg/day
orally in divided doses. The therapeutic blood level is
50-125 mg/ml. Oral loading strategies (20-30 mg/kg/
day) are rapidly effective in the management of acute
mania.

Indications
In addition to its primary indication as an anticonvulsant, Valproate has several other indications in
various psychiatric and neuropsychiatric disorders.

Bipolar Disorders
Acute Mania (as a first-line agent for the treatment
of acute mania in oral and IV forms): Several factors
associated with a favourable antimanic response to
valproate (as well as carbamazepine) include:
a. Co-morbid substance abuse or other psychiatric
disorders
b. Later age at onset and/or shorter duration of illness
c. History of poor response to lithium
d. Dysphoric mania, mixed affective episodes, or
rapid cycling
e. Organic/complicated mania associated with seizure disorder, history of head trauma, or EEG
abnormalities
f. D-M-I (Depression-Mania-Well Interval) pattern
of illness, as opposed to the M-D-I pattern
There is some suggestion that patients nonresponsive to valproate may respond well to
carbamazepine.
Prophylaxis: Valproate is probably less effective in
maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder than in
treatment of acute mania. It has been used alone, as
well as along with lithium and other mood stabilisers
in the maintenance treatment.
The addition of valproate to lithium has been
recognised as a useful treatment for mania refractory
to lithium monotherapy.




<<<PAGE 204>>>

192

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Rapid cycling bipolar disorder and mixed (or dysphoric) mania: The patients with rapid cycling, mixed
affective episodes, or dysphoric mania are often
resistant to lithium treatment and respond better to
valproate. Valproate is also effective in management
of ultra-rapid cycling mood disorders.
Bipolar depression: Valproate appears to be generally
more effective in the treatment of acute mania than in
bipolar depression.

The use of valproate in pregnancy and lactation
should be best avoided. The NICE guidelines for treatment of bipolar disorder recommend that valproate is
best avoided in women of childbearing potential (see
Further Reading List).
In overdose, the amount of drug, that is not protein
bound, is high. Therefore, dialysis is useful in the
management of an overdose with valproate.

Neurological Disorders

Certain drug may increase (such as aspirin, cimetidine,
ibuprofen, erythromycin, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine,
phenothiazines) or decrease (such as carbamazepine,
phenytoin, phenobarbital, ethosuximide, rifampicin,
mefloquine) the serum levels of valproate.
In addition, valproate increases serum levels of
other drugs (such as lamotrigine, tricyclic antidepressants, zidovudine, tolbutamide).

Migraine and Pain syndromes: Valproate has been
used for prophylaxis of migraine headaches, as well
as for aborting an acute attack (IV route). Valproate
has also been used in treatment of trigeminal neuralgia
and neuropathic pain.
Seizure disorders: Valproate is primarily indicated for
treatment of absence seizures (both simple and complex), complex partial seizures, myoclonic seizures,
and generalised tonic-clonic seizures, as monotherapy
as well as adjunct therapy.

Other Disorders
Valproate has also been used at times in several other
conditions, including behavioural agitation in dementia, severe behavioural symptoms in mental retardation, ADHD and conduct disorder, schizoaffective
disorder (bipolar type), alcohol withdrawal, tardive
dyskinesia, impulse control disorder, panic disorder
and borderline personality disorder.

Side Effects
Adverse effects are more common with valproate
concentrations above 100 mg/ml.
The common side effects are nausea, sedation, tremor, flushing, weight gain, thrombocytopenia, menstrual disturbances (in women) and hair
loss. There are some reports of polycystic ovaries
and hyperandrogenism in young women with
epilepsy.
The most serious, though relatively uncommon,
side effects include hepatic toxicity (especially in
young children), acute haemorrhagic pancreatitis, and
Steven-Johnson syndrome.

Drug Interactions

CARBAMAZEPINE
Like lithium and valproate, carbamazepine too has
been used as an antimanic and for prophylaxis of bipolar disorder. It is a tricyclic compound synthesised
in 1953 by Schindler. It has a structure similar to
TCAs. The onset of action can be faster as compared
to lithium, but slower compared to valproate.
The usual dose is 600-1600 mg/day orally, in
divided doses. The treatment is best monitored with
repeated blood levels. The therapeutic blood levels
are 4-12 μg/ml and the toxic blood levels are usually
reached at >15 μg/ml.

Indications
The indications for use of carbamazepine include:
1. Seizures
i. Complex partial seizures (CPS)
ii. Generalised tonic clonic seizures
iii. Alcohol withdrawal seizures (rum fits), if persistent (also used sometimes for treatment of
simple alcohol withdrawal syndrome)
2. Psychiatric disorders
i. Bipolar mood disorder (especially for rapid
cyclers; lithium-refractory patients; lithium-




<<<PAGE 205>>>

Psychopharmacology

intolerant patients; for prophylaxis in some
patients; for treatment of acute mania, especially
severe and dysphoric mania)
ii. Impulse control disorder and aggression (in
some cases)
iii. Psychosis (especially mania) with epilepsy
iv. Borderline personality disorder (for treatment
of mood swings)
v. Cocaine withdrawal syndrome
3. Paroxysmal pain syndromes
i. Trigeminal neuralgia
ii. Phantom limb pain
iii. Other paroxysmal pain syndromes (neuralgias).

Side Effects
The major side effects include diplopia, drowsiness, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, ataxia, skin rash,
Steven-Johnson syndrome (erythema multiforme
major), photosensitivity, cholestatic jaundice, acute
oliguria with hypertension, leucopenia and thrombocytopenic purpura. The most dangerous side effects
include bone marrow depression (causing aplastic anaemia), agranulocytosis and cardiovascular
collapse.
Therefore, it is essential to monitor cardiac, renal,
hepatic and bone-marrow functions during carbamazepine treatment. The use of carbamazepine in
pregnancy and lactation should be best avoided.
The use of carbamazepine in management of
bipolar disorder appears to be recently declining.

ANTI-ANXIETY DRUGS
Anti-anxiety drugs, also known as minor tranquilisers
and anxiolytics, can be classified as follows:

Classification
Barbiturates
Barbiturates can be divided into four main types:
Long Acting
The duration of action is more than 8 hours. Examples
include phenobarbital.

193

Intermediate Acting
The duration of action is 5-8 hours. Examples include
amobarbital and pentobarbital.
Short Acting
The duration of action is 1-5 hours. Examples include
secobarbital.
Ultra-Short Acting
The duration of action is less than 1 hour. Examples
include thiopentone and methohexital.
Barbiturates are no longer used or recommended as
anti-anxiety agents. They produce multiple side effects
such as excessive sedation, respiratory and circulatory
depression, hepatic enzyme induction, dependence,
withdrawal symptoms, rebound increase in REM-sleep
on withdrawal, and potential for use in suicide.

Non-barbiturate, Non-benzodiazepine
Anti-anxiety Agents
These can be further divided into the following categories:
Carbamates
The common examples are meprobamate, tybamate
and carisoprodol. These are not used commonly due
to the potential for abuse and dependence.
Piperidinediones
An example is glutethimide. This drug too is not used
now-a-days due to its dependence potential.
Alcohols
The examples include ethanol, chloral hydrate and
ethchlorvynol. These drugs are highly dependence
producing and clearly not recommended.
Quinazoline Derivatives
An example is methaqualone. Methaqualone had
become a street drug (i.e. a drug of abuse) and its
use was discontinued as an anti-anxiety agent and a
hypnotic.
Anti-histaminics
The common examples include diphenhydramine,
hydroxyzine and promethazine. In past, diphenhydramine was usually combined with methaqualone or
diazepam. They may be used as hypnotic-sedatives,
but their use as anti-anxiety agents is minimal and
probably not safe.




<<<PAGE 266>>>

254

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Blackouts 37
Bladder training 169
Blocking 12
Blood
alcohol concentration 39
lithium levels 190
Blunted affect 58
Borderline personality disorder 60,
117, 228
Brain imaging 64, 75
Brief
dissociative stupor 100
history of psychopharmacology 173
pulse ECT 202
Bromocriptine 48, 132
Bruxism 140
Bulimia nervosa 144
Buprenorphine 44, 45
Bupropion 52
Buspirone 92, 98, 197

Childhood
history 9
psychosis 165
Chlordiazepoxide 40, 51
Chlorpromazine 66
Cholinesterase inhibitors 25, 26
Chromatography 157
Chronic
depression 74, 77
fatigue syndrome 109
Circumscribed amnesia 101
Citalopram 26
Citrated calcium carbimide 42
Civil responsibility 229
Classical
conditioning model 214
psychoanalysis 213
psychosomatic disorders 147
Classification in
child psychiatry 162
psychiatry 2
Classification of
alcoholism 37
benzodiazepines 196
mental retardation 156
psychotropic drugs 172
Claustrophobia 93
Clerambault’s syndrome 84
Clomipramine 98, 131
Clonazepam 94, 98
Clonidine 44, 167, 169
Clozapine 52, 53, 66
Cocaine 47
overdose 48
preparations 47
use disorder 46
withdrawal syndrome 48
Code of ethics for psychiatrists 234
Cognitive
behaviour therapy 68, 79, 94, 98,
112, 215, 216
behavioural theory 91
therapy 215
Combativeness 225
Command hallucinations 57
Common
examples of psychosomatic disorders
148
psychiatric emergencies 222
themes in suicide 222
Community
mental health 235
psychiatry 235

C
Caffeine 52, 53
CAGE questionnaire 37, 39
Cannabis
preparations 45
use disorder 45
Capgras’ syndrome 87
Carbamazepine 79, 192
Carphologia 20
Castration anxiety 211
Cataplexy 138
Catastrophic reaction 22
Catatonia 59
Catatonic
behaviour 58
features 57
schizophrenia 59
signs 11, 225
stupor 67, 225
syndrome 225
withdrawal 225
Causes of
catatonic stupor 225
hypersomnia 138
mental retardation 157
Censor 206
Central mental health authority 233, 237
Cerebral palsy 159
Chasing the dragon 43
Child
abuse 228
psychiatry 162

Comparison of delirium and dementia 22
Complex partial seizures 29, 31, 61, 227
Complicated grief reaction 152
Complications of
alcohol dependence 39
chronic alcohol use 38
Conceptual thinking stage 153
Concrete thinking stage 153
Conditioning devices 169
Conduct disorders 167
Conjugal paranoia 84
Consultation-liaison psychiatry 149
Continuous amnesia 101
Contraindications of disulfiram 42
Conversion
disorder 99
release symptoms 102
Coping
mechanisms 207
skills training 112
Coprolalia 168
Cortical dementia 24
Counselling 110
Counter
phobic defense 210
thoughts 96
Covert sensitisation 41, 215
CPAP 139
Crack 47
Cretinism 159
Criminal lunatic 232
Crisis 221
intervention 112
centre 228
Critical
comments 64
remarks 68
Cross-gender homosexuality 122
Culture bound syndromes 110
Cyclothymia 73
Cyproheptadine 144

D
Dangerous Drug Act of 1930 233
Deep brain stimulation 199
Defense mechanism 90
Definition of psychiatric disorder 1
Deliberate self-harm 222
Delirium 19, 21, 23
tremens 38, 41
Delusion of doubles 87
Delusional
depression 77, 78


