<<<PAGE 38>>>

26

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

i. Fluctuating cognitive impairment over weeks or
months, with involvement of memory and higher
cortical functions (such as language, visuo-spatial
ability, praxis and reasoning). Lucid intervals can
be present in between fluctuations.
ii. Recurrent and detailed visual hallucinations.
iii. Spontaneous extrapyramidal or parkinsonian
symptoms such as rigidity and tremors.
iv. Neuroleptic sensitivity syndrome, characterised by
a marked sensitivity to the effects of typical doses
of antipsychotic drugs (resulting in severe extrapyramidal side-effects with use of antipsychotics).
Other clinical features may include repeated falls,
autonomic dysfunction (e.g. orthostatic hypotension), urinary incontinence, delusions and depressive
features. Although Lewy bodies (intra-cytoplasmic
inclusion bodies) are also present in Parkinson’s
disease, the occurrence of Lewy bodies in Lewy body
dementia is more widespread. A PET (Positron Emission Tomography) or SPECT (Single Photon Emission
Computerised Tomography) scan of brain may show
low dopamine transporter uptake in basal ganglia.
Antipsychotic medication should be avoided (or
used with extreme caution and in low doses) in patients
with Lewy body dementia.

Management
Basic Investigations
The diagnostic tests are of great importance in finding the cause, or to exclude all other causes before
diagnosing Alzheimer’s dementia.
The list of investigations could include complete
blood count, urinalysis, blood glucose, serum electrolytes, renal function tests, thyroid function tests, serum
B12 and folate levels, serological tests for syphilis,
arterial pO2 and pCO2, X-ray chest, ECG, X-ray skull,
EEG, lumbar puncture, CT scan/MRI scan of brain,
neuropsychological tests, and drug screens.

Treatment of the Underlying Cause,
if Treatable
Some underlying causes of dementia are treatable
(reversible dementias), for example, treatment of

hypertension in multi-infarct dementia, thyroxin
replacement in hypothyroid dementia, shunting in
hydrocephalic dementia, levodopa in parkinsonism,
and removal of the toxic agent in toxic dementias.
Early treatment can prevent further deterioration of
dementia.

Symptomatic Management
1. Environmental manipulation and focus on coping
skills to reduce stress in day-to-day activities.
2. Treatment of medical complications, if any.
3. Care of food and hygiene
4. Supportive care for the patient and family/carers.
5. Anxiety symptoms can be treated with low dose of
a short-acting benzodiazepine (such as Lorazepam
and Oxazepam), though care should be taken to
prevent benzodiazepine dependence/misuse.
6. Depression can be treated with low doses of
SSRIs such as Citalopram or Sertraline as these
antidepressants have low anticholinergic activity
and have a safer cardiac profile. Agents with high
anticholinergic activity can cause confusion or
even frank delirium.
7. Psychotic symptoms and disruptive behaviours
can be treated with low doses of antipsychotics.
Haloperidol and Risperidone have usually been
preferred as they are less sedating and have low
cardiac toxicity, though Risperidone can cause
postural hypotension. Recently, the use of antipsychotics in treatment of behavioural symptoms
in dementia has decreased markedly due to
possible association of antipsychotic use with
increased mortality. Antipsychotics should
also be avoided if Lewy body dementia is
suspected.
8. Short-term hospitalisation may be needed for
emergent symptoms whilst a longer term hospitalisation or respite placement may be necessary
in later stages.
9. Specific drug treatment such as cholinesterase
inhibitors (e.g. donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine) in moderate Alzheimer’s disease, or
memantine (NMDA antagonist) in moderate to
severe Alzheimer’s disease, can be helpful.




<<<PAGE 78>>>

66

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry
Table 5.7: Antipsychotic Dose in Schizophrenia

Drug

Oral Dose Range
(mg/day)

Parenteral Dose
(mg/day)

Equivalent Oral Dose*
(Equal to 100 mg CPZ)

A. Typical/Traditional/First Generation Antipsychotics
1. Chlorpromazine (CPZ)
300-1000
50-100 IM
100
2. Flupentixol
3-18
—
2
3. Haloperidol
5-30
5-10 IM
2-3
4. Loxapine
25-250
—
10
5. Pimozide
4-12
—
2
6. Prochlorperazine
45-150
40-80 IM
15
7. Sulpiride
400-2400
—
200
8. Thioridazine
300-600
—
100
9. Trifluoperazine
15-50
1-5 IM
5
10. Triflupromazine
100-400
30-60 IM
25
11. Zuclopenthixol
25-150
50-100 IM
25
B. Atypical/Second Generation Antipsychotics
12. Amisulpride
400-1200
—
—
13. Aripiprazole
5-30
5.25-15 IM
—
14. Clozapine
50-900
—
50
15. Olanzapine
5-20
2.5-10 IM
2-3
16. Paliperidone
3-12
—
—
17. Quetiapine
150-800
—
50-100
18. Risperidone
2-16
—
0.5-1.0
19. Ziprasidone
40-160
—
20
20. Zotepine
75-300
—
—
*Equivalent doses are at best approximations only. The dose in a particular patient should be chosen on an individualised basis by the treating professional.

aripiprazole, and ziprasidone, are more commonly
used than the older typical (or first generation) antipsychotics such as trifluoperazine and haloperidol, in
acute stages. Atypical antipsychotics are also more
useful when negative symptoms are prominent, e.g.
in chronic schizophrenia.
Clozapine, another atypical antipsychotic, is
available in the Indian market. The clinical trials have
shown that clozapine is effective in about 30% of
patients who had no beneficial response to traditional
(typical and atypical) antipsychotics. It is an effective
drug; however, as it can cause agranulocytosis and
seizures as side-effects, it should be used with caution,
with regular WBC and neutrophil counts as advised
by the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC).

Drug treatment is usually administered in the
outpatient setting as:
1. There are very few number of psychiatric beds in
India,
2. Majorities of families are willing to care for the
patients at home, and
3. Majority of patients do not require hospitalisation.
However, hospitalisation is indicated if there is:
1. Neglect of food and water intake,
2. Danger to self or others,
3. Poor treatment adherence,
4. Significant neglect of self-care, or
5. Lack of social support with evidence of abovementioned risks.




<<<PAGE 79>>>

Schizophrenia

In the presence of acute excitement, haloperidol
5 mg IV or IM, with/without 10 mg diazepam or
50 mg of promethazine can be administered. Given
IM, chlorpromazine can cause painful injection
abscess at the injection site. It should never be given
IV, as severe hypotension can occur. It is really
important to exercise care in administering parenteral
antipsychotics to any patient, but particularly one who
is treatment (antipsychotic) naïve. Oral antipsychotics
are preferable to parenteral antipsychotic in routine
clinical practice.
A majority of patients require maintenance treatment with antipsychotics to prevent relapse. Generally,
the treatment is continued for 6 months to 1 year for
the first episode, for 1-2 years for the subsequent episodes, and for indefinite period for repeated episodes
or persistent symptoms. However, the decision regarding the duration of treatment in a particular case has to
be assessed individually by the treating psychiatrist in
consultation with the patient and family (if appropriate), in view of past history and possible risks.
To ensure drug concordance, depot antipsychotic
preparations with long duration of action can be used.
(See Table 15.5 for some common preparations of
depot antipsychotics).
Many patients require adjuvant antiparkinsonian
medication to prevent extrapyramidal side-effects;
for example, trihexiphenidyl 6 mg/day, orphenadrine
150 mg/day, procyclidine 7.5-15 mg/day. This is
particularly true if the patient is receiving an older,
typical antipsychotic (such as haloperidol). However,
at times atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone
can also cause extrapyramidal symptoms, particularly
in higher doses.
Ideally speaking, during hospitalisation, no patient
should receive anticholinergic antipar kin sonian
medication till extrapyramidal side-effects appear.
Anticholinergics can worsen cognitive function, have
an abuse potential, can cause delirium (especially
in elderly), can worsen or contribute to negative
symptoms in schizophrenia, and may increase the risk
of tardive dyskinesia. But, in routine clinical practice,
often a majority of patients do receive anticholinergics
in addition to traditional antipsychotics.

67

Antipsychotics probably act by blocking the postsynaptic dopamine (D2) receptors in the mesolimbic
system. Other receptors such as 5-HT, muscarinic
receptors and GABA are also probably important.
Atypical antipsychotics are also called as SerotoninDopamine Antagonists (SDAs) due of their action on
both dopamine and 5-HT.

Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)
Schizophrenia is not a primary indication for ECT.
The indications for ECT in schizophrenia include:
1. Catatonic stupor.
2. Uncontrolled catatonic excitement.
3. Acute exacerbation not controlled with drugs.
4. Severe side-effect with drugs, in presence of untreated schizophrenia.
Usually 8-12 ECTs are needed (although up to 18
have been given in poor responders), administered two
or three times a week.

Miscellaneous Treatments
Psychosurgery is not routinely indicated in the treatment of schizophrenia. It is a treatment which is
extremely rarely used in clinical practice. When used,
the treatment of choice is limbic leucotomy (a small
subcaudate lesion with a cingulate lesion) in some
cases with severe and very prominent depression,
anxiety or obsessional symptoms.
Severely deteriorated patients are unlikely to
benefit. The maximum benefit would be in acute
episodes, but antipsychotics are far better obviously
both in efficacy and safety.
Many other methods such as megavitamin therapy,
dialysis, malaria therapy, high dose propranolol and
insulin coma therapy have been used in past but are
no longer used in clinical practice due to either poor
evidence for efficacy and/or risks to the patient.

Psychosocial Treatment
Psychosocial treatment is an extremely important
component of comprehensive management of schizophrenia. It can be divided in following steps:
1. Psychoeducation of the patient and especially the
family/carers (with patient’s consent) regarding




<<<PAGE 90>>>

78

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

ii. Severe depression with stupor, severe psychomotor retardation, or somatic syndrome.
iii. Severe treatment refractory depression.
iv. Delusional depression (psychotic features).
v. Presence of significant antidepressant sideeffects or intolerance to drugs.
Severe depression with suicidal risk is the first and
foremost indication for use of ECT. The prompt use
of ECT can be life-saving in such a situation.
The response is usually rapid, resulting in a marked
improvement. In most clinical situations, usually 6-8
ECTs are needed, given three times a week. When six
ECTs are administered, the usual pattern is three ECTs
in the first week, two in the second week and one in
the third week.
However, improvement is not sustained after
stopping the ECTs. Therefore, antidepressants are
often needed along with ECTs, in order to maintain
the improvement achieved. The safety of the ECT
procedure has now been well-established.
ECT can also be used for acute manic excitement,
if it is not adequately responding to antipsychotics and
mood stabilisers.

Lithium (Li)
Lithium has traditionally been the drug of choice for
the treatment of manic episode (acute phase) as well
as for prevention of further episodes in bipolar mood
disorder. It has also been used in treatment of depression with less success. (Lithium is discussed in detail
in Chapter 15).
There is usually a 1-2 week lag period before any
appreciable response is observed. So, for treatment
of acute manic episode, antipsychotics are usually
administered along with lithium, in order to provide
cover for the first few weeks.
The usual therapeutic dose range is 900-1500 mg
of lithium carbonate per day. Lithium treatment needs
to be closely monitored by repeated blood levels, as
the difference between the therapeutic and lethal blood
levels is not very wide (narrow therapeutic index).
Therapeutic blood lithium = 0.8-1.2 mEq/L
Prophylactic blood lithium = 0.6-1.2 mEq/L

A blood lithium level of >2.0 mEq/L is often
associated with toxicity, while a level of more than
2.5-3.0 mEq/L may be lethal.
Although lithium is indicated for therapeutic use
in all manic episodes, the preventive use is best in
usually those patients with bipolar disorder, in whom
the frequency of episodes is 1-3 per year or 2-5 per
two years.
The common acute toxic symptoms of lithium are
neurological while the common chronic side-effects
are nephrological and endocrinal (usually hypothyroidism).
The important investigations before star ting
lithium therapy include a complete general physical
examination, full blood counts, ECG, urine routine
examination (with/without 24 hour urine volume),
renal function tests and thyroid function tests.

Antipsychotics
Antipsychotics are an important adjunct in the
treatment of mood disorder. The commonly used
drugs include risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine,
haloperidol, and aripiprazole. It is customary to use
the atypical antipsychotics first, before considering
the older typical antipsychotics.
Some of the indications include:
1. Acute manic episode
• Along with mood stabilisers for the first few
weeks, before the effect of mood stabilisers
becomes apparent.
• Where mood stabilisers are not effective, not indicated, or have significant side-effects.
• Given parenterally (IM or IV) for emergency
treatment of mania.
• Recently, there has been some early evidence that
atypical antipsychotics (e.g. olanzapine) might
have some mood stabilising properties.
2. Delusional depression
As stated above, antipsychotics are important adjuncts
in the treatment of delusional depression. Once again,
it is customary to use atypical antipsychotics such as
olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, and ziprasidone
first, although any antipsychotic can be used.




<<<PAGE 110>>>

98

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Treatment
Psychotherapy
1. Psychoanalytic psychotherapy is used in certain
selected patients, who are psychologically oriented.
2. Supportive psychotherapy is an important adjunct to other modes of treatment. Supportive
psychotherapy is also needed by the family
members.

Behaviour Therapy and Cognitive
Behaviour Therapy
Behaviour modification is an effective mode of
therapy, with a success rate as high as 80%, especially
for the compulsive acts. It is customary these days to
combine CBT with BT at most centres.
The techniques used are listed below (They are
described in Chapter 18):
i. Thought-stopping (and its modifications).
ii. Response prevention.
iii. Systematic desensitisation.
iv. Modelling.

Drug Treatment
1. Benzodiazepines (e.g. alprazolam, clonazepam)
have a limited role in controlling anxiety as
adjuncts and should be used very sparingly.
2. Antidepressants: Some patients may improve
dramatically with specific serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs).
Clomipramine (75-300 mg/day), a nonspecific
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SRI), was the first
drug used effectively in the treatment of OCD.
The response is better in the presence of depressive symptoms, but many patients with pure
OCD also improve substantially.
Fluoxetine (20-80 mg/day) is a good alternative to clomipramine and often preferred these
days for its better side-effect profile. Fluvoxamine (50-200 mg/day) is marketed as a specific
anti-obsessional SSRI drug, whilst paroxetine

(20-40 mg/day) and sertraline (50-200 mg/day)
are also effective in some patients.
3. Antipsychotics: These are occasionally used in
low doses (e.g. haloperidol, risperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole, pimozide) in the treatment
of severe, disabling anxiety.
4. Buspirone has also been used beneficially as
an adjunct for augmentation of SSRIs, in some
patients.

Electroconvulsive Therapy
In presence of severe depression with OCD, ECT may
be needed. ECT is particularly indicated when there is
a risk of suicide and/or when there is a poor response
to the other modes of treatment. However, ECT is not
the treatment of first choice in OCD.

Psychosurgery
Psychosurgery can be used in treatment of OCD that
has become intractable, and is not responding to other
methods of treatment. It is worth mentioning that
psychosurgery is only available as a treatment choice
at a very few centres throughout the world.
The best responders are usually those who have
significant associated depression, although pure
obsessives also do respond. The main benefit is the
marked reduction in associated distress and severe
anxiety.
The procedures which can be employed are:
i. Stereotactic limbic leucotomy.
ii. Stereotactic subcaudate tractotomy.
Psychosurgery is usually followed by intensive
behaviour therapy aimed at rehabilitation. However,
with the easy availability of SSRIs, and a good response of OCD symptoms to SSRIs and other pharmacological measures, psychosurgery is very rarely
used in the treatment of OCD.
Very often, a comprehensive treatment of OCD
requires that multiple treatment modalities (e.g. drug
treatment and BT/CBT) be combined in a specific
manner, suitable to the particular patient being treated
at the time.




<<<PAGE 161>>>

Behavioural Syndromes Associated with Psychological Disturbances and Physiological Factors

2. Behaviour modification techniques.
3. Individual psychotherapy, usually cognitive
behaviour therapy.
4. Group therapy.

Post-cardiac Surgery Delirium
This is a condition similar to ICU (Intensive care unit)
syndrome. A fairly common disorder, its onset typically occurs after 24-48 hours of surgery. The patients,
who develop post-surgery delirium, can sometimes
be the ones who are most fearful before the surgery.
Many causes have been attributed for delirium,
which include:
1. Cardiac status.
2. Presence of preoperative, subclinical organic brain
disease.
3. Restrictive environment of the ICU/CCU, with
isolation.
4. Electrolyte imbalance.
5. Preoperative anxiety, fearfulness, depression or
denial.
Probably the condition is aetiologically multifactorial and should be treated as a type of delirium
(see Chapter 4).

Treatment
1. Preoperative measures.
i. Allaying the anxiety and fears of the patient.
ii. Treatment of depression, if present.
iii. Easy access to clocks and windows in ICU/
CCU, to keep the patient oriented in time.
iv. Allowing a family member to stay near the
patient.
2. Treatment of delirium as described in Chapter 4.
Since delirium can be life threatening, as patients
can take out IV lines, catheters or other ‘life-lines’ and
can jump down from balcony or window, urgent treatment is often needed. Small doses of benzodiazepines
(such as Diazepam or Lorazepam) or antipsychotics
(such as Haloperidol or Risperidone) can be used
orally or parenterally. Later the patient can be switched
to low dose oral haloperidol or risperidone till recovery from delirium occurs.

149

Anticholinergic medication should not routinely
be added to antipsychotics, as it may actually worsen
the delirium. However, it may be needed if there
are any significant extrapyramidal adverse effects
present.

PSYCHIATRY IN MEDICINE
About one-third to two-third of medical outpatients
may have primary or associated psychiatric disorders.
If minor psychological and social problems are also
taken into consideration, this number would be even
larger. Since these patients may benefit from a psychiatric referral, psychiatrists are becoming increasingly
involved in treatment of medical and surgical patients.
In fact a whole new branch of consultation-liaison
psychiatry has sprung up in the last few decades.
Consultation-liaison psychiatry is an area of clinical psychiatry which includes diagnostic, therapeutic,
teaching and research activities of psychiatrists in the
non-psychiatric parts of the hospital.
The common reasons for a psychiatric referral
include:
1. Suicidal attempt, ideation or threat.
2. Grossly ‘abnormal’ behaviour disturbing the
inpatient setting.
3. Presence of disorders related to alcohol or substance abuse/dependence such as severe withdrawal symptoms.
4. Organic brain syndromes.
5. Psychosomatic disorders.
6. Psychological reaction to medical illness.
7. Uncertain diagnosis (No medical illness can be
found despite the presence of significant symptoms).
8. Manipulative or difficult or hostile patient.
9. Psychiatric side-effects of drugs.
10. Patient is unable to manage his or her own affairs.
11. Presence of severe primary psychiatric disorder(s).
A large number of medical illnesses can present
with psychiatric symptomatology. It is important to
keep in mind the possibility of a secondary mental
disorder, i.e. a psychiatric disorder which is caused




<<<PAGE 177>>>

Child Psychiatry

iv. Speech therapy and/or sign language teaching.
v. Behavioural techniques to encourage interpersonal interactions.
2. Psychotherapy
Parental counselling and supportive psychotherapy
can be very useful in allaying parental anxiety
and guilt, and helping their active involvement in
therapy. However, overstimulation of child should
be avoided during treatment.
3. Pharmacotherapy
Drug treatment can be used for treatment of autism
as well as for treatment of co-morbid epilepsy.
i. Haloperidol decreases dopamine levels in brain.
It is believed to decrease hyperactivity and
behavioural symptoms. Risperidone, an atypical antipsychotic, is helpful in some patients
and is licensed in some countries for treatment
of autism in children aged 5 and above. Both
haloperidol and risperidone can cause extrapyramidal side-effects (EPSE), though usually
more with haloperidol.
The starting dose for Risperidone is usually
0.25-0.5 mg (based on body weight), with a
dose range of 0.02-0.06 mg/kg/day.
ii. Other drugs such as SSRIs, chlorpromazine,
amphetamines, methysergide, imipra mine,
multi-vitamins and triiodothyronine have been
tried with limited success and should be used
only by the experts in the field.
iii. Anticonvulsant medication is used for the treatment of generalised or other seizures, if present.

OTHER PERVASIVE DEVELOPMENTAL
DISORDERS
Childhood psychosis is a vague term which includes
all psychotic illnesses occurring in childhood, such
as infantile and childhood onset autism, childhood
schizophrenia, mood disorders, and organic psychiatric disorders. This term has frequently been misused in
the past, also meaning at times infantile autism alone.
This is a term which is probably best dispensed with.

165

Schizophrenia, mood disorders and organic
psychiatric disorders have a nearly similar picture in
children as in adulthood. Sometimes, childhood onset
schizophrenia may be mistaken for autism. The most
important differentiating features are:
1. Delusions, formal thought disorder and hallucinations may be present in childhood-onset schizophrenia while they are always absent in infantile
autism.
2. Typical age of onset of symptoms is before 2½
years in infantile autism while it is after 5-6 years
in childhood onset schizophrenia.
3. Moderate to severe mental retardation and epilepsy
are common in infantile autism while they are rare
in childhood-onset schizophrenia. Mental retardation, if ever present, is usually of mild type.
Another type of childhood psychosis, called
Heller’s syndrome or disintegrative psychosis, has
often been described in literature. Typically, the age
of onset is between 3 to 5 years and the syndrome is
characterised by a rapid downhill course, leading to
deterioration and development of neurological deficits.
This is really a ‘rag-bag’ category containing diverse
organic brain syndromes of varying aetiologies (For
example, some are caused by lipoid degeneration of
ganglia in central nervous system). Prognosis is usually poor in this condition.
Two other syndromes with autistic features have
been described; namely, Asperger’s syndrome and
Rett’s syndrome.
Asperger’s syndrome is characterised by autism
without any significant delay in language or cognitive
development (including intelligence). This syndrome
occurs predominantly in boys (male : female ratio =
8:1). It probably represents mild cases of autism and
has been also called as high functioning autism.
Rett’s syndrome is a disorder which is only
reported in girls so far. After an apparently normal
early development and normal head circumference at
birth, there is a deceleration of head growth between
the age of 5 months and 30 months. There is also a loss
of purposive hand movements and acquired fine motor




<<<PAGE 186>>>

174

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The information in this chapter is necessarily very
brief and introductory in nature. A much more detailed
reading is definitely recommended before prescribing any psychotropic medication to a patient with
consultation of local formularies and guidelines. This
information should not be used to make any treatment
decisions without further reading.

ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS
Antipsychotics are psychotropic drugs which are
used in the treatment of psychotic disorders and
psychotic symptoms. These are also known as major
tranquilisers, neuroleptics, ataractics, anti-schizophrenic drugs and D2-receptor (dopamine receptor)
blockers; however, the term antipsychotic appears
to be the most appropriate and the most widely used
term.

Indications
Antipsychotics have previously been used as urinary
antiseptics and anti-helminthic; however, their use
stopped was due to toxicity and lack of efficacy.
Although they have been used in a wide variety of
conditions in the past their current use includes the
following conditions.
Organic Psychiatric Disorders
1. Delirium (in small doses; e.g. haloperidol,
risperidone)
2. Dementia (careful and considered use for psychotic features, and severe agitation)
3. Delirium tremens (and psychoses occurring
in drug and alcohol withdrawal states; e.g.
haloperidol, risperidone)
4. Drug induced psychosis (e.g. haloperidol in
amphetamine-induced psychosis)
5. Other organic mental disorders (e.g. organic
hallucinosis; organic delusional disorder; secondary mania)
Non-organic Psychotic Disorders
1. Schizophrenia
2. Schizo-affective disorder
3. Acute psychoses

4. Mania (with or without mood stabilisers)
5. Maintenance treatment of bipolar disorders
(e.g. olanzapine, quetiapine)
6. Major depression (for psychotic features,
agitation, and melancholic features; along with
antidepressants)
7. Delusional disorders
Neurotic and Other Psychiatric Disorders
1. Severe, intractable, and disabling anxiety
(rarely used and not recommended)
2. Treatment refractory obsessive compulsive
disorder (as an adjunct)
3. Anorexia nervosa (rarely used and not widely
recommended)
Medical Disorders
1. Huntington’s chorea (e.g. haloperidol)
2. Intractable hiccups (e.g. chlorpromazine in low
doses) (rarely used)
3. Nausea and vomiting (rarely, in low doses);
ondansetron, an anti-emetic drug, is a weak
antipsychotic
4. Tic disorders, e.g. Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (e.g. haloperidol, risperidone)

Pharmacokinetics
The orally administered antipsychotics are absorbed
erratically and variably from gastrointestinal tract,
with uneven blood levels. Intramuscular and intravenous administration provides much more reliable
blood levels. On an average, the oral liquid dose produces a peak level at 1½ hours and the intramuscular
dose peaks at 30 minutes.
The antipsychotics are highly lipophilic and
highly protein-bound. They easily enter areas with
good blood supply such as brain, lung, kidneys and
foetus, and accumulate there. They are not dialysable. The half-lives of most antipsychotics are long
and theoretically a single daily dose is sufficient to
produce sustained therapeutic blood levels. However
in practice, divided doses are administered, at least
initially, to decrease adverse effects. Later an attempt
can be made to give the whole dose or a major part of
total daily dose at night.




<<<PAGE 187>>>

Psychopharmacology

Steady state plasma levels are usually reached in
5-10 days. Once the drug is withdrawn, it may remain
in body for many days to many months. The main metabolic pathway is through liver (hepatic microsomal
enzymes). Oxidation and conjugation are the most
important methods of metabolism for phenothiazines.
Many of the metabolites, such as mesoridazine (for
thioridazine), reduced haloperidol (for haloperidol)
and 9-hydroxy-risperidone (for risperidone), are also
active compounds. Chlorpromazine has more than 150
metabolites, some of which are active. The excretion
of the metabolites is through kidneys and liver (enterohepatic circulation).
Most of the antipsychotics tend to have a therapeutic window. If the blood level is below this ‘window’,
the drug is ineffective. If the blood level is higher than
the upper limit of the ‘window’, there is toxicity or
the drug is again ineffective.

Classification
A classification of currently available antipsychotic
drugs is presented in Table 15.2.

Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of action of antipsychotics is
unknown. However, one of the major mechanisms
appears to be antidopaminergic activity of these drugs.
Antipsychotic drugs block D2-receptors, which are
mainly present in mesolimbic-mesocortical system
(mesolimbic system is concerned with emotional reactions), nigro-striatal system and tubero-infundibular
system. The relative potencies of these drugs in competing for D2-receptors parallel quite closely their
clinical potencies.
It is currently believed that antipsychotic drugs
are effective in treating psychosis due to their action on the D2-receptors located in the mesolimbic
system whilst extrapyramidal side-effects (EPSE)
are caused by blockade of D2-receptors situated in
nigro-striatal system and hyperprolactinaemia is
caused by D2-blockade in tubero-infundibular system.
However, other neurotransmitters (such as 5-HT, acetylcholine) are clearly implicated (see below; atypical
antipsychotics). Sedation is caused by histaminergic

175

blockade which is usually highest for drugs such as
chlorpromazine and thioridazine.

Second Generation Antipsychotics
A search for an antipsychotic drug which acts only
on the mesolimbic system but has no effect on nigrostriatal or tubero-infundibular systems, has led to the
development of a heterogeneous group of drugs collectively known as atypical or newer antipsychotics.
These are also known as second generation antipsychotics (SGAs) or serotonin-dopamine antagonists
or (SDAs). These include risperidone, quetiapine,
olanzapine, amisulpride, paliperidone, zotepine,
ziprasidone and aripiprazole.
By definition these drugs are effective antipsychotics without theoretically producing undesirable
extrapyramidal side-effects (i.e. antipsychotics without neuroleptic effect), or causing elevation of serum
prolactin levels. These are characterised by a selective
limbic dopamine blockade, D4-receptor blockade, or
a combination of potent 5-HT2 and weak D2 antagonism. These drugs should theoretically be safer with
lesser incidence of serious side-effects such as tardive
dyskinesia and neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Clozapine is one such drug but it can cause
agranulocytosis and seizures. Risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, aripiprazole, amisulpride and ziprasidone
are currently being used widely as atypical antipsychotics, while paliperidone and zotepine are also
available in the international market.
Atypical antipsychotics, in addition to their effect
on positive symptoms, are believed to be effective
in treatment of negative symptoms (such as apathy,
decreased sociality, anhedonia) of chronic schizophrenia. Clozapine in particular is effective in management
of treatment-resistant schizophrenia. However, there
is need for close haematological monitoring for
neutropenia or agranulocytosis as suggested in SPC
of the drug.

Side Effects
The antipsychotics are safe drugs with a high therapeutic index and wide margin of safety in routine
clinical dosages. In spite of this safety, a wide range




<<<PAGE 190>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

178

Table 15.3: Side Effects of Antipsychotics
Category and
Probable Cause
Maximum with
Side Effect
(For example)
A. Autonomic Side Effects
1. Dry mouth
Muscarinic Choliner- Chlorpromazine
gic blockade

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Haloperidol
Risperidone

2. Constipation

–do–

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Risperidone

3. Cycloplegia

–do–

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Risperidone

4. Mydriasis

–do–

Haloperidol
Risperidone

5. Urinary
Retention

–do–

Thioridazine;
miosis with
Chlorpromazine)
Chlorpromazine

Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Occasionally
Pilocarpine 2%
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Bulk (or sometimes other) laxatives
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Occasionally
Pilocarpine 2%
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Occasionally
Pilocarpine 2%
Usually none if only hesitancy occurs. Tolerance
develops; Rule out BHP;
Bethanethol or catheterisation for retention
Physostigmine (neostigmine does not enter
CNS); Diazepam sometimes supportive care
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; change in posture slowly. When severe,
use plasma expanders,
raise leg, supportive
measures.
Decrease dose. If severe,
change medication.
Decrease dose. If severe,
change medication.

6. Delirium (central –do–
anticholinergic
syndrome)

Haloperidol
Risperidone

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Risperidone

7. Orthostatic
hypotension

α1 Adrenergic
blockade

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Aripiprazole

8. Impotence

–do–

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol

9. Impaired
–do–
Thioridazine
ejaculation
B. Extra-pyramidal Side Effects (EPSE)
1. Parkinsonian
Dopaminergic (D2) Haloperidol
syndrome
receptor blockade in
(esp. tremor)
striatal areas
2. Akathisia (motor –do–
–do–
restlessness)

Haloperidol

Clozapine
Quetiapine
Aripiprazole
Clozapine
Quetiapine

Antiparkisonian medication for treatment; also
for prevention if needed.
Change of medication or
reduction; Beta-blockers
such as Propranolol; Benzodiazepines
Contd...




<<<PAGE 191>>>

Psychopharmacology

179

Contd...
Category and
Side Effect
3. Acute Dystonia

Probable Cause
—do—

Maximum with
(For example)
—do—

4. Rabbit Syndrome —do—
—do—
(Peri-oral tremor)
Dopaminergic (D2) Not known
5. Tardive
Dyskinesia (late receptor
onset oro-facial
super-sensitivity
dyskinesia)
Not known
Probably
6. Neuroleptic
haloperidol
Malignant
Syndrome
(Fever, EPS,
High CPK,
catatonic
symptoms and
autonomic
dysfunction)
C. Other Central Nervous System Effects
1. Seizures
Decreased seizure
Clozapine
threshold
Chlorpromazine
(High doses)
2. Sedation
Histaminergic
—do—
blockade

3. Depression or
Decreased catecho- Not known
Pseudolamine levels in
depression
brain
D. Metabolic and Endocrine Side Effects
1. Weight gain
H1 blockade
Almost all
antipsychotics esp.
Clozapine and
Olanzapine
2. Diabetes
Not known
Clozapine
Olanzapine
3. Galactorrhoea
Increased Prolactin Haloperidol
Risperidone
with/without
released due to
amenorrhoea
dopaminergic blockade in hypothalamus

Minimum with
(For example)
—do—

—do—
Clozapine

Not known

Management
Antiparkinsonian
medication; Rule out
hypercalcaemia
Antiparkinsonian
medication
Treatment unsatisfactory,
though several drugs are
available. Prevention
best.
Bromocriptine, Dantrolene, Baclofen, General
supportive care. Add-on
lorazepam, Occasionally
ECT

Trifluoperazine

Decrease dose. Change
to a safer antipsychotic

Haloperidol
Aripiprazole

This side effect may be
beneficial. Otherwise
decrease dose. Change
drug. Give single dose
only at night
Decrease dose. Change
drug. Occasionally antidepressants or ECT.

SDAs
(e.g. Ziprasidone)

Aripiprazole
Haloperidol

Change drug. Dietary
control. Exercises.

Ziprasidone
Aripiprazole
Aripiprazole
Quetiapine

Change drug. Dietary
control.
None. Change drug.

Contd...




<<<PAGE 193>>>

Psychopharmacology
Table 15.4: Some Factors in Poor Drug Concordance
1. Drug Related Factors
i. Adverse effects (particularly their early appearance and persistence)
ii. Slow onset of desirable effects
iii. Complexity of regimen (e.g. several doses/day)
iv. Route of administration (IM/IV as opposed to
oral)
2. Patient Related Factors
i. Poor education regarding illness and medication
ii. Denial of illness/absent insight
iii. Perceived stigma of mental disorder, medication, or visible side effects (e.g. dystonia)
iv. Treatment access problems (e.g. poverty, cost
of medications, distance from hospital)
v. Low IQ and/or low educational level
vi. Poor social support
vii. Specific psychopathology, e.g. persecutory ideation, hopelessness
viii. Poor doctor-patient relationship.
Table 15.5: Some Antipsychotic Depot Preparations*
1. Flupentixol decanoate 20-300 mg IM every 2-4
weeks (40 mg IM every 2 weeks roughly equivalent to
25 mg of fluphenazine decanoate IM every 2 weeks)
2. Fluphenazine decanoate 12.5-100 mg IM every 2-4
weeks (25 mg IM every 2 weeks roughly equivalent
to 300 mg of oral Chlorpromazine per day)
3. Haloperidol decanoate 25-250 mg IM every 4 weeks
(100 mg IM every 4 weeks roughly equivalent to 5
mg/day of oral haloperidol)
4. Olanzapine pamoate 150-300 mg IM every 2 weeks
or 300-405 mg IM every 4 weeks (Note risk of postinjection syndrome; Also note dose escalation chart
in SPC)
5. Pipotiazine palmitate 25-100 mg IM every 4 weeks
6. Risperidone Consta 25-50 mg IM every 2 weeks
(Note delay in onset of action by 2-3 weeks and need
for refrigeration)
7. Zuclopenthixol decanoate 200-400 mg IM every 2-4
weeks (200 mg IM every 2 weeks roughly equivalent
to 25 mg/day of oral Zuclopenthixol)
* Check SPC (Summary of Product Characteristics) before
prescribing any medicines

181

Since discontinuation of antipsychotic medication
often leads to relapse, long-acting preparations of
antipsychotics are valuable in the treatment. They
may be given in a depot form, either intramuscularly
or administered orally. There are several different
preparations available in the international market but
the preparations summarised in Table 15.5 are used
most often.

Clinical Use
Some general principles regarding routine clinical use
of antipsychotics include:
1. Although atypical antipsychotics are usually
preferred, the choice of antipsychotic medication
should be individualised in a particular patient.
The recent evidence shows more differences in
adverse effect profiles but not in efficacy between
older and newer antipsychotics.
2. Whenever possible the lowest effective dose
should be used.
3. Routinely only one antipsychotic should be used
at one time. Rational polypharmacy should be
reserved only for judicious treatment after nonresponse to single antipsychotics.
4. High doses of antipsychotics should be avoided.
5. Whenever appropriate, psychosocial management
should be combined with antipsychotic treatment.
6. It is really important to monitor physical health
on a regular basis whilst the patient receives antipsychotic medication (see above).
7. Do not use rapid neuroleptisation (parenteral use
of a loading dose of antipsychotic medication), if
possible.

ANTIDEPRESSANT DRUGS
Antidepressants are those psychotropic drugs which
are used for treatment of depressive disorders. These
have also been called as mood-elevators and thymoleptics.
Isoniazid (INH) was found to have mood elevating
properties in some patients suffering from tuberculosis
in 1951. Iproniazid, a MAO inhibitor and a derivative
of INH, was later (1958) introduced for the treatment


