<<<PAGE 205>>>

Psychopharmacology

intolerant patients; for prophylaxis in some
patients; for treatment of acute mania, especially
severe and dysphoric mania)
ii. Impulse control disorder and aggression (in
some cases)
iii. Psychosis (especially mania) with epilepsy
iv. Borderline personality disorder (for treatment
of mood swings)
v. Cocaine withdrawal syndrome
3. Paroxysmal pain syndromes
i. Trigeminal neuralgia
ii. Phantom limb pain
iii. Other paroxysmal pain syndromes (neuralgias).

Side Effects
The major side effects include diplopia, drowsiness, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, ataxia, skin rash,
Steven-Johnson syndrome (erythema multiforme
major), photosensitivity, cholestatic jaundice, acute
oliguria with hypertension, leucopenia and thrombocytopenic purpura. The most dangerous side effects
include bone marrow depression (causing aplastic anaemia), agranulocytosis and cardiovascular
collapse.
Therefore, it is essential to monitor cardiac, renal,
hepatic and bone-marrow functions during carbamazepine treatment. The use of carbamazepine in
pregnancy and lactation should be best avoided.
The use of carbamazepine in management of
bipolar disorder appears to be recently declining.

ANTI-ANXIETY DRUGS
Anti-anxiety drugs, also known as minor tranquilisers
and anxiolytics, can be classified as follows:

Classification
Barbiturates
Barbiturates can be divided into four main types:
Long Acting
The duration of action is more than 8 hours. Examples
include phenobarbital.

193

Intermediate Acting
The duration of action is 5-8 hours. Examples include
amobarbital and pentobarbital.
Short Acting
The duration of action is 1-5 hours. Examples include
secobarbital.
Ultra-Short Acting
The duration of action is less than 1 hour. Examples
include thiopentone and methohexital.
Barbiturates are no longer used or recommended as
anti-anxiety agents. They produce multiple side effects
such as excessive sedation, respiratory and circulatory
depression, hepatic enzyme induction, dependence,
withdrawal symptoms, rebound increase in REM-sleep
on withdrawal, and potential for use in suicide.

Non-barbiturate, Non-benzodiazepine
Anti-anxiety Agents
These can be further divided into the following categories:
Carbamates
The common examples are meprobamate, tybamate
and carisoprodol. These are not used commonly due
to the potential for abuse and dependence.
Piperidinediones
An example is glutethimide. This drug too is not used
now-a-days due to its dependence potential.
Alcohols
The examples include ethanol, chloral hydrate and
ethchlorvynol. These drugs are highly dependence
producing and clearly not recommended.
Quinazoline Derivatives
An example is methaqualone. Methaqualone had
become a street drug (i.e. a drug of abuse) and its
use was discontinued as an anti-anxiety agent and a
hypnotic.
Anti-histaminics
The common examples include diphenhydramine,
hydroxyzine and promethazine. In past, diphenhydramine was usually combined with methaqualone or
diazepam. They may be used as hypnotic-sedatives,
but their use as anti-anxiety agents is minimal and
probably not safe.


