<<<PAGE 149>>>

Sleep Disorders

each individual contraction lasts for a few seconds and
is repeated at an interval of 20-60sec. during a long
sleep-period, partial or complete awakenings occur
many times in one night sleep.
The patient is usually not aware of the myoclonus
and usually complains of non-restorative sleep or of
frequent awakenings. The myoclonus is observed, if
at all, by the bed partner. This is commonly seen in
middle-aged and elderly people. Due to night-time
insomnia, daytime hypersomnia can occur and, at
times, may be the only presenting symptom.
‘Restless Legs’ Syndrome (Ekbom syndrome)
RLS is a condition in which the person experiences,
during waking, an extremely uncomfortable feeling
in the leg muscles. Sometimes, it may resemble painful creeping sensations deep inside the calf muscles.
Classically, these abnormal sensations occur while
sitting or lying down and cause an irresistible urge to
move the legs. Moving about or standing provides
immediate, temporary relief. This is often associated
with periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD) during night sleep. Daily, regular exercises can lead to
marked improvement in certain cases.
Treatment
1. A thorough medical and psychiatric assessment.
2. Polysomnography (see Table 11.1) may be needed
in some patients to reach a diagnosis.
3. Treatment of the underlying physical and/or psychiatric disorder, if present.
4. Withdrawal of current medications, if any.
5. Relaxation techniques before sleep time and education regarding sleep hygiene (see Table 11.3).
Sleep hygiene consists of general guidelines for
promoting good sleep. In itself, it is not a treatment
for insomnia.
6. Psychotherapy, if indicated.
7. Benzodiazepines may be used, either alone, e.g.
in primary insomnia, or may be used with the
treatment of underlying physical or psychiatric
disorder(s). The use of benzodiazepines should
only be for short-term periods, not more than for
4-6 weeks at one time.

137
Table 11.3: Sleep Hygiene

Some basic components of sleep hygiene are:
1. Regular, daily physical exercises (preferably not in
the evening).
2. Minimise daytime napping.
3. Avoid fluid intake and heavy meals just before bedtime.
4. Avoid caffeine intake (e.g. tea, coffee, cola drinks)
before sleeping hours.
5. Avoid regular use of alcohol (especially avoid use of
alcohol as a hypnotic for promoting sleep).
6. Avoid reading or watching television while in bed.
7. Sleep in a dark, quiet, and comfortable environment.
8. Regular times for going to sleep and waking-up
9. Try relaxation techniques

If the difficulty in initiating sleep is the main
symptom, then a benzodiazepine with shorter halflife should be used, such as temazepam, oxazepam
or lorazepam.
If the difficulty in maintaining sleep is the
predominant symptom, then a longer acting benzodiazepine, such as nitrazepam, flurazepam or
even diazepam, should be used (see Chapter 15
for details).
Physicians should be careful to avoid benzodiazepine abuse or dependence in patients presenting with insomnia. Non-benzodiazepine hypnotics
(e.g. zopiclone, zolpidem, zalpelon and trazodone)
are useful alternatives (see Chapter 15).
8. L-tryptophan, an amino-acid present in many
vegetables, is an apparently non-dependence producing hypnotic. The usual dose is 0.5g at night
time.

Hypersomnia
Hypersomnia is also known as Disorder of excessive
somnolence (DOES). Hypersomnia means one or
more of the following:
1. Excessive day time sleepiness.
2. ‘Sleep attacks’ during day time (falling asleep
unintentionally).




<<<PAGE 209>>>

Psychopharmacology

dose (mg nocte/HS); usual oral dose (mg/day; if applicable); usual parenteral dose (mg; if applicable);
active metabolites and other comments.
Side Effects
The side effects of benzodiazepines include nausea,
vomiting, weakness, epigastric pain, diarrhoea, vertigo, blurring of vision, body aches, urinary incontinence (rare), impotence, sedation, lassitude, increased
reaction time, ataxia (in high doses), dry mouth,
retrograde amnesia (rare), impairment of driving
skills, severe effects when administered with alcohol,
irritability, disinhibited behaviour, dependence and
withdrawal symptoms (on stopping the drug).
Cross-tolerance occurs with barbiturates, methaqualone and ethyl alcohol. A worsening of depression and pre-existing psychosis with use of benzodiazepines has been reported.
Since withdrawal symptoms usually occur after
long-term use, benzodiazepines should be withdrawn
slowly.

Newer Drugs
1. Buspirone
Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine, anti-anxiety drug.
It is an azaspiro decanedione (azapirone) derivative.
Buspirone is a 5-HT1A partial agonist and a selective
DA autoreceptor antagonist. It also inhibits the spontaneous firing of 5-HT neurons.
It does not seem to act on the benzodiazepine receptors. It is anxioselective, with no sedative action,
and no anticonvulsant or muscle-relaxant properties.
It is administered in a dose of 15-30 mg/day, in a
thrice daily schedule due to a short half-life. As it has
a slower and more gradual onset of action, it usually
takes about two weeks before its anti-anxiety effects
are evident. Buspirone is not useful in treatment of
panic disorder. The common side effects include dizziness, headache, lightheadedness and diarrhoea.
As it is an anxio-selective and lacks any risk of
dependence, it was hoped that it might replace the
benzodiazepines as the drug of choice in treatment
of generalised anxiety disorders. However, it is not
as widely used as it was once expected.

197

2. Zopiclone
Zopiclone belongs to a new class of non-benzodiazepine drugs, the cyclopyrrolones. Cyclopyrrolone
derivatives also act on the GABA receptors, but at a
site distinct from that of benzodiazepines. Zopiclone
has a short duration of action as well as shorter onset.
After oral administration, it is absorbed rapidly, with
peak plasma concentration occurring in about 60
minute. The elimination half-life is 4-6 hours.
The usual dose of zopiclone is 3.75-7.5 mg
at bedtime (lower dose in elderly patients and in
patients with severe hepatic failure). The side effects
include bitter taste, dry mouth, drowsiness, nausea
and headache. Its safety in children, in pregnancy
and lactation is not proven. It is clinically superior
to benzodiazepines in subjective awakening quality,
well-being, and attention span in the morning.
3. Zolpidem
Zolpidem is an imidazopyridine derivative which
is marketed as a hypnotic. It is administered in a
dose of 5-10 mg for hypnotic use. It has a half-life
of 2-3 hours; therefore it is useful in the treatment
of difficulty in initiation of sleep (initial insomnia).
The side effects include drowsiness, dizziness,
headache, depression, nausea, dry mouth, and myalgia.
It should not be used for more than two weeks at one
time. Its safety in children, in pregnancy and lactation
is not proven.
4. Zalpelon
Zalpelon is a pyrazolo-pyrimidine derivative which
is marketed as a hypnotic. Although a non-benzodiazepine drug, it acts on the omega-1 benzodiazepine
receptor located on the alpha sub-unit of the GABA-A
receptor complex (causing sedation), with very little
effect on omega-2 and omega-3 receptors.
It is administered in a dose of 5-10 mg for
hypnotic use. It has a half-life of one hour with a rapid
onset of effect. Therefore, it is useful in treatment
of difficulty in initiation of sleep (initial insomnia).
It can be taken again at night if there is more than
4 hours of sleep time remaining. Because of the very
short half-life, there is virtually no hangover in the
morning.




<<<PAGE 273>>>

Index
Unilateral ECT 202
Unipolar depression 69, 75
Urophilia 126

V
Vagal nerve stimulation 199
Valproate 30, 79, 191
Valproic acid 191
Valpromide 191
Van Gogh syndrome 60
Varenicline 52
Vascular surgery 132
Verbigeration 56, 59
Verdenafil 132
Violence 227
Vipasna 219
Visual hallucinations 29, 38, 56
Vocal tics 168
Voices
commenting 55, 56
heard arguing 55, 56

Volatile solvent use disorder 51
Voluntary admission 232
Von Domarus law 55
Vorbeireden 102
Voyeurism 125

W
Waxy flexibility 59
Wernicke’s encephalopathy 27, 38
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome 27, 38
Wihtigo 110, 111
Windigo 111
Withdrawal
state 33, 34
symptoms 40
syndrome 37, 46
Word approximations 56
Work-shift 140
World (Mental) Health Report 2001
238, 239

261
Worthlessness 71

X
Xenophobia 93

Y
Y-BOCS 96
Yog nindra 219
Yoga 92, 107
Yohimbine 132

Z
Zalpelon 137, 197
Ziprasidone 66, 169
Zolpidem 137, 197
Zoophilia 126
Zoophobia 93
Zopiclone 137, 197
Zotepine 66
Zuclopenthixol 66

