<<<PAGE 46>>>

34

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The withdrawal state is further classified as:
i. uncomplicated;
ii. with convulsions; and
iii. with delirium.

Dependence Syndrome
According to the ICD-10, the dependence syndrome is
a cluster of physiological, behavioural, and cognitive
phenomena in which the use of a substance or a class
of substances takes on a much higher priority for a
given individual than other behaviours that once had
greater value.
A central descriptive characteristic of the dependence syndrome is the desire (often strong and
sometimes overpowering) to take psycho active
substances (which may or may not have been medically prescribed), alcohol, or tobacco. There may be
evidence that return to substance use after a period
of abstinence leads to a more rapid reappearance of
other features of the syndrome than occurs with nondependent individuals.
A definite diagnosis of dependence should usually
be made only if at least three of the following have
been experienced or exhibited at sometime during the
previous year:
1. A strong desire or sense of compulsion to take the
substance.
2. Difficulties in controlling the substance-taking
behaviour in terms of its onset, termination, or
levels of use.
3. A physiological withdrawal state when the substance use has ceased or reduced, as evidenced
by the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for
the substance; or use of the same (or a closely
related) substance with the intention of relieving
or avoiding withdrawal symptoms.
4. Evidence of tolerance, such that increased doses of
the psychoactive substance are required in order to
achieve effects originally produced by lower doses
(clear examples of this are found in the alcoholand opiate-dependent individuals who may take
daily doses that are sufficient to incapacitate or
kill non-tolerant users).

5. Progressive neglect of alternative pleasures or
interests because of psychoactive substance use,
increased amount of time necessary to obtain or
take the substance or to recover from its effects.
6. Persisting with substance use despite clear evidence of overtly harmful consequences, such as
harm to the liver through excessive drinking,
depressive mood states consequent to periods of
heavy substance use, or drug-related impairment
of cognitive functioning; efforts should be made
to determine that the user was actually, or could
be expected to be, aware of the nature and extent
of the harm.
A narrowing of personal repertoire of patterns of
psychoactive substance use has also been described as
a characteristic feature of the dependence syndrome
(e.g. a tendency to drink in the same way on weekdays
and weekends, regardless of the social constraints that
determine appropriate drinking behaviour).
The dependence syndrome can be further coded
as (ICD-10):
i. currently abstinent;
ii. currently abstinent, but in a protected environment
(e.g. in hospital, in a therapeutic community, in
prison, etc.);
iii. currently on a clinically supervised maintenance
or replacement regime (controlled dependence,
e.g. with methadone; nicotine gum or nicotine
patch);
iv. currently abstinent, but receiving treatment with
aversive or blocking drugs (e.g. naltrexone or
disulfiram);
v. currently using the substance (active dependence);
vi. continuous use; and
vii. episodic use (dipsomania).
The dependence can be either psychic, or physical,
or both.

Harmful Use
Harmful use is characterised by:
1. Continued drug use, despite the awareness of
harmful medical and/or social effect of the drug
being used, and/or




<<<PAGE 54>>>

42

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Fig. 4.1: Disulfiram: Mode of Action

The contraindications of disulfiram use are first
trimester of pregnancy, coronary artery disease, liver
failure, chronic renal failure, peripheral neuropathy,
muscle disease and psychotic symptoms presently or
in the past.
In selected patients (such as an older age group,
good motivation, good social support, absent underlying psychopathology and good treatment concordance), the response can be dramatic. In addition to
oral preparations, subcutaneous disulfiram implants
are also now available. However, they provide unpredictable blood levels of disulfiram.
Other deterrent agents
1. Citrated calcium carbimide (CCC): The mechanism of action is similar to disulfiram but onset of
action occurs within 1 hour and is reversible. The
usual dosage is 100 mg/d in two divided doses.
2. Metronidazole.
3. Animal charcoal, a fungus (Coprinus atramentarius), sulfonylureas and certain cephalosporins
also cause a disulfiram like action.
v. Anti-craving agents
Acamprosate, naltrexone and SSRIs (such as fluoxetine) are among the medications tried as anti-craving
agents in alcohol dependence.

Acamprosate (the Ca++ salt of N-acetyl-homotaurinate)
interacts with NMDA receptor-mediated glutamatergic neurotransmission in the various brain regions
and reduces Ca++ fluxes through voltage-operated
channels.
Naltrexone (oral opioid receptor antagonist) probably interferes with alcohol-induced reinforcement
by blocking opioid receptors. Fluoxetine (and other
SSRIs) have been occasionally used as anti-craving
agents in their usual antidepressant doses.
vi. Other medications
A variety of other medicines such as benzodiazepines, antidepressants, antipsychotics, lithium,
carbamazepine, and even narcotics have been tried.
These should be used only if there is a special indication for their use (for example, antidepressants for
underlying depression).
vii. Psychosocial rehabilitation
Rehabilitation is an integral part of the multi-modal
treatment of alcohol dependence.

OPIOID USE DISORDERS
Dried exudate obtained from unripe seed capsules of
Papaver somniferum has been used and abused for




<<<PAGE 56>>>

44

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Treatment
Before treatment, a correct diagnosis must be made
on the basis of history, examination (pin-point pupils
during intoxication or withdrawal symptoms) and/or
laboratory tests. These tests are:
1. Naloxone challenge test (to precipitate withdrawal
symptoms).
2. Urinary opioids testing: With radioimmunoassay
(RIA), free radical assay tech nique (FRAT),
thin layer chromatography (TLC), gas-liquid
chromatography (GLC), high pressure liquid
chromatography (HPLC) or enzyme-multiplied
immunoassay technique (EMIT).
The treatment can be divided into three main types:
1. Treatment of overdose.
2. Detoxification.
3. Maintenance therapy.

Treatment of Opioid Overdose
An overdose of opioid can be treated with narcotic
antagonists (such as naloxone, naltrexone). Usually an
intravenous injection of 2 mg naloxone, followed by a
repeat injection in 5-10 minutes, can cause reversal of
overdose. But as naloxone has a short half-life repeated
doses may be needed every 1-2 hours. This should be
combined with general care and supportive treatment.

Detoxification
This is a mode of treatment in which the dependent
person is ‘taken off’ opioids. This is usually done
abruptly, followed by management of emergent
withdrawal symptoms. It is highly recommended that
detoxification is conducted in a safe manner under
expert guidance of a specialist.
The withdrawal symptoms can be managed by one
of the following methods:
1. Use of substitution drugs such as methadone (not
available in India at present) to ameliorate the
withdrawal symptoms.
The aim is to gradually taper off the patient from
methadone (which is less addicting, has a longer
half-life, decreases possible criminal behaviour,
and has a much milder withdrawal syndrome).
However, relapses are common and its opponents

argue that one type of dependence is often replaced
by another (methadone).
2. Clonidine is an α2 agonist that acts by inhibiting
norepinephrine release at presynaptic α2 receptors. The usual dose is 0.3-1.2 mg/day, and drug
is tapered off in 10-14 days. It can be started after
stoppage of either the opioid itself or the substitution drug (methadone). The important side effects
of clonidine are excessive sedation and postural
hypotension. Clonidine treatment is usually started
in an inpatient psychiatric or specialist alcohol and
drug treatment centre setting.
3. Naltrexone with Clonidine: Naltrexone is an orally
available narcotic antagonist which, when given to
an opioid dependent individual, causes withdrawal
symptoms. These symptoms are managed with the
addition of clonidine for 10-14 days after which
clonidine is withdrawn and the patient is continued
on naltrexone alone. Now if the person takes an
opioid, there are no pleasurable experiences, as
the opioid receptors are blocked by naltrexone.
Therefore, this method is a combination of detoxification and maintenance treatment. The usual
dose of naltrexone is 100 mg orally, administered
on alternate days. Once again treatment is usually
started in an inpatient psychiatric or specialist
alcohol and drug treatment centre setting.
4. Other Drugs: The other detoxification agents
include LAAM (levo-alpha-acetyl-methadol),
propoxyphene, diphenoxylate, buprenorphine
(long acting synthetic partial μ-agonist which can
be administered sublingually), and lofexidine (α2
agonist, similar to clonidine).
In particular, Buprenorphine has recently been
used widely for detoxification as well as for maintenance treatment in many parts of the World. Care
must be exercised as there is potential for misuse
with buprenorphine.

Maintenance Therapy
After the detoxification phase is over, the patient is
maintained on one of the following regimens:
1. Methadone maintenance
(Agonist substitution therapy)




<<<PAGE 57>>>

Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

This a very popular method used widely in the
Western World. 20-50 mg/day of methadone is given
to the patients to ‘shift’ them from ‘hard’ drugs, thus
decreasing IV use and criminal behaviour. Its use
in India has not been recommended by an expert
committee for de-addiction services.
Other drugs such as LAAM and buprenorphine
can be used for maintenance treatment.
2. Opioid antagonists
Opioid antagonists have been in use for a long time
but they were either partial antagonists (such as nalorphine) or had to be administered parenterally (such as
naloxone). Now with the availability of orally effective
and very potent antagonists, such as naltrexone, the
use of opioid antagonists in routine practice has been
simplified. The usual maintenance dose is 100 mg on
Mondays and Wednesdays, and 150 mg on Fridays.
Naltrexone combined with clonidine, as described
above, is a very effective method for detoxification
as well as for maintenance treatment.
3. Other methods
These include individual psychotherapy, behaviour
therapy, interpersonal therapy, cognitive behaviour
therapy (CBT), motivational enhancement therapy,
self-control strategies, psychotropic drugs for associated psychopathology, family therapy, and group
therapy (e.g. in therapeutic communities such as Synanon, self-help groups such as Narcotic Anonymous or
NA). These methods have to be tailored for use in an
individual patient.

45

4. Psychosocial rehabilitation
This is a very important step in the post-detoxification
phase, in the absence of which relapse rates can be
very high. Rehabilitation should be at both occupational and social levels.

CANNABIS USE DISORDER
Cannabis is derived from the hemp plant, Cannabis
sativa, which has several varieties named after the
region in which it is found (e.g. sativa indica in India
and Pakistan, and americana in America).
Cannabis (street names: grass, hash or hashish,
marihuana) produces more than 400 identifiable
chemicals of which about 50 are cannabinoids, the
most active being Δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9THC). The pistillate form of the female plant is more
important in cannabis production (Table 4.8).
Recently, a Gi-protein (inhibitory G-protein) linked
cannabinoid receptor has been found (in basal ganglia,
hippocampus and cerebellum) which inhibits the adenylate cyclase activity in a dose-dependent manner.
Cannabis produces a very mild physical dependence, with a relatively mild withdrawal syndrome,
which is characterised by fine tremors, irritability, restlessness, nervousness, insomnia, decreased
appetite and craving. This syndrome begins within
few hours of stopping cannabis use and lasts for 4 to
5 days. However, some health professionals feel that
there is no true physical dependence with cannabis.

Table 4.8: Cannabis Preparations
Cannabis
Preparation

Portion of Plant

1

Hashish/Charas

2

Ganja

3

Bhang

4

Hash oil

Resinous exudate from the flowering
tops of cultivated plantsh
Small leaves and brackets of inflorescence
of highly cultivated plants
Dried leaves, flowering shoots and
cut tops of uncultivated plants
Lipid soluble plant extract

THC Content (%)

Potency
(as compared to ‘Bhang’)

8-14

10

1-2

2

1

1

15-40

25




<<<PAGE 144>>>

132

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

e.g. alpha-blockers (such as yohim bine,
idazoxan), opiate antagonists (such as naltrexone), dopamine agonists (such as bromocriptine, apomorphine), pentoxifylline, and topical
drugs (glyceryl trinitrate, minoxidyl, papaverine
and PgE1 and E2).
v. Sildenafil citrate has been used for treatment
of erectile dysfunction. Rapidly absorbed after oral administration, the maximum plasma
concentration is reached in 30-120 minutes. It
is metabolised in liver (mainly by cytochrome
P450 3A4) and is converted to an active metabolite. Sildenafil has a terminal half life of about
4 hours. It is highly bound to plasma proteins
and is not dialysable. It is a competitive and
selective inhibitor of cGMP (cyclic guanosine monophosphate)-specific PDE-5 (phosphodiesterase type 5). It prevents the rate of
breakdown of cGMP causing enhanced relaxation of cavernosal smooth muscle, increase in arterial flow in to corpus cavernosa, compression
of subtunical veins, and hence penile erection.
The typical dose is 50 mg (25-100 mg), 1 hour
before sexual activity. The maximum recommended dosing frequency is once a day. The
drug acts only in the presence of sexual stimulation. The adverse effects include transient and
mild headache, flushing, dyspepsia, and nasal
congestion. Caution needs to be exercised in
patients with known history of hypersensitivity,

with poor cardiovascular status, with anatomical deformation of penis, with conditions that
predispose to priapism, and especially those on
nitrates.
Other similar drugs include tadalafil and verdenafil.
vi. Hormonal treatment (e.g. androgens) should
not be employed unless there is an evidence of
hormonal dysfunction.
It should always be remembered that prescription
of the non-essential drugs may worsen sexual dysfunction.
8. Intracavernosal Injection of Vasoactive Drugs
(IIVD): Papaverine, an alkaloid and a vasoactive
substance, has been used as an intracavernosal injection in the differential diagnosis of organic and
non-organic impotence and also for treatment of
impotence (either alone; or along with phentolamine,
phenoxy-benzamine, alprostadil or prostaglandin E1,
and/or atropine).
9. Physical devices: Various suction devices (for
producing artificial penile tumescence) and penile
prosthetic implants are available. Their use, however,
should be limited to only those patients who suffer
from organic sexual disorder or in whom a sufficient
and regular trial of psychological management has
been completing, with distress persisting.
10. Vascular surgery: Rarely, vascular surgery may
be needed for some patients with underlying vascular
insufficiency (organic sexual disorder).




<<<PAGE 269>>>

Index
Kleptomania 119
Klismaphilia 126
Koro 110, 111
Korsakoff’s
psychosis 38, 39
syndrome 27
Kurt Schneider 54

L
LAAM 44, 45
La-belle-indifférence 103
Lack of
rapport 57
sexual enjoyment disorder 126
Lamotrigine 79, 188
Larks 140
Latah 110, 111
Late paraphrenia 61
Latency phase 212
Latent schizophrenia 59
Leaden paralysis 81
Learned behaviour 214
Learning disability 155
Legal and ethical issues in psychiatry 229
Lethal catatonia 59
Leucotomy 203
Lewy body dementia 25
Licensing authority 232
Life chart 7
Limbic system 203
Lithium 78, 188
Long-sleepers 134
Loosening of associations 55, 58, 59, 62
Lorazepam 26, 29, 87, 149, 228
Loss of ego boundaries 57, 65
Loxapine 66
LSD use disorder 49
L-thyroxin 227
L-tryptophan 137
Lucid intervals 26
Lunatic 232

M
Made
feeling 55, 56
impulses 55, 56
volition 55, 56
Maintenance therapy 44
Major depression 105
Male
anorgasmia 128
erectile disorder 127
orgasmic disorder 128

Malignant syndrome 228
Malingering 119
Mania 61, 70, 80, 227
Manic
depressive psychosis 73
episode 30, 69
stupor 70
Mannerisms 57-59, 164
MAOIs 81, 82
Marchiafava-Bignami disease 40
Marijuana 46
Marital therapy 217
Masked depression 80, 105, 106
MCI code of medical ethics, 2002 234
McNaughten rule 229
Medical
emergency 221
interview 5
Medicolegal aspects 224
Megavitamin therapy 67
Memantine 25, 26
Memory disturbances 203
Menstrual and obstetric history 9
Mental
and behavioural disorders in ICD-10
3
disorders 19
Health
Act, 1987 232, 233
Authorities 232
retardation 153, 155, 162, 164
status examination 10, 11, 222
Mentally ill
person 232
prisoner 232
Metabolic syndrome 63
Methadone 44
maintenance 44
Methylphenidate 167
Michigan alcoholism screening test 37
Migraine 28
Mild cognitive disorder 32
Milieu therapy 68
Mini mental state examination 13
Minimal brain dysfunction 166
Minoxidyl 132
Mirror-gazing 58
Mirtazapine 30
Misconceptions about suicide 224
Mixed
affective 61, 73
episode 73
anxiety depressive disorder 80

257
Monosymptomatic hypochondriacal
psychosis 84, 85
Mood 12, 69
disorders 69, 76
stabiliser 30
stabilising drugs 185
Morbid grief 151
Motor activity 11
Multi-axial classification 4
Multifocal myoclonus 20
Multi-infarct dementia 25
Multiple personality disorder 102
Munchausen syndrome 119
Muslim Marriages Act 230
Mutism 56, 59, 225, 171

N
Naloxone 44, 227
challenge test 44
Naltrexone 42, 44, 132
Narcolepsy 138
Narcotic
anonymous 45
antagonists 44
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
(Amendment) Act, 2001 233
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act (NDPSA), 1985 233
National
Crime Records Bureau 222
Health Policy 235, 237
Mental Health
Advisory Group 237
Programme 235
Trust Act 161
NDRI 52
Necrophilia 126
Negative
reinforcement 215
symptom 57, 58, 60-61
Neurasthenia 109
Neuroleptic
malignant syndrome 228
sensitivity syndrome 26
Neurosis 89
Neurotic
depression 82
traits 9
Nicotine 52
replacement therapy 52
Night terrors 140
Nightmares 140
Nitrazepam 137


