<<<PAGE 38>>>

26

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

i. Fluctuating cognitive impairment over weeks or
months, with involvement of memory and higher
cortical functions (such as language, visuo-spatial
ability, praxis and reasoning). Lucid intervals can
be present in between fluctuations.
ii. Recurrent and detailed visual hallucinations.
iii. Spontaneous extrapyramidal or parkinsonian
symptoms such as rigidity and tremors.
iv. Neuroleptic sensitivity syndrome, characterised by
a marked sensitivity to the effects of typical doses
of antipsychotic drugs (resulting in severe extrapyramidal side-effects with use of antipsychotics).
Other clinical features may include repeated falls,
autonomic dysfunction (e.g. orthostatic hypotension), urinary incontinence, delusions and depressive
features. Although Lewy bodies (intra-cytoplasmic
inclusion bodies) are also present in Parkinson’s
disease, the occurrence of Lewy bodies in Lewy body
dementia is more widespread. A PET (Positron Emission Tomography) or SPECT (Single Photon Emission
Computerised Tomography) scan of brain may show
low dopamine transporter uptake in basal ganglia.
Antipsychotic medication should be avoided (or
used with extreme caution and in low doses) in patients
with Lewy body dementia.

Management
Basic Investigations
The diagnostic tests are of great importance in finding the cause, or to exclude all other causes before
diagnosing Alzheimer’s dementia.
The list of investigations could include complete
blood count, urinalysis, blood glucose, serum electrolytes, renal function tests, thyroid function tests, serum
B12 and folate levels, serological tests for syphilis,
arterial pO2 and pCO2, X-ray chest, ECG, X-ray skull,
EEG, lumbar puncture, CT scan/MRI scan of brain,
neuropsychological tests, and drug screens.

Treatment of the Underlying Cause,
if Treatable
Some underlying causes of dementia are treatable
(reversible dementias), for example, treatment of

hypertension in multi-infarct dementia, thyroxin
replacement in hypothyroid dementia, shunting in
hydrocephalic dementia, levodopa in parkinsonism,
and removal of the toxic agent in toxic dementias.
Early treatment can prevent further deterioration of
dementia.

Symptomatic Management
1. Environmental manipulation and focus on coping
skills to reduce stress in day-to-day activities.
2. Treatment of medical complications, if any.
3. Care of food and hygiene
4. Supportive care for the patient and family/carers.
5. Anxiety symptoms can be treated with low dose of
a short-acting benzodiazepine (such as Lorazepam
and Oxazepam), though care should be taken to
prevent benzodiazepine dependence/misuse.
6. Depression can be treated with low doses of
SSRIs such as Citalopram or Sertraline as these
antidepressants have low anticholinergic activity
and have a safer cardiac profile. Agents with high
anticholinergic activity can cause confusion or
even frank delirium.
7. Psychotic symptoms and disruptive behaviours
can be treated with low doses of antipsychotics.
Haloperidol and Risperidone have usually been
preferred as they are less sedating and have low
cardiac toxicity, though Risperidone can cause
postural hypotension. Recently, the use of antipsychotics in treatment of behavioural symptoms
in dementia has decreased markedly due to
possible association of antipsychotic use with
increased mortality. Antipsychotics should
also be avoided if Lewy body dementia is
suspected.
8. Short-term hospitalisation may be needed for
emergent symptoms whilst a longer term hospitalisation or respite placement may be necessary
in later stages.
9. Specific drug treatment such as cholinesterase
inhibitors (e.g. donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine) in moderate Alzheimer’s disease, or
memantine (NMDA antagonist) in moderate to
severe Alzheimer’s disease, can be helpful.




<<<PAGE 40>>>

28

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

OTHER ORGANIC MENTAL
DISORDERS (DUE TO BRAIN DAMAGE
AND DYSFUNCTION, AND TO
PHYSICAL DISEASES)
This group includes miscellaneous mental disorders
which are causally related to brain dysfunction due to
primary cerebral disease, systemic disease (secondary), or toxic substances.
According to ICD-10, an evidence of cerebral
disease, damage or dysfunction, or of systemic
physical disease, known to be associated with one
of the listed syndromes is required, with a temporal
relationship between development of the underlying
disease and the onset of the mental syndrome, with
recovery from the mental disorder following removal
or improvement of the underlying presumed cause,
and an absence of evidence to suggest an alternative
cause of the mental syndrome (such as a strong family
history or precipitating stress).
If conditions 1 and 2 are present, a provisional
diagnosis can be made; if all four are present, the
certainty of diagnosis is significantly increased.
The following clinical conditions are known to
be associated with an increased risk for these other
organic mental disorders:

Primary Cerebral Diseases
Epilepsy, limbic encephalitis, Huntington’s disease,
head trauma, brain neoplasms, vascular cerebral disease, cerebral malformations.

Systemic Diseases
Extracranial neoplasms (e.g. carcinoma pancreas),
collagen diseases (e.g. SLE), endocrine disease (e.g.
hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, Cushing’s disease),
metabolic disorders (e.g. hypoglycaemia, porphyria,
hypoxia); infectious diseases (e.g. trypanosomiasis).

Drugs
Steroids, propranolol, levodopa, methyldopa, antihypertensives, antimalarials, alcohol and other psychoactive substances.

ORGANIC HALLUCINOSIS
According to ICD-10, presence of persistent or recurrent hallucinations due to an underlying organic cause
is required for the diagnosis of organic hallucinosis,
in addition to the general guidelines for the diagnosis
of other organic mental disorders, described earlier.
It is important to rule out any major disturbance of
consciousness, intelligence, memory, mood or
thought.
These hallucinations can occur in any sensory
modality but are usually visual (most common) or
auditory in nature. In many cases, they depend on
the underlying cause. These hallucinations can range
from very simple and unformed, to very complex and
well-organised. Usually the patients realise that the
hallucinations are not real but sometimes there may
be a delusional elaboration of hallucinations.

Aetiology
1. Drugs: Hallucinogens (LSD, psilocybin, mescaline), cocaine, cannabis, phencyclidine (PCP),
levodopa, bromocriptine, amantadine, ephedrine,
propranolol, pentazocine, methylphenidate, imipramine, anticholinergics, bromide.
2. Alcohol: In alcoholic hallucinosis, auditory hallucinations are usually more common.
3. Sensory deprivation.
4. ‘Release’ hallucinations due to sensory pathway
disease, e.g. bilateral cataracts, otosclerosis, optic
neuritis.
5. Migraine.
6. Epilepsy: Complex partial seizures.
7. Intracranial space occupying lesions.
8. Temporal arteritis.
9. Brain stem lesions (peduncular hallucinosis).

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause, if treatable.
2. Symptomatic treatment with a low dose of an
antipsychotic medication (such as Haloperidol,
Risperidone and Olanzapine) may be needed.




<<<PAGE 42>>>

30

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

ORGANIC MOOD (AFFECTIVE)
DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of prominent and
persistent mood disturbance caused by an underlying
organic cause is required for the diagnosis of organic
mood disorder, in addition to the general guidelines
for the diagnosis of other organic mental disorders,
described earlier. It is important to rule out any major
disturbance of consciousness, orientation, or memory.
The mood disturbance can be a major depressive
episode, a manic episode, or a mixed affective episode.
The severity may vary from mild to severe.

Aetiology
Some of the causes of organic mood disorder are
listed below:
1. Drugs:
Mania: INH, Levodopa, Bromide, LSD, Corticosteroids (hypomania), Hallucinogens, Tricyclic
antidepressants, Cocaine, Baclofen, Amphetamines, Bromocriptine, Cimetidine, Procyclidine
Depression: Reserpine, Ethanol, Clonidine,
Methyldopa, Propranolol, Corticosteroids, Antipsychotics (particularly typical antipsychotics),
Cimetidine, Anticancer chemotherapy, Oral contraceptives.
Any drug a depressed person is taking should be
considered a potential factor in the causation of
depressive episode.
2. Endocrine disorders:
Mania: Hyperthyroidism
Depression: Hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome, Addison’s disease, hyper- and hypoparathyroidism.
3. CNS disorders: Parkinsonism, Huntington’s
chorea, PSP (progressive supranuclear palsy;
depression more likely), CVAs (cerebrovascular
accidents; left-sided anterior lesions and rightsided posterior lesions cause depression in stroke),
cerebral tumours, epilepsy (com plex partial
seizures), neurosyphilis (GPI), head injury (mania
more likely), multiple sclerosis.

4. Post-viral illnesses: Influenza, infectious mononucleosis, viral pneumonia, infectious hepatitis.
5. Deficiencies: Pellagra, deficiency of thiamine,
folate, niacin, folate, B12.
6. Others: Carcinoma pancreas (depression), SLE,
pernicious anaemia, temporal arteritis (depression), carcinoid syndrome (mania).

Management
1. Management of the underlying organic cause, if
treatable.
2. Symptomatic management, if the episodes are
severe. For example, for a manic episode, low dose
antipsychotic medication (such as risperidone,
haloperidol, olanzapine) and/or a mood stabiliser
(such as valproate); and for a depressive episode,
low dose antidepressants (such as sertraline or mirtazapine). Antipsychotics are not recommended
in patients who have suffered from stroke and/or
dementia as the risk of mortality is higher.
Pathological laughter and crying (associated
with multiple sclerosis or stroke) can similarly
respond to small dose SSRIs or small dose amitriptyline.

ORGANIC ANXIETY DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of prominent and
persistent generalised anxiety or panic caused by an
underlying cause is required for diagnosis of organic
anxiety disorder, in addition to the general guidelines
for the diagnosis of other organic mental disorders,
described earlier. It is important to rule out any major
disturbance of consciousness, orientation, memory,
personality, thought, perception, or mood.

Aetiology
1. Drugs and toxins: Cocaine, caffeine, amphetamines and other sympathomimetics, alcohol and
drug withdrawal, heavy metals, penicillin.
2. Endocrine disorders: Thyroid, pituitary, parathyroid, or adrenal dysfunction; pheochromocytoma;
fasting hypoglycaemia, carcinoid syndrome.




<<<PAGE 237>>>

Emergency Psychiatry

with psychotic disorders. Follow-up care is very
important to prevent future suicidal attempts or
suicide.

Stupor and Catatonic Syndrome
Stupor is a common condition which presents at
the emergency services. It is defined as a clinical
syndrome of akinesis and mutism but with relative
preservation of conscious awareness.
The term stupor, traditionally, has a psychiatric
connotation, but a careful analysis of the stuporous
patients shows that a large majority of them have
an underlying organic cerebral cause. Stupor is
often associated with catatonic signs and symptoms
(catatonic withdrawal or catatonic stupor). Catatonic
syndrome is any disorder which presents with at least
two catatonic signs. Catatonia can be either excited
or withdrawn (or mixed). Only catatonic withdrawal
is associated with stupor.
The various catatonic signs include mutism, negativism, stupor, ambitendency, echolalia, echopraxia,
automatic obedience, posturing, mannerisms, stereotypies, excitement (not goal-directed), impulsiveness,
combativeness or nudism.

Aetiology
A wide variety of disorders can cause catatonic stupor.
Some of the important causes are listed in Table 19.5.

Differential Diagnosis
It is of foremost importance to differentiate between
organic stupor and psychogenic (or so called ‘functional’) stupor. This can be done on the basis of antecedent medical and psychiatric history, mode of onset,
and detailed physical and neurological examination.
The important differentiating points between an
organic and a psychogenic stupor are tabulated in
Table 19.6. If a diagnosis of organic catatonic stupor
is made, a search for underlying cause should be made.
On the other hand, if the pentothal/amytal/diazepam
interview reveals psycho pathology, appropriate
treatment can be instituted.

225

Table 19.5: Some Causes of Catatonic Stupor
1. Neurological Disorders
i. Post-encephalitic parkinsonism
ii. Limbic encephalitis
iii. Surgical procedures on basal ganglia
iv. Neoplasms in diencephalon, frontal lobe and
limbic system
v. Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE)
vi. General paresis of insane (GPI)
vii. Petit mal status
viii. Post-ictal phase of epilepsy
ix. Subdural haematoma
x. Cerebral malaria
xi. Cortical venous thrombosis
2. Systemic and Metabolic Disorders
i. Diabetic ketoacidosis
ii. Acute intermittent porphyria
iii. Hyperparathyroidism causing hypercalcaemia
iv. Pellagra
v. Hepatic encephalopathy
vi. Systemic lupus erythematosis
vii. Homocystinuria
viii. Membranous glomerulonephritis
3. Drugs and Poisoning
i. Organic alkaloids
ii. Antipsychotics
iii. ACTH (therapeutic doses)
iv. Aspirin
v. Illuminating gas
vi. Ethyl alcohol (large doses)
vii. Levodopa
viii. Disulfiram
ix. CO poisoning
x. Lithium toxicity
xi. Methylphenidate
xii. Phencyclidine (large doses)
xiii. Mescaline
4. Psychiatric Disorders
i. Catatonic schizophrenia
ii. Depressive stupor
iii. Manic stupor
iv. Periodic catatonia
v. Conversion and dissociative disorder
vi. Reactive psychosis
vii. During hypnosis.


