<<<PAGE 27>>>

Psychiatric History and Examination

The answers may be overly concrete or abstract.
The appropriateness of answers is judged. Concretisation of responses or inappropriate answers may occur
in schizophrenia.

Insight
Insight is the degree of awareness and understanding
that the patient has regarding his illness.
Ask the patient’s attitude towards his present state;
whether there is an illness or not; if yes, which kind of
illness (physical, psychiatric or both); is any treatment
needed; is there hope for recovery; what is the cause of
illness. Depending on the patient’s responses, insight
can be graded on a six-point scale (Table 2.3).

Judgement
Judgement is the ability to assess a situation correctly
and act appropriately within that situation. Both social
and test judgement are assessed.
i. Social judgement is observed during the hospital
stay and during the interview session. It includes
an evaluation of ‘personal judgement’.
ii. Test judgement is assessed by asking the patient
what he would do in certain test situations, such
as ‘a house on fire’, or ‘a man lying on the road’,
or ‘a sealed, stamped, addressed envelope lying
on a street’.
Judgement is rated as Good/Intact/Normal or Poor/
Impaired/Abnormal.

INVESTIGATIONS
After a detailed history and examination, investigations (laboratory tests, diagnostic standardised
interviews, family interviews, and/or psychological
tests) are carried out based on the diagnostic and
aetiological possibilities. Some of these investigations
are described briefly in Table 2.4.

FORMULATION
After a comprehensive psychiatric assessment, a
diagnostic formulation summarises the detailed posi-

15

Table 2.3: Clinical Rating of Insight
Insight is rated on a 6-point scale from one to six.
1. Complete denial of illness.
2. Slight awareness of being sick and needing help, but
denying it at the same time.
3. Awareness of being sick, but it is attributed to external or physical factors.
4. Awareness of being sick, due to something unknown
in self.
5. Intellectual Insight: Awareness of being ill and that
the symptoms/failures in social adjustment are due
to own particular irrational feelings/thoughts; yet
does not apply this knowledge to the current/future
experiences.
6. True Emotional Insight: It is different from intellectual insight in that the awareness leads to significant
basic changes in the future behaviour.

Table 2.4: Some Investigations in Psychiatry
I. Biological Investigations
Medical Screen
Some of the following tests may be useful in screening for the medical disorders causing the psychiatric
symptoms. Some examples of indications are stated in
front of the tests (these examples are not intended to be
comprehensive).
Haemoglobin: Routine screen.
Total and differential leucocyte counts: Routine screen,
Treatment with antipsychotics (e.g. clozapine), lithium,
carbamazepine.
Mean Corpuscular Volume (MCV): Alcohol dependence
(increased).
Urinalysis: Routine screen; Drug screening.
Peripheral smear: Anaemia.
Renal function tests: Treatment with lithium.
Liver function tests: Treatment with carbamazepine,
valproate, benzodiazepines. Alcohol dependence.
Serum electrolytes: Dehydration, SIADH, Treatment with
carbamazepine, antipsychotics, lithium.
Blood glucose: Routine screen (age>35 years), treatment
with antipsychotics
Contd...




<<<PAGE 28>>>

16

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Contd...
Thyroid function tests: Refractory depression, rapid
cycling mood disorder. Treatment with lithium, carbamazepine.
Electrocardiogram (ECG): Age>35 years, Treatment with
lithium, antidepressants, ECT, antipsychotics.
HIV testing: Intravenous drug users, suggestive sexual
history, AIDS dementia.
VDRL: Suggestive sexual history.
Chest X-ray: Age>35 years, Treatment with ECT.
Skull X-ray: History of head Injury.
Serum CK: Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (markedly
increased levels).
Toxicology Screen
Useful when substance use is suspected; for example,
alcohol, cocaine, opiates, cannabis, phencyclidine,
benzodiazepines, barbiturates; remember that certain
medications can cause false positive results (for example,
quetiapine for methadone).
Drug Levels
Drug levels are indicated to test for therapeutic blood
levels, for toxic blood levels, and for testing drug
compliance. Examples are lithium (0.6-1.0 meq/L),
carbamazepine (4-12 mg/ml), valproate (50-100 mg/
ml), haloperidol (8-18 ng/ml), tricyclic antidepressants
(nortriptyline 50-150 ng/ml; imipramine 200-250 ng/
ml), benzodiazepines, barbiturates and clozapine (350500 μg/L).
Electrophysiological Tests
EEG (Electroencephalogram): Seizures, dementia, pseudoseizures vs. seizures, episodic abnormal behaviour.
BEAM (Brain electrical activity mapping): Provides
topographic imaging of EEG data.
Video-Telemetry EEG: Pseudoseizures vs. seizures.
Evoked potentials (e.g. p300): Research tool.
Polysomnography/Sleep studies: Sleep disorders, seizures (occurring in sleep). The various components in
sleep studies include EEG, ECG, EOG, EMG, airflow
measurement, penile tumescence, oxygen saturation,
body temperature, GSR (Galvanic skin response), and
body movement.
Holter ECG: Panic disorder.

Brain Imaging Tests (Cranial)
Computed Tomography (CT) Scan: Dementia, delirium,
seizures, first episode psychosis.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scan: Dementia.
Higher resolution than CT scan.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Scan: Research tool
for study of brain function and physiology.
Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)
Scan: Research tool.
Magnetic Resonance (MR) Angiography: Research tool
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS): Research tool
Neuroendocrine Tests
Dexamethasone Suppression Test (DST): Research tool
in depression (response to antidepressants or ECT). If
plasma cortisol is >5 mg/100 ml following administration of dexamethasone (1 mg, given at 11 PM the night
before and plasma cortisol taken at 4 PM and 11 PM
the next day), it indicates non-suppression.
TRH Stimulation Test: Lithium-induced hypothyroidism,
refractory depression. If the serum TSH is >35 mIU/ml
(following 500 mg of TRH given IV), the test is positive.
Serum Prolactin Levels: Seizures vs. pseudoseizures,
galactorrhoea with antipsychotics.
Serum 17-hydroxycorticosteroid: Organic mood (depression) disorder.
Serum Melatonin Levels: Seasonal mood disorders.
Biochemical Tests
5-HIAA: Research tool (depression, suicidal and/or
aggressive behaviour).
MHPG: Research tool (depression).
Platelet MAO: Research tool (depression).
Catecholamine levels: Organic anxiety disorder (e.g.
pheochromocytoma).
Genetic Tests
Cytogenetic work-up is useful in some cases of mental
retardation.
Sexual Disorder Investigations
Papaverine test: Male erectile disorder (intracavernosal
injection of papaverine is sometimes used to differentiate
organic from non-organic male erectile disorder).
Nocturnal penile tumescence: Male erectile disorder.
Contd...




<<<PAGE 54>>>

42

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Fig. 4.1: Disulfiram: Mode of Action

The contraindications of disulfiram use are first
trimester of pregnancy, coronary artery disease, liver
failure, chronic renal failure, peripheral neuropathy,
muscle disease and psychotic symptoms presently or
in the past.
In selected patients (such as an older age group,
good motivation, good social support, absent underlying psychopathology and good treatment concordance), the response can be dramatic. In addition to
oral preparations, subcutaneous disulfiram implants
are also now available. However, they provide unpredictable blood levels of disulfiram.
Other deterrent agents
1. Citrated calcium carbimide (CCC): The mechanism of action is similar to disulfiram but onset of
action occurs within 1 hour and is reversible. The
usual dosage is 100 mg/d in two divided doses.
2. Metronidazole.
3. Animal charcoal, a fungus (Coprinus atramentarius), sulfonylureas and certain cephalosporins
also cause a disulfiram like action.
v. Anti-craving agents
Acamprosate, naltrexone and SSRIs (such as fluoxetine) are among the medications tried as anti-craving
agents in alcohol dependence.

Acamprosate (the Ca++ salt of N-acetyl-homotaurinate)
interacts with NMDA receptor-mediated glutamatergic neurotransmission in the various brain regions
and reduces Ca++ fluxes through voltage-operated
channels.
Naltrexone (oral opioid receptor antagonist) probably interferes with alcohol-induced reinforcement
by blocking opioid receptors. Fluoxetine (and other
SSRIs) have been occasionally used as anti-craving
agents in their usual antidepressant doses.
vi. Other medications
A variety of other medicines such as benzodiazepines, antidepressants, antipsychotics, lithium,
carbamazepine, and even narcotics have been tried.
These should be used only if there is a special indication for their use (for example, antidepressants for
underlying depression).
vii. Psychosocial rehabilitation
Rehabilitation is an integral part of the multi-modal
treatment of alcohol dependence.

OPIOID USE DISORDERS
Dried exudate obtained from unripe seed capsules of
Papaver somniferum has been used and abused for




<<<PAGE 89>>>

Mood Disorders

The usual starting dose is about 75-150 mg of
imipramine equivalent. The clinical improvement
is assessed after about two weeks. In case of nonimprovement, the dose can usually be increased up
to 300 mg of imipramine equivalent.
It should be remembered that it may take up to
3 weeks before any appreciable response may be
noticed. Before stopping or changing a drug, the
particular drug should be given in a therapeutically
adequate dose for at least 6 weeks.
A variety of antidepressants are now available
in the market. Since almost all antidepressants are
equal in antidepressant efficacy and there is no single
antidepressant effective for all depressed patients, the
choice of antidepressant is often dictated by other factors. These factors include cost and ease of availability
of the drug, the side-effect profile of the drug, past
history of response and (any) co-morbid medical or
psychiatric disorders. An individualised choice has to
be made in each patient, keeping these various factors in mind.
Imipramine, amitriptyline and other related drugs
are called tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). The
newer antidepressants such as selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (e.g. fluoxetine, sertraline,
citalopram), mirtazapine, and serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) (e.g. venlafaxine,
duloxetine) have very little anti cholinergic side
effects and, hence, are generally safer drugs to use in
elderly patients with benign hypertrophy of prostate.
However, both venlafaxine and duloxetine have been
associated with hypertension and should be used with
care in those with a history of cardiac illness.
The antidepressant dosage is monitored on the
basis of clinical improvement. Routine monitoring
of blood levels is not usually indicated.
For the first, uncomplicated, depressive episode,
the patient should receive full therapeutic dose of the
chosen antidepressant for a period of 6-9 months,
after achieving full remission. It is wise to taper the
antidepressant medication, when the treatment is to
be stopped after the continuation phase.

77

There are three main phases of treatment:
i. Acute treatment (till remission occurs),
ii. Continuation treatment (from remission till end
of treatment), and
iii. Maintenance treatment (to prevent further recurrences).
Maintenance treatment may be indicated in the
following patients:
i. Partial response to acute treatment.
ii. Poor symptom control during the continuation
treatment.
iii. More than 3 episodes (90% chances of recurrence).
iv. More than 2 episodes with early age of onset,
or recurrence within 2 years of stopping
antidepressants, or severe and/or life-threatening
depression, or family history of mood disorder.
v. Chronic depression (> 2 years) or double depression.
About 20-35% of depressed patients are refractory
to antidepressant medication. The management of a
treatment refractory depressed patient is best done
by a psychiatrist, often at a tertiary care centre. These
patients may require one of the following alternatives:
i. A change of antidepressant (Switch),
ii. Combination of two types of antidepressants,
iii. Augmentation with lithium,
iv. Augmentation with T3 or T4,
v. Augmentation with antipsychotics,
vi. Electroconvulsive therapy, or
vii. Use of newer and experimental techniques.
One type of depression, namely delusional depression (depression with psychotic features), is usually
refractory to antidepressants alone. The treatments of
choice in this condition include:
i. An antidepressant with ECT, or
ii. An antidepressant with antipsychotics, or
iii. An antidepressant with lithium.

Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)
The indications for ECT in depression include:
i. Severe depression with suicidal risk.




<<<PAGE 90>>>

78

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

ii. Severe depression with stupor, severe psychomotor retardation, or somatic syndrome.
iii. Severe treatment refractory depression.
iv. Delusional depression (psychotic features).
v. Presence of significant antidepressant sideeffects or intolerance to drugs.
Severe depression with suicidal risk is the first and
foremost indication for use of ECT. The prompt use
of ECT can be life-saving in such a situation.
The response is usually rapid, resulting in a marked
improvement. In most clinical situations, usually 6-8
ECTs are needed, given three times a week. When six
ECTs are administered, the usual pattern is three ECTs
in the first week, two in the second week and one in
the third week.
However, improvement is not sustained after
stopping the ECTs. Therefore, antidepressants are
often needed along with ECTs, in order to maintain
the improvement achieved. The safety of the ECT
procedure has now been well-established.
ECT can also be used for acute manic excitement,
if it is not adequately responding to antipsychotics and
mood stabilisers.

Lithium (Li)
Lithium has traditionally been the drug of choice for
the treatment of manic episode (acute phase) as well
as for prevention of further episodes in bipolar mood
disorder. It has also been used in treatment of depression with less success. (Lithium is discussed in detail
in Chapter 15).
There is usually a 1-2 week lag period before any
appreciable response is observed. So, for treatment
of acute manic episode, antipsychotics are usually
administered along with lithium, in order to provide
cover for the first few weeks.
The usual therapeutic dose range is 900-1500 mg
of lithium carbonate per day. Lithium treatment needs
to be closely monitored by repeated blood levels, as
the difference between the therapeutic and lethal blood
levels is not very wide (narrow therapeutic index).
Therapeutic blood lithium = 0.8-1.2 mEq/L
Prophylactic blood lithium = 0.6-1.2 mEq/L

A blood lithium level of >2.0 mEq/L is often
associated with toxicity, while a level of more than
2.5-3.0 mEq/L may be lethal.
Although lithium is indicated for therapeutic use
in all manic episodes, the preventive use is best in
usually those patients with bipolar disorder, in whom
the frequency of episodes is 1-3 per year or 2-5 per
two years.
The common acute toxic symptoms of lithium are
neurological while the common chronic side-effects
are nephrological and endocrinal (usually hypothyroidism).
The important investigations before star ting
lithium therapy include a complete general physical
examination, full blood counts, ECG, urine routine
examination (with/without 24 hour urine volume),
renal function tests and thyroid function tests.

Antipsychotics
Antipsychotics are an important adjunct in the
treatment of mood disorder. The commonly used
drugs include risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine,
haloperidol, and aripiprazole. It is customary to use
the atypical antipsychotics first, before considering
the older typical antipsychotics.
Some of the indications include:
1. Acute manic episode
• Along with mood stabilisers for the first few
weeks, before the effect of mood stabilisers
becomes apparent.
• Where mood stabilisers are not effective, not indicated, or have significant side-effects.
• Given parenterally (IM or IV) for emergency
treatment of mania.
• Recently, there has been some early evidence that
atypical antipsychotics (e.g. olanzapine) might
have some mood stabilising properties.
2. Delusional depression
As stated above, antipsychotics are important adjuncts
in the treatment of delusional depression. Once again,
it is customary to use atypical antipsychotics such as
olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, and ziprasidone
first, although any antipsychotic can be used.




<<<PAGE 91>>>

Mood Disorders

iii. Bipolar depression
There is recent evidence that quetiapine has antidepressant efficacy in bipolar depression.
iv. Maintenance or prophylactic treatment in bipolar
disorder
Recent evidence shows that several atypical antipsychotics such as olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole
can be successfully used in the maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder.

Other Mood Stabilisers
The other mood stabilisers which are used in the treatment of bipolar mood disorders include:
1. Sodium valproate
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium.
• The dose range is usually 1000-3000 mg/day (the
therapeutic blood levels are 50-125 mg/ml).
• It has a faster onset of action than lithium, therefore, it can be used in acute treatment of mania
effectively.
2. Carbamazepine and Oxcarbazepine
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium and valproate.
• Particularly effective when EEG is abnormal
(although this is not necessary for the use of carbamazepine).
• The dose range of carbamazepine is 600-1600 mg/
day (the therapeutic blood levels are 4-12 mg/ml).
• The use of carbamazepine in treatment of bipolar
disorder has recently declined, partly due to its
potential for drug interactions.
• Oxcarbazepine has a narrow evidence base and its
use in bipolar disorder is quite recent.
3. Benzodiazepines
Lorazepam (IV and orally) and clonazepam are used
for the treatment of manic episode alone rarely; however, they have been used more often as adjuvants to
antipsychotics.

79

4. Lamotrigine is particularly effective for bipolar
depression and is recommended by several guidelines.
5. T3 and T4 as adjuncts for the treatment of rapid cycling mood disorder and resistant depression.

Other Treatments
Psychosurgery is an extremely rarely used method
of treatment and is resorted to only in exceptional
circumstances.
In depressive episode, which is either chronic or
persistently recurrent with a limited or absent response
to other modes of treatment, one of the following
procedures may very rarely be performed:
i. Stereotactic subcaudate tractotomy, or
ii. Stereotactic limbic leucotomy.
In carefully selected patients, the results are
reported to be satisfactory. However, in the current
day and age, psychosurgery is hardly ever considered
in routine clinical practice.

Psychosocial Treatment
Although somatic treatment appears to be the primary
mode of management in major mood disorders, psychosocial treatment is often helpful. These indications
include:
i. As an adjunct to somatic treatment.
ii. In mild to moderate cases of depression.
iii. Certain selected cases.
These methods include (see Chapter 18 for details):

Cognitive Behaviour Therapy
Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) aims at correcting depressive negative cognitions (ideations) such
as hopelessness, worthlessness, helplessness and pessimistic ideas, and replacing them by new cognitive
and behavioural responses.
CBT is useful in mild to moderate, non-bipolar
depression and can be used with or without somatic
treatment.

Interpersonal Therapy
Interpersonal therapy (IPT) attempts to recognise
and explore interpersonal stressors, role disputes and




<<<PAGE 197>>>

Psychopharmacology

It is essential to continue the antidepressant for a
period of further 6 months after reaching remission, in
the first episode of depressive disorder (and for longer
duration in subsequent episodes) to prevent recurrence of symptoms. It is important to prescribe the
antidepressant in the same dose as used for treatment
unless there are adverse effects requiring a decrease
in dose.
Only when adequate doses (150-300 mg
imipramine equivalent) have been administered for
an adequate period (at least 6 weeks) without a clinical response then the drug can be called ineffective
for that patient. Another drug, usually from a different
class or group, or ECT may then be used.

Side Effects and Toxicity
The common side effects of antidepressants with their
management are summarised in Table 15.7.
TCAs are dangerous in overdose; amitriptyline
and dosulepin (dotheipin) are particularly cardiotoxic
whilst lofepramine is the safest amongst TCAs. Clinical features of overdose include agitation, delirium,
paralytic ileus, urinary retention, coma, respiratory
depression, seizures, hyperpyrexia, cardiac arrhythmias, conduction defects, mydriasis, and death. The
lethal dose of imipramine is 1-2 g. (40-80 tabs. of
25 mg imipramine equivalence).
The treatment options in overdose include gastric
lavage/induction of vomiting, activated charcoal for
adsorption, cardio-respiratory resuscitation, treatment
of seizures (if they occur), general supportive care
and symptomatic management. Quinidine-like drugs
are contraindicated whilst antiarrhythmics such as
lignocaine can be helpful. Physostigmine 0.5 mg
IV/IM bolus repeated to a total of 3-4 mg/day may
be used under careful supervision. Coma often reverts
in less than 24 hours, although toxicity lasts for
5-6 days.
Co-prescription of serotonergic drugs (such as
SSRIs) with other serotonergic agents and especially
MAOIs can lead to serotonin syndrome. It is characterised by a classic triad of mental status changes,
neuromuscular abnormalities and autonomic hyper-

185

activity. These include anxiety, agitation, confusion,
clonus (e.g. ankle clonus, ocular clonus), hyperreflexia, myoclonus, rigidity, increased heart rate, tremor,
flushing, hyperthermia and excessive sweating. Death
can occur in severe serotonin syndrome.
Treatment includes discontinuation of the offending drug(s), supportive management and (sometimes)
use of serotonin and histamine antagonist cyproheptadine.

Refractory Depression
About 20-35% of patients do not respond to the
antidepressant therapy. The chief reasons for this
non-response include:
1. Poor drug concordance.
2. Inadequate dosage.
3. Insufficient treatment duration.
4. Low plasma antidepressant levels.
5. Incorrect diagnosis.
Even when these important reasons are excluded,
there still remains a group (15-20%) of depressed
patients who are non-responders or poor-responders.
Such patients should receive a trial of another antidepressant preferably from a different group (e.g. SNRI)
for adequate duration. In case the patient still does not
respond, the treatment of choice of refractory depression is electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), though other
treatment choices (such as lithium augmentation) are
also available.

MOOD STABILISING DRUGS
(DRUGS USED IN PROPHYLAXIS
OF BIPOLAR DISORDER)
These drugs are usually effective in treatment of mania and therefore the word antimanic is often used to
describe them. But as they are effective in preventing
mood swings in bipolar disorder, the better term is
mood-stabilising agent or a prophylactic agent. The
most commonly used mood-stabilising agents include
lithium, valproate, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine,
though there are several other experimental mood
stabilisers such as oxcarbazepine.




<<<PAGE 200>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

188
Contd...
Category and
Side Effect
2. Severe hepatic
necrosis (rare)
3. Hyperpyrexia

4. Bleeding

5. Hyponatraemia

Probable Cause

Maximum with
(For example)

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Toxic or
Hypersensitive
Interaction with
tricyclics or
meperidine
Decreased
platelet serotonin

Iproniazid

Tranylcypromine

Not known

Not known

SSRIs

Not known

SSRIs
SNRIs

Not known;
Probably MAOIs

Stop/change drug. Supportive
care; Death rate high.
Stop drug. Keep a gap of
1 week between imipramine
and MAOI. Supportive care.
Change drug. Do not coprescribe other drugs that
increase risk of bleeding;
Gastro-protective drugs such
as PPIs can decrease risk
to some extent in high-risk
patients
Risk higher in elderly; Avoid
co-prescribing other drugs
that cause hyponatraemia
(such as diuretics); monitor
closely

Probably SIADH

Recently, several atypical antipsychotics such as
olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole have been
added to list of drugs used in maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder. In addition, other antipsychotics
such as risperidone (and the others mentioned above)
are also used as antimanic agents.
Lamotrigine and Quetiapine (and its metabolite
norquetiapine) appear to have particular efficacy for
treatment of bipolar depression. There is a risk of skin
rash with lamotrigine particularly early in treatment
and the risk appears higher with faster escalation of
dose as well as with co-prescription of valproate. It is
therefore important to increase the dose of lamotrigine
very gradually as suggested in the summary of product
characteristics (SPC) and the dose prescribed depends
on other co-prescribed drugs (such as carbamazepine
and valproate).

LITHIUM
Lithium (Li) is an element (Atomic number 3 and
Atomic weight 7) which is the smallest alkali ion.

The element was discovered in 1817 by Arfuedson.
Since then, it has been used for treatment of gout and
for salt replacement in cardiac disease, but its use was
restricted due to fatal toxicity.
It was rediscovered in 1949 by John Cade, for use
in treatment of mania but its potential went unrecognised as it was discovered in Australia. Mogen Schou
in 1957, had to rediscover it yet again before it became
popular as a treatment of mania.

Indications
Although lithium salts are used in treatment of a
myriad of psychiatric and non-psychiatric disorders,
the established indications are only the following
ones:
1. Treatment of acute mania
2. Prophylaxis of bipolar mood disorder.
In addition, the following may also constitute
possible clinical indications of lithium use:
3. Treatment of schizo-affective disorder
4. Prophylaxis of unipolar mood disorder
5. Treatment of cyclothymia




<<<PAGE 201>>>

Psychopharmacology

6. Treatment of acute depression (as an adjuvant for
refractory depression)
7. Treatment of chronic alcoholism (in presence of
significant depressive symptoms) and psychoactive use disorders (e.g. cocaine dependence)
8. Treatment of impulsive aggression
9. Treatment of Kleine-Levin syndrome.

Pharmacokinetics
Lithium is very rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. The peak serum levels occur between
30 minutes to 3 hours. The absorption is virtually
complete in about 8 hours.
The distribution is in total body water with a slow
entry into the intracellular compartment. Lithium is
not protein bound. The maximum levels occur in
thyroid (3-5 times serum level), saliva (two times),
milk (0.3-1.0 times) and CSF (0.4 times). The steady
state levels are achieved in about 7 days. There is
no metabolism of lithium in body and it is excreted
almost entirely by the kidneys. Proximal reabsorption
is influenced by the sodium balance, and depletion
of sodium results in retention, causing higher blood
levels of lithium.

Mechanism of Action
Lithium’s mechanism of action is not known; however,
the following mechanisms have been hypothesised:
1. It affects the Na+-K+ ATP-ase and accumulates
intracellularly as a substitute of Na+.
2. It inhibits the adenylate cyclase and thus decreases
cAMP (II messenger) intracellularly.
3. It accelerates the presynaptic reuptake and destruction of catecholamines, like norepinephrine.
4. It inhibits the release of catecholamines at the
synapse.
5. It decreases the postsynaptic serotonin 5-HT2
receptor sensitivity.
6. It stabilizes the cell membrane, along with Ca++
and Mg++.
7. It decreases the Ca++ mobilisation from the intracellular pools by ITP (inositol-triphosphate)dependent Ca++ channels (II messenger system).

189

8. It interferes with the phosphatidyl-inositol cycle
by blocking the conversion of IMP (inositol monophosphate) to inositol, by inositol monophosphate
phosphatase. The muscarinic acetylcholine (Ach)
receptor is among one of the neurotransmitter
receptors linked to this system in brain. The
antimanic effects of lithium may be attributed to
this effect on Ach, thus affecting the cholinergicadrenergic balance.
All these actions result in a decreased catecholamine activity, thus ameliorating mania. However,
these mechanisms do not explain the antidepressant
effect and the prophylactic effect in bipolar mood disorder. It is also described to possess NMDA (n-methyl
d-aspartate) mediated neuroprotective properties.
There is a lag period of 7-10 days before the onset
of action occurs, which is probably due to the time
taken to achieve steady state levels.

Clinical Use
Lithium is available in market in the form of the following preparations.
1. Lithium carbonate (300 mg tablets; 400 mg
sustained-release tablets)
2. Lithium citrate (300 mg/5 ml liquid; not available
in India)
Before starting treatment, it is essential to ensure
normal functioning of kidneys (one of the most important), thyroid, heart and central nervous system.
After starting lithium, it is necessary to investigate
these systems at repeated intervals.
The usual profile of investigations is as follows:
1. Routine general and systemic physical examination.
2. Routine blood counts (Hb, TC, DC).
3. Urine: routine and microscopic examination.
4. ECG.
5. Renal function tests (blood urea, serum creatinine,
24 hour urine volume, urine specific gravity).
eGFR with creatinine clearance test, if indicated.
6. Thyroid function tests (TSH, T3, T4).
The initial daily starting dose of lithium for treatment of acute mania is usually 900-2100 mg/day,




<<<PAGE 202>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

190

Table 15.8: Blood Lithium Levels
(in treatment of bipolar disorder)
• Therapeutic levels = 0.6-1.2 mEq/L (For the treatment of acute mania)
• Prophylactic levels = 0.6-1.0 mEq/L (For relapse
prevention in bipolar disorder)
• Toxic lithium levels > 2.0 mEq/L

given in 1-3 doses. Ideally, the treatment is started
after serial lithium estimation, conducted after a loading dose of 600 mg or 900 mg of lithium carbonate,
to determine pharmacokinetics. However, this method
is much less frequently practiced these days.
During treatment it is essential to estimate blood
lithium levels at regular intervals (usually 3 monthly)
(Table 15.8). The blood sample for estimation is
taken 12 hours after the last lithium dose. If any
changes are made in lithium dosage, the next blood
level is estimated after at least 5-7 days of the last
change.
When stopping lithium treatment (except in cases
of lithium toxicity), it is desirable to gradually taper
the dose of lithium over several days or weeks in order
to minimise the risk of early relapse on discontinuation.
There is evidence from several studies that lithium
substantially reduces the risk of suicide in bipolar
disorder; however, it has a narrow margin of safety
and it is important to remember this particularly in
patient with active ideas or plans of suicide.

Side Effects
Adverse effects are common and toxicity can occur
easily, if blood levels reach about 2.0 mEq/L; lifethreatening intoxication occurs, if levels reach about
3.5 mEq/L. In acute administration, toxicity is primarily neurological whilst during maintenance therapy
renal side effects are the commonest.
The common side effects are listed below:
I. Neurological
1. Tremor: This is the commonest side effect,
occurring in up to 50% of patients. Treatment is

by decreasing the dose of lithium or by adding
propranolol.
2. Muscular weakness.
3. Cogwheel rigidity (mild).
4. Seizures (decreased threshold).
5. Neurotoxicity: The important features include
delirium, cerebellar signs, abnormal involuntary
movements, seizures, and later coma. In some
individuals, toxicity may occur even within the
therapeutic range. The treatment of choice for
acute toxicity is haemodialysis.
II. Renal
The renal side effects occur in about 10-50% of all
patients on maintenance lithium therapy. Some of the
features include:
1. Polyuria, polydipsia.
2. Tubular changes.
3. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
4. Nephrotic syndrome.
III. Cardiovascular
The effects on heart are similar to those of hypokalaemia.
The commonest ECG change is T-wave depression.
IV. Endocrine
1. Goitre.
2. Hypothyroidism.
3. Abnormal thyroid function (30-40%).
4. Weight gain (pedal oedema is also common).
V. Gastrointestinal
These side effects include nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea,
metallic taste and abdominal pain.
VI. Dermatological
These dermatological side effects include acneiform
eruptions, papular eruptions and exacerbation of
psoriasis.
VII. Side effects during pregnancy and lactation
1. Teratogenic (possibly).
2. Increased incidence of Ebstein’s anomaly (distortion and downward displacement of tricuspid
valve in the right ventricle), when taken in the first
trimester.
3. Secreted in milk with 30-100% of the maternal
blood lithium levels. Lithium can therefore cause
toxicity in the infant.




<<<PAGE 203>>>

Psychopharmacology

Contraindications of Lithium Use
1. Presence of clear evidence of cardiac, renal, thyroid or neurological dysfunction
2. Presence of blood dyscrasia
3. During pregnancy and lactation
4. Concomitant administration of thiazide diuretics,
tetracyclines or anaesthetics
ACE inhibitors (such as captopril), Angiotensin
II receptor antagonists (such as losartan), NSAIDs
(nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) and COX-2
inhibitors (such as celecoxib) can increase the risk of
lithium toxicity in an unpredictable manner, especially
in elderly.

VALPROATE
Valproate and lithium have been widely used as
first line drugs for treatment of mania as well as for
prophylaxis of bipolar mood disorder.
Valproic acid was first synthesised by Burton
and used as an organic solvent. In 1963, Meunier
serendipitously discovered the antiepileptic properties of valproic acid, while Lambert reported in 1966
that valpromide (a valproic acid analogue) might be
effective as an antimanic. It was approved by the US
FDA as an antiepileptic drug for absence seizures in
1978 and for the treatment of acute mania (and for
migraine headache prophylaxis) in 1996.
Although its mechanism of action is not clearly
understood, it increases GABA though other nonGABAergic mechanisms have been proposed.
The term valproate is often used to denote all
commercial preparations, since the common entity
in blood is valproic acid. The following preparations
of valproate are available in India:
i. Valproate sodium
ii. Divalproex (Enteric-coated stable coordination
compound composed of sodium valproate and
valproic acid in a 1:1 molar relationship)
iii. Chrono preparations (Enteric-coated compound
composed of sodium valproate and valproic acid
in a 3:2 ratio).

191

It is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral
administration. The peak plasma levels are reached
at 1-4 hours after a single oral dose. The half-life of
valproate is 8-17 hours.
The usual dose of valproate is 1000-3000 mg/day
orally in divided doses. The therapeutic blood level is
50-125 mg/ml. Oral loading strategies (20-30 mg/kg/
day) are rapidly effective in the management of acute
mania.

Indications
In addition to its primary indication as an anticonvulsant, Valproate has several other indications in
various psychiatric and neuropsychiatric disorders.

Bipolar Disorders
Acute Mania (as a first-line agent for the treatment
of acute mania in oral and IV forms): Several factors
associated with a favourable antimanic response to
valproate (as well as carbamazepine) include:
a. Co-morbid substance abuse or other psychiatric
disorders
b. Later age at onset and/or shorter duration of illness
c. History of poor response to lithium
d. Dysphoric mania, mixed affective episodes, or
rapid cycling
e. Organic/complicated mania associated with seizure disorder, history of head trauma, or EEG
abnormalities
f. D-M-I (Depression-Mania-Well Interval) pattern
of illness, as opposed to the M-D-I pattern
There is some suggestion that patients nonresponsive to valproate may respond well to
carbamazepine.
Prophylaxis: Valproate is probably less effective in
maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder than in
treatment of acute mania. It has been used alone, as
well as along with lithium and other mood stabilisers
in the maintenance treatment.
The addition of valproate to lithium has been
recognised as a useful treatment for mania refractory
to lithium monotherapy.




<<<PAGE 204>>>

192

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Rapid cycling bipolar disorder and mixed (or dysphoric) mania: The patients with rapid cycling, mixed
affective episodes, or dysphoric mania are often
resistant to lithium treatment and respond better to
valproate. Valproate is also effective in management
of ultra-rapid cycling mood disorders.
Bipolar depression: Valproate appears to be generally
more effective in the treatment of acute mania than in
bipolar depression.

The use of valproate in pregnancy and lactation
should be best avoided. The NICE guidelines for treatment of bipolar disorder recommend that valproate is
best avoided in women of childbearing potential (see
Further Reading List).
In overdose, the amount of drug, that is not protein
bound, is high. Therefore, dialysis is useful in the
management of an overdose with valproate.

Neurological Disorders

Certain drug may increase (such as aspirin, cimetidine,
ibuprofen, erythromycin, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine,
phenothiazines) or decrease (such as carbamazepine,
phenytoin, phenobarbital, ethosuximide, rifampicin,
mefloquine) the serum levels of valproate.
In addition, valproate increases serum levels of
other drugs (such as lamotrigine, tricyclic antidepressants, zidovudine, tolbutamide).

Migraine and Pain syndromes: Valproate has been
used for prophylaxis of migraine headaches, as well
as for aborting an acute attack (IV route). Valproate
has also been used in treatment of trigeminal neuralgia
and neuropathic pain.
Seizure disorders: Valproate is primarily indicated for
treatment of absence seizures (both simple and complex), complex partial seizures, myoclonic seizures,
and generalised tonic-clonic seizures, as monotherapy
as well as adjunct therapy.

Other Disorders
Valproate has also been used at times in several other
conditions, including behavioural agitation in dementia, severe behavioural symptoms in mental retardation, ADHD and conduct disorder, schizoaffective
disorder (bipolar type), alcohol withdrawal, tardive
dyskinesia, impulse control disorder, panic disorder
and borderline personality disorder.

Side Effects
Adverse effects are more common with valproate
concentrations above 100 mg/ml.
The common side effects are nausea, sedation, tremor, flushing, weight gain, thrombocytopenia, menstrual disturbances (in women) and hair
loss. There are some reports of polycystic ovaries
and hyperandrogenism in young women with
epilepsy.
The most serious, though relatively uncommon,
side effects include hepatic toxicity (especially in
young children), acute haemorrhagic pancreatitis, and
Steven-Johnson syndrome.

Drug Interactions

CARBAMAZEPINE
Like lithium and valproate, carbamazepine too has
been used as an antimanic and for prophylaxis of bipolar disorder. It is a tricyclic compound synthesised
in 1953 by Schindler. It has a structure similar to
TCAs. The onset of action can be faster as compared
to lithium, but slower compared to valproate.
The usual dose is 600-1600 mg/day orally, in
divided doses. The treatment is best monitored with
repeated blood levels. The therapeutic blood levels
are 4-12 μg/ml and the toxic blood levels are usually
reached at >15 μg/ml.

Indications
The indications for use of carbamazepine include:
1. Seizures
i. Complex partial seizures (CPS)
ii. Generalised tonic clonic seizures
iii. Alcohol withdrawal seizures (rum fits), if persistent (also used sometimes for treatment of
simple alcohol withdrawal syndrome)
2. Psychiatric disorders
i. Bipolar mood disorder (especially for rapid
cyclers; lithium-refractory patients; lithium-


