<<<PAGE 40>>>

28

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

OTHER ORGANIC MENTAL
DISORDERS (DUE TO BRAIN DAMAGE
AND DYSFUNCTION, AND TO
PHYSICAL DISEASES)
This group includes miscellaneous mental disorders
which are causally related to brain dysfunction due to
primary cerebral disease, systemic disease (secondary), or toxic substances.
According to ICD-10, an evidence of cerebral
disease, damage or dysfunction, or of systemic
physical disease, known to be associated with one
of the listed syndromes is required, with a temporal
relationship between development of the underlying
disease and the onset of the mental syndrome, with
recovery from the mental disorder following removal
or improvement of the underlying presumed cause,
and an absence of evidence to suggest an alternative
cause of the mental syndrome (such as a strong family
history or precipitating stress).
If conditions 1 and 2 are present, a provisional
diagnosis can be made; if all four are present, the
certainty of diagnosis is significantly increased.
The following clinical conditions are known to
be associated with an increased risk for these other
organic mental disorders:

Primary Cerebral Diseases
Epilepsy, limbic encephalitis, Huntington’s disease,
head trauma, brain neoplasms, vascular cerebral disease, cerebral malformations.

Systemic Diseases
Extracranial neoplasms (e.g. carcinoma pancreas),
collagen diseases (e.g. SLE), endocrine disease (e.g.
hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, Cushing’s disease),
metabolic disorders (e.g. hypoglycaemia, porphyria,
hypoxia); infectious diseases (e.g. trypanosomiasis).

Drugs
Steroids, propranolol, levodopa, methyldopa, antihypertensives, antimalarials, alcohol and other psychoactive substances.

ORGANIC HALLUCINOSIS
According to ICD-10, presence of persistent or recurrent hallucinations due to an underlying organic cause
is required for the diagnosis of organic hallucinosis,
in addition to the general guidelines for the diagnosis
of other organic mental disorders, described earlier.
It is important to rule out any major disturbance of
consciousness, intelligence, memory, mood or
thought.
These hallucinations can occur in any sensory
modality but are usually visual (most common) or
auditory in nature. In many cases, they depend on
the underlying cause. These hallucinations can range
from very simple and unformed, to very complex and
well-organised. Usually the patients realise that the
hallucinations are not real but sometimes there may
be a delusional elaboration of hallucinations.

Aetiology
1. Drugs: Hallucinogens (LSD, psilocybin, mescaline), cocaine, cannabis, phencyclidine (PCP),
levodopa, bromocriptine, amantadine, ephedrine,
propranolol, pentazocine, methylphenidate, imipramine, anticholinergics, bromide.
2. Alcohol: In alcoholic hallucinosis, auditory hallucinations are usually more common.
3. Sensory deprivation.
4. ‘Release’ hallucinations due to sensory pathway
disease, e.g. bilateral cataracts, otosclerosis, optic
neuritis.
5. Migraine.
6. Epilepsy: Complex partial seizures.
7. Intracranial space occupying lesions.
8. Temporal arteritis.
9. Brain stem lesions (peduncular hallucinosis).

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause, if treatable.
2. Symptomatic treatment with a low dose of an
antipsychotic medication (such as Haloperidol,
Risperidone and Olanzapine) may be needed.




<<<PAGE 42>>>

30

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

ORGANIC MOOD (AFFECTIVE)
DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of prominent and
persistent mood disturbance caused by an underlying
organic cause is required for the diagnosis of organic
mood disorder, in addition to the general guidelines
for the diagnosis of other organic mental disorders,
described earlier. It is important to rule out any major
disturbance of consciousness, orientation, or memory.
The mood disturbance can be a major depressive
episode, a manic episode, or a mixed affective episode.
The severity may vary from mild to severe.

Aetiology
Some of the causes of organic mood disorder are
listed below:
1. Drugs:
Mania: INH, Levodopa, Bromide, LSD, Corticosteroids (hypomania), Hallucinogens, Tricyclic
antidepressants, Cocaine, Baclofen, Amphetamines, Bromocriptine, Cimetidine, Procyclidine
Depression: Reserpine, Ethanol, Clonidine,
Methyldopa, Propranolol, Corticosteroids, Antipsychotics (particularly typical antipsychotics),
Cimetidine, Anticancer chemotherapy, Oral contraceptives.
Any drug a depressed person is taking should be
considered a potential factor in the causation of
depressive episode.
2. Endocrine disorders:
Mania: Hyperthyroidism
Depression: Hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome, Addison’s disease, hyper- and hypoparathyroidism.
3. CNS disorders: Parkinsonism, Huntington’s
chorea, PSP (progressive supranuclear palsy;
depression more likely), CVAs (cerebrovascular
accidents; left-sided anterior lesions and rightsided posterior lesions cause depression in stroke),
cerebral tumours, epilepsy (com plex partial
seizures), neurosyphilis (GPI), head injury (mania
more likely), multiple sclerosis.

4. Post-viral illnesses: Influenza, infectious mononucleosis, viral pneumonia, infectious hepatitis.
5. Deficiencies: Pellagra, deficiency of thiamine,
folate, niacin, folate, B12.
6. Others: Carcinoma pancreas (depression), SLE,
pernicious anaemia, temporal arteritis (depression), carcinoid syndrome (mania).

Management
1. Management of the underlying organic cause, if
treatable.
2. Symptomatic management, if the episodes are
severe. For example, for a manic episode, low dose
antipsychotic medication (such as risperidone,
haloperidol, olanzapine) and/or a mood stabiliser
(such as valproate); and for a depressive episode,
low dose antidepressants (such as sertraline or mirtazapine). Antipsychotics are not recommended
in patients who have suffered from stroke and/or
dementia as the risk of mortality is higher.
Pathological laughter and crying (associated
with multiple sclerosis or stroke) can similarly
respond to small dose SSRIs or small dose amitriptyline.

ORGANIC ANXIETY DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of prominent and
persistent generalised anxiety or panic caused by an
underlying cause is required for diagnosis of organic
anxiety disorder, in addition to the general guidelines
for the diagnosis of other organic mental disorders,
described earlier. It is important to rule out any major
disturbance of consciousness, orientation, memory,
personality, thought, perception, or mood.

Aetiology
1. Drugs and toxins: Cocaine, caffeine, amphetamines and other sympathomimetics, alcohol and
drug withdrawal, heavy metals, penicillin.
2. Endocrine disorders: Thyroid, pituitary, parathyroid, or adrenal dysfunction; pheochromocytoma;
fasting hypoglycaemia, carcinoid syndrome.




<<<PAGE 43>>>

Organic (Including Symptomatic) Mental Disorders

3. Systemic diseases: Cardiac arrhythmias, mitral
valve prolapse syndrome, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, coronary artery disease,
pulmonary embolism, anaemia, fever, deficiency
diseases.
4. CNS diseases: Cerebral tumours, epilepsy (especially complex partial seizures of temporal lobe
origin), cerebrovascular disease, postconcussional
syndrome.

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying organic cause, if
treatable.
2. Symptomatic treatment with benzodiazepines,
beta-blockers (such as propranolol), cognitive
behaviour therapy, and relaxation techniques may
be needed.

ORGANIC PERSONALITY DISORDER
(PERSONALITY AND BEHAVIOURAL
DISORDERS DUE TO BRAIN DISEASE,
DAMAGE AND DYSFUNCTION)
The organic personality disorder is characterised by
a significant alteration of the premorbid personality
caused by an underlying organic cause without major
disturbance of consciousness, orientation, memory
or perception. The personality change may be characterised by poor impulse control, emotional lability,

apathy, accentuation of earlier personality traits, or
hostility.
According to ICD-10, the following features are
required for diagnosis of organic personality disorder,
in addition to the general guidelines for the diagnosis
of other organic mental disorders, described earlier.
In addition to an established history or other evidence
of brain disease, damage, or dysfunction, a definitive
diagnosis requires the presence of two or more of six
features described. These include consistently reduced
ability to persevere with goal-directed activities,
altered emotional behaviour (emotional lability,
euphoria, inappro priate jocularity, irritability or
short-lived anger outbursts), expression of needs and
impulses without consideration of the consequences,
cognitive disturbances (such as suspiciousness, paranoid ideation, and/or excessive preoccupation with a
single theme), marked alteration of language production (such as circumstantiality, over-inclusiveness,
viscosity, and hypergraphia), and altered sexual
behaviour.

Aetiology
1. Temporal lobe epilepsy (complex partial seizures)
which can be associated with temporal lobe (personality) syndrome (see Table 3.7).
2. Concussion (postconcussional syndrome).
3. Encephalitis (postencephalitis syndrome).
4. Multiple sclerosis (early).

Table 3.7: Organic Personality Disorders
Organic Personality Disorder
1. Frontal lobe syndrome (Types)
a. Orbito-frontal syndrome
(Pseudo-psychopathic)
b. Frontal convexity type
(Pseudo-depressive)
c. Medial frontal syndrome
(Akinetic)
2. Temporal lobe syndrome
3. Bilateral temporal lobe or
limbic system lesions

31

Clinical Features
Disinhibition, jocularity, impulsivity, impaired insight and judgement
Apathy, lack of initiative, retardation, perseveration
Akinesis, incontinence, poor verbal output
Egocentricity, explosive affect, perseveration, excessive religiosity,
obsessional traits
Emotional placcidity, hyper-orality, altered sexual behaviour,
excessive exploration of environment (hyper-metamorphosis)




<<<PAGE 60>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

48

Table 4.9: Phases in Cocaine Withdrawal Syndrome
Phase
I (Crash phase)

Sub-stage
i
ii
iii

II

i

Duration

Clinical Features

9 hours
to
4 days
after discontinuation

Agitation, depression, anorexia,
craving +++
Fatigue, depression, sleepiness, craving +
Exhaustion, hypersomnia with intermittent
awakening, hyperphagia, craving ±
Normal sleep, improved mood, craving ±

4 to 7 days
after
discontinuation

ii
III (Extinction phase)

After 7-10 days of
discontinuation

Cocaine use disorder is commonly associated with
mood disorder, particularly major depression and
cyclothymia.

Treatment of Cocaine Overdose
The treatment of overdose consists of oxygenation,
muscle relaxants, and IV thiopentone and/or IV
diazepam (for seizures and severe anxiety).
IV propranolol, a specific antagonist of cocaineinduced sympathomimetic effects, can be helpful,
administered by a specialist. Haloperidol (or pimozide) can be used for the treatment of psychosis, as
well as for blocking the cardio-stimulatory effects of
cocaine. These must be administered very carefully
by an expert specialist.

Treatment of Chronic Cocaine Use
The management of underlying (or co-existent) psychopathology is probably the most important step in
the management of chronic cocaine use.
The pharmacological treatment includes the
use of bromocriptine (a dopaminergic agonist) and
amantadine (an antiparkinsonian) in reducing cocaine
craving.
Other useful drugs are desipramine, imipramine
and trazodone (both for reducing craving and for
antidepressant effect). The goal of the treatment is
total abstinence from cocaine use.
The psychosocial management techniques, such as
supportive psychotherapy and contingent behaviour

Anxiety, anergia, anhedonia, craving ++
No withdrawal symptoms, increased
vulnerability to relapse

therapy, are useful in the post-withdrawal treatment
and in the prevention of relapse.

AMPHETAMINE USE DISORDER
Though synthesised by Edleano in 1887, it was introduced in Medicine in 1932 as benzedrine inhaler, for
the treatment of coryza, rhinitis and asthma. Later, it
was recommended for a variety of conditions such as
narcolepsy, postencephalitic parkinsonism, obesity,
depression, and even to heighten energy and capacity to work.
Amphetamine refers to a unique chemical which
is basically phenyl-iso-propylamine or methylphenethylamine. It is a powerful CNS stimulant,
with peripheral sympathomimetic effects too. The
dextro-amphetamine isomer is nearly 3-4 times more
potent than the levo-isomer. It acts primarily on norepinephrine release in brain, along with an action on
the release of dopamine and serotonin.
Although still clinically indicated for narcolepsy
and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (and very
rarely for obesity and mild depression), one of the
commonest patterns of ‘use’ is seen amongst the
students and sports-persons to overcome the need for
sleep and fatigue. Tolerance usually develops to the
central as well as cardiovascular effects of amphetamines.
Recently, there has been a resurgence of amphetamine use in USA and Europe, with the availability of




<<<PAGE 79>>>

Schizophrenia

In the presence of acute excitement, haloperidol
5 mg IV or IM, with/without 10 mg diazepam or
50 mg of promethazine can be administered. Given
IM, chlorpromazine can cause painful injection
abscess at the injection site. It should never be given
IV, as severe hypotension can occur. It is really
important to exercise care in administering parenteral
antipsychotics to any patient, but particularly one who
is treatment (antipsychotic) naïve. Oral antipsychotics
are preferable to parenteral antipsychotic in routine
clinical practice.
A majority of patients require maintenance treatment with antipsychotics to prevent relapse. Generally,
the treatment is continued for 6 months to 1 year for
the first episode, for 1-2 years for the subsequent episodes, and for indefinite period for repeated episodes
or persistent symptoms. However, the decision regarding the duration of treatment in a particular case has to
be assessed individually by the treating psychiatrist in
consultation with the patient and family (if appropriate), in view of past history and possible risks.
To ensure drug concordance, depot antipsychotic
preparations with long duration of action can be used.
(See Table 15.5 for some common preparations of
depot antipsychotics).
Many patients require adjuvant antiparkinsonian
medication to prevent extrapyramidal side-effects;
for example, trihexiphenidyl 6 mg/day, orphenadrine
150 mg/day, procyclidine 7.5-15 mg/day. This is
particularly true if the patient is receiving an older,
typical antipsychotic (such as haloperidol). However,
at times atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone
can also cause extrapyramidal symptoms, particularly
in higher doses.
Ideally speaking, during hospitalisation, no patient
should receive anticholinergic antipar kin sonian
medication till extrapyramidal side-effects appear.
Anticholinergics can worsen cognitive function, have
an abuse potential, can cause delirium (especially
in elderly), can worsen or contribute to negative
symptoms in schizophrenia, and may increase the risk
of tardive dyskinesia. But, in routine clinical practice,
often a majority of patients do receive anticholinergics
in addition to traditional antipsychotics.

67

Antipsychotics probably act by blocking the postsynaptic dopamine (D2) receptors in the mesolimbic
system. Other receptors such as 5-HT, muscarinic
receptors and GABA are also probably important.
Atypical antipsychotics are also called as SerotoninDopamine Antagonists (SDAs) due of their action on
both dopamine and 5-HT.

Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)
Schizophrenia is not a primary indication for ECT.
The indications for ECT in schizophrenia include:
1. Catatonic stupor.
2. Uncontrolled catatonic excitement.
3. Acute exacerbation not controlled with drugs.
4. Severe side-effect with drugs, in presence of untreated schizophrenia.
Usually 8-12 ECTs are needed (although up to 18
have been given in poor responders), administered two
or three times a week.

Miscellaneous Treatments
Psychosurgery is not routinely indicated in the treatment of schizophrenia. It is a treatment which is
extremely rarely used in clinical practice. When used,
the treatment of choice is limbic leucotomy (a small
subcaudate lesion with a cingulate lesion) in some
cases with severe and very prominent depression,
anxiety or obsessional symptoms.
Severely deteriorated patients are unlikely to
benefit. The maximum benefit would be in acute
episodes, but antipsychotics are far better obviously
both in efficacy and safety.
Many other methods such as megavitamin therapy,
dialysis, malaria therapy, high dose propranolol and
insulin coma therapy have been used in past but are
no longer used in clinical practice due to either poor
evidence for efficacy and/or risks to the patient.

Psychosocial Treatment
Psychosocial treatment is an extremely important
component of comprehensive management of schizophrenia. It can be divided in following steps:
1. Psychoeducation of the patient and especially the
family/carers (with patient’s consent) regarding




<<<PAGE 104>>>

92

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

These techniques include Jacobson’s progressive
relaxation technique, yoga, pranayama, self-hypnosis, and meditation (including TM or transcendental
meditation).
3. Other Behaviour Therapies
The behaviour therapies include biofeedback and
hyperventilation control. These methods are important
adjuncts to treatment.
4. Drug Treatment
The differential response of generalised anxiety and
panic to drug treatment has lead to what is called as
the pharmacological dissection of anxiety disorders
though this differentiation has become much more
diluted recently with antidepressants used in treatment
of both conditions.
The drugs of choice for generalised anxiety disorder have traditionally been benzodiazepines, and for
panic disorder, antidepressants. Both benzodiazepines
and antidepressants are discussed in detail in Chapter
15. It is useful to begin the treatment of panic disorders
with small doses of antidepressants, usually SSRIs
(e.g. fluoxetine).
Benzodiazepines (such as alprazolam and clonazepam) are useful in short-term treatment of both
generalised anxiety and panic disorders. However,
tolerance and dependence potential limit the use of
these drugs. Several antidepressants (such as sertraline) are now licensed for treatment of anxiety and
panic disorders.
β-blockers such as propranolol and atenolol are
particularly useful in the management of anticipatory
anxiety (e.g. anxiety occurring before going on stage
or before examinations). However, due care must be
exercised in the use of propranolol in the patients with
history of asthma, bradycardia or heart block. Atenolol
does not cross the blood brain barrier and takes care
of only the peripheral symptoms of anxiety. It also has
less likelihood of causing bronchial constriction than
propranolol.
Buspirone is an anti-anxiety drug (discussed in
Chapter 15) which does not have any dependence
potential, unlike benzodiazepines. It takes about 2-3
weeks before its action is apparent. It may be prefer-

able to benzodiazepines for the long-term management
of anxiety disorder. It, however, has not much role in
the management of panic disorder.

PHOBIC DISORDER
Phobia is defined as an irrational fear of a specific
object, situation or activity, often leading to persistent
avoidance of the feared object, situation or activity.
The characteristic features of phobia are described
in Table 8.3. The common types of phobias are:
1. Agoraphobia,
2. Social phobia, and
3. Specific (Simple) phobia.

Agoraphobia
Agoraphobia is an example of irrational fear of situations. It is the commonest type of phobia encountered
in clinical practice. Women far out-number men in
suffering from agoraphobia in the Western countries.
It is characterised by an irrational fear of being
in places away from the familiar setting of home.
Although it was earlier thought to be a fear of open
spaces only, now it includes fear of open spaces, public places, crowded places, and any other place from
where there is no easy escape to a safe place.
Table 8.3: Phobia: Some Characteristic Features
1. Presence of the fear of an object, situation or activity.
2. The fear is out of proportion to the dangerousness
perceived.
3. Patient recognises the fear as irrational and unjustified (Insight is present).
4. Patient is unable to control the fear and is very
distressed by it.
5. This leads to persistent avoidance of the particular
object, situation or activity.
6. Gradually, the phobia and the phobic object become
a preoccupation with the patient, resulting in marked
distress and restriction of the freedom of mobility
(afraid to encounter the phobic object; phobic avoidance).




<<<PAGE 141>>>

Sexual Disorders

129

Table 10.3: Sexual Dysfunctions Caused by Drugs
Drugs
I.

Effect on
Sexual Desire

Effect on
Effect on
Erectile Function Ejaculation

Antihypertensives
1. Methyldopa
2. Clonidine
3. Propranolol
4. Thiazide diuretics
5. Spironolactone
6. Guanethidine

Inhibited
—
Inhibited
—
Inhibited
—

Impaired
Impaired
Impaired
Impaired
Impaired
Impaired

7. Hexamethonium

—

Impaired

Inhibited
Inhibited (in males)
Increased (in both sexes)

Impaired
Impaired

Impaired
Impaired

+/–

Impaired

Impaired

+/–

Impaired

Delayed ejaculation

Inhibited

Impaired

Inhibited
—
—
Increased (with low dose,
due to decrease in anxiety)
Decreased (with high dose)
—
—

Impaired
Impaired
Priapism
Impaired (with
high dose)

Retrograde and
Delayed ejaculation
—
—
—
Impaired (with high
dose)

Impaired
—

—
Delayed ejaculation

Increased (with low dose)
Inhibited

Impaired
Impaired (with
high dose)

Impaired
Impaired

Inhibited

Impaired

—

Inhibited
—

—
Impaired

—
Impaired

II. Hormonal Preparations
1. Corticosteroids
2. Oestrogens
3. Androgens
III. Psychotropic Medications
1. Tricyclic antidepressants
and MAO inhibitors
2. SSRI antidepressants
(e.g. paroxetine, fluoxetine)
3. Thioridazine
4.
5.
6.
7.

Chlorpromazine
Haloperidol
Trazodone
Barbiturates and
benzodiazepines

8. Lithium
9. Disulfiram
IV. Psychoactive Substance Use
1. Alcohol
2. Opiates and cocaine
V. Others
1. Anti-inflammatory drugs
(e.g. indomethacin)
2. L-dopa
3. Anticholinergic drugs
(e.g. trihexiphenidyl)

Impaired
Impaired
—
—
Impaired
Impaired; Retrograde
ejaculation
Impaired; Retrograde
ejaculation




<<<PAGE 148>>>

136

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The various sleep disorders are divided in 2 subtypes:
I. Dyssomnias
1. Insomnia
2. Hypersomnia
3. Disorders of sleep-wake schedule.
II. Parasomnias
1. Stage 4 sleep disorders
2. Other sleep disorders.

Dyssomnias
Dyssomnias are sleep disorders that are characterised
by disturbances in the amount, quality or timing of
sleep. These are the commonest disorders of sleep.

Insomnia
Insomnia is also known as the Disorder of Initiation
and/or Maintenance of Sleep (DIMS). Insomnia means
one or more of the following:
1. Difficulty in initiating sleep (going-off to sleep).
2. Difficulty in maintaining sleep (remaining asleep).
This can include both:
a. Frequent awakenings during the night, and
b. Early morning awakening.
3. Non-restorative sleep where despite an adequate
duration of sleep, there is a feeling of not having
rested fully (poor quality sleep).
Insomnia is very common, with nearly 15-30%
of general population complaining of a period of
insomnia per year requiring treatment. It is required for
diagnosis that sleep disturbance occurs at least three
times a week for at least 1 month, and that it causes
either marked distress or interferes with social and
occupational functioning.
Aetiology
The common causes of insomnia are listed in
Table 11.2.
A person suffering from insomnia should be differentiated from a short-sleeper, who needs less than
6 hours of sleep per night and has no symptoms or
dysfunction. A short-sleeper does not need any treatment.

Table 11.2: Common Causes of Insomnia
1. Medical illnesses
i. Any painful or uncomfortable condition
ii. Heart diseases
iii. Respiratory diseases
iv. Rheumatic and musculo-skeletal disease
v. Old age
vi. Brain stem or hypothalamic lesions
vii. Delirium
viii. PMS (Periodic movements in sleep)
2. Alcohol and drug use
i. Drug or alcohol withdrawal syndrome
ii. Delirium tremens
iii. Amphetamine or other stimulants, e.g. caffeine
iv. Chronic alcoholism
3. Current medication, e.g. fluoxetine, steroids, theophylline, propranolol
4. Psychiatric disorders
i. Mania (may not complain of decrease in sleep,
as there is often a decreased need for sleep)
ii. Major depression (difficulty in maintenance of
sleep is more prominent, although difficulty in
initiating sleep is also present)
iii. Dysthymia (difficulty in initiating sleep is characteristic)
iv. Anxiety disorder (difficulty in initiating sleep is
common)
v. Stressful life situation (may cause temporary
insomnia).
5. Idiopathic insomnia

One cause of insomnia, PMS (periodic movements in sleep) needs further mention. PMS actually
consists of two different syndromes, which often occur
together:
1. Periodic Limb Movement Disorder (PLMD), and
2. ‘Restless Legs’ Syndrome (RLS or Ekbom syndrome).
Periodic Limb Movement Disorder (PLMD)
It is characterised by sudden, repeated contraction of
one or more of muscle groups (usually of the legs)
during sleep. Often occurring bilaterally, it is followed
by partial (most commonly) or complete arousal. Since




<<<PAGE 190>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

178

Table 15.3: Side Effects of Antipsychotics
Category and
Probable Cause
Maximum with
Side Effect
(For example)
A. Autonomic Side Effects
1. Dry mouth
Muscarinic Choliner- Chlorpromazine
gic blockade

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Haloperidol
Risperidone

2. Constipation

–do–

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Risperidone

3. Cycloplegia

–do–

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Risperidone

4. Mydriasis

–do–

Haloperidol
Risperidone

5. Urinary
Retention

–do–

Thioridazine;
miosis with
Chlorpromazine)
Chlorpromazine

Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Occasionally
Pilocarpine 2%
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Bulk (or sometimes other) laxatives
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Occasionally
Pilocarpine 2%
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Occasionally
Pilocarpine 2%
Usually none if only hesitancy occurs. Tolerance
develops; Rule out BHP;
Bethanethol or catheterisation for retention
Physostigmine (neostigmine does not enter
CNS); Diazepam sometimes supportive care
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; change in posture slowly. When severe,
use plasma expanders,
raise leg, supportive
measures.
Decrease dose. If severe,
change medication.
Decrease dose. If severe,
change medication.

6. Delirium (central –do–
anticholinergic
syndrome)

Haloperidol
Risperidone

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Risperidone

7. Orthostatic
hypotension

α1 Adrenergic
blockade

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Aripiprazole

8. Impotence

–do–

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol

9. Impaired
–do–
Thioridazine
ejaculation
B. Extra-pyramidal Side Effects (EPSE)
1. Parkinsonian
Dopaminergic (D2) Haloperidol
syndrome
receptor blockade in
(esp. tremor)
striatal areas
2. Akathisia (motor –do–
–do–
restlessness)

Haloperidol

Clozapine
Quetiapine
Aripiprazole
Clozapine
Quetiapine

Antiparkisonian medication for treatment; also
for prevention if needed.
Change of medication or
reduction; Beta-blockers
such as Propranolol; Benzodiazepines
Contd...




<<<PAGE 202>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

190

Table 15.8: Blood Lithium Levels
(in treatment of bipolar disorder)
• Therapeutic levels = 0.6-1.2 mEq/L (For the treatment of acute mania)
• Prophylactic levels = 0.6-1.0 mEq/L (For relapse
prevention in bipolar disorder)
• Toxic lithium levels > 2.0 mEq/L

given in 1-3 doses. Ideally, the treatment is started
after serial lithium estimation, conducted after a loading dose of 600 mg or 900 mg of lithium carbonate,
to determine pharmacokinetics. However, this method
is much less frequently practiced these days.
During treatment it is essential to estimate blood
lithium levels at regular intervals (usually 3 monthly)
(Table 15.8). The blood sample for estimation is
taken 12 hours after the last lithium dose. If any
changes are made in lithium dosage, the next blood
level is estimated after at least 5-7 days of the last
change.
When stopping lithium treatment (except in cases
of lithium toxicity), it is desirable to gradually taper
the dose of lithium over several days or weeks in order
to minimise the risk of early relapse on discontinuation.
There is evidence from several studies that lithium
substantially reduces the risk of suicide in bipolar
disorder; however, it has a narrow margin of safety
and it is important to remember this particularly in
patient with active ideas or plans of suicide.

Side Effects
Adverse effects are common and toxicity can occur
easily, if blood levels reach about 2.0 mEq/L; lifethreatening intoxication occurs, if levels reach about
3.5 mEq/L. In acute administration, toxicity is primarily neurological whilst during maintenance therapy
renal side effects are the commonest.
The common side effects are listed below:
I. Neurological
1. Tremor: This is the commonest side effect,
occurring in up to 50% of patients. Treatment is

by decreasing the dose of lithium or by adding
propranolol.
2. Muscular weakness.
3. Cogwheel rigidity (mild).
4. Seizures (decreased threshold).
5. Neurotoxicity: The important features include
delirium, cerebellar signs, abnormal involuntary
movements, seizures, and later coma. In some
individuals, toxicity may occur even within the
therapeutic range. The treatment of choice for
acute toxicity is haemodialysis.
II. Renal
The renal side effects occur in about 10-50% of all
patients on maintenance lithium therapy. Some of the
features include:
1. Polyuria, polydipsia.
2. Tubular changes.
3. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
4. Nephrotic syndrome.
III. Cardiovascular
The effects on heart are similar to those of hypokalaemia.
The commonest ECG change is T-wave depression.
IV. Endocrine
1. Goitre.
2. Hypothyroidism.
3. Abnormal thyroid function (30-40%).
4. Weight gain (pedal oedema is also common).
V. Gastrointestinal
These side effects include nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea,
metallic taste and abdominal pain.
VI. Dermatological
These dermatological side effects include acneiform
eruptions, papular eruptions and exacerbation of
psoriasis.
VII. Side effects during pregnancy and lactation
1. Teratogenic (possibly).
2. Increased incidence of Ebstein’s anomaly (distortion and downward displacement of tricuspid
valve in the right ventricle), when taken in the first
trimester.
3. Secreted in milk with 30-100% of the maternal
blood lithium levels. Lithium can therefore cause
toxicity in the infant.




<<<PAGE 206>>>

194

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Cyclic Ethers
An example is paraldehyde. It is not used commonly
as it is not very effective and is also dependence
producing.
Others
Antipsychotics (such as thioridazine, flupentixol,
olanzapine, quetiapine) and antidepressants (such as
doxepine) have sometimes been used for the treatment
of severe, intractable anxiety. However, antipsychotics
are not the drugs of first choice and should be used
with extreme discretion (with balancing of risks and
benefits) when all other drugs have failed to benefit.
Antidepressants (such as SSRIs, SNRIs and Mirtazapine) have recently emerged as treatments of choice
in several anxiety disorders including generalised
anxiety disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, panic
disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder. There is
some data to support that smaller starting doses are
better as anxiety symptoms may worsen initially in
treatment.
Beta (β) Blockers
An example is propranolol which is particularly effective in treatment of peripheral somatic manifestations
of anxiety. It is also helpful in treatment of anticipatory anxiety and situational anxiety. Propranolol can
be used either alone or along with benzodiazepines.
β-blockers are not treatments of first choice in the
treatment of psychic or psychological manifestations
of anxiety.
Propranolol is contraindicated in patients with
bronchial asthma and cardiac conditions. It should be
used with caution in patients of age 40 and above. The
usual dose is 40-240 mg/day, administered in divided
doses.

Benzodiazepines
Since the discovery of chlordiazepoxide in 1957 by
Sternbach, benzodiazepines have replaced other antianxiety drugs and hypnotics though SSRIs are now
gradually becoming drugs of first choice in management of anxiety disorders.
The benzodiazepines can be classified according
to their elimination half-lives (Table 15.9).

Indications
The indications for use of benzodiazepines include
the following:
1. Generalised anxiety disorder; adjustment disorder
with anxious mood (Short-term use)
2. Panic disorder, agoraphobia, and school phobia (particularly alprazolam and clonazepam;
short-term use, along with antidepressants)
3. Agitated depression (short-term use, along with
antidepressants, for first 1-2 weeks)
4. Short-term treatment of insomnia
5. Stage 4 NREM-sleep disorders such as enuresis,
somnambulism (diazepam reduces duration of
Stage 4 NREM-sleep)
6. Nightmares (diazepam also reduces the REMsleep duration).
7. Pre-medication in anaesthesia (intravenous
lorazepam, midazolam, or diazepam)
8. Anticonvulsant use (drugs of choice for status epilepticus, myoclonic seizures and certain infantile
spasms)
9. To produce skeletal muscle relaxation (e.g. in
tetanus, cerebral palsy)
10. Treatment of alcohol and other drug withdrawal
syndromes
11. For minor surgical, endoscopic or obstetric procedures
12. Acute mania (lorazepam, usually with lithium or
atypical antipsychotics).
13. Antipsychotic-induced akathisia
14. Emergency management of acute psycho ses
(IV lorazepam, along with parenteral antipsychotics).
15. Narcoanalysis or abreaction (IV diazepam)
Whenever administered, benzodiazepines should
not be ordinarily used for more than 2-4 weeks at a
time; otherwise risk of dependence is quite high and
tolerance occurs.
Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of action of benzodiazepines is
not clear. The discovery of the benzodiazepine receptors in 1977 shed some light on the mode of action
(Fig. 15.1).




<<<PAGE 271>>>

Index
Pressure of speech 59
Pre-treatment evaluation 200
Prevention of Illicit Traffic in NDPS Act,
1988 233
Primary
delusions 56
process thinking 205, 206
transexualism 121
Problem-solving skills 216
Prochlorperazine 66
Prodromal symptoms of schizophrenia 59
Prognostic factors in
mood disorders 74
schizophrenia 62
Promethazine 67, 228
Propranolol 48, 67, 92, 194
Proverb testing 14
Pseudoseizures 228
Pseudodementia 23
Pseudohallucination 13
Pseudo-hermaphroditism 123
Pseudologia fantastica 120
Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia 60, 117
Pseudoseizures 100
Pseudo-transexualism 122
Psychiatric
emergency 221
intensive care unit 228
interview 5
rehabilitation 219
Psychiatry in medicine 149
Psychic determinism 206
Psychoactive substances 35
Psychoanalytic
psychotherapy 80, 98
theories 75
Psychoanalytical psychotherapy 213
Psychoanalytically-oriented psychotherapy 214
Psychodynamic theory 90, 93, 96
Psychodynamic theory of
dissociative disorder 103
obsessive compulsive disorder 97
Psychodynamically oriented psychotherapy 94
Psychoeducation 67, 144
Psychogenic
pain disorder 109
stupor 225, 226
vomiting 145
Psychological
theories 64
treatments 213

Psychomotor activity 70, 71
Psychopath 115
Psychopharmacology 172-198
Psychosexual stages of development 211
Psychosis 83, 89
Psychosocial
crises 228
rehabilitation 42, 45, 68
therapies 75, 213
treatment 65, 67, 79
Psychosomatic disorders 146
Psychosurgery 67, 79, 97, 98, 203
Psychotherapy 41, 87, 91, 98, 104, 110,
143, 144, 165, 213
Psychotic
disorders 83
features 70-72
Psychotropic drug 172
Punishment 215
Pyromania 119

Q
Quetiapine 29, 66, 169, 188

R
Rapid
cyclers 74
cycling 73
Rapport 11
Reaction to stress and adjustment disorders 111
Reactive psychosis 87
Reception order
on application 232
without application 232
Receptive language disorder 163
Recurrent depressive disorder 73
Refractory depression 185
Regression in service of ego 207
Rejection sensitivity 81
Relaxation
techniques 91, 94, 107, 137, 148
therapies 218
training 214
Release hallucinations 28
Remote memory 14
REM-sleep 133
Repression 90, 93, 205, 207
Reserpine 65
Residual schizophrenia 59
Restless legs’ syndrome 136, 137
Rett’s syndrome 165

259
Reversible dementias 26
Risperidone 26, 28-30, 66, 149, 165, 168
Rivastigmine 25, 26

S
Satyriasis 127
Schizoaffective disorder 61, 76, 87
Schizoid
fantasy 209
personality disorder 114
Schizophrenia 54, 76, 105
Schizophrenia—clinical types 58
Schizophreniform disorder 60
Schizotypal disorder 115
Schneider’s first rank symptoms 54, 56
Second generation antipsychotics 66, 175
Secondary
delusions 56
depression 82
gain 99
mania 82
process thinking 205, 206
transexualism 121
Sedative-hypnotic use disorder 51
Selective
amnesia 101
serotonin reuptake inhibitors 77
Seman’s technique 131
Sensate focus technique 131
Sensory
deprivation 28
disorders 100
Serotonin 64
dopamine antagonists 67
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
77
syndrome 185
Sertraline 26, 30, 92, 95
Severe depression 199, 228
Sex reassignment surgery 122
Sexual
and marital history 9
anhedonia 127
aversion disorder 126
desire disorders 126
disorders 121, 130
dysfunctions 126, 129
masochism 125
maturation disorder 123
pain disorders 130
relationship disorder 124
response cycle 127
sadism 125


