<<<PAGE 60>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

48

Table 4.9: Phases in Cocaine Withdrawal Syndrome
Phase
I (Crash phase)

Sub-stage
i
ii
iii

II

i

Duration

Clinical Features

9 hours
to
4 days
after discontinuation

Agitation, depression, anorexia,
craving +++
Fatigue, depression, sleepiness, craving +
Exhaustion, hypersomnia with intermittent
awakening, hyperphagia, craving ±
Normal sleep, improved mood, craving ±

4 to 7 days
after
discontinuation

ii
III (Extinction phase)

After 7-10 days of
discontinuation

Cocaine use disorder is commonly associated with
mood disorder, particularly major depression and
cyclothymia.

Treatment of Cocaine Overdose
The treatment of overdose consists of oxygenation,
muscle relaxants, and IV thiopentone and/or IV
diazepam (for seizures and severe anxiety).
IV propranolol, a specific antagonist of cocaineinduced sympathomimetic effects, can be helpful,
administered by a specialist. Haloperidol (or pimozide) can be used for the treatment of psychosis, as
well as for blocking the cardio-stimulatory effects of
cocaine. These must be administered very carefully
by an expert specialist.

Treatment of Chronic Cocaine Use
The management of underlying (or co-existent) psychopathology is probably the most important step in
the management of chronic cocaine use.
The pharmacological treatment includes the
use of bromocriptine (a dopaminergic agonist) and
amantadine (an antiparkinsonian) in reducing cocaine
craving.
Other useful drugs are desipramine, imipramine
and trazodone (both for reducing craving and for
antidepressant effect). The goal of the treatment is
total abstinence from cocaine use.
The psychosocial management techniques, such as
supportive psychotherapy and contingent behaviour

Anxiety, anergia, anhedonia, craving ++
No withdrawal symptoms, increased
vulnerability to relapse

therapy, are useful in the post-withdrawal treatment
and in the prevention of relapse.

AMPHETAMINE USE DISORDER
Though synthesised by Edleano in 1887, it was introduced in Medicine in 1932 as benzedrine inhaler, for
the treatment of coryza, rhinitis and asthma. Later, it
was recommended for a variety of conditions such as
narcolepsy, postencephalitic parkinsonism, obesity,
depression, and even to heighten energy and capacity to work.
Amphetamine refers to a unique chemical which
is basically phenyl-iso-propylamine or methylphenethylamine. It is a powerful CNS stimulant,
with peripheral sympathomimetic effects too. The
dextro-amphetamine isomer is nearly 3-4 times more
potent than the levo-isomer. It acts primarily on norepinephrine release in brain, along with an action on
the release of dopamine and serotonin.
Although still clinically indicated for narcolepsy
and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (and very
rarely for obesity and mild depression), one of the
commonest patterns of ‘use’ is seen amongst the
students and sports-persons to overcome the need for
sleep and fatigue. Tolerance usually develops to the
central as well as cardiovascular effects of amphetamines.
Recently, there has been a resurgence of amphetamine use in USA and Europe, with the availability of




<<<PAGE 78>>>

66

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry
Table 5.7: Antipsychotic Dose in Schizophrenia

Drug

Oral Dose Range
(mg/day)

Parenteral Dose
(mg/day)

Equivalent Oral Dose*
(Equal to 100 mg CPZ)

A. Typical/Traditional/First Generation Antipsychotics
1. Chlorpromazine (CPZ)
300-1000
50-100 IM
100
2. Flupentixol
3-18
—
2
3. Haloperidol
5-30
5-10 IM
2-3
4. Loxapine
25-250
—
10
5. Pimozide
4-12
—
2
6. Prochlorperazine
45-150
40-80 IM
15
7. Sulpiride
400-2400
—
200
8. Thioridazine
300-600
—
100
9. Trifluoperazine
15-50
1-5 IM
5
10. Triflupromazine
100-400
30-60 IM
25
11. Zuclopenthixol
25-150
50-100 IM
25
B. Atypical/Second Generation Antipsychotics
12. Amisulpride
400-1200
—
—
13. Aripiprazole
5-30
5.25-15 IM
—
14. Clozapine
50-900
—
50
15. Olanzapine
5-20
2.5-10 IM
2-3
16. Paliperidone
3-12
—
—
17. Quetiapine
150-800
—
50-100
18. Risperidone
2-16
—
0.5-1.0
19. Ziprasidone
40-160
—
20
20. Zotepine
75-300
—
—
*Equivalent doses are at best approximations only. The dose in a particular patient should be chosen on an individualised basis by the treating professional.

aripiprazole, and ziprasidone, are more commonly
used than the older typical (or first generation) antipsychotics such as trifluoperazine and haloperidol, in
acute stages. Atypical antipsychotics are also more
useful when negative symptoms are prominent, e.g.
in chronic schizophrenia.
Clozapine, another atypical antipsychotic, is
available in the Indian market. The clinical trials have
shown that clozapine is effective in about 30% of
patients who had no beneficial response to traditional
(typical and atypical) antipsychotics. It is an effective
drug; however, as it can cause agranulocytosis and
seizures as side-effects, it should be used with caution,
with regular WBC and neutrophil counts as advised
by the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC).

Drug treatment is usually administered in the
outpatient setting as:
1. There are very few number of psychiatric beds in
India,
2. Majorities of families are willing to care for the
patients at home, and
3. Majority of patients do not require hospitalisation.
However, hospitalisation is indicated if there is:
1. Neglect of food and water intake,
2. Danger to self or others,
3. Poor treatment adherence,
4. Significant neglect of self-care, or
5. Lack of social support with evidence of abovementioned risks.




<<<PAGE 93>>>

Mood Disorders

Depressive Equivalents
These are certain conditions which, though not a part
of the depressive syndrome, are still thought be comparable to depression (affective spectrum disorders).
Some of these show clinical response to antidepressant
treatment whilst others appear related to depression
due to multiple complex reasons.
These disorders include agoraphobia, chronic pain,
paraesthesias, panic attacks, alcoholism, drug abuse,
hysteria, obsessive compulsive disorder and eating
disorders (anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa).
This term presently has an uncertain nosological
status.

Atypical Depression(s)
These are depressive syndromes which do not present
with classical or typical features of depression. These
include:
1. Depression with predominant anxiety: The anxiety here is far more subjective, in contrast to the
objective restlessness seen in agitated depression.
The treatment is usually by antidepressants.
2. Phobic-anxiety-depersonalisation syndrome (PAD
syndrome): Described by Roth, this syndrome
is commoner in women aged 20-40 years. It
is characterised by diffuse anxiety and panic
attacks, multiple phobias (such as agoraphobia and
claustrophobia), depersonalisation, derealisation
and depressive features. The treatment is usually
by antidepressants. It is recognised that ECTs may
make the condition worse.
3. Non-endogenous depression: Atypical depression
of the non-endogenous type is characterised by
absence of neurotic traits and significant stressful
life events. This differentiates it from neurotic or
reactive depression.
4. Hysteroid-dysphoric depression: In this type, there
are marked fluctuations of mood, ranging from
near normal to severe depression. Any stress leads
to an abrupt onset of depression, with marked anxiety, pallor and changes in physical appearance.
The person usually has histrionic personality traits
or disorder.

81

Atypical depression usually has an onset in
the teens and runs a chronic course. Hypersomnia,
hyperphagia, reactive nature of symptoms, rejection
sensitivity and lethargy (leaden paralysis) are some
of the characteristic features.
The importance of diagnosing atypical depression
lies in the fact that many of these patients respond
better to MAOIs (monoamine oxidase inhibitors),
although SSRIs (Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors) and TCAs (Tricyclic Antidepressants) should be
tried first.

Double Depression
This is a major depressive episode (usually acute),
superimposed on an underlying dysthymia or neurotic
depression (usually chronic). The response to treatment is usually poor.

Agitated Depression
This is a type of severe depression with marked motor
restlessness or agitation. It is either seen alone or along
with involutional melancholia. It is more common
after the age of 40 years.
The treatment of agitated depression usually
requires addition of antipsychotics or benzodiazepines
to the antidepressant therapy.

Seasonal Mood Disorder
This is either a bipolar mood disorder or recurrent
depressive episode which tends to occur in the same
season on each occasion. It is usually more commonly
seen in women.
For example, in a bipolar seasonal mood disorder,
depression would tend to occur in the same months
every time (usually winter months), while mania
would occur in the months of some other season every
episode (usually summer months).
This is thought to be due to changes in the length
of the day (and light) and its effect on hypothalamus.
The characteristic symptoms of winter depression are
dysphoria, decreased activity and atypical depressive
symptoms (increased fatigue, increased sleep, increased appetite and weight, and carbohydrate craving).




<<<PAGE 97>>>

Other Psychotic Disorders

Differential Diagnosis
The conditions from which delusional disorders
should be differentiated include paranoid schizophrenia, mania, depression, paranoid personality disorder and organic delusional disorder (see Table 7.2).

Treatment
1. Antipsychotics are used to control agitation and
treat the psychotic features. For MHP (monosymptomatic hypochondriacal psychosis) or delusional
disorder with somatic (hypochondriacal) delusions, pimozide has classically been the drug of
choice, though other antipsychotics with or without antidepressants have been used as effectively.
Recently, the use of pimozide has declined sharply
due to concerns regarding its cardiac adverse
effects.
2. Supportive psychotherapy.
3. Antidepressants (such as fluoxetine) and/or ECT
may be needed for secondary depression.

INDUCED DELUSIONAL DISORDER
This is an uncommon delusional disorder characterised by a sharing of delusions between usually two
(folie å deux) or occasionally more persons (folie
å trios, folie å quatre, folie å famille), who usually
have a closely knit emotional bond. Only one person
usually has authentic delusions due to an underlying
psychiatric disorder, most often schizophrenia or
delusional disorder.
On separation of the two, the dependent individual
may give up his/her delusions and the patient with the
primary delusions should then be treated appropriately.

ACUTE AND TRANSIENT PSYCHOTIC
DISORDERS
A large number of psychiatrists, especially from the
developing countries such as India and Africa, reported that many patients developed an acute psychotic
disorder that neither followed the classical course
of schizophrenia nor resembled mood disorders in

85

clinical picture, and usually had a better prognosis
than schizophrenia.
In a study conducted by the Indian Council of
Medical Research (ICMR) on acute psychoses (1989),
the following findings were apparent:
1. 85% of these patients exhibited full recovery.
2. Recovery occurred in several cases even in the
absence of treatment.
3. 50% of patients had a psychological stressor and
20% of patients had a somatic stressor before the
onset of illness.
4. The onset occurred in less than 48 hours in 50%
of cases.
ICD-10 has included a new category of ‘acute and
transient psychotic disorders’ (ATPD) in the section on
‘schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders’.
According to ICD-10, these disorders have an
abrupt (less than 48 hours) or acute (less than 2 weeks)
onset. The onset is often associated with an easily identifiable acute stress (though not necessarily always so)
that would be regarded as stressful to most people in
similar circumstances, within the culture of the person
concerned. The typical events would include bereavement, unexpected loss of partner or job, marriage, or
the psychological trauma of combat, terrorism, and
torture. Longstanding difficulties or problems are not
included here as stressful.
Acute onset is probably associated with a good
outcome, and it seems that more abrupt the onset, the
better is the outcome. A complete recovery usually
occurs within 2-3 months, often even much earlier.
These disorders should not satisfy the criteria for
organic mental disorders, psychoactive substance use
disorders, schizophrenia, or mood disorders.
The subtypes of acute and transient psychotic
disorders include the following:
1. Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder without
symptoms of schizophrenia.
2. Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder with symptoms of schizophrenia.
3. Acute schizophrenia-like psychotic disorder.
4. Other acute predominantly delusional psychotic
disorders.




<<<PAGE 104>>>

92

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

These techniques include Jacobson’s progressive
relaxation technique, yoga, pranayama, self-hypnosis, and meditation (including TM or transcendental
meditation).
3. Other Behaviour Therapies
The behaviour therapies include biofeedback and
hyperventilation control. These methods are important
adjuncts to treatment.
4. Drug Treatment
The differential response of generalised anxiety and
panic to drug treatment has lead to what is called as
the pharmacological dissection of anxiety disorders
though this differentiation has become much more
diluted recently with antidepressants used in treatment
of both conditions.
The drugs of choice for generalised anxiety disorder have traditionally been benzodiazepines, and for
panic disorder, antidepressants. Both benzodiazepines
and antidepressants are discussed in detail in Chapter
15. It is useful to begin the treatment of panic disorders
with small doses of antidepressants, usually SSRIs
(e.g. fluoxetine).
Benzodiazepines (such as alprazolam and clonazepam) are useful in short-term treatment of both
generalised anxiety and panic disorders. However,
tolerance and dependence potential limit the use of
these drugs. Several antidepressants (such as sertraline) are now licensed for treatment of anxiety and
panic disorders.
β-blockers such as propranolol and atenolol are
particularly useful in the management of anticipatory
anxiety (e.g. anxiety occurring before going on stage
or before examinations). However, due care must be
exercised in the use of propranolol in the patients with
history of asthma, bradycardia or heart block. Atenolol
does not cross the blood brain barrier and takes care
of only the peripheral symptoms of anxiety. It also has
less likelihood of causing bronchial constriction than
propranolol.
Buspirone is an anti-anxiety drug (discussed in
Chapter 15) which does not have any dependence
potential, unlike benzodiazepines. It takes about 2-3
weeks before its action is apparent. It may be prefer-

able to benzodiazepines for the long-term management
of anxiety disorder. It, however, has not much role in
the management of panic disorder.

PHOBIC DISORDER
Phobia is defined as an irrational fear of a specific
object, situation or activity, often leading to persistent
avoidance of the feared object, situation or activity.
The characteristic features of phobia are described
in Table 8.3. The common types of phobias are:
1. Agoraphobia,
2. Social phobia, and
3. Specific (Simple) phobia.

Agoraphobia
Agoraphobia is an example of irrational fear of situations. It is the commonest type of phobia encountered
in clinical practice. Women far out-number men in
suffering from agoraphobia in the Western countries.
It is characterised by an irrational fear of being
in places away from the familiar setting of home.
Although it was earlier thought to be a fear of open
spaces only, now it includes fear of open spaces, public places, crowded places, and any other place from
where there is no easy escape to a safe place.
Table 8.3: Phobia: Some Characteristic Features
1. Presence of the fear of an object, situation or activity.
2. The fear is out of proportion to the dangerousness
perceived.
3. Patient recognises the fear as irrational and unjustified (Insight is present).
4. Patient is unable to control the fear and is very
distressed by it.
5. This leads to persistent avoidance of the particular
object, situation or activity.
6. Gradually, the phobia and the phobic object become
a preoccupation with the patient, resulting in marked
distress and restriction of the freedom of mobility
(afraid to encounter the phobic object; phobic avoidance).




<<<PAGE 105>>>

Neurotic, Stress-related and Somatoform Disorders

In fact, the patient is afraid of all the places or
situations from where escape may be perceived to be
difficult or help may not be available, if he suddenly
develops embarrassing or incapacitating symptoms.
These embarrassing or incapacitating symptoms are
the classical symptoms of panic.
A full-blown panic attack may occur (agoraphobia
with panic disorder) or only a few symptoms (such
as dizziness or tachycardia) may occur (agoraphobia
without panic disorder).
As the agoraphobia increases in severity, there is
a gradual restriction in the normal day-to-day activities. The activities may become so severely restricted
that the person becomes self-imprisoned at his home.
One or two persons (usually close relations or friends)
may be relied upon, with whom the patient can leave
home. Hence, the patient becomes severely dependent
on these phobic companion(s).

Social Phobia
This is an example of irrational fear of activities or
social interaction, characterised by an irrational fear of
performing activities in the presence of other people
or interacting with others. The patient is afraid of his
own actions being viewed by others critically, resulting in embarrassment or humiliation.
There is marked distress and disturbance in routine daily functioning. Some of the examples include
fear of blushing (erythrophobia), eating in company
of others, public speaking, public performance (e.g.
on stage), participating in groups, writing in public
(e.g. signing a check), speaking to strangers (e.g. for
asking for directions), dating, speaking to authority
figures, and urinating in a public lavatory (shy bladder). Sometimes, alcohol (and sometimes, other drugs)
is used to overcome the anxiety occurring in social
situations.

Specific (Simple) Phobia
In contrast to agoraphobia and social phobia where the
stimuli are generalised, in specific phobia the stimulus
is usually well circumscribed. This is an example of
irrational fear of objects or situations.

93

Specific phobia is characterised by an irrational
fear of a specified object or situation. Anticipatory
anxiety leads to persistent avoidant behaviour, while
confrontation with the avoided object or situation leads
to panic attacks. Gradually, the phobia usually spreads
to other objects and situations.
The disorder is diagnosed only if there is marked
distress and/or disturbance in daily functioning, in
addition to fear and avoidance of the specified object
or situation. Some of the examples of simple phobia
include acrophobia (fear of high places), zoophobia
(fear of animals), xenophobia (fear of strangers),
algophobia (fear of pain), and claustrophobia (fear
of closed places).
The list of specific phobias is virtually endless.

Course
Phobias are generally more common in women with
an onset in late second decade or early third decade.
Typically, the onset is sudden without any apparent
cause. The course is usually chronic with gradually
increasing restriction of daily activities. Sometimes,
phobias are spontaneously remitting.

Aetiology
Psychodynamic Theory
As discussed in the aetiology of anxiety disorders,
anxiety is usually dealt with the defense mechanism
of repression. When repression fails to function
adequately, other secondary defense mechanisms of
ego come into action.
In phobia, this secondary defense mechanism
is displacement. By using displacement, anxiety is
transferred from a really dangerous or frightening
object to a neutral object. These two objects are often
connected by symbolic associations.
The neutral object chosen unconsciously is the
one which can be easily avoided in day-to-day life,
in contrast to the frightening object (frightening to the
patient only, due to oedipal genital drives).
In agoraphobia, loss of parents in childhood and
separation anxiety have been theorised to contribute
to causation.




<<<PAGE 110>>>

98

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Treatment
Psychotherapy
1. Psychoanalytic psychotherapy is used in certain
selected patients, who are psychologically oriented.
2. Supportive psychotherapy is an important adjunct to other modes of treatment. Supportive
psychotherapy is also needed by the family
members.

Behaviour Therapy and Cognitive
Behaviour Therapy
Behaviour modification is an effective mode of
therapy, with a success rate as high as 80%, especially
for the compulsive acts. It is customary these days to
combine CBT with BT at most centres.
The techniques used are listed below (They are
described in Chapter 18):
i. Thought-stopping (and its modifications).
ii. Response prevention.
iii. Systematic desensitisation.
iv. Modelling.

Drug Treatment
1. Benzodiazepines (e.g. alprazolam, clonazepam)
have a limited role in controlling anxiety as
adjuncts and should be used very sparingly.
2. Antidepressants: Some patients may improve
dramatically with specific serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs).
Clomipramine (75-300 mg/day), a nonspecific
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SRI), was the first
drug used effectively in the treatment of OCD.
The response is better in the presence of depressive symptoms, but many patients with pure
OCD also improve substantially.
Fluoxetine (20-80 mg/day) is a good alternative to clomipramine and often preferred these
days for its better side-effect profile. Fluvoxamine (50-200 mg/day) is marketed as a specific
anti-obsessional SSRI drug, whilst paroxetine

(20-40 mg/day) and sertraline (50-200 mg/day)
are also effective in some patients.
3. Antipsychotics: These are occasionally used in
low doses (e.g. haloperidol, risperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole, pimozide) in the treatment
of severe, disabling anxiety.
4. Buspirone has also been used beneficially as
an adjunct for augmentation of SSRIs, in some
patients.

Electroconvulsive Therapy
In presence of severe depression with OCD, ECT may
be needed. ECT is particularly indicated when there is
a risk of suicide and/or when there is a poor response
to the other modes of treatment. However, ECT is not
the treatment of first choice in OCD.

Psychosurgery
Psychosurgery can be used in treatment of OCD that
has become intractable, and is not responding to other
methods of treatment. It is worth mentioning that
psychosurgery is only available as a treatment choice
at a very few centres throughout the world.
The best responders are usually those who have
significant associated depression, although pure
obsessives also do respond. The main benefit is the
marked reduction in associated distress and severe
anxiety.
The procedures which can be employed are:
i. Stereotactic limbic leucotomy.
ii. Stereotactic subcaudate tractotomy.
Psychosurgery is usually followed by intensive
behaviour therapy aimed at rehabilitation. However,
with the easy availability of SSRIs, and a good response of OCD symptoms to SSRIs and other pharmacological measures, psychosurgery is very rarely
used in the treatment of OCD.
Very often, a comprehensive treatment of OCD
requires that multiple treatment modalities (e.g. drug
treatment and BT/CBT) be combined in a specific
manner, suitable to the particular patient being treated
at the time.




<<<PAGE 181>>>

Child Psychiatry

ziprasidone, quetiapine, and sulpiride. Treatment
options are often chosen based on adverse effect
profile of each drug (which adverse effects to avoid).
SSRIs (such as fluoxetine) have been used for the
treatment of co-morbid obsessive compulsive symptoms.
In the resistant cases or in case of severe sideeffects, pimozide or clonidine can be used under
expert supervision. Behaviour therapy can sometimes
be used, as an adjunct.

NON-ORGANIC ENURESIS
Enuresis is repetitive voiding of urine, either during
the day or night, at inappropriate places. This state of
affairs is normal in infancy.
Most children achieve bladder control by the age
of three years. By the age of 5 years, there are still
about 7% of children who wet their bed. Technically,
enuresis is diagnosed only after 5 years of age (and
at least 4 years of mental age).
Enuresis can be either of:
1. Primary type, where bladder control has never
been achieved, or
2. Secondary type, where enuresis emerges after a
period of bladder control (at least one year).
The majority (about 80%) of children with enuresis
have nocturnal bed wetting only. Non-organic enuresis
is more common (about two times) in males.

Aetiology
The exact cause of enuresis is not known. A variety
of factors, which are implicated in its causation, are
largely biopsychosocial. About 75% of children with
enuresis have a first degree relative with history of
enuresis.
The most commonly occurring factors, however,
are psychosocial, such as emotional disturbances, insecurity, sibling rivalry, death of a parent. An organic
cause must be looked for in children with diurnal
enuresis (15% of all cases of diurnal enuresis) and
adolescents with enuresis. The organic causes are
present in about 5% of cases and include worm infes-

169

tation, spina bifida, neurogenic bladder, urinary tract
infection, diabetes mellitus, and seizure disorder.
In secondary enuresis, the age of onset is usually
5-8 years. Enuresis tends to remit spontaneously and
only 1% of children with enuresis continue to have
the disorder in adulthood.

Treatment
The management consists of one or more of the following measures:
1. Restriction of fluid intake after 8 PM, in nocturnal
enuresis.
2. Bladder training during daytime, aimed at increasing the holding-time of bladder. This is carried out
in a step-by-step manner using positive reinforcements.
3. Interruption of sleep before the expected time of
bed wetting. The child should be fully woken up
and made aware of passing of urine.
4. Conditioning devices, which cause an alarm to
sound as soon as the voided urine touches the bedsheet. It is important to check the child’s hearing
before starting treatment. The alarm causes inhibition of further micturition and the child awakens. If
properly used, it is an effective method of therapy.
5. Supportive psychotherapy for the child, parents
and the whole family is often needed.
6. Pharmacotherapy: Drug treatment is usually not
a preferred option for the treatment of enuresis.
The drug of choice in those who need pharmacotherapy has traditionally been a tricyclic antidepressant, usually imipramine (25-75 mg/day). It
probably acts by its anticholinergic effect as well as
by decreasing the deep sleep (stage 4 NREM-sleep)
period. However, there is a risk of sudden death in
some children with the use of tricyclic antidepressants.
It should never be used for children under the age of
6 years.
Intranasal desmopressin has been found useful
in some patients and is a good alternative. The other
drugs that have been used for this purpose include
diazepam, anticholinergics, amphetamines, placebos,
but none have shown a good therapeutic response.




<<<PAGE 188>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

176

Table 15.2: Classification and Properties of Antipsychotics
Drugs

Oral Dose
(mg/d)

Parenteral
Dose (mg)

I. Phenothiazines
A. Aliphatics
1. Chlorpromazine
300-1000 50-100 IM
(CPZ)
2. Triflupromazine
100-400
30-60 IM
B. Piperidines
____
1. Mesoridazine
100-400
____
2. Thioridazine
300-600
C. Piperazines
____
1. Fluphenazine
2-20
2. Prochlorperazine
45-150
40-80 IM
3. Trifluoperazine
15-50
1-5 IM
II. Thioxanthenes
A. Aliphatics
1. Chlorprothixene
75-600
25-75 IM
B. Piperazines
____
1. Flupentixol
3-18
2. Thiothixene
6-60
2-6 IM
3. Zuclopenthixol
25-150
50-100 IM
III. Butyrophenones
1. Haloperidol
5-30
5-10 IM
2. Trifluperidol
0.5-8.0
2.5-5.0 IM
IV. Diphenylbutylpiperidines
____
1. Penfluridol
20-60 mg
weekly
____
2. Pimozide
4-20
V. Indolic Derivatives (Dihydroindolones)
____
1. Molindone
50-225

#

Sedation

Some Common Adverse Effects**
Hypotension
EPSE* Weight
Gain

Increased
Prolactin

+++

+++

+

++

++

++

++

++

++

++

++
+++

+
++

+
+

++
++

+
+

+
+
+

+
+
+

+++
+++
+++

+
+
+

+++
+++
+++

+++

++

++

++

++

+
+
++

+
++
++

++
++
++

++
++
++

++
++
+++

+
±

+
±

+++
+++

+
+

+++
++

+

+

++

+

++

+

+

++

+

+++

++

0

+

±

±

++

++

+

+++

+++

0

+++

0

+
+

+
+

+
+

+++
+++

VI. Dibenzoxapines
____
1. Loxapine
25-250
++
VII. Atypical or Second Generation Antipsychotics
A. Dibenzodiazepines
____
1. Clozapine
50-900
+++
B. Substituted Benzamides
1. Amisulpride
400-1200 ____
±
2. Sulpiride (not
400-2400 ____
±
called atypical
usually)

Contd...




<<<PAGE 192>>>

180

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Contd...
Category and
Probable Cause
Side Effect
E. Allergic Side Effects
1. Cholestatic
Hypersensitivity
Jaundice
reaction
2. Agranulocytosis —do—
(very rare)

F. Cardiac Side Effects
1. ECG Changes
Anticholinergic
(e.g. QTc
effect
prolongation)
Calcium channel
blocking effect
2. Sudden Death
Probably ventricular
(very rare)
fibrillation
G. Ocular Side Effects
1. Granular
Not known
deposits in
(Probably
cornea and lens photosensitivity
Not known
2. Pigmentary
retinopathy
resembling
retinitis
pigmentosa
H. Dermatological Side Effects
1. Contact
Allergic
dermatitis
2. Photosensitive
Probably
reaction
photosensitive
3. Blue-gray
—do—
metallic
discolouration

Maximum with
(For example)

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol

Clozapine

—do—

Change drug. Benign
course. Supportive care.
Stop drug immediately.
Treat infection. Isolation.
General supportive care.
Figastrim may be useful

Thioridazine
Pimozide

Aripiprazole

Change drug, if severe.

Not known

Not known

None

Chlorpromazine
(High doses for
long duration)
Thioridazine only
(Dose-related)

Haloperidol

Change drug.

All other antipsychotics

Never give more than
800 mg/day of thioridazine. Prevention only

Chlorpromazine
(By handling)
—do— (High doses)

—do—

Avoid handling.
Symptomatic treatment
Avoid sunlight.
Use sunscreen.
Change drug.

—do— (High doses
for long duration)

such as quinidine, anti-malarials such as quinine,
and antibiotics such as erythromycin) and/or medical
conditions (such as ischaemic heart disease, extremes
of ages).
This list of side-effects is necessarily incomplete
and it is important to read the SPC of any drug before
prescribing it in a patient.

—do—
—do—

Treatment Adherence
Many patients with schizophrenia can be uncooperative, with a poor treatment adherence (see
Table 15.4). Therefore, it may at times be difficult to
ensure adequate administration of antipsychotics on
an outpatient basis.




<<<PAGE 194>>>

182

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

of depression. The first tricyclic antidepressant (TCA)
imipramine was used in 1958 by Thomas Kuhn. It was
different from phenothiazines by only a replacement
of sulphur with an ethylene linkage. With this small
structural difference (discovered by chance), imipramine was found not effective as an antipsychotic
but instead quite beneficial in depressed patients.
Since 1958, the number of antidepressants has been
gradually increasing.
Antidepressants have no euphoriant effect when
administered to normal, non-depressed individuals.

Indications
Presently, the indications for the use of antidepressants
include:
Depression
1. Depressive episode (also called major depression,
endogenous depression)
2. Depressive episode with melancholia (with or
without ECTs)
3. Depressive episode with psychotic features (with
antipsychotics or ECTs)
4. Dysthymia (with psychotherapy)
5. Reactive depression (with psychotherapy)
6. Depressive equivalents and masked depression
(sometimes)
7. Atypical depression (e.g. MAO inhibitors)
8. Secondary depression (e.g. in hypothyroidism,
Cushing’s syndrome)
9. Abnormal grief reaction
Child Psychiatric Disorders
1. Enuresis (with or without behaviour therapy)
2. Attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity (in
low doses, after 6 years of age, when stimulant
medication is not available)
3. School phobia (sometimes, in low doses)
4. Separation anxiety disorder (in children)
5. Somnambulism
6. Night terrors
Other Psychiatric Disorders
1. Panic attacks (e.g. SSRIs)
2. Agoraphobia and social phobia
3. Obsessive compulsive disorder with or without
depression (e.g. clomipramine, SSRIs)

4. Cataplexy (associated with narcolepsy)
5. Aggression in elderly (e.g. trazodone)
6. Eating disorders (e.g. fluoxetine in bulimia nervosa)
7. Borderline personality disorder (for treatment of
depressive symptoms)
8. Trichotillomania (e.g. clomipramine; fluoxetine)
9. Depersonalisation syndrome
10. Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
11. Generalised anxiety disorder (e.g. SSRIs)
12. Nicotine dependence (e.g. bupropion is used for
treatment of craving)
13. Alcohol dependence (e.g. fluoxetine sometimes
used for treatment of craving)
Medical Disorders
1. Chronic pain (in low doses, e.g. amitriptyline,
duloxetine)
2. Migraine (as an adjuvant)

Classification
Classification and properties of antidepressants
(Table 15.6).

Pharmacokinetics
The oral dose of TCAs is incompletely though adequately absorbed. As they are highly anticholinergic
in nature, they delay gastric emptying and slow gastrointestinal motility. SSRIs are well absorbed from the
gastrointestinal tract.
These antidepressants, much like antipsychotics, are highly lipophilic and are highly protein
bound. Thus they have a large volume of distribution and tend to accumulate in areas with good blood
supply. Like antipsychotics, they are also not dialysable.
Their other pharmacokinetic properties of TCAs
are similar to those of phenothiazines. The half-life
is long, usually more than 24 hours. Although TCAs
can be administered in a single night-time dose, the
routine clinical practice is to prescribe divided doses,
at least in the initial days of treatment, to prevent
accumulated side-effects. The metabolism of TCAs is
by oxidation (hepatic microsomal enzymes) followed
by conjugation (glucoronic acid). The major metabolites of imipramine and amitriptyline (desipramine and




<<<PAGE 206>>>

194

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Cyclic Ethers
An example is paraldehyde. It is not used commonly
as it is not very effective and is also dependence
producing.
Others
Antipsychotics (such as thioridazine, flupentixol,
olanzapine, quetiapine) and antidepressants (such as
doxepine) have sometimes been used for the treatment
of severe, intractable anxiety. However, antipsychotics
are not the drugs of first choice and should be used
with extreme discretion (with balancing of risks and
benefits) when all other drugs have failed to benefit.
Antidepressants (such as SSRIs, SNRIs and Mirtazapine) have recently emerged as treatments of choice
in several anxiety disorders including generalised
anxiety disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, panic
disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder. There is
some data to support that smaller starting doses are
better as anxiety symptoms may worsen initially in
treatment.
Beta (β) Blockers
An example is propranolol which is particularly effective in treatment of peripheral somatic manifestations
of anxiety. It is also helpful in treatment of anticipatory anxiety and situational anxiety. Propranolol can
be used either alone or along with benzodiazepines.
β-blockers are not treatments of first choice in the
treatment of psychic or psychological manifestations
of anxiety.
Propranolol is contraindicated in patients with
bronchial asthma and cardiac conditions. It should be
used with caution in patients of age 40 and above. The
usual dose is 40-240 mg/day, administered in divided
doses.

Benzodiazepines
Since the discovery of chlordiazepoxide in 1957 by
Sternbach, benzodiazepines have replaced other antianxiety drugs and hypnotics though SSRIs are now
gradually becoming drugs of first choice in management of anxiety disorders.
The benzodiazepines can be classified according
to their elimination half-lives (Table 15.9).

Indications
The indications for use of benzodiazepines include
the following:
1. Generalised anxiety disorder; adjustment disorder
with anxious mood (Short-term use)
2. Panic disorder, agoraphobia, and school phobia (particularly alprazolam and clonazepam;
short-term use, along with antidepressants)
3. Agitated depression (short-term use, along with
antidepressants, for first 1-2 weeks)
4. Short-term treatment of insomnia
5. Stage 4 NREM-sleep disorders such as enuresis,
somnambulism (diazepam reduces duration of
Stage 4 NREM-sleep)
6. Nightmares (diazepam also reduces the REMsleep duration).
7. Pre-medication in anaesthesia (intravenous
lorazepam, midazolam, or diazepam)
8. Anticonvulsant use (drugs of choice for status epilepticus, myoclonic seizures and certain infantile
spasms)
9. To produce skeletal muscle relaxation (e.g. in
tetanus, cerebral palsy)
10. Treatment of alcohol and other drug withdrawal
syndromes
11. For minor surgical, endoscopic or obstetric procedures
12. Acute mania (lorazepam, usually with lithium or
atypical antipsychotics).
13. Antipsychotic-induced akathisia
14. Emergency management of acute psycho ses
(IV lorazepam, along with parenteral antipsychotics).
15. Narcoanalysis or abreaction (IV diazepam)
Whenever administered, benzodiazepines should
not be ordinarily used for more than 2-4 weeks at a
time; otherwise risk of dependence is quite high and
tolerance occurs.
Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of action of benzodiazepines is
not clear. The discovery of the benzodiazepine receptors in 1977 shed some light on the mode of action
(Fig. 15.1).




<<<PAGE 239>>>

Emergency Psychiatry

Management
Since psychogenic stupor may easily be mistaken for
organic stupor and coma, certain steps must be taken
even before a detailed examination is undertaken, to
prevent irreversible brain damage and death which
may otherwise occur. These steps should be taken in
the management of any unconscious patient.
1. Ensure the patency of airway; and provide
ventilatory support with oxygen (for possible
hypoxia).
2. Check cardiac rhythm and stabilise it (if needed).
3. Maintain circulation; insert IV (intravenous) line
and give fluids (for possible fluid and electrolyte
imbalance).
4. Investigations; withdraw blood, CSF and urine
samples, before instituting any treatment.
5. 50 ml of 50% dextrose (2 ml/kg body weight for
a child) should be given IV (for possible hypoglycaemia).
6. Administer:
Naloxone 0.4 mg IV (if morphine poisoning is
suspected);
Physostigmine 1-2 mg IV (if anticholinergic poisoning is suspected);
Thiamine 100 mg IV (if Wernicke’s encephalopathy or delirium tremens is suspected);
Hydrocortisone 100 mg IV (if adrenal crisis is
suspected);
L-Thyroxin 200-500 μg IV (if myxoedema coma
is suspected);
Flumazenil 0.2 mg IV (if benzodiazepine overdose is suspected).
This should be followed by a detailed work-up.
The underlying medical or psychiatric cause of stupor
should be searched for and treated. The importance
of supportive care during the period of stupor cannot
be overemphasised.

Excited Behaviour and Violence
Excitement is a common reason for a referral to an
emergency psychiatry setting. Although a large majority of psychiatric patients are not dangerously violent,

227

some patients can indeed be aggressive especially
during the acute phase of the illness.

Aetiology
Some common causes of excited behaviour are listed
below.
I. Organic psychiatric disorders
1. Delirium (acute organic brain syndrome), e.g.
delirium tremens.
2. Dementia, e.g. catastrophic reaction, loss of
control.
3. Wernicke-Korsakoff’s psychosis.
II. Nonorganic psychiatric disorders
1. Schizophrenia and other psychoses.
i. Schizophreniform psychosis.
ii. Catatonic (excited) schizophrenia.
iii. Paranoid schizophrenia.
iv. Acute psychotic disorder.
2. Mania.
Although excitement is common, violence
occurs usually only when the patient is
prevented from engaging in his activities, or
when he is irritable. Similarly, patients with
dysphoric mania or mixed affective states may
occasionally present similarly.
3. Depression: Agitated depression may present
with excitement. Occasionally aggressive,
violent behaviour may occur if the patient is
irritable and agitated.
4. Drug and alcohol dependence: Excitement and
violence may occur in:
i. Intoxication.
ii. Withdrawal syndrome.
iii. Comorbid psychiatric disorder(s).
5. Epilepsy.
i. Complex partial seizures.
ii. Postictal confusion.
iii. Epileptic furore.
6. Acute stress reaction.
7. Neurotic disorders.
i. Panic disorder.
ii. Agoraphobia with panic attacks.


