<<<PAGE 28>>>

16

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Contd...
Thyroid function tests: Refractory depression, rapid
cycling mood disorder. Treatment with lithium, carbamazepine.
Electrocardiogram (ECG): Age>35 years, Treatment with
lithium, antidepressants, ECT, antipsychotics.
HIV testing: Intravenous drug users, suggestive sexual
history, AIDS dementia.
VDRL: Suggestive sexual history.
Chest X-ray: Age>35 years, Treatment with ECT.
Skull X-ray: History of head Injury.
Serum CK: Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (markedly
increased levels).
Toxicology Screen
Useful when substance use is suspected; for example,
alcohol, cocaine, opiates, cannabis, phencyclidine,
benzodiazepines, barbiturates; remember that certain
medications can cause false positive results (for example,
quetiapine for methadone).
Drug Levels
Drug levels are indicated to test for therapeutic blood
levels, for toxic blood levels, and for testing drug
compliance. Examples are lithium (0.6-1.0 meq/L),
carbamazepine (4-12 mg/ml), valproate (50-100 mg/
ml), haloperidol (8-18 ng/ml), tricyclic antidepressants
(nortriptyline 50-150 ng/ml; imipramine 200-250 ng/
ml), benzodiazepines, barbiturates and clozapine (350500 μg/L).
Electrophysiological Tests
EEG (Electroencephalogram): Seizures, dementia, pseudoseizures vs. seizures, episodic abnormal behaviour.
BEAM (Brain electrical activity mapping): Provides
topographic imaging of EEG data.
Video-Telemetry EEG: Pseudoseizures vs. seizures.
Evoked potentials (e.g. p300): Research tool.
Polysomnography/Sleep studies: Sleep disorders, seizures (occurring in sleep). The various components in
sleep studies include EEG, ECG, EOG, EMG, airflow
measurement, penile tumescence, oxygen saturation,
body temperature, GSR (Galvanic skin response), and
body movement.
Holter ECG: Panic disorder.

Brain Imaging Tests (Cranial)
Computed Tomography (CT) Scan: Dementia, delirium,
seizures, first episode psychosis.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scan: Dementia.
Higher resolution than CT scan.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Scan: Research tool
for study of brain function and physiology.
Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)
Scan: Research tool.
Magnetic Resonance (MR) Angiography: Research tool
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS): Research tool
Neuroendocrine Tests
Dexamethasone Suppression Test (DST): Research tool
in depression (response to antidepressants or ECT). If
plasma cortisol is >5 mg/100 ml following administration of dexamethasone (1 mg, given at 11 PM the night
before and plasma cortisol taken at 4 PM and 11 PM
the next day), it indicates non-suppression.
TRH Stimulation Test: Lithium-induced hypothyroidism,
refractory depression. If the serum TSH is >35 mIU/ml
(following 500 mg of TRH given IV), the test is positive.
Serum Prolactin Levels: Seizures vs. pseudoseizures,
galactorrhoea with antipsychotics.
Serum 17-hydroxycorticosteroid: Organic mood (depression) disorder.
Serum Melatonin Levels: Seasonal mood disorders.
Biochemical Tests
5-HIAA: Research tool (depression, suicidal and/or
aggressive behaviour).
MHPG: Research tool (depression).
Platelet MAO: Research tool (depression).
Catecholamine levels: Organic anxiety disorder (e.g.
pheochromocytoma).
Genetic Tests
Cytogenetic work-up is useful in some cases of mental
retardation.
Sexual Disorder Investigations
Papaverine test: Male erectile disorder (intracavernosal
injection of papaverine is sometimes used to differentiate
organic from non-organic male erectile disorder).
Nocturnal penile tumescence: Male erectile disorder.
Contd...




<<<PAGE 196>>>

184

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Contd...
Drugs

Oral Dose
Some Common Adverse Effects#
(mg/d)
Sedation* Orthostatic Hypotension* Anticholinergic*
VIII. Noradrenergic Reuptake Inhibitors (NARIs)
1. Reboxetine
8-10
±
±
±
IX. Mono-amine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
A. Irreversible Non-selective and Selective MAOIs
Not available in India
B. Reversible Selective MAO-B Inhibitors
1. Selegiline
5-10
Useful in Parkinsonism
C. Reversible Selective MAO-A Inhibitors (RIMAs)
1. Moclobemide
300-600
Activating 0
0
X. Melatonin receptor agonist and 5-HT2C antagonist
1. Agomelatin
25-50
+
0
0
# The estimate of common adverse effects in this table is a very rough and empirical guideline to the clinical use of
antidepressants. The drug dosage in each patient needs to be individualised based on the clinical symptoms, their
severity, response to treatment and several other clinical factors.
* 0 = Absent; ± = Probable/Very little; + = Mild; ++ = Moderate; +++ = Severe

nortriptyline respectively) are active antidepressants
themselves. Fluoxetine is demethylated in liver to
norfluoxetine.
With the regular administration of TCAs, a constant blood level is achieved usually by the end of
two weeks. Although routine monitoring of blood
levels is not indicated, it may become important in
cases of toxicity. Also, some antidepressants such
as nortriptyline and protriptyline have a therapeutic
window.
Antidepressants (especially SSRIs, e.g. fluoxetine)
also cause inhibition of cytochrome P450 enzymes in
liver (e.g. CYP P450 2D6 and CYP P450 3A4).
The MAO inhibitors are absorbed well by oral
route, and are predominantly metabolised in liver by
acetylation.

Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of action is not clearly known.
It appears from clinical studies that the predominant
action of antidepressants is to increase the catecholamine levels in brain (Amine hypothesis).
Tricyclic antidepressants are also called as Monoamine reuptake inhibitors (MARIs). Their main modes
of action include:

1. Blocking reuptake of norepinephrine (NE), serotonin (5HT) and/or dopamine (DA) at the nerve
terminals, thus increasing NE, 5HT and/or DA
levels at the receptor site.
2. Down-regulation of the β-adrenergic receptors.
The Mono-amine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
instead act on mono-amine oxidase (MAO) which
is responsible for degradation of catecholamines following their reuptake. The final effect is the same, i.e.
a functional increase in the NE and/or 5HT levels at
receptor site.
Another important clinical point is that it takes
5-10 days before a MAOI, and 2-3 weeks before a
non-MAOI antidepressant, has any evident action on
depression (although sleep, anxiety and agitation may
respond earlier). The reason for this is not fully clear
though an increase in brain amine levels is possibly
responsible for antidepressant action. However, postsynaptic events (such as down-regulation of postsynaptic receptors) are probably more important and they
take longer than an increase in amine levels. Therefore,
it is of no benefit to prescribe antidepressants on an
SOS or PRN (as needed) basis. They must be administered regularly in appropriate doses to achieve the
desired effect.


