<<<PAGE 28>>>

16

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Contd...
Thyroid function tests: Refractory depression, rapid
cycling mood disorder. Treatment with lithium, carbamazepine.
Electrocardiogram (ECG): Age>35 years, Treatment with
lithium, antidepressants, ECT, antipsychotics.
HIV testing: Intravenous drug users, suggestive sexual
history, AIDS dementia.
VDRL: Suggestive sexual history.
Chest X-ray: Age>35 years, Treatment with ECT.
Skull X-ray: History of head Injury.
Serum CK: Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (markedly
increased levels).
Toxicology Screen
Useful when substance use is suspected; for example,
alcohol, cocaine, opiates, cannabis, phencyclidine,
benzodiazepines, barbiturates; remember that certain
medications can cause false positive results (for example,
quetiapine for methadone).
Drug Levels
Drug levels are indicated to test for therapeutic blood
levels, for toxic blood levels, and for testing drug
compliance. Examples are lithium (0.6-1.0 meq/L),
carbamazepine (4-12 mg/ml), valproate (50-100 mg/
ml), haloperidol (8-18 ng/ml), tricyclic antidepressants
(nortriptyline 50-150 ng/ml; imipramine 200-250 ng/
ml), benzodiazepines, barbiturates and clozapine (350500 μg/L).
Electrophysiological Tests
EEG (Electroencephalogram): Seizures, dementia, pseudoseizures vs. seizures, episodic abnormal behaviour.
BEAM (Brain electrical activity mapping): Provides
topographic imaging of EEG data.
Video-Telemetry EEG: Pseudoseizures vs. seizures.
Evoked potentials (e.g. p300): Research tool.
Polysomnography/Sleep studies: Sleep disorders, seizures (occurring in sleep). The various components in
sleep studies include EEG, ECG, EOG, EMG, airflow
measurement, penile tumescence, oxygen saturation,
body temperature, GSR (Galvanic skin response), and
body movement.
Holter ECG: Panic disorder.

Brain Imaging Tests (Cranial)
Computed Tomography (CT) Scan: Dementia, delirium,
seizures, first episode psychosis.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scan: Dementia.
Higher resolution than CT scan.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Scan: Research tool
for study of brain function and physiology.
Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)
Scan: Research tool.
Magnetic Resonance (MR) Angiography: Research tool
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS): Research tool
Neuroendocrine Tests
Dexamethasone Suppression Test (DST): Research tool
in depression (response to antidepressants or ECT). If
plasma cortisol is >5 mg/100 ml following administration of dexamethasone (1 mg, given at 11 PM the night
before and plasma cortisol taken at 4 PM and 11 PM
the next day), it indicates non-suppression.
TRH Stimulation Test: Lithium-induced hypothyroidism,
refractory depression. If the serum TSH is >35 mIU/ml
(following 500 mg of TRH given IV), the test is positive.
Serum Prolactin Levels: Seizures vs. pseudoseizures,
galactorrhoea with antipsychotics.
Serum 17-hydroxycorticosteroid: Organic mood (depression) disorder.
Serum Melatonin Levels: Seasonal mood disorders.
Biochemical Tests
5-HIAA: Research tool (depression, suicidal and/or
aggressive behaviour).
MHPG: Research tool (depression).
Platelet MAO: Research tool (depression).
Catecholamine levels: Organic anxiety disorder (e.g.
pheochromocytoma).
Genetic Tests
Cytogenetic work-up is useful in some cases of mental
retardation.
Sexual Disorder Investigations
Papaverine test: Male erectile disorder (intracavernosal
injection of papaverine is sometimes used to differentiate
organic from non-organic male erectile disorder).
Nocturnal penile tumescence: Male erectile disorder.
Contd...




<<<PAGE 41>>>

Organic (Including Symptomatic) Mental Disorders

ORGANIC CATATONIC DISORDER
According to the ICD-10, the following features
are required for the diagnosis of organic catatonic
disorder, in addition to the general guidelines for the
diagnosis of other organic mental disorders, described
earlier:
1. Stupor (diminution or complete absence of spontaneous movement with partial or complete mutism,
negativism, and rigid posturing);
2. Excitement (gross hypermotility with or without
a tendency to assaultiveness);
3. Mixed (shifting rapidly and unpredictably from
hypo- to hyperactivity).
The presence of other catatonic symptoms and
signs increases the confidence in the diagnosis. The
catatonic symptoms and signs are described in detail
in Chapter 5.

29

earlier. It is important to rule out any major disturbance
of consciousness, orientation, memory, or mood.
The delusions are variable and the type depends on
the underlying aetiology. The most common delusions
are persecutory in nature. Hallucinations (visual more
often than auditory) may accompany the delusions.
Schneiderian first rank symptoms (SFRS) are usually
not seen the organic delusional disorder (in contrast
to schizophrenia).

Diagnosis
Organic delusional disorder secondary to amphetamine use may be difficult to differentiate from paranoid schizophrenia. The differentiating points are an
acute onset, history of amphetamine use prior to the
onset, predominant visual hallucinations which may
be fleeting, absence of formal thought disorder and a
more ‘appropriate’ affect.

Aetiology

Aetiology

The aetiology and management of organic catatonic
disorder is described in detail in Chapter 19.

1. Drugs: Amphetamines, hallucinogens, cannabis,
disulfiram
2. Complex partial seizures (e.g. temporal lobe
epilepsy)
3. Huntington’s chorea (initial stages), Parkinson’s
disease, Wilson’s disease, and idiopathic basal
ganglia calcification
4. Right parietal lobe lesions, especially vascular
lesions
5. Lesions involving limbic system (e.g. tumours)
6. Spinocerebellar degeneration
7. Cerebral malaria
8. Herpes simplex encephalitis
9. Nutritional deficiencies (Vitamin B12, iron)
10. Demyelinating disorders (such as multiple sclerosis, metachromatic leukodystrophy)

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause, if amenable to
treatment.
2. Symptomatic treatment with low dose of a shortacting benzodiazepine (e.g. Lorazepam), or electroconvulsive therapy (if needed). Antipsychotics
should usually be avoided as they can make
catatonic features worse; however small doses
of atypical antipsychotics such as Risperidone,
Olanzapine, Aripiprazole or Quetiapine can be
used with care.

ORGANIC DELUSIONAL
(SCHIZOPHRENIA-LIKE) DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of predominant
delusions caused by an underlying organic cause is
required for the diagnosis of organic delusional disorder, in addition to the general guidelines for the
diagnosis of other organic mental disorders, described

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause such as removal
of toxic agent in amphetamine psychosis.
2. Symptomatic management with a low dose of an
antipsychotic medication (such as Risperidone, Haloperidol, Olanzapine, or Quetiapine) may be needed.




<<<PAGE 78>>>

66

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry
Table 5.7: Antipsychotic Dose in Schizophrenia

Drug

Oral Dose Range
(mg/day)

Parenteral Dose
(mg/day)

Equivalent Oral Dose*
(Equal to 100 mg CPZ)

A. Typical/Traditional/First Generation Antipsychotics
1. Chlorpromazine (CPZ)
300-1000
50-100 IM
100
2. Flupentixol
3-18
—
2
3. Haloperidol
5-30
5-10 IM
2-3
4. Loxapine
25-250
—
10
5. Pimozide
4-12
—
2
6. Prochlorperazine
45-150
40-80 IM
15
7. Sulpiride
400-2400
—
200
8. Thioridazine
300-600
—
100
9. Trifluoperazine
15-50
1-5 IM
5
10. Triflupromazine
100-400
30-60 IM
25
11. Zuclopenthixol
25-150
50-100 IM
25
B. Atypical/Second Generation Antipsychotics
12. Amisulpride
400-1200
—
—
13. Aripiprazole
5-30
5.25-15 IM
—
14. Clozapine
50-900
—
50
15. Olanzapine
5-20
2.5-10 IM
2-3
16. Paliperidone
3-12
—
—
17. Quetiapine
150-800
—
50-100
18. Risperidone
2-16
—
0.5-1.0
19. Ziprasidone
40-160
—
20
20. Zotepine
75-300
—
—
*Equivalent doses are at best approximations only. The dose in a particular patient should be chosen on an individualised basis by the treating professional.

aripiprazole, and ziprasidone, are more commonly
used than the older typical (or first generation) antipsychotics such as trifluoperazine and haloperidol, in
acute stages. Atypical antipsychotics are also more
useful when negative symptoms are prominent, e.g.
in chronic schizophrenia.
Clozapine, another atypical antipsychotic, is
available in the Indian market. The clinical trials have
shown that clozapine is effective in about 30% of
patients who had no beneficial response to traditional
(typical and atypical) antipsychotics. It is an effective
drug; however, as it can cause agranulocytosis and
seizures as side-effects, it should be used with caution,
with regular WBC and neutrophil counts as advised
by the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC).

Drug treatment is usually administered in the
outpatient setting as:
1. There are very few number of psychiatric beds in
India,
2. Majorities of families are willing to care for the
patients at home, and
3. Majority of patients do not require hospitalisation.
However, hospitalisation is indicated if there is:
1. Neglect of food and water intake,
2. Danger to self or others,
3. Poor treatment adherence,
4. Significant neglect of self-care, or
5. Lack of social support with evidence of abovementioned risks.




<<<PAGE 90>>>

78

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

ii. Severe depression with stupor, severe psychomotor retardation, or somatic syndrome.
iii. Severe treatment refractory depression.
iv. Delusional depression (psychotic features).
v. Presence of significant antidepressant sideeffects or intolerance to drugs.
Severe depression with suicidal risk is the first and
foremost indication for use of ECT. The prompt use
of ECT can be life-saving in such a situation.
The response is usually rapid, resulting in a marked
improvement. In most clinical situations, usually 6-8
ECTs are needed, given three times a week. When six
ECTs are administered, the usual pattern is three ECTs
in the first week, two in the second week and one in
the third week.
However, improvement is not sustained after
stopping the ECTs. Therefore, antidepressants are
often needed along with ECTs, in order to maintain
the improvement achieved. The safety of the ECT
procedure has now been well-established.
ECT can also be used for acute manic excitement,
if it is not adequately responding to antipsychotics and
mood stabilisers.

Lithium (Li)
Lithium has traditionally been the drug of choice for
the treatment of manic episode (acute phase) as well
as for prevention of further episodes in bipolar mood
disorder. It has also been used in treatment of depression with less success. (Lithium is discussed in detail
in Chapter 15).
There is usually a 1-2 week lag period before any
appreciable response is observed. So, for treatment
of acute manic episode, antipsychotics are usually
administered along with lithium, in order to provide
cover for the first few weeks.
The usual therapeutic dose range is 900-1500 mg
of lithium carbonate per day. Lithium treatment needs
to be closely monitored by repeated blood levels, as
the difference between the therapeutic and lethal blood
levels is not very wide (narrow therapeutic index).
Therapeutic blood lithium = 0.8-1.2 mEq/L
Prophylactic blood lithium = 0.6-1.2 mEq/L

A blood lithium level of >2.0 mEq/L is often
associated with toxicity, while a level of more than
2.5-3.0 mEq/L may be lethal.
Although lithium is indicated for therapeutic use
in all manic episodes, the preventive use is best in
usually those patients with bipolar disorder, in whom
the frequency of episodes is 1-3 per year or 2-5 per
two years.
The common acute toxic symptoms of lithium are
neurological while the common chronic side-effects
are nephrological and endocrinal (usually hypothyroidism).
The important investigations before star ting
lithium therapy include a complete general physical
examination, full blood counts, ECG, urine routine
examination (with/without 24 hour urine volume),
renal function tests and thyroid function tests.

Antipsychotics
Antipsychotics are an important adjunct in the
treatment of mood disorder. The commonly used
drugs include risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine,
haloperidol, and aripiprazole. It is customary to use
the atypical antipsychotics first, before considering
the older typical antipsychotics.
Some of the indications include:
1. Acute manic episode
• Along with mood stabilisers for the first few
weeks, before the effect of mood stabilisers
becomes apparent.
• Where mood stabilisers are not effective, not indicated, or have significant side-effects.
• Given parenterally (IM or IV) for emergency
treatment of mania.
• Recently, there has been some early evidence that
atypical antipsychotics (e.g. olanzapine) might
have some mood stabilising properties.
2. Delusional depression
As stated above, antipsychotics are important adjuncts
in the treatment of delusional depression. Once again,
it is customary to use atypical antipsychotics such as
olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, and ziprasidone
first, although any antipsychotic can be used.




<<<PAGE 91>>>

Mood Disorders

iii. Bipolar depression
There is recent evidence that quetiapine has antidepressant efficacy in bipolar depression.
iv. Maintenance or prophylactic treatment in bipolar
disorder
Recent evidence shows that several atypical antipsychotics such as olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole
can be successfully used in the maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder.

Other Mood Stabilisers
The other mood stabilisers which are used in the treatment of bipolar mood disorders include:
1. Sodium valproate
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium.
• The dose range is usually 1000-3000 mg/day (the
therapeutic blood levels are 50-125 mg/ml).
• It has a faster onset of action than lithium, therefore, it can be used in acute treatment of mania
effectively.
2. Carbamazepine and Oxcarbazepine
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium and valproate.
• Particularly effective when EEG is abnormal
(although this is not necessary for the use of carbamazepine).
• The dose range of carbamazepine is 600-1600 mg/
day (the therapeutic blood levels are 4-12 mg/ml).
• The use of carbamazepine in treatment of bipolar
disorder has recently declined, partly due to its
potential for drug interactions.
• Oxcarbazepine has a narrow evidence base and its
use in bipolar disorder is quite recent.
3. Benzodiazepines
Lorazepam (IV and orally) and clonazepam are used
for the treatment of manic episode alone rarely; however, they have been used more often as adjuvants to
antipsychotics.

79

4. Lamotrigine is particularly effective for bipolar
depression and is recommended by several guidelines.
5. T3 and T4 as adjuncts for the treatment of rapid cycling mood disorder and resistant depression.

Other Treatments
Psychosurgery is an extremely rarely used method
of treatment and is resorted to only in exceptional
circumstances.
In depressive episode, which is either chronic or
persistently recurrent with a limited or absent response
to other modes of treatment, one of the following
procedures may very rarely be performed:
i. Stereotactic subcaudate tractotomy, or
ii. Stereotactic limbic leucotomy.
In carefully selected patients, the results are
reported to be satisfactory. However, in the current
day and age, psychosurgery is hardly ever considered
in routine clinical practice.

Psychosocial Treatment
Although somatic treatment appears to be the primary
mode of management in major mood disorders, psychosocial treatment is often helpful. These indications
include:
i. As an adjunct to somatic treatment.
ii. In mild to moderate cases of depression.
iii. Certain selected cases.
These methods include (see Chapter 18 for details):

Cognitive Behaviour Therapy
Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) aims at correcting depressive negative cognitions (ideations) such
as hopelessness, worthlessness, helplessness and pessimistic ideas, and replacing them by new cognitive
and behavioural responses.
CBT is useful in mild to moderate, non-bipolar
depression and can be used with or without somatic
treatment.

Interpersonal Therapy
Interpersonal therapy (IPT) attempts to recognise
and explore interpersonal stressors, role disputes and




<<<PAGE 181>>>

Child Psychiatry

ziprasidone, quetiapine, and sulpiride. Treatment
options are often chosen based on adverse effect
profile of each drug (which adverse effects to avoid).
SSRIs (such as fluoxetine) have been used for the
treatment of co-morbid obsessive compulsive symptoms.
In the resistant cases or in case of severe sideeffects, pimozide or clonidine can be used under
expert supervision. Behaviour therapy can sometimes
be used, as an adjunct.

NON-ORGANIC ENURESIS
Enuresis is repetitive voiding of urine, either during
the day or night, at inappropriate places. This state of
affairs is normal in infancy.
Most children achieve bladder control by the age
of three years. By the age of 5 years, there are still
about 7% of children who wet their bed. Technically,
enuresis is diagnosed only after 5 years of age (and
at least 4 years of mental age).
Enuresis can be either of:
1. Primary type, where bladder control has never
been achieved, or
2. Secondary type, where enuresis emerges after a
period of bladder control (at least one year).
The majority (about 80%) of children with enuresis
have nocturnal bed wetting only. Non-organic enuresis
is more common (about two times) in males.

Aetiology
The exact cause of enuresis is not known. A variety
of factors, which are implicated in its causation, are
largely biopsychosocial. About 75% of children with
enuresis have a first degree relative with history of
enuresis.
The most commonly occurring factors, however,
are psychosocial, such as emotional disturbances, insecurity, sibling rivalry, death of a parent. An organic
cause must be looked for in children with diurnal
enuresis (15% of all cases of diurnal enuresis) and
adolescents with enuresis. The organic causes are
present in about 5% of cases and include worm infes-

169

tation, spina bifida, neurogenic bladder, urinary tract
infection, diabetes mellitus, and seizure disorder.
In secondary enuresis, the age of onset is usually
5-8 years. Enuresis tends to remit spontaneously and
only 1% of children with enuresis continue to have
the disorder in adulthood.

Treatment
The management consists of one or more of the following measures:
1. Restriction of fluid intake after 8 PM, in nocturnal
enuresis.
2. Bladder training during daytime, aimed at increasing the holding-time of bladder. This is carried out
in a step-by-step manner using positive reinforcements.
3. Interruption of sleep before the expected time of
bed wetting. The child should be fully woken up
and made aware of passing of urine.
4. Conditioning devices, which cause an alarm to
sound as soon as the voided urine touches the bedsheet. It is important to check the child’s hearing
before starting treatment. The alarm causes inhibition of further micturition and the child awakens. If
properly used, it is an effective method of therapy.
5. Supportive psychotherapy for the child, parents
and the whole family is often needed.
6. Pharmacotherapy: Drug treatment is usually not
a preferred option for the treatment of enuresis.
The drug of choice in those who need pharmacotherapy has traditionally been a tricyclic antidepressant, usually imipramine (25-75 mg/day). It
probably acts by its anticholinergic effect as well as
by decreasing the deep sleep (stage 4 NREM-sleep)
period. However, there is a risk of sudden death in
some children with the use of tricyclic antidepressants.
It should never be used for children under the age of
6 years.
Intranasal desmopressin has been found useful
in some patients and is a good alternative. The other
drugs that have been used for this purpose include
diazepam, anticholinergics, amphetamines, placebos,
but none have shown a good therapeutic response.




<<<PAGE 186>>>

174

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

The information in this chapter is necessarily very
brief and introductory in nature. A much more detailed
reading is definitely recommended before prescribing any psychotropic medication to a patient with
consultation of local formularies and guidelines. This
information should not be used to make any treatment
decisions without further reading.

ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS
Antipsychotics are psychotropic drugs which are
used in the treatment of psychotic disorders and
psychotic symptoms. These are also known as major
tranquilisers, neuroleptics, ataractics, anti-schizophrenic drugs and D2-receptor (dopamine receptor)
blockers; however, the term antipsychotic appears
to be the most appropriate and the most widely used
term.

Indications
Antipsychotics have previously been used as urinary
antiseptics and anti-helminthic; however, their use
stopped was due to toxicity and lack of efficacy.
Although they have been used in a wide variety of
conditions in the past their current use includes the
following conditions.
Organic Psychiatric Disorders
1. Delirium (in small doses; e.g. haloperidol,
risperidone)
2. Dementia (careful and considered use for psychotic features, and severe agitation)
3. Delirium tremens (and psychoses occurring
in drug and alcohol withdrawal states; e.g.
haloperidol, risperidone)
4. Drug induced psychosis (e.g. haloperidol in
amphetamine-induced psychosis)
5. Other organic mental disorders (e.g. organic
hallucinosis; organic delusional disorder; secondary mania)
Non-organic Psychotic Disorders
1. Schizophrenia
2. Schizo-affective disorder
3. Acute psychoses

4. Mania (with or without mood stabilisers)
5. Maintenance treatment of bipolar disorders
(e.g. olanzapine, quetiapine)
6. Major depression (for psychotic features,
agitation, and melancholic features; along with
antidepressants)
7. Delusional disorders
Neurotic and Other Psychiatric Disorders
1. Severe, intractable, and disabling anxiety
(rarely used and not recommended)
2. Treatment refractory obsessive compulsive
disorder (as an adjunct)
3. Anorexia nervosa (rarely used and not widely
recommended)
Medical Disorders
1. Huntington’s chorea (e.g. haloperidol)
2. Intractable hiccups (e.g. chlorpromazine in low
doses) (rarely used)
3. Nausea and vomiting (rarely, in low doses);
ondansetron, an anti-emetic drug, is a weak
antipsychotic
4. Tic disorders, e.g. Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (e.g. haloperidol, risperidone)

Pharmacokinetics
The orally administered antipsychotics are absorbed
erratically and variably from gastrointestinal tract,
with uneven blood levels. Intramuscular and intravenous administration provides much more reliable
blood levels. On an average, the oral liquid dose produces a peak level at 1½ hours and the intramuscular
dose peaks at 30 minutes.
The antipsychotics are highly lipophilic and
highly protein-bound. They easily enter areas with
good blood supply such as brain, lung, kidneys and
foetus, and accumulate there. They are not dialysable. The half-lives of most antipsychotics are long
and theoretically a single daily dose is sufficient to
produce sustained therapeutic blood levels. However
in practice, divided doses are administered, at least
initially, to decrease adverse effects. Later an attempt
can be made to give the whole dose or a major part of
total daily dose at night.




<<<PAGE 187>>>

Psychopharmacology

Steady state plasma levels are usually reached in
5-10 days. Once the drug is withdrawn, it may remain
in body for many days to many months. The main metabolic pathway is through liver (hepatic microsomal
enzymes). Oxidation and conjugation are the most
important methods of metabolism for phenothiazines.
Many of the metabolites, such as mesoridazine (for
thioridazine), reduced haloperidol (for haloperidol)
and 9-hydroxy-risperidone (for risperidone), are also
active compounds. Chlorpromazine has more than 150
metabolites, some of which are active. The excretion
of the metabolites is through kidneys and liver (enterohepatic circulation).
Most of the antipsychotics tend to have a therapeutic window. If the blood level is below this ‘window’,
the drug is ineffective. If the blood level is higher than
the upper limit of the ‘window’, there is toxicity or
the drug is again ineffective.

Classification
A classification of currently available antipsychotic
drugs is presented in Table 15.2.

Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of action of antipsychotics is
unknown. However, one of the major mechanisms
appears to be antidopaminergic activity of these drugs.
Antipsychotic drugs block D2-receptors, which are
mainly present in mesolimbic-mesocortical system
(mesolimbic system is concerned with emotional reactions), nigro-striatal system and tubero-infundibular
system. The relative potencies of these drugs in competing for D2-receptors parallel quite closely their
clinical potencies.
It is currently believed that antipsychotic drugs
are effective in treating psychosis due to their action on the D2-receptors located in the mesolimbic
system whilst extrapyramidal side-effects (EPSE)
are caused by blockade of D2-receptors situated in
nigro-striatal system and hyperprolactinaemia is
caused by D2-blockade in tubero-infundibular system.
However, other neurotransmitters (such as 5-HT, acetylcholine) are clearly implicated (see below; atypical
antipsychotics). Sedation is caused by histaminergic

175

blockade which is usually highest for drugs such as
chlorpromazine and thioridazine.

Second Generation Antipsychotics
A search for an antipsychotic drug which acts only
on the mesolimbic system but has no effect on nigrostriatal or tubero-infundibular systems, has led to the
development of a heterogeneous group of drugs collectively known as atypical or newer antipsychotics.
These are also known as second generation antipsychotics (SGAs) or serotonin-dopamine antagonists
or (SDAs). These include risperidone, quetiapine,
olanzapine, amisulpride, paliperidone, zotepine,
ziprasidone and aripiprazole.
By definition these drugs are effective antipsychotics without theoretically producing undesirable
extrapyramidal side-effects (i.e. antipsychotics without neuroleptic effect), or causing elevation of serum
prolactin levels. These are characterised by a selective
limbic dopamine blockade, D4-receptor blockade, or
a combination of potent 5-HT2 and weak D2 antagonism. These drugs should theoretically be safer with
lesser incidence of serious side-effects such as tardive
dyskinesia and neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Clozapine is one such drug but it can cause
agranulocytosis and seizures. Risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, aripiprazole, amisulpride and ziprasidone
are currently being used widely as atypical antipsychotics, while paliperidone and zotepine are also
available in the international market.
Atypical antipsychotics, in addition to their effect
on positive symptoms, are believed to be effective
in treatment of negative symptoms (such as apathy,
decreased sociality, anhedonia) of chronic schizophrenia. Clozapine in particular is effective in management
of treatment-resistant schizophrenia. However, there
is need for close haematological monitoring for
neutropenia or agranulocytosis as suggested in SPC
of the drug.

Side Effects
The antipsychotics are safe drugs with a high therapeutic index and wide margin of safety in routine
clinical dosages. In spite of this safety, a wide range




<<<PAGE 189>>>

Psychopharmacology
Contd...
Drugs

Oral Dose
(mg/d)

C. Benzisoxales
1. Iloperidone
4-24
2. Paliperidone
3-12
3. Risperidone
2-8
D. Benzisothiazolyl
1. Ziprasidone
40-160
E. Thienobenzodiazepine
1. Olanzapine
5-20
F. Dibenzothiazepine
1. Quetiapine
150-750
G. Partial Agonists
1. Aripiprazole
5-30
2. Bifeprunox
20
H. Dibenzothiepin
1. Zotepine
75-300
I. Dibenzooxepinopyrrole
1. Asenapine
5-10

177

#

Parenteral
Dose (mg)

Sedation

Some Common Adverse Effects**
Hypotension
EPSE* Weight
Gain

Increased
Prolactin

____
____
____

0
+
+

+
++
++

+
+
+

++
++
++

0
+++
+++

____

±

+

0

±

±

2.5-10 IM

++

+

±

+++

+

____

++

±

0

++

0

____
____

0
0

0
0

0
0

±
±

0
0

____

++

±

+

++

++

____

0

±

0

±

0

#

The estimate of common adverse effects in this table is a very rough and empirical guideline to the clinical use of
antipsychotics. The drug dosage in each patient needs to be individualised based on the clinical symptoms, their
severity, response to treatment and several other clinical factors.
* EPSE means Extrapyramidal side effects.
** 0 = Absent; ± = Probable/Very little; + = Mild; ++ = Moderate; +++ = Severe

of side-effects do occur with the use of antipsychotics
even in the therapeutic doses.
The common side-effects are listed in Table 15.3
with their mechanisms of causation and management.
Some of newer antipsychotics appear to have a higher
association with metabolic syndrome (see Chapter 5
and Table 15.3).
It is important to monitor physical health whilst
prescribing antipsychotics and the following are the
most commonly recommended minimum suggestions.
Other investigations may also be indicated (such as
ECG, HbA1c) based on clinical opinion.
Baseline (before prescribing): Obtaining detailed
personal and family history, Weight, BMI, Waist
circumference, Blood pressure, WBC and Neutrophil
count, Fasting blood sugar, Serum lipids, and LFTs.

After 1 month: Weight, BMI, Blood pressure, Waist
circumference, and Fasting blood sugar.
After 3 months: Weight, BMI, Blood pressure, Waist
circumference, and Fasting blood sugar.
After 6 months: Weight, BMI, Blood pressure, Waist
circumference, Fasting blood sugar, Serum lipids,
and LFTs.
After 12 months: Weight, BMI, Blood pressure, Waist
circumference, Fasting blood sugar, and Serum lipids.
Several antipsychotics can increase QTc interval
(QT interval corrected for heart rate). These include
sertindole, haloperidol, pimozide, ziprasidone, zotepine, quetiapine, or any intravenously administered
antipsychotic. A similar effect is seen with administration of TCAs. QTc prolongation can be made worse
with co-prescribed medications (e.g. anti-arrhythmics




<<<PAGE 190>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

178

Table 15.3: Side Effects of Antipsychotics
Category and
Probable Cause
Maximum with
Side Effect
(For example)
A. Autonomic Side Effects
1. Dry mouth
Muscarinic Choliner- Chlorpromazine
gic blockade

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Haloperidol
Risperidone

2. Constipation

–do–

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Risperidone

3. Cycloplegia

–do–

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Risperidone

4. Mydriasis

–do–

Haloperidol
Risperidone

5. Urinary
Retention

–do–

Thioridazine;
miosis with
Chlorpromazine)
Chlorpromazine

Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Occasionally
Pilocarpine 2%
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Bulk (or sometimes other) laxatives
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Occasionally
Pilocarpine 2%
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; Occasionally
Pilocarpine 2%
Usually none if only hesitancy occurs. Tolerance
develops; Rule out BHP;
Bethanethol or catheterisation for retention
Physostigmine (neostigmine does not enter
CNS); Diazepam sometimes supportive care
Usually none; Tolerance
develops; change in posture slowly. When severe,
use plasma expanders,
raise leg, supportive
measures.
Decrease dose. If severe,
change medication.
Decrease dose. If severe,
change medication.

6. Delirium (central –do–
anticholinergic
syndrome)

Haloperidol
Risperidone

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Risperidone

7. Orthostatic
hypotension

α1 Adrenergic
blockade

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol
Aripiprazole

8. Impotence

–do–

Chlorpromazine

Haloperidol

9. Impaired
–do–
Thioridazine
ejaculation
B. Extra-pyramidal Side Effects (EPSE)
1. Parkinsonian
Dopaminergic (D2) Haloperidol
syndrome
receptor blockade in
(esp. tremor)
striatal areas
2. Akathisia (motor –do–
–do–
restlessness)

Haloperidol

Clozapine
Quetiapine
Aripiprazole
Clozapine
Quetiapine

Antiparkisonian medication for treatment; also
for prevention if needed.
Change of medication or
reduction; Beta-blockers
such as Propranolol; Benzodiazepines
Contd...




<<<PAGE 191>>>

Psychopharmacology

179

Contd...
Category and
Side Effect
3. Acute Dystonia

Probable Cause
—do—

Maximum with
(For example)
—do—

4. Rabbit Syndrome —do—
—do—
(Peri-oral tremor)
Dopaminergic (D2) Not known
5. Tardive
Dyskinesia (late receptor
onset oro-facial
super-sensitivity
dyskinesia)
Not known
Probably
6. Neuroleptic
haloperidol
Malignant
Syndrome
(Fever, EPS,
High CPK,
catatonic
symptoms and
autonomic
dysfunction)
C. Other Central Nervous System Effects
1. Seizures
Decreased seizure
Clozapine
threshold
Chlorpromazine
(High doses)
2. Sedation
Histaminergic
—do—
blockade

3. Depression or
Decreased catecho- Not known
Pseudolamine levels in
depression
brain
D. Metabolic and Endocrine Side Effects
1. Weight gain
H1 blockade
Almost all
antipsychotics esp.
Clozapine and
Olanzapine
2. Diabetes
Not known
Clozapine
Olanzapine
3. Galactorrhoea
Increased Prolactin Haloperidol
Risperidone
with/without
released due to
amenorrhoea
dopaminergic blockade in hypothalamus

Minimum with
(For example)
—do—

—do—
Clozapine

Not known

Management
Antiparkinsonian
medication; Rule out
hypercalcaemia
Antiparkinsonian
medication
Treatment unsatisfactory,
though several drugs are
available. Prevention
best.
Bromocriptine, Dantrolene, Baclofen, General
supportive care. Add-on
lorazepam, Occasionally
ECT

Trifluoperazine

Decrease dose. Change
to a safer antipsychotic

Haloperidol
Aripiprazole

This side effect may be
beneficial. Otherwise
decrease dose. Change
drug. Give single dose
only at night
Decrease dose. Change
drug. Occasionally antidepressants or ECT.

SDAs
(e.g. Ziprasidone)

Aripiprazole
Haloperidol

Change drug. Dietary
control. Exercises.

Ziprasidone
Aripiprazole
Aripiprazole
Quetiapine

Change drug. Dietary
control.
None. Change drug.

Contd...




<<<PAGE 200>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

188
Contd...
Category and
Side Effect
2. Severe hepatic
necrosis (rare)
3. Hyperpyrexia

4. Bleeding

5. Hyponatraemia

Probable Cause

Maximum with
(For example)

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Toxic or
Hypersensitive
Interaction with
tricyclics or
meperidine
Decreased
platelet serotonin

Iproniazid

Tranylcypromine

Not known

Not known

SSRIs

Not known

SSRIs
SNRIs

Not known;
Probably MAOIs

Stop/change drug. Supportive
care; Death rate high.
Stop drug. Keep a gap of
1 week between imipramine
and MAOI. Supportive care.
Change drug. Do not coprescribe other drugs that
increase risk of bleeding;
Gastro-protective drugs such
as PPIs can decrease risk
to some extent in high-risk
patients
Risk higher in elderly; Avoid
co-prescribing other drugs
that cause hyponatraemia
(such as diuretics); monitor
closely

Probably SIADH

Recently, several atypical antipsychotics such as
olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole have been
added to list of drugs used in maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder. In addition, other antipsychotics
such as risperidone (and the others mentioned above)
are also used as antimanic agents.
Lamotrigine and Quetiapine (and its metabolite
norquetiapine) appear to have particular efficacy for
treatment of bipolar depression. There is a risk of skin
rash with lamotrigine particularly early in treatment
and the risk appears higher with faster escalation of
dose as well as with co-prescription of valproate. It is
therefore important to increase the dose of lamotrigine
very gradually as suggested in the summary of product
characteristics (SPC) and the dose prescribed depends
on other co-prescribed drugs (such as carbamazepine
and valproate).

LITHIUM
Lithium (Li) is an element (Atomic number 3 and
Atomic weight 7) which is the smallest alkali ion.

The element was discovered in 1817 by Arfuedson.
Since then, it has been used for treatment of gout and
for salt replacement in cardiac disease, but its use was
restricted due to fatal toxicity.
It was rediscovered in 1949 by John Cade, for use
in treatment of mania but its potential went unrecognised as it was discovered in Australia. Mogen Schou
in 1957, had to rediscover it yet again before it became
popular as a treatment of mania.

Indications
Although lithium salts are used in treatment of a
myriad of psychiatric and non-psychiatric disorders,
the established indications are only the following
ones:
1. Treatment of acute mania
2. Prophylaxis of bipolar mood disorder.
In addition, the following may also constitute
possible clinical indications of lithium use:
3. Treatment of schizo-affective disorder
4. Prophylaxis of unipolar mood disorder
5. Treatment of cyclothymia




<<<PAGE 206>>>

194

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Cyclic Ethers
An example is paraldehyde. It is not used commonly
as it is not very effective and is also dependence
producing.
Others
Antipsychotics (such as thioridazine, flupentixol,
olanzapine, quetiapine) and antidepressants (such as
doxepine) have sometimes been used for the treatment
of severe, intractable anxiety. However, antipsychotics
are not the drugs of first choice and should be used
with extreme discretion (with balancing of risks and
benefits) when all other drugs have failed to benefit.
Antidepressants (such as SSRIs, SNRIs and Mirtazapine) have recently emerged as treatments of choice
in several anxiety disorders including generalised
anxiety disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, panic
disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder. There is
some data to support that smaller starting doses are
better as anxiety symptoms may worsen initially in
treatment.
Beta (β) Blockers
An example is propranolol which is particularly effective in treatment of peripheral somatic manifestations
of anxiety. It is also helpful in treatment of anticipatory anxiety and situational anxiety. Propranolol can
be used either alone or along with benzodiazepines.
β-blockers are not treatments of first choice in the
treatment of psychic or psychological manifestations
of anxiety.
Propranolol is contraindicated in patients with
bronchial asthma and cardiac conditions. It should be
used with caution in patients of age 40 and above. The
usual dose is 40-240 mg/day, administered in divided
doses.

Benzodiazepines
Since the discovery of chlordiazepoxide in 1957 by
Sternbach, benzodiazepines have replaced other antianxiety drugs and hypnotics though SSRIs are now
gradually becoming drugs of first choice in management of anxiety disorders.
The benzodiazepines can be classified according
to their elimination half-lives (Table 15.9).

Indications
The indications for use of benzodiazepines include
the following:
1. Generalised anxiety disorder; adjustment disorder
with anxious mood (Short-term use)
2. Panic disorder, agoraphobia, and school phobia (particularly alprazolam and clonazepam;
short-term use, along with antidepressants)
3. Agitated depression (short-term use, along with
antidepressants, for first 1-2 weeks)
4. Short-term treatment of insomnia
5. Stage 4 NREM-sleep disorders such as enuresis,
somnambulism (diazepam reduces duration of
Stage 4 NREM-sleep)
6. Nightmares (diazepam also reduces the REMsleep duration).
7. Pre-medication in anaesthesia (intravenous
lorazepam, midazolam, or diazepam)
8. Anticonvulsant use (drugs of choice for status epilepticus, myoclonic seizures and certain infantile
spasms)
9. To produce skeletal muscle relaxation (e.g. in
tetanus, cerebral palsy)
10. Treatment of alcohol and other drug withdrawal
syndromes
11. For minor surgical, endoscopic or obstetric procedures
12. Acute mania (lorazepam, usually with lithium or
atypical antipsychotics).
13. Antipsychotic-induced akathisia
14. Emergency management of acute psycho ses
(IV lorazepam, along with parenteral antipsychotics).
15. Narcoanalysis or abreaction (IV diazepam)
Whenever administered, benzodiazepines should
not be ordinarily used for more than 2-4 weeks at a
time; otherwise risk of dependence is quite high and
tolerance occurs.
Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of action of benzodiazepines is
not clear. The discovery of the benzodiazepine receptors in 1977 shed some light on the mode of action
(Fig. 15.1).


