<<<PAGE 52>>>

40

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

and mammillary bodies. The changes are also seen
in periventricular and periaqueductal grey matter,
cerebellum and parts of brain stem.
The underlying cause is believed to be usually
severe untreated thiamine deficiency secondary to
chronic alcohol use.
Marchiafava-Bignami disease
This is a rare disorder characterised by disorientation,
epilepsy, ataxia, dysarthria, hallucinations, spastic
limb paralysis, and deterioration of personality and
intellectual functioning. There is a widespread demyelination of corpus callosum, optic tracts and cerebellar peduncles. The cause is probably an alcohol-related
nutritional deficiency.

Other Complications
These include:
i. Alcoholic dementia.
ii. Cerebellar degeneration.
iii. Peripheral neuropathy.
iv. Central pontine myelinosis.

Treatment
Before starting any treatment, it is important to follow
these steps:
i. Ruling out (or diagnosing) any physical disorder.
ii. Ruling out (or diagnosing) any psychiatric disorder
and/or co-morbid substance use disorder.
iii. Assessment of motivation for treatment.
iv. Assessment of social support system.
v. Assessment of personality characteristics of the
patient.
vi. Assessment of current and past social, interpersonal and occupational functioning.
The treatment can be broadly divided into two
categories which are often interlinked. These are
detoxification and treatment of alcohol dependence.

Detoxification
Detoxification is the treatment of alcohol withdrawal
symptoms, i.e. symptoms produced by the removal of
the ‘toxin’ (alcohol). The best way to stop alcohol (or
any other drug of dependence) is to stop it suddenly

unless the risks of acute discontinuation are felt to be
high by the treating team. This decision is often based
on several factors including chronicity of alcohol
dependence, daily amount consumed, past history of
alcohol withdrawal complications, level of general
health and the patient’s wishes.
The usual duration of uncomplicated withdrawal
syndrome is 7-14 days. The aim of detoxification is
symptomatic management of emergent withdrawal
symptoms.
The drugs of choice for detoxification are usually
benzodiazepines. Chlordiazepoxide (80-200 mg/day in
divided doses) and diazepam (40-80 mg/day in divided
doses) are the most frequently used benzodiazepines.
The higher limit of the normal dose range is used in
delirium tremens.
A typical dose of Chlordiazepoxide in moderate
alcohol dependence is 20 mg QID (four times a day)
on day 1, 15 mg QID on day 2, 10 mg QID on day 3,
5 mg QID on day 4, 5 mg BD on day 5 and none on
day 6. However, in more severe dependence, higher
doses are needed for longer periods (up to 10 days).
These drugs are used in a standardised protocol, with
the dosage steadily decreasing everyday before being
stopped, usually on the tenth day. Clormethiazole (1-2
g/day) and carbamazepine (600-1600 mg/day) are
experimental drugs and should not be used routinely
for detoxification.
In addition, vitamins should also be administered.
In patients suffering from (or likely to suffer from)
delirium tremens, peripheral neuropathy, WernickeKorsakoff syndrome, and/or with other signs of vitamin B deficiency (especially thiamine and nicotinic
acid), a preparation of vitamin B containing 100 mg
of thiamine (vitamin B1) should be administered
parenterally, twice everyday for 3-5 days. This should
be followed by oral administration of vitamin B1 for
at least 6 months.
Care of hydration is another important step; it is
extremely important not to administer 5% dextrose
(or any carbohydrate) in delirium tremens (or even in
uncomplicated alcohol withdrawal syndrome) without
thiamine.




<<<PAGE 61>>>

Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

‘designer’ amphetamines, such as MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxy-amphetamine; street name: ecstasy or
XTC).

Intoxication and Complications
The signs and symptoms of acute amphetamine
intoxication are primarily cardiovascular (tachycardia, hypertension, haemorrhage, cardiac failure and
cardiovascular shock) and central (seizures, hyperpyrexia, tremors, ataxia, euphoria, pupillary dilatation,
tetany and coma). The neuropsychiatric manifestations
include anxiety, panic, insomnia, restlessness, irritability, hostility and bruxism.
Acute intoxication may present as a paranoid hallucinatory syndrome which closely mimics paranoid
schizophrenia. The distinguishing features include
rapidity of onset, prominence of visual hallucinations,
absence of thought disorder, appropriateness of affect,
fearful emotional reaction, and presence of confusion.
However, a confident diagnosis requires an estimation
of the recent urinary amphetamine levels. Amphetamine-induced psychosis usually resolves within seven
days of urinary clearance of amphetamines.
Chronic amphetamine intoxication leads to severe
and compulsive craving for the drug. A high degree
of tolerance is characteristic, with the dependent
individual needing up to 15-20 times the initial dose,
in order to obtain the pleasurable effects. A common
pattern of chronic use is a cycle of runs (heavy use
for several days) followed by crashes (stopping the
drug use).
Tactile hallucinations, in clear consciousness,
may sometimes occur in chronic amphetamine
intoxication.

49

Treatment
Treatment of Intoxication
Acute intoxication is treated by symptomatic measures, e.g. hyperpyrexia (cold sponging, parenteral
antipyretics), seizures (parenteral diazepam), psychotic symptoms (antipsychotics), and hypertension
(antihypertensives). Acidification of urine (with oral
NH4Cl; 500 mg every 4 hours) facilitates the elimination of amphetamines.

Treatment of Withdrawal Symptoms
The presence of severe suicidal depression may necessitate
hospitalisation. The treatment includes symptomatic
management, use of antidepressants and supportive
psychotherapy. The management of withdrawal syndrome
is usually the first step towards successful management
of amphetamine dependence.

LSD USE DISORDER
Lysergic acid diethylamide, first synthesised by Albert
Hoffman in 1938 and popularly known as ‘acid’, is a
powerful hallucinogen. It is related to the psychedelic
compounds found in the ‘morning glory’ seeds, the
lysergic acid amides. As little as 100 μg of LSD is
sufficient to produce behavioural effects in man. LSD
presumably produces its effects by an action on the
5-HT levels in brain.
Although tolerance as well as psychological
dependence can occur with LSD use, no physical
dependence or withdrawal syndrome is reported. A
common pattern of LSD use is a trip (occasional use
followed by a long period of abstinence).

Withdrawal Syndrome

Intoxication

The withdrawal syndrome is typically seen on an
abrupt discontinuation of amphetamines after a period
of chronic use. The syndrome is characterised by
depression (may present with suicidal ideation),
marked asthenia, apathy, fatigue, hypersomnia alternating with insomnia, agitation and hyperphagia.

The characteristic features of acute LSD intoxication
are perceptual changes occurring in a clear consciousness. These perceptual changes include depersonalisation, derealisation, intensification of perceptions,
synaesthesias (for example, colours are heard, and
sounds are felt), illusions, and hallucinations.




<<<PAGE 63>>>

Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders

and use of activated charcoal can reduce drug absorption. If coma ensues, intensive care measures should
be employed on an emergency basis.
The treatment of withdrawal syndrome is usually
conservative. However, pentobarbital substitution
therapy has been suggested for treatment of withdrawal
from short-acting barbiturates. After detoxification
phase is over, follow-up supportive treatment and
treatment of associated psychiatric disorder, usually
depression, are important steps to prevent relapses.

BENZODIAZEPINES AND OTHER
SEDATIVE-HYPNOTIC USE DISORDER
Since the discovery of chlordiazepoxide in 1957
by Sternbach, benzodiazepines have replaced other
sedative-hypnotics in treatment of insomnia and
anxiety. These are currently one of the most often prescribed drugs. Benzodiazepines produce their effects
by acting on the benzodiazepine receptors (GABAbenzodiazepine receptor complex), thereby indirectly
increasing the action of GABA, the chief inhibitory
neurotransmitter in the human brain.
Benzodiazepine (or sedative-hypnotic) use disorder can be either iatrogenic or originating with illicit
drug use. Dependence, both physical and psychological, can occur and tolerance is usually moderate.

Intoxication and Complications
Acute intoxication resembles alcohol intoxication
whilst chronic intoxication causes tolerance, especially to the sedative and anticonvulsant actions of
benzodiazepines. Excessive doses can lead to respiratory depression, coma and death while chronic use has
been reported to cause amnestic syndrome.
Some of the other complications of benzodiazepines, particularly with high dose and chronic
use, include behavioural disinhibition, impulsivity,
blackouts, memory loss, worsening of depression and
interactions with other prescribed medications.

51

to heavy doses (more than 60-80 mg per day of diazepam), is characterised by marked anxiety, irritability,
tremors, insomnia, vomiting, weakness, autonomic
hyperactivity with postural hypotension, and seizures.
Depression, transient psychotic episodes, suicidal
ideation, perceptual disturbances and rarely delirium
have also been reported in withdrawal period.

Treatment
The treatment of benzodiazepine intoxication is
usually symptomatic. However, in cases of coma
caused by benzodiazepine overdose, flumazenil (a
benzodiazepine receptor antagonist) can be used in a
dose of 0.3-1.0 mg IV, administered over 1-2 minutes.
The treatment of low dose dependence syndrome
(~15 mg/day of diazepam) is abrupt withdrawal and
symptomatic management of withdrawal symptoms.
However, moderate to high dose dependence is best
managed by gradual withdrawal in a step-wise manner
(a reduction of ~10% of the dose every day). Sometimes
a slower withdrawal is clinically indicated (see Ashton
Manual in Suggested Further Reading List).
The best treatment is probably prevention by limiting benzodiazepine use to no more than 2-4 weeks of
prescription at most.
After the detoxification phase, an adequate follow-up
and supportive treatment is essential to prevent relapses.

INHALANTS OR VOLATILE SOLVENT
USE DISORDER
The commonly used volatile solvents include gasoline (petrol), glues, aerosols (spray paints), thinners,
varnish remover and industrial solvents. The active
ingredients usually include toluene, benzene, acetone
and halogenated hydrocarbons.
Volatile solvent misuse is more common in early
adolescence as a group activity, particularly in low
socioeconomic status groups (e.g. rag-pickers in
Mumbai and Delhi).

Withdrawal Syndrome

Intoxication and Complications

A typical withdrawal syndrome, after cessation of
prolonged use (more than 4-6 weeks) of moderate

Inhalation of a volatile solvent leads to euphoria, excitement, belligerence, dizziness, slurring of speech,




<<<PAGE 79>>>

Schizophrenia

In the presence of acute excitement, haloperidol
5 mg IV or IM, with/without 10 mg diazepam or
50 mg of promethazine can be administered. Given
IM, chlorpromazine can cause painful injection
abscess at the injection site. It should never be given
IV, as severe hypotension can occur. It is really
important to exercise care in administering parenteral
antipsychotics to any patient, but particularly one who
is treatment (antipsychotic) naïve. Oral antipsychotics
are preferable to parenteral antipsychotic in routine
clinical practice.
A majority of patients require maintenance treatment with antipsychotics to prevent relapse. Generally,
the treatment is continued for 6 months to 1 year for
the first episode, for 1-2 years for the subsequent episodes, and for indefinite period for repeated episodes
or persistent symptoms. However, the decision regarding the duration of treatment in a particular case has to
be assessed individually by the treating psychiatrist in
consultation with the patient and family (if appropriate), in view of past history and possible risks.
To ensure drug concordance, depot antipsychotic
preparations with long duration of action can be used.
(See Table 15.5 for some common preparations of
depot antipsychotics).
Many patients require adjuvant antiparkinsonian
medication to prevent extrapyramidal side-effects;
for example, trihexiphenidyl 6 mg/day, orphenadrine
150 mg/day, procyclidine 7.5-15 mg/day. This is
particularly true if the patient is receiving an older,
typical antipsychotic (such as haloperidol). However,
at times atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone
can also cause extrapyramidal symptoms, particularly
in higher doses.
Ideally speaking, during hospitalisation, no patient
should receive anticholinergic antipar kin sonian
medication till extrapyramidal side-effects appear.
Anticholinergics can worsen cognitive function, have
an abuse potential, can cause delirium (especially
in elderly), can worsen or contribute to negative
symptoms in schizophrenia, and may increase the risk
of tardive dyskinesia. But, in routine clinical practice,
often a majority of patients do receive anticholinergics
in addition to traditional antipsychotics.

67

Antipsychotics probably act by blocking the postsynaptic dopamine (D2) receptors in the mesolimbic
system. Other receptors such as 5-HT, muscarinic
receptors and GABA are also probably important.
Atypical antipsychotics are also called as SerotoninDopamine Antagonists (SDAs) due of their action on
both dopamine and 5-HT.

Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)
Schizophrenia is not a primary indication for ECT.
The indications for ECT in schizophrenia include:
1. Catatonic stupor.
2. Uncontrolled catatonic excitement.
3. Acute exacerbation not controlled with drugs.
4. Severe side-effect with drugs, in presence of untreated schizophrenia.
Usually 8-12 ECTs are needed (although up to 18
have been given in poor responders), administered two
or three times a week.

Miscellaneous Treatments
Psychosurgery is not routinely indicated in the treatment of schizophrenia. It is a treatment which is
extremely rarely used in clinical practice. When used,
the treatment of choice is limbic leucotomy (a small
subcaudate lesion with a cingulate lesion) in some
cases with severe and very prominent depression,
anxiety or obsessional symptoms.
Severely deteriorated patients are unlikely to
benefit. The maximum benefit would be in acute
episodes, but antipsychotics are far better obviously
both in efficacy and safety.
Many other methods such as megavitamin therapy,
dialysis, malaria therapy, high dose propranolol and
insulin coma therapy have been used in past but are
no longer used in clinical practice due to either poor
evidence for efficacy and/or risks to the patient.

Psychosocial Treatment
Psychosocial treatment is an extremely important
component of comprehensive management of schizophrenia. It can be divided in following steps:
1. Psychoeducation of the patient and especially the
family/carers (with patient’s consent) regarding




<<<PAGE 116>>>

104

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

However, the use of aversion therapy has been
decried as it:
a. tends to get over-used;
b. may harm the patient;
c. violates the basic human rights of the patient;
and
d. can lend a wrong mental picture of the patient
in the physician’s mind, i.e. of a ‘manipulator’
needing punishment!
The current status is that aversion therapy is not
a preferred treatment choice.
iii. Amplification of suggestion with hypnosis, freeassociation, intravenous amytal or thiopentone, or
intravenous diazepam.

Psychotherapy with Abreaction
Abreaction is bringing to the conscious awareness,
thoughts, affects and memories for the first time. This
may be achieved by:
i. Hypnosis.
ii. Free association.
iii. Intravenous thiopentone or diazepam: The aim
of abreaction with IV thiopentone is, both, to
make the conflicts conscious and to make the
patient more suggestible to therapist’s advice.
Once the conflicts have become conscious and
their affects (emotions) have been released,
the conversion or dissociative symptom disappears.

Supportive Psychotherapy
Supportive psychotherapy is needed especially when
the conflicts (and the current problems) have become
conscious and have to be faced in routine life. It is an
important adjunct to treatment.

Psychoanalysis
This mode of treatment is chosen not on the basis of
conversion/dissociative symptoms but on the total
personality structure of the patient. Several patients
respond remarkably well. The total length of therapy
in classical psychoanalysis is usually five years or
more.

Drug Therapy
Drug treatment has a very limited role in dissociative
(and conversion) disorders (apart from the use of IV
thiopentone, amytal or diazepam in abreaction). A few
patients have disabling anxiety (although anxiety as a
rule is rather uncommon in ‘hysteria’) and may need
short-term benzodiazepines.

SOMATOFORM DISORDER
The somatoform disorders are characterised by
repeated presentation with physical symptoms which
do not have any adequate physical basis (and are not
explained by the presence of other psychiatric disorders),
and a persistent request for investigations and treatment
despite repeated assurances by the treating doctors.
In ICD-10, somatoform disorders are divided into
the following categories.

Somatisation Disorder
Somatisation disorder is characterised by the following clinical features:
1. Multiple somatic symptoms in the absence of any
physical disorder.
2. The symptoms are recurrent and chronic (of many
years duration, usually); at least 2 year duration is
needed for diagnosis.
3. The symptoms are vague, presented in a dramatic
manner, and involve multiple organ systems. The
common symptoms include gastrointes tinal
(abdominal pain, beltching, nausea, vomiting,
regurgitation), abnormal skin sensations (numbness, soreness, itching, tingling, burning), and
sexual and menstrual complaints (menorrhagia,
dysmenorrhoea, dyspareunia).
4. There is frequent change of treating physicians.
5. Persistent refusal to accept the advice or reassurance of several doctors that there is no physical
explanation for the symptoms.
6. Some degree of impairment of social and family
functioning attributable to the nature of the symptoms and resulting behaviour.
7. Presence of conversion symptoms is common.




<<<PAGE 181>>>

Child Psychiatry

ziprasidone, quetiapine, and sulpiride. Treatment
options are often chosen based on adverse effect
profile of each drug (which adverse effects to avoid).
SSRIs (such as fluoxetine) have been used for the
treatment of co-morbid obsessive compulsive symptoms.
In the resistant cases or in case of severe sideeffects, pimozide or clonidine can be used under
expert supervision. Behaviour therapy can sometimes
be used, as an adjunct.

NON-ORGANIC ENURESIS
Enuresis is repetitive voiding of urine, either during
the day or night, at inappropriate places. This state of
affairs is normal in infancy.
Most children achieve bladder control by the age
of three years. By the age of 5 years, there are still
about 7% of children who wet their bed. Technically,
enuresis is diagnosed only after 5 years of age (and
at least 4 years of mental age).
Enuresis can be either of:
1. Primary type, where bladder control has never
been achieved, or
2. Secondary type, where enuresis emerges after a
period of bladder control (at least one year).
The majority (about 80%) of children with enuresis
have nocturnal bed wetting only. Non-organic enuresis
is more common (about two times) in males.

Aetiology
The exact cause of enuresis is not known. A variety
of factors, which are implicated in its causation, are
largely biopsychosocial. About 75% of children with
enuresis have a first degree relative with history of
enuresis.
The most commonly occurring factors, however,
are psychosocial, such as emotional disturbances, insecurity, sibling rivalry, death of a parent. An organic
cause must be looked for in children with diurnal
enuresis (15% of all cases of diurnal enuresis) and
adolescents with enuresis. The organic causes are
present in about 5% of cases and include worm infes-

169

tation, spina bifida, neurogenic bladder, urinary tract
infection, diabetes mellitus, and seizure disorder.
In secondary enuresis, the age of onset is usually
5-8 years. Enuresis tends to remit spontaneously and
only 1% of children with enuresis continue to have
the disorder in adulthood.

Treatment
The management consists of one or more of the following measures:
1. Restriction of fluid intake after 8 PM, in nocturnal
enuresis.
2. Bladder training during daytime, aimed at increasing the holding-time of bladder. This is carried out
in a step-by-step manner using positive reinforcements.
3. Interruption of sleep before the expected time of
bed wetting. The child should be fully woken up
and made aware of passing of urine.
4. Conditioning devices, which cause an alarm to
sound as soon as the voided urine touches the bedsheet. It is important to check the child’s hearing
before starting treatment. The alarm causes inhibition of further micturition and the child awakens. If
properly used, it is an effective method of therapy.
5. Supportive psychotherapy for the child, parents
and the whole family is often needed.
6. Pharmacotherapy: Drug treatment is usually not
a preferred option for the treatment of enuresis.
The drug of choice in those who need pharmacotherapy has traditionally been a tricyclic antidepressant, usually imipramine (25-75 mg/day). It
probably acts by its anticholinergic effect as well as
by decreasing the deep sleep (stage 4 NREM-sleep)
period. However, there is a risk of sudden death in
some children with the use of tricyclic antidepressants.
It should never be used for children under the age of
6 years.
Intranasal desmopressin has been found useful
in some patients and is a good alternative. The other
drugs that have been used for this purpose include
diazepam, anticholinergics, amphetamines, placebos,
but none have shown a good therapeutic response.




<<<PAGE 206>>>

194

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Cyclic Ethers
An example is paraldehyde. It is not used commonly
as it is not very effective and is also dependence
producing.
Others
Antipsychotics (such as thioridazine, flupentixol,
olanzapine, quetiapine) and antidepressants (such as
doxepine) have sometimes been used for the treatment
of severe, intractable anxiety. However, antipsychotics
are not the drugs of first choice and should be used
with extreme discretion (with balancing of risks and
benefits) when all other drugs have failed to benefit.
Antidepressants (such as SSRIs, SNRIs and Mirtazapine) have recently emerged as treatments of choice
in several anxiety disorders including generalised
anxiety disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, panic
disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder. There is
some data to support that smaller starting doses are
better as anxiety symptoms may worsen initially in
treatment.
Beta (β) Blockers
An example is propranolol which is particularly effective in treatment of peripheral somatic manifestations
of anxiety. It is also helpful in treatment of anticipatory anxiety and situational anxiety. Propranolol can
be used either alone or along with benzodiazepines.
β-blockers are not treatments of first choice in the
treatment of psychic or psychological manifestations
of anxiety.
Propranolol is contraindicated in patients with
bronchial asthma and cardiac conditions. It should be
used with caution in patients of age 40 and above. The
usual dose is 40-240 mg/day, administered in divided
doses.

Benzodiazepines
Since the discovery of chlordiazepoxide in 1957 by
Sternbach, benzodiazepines have replaced other antianxiety drugs and hypnotics though SSRIs are now
gradually becoming drugs of first choice in management of anxiety disorders.
The benzodiazepines can be classified according
to their elimination half-lives (Table 15.9).

Indications
The indications for use of benzodiazepines include
the following:
1. Generalised anxiety disorder; adjustment disorder
with anxious mood (Short-term use)
2. Panic disorder, agoraphobia, and school phobia (particularly alprazolam and clonazepam;
short-term use, along with antidepressants)
3. Agitated depression (short-term use, along with
antidepressants, for first 1-2 weeks)
4. Short-term treatment of insomnia
5. Stage 4 NREM-sleep disorders such as enuresis,
somnambulism (diazepam reduces duration of
Stage 4 NREM-sleep)
6. Nightmares (diazepam also reduces the REMsleep duration).
7. Pre-medication in anaesthesia (intravenous
lorazepam, midazolam, or diazepam)
8. Anticonvulsant use (drugs of choice for status epilepticus, myoclonic seizures and certain infantile
spasms)
9. To produce skeletal muscle relaxation (e.g. in
tetanus, cerebral palsy)
10. Treatment of alcohol and other drug withdrawal
syndromes
11. For minor surgical, endoscopic or obstetric procedures
12. Acute mania (lorazepam, usually with lithium or
atypical antipsychotics).
13. Antipsychotic-induced akathisia
14. Emergency management of acute psycho ses
(IV lorazepam, along with parenteral antipsychotics).
15. Narcoanalysis or abreaction (IV diazepam)
Whenever administered, benzodiazepines should
not be ordinarily used for more than 2-4 weeks at a
time; otherwise risk of dependence is quite high and
tolerance occurs.
Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of action of benzodiazepines is
not clear. The discovery of the benzodiazepine receptors in 1977 shed some light on the mode of action
(Fig. 15.1).




<<<PAGE 207>>>

Psychopharmacology

195

Table 15.9: Classification and Properties of Benzodiazepines
Class and Drug

Elimination
Half-life
(Hours)

I. Very Short Acting Drugs
1. Midazolam
2-5 hours
2. Triazolam

2-5 hours

Usual
Hypnotic
Dose (mg
HS/Nocte)

Oral Dose
(mg/day)

Parenteral
Dose (mg)

Active
Metabolites

Other Comments

___

___

___

___

0.125-0.25 ___
mg

___

α-hydroxytriazolam

Used for
anaesthesia
Rapid oral absorption; Marketed as
hypnotic

α-hydroxyalprazolam
___

II. Short Acting Drugs
1. Alprazolam
6-20 hours

___

0.5-6.0 mg ___

2. Estazolam
3. Loprazolam

8-24 hours
6-12 hours

1-2 mg
1-2 mg

1-2 mg
___

___
___

4. Lormetazepam
5. Lorazepam

10-12 hours 0.5-1.5 mg
10-20 hours 0.5-2.0 mg

___

___

2-6 mg

2-4 mg

6. Oxazepam

5-15 hours

15-120 mg ___

7. Temazepam

10-20 hours 10-20 mg

III. Long Acting Drugs
1. Chlorazepate
30-100
hours

15-30 mg

7.5-30 mg

Piperazine
N-oxide
Lorazepam
None
None

10-20 mg

___

Oxazepam

7.5-60 mg

___

Nordiazepam

2. Chlordiazepoxide

25-48 hours 10-25 mg

3. Clonazepam

20-40 hours ___

15-100 mg 50-100 mg Desmethyldemoxepam
___
0.5-20 mg 2-5 mg

4. Diazepam

14-90 hours 2-10 mg

2-30 mg

2-20 mg

Nordiazepam

5. Flurazepam

30-100
hours

15-60 mg

___

6. Halazepam
7. Nitrazepam

30-60 hours 20-40 mg
20-60 hours 5-10 mg

Desmethylhydroxy-ethylflurazepam
Nordiazepam
Nordiazepam

15-30 mg

40-160 mg ___
___
5-20 mg

___
___
___
___
High dependence
potential
Slow oral
absorption
Slow oral
absorption
Hydrolysed to
active form in
stomach
Erratic absorption
after IM injection
Also used in treatment of epilepsy
Erratic absorption
after IM injection
Marketed as a
hypnotic
___
Marketed as a
hypnotic
Contd...




<<<PAGE 208>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

196
Contd...
Class and Drug

8. Prazepam
9. Quazepam

Usual
Hypnotic
Dose (mg
HS/Nocte)
30-60 hours 10-20 mg

Oral Dose
(mg/day)

Parenteral
Dose (mg)

Active
Metabolites

Other Comments

20-60 mg

___

40-160
hours

7.5-30 mg

Nordiazepam
and Diazepam
___

Slow oral
absorption
Probably selective
for benzodiazepine
receptor I; may
cause less
cognitive/motor
disturbances.

Elimination
Half-life
(Hours)

7.5-15 mg

Each drug is described under the headings of elimination half-life (hours); usual hypnotic dose (mg nocte/HS); usual
oral dose (mg/day; if applicable); usual parenteral dose (mg; if applicable); active metabolites and other comments.

Fig. 15.1: Probable Mechanism of Action of Benzodiazepines (BDZ)

There are, presently, two known benzodiazepine
(BDZ) receptors.
1. BDZ Receptor I, which is linked with the GABA
(Gamma-Aminobutyric acid) receptor and is involved in mediation of sleep.
2. BDZ Receptor II, which is alone and is involved
in cognition and motor control.
Thus, benzodiazepines act by enhancing GABA
transmission in the brain.

Benzodiazepine receptor antagonists (such as
flumazenil) are anxiety-provoking agents. Flumazenil has a half-life of 60 minutes and administered
in a parenteral dose of 0.2-1.0 mg IV given over 1-2
minutes in treatment of benzodiazepine toxicity.

Classification of Benzodiazepines
Each drug is described in Table 15.9 under the headings of elimination half-life (hours); usual hypnotic




<<<PAGE 230>>>

218

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

ii. Dissociation of a part of body or emotions from
the remainder may occur.
iii. There is a partial or complete amnesia for the
events occurring during the hypnotic trance.
iv. There is an ability to produce or remove symptoms, perceptions and/or movements.
v. Post-hypnotic suggestion can be given just after
the trance and it is followed by the hypnotised
person.
Persons who are hypnotisable are in no way
abnormal as compared to the rest of the population.

Indications in Psychiatry
i. As an adjunct to psychotherapy.
ii. To abreact past experiences.
The conditions in which hypnosis can help in
treatment are many. The most important ones are listed
below.
i. Psychosomatic disorders
ii. Conversion disorder (hysteria)
iii. Dissociative disorder (hysteria)
iv. Eating disorders (anorexia nervosa, bulimia
nervosa and obesity)
v. Habit disorders (smoking)
vi. Pain
vii. Anxiety disorder.

Abreaction
Abreaction is an important procedure which brings to
conscious awareness, for the first time, unconscious
conflicts and associated emotions.
The release of emotions is therapeutic. Although
abreaction is an integral part of psychoanalysis and
hypnosis, it can be used independently also. Abreaction can be done with or without the use of medication.

Abreaction with Medication
Earlier amphetamines, ether, nitrous oxide and
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) have been used for
abreaction. Particularly, intravenous amphetamines
were very successful as they lead to a marked increase
in productivity of speech, thus facilitating release of
unconscious ideas and emotions. These agents are no

longer commonly used in clinical practice, due to risk
of dependence (in case of amphetamines and LSD)
and/or side effects.
Another method is the use of 5% solution of
sodium amobarbital (amytal) or thiopentone sodium
(pentothal), infused at a rate no faster than 1 cc/min to
prevent sleep as well as respiratory depression. This
procedure must always be done very carefully with
support from an anaesthetist who should be physically
present.
The abreactive procedure is begun with neutral
topics at first, gradually approaching area(s) of conflicts. Usually about 150-350 mg (3-7 cc.) of amytal
is sufficient for the purpose. In elderly and patients
with organic brain disorder, even 75 mg of amytal
may produce excessive drowsiness.
The indications of amytal interview include:
i. Abreaction (mainly) e.g. in hysteria.
ii. Interview with a mute patient.
iii. Diagnostic test in catatonic syndrome.
iv. Differentiating test in stupor (for differential
diagnosis of depression, schizophrenia, hysteria
and organic brain disorder).
There are certain contraindications for the use of
amytal interview:
i. Airway disease including upper respiratory tract
infection.
ii. Severe renal or hepatic disease.
iii. History of porphyria.
iv. Hypotension.
v. Dependence on barbiturates.
vi. Psychosis (except for catatonia or stupor).
The other medications which have been used
successfully for abreaction include diazepam and
ketamine. The use of abreaction has declined considerably in the last three decades and the current practice and guidelines do not encourage its
routine use.

Relaxation Therapies
The aim of these therapies is to induce muscular
relaxation. Since anxiety produces muscular tension,
which in turn reinforces (and thus increases) anxiety,




<<<PAGE 238>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

226

Table 19.6: Organic and Psychogenic Stupor
Features

Organic Stupor

Psychogenic Stupor

1. Previous psychiatric illness
2. Previous medical illness
3. Previous history of stupor
4. Precipitating stressor
5. Frequency

Usually absent
Usually present
About 10% of cases
Usually absent
Much more common

6. Onset
7. Course

Sudden or insidious
Longer

8. Protective reflexes
(Blepharospasm, menace reflex,
protective response)
9. Resistance to eye opening
10. Doll’s head eye phenomenon
(Oculocephalic reflex)
11. Meaningful posture and/or facial
expressions
12. Urinary/faecal incontinence
13. Neurological signs and deficits
14. Abnormal EEG
15. Oculovestibular reflex
16. Pentothal/amytal interview*

Absent

Usually present
Usually absent
24-33% of cases
Usually present
Not so common (3-5% of all stupor
cases)
Often sudden
Shorter. Recovery usually within
7 days
Present

17. Mortality

Absent
Usually present
Absent

Usually present
Absent (may avoid the gaze of
examiner)
May be present

Usually present
May be present
More often
Absent
Low dose (100-150 mg) increases
stupor and neurological signs
develop or increase
About 35%

Unlikely
Absent
Less often
Present
High dose (300-400 mg) increases
alertness and a mental status examination can often be conducted
0-3%

*Pentothal/amytal interview is no longer carried out routinely in clinical practice

Examination
The examination consists of the following steps:
1. History and physical examination, with special
emphasis on neurological examination.
2. Level of consciousness should ideally be
rated on the Glasgow Coma Scale. This scale
consists of three main categories of activity,
namely eye opening (1-4), motor response
(1-5) and verbal response (1-5). The rating is done
on a scale from 3 to 14.
3. Pentothal/amytal/diazepam interview is sometimes very helpful in differentiating organic and
psychogenic catatonic stupor. It should however
be noted that pentothal/amytal/diazepam interview

is not routinely administered in clinical practice,
and the emphasis has recently shifted to making
this distinction on a clinical basis.
4. Investigations: Blood glucose, blood urea, serum
creatinine, serum electrolytes, blood (arterial) gas
analysis, ECG, blood and urine examination for
drugs and poisons, blood and urine culture, and
peripheral smear for malarial parasite.
Also routine bloods including haemoglobin,
total leucocyte count (TC), differential leucocyte
count (DC), ESR, urine (routine and microscopic)
examination, thyroid and adrenal functions, liver
function tests, CSF examination, gastric lavage with
examination of aspirate, EEG and CT scan/MRI scan
brain (if indicated).




<<<PAGE 240>>>

228

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Marked excitement can occur during a
panic attack but violent behaviour does not
usually occur.
8. Impulsive violent behaviour.
i. Borderline personality disorder.
ii. Intermittent explosive disorder.
9. Reactive psychosis.

Management
The patient is examined according to the guidelines
suggested earlier in this chapter. The physician,
psychiatrist or another mental health professional,
examining an excited patient, must demonstrate an
attitude of empathy but at the same time must be firm
and should exude confidence.
The measures which can be adopted to handle
excited or violent behaviour include:
1. Reassurance: In case of emergency, it rarely works
alone but must be tried first.
2. Sedation: Diazepam 5-10 mg parenterally slowly
(or lorazepam 1-2 mg parenterally slowly) can be
given. In the presence of psychosis, haloperidol
2-10 mg parenterally (with or without 5-10 mg
diazepam or 50 mg of promethazine) can be given.
It is really important to exercise care in administering parenteral antipsychotics to any patient,
but particularly one who is treatment (antipsychotic) naïve. Oral antipsychotics are preferable to
parenteral antipsychotic in routine clinical practice.
3. Restraint: Restraint should always be used as a last
resort, but when needed, it should not be delayed.
Restraint should always be done in a humane way,
after taking (preferably) written consent from the
attendant relatives/carers. A second opinion from
another mental health professional is helpful.
Restraint is usually followed by compulsory
hospitalisation and parenteral medication. It is
rarely ever necessary to continue restraint for more
than a few hours and restraint should be removed
at the earliest possible time.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is not a treatment
for excitement or violence per se. When used, there
should be a clear indication for the use of ECT, which
should be clearly recorded in the case notes.

Other Psychiatric Emergencies
The list of possible psychiatric emergencies is
long. A few psychiatric emergencies are listed below,
some of which have already been discussed in the
book.
1. Severe depression (Chapter 6): Apart from
presenting as a suicide/suicidal attempt and/or
agitation, the depressed patient may come to
casualty because of a refusal to eat and drink,
leading to dehydration or because of refusal to take
medication (for example, secondary to hopelessness).
2. Hyperventilation syndrome (Chapter 8).
3. Side effects of psychotropic medication, e.g. acute
dystonia (promptly relieved by promethazine
25-50 mg parenterally), akathisia, neuroleptic
malignant syndrome (Chapter 15).
4. Psychiatric complications of medical and surgical
diseases, procedures and medication (e.g. ICU
syndrome, hypomania caused by steroids).
5. Severe insomnia (Chapter 11).
6. Pseudo seizures (conversion and/or dissociation
hysteria) (Chapter 8).
7. Anorexia nervosa (usually presenting with dehydration and/or cachexia) (Chapter 12).
8. Battered child syndrome or child abuse.
9. Grief and bereavement (Chapter 12).
10. Psychosocial crises (e.g. marital conflict, occupational and financial difficulties).
11. Drug or alcohol use disorders (Chapter 4).
12. Panic disorder (Chapter 8).
13. Acute psychosis (Chapter 7).
Psychiatric patients, especially when excited or
emotionally disturbed, often arouse anxiety in the
treating physicians as well as other patients in the
casualty. So, it is necessary to have an ‘emergency
psychiatry room’ or ‘psychiatric holding area’ near
the casualty, where the patients can be interviewed
and treated.
An ideal place for treating psychiatric emergencies
is a separate ‘psychiatric intensive care unit’ (PICU)
or ‘crisis intervention centre’ (CIC) attached to a
psychiatric unit in a general hospital or to a psychiatric
hospital or nursing home.


